2576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Electrodes for Long-Term Esophageal
Electrocardiography
Thomas Niederhauser, Andreas Haeberlin, Thanks Marisa, Michael Jungo, Josef Goette, Marcel Jacomet,
Roger Abächerli, and Rolf Vogel∗

Abstract—The emerging application of long-term and highquality ECG recording requires alternative electrodes to improve
the signal quality and recording capability of surface skin electrodes. The esophageal ECG has the potential to overcome these
limitations but necessitates novel recorder and lead designs. The
electrode material is of particular interest, since the material has to
ensure conflicting requirements like excellent biopotential recording properties and inertness. To this end, novel electrode materials
like PEDOT and silver-PDMS as well as established electrode materials such as stainless steel, platinum, gold, iridium oxide, titanium
nitride, and glassy carbon were investigated by long-term electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and model-based signal analysis
using the derived in vitro interfacial properties in conjunction with
a dedicated ECG amplifier. The results of this novel approach show
that titanium nitride and iridium oxide featuring microstructured
surfaces did not degrade when exposed to artificial acidic saliva.
These materials provide low electrode potential drifts and insignificant signal distortion superior to surface skin electrodes making
them compatible with accepted standards for ambulatory ECG.
They are superior to the noble and polarizable metals such as platinum, silver, and gold that induced more signal distortions and are
superior to esophageal stainless steel electrodes that corrode in artificial saliva. The study provides rigorous criteria for the selection
of electrode materials for prolonged ECG recording by combining
long-term in vitro electrode material properties with ECG signal
quality assessment.
Index Terms—Corrosion resistance, electrode material, electrode potential stability, esophageal ECG (eECG), long-term and
high-quality ECG, signal distortion.

Manuscript received December 11, 2012; revised March 4, 2013 and April
4, 2013; accepted April 28, 2013. Date of publication May 1, 2013; date of
current version August 16, 2013. This work was supported by the Commission
for Technology and Innovation CTI (10717.1-PFLS-LS), Switzerland, by the
Department of Cardiology, Bern University Hospital, and by the Swiss Heart
Foundation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
T. Niederhauser and M. Jungo are with ARTORG Cardiovascular Engineering, University of Bern, BE 3010 Bern, Switzerland (e-mail: thomas.
niederhauser@artorg.unibe.ch; michael.jungo@artorg.unibe.ch).
A. Haeberlin is with ARTORG Cardiovascular Engineering, University of
Bern, BE 3010 Bern, Switzerland, and also with the Department of Cardiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, BE 3010 Bern, Switzerland (e-mail:
andreas.haeberlin@insel.ch).
T. Marisa, J. Goette, and M. Jacomet are with the Institute for Human
Centered Engineering—microLab, Engineering and Information Technology,
Bern University of Applied Sciences, BE 2501 Biel, Switzerland (e-mail:
thanks.marisa@bfh.ch; josef.goette@bfh.ch; marcel.jacomet@bfh.ch).
R. Abächerli is with the Medical Technology Center, Engineering and Information Technology, Bern University of Applied Sciences, BE 3014 Bern,
Switzerland (e-mail: roger.aebecherli@bfh.ch).
∗ R. Vogel was with the University of Bern, BE 3010 Bern, Switzerland. He
is now with the Department of Cardiology, Bürgerspital Solothurn, SO 4500
Solothurn, Switzerland (e-mail: rolf.vogel@spital.so.ch).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2261067

I. INTRODUCTION
N increasing number of patients suffer from cardiac arrhythmias as a result of the ever aging population and
the increasing prevalence of chronic heart disease. This makes
long-term (outpatient) ECG recordings highly desirable. Today, disposable silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl)–gelled surface
electrodes are most commonly used. Unfortunately, they suffer from limited ECG signal quality and recording capability
because the electromechanical contact properties give rise to
motion artifacts [1] and alter over time [2], particularly when
exposed to lower pH-values during sweating [3]. The acquisition
from the body surface is problematic for atrial signals resulting
in low amplitudes that turn its automatic delineation cumbersome [4], [5]. Besides the technical challenges, skin electrodes
very often induce skin irritations or even skin defects; both
reduce the patient compliance [6]. Ag/AgCl electrodes, therefore, struggle with emerging applications like prolonged ECG
recordings required to diagnose short lasting [7] and/or subclinical [8] arrhythmias like paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and
high-quality ECG necessary, e.g., to detect supraventricular arrhythmias [9]. Alternative dry- and textile-based electrodes have
recently become very popular in research. However, their susceptibility to motion artifacts and inband noise are still unsolved
problems [10], [11] impeding clinical applications.
The esophageal electrode provides major advantages compared to wet/dry surface skin electrodes. The collapsed esophagus exerts continuous pressure on the electrode and the
esophageal mucosa incessantly produces electrolyte-like mucus. Both effects guarantee tight electromechanical coupling
between electrode and tissue without the need of an additional
electrolyte resulting in adequate and stable signal quality suitable for long-term monitoring [12], [13]. Due to its anatomic
vicinity to the atria, esophageal leads sense atrial signals with
high amplitudes [14] that allows their reliable detection [15] and
delineation [16]. So far, long-term esophageal ECG (eECG) was
rarely used clinically mainly because of the inconvenient electrodes (rigid esophageal catheters, oral catheter insertion, and
lack of miniaturization).
We recently showed that esophageal electrodes are well tolerated by patients when using soft nasal catheters [17]. Moreover,
we introduced a high-resolution long-term eECG recorder [18]
that features detailed morphologic analysis of atrial signals and,
thus, has the potential to reliably detect paroxysmal atrial fibrillation [19] or other atrial arrhythmias [18], [20]. By using
new signal acquisition methods like compressed sensing suitable for eECG signals [21], a prolonged recorder capability up
to 30 days maintaining high-quality ECG signals may become

A

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

NIEDERHAUSER et al.: ELECTRODES FOR LONG-TERM ESOPHAGEAL ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY

possible. However, the actual recording time remains limited to
24 h because suitable electrode materials for esophageal longterm exposure are lacking.
The esophageal recording site makes the material selection
challenging. Biocompatible and inert materials are polarizable
and tend to cause unstable electrode potentials, whereas biopotential electrodes require low polarization, high conductivity,
and low potentials drifts to minimize signal attenuations, distortions, and avoid artifacts [22]. The esophageal electrode has to
satisfy both conflicting requirements because high signal quality
is required for compressed eECG sensing [21] and accurate delineation [18], while the material is exposed to the esophageal
mucus, which may become acidic (pH-value < 4 during reflux [23]). Moreover, the need for a highly miniaturized recorder
and minimal number of electrodes necessitates the use of very
low-power amplifiers [18], which reduce the input impedance
and might accumulate signal attenuations/distortions. In addition to signal distortions, electrode potential drifts occur. Those
nonphysiological, low-frequency artifacts produced by electrode potential fluctuations [24] and mechanical motions [22]
are hard to filter from biopotential signals [25]. In the case
of eECG recordings, where electrode motions are present [5],
the material has to ensure stable electrode potentials and low
polarization.
The purpose of this study is to investigate and compare novel
and well-established electrode materials for their applicability
in high-quality long-term ECG recordings. To this end, we propose a novel two-step approach: first, in vitro measurements
demonstrate the electrochemical behavior and degradation of
the electrode exposed to artificial saliva. Second, the retrieved
interface characteristics of each material along with the model
of a low-power eECG amplifier are used to analyze signal distortions. The suitability of the investigated materials is discussed
from an electrochemical viewpoint and in context of the standards [26], [27] for ambulatory ECG. Suitable materials are
expected to be equal or superior to surface skin electrodes with
respect to biopotential recording properties.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Electrode Materials
Eight electrode materials were investigated, namely stainless steel (SS, AISI 303), platinum-iridium (Pt, 90% Pt and
10% Ir, average roughness of 8 μm, Johnson Matthey), gold
(Au, 99.99% purity, electroplated on platinum rings), iridium
oxide (IrOx, coating on pure Pt by physical vapor deposition
(PVD), layer thickness of 2–3 μm, Heraeus), titanium nitride
(TiN, fabricated like IrOx, layer thickness of 4–5 μm), glassy
carbon (GC, polished with SiC papers of decreasing roughness
and heat-activated as described in [28], HTW), polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT, Heraeus), and silver polydimethylsiloxan (AgPDMS, Sigma-Aldrich & Dow Corning). Except
for PEDOT and AgPDMS, the materials were processed to ring
electrodes with lengths and diameters of 6–8 mm and 2.9–
3.8 mm, respectively. The PEDOT substrate was mixed with
electrolyzed CoatOSil 2287 Silane (0.3%, Momentive) to increase the stability (according to a personal communication of

2577

Mr. Guntermann from Heraeus). PEDOT electrodes were dipcoated and hardened at room temperature. AgPDMS electrodes
were fabricated by mixing a silver powder (particle size of 2–
3.5 μm, 99.9% purity) with PDMS at a weight ratio of 14:5 [29].
The electrodes were brush-coated and hardened at 100 ◦ C for
45 min. For each material, two ring electrodes were mounted on
polyurethane catheters with a constant interelectrode distance
of 18 mm. Prior to the experiments, all metal electrodes were
cleaned with isopropanol and placed into an ultrasonic bath
(Bransonic 220, Branson, Switzerland) with deionized water
during 1 min. This step equalized surface contaminations and
guaranteed reproducibility.
B. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
The electrochemical properties of the electrode–electrolyte
interface were characterized by electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy (EIS, 1260 A, Solartron Analytical, U.K.) [30]
using a two-electrode setup. The catheters were immersed in
individual reservoirs of 250 ml filled with artificial saliva after Mondelli [31]. This solution exclusively contains inorganic
compounds with a pH value of 5.8–6 at initial conditions. The
reservoirs were stored in a water bath at 37 ◦ C. The electrodes
were continuously exposed for 30 days and EIS impedance
spectra were obtained at least eight times during this period.
The measurements were performed at open-circuit potential applying an ac sinusoidal signal of 10 mV (rms) within the frequency range from 10 kHz down to 10 mHz (logarithmic scale).
For each frequency, multiple cycles were averaged until the standard deviation decreased to ±10% of the mean impedance value.
Prior to EIS, the mean dc potential between the electrodes over
10 s (Fluke ScopeMeter 105 series II, Fluke) and the pH values
within each reservoir (Checker 1, HANNA instruments) were
assessed. Qualitative surface assessment was done by scanning
electron microscopy (SEM, Philips XL 30 FEG with resolution
of 2.0 nm at 30 kV and 5.0 nm at 1 kV) in selected material
samples before and after the exposure.
C. Equivalent Electrode Circuit Model
We analyzed the electrochemical behavior of the electrode–
electrolyte interfaces with the help of an equivalent circuit model
that has been extensively validated for biomedical applications
using theoretical equations [32] [see Fig. 1, Ze (ω)]. The model
consists of the half-cell potential Eq (V), the electrolyte resistance Rs (Ω), the faradic (charge transfer) resistance Rp (Ω), and
the constant phase element CPE that represents the double-layer
capacitance Cp (F ) and accounts for the nonideality typically
measured in this element. The impedance of the CPE is defined
by
ZCPE = 1/Q (iω)η

(1)

where Q is a measure of the magnitude of ZCPE , η is a constant
representing inhomogeneities in the surface (0 ≤ η ≤ 1), and ω
is the angular frequency. For η = 1, Q exactly matches Cp .
The passive components Rs , Rp , and CPE were calculated
by fitting the experimentally obtained complex EIS spectra to
the model circuit using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm

2578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

poles and one zero whose values are real and negative. Thus, the
poles and the zero are equivalent to corresponding characteristic
frequencies:


/ (Rp + Rcm
)
1/γ = Rcm

(5)

|z1 | =
ˆ ω1 = 1/ (Rp · Cp )
|p1 | =
ˆ ω2 = 1/ (Rp 


Rcm

|p2 | =
ˆ ω3 = 1/ (Rs · Cp 

Fig. 1. Simplified equivalent circuit model of the electrode–electrolyte interface [left, summarized as Z e (ω)] connected to an input amplifier (right) that
comprises an ideal amplifier and an equivalent input impedance Z a (ω).

(MATLAB). The active interfacial component Eq was indirectly
measured as ΔV between two identical electrodes.
D. Equivalent Amplifier Circuit Model
Fig. 1 shows one half of the symmetric ECG amplifier input
circuit adapted from [33]. The ground-free electrode setup was
chosen to minimize the number of electrodes favored for miniaturized eECG recorders. Dedicated amplifier [18] has the ability
to cope with high baseline wander and provides micropower
operation and high common-mode rejection ratio. The effective
amplifier input impedance Za (ω) is the total impedance to common mode subsequent the electrode; this includes a path through
the input amplifier (instrumental amplifier) Za (ω) and routes
to common mode outside the amplifier, Ccm and Rcm . Because
a ground electrode is missing, finite elements for Ccm and Rcm ,
that dominate the corresponding counterparts of Za (ω), are required to stabilize the amplifier. However, the characterization
of the model only requires the effective impedance Za (ω) that
can be directly measured on the target system [18]. This was
done using an impedance analyzer (DU 7010, Sourcetronic)
with the empirical input impedance given by


 Ccm
= 1.3 MΩ  7.5 pF.
Za (ω) = Rcm
m

(2)

Characterization of the proposed model was carried out using
its Laplace transformation (s = jω) assuming linear (CPE with
η = 1) and time-invariant behavior:
H(s) = Vin (s)/Vsig (s) = Za (s)/ (Ze (s) + Za (s)) .

(3)

Inserting the equivalent electrode and input amplifier components, assuming Rs  Rp that holds for all polarizable elec
that is true for well-designed
trode materials and Rs  Rcm
biopotential input amplifiers, the transfer function can be simplified to


H(s) =
R p +R c m
R c m

·

1 + s · Rp · Cp
 . (4)


1 + s · Rp  Rcm
· (Cp + Ccm
)


· Rs · Cp · Ccm
+s2 · Rp  Rcm

For convenience, the effect of Eq is not considered in H(s)
and will be discussed separately. H(s) has bandpass structure
with a maximal gain of 1. The equivalent amplifier circuit model
is, therefore, fully described by the dc gain (s = 0), and two

(6)
· (Cp +


Ccm
))


Ccm
).

(7)
(8)

The derivations of (7) and (8) assume that the poles p1 and

.
p2 are widely separated, i.e., Rs  Rcm
In addition to the frequency point’s ω1 –ω3 , the response of
H(s) to a standardized rectangular pulse was analyzed. Assuming that the impulse has an amplitude and length of Vp and Tp ,
respectively, its Laplace transformation calculates to

Vp 
p
Vsig
1 − e−sT p .
(9)
(s) =
s
Replacing (9) in (3) and neglecting the high-frequency pole p2
in H(s), the Laplace transformation of Vin (s) can be simplified
and transferred back to the time domain

Vp 
· 1 − eT p ·ω 2 · (ω2 /ω1 − 1) · e−t·ω 2
Vinp (t) =
γ
(10)
∀t > Tp .
The relevant baseline shift (displacement) is characterized
by the maximal amplitude and slope after the impulse that are
identified at t equals Tp :


 Vp  −T ·ω


(11)
max |Vinp (t)| = 
· e p 2 − 1 · (ω2 /ω1 − 1)
t> T p
γ
max dVinp (t) =
t> T p



Vp
· ω2 · 1 − e−T p ·ω 2 · (1 − ω2 /ω1 ) . (12)
γ

Amplitude and duration of the rectangular pulse are set to
3 mV and 100 ms, respectively [26], [27]. These standards model
the skin-electrode impedance of a surface lead as a capacitive
part of 4.7 nF shunted by a resistive part of 620 kΩ both in series
with a 100-Ω resistor and the negligible electrode impedance.
This electrode, referred hereafter as surface electrode, is used
as reference.
III. RESULTS
A. Characterization of Interfacial Components
Fig. 2 summarizes the temporal evolution of the interfacial
components of the electrode materials exposed to artificial saliva
during 30 days. The numerical values were standardized to cm2
to account for various geometric surface areas. To verify the
accuracy of the measurements, 95% confidence intervals are
plotted in addition to the component’s values. For Rs , Q, and
η, the intervals are less than 5% in all cases. In the case of
Rp , the intervals are as high as 25%. This deviation can be attributed to the high sensitivity of Rp to the electrode–electrolyte
interface conditions. Furthermore, Rp is extrapolated from the
low-frequency data, which lead to increased uncertainty. For
SS and GC, the determination of the intervals was not possible
because of the very high Rp values.

NIEDERHAUSER et al.: ELECTRODES FOR LONG-TERM ESOPHAGEAL ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY

2579

Fig. 2. Temporal evolution of the passive interfacial components, (a) R s , (b) R p , (c) Q, and (d) η, Q and η as the two parts of CPE during 30 days in artificial
saliva: value (solid line) ± 0.95 CI fitting interval (dashed-dotted line).

At initial state, Rs of all materials [see Fig. 2(a)] are in a small
range between 70 and 135 Ω·cm2 , with the exception of GC and
PEDOT. IrOx, PEDOT, AgPDMS, and TiN show by far much
smaller Rp as compared to Pt, Au, SS, and GC electrodes [see
Fig. 2(b)]. All materials exhibit near ideal capacitive behavior
with η > 0.79 [see Fig. 2(d)], thus allowing the use of Cp
instead of Q. The approximated Cp [see Fig. 2(c)] is lowest for
the group containing Au, AgPDMS, and SS, almost five times
higher for the Pt and GC electrodes, and thousand fold higher
for the materials IrOx, TiN, and PEDOT.
B. Temporal Changes During Exposure
The evolution of the interfacial components (see Fig. 2) is
accompanied by surface alterations as visualized by SEM images of electrode materials shown in Fig. 3. Except for PEDOT
whose SEM images could not be obtained, samples of all materials before and after exposure are examined using adequate
magnifications for various surface structures.
Only the first and the first four EIS measurements of PEDOT
and GC, respectively, produced reliable results. The increase of
Rs of GC (525% in 13 days) came along with increasing pH values from 5.8 to 7.8 and surface ion deposition observed by SEM
after exposure [see Fig. 3(f)]. All other materials’ Rs altered
only minimally during the exposure time (max. deviation =
30%). As shown in Fig. 2, Rp and Cp of the SS electrode
changed the most. The approximate increase of Cp by factor
3 and of Rp more than factor 100 during exposure indicates a
substantial modification of the electrode’s surface. Accordingly,

the surface of SS was modified as documented by SEM [see
Fig. 3(a)] showing little holes after exposure. In contrast to the
continuous altering of SS, there is an increase of Rp for Au that
primarily took place during the first six days. This phenomenon
is related to ion adhesion that was most observed for Au [SEM
in Fig. 3(b)]. AgPDMS shows inverse changes of Rp that decreased by almost 50% within the first five days. Furthermore,
Cp increased by factor 2.5 and became less ideal. Correspondingly, SEM images prior to the exposure [see Fig. 3(g)] document more conducting particles (white areas) on the surface
than after exposure. For Pt, IrOx, and TiN, neither the interfacial components nor the SEM evolution could demonstrate
significant surface modifications.
C. Electrode Potential Difference
Fig. 4 depicts the electrode potential differences ΔEq between two identical electrodes measured as dc voltage.
PEDOT had the highest dc voltage; however, the temporal
change is unknown. SS and Au had intermediate electrode potential differences (μ (mean) > 13 mV) with considerable variability (σ (variance) > 5 mV). The group containing Pt, IrOx,
TiN, AgPDMS, and GC, showed small (μ < 5 mV) electrode
potentials and very low drift (σ < 3 mV).
D. Characterization of the Amplifier Circuit Models
The dc-gain, characteristic frequencies (in Hz), and phase
shift parameters of the amplifier circuit models are summarized
in Table I. Since the maximal signal distortions are of interest,

2580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Fig. 3. Surface assessed by SEM of (a) SS, (b) Au, (c) Pt, (d) IrOx, (e) TiN, (f) GC, and (g) AgPDMS electrodes before (upper panel) and after exposure (lower
panel) in artificial saliva.
TABLE I
DC GAIN, CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCIES, AND PHASE DISTORTION
PARAMETERS OF THE AMPLIFIER CIRCUIT MODELS

Fig. 4. Temporal evolution of the electrode potential difference ΔE q during
30 days exposure in artificial saliva.

only the values corresponding to the maximal baseline shifts are
shown.
Expect for AgPDMS, Au, and SS, the materials feature a low
frequency cutoff (f2 ) well below 0.05 Hz. For SS at initial state
and for Au after exposure, f2 is close to, whereas for AgPDMS,
f2 exceed 0.05 Hz. However, since the lowest characteristic

frequency of AgPDMS (f1 ) is close to f2 , the gain loss is small
(<3%) for frequencies below f2 . This is not true for the surface
electrode, where f2 is even higher compared to AgPDMS and the
gain loss exceeds 3 dB because f2 and f1 are widely separated.

NIEDERHAUSER et al.: ELECTRODES FOR LONG-TERM ESOPHAGEAL ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY

All materials describe a high frequency cutoff (f3 ) greater than
10 MHz.
There is no significant baseline shift for materials like TiN,
IrOx, and PEDOT. GC and Pt have slightly higher but constant
displacements after the impulse. The highest displacements occur with SS and Au. The baseline shift of Au, e.g., achieves
0.08 mV measured at the end of exposure. Smaller displacement but associated with the highest baseline slope is present
for AgPDMS (0.17 mV/s). In contrast to the investigated materials, the high f2 of the surface electrode results in a high
negative and fast increasing peak after the rectangular impulse
[according to (10)].
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we investigated novel and well-established electrode materials for their applicability in long-term, high-quality
ECG recordings. The materials’ electrochemical properties as
well as their temporal behavior during 30 days exposure in
artificial saliva were described by interfacial components derived from a well-established electrode model. Among the eight
studied materials, TiN and IrOx yielded the smallest contact
impedances and did not suffer from electrode degradation.
Those materials guarantee low electrode potential drifts, low
polarization, and insignificant signal distortions when combined
with a dedicated low-power ECG amplifier circuit model.
A. Electrochemical Characterization and
Material Comparison
Our measurements at the beginning of exposure showed that
TiN and IrOx have considerably lower Rp (lower polarization)
and higher Cp compared to pure metal electrodes like SS, Au,
and Pt. Those effects are caused by the PVD coating producing a thin-film microstructured surface as seen in Fig. 3(d) and
(e) for IrOx and TiN, respectively. Detailed characterization of
those surface morphologies would require additional imaging
techniques like 3-D-SEM or atomic force microscopy that are
beyond the scope of this study. However, the microcolumns of
TiN and the multilayer porous structure of IrOx visualized by
SEM increase the total electrode surface area and thus decrease
Rp and increase Cp [34], [35]. Numerical variations to the literature arise from different PVD parameters resulting in different
surface morphologies. In contrast to IrOx and TiN, the surface
roughening of Pt by sandblasting did not produce a heavily
increased surface area as demonstrated by SEM [in Fig. 3(c)].
Unlike Rp and Cp , Rs depends on the geometrical area and
the electrode’s shape [32]. Since tube electrodes with similar geometrical dimensions were used, our materials except PEDOT
and GC feature similar values for Rs . The range of Rs is in
turn not comparable to the literature [34], [35] in absolute terms
because Rs depends on the solution resistivity [32]. PEDOT
achieves considerably higher Rs . This effect is most likely the
consequence of the nonconducting additive that increases the
bulk material resistance. Nevertheless, the surface characteristics of PEDOT are not impaired and similar values for Rp
and Cp as compared to TiN and IrOx are observed. PEDOT’s
microstructured polymer layers [36] explain this behavior. The

2581

suitability of PEDOT for chronic neural stimulation electrodes
has been described by in vitro and in vivo settings [37]. Activated GC shows similar Cp as Pt in conjunction with very high
polarization that makes this material suitable for stimulation applications. This has been proven for nanoporous carbon, e.g., in
leads of implantable cardioverter defibrillators [34]. However,
in the setting of biopotential sensing, the material has to ensure low polarization and low impedance. Both criteria are best
fulfilled by IrOx, PEDOT, TiN, and AgPDMS (in this order),
partially fulfilled by Pt and not fulfilled by GC, SS, and Au.
B. Corrosion Resistance in Artificial Saliva
The temporal alteration of the passive interfacial components
indicates that the most inert materials such as IrOx, TiN, as
well as the noble metals Pt and Au, do not suffer from electrode degradation when exposed to artificial acidic saliva during
30 days. This is concordant with their tradition as long-term
implanted electrodes [22]. Nevertheless, small modifications of
the interfacial components are present: e.g., Rp of Au increases
particularly during the first few days of exposure as the result
of ion depositions. These impurities are visible as crystals in
the microscopic inspection and are most likely calcium chloride compositions. The surface assessment of TiN, IrOx, and Pt
also demonstrated ion depositions (see Fig. 3) but with a lower
density compared to Au that explains their lower Rp variations.
In contrast to the local ion deposition on aforementioned
materials, the reactive surface of GC provokes surface encapsulation (see Fig. 3) by calcium chloride compositions associated
with increasing pH-values. The concordant increase of Rs and
Rp explains the electrode deactivation after 13 days of exposure.
The surface has not been reactivated and the isolating behavior
persisted since we did not apply electrical pulses with high current densities during our protocol.1 Therefore, our results argue
against the applicability of activated GC as electrode material
for long-term eECG recording.
PEDOT electrodes underwent very fast degradation and we
were not able to measure the passive interfacial components after
one day of exposure. Similar PEDOT degradation was reported
in [37], where the electrodes were matured in phosphate buffered
saline at 67 ◦ C for four weeks. Although the temperature in our
setup was lower, the electrode degradation was faster than in
the aforementioned study [37]. This fact can be explained by
the different pH values: phosphate buffered saline is neutral,
whereas our artificial saliva is acidic and accelerated the PEDOT
aging. Since the environment of esophageal electrodes is acidic,
PEDOT should not be used for eECG recordings at all.
Like PEDOT, SS underwent substantial surface modifications. Freire et al. [30] claimed that the degradation of the
protective oxide layer in alkaline solutions is associated with
a decrease of Rp and increase of Cp . Continuous immersion
facilitates the growth of pits that in conjunction with chloride
ions increases Rp and Cp . During our experiment with SS, the
pitting corrosion—see small holes in Fig. 3(a)—progresses similarly to [30] because the acidic artificial saliva contains high
1 In case of stimulating electrodes, periodic electrical stimuli keep the surface
electrochemically active [28].

2582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

chloride ion concentration of 10−3 Mol [31]. Thereby, the oxide
layer degradation could not be measured within our protocol.
However, surface corrosion precludes the use of SS as long-term
eECG electrode.
Similar to SS in [30], the oxide layer of AgPDMS was altered early during exposition. In contrast to the other materials,
local ion deposition was not identified by SEM. Instead, Cp
of AgPDMS increased during exposure and became less ideal.
This phenomenon may be explained by our equivalent circuit
that should have been expanded by a Warburg element. This
element takes into account the diffusion of ions across the interface from the bulk of the material, in our case the PDMS.
The diffusion result in more isolating behavior as documented
by SEM [see Fig. 3(g)] and accordingly increased Cp measured
by EIS. However, detailed modeling of the diffusion process
was not part of this study and AgPDMS remains applicable for
long-term eECG recording.
C. ECG Signal Distortions
The standards [26], [27] for ambulatory ECG define the bandwidth that every component of the signal acquisition system has
to fulfill. Like conventional analog or digital filters, our proposed amplifier circuit model has bandpass structure [according
to H(s) in (4)] and, therefore, has to be included in those tests.
Since the high-frequency cutoff of 40 Hz is well exceeded by
all materials featuring widely separated poles (see Table I), the
discussion below concentrates on the low-frequency part.
The frequency response test [26], [27] ensures that an ECG
at a heart rate of 40 beats/min (0.67 Hz) is reliably recorded.
All materials fulfill this requirement, since the relevant pole of
H(s), p2 is low enough for polarizable electrodes due to high
values for Rp and Cp . Nevertheless, care must be taken to Rcm
so that p2 will not be significantly increased (2 MΩ [18] is
sufficient). However, if the long-term ECG device targets STsegment measurements, the phase response must match the one
of a one-pole 0.05-Hz high-pass filter. The same requirement
applies to high-quality, long-term eECG, where waveform morphology analyses are important [18]. Au and SS hardly pass
the more restrictive high-pass criteria necessitating to increase
Rcm . Unfortunately, a higher Rcm induces more thermal noise
because Rcm is directly connected to the input leads [18] and
gets amplified by the same gain as the ECG signal. In contrast,
the less polarizable materials like TiN, IrOx, and PEDOT easily
fulfill the low-frequency requirement.
The characteristic frequencies are accompanied with the response analysis to a rectangular pulse that measures the phase
disturbances after a worst-case QRS complex [26], [27]. Au and
SS show baseline displacements that come close to the accepted
value of 0.1 mV after the pulse. Moreover, necessary high-pass
filters in the ECG acquisition system (e.g., ac coupler) that contain pole(s) in the range of p2 in H(s) increase the phase shift
similar to (11). Materials TiN, IrOx, and PEDOT providing very
low impedances have negligible baseline shifts and thus provide
a higher margin for subsequent filters as compared to Au and
SS. AgPDMS exhibits the steepest slope of the baseline after
the impulse (0.17 mV/s). This fact is explained by the low-

frequency cutoff f2 that increases the slope according to (12).
The slope fulfills the requirement of being <0.3 mV/s, but the
same difficulty with subsequent filters applies as for Au and SS.
Although the surface electrode shows high baseline shift after
the rectangular impulse, the fast peak will be suppressed with the
ECG recorder that necessitates filtering according to the Nyquist
frequency. The low-pass filter features a pole that dominates p2
in H(s) and thereby smoothens the impulse response. However,
the signal attenuation of the surface electrode at frequencies
below f1 (54.6 Hz) is significantly higher as compared to TiN,
IrOx, and PEDOT and will not pass the frequency response test
with present Rcm . Rcm has to be increased or rather omitted
with an additional ground electrode that is common in surface
ECG but not desired in low-power eECG recorders [18].
In summary, Au, SS, and AgPDMS are not the first choice
for high-quality, long-term eECG recordings, in particular when
wave morphology analysis is desired. The less polarizable materials like TiN, IrOx, and PEDOT behave superior to the surface
electrode because of their very high capacitance and thus do not
induce significant signal distortions and attenuations.
D. Electrode Potential Stability
The potential difference ΔEq between identical materials
arises from different potentials that add to the standard half-cell
potential of each electrode. These overpotentials do not cancel
out mainly because of different electrode surface contamination, slight differences within the electrode material and surface
composition, and by inhomogeneity’s of the local ion concentration [24].
The potential difference is highest for PEDOT and Au. For
the latter, the local ion deposition changed the passive interfacial
components and the potential difference in similar time scale as
can be seen in Figs. 2 and 4. However, the absolute values of the
potential difference are smaller than 300 mV and, thus, will be
adequately damped because the proposed amplifier copes with
dc potentials below 300 mV according to standards for ambulatory ECG [26], [27]. As compared to Au, SS produced higher
potential variability during the entire exposure time, which can
be explained by surface corrosion and slow spontaneous potential fluctuations [38]. This potential drift might superimpose
to the ECG signal and disturb its low-frequency components.
The lowest potential drift is found in materials such as IrOx,
AgPDMS, and TiN, in this order. This is most likely the results of their small and stable polarization resistances that minimize the overpotentials and their variability. For this reason,
microstructured surfaces are preferred regarding the electrode
potential stability and concordantly their lower susceptibility to
motion artifacts [24].
It has to be mentioned that the potential differences and their
variability of the investigated materials are higher than the one
of the Ag/AgCl skin electrodes in contact with ECG pastes [38].
This electrode type minimizes the net flow of the principal anion CI− using a silver chloride buffer as additional electrode
layer. Furthermore, the Ag/AgCl skin electrode is almost nonpolarizable that minimizes overpotentials, as well. However, this
electrode is not usable for eECG recording due to the different

NIEDERHAUSER et al.: ELECTRODES FOR LONG-TERM ESOPHAGEAL ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE PROPERTIES OF DIFFERENT ELECTRODE MATERIALS FOR
THE USE IN HIGH-QUALITY LONG-TERM ECG RECORDING

ionic composition of the esophageal electrolyte as compared to
ECG pastes.
E. Suitable Materials for High-Quality Long-Term
ECG Recording
Table II summarizes the discussed parameters of our investigated electrode materials. The qualitative comparison shows
that implantable TiN and IrOx are the most suitable candidates for high-quality, long-term ECG recordings. They show
no electrode degradation, the smallest polarizations, low potential drifts, and easily pass the phase response requirements
as described in the ambulatory ECG standard. This behavior
is related to their microstructured surfaces that, unfortunately,
require expensive manufacturing processes like PVD. This is
not necessary for materials such as bulk Pt (see Table II) that
is well established as electrode material for implantable pacemaker electrodes. Unfortunately, Pt is polarizable and might
suffer from higher motion artifacts compared to TiN and IrOx. If
waveform morphology analyses of eECG waves are not desired,
the less polarizable AgPDMS mixture may be a valuable candidate for the production of flexible and cost-effective esophageal
long-term electrodes.
F. Limitations
The present characterization of interfacial properties of electrode materials by EIS only included artificial saliva in an in vitro
setting. The esophageal mucus contains additional organic components like proteins, lipids, and mucopolysaccharides that
might deposit on the electrode’s surface and/or modify interfacial properties. However, this study precludes highly reactive
surfaces, e.g., as obtained for GC for the use in long-term eECG
recording. Furthermore, the esophagus has an intrinsic clearance that may prevent the permanent adhesion of such macro
molecules. Long-term in vivo tests should clarify whether TiN
or IrOx electrodes with rough surfaces or smooth Pt electrodes
are to prefer with respect to molecule deposition.
The effect of the esophageal mucosa and underlying tissues
on the interfacial components has not been taken into account.
These layers will add resistive and capacitive parts in series

2583

to the equivalent electrode circuit and might increase contact
impedance. However, since the esophagus does not include
highly capacitive tissues like the epidermis of the skin, these
layers can be modeled as pure resistances [22]. The corresponding resistances will add to the electrolyte resistance Rs and,
thus, only affect the high-frequency cutoff of the amplifier circuit model [see (6)–(8)] if Rs  Rp remains. For materials
such as TiN and IrOx featuring Rp > 104 Ω, this assumption
is applicable if the total series resistance remains below 103 Ω.
In vivo impedance measurements of stainless steel electrodes
[39] demonstrate that this requirement is fulfilled.
The esophageal recording site raises the problem of electrode
motions. Electrode movements relative to the esophageal mucus
mechanically disturb the charge distribution at the electrode–
electrolyte interface. As a consequence, the half-cell potential
changes until equilibrium can be reestablished. If just one electrode of a bipolar lead moves, a potential difference will be
measured. These motion artifacts are minimal for nonpolarizable electrodes [22]. The materials like Tin and IrOx might,
therefore, less well perform than, e.g., Ag/AgCl skin electrodes
that, unfortunately, cannot be used for eECG recording. Nevertheless, our in vitro study provides the lowest possible Rp for the
materials Tin and IrOx and the esophageal tissue might not add
to polarization in contrast to the epidermis of the skin (i.e., surface electrode with Rp = 0.62 MΩ). Additional parameters that
affect the baseline wander in eECG signals are the electrode
shape, length and diameter, interelectrode distance, electrode
position in the esophagus, and proband’s anatomy. Electrode’s
shape has already been discussed in an in vivo study [39] showing that the increased surface area of hemispherical electrodes
resulted in significantly higher signal-to-noise ratios. However,
the investigation of the other factors necessitates dedicated
in vivo trials.
V. CONCLUSION
Various electrode materials were investigated for their applicability in long-term, high-quality ECG recordings. Criteria like corrosion resistance, deposition rate, potential stability,
polarization, and impulse distortion were analyzed using an
in vitro electrochemical setup and model-based signal analysis. This study proposes TiN and IrOx as suitable materials
for esophageal electrodes that are superior to the standardized
surface skin electrode with respect to signal distortions and,
thus, might help to prolong conventional ECG recordings while
maintaining high-quality signals.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Waldovski, Chemistry
Department of the University of Bern for technical support.
REFERENCES
[1] M. F. Márquez, L. Colı́n, M. Guevara, P. Iturralde, and A. G. Hermosillo,
“Common electrocardiographic artifacts mimicking arrhythmias in ambulatory monitoring,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 144, no. 2, pp. 187–197, Aug.
2002.

2584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

[2] A. Searle and L. Kirkup, “A direct comparison of wet, dry and insulating
bioelectric recording electrodes,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 271–
283, Mar. 2000.
[3] C. Shih, C. Shih, K. Chou, S. Lin, Y. Su, and R. A. Gerhardt, “Mechanism
of degradation of AgCL coating on biopotential sensors,” J. Biomed.
Mater. Res., Part A, vol. 82 A, no. 4, pp. 872–883, Sep. 2007.
[4] D. Goldwasser, A. Bayés De Luna, G. Serra, R. Elosúa, E. Rodriguez,
J. M. Guerra, C. Alonso, and X. Viñolas Prat, “A new method of filtering
T waves to detect hidden P waves in electrocardiogram signals,” Europace,
vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1028–1033, Jan. 2011.
[5] J. Jenkins, D. Wu, and R. Arzbaecher, “Computer diagnosis of supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias. A new esophageal technique,” Circulation, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 977–987, Nov. 1979.
[6] L. Roten, M. Schilling, A. Häberlin, J. Seiler, N. G. Schwick, J. Fuhrer,
E. Delacrétaz, and H. Tanner, “Is 7-day event triggered ECG recording
equivalent to 7-day Holter ECG recording for atrial fibrillation screening?”
Heart, vol. 98, no. 8, pp. 645–649, Apr. 2012.
[7] R. Stahrenberg, M. Weber-Krüger, J. Seegers, F. Edelmann, R. Lahno,
B. Haase, M. Mende, J. Wohlfahrt, P. Kermer, D. Vollmann, G. Hasenfuß,
K. Gröschel, and R. Wachter, “Enhanced detection of paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation by early and prolonged continuous holter monitoring in patients
with cerebral ischemia presenting in sinus rhythm,” Stroke, vol. 41, no. 12,
pp. 2884–2888, Dec. 2010.
[8] J. S. Healey, S. J. Connolly, M. R. Gold, C. W. Israel, I. C. Van Gelder,
A. Capucci, C. P. Lau, E. Fain, S. Yang, C. Bailleul, C. A. Morillo,
M. Carlson, E. Themeles, E. S. Kaufman, and S. H. Hohnloser, “Subclinical atrial fibrillation and the risk of stroke,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 366,
no. 2, pp. 120–129, Jan. 2012.
[9] Z. Binici, T. Intzilakis, O. W. Nielsen, L. Køber, and A Sajadieh, “Excessive supraventricular ectopic activity and increased risk of atrial fibrillation
and stroke,” Circulation, vol. 121, no. 17, pp. 1904–1911, Mar. 2010.
[10] V. Marozas, A. Petrenas, S. Daukantas, and A. Lukosevicius, “A comparison of conductive textile-based and silver/silver chloride gel electrodes in
exercise electrocardiogram recordings,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 44, no. 2,
pp. 189–194, Apr. 2011.
[11] Y. M. Chi, T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and noncontact
biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 3, pp. 106–119, 2010.
[12] R. Arzbaecher, J. Jenkins, S. Collins, and S. Lorenzen, “Feasibility of
long-term esophageal electrocardiography in the study of transient arrhythmias,” Biomed. Sci. Instrum., vol. 14, pp. 1–6, Apr. 1978.
[13] I. Schnittger, I. M. Rodriguez, and R. A. Winkle, “Esophageal electrocardiography: A new technology revives an old technique,” Amer. J. Cardiol.,
vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 604–607, Mar 1986.
[14] M. N. Benzadón, D. F. Ortega, J. M. Thierer, R. A. S. Torcivia,
L. Aldunate, A. E. Alves de Lima, D. Navia, A. Dorsa, A. Rossi, and
M. Trivi, “Comparison of the amplitude of the p-wave from intracardiac
electrocardiogram obtained by means of a central venous catheter filled
with saline solution to that obtained via esophageal electrocardiogram,”
Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 98, no. 7, pp. 978–981, Oct. 2006.
[15] L. T. Mainardi, G. Duca, and S. Cerutti, “Analysis of esophageal atrial
recordings through wavelet packets decomposition,” Comput. Meth. Programs Biomed., vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 251–257, Jun. 2005.
[16] M. Holm, S. Pehrson, M. Ingemansson, L. Sörnmo, R. Johansson,
L. Sandhall, M. Sunemark, B. Smideberg, C. Olsson, and S. B. Olsson,
“Non-invasive assessment of the atrial cycle length during atrial fibrillation in man: introducing, validating and illustrating a new ECG method,”
Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 69–81, Apr. 1998.
[17] A. Haeberlin, T. Niederhauser, T. Marisa, J. Goette, M. Jacoment,
D. Mattle, L. Roten, J. Fuhrer, H. Tanner, and R. Vogel, “The optimal
lead insertion depth for esophageal ECG recordings with respect to atrial
signal quality,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 158–165, Mar. 2013.
[18] T. Niederhauser, T. Marisa, A. Haeberlin, J. Goette, M. Jacoment, and
R. Vogel, “High-resolution esophageal long-term ECG allows detailed
atrial wave morphology analysis in case of atrial ectopic beats,” Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 769–772, 2012.
[19] A. Haeberlin, T. Niederhauser, T. Marisa, D. Mattle, M. Jacomet, J. Goette,
H. Tanner, and R. Vogel, “Esophageal long-term ECG reveals paroxysmal
atrial fibrillation,” Circulation, vol. 125, no. 18, pp. 2281–2282, Aug.
2012.

[20] A. Haeberlin, T. Niederhauser, H. Tanner, and R. Vogel, “Atrial waveform
analysis using esophageal long-term electrocardiography reveals atrial
ectopic activity,” Clin. Res. Cardiol., vol. 101, no. 11, pp. 941–942, 2012.
[21] T. Marisa, T. Niederhauser, A. Haeberlin, J. Goette, M. Jacoment, and
R. Vogel, “Asynchronous ECG sampling: saving bits with Golomb-rice
encoding,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiology, 2012, vol. 39, pp. 61–64.
[22] E. McAdams, “Bioelectrodes,” in Encyclopedia of Medical Devices and
Instrumentation, J. G. Webster, Ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2006.
[23] P. J. Kahrilas and E. M. Quigley, “Clinical esophageal pH recording: A
technical review for practice guideline development,” Gastroenterology,
vol. 110, no. 6, pp. 1982–1996, Jun. 1996.
[24] L. A. Geddes, Electrodes and the Measurement of Bioelectric Events.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience, 1972.
[25] Y. Tu, X. Fu, D. Li, C. Huang, Y. Tang, S. Ye, and H. Chen, “A novel
method for automatic identification of motion artifact beats in ECG recordings,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 1917–1928, Sep. 2012.
[26] Medical Electrical Equipment—Part 2-47: Particular Requirements for
the Safety, Including Essential Performance, of Ambulatory Electrocardiographic Systems, IEC 60601-2-47, Jul. 2001.
[27] Medical Electrical Equipment—Part 2-47: Particular Requirements for
the Safety, Including Essential Performance, of Ambulatory Electrocardiographic Systems, AAMI/ANSI EC38, 2007.
[28] R. L. McCreery, “Advanced carbon electrode materials for molecular electrochemistry,” Chem. Rev., vol. 108, no. 7, pp. 2646–2687, 2008.
[29] J. Vörös, G. Courtine, A. Larmagnac, and P. Musienko, “Pdms-based
stretchable multi-electrode and chemotrode array for epidural and subdural
neuronal recording, electrical stimulation and drug delivery,” U.S. Patent
WO/2011/15771423, Dec. 2011.
[30] L. Freire, M. J. Carmezim, M. G. S. Ferreira, and M. F. Montemor, “The
electrochemical behaviour of stainless steel AISI 304 in alkaline solutions
with different pH in the presence of chlorides,” Electrochim. Acta, vol. 56,
no. 14, pp. 5280–5289, Mar. 2011.
[31] G. M. O. de Queiroz, L. F. Silva, J. T. L. Ferreira, J. A. da, C. P. Gomes,
and L. Sathler, “Electrochemical behavior and pH stability of artificial
salivas for corrosion tests,” Braz. Oral Res., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 209–215,
Sep. 2007.
[32] W. Franks, I. Schenker, P. Schmutz, and A. Hierlemann, “Impedance
characterization and modeling of electrodes for biomedical applications,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1295–1302, Jul. 2005.
[33] E. M. Spinelli and M. A. Mayosky, “Two-electrode biopotential measurements: power line interference analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1436–1442, Aug. 2005.
[34] A. Norlin, J. Pan, and C. Leygraf, “Investigation of Pt, Ti, TiN, and
nano-porous carbon electrodes for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
applications,” Electrochim. Acta, vol. 49, no. 22–23, pp. 4011–4020, Sep.
2004.
[35] J. D. Weiland, D. J. Anderson, and M. S. Humayun, “In vitro electrical properties for iridium oxide versus titanium nitride stimulating electrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 1574–1579, Dec.
2002.
[36] X. Cui and D. C. Martin, “Electrochemical deposition and characterization
of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) on neural microelectrode arrays,”
Sens. Actuators, B, vol. 89, no. 1–2, pp. 92–102, Mar. 2003.
[37] S. Venkatraman, J. Hendricks, Z. A. King, A. J. Sereno, S. RichardsonBurns, D. Martin, and J. M. Carmena, “In vitro and in vivo evaluation
of PEDOT microelectrodes for neural stimulation and recording,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 307–316, Jun. 2011.
[38] P. Tallgren, S. Vanhatalo, K. Kaila, and J. Voipio, “Evaluation of commercially available electrodes and gels for recording of slow EEG potentials,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 116, no. 4, pp. 799–806, Apr. 2005.
[39] T. Niederhauser, A. Haeberlin, R. Vogel, T. Marisa, J. Goette, and
M. Jacomet, “Esophageal ECG: The challenge of electrode design,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Med. Measurements Appl., 2011, pp. 322–326.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

