IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

193

Development of an Automated Updated Selvester
QRS Scoring System Using SWT-Based QRS
Fractionation Detection and Classification
Valentina Bono, Evangelos B. Mazomenos, Taihai Chen, James A. Rosengarten, Amit Acharyya, Member, IEEE,
Koushik Maharatna, Member, IEEE, John M. Morgan, and Nick Curzen

Abstract—The Selvester score is an effective means for estimating the extent of myocardial scar in a patient from low-cost ECG
recordings. Automation of such a system is deemed to help implementing low-cost high-volume screening mechanisms of scar
in the primary care. This paper describes, for the first time to
the best of our knowledge, an automated implementation of the
updated Selvester scoring system for that purpose, where fractionated QRS morphologies and patterns are identified and classified
using a novel stationary wavelet transform (SWT)-based fractionation detection algorithm. This stage informs the two principal
steps of the updated Selvester scoring scheme—the confounder
classification and the point awarding rules. The complete system
is validated on 51 ECG records of patients detected with ischemic
heart disease. Validation has been carried out using manually detected confounder classes and computation of the actual score by
expert cardiologists as the ground truth. Our results show that
as a stand-alone system it is able to classify different confounders
with 94.1% accuracy whereas it exhibits 94% accuracy in computing the actual score. When coupled with our previously proposed
automated ECG delineation algorithm, that provides the input
ECG parameters, the overall system shows 90% accuracy in confounder classification and 92% accuracy in computing the actual
score and thereby showing comparable performance to the standalone system proposed here, with the added advantage of complete
automated analysis without any human intervention.
Index Terms—Automated ECG processing, electrocardiography, myocardial scar, Selvester QRS score, stationary wavelet
transform (SWT).

I. INTRODUCTION

A

HEART attack, known as myocardial infarction (MI), can
occur following a sudden compromise in blood supply. If

Manuscript received November 22, 2012; revised March 28, 2013; accepted
May 6, 2013. Date of publication May 15, 2013; date of current version December 31, 2013. This work was supported by E.U. ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking
under the Cyclic and Person-Centric Health Management: Integrated Approach
for Home, Mobile, and Clinical Environments (CHIRON) Project under Agreement # 2009-1-100228.
V. Bono, E. B. Mazomenos, T. Chen, and K. Maharatna are with
the Electronics and Software Systems Group, University of Southampton,
SO17 1BJ, U.K. (e-mail: vb2g12@ecs.soton.ac.uk; ebm@ecs.soton.ac.uk;
tc10g09@ecs.soton.ac.uk; km3@ecs.soton.ac.uk).
J. A. Rosengarten, J. M. Morgan, and N. Curzen are with the
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, SO166YD, U.K. (e-mail: james@rosengarten.co.uk; jmm@hrclinic.org;
nick.curzen@suht.swest.nhs.uk).
A. Acharyya is with Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Hyderabad 502205, India (e-mail:
amit_acharyya@iith.ac.in).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2263311

blood flow is not restored promptly, healing results in scar tissue. This scar tissue demonstrates different properties to healthy
heart tissue and reduces the contractile efficiency of the heart.
In addition, since the scar tissue cannot propagate normal electrical activity, disordered conduction around an area of scar
becomes a focus for the formation of dangerous heart rhythms
(arrhythmias).
Imaging techniques such as nuclear perfusion scanning and
contrast enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR)
are used in clinical practice to define the presence and magnitude of scar. Quantification of scar size helps to define risk of
arrhythmia and/or death, and therefore guide preventive therapies. However, these imaging modalities are not available in
every hospital, nor suitable for bedside testing. On the other
hand, the ECG is widely available and can be also used in a
bedside or mobile environment. Since the QRS-complex of the
ECG reflects the electrical activity, or depolarization, through
ventricles, there is clinical interest in defining features from the
QRS-complex that may reflect scar. As an example, disordered
conduction may manifest as various additional deflections in
the QRS-complex—fractionated QRS—resulting in notching,
slowing, or slurring of the typical ECG trace.
The Selvester QRS score was developed to quantify left ventricular scar and is based upon 50 manually measured ECG
criteria, including the presence of fractionated QRS features
and various QRS width and amplitude ratios [1]. The score
was initially developed from computer modeling studies of the
heart’s activity and validated with postmortem specimens, but
was limited due to its application to an ECG of normal width
QRS only [2], [3]. The score was recently (2009) updated to take
account of various ECG abnormalities, or confounders, such as
left bundle branch block (LBBB) or left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) that may also be present but not necessarily related
to scarring. This updated version of the Selvester score demonstrates good agreement with scar measured on CMR [4], [5]. The
criteria used to define an ECG confounder, and to award points
for the presence of scar, rely upon the accurate detection of the
delayed QRS conduction, seen as fractionated QRS and in particular notching (reversal in direction ≥ 90◦ and notch amplitude
≥ 0.05 mV), or slurring/slowing (change in gradient ≤ 90◦ ) in
the QRS trace [6]. The manual calculation of the Selvester score
is a time consuming process, and lacks reproducibility due to the
limits of human precision, even following appropriate training,
and therefore is not currently widely used in clinical practice. An
automated tool for computing the Selvester score will remove

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

194

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

these limitations and enable its effective deployment in clinical
practice. Since the Selvester score provides an estimation of
the scar size, by relying only upon the widely available ECG
signal, the cost savings compared to its detection and quantification through costly imaging techniques, like CMR, could be
significant. Although attempts have been made to automate the
original version of the Selvester scoring model, which does not
include any confounder determination and in some cases not
even fractionated QRS, no published data demonstrate the automation of the updated, modified score [7]–[9], which is more
relevant to the clinical practice.
The primary objective of this paper is to develop an automated Selvester scoring system based on the updated Selvester
score, for the quantification of myocardial scar from 12-lead
ECG. To our knowledge, this is the first of its kind. The most
challenging part of the updated Selvester score is the identification and characterization of fractionated QRS segments, which
is required for confounder classification and awarding points. It
is common, even for well-trained cardiologists, to misdetect or
misclassify QRS fractionations, due to the variability of fractionated QRS, when manually inspecting the ECG trace. On the
other hand, the evolution of signal processing methods, during
the previous decade, provided various techniques for the automated analysis of the ECG signal [10]. In this paper, we propose
a novel algorithm for the automated detection and pattern identification of fractionated QRS segments, based on the stationary wavelet transform (SWT), which alleviates the problems of
manual fractionation detection and provides a tool for in-depth
analysis of fractionated ECG. In our approach, the operations
of detecting fractionated QRS and ascertaining its morphology,
classification of the confounders and the subsequent scoring
mechanism are all integrated under one framework, resulting
in an end-to-end realization of the automated updated Selvester
scoring system which, with no human intervention, can compute
the Selvester score in a fast and accurate manner. In our design,
we follow the definitions of fractionation as provided in [6].
To evaluate the performance of the developed system, standard
12-lead ECG recordings were obtained from patients known to
have ischemic heart disease, enrolled in a study at the University
Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust. The confounder
classification and Selvester scores were manually calculated by
expert cardiologists for all records and then were compared with
the same as calculated by the proposed automated system. The
results show that for classifying the confounders, the automated
system agrees to the manual classification in 94% (48 out of 51
records) of the cases. Similar accuracy (47 out of 51 records)
was also observed in the computation of the Selvester score by
the automated system, within 1-point of the manual scoring.
These results show that the proposed system exhibits clinically
acceptable performance.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we
provide a brief background of the updated Selvester score and
the definitions of fractionations in the QRS. Section III describes
the algorithmic development of the automated updated Selvester
scoring system including a novel algorithm for detecting fractionations in the QRS-complex and ascertaining the fraction-

ated QRS morphology and confounder class. In Section IV, we
present experimental results for validating the developed system
while conclusion is drawn in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Updated Selvester Scoring System
The updated Selvester QRS score is a 50-criteria/31-point
method for approximating scarring in the left ventricle from
ECG recordings. The scoring criteria are selected according to
the conduction pattern of the ECG, in order to take account of
features which are part of common disease processes but might
be mistaken for those representing scar. Such confounding categories considered are LBBB, right bundle branch block (RBBB),
left anterior fascicular block (LAFB), LVH, RBBB+LAFB, or
a normal pattern. The presence of these is determined according to the electrical axis of the heart, various QRS width and
amplitude measurements and morphological features, including
the QRS pattern and the presence of fractionations in the QRS
seen as notching, slurring, or slowing. In addition, the criterion
thresholds are adjusted to account for changes on the ECG due
to right atrial overload/right ventricular hypertrophy (defined by
a P-wave amplitude in V 1 ≥ 0.1 mV or in aV F ≥ 0.175 mV),
and for younger men with increased voltage and older women
with lower voltage. The ECG leads considered in the scoring
rules are I, II, aVL, aVF, and V1 through V6 and points are then
awarded according to the presence of fractionations in QRS
and various durations and amplitude criteria [6]. Each Selvester
score point represents 3% of myocardial scar. The detailed description of the scoring scheme including the confounder determination is described vividly in [6] and therefore is omitted
here for brevity.
B. Fractionated QRS
Fractionations in QRS result from delayed conduction and
typically are visible in three forms: notching, slurring, and slowing. Notching is defined as a reversal in the QRS trace with an
angle > 90◦ and amplitude > 0.05 mV. As an example, Fig. 1(a)
shows an R-wave where two notches are present. Contrary to
notches, slurs are segments where an ECG signal exhibits minuscule change in amplitude between successive samples, thereby
creating a “plateau”-like segment. Fig. 1(b) shows an example
of slurring in an R-wave. The third component of fractionation,
slowing, is characterized by an almost smooth declined rate of
change in the QRS waveform. Although it is closely similar
to slurring, the major difference is that slowing segments have
a finite gradient (angle < 90◦ ) compared to the “plateau”-like
nature of slurring. Fig. 1(c) shows an example of slowing in the
S-wave.
It is to be noted that fractionation may occur in any of the
three waves (Q, R, and S) of the QRS-complex resulting into
a number of different morphologies of fractionated QRS, e.g.,
RS, RSR , RSR S , etc., where by definition, the preceding positive/negative deflection is characterized as R-/S -peak and the
succeeding as R -/S -peak. Two such morphologies (RS and

BONO et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN AUTOMATED UPDATED SELVESTER QRS SCORING SYSTEM

(a)
Fig. 1.

(b)

(c)

Three types of fractionation. (a) Example of two notches in the QRS. (b) Example of slurring in the QRS. (c) Example of slowing in the QRS.

(a)
Fig. 2.

195

(b)

Two examples of fractionated QRS pattern. (a) RS pattern with slurring on the S-wave. (b) RSR S pattern with additional deflections (notches).

A. ECG Database

Fig. 3.

Block diagram of the automated Selvester scoring system.

RSR S ) are shown in Fig. 2 as an example. Successful determination of these typical patterns is of high importance for the
Selvester scoring system as the overall fractionated QRS patterns are used both for confounder classification as well as for
awarding points.

III. ALGORITHMIC FORMULATION
The algorithmic flow of the proposed automated Selvester
scoring system is depicted in Fig. 3. It consists of four main
parts—isoelectric line detection and QRS wave segmentation,
fractionated QRS detection, and its morphology characterization, and the implementation of the actual scoring scheme. The
actual scoring can be divided into two parts, viz., confounder
classification and the point awarding procedure. In the following sections, each of these blocks is explained in details. In the
proposed algorithm, the only inputs are the ECG signal itself
(one PQRST-complex) and the temporal locations of the P-onset
and P-offset, if the P-wave appears on the ECG signal as well
as the QRS-onset and QRS-offset.

In our investigation, we used 51 standard 12-lead ECG
records from patients enrolled in a study at the University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust. All subjects underwent
examinations particularly for the detection of myocardial scar
through elaborate medical tests (i.e., CMR), thus there was unambiguous knowledge on the presence and extent of scarring
which is the paramount requirement for validating this paper
as in essence, the Selvester score tries to estimate the extent
of scarring from the ECG. Such a cohort provides a suitable
database for the formulation of our fractionation detection algorithm and the automated Selvester scoring system. However, the
digital ECG recordings of the 51 subjects could not be utilized
directly due to proprietary encryption applied by the manufacturer of the acquisition device. We therefore opted to employ
the ECGScan software, clinically validated in [11], for its ability to reconstruct a digital ECG from printed paper ECGs, in
order to manually digitize the 51 signals used in our analysis
from printed paper ECGs at a rate of 1000 samples/s. The signal quality of the digitized ECGs was carefully examined and
uniformly endorsed, from a clinical perspective, by three practicing expert cardiologists, at the very beginning of our experimentation. As a second level of verification, the digitized ECGs
were also used by the cardiologists in the manual calculation
of the Selvester score (see Section IV). The 1-KHz digitization
rate was chosen in order to have sufficient resolution in capturing the abrupt changes in the direction, thus the monotonicity
of the ECG trace in fractionated QRS segments. Considering
the experience of the cardiologists, it is imperative to employ

196

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

such a high sampling frequency for detecting and classifying
fractionated QRS segments unambiguously. In addition, latest
generation 12-lead ECG machines, both hospital-based and ambulatory, are capable of acquiring the ECG signal with such high
sampling frequencies (even higher than 1 KHz).
B. Isoelectric Line Detection and Segmentation
The detection of the isoelectric line of the PQRST complex
is critical here since it is used as the reference for calculating
the amplitudes of ECG peaks. In principle, we follow the same
method described in [12] for its extraction, where two median
filters are used with time window of 200 and 600 ms. In addition,
we use a third median filter of time window (P-offset–QRSonset) only when the P-wave is present. The output of the series
of median filters is considered as the extracted isoelectric line.
Once the isoelectric line is detected we apply it for determining the different waves present in the QRS-complex by finding
out the intersection points of the isoelectric line and the QRScomplex as it is localized by the QRS boundaries, used as inputs.
The QRS-onset and QRS-offset are considered as the beginning
instance of the first wave and the ending point of the last wave,
respectively, and excluded from the intersection investigation.
The process is depicted pictorially in Fig. 4 for the two samples
of Fig. 2. If two consecutive intersection points occur within
5 ms, only the first one is considered as the other is attributed to
local fluctuation. In addition an amplitude rule, which stipulates
that the peak of each detected wave, defined by two successive
intersection points should demonstrate higher than ±0.009 mV
separation from the isoelectric line was applied, following the
cardiologists directives. If this is not satisfied, the detected interval is again attributed to local fluctuation and the latter intersection point is discarded. In this process, although theoretically
we should have two intersection points, since sometimes one or
two of the waves may not be present, the occurrence of less than
two intersection points is normal. Conversely, in the presence
of fractionated segments [see Fig. 4(b)], additional intersection
points may be encountered. However, in all cases between a
pair of intersection points we follow the clinical definitions of
Q, R, and S waves based on the polarity of the deflections and
their characteristic sequence of occurrence, in identifying them
individually.
C. Detection of Fractionation in the QRS-Complex
Over the years the time-frequency localization property of
discrete wavelet transform (DWT) with various forms of mother
wavelet has been used successfully for detecting the temporal
positions of the constituent waves of an ECG [13]–[15]. It is in
principle a cascaded structure of filters where the transfer function of each of them is determined by the mathematical form of
the mother wavelet used. In essence, it decomposes an input signal into different resolution scales by computing two vectors of
detailed (cD) and approximate (cA) coefficients, respectively. In
our paper, we selected the Haar function as the mother wavelet.
According to the definition of the Haar function, the cD coefficients generated, at each DWT resolution scale, are proportional
to the derivative of the local averages of the input which is a fil-

tered version of the original signal [16]. This is the main feature
of DWT that is used in detecting the various waves in an ECG.
Thus, any peak occurring in an ECG time series is manifested
as a pair of maxima–minima (sign change) and a zero-crossing
or zero-value point between them in the cD space [14], [17].
This fundamental principle allows one to explore the monotonicity of a given signal by applying Haar DWT. Since the
three classes of fractionations described in Section II are in
essence deviations from monotonicity, one may use the Haar
DWT for detecting QRS fractionations, through exploration of
the cD coefficients value and characterizing them. In principle
other mother wavelets (e.g., quadratic spline) share the same
derivative-proportionality property as Haar, in this respect and
therefore can also be adopted for analyzing the monotonicity of
the ECG signal. However, Haar wavelet is the simplest form of
wavelets from a computational complexity point of view. Subsequently, in our paper we opted to choose the Haar function as
the mother wavelet. In addition, since the DWT maintains the
temporal resolution of the input signal, the monotonicity deviations can also be localized in time. Nevertheless, conventional
DWT suffers from the fact that at each level of decomposition
the number of input samples is reduced to half and therefore
higher decomposition scales suffer from reduced time resolution. The SWT is a class of DWT that eliminates this problem
and achieves a time-invariant decomposition by removing the
subsamplers after each filtering operation and interpolating the
impulse response of the filters [18]. Therefore, for detecting the
presence of fractionations in the QRS-complex we have used
the SWT with the Haar function, as the main analysis method.
Although in our fractionation detection algorithm, we predominantly adopted the clinical definition of the different types
of QRS fractionation [6], it is possible, due to local fluctuations,
to misdetect a type of fractionation as another. The detection
of notching due to its distinct morphology is less vulnerable to
this effect, but because of the possibly similar morphology of
slurring and slowing, misclassifications may occur in the presence of local fluctuations. To mitigate this effect our strategy is
to follow the expert decisions of practicing cardiologists. Based
on their opinion, we have empirically formulated a set of rules
for distinguishing the slowing segments, in particular from slurring. To achieve this, three expert cardiologists first annotated
the fractionations (notching, slurring, and slowing) in ten ECG
signals chosen by them as representative examples that exhibit
extreme types of fractionations and more specifically when slurring and slowing segments appear to be quite similar. During
the annotation they were blind to the algorithmic outcome. The
algorithmic outcomes were then validated against the manual
annotations for these ten ECGs and were found very much accurate particularly for notching and slurring. On the other hand,
slowing segments, because of their close similarity to slurring,
were sometimes detected as slurs. We therefore tuned the set of
rules for the detection of slowing, using the manual annotations
of the cardiologists for the ten ECG signals. In the following
sections, we analyze in details the rules we formulated for the
detection and classification of the three types of QRS fractionation. The practical soundness of these rules is ultimately assessed during the evaluation of the proposed automated updated

BONO et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN AUTOMATED UPDATED SELVESTER QRS SCORING SYSTEM

(a)

197

(b)

Fig. 4. Identification of the QRS morphological pattern after the extraction of the isoelectric line. The solid arrows denote the intersection points between the
isoelectric line and the QRS trace. The QRS waves are also numbered. (a) RS-pattern (2 deflections). (b) RSR S -pattern (4 deflections).

Selvester scoring system (see Section IV) and particularly in the
system’s ability to accurately categorize testing records in the
correct confounder group.
The isoelectric line compensated and segmented ECG signal is first subjected to SWT analysis up to 24 resolution scale
and then we focus entirely on the cD coefficients of the already
localized QRS-complex. The coefficients of the 21 resolution
scale were discarded from our analysis since it is already established (which also agrees to our observation) that this scale
is mainly dominated by high-frequency noise components [13].
Therefore, we concentrate in analyzing the cD coefficients of
the remaining resolution scales (22 , 23 , and 24 ).
1) Extraction of Notching: Following the basic principle of
monotony deviation detection, presented at the beginning of this
section, in the cD space of a resolution scale, a potential notch
in a QRS-complex is represented as two local maxima–minima
pairs with a zero-crossing point between each of them. This is
because, in a notch the direction change of the trace occurs twice
[see Fig. 1(a)], hence each maxima–minima pair corresponds to
each change in direction. On the other hand, the main peak of
each one of the QRS waves is expected to be represented by
one pair of maxima–minima since the direction change occurs
only once. This distinction is crucial as it enables one to classify
notches and main peaks accurately.
We start the analysis by detecting all the zero-crossing points
in the cD space of resolution scale 22 (cD_l2), thus localizing each of the maxima–minima pairs present at that scale. For
each zero-crossing point in cD_l2 located between cD coefficient number j−1 and j, we investigate whether there exists
a zero-crossing point between j−3 and j−1 cD coefficients in
resolution scale 23 , (cD_l3). The reason behind this process is
that it is established that the high-frequency components (like a
notch) of an input signal are mainly localized within the scales
22 and 23 . Therefore, if a zero-crossing point is detected in
both of these resolution scales corresponding to the same timeindexed position of the signal then it can be concluded that a
valid notch is present and this is not a noise-based fluctuation.
The difference of the indices used for the cD space search window, in 22 and 23 scales is related to the inherent delay of the
SWT computing process and therefore the windows position is
adjusted accordingly. The process for detecting notches in the
QRS is depicted in Fig. 5. To eliminate potential notches present

Fig. 5.

Detection of notches in the signal of Fig. 1(a).

on the isoelectric line (which are of no clinical significance), we
measure the amplitude of each of the detected notches with respect to the isoelectric line and those with amplitudes within
±0.015 mV of the isoelectric line are disregarded as they are
considered to be isoelectric line fluctuations. The rest of the
detections are retained as valid notches.
2) Extraction of Slurring: As mentioned in Section II, slurring is characterized by a “plateau”-like segment in the QRScomplex. Therefore, according to the principle described earlier
for cD coefficient computation, a slurring segment in the QRScomplex manifests itself as a sequence of consecutive zeros
in the cD space. The analysis for detecting consecutive zeros is
carried out in the cD_l2 space. If a sequence of two or more consecutive zeros is detected in the cD_l2 space a slurring segment
is identified with its beginning and ending (in time) coinciding
with the first and last zero of the sequence in the cD_l2 space.
However, in practice we observed that even within a clinically
accepted slurring segment (as identified by expert cardiologists)
local fluctuations may occur which may result in a little deviation

198

Fig. 6.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Detection of slurs in the signal of Fig. 1(b).

from a strict “plateau”-like morphology. This phenomenon is reflected in the cD_l2 space as two or more sequences of consecutive zeros with finite values of cD_l2, in between them. Since
they are still clinically considered as part of the same slurring
segment, during the analysis we adopted the strategy that if two
or more sequences of consecutive zeros occur within 8 ms of
each other then they are considered as part of the same slurring segment. This time window is selected both by observation
and in consultation with the expert cardiologists. In this case, the
time position corresponding to the first zero of the first sequence
in cD_l2 space is considered as the beginning of the slurring segment and the last zero in the last sequence is considered as the
end point of it. An example of this procedure is shown in Fig. 6
where two sequences of more than two consecutive zeros occur
within the same slurring segment. However, since their separation is less than 8 ms, they can altogether characterize the
beginning and the end of a single slurring segment. Similar to
the notching fractionation, once a slurring segment is detected,
its amplitude with respect to the isoelectric line is measured and
if it is found within ±0.015 mV of the isoelectric line value, it
is disregarded and attributed as part of the isoelectric line itself.
This process eliminates any slurring-like segments toward the
end of a QRS-complex when the ECG trace gradually returns to
the isoelectric line-a typical phenomenon observed in a number
of leads.
3) Extraction of Slowing: Unlike the notching and slurring
segments where due to their specific morphologies a one-to-one
mapping exists between the cD space and time series data, no
one-to-one mapping of that kind exists for slowing segments.
This is due to the fact that slowing is defined as a change of
the rate of the ECG trace that is neither a sudden change in
direction of ≥ 90◦ (like notch) nor a “plateau” (like slurring).
Therefore, we have employed an empirical method based on
experimental observation for detecting the slowing segments as
described in the following. We have experimentally observed

Fig. 7. Detection of slowing in the signal of Fig. 1(c). Squares indicate the
zero-crossing points in cD_l4 (z1, z2), circles indicate the zero crossings in
gradc D l4 (q1, q2, q3, q4, q5) within [z1, z2] and the star that coincides with
q2 indicates the detected slowing fractionation after applying (1).

more than 51 ECG records from ischemic patients, that when a
clinically identified slowing segment is present, the corresponding cD coefficients show at least three local extrema between
two consecutive zero-crossing points (or zero-value points) at
the 24 resolution scale (cD_l4). This directly implies that in the
gradient space of cD_l4, at least three zero-crossing points (each
one corresponding to an extrema in cD_l4) will exist. Having
detected all the zero-crossing and zero-value points as part of
the extraction of notching and slurring, we translate the intervals between them to the cD_l4 space by appropriately shifting
them and consequently define a search window within which the
gradient (gradcD l4 ) of cD_l4 is computed. This enables us to
compute the number of zero-crossings in gradcD l4 within each
of those intervals. The gradcD l4 is approximated by calculating
the forward difference on the two edges and the centered difference in the interior points of each window. Let us consider, as
an example (as shown in Fig. 7) that we have two zero-crossing
(or zero-value) points in cD_l4 at positions z1 and z2 and the
gradient of cD_l4 exhibits at least three zero-crossing points
(according to our observed criterion) within that interval at positions q1, q2, q3. We then first extract the cD_l4 coefficient with
maximum absolute value (M) within [z1 , z2 ]. Since z1 , z2 are
sequential zero crossings the value of cD_l4 will not change sign
between these two points. Following we check the sign of the
gradient in [q1 , q2 ] and if found positive/negative we extract the
maximum/minimum value of gradcD l4 in [q1 , q2 ] and the minimum/maximum value of gradcD l4 in [q2 , q3 ] denoted as A1, A2
in Fig. 7, respectively. If there are more than three zero-crossing
points in gradcD l4 (as it is the case in Fig. 7), we consider only
an odd number of zero crossings and extract either the maximum or the minimum value of gradcD l4 in each subsequent

BONO et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN AUTOMATED UPDATED SELVESTER QRS SCORING SYSTEM

Fig. 8.

Detection of the R-peak of Fig. 1(a) as slur.

window defined by the number of zero-crossing points, based
on the sign of the gradcD l4 within that window. If there are
more than three zero-crossing points in gradcD l4 then accordingly there will be additional pairs of maxima–minima. We
then compare each of these pairs (|A1|, |A2| and |A3|, |A4|),
starting with the one with highest absolute sum of amplitudes
(|A1| + |A2| > |A3| + |A4|), to the absolute value of M according to the relations stated in (1) and if both of these are
satisfied a slowing fractionation is detected and localized in the
middle zero-crossing point (q2 in our example), from the three
(q1 , q2 , q3 ) zero crossings used to define the search windows of
A1, A2 in gradcD l4
|A2| > 0.01M
|A1| + |A2| > 0.075M.

(1)

D. Extraction of the QRS Morphology Pattern
Based on the presence of fractionation in the QRS-complex,
as detected by the methods described in the foregoing sections,
one needs to determine the overall fractionated morphology of
the QRS-complex in order to proceed for confounder classification and point awarding as mentioned in Section II-B. Note
that the fractionation detection algorithms used here, in essence
detect the deviation from monotonicity in an ECG trace. Therefore, it is intuitive that within the pool of “detected” fractionations even the nonfractionated (normal) Q, R, and S peaks will
also exist, since morphologically at the peaks, these waves also
exhibit deviation from monotonicity. Fig. 8 shows an example
where a clinically accepted nonfractionated R-peak is identified
as a slurring segment since the rate of change of the ECG trace
at the peak point is small, thus creating a small “plateau”-like
segment. In addition, in several cases, the same fractionation
segment could be detected as more than one type depending on
their local fluctuation. To eliminate erroneously detected fractionation segments and thereby extract the true fractionated QRS

199

morphology a set of empirical rules based on clinical observations and definitions has been applied and described as follows.
1) If two fractionations are detected within 10 ms of each
other, they are considered as one and the latter type is
retained.
2) If three or more fractionations are detected in a wave
interval, then the normal wave peak is considered present
alongside one or more fractionation segments.
3) Detected fractionations within 6 ms of the QRS boundaries
are ignored.
4) Of all the detected fractionations within a wave interval (Q,
R, and S, etc.) the one which exhibits highest separation
from the isoelectric line is labeled as the actual wave peak
and in the case of only one fractionation detected, this is
classified as the main peak in that wave labeled as Q, R,
or S peak.
5) Detection of two fractionations within a wave, indicates
that either slurring or slowing fractionation exists along
with the main peak in that wave.
6) Each notch will always be associated with two fractionations detected. Of the pair of points the notch is localized
based on the deflection direction of the wave. If the wave
is positive (R-wave) the maximum of the two is used, conversely if it is negative (Q-wave, S-wave) the minimum
one is considered as the notch.
7) Slowing fractionations do not correspond to main wave
peaks.
Based on these rules, the presence of fractionation segments
will define the actual fractionated QRS morphology.
E. Confounder Classification and Point Awarding
Once all the fractionated segments and the final QRS morphological pattern is extracted, they are applied for confounder
classification and subsequently for awarding points. The basic
rules for these purposes are shown in the flowchart of Fig. 9
which follows, without any modification the directives established by Loring et al. and has been reproduced from Figs. 2
to 4 which appear in [6]. For brevity, the specific rules for each
confounder category are not listed here, but they were implemented exactly as they appear in Fig. 5 of [6]. As can be seen
from Fig. 9, one needs to compute the electrical axis of the heart
in order to invoke the entire process.
Typically, all the electrical signals (depolarizations) generated
from the heart can be represented as a vector and its orientation from the origin is considered as the electrical axis of the
heart. Deviation or changes from the normal axis values may
be indicative of pathological conditions. The conventional way
of calculating the heart’s electrical axis is to identify the isoelectric lead—the lead whose net deflection (R_ampl - S_ampl
- Q_ampl) is closer to the isoelectric line. The heart’s electrical axis is then calculated as perpendicular to the orientation
of that lead. However, it is also recognized that this definition
has its own shortcomings and therefore following the directives
of expert cardiologists we adopted a modified way for identifying the electrical axis as described later [19], [20]. First,
the area under the curve (AUC) is computed using trapezoid

200

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

onset/offset in addition to the calculated electrical axis. For
extracting these ECG features and various measurements of
ECG waves (like amplitudes and durations), we have previously proposed an automated algorithm that extracts the ECG
features with high accuracy using time domain morphology
analysis principles (termed as TDMG algorithm) [21]. Therefore, this TDMG algorithm can be integrated with the automated Selvester scoring algorithm proposed here to develop
a self-contained fully automated system, henceforth termed as
the fully automated Selvester scoring system (FASS). On the
other hand, manually annotated values of the required ECG parameters could be used as the primary inputs of the automated
Selvester scoring system proposed here, resulting in a semiautomated Selvester scoring system (SASS). Both these scenarios
are depicted in Fig. 9.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Formulation of the Evaluation Standard

Fig. 9. Flowchart of the automated system. Reproduced according to
Figs. 2–4 from [6].

rule for the QRS-complex of the limb leads (I, II, III, avL,
avF, and avR). The QRS boundaries and the derived isoelectric
line are used as reference for the AUC computation. Finally,
these AUCs are used for computing the heart’s electrical axis
from the following equations, where A# denotes the AUC of
lead #
xaxis = AI cos(0◦ ) + AII cos(60◦ ) + AIII cos(120◦ )
+ AavR cos(−150◦ )+AavL cos(−30◦ )+AavF cos(90◦ )
yaxis = AI sin(0◦ ) + AII sin(60◦ ) + AIII sin(120◦ )

To formulate the gold standard for evaluating the performance
of our system, three cardiologists independently classified the
confounder group and computed the updated Selvester score
for each of the 51 ECG records in manual fashion, following
the clinical standard procedure of the updated Selvester score
calculation [6]. The manual scores and confounding categories,
from each annotator, were then compared to each other and
whenever a disagreement was found a consensus among the
three annotators was reached. In the end of this process, a single
consented confounding category and manual score was considered for each record which was then used as the gold standard
for validating the outcomes of the automated system. In parallel
with the manual calculation, the confounding category and the
Selvester Score were derived for each of the 51 records from
the developed automated system as explained in the following.
During this process, the cardiologists were blind to the results
of the automated system.
B. Testing Strategy

We employed an integrated testing strategy for the proposed
system. This strategy involves two steps of validation—accuracy
(2) of the confounder classification and accuracy of the actual scoring. In order to isolate any erroneous effects originating from
∠axis =




⎧
⎫ the automated ECG parameter extraction, using the TDMG al360◦
yaxis
gorithm, that may affect the final performance of the complete
⎪
⎪
−1
⎪
⎪
, AI > 0
tan
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
system we run two different validation experiments—one with
2π
x
⎪
⎪
axis
⎪
⎪




⎨
⎬ the FASS system and the other with the SASS system, where
360◦
yaxis
◦
−1
−180 +
, AI < 0, AavF > 0 .
tan
the input ECG parameters (P-onset/offset, QRS-onset/offset)
⎪
⎪
2π 
xaxis
⎪
⎪


⎪
⎪
◦
⎪
⎪
are manually annotated by the expert cardiologists. In addition,
360
y
⎪
⎪
axis
⎪
⎩ 180◦ +
⎭ when doing the validation experiment with the FASS system,
, AI < 0, AavF < 0 ⎪
tan−1
2π
xaxis
in 26 records (half of the total records) we chose to calculate
(3)
the Selvester score from a different heartbeat than the ones
Once the electric axis of the heart is computed, we follow used in the SASS system, covering a wider range of heartbeats
the rules described in Fig. 9 for confounder classification and for the system evaluation. This enables us to make a consisawarding points. The individual Selvester scoring point rules for tency check for the performance of the FASS and SASS syseach confounder class are described in details in [6]. As men- tems when: 1) the same heartbeats are used in both cases (25
tioned, the developed system requires different ECG parameters cases) and 2) different heartbeats are used (26 cases) for the two
as its principal inputs including the P-onset/offset and the QRS- systems.
+ AavR sin(−150◦ )+AavL sin(−30◦ )+AavF sin(90◦ )

BONO et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN AUTOMATED UPDATED SELVESTER QRS SCORING SYSTEM

(a)
Fig. 10.

201

(b)

Cardiologists and automated system Confounder categorization results. (a) SASS. (b) FASS.

TABLE I
CATEGORIZATION DISCREPANCIES

TABLE II
CARDIOLOGISTS AND AUTOMATED SYSTEM AXIS VALUES FOR
RECORDS 27, 44, AND 48

1) Validation of the Confounder Classification: Fig. 10
shows the results of the confounder classification by the SASS
[see Fig. 10(a)] and the FASS [see Fig. 10(b)] systems compared to the manually inferred confounders by the cardiologist
team. Out of 51 records, the SASS system is able to classify
the confounders correctly in 48 records (94.1%) whereas the
FASS system does the same in 46 records (90%). Table I lists
the individual records that exhibited classification discordance
compared to the manual classification. Records 27, 36, and 44
were classified differently by both the FASS and SASS systems
whereas records 11 and 48 are additionally misclassified by the
FASS system. In records 27, 44, and 48 the disagreement results from the derived value of the hearts electrical axis. Table II
illustrates the differences in the axis calculations in these three
cases. In record 27, this was caused due to the extremely irregular shape of the ECG waveform on the avR lead which affected
the calculation of the axis from (3) resulting in a value (−23◦ ),
for both SASS and FASS systems, that diverges significantly
from the cardiologists value (−90◦ ). In record 44, the axis angle
was found to be −45.4◦ (FASS) and −57◦ (SASS) instead of
−30◦ provided by cardiologists. This was caused due to significant isoelectric line wandering which affected its approximation
from the automated systems, thus the value of the AUC in (3) and
ultimately the axis calculation. With these axis values, both for

SASS and FASS, the LAFB criteria are satisfied, thus the record
is misclassified by the automated systems as LAFB, instead of
the no confounders class given by cardiologists. It must be noted
than the axis calculation in FASS will also be affected by the
QRS boundaries provided by the TDMG algorithm. This was
the case in record 48, where the annotators value was −30◦ and
the automated system’s value was −43◦ and −47◦ for SASS and
FASS, respectively. The classification discrepancy was present
only in the case of FASS where the axis value satisfied the LAFB
criterion (axis ≤ −45◦ ). This was caused due to inaccurate QRS
boundaries obtained by the TDMG algorithm.
The misclassification of record 36 is attributed to a less accurate approximation of the baseline due to ST elevation. This
resulted into the terminal deflection (the last segment of the
QRS) to be classified as a negative deflection instead of a positive deflection and a valid notch to be disregarded due to the
amplitude criterion, hence leading to the confounder disagreement. Finally record 11 was classified differently by the FASS
system because of the QRS-onset value computed by the TDMG
algorithm, which resulted in a notching fractionation to be disregarded. According to the manual annotation the notch was
detected 41 ms after the onset of the QRS, whereas with TDMG
the same notch was detected 39 ms after the QRS-onset. Since
the updated Selvester scoring system stipulates that only fractionations located after 40 ms of the QRS-onset are considered
valid, the detected notch in the former case was accepted as
a valid notch, whereas it was disregarded in the latter, even
though the misdetection is only by 2 ms. These results also
provide a comprehensive way for validating the accuracy of
the algorithm proposed in Section III-C for detecting fractionations in the QRS-complex. Ignoring the cases of confounder
misclassification due to the axis mismatch and the less accurate
QRS-onset localization, it is evident that only in one case (record
36) the proposed fractionation detection algorithm fails to detect a notch, thereby giving a fractionation detection accuracy
of approximately 98%.
2) Validation of the Selvester Scoring: The comparisons of
the manually calculated Selvester score to both the SASS and
FASS systems are shown in Fig. 11 in the form of histograms of
the absolute difference in the scores of the 51 patients. For those

202

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 11. Histogram of the absolute difference between the cardiologists and
the automated system’s derived Selvester score.

Fig. 12. Comparison of the FASS and SASS systems against the Cardiologists
score on 25 records where the same beat was used for calculating the Selvester
score.

(resulting in the FASS system) shows comparable level of
accuracy.
records where confounders were found to be different, the final
score calculation in the automated implementation (both SASS
and FASS) was performed using the confounding categories of
the cardiologists. It can be seen that the SASS system is able
to match the manual scoring exactly in 45 out of 51 records
whereas for another three records it calculate the score within
1 point of the manual score. It is to be noted that in the clinical
practice the difference of 1 point is not considered significant
as it is well within the limit of human error. As a consequence,
it could be concluded that the proposed algorithm in its standalone form (i.e., SASS) exhibits an approximate accuracy of
94% in computing the final score. On the other hand, the FASS
system exhibits complete agreement with the manual scoring in
42 out of 51 records and an additional five records are within
1-point difference, therefore attaining an accuracy of approximately 92%. It is worth pointing out at this stage that, while
digitizing the paper ECGs, we have observed some loss of resolution, which quite understandably may have affected the final
score values. However, despite this fact, the accuracy exhibited
by the proposed system makes it quite promising.
As mentioned earlier, while evaluating the performance of
the FASS system, we have used 25 records with the same heartbeat that was used for the SASS system (manually annotated
by the cardiologists) in order to examine the dependence of the
FASS system on the TDMG algorithm used for extracting the
necessary ECG parameters (P-onset/offset, QRS-onset/offset).
Fig. 12 shows that under this condition 23 out of 25 records
are accurately scored by the SASS system whereas the same
level of accuracy is observed in 20 out of 25 records for the
FASS system. The two records that are scored differently than
the cardiologists in SASS, are also scored differently in FASS.
Surprisingly, the scores produced by SASS and FASS in these
are the same. In the additional three records scored differently
only by FASS, two records are scored within 1-point difference
and one record is scored within 2-points difference. From the
aforementioned results, it is evident that not only the proposed
algorithm in its stand-alone form gives high level of accuracy
for calculating the Selvester score, but also a fully automated
system integrating the proposed algorithm with the TDMG

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a novel system for the automated computation of the updated Selvester score that may
enable quantifying myocardial scar from less expensive ECG
recordings in the primary care. The novel algorithm based on
SWT for detecting and classifying fractionated QRS proposed
here, as the core of the system, exhibits approximately 98%
accuracy. Our validation results show that the proposed automated Selvester scoring system achieves 94% accuracy both in
classifying the confounders as well as in computing the actual
Selvester score which is well acceptable in the clinical community. Such high level of accuracy makes the proposed system a
potential candidate for a fast and large-volume screening tool for
scar estimation in the primary care from low-cost ECG recordings resulting in significant economic benefits in care delivery.
REFERENCES
[1] R. H. Selvester, J. C. Solomon, and T. L. Gillespie, “Digital computer
model of a total body electrocardiographic surface map: An adult maletorso simulation with lungs,” Circulation, vol. 38, pp. 684–690, 1968.
[2] R. E. Ideker, G. S. Wagner, W. K. Ruth, D. R. Alonso, S. P. Bishop, C.
M. Bloor, J. T. Fallon, G. J. Gottlieb, D. B.Hackel, H. R. Phillips, K. A.
Reimer, S. F. Roark, W. J. Rogers, R. M. Savage, R. D. White, and R. H.
Selvester, “Evaluation of a QRS scoring system for estimating myocardial
infarct size—Part II: Correlation with quantitative anatomic findings for
anterior infarcts,” Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1604–1614, 1982.
[3] G. S. Wagner, C. J. Freye, S. T. Palmeri, S. F. Roark, N. C. Stack,
R. E. Ideker, F. E. Harrell Jr., and R. H. Selvester, “Evaluation of a QRS
scoring system for estimating myocardial infarct size—Part I: Specificity
and observer agreement,” Circulation, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 342–347, 1982.
[4] D. G. Strauss, R. H. Selvester, J. A. Lima, H. Arheden, J. M. Miller,
G. Gerstenblith, E. Marbn, R. G. Weiss, G. F. Tomaselli, G. S. Wagner,
and K. C. Wu, “ECG quantification of myocardial scar in cardiomyopathy patients with or without conduction defects: Correlation with cardiac
magnetic resonance and arrhythmogenesis,” Circ. Arrhythm Electrophys.,
vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 327–336, 2008.
[5] D. G. Strauss and R. H. Selvester, “The QRS complexa biomarker that
images the heart: QRS scores to quantify myocardial scar in the presence
of normal and abnormal ventricular conduction,” J. Electrocardiol, vol. 42,
no. 1, pp. 85–96, 2009.
[6] Z. Loring, S. Chelliah, R. H. Selvester, G. S. Wagner, and D. G. Strauss,
“A detailed guide for quantification of myocardial scar with the Selvester
QRS score in the presence of electrocardiogram confounders,” J. Electrocardiol, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 544–554, 2011.

BONO et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN AUTOMATED UPDATED SELVESTER QRS SCORING SYSTEM

[7] B. M. Horáček, J. W. Warren, A. Albano, M. A. Palmeri, J. C. Rembert,
J. C. Greenfield Jr., and G. S. Wagner, “Development of an automated
selvester scoring system for estimating the size of myocardial infarction
from the electrocardiogram,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 162–
168, 2006.
[8] J. E. Pope, N. B Wagner, D. Dubow, J. H. Edmonds, G. S. Wagner, W.
K. Haisty Jr., “Development and validation of an automated method of
the selvester QRS scoring system for myocardial infarct size,” Amer. J.
Cardiol, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 734–738, 1988.
[9] J. Haisty, O. Pahlm, N. B. Wagner, J. E. Pope, and G. S. Wagner, “Performance of the automated complete selvester QRS scoring system in normal
subjects and patients with single and multiple myocardial infarctions,” J.
Amer. Col. Card., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 341–346, 1992.
[10] B.-U. Kohler, C. Hennig, and R. Orglmeister, “The principles of software
QRS detection,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–57,
Jan./Feb. 2002.
[11] F. Badilini, T. Erdem, W. Zareba, and A. J. Moss, “ECGScan: A method
for conversion of paper electrocardiographic printouts to digital electrocardiographic files,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 310–318, 2005.
[12] P. de Chazal, M. O’Dwyer, and R. Reilly, “Automatic classification of
heartbeats using ECG morphology and heartbeat interval features,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 1196–1206, Jul. 2004.
[13] J. Martinez, R. Almeida, S. Olmos, A. P. Rocha, and P. Laguna, “A
wavelet-based ECG delineator: Evaluation on standard databases,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 570–581, Apr. 2004.
[14] C. Li, C. Zheng, and C. Tai, “Detection of ECG characteristic points using
wavelet transforms,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 21–28,
Jan. 1995.
[15] J. Sahambi, S. Tandon, and R. Bhatt, “Using wavelet transforms for ECG
characterization. An on-line digital signal processing system,” IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 77–83, Jan. 1997.
[16] Z. R. Struzik and A. Siebes, “The haar wavelet transform in the time series
similarity paradigm,” in Proc. 3rd Eur. Conf. Principles Data Mining
Knowl. Discovery, 1999, pp. 12–22.
[17] S. Mallat, “Zero-crossings of a wavelet transform,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theor., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1019–1033, Jul. 1991.
[18] M. Shensa, “The discrete wavelet transform: Wedding the à trous and
Mallat algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Sig. Process., vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 2464–
2482, Oct. 1992.
[19] H. Burger and J. van Milaan, “Heart-vector and leads—Part III: Geometrical representation,” Br. Heart J., vol. 10, pp. 229–233, Oct. 1948.
[20] F. R. Baltazar, Basic and Bedside Electrocardiography. Baltimore, MD,
USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
[21] E. B. Mazomenos, T. Chen, A. Acharyya, A. Bhattacharya, J. Rosengarten,
and K. Maharatna, “A time-domain morphology and gradient based algorithm for ECG feature extraction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Technol.,
Mar. 2012, pp. 117–122.

Valentina Bono received the M.Sc. degree in
biomedical engineering from the University of Pisa,
Pisa, Italy, in 2012. She is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering in the
Electronics and Software Systems Group in the University of Southampton, Southampton, U.K.
Her research interests include biomedical signal
processing and image processing.

Evangelos B. Mazomenos received the diploma degree (5-year) in electrical and computer engineering
from the University of Patras, Patras, Greece, and
the Ph.D. degree from the School of Engineering
and Computer Science, University of Southampton,
Southampton, U.K., in 2006 and 2012, respectively.
He received the 2009 IET Leslie H. Paddle fellowship on postgraduate studies for Ph.D. research
on real-time target tracking in WSN. Since January
2011, he has been a Research Fellow in ECS. His
research interests include the area of WSNs with a
focus on positioning and tracking, biomedical signal processing, and dynamic
estimation algorithms.

203

Taihai Chen received the B.Eng. degree (First Class
Hons.) from the University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2009, and
the M.Sc. degree (Distinction) from University of
Southampton, Southampton, U.K., in 2010. Since
October 2010, he has been working toward the Ph.D.
degree in Electronic and Software Systems Research
Group in the University of Southampton.
His research interests include biomedical signal processing, low-power design techniques, pattern
recognition, machine learning, associated VLSI architectures, and next-generation healthcare systems.

James A. Rosengarten received the MBBS degree
from the University of London, London, U.K., in
2002.
He is currently Clinical Cardiologist in Southampton, U.K. Following training in general cardiology
in London and Wessex, he is now specializing in
heart rhythm disorders, including invasive testing and
implantable devices. He is currently the Research
Fellow in Cardiac Rhythm Management at University Hospital Southampton. Under the supervision of
Prof. Morgan and Prof. Hanson at the University of
Southampton, he is utilizing engineering techniques to discover novel biomarkers of sudden cardiac death risk.
Dr. Rosengarten became a member of the Royal College of Physicians
(MRCP(UK)) in 2005.

Amit Acharyya (M’13) received the Ph.D. degree in
2011 from the School of Electronics and Computer
Science, University of Southampton, Southampton,
U.K.
He is currently working as an Assistant Professor in the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT),
Hyderabad, India. His research interests include signal processing algorithms, VLSI architectures, low
power design techniques, computer arithmetic, numerical analysis, linear algebra, bioinformatics, and
electronic aspects of pervasive computing.

Koushik Maharatna (M’02) received the M.Sc. degree in electronic science from Calcutta University,
Kolkata, India, in 1995 and the Ph.D. degree from
Jadavpur University, Kolkata, in 2002.
From 1996 to 2000, he was involved in different
projects sponsored by the Government of India undertaken at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT)
Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India. From 2000 to 2003, he
was a Research Scientist in IHP, Frankfurt (Oder),
Germany. During this phase, his main involvement
was related to the design of a single-chip modem for
the IEEE 802.11a standard. In September 2006, he joined the School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, U.K., where he is
currently a Reader. His research interests include low-power VLSI and signal
processing for applications in DSP, communication and next-generation healthcare systems, computer arithmetic, analog signal processing, and bioinspired
circuits and systems.
Dr. Maharatna is a member of the IEEE VLSI System Application Technical
Committee.

204

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

John M. Morgan received the B.A. degree in natural
sciences from the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., in 1979, the MB BChir degree from
the Westminster Medical School, London, England,
in 1982, and the M.A. and M.D. degrees from Cambridge University in 1983 and 1991, respectively.
He was a Consultant Cardiologist, Wessex Cardiothoracic Centre in 1992, he founded the Wessex
Cardiac Arrhythmia Management Service which has
been recognized as a centre of clinical and research
excellence. He was an Honorary Professor at the University of Teesside in 2006 for his work in medical education and received a
personal chair in the School of Medicine, University of Southampton, in 2007.
He holds several published patents relating to the invention of novel interventional and device technologies. He supervises/has supervised several fellows
in doctoral research projects and continues to research and publish extensively
and is an internationally recognized Leader in his field. He also sits on a series
of national and international boards/professional associations and governing
bodies.
He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians (MRCP(UK)) in
1985 and Fellow (FRCP) in 1995.

Nick Curzen received the Ph.D. degree in vascular biology from Imperial College, London, U.K., in
1996.
He is a Consultant Cardiologist at University
Southampton Hospital, Southampton, U.K., and a
Professor of Interventional Cardiology at the University of Southampton, Southampton. From 1993
to 1996, he trained in cardiology at Southampton,
Bournemouth, Royal Brompton, London Chest, and
St Bartholomew’s Hospital. His research interests include platelet function, myocardial ischaemia, cardiac magnetic resonance, and scar. He has more than 130 peer review scientific
papers and has edited three cardiology textbooks.
In November 2010, he came top of a national poll of interventional cardiologist published in the Daily Mail.

