IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

257

Dynamical Characteristics of Surface EMG Signals
of Hand Grasps via Recurrence Plot
Gaoxiang Ouyang, Xiangyang Zhu, Zhaojie Ju, Member, IEEE, and Honghai Liu, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Recognizing human hand grasp movements through
surface electromyogram (sEMG) is a challenging task. In this paper, we investigated nonlinear measures based on recurrence plot,
as a tool to evaluate the hidden dynamical characteristics of sEMG
during four different hand movements. A series of experimental
tests in this study show that the dynamical characteristics of sEMG
data with recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) can distinguish
different hand grasp movements. Meanwhile, adaptive neuro-fuzzy
inference system (ANFIS) is applied to evaluate the performance
of the aforementioned measures to identify the grasp movements.
The experimental results show that the recognition rate (99.1%)
based on the combination of linear and nonlinear measures is much
higher than those with only linear measures (93.4%) or nonlinear
measures (88.1%). These results suggest that the RQA measures
might be a potential tool to reveal the sEMG hidden characteristics of hand grasp movements and an effective supplement for the
traditional linear grasp recognition methods.
Index Terms—Hand grasp, nonlinear measures, recurrence plot
(RP), surface electromyogram (sEMG).

I. INTRODUCTION
HE surface electromyogram (sEMG) reflects both peripheral and central properties of the neuromuscular system
and presents information of the neural activation of muscles [1].
Thus, the analysis of the sEMG signals is particularly attractive in that it provides relatively easy access to the physiological processes that allow the muscles to generate force and
movement [2], [3]. One important potential application using
sEMG signals lies in controlling prosthetic devices [4]–[7], for
instance hand prostheses [8], [9], due to the fact that sEMG signals contain the electrical activities of arm muscle contraction

T

Manuscript received November 6, 2012; revised February 24, 2013; accepted
April 27, 2013. Date of publication May 15, 2013; date of current version
December 31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program (973 Program) of China under Grant 2011CB013305, in part by
Leverhulme Trust under Grant 13754, and in part by U.K. National Engineering
and Physical Scientific Research Council under Grant EP/G041377/1.
G. Ouyang and Z. Ju are with the Intelligent Systems and Biomedical Robotics
Group, School of Creative Technologies, University of Portsmouth, England,
PO1 2DJ, U.K. (e-mail: gx.ouyang@gmail.com; zhaojie.ju@port.ac.uk).
H. Liu is with the Intelligent Systems and Biomedical Robotics Group, School
of Creative Technologies, University of Portsmouth, England, PO1 2DJ, U.K.
and also with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration,
School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China (e-mail: honghai.liu@port.ac.uk).
X. Zhu is with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration,
School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China (e-mail: mexyzhu@sjtu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2261311

that undergo many complex transitions in different hand movements [10]. However, there are inherent difficulties in deriving a
general model on the relationship between the recorded sEMG
and hand gestures when humans perform contractions [11]. In
order to control a prosthetic device, the fundamental challenge
is to efficiently handle sEMG signals and identify the intention
of the users [12]. Meanwhile, the exploration of inherent features of sEMG signals could be of benefit in understanding the
mechanisms of neuromuscular systems. Therefore, there is a
growing interest in tackling this challenge [13].
Various methods have been proposed to extract valuable information from sEMG signals ranging from traditional linear
methods such as time and frequency analysis to nonlinear methods. In the time domain, traditional methods of EMG amplitude
analysis mainly consist of the mean absolute value (MAV), number of zero crossings (ZC), waveform length (WL), and number
of slope sign (SS) changes [14], [15]. It should be noted that,
during a sustained isometric contraction, there is a phenomenon
called EMG spectrum compression. That is to say that there is an
increase in the amplitude of the low frequency band and a relative decrease in the higher frequency band [16]. To some extent,
these traditional methods of EMG amplitude have the capability
of tracking muscular changes [15]. However, traditional methods of sEMG amplitude and spectral analysis are not effective
in analyzing complex transient signals [17]. In particular, the
spectral analysis is based on an assumption that the observed
variations of electrical field of muscle activity are time-invariant
(stationary) processes [16]. Therefore, these traditional methods
fail to detect the critical feature of sEMG data during transient
human movement since this assumption is inconsistent with
sEMG dynamics.
Nonlinear methods derived from the theory of nonlinear dynamical systems (also called chaos theory) recently have been
proposed to analyze the sEMG signals [16]. These methods such
as the Lyapunov exponents and fractal dimension extract the informative features from sEMG data to detect the muscle status
changes [18]. However, chaos-based approaches assume that the
signal is stationary and originates from a low dimensional nonlinear system [19]. In practice, the sEMG signal is a nonstationary signal and stems from a highly nonlinear system, which is a
complex signal embedded in noise [20]. It is thus promising to
develop new methods to characterize sEMG changes in different
neural activation of muscles based on nonlinear methods. Moreover, recently reported sEMG analysis techniques and tools have
made it possible to extract the substantial meaningful information from recordings of the neuromuscular system [16], [21].
Note that chaos-based approaches should be employed to analyze sEMG data in constrained conditions [13].

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

258

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

It is evident that nonlinear methods have significantly inspired
research in sEMG signal analysis. For instance, a recurrence
quantification analysis (RQA) was employed to analyze the nonlinear dynamical characteristics of sEMG data [3]. One of its key
features is the ability of describing nonlinear nature of short and
nonstationary signal corrupted with noise [22]. RQA methods
had been broadly applied to the analysis of physiological data,
such as electroencephalogram data [23], fMRI data [24], heart
signals [25], and EMG data [26], [27]. A number of experimental studies had showed that RQA methods have high potential of
detecting changes in sEMG due to muscle contractions [28] or
fatigue [29]. For example, Yuan et al. employed RQA measures
and BP neural network to classify eight forearm motions, which
has been proved to achieve a desirable motion classification accuracy [30]. This study aims to investigate whether or not the
RQA measures can extract the sEMG hidden characteristics of
hand grasp movements so that it can be employed as an effective
supplement for the traditional linear grasp recognition methods.

Fig. 1.

Three hand grasping tasks.

Eight (two female, six male) healthy right-handed subjects
were volunteered for this study. Their ages range from 23 years
old to 40 years old, and on average it is 32.5 years old; the
body height on average is 175.5 cm; the body mass on average
is 70 kg. All participants were given informed consent prior to
the experiments according to the University of Portsmouth CCI
Faculty Ethics Committee.

of these four muscles and confirmed by specific muscle contractions, which include manually resisted finger flexion, extension,
and abduction. The captured sEMG signals were visualized on
a computer screen in order to provide the participants feedback
for their choosing the positions of the electrodes with stronger
sEMG signals.
To investigate the dynamical characteristics of sEMG data
during different grasp gestures, EMG signals were selected from
grasp states of no action (dataset I), grasp, and lift an orange
using five fingers (dataset II), grasp, and lift a can full of rice
using five fingers with the thumb abduction (dataset III) and hold
and lift a dumbbell (dataset IV) intervals as shown in Fig. 1. In
this study, 80 4-channel 1 s EMG epochs were selected for each
dataset. Short (1 s) EMG signals were used since the duration
of the grasp gesture is only about a few seconds. The criterion
for the selection of the EMG signals from hand grasps is that
the interval is the first 1 s of hand starting to hold and lift the
objects.

A. Experimental Procedure

C. Phase Space Reconstruction

The experiment consists of both freely grasps and different
grasping gestures. Each type of the grasps was repeated ten
times. Every motion lasted about 2 s. Between every two repetitions, participants were instructed to relax their hands for 2 s in
the intermediate state, which is the status of opening hand naturally without any muscle contraction. Once one motion with ten
repetitions was completed, participants were instructed to relax
their hand for 2 min before the next motion started. This was
designed to overcome the effects of occurred muscle fatigue.

EMG data are nonstationary time series. The first step in
the analysis of a signal using nonlinear dynamics theory is the
reconstruction of the phase space trajectory of the signal [31].
The methods involving time delay are usually used to embed a
scalar time series into a m-dimensional space, it is

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

B. Data Collection
The four EMG electrodes were applied to the subject’s right
forearm muscles, i.e., flexor carpi radialis (channel 1), flexor
carpi ulnaris (channel 2), flex or pollicis longus (channel 3), and
flexor digitorum profundus (channel 4). The sEMG data were
recorded using DataLINK system from Biometrics LTD with a
gel-skin contact area of about 4 cm2 for each bipolar electrode
and a center-to-center recording distance of 20 mm. The sampling frequency of DataLINK system in our experiment was set
to be 1000 Hz and sEMG signals were amplified 1000 times and
bandwidth is 20 to 460 Hz using a sEMG amplifier (SX230FW
sEMG Amplifier, Biometrics, Ltd.). To obtain good-quality signals, subjects were scrubbed with alcohol and shaved if necessary and then electrodes were applied over the body using the
die cut medical grade double-sided adhesive tape. Electrodes locations were selected according to the musculoskeletal system

xk = (uk , uk +τ , . . . , uk +(m −1)τ )

(1)

where k = 1, 2, . . . , L − (m − 1)τ, τ is the delay time, and m is
the embedding dimension, m ≥ 2. The difficulty of this method
is the choice of the delay time τ and the minimum embedding
dimension, m.
Takens’ theorem assumes that the data are infinite and noise
free, where the delay time τ can be chosen almost arbitrarily.
However, real EMG datasets are always finite and noisy; the
choice of the delay time must therefore be carefully considered.
If τ is too small, the reconstructed vector is too close to serve as
independent coordinates; if τ is too large, the reconstructed vector is independent and loses the connection with each other [32].
The most common method for choosing a proper time delay is
based on the detection of the first local minimum of the mutual
information (MI) function [33], since the first minimum of the
MI(τ ) portrays the time delay where the signal ut+τ adds maximal information to the knowledge obtained from ut [33]. The
MI method produces nonlinear characteristics of time series,
so it is better to estimate time delay than linear autocorrelation
functions.

OUYANG et al.: DYNAMICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE EMG SIGNALS OF HAND GRASPS VIA RECURRENCE PLOT

As for the choice of the embedding dimension, if the m is
too small, the geometry is not entirely unfolded. As shown in
Takens’ embedding theorem, it certainly unfolds the attractor
in m-dimensional space when m < 2d + 1, where d is the dimension of the attractor defined by the orbits. On the other
hand, if m is too large, it leads to excessive computations and
enhances the problem of contamination by round off or instrumental error. Hence, it is crucial to choose a sufficiently large
embedding dimension that contains the relevant dynamics in the
presence of noise. There are a number of different criteria for
choosing m presented in the literature. Cao proposed a robust
and efficient method that determines the minimum embedding
dimension; it can overcome some shortcomings of false nearest
neighbors [34]. In this study, the MI method [33] and Cao’s
method [34] are employed to estimate the delay time and the
embedding dimension, respectively.
D. Recurrence Plot and RQA Measures

Ri,j (ε) = Θ(ε − xi − xj ), i, j = 1, . . . , N

(2)

where N = L − (m − 1)τ, ε is a predefined cutoff distance, ·
is the norm (e.g., the Euclidean norm), and Θ(x) is a Heaviside
function. The phase space vector xi can be reconstructed using Takens’ time delay method, xi = (ui , ui+τ , . . . , ui+(m −1)τ )
[31], based on the observations ui . The cutoff distance ε defines
a sphere centered at xj , if xi falls within this sphere, i.e., the
state is close to xj , then Ri,j = 1; otherwise Ri,j = 0. The
binary values of Ri,j can be simply visualized with the colors
black (1) and white (0). Thereby, the RP can be considered as
a visual inspection of a high-dimensional phase space trajectory: in other words, the RP indicates the time evolution of a
trajectory. In short, the RP can describe the characteristics of
large-scale and small-scale patterns of a dynamical system [35].
In order to further investigate the properties of the RP, several
measures of complexity that quantify the small-scale structures
in the RP called RQA have been proposed. We only introduced
two measure variables: determinism (DET) and entropy (ENTR)
in this paper. These measures are based on the recurrence point
density and the diagonal line structures of the RP. For more
details please refer to [22].
The classical measure of the RQA is the recurrence rate (RR)
RR(ε) =

N
1 
Ri,j (ε)
N 2 i,j =1

(3)

which simply counts the black dots in the RP. The RR is a
measure of the density of recurrence points, and the value
Nn (ε) =

1
N

N

i,j =1

Ri,j (ε)

is the simple average number of neighbors that each point on
the trajectory has in its ε−neighborhood.
The frequency distribution of the lengths l of the diagonal
structures in the RP is P ε (l) = {li ; i = 1, 2, . . . , N }. The ratio
of recurrence points on the diagonal structures (of at least length
lm in ) to all recurrence points is called the DET, and is introduced
as a determinism (or predictability) measure of the system. Its
formulation is given as follows:
N
N


ε
lP (l)
lP ε (l)
(5)
DET =
l=l m i n

(4)

l=1

where lm in is the threshold, which excludes the diagonal lines
formed by the tangential motion of a phase space trajectory,
which in this study we fixed at lm in = 2.
The ENTR refers to the Shannon entropy of the frequency
distribution of the diagonal line lengths
ENTR = −

Recurrence plots (RP), proposed by Eckmann et al. [35],
describes the recurrence property of a deterministic dynamical
system, i.e., visualizing the time-dependent behavior of orbits xi
in a phase space. The key step of RP is to calculate the following
N × N matrix:

259

N


p(l) ln p(l)

l=l
m in

where p(l) = P (l)

N


(6)
P (l).

l=l m i n

The ENTR is considered as a complexity measure of a deterministic structure in a dynamical system. The more complex
the deterministic structure, the larger the ENTR value.
A parameter specific to the RP is the cutoff distance ε. If
it is too large, almost every point is a neighbor of every other
point, which produces a saturation of the RP including irrelevant
points; on the contrary, if it is too small, there may be almost
no recurrence points, which loses information of the underlying
system [22]. Several criteria for choosing the cutoff distance
ε have been advocated in the literature [36]. One approach,
using a fixed number of neighbors Nn for every point of the
trajectory, is called fixed amount of nearest neighbors [22]). In
this approach, the cutoff distance εi changes for each state xi to
ensure all columns of the RP obtain the same recurrence density.
Using this neighborhood criterion, εi can be adjusted in such
a way that the recurrence rate has a fixed predetermined value
(i.e., RR = Nn /N ) [22]. In this paper, the DET and ENTR
are computed for all 1-s EMG recordings (the number of data
L = 1000) with a fixed number of neighbors Nn = 50. Using
this Nn value, the recurrence rate RR is about 0.05.
E. Linear Analysis Methods
In order to compare the extraction information of EMG
between linear and nonlinear methods, six well known timedomain and frequency-domain linear methods, i.e., MAV, number of ZC, WL, number of SS changes, mean frequency (MF),
and peak frequency (PF) are also used to analyze the sEMG
data. For more details, please refer to [14], [37].
F. Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System
The adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) described by J. Roger [38] is adopted to evaluate the ability and
effectiveness of the aforementioned MPE measures in classifying the different seizure phases. The ANFIS learns features in

260

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 3. sEMG epoch from flexor pollicis longus and its RPs from hold and lift
a dumbbell (dataset IV).

Fig. 2. Phase space reconstruction of a sEMG epochs. (a) an example for
sEMG signal; (b) mutual information (MI) versus delay time, the circle in (b)
indicates the vicinity of τ , which is at the first local minimum of MI, namely τ
= 4; (c) embedding dimension, the circle in (c) indicates E1 stops significant
changing at the m = 9, so take the minimum embedding dimension as 9.

the data set and adjusts the system parameters according to a
given error criterion. It has been widely used in analyzing the
biological signals, such as EEG and EMG [39].
In order to improve the generalization, ANFIS classifiers are
trained with the back propagation gradient descent method in
combination with the least-squares method. For each ANFIS
classifier, nonlinear or/and linear features are used as inputs.
The samples with target outputs, no action (dataset I), grasp an
orange (dataset II), grasp a can (dataset III), and hold a dumbbell (dataset IV) are given the binary target values of (0,0,0,1),
(0,0,1,0), (0,1,0,0), and (1,0,0,0), respectively.
III. RESULTS
A. Choice of Time Delay and Embedding Dimension
The first step in the RQA is the reconstruction of the mdimensional phase space trajectory. The delay time τ and the
embedding dimension m of the EMG epochs are determined by
using the MI method and the Cao’s method. Fig. 2(a) plots an
original EMG epoch. Fig. 2(b) shows the mutual information
versus the delay time of the EMG, the delay time τ at the first
local minimum τ = 4 was selected for the phase space reconstruction. Given the delay time, the Cao method was applied to
determine the embedding dimension, the details can be found
in [34]. As shown in Fig. 2(c), after the m = 9, El is closer to
1 and does not change significantly over the dimension values,
as a result we take the minimum embedding dimension as 9 for
this EMG epoch.

Next, the MI method and Cao method were applied to all
EMG epochs. The optimum values of τ , based on the detection
of the first local minimum of the MI function, ranged from
2 to 8 samples (mean and standard deviation is 3.43 ± 1.75)
for different EMG epochs. So the optimum delay time τ =
4 was selected for the phase space reconstruction of the four
EMG datasets. The optimum embedding dimension m ranged
from 6 to 12 (mean and standard deviation are 8.85 ± 1.04) for
different EMG segments. Therefore, m = 9 is suitable for the
topologically proper reconstruction of the EMG data.
B. RQA Measures of sEMG Data
The RPs, as shown in Fig. 3, are constructed from the phase
space trajectories of sEMG epochs. Fig. 3 is a representative
example of sEMG signals from dataset IV, which recorded at
flexor pollicis longus from subject 1. sEMG epoch and its RPs
(m = 9, τ = 4, and Nn = 50) are shown in Fig. 3. Visual inspections of the RPs show that the diagonal lines structure in
the RP of sEMG epoch is more regular than ones of dataset I
and II sEMG epochs. In order to go beyond the visual impression yielded by RP, the RQA measures DET and ENTR were
computed for sEMG epochs. In this example, DET and ENTR
value of sEMG is 0.528 and 0.579, respectively.
Further, the RQA measures, DET and ENTR, were applied
to analyze all 1280 1 s sEMG epochs in this study (80 ×
4-channel from each dataset I, II, III, and IV). The averages
of DET and ENTR of each sEMG epochs are represented as a
bar graph, as shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively. Fig. 4(a)
shows the DET values of the grasp of no action are lower than
those in the states of grasp and lift an orange, grasp and lift
a can, and hold and lift a dumbbell. For example, the DET
values for the sEMG epochs from flexor digitorum profundus averaged 0.330 ± 0.105, 0.443 ± 0.094, 0.376 ± 0.077, and
0.563 ± 0.110 (mean ± SD) in datasets I, II, III, and IV, respectively. The same observation can also be mode for the ENTR

OUYANG et al.: DYNAMICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE EMG SIGNALS OF HAND GRASPS VIA RECURRENCE PLOT

261

TABLE I
ONE-WAY ANOVA TEST

TABLE II
ONE-WAY PAIRWISE COMPARISONS VIA SCHEFFE’S TEST

Fig. 4. Bar graph for the DET and ENTR values of the all sEMG epochs,
grouped by no action (I), grasp and lift an orange (II) grasp, and lift a can
(III) and hold and lift a dumbbell (IV), from flexor carpi radialis (FCR), flexor
carpi ulnaris (FCU), flexor pollicis longus (FPL), and flexor digitorum profundus
(FDP), respectively. Height of each bar represents mean value, and the horizontal
tick above each bar represents standard deviation.

in Fig. 4(b). These observations indicate that the alterations of
electrical activity dynamics of muscles could be characterized
by the measures of the RQA.
In order to distinguish these observed means statistically, the
one-way ANOVA test is performed for the DET and the ENTR
values of four different sets. As calculated, the critical value is
Fcrit (3, 316) = 2.63 at α = 0.05. At this point, the test statistic
must exceed to reject the null hypothesis. In order to further investigate the EMG activities of different forearm muscles during
hand grasps, statistical analysis of the DET and ENTR values
in each dataset were carried out for flexor carpi radialis, flexor
carpi ulnaris, flexor pollicis longus, and flexor digitorum profundus, respectively. For example, the results of the DET from
flexor digitorum profundus are shown in Table I. It can be seen
that the statistical test yields an F-test (F = 82.0) that is much
higher than the threshold Fcrit (F = 2.63). This suggests the
null hypothesis, i.e., no differences of DET between the four
different groups from flexor digitorum profundus should be rejected. The similar results of statistical analysis can be obtained
from the other tests. The F value is 81.1, 80.5, and 43.8 for the
DET from flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, and flexor

pollicis longus, respectively. The F value is 79.2, 82.0, 37.7,
and 79.4 for the ENTR from flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi
ulnaris, flexor pollicis longus, and flexor digitorum profundus,
respectively. The results suggest that the determinism of sEMG
data in the grasps of no action, grasp and lift an orange, grasp
and lift a can, and hold and lift a dumbbell are significantly
different.
Thus, Scheffe’s post-hoc test (MATLAB’s multcompare
function, statistics toolbox) [40] for all pairwise comparisons
between the means is used to determine whether there is
statistically significant difference between any two groups. For
example, Table II shows the results of multiple comparisons
analysis of DET values of sEMG data from flexor digitorum
profundus. In this case, the threshold value for Scheffe’s
post-hoc test can be calculated as follows:


4 × MS × Fcrit
4 × 0.01 × 2.63
=
= 0.036.
Sth =
n
80
(7)
When the difference between treatment means is larger than
the threshold value Sth , there is a statistically significant difference between these two groups. The DET values for the sEMG
epochs from flexor digitorum profundus averaged 0.330, 0.443,
0.376, and 0.563 in datasets I, II, III, and IV, respectively. The results suggest that: the DET values for the sEMG data from flexor
digitorum profundus during different types of grasps have significantly higher values than those of no action; grasp an orange
and grasp a can have significantly lower values than those of
hold a dumbbell; and grasp an orange significantly differs from
grasp a can. Similar statistical results can be also obtained from
the ENTR values. In short, it can be seen that the difference
between different groups is statistically significant.
C. Linear Analysis of sEMG Data
The linear techniques MAV, number of ZC, WL, number of
SS changes, MF, and PF, were applied to analyze all 1280 1-s

262

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE V
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS WITH LINEAR MEASURES

TABLE VI
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS WITH RQA MEASURES
Fig. 5. Bar graph for the MAV of the all sEMG epochs, grouped by no action
(I), grasp and lift an orange (II), grasp and lift a can (III), and hold and lift
a dumbbell (IV), from flexor carpi radialis (FCR), flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU),
flexor pollicis longus (FPL), and flexor digitorum profundus (FDP), respectively.
Height of each bar represents mean value, and the horizontal tick above each
bar represents standard deviation.
TABLE III
ONE-WAY ANOVA TEST

servation can also be made for the number of ZC, WL, number
of SS changes, MF, and PF.
D. Classification

TABLE IV
ONE-WAY PAIRWISE COMPARISONS VIA SCHEFFE’S TEST

sEMG epochs in this study (80 × 4-channel from each datasets
I, II, III, and IV). For example, the results of the MAVs are
shown in Fig. 5 and the results of one-way ANOVA test for
MAV from flexor digitorum profundus are shown in Table III. It
can be seen that the statistical test yields an F-test (F = 172.4)
that is much higher than the threshold Fcrit (F = 2.63). Thereby,
this suggests the null hypothesis, i.e., no differences of the MAV
between the four different groups from flexor digitorum profundus should be rejected. The similar results of statistical analysis
can be obtained from other tests. The F value is 86.0, 203.3,
and 85.1 for MAV from flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris,
and flexor pollicis longus, respectively. Table IV shows the results of multiple comparisons analysis of MAV values of sEMG
data from flexor digitorum profundus. The MAV values for the
sEMG epochs from flexor digitorum profundus averaged 39.5,
79.6, 67.7, and 255.6, respectively. It is found that the MAV values for the sEMG data from flexor digitorum profundus during
grasping an orange, grasping a can, and holding a dumbbell each
are significantly higher than that with no action. The same ob-

The performance of the aforementioned measures to discriminate among groups is also evaluated by means of an adaptive
neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) [38], and tenfold crossvalidations are employed to demonstrate the accuracy of classification [41]. First, the ability of the linear techniques in classifying different hand grasp was evaluated using the ANFIS.
Four ANFIS classifiers are trained with the back-propagation
gradient descent method in combination with the least-squares
method when the calculated six linear measures are used as
input. Each of the ANFIS classifier is trained so that they are
likely to be more accurate for one state of sEMG signals than the
other states. Samples with target outputs sets I, II, III, and IV are
given the binary target values of (0,0,0,1), (0,0,1,0), (0,1,0,0),
and (1,0,0,0), respectively. Each ANFIS classifier was implemented by using the MATLAB software package (MATLAB
version 7.0 with fuzzy logic toolbox). The classification results
are illustrated in Table V. Out of 320 hand movements in four
groups, 299 are classified correctly. The total classification accuracy is 93.4%.
Then, in order to investigate whether or not the RQA measures can effectively extract additional hidden information from
sEMG data, the two calculated nonlinear measures are used
as the input data in the ANFIS classifiers, and tenfold crossvalidations were employed to demonstrate the performance of
classification. The classification results are illustrated in Table VI. Out of 320 hand movements in four groups, 282 are
classified correctly. The total classification accuracy is 88.1%.
Finally, all the calculated linear and nonlinear measures are
used as the input data in the ANFIS classifier. Classification
results of the ANFIS model revealed that, as listed in Table VII,
only two sEMG segments from the grasp of grasping a can are
misclassified by ANFIS as that of grasping an orange sEMG

OUYANG et al.: DYNAMICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE EMG SIGNALS OF HAND GRASPS VIA RECURRENCE PLOT

TABLE VII
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS WITH LINEAR AND RQA MEASURES

segments and one sEMG segment from grasping an orange is
mistaken as grasping a can. The total classification accuracy of
the ANFIS model is 99.1% by using tenfold cross-validations.
IV. DISCUSSIONS
The sEMG signal is a measure of the summed activity of a
number of motor unit action potentials (MUAP) lying in the
vicinity of the recording electrode, and it may provide insight
into the neural activation and dynamics of muscles [42], [43].
The composition of a sEMG signal from MUAPs results in a
nonlinear and stochastic signal because of the different firing
rates and the large number of motor units that contribute [44]. It
is also evident that the sEMG signals are complex data that
needs to be condensed with useful information; analysis of
sEMG using nonlinear dynamics can provide a better insight
into the complex relation between sEMG and muscle activities. In particular, nonlinear sEMG analysis has opened up a
range of new perspectives for the study of normal and disturbed neuromuscular functions [29] and their development to a
new interdisciplinary field of nonlinear muscle dynamics [45].
Therefore, exploration of hidden dynamical structures within
sEMG signals is of both fundamental and clinical interests and
has attracted more and more attention [46], [47].
In this study, we have analyzed nonlinear dynamical characteristics in sEMG data during different hand grasp states using
the RQA measure. It is found that there is a significant increase
of the determinism of the sEMG data from no action grasp
state to the selected hand grasp states. Similar results had been
reported previously. In [48], the RQA method was applied to
indicate the deterministic dynamics of the sEMG signals during
the muscle state changes. In [3], the measure DET was used
to detect the hidden rhythms in sEMG signals; the high values of the DET in the sEMG signals during the contraction are
found, and it was shown that the DET is more effective than
median frequency in detecting sEMG changes determined by
brisk transients of force output. The increase in determinism is
classically attributed to sEMG self-organization into more periodic waves, this process which may be caused by an increase in
the probability that motor units will discharge in unity [29].
Furthermore, our results have showed that there is a significant difference in the determinism of the sEMG data from forearm muscles among the states of grasp an orange, grasp a can,
and hold a dumbbell. The results in this paper have demonstrated
that the DET values for the sEMG data from flexor digitorum
profundus have significantly higher values during grasp of hold
a dumbbell than during grasp an orange and a can. This finding

263

is consistent with the fact that the contractions of flexor digitorum profundus during hold a dumbbell are stronger than those
during grasp an orange and a can. In terms of anatomy, it is well
known that the flexor digitorum profundus muscle is a muscle
of the human forearm that acts to flex the fingers [49]. Then,
the ANFIS is applied to evaluate the performance of nonlinear
measures to discriminate among four hand grasp movements.
A total classification accuracy of 88.1% is achieved. Moreover,
the hand gestures of grasp a can and hold a dumbbell can be
separated nicely when using the DET and ENTR measures.
Finally, the classical linear techniques are also used to extract
the features from sEMG data. It is found that the high MAVs exist in the sEMG signals during the contraction. These results are
consistent with the previous works that muscles in the process of
contraction exhibit the increases in sEMG amplitude [14]. Then,
the ANFIS is applied to evaluate the performance of linear measures to discriminate among four hand grasp movements. A total
classification accuracy of 93.4% is achieved based on the traditional linear techniques. Moreover, it is found that the linear
measures can provide a better separability between no action
and grasp an object than the nonlinear measures. Additionally,
a total classification accuracy of 99.1% is achieved based on
the combination of linear and nonlinear measures. Thus, these
results suggest that both linear and nonlinear measures of sEMG
may contribute to the understanding of the electrical activities of
muscle contraction during hand grasp, and our findings provide
further support for the notion that different information about
muscle electrical activities may be extracted using linear and
nonlinear measures. Another significant note is that the RQA
measures of a single channel sEMG of 1 s could be calculated
in less than 20 ms by using MATLAB (Math Works, Inc.) on a
2.4-GHz personal computer in this study. Therefore the combination of the RQA measures and linear measures in the sEMG
data has the potential of providing the basis for designing a
real-time hand grasp movement detection system.
It is challenging that employing sEMG, due to its highly
dynamic nature, to detect the changes of muscles for musculoskeletal assessment and prosthetic control. It is expected
that the reported findings would lead to a solution for sEMG
in-depth understanding and further reduction of patients’ conscious efforts in monitoring dynamic hand motion of controlled
prosthetic devices. One of the future works is targeted to investigate nonlinear classifiers to further improve the classification
performance for more natural hand motions [50], [51].
REFERENCES
[1] D. Farina, R. Merletti, and R. M. Enoka, “The extraction of neural strategies from the surface EMG,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 96, pp. 1486–1495,
Apr. 2004.
[2] H. Ghasemzadeh, R. Jafari, and B. Prabhakaran, “A body sensor network
with electromyogram and inertial sensors: Multimodal interpretation of
muscular activities,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 198–206, Mar. 2010.
[3] G. Filligoi and F. Felici, “Detection of hidden rhythms in surface EMG
signals with a non-linear time-series tool,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 21,
pp. 439–348, Jul./Sep. 1999.
[4] P. K. Artemiadis and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “An EMG-based robot control
scheme robust to time-varying EMG signal features,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 582–588, May 2010.

264

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[5] Y. H. Yin, Y. J. Fan, and L. D. Xu, “EMG and EPP-integrated humanmachine interface between the paralyzed and rehabilitation exoskeleton,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 542–549, Jul. 2012.
[6] S. Vernon and S. S. Joshi, “Brain-muscle-computer interface: Mobilephone prototype development and testing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 531–538, Jul. 2011.
[7] F. Zhang and H. Huang, “Source selection for real-time user intent recognition towards volitional control of artificial legs,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., 2013, to be published. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2012.2236563.
[8] C. Cipriani, C. Antfolk, C. Balkenius, B. Rosen, G. Lundborg,
M. C. Carrozza et al., “A novel concept for a prosthetic hand with a
bidirectional interface: a feasibility study,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 2739–2743, Nov. 2009.
[9] A. Al-Timemy, G. Bugmann, J. Escudero, and N. Outram, “Classification
of finger movements for the dexterous hand prosthesis control with surface
electromyography,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inf., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 608–
618, May 2013.
[10] F. V. Tenore, A. Ramos, A. Fahmy, S. Acharya, R. Etienne-Cummings,
and N. V. Thakor, “Decoding of individuated finger movements using
surface electromyography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 5,
pp. 1427–1434, May 2009.
[11] H. Liu, “Exploring human hand capabilities into embedded multifingered
object manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 389–398,
Aug. 2011.
[12] S. Kwon and J. Kim, “Real-time upper limb motion estimation from surface electromyography and joint angular velocities using an artificial neural network for human-machine cooperation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 522–530, Jul. 2011.
[13] R. Merletti, M. Aventaggiato, A. Botter, A. Holobar, H. Marateb, and
T. M. Vieira, “Advances in surface EMG: Recent progress in detection
and processing techniques,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, pp. 305–
345, 2010.
[14] B. Hudgins, P. Parker, and R. N. Scott, “A new strategy for multifunction
myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 82–94,
Jan. 1993.
[15] G. Li, A. E. Schultz, and T. A. Kuiken, “Quantifying pattern recognitionbased myoelectric control of multifunctional transradial prostheses,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 185–92, Apr. 2010.
[16] H. B. Xie, J. Y. Guo, and Y. P. Zheng, “Fuzzy approximate entropy analysis of chaotic and natural complex systems: Detecting muscle fatigue using
electromyography signals,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, pp. 1483–1496,
Apr. 2010.
[17] J. Duchene and F. Goubel, “Surface electromyogram during voluntary
contraction: Processing tools and relation to physiological events,” Crit.
Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 21, pp. 313–397, 1993.
[18] X. Hu, Z. Z. Wang, and X. M. Ren, “Classification of surface EMG signal
with fractal dimension,” J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B, vol. 6, pp. 844–848,
Aug. 2005.
[19] J. P. Eckmann and D. Ruelle, “Fundamental limitations for estimating
dimensions and lyapunov exponents in dynamic-systems,” Physica D,
vol. 56, pp. 185–187, May 1992.
[20] M. Akay, “Nonlinear biomedical signal processing,” in Dynamic Analysis
and Modeling. vol. II. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2001.
[21] X. Zhang, X. Chen, P. E. Barkhaus, and P. Zhou, “Multiscale entropy
analysis of different spontaneous motor unit discharge patterns,” IEEE J.
Biomed. Health Inf., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 470–476, Mar. 2013.
[22] N. Marwan, M. C. Romano, M. Thiel, and J. Kurths, “Recurrence plots
for the analysis of complex systems,” Phys. Rep.-Rev. Sect. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 438, pp. 237–329, Jan. 2007.
[23] G. Ouyang, X. Li, C. Dang, and D. A. Richards, “Using recurrence plot
for determinism analysis of EEG recordings in genetic absence epilepsy
rats,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 119, pp. 1747–1755, Aug. 2008.
[24] M. Bianciardi, P. Sirabella, G. E. Hagberg, A. Giuliani, J. P. Zbilut, and
A. Colosimo, “Model-free analysis of brain fMRI data by recurrence
quantification,” Neuroimage, vol. 37, pp. 489–503, Aug. 15, 2007.
[25] H. Yang, “Multiscale recurrence quantification analysis of spatial cardiac
vectorcardiogram signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 2,
pp. 339–347, Feb. 2011.
[26] A. Schmied and M. Descarreaux, “Reliability of EMG determinism to
detect changes in motor unit synchrony and coherence during submaximal
contraction,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 196, pp. 238–46, Mar. 30, 2011.
[27] J. L. Dideriksen, D. Falla, M. Baekgaard, M. L. Mogensen, K. L. Steimle,
and D. Farina, “Comparison between the degree of motor unit short-term
synchronization and recurrence quantification analysis of the surface EMG
in two human muscles,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 120, pp. 2086–2092,
Dec. 2009.

[28] S. M. Rissanen, M. Kankaanpaa, M. P. Tarvainen, A. Y. Meigal,
J. Nuutinen, I. M. Tarkka et al., “Analysis of dynamic voluntary muscle
contractions in Parkinson’s disease,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56,
no. 9, pp. 2280–2288, Sep. 2009.
[29] C. Morana, S. Ramdani, S. Perrey, and A. Varray, “Recurrence quantification analysis of surface electromyographic signal: Sensitivity to potentiation and neuromuscular fatigue,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 177,
pp. 73–79, Feb. 15, 2009.
[30] C. Yuan, X. Zhu, G. Liu, and M. Lei, “Classification of the surface EMG
signal using RQA based representations,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf.
Neural Netw., vol. 1–8, pp. 2106–2111, 2008.
[31] N. H. Packard, J. P. Crutchfield, J. D. Farmer, and R. S. Shaw, “Geometry
from a time-series,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 45, pp. 712–716, 1980.
[32] H. S. Kim, R. Eykholt, and J. D. Salas, “Nonlinear dynamics, delay times,
and embedding windows,” Physica D, vol. 127, pp. 48–60, Mar. 1999.
[33] A. M. Fraser and H. L. Swinney, “Independent coordinates for strange
attractors from mutual information,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 33, pp. 1134–1140,
Feb. 1986.
[34] L. Y. Cao, “Practical method for determining the minimum embedding
dimension of a scalar time series,” Physica D, vol. 110, pp. 43–50, Dec.
1, 1997.
[35] J. P. Eckmann, S. O. Kamphorst, and D. Ruelle, “Recurrence plots of
dynamic-systems,” Europhys. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 973–977, Nov. 1987.
[36] L. Matassini, H. Kantz, J. Holyst, and R. Hegger, “Optimizing of recurrence plots for noise reduction,” Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlinear Soft Matter
Phys., vol. 65, Art. no. 021102, Feb. 2002.
[37] G. Fele-Zorz, G. Kavsek, Z. Novak-Antolic, and F. Jager, “A comparison
of various linear and non-linear signal processing techniques to separate
uterine EMG records of term and pre-term delivery groups,” Med. Biol.
Eng. Comput., vol. 46, pp. 911–922, 2008.
[38] J. S. R. Jang, “ANFIS—adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system,”
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 665–685, May/Jun.
1993.
[39] R. T. Lauer, B. T. Smith, and R. R. Betz, “Application of a neuro-fuzzy
network for gait event detection using electromyography in the child with
cerebral palsy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 1532–1540,
Sep. 2005.
[40] R. V. Hogg and J. Ledolter, Engineering Statistics. New York, NY, USA:
MacMillan, 1987.
[41] C. D. Katsis, N. Katertsidis, G. Ganiatsas, and D. I. Fotiadis, “Toward
emotion recognition in car-racing drivers: A biosignal processing approach,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. A-Syst. Humans, vol. 38, no. 3,
pp. 502–512, May 2008.
[42] X. Li, Y. C. Wang, N. L. Suresh, W. Z. Rymer, and P. Zhou, “Motor unit
number reductions in paretic muscles of stroke survivors,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 505–512, Jul. 2011.
[43] J. S. Karlsson, K. Roeleveld, C. Gronlund, A. Holtermann, and N. Ostlund,
“Signal processing of the surface electromyogram to gain insight into neuromuscular physiology,” Philos. Trans. A Math Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 367,
pp. 337–356, Jan. 28, 2009.
[44] F. D. Farfan, J. C. Politti, and C. J. Felice, “Evaluation of EMG processing
techniques using information theory,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 9, Art.
no. 72, 2010.
[45] H. Geyer and H. Herr, “A muscle-reflex model that encodes principles of
legged mechanics produces human walking dynamics and muscle activities,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 263–273,
Jun. 2010.
[46] P. Palmes, W. T. Ang, F. Widjaja, L. C. Tan, and W. L. Au, “Pattern mining
of multichannel sEMG for tremor classification,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 2795–805, Dec. 2010.
[47] D. Rodrick and W. Karwowski, “Nonlinear dynamical behavior of surface
electromyographical signals of biceps muscle under two simulated static
work postures,” Nonlinear Dyn. Psychol. Life Sci., vol. 10, pp. 21–35, Jan.
2006.
[48] C. L. Webber, Jr., M. A. Schmidt, and J. M. Walsh, “Influence of isometric
loading on biceps EMG dynamics as assessed by linear and nonlinear
tools,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 78, pp. 814–822, Mar. 1995.
[49] G. R. Naik, D. K. Kumar, and Jayadeva, “Twin SVM for gesture classification using the surface electromyogram,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 301–308, Mar. 2010.
[50] Z. Ju and H. Liu, “Fuzzy Gaussian mixture models,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 45, pp. 1146–1158, 2012.
[51] Z. Ju and H. Liu, “Human hand motion analysis with multisensory
information,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., 2013, to be published.
doi:10.1109/TMECH.2013.2240312.

OUYANG et al.: DYNAMICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE EMG SIGNALS OF HAND GRASPS VIA RECURRENCE PLOT

265

Gaoxiang Ouyang received the B.S. degree in automation and the M.S. degree in control theory and
control engineering both from Yanshan University,
Hebei, China, in 2002 and 2004, respectively, and the
Ph.D. degree from the Department of Manufacturing
Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, in 2010.
He is currently a Lerverhulme Visting Fellow
in the intelligent systems and biomedical robotics
group at the University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth,
U.K. His research interests include bio-signal analysis, neural engineering, and dynamics system. He has published numerous
refereed international journals and conference papers.

Zhaojie Ju (M’08) received the B.S. degree in automatic control and the M.S. degree in intelligent
robotics both from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Hubei, China, in 2005 and
2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in intelligent
robotics at the University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth,
U.K., in 2010.
He is currently a Lecturer in the School of Creative
Technologies, University of Portsmouth. He previously held research appointments in the Department
of Computer Science, University College London and
Intelligent Systems and Biomedical Robotics group, University of Portsmouth,
U.K. His research interests include machine intelligence, robot learning, pattern recognition and their applications in robotic/prosthetic hand control, and
human-robot interaction.

Xiangyang Zhu received the B.S. degree from the
Department of Automatic Control Engineering, Nanjing Institute of Technology, Nanjing, China, in 1985,
the M.Phil. degree in instrumentation engineering,
and the Ph.D. degree in automatic control engineering, both from Southeast University, Nanjing, China,
in 1989 and 1992, respectively.
From 1993 to 1994, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China. He joined the Department of Mechanical Engineering as an Associate
Professor, Southeast University, in 1995. Since June 2002, he has been with the
School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China, where he is currently a Changjiang Chair Professor and the Director of
the Robotics Institute. His current research interests include biomechatronics,
human-machine interfacing, and robotic manipulation planning. He received
the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2005.

Honghai Liu (M’02–SM’06) received the Ph.D. degree in robotics from King’s College London, London, U.K., in 2003.
He is currently a Professor of intelligent systems at the University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth,
U.K. He previously held research appointments at
the Universities of London and Aberdeen, and Project
Leader appointments in large-scale industrial control
and system integration industry. His research interests
include biomechatronics, pattern recognition, intelligent video analytics, intelligent robotics, and their
practical applications with an emphasis on approaches that could make contribution to the intelligent connection of perception to action using contextual
information.

