IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

2745

Myoelectric Walking Mode Classification
for Transtibial Amputees
Jason D. Miller, Mahyo Seyedali Beazer, and Michael E. Hahn∗

Abstract—Myoelectric control algorithms have the potential to
detect an amputee’s motion intent and allow the prosthetic to adapt
to changes in walking mode. The development of a myoelectric
walking mode classifier for transtibial amputees is outlined. Myoelectric signals from four muscles (tibialis anterior, medial gastrocnemius (MG), vastus lateralis, and biceps femoris) were recorded
for five nonamputee subjects and five transtibial amputees over
a variety of walking modes: level ground at three speeds, ramp
ascent/descent, and stair ascent/descent. These signals were decomposed into relevant features (mean absolute value, variance,
wavelength, number of slope sign changes, number of zero crossings) over three subwindows from the gait cycle and used to test the
ability of classification algorithms for transtibial amputees using
linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and support vector machine
(SVM) classifiers. Detection of all seven walking modes had an accuracy of 97.9% for the amputee group and 94.7% for the nonamputee group. Misclassifications occurred most frequently between
different walking speeds due to the similar nature of the gait pattern. Stair ascent/descent had the best classification accuracy with
99.8% for the amputee group and 100.0% for the nonamputee
group. Stability of the developed classifier was explored using an
electrode shift disturbance for each muscle. Shifting the electrode
placement of the MG had the most pronounced effect on the classification accuracy for both samples. No increase in classification
accuracy was observed when using SVM compared to LDA for the
current dataset.
Index Terms—Electromyography, linear discriminant analysis
(LDA), myoelectric control, support vector machine (SVM).

I. INTRODUCTION
HE number of amputees is expected to increase steadily,
doubling by the year 2050 [1]. Of the current estimated
1.6 million patients who have experienced limb loss within the
United States, 45% include lower limb amputees [1]. Despite advances in prosthetic technology, lower limb amputees are generally restricted to the use of foot–ankle prosthetic systems which
consist of passive, elastic energy storing elements to mimic the
dynamic function of the healthy lower limb. The loss of ankle

T

Manuscript received December 12, 2012; revised April 10, 2013; accepted
May 11, 2013. Date of publication May 21, 2013; date of current version September 14, 2013. This work was supported by the Department of Defense under
Grant W81XWH-09-2-0144 and the Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, Rehabilitation Research and Development Service.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
J. D. Miller is with EndoGastric Solutions, Redmond, WA 98052 USA
(e-mail: miller.3839@gmail.com).
M. S. Beazer is with Entergy, New Orleans, LA 70112 USA (e-mail:
mseyedali09@gmail.com).
∗ M. E. Hahn is with the Department of Human Physiology, University of
Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403 USA (e-mail: mhahn@uoregon.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2264466

power generation has been observed to increase metabolic energy costs in transtibial amputees by 20–30% [2], and result
in asymmetric gait patterns, decreased stride length on affected
limbs, and reductions in self-selected walking speeds [3]. In
addition, the transtibial amputees lose the ability to control the
response of their foot–ankle function between different walking
modes. For healthy subjects, the function of the foot–ankle system has been observed to modulate with different level ground
walking speeds [4], different slopes of the walking terrain [5],
and ascending/descending stairs [6].
In order to further advance prosthetic technology and replace
the neural connections lost during amputation, myoelectric control has been the focus of significant research efforts. Myoelectric control efforts have placed primary focus on upper limb
amputees. Limited advances have been made for lower limb amputees until recently [7]. Lower limb amputee myoelectric signals have been used toward discrete joint angle separations [8],
continuous joint kinematics estimation [9], separation between
joint flexion/extension or internal/external rotation motion intent [10]–[12], and walking mode classification [13]–[15].
When using myoelectric signals toward walking mode classification, detection of six to seven different walking modes
was observed to be possible for transfemoral amputees using
a combination of 10–16 myoelectric signals from the muscles
of the residual limb and the nonimpaired limb [14], [15]. The
accuracy of classification ranged from 80% to 100% and varied
depending on the mode being classified, the myoelectric windowing scheme, and the machine learning algorithm utilized.
For transtibial amputees, walking mode selection has only been
observed to be possible between two different walking modes
(level ground and stair descent) [16]. This algorithm required
conscious contraction of the amputee subject’s residual limb
muscles which was only accessed on a single subject. Different
machine learning algorithms have been shown to be more advantageous with support vector machines (SVMs) outperforming
linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [15] and LDA outperforming artificial neural networks [14] for transfemoral amputees.
Several advances are necessary for myoelectric control to become a realistic option for lower limb amputees. Specifically
for transtibial amputees, the classification of a wider range of
walking modes is necessary to reflect the complexity of normal
walking terrain. The stability of the classifier to disturbances
must also be considered. For upper limb amputees, the effects
of a variety of disturbances on classification accuracy have been
previously explored. The most significant disturbance was observed to be shifting of electrode placement [17]. Reductions
in computational demand of the classifier are also an important step toward myoelectric control development and can be

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

2746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

achieved through reduction in machine learning classification
demands and myoelectric signals necessary for classification.
The purpose of this study was to develop and test a walking
mode classification system using LDA and SVM, and to further
test the resilience of the system in response to shifts in electrode
placement.
II. METHODS
A. Myoelectric Data Collection
A sample of unilateral transtibial amputees (n = 5, all male,
age: 28.8 ± 5.4 years, weight: 78.9 ± 15.7 kg, height: 174 ±
4.3 cm, amputated limb: 3 left/2 right) and a sample of nonamputee subjects (n = 5, 4 males/1 female, age: 39.2 ± 16.0 years,
weight: 78.0 ± 5.1 kg, height: 173 ± 3.0 cm) were recruited.
Subjects were selected from the general population and excluded
if they had neuromuscular disorders or etiology was congenital
in nature. Amputee subjects used their prescribed, passive prosthetic components. The institutional review board approved the
experimental protocol, and informed consent was received from
each subject prior to testing.
Four muscles were selected for electromyographic (EMG)
collection: tibialis anterior (TA), medial gastrocnemius (MG),
biceps femoris (BF), and vastus lateralis (VL). These muscles were selected based on 1) their role as primary agonist/antagonist pairs for the knee and ankle joints, 2) ease of
accessibility for EMG sensor placement, and 3) relative muscle mass present in the residual limb in the event of transtibial
amputation. Data were sampled at 1500 Hz in a passive, bipolar single differentiation configuration, using wet-gel Ag/AgCl
surface electrodes. Low-profile, neonatal electrodes (Ambu NF50-K/US, Glen Burnie, MD, USA) were used for the withinsocket muscles of the shank and standard snap electrodes (Noraxon Single Electrodes #272, Scottsdale, AZ, USA) were used
for the thigh muscles. EMG signals were collected bilaterally
for both. Only signals from a single limb were used toward
classification. The selected limb was the affected limb or a
randomly selected limb for amputee subjects and nonamputee
subjects, respectively. Two EMG channels were collected from
each muscle group: a primary and a secondary channel. For the
primary channels, electrodes were placed based on Delagi and
Perotto’s standards [18]. Secondary channels were placed adjacent to the primary channel along the direction of the muscle
body (see Fig. 1). The amount of the electrode shift between the
primary and secondary channels was 3 cm and was identical for
all four muscles.
During placement of electrodes, subjects contracted each
muscle group against resistance in order to verify proper electrode placement. For TA and MG, amputee subjects were instructed to imagine either flexing or extending their missing foot.
All amputee subjects had voluntary control over their residual
limb muscles. EMG signals were normalized against the maximum voltage measured during these muscle exercises. Slight
adaptations of placement were at times necessary for amputee
subjects due to abnormalities in the transected muscles of the
shank. These adjustments were based on palpation of the muscle bodies during voluntary contraction. The EMG signals were

Fig. 1. Bipolar electrode placement shown on a sample transtibial amputee
subject. Electrode placement is shown for the tibialis anterior (left), medial
gastrocnemius (center), and vastus lateralis/biceps femoris (right). Two bipolar
EMG signals were collected from each muscle group.

band-pass filtered (20–500 Hz) with a fourth-order Butterworth
filter to remove motion artifact and nonphysiological signal content [19]. Footswitches were placed bilaterally on the plantar
surface under the calcaneus and first metatarsophalangeal joint.
For amputee subjects, footswitches were in similar locations on
the plantar surface of the prosthetic foot.
Data were collected over a variety of walking conditions including level ground, stair ascent/descent (SUP/SDW; six trials/walking mode; six to seven gait cycles/trial), and ramp ascent/descent (RUP/RDW; six trials/walking mode; nine to ten
gait cycles/trial). The stair surface consisted of 13 stairs which
all amputee subjects were able to manage in a normal, singlestep fashion similar to the nonamputee subjects. The ramp surface spanned 12 m in total. Level ground walking trials were
completed at three different speeds: self-selected (SSW; five
trials; seven gait cycles/trial), fast (FTW; two trials; seven gait
cycles/trial), and slow (SLW; two trials; seven gait cycles/trial).
From each trial, steady-state gait cycles were extracted to represent these walking modes. Different level ground walking
speeds were achieved after instructing the subject with the desired walking speed (i.e., fast, normal, or slow). Each walking
speed was based on the subject’s own determination with no
feedback provided to the subject or min/max threshold required
for each speed. The average speed of each level ground walking
trial was measured by recording the distance traveled and length
of time for each trial. The stairs were uniform, with 17 cm of
rise and 28 cm of run. The incline of the ramp surface was a
constant 5◦ from horizontal.
B. Walking Mode Classification
Heel strike (HS) and toe off (TO) events were identified by
initial and final foot contact based on footswitch data. These
events were used as reference points when defining subwindows of the gait cycle over which classification would occur
(see Fig. 2). Three EMG subwindows were defined for each gait
cycle. Data were segmented as follows: 1) HS to HS + 200 ms,
2) TO – 300 ms to TO, and 3) TO to TO + 100 ms. The length of
each subwindow was selected based on empirical observations
of muscle activity surrounding the HS and TO events for all
subjects and walking modes. Five features from each subwindow were extracted to be used for classification: mean absolute

MILLER et al.: MYOELECTRIC WALKING MODE CLASSIFICATION FOR TRANSTIBIAL AMPUTEES

2747

TABLE I
AVERAGE WALKING SPEED (M/S) ± SD

Fig. 2. EMG subwindows and sample EMG signals are shown for a single
amputee gait cycle. Myoelectric signals were normalized to the maximum voluntary contraction. Three EMG subwindows were used in classification: 1) heel
strike (HS) to heel strike plus 200 ms, 2) toe off (TO) minus 300 ms to toe off,
and 3) toe off to toe off plus 100 ms.

value, variance, waveform length, number of zero crossings, and
slope sign changes [7], [17], [20]. The total number of features
was 20 (4 muscles × 5 features/muscle) for each subwindow
and 60 features (20 features/subwindow × 3 subwindows) to
represent each gait cycle.
Subject-specific multiclass LDA and SVM were used to separate between the different walking modes. When using SVMs,
a linear kernel and the one against one multiclass algorithm [21]
were used. SVM optimization was completed using sequential
minimal optimization [15], [21]. Training for both classifiers
was completed using a k-fold algorithm with each trial representing a data subset. This resulted in a total of 33 folds.
Both algorithms were implemented with custom codes in the
MATLAB v7.10.0 environment. Nonlinear kernels for the SVM
were explored as part of a preliminary classification effort, but
did not benefit classification (data not shown).
The effect of shifting the location of an electrode was evaluated through dual EMG channels recorded for each muscle
body. When determining the effect of an electrode location shift
on classification accuracy, the same k-fold algorithm was used
as described earlier for the original accuracy of the classifier.
The training dataset for the shifted electrode condition was defined as features from the primary EMG channels and the test
dataset defined as features from the secondary EMG channels.
This allowed simulation of a classifier being trained on features
from a standard electrode location and walking mode classifications being made based on features from a potentially faulty or
misplaced electrode set. The shifted electrode experiment was
performed for each muscle individually.
III. RESULTS
The average walking speeds (SSW, SLW, FTW) for all level
ground walking trials are presented on a per subject basis (see
Table I). The average walking speed varied between subjects
for all three desired walking speeds. However, distinct changes
were observed for each instructed speed within each subject.
This supported the assumption that three distinct and repeatable walking modes were being experienced by each subject.
As a result, the three different walking speeds were treated as
independent walking modes for classification.
A. Walking Mode Classification
The two classification algorithms (LDA and SVM) exhibited
similar classification accuracies within the amputee group and

the nonamputee group. Classification accuracy was assessed for
each subject as the number of correct classifications relative to
the total classifications made. The average classification accuracy (±SD) when separating between all seven walking modes
(SSW, SLW, FTW, SUP, SDW, RUP, and RDW) using LDA
and SVM was 97.9% (±0.22) and 97.9% (±1.39) for the amputee group, and 93.3% (±2.62) and 94.7% (±2.82) for the
nonamputee group, respectively.
Confusion matrices showing the percentage of misclassified
gait cycles for both subject groups are presented in Table II. The
most common misclassifications were between different walking speeds during the level ground conditions. The accuracy of
classification between different walking speeds with LDA and
SVM was 92.0% (±11.7) and 91.5% (±8.43) for the amputee
group, and 84.9% (±2.42) and 91.9% (±14.1) for the nonamputee group, respectively. The average classification accuracy
(±SD) when making classifications between only five walking modes (level ground—all walking speeds combined, SUP,
SDW, RUP, RDW) using LDA and SVM was 98.5% (±0.30)
and 98.2% (±1.39) for the amputee group, and 96.9% (±2.42)
and 96.4% (±2.82) for the nonamputee group, respectively.
Misclassification of stair walking modes was the least common
type of misclassification. When making classification between
SUP, SDW, and all other walking modes, the classification accuracy increased to 99.7% (±0.70) and 99.8% (±0.29) for the
amputee group, and 100.0% (±0.00) and 100.0% (±0.00) for
the nonamputee group when using LDA and SVM, respectively.
B. Electrode Shift Condition
The change in classification accuracy for each subject under
the shifted electrode condition can be seen in Table III. For
some amputee subjects, the residual limb was not long enough
to allow placement of the number of electrodes necessary to
collect two adjacent EMG signals from the TA. As a result, the
shifted TA electrode condition could not be simulated for three
amputee subjects. Across both groups and the classification algorithms, shifting the location of the MG electrodes resulted in
the largest decrease in classification accuracy with a reduction
of over 60% for one nonamputee subject. This large decrease
in classification accuracy was largely due to misclassifications

2748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

TABLE II
CONFUSION MATRICES FOR AMPUTEE AND NONAMPUTEE SUBJECTS USING LDA AND SVM CLASSIFIERS

TABLE III
DECREASED CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR THE SHIFTED ELECTRODE CONDITION

between level ground walking speeds and misclassifications between level ground walking and ramp walking modes. Classification of stair walking modes was more resistant to degradation
under the shifted electrode condition than other walking modes.
When simulating an electrode shift for the MG muscle, classification of stair modes with LDA and SVM decreased by only
1.0% and 1.9%, respectively, compared to the average classification accuracy for the amputee group. The average decrease in
the classification accuracy of all seven walking modes for the
amputee group under the MG-shifted electrode condition was
15.8% (±17.8) and 23.1% (±22.3) for LDA and SVM, respectively, compared to the classification accuracy determined using
the primary electrode position.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Walking Mode Classification
Relevant classification of seven different walking modes was
observed to be feasible for transtibial amputees using EMG data
from four muscles and a feature set with low computational cost.
The accuracy of classification ranged from 90.0% to 98.2% and

89.6% to 98.7% for amputee subjects and from 89.0% to 95.4%
and 91.4% to 97.7% for nonamputee subjects using LDA and
SVM, respectively. The classifier was least accurate when making separations between different level ground walking speeds.
The lower classification of level ground walking speeds could
be due to the inherent similarity in muscle activations for these
walking modes. The slight adjustments between walking speeds
may not be as easily detected in the current algorithm compared
to larger adjustments to muscle activation patterns that are associated with more distinct walking modes. Based on this observation, detection of varying walking speeds may be more suitable
using mechanical sensors. Accurate detection of walking speed
has been demonstrated previously using solely a shank-mounted
inertial measurement unit [22].
A previous report of myoelectric control for the lower limb
[15] reported better classification accuracy with the use of the
SVM approach. In this study, we observed that the SVM classification provided very similar classification accuracy to LDA
without a notable or consistent increase in classification accuracy for either group of subjects, or for the various separations
evaluated. The LDA approach has a lower computational cost

MILLER et al.: MYOELECTRIC WALKING MODE CLASSIFICATION FOR TRANSTIBIAL AMPUTEES

to train and make classifications. In the absence of an increase
in classification accuracy, our findings indicate that LDA is the
more efficient classifier, for this particular dataset.
Previous myoelectric control efforts have focused on making similar walking mode classifications for transfemoral amputees [14], [15]. The most recent of these efforts [15] used a
continuous windowing scheme which segments the EMG signal
into repeated, constant time interval subwindows. The current
effort was able to produce similar accuracy of classifications
using an alternative window scheme which used both fewer
subwindows per gait cycle and fewer EMG input signals. Both
windowing schemes have inherent advantages. The scheme proposed in this effort results in a classifier with a lower computational cost as fewer subwindows and EMG signals result in
fewer calculations by the controller. The lower computational
cost may make the proposed classifier a more realistic option
for real world use. The continuous windowing classifier is able
to use postprocessing techniques (i.e., majority voting) to better
manage sporadic misclassifications. The continuous windowing
is also able to identify mid-stance transitions between different
walking modes. Identification of transitions between walking
modes has not been shown using the current windowing scheme.
B. Electrode Shift Condition
The myoelectric classifier’s stability to electrode shifting is
relevant as attachment of the prosthetic is not constant. Specifically, every time the prosthetic is donned the location of surface
electrodes will experience slight shifts in location. Recent efforts
have shown an increased robusticity to electrode shifting with
greater interelectrode distances and a feature set that includes
both autoregressive coefficients and time-domain features [23].
The amount of electrode shift in this procedure is based on
the size of the electrodes used (as the electrodes could not be
overlapped and still record EMG signal) and is consistent with
simulated electrode shifting experiments for upper limb myoelectric classification [23]. The amount of electrode shifting that
is expected to be experienced during normal use is not quantifiable without a complete understanding of how the electrodes
will be embedded in a functional prosthetic system. However,
the 3 cm of shift simulated in this effort is believed to be on the
high end of possible shift as the amputee’s socket is custom built
to their residual limb. This customization limits the amount of
shifting that the socket and electrodes are likely to experience.
For all subjects in this study, simulating the shifting of the
TA or MG EMG signal resulted in a more dramatic decrease in
classification accuracy when compared to the VL or BF. This
observed decrease in classification accuracy for the TA and MG
appears to be a result of increased misclassifications between
level ground walking speeds and RUP/RDW walking modes.
Classifications of SUP/SDW modes were observed to be very
robust in the simulation of a shifted electrode measurement. This
is likely due to large changes in muscle activations when completing stair modes in comparison to all other walking modes.
It should also be noted that the distance of electrode shift was
consistent for all four muscles at approximately 3 cm. The TA
and MG are shorter muscle bodies when compared to the VL

2749

and BF. It is possible that the VL and BF are more robust to the
simulated electrode shift because the ratio of the shift length to
the length of the muscle body is smaller than that for the TA
and MG. This effect would be exaggerated for amputee subjects
who have shorter TA and MG muscle bodies than nonamputee
subjects.

C. Additional Considerations
Several key areas need to be further explored before a myoelectric classifier similar to the one proposed could be used as
part of an active prosthetic system for transtibial amputees. The
classifier outlined in this study would need to be evaluated on
a larger amputee sample to demonstrate the robusticity of the
classifier to the variability of amputee EMG signals. The EMG
signals used in the present classification effort were recorded
over a short time window, typically within a 3-h time period. It
is unknown whether the classifier will remain stable in response
to changing muscle activations that may occur over the course
of time. Additionally, walking mode classifications were taken
from walking trials over identical ramp and stair terrains. This
does not accurately reflect the range of terrains that the amputee would likely experience on a regular basis. It is unknown
whether the presented classifier will be able to make robust
classifications on terrains that vary from the training terrain.
A myoelectric classifier can only be trained to a finite number of walking modes which does not reflect the wide range
of walking patterns that the amputee subject is capable of performing (i.e., stutter stepping, turning, sitting, driving, initiation/termination of gait, transitions between different walking
modes, etc.). It is unknown how a myoelectric classifier would
respond to EMG signals associated with these movement patterns. The real-time ability of any myoelectric classifier also
needs to be addressed. A myoelectric classifier’s utility will be
reduced if it is not able to make a classification with sufficient
time for the prosthetic to respond when embedded in a prosthetic system. Thus, a robust machine coded algorithm would
be needed to implement classification decisions in near real
time.

V. CONCLUSION
Myoelectric classification of seven distinct walking modes
(self-selected walking, slow walking, fast walking, ramp ascent/descent, and stair ascent/descent) was observed to be possible for both unilateral transtibial amputees and nonamputee
subjects, using LDA and SVM algorithms. The average classification accuracy using LDA and SVM was 97.9% (±0.22)
and 97.9% (±1.39) for amputees and 93.3% (±2.62) and 94.7%
(±2.82) for nonamputees, respectively. The majority of misclassifications were between different walking speeds. No benefit
in classification accuracy was observed for the SVM as compared to LDA. The similar classification accuracy of the two
approaches makes LDA the more efficient classifier for the proposed myoelectric algorithm due to the lower computational
cost to train and classify walking modes.

2750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of J.
Pecoraro, Dr. J. Czerniecki, and Dr. D. Morgenroth.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Ziegler-Graham, E. J. MacKenzie, P. L. Ephraim, T. G. Travison, and
R. Brookmeyer, “Estimating the prevalence of limb loss in the United
States: 2005 to 2050,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 89, pp. 422–429,
Mar. 2008.
[2] R. L. Waters and S. Mulroy, “The energy expenditure of normal and
pathologic gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 9, pp. 207–231, Jul. 1999.
[3] C. M. Powers, S. Rao, and J. Perry, “Knee kinetics in trans-tibial amputee
gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 8, pp. 1–7, Aug. 1, 1998.
[4] A. H. Hansen, D. S. Childress, S. C. Miff, S. A. Gard, and K. P. Mesplay,
“The human ankle during walking: Implications for design of biomimetic
ankle prostheses,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, pp. 1467–1474, Oct. 2004.
[5] S. D. Prentice, E. N. Hasler, J. J. Groves, and J. S. Frank, “Locomotor
adaptations for changes in the slope of the walking surface,” Gait Posture,
vol. 20, pp. 255–265, Dec. 2004.
[6] A. Protopapadaki, W. I. Drechsler, M. C. Cramp, F. J. Coutts, and
O. M. Scott, “Hip, knee, ankle kinematics and kinetics during stair ascent and descent in healthy young individuals,” Clin. Biomech. (Bristol,
Avon), vol. 22, pp. 203–210, Feb. 2007.
[7] M. A. Oskoei and H. S. Hu, “Myoelectric control systems—A survey,”
Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 2, pp. 275–294, Oct. 2007.
[8] S. K. Au, P. Bonato, and H. Herr, “An EMG-position controlled system for
an active ankle–foot prosthesis: An initial experimental study,” in Proc.
9th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., Chicago, IL, USA, 2005, pp. 375–379.
[9] A. L. Delis, J. L. Carvalho, A. F. da Rocha, R. U. Ferreira, S. S. Rodrigues,
and G. A. Borges, “Estimation of the knee joint angle from surface electromyographic signals for active control of leg prostheses,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 30, pp. 931–946, Sep. 2009.
[10] K. H. Ha, H. A. Varol, and M. Goldfarb, “Myoelectric control of a powered knee prosthesis for volitional movement during non-weight-bearing
activities,” in Proc. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 3515–
3518.
[11] K. H. Ha, H. A. Varol, and M. Goldfarb, “Volitional control of a prosthetic
knee using surface electromyography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 1, pp. 144–151, Jan. 2011.
[12] L. J. Hargrove, A. M. Simon, R. D. Lipschutz, S. B. Finucane, and
T. A. Kuiken, “Real-time myoelectric control of knee and ankle motions
for transfemoral amputees,” JAMA, vol. 305, pp. 1542–1544, Apr. 20
2011.
[13] S. K. Au and H. M. Herr, “Powered ankle-foot prosthesis—The importance of series and parallel motor elasticity,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 52–59, Sep. 2008.
[14] H. Huang, T. A. Kuiken, and R. D. Lipschutz, “A strategy for identifying
locomotion modes using surface electromyography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 65–73, Jan. 2009.
[15] H. Huang, F. Zhang, L. J. Hargrove, Z. Dou, D. R. Rogers, and
K. B. Englehart, “Continuous locomotion-mode identification for prosthetic legs based on neuromuscular–mechanical fusion,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2867–2875, Oct. 2011.
[16] S. Au, M. Berniker, and H. Herr, “Powered ankle-foot prosthesis to assist
level-ground and stair-descent gaits,” Neural Netw., vol. 21, pp. 654–666,
May 2008.
[17] D. Tkach, H. Huang, and T. A. Kuiken, “Study of stability of time-domain
features for electromyographic pattern recognition,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 7, p. 21, 2010.
[18] E. F. Delagi and A. Perotto, Anatomic Guide for the Electromyographer—
The Limbs, 2nd ed. Springfield, IL, USA: Thomas, 1980.
[19] E. A. Clancy, E. L. Morin, and R. Merletti, “Sampling, noise-reduction
and amplitude estimation issues in surface electromyography,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 12, pp. 1–16, Feb. 2002.

[20] K. Englehart and B. Hudgins, “A robust, real-time control scheme for
multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
no. 7, pp. 848–854, Jul. 2003.
[21] C. W. Hsu and C. J. Lin, “A comparison of methods for multiclass support
vector machines,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 415–425,
Mar. 2002.
[22] Q. Li, M. Young, V. Naing, and J. M. Donelan, “Walking speed estimation
using a shank-mounted inertial measurement unit,” J. Biomech., vol. 43,
pp. 1640–1643, May 2010.
[23] A. J. Young, L. J. Hargrove, and T. A. Kuiken, “Improving myoelectric
pattern recognition robustness to electrode shift by changing interelectrode
distance and electrode configuration,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 3, pp. 645–652, Mar. 2012.

Jason D. Miller received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the Ohio State University,
Columbus, USA, in 2010, and the M.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from the University of Washington, Seattle, USA, in 2012.
He is currently an R&D Engineer at EndoGastric
Solutions, Redmond, WA, USA. His research interests include medical device design and development.

Mahyo Seyedali Beazer received the B.S. degree
with a dual major in applied physics and athletic training from Whitworth University in 2009, and the M.S.
degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Washington, Spokane, USA, in 2011.
She is currently a Mechanical Engineer at Entergy,
New Orleans, LA, USA. Her area of emphasis is in
drive train design.

Michael E. Hahn received the B.S. degree in biological sciences from Colorado Mesa University, Grand
Junction, USA, the M.S. degree in exercise and sports
science from Iowa State University, Ames, USA, and
the Ph.D. degree in exercise and movement science
from the University of Oregon, Eugene, USA.
He recently served as the Director of the Motion
Analysis Laboratory, VA RR&D Center of Excellence for Limb Loss Prevention and Prosthetic Engineering, and an Affiliate Assistant Professor in the
Department Mechanical Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, USA. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Human physiology and the Director of the Bowerman Sports Science
Clinic, University of Oregon.

