IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

215

Individualized Estimation of the Central Aortic Blood
Pressure Waveform: A Comparative Study
Jin-Oh Hahn, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a comparative study on the relative performance of alternative strategies for estimating an individualized central aortic blood pressure (BP) waveform. Based
on the transmission line representation of the central aortic–radial
arterial line, a fully individualized (ITF1 ), two partially individualized (ITF2 and ITF3 ), and a fully nonindividualized (NITF)
transfer functions (i.e., frequency-dependent central aortic–radial
BP relationships) were constructed using experimental data collected from nine swine subjects. The central aortic BP waveforms
estimated by these transfer functions were compared against their
measured gold standards, with the root-mean-squared waveform
error and the absolute errors associated with systolic and pulse
pressures as performance measures. Overall, the advantage of the
individualized over the nonindividualized approach was modest
but significant. The superiority of the individualized approach to
its nonindividualized counterpart was increasingly pronounced under nonnominal or extreme physiologic conditions, as the subject’s
pulse transit time deviated from the averaged nominal value. The
results suggest that the use of a fully individualized transfer function (ITF1 ) is strongly recommended for nonnominal physiologic
conditions, whereas a partially (ITF2 and ITF3 ) or even fully nonindividualized transfer function (NITF) may also yield acceptable
performance under nominal physiologic conditions.
Index Terms—Central aortic blood pressure, generalized transfer function, individualized transfer function.

I. INTRODUCTION
ENTRAL cardiovascular parameters, such as aortic BP
and flow, are generally more informative about cardiac dynamics and global circulation, and thus provide a greater clinical
value compared with those measured in the periphery [1], [2].
Despite its clinical value, central aortic BP has not been widely
used in clinical monitoring due to highly invasive procedures
involved in its conventional measurement (e.g., catheterization
in the aorta or another artery near the heart) that can incur great
risk (e.g., stroke), significant cost, and discomfort. Relatively
easy noninvasive measurements (e.g., via catheterization or applanation of the radial artery) may set off peripheral arterial BP.
However, they cannot serve as direct substitutes for central aortic
BP because the BP waveform becomes progressively distorted
with increasing distance from the heart, due to the well-known

C

Manuscript received October 26, 2012; revised February 2, 2013 and March
19, 2013; accepted May 6, 2013. Date of publication May 14, 2013; date of
current version December 31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and in part by
the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada.
The author is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA (e-mail: jhahn12@umd.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2262945

appreciation that the BP wave ejected by the heart (called the
forward traveling wave) travels through the arterial tree and is
reflected at the level of arterioles (called the backward traveling
wave) [3]. In an attempt to leverage the advantage of both central
aortic and peripheral BP, there have been substantial research
efforts to develop methods to infer central conditions from peripheral circulatory measurements, e.g., arterial BP measured at
distal extremity locations.
These alternative methods can be classified into populationbased versus individualized approaches. First, the populationbased approach (which corresponds to most of the existing
methods) involves creating a population-based transfer function (a frequency-dependent relationship between central aortic
and peripheral BP) using central aortic and peripheral BP measurements from a group of subjects and applying the transfer
function thus obtained to the peripheral BP waveform of a new
subject to predict the central aortic BP waveform. In a set of
clinical investigations to date, this approach has been shown to
yield waveforms that in general correspond better to reference
central aortic BP measurements than the analyzed peripheral
BP waveforms [4]–[6]. In reality, however, the relationship between central aortic and peripheral BP is not fixed as assumed by
these population-based techniques, as arterial parameters vary
between subjects and with physiologic conditions [7]–[9]. For
example, arterial compliance and peripheral resistance differ
with age and disease, and are altered by neurohumoral control
mechanisms and therapy (e.g., vasoactive drugs). Thus, this approach can yield large central aortic BP errors. To overcome
this drawback, novel approaches were proposed to adapt the
model to individual relationship by exploiting peripheral measurements [10]–[15]. In particular, methods involving only a
single peripheral BP stand out by virtue of their applicability
in real clinical settings (e.g., with invasive or noninvasive radial BP). Existing methods in this category include Sugimachi
et al. [13] who proposed a partially individualized method where
the pulse travel time (PTT) parameter in the transmission line
(TL) model is adapted to each individual subject using an extra
ECG measurement, Swamy et al. [14] who proposed a fully
individualized method where the measured PTT and estimated
polynomial coefficients fully characterize the TL model of an
individual subject, and Hahn et al. [15] who proposed a fully
individualized method that can estimate individual-specific PTT
and polynomial coefficients in the TL model, thereby eliminating the use of extra PTT measurements required in Sugimachi
et al. [13] and Swamy et al. [14].
Despite notable advances in a wide spectrum of methods for
estimating central aortic BP waveform, advantages and drawbacks of these methods, especially with respect to one another,

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

216

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

have not been fully unveiled, and the utility of individualized
versus nonindividualized approaches is still under controversy
to a certain extent. Indeed, on the one hand, the superiority of
the individualized approach over the population-based approach
was illustrated in a number of recent studies [10]–[16]. On the
other hand, there are studies reporting that the population-based
approach is as good as its individualized counterpart (e.g., [17]).
It is expected that the individualized approach may offer improved estimates of the central aortic BP waveform than the
population-based approach if the individualization algorithm
works properly. However, how the algorithm performs to individualize the transfer function depends on a variety of factors
such as the richness of the underlying BP waveform used to
construct the transfer function. Furthermore, the degree of improvement in the accuracy of the estimates of the central aortic
BP waveform may be marginal under certain circumstances,
which can weaken the rationale behind the use of the individualized approach. In this regard, elucidating the strengths and the
weaknesses of the individualized approach versus nonindividualized approach for estimating the central aortic BP waveform
can be very useful in determining which approach is more appropriate for a specific circumstance and/or a target application.
However, to the best of the author’s knowledge, no previous
effort has been made to perform a comprehensive and objective
comparison of these different approaches to estimate the central aortic BP, especially, based on the same set of data. Since
different techniques were developed using different sets of data,
comparison of the techniques is a significant challenge. This paper is perhaps the first effort to compare the existing techniques
in a comprehensive and systematic fashion.
In our attempt to rigorously explore strengths and limitations
of the individualized approach versus the nonindividualized approach for estimating central aortic BP, a comparative study on
the relative performance of alternative strategies for estimating
the individualized central aortic BP waveform was conducted in
this paper. Based on the TL representation of the central aortic–
radial arterial line, a fully individualized (ITF1 ), two partially
individualized (ITF2 and ITF3 ), and a fully nonindividualized
(NITF) transfer functions (i.e., central aortic–radial BP relationships) were constructed using experimental data collected
from nine swine subjects. The central aortic BP waveforms estimated by these transfer functions were compared against their
measured counterparts, with the RMSE and the absolute errors
associated with systolic pressure (SP) and pulse pressure (PP)
as performance measures. Overall, the advantage of the individualized approach over nonindividualized approach was modest
but significant. However, the superiority of the individualized
approach was increasingly pronounced under nonnominal or
extreme physiologic conditions, as the subject’s PTT deviated
from the averaged nominal value. The results suggest that the
use of a fully individualized transfer function (ITF1 ) is strongly
recommended for nonnominal physiologic conditions, whereas
a partially individualized (ITF2 and ITF3 ) or even a fully nonindividualized transfer function (NITF) may also yield acceptable
performance under nominal physiologic conditions.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly describes
the principles of individualized and nonindividualized transfer

functions, as well as the estimation of central aortic BP waveforms using these transfer functions. Experimental protocol and
statistical analysis are detailed in Section III. The relative performance of the alternative approaches are compared in Section
IV and discussed in Section V, with conclusion presented in
Section VI.
II. INDIVIDUALIZED VERSUS NONINDIVIDUALIZED
ESTIMATION OF CENTRAL AORTIC BP
In this section, the principles of individualized and nonindividualized transfer function approaches to estimation of central aortic BP are described. In essence, partially individualized
(ITF2 and ITF3 ) and nonindividualized (NITF) approaches can
be regarded as special cases of fully individualized transfer function (ITF1 ), where some or all of its intra- and inter-individual
adaptabilities are eliminated.
A. Fully Individualized Transfer Function
The “ITF” technique described in Hahn et al. [15] is used as a
fully individualized approach (ITF1 ), by virtue of its capability
of completely characterizing the TL model of the central aortic–
radial line solely based on the radial BP waveform measurement.
In the continuous time domain, the TL model of the central
aortic–radial arterial line is given by [11]–[15]
G (s) =

s+α+β
Pr (s)
=
Pa (s)
(s + α) eτ s + βe−τ s

(1)

where s is the Laplace operator, Pa and Pr are central aortic
and radial BP, respectively, τ is the central aortic–radial PTT,
and α and β are the polynomial coefficients. TL model parameters are subject to underlying physiologic condition, such as the
compliance of large conduit and small terminal arterial vessels
as well as the peripheral resistance of arterioles. ITF1 adapts
TL model (1) to a specific individual subject under a particular
physiologic condition, by formulating and solving a constrained
optimization problem for identifying the PTT and polynomial
coefficient parameters pertaining to an individual subject [15].
More specifically, the key premise underlying this technique
is a priori knowledge that the central aortic BP waveform is
typically smoother (i.e., smaller time rate of change) than its
peripheral counterparts [18], e.g., in terms of the second derivative of the waveform with respect to time [15]. By exploiting
this knowledge, it is possible to reformulate (1) into a linear
regression in terms of peripheral BP data in the discrete time
domain, by approximating the central aortic BP to a piecewise
constant signal [15] for an assumed PTT value. Then, the linear
regression is solved to individualize (1) and construct candidate central aortic BP for a range of PTT values. Finally, the
smoothest candidate central aortic BP (e.g., the one with the
minimum second time derivative [15]) is chosen as the optimal
estimate of the central aortic BP, and the corresponding transfer
function is chosen as the ITF [15].
B. Partially Individualized Transfer Function (ITF2 and ITF3 )
Partially individualized approach is the one in which a subset
of TL model parameters are not adapted but are fixed at nominal

HAHN: INDIVIDUALIZED ESTIMATION OF THE CENTRAL AORTIC BLOOD PRESSURE WAVEFORM: A COMPARATIVE STUDY

values (i.e., population averages). In this paper, ITF2 is obtained
by using population-averaged polynomial coefficients, whereas
ITF3 is obtained by using population-averaged PTT.

217

TABLE I
PHYSIOLOGIC CONDITIONS OF EXPERIMENTAL SWINE SUBJECTS:
MAX/MIN (MEAN ± SD)

C. Nonindividualized Transfer Function
Fixing all TL model parameters at nominal values yields the
NITF. It is conceptually equivalent to the well-known “generalized transfer function (GTF)” technique [4]–[9], where the
intra- and inter-individual adaptability is completely eliminated
from ITF1 .
D. Estimation of the Central Aortic BP Waveform
Once (1) is determined (i.e., the parameters in (1) are characterized), radial BP measurement is inversely filtered using (1)
to estimate the central aortic BP
P̂a (s) =

(s + α̂) eτ̂ s + β̂e−τ̂ s
s + α̂ + β̂

Pr (s)

(2)

where P̂a is the estimated central aortic BP, while τ̂ is the
estimated PTT, and α̂ and β̂ are the estimated polynomial coefficients.
III. METHODS
Experimental circulatory data were collected from nine swine
subjects. Four central aortic BP waveform estimation methods
described in Section II (ITF1 , ITF2 , ITF3 , and NITF) were implemented and tested, and their relative performance compared
with each other under nominal and nonnominal physiologic
conditions.
A. Experimental Protocol
Under the experimental protocol #01-055 approved by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee of Animal
Care, invasive circulatory data were collected from nine anesthetized swine subjects. BP signals were recorded simultaneously from indwelling catheters in the radial artery and the aorta,
coupled via rigid fluid-filled tubing to external BP transducers
with a frequency bandwidth of 100 Hz. During the experiment,
physiologic conditions of the swine subjects were widely altered with the following interventions: infusions of crystalloid
volume, phenylephrine, dobutamine, isoproterenol, esmolol, nitroglycerine, and progressive hemorrhage. Since each swine
subject responded differently to the interventions, the type of
interventions and their durations were independently titrated so
as to allow each swine subject to span a broad range of physiologic conditions. Table I summarizes the physiologic conditions
spanned by the swine subjects.
B. Data Processing and Statistical Analysis
Considering that the choice of sampling frequency is crucial
in the implementation of ITF1 (since the central aortic BP is
approximated to a piecewise constant signal [15]), a stochastic
error propagation analysis [19] was conducted on the animal
experimental data to examine the influence of the sampling

frequency on the performance of ITF1 against a range of physiologic conditions. The results indicated that the inaccuracy in
the peripheral BP due to the approximation made to the central aortic BP was confined within a small bound: only 8% if
100 Hz sampling frequency was used, and only 2% if 500 Hz
sampling frequency was used (see [20] for the full details of the
analysis). After determining that up to 10% error is acceptable
based on the inspection of actual versus approximated peripheral BP waveforms, a sampling frequency of around 100 Hz
was chosen empirically to minimize computational load while
preserving the performance of the technique. The BP waveform
signals were first measured at 250 Hz without filtering. The signals were then prefiltered using an FIR digital low-pass filter
with 30 Hz cut-off frequency and down-sampled to 125 Hz. The
central aortic and radial BP waveform measurements obtained
from the experimental swine subjects were segmented into timeseries sequences each of which is 8 s long, yielding 4638 data
segments in total, each of which was used to compare alternative
approaches to estimate the central aortic BP waveform.
An experimentally measured radial BP waveform in each
segment of data was used to build an ITF1 for that segment
following the algorithm described in Hahn et al. [15]:
(1)

Gi (s) =

s + α̂i + β̂i
(s + α̂i ) eτ̂ i s + β̂i e−τ̂ i s

(3)

(1)

where Gi (s) represents ITF1 associated with the ith data segment (1 ≤ i ≤ 4638), in which τ̂i the associated PTT, and α̂i ,
and β̂i are the polynomial coefficient parameters.
Given a total of 4638 ITF1 associated with all data segments,
its model parameters were averaged to obtain nominal values of
PTT (τ ) and polynomial coefficients (α and β)
Δ

τ̄ =

N
N
N


1 
Δ 1
Δ 1
τ̂i , ᾱ =
α̂i , β̄ =
β̂i
N i=1
N i=1
N i=1

(4)

where N = 4638. Then for each segment of data, ITF2 was
constructed by substituting nominal polynomial coefficients and
segment-specific PTT to TL model (1):
(2)

Gi (s) =

s + ᾱ + β̄
(s + ᾱ) eτ̂ i s + β̄e−τ̂ i s

(5)

whereas ITF3 was implemented by substituting segmentspecific polynomial coefficients and nominal PTT to TL

218

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE II
CENTRAL AORTIC BP WAVEFORM RMSE AND SP/PP ERRORS (MEAN ± SD)

TABLE III
ITF1 ’S MEDIAN REDUCTION IN ERROR MEASURES

model (1):
(3)

Gi (s) =

s + α̂i + β̂i
(s + α̂i ) eτ̄ s + β̂i e−τ̄ s

.

(6)

Also, NITF was built by fixing all the TL model parameters
to their nominal values
Ḡ (s) =

s + ᾱ + β̄
.
(s + ᾱ) eτ̄ s + β̄e−τ̄ s

(7)

In turn, for 4638 data segments, these ITF and NITF were applied to the radial BP waveforms to yield estimated central aortic
BP waveforms. Accuracy of the estimates was evaluated in terms
of 1) the RMSE of the estimated central aortic BP waveform
versus its actual counterpart (i.e., the measured central aortic BP
waveform), as well as the errors associated with 2) the estimated
central aortic SP, and 3) the estimated central aortic PP. Besides,
the discrepancy between the radial and the central aortic BP was
also quantified. Specifically, 1) RMSE, 2) SP error, and 3) PP
error between the directly measured radial versus the actual central aortic BP waveforms were computed. Finally, ITF1 - versus
ITF2 -, ITF3 -, NITF-, and radial-BP-derived error measures were
compared with each other to examine the performance of the
fully individualized (ITF1 ) against the partially individualized
(ITF2 and ITF3 ) and the nonindividualized (NITF) approaches
as well as the direct peripheral measurement (i.e., radial BP).
To test the hypothesis that the strength of the ITF approach
stands out under nonnominal physiologic conditions, these calculations were repeated for the subset of data segments in which
the measured PTT deviates more than 25 ms from the averaged
PTT used for the NITF.1
1 Since PTT is the most critical parameter in the transfer function [13], the
fidelity of GTF is expected to degrade as its underlying value (corresponding
to a given data) deviates from its value used in GTF. The 25 ms threshold

As the test of statistical significance, the repeated-measures
ANOVA test was applied to the ITF1 - versus ITF2 -, ITF3 -,
NITF-, and the radial-BP-derived error measures (which includes BP waveform RMSE and SP/PP errors). Considering
that the 4638 data segments included different numbers of data
from each subjects, it was decided that the equal number of error
measures be extracted from each subject in order to prevent the
results of the statistical test from being weighted toward the subject that contributed the largest number of data. To suppress the
adverse effect of temporal dependence among data segments,
50 equally spaced error measures were sampled from each animal subject (thus 450 error measures in total, which allowed for
separation in time between the error measures of as small as 13 s
and as large as 133 s), which were then applied to the statistical
test. Multiple ANOVA tests were performed between the error
measures corresponding to ITF1 versus ITF2 , ITF1 versus ITF3 ,
ITF1 versus NITF, and ITF1 versus radial BP, respectively.
IV. RESULTS
Relative to ITF2 , ITF3 , NITF, and radial BP, the ITF1 -derived
central aortic BP waveform and its SP/PP values were closer
to the actual central aortic values with significance under all
physiologic conditions (except for PP associated with ITF2 ; see
Table II). In comparison to the original radial BP, ITF1 resulted
in a large amount of median reduction in RMSE and SP/PP errors
(see Table III). ITF1 could also yield notable median reduction in
SP/PP errors compared with ITF3 . On the other hand, the median
reduction in RMSE of ITF1 versus ITF3 was small in absolute
terms (see Table III). ITF2 exhibited comparable performance
to ITF1 when all physiologic conditions were considered.
was determined empirically to illustrate the difference in performance between
ITF1 versus its competitors effectively.

HAHN: INDIVIDUALIZED ESTIMATION OF THE CENTRAL AORTIC BLOOD PRESSURE WAVEFORM: A COMPARATIVE STUDY

219

Fig. 1. Bland–Altman plots of SP under nonnominal physiologic conditions, where average and difference are calculated using measured versus estimated central
aortic SP. A data segment is categorized as a nonnominal physiologic condition if its underlying PTT deviates from its nominal value by more than 25 ms.
TABLE IV
BREAKDOWN PERCENTILES ASSOCIATED WITH ITF1 , ITF2 , ITF3 , NITF, AND RADIAL BP

However, the potential advantage of ITF1 over its competitors
as well as the radial BP was increasingly pronounced in those
data segments whose PTT largely deviated from its nominal
(i.e., overall average) counterpart, representing nonnormative
physiologic conditions (see Tables III and IV). For those intervals, ITF1 provided large amount of median reduction in RMSE
and SP/PP errors in comparison with ITF2, ITF3, NITF, and the
radial BP (see Table III). ITF1 essentially eliminated the bias in
estimating SP and PP (see Fig. 1). The breakdown percentiles
summarized in Table IV also support the hypothesis that the
individualized approach is useful especially under nonnormative physiologic conditions. In particular, the benefit of ITF1
over NITF was modest if all the data segments were analyzed.
However, ITF1 significantly reduced the breakdown percentile
over NITF if the data segments associated with nonnormative
physiologic conditions were analyzed.
Comparing fully (ITF1 ) versus partially (ITF2 and ITF3 ) individualized approaches, the accuracy of ITF1 and ITF2 was comparable under nominal physiologic conditions with small reduction in errors, whereas ITF1 ’s improvement in performance over
ITF3 was quite notable (see Table III). On the other hand, the
performance of ITF2 and ITF3 was largely deteriorated under
nonnominal physiologic conditions, yielding ITF1 to provide
large reduction in error measures that is comparable to its reduction over NITF (see Table III). In addition, the breakdown
percentiles associated with ITF2 and ITF3 were worse compared
with ITF1 , although they were still superior to the radial BP (see
Table IV).
V. DISCUSSION
A. Relationship to Previous Methods
The individualized and nonindividualized approaches examined in this paper (except ITF3 ) are conceptually equivalent
to previously developed methods for estimating central aortic

BP. ITF1 , which is the fully individualized method proposed
by Hahn et al. [15], is also equivalent to the method proposed
by Swamy et al. [14] except for the fact that PTT is estimated
rather than known using an extra measurement. Moreover, ITF2
is equivalent to the partially individualized method with subjectspecific PTT developed by Sugimachi et al. [13], whereas NITF
can be linked to the well-known GTF technique [4]–[9]. In
fact, ITF2 was also conceptually discussed in the work of Stok
et al. [16] and Westerhof et al. [17]. In this context, the comparative study conducted in this paper can be regarded as an objective relative assessment of these methods. In fact, this study
is perhaps the first investigation to comprehensively evaluate
the performance of individualized and nonindividualized central aortic BP waveform estimation methods.

B. Strength of the Individualized Approach Under Nominal
and Nonnominal Physiologic Conditions
Experimental results summarized in Table II indicate that
ITF1 exhibited superior performance to its competitors. However, ITF1 provided only modest improvements over ITF2 , ITF3 ,
and NITF, suggesting that the use of fully individualized approach may not bring significant advantage over traditional GTF
technique under nominal physiologic conditions. In these conditions, ITF2 , ITF3 , and NITF essentially showed similar accuracy, although ITF2 slightly outperformed ITF3 and NITF (see
Tables III and IV).
In contrast to nominal physiologic conditions, ITF1 outperformed its competitors and the radial BP to a large extent under
nonnominal physiologic conditions (see the large median error reduction in Table III and superior breakdown percentile in
Table IV). This strongly supports our hypothesis that the strength
of the individualized approach over its generalized counterpart
may be clearly demonstrated under nonnormative physiologic
conditions. In fact, the long-standing controversy on the efficacy

220

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

of the GTF technique [4]–[9] may be explained by this finding:
studies in support of the GTF technique performed validation
of the technique under well-controlled nominal conditions [4]–
[6], while those studies against this technique raised issues with
its breakdown under extreme physiologic conditions [7]–[9]. As
the current comparative study demonstrates, the GTF (NITF in
this paper) technique may show acceptable performance under
nominal physiologic conditions; however, it can be significantly
deteriorated once the subject deviates from the “nominal” condition for which it is constructed. The use of the individualized
approach is highly recommended in estimating central aortic BP
under nonnominal physiologic conditions.
Comparing ITF2 with ITF3 , the former was consistently superior to the latter, especially under nonnominal physiologic
conditions (see Tables III and IV), which suggests critical importance of PTT over polynomial coefficients in characterizing
the individual-specific TL model for estimating central aortic
BP. The result is also consistent with the rationale behind the
previous partially individualized approach proposed by Sugimachi et al. [13], in which only PTT was individualized, whereas
group-averaged polynomial coefficients were used to estimate
the individual-specific central aortic BP waveform.
It must be emphasized that all the approaches analyzed in this
paper appear to be superior to the direct radial BP (which is one
of the common clinical standards to measure BP). In particular, in accordance with some previous work on the GTF technique [4]–[6], RMSE and SP/PP errors associated with NITF are
smaller than those associated with the radial BP (in terms of average, 15%, 42%, and 41%, respectively; see Table II). However,
it tends to less outperform the radial BP under nonnominal conditions (see Table III; the relative difference in errors between
NITF and the radial BP reduces in nonnominal conditions when
compared with all physiologic conditions). These observations
indicate that the performance of NITF in estimating central aortic BP is better than the direct radial BP, but its efficacy appears
to be degraded under nonnominal physiologic conditions.
In effect, the comparative assessment of four different approaches indicates that although the use of nonindividualized
approach is acceptable in stable and normative physiologic conditions, the use of fully individualized approach is always preferred, especially in nonnormative physiologic conditions in
which it has potential to result in large improvement in the
accuracy of the estimated central aortic BP waveform when
compared with its partially individualized and nonindividualized counterparts, and under nominal physiologic conditions as
well with modest improvement in accuracy.
C. Limitation of the Individualized Approach
Considering the importance of PTT over polynomial coefficients in deriving the individualized TL model [13], the accuracy of ITF2 that is comparable to ITF3 and NITF in Table II
appears to be counter-intuitive. In fact, this was caused by the
inappropriately estimated PTT associated with a small subset
of the entire data segments. On the contrary, the superiority
of ITF2 over ITF3 is clearly demonstrated by its smaller median deterioration in errors than ITF3 with respect to ITF1 (see

Table III) and its superior breakdown percentile compared with
ITF3 (see Table IV). In essence, the accuracy of PTT estimate is
an important limiting factor of the efficacy of the individualized
approach in estimating central aortic BP. There are research
efforts to estimate PTT based on a pair of peripheral [21] or
proximal-distal [22] circulatory waveform measurements, but
to the best of the author’s knowledge there is no existing result
on estimation of PTT using a single circulatory signal except
for the method proposed by Hahn et al. [15]. From this perspective, future research on the development of more reliable PTT
estimation methods is strongly warranted.
The systematic selection of the optimal sampling frequency
for constructing ITF1 needs to be studied. In this paper, an
empirical choice of 125 Hz sampling frequency was employed
throughout the analysis as a reasonable compromise between
computational efficiency and performance. Although ITF1 thus
derived outperformed other alternatives studied in this paper,
the performance of ITF1 may further be improved with more
careful and systematic selection of the sampling frequency.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, a comparative assessment study on the relative performance of individualized and nonindividualized approaches to estimating central aortic BP waveform was conducted. The advantage of individualized over nonindividualized
approach was modest under nominal physiologic conditions.
On the other hand, the superiority of the individualized approach was increasingly pronounced under nonnominal physiologic conditions in which the subject’s PTT deviated from the
averaged nominal value. It is concluded that the use of the fully
individualized approach is strongly recommended for nonnominal physiologic conditions, whereas partially individualized and
even nonindividualized approaches may also yield acceptable
performance under nominal physiologic conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank Dr. A. T. Reisner at the Massachusetts General Hospital for valuable discussion throughout
this study.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Safar and P. Jankowski, “Central blood pressure and hypertension: Role
in cardiovascular risk assessment,” Clin. Sci., vol. 116, no. 4, pp. 273–282,
2009.
[2] T. Papaioannou, A. Protogerou, K. Stamatelopoulos, M. Vavuranakis, and
C. Stefanadis, “Non-invasive methods and techniques for central blood
pressure estimation: Procedures, validation, reproducibility and limitations,” Curr. Pharm. Des., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 245–253, 2009.
[3] E. Kroeker and E. Wood, “Comparison of simultaneously recorded central
and peripheral arterial pressure pulses during rest, exercise, and tilted
position in man,” Circ. Res., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 623–632, 1955.
[4] B. Fetics, E. Nevo, C.-H. Chen, and D. Kass, “Parametric model derivation
of transfer function for noninvasive estimation of aortic pressure by radial
tonometry,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 698–706, Jun.
1999.
[5] D. Gallagher, A. Adji, and M. O’Rourke, “Validation of the transfer function technique for generating central from peripheral upper limb pressure
waveform,” Amer. J. Hypertens., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 1059–1067, 2004.
[6] J. Jansen, J. Schreuder, J. Mulier, N. Smith, J. Settels, and K. Wesseling,
“A comparison of cardiac output derived from the arterial blood pressure

HAHN: INDIVIDUALIZED ESTIMATION OF THE CENTRAL AORTIC BLOOD PRESSURE WAVEFORM: A COMPARATIVE STUDY

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

wave against thermodilution in cardiac surgery patients,” Brit. J. Anesth.,
vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 212–222, 2001.
W. Stok, B. Westerhof, and J. Karemaker, “Changes in finger-aorta pressure transfer function during and after exercise,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 101,
no. 4, pp. 1207–1214, 2006.
S. Hope, D. Tay, I. Meredith, and J. Cameron, “Use of arterial transfer
functions for the derivation of aortic waveform characteristics,” J. Hypertens., vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 1299–1305, 2003.
P. Segers, S. Carlier, A. Pasquet, S. Rabben, L. Hellevik, E. Remme,
T. De Backer, J. De Sutter, J. Thomas, and V. Verdonck, “Individualizing
the aortic-radial pressure transfer function: Feasibility of a model-based
approach,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 279, no. 2, pp. 542–549, 2000.
C.-J. Thore, J. Stalhand, and M. Karlsson, “Toward a non-invasive subjectspecific estimation of abdominal aortic pressure,” Amer. J. Physiol.,
vol. 295, no. 3, pp. 1156–1164, 2008.
J. O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, and H. H. Asada, “Blind identification of twochannel IIR systems with application to central cardiovascular monitoring,” ASME J. Dyn. Syst., Meas. Control, vol. 131, no. 5, p. 051009,
2009.
G. Swamy, Q. Ling, T. Li, and R. Mukkamala, “Blind identification of
the aortic pressure waveform from multiple peripheral artery pressure
waveforms,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 292, no. 5, pp. 2257–2264, 2007.
M. Sugimachi, T. Shishido, K. Miyatake, and K. Sunagawa, “A new
model-based method of reconstructing central aortic pressure from peripheral arterial pressure,” Jpn. J. Physiol., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 217–222,
2001.
G. Swamy, D. Xu, N. B. Oliver, and R. Mukkamala, “An adaptive transfer
function for deriving the aortic pressure waveform from a peripheral artery
pressure waveform,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 297, no. 5, pp. 1956–1963,
2009.
J. O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, and H. H. Asada, “Subject-specific estimation
of central aortic blood pressure using an individualized transfer function:
Initial feasibility study,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 212–220, Mar. 2012.
W. J. Stok, B. E. Westerhof, and J. M. Karemaker, “Changes in fingeraorta pressure transfer function during and after exercise,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 101, no. 4, pp. 1207–1214, 2006.

221

[17] B. E. Westerhof, I. Guelen, W. J. Stok, H. A. Lasance, C. A. Ascoop,
K. H. Wesseling, N. Westerhof, W. J. Bos, N. Stergiopulos, and
J. A. Spaan, “Individualization of transfer function in estimation of central
aortic pressure from the peripheral pulse is not required in patients at rest,”
J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 105, no. 6, pp. 1858–1863, 2008.
[18] W. Nichols, M. O’Rourke, and C. Vlachopoulos, McDonald’s Blood Flow
in Arteries. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1998.
[19] G. F. Franklin, J. D. Powell, and M. L. Workman, Digital Control of Dynamic Systems. Reading, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[20] J. O. Hahn, “A system identification approach to non-invasive central cardiovascular monitoring,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. of Technol., Cambridge, USA, 2008.
[21] J. O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, and H. H. Asada, “Estimation of pulse transit
time using two diametric blood pressure waveform measurements,” Med.
Eng. Phys., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 753–759, 2010.
[22] D. Xu, K. L. Ryan, C. A. Rickards, G. Zhang, V. A. Convertino, and
R. Mukkamala, “Improved pulse transit time estimation by system identification analysis of proximal and distal arterial waveforms,” Amer. J.
Physiol., vol. 301, no. 4, pp. 1389–1395, 2011.
Jin-Oh Hahn (M’08) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees from Seoul National University, in 1997 and
1999, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
USA, in 2008, all in mechanical engineering.
From 2010 to 2012, he was with the University of
Alberta, where he was an Assistant Professor in the
Department of Mechanical Engineering, an Assistant
Adjunct Professor in the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, and a Research Affiliate at the Glenrose
Rehabilitation Hospital. Since 2012, he has been with
the University of Maryland, College Park, USA, where he is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering. His research interests include
control systems approach to health monitoring, diagnostics and maintenance of
dynamic systems, with applications to bio-systems and healthcare, automotive
systems, and energy systems.

