2624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Electroporation of Intracellular Liposomes Using
Nanosecond Electric Pulses—A Theoretical Study
Lea Retelj, Gorazd Pucihar, and Damijan Miklavčič∗

Abstract—Nanosecond (ns) electric pulses of sufficient amplitude can provoke electroporation of intracellular organelles. This
paper investigates whether such pulses could provide a method for
controlled intracellular release of a content of small internalized
artificial lipid vesicles (liposomes). To estimate the pulse parameters needed to selectively electroporate liposomes while keeping the
plasma and nuclear membranes intact, we constructed a numerical model of a biological cell containing a nucleus and liposomes of
different sizes (with radii from 50 to 500 nm), which were placed in
various sites in the cytoplasm. Our results show that under physiological conditions selective electroporation is only possible for the
largest liposomes and when using very short pulses (few ns). By increasing the liposome interior conductivity and/or decreasing the
cytoplasmic conductivity, selective electroporation of even smaller
liposomes could be achieved. The location of the liposomes inside
the cell does not play a significant role, meaning that liposomes of
similar size could all be electroporated simultaneously. Our results
indicate the possibility of using ns pulse treatment for liposomal
drug release.
Index Terms—Electroporation, finite-element model, liposomes,
nanosecond (ns) electric pulses.

I. INTRODUCTION
XPOSING the cell to an external electric field causes accumulation of charges on both sides of the plasma membrane
and consequently the formation of an induced transmembrane
voltage (ITV) [1], [2]. If ITV reaches a certain value (∼0.2–
1 V), membrane permeability increases, allowing molecules
for which the plasma membrane is under physiological conditions poorly permeable to enter or exit the cell [2]–[4]. Theories supported by molecular dynamics simulations suggest that
the observed increase in membrane permeability results from
the formation of hydrophilic pores in the lipid bilayer, which

E

Manuscript received January 12, 2013; revised March 25, 2013 and April
22, 2013; accepted May 1, 2013. Date of publication May 7, 2013; date of
current version August 16, 2013. This work was supported by the Slovenian
Research Agency. Research was conducted within the scope of the European
Associated Laboratory for Pulsed Electric Field Applications in Biology and
Medicine (LEA EBAM). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
L. Retelj is with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia (e-mail: lea.retelj@fe.uni-lj.si)
G. Pucihar, deceased, was with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia (e-mail: gorazd.pucihar@fe.unilj.si).
*D. Miklavčič is with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University
of Ljubljana, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia (e-mail: damijan.miklavcic@fe.unilj.si).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2262177

gives the phenomenon its name—electroporation [5]–[8]. When
the electric field is not too strong and the exposure is not too
long, the pores reseal in seconds to minutes after exposure and
the cells restore their normal activity. Today, electroporation
is commonly used in many fields of biology, biotechnology,
and medicine, for applications such as cell fusion [9], [10],
electrochemotherapy [11]–[14], gene electrotransfer [15]–[17],
food processing [18], [19], and others.
In “classical” electroporation, rectangular pulses of microor milli-second duration with rise times in the order of μs and
amplitudes in the range of kilovolt per centimeter are used. As
the charging time of a cell is typically much shorter than the
pulse duration (for a cell with radius of ∼10 μm the charging
time in physiological medium is in the order of 100 ns), classical electroporation pulses primarily affect the plasma membrane while the cell interior practically remains shielded from
the external electric field. However, if the cells are exposed to
pulses with duration in the nanosecond range and amplitudes
of several tens of kilovolts per centimeter, a high electric field
is also present in the cell interior and affects the membranes of
cell organelles [20]. Nanosecond (ns) pulses were reported to
permeabilize intracellular granules [21], large endocytosed vacuoles [22], endocytotic vesicles [23], the nuclear envelope [24],
the inner mitochondrial membrane [25], and also stimulate the
release of calcium from endoplasmic reticulum [26]–[28].
The effects of ns pulses are primarily nonthermal. When
pulses are applied in the moderate number, the overall increase
in the temperature of the pulsed sample is practically negligible
due to short pulse duration [29]. Yet, recent modeling results
suggest that considerable temperature increases could indeed
occur at local membrane sites and contribute to the observed
biophysical responses of cells [30].
The feasibility of intracellular organelle electroporation motivated us to study the possibility of using ns pulses for selective electroporation of intracellular artificial lipid vesicles (liposomes). Liposomes present a convenient way to deliver various
solutions containing drugs, proteins, or nucleic acids into cells,
as they protect their content from the hostile environment (e.g.,
nucleic acids from endogenous nucleases in the blood plasma),
reduce the toxicity of the containing drug for the nontargeted
cells, increase the uptake of the drug into the targeted cells and
consequently increase the drug efficacy [31], [32]. We hypothesize that when the liposomes reach the cell interior, ns pulses
could provide a method for a controlled release of their content
into the cytosol.
Recently, attention has been devoted to liposomes made of archaeal lipids (archaeosomes). These liposomes have several advantages over conventional liposomes, made of phospholipids,

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

RETELJ et al.: ELECTROPORATION OF INTRACELLULAR LIPOSOMES USING NANOSECOND ELECTRIC PULSES—A THEORETICAL STUDY

regarding their preparation, storage conditions, and stability under wide temperature and pH ranges. Archaeosomes can cross
the intact plasma membrane, and when administrated in moderate dosages in vitro or in vivo, they generally do not affect
the cell viability or animal physiology. Extensive research has
focused on archaeosomes as vaccine delivery systems due to
their adjuvant properties, though the delivery of other drugs is
also considered [33]–[35]. When drug-carrying archaeosomes
enter the targeted cells, electroporation with ns pulses could be
used to release the drug.
On the contrary, ns pulses can also exhibit lethal effects on
cells and tissues, which could result from DNA and nuclear damage, change in the mitochondrial membrane potential, and/or
plasma membrane permeabilization [36]. Namely, ns pulses
were reported to induce apoptosis or necrosis in cells in vitro and
tumors in vivo [28], [29], [36]–[44]. Whereas treatment with ns
pulses appears to be a promising drug-free nonthermal therapy
for treating cancer [40], [41], the detrimental effects of ns pulses
should be avoided, if we want to use the pulses for drug release
from liposomes. For this reason appropriate pulse parameters
need to be determined.
In our study, we employed numerical modeling to investigate
whether liposome electroporation could be achieved without
causing severe damage to the cell and its organelles. Such modeling can also provide us with useful information on how to
design the experiments. There are several parameters on which
we can influence in experimental settings, such as electric pulse
parameters, size of the liposomes, liposome interior conductivity, extracellular medium conductivity, etc. We explored the
influence of all these and some other parameters on the ITV
and electroporation of the plasma membrane, the nuclear envelope, and membranes of liposomes. By placing the liposomes in
various locations inside the cell, we also investigated whether
liposomes electroporate differently with respect to their position. Potential risks of ns pulses are discussed and guidelines
that might help reduce damaging effects of ns pulses to the cell
and its organelles when electroporating liposomes are proposed.
II. METHODS
A. Construction of the Model
The finite-element model of a cell containing the nucleus
and intracellular liposomes was constructed in COMSOL Multiphysics 4.2a (COMSOL, Burlington, MA, USA). Most calculations were performed with a 2-D axisymmetric model, which
is presented in Fig. 1. The axial symmetry of the geometry
allowed us to perform calculations in two dimensions, which
considerably reduced the calculation time. However, since the
liposome position in this model was confined to the left vertical axis of the model, we also constructed a 3-D model with
five differently positioned liposomes, shown in Fig. 2, which
allowed us to study the influence of liposome position on their
electroporation.
The 2-D model was constructed from a rectangle with dimensions 50 μm × 100 μm representing the extracellular medium,
in which a semicircle with radius of 10 μm (the cell) was placed.
The cell contained a smaller concentric semicircle with radius of

2625

Fig. 1. 2-D axisymmetric model of a cell containing a nucleus and a liposome.
The radii of the cell and the nucleus were 10 and 3 μm, respectively. The radius
of the liposome was varied from 50 to 500 nm, with the center of the liposome
always positioned in the middle between the nuclear envelope and the plasma
membrane. The inset shows enlarged view of the cell, nucleus, and liposome.

Fig. 2. 3-D model of a cell containing a nucleus and five liposomes. The
dimensions of the cell and the nucleus were identical as in Fig. 1. Bottom: The
cell was placed in the center of a block representing the extracellular medium.
Two opposite sides of the block were modeled as electrodes. Top: Enlarged view
of the intracellular position of the liposomes. The distance from the center of
the cell to the center of the liposomes is 4 μm for liposomes 1 and 3, 9 μm for
liposomes 2 and 4, and 6.5 μm for liposome 5.

3 μm representing the nucleus. Another semicircle representing
a liposome was positioned in the middle between the plasma
membrane and the nuclear envelope with its radius varying
between 50 and 500 nm. The boundary condition for the left
side of the rectangle was set to Axial Symmetry, the right side
was modeled as electrically insulated, whereas the upper and
the lower sides of the rectangle were modeled as electrodes
by assigning them an electric potential. One electrode was set
to ground and the other was excited by a single ns pulse. The
pulse was obtained by subtracting two Heaviside functions, one
being delayed from the other for 4, 10, 20 or 50 ns, using the
COMSOL function flc1hs. The pulse rise and fall times were
set to 1 ns, which is close to the characteristic rise time of some

2626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

nanosecond pulse generators [45], [46]. The pulse duration, to
which we refer in this paper, is defined as the pulse width at
half maximum amplitude. The pulse amplitude was set to a
value resulting in a desired electric field between the electrodes,
calculated as the potential difference between the electrodes
divided by the electrode distance.
For construction of the 3-D model, spheres, and boxes were
used instead of circles and rectangles. Also, the cell contained
five differently positioned liposomes with radii of 250 nm. Due
to the symmetry of the geometry only a quarter of the complete
model was used in calculations (see Fig. 2).
Electric potential V in both the 2-D and 3-D model was calculated in the Electric Currents application mode of the AC/DC
module (Time Dependent Study) by
−∇ (σi ∇V ) − ∇

∂ (εi ∇V )
=0
∂t

(1)

where σi and εi denote the conductivity and dielectric permittivity of a given subdomain, respectively. For each subdomain
(extracellular medium, cell, nucleus, and liposomes), a separate
application mode of the same type was used, and in each application mode only the corresponding subdomain was activated
to calculate V [47], [48].
Plasma membrane, nuclear envelope, and liposome membranes were modeled as the boundary conditions of each of the
corresponding application modes by assigning a current density J through the thin shell representing the membrane using
Distributed Impedance boundary condition [47], [48]
εm
σm
(V − Vref ) +
n·J =
dm
dm



∂V
∂Vref
−
∂t
∂t


.

(2)

Here, n is the unit vector normal to the surface, V is the
electric potential on the interior side of the boundary, Vref is
the potential on the exterior side of the boundary, and σm , εm ,
and dm , are the membrane conductivity, membrane dielectric
permittivity, and membrane thickness, respectively. The ITV is
then calculated as the difference between the electric potentials
on each side of the boundary.
Cells also have an intrinsic (resting) membrane voltage of
few 10 mV, with the cell interior being negative relative to its
exterior. The ITV superimposes onto this voltage, so that the
transmembrane voltage at the anodic pole of the cell is slightly
higher compared to the voltage at the opposite pole in its absolute value. A slight asymmetry in membrane electroporation
across the two poles can, therefore, appear. However, in our calculations, we neglected the influence of the resting potential, as
significant electroporation is expected to occur at considerably
higher values (∼1 V) compared to the resting voltage and thus
the expected asymmetry in electroporation is small [49].
To model membrane electroporation, we included the asymptotic model of electroporation proposed by DeBruin and Krassowska [49]. Although the model in its basic form does not
account for pore expansion, it was found to be particularly appropriate for studies of ns pulses, since it is not expected for the
pores to expand significantly on such a short time scale [6]. The

dynamics of pore formation is described by differential equation

2 
 

IT V
N −q IVTe Vp 2
dN
V ep
= αe
e
1−
(3)
dt
N0
where N is the membrane pore density, N0 the pore density in
the nonelectroporated membrane, and α, q, and Vep are electroporation parameters. This equation was incorporated in the
model with the Weak Form Boundary PDE application mode on
all surfaces corresponding to the membranes [48].
The increase in the membrane conductivity due to electroporation was determined as follows:
σep = πrp2 σp N

eν m − 1
w e w −n ν m

−n ν m
w −n ν m

eν m −

w e w + n ν m +n ν m
w +n ν m

.

(4)

Parameters rp and σp are the radius and internal conductivity of a single pore, respectively, and νm is the nondimensional transmembrane voltage, given by expression νm =
ITV·F /(R·T ), where F is the Faraday constant, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the temperature. The expression
at the end of (4) accounts for the pore shape and the interactions between the pore wall and ions that are passing through the
pore [49], [50]. Assuming a toroidal pore, n is the length of pore
entrance area, relative to the membrane thickness. Parameter w
is the energy cost for moving an ion from a region of high dielectric constant (water) to a small pore in the lipid bilayer with
low dielectric constant. The foundation of the electroporation
model is described in detail in [49] and references therein.
The total membrane conductivity σm was calculated at each
time step as the sum of the passive membrane conductivity
and the conductivity due to electroporation σep . Equations (1)–
(4) were solved simultaneously with a linear system solver
MUMPS.
B. Parameters of the Model
In experiments concerning liposome electroporation, some
parameters can be varied. Liposomes can be made of different
sizes [51], [52] and can be loaded with a medium of arbitrary
conductivity. When performing experiments in vitro, the extracellular medium conductivity can also be adjusted. Furthermore,
by electroporating the cells with microsecond pulses the conductivity of the plasma membrane can be increased by several
orders of magnitude [1], [49] without affecting the membranes
of the organelles. If electroporation is performed in a low conductivity medium, the efflux of cytosolic ions reduces the cytoplasmic conductivity [53], [54]. In order to explore, how a
change in these parameters could influence the results, we performed calculations for a range of parameter values, given in
Table I.
In our calculations, however, we neglected the changes in
the extracellular, cytoplasmic, and nucleoplasmic conductivity,
which could arise due to electroporation during the pulse application. This is justified since it is not expected for significant
transport of ions to occur during an ns pulse because of its extremely short duration [55]. Our results are namely based only
on exposure during a single pulse.

RETELJ et al.: ELECTROPORATION OF INTRACELLULAR LIPOSOMES USING NANOSECOND ELECTRIC PULSES—A THEORETICAL STUDY

TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF THE MODEL

2627

space is negligible. In this case the voltage equally distributes
between both membranes. This allowed us to calculate the ITV
across one of the nuclear membranes as half of the ITV across
the whole nuclear envelope and apply this value to (3). In short,
twice the value of ITV was required for electroporation of the
nuclear envelope compared to the plasma membrane or the liposome membrane. Still, in Figs. 3(a) and 5(a), we show only the
ITV across one nuclear membrane. The above principle is similar to the one used in [20], where calculations were performed
based on a transport lattice approach. The authors modeled the
nuclear envelope with three impedances in series; two representing each nuclear membrane and one representing the space
between nuclear membranes (we neglected the contribution of
the latter).
C. Comparison of Plasma Membrane, Nuclear Envelope,
and Liposome Membrane Electroporation
The objective of the parametric study was to find such parameters for electroporation of liposomes that would not result in
significant electroporation of the plasma membrane or the nuclear envelope. We varied the pulse amplitude at constant pulse
duration and calculated the pore density induced over the membranes at the end of the pulse. If a pore density of N = 1014
m−2 was reached at the pole of a membrane (the point where it
was the highest), the membrane was considered to be electroporated (threshold of significant, i.e., observable electroporation).
This value was taken from the model of DeBruin and Krassowska [49], which compared simulations with the experiments
of Hibino et al. [1]. The pore density of 1014 m−2 and higher
was also used for presenting the areas of significant membrane
electroporation in a similar modeling study [62].
D. Model Validation

According to dielectric spectroscopy measurements of cell
electric properties by Polevaya et al. [56] and Garner et al. [54],
the ratio between the nucleoplasmic conductivity σnp and the
cytoplasmic conductivity σcp is ∼2, even if the cytoplasmic
conductivity reduces due to electroporation in a low conductivity
medium [54]. The same ratio was thus kept when σcp was varied.
Although the nuclear envelope is covered with large nuclear
pore complexes, experiments have confirmed that the nuclear
envelope can actively transport ions [57].
We modeled the nuclear envelope as a boundary condition
similarly as the plasma membrane and the liposome membrane.
However, the nuclear envelope consists of two membranes separated by a thin perinuclear space filled with electrolyte [57]. For
simplicity, we assumed that both membranes have equal electric properties, and that the voltage drop across the perinuclear

The time course and spatial distribution of the ITV on the
cell membrane and the organelle membrane, if the organelle is
positioned in the center of the cell, can be analytically derived
using the Laplace equation [58]. The model was validated by
comparing the analytical solution for the ITV with numerical
calculations obtained in COMSOL Multiphysics. The maximum
error for the ITV on the plasma membrane and the organelle
membrane (in our case the nuclear envelope or the liposome
membranes) was less than 1% for the 2-D and 3-D model.
Therefore, we considered our numerical model to be sufficiently
accurate for the calculations performed in our study.
III. RESULTS
The model was used to calculate the ITV and the pore density
N on the plasma membrane, the nuclear envelope, and the liposome membrane, when the cell is exposed to a single electric
pulse of different durations and different amplitudes. A typical
example of the time course of ITVs during and shortly after
exposure to a 10 ns, 50 kV/cm pulse, as observed at the pole
of each membrane, is presented in Fig. 3(a). The first 11 ns in
the figure refer to the time during the pulse (including the pulse
rise and fall times) and the next 9 ns to the time after the pulse.

2628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Fig. 3. (a) Time courses of the ITV on the plasma membrane (red dashed line), nuclear envelope (blue dotted line), and liposome membrane (radius 250 nm)
(black solid line) for a cell exposed to a 10 ns, 50 kV/cm pulse. The first 11 ns in the figure refer to the time during the pulse (including the pulse rise and fall
times) and the next 9 ns to the time after the pulse. (b) Pore density N , calculated at the membrane poles (the points where the normal to the membrane surface is
parallel to the direction of the electric field) at the end of a 10 ns pulse for a range of amplitudes from 10 to 100 kV/cm. The color code is the same as in (a). The
black horizontal line indicates a pore density of 101 4 m−2 , referred to as significant electroporation. (c) Time courses of the ITV for liposomes with radii of 50,
100, 250, and 500 nm. (d) Amplitudes for which the pore density at the liposome pole, depending on the liposome size, reaches significant electroporation at the
end of a 10 ns pulse. The red dashed and blue dotted horizontal lines indicate the pulse amplitudes for significant electroporation of the plasma membrane and the
nuclear envelope, respectively.

At the beginning of the pulse, the ITV on the plasma membrane
[red dashed line in Fig. 3(a)] and the liposome membrane (black
solid line) rise to approximately 1.6 V in few ns and afterward
decrease to a lower value. The decrease in the ITV is due to
increase in the pore density in the membranes (electroporation),
which considerably increases the membrane conductivity and
consequently reduces the voltage drop across the membranes.
Similar behavior is observed on the nuclear envelope (blue dotted line).
Fig. 3(b) shows the pore density N at the membrane poles at
the end of a 10 ns pulse for pulse amplitudes in the range from
10 to 100 kV/cm. To obtain this figure, a series of time courses
of ITV for pulse amplitudes in steps of 2 kV/cm were calculated
and the values of the pore density at the end of the pulse were
extracted. The figure shows that the plasma membrane becomes
significantly electroporated (pore density N higher than 1014
m−2 , see Methods) at 20 kV/cm, whereas higher amplitudes, 31
and 34 kV/cm, are needed to electroporate the nucleus and the
liposome, respectively.
While Fig. 3(a) and (b) show calculations for a liposome
with 250 nm radius, Fig. 3(c) presents the time courses of the
ITV for liposomes with radii of 50, 100, 250, and 500 nm,
again for a 10 ns, 50 kV/cm pulse. The ITV on the liposome
is strongly affected by its size, namely, the ITV on smaller
liposomes is significantly lower than on larger liposomes. As a
consequence, higher amplitudes are required for electroporation

of smaller liposomes, as demonstrated in Fig. 3(d). The red
dashed and blue dotted horizontal lines in Fig. 3(d) indicate
the amplitudes for significant plasma membrane and nuclear
envelope electroporation, respectively.
We then performed a parametric analysis, where we investigated the influence of the pulse duration and electric properties
of the cell and the liposomes on the pulse amplitudes required
to obtain electroporation. These amplitudes are presented in
Fig. 4 as dots. The range of the parameters was taken from the
literature and is also presented in Table I.
A brief look at Fig. 4 shows that the pulse duration mostly
affects the amplitudes for the plasma membrane and nuclear
envelope electroporation, which are shifted toward lower values with longer pulses, whereas the amplitudes for liposome
electroporation are less affected regardless of the liposome size.
However, liposomes of different size electroporate at different amplitudes. While the amplitude needed to electroporate a
50 nm liposome is usually close to or higher than 150 kV/cm, the
amplitude for electroporation of a 500 nm liposome is generally
lower than 30 kV/cm.
The amplitudes for plasma membrane, nuclear envelope,
and liposome electroporation can, nevertheless, significantly
change when varying the values of specific electric parameters.
Fig. 4(a)–(d) present the results of calculations for different values of extracellular medium conductivity (σe = 0.01–1.6 S/m).
In low conductivity medium, higher amplitudes are required to

RETELJ et al.: ELECTROPORATION OF INTRACELLULAR LIPOSOMES USING NANOSECOND ELECTRIC PULSES—A THEORETICAL STUDY

2629

Fig. 4. Amplitudes required for electroporation of the plasma membrane (red dashed line), nuclear envelope (blue dotted line), and liposome membranes (black
solid lines). The results are presented for liposomes with radii of 50, 100, 250, and 500 nm. Smaller liposomes are always electroporated at higher amplitudes;
thus, the top black solid line refers to the 50 nm liposome and the bottom line to the 500 nm liposome. The pulse duration, for which the results were calculated,
is indicated on the top of each column (e.g. Fig. (a), (e), (i), (m), and (q) present results for a 4 ns pulse). In each row an individual parameter was varied, while
other parameters were kept at their default values (see Table I).

achieve significant electroporation of all membranes, and this is
more pronounced for conductivities below 0.7 S/m.
Fig. 4(e)–(h) show the influence of the cytoplasmic conductivity (σcp = 0.1–1.3 S/m) on the amplitude for electroporation.
We should note that the nucleoplasmic conductivity (σnp ) was

also proportionally reduced to obtain a σnp /σcp ratio of 2, as explained in Methods. An increase in σcp considerably decreases
the amplitude needed for electroporation of the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope, and this is more pronounced
with shorter pulses. The amplitudes for liposome electroporation

2630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Fig. 5. Calculations for a combination of parameter values that are in favor for liposome electroporation (see text). (a) Time courses of the ITV at the poles of
the plasma membrane (red dashed line), nuclear envelope (blue dotted line), and membranes of liposomes with radii of 50, 100, 250, and 500 nm (black solid
lines), when the cell is exposed to a 4 ns, 70 kV/cm pulse. (b) Amplitudes for which the pore density at the liposome pole, depending on the liposome size, reaches
significant electroporation at the end of a 4 ns pulse. The red dashed and blue dotted horizontal lines indicate the pulse amplitudes for significant electroporation
of the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope, respectively.

take the opposite direction and increase, though to a smaller
extent, with the increase of σcp . This leads to an important
observation, namely, that at certain σcp it is possible to selectively electroporate only liposomes, while the plasma and
nuclear membranes remain intact. For example, with 4 ns pulse
and with σcp = 0.1 S/m, 50 kV/cm pulse would be enough to
electroporate 250 and 500 nm liposomes, while 50 and 100 nm
liposomes, as well as the plasma and nuclear membranes, would
remain nonelectroporated.
Fig. 4(i)–(l) present the influence of the plasma membrane
conductivity (σpm = 10−10 –10−4 S/m). The calculated amplitudes for electroporation are not affected by σpm . Similar can
be observed also when changing the liposome membrane conductivity (data not shown). However, the sole effect of the pulse
duration on the electroporation amplitudes can be clearly seen.
With longer pulses, lower pulse amplitudes are needed to obtain
electroporation, but this effect is much more pronounced for the
plasma and nuclear membranes.
Fig. 4(m)–(p) show the calculations for different values of
the liposome interior conductivity (σlip = 0.01–2 S/m). This
parameter does not impact the amplitude for electroporation
of the plasma membrane or the nuclear envelope. In contrast,
if liposomes are filled with a more conductive medium, they
electroporate at lower amplitudes. The effect of σlip is greater
for shorter pulses (4 and 10 ns).
Fig. 4(q)–(t) show the influence of the liposome membrane
permittivity (εlm = 2–5). Similar to liposome interior conductivity, this parameter also influences only the amplitudes for
electroporation of the liposomes. Liposomes with lower membrane permittivity electroporate at lower amplitudes. Again, the
effect of εlm is greater for shorter pulses (4 and 10 ns), whereas
for longer pulses (20 and 50 ns) it becomes diminished.
The aforementioned parametric analysis demonstrated that
some parameters have a considerable impact on plasma membrane, nuclear envelope, and liposome electroporation. Therefore, we performed calculations combining parameter values
that are in favor for selective liposome electroporation. These
are pulse duration 4 ns, σcp = 0.1 S/m, σlip = 2 S/m, σpm
= 3·10−7 S/m (parameter was left unchanged as it was shown

not to affect the results), and εlm = 2.1 (parameter was left
unchanged as it was already optimal). We also decreased the
extracellular medium conductivity to 0.1 S/m as incubation of
cells in a medium of low ionic strength could result in a decrease of the cytoplasmic conductivity. Results are shown in
Fig. 5. Fig. 5(a) presents the time courses of the ITV on the
plasma membrane, the nuclear envelope, and liposomes of different sizes for a 4 ns, 70 kV/cm pulse, and Fig. 5(b) presents the
amplitudes required for their electroporation. The dots present
the amplitudes for electroporation of liposomes, depending on
their radius, while the horizontal lines present the amplitudes for
electroporation of the plasma membrane (red dashed line) and
the nuclear envelope (blue dotted line). Under such conditions,
100 nm liposomes and larger electroporate at lower amplitudes
than the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope, in contrast
to results in Fig. 3(d) where none of the liposomes electroporated
below the amplitude for plasma membrane electroporation.
Finally, Fig. 6 presents the influence of the liposome intracellular position on the time courses of the ITV, and pore densities
on the plasma membrane and membranes of differently positioned liposomes, when the cell is exposed to a 10 ns, 50 kV/cm
pulse. The liposome positioned close to the nuclear pole (liposome 1, see Fig. 2) electroporates at somewhat lower amplitude
(31 kV/cm), while other liposomes electroporate between 34
and 37 kV/cm. Although this indicates that the charging of
other larger organelles could affect electroporation of nearby
liposomes, most of the liposomes would be electroporated at
similar amplitudes.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Appropriate Choice of Pulse Parameters
for Electroporation of Liposomes (Avoiding the Cytotoxic
Effects of Nanosecond Pulses)
The effects of ns pulses on mammalian cells have been extensively studied in the past decade, since the first experiments
performed on human eosinophils showed that ns pulses could
electroporate intracellular granules [21]. Subsequent studies
further confirmed the initial hypothesis that ns pulses breach

RETELJ et al.: ELECTROPORATION OF INTRACELLULAR LIPOSOMES USING NANOSECOND ELECTRIC PULSES—A THEORETICAL STUDY

2631

Fig. 6. Influence of the liposome position on liposome electroporation. The arrangement of the liposomes is given in Fig. 2. (a) Time courses of the ITV at the
cell and liposome poles for exposure to a 10 ns, 50 kV/cm pulse. (b) Pore density, reached at the cell and liposome poles at the end of a 10 ns pulse for a range of
amplitudes from 10 to 100 kV/cm. The color code is the same as in (a). Horizontal line indicates the pore density for significant electroporation (101 4 m−2 ).

the plasma membrane, providing a tool for intracellular manipulation [39]. Beside organelle membrane permeabilization
[21]–[28], ns pulses were also shown to cause DNA damage,
caspase activation, and induction of apoptosis [28], [36]–[41],
[63], [64], or profound plasma membrane damage, following
long pulse trains, that eventually lead to cell death by necrosis [29], [42]–[44].
The purpose of our study was to explore the possibility of using ns pulses for electroporation of liposomes preloaded with a
specific drug for intracellular drug delivery. Liposomes as a drug
delivery system provide protection to its content from degradation and increase the uptake of the drug into the targeted cells.
However, when the liposomes enter the cells, their cargo must
be released for the drug to become effective. Electroporation of
liposomes could present a way to control this release. The main
objective of such application is to use pulses that effectively
electroporate liposomes but cause as little damage as possible
to the cell and other cell organelles. For example, is the liposomes are loaded with specific genes, the cell must remain alive
after transfection in order to express these genes. Appropriate
choice of pulse parameters is thus of high importance.
Using numerical modeling, we found that it takes about 10
to 20 ns to fully charge the liposomes considered in our study,
which is the reason why the amplitudes for liposome electroporation do not significantly change when the pulses are longer
than 10 ns. On the contrary, the cell and the nucleus need more
time to charge (since they are larger than liposomes), so they
electroporate at considerably lower amplitudes when exposed
to a 50 ns pulse compared to a 10 ns pulse.
Experimental data indicate that the cytotoxic effects of ns
pulses increase with increasing pulse duration and pulse amplitude [28], [29], [36]–[44]. As liposomes would electroporate at similar amplitudes for pulse durations, longer than the
charging time of liposomes, pulses with duration equal to or
shorter than this charging time (∼10 ns) should be used for
their electroporation. It is also important to note that the amplitude needed for liposome electroporation strongly depends on
their size. According to our calculations, liposomes with radius
of 500 nm could be electroporated at ∼20 kV/cm, while 50 nm

liposomes require rather high amplitudes, exceeding 150 kV/cm
[see Fig. 3(d) and 4]. When using 10 ns pulses, electroporation
of liposomes, larger than 100 nm, does not seem challenging
with respect to retaining the cell viability. This is in agreement
with the results of Ibey and coworkers [44], who demonstrated
that exposure of cells to a moderate number of 10 ns pulses with
amplitudes of up to 105 kV/cm does not significantly affect the
cell survival. Our results indicate that such liposomes would
electroporate below 80 kV/cm. Electroporation of 50 nm liposomes, however, appears to be more difficult, as these liposomes
would electroporate at ∼150 kV/cm, which could impact the cell
survival more profoundly. Ten pulses with such parameters were
already shown to decrease the cell survival to ∼50% in Jurkat
cells [43], [44]. Nevertheless, the cytotoxic effects of ns pulses
vary between different cell lines [29], [42]–[44], [63], [64]
with some indications that adherent cell lines are more resistant compared to cells grown in suspension [63], possibly due
to a more complex cytoskeleton network [64]. While 10 ns,
150 kV/cm pulses were damaging to Jurkat cells, they only
negligibly affected the survival of HeLa cells [44]. Therefore,
applying 150 kV/cm pulses may not be detrimental to all cell
types [29], [44].
Nevertheless, electroporation with pulses of such high amplitudes would probably also electroporate other larger organelles
in the cell interior. We only included the nucleus in our model;
however, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was also demonstrated as a target of ns pulses. Numerical modeling suggested
that observed increases in intracellular calcium levels after ns
pulse exposure is due to ER electroporation [20], [65]. Cell
death, caused by ns pulse exposure, is dependent on the presence of intracellular calcium, but an increase in the intracellular calcium level itself is not sufficient enough to cause cell
death [37]. Namely, intracellular calcium release was detected
at pulse amplitudes below observable effect on the cell viability [26]–[28], [37]. The processes, which lead to cell apoptosis,
are complex, and it is difficult to predict whether a cell would
survive the exposure only based on plasma and organelle membrane electroporation. For this reason, we decided to compare
our predicted pulse parameters for liposome electroporation

2632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

with experimental data on cell survival after exposure to pulses
of similar parameters, in order to evaluate the possibility of
the damaging effects on cells, which could arise from liposome
electroporation.
B. Selective Electroporation of Liposomes
Some early experimental reports on ns pulses implied that
cells organelles could be electroporated without disrupting the
plasma membrane. Schoenbach et al. [21] reported permeabilization of intracellular granules in human eosinophils after exposure to 3–5 pulses of 60 ns, 36 and 53 kV/cm, while the plasma
membrane remained impermeable to fluorescent dye calcein.
Chen et al. [24] showed nuclear membrane permeabilization
in HL-60 cells after a single 10 ns, 65 kV/cm pulse, without
detectable uptake of propidium iodide (PI) into the cells. Tekle
et al. [22] electroporated endocytosed vacuoles in COS-7 cells
with one hundred 50 ns, 6.7 kV/cm pulses, while leaving the
plasma membrane impermeable to ethidium homodimer.
Although in these experiments plasma membrane electroporation was not detected, modeling studies suggested that pores
indeed can form in the plasma membrane, however, they are
smaller and appear in larger numbers compared to pores induced by conventional microsecond pulses [6], [20], [58], [62].
This was also confirmed experimentally by showing an increase
in plasma membrane conductance using patch-clamp measurements [42], [66], by introducing smaller molecules into the cell
(e.g. YO-PRO-1 and Tl+ ) while plasma membrane remained
impermeable to larger molecules (e.g. PI) [67], [68], and by
measuring cell volume changes after exposure to ns pulses in
the presence of polyethylene glycol and sugar molecules of different sizes [69]. Indeed, two recent studies by Batista Napotnik
et al. [23], [25] showed that electroporation of endocytotic vesicles in B16-F1 cells with ten 60 ns, 50 kV/cm pulses, and mitochondrial membrane permeabilization in Jurkat cells with five
4 ns, 100 kV/cm pulses was accompanied by plasma membrane
electroporation, detected with PI and YO-PRO-1, respectively.
Nevertheless, a theoretical study by Kotnik and Miklavčič
[58] demonstrated that the ITV on the organelle membrane can
exceed the ITV on the plasma membrane for some time after the
onset of a ns pulse, when the organelle interior conductivity is
higher than the cytoplasmic and when the organelle membrane
has a lower permittivity or is thicker than the plasma membrane, suggesting that selective electroporation of organelles is
possible. If we consider that liposomes are made of pure lipids
(membrane permittivity ∼2) and that they can be filled with
a medium with conductivity substantially higher than the cytoplasmic, liposomes can have the properties required for selective
electroporation.
Our results are consistent with these predictions. The model
showed that under physiological conditions, selective electroporation is possible for the largest, 500 nm liposomes, but only
when using the shortest, 4 ns pulses. Despite the fact that liposomes are an order of magnitude smaller than the cell, they
charge considerably faster than the plasma membrane due to
smaller liposome size and lower liposome membrane permittivity. The size of the 500 nm liposomes is just enough for their

ITV to notably exceed the ITV on the plasma membrane [see
Fig. 3(c)]. Therefore, when applying a sufficiently short pulse,
they can be electroporated selectively with respect to the plasma
membrane. We must note, though, that the pulse rise time plays
and important role. For considerably longer pulse rise times than
used in our study (1 ns), exceeding of the liposome ITV above
the ITV on the plasma membrane would not be observed.
Our calculations further demonstrated that the selectivity for
liposome electroporation could be increased by modifying some
of the parameters in the model. When liposomes would be filled
with a conductive medium (above 1 S/m), 4 ns pulses could
also selectively electroporate 250 nm liposomes. Adjusting the
liposome interior conductivity is not a difficult task, as liposomes can be filled with a medium of arbitrary conductivity in
the process of the liposome preparation. Furthermore, a higher
liposome interior conductivity might favor electroporation of
liposomes before other vesicles, naturally present in the cell
(lysosomes, peroxisomes and endosomes), that are comparable in size. We can assume that most of these vesicles have
an internal conductivity similar to the cytoplasmic as they are
formed in this space. Still, since the size of the liposome/vesicle
is an important factor determining the pulse amplitude for electroporation, vesicles considerably larger than liposomes would
probably be always electroporated as well.
Furthermore, a reduction in the cytoplasmic conductivity
would lower the threshold for electroporation of the liposomes
and increase the threshold for electroporation of the plasma
membrane and the nuclear envelope, extending the possibility
to selectively electroporate even smaller liposomes with even
longer pulses (10 ns). In contrast to liposome interior conductivity, the cytoplasmic conductivity is more difficult to manipulate.
One option would be incubating the cells in the presence of a low
conductivity medium or even moderately electroporate them using classical electroporation protocols, as this causes efflux of
ions from the cytoplasm [53]. Similarly, efflux of cytosolic ions
could also occur between application of several ns pulses. In this
study, we only considered exposure to a single pulse, whereas
in practice usually more than one pulse is applied. Although
the transport of ions through electroporated membrane during
a ns pulse is not expected to be significant due to extremely
short pulse duration [55], notable changes in the conductivity
could occur between pulses, when ions would have enough time
to diffuse through pores. However, since prolonged incubation
of cells in a low conductivity medium is not well tolerated by
cells [60], the exposure time of the cells outside their growth
medium should be minimized.
Liposomes can also be made from different lipids and some
can even have protein molecules incorporated into the liposome
membrane. This could affect the effective liposome membrane
permittivity, which is the reason why we also investigated this
parameter. A lower membrane permittivity decreases the charging time, therefore, a liposome composed of pure lipids might
be electroporated at lower amplitudes than a similar sized intracellular organelle, which has proteins incorporated in its membrane, but only when 4 or 10 ns pulses are employed.
Nonetheless, the significant variation in results for different values of the cytoplasmic conductivity, liposome interior

RETELJ et al.: ELECTROPORATION OF INTRACELLULAR LIPOSOMES USING NANOSECOND ELECTRIC PULSES—A THEORETICAL STUDY

conductivity and liposome membrane permittivity indicate that
these parameters should be carefully selected also in numerical
modeling.
In addition, we explored the influence of the intracellular liposome position on liposome electroporation. The electric field
inside the cell can be locally deformed due to charging of other
intracellular organelles. We included the nucleus in our model,
which is the largest organelle and could influence the local
electric field most profoundly. Indeed, liposome 1, which is
positioned close to the nuclear pore, is exposed to somewhat
higher electric field compared to other liposomes, and is thus
electroporated at lower amplitude. Nevertheless, all liposomes
are electroporated in a range of amplitudes from 31 to 37 kV/cm,
meaning that their position does not play a major role in electroporation. Consequently, most liposomes of similar size are
expected to be electroporated simultaneously and to a similar
extent regardless of their position inside the cell.
C. Validity of the Predicted Thresholds for Electroporation
The model, which we used in our study, does account for
electroporation, but is still very simplistic compared to the complexity of biological cells. It predicts that detectable electroporation occurs when the ITV reaches ∼1 V; however, it was
found that the electroporation threshold can vary between different cell lines when either microsecond or nanosecond pulses
are applied [42], [70]. Still, it was experimentally confirmed
that electroporation of the plasma membrane depends on the
membrane charging characteristics also with ns pulses [67].
Therefore, the model gives at least important qualitative information on the plasma membrane and organelle membrane
electroporation.
We predicted that significant electroporation occurs when a
pore density of 1014 m−2 is reached in the membrane. One
should note, though, that even if we used an order of magnitude
lower or higher threshold pore density, in most cases this would
not significantly alter the calculated pulse amplitude for electroporation E due to the steep slope of the curve E(N ) around
1014 m−2 [see Fig. 3(b)].
We assumed that the threshold voltage for liposome electroporation is the same as for the plasma membrane. We calculated the amplitude for electroporation of 50 nm liposomes
to be ∼150 kV/cm when the liposomes are filled with a conductive medium, and ∼190 kV/cm, when they are filled with
a medium with conductivity of 0.01 S/m [exposure to a 10 ns
pulse, Fig. 4(n)]. Tekle et al. [22] exposed salt-filled and sucrosefilled liposomes of similar size (median diameter 103 nm) to a
single 10 ns pulse of either 80, 160 or 240 kV/cm. They observed
that none of the liposomes electroporated at 80 kV/cm, only saltfilled liposomes electroporated at 160 kV/cm, and both salt- and
sucrose-filled liposomes electroporated at 240 kV/cm. The liposomes were exposed outside the cell in a low-conductivity
sucrose medium, therefore, we cannot directly compare the amplitudes from the experiment with the predicted ones from the
model. However, these data qualitatively agree with our calculations and suggest that the predicted amplitudes are not exaggerated.

2633

The parameters, which govern the electroporation process
(α, q, N0 , Vep ) were assumed to be equal for all membranes,
although in practice they can differ for membranes of different composition. Considering that the plasma and the organelle
membranes are mostly constituted of phospholipids, it can be
expected that these parameters are similar for the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope. On the contrary, liposomes
can also be made of archaeal lipids, which have a different
structure compared to phospholipids [33], [34], [51]. This difference in structure might affect pore formation. The threshold
voltage for electroporation of such archaeosomes has, to our
knowledge, not yet been determined, but some preliminary results from planar lipid bilayer experiments and molecular dynamics simulations indicate, that they require a higher ITV for
electroporation (unpublished data). In this case, the amplitudes
predicted for electroporation by the model would be an underestimate. Furthermore, the liposomes usually enter the cells by
endocytosis [31], [32]. This also appears to be true for archaeosomes [35]. If the plasma membrane was still present around
the liposome membrane when exposing the cells to ns pulses,
the voltage drop across the liposome membrane would be lower,
and again, the calculated amplitudes would be an underestimate.
Similarly, higher amplitude would also be required to electroporate multilamellar liposomes. All the above indicate that it is
important to carefully optimize the experimental protocol in order to avoid the damaging effects of ns pulses, especially when
the drug delivery with very small liposomes (up to 200 nm
in diameter) would be unavoidable, e.g., in the case of intravenous administration of liposomes, when liposomes need to be
sufficiently small to be able to cross the vascular endothelium
wall [32].
V. CONCLUSION
Overall, our model suggests two important factors for successful optimization of liposome drug delivery with ns pulses.
The first is the pulse duration and the second is the liposome size.
Using both shorter pulses and larger liposomes would increase
the possibility of selective electroporation of liposomes with
respect to other intracellular organelles and the cell itself, and
consequently present a smaller risk for compromising the cell
viability after the treatment. Liposomes that have a higher internal conductivity and lower membrane permittivity compared to
other similar-sized organelles could be favorably electroporated,
but only when the pulses are few nanoseconds long.
There is, however, one drawback of using very short pulses
for drug delivery. The small size of pores induced by ns pulses
(∼1 nm [69]), which allows the permeation of only small ions
and molecules, could prevent the release of larger molecules
or macromolecules (e.g., siRNA) from the liposomes. Nevertheless, a recent experimental study on Chinese hamster lung
cells showed that a small population of larger pores may also
form in the plasma membrane during exposure to a single
10 ns, 40 kV/cm pulse, which allowed the passage of at least
500 molecules of bleomycin [71]. Furthermore, a single 10 ns
pulse was efficient enough to translocate siRNA into giant unilamellar vesicles [72]. The accompanying molecular dynamics

2634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

simulations demonstrated how a complete translocation of the
siRNA molecule can occur on such short time scales.
Based on our calculations and other experimental data, we
can conclude that with appropriately adjusted pulse parameters,
nanosecond pulses have the potential to be used as a tool for
controlled drug release from intracellular liposomes. This study
should serve as a guideline for further experiments in this area.

[19]
[20]

[21]

REFERENCES
[22]
[1] M. Hibino, M. Shigemori, H. Itoh, K. Nagayama, and K. Kinosita Jr,
“Membrane conductance of an electroporated cell analyzed by submicrosecond imaging of transmembrane potential,” Biophys. J., vol. 59,
no. 1, pp. 209–220, Jan. 1991.
[2] T. Kotnik, G. Pucihar, and D. Miklavčič, “Induced transmembrane voltage
and its correlation with electroporation-mediated molecular transport,” J.
Membr. Biol., vol. 236, no. 1, pp. 3–13, Jul. 2010.
[3] T. Y. Tsong, “Electroporation of cell membranes,” Biophys. J., vol. 60,
no. 2, pp. 297–306, Aug. 1991.
[4] J. Teissié and M. P. Rols, “An experimental evaluation of the critical potential difference inducing cell membrane electropermeabilization,” Biophys.
J., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 409–413, Jul. 1993.
[5] E. Neumann, M. Schaefer-Ridder, Y. Wang, and P. H. Hofschneider,
“Gene transfer into mouse lyoma cells by electroporation in high electric fields,” EMBO J., vol. 1, no. 7, pp. 841–845, 1982.
[6] Z. Vasilkoski, A. T. Esser, T. R. Gowrishankar, and J. C. Weaver, “Membrane electroporation: The absolute rate equation and nanosecond time
scale pore creation,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 021904-1–02190412, Aug. 2006.
[7] A. A. Gurtovenko, J. Anwar, and I. Vattulainen, “Defect-mediated trafficking across cell membranes: Insights from in silico modeling,” Chem.
Rev., vol. 110, no. 10, pp. 6077–6103, Oct. 2010.
[8] L. Delemotte and M. Tarek, “Molecular dynamics simulations of lipid
membrane electroporation,” J. Membr. Biol., vol. 245, no. 9, pp. 531–543,
Sep. 2012.
[9] U. Zimmermann, P. Gessner, R. Schnettler, S. Perkins, and S. K. Foung,
“Efficient hybridization of mouse-human cell lines by means of hypoosmolar electrofusion,” J. Immunol. Methods, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 43–50,
Nov. 1990.
[10] M. Ušaj and M. Kandušer, “The systematic study of the electroporation
and electrofusion of B16-F1 and CHO cells in isotonic and hypotonic
buffer,” J. Membr. Biol., vol. 245, no. 9, pp. 583–590, Sep. 2012.
[11] R. Heller, M. J. Jaroszeski, D. S. Reintgen, C. A. Puleo, R. C. DeConti,
R. A. Gilbert, and L. F. Glass, “Treatment of cutaneous and subcutaneous
tumors with electrochemotherapy using intralesional bleomycin,” Cancer,
vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 148–157, Jul. 1998.
[12] L. M. Mir, J. Gehl, G. Serša, C. G. Collins, J.-R. Garbay, V. Billard,
P. F. Geertsen, Z. Rudolf, G. C. O’Sullivan, and M. Marty, “Standard
operating procedures of the electrochemotherapy: Instructions for the use
of bleomycin or cisplatin administered either systemically or locally and
electric pulses delivered by the CliniporatorT M by means of invasive or
non-invasive electrodes,” Eur. J. Cancer Suppl., vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 14–25,
Nov. 2006.
[13] G. Serša, T. Čufer, S. M. Paulin, M. Čemažar, and M. Snoj, “Electrochemotherapy of chest wall breast cancer recurrence,” Cancer Treat.
Rev., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 379–386, Aug. 2012.
[14] J. Teissié, J. M. Escoffre, A. Paganin, S. Chabot, E. Bellard, L. Wasungu,,
M. P. Rols, and M. Golzio, “Drug delivery by electropulsation: Recent
developments in oncology,” Int. J. Pharm., vol. 423, no. 1, pp. 3–6, Feb.
2012.
[15] M. Bettan, M. A. Ivanov, L. M. Mir, F. Boissière, P. Delaere, and
D. Scherman, “Efficient DNA electrotransfer into tumors,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 83–90, Sep. 2000.
[16] M. Kandušer, D. Miklavčič, and M. Pavlin, “Mechanisms involved in
gene electrotransfer using high- and low-voltage pulses-an in vitro study,”
Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 265–271, Feb. 2009.
[17] J. M. Escoffre, T. Portet, C. Favard, J. Teissié, D. S. Dean, and M. P. Rols,
“Electromediated formation of DNA complexes with cell membranes and
its consequences for gene delivery,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 1808,
no. 6, pp. 1538–1543, Jun. 2011.
[18] N. J. Rowan, S. J. MacGregor, J. G. Anderson, R. A. Fouracre, and
O. Farish, “Pulsed electric field inactivation of diarrhoeagenic Bacillus

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]
[38]

cereus through irreversible electroporation,” Lett. Appl. Microbiol.,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 110–114, Aug. 2000.
S. Toepfl, V. Heinz, and D. Knorr, “High intensity pulsed electric fields
applied for food preservation,” Chem. Eng. Process.: Process Intensif.,
vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 537–546, Jun. 2007.
T. R. Gowrishankar, A. T. Esser, Z. Vasilkoski, K. C. Smith, and
J. C. Weaver, “Microdosimetry for conventional and supra-electroporation
in cells with organelles,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 341, no. 4,
pp. 1266–1276, Mar. 2006.
K. H. Schoenbach, S. J. Beebe, and E. S. Buescher, “Intracellular effect of
ultrashort electrical pulses,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 440–
448, Sep. 2001.
E. Tekle, H. Oubrahim, S. M. Dzekunov, J. F. Kolb, K. H. Schoenbach,
and P. B. Chock, “Selective field effects on intracellular vacuoles and
vesicle membranes with nanosecond electric pulses,” Biophys. J., vol. 89,
no. 1, pp. 274–284, Jul. 2005.
T. Batista Napotnik, M. Reberšek, T. Kotnik, E. Lebrasseur, G. Cabodevila,
and D. Miklavčič, “Electropermeabilization of endocytotic vesicles in
B16 F1 mouse melanoma cells,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 48, no. 5,
pp. 407–413, May 2010.
N. Chen, K. H. Schoenbach, J. F. Kolb, R. J. Swanson, A. L. Garner,
J. Yang, R. P. Joshi, and S. J. Beebe, “Leukemic cell intracellular responses
to nanosecond electric fields,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 317,
no. 2, pp. 421–427, Apr. 2004.
T. Batista Napotnik, Y. H. Wu, M. A. Gundersen, D. Miklavčič, and
P. T. Vernier, “Nanosecond electric pulses cause mitochondrial membrane
permeabilization in Jurkat cells,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 257–264, Apr. 2012.
P. T. Vernier, Y. Sun, L. Marcu, S. Salemi, C. M. Craft, and
M. A. Gundersen, “Calcium bursts induced by nanosecond electric
pulses,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 310, no. 2, pp. 286–295,
Oct. 2003.
S. S. Scarlett, J. A. White, P. F. Blackmore, K. H. Schoenbach, and
J. F. Kolb, “Regulation of intracellular calcium concentration by nanosecond pulsed electric fields,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 1788, no. 5,
pp. 1168–1175, May 2009.
S. J. Beebe, J. White, P. F. Blackmore, Y. Deng, K. Somers, and
K. H. Schoenbach, “Diverse effects of nanosecond pulsed electric fields
on cells and tissues,” DNA Cell Biol., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 785–796, Dec.
2003.
A. G. Pakhomov, A. Phinney, J. Ashmore, K. Walker, J. F. Kolb, S. Kono,
K. H. Schoenbach, and M. R. Murphy, “Characterization of the cytotoxic
effect of high-intensity, 10-ns duration electrical pulses,” IEEE Trans.
Plasma Sci., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1579–1586, Aug. 2004.
J. Song, R. P. Joshi, and K. H. Schoenbach, “Synergistic effects of local
temperature enhancements on cellular responses in the context of highintensity, ultrashort electric pulses,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 49,
no. 6, pp. 713–718, Jun. 2011.
H. Hillaireau and P. Couvreur, “Nanocarriers’ entry into the cell: relevance
to drug delivery,” Cell. Mol. Life Sci., vol. 66, no. 17, pp. 2873–2896, Sep.
2009.
L. Huang and Y. Liu, “In vivo delivery of RNAi with lipid-based nanoparticles,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 507–530, Aug. 2011.
T. Benvegnu, L. Lemiègre, and S. Cammas-Marion, “New generation of
liposomes called archaeosomes based on natural or synthetic archaeal
lipids as innovative formulations for drug delivery,” Recent. Pat. Drug
Del. Formul., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 206–220, Nov. 2009.
G. B. Patel and W. Chen, “Archaeosomes as drug and vaccine nanodelivery systems,” in Nanocarrier Technologies, M. R. Mozafari, Ed. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 17–40.
G. D. Sprott, S. Sad, L. P. Fleming, C. J. Dicaire, G. B. Patel, and
L. Krishnan, “Archaeosomes varying in lipid composition differ in
receptor-mediated endocytosis and differentially adjuvant immune responses to entrapped antigen,” Archaea, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 151–164, Oct.
2003.
S. J. Beebe, P. M. Fox, L. J. Rec, K. Somers, R. H. Stark, and
K. H. Schoenbach, “Nanosecond pulsed electric field (nsPEF) effects on
cells and tissues: Apoptosis induction and tumor growth inhibition,” IEEE
Trans. Plasma Sci., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 286–292, Feb. 2002.
S. Beebe, N. Sain, and W. Ren, “Induction of cell death mechanisms and
apoptosis by nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs),” Cells, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 136–162, Mar. 2013.
E. H. Hall, K. H. Schoenbach, and S. J. Beebe, “Nanosecond pulsed electric fields induce apoptosis in p53-wildtype and p53-null HCT116 colon
carcinoma cells,” Apoptosis, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 1721–1731, Sep. 2007.

RETELJ et al.: ELECTROPORATION OF INTRACELLULAR LIPOSOMES USING NANOSECOND ELECTRIC PULSES—A THEORETICAL STUDY

[39] K. Schoenbach, B. Hargrave, R. Joshi, J. Kolb, R. Nuccitelli, C. Osgood,
A. Pakhomov, M. Stacey, R. Swanson, J. White, S. Xiao, J. Zhang,
S. Beebe, P. Blackmore, and E. Buescher, “Bioelectric effects of intense
nanosecond pulses,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., vol. 14, no. 5,
pp. 1088–1109, Oct. 2007.
[40] R. Nuccitelli, X. Chen, A. G. Pakhomov, W. H. Baldwin, S. Sheikh,
J. L. Pomicter, W. Ren, C. Osgood, R. J. Swanson, J. F. Kolb, S. J. Beebe,
and K. H. Schoenbach, “A new pulsed electric field therapy for melanoma
disrupts the tumor’s blood supply and causes complete remission without
recurrence,” Int. J. Cancer, vol. 125, no. 2, pp. 438–445, Jul. 2009.
[41] R. Nuccitelli, K. Tran, S. Sheikh, B. Athos, M. Kreis, and P. Nuccitelli,
“Optimized nanosecond pulsed electric field therapy can cause murine
malignant melanomas to self-destruct with a single treatment,” Int. J.
Cancer, vol. 127, no. 7, pp. 1727–1736, Oct. 2010.
[42] A. G. Pakhomov, R. Shevin, J. A. White, J. F. Kolb, O. N. Pakhomova,
R. P. Joshi, and K. H. Schoenbach, “Membrane permeabilization and cell
damage by ultrashort electric field shocks,” Arch. Biochem. Biophys.,
vol. 465, no. 1, pp. 109–118, Sep. 2007.
[43] B. L. Ibey, A. G. Pakhomov, B. W. Gregory, V. A. Khorokhorina,
C. C. Roth, M. A. Rassokhin, J. A. Bernhard, G. J. Wilmink, and
O. N. Pakhomova, “Selective cytotoxicity of intense nanosecond-duration
electric pulses in mammalian cells,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 1800,
no. 11, pp. 1210–1219, Nov. 2010.
[44] B. L. Ibey, C. C. Roth, A. G. Pakhomov, J. A. Bernhard, G. J. Wilmink,
and O. N. Pakhomova, “Dose-dependent thresholds of 10-ns electric pulse
induced plasma membrane disruption and cytotoxicity in multiple cell
lines,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. e15642-1–e15642-11, 2011.
[45] J. F. Kolb, S. Kono, and K. H. Schoenbach, “Nanosecond pulsed electric
field generators for the study of subcellular effects,” Bioelectromagnetics,
vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 172–187, Apr. 2006.
[46] J. Sanders, A. Kuthi, Y. H. Wu, P. Vernier, and M. Gundersen, “A linear,
single-stage, nanosecond pulse generator for delivering intense electric
fields to biological loads,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 1048–1054, Aug. 2009.
[47] G. Pucihar, T. Kotnik, B. Valič, and D. Miklavčič, “Numerical determination of transmembrane voltage induced on irregularly shaped cells,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 642–652, Apr. 2006.
[48] G. Pucihar, D. Miklavčič, and T. Kotnik, “A time-dependent numerical
model of transmembrane voltage inducement and electroporation of irregularly shaped cells,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1491–
1501, May 2009.
[49] K. A. DeBruin and W. Krassowska, “Modeling electroporation in a single
cell. I. Effects Of field strength and rest potential,” Biophys. J., vol. 77,
no. 3, pp. 1213–1224, Sep. 1999.
[50] R. W. Glaser, S. L. Leikin, L. V. Chernomordik, V. F. Pastushenko, and
A. I. Sokirko, “Reversible electrical breakdown of lipid bilayers: Formation and evolution of pores,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 940, no. 2,
pp. 275–287, May 1988.
[51] D. Gmajner, P. Ahlin Grabnar, M. Žnidarič Tušek, J. Štrus, M. Šentjurc,
and N. Poklar Ulrih, “Structural characterization of liposomes made of diether archaeal lipids and dipalmitoyl-L-α-phosphatidylcholine,” Biophys.
Chem., vol. 158, no. 2–3, pp. 150–156, Oct. 2011.
[52] A. Di Biasio and C. Cametti, “Dielectric properties of aqueous zwitterionic
liposome suspensions,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 328–334,
May 2007.
[53] M. Pavlin, M. Kandušer, M. Reberšek, G. Pucihar, F. X. Hart,
R. Magjarević, and D. Miklavčič, “Effect of cell electroporation on the
conductivity of a cell suspension,” Biophys. J., vol. 88, no. 6, pp. 4378–
4390, Jun. 2005.
[54] A. L. Garner, G. Chen, N. Chen, V. Sridhara, J. F. Kolb, R. J. Swanson,
S. J. Beebe, R. P. Joshi, and K. H. Schoenbach, “Ultrashort electric pulse
induced changes in cellular dielectric properties,” Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun., vol. 362, no. 1, pp. 139–144, Oct. 2007.
[55] K. C. Smith and J. C. Weaver, “Transmembrane molecular transport during versus after extremely large, nanosecond electric pulses,” Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 412, no. 1, pp. 8–12, Aug. 2011.
[56] Y. Polevaya, I. Ermolina, M. Schlesinger, B. Z. Ginzburg, and Y. Feldman,
“Time domain dielectric spectroscopy study of human cells—Part II: Normal and malignant white blood cells,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 1419,
no. 2, pp. 257–271, Jul. 1999.

2635

[57] M. Mazzanti, J. O. Bustamante, and H. Oberleithner, “Electrical dimension of the nuclear envelope,” Physiol. Rev., vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 1–19, Jan.
2001.
[58] T. Kotnik and D. Miklavčič, “Theoretical evaluation of voltage inducement
on internal membranes of biological cells exposed to electric fields,”
Biophys. J., vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 480–491, Jan. 2006.
[59] A. Irimajiri, K. Asami, T. Ichinowatari, and Y. Kinoshita, “Passive electrical properties of the membrane and cytoplasm of cultured rat basophil
leukemia cells—Part II: Effects of osmotic perturbation,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 896, no. 2, pp. 214–223, Jan. 1987.
[60] V. L. Sukhorukov, R. Reuss, D. Zimmermann, C. Held, K. J. Müller,
M. Kiesel, P. Gessner, A. Steinbach, W. A. Schenk, E. Bamberg, and
U. Zimmermann, “Surviving high-intensity field pulses: Strategies for
improving robustness and performance of electrotransfection and electrofusion,” J. Membr. Biol., vol. 206, no. 3, pp. 187–201, Aug. 2005.
[61] G. Pucihar, T. Kotnik, M. Kandušer, and D. Miklavčič, “The influence of
medium conductivity on electropermeabilization and survival of cells in
vitro,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 107–115, Nov. 2001.
[62] K. C. Smith and J. C. Weaver, “Active mechanisms are needed to describe
cell responses to submicrosecond, megavolt-per-meter pulses: cell models
for ultrashort pulses,” Biophys. J., vol. 95, no. 4, pp. 1547–1563, Aug.
2008.
[63] M. Stacey, J. Stickley, P. Fox, V. Statler, K. Schoenbach, S. J. Beebe, and
S. Buescher, “Differential effects in cells exposed to ultra-short, high intensity electric fields: Cell survival, DNA damage, and cell cycle analysis,”
Mutat. Res., vol. 542, no. 1–2, pp. 65–75, Dec. 2003.
[64] M. Stacey, P. Fox, S. Buescher, and J. Kolb, “Nanosecond pulsed electric
field induced cytoskeleton, nuclear membrane and telomere damage adversely impact cell survival,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 131–
134, Oct. 2011.
[65] R. P. Joshi, A. Nguyen, V. Sridhara, Q. Hu, R. Nuccitelli, S. J. Beebe,
J. Kolb, and K. H. Schoenbach, “Simulations of intracellular calcium
release dynamics in response to a high-intensity, ultrashort electric pulse,”
Phys. Rev. E, vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 041920-1–041920-10, Apr. 2007.
[66] B. L. Ibey, D. G. Mixon, J. A. Payne, A. Bowman, K. Sickendick,
G. J. Wilmink, W. P. Roach, and A. G. Pakhomov, “Plasma membrane
permeabilization by trains of ultrashort electric pulses,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 114–121, Aug. 2010.
[67] P. T. Vernier, Y. Sun, and M. A. Gundersen, “Nanoelectropulse-driven
membrane perturbation and small molecule permeabilization,” BMC Cell
Biol., vol. 7, pp. 37-1–37-16, 2006.
[68] A. M. Bowman, O. M. Nesin, O. N. Pakhomova, and A. G. Pakhomov,
“Analysis of plasma membrane integrity by fluorescent detection of Tl+
uptake,” J. Membr. Biol., vol. 236, no. 1, pp. 15–26, Jul. 2010.
[69] O. M. Nesin, O. N. Pakhomova, S. Xiao, and A. G. Pakhomov, “Manipulation of cell volume and membrane pore comparison following single cell
permeabilization with 60- and 600-ns electric pulses,” Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, vol. 1808, no. 3, pp. 792–801, Mar. 2011.
[70] M. Čemažar, T. Jarm, D. Miklavčič, A. Maček Lebar, A. Ihan,
N. A. Kopitar, and G. Serša, “Effect of electric-field intensity on electropermeabilization and electrosensitivity of various tumor-cell lines in
vitro,” Electro. Magnetobiol., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 263–272, Jan. 1998.
[71] A. Silve, I. Leray, and L. M. Mir, “Demonstration of cell membrane
permeabilization to medium-sized molecules caused by a single 10 ns
electric pulse,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 87, pp. 260–264, Oct. 2012.
[72] M. Breton, L. Delemotte, A. Silve, L. M. Mir, and M. Tarek, “Transport
of siRNA through lipid membranes driven by nanosecond electric pulses:
an experimental and computational study,” J. Amer. Chem. Soc., vol. 134,
no. 34, pp. 13938–13941, Aug. 2012.

Authors, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

