IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

205

In-Silico Modeling of Glycosylation Modulation
Dynamics in hERG Ion Channels and Cardiac
Electrical Signals
Dongping Du, Member, IEEE, Hui Yang∗ , Member, IEEE, Sarah A. Norring, and Eric S. Bennett

Abstract—Cardiac action potentials (AP) are produced by the
orchestrated functions of ion channels. A slight change in ion channel activity may affect the AP waveform, thereby potentially increasing susceptibility to abnormal cardiac rhythms. Cardiac ion
channels are heavily glycosylated, with up to 30% of a mature protein’s mass comprised of glycan structures. However, little is known
about how reduced glycosylation impacts the gating of hERG (human ether-a-go-go related gene) channel, which is partially responsible for late phase 2 and phase 3 of the AP. This paper integrates
the data from in vitro experiments with in-silico models to predict
the glycosylation modulation dynamics in hERG ion channels and
cardiac electrical signals. The gating behaviors of hERG channels
expressed in Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells were measured
under four glycosylation conditions, i.e., full glycosylation, reduced
sialylation, mannose-rich. and N-glycanase treated. Further, we developed in-silico models to simulate glycosylation-channel interactions and predict the effects of reduced glycosylation on multiscale
cardiac processes (i.e., cardiac cells, 1-D and 2-D tissues). From
the in-silico models, reduced glycosylation was shown to shorten
the repolarization phase of cardiac APs, thereby influencing electrical propagation in cardiac fibers and tissues. In addition, the
patterns of derived electrocardiogram show that reduced glycosylation of hERG channel shortens the QT interval and decreases
the re-entry rate of spiral waves. This work suggests new pharmaceutical targets for the long QT syndrome and potentially other
cardiac disorders.
Index Terms—Cardiac action potential, glycosylation, hERG
channel, in-silico model, long-QT syndrome.

I. INTRODUCTION
LYCOSYLATION is a common enzymatic process in cardiac cells. It is shown that nearly 30% of a mature protein’s
mass is comprised of glycan structures [1]. It is established that
voltage-gated Na+ channels (Nav ) and K+ channels (Kv ) are

G

Manuscript received December 8, 2012; revised March 31, 2013; accepted
April 27, 2013. Date of publication April 30, 2013; date of current version
December 31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under Grant IOS-1146882 and in part by the University of South
Florida System Internal Awards Program under Grant 76734.
D. Du and H. Yang∗ are with the Department of Industrial, Management
and Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail
dongpingdu@mail.usf.edu; ∗ corresponding author: huiyang@usf.edu).
S. A. Norring is with the Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine, Bradenton, FL 34211 USA.
E. S. Bennett is with the Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail: esbennet@
health.usf.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2260864

modulated by posttranslational glycosylation through isoformspecific mechanisms [2]–[5]. Many previous studies showed
that glycosylation-dependent gating effects were imposed on
ion channels primarily by the terminal residue attached to
N- and O-glycans, sialic acid [5]–[7]. The addition and removal
of glycans from proteins and lipids are completed by the activity of >200 glycosidases, glycosyltransferases, and transport
proteins (glycogenes). Recently, Montpetit et al. showed that
the cardiac glycome (i.e., the complete set of glycan structures
produced in the heart) varies between atria and ventricles, and
changes differentially during the development of each cardiac
chamber [4]. The regulated expression of a single glycogene
was sufficient to modulate action potential (AP) waveforms and
gating of less sialylated Nav consistently [3].
In addition to the evidence that a correctly regulated glycome is vital to normal cell function, aberrant glycosylation
has dramatic effects on cardiac function. There is a set of >40
distinct forms of inherited human diseases of reduced glycosylation known as congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG)
caused, typically, by a mutation or deficiency in a glycogene
that results in a relatively modest reduction in glycoprotein
glycosylation [8], [9]. This variable but modest reduction in
glycosylation among CDG subtypes causes a high infant mortality rate. Recently reported prevalence of cardiac involvement
prompted experts to suggest screening for cardiac dysfunction
in all CDG patients and for CDG in all young patients suffering from cardiomyopathy of unknown etiology. Together, the
literature suggests that regulated and aberrant changes in glycosylation impact cardiac function.
However, little is known about how altered glycosylation will
impact cardiac function at different organization levels, i.e.,
from ion channels to cells to tissues to the whole heart. Corroborating data that connect the changes in multiscale cardiac
systems are difficult without performing computer simulations.
There is an urgent need to couple the wealth of data obtained
from in vitro and in vivo experiments with in-silico models. The
computer model overcomes practical and ethical limitations in
the physical experiments. In addition, it enables the prediction
of causal relationships between normal or abnormal functions
(e.g., glycosylation modulation dynamics) that physical experiments alone cannot easily achieve.
Our objective is to investigate how changes in glycosylation influence hERG (i.e., human ether-a-go-go related gene)
ion channels and cardiac electrical signaling from cells to cables to tissues. In this paper, we developed in-silico models of
cardiac cells and tissues to study the role of glycosylation in

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

206

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

cardiac function. The hERG channel mediates the rapid delayed
rectifying potassium current (IK r ), which is partially responsible for late phase 2 and phase 3 of the AP, i.e., the repolarization
of cardiac myocytes [10]. The “gain” or “loss” in the hERG
channel function can potentially lead to the short- or long-QT
syndromes [11]. Our contribution is to integrate the data from in
vitro experiments with in-silico models for predicting the effects
of reduced glycosylation on cardiac function. The purpose of
this paper is to model the glycosylation effects on ion channels,
and further predict its impacts at higher scales, i.e., from cells
to tissues.
The rest of this article is organized as follows: Section II
presents the development of multiscale cardiac models. Section
III introduces the design of physical and computer experiments.
Section IV shows the experimental results. Finally, section V
concludes this present study.
II. MULTISCALE CARDIAC MODELING
Computer models facilitate the quantitative simulation, elucidation, and understanding of cardiac function in health and
disease. The need to integrate models and data across multiple biological scales has been widely recognized by biomedical
and clinical researchers [12], [13]. This present investigation integrates glycosylation-channel interactions, obtained from the
whole-cell patch clamp experiments, with in-silico models to
predict glycosylation modulation dynamics in hERG channels
and cardiac electrical signals including ionic currents, APs, spiral waves, and ECG signals. The development of multiscale cardiac models, i.e., hERG channel, cell, and tissues, is described
as follows.
A. Model of the hERG Channel
The hERG channel is widely modeled in two forms. One is the
Hodgkin–Huxley (HH) type model, and the other is the Markov
state model. The HH type formulation typically describes the
gating of the hERG channel with two independent activation
and inactivation variables, as shown in the following:

Ko
Xr 1 Xr 2 (V − EK )
(1)
IK r = GK r
5.4
1
1
Xr 1∞ =
Xr 2∞ =
(2)
( V −V )
( V −V i )
− Kaa
1+e
1 + e Ki
where V is the transmembrane AP, Ko = 5.4 mM is the extracellular K + concentration, EK is the reversal potential, GK r
is the conductance (nS/pF), Xr 1∞ is the steady-state activation,
Xr 2∞ is the steady-state inactivation, Va is the voltage of halfactivation, Vi is the voltage of half-inactivation, and Ka and Ki
are slope factors.
Despite the popularity of HH-type descriptions, Markov models have become increasingly important in recent years. There
are a number of Markov models developed with different states
and structures, e.g., Wang et al. [14], Clancy and Rudy [15],
Mazhari et al. [16], and Oehmen et al. [17]. In 2011, Bett et al.
compared the HH type formulation with the aforementioned four
Markov models. The conclusion is that the hERG channel is best

Fig. 1.

Structure of five-state Markov model of an hERG channel.

represented by a linear Markov model with three closed states,
one open and one inactivated state [18]. Hence, we adopted the
five-state Markov formulations to model the gating of the hERG
channel. As shown in Fig. 1, the Markov model includes three
closed states (C1, C2, C3), 1 inactivation (I), and 1 open (O)
state. The transition rates (αs and βs) are voltage-dependent,
i.e., α = ai × eb i V and β = ci × ed i V , wherer i is the index of
transition rate parameters. The constants Kf and Kb describe the
voltage insensitive transition in the gating of the hERG channel.
Ψ is defined as a function of other transition rates to ensure the
microscopic reversibility [16], [18]. The hERG channel stays in
the fully closed state (C1) during resting, and transfers to other
states when excited. The initial value of C1 = 1, and others
are 0.
B. Model of a Cardiac Myocyte
When a cardiac myocyte is stimulated, the states of ion channels (e.g., closed, activated, inactivated) control the ability of
the ions (e.g., Na+ , Ca++ , and K+ ) to cross the membrane. The
influx and efflux of ions generate electrical currents through
the ion channels, and vary transmembrane potentials. The cardiac cell is modeled as a structured electric circuit with capacitors, resistors, and batteries. Specific to human ventricular
cells, a number of models have been developed in the literature,
e.g., the Priebe and Beuckelmann model [19], ten Tusscher–
Panfilov 2004 model [20] and the updated 2006 model [21],
Iyer et al. model [22], Grandi et al. model [23], and O’Hara
et al. model [24].
In this present investigation, we utilized the ten Tusscher–
Panfilov 2006 model to describe the electrophysiological behaviors of human ventricular myocytes [21]. The justification
is that the results of ten Tusscher–Panfilov 2006 model best
match our wild-type data (i.e., full glycosylation) from in vitro
experiments. The major updates from the ten Tusscher–Panfilov
2004 model to the 2006 version are the inclusion of more detailed description of intracellular Ca++ dynamics and subspace
Ca++ dynamics, as well as the revisions of fast and slow voltage
inactivation gate in ICaL .
The endocardial-cell version of the ten Tusscher–Panfilov
2006 model is used to simulate the AP (V ) with the following
ordinal differential equation:
−Cm

dV
= Ito + IK s + IK r + IK 1 + INaCa + INaK + IpK
dt
+ IpCa + IbCa + IbNa + INa + ICaL + Istim (3)

where t is time, Cm is the cell capacitance per unit surface
area, Istim is the external stimulus current which activates the
cell from the resting state. The transmembrane currents include
transient outward current Ito , slow delayed rectifier K+ current

DU et al.: IN-SILICO MODELING OF GLYCOSYLATION MODULATION DYNAMICS

207

surface-to-volume ratio, and Cm = 2 μF/cm2 is the cell capacitance per unit surface area.
To simulate the propagation of cardiac electrical waves along
1-D fiber, reaction-diffusion equations are numerically solved
with the finite-difference scheme as


2q
dt
t+dt
=−
(Iion + Istim ) −
− 1 Vit
Vi
Cm
Cm

q  t
t
V + Vi+1
(6)
+
Cm i−1

Fig. 2.

Structures of the1-D fiber and 2-D tissues.

(IK s ), rapid delayed rectifier K + current IK r , inward rectifier
current IK 1 , Na+ /Ca++ exchange current INaCa , pump current
(INaK ), plateau currents (IpK , IpCa ), background currents
(IbCa , IbNa ), fast Na+ current (INa ) and L-type Ca++ current
(ICaL ). Most of these voltage-gated ionic currents are modeled
in the form of cell conductance, membrane potential gradients,
and channel gate dynamics. The details of all ion-channel kinetics can be found in references [20] and [21]. All parameters
and initial values are the same as given in the ten Tusscher–
Panfilov 2006 model. Note that we replaced the HH type model
of IK r with the 5-state Markov model. The GK r is the same as
the original value in ten Tusscher-Panfilov model. We optimally
calibrated the 5-state Markov model to fit the in vitro data of
four glycosylation conditions from our physical experiments.
C. Model of the Cardiac Tissue
The cardiac cell is not an independent unit. Each depolarized cell can stimulate neighboring cells and trigger cell-to-cell
conductions. In the rapid depolarization phase, the overshoot
of Na+ ions causes a resting-to-depolarizing Na+ gradient and
drives the flow of Na+ through gap junctions that stimulates
adjacent cells. The influx of Na+ causes neighboring cells to
reach threshold potential and initiates the depolarization phase
of the AP. As the depolarization and repolarization propagate
among cells, electrical waves are generated. This cell-to-cell
conduction is analogous to a circuit system with resistances and
capacitors. As shown in Fig. 2, the consecutive cell connections
are modeled as linear fiber (cable) and tissue (cell array). The
1-D linear cable is composed of 600 cells, and a stimulus is
given at cell 1. The linear strand of cells (i.e., cable) is modeled
using the following monodomain reaction–diffusion equation:
1
1 ∂2 V
∂V
=−
(Iion + Istim ) +
∂t
Cm
ρSCm ∂x2
and in the 2-D tissue, the equation is
∂V
1
1
=−
(Iion + Istim ) +
∂t
Cm
ρSCm



∂2 V
∂2 V
+
2
∂x
∂y 2

(4)

where q = ρSdtdx 2 is the same for all cells. The Neuman boundary
condition was assumed in the simulation of 1-D cardiac cable,
t
t
= V99
and V0t = V2t at the boundaries. The numerical
i.e., V101
finite-difference scheme for 2-D tissue is formulated as:


4q
dt
t+dt
t
Vi,j
=−
(Iion + Istim ) −
− 1 Vi,j
Cm
Cm

q  t
t
t
t
Vi−1,j + Vi+1,j
(7)
+
+ Vi,j
−1 + Vi,j +1
Cm
where no flux boundary condition is assumed to ensure there
are no current leakages on the borders.
D. ECG Derivation
The ECG signal provides a system-level view of cardiac electrical activity, which is an important clinical diagnostic tool. The
standard leads I, II, and III (i.e., Einthoven’s triangle) measure
difference in potentials between electrodes placed on the left
arm, right arm, and left leg [25]. In this paper, three-lead ECG
signals are measured using three virtual electrodes in an equilateral triangle on 2-D tissues. The ECG will be used to evaluate
and quantify whether and how altered glycosylation affects cardiac electrical conduction. In this investigation, the electrodes
were placed at a distance of 6 cm above 2-D tissues with no-flux
boundary conditions. The potential at each electrode is calculated using the following equation:

Iion
dxdy
(8)
∅=
s r
where S is the area over cardiac tissue, Iion is the transmembrane
currents, x and y represent the coordinates of cells on the 2-D
tissue, and r is given as

r = (x − xE )2 + (y − yE )2 + zE2
(9)
where E = (xE , yE , zE ) is the location of the electrode. The
Iion current is obtained with the following equation:
 2

∂ V
1
∂2 V
Iion =
+
.
(10)
ρSCm ∂x2
∂y 2
Leads I, II, III ECG signals are the potential differences between two electrodes as:


(5)

ECG (E1 , E2 ) = ∅ (xE 1 , yE 1 , zE 1 ) − ∅ (xE 2 , yE 2 , zE 2 ) (11)

where Iion is the sum of transmembrane ion currents, ρ =
180 Ω · cm is the cellular resistivity, S = 0.2 μm−1 is the

It may be noted that 60◦ orientation is considered between
each two leads.

208

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE I
hERG CHANNEL ACTIVATION AND INACTIVATION PARAMETERS [26]

were used to calibrate in-silico models, which further predict
glycosylation effects on cardiac electrical signaling of cells and
tissues.
B. Computer Experiments

III. MATERIALS AND THE EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
A. Physical Experiments
We recently reported the effects of differential glycosylation on the gating of hERG ion channels, showing that
N-glycosylation effectively limits hERG channel activity [26],
[27]. The in vitro experimental data were collected from hERGexpressing CHO cells under 4 glycosylation conditions, i.e., full
glycosylation (n = 11), reduced sialylation (n = 11), mannoserich glycosylation (n = 6), and N-glycanase treated (n = 6).
Pulse Protocols. Steady-state gating parameters were examined with the use of standard pulse protocols and solutions
described by the Bennett lab and others [1], [26].
1) Steady-State Activation (SSA): Cells were held at −80 mV,
stepped to more depolarized potentials (−80 mV to
+40 mV in 10 mV increments) for 4 s, then stepped back
to −50 mV for another 4 s, and returned to the holding
potential. Steady-state conductance values (G) were calculated using ohm’s law G = I/(Vp − EK ), where I is
the peak of tail currents elicited at each test potential Vp .
The maximum conductance generated by each cell was
used to normalize the data for each cell to its maximum
conductance by fitting the data to a single Boltzmann distribution as:
Fraction of maximal conductance
= [1 + exp(−(V − Va )/Ka ]]−1
where V is the membrane potentials, Va is the halfactivation potential, Ka is the slope factor. The normalized
data were averaged with those from the other cells to calculate the resulting average G–V curves.
2) Steady-state inactivation (SSI): Cells were held at
−80 mV before stepping to +20 mV for 3 s. Then we
stepped to −120 to +60 mV (in 10 mV increments) for
30 ms before stepping back to +20 mV for 1 s and then
returned to the resting potential. The maximum current
generated by each cell was used to normalize the data for
each cell to its maximum current by fitting the data to a
single Boltzmann distribution, from which the mean Vi ±
SEM and Ki ± SEM values were determined.
Fraction of maximal current = [1+exp((V −Vi )/Ki )]−1
where V is the membrane potential, Vi is the voltage of
half-inactivation, Ki is the slope factor.
Table I shows the mean ± SEM SSA and SSI parameters
measured under four glycosylation conditions, as reported by
us previously [26]. These changes in the hERG channel gating

Recall that we modeled the hERG channel with a five-state
Markov formulation, as opposed to the traditional HH type formulation. First, the Markov model was calibrated and fitted to
glycosylation data from in vitro experiments (see Table I). The
sensitivity analysis is performed to establish model parameters
that maximally influence the output for each protocol. Furthermore, the algorithm of nonlinear constrained optimization is
used to find the parameter values minimizing the sum of the
least-squares errors between model predictions and experimental data. Pulse protocols used in in-silico models are the same as
in in vitro experiments. Second, we simulated and compared the
variations of IK r currents and APs for four glycosylation conditions. The glycosylation-induced variations in hERG channels
were modeled to predict the changes of IK r magnitudes and AP
durations (APDs). Third, cardiac cells were connected by gap
junctions in a linear fiber, i.e., cable, to predict the glycosylation
effects on AP propagation, assuming that altered glycosylation
impacts hERG channel gating only. The inhomogeneous cable
contains 600 cells, in which 300 cells are fully glycosylated
and the other 300 cells are under one of the three conditions of
reduced glycosylation (i.e., reduced sialylation, mannose-rich,
or N-glycanase treated). Further, we measured the APD restitution curves for four glycosylation conditions in the 1-D cable of
cardiac cells. Finally, we construct the model of 2-D tissues by
arranging cardiac cells in an array (see Fig. 2). Glycosylation
effects on the rectilinear and spiral waves were predicted using in-silico simulation models. In addition, ECG signals were
derived to characterize the variations of cardiac electrical conduction between full glycosylation and reduced glycosylation.
Simulation parameters and methods: 1) In the single cell,
we used a 2-ms 38 pA/pF stimulus current Istim applied at
a frequency of 0.5–2 Hz to trigger simulated APs. The IK r
currents and AP were obtained after at least 100 cycles when
the cell reached steady states. The variable temporal resolution is
used in the single-cell simulation. 2) In the linear cable, the Istim
amplitude of 52 pA/pF and spatial resolution Δx = 0.25 mm
were used to generate the electrical waves. In addition, APD
restitution curve is quantified with the S1–S2 protocol. The left
of the cable is paced at a basic cycle length (BCL) of 1000 ms
with the S1 stimulus until the steady state is reached and is then
perturbed by a stimulus (S2) after waiting a variable-length
interval. 3) In the 2-D tissues, the Istim amplitude is twice the
diastolic threshold, i.e., 52 pA/pF. The spatial resolution Δx
is 0.04 cm, and the temporal resolution Δt is 0.02 ms. The
spiral wave was initiated by applying a first stimulus (S1 =
2 ms) along one side of the tissue to generate a rectilinear wave
propagating toward the other side. When the refractory tail of
electrical waves reaches the middle, a second stimulus (S2 =
5 ms) will be given in the middle of the tissue, paralleling to the
first rectilinear wave and covering only 3/4 of the length of the
tissue [21].

DU et al.: IN-SILICO MODELING OF GLYCOSYLATION MODULATION DYNAMICS

209

TABLE II
NUMERICAL ACCURACY OF APD AND CV AT DIFFERENT Δx AND Δt

Numerical Accuracy: We measured the CVs at different spatial and time resolutions for four glycosylation conditions on
a cable of 600 cells. Note that Table II does not include the
CVs and APDs for different glycosylation conditions. This is
because INa is the main contributor to excite a cardiac cell and
trigger the electrical conduction. In this investigation, we assumed that only hERG channels have altered glycosylation and
all other channels (including Na+ channel) remain unchanged.
In the 1-D cable, the CVs are primarily controlled by the front of
the waves (i.e., INa current). Hence, in-silico experiments show
that CVs are approximately the same for different glycosylation
conditions at the same Δx and Δt. However, when electrical
waves propagate in the tissues, not only the front of the waves,
but also the back of the waves (i.e., refractory period) could
affect the conduction. This will be shown later in the section of
results of spiral waves.
Here, the APD and CV decrease slightly when Δx increase
from 0.02 to 0.04 cm at both time steps. When Δt increases
from 0.01 to 0.02 ms, there is a slight decrease in both APD
and CV. These small variations are mainly due to the approximation errors in the numerical analysis. The models of cardiac cell and tissue are solved with the use of Ode15s solver
and explicit finite-difference methods. Computer models were
implemented using MATLAB R2010a and Simulink v7.5 software from MathWorks (Natick, MA, USA) in a Windows 7
(Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) 64-bit machine.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Glycosylation Modulation of the hERG Channel
The Markov model of hERG channels is optimally calibrated
to reproduce the in vitro data from the whole-cell voltage clamp
experiments. Note that the SSA and SSI curves were obtained
using the same pulse protocol from simulated currents as well as
from in vitro experiments (see Fig. 3). First, we performed the
sensitivity analysis on the Markov model to identify transition
rates that maximally impact the in-silico data for each pulse protocol. Second, a constrained nonlinear optimization algorithm,
i.e., trust-region-reflective [28], is employed to identify the parameters of transition rates. The objective function is to find
optimal parameter values that minimize the sum of the leastsquares errors between in-silico and in vivo data. Note that the
parameter values from Mazhari et al. [16] were used as initial
guesses in the minimization procedure. A full list of the parameters of transition rates under four glycosylation conditions is
reported in Table III.

Fig. 3. The hERG channel gating and kinetics under four glycosylation conditions. (a) Steady-state activation. (b) Steady-state inactivation. (In vitro data as
reported by us previously [26]:  Full Glycosylation • Reduced Sialylation 
Mannose Rich  N-Glycanase, In-silico data from the Markov model: straight
and dashed lines).

Fig. 3 shows the fitted SSA and SSI relationships of hERG
under four glycosylation conditions. Note that the SSA and
SSI curves are shifted rightward (5–15 mv) to more hyperpolarized potentials. In other words, N-glycans limits hERG
voltage-dependent activation and inactivation by shifting the
half-activation voltage of hERG to more depolarized potentials
(see Table I for parameter values). Thus, changes in glycosylation modulate the voltage-dependent gating behaviors of hERG
ion channels.
B. Reduced Glycosylation Modifies IK r and Shortens APD
The measured shifts in SSA and SSI with changes in glycosyaltion would likely modulate IK r during the repolarization
phases of the AP. Further, we integrate glycosylation-channel
interactions (see Fig. 3 from the whole-cell patch clamp experiments) with the in-silico model of cardiac cell to predict
whether and how reduced glycosylation will impact the IK r
currents and APs. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the IK r current is
shifted leftward along the time axis with earlier and higher current densities under three reduced glycosylation conditions (i.e.,
reduced sialylation, mannose-rich, and N-glycanase). As hERG
channels recover from the inactivated to the activated state, the
myocyte will repolarize toward the resting potential. As shown
in Fig. 4(a), the N-glycanase treated cell has an earlier IK r peak
along the time axis. This indicates the efflux of potassium current occurs earlier (i.e., repolarization) in Phases 2 and 3 of AP.
It may also be noted that mannose-rich and reduced sialylation
treated cells have similar IK r spike shapes except the former has
a higher peak in Fig. 4(a). The larger rightward shift in the SSI
curve measured for the mannose-rich conditions [See Fig. 3(b)]
is likely responsible for this higher peak. In other words, hERG
channels under mannose-rich conditions would recover from
inactivation at more depolarized potentials during the AP, therefore, the hERG channel would be more active during the AP,
causing an increased K+ efflux.
Fig. 4(b) shows that reduced glycosylation is predicted to
shorten the AP duration (APD), and the N-Glycanse treated cell
yields the shortest APD. When K+ efflux increases, the transmembrane potential decreases quickly and the cell repolarizes
to the resting potential more quickly. Reduced glycosylation
promotes an earlier/higher IK r peak, thereby leading to a faster
repolarization and a shortened APD [see Fig. 4(b)]. In addition,

210

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE III
MARKOV STATE TRANSITION RATES UNDER FOUR GLYCOSYLATION CONDITIONS

Fig. 4. (a) Predicted rapid delayed rectifier K+ current (IK r ) and (b) human
ventricular action potential under four glycosylation conditions [26].

Fig. 5.

Comparison between the in-vitro and simulated IK r currents [26].

we validated the results from in-silico models by measuring
hERG currents in CHO cells treated with N-Glycanase and under conditions of full glycosylation [26]. As shown in Fig. 5,
in-vitro IK r currents match the simulated IK r curves in major characteristics (e.g., leftward shifted and higher amplitude
in the N-Glycanase treated condition), but with more random
variations in the in vitro data.
C. Reduced Glycosylation Affects IK r Magnitudes,
APDs at Different Pacing Rates, and APD
Restitution in a Cardiac Cable
Fig. 6 shows the predicted variations of IK r currents and
APDs of four glycosylation conditions at different pacing rates
in a linear cable of 600 cells. In our experiments, the first cell
in the cable is stimulated. IK r and APD for the 200th cell are
collected in the steady state (i.e., after the first cell is stimulated
for at least 20 times). The IK r magnitude decreases 30.98%,
26.08%, 17.37%, and 32.73% when the pacing period increases
from 400 to 2000 ms for full glycosylation, reduced sialylation,

Fig. 6. Variations of IK r magnitudes (peak currents) (a) and APDs (b) in the
1D cable with respect to different pacing periods under the conditions of full
glycosylation, reduced sialylation, mannose rich and N-glycanase.

mannose rich, and N-glycanase, respectively. However, the differences of IK r magnitudes are bigger between four glycosylation conditions for the larger pacing period, i.e., 1000–2000 ms
[see Fig. 6(a)]. In addition, it is shown that APD90 increases
when the pacing period increases from 400 to 2000 ms [see
Fig. 6(b)]. Note that APD90 differences decrease among the
three reduced glycosylation conditions when the pacing period
increases. However, if we compare reduced glycosylation with
full glycosylation, the effect to shorten the APD90 is the same
for different pacing periods [see Fig. 6(b)]. It may also be noted
that the APD90 differences among the three reduced glycosylation conditions vanish when the pacing periods is greater than
1500 ms.
We also measured APD restitution APDn +1 = f (DIn ) for
a linear cable of 600 cells with the S1–S2 restitution protocol
(see details in Section III, computer experiments). Note that the
experiments of APD restitution not only quantify the effects of
glycosylation on the minimal diastolic interval (DI), but also potentially indicate the stability of spiral waves. In other words, the
slope of APD restitution curve provides potential information
on the alternans or breakups of spiral waves [29], [30]. In our
experiment, S1 stimulus is applied in the first cell for 20 cycles
at the BCL of 1000 ms to reach the steady state. The APD90
restitution curve for the 200th cell is collected. As shown in
Fig. 7, APD increase with DI. The slopes of APD restitution
curves are greater than or equal to 1 (i.e., df /d (DI) ≥ 1) for
each condition. This indicates that reduced glycosylation does
not increase the probability of spiral wave breakups. In addition,
the minimal DIs that elicit a propagating AP are 99.02, 99.44,
99.58, and 99.40 ms for full glycosylation, reduced sialylation, mannose rich, and N-glycanase, respectively. Note that the

DU et al.: IN-SILICO MODELING OF GLYCOSYLATION MODULATION DYNAMICS

Fig. 7.

Action potential duration (APD) restitution curve of a 1-D cable.

211

Fig. 9. Propagation of rectlinear waves (a) and spiral waves (b) in 2-D cardiac
tissue. Three virtual eletrodes are placed at E 1 , E 2 , E 3 . The three-lead ECGs
are derived based on the potential differences between two electrodes.

cable). Reduced glycosylation modulates the gating of hERG
channels, shortens the APD of cardiac cell, and affects the AP
repolarization in cardiac cable. If periodic stimuli are applied,
reduced glycosylation can also potentially vary electrical propagation in a linear cable of cells.
E. Reduced Glycosylation Affects Electrical Conduction
in 2-D Cardiac Tissues

Fig. 8. AP propagation along a 1-D inhomogeous cable with 600 cells, in
which the first 300 cells are fully glycosylated and the second 300 cells are under
the reduced glycosylation conditions: (a) Reduced Sialylation. (b) Mannose
Rich. (c) N-Glycanase. The comparison plots (d–f) represent the differences
between (a–c) versus a fully glycosylated cable.

minimal DI in tissues is often larger than a single cell because
of the effects of the cell coupling and electrical conduction.
D. Reduced Glycosylation Affects the AP Propagation
in the Inhomogeneous Cable
Repolarization heterogeneity can potentially cause inhomegeneous electrical wavelength in cardiac fibers. As depicted
in Fig. 8(a)–(c), we connected 600 inhomogeneous ventricular
cells with gap junctions in a linear cable. The first 300 cells are
fully glycosylated and the next 300 cells are under one of the
following conditions: (a) reduced sialylation, (b) mannose-rich,
or (c) N-Glycanase. The stimulus is initiated in the first cell, then
adjacent cells are consecutively excited until electrical waves are
conducted to the end of the tissue. The abruptions in electrical
waves indicate the heterogeneity of APD between fully glycosylated cells and less glycosylated cells. Such a repolarization
heterogeneity may potentially increase the risks of cardiac arrythmia. The comparisons under these conditions are presented
in Fig. 8(d)–(f), which represent the differences between the
inhomogenous cables [see Fig. 8(a)–(c)] and a homogenous cable, i.e., fully glycosylated. The N-glycanase treated cable is
shown to have the most significant abruptions in electrical wave
conductions. Experimental results are consistent with predicted
effects on cardiac electrical signaling based on multiscale modeling of the hERG ion channel, cardiac cells, and tissues (i.e.,

Little is known about how reduced glycosylation affects the
electrical conduction in 2-D cardiac tissues. Most previous
works focused on glycosylation modulation effects at the levels of ion channels (e.g., sodium and potassium channels) and
cells, although a recent study showed that altered sialylation increases susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias [31]. Note that
the conduction may produce either nonspiral or spiral waves in
2-D tissues.
Nonspiral waves often represent normal cardiac electrical
conductions. The stimulus (i.e., 52 pA/pF) is applied along the
entire left edge of the tissue, and electrical waves propagate toward the right side [see Fig. 9(a)]. Because there are no potential
gradients in the perpendicular direction, this type of electrical
propagation in 2-D tissues is similar to the 1-D cable.
However, spiral waves are modeling reentrant cardiac arrhythmias. The re-entry on 2-D tissue was generated using the
pulse protocols that are introduced in Section III. As shown
in Fig. 9, three virtual electrodes were placed at the locations
as follows: E1 (60, 60, 60), E2 (60, 600, 60), E3 (600, 330, 60).
The three-lead ECG signals were derived to quantify the effects of reduced glycosylation on electrical conductions.
First, we simulated the propagation of normal electrical waves
(i.e., rectilinear waves in Fig. 9(a)) in fully glycosylated and
N-glycanase-treated ventricular tissues, assuming that only
hERG channel gating is impacted by changes in glycosylation.
As shown in Fig. 10(a), leads I, II, III ECG signals capture
electrical conduction along three different directions in 2-D
tissues. It may be noted that the wavelength of ECG signals
of N-glycanase treated tissues is shorter than fully glycosylated tissue. Because ECG signals are derived from a piece of
ventricular tissue instead of a 3-D heart, it is difficult to obtain the T wave. However, three-lead ECG signals indicate that
reduced glycosylation influences the electrical propagation on
the 2-D tissue. Further, the waveforms of ECG signals demonstrate that reduced glycosylation will shorten the wavelength in
ECG signals. The in-silico prediction results show that reduced

212

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 10. Derived Lead I, II, III ECG signals from the propagation of rectilinear waves (a) and spiral waves (b) in 2-D cardiac tissues under fully glycosylation
(solid black line) and N-glycanase (red dash line) treated conditions.

Fig. 11.
tissues.

Spiral waves in fully glycosylated (a) N-glycanase treated (b) cardiac

glycosylation can potentially be used to shorten the QT interval,
thereby partially controlling the LQTS.
Second, spiral waves were simulated in the fully glycosylated
and N-glycanase-treated ventricular tissues to investigate how
reduced glycoslyation will impact the progression of reentrant
cardiac arrhythmias. Note that spiral wave simulations roughly
correlate with monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. Two spiral waves were rotating for at least 8 s to reach the steady state.
As shown in Fig. 11, there are distinct differences in the wave
lengths between full glycosylation and N-glycanase treated. The
measurements show that N-glycanase treated tissue yields a
smaller width of wave (L2 = 5.64 cm) than the fully glycosylated one (L1 = 6 cm). This indicates that the vulnerability to
arrhythmia is different for reduced hERG channel glycosylation, because the wave length impacts not only the propagation
of electrical waves in space but also the rotating cycle of the
vortex.
Furthermore, we derived the three-lead ECG to characterize how N-Glycanase treatment of hERG channels impacts the
propagation of spiral waves. Fig. 9(b) depicts the locations of

three electrodes for deriving the ECG. As shown in Fig. 10(b),
the waveforms of ECG signals are distinctly different from the
ones in rectilinear waves, because spiral waves represent and
model cardiac arrhythmias. In addition, N-glycanase-treated tissue yields a shorter RR interval than the fully glycosylated tissue. In other words, N-glycanase-treated tissue takes less time
to fulfill a single cardiac cycle than full glycosylation, when
stimulated with the same protocol. Fig. 10(b) shows that NGlycanase yields the ECG cycle of 0.207 s, which is shorter than
0.22 s in full glycosylation. Because of the prolonged T wave in
LQTS, depolarization often occurs during the late repolarization
phase of the previous ECG cycle (R on T phenomenon) [11].
Therefore, N-Glycanase can potentially prevent a premature
depolarization by shortening the ECG cycle. This can potentially reduce the risk of LQTS and spiral wave breakups (i.e.,
Ventricular Tachycardia is less likely transfer into Ventricular
Fibrillation) [31].
V. CONCLUSION
In the pharmaceutical industry, in vitro and in vivo experiments are widely used to characterize and quantify the drug
effects on biological systems. However, there are often many
practical and ethical limitations in physical experiments of animal or human subjects. Also, it is very expensive and difficult to
comprehensively conduct physical experiments across biological scales, e.g., from ion channels to cells to tissues. In-silico
models allow one to overcome these limitations, discover gaps
in the experimental data, derive new hypotheses, and/or suggest
new experimental designs.
Although computer models have long been intertwined with
physical experiments in cardiac research, no approach to date
has integrated the understanding of how cardiac function
changes with variable levels of glycosylation across the physical

DU et al.: IN-SILICO MODELING OF GLYCOSYLATION MODULATION DYNAMICS

scales of increasing complexity, from molecules to cells to tissues. Cardiac ion channels are heavily glycosylated, and slight
changes in the glycan structure can possibly impact the gating behaviors of ion channels. This paper made one of the first
attempts to integrate glycosylation-channel data from in vitro
experiments with in-silico models to investigate how aberrant
glycosylation modulates hERG ion channels and, as a result,
cardiac electrical signaling across different organization levels,
from molecule to cell to tissues.
Here, we show that reduced glycosylation, i.e., reduced sialylation, mannose-rich, and N-glycanase, shifts the steady-state
activation and inactivation of hERG channels toward more positive potentials. These measured changes in hERG channel gating were integrated with in-silico models to predict glycosylation modulation dynamics on cardiac cells and tissues. The
results of computer experiments show that reduced glycosylation increases the IK r magnitudes and shortens the APD. These
glycosylation-induced changes are consistent over a range of
pacing rates from 0.5 to 2 Hz, but they are less pronounced
for faster rates. Also, the APD restitution indicates that reduced
glycosylation does not increase the probability of spiral wave
breakups. Further, the abruptions in inhomogeneous cable experiments show that reduced glycosylation affects the AP repolarization and shortens the wavelength in a 1-D cable. It may be
noted that N-glycanase has the most significant effect on cardiac
repolarization and electrical propagations. Moreover, three-lead
ECGs derived from rectilinear waves and spiral waves in 2D tissues demonstrates that reduced glycosylation narrows the
width of waves, shorten the QT interval, and speed up re-entry.
Because QT intervals are closely related to ventricular repolarization and hERG ion channel gating, a better understanding
of glycosylation modulation dynamics in hERG ion channels
can suggest a possible new mechanism to control QT intervals
in ECG signals. As a result, new “rescue” therapies can be
developed by imposing a glycan-dependent change in channel
function that counterbalances the dysfunction due to diseases
such as long QT syndrome. Our future studies will be dedicated
to a continued understanding of how regulated and aberrant
glycosylation impact cardiac function using in vitro/in vivo experiments and in-silico simulations as tools to test this novel
mechanism for the control of cardiac electrical signaling.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. R. L. Rasmusson from the
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine
and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA, for sharing the computer
model of action potential of mouse ventricular myocytes. The
authors would also like to thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for the constructive comments and suggestions on our
in-silico modeling work.
REFERENCES
[1] A. R. Ednie and E. S. Bennett, “Modulation of voltage-gated ion channels by sialylation,” in Comprehensive Physiology. Hoboken, NJ, USA:
Wiley, 2012, pp. 1269–1301.

213

[2] T. A. Schwetz, S. A. Norring, A. R. Ednie, and E. S. Bennett, “Sialic acids
attached to O-glycans modulate voltage-gated potassium channel gating,”
J. Biol. Chem., vol. 286, pp. 4123–4132, 2011.
[3] M. L. Montpetit, P. J. Stocker, T. A. Schwetz, J. M. Harper, S. A. Norring,
L. Schaffer, S. J. North, J. Jang-Lee, T. Gilmartin, S. R. Head,
S. M. Haslam, A. Dell, J. D. Marth, and E. S. Bennett, “Regulated and
aberrant glycosylation modulate cardiac electrical signaling,” Proc Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 106, pp. 16517–16522, 2009.
[4] P. J. Stocker and E. S. Bennett, “Differential sialylation modulates voltagegated Na+ Channel gating throughout the developing myocardium,” J.
Gen. Physiol., vol. 127, pp. 253–265, Mar. 1, 2006.
[5] I. Watanabe, J. Zhu, J. J. Sutachan, A. Gottschalk, E. Recio-Pinto, and
W. B. Thornhill, “The glycosylation state of Kv1.2 potassium channels
affects trafficking, gating, and simulated action potentials,” Brain Res.,
vol. 1144, pp. 1–18, 2007.
[6] C. A. Ufret-Vincenty, D. J. Baro, and L. F. Santana, “Differential contribution of sialic acid to the function of repolarizing K+ currents in ventricular
myocytes,” Amer. J. Physiol.—Cell Physiol., vol. 281, pp. C464–C474,
Aug. 1, 2001.
[7] Y. Zhang, H. A. Hartmann, and J. Satin, “Glycosylation influences voltagedependent gating of cardiac and skeletal muscle sodium Channels,” J.
Membrane Biol., vol. 171, pp. 195–207, 1999.
[8] H. H. Freeze, “Genetic defects in the human glycome,” Nat. Rev. Genet.,
vol. 7, pp. 537–551, 2006.
[9] J. Jaeken, “Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG): Update and new
developments,” J. Inherit. Metab. Dis., vol. 27, pp. 423–426, 2004.
[10] M. C. Sanguinetti and M. Tristani-Firouzi, “hERG potassium channels
and cardiac arrhythmia,” Nature, vol. 400, pp. 463–469, 2006.
[11] H. Morita, J. Wu, and D. P. Zipes, “The QT syndromes: long and short,”
Lancet, vol. 372, pp. 750–763, 2008.
[12] R. H. Clayton, O. Bernus, E. M. Cherry, H. Dierckx, F. H. Fenton,
L. Mirabella, A. V. Panfilov, F. B. Sachse, G. Seemann, and H. Zhang,
“Models of cardiac tissue electrophysiology: Progress, challenges and
open questions,” Progr. Biophys. Mol. Biol., vol. 104, pp. 22–48, 2011.
[13] M. Fink, S. A. Niederer, E. M. Cherry, F. H. Fenton, J. T. Koivumäki,
G. Seemann, R. Thul, H. Zhang, F. B. Sachse, D. Beard, E. J. Crampin,
and N. P. Smith, “Cardiac cell modeling: Observations from the heart
of the cardiac physiome project,” Progr. Biophys. Mol. Biol., vol. 104,
pp. 2–21, 2011.
[14] S. Wang, S. Liu, M. J. Morales, H. C. Strauss, and R. L. Rasmusson, “A
quantitative analysis of the activation and inactivation kinetics of hERG
expressed in Xenopus oocytes,” J. Physiol., vol. 502, pp. 45–60, Jul. 1,
1997.
[15] C. E. Clancy and Y. Rudy, “Cellular consequences of HERG mutations in
the long QT syndrome: precursors to sudden cardiac death,” Cardiovasc.
Res., vol. 50, pp. 301–313, May 1, 2001.
[16] R. Mazhari, J. L. Greenstein, R. L. Winslow, E. Marbán, and H. B. Nuss,
“Molecular interactions between two long-QT syndrome gene products,
hERG and KCNE2, rationalized by in vitro and in-silico analysis,” Circ.
Res., vol. 89, pp. 33–38, Jul. 06, 2001.
[17] C. S. Oehmen, W. R. Giles, and S. S. Demir, “Mathematical model of
the rapidly activating delayed rectifier potassium current IKr in rabbit
sinoatrial node,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 13, pp. 1131–1140,
2002.
[18] G. C. Bett, Q. Zhou, and R. L. Rasmusson, “Models of hERG gating,”
Biophys. J., vol. 101, pp. 631–642, 2011.
[19] L. Priebe and D. J. Beuckelmann, “Simulation Study of Cellular Electric
Properties in Heart Failure,” Circ. Res., vol. 82, pp. 1206–1223, Jun. 15,
1998.
[20] K. H. W. J. Ten Tusscher, D. Noble, P. J. Noble, and A. V. Panfilov, “A
model for human ventricular tissue,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 286, pp. 1573–1589, 2004.
[21] K. H. W. J. Ten Tusscher and A. V. Panfilov, “Alternans and spiral breakup
in a human ventricular tissue model,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 291, pp. H1088–H1100, Sep. 01, 2006.
[22] V. Iyer, R. Mazhari, and R. L. Winslow, “A Computational model of the
human left-ventricular epicardial myocyte,” Biophys. J., vol. 87, pp. 1507–
1525, Sep. 2004.
[23] E. Grandi, F. S. Pasqualini, and D. M. Bers, “A novel computational model
of the human ventricular action potential and Ca transient,” J. Mol. Cell.
Cardiol., vol. 48, pp. 112–121, Jan. 2010.
[24] T. O’Hara, L. Virág, A. Varró, and Y. Rudy, “Simulation of the undiseased
human cardiac cardiac ventricular action potential: model formulation
and experimental validation,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 7, p. e1002061,
2011.

214

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[25] J. Malmivuo and R. Plonsey, Bioelectromagnetism: Principles and Applications of Bioelectric and Biomagnetic Fields. New York, NY, USA:
Oxford Univ. Press, 1995.
[26] S. A. Norring, A. R. Ednie, T. A. Schwetz, D. Du, H. Yang, and
E. S. Bennett, “Channel sialic acids limit hERG channel activity during
the ventricular action potential,” FASEB J., vol. 27, pp. 622–631, 2013.
[27] D. Du, H. Yang, S. A. Norring, and E. S. Bennett, “Multi-scale modeling
of glycosylation modulation dynamics in cardiac electrical signaling,” in
Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2011, pp. 104–107.
[28] R. H. Byrd, J. C. Gilbert, and J. Nocedal, “A trust region method based on
interior point techniques for nonlinear programming,” Math. Program.,
vol. 89, pp. 149–185, Dec./Jan. 2000.
[29] F. Xie, Z. Qu, A. Garfinkel, and J. N. Weiss, “Electrical refractory period
restitution and spiral wave reentry in simulated cardiac tissue,” Amer. J
Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 283, pp. 448–460, 2002.
[30] J. N. Weiss, P. S. Chen, Z. Qu, H. S. Karagueuzian, and A. Garfinkel,
“Ventricular fibrillation : How do we stop the waves from breaking?”
Circ. Res., vol. 87, pp. 1103–1107, Dec. 8, 2000.
[31] A. R. Ednie, K. Horton, J. Wu, and E. S. Bennett, “Expression of the
sialyltransferase, ST3Gal4, impacts cardiac voltage-gated sodium channel activity, refractory period and ventricular conduction,” J. Mol. Cell.
Cardiol., vol. 59, pp. 117–127, 2013.

Dongping Du (M’11) received the M.S. degree from
the University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA,
where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering.
Her research interests are physical-statistical modeling of cardiac ion channels, myocytes, tissues and
organ.
She is a member of IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society.

Hui Yang (M’08) was born in Nanjing, China. He
received the Ph.D. degree from the School of Industrial Engineering and management at Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, OK, USA.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Department
of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering,
the University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
His research interests are sensor-based modeling and
analysis of complex systems for the process monitoring/control, system diagnostics/prognostics, quality improvement, and performance optimization, with
special focus on nonlinear stochastic dynamics, and the resulting chaos, multifractal, self-organization, long range dependence behaviors.
Dr.Yang received three best paper awards from the IEEE Biomedical Engineering Conference and Industrial Engineering Research Conferences.

Sarah A. Norring received the B.S. degree in Biology from the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, USA, and the Ph.D. degree
in Medical Sciences from the Morsani College of
Medicine, the University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL, USA.
She is currently an Assistant Professor at the Lake
Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine: LECOM,
Bradenton, FL. She has more than ten years’ experience as a researcher with a track record of producing
extraordinary results for top biotech/pharmaceutical
companies.

Eric S. Bennett received the B.S. degree in Applied
and Engineering Physics from the Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA, the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Biophysics from the University of Rochester, Rochester,
NY.
He is an active researcher in cardiac electrophysiology and molecular pharmacology. He is particularly interested in determining how cardiac excitability and conduction are controlled through the posttranslational and pharmaceutical modification of ion
channels. Current interests include studies of cardiac
arrhythmias, diabetes, and epilepsy, focusing on three major areas: 1) Studies designed to question how glycosylation and its regulation (dysregulation)
modulate ion channel activity and consequently, excitability and conduction,
2) Studies designed to determine how structural differences among channel
isoforms confer isoform-specific functions, and 3) Studies that question the
role of extracellular glycosylation on cardiac function. Techniques routinely
used by the laboratory include tissue culture methods, established lines and primary culture, protein biochemistry and immunology using gel electrophoresis
and immunocytochemistry technologies including basic confocal microscopy,
molecular biological methods, and electrophysiological recordings. The breadth
of methods used in the lab is continuously expanding to now include studies on
transgenic and knockout mice to determine the physiological and pathophysiological role of channel glycosylation on ion channel function, on cardiac and
neuronal action potentials, on conduction using ECG, EEG, optical mapping,
and in vivo electrophysiology measurements, as well as on cardiac function
using echocardiography.

