IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY 2013

539

Estimation of Sleep Onset Latency Based on the
Blood Pressure Regulatory Reflex Mechanism
Da Woon Jung, Su Hwan Hwang, Gih Sung Chung, Yu-Jin Lee, Do-Un Jeong,
and Kwang Suk Park, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Sleep onset latency (SOL) is an objective indicator of
sleepiness and is being used clinically as a diagnostic tool for sleep
deprivation. This study proposes a new and less intrusive approach
to estimate SOL based on the blood pressure (BP) regulatory reflex
mechanism. We hypothesized that the arterial baroreflex, one kind
of reflex mechanism for BP regulation, maintains the toning-down
effect sleep has on BP. The arterial baroreflex is strongly activated
after the time of sleep onset in order to maintain the lowered BP
by leading to an increase in heart beat interval (HBI). This observation suggests that the arterial baroreflex has a marked influence
on the HBI control with the onset of sleep. As a result, a positive
correlation is expected between fluctuations of BP and those of
subsequent HBI after sleep onset. To investigate our hypothesis,
we determined the relationship between BP and HBI using the R–
J and R–R intervals measured from an electrocardiogram and a
ballistocardiogram. We estimated SOL using the correlation coefficients corresponding to the relationship between fluctuations of the
R–J interval and those of the subsequent R–R interval. The SOLs
of ten healthy subjects [age (mean ± SD): 28.72 ± 3.21 years]
were estimated using our proposed method and compared with
the polysomnography data. The mean absolute error was 0.25 ±
0.35 min, corresponding to a half epoch (15 s) on average. We
expect our method will be applicable as a nonintrusive and automatic SOL estimation system that does not require the use of
electroencephalogram sensors.
Index Terms—Arterial baroreflex, ballistocardiogram, electrocardiogram, sleep onset latency.

I. INTRODUCTION

S

LEEP onset latency (SOL) is the length of time taken
to complete the transition from full wakefulness to sleep,

Manuscript received May 8, 2012; revised October 17, 2012 and January 23,
2013; accepted April 1, 2013. Date of current version May 1, 2013. This work
was supported in part by the grant of the Korea Healthcare technology R&D
Project, Ministry for Health, Welfare and Family Affairs, Republic of Korea
(A101808), in part by the R&D program of MKE/KEIT under Grant 10032110,
and in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded
by the Korea government (MEST) under Grant 2012010714.
D. W. Jung, S. H. Hwang, and G. S. Chung are with the Interdisciplinary Program of Bioengineering, Graduate School, Seoul National University, Seoul
110-799, Korea (e-mail: dwjung@bmsil.snu.ac.kr; lostzoo@bmsil.snu.ac.kr;
renon1@bmsil.snu.ac.kr).
Y. J. Lee and D. U. Jeong are with the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799,
Korea (e-mail: eugenie8199@hotmail.com; jeongdu@snu.ac.kr).
K. S. Park is with Department of Biomedical Engineering, College
of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799, Korea (e-mail:
pks@bmsil.snu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2257816

normally into light sleep or directly into rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep in sleep disorders such as narcolepsy. Clinically,
the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) is used to assess sleep
tendency and helps to determine the severity of sleepiness based
on the SOL score. The SOL score is defined as the time taken to
reach first epoch scored as any sleep stage other than wakefulness and ranges from 0 to 20 min. An SOL of 0 to 5 min indicates
severe sleep deprivation, 5 to 10 min is “troublesome,” 10 to
15 min indicates a mild but “manageable” degree of sleep debt,
and 15 to 20 min is indicative of “little or no” sleep debt. Sleep
debt is a phenomenon that is the result of a lack of sufficient
sleep during a given period of time [1]. Thus, SOL provides an
objective assessment of sleepiness and it is also clinically useful
as a diagnostic tool for sleep deprivation.
During the MSLT, a subject’s electroencephalogram (EEG),
chin electromyogram (EMG), electrooculogram (EOG), and
electrocardiogram (ECG) are monitored and recorded [2]–[4].
Among these assessments, the EEG is most important in estimating SOL [2]–[4]. In this study, we suggest a new method for
the SOL estimation based on the blood pressure (BP) regulatory
reflex mechanism using only the ECG and ballistocardiogram
(BCG). BCG measures the mechanical recoil of the body in
reaction to the ejection of blood from the heart through the vasculature. BCG is useful for a home healthcare study because it
makes possible to estimate cardiac activities unobtrusively and
nonconstrainedly.
One kind of BP regulatory reflex mechanism is the arterial
baroreflex, which acts on arterial baroreceptor to provide a negative feedback loop for maintaining BP by causing a change
in heart beat interval (HBI). A positive correlation between
the HBI and the previous BP values is a result of the arterial
baroreflex [5].
Many physiologic parameters such as respiration, oxygen
consumption, temperature regulation, and cardiovascular function change after we fall asleep [6]. Sleep has a toning-down
effect in many of these systems [6]. One such example is the
effect of sleep on BP. During normal sleep, BP drops by 10–20%
compared to waking values [6], [7].
BP is the result of several internal and external stimuli. During sleep, the external stimuli are minimized, so the external
homeostasis control loop is excluded while the internal control
loop is stabilized. In this study, we hypothesized that during
sleep, the arterial baroreflex maintains the toning-down effect
on BP as the most powerful internal control loop. With the onset
of sleep, the arterial baroreflex reacts favorably to the lowered
BP; on the other hand, another kind of internal homeostasis
control loop reacts unfavorably. In other words, with the onset

2168-2194/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE

540

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY 2013

TABLE I
ANTHROPOMETRIC AND SLEEP CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECTS

of sleep, an occurrence of momentary elevation of BP is caused
by another kind of internal homeostasis control loop against
a toning-down effect; however, it is promptly and reflectively
restrained by arterial baroreflex causing an increase in HBI to
maintain the lowered BP. This strong activation of the arterial
baroreflex suggests that it has a marked influence on HBI control from the time of sleep onset. To confirm our hypothesis, we
measured the R–R and R–J intervals from the R peak on ECG
and the J peak on BCG to represent HBI and systolic blood
pressure (SBP), respectively [8]. It was previously reported that
SBP and the R–J interval are negatively correlated [8]. In conclusion, a negative correlation between fluctuations of the R–J
interval and those of the subsequent R–R interval could be expected as a result of the arterial baroreflex. By using the BCG,
we ultimately sought less intrusive, not disturbing one’s sleep,
monitoring of BP fluctuations.
The findings of this study will likely have implications for
the estimation of SOL based on the BP regulatory reflex mechanism via a less constrained method than the currently used
polysomnographic method.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Subjects
Ten healthy subjects participated in this study. They were
free from medical and sleep disorders as well as psychiatric
illnesses and were not taking any medications that could affect
sleep. Table I summarizes the subjects’ characteristics.
B. Experimental Protocol
Because BP is dependent on environmental temperature and
humidity, the sleep laboratory was maintained at a constant
temperature (24 ± 1 ◦ C) and humidity (40–50%) during the
experiment. Excessive exercise, mental stress, pain, tobacco,
alcohol, salty food, and caffeinated food and beverages such as
coffee, colas, and chocolate were forbidden for 2 h prior to the
experiment. All subjects were asked to lie down on the bed in a
supine position.
C. Data Recording and Collecting
Polysomnography (PSG) and BCG recordings were performed simultaneously using a bed equipped with load cells

Fig. 1. (a) (Left) Load cell sensor we used and (right) the bed equipped with
the load cells underneath each leg. The dotted circles represent the locations of
the load cell. (b) Block diagram of the ballistocardiographic recording system.
IA refers to instrumentation amplifier, HPF refers to high-pass filter, MUX refers
to multiplexer, and PC refers to personal computer.

over an 8-h period at the sleep laboratory of Seoul National
University Hospital.
1) PSG Recording: PSG was conducted for each subject
over an entire night. Fifteen channels of data were collected
following the common PSG routine: EEGs at C3-A2 and O2A1 positions, bilateral EOGs, three EMGs at the chin and anterior tibialis muscles, ECG at lead II, oro-nasal airflow with
thermocouple, abdominal and thoracic volume changes with
piezoelectric type belts, body position, snoring with a microphone, and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2 ). All channels were
recorded with a Grass model 15LT amplifier (Grass Telefactor,
USA) and collected with an ADC [NI-DAQ 6221 (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA)] and a digital computer system
equipped with a software developed in-house (Xomnia, 2005).
The sampling rate was 250 Hz for each channel. PSG data were
scored by experts at the Seoul National University Hospital according to the Rechtschaffen and Kales (R&K) criteria [9]. The
SOL was determined by the time taken to reach first epoch
scored as any sleep stage other than wakefulness according to
the criteria in AASM manual [10]. Because SOL is not affected
by these different standards [11], the AASM criteria for SOL
could be applied even if R&K criteria were used for the sleep
stage scoring.
2) BCG Recording: BCG was measured nonintrusively on
a bed equipped with load cells that was designed to collect
data when a subject is lying horizontally on this system. We
used strain gauge-based load cells (MNC-100L, CAS Co. Ltd.,
Korea) with a single contact point to detect fluctuations. One
load cell was positioned underneath each bed leg, for a total of
four load cells were installed per bed. The load cell sensor and
the bed equipped with the load cells were shown in Fig. 1(a). As
shown in Fig. 1(b), instrumentation amplifiers (AD620, Analog
Devices, Inc., USA) were used to amplify the output voltage
from the load cells. A fluctuating signal was recorded by highpass filtering at 0.2 Hz, which removed the baseline signal,

JUNG et al.: ESTIMATION OF SLEEP ONSET LATENCY BASED ON THE BLOOD PRESSURE REGULATORY REFLEX MECHANISM

541

the R–J interval and those of the subsequent R–R interval. As the
data subsets were organized, the correlation coefficients were
investigated time-sequentially. When negative correlation coefficients were presented for more than two successive data subsets, we defined that sleep onset had occurred after 30 s from
the start time of the first data subset having negative correlation
coefficient and then we estimated that time as SOL.

F. Statistical Analysis

Fig. 2. (Top) ECG with R peaks (hollow circles) and (bottom) BCG with J
peaks (hollow circles).

with a two-pole and second-order filter. Four-channel data were
multiplexed and converted to digital signals through the DAQ
board used for the PSG data recording.
3) Data Collecting: We used the ECG recording channel
among the 15 channels of data obtained by PSG.
Fig. 2 shows an ECG with R peaks and a BCG with J peaks.
The peak indices of each signal were extracted using a peak
detection algorithm developed in-house.
D. Data Analysis
1) Time Series Analysis: For the consecutive data subsets of
120-s (4 epochs) duration overlapped for 30 s (1 epoch), we
obtained the time interval between successive R peaks of ECG,
called the R–R interval, and the time interval between the R peak
on the ECG and the J peak on the BCG, called the R–J interval.
We assessed the potential associations between fluctuations of
the R–J interval and those of the R–R interval lagged by one
beat as an indicator of the relationship between SBP and the
subsequent HBI.
2) Correlation Analysis: To evaluate the level of arterial
baroreflex contribution to the HBI control, we performed a
correlation analysis of the relationship between the detrended
fluctuations of the R–J interval and those of the subsequent R–
R interval for each data subset. The correlation analysis was
performed using MATLAB and yielded linear correlation coefficients. The correlation coefficients (rRJI,RRI ) were calculated
as follows:
n
i=1 (RJIi −RJI)(RRIi −RRI)
rRJI,RRI = 

n
n
2 ·
2
(RJI
−RJI)
i
i=1
i=1 (RRIi −RRI)
(1)
where RJI is the R–J interval, RRI is the R–R interval, and n is
the number of pairs of R–J and subsequent R–R intervals.
E. SOL Estimation
We hypothesized that the arterial baroreflex would have a
marked influence on the HBI control with the onset of sleep,
which was not observed during full wakefulness. As such, we
expected to find a negative correlation between fluctuations of

Statistical testing was performed with SPSS software. After
confirming normality with the Shapiro–Wilk test, the nonsignificance of differences between the SOLs reported by PSG and
those estimated using our method was examined by the paired
samples t-test.

III. RESULTS
Mean values with standard deviations of the R–J and R–R
intervals for 2 min just before and after sleep onset are shown
in Table II. The R–J intervals before and after sleep onset were
119.98 ± 35.03 and 128.47 ± 23.94 ms, respectively, and the
R–R intervals before and after sleep onset were 912.66 ± 67.93
and 956.49 ± 44.85 ms, respectively. For all subjects, the mean
R–J and R–R intervals after sleep onset were longer than before
sleep onset as a result of sleep’s toning-down effect on BP and
heartbeat. Fig. 3 illustrates the time series of the fluctuations
of the R–J interval and those of the subsequent R–R interval
beginning from the time the subject lied down on the bed at
the start of data recording and ending several minutes after
sleep onset. A visual analysis of the time series reveals the
different trends of correlation between the R–R intervals and R–
J intervals before and after the time of sleep onset. There were
clear increases in the R–R interval as the R–J interval decreased,
that is, there was an increase in HBI for the elevated BP after the
time of sleep onset whereas that was not well observed before
the time of sleep onset.
A change in the correlation coefficients for one subject over
4 min including the time of sleep onset is evident in Fig. 4.
At one moment, the correlation coefficient dropped below zero
and then negative values were maintained for more than 1 min.
We inferred that the time at which the first negative correlation
coefficient was detected and maintained corresponded to the
time around sleep onset. For subject #6 in Fig. 4, the SOL
estimated using our method was 2 min and that determined by
PSG was also 2 min.
Our SOL estimation results are shown in Table III with the
SOLs determined by PSG for comparison. For all subjects,
the mean absolute error (MAE) of our estimation method was
0.25 ± 0.35 min, corresponding to about half an epoch (15 s) on
average. The normality of the data was satisfied (Shapiro–Wilk
test, P = 0.174 > 0.05 in SOLs reported by PSG and P =
0.263 > 0.05 in SOLs estimated using our method). The significant differences were not detected between the SOLs reported
by PSG and those estimated using our method (paired samples
t-test, P = 0.279 > 0.05, confidence interval: –0.144–0.444).

542

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY 2013

TABLE II
R–J AND R–R INTERVALS BEFORE AND AFTER SLEEP ONSET

Fig. 3. Representative time series of the fluctuations of the R–J interval (dotted red line) and those of the subsequent R–R interval (dotted blue line). The thick
colored lines correspond to low-pass filtered data showing a trend of correlation between the two intervals. The thick black line indicates the time of sleep onset.

IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we observed and evaluated the contribution of
arterial baroreflex to HBI control using time series and correlation analysis for less intrusive SOL estimation.
In animal model studies, the correlation between HBI and
SBP suggests a variable contribution of central and arterial
baroreflex mechanisms to cardiovascular control in different
wake–sleep states [12], [13]. The arterial baroreflex contribution to HBI control was most prominent during quiet sleep in
lambs [13] and during nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep
in rats [12]. For human subjects, the authors in [14] determined
that the relationship between HBI and the previous SBP values
differs substantially among sleep–wake states. They computed
the cross-correlation function (CCF) between HBI and SBP. A
positive CCF peak occurred for HBI following SBP during the
light and deep stages of NREM sleep, whereas it was barely
observable in REM sleep and completely absent in quiet wakefulness. These studies revealed that the contribution of arterial

baroreflex to HBI control differs significantly before and after sleep onset. Likewise, our study indicated that the arterial
baroreflex has a considerable influence on HBI control after
sleep onset, which is not observed during full wakefulness. This
finding suggests that it is possible to estimate approximate SOL
based on the BP regulatory reflex mechanism.
There are many physiological mechanisms related to a specific correlation between HBI and SBP under the certain environment or situation [15]–[17]. Among these mechanisms, we
took attention to BP regulatory reflex mechanism, especially to
the arterial baroreflex, because it is a major operator of a delayed negative feedback control [5] and the most effective and
significant mechanism during sleep for the regulation of cardiovascular system [18]. During full wakefulness as compared with
during sleep, there is more possibility that the HBI is controlled
not only by the arterial baroreflex but also by other mechanisms
from central autonomic commands affected by environment factors and psychological state [15], [16]. It causes an absence of
positive correlation between HBI and the previous SBP values

JUNG et al.: ESTIMATION OF SLEEP ONSET LATENCY BASED ON THE BLOOD PRESSURE REGULATORY REFLEX MECHANISM

543

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF THE MAE BETWEEN SOLS RECORDED BY PSG AND
ESTIMATED BY EACH METHOD

Fig. 4. Change in the correlation coefficients obtained for each data subset.
The change in the correlation coefficients over 4 min for one subject is shown.
The dotted horizontal line is a threshold used to determine sleep onset. The
arrow points to the first time at which more than two successive correlation
coefficients dropped below the threshold; this is the estimated SOL.
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF THE SOLS DETERMINED BY PSG AND ESTIMATED
USING OUR METHOD

The estimation errors were not dependent on the value of
SOL but relatively large errors were detected in subjects who
experienced relatively poor toning-down effect on BP early in
sleep.
Our method is a novel approach to estimating SOL based
on the BP regulatory reflex mechanism, in particular, arterial
baroreflex. It is less intrusive and less constrained than the existing SOL measurement method and produces results similar
to those provided by PSG. Furthermore, instead of intrusive BP
monitoring using a commercialized continuous BP monitoring
system, we used a bed equipped with load cells and measured
the R–J interval as a substitute for SBP based on the finding
of [8]; SBP and the R–J interval are negatively correlated (r =
–0.768, P < 0.001). Thus, our method is optimized for monitoring the cardiovascular regulation and then estimating SOL
without disturbing one’s sleep.
B. Limitations
The limitations of our study include the relatively small sample size, which was sufficient to confirm our hypothesis but
inadequate to claim consistent high performance of our method.
Our method has not yet been tested on subjects with narcolepsy
whose SOLs are abnormally short, and subjects with insomnia
whose SOLs are abnormally long. It is necessary to conduct
more experimental validations on subjects in the wide range of
age groups.

during full wakefulness. However, once we fall asleep, the arterial baroreflex has a more effective and marked influence on HBI
control resulting in a presence of positive correlation between
HBI and the previous SBP values.
A. Performance and Value of the Proposed Method
For all subjects whose SOLs vary from 1 to 13 min, the
estimation errors associated with our method were less than
1 min. In [19], SOLs of 21 healthy subjects aged between 18 and
33 years were estimated by analyzing actigraphic recordings. In
Table IV, the MAE between SOLs recorded by PSG and those
estimated by each actigraphy algorithm (Cole’s and Sadeh’s)
was presented. It was compared with the MAE between SOLs
recorded by PSG and those estimated by our method. The use
of actigraphy is considerably increasing in clinical studies [19].
Better performance of our method than the actigraphic method
in the SOL estimation suggests a potential of our method to
serve as a useful and powerful tool in clinical research.

C. Future Works
We plan to pursue further performance validations to subjects
with various pathological conditions.
With other BCG measurement tools such as an air mattress
with a balancing tube [20], a polyvinylidene fluoride film, and
an electromechanical film sensor which have the advantage of
not requiring a modification of bed for installation, we plan to
implement a system and apply our method. Finally, we plan
to develop a perfectly nonconstrained and automatic SOL estimation system using an ECG recorded nonintrusively using
capacitively coupled electrodes on a bed [21].
REFERENCES
[1] M. J. Thorpy, P. Westbrook, R. Ferber, and P. Fredrickson, “The clinical
use of the multiple sleep latency test,” Sleep, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 268–276,
1992.
[2] M. A. Carskadon and W. C. Dement, “Sleep tendency: An objective measure of sleep loss,” Sleep Res., vol. 6, no. 6, p. 200, 1977.

544

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY 2013

[3] G. S. Richardson, M. A. Carskadon, W. Flagg, J. Van den Hoed,
W. C. Dement, and M. M. Mitlerl, “Excessive daytime sleepiness in man:
Multiple sleep latency measurement in narcoleptic and control subjects,”
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 621–627, 1978.
[4] M. A. Carskadon, W. C. Dement, M. M. Mitler, T. Roth, P. R. Westbrook,
and S. Keenan, “Guidelines for the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT): A
standard measure of sleepiness,” Sleep, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 519–524, 1986.
[5] M. Ursino and E. Magosso, “Role of short-term cardiovascular regulation
in heart period variability: A modeling study,” Amer. J. Physiol.-Heart
Circ. Physiol., vol. 284, no. 4, pp. H1479–H1493, 2003.
[6] J. S. Loredo, R. Nelesen, S. Ancoli-Israel, and J. E. Dimsdale, “Sleep
quality and blood pressure dipping in normal adults,” Sleep, vol. 27, no. 6,
pp. 1097–1103, 2004.
[7] D. W. Richardson, A. J. Honour, G. W. Fenton, F. H. Stott, and
G. W. Pickering, “Variation in arterial pressure throughout the day and
night,” Clin. Sci., vol. 26, pp. 445–460, 1964.
[8] J. H. Shin, K. M. Lee, and K. S. Park, “Non-constrained monitoring of
systolic blood pressure on a weighing scale,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 30,
pp. 679–693, 2009.
[9] A. Rechtschaffen, A. Kales, R. Berger, and W. Dement, Eds., A Manual
of Standardized Terminology, Techniques and Scoring System for Sleep
Stages of Human Subjects. Washington, DC, USA: Public Health Service, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1968.
[10] C. Iber, The AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and Associated
Events: Rules, Terminology and Technical Specifications. Darien, IL,
USA: American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2007.
[11] D. Moser, P. Anderer, G. Gruber, S. Parapatics, E. Loretz, M. Boeck,
G. Kloesch, E. Heller, A. Schmidt, H. Danker-Hopfe, B. Saletu,
J. Zeitlhofer, and G. Dorffner, “Sleep classification according to AASM
and Rechtschaffen & Kales: Effects on sleep scoring parameters,” Sleep,
vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 139–149, 2009.
[12] G. Zoccoli, T. Bojic, C. Franzini, and S. Predieri, “Central and baroreflex
control of heart rate during the wake-sleep cycle in rat,” Sleep, vol. 24,
no. 7, pp. 753–758, 2001.
[13] A. Silvani, V. Asti, T. Bojic, V. Ferrari, C. Franzini, P. Lenzi, D. A. Grant,
A. M. Walker, and G. Zoccoli, “Sleep-dependent changes in the coupling
between heart period and arterial pressure in newborn lambs,” Pediatr.
Res., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 108–114, 2005.

[14] A. Silvani, D. Grimaldi, S. Vandi, G. Barletta, R. Vetrugno, F. Provini,
G. Pierangeli, C. Berteotti, P. Montagna, and G. Zoccoli, “Sleep-dependent
changes in the coupling between heart period and blood pressure in human
subjects,” Amer. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., vol. 294, no. 5,
pp. R1686–R1692, 2008.
[15] R. A. L. Dampney, M. J. Coleman, M. A. P. Fontes, Y. Hirooka,
J. Horiuchi, Y. W. Li, J. W. Polson, P. D. Potts, and T. Tagawa, “Central
mechanisms underlying short-and long-term regulation of the cardiovascular system,” Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 261–268,
2002.
[16] T. J. Mullen, M. L. Appel, R. Mukkamala, J. M. Mathias, and R. J. Cohen,
“System identification of closed-loop cardiovascular control: Effects of
posture and autonomic blockade,” Amer. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp.
Physiol., vol. 272, no. 1, pp. H448–H461, 1997.
[17] A. Stefanovska, “Physics of the human cardiovascular system,” Contemp.
Phys, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 31–55, 1999.
[18] D. E. Donald and J. T. Shepherd, “Reflexes from the heart and lungs:
Physiological curiosities or important regulatory mechanisms,” Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 449–469, 1978.
[19] L. de Souza, A. A. Benedito-Silva, M. L. N. Pires, D. Poyares, S. Tufik,
and H. M. Calil, “Further validation of actigraphy for sleep studies,” Sleep,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 81–85, 2003.
[20] J. H. Shin, Y. J. Chee, D. U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Nonconstrained sleep
monitoring system and algorithms using air-mattress with balancing tube
method,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 147–156,
Jan. 2010.
[21] Y. G. Lim, K. H. Hong, K. K. Kim, J. H. Shin, S. M. Lee, G. S. Chung,
H. J. Baek, D. U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Monitoring physiological signals
using nonintrusive sensors installed in daily life equipment,” Biomed. Eng.
Lett., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11–20, 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

