IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

2751

Real-Time Implementation of a Dual-Mode
Ultrasound Array System: In Vivo Results
Andrew J. Casper, Student Member, IEEE, Dalong Liu, Member, IEEE, John R. Ballard, Member, IEEE,
and Emad S. Ebbini∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A real-time dual-mode ultrasound array (DMUA) system for imaging and therapy is described. The system utilizes a
concave (40-mm radius of curvature) 3.5 MHz, 32 element array,
and modular multichannel transmitter/receiver. The system is capable of operating in a variety of imaging and therapy modes
(on transmit) and continuous receive on all array elements even
during high-power operation. A signal chain consisting of fieldprogrammable gate arrays and graphical processing units is used to
enable real time, software-defined beamforming and image formation. Imaging data, from quality assurance phantoms as well as in
vivo small- and large-animal models, are presented and discussed.
Corresponding images obtained using a temporally-synchronized
and spatially-aligned diagnostic probe confirm the DMUA’s ability to form anatomically-correct images with sufficient contrast in
an extended field of view around its geometric center. In addition,
high-frame rate DMUA data also demonstrate the feasibility of
detection and localization of echo changes indicative of cavitation
and/or tissue boiling during high-intensity focused ultrasound exposures with 45–50 dB dynamic range. The results also show that
the axial and lateral resolution of the DMUA are consistent with its
fnu m b e r and bandwidth with well-behaved speckle cell characteristics. These results point the way to a theranostic DMUA system
capable of quantitative imaging of tissue property changes with
high specificity to lesion formation using focused ultrasound.
Index Terms—Beamforming, image-guided surgery, phased arrays, therapeutic ultrasound, ultrasound imaging.

I. INTRODUCTION
MAGE-GUIDED high-intensity focused ultrasound
(IgHIFU) surgery is an active area of research in many
academic and industrial labs worldwide [1]–[7]. Innovations

I

Manuscript received June 21, 2012; revised September 27, 2012, February
1, 2013, and May 5, 2013; accepted May 8, 2013. Date of publication May 21,
2013; date of current version September 14, 2013. This work was supported in
part by the National Institutes of Health under Grants EB008191 and EB009750
and by a grant from International Cardio Corporation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. J. Casper is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: casp0069@umn.edu).
D. Liu is with Siemens Medical Solutions, Malvern, PA 19355 USA (e-mail:
dalong.liu@siemens.com).
J. R. Ballard is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
College of Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN 55455 USA (e-mail: ball0250@umn.edu).
∗ E. S. Ebbini is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, College of Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN 55455 USA (e-mail: emad@umn.edu).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2264484

and advances in technology have led to several clinical uses of
IgHIFU [8], [9]. Currently, the two most common techniques
for providing image guidance for focused ultrasound (FUS)
are magnetic resonance imaging (MRgFUS) and diagnostic
ultrasound (USgFUS). MRgFUS is the most widely used
image-guidance modality in the clinical setting. At present, it is
the only FDA-approved guidance method for the treatment of
uterine fibroids in the U.S. The ability to create high-contrast
anatomical images, as well as monitor high-intensity focused
ultrasound (HIFU) induced temperature rise to 100 ◦ C are
distinct advantages of magnetic resonance (MR) [10], [11].
The impact of MRgFUS on the field of IgHIFU surgery has
been significant, but MR guidance has limitations. Specifically,
the overall cost as well as the relatively long image-acquisition
times. Ultrasound continues to be a promising image-guidance
modality. While current diagnostic ultrasound scanners do
not provide the same levels of soft-tissue contrast achievable
by MRI, ultrasound has qualities that make it attractive as a
guidance modality. Low-cost ultrasound systems are capable of
providing high-frame rate imaging that can provide quantitative
information on the state tissue undergoing HIFU treatment.
Specifically, ultrasound can provide fast tissue property measurements, highly localized and sensitive temperature maps, as
well as information on the presence and spatial distribution of
cavitation activity [12]–[15].
The targeted tissues of currently approved clinical systems
(e.g., uterine fibroids and prostate cancer) share common characteristics of relative target immobility and largely nondistorting soft tissue access. To move beyond these targets will require
guidance that can account for tissue motion and heterogeneity.
Guidance systems will need to have the ability to interrogate
the treatment volume with high spatial and temporal resolutions
to capture the lesion formation dynamics both at the target location and throughout the path of the HIFU beam. The ability
to monitor and control HIFU therapy in mobile organs will be
a major step toward the widespread acceptance of noninvasive
IgHIFU in applications like liver cancer [16]. Efficient noninvasive targeting of liver tumors requires optimal refocusing of
the therapeutic HIFU beam to account for tissue motion and
to avoid the collateral damage to any ribs in its path, a problem that has received increased interest in recent years [4], [6],
[17]–[19]. In addition, numerous therapeutic arrays have been
recently proposed for IgHIFU operations [7], [20]–[23].
The increased interest in therapeutic arrays, together with
the availability of new transducer technologies allowing larger
bandwidth and reduced cross coupling, have allowed for the introduction of dual-mode ultrasound arrays (DMUA) for imaging

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

2752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

and therapy [3], [24]–[28]. Real-time DMUA operation has the
major advantage of precise interrogation of the tissue response
to the HIFU beam [3] due to the inherent registration between
the therapeutic and imaging coordinate systems. This becomes
particularly important with the increased interest in the use of
cavitation in the enhancement of the therapeutic effects due to
heat [29], [30] or due to drugs [31]. A real-time imaging system
capable of detecting, localizing, and characterizing the nature of
cavitation activity will be essential to achieve controlled lesion
formation with high levels of safety and precision. Real-time
imaging with DMUAs offers the potential of providing this
kind of feedback.
This paper presents DMUA-based real time in vivo demonstration of image-guided lesion formation and target tracking in
small- and large-animal models. In particular, the use of singletransmit focus (STF) imaging [3] at high-frame rates to monitor
the dynamics of lesion formation, including sporadic cavitation activity. In addition, speckle tracking of DMUA data is
also shown to produce displacement fields suitable to characterize the motion/deformation patterns of the target tissue, e.g.,
pulsating artery. The in vivo images (and associated multimedia) demonstrate the DMUA’s ability to provide anatomically
correct images with sufficient dynamic range and spatial resolution to localize and capture the large variation in echogenicity associated with the cavitation and/or tissue boiling. Results
from imaging the same targets using an integrated diagnostic
probe are also given to provide a reference for the evaluation
of the performance of the DMUA imaging as a means of image
guidance.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Transducer Assembly
We describe a fenestrated DMUA transducer shown in Fig. 1
with a diagnostic probe positioned such that DMUA and diagnostic images are in the same plane. The diagnostic system is
fully synchronized with the DMUA driver and is capable of producing real-time M2D-mode imaging of temperature and strain
as described in [15]. Briefly, M2D is a generalization of the
M-mode imaging on the Sonix RP where we collected image
frames with reduced number of A-lines to improve the frame
rates in a region of interest, e.g., near a pulsating blood vessel.
M2D imaging improves the correlation of the frame-to-frame
ultrasound data in tissues undergoing significant deformations.
M2D strain imaging has been used for monitoring thermal and
mechanical tissue responses to pulsed HIFU beams in vivo [32].
1) DMUA Prototype Characterization: Piezocomposite
transducer technology (Imasonic, Voray sur l’Ognon, France)
was used for manufacturing a custom-designed DMUA for use
in small-animal experiments as well as peripheral vascular applications. The array consists of two rows of 32, 1.2 × 6.8 mm2
elements spaced 1.5 mm apart on a concave, spherical section
with a radius of 40 mm and an fnumb er of 0.86.
The therapeutic and imaging performance of a DMUA can
be characterized by its therapeutic operating field (ThxOF) and
imaging field of view (IxFOV) [3], [25]. The ThxOF can be
determined using continuous wave or pulsed simulations of the

Fig. 1. (a) DMUA-diagnostic transducer assembly. The diagnostic probe is
positioned within fenestration with its imaging slice shown. (b) Active elements
of the DMUA and a coarse grid centered at the geometric center demonstrating
the DMUA imaging slice.

array geometry as shown in [3] and is defined from the profile
of the intensity focusing gain. For this prototype, the focusing
gain drops gradually with a −6 dB isocontour approximately
a circle with a radius of 4 mm centered around the geometric
center. Steering beyond the boundaries of the ThxOF results
in unacceptable reduction in focusing gain at the target. The
IxFOV can be estimated using pulsed field simulations taking
the transmit–receive impulse response of the array elements and
the concave low fnumb er into account [25]. For this prototype,
the manufacturer reported an average pulse length of 1288 ns
(56 ns standard deviation) and an average fractional bandwidth
of 51% (1% standard deviation). These values were confirmed in
our laboratory using wire targets and steel block measurements.
The IxFOV for this array was estimated to cover an elliptical

CASPER et al.: REAL-TIME IMPLEMENTATION OF A DUAL-MODE ULTRASOUND ARRAY SYSTEM: IN V I V O RESULTS

region extended by ±12 mm and ± 5 mm in the axial and lateral
directions (from the geometric center).
2) Diagnostic Probe: The DMUA probe shown in Fig. 1(a)
has a fenestration allowing for the use of a diagnostic probe as
shown. The use of a diagnostic probe allows us to take advantage
of M2D-imaging capabilities described in [15]. It was critical
that the diagnostic probe used be small to minimize the loss
in an active transducer surface area in the therapeutic mode. A
HST15-8/20 imaging probe connected to a Sonix RP scanner
(Ultrasonix Medical Corporation, Richmond, British Columbia,
Canada) was used to provide the diagnostic images. According
to the manufacturer data sheets, the HST is a linear array with
a mechanical focus at 16 mm and a bandwidth of 6 MHz. The
HST probe was driven at a center frequency of 10 MHz.

2753

TABLE I
TIME (IN MSEC) FOR EACH PROCESSING STEP ON GPU

TABLE II
IMAGING CHARACTERISTICS OF DMUA AND HST TRANSDUCERS

B. Signal Transmission
The multiple-focus synthesis method, described in [33], is
used to calculate the phases and amplitudes required to generate
a desired pressure field. This synthesis technique, which requires
the multiplication and inversion of several low-order matrices,
is carried out on a core i7 processor with Intel’s Math Kernel
Library and requires less than 1 ms processing time. Update
rates of this magnitude provide the ability for extremely precise
spatiotemporal control of the therapy process [34].
The calculated amplitudes and phases are conveyed to the
array through a 32-channel, FPGA-based, arbitrary waveform
generator. Commands and data are transmitted to the waveform
generators through a gigabit ethernet connection ensuring a lowlatency, high-bandwidth communication link. Each channel has
a dedicated 10-bit DAC (DAC5652, Texas Instruments, Dallas,
TX, USA) which generates a signal that is fed through a custombuilt 10 W linear amplifier, a high-power matching network,
and delivered to the array through a microcoaxial cable. This
setup allows the array to produce focal intensities in the range
of 5000–12000 W/cm2 (in water), which is suitable for lesion
formation in tissues at depths 0.6–2.3 cm.
The transmitter circuitry is also capable of supporting pulsed
operation for imaging applications using the same amplifiers
and matching networks used for therapy. This is due to the use
of wideband amplifiers (0.5–10 MHz flat gain operation) and
relatively wideband matching circuit topology allowing the use
of the transducer bandwidth (2.6–4.6 MHz).
C. Signal Receive Chain
Each element on the array has an independent receiver and a
signal processing chain. Echo data from each element are passed
through a software controllable analog front end (AFE) before
being digitized by a 12 bit, 50 MSPS ADC (AFE5801, Texas
Instruments, Dallas, TX, USA). The AFE allows dynamic control over the filtering and scaling of the analog signal to ensure
the full dynamic range of the ADC is utilized without causing saturation. This control is crucial for monitoring the tissue
during HIFU therapies where dramatic changes in echogenicity
can cause the strength of the received echo signal to vary by
orders of magnitude. The 32 channels of digitized echo data
are processed by two FPGAs (Virtex 5, Xilinx, San Jose, CA,

USA). The FPGAs work in parallel to pass the data through a
reconfigurable 208 tap FIR filter and an optional 4x decimator
before buffering the data in on-chip memory.
D. Image-Based Monitoring Methods
The data received from the FPGAs through the gigabit ethernet are transferred to a graphical processing unit (GPU) (GTX
285, NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA, USA) where massively parallel processing allows for additional filtering, beamforming,
envelope detection, and log compression to take place in real
time. The processing times for the individual steps are shown
in Table I for both STF and synthetic aperture (SA) imaging.
With the high-performance computing (HPC) capabilities of
our DMUA system, real-time implementation of SA and STF
allows for monitoring the lesion formation process with high
temporal and spatial resolutions. SA is used to image the media
at the highest spatial and contrast resolutions within the IxFOV
(based on traditional delay and sum beamforming). STF imaging is used primarily during therapy to provide high-frame rate
imaging for monitoring the dynamics of the lesion formation at
the treatment site (with high specificity within and in the immediate vicinity of the HIFU focal spot). This property, together
with the high temporal resolution of STF, allows for immediate and precision identification of tissue change in response to
HIFU and/or other abnormal events in the treatment region. For
the DMUA system described in this paper, the GPU allows for
the collection and processing of full SA and STF imaging data
at over 30 and 1000 frames/s, respectively.
E. Imaging Targets
1) Quality Assurance Phantom: A wire target quality assurance phantom (Model 040, CIRS, Norfolk, VA, USA) was used
for the characterization of the image quality of both DMUA and
the diagnostic imaging probe when used in conjunction with the
DMUA [in the configuration shown in Fig. 1(a)]. The phantom
contains an array of wires as well as low- and high-contrast targets embedded in a speckle generating material. For purposes
of this paper, we have focused on the wire targets to establish
the registration between the DMUA and the diagnostic imaging

2754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

probe. To achieve this, the position of the HST probe within the
transducer assembly was adjusted manually to: 1) maximize the
brightness of the wire targets; and 2) maximize the alignment
between the wire locations on both DMUA and HST images.
2) Femoral Artery and Vein in Adult Swine: The femoral
arteries and veins of the adult familial hypercholesterolemic
swine (100–200 Kg) were imaged using the transducer assembly shown in Fig. 1. A water filled bolus was used to couple
the DMUA and diagnostic transducer to the animal (in a supine
posture). The animals were anesthetized and mechanically ventilated during the imaging and therapy procedure in accordance
with the approved animal care protocol VSP001 (American Preclinical Services, Coon Rapids, MN, USA) SA DMUA imaging
was performed in the course of image-guided lesion formation
using HIFU for purposes of target identification and tracking.
3) Hind Limb in Copenhagen Rat Model: Lesion formation
experiments were conducted on healthy rats (≈250 g in weight)
as approved by the University of Minnesota IACUC protocol
# 0802A26282. The rats were anesthetized using Ketamine and
Xylazine before being placed in a temperature-controlled water
bath at 33 ◦ C for the duration of the experiment. The setup
was described in [32]. The imaging results described herein
are intended to illustrate the different modes of monitoring and
their potential advantages in image-guided lesion formation. In
one experiment, high-frame rate STF imaging is used to capture
the spatiotemporal changes in echogenicity due to cavitation
activity. In another case, STF and M2D imaging frames are
synchronously acquired to illustrate the feasibility of DMUA
operation in conjunction with other diagnostic image guidance.
In each experiment, an anesthetized rat was placed in a holder
attached to a 3-D position system and immersed in a 33 ◦ C water
bath. DMUA and diagnostic imaging were used to guide the rat
such that the geometric focus of the array was located in the
thigh, approximately 7–10 mm from the previously depilated
surface.
III. RESULTS
Imaging results are presented to demonstrate the capabilities
of this DMUA prototype in identifying target locations and
tracking the spatiotemporal characteristics of lesion formation
dynamics. In most cases, DMUA images are provided together
with images obtained using the HST15-8/20 probe positioned as
shown in Fig. 1. The images from both transducers are provided
without postbeamforming image processing, each with its own
dynamic range (based on intensity distribution).
A. Quality Assurance Phantom
Fig. 2 shows images of the CIRS Model 40 QA phantom
obtained using the HST15-8/20 probe (a) and the DMUA (b).
Three of four wires placed within the displayed range are visible
in both images. The fourth wire at −5 mm lateral and 50 mm
axial is visible on the DMUA image, but not on the HST image.
This is due to both the attenuation and the loss of focusing gain,
especially due to elevation focusing of the HST probe. The
visible wires common to both images were used to establish the
spatial registration between the two coordinate systems. This

Fig. 2. Images of the CIRS Model 40 phantom: (a) 65 dB image using the
HST15-8/20 and (b) 45 dB SA image using the DMUA.

Fig. 3. Speckle cell size measurement for 3.5 MHz DMUA prototype.
(a) 50 dB from a uniform region in the QA phantom and (b) speckle autocovariance function with the 6-dB contour shown.

is necessary due to the fact that the diagnostic array position
within the DMUA fenestration, while secure, is not locked and
is subject to small shifts and rotations. Registration between the
two coordinate systems is necessary for comparison of results.
This adjustment was performed as described in Section II-E1 to
produce maximum visibility of the wires on the HST image.
The QA phantom images shown demonstrate the capabilities
and relative merits of DMUA and diagnostic US transducers
in the context of image guidance. For example, the HST probe
provides superior axial resolution consistent with its larger bandwidth while the DMUA offers superior lateral resolution consistent with its low fnumb er . One can also observe the limited
IxFOV of the DMUA compared with the HST probe, which is
predicted from the two-way focusing gain results [25]. One can
observe the effects of the grating lobes at the edges of the IxFOV
of the DMUA in Fig. 2(b) (35–42 mm axial and 7–9 mm lateral), which result from the strong wire target reflectors near the
geometric center. The visibility of the grating lobes can be controlled by including the element directivity in the beamforming
equations [25] at the expense of the IxFOV.
A speckle cell size measurement [25], [35] was made by imaging a uniform speckle region in the CIRS Model 40 phantom
(i.e., no wires and no contrast targets). Fig. 3(a) shows a 50-dB
image of a uniform speckle region obtained using the DMUA
prototype. Fig. 3(b) shows the speckle autocovariance function
for the region defined by the 10 × 5 mm2 rectangular region
shown in Fig. 3(a). The 6-dB speckle cell size for the DMUA
was determined to be 0.25 and 1.60 mm in the lateral and ax-

CASPER et al.: REAL-TIME IMPLEMENTATION OF A DUAL-MODE ULTRASOUND ARRAY SYSTEM: IN V I V O RESULTS

2755

Fig. 4. Real-time imaging of peripheral vessels in adult swine: (a) B-mode
image of artery and vein (left) and DMUA SA image of area highlighted in red.
(b) Axial displacement (in μm) of vessel along white line on DMUA image.

ial directions, respectively. These values are consistent with the
appearance of the wire targets in Fig. 2(b). Similar measurements for the HST probe resulted in a 6-dB speckle cell size of
2.4 and 0.3 mm in the lateral and axial directions, respectively
(consistent with the wire target appearance in Fig. 2(a). Based
on imaging results from the QA phantom, we can summarize
the imaging characteristics of the DMUA and HST transducers in the following table: The speckle statistics in a region
near the geometric center were determined to be approximately
Rayleigh with a signal-to-noise ratio of 1.85. These statistics,
together with well-defined speckle cell dimensions, suggest that
the beamformed RF data obtained using the DMUA transducer
can be used in the estimation of tissue motion using speckle
tracking. They also suggest that DMUA data will be suitable for
quantitative imaging.
B. Targeting of Peripheral Vessels in Adult Swine Model
Fig. 4 shows an example result (from hundreds of similar
images taken) where both the DMUA and the HST probes were
used to image the femoral artery and vein through a water bolus
before, during, and after lesion formation. SA DMUA imaging is
performed before and after each HIFU shot while STF imaging
was used during the shot (at a pulse repetition frequency (PRF)
of 0.1–1 kHz). The upper left image in Fig. 4 shows the B-Mode
image of the artery and vein at 50 dB. The artery lies superficial
to the vein and at an approximate depth of 15 mm below the skin.
The specular reflector along the posterior wall of the vessel helps
to highlight the boundaries of the artery. The DMUA image is
shown in the upper right of Fig. 4 and corresponds the region
outlined in red on the diagnostic B-mode image. The DMUA

Fig. 5. B-mode (HST) and SA DMUA images: (a) prior to therapy (b) immediately following therapy for the STF only monitoring case. Note the pronounced
change in echogenicity on DMUA image while the change is muted on the HST
image.

image allows for clear identification of both vessels and the
surrounding tissue. The specular reflector along the posterior
wall of the artery is also present in the DMUA image. The
fast acquisition rate of the SA images allows for tracking of
the vessel dynamics. The bottom plot in Fig. 4 shows the axial
displacement in time along the white line in the DMUA image.
The vessel pulsation is clear with an approximate frequency of
1.6 beats/s. The displacement on the proximal side of the vessel
is 180◦ out of phase with the displacement along the distal
side of the vessel, indicative of radial expansion of the artery.
This high-resolution spatiotemporal map of tissue motion could
provide a key feedback component in accurate targeting and
tracking of the vessel wall during HIFU exposure.
C. Image-Guided Lesion Formation
1) Lesion Formation With STF Monitoring: The first experiment consisted of a 500 ms exposure at an in situ intensity
of approximately 5100 W/cm2 . The images in Fig. 5(a) and
(b) show the rat leg prior to and immediately following the
HIFU shot acquired using the HST (left) and DMUA (right).
The DMUA images show a clear echogenic change in the focal
region. The B-Mode images show some changes in the focal
region, but the difference is muted compared to the DMUA.
Changes in tissue echogenicity have been suggested as a means
of monitoring tissue damage and therapy progression. These hyperechoic changes are associated with HIFU-induced bubble ac-

2756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Fig. 6. M-mode STF data (1 kHz PRF) from the lesion location (40 dB). Top:
Full acquisition over 2500 ms with HIFU turned ON at 1000 ms and animal
twitch at ≈ 1400 ms. Bottom: Two close ups showing 300 ms during shot
starting at 1100 ms (left) and 50 ms starting at 1140 ms, which shows the first
cavitation event.

tivity. The DMUA STF imaging is ideally suited for monitoring
these echogenic changes. This is primarily due to the match
between the lateral dimensions of the induced lesions and the
lateral extent of the imaging point spread function (psf). Fig. 6
displays M-mode echo data from a 6 mm axial segment centered at 0 mm laterally and 40 mm axially. Baseline data were
collected for 1 s before the therapy shot was delivered between
1 and 1.5 s. The first echogenic change appeared 161 ms into
the therapy followed by sporadic echoes within the HIFU focus
indicative of cavitation activity. The video included in the multimedia section shows the progression of the echogenic changes
throughout the treatment and clearly illustrates the sporadic nature of the bubble dynamics in space and time. This is also
illustrated by the closeup M-mode (1100–1400 ms) shown in
Fig. 6. One can see five transient events starting at ≈ 1161 ms
each resulting in a sudden change in echogenicity followed by a
drop in echogenicity with highly dynamic (but more correlated)
changes in the echo location and/or amplitude. This behavior is
consistent with the creation and depletion of cavitation bubbles
in the focal region. The high-frame rate STF captured both the
fast and slow dynamics of this process with high-spatial resolution as can be seen from both the M-mode and the multimedia
results shown.
This case illustrates another noteworthy issue where continuous monitoring using DMUA may prove essential. The animal
twitched its leg approximately 400 ms into the therapy introducing a large global shift resulting in loss of echo at 1400 ms
as can be seen on the M-mode image as well as the video. It
also illustrates that the DMUA image has sufficient dynamic
range to capture the large variation in backscatter energy due to
cavitation activity and motion. In this case, the echo intensity
at a depth of 38.6 mm and t = 1.362 s was 34.5 dB higher than

Fig. 7. M2D grayscale (HST) and SA DMUA images: (a) prior to therapy
(b) immediately following therapy for the STF/M2D monitoring case. Both
systems show pronounced change in echogenicity at the lesion location.

the base line intensity at the same location before HIFU. The
intensity dropped by 13 dB below baseline during the twitch.
2) Lesion Formation With STF/M2D Monitoring: The second rat experiment consisted of a 750 ms exposure at an in situ
intensity 5500 of W/cm2 . Fig. 7 shows the DMUA SA (40 dB)
and M2D grayscale images (50 dB) before and after therapy.
In this case, both the DMUA and the diagnostic B-Mode captured an echogenic change at the focus. The video attached in
the multimedia section offers a frame by frame comparison of
the DMUA STF image and the diagnostic B-Mode image taken
during therapy. Both imaging modalities show clear changes in
the speckle pattern prior to the large echogenic change.
The STF M-Mode image in Fig. 8 corresponds to a 6 mm
axial line segment centered at 0 mm laterally and 40 mm axially. As before, baseline data were collected for 1 s before the
therapy began. The M-mode data show a small displacement
due to the acoustic radiation force as well as a strong echogenic
change approximately 600 ms into the therapy (typically indicative of tissue boiling). In this case, the echogenic changes due
to lesion formation exhibited less sporadic behavior than the

CASPER et al.: REAL-TIME IMPLEMENTATION OF A DUAL-MODE ULTRASOUND ARRAY SYSTEM: IN V I V O RESULTS

Fig. 8.

M-mode STF data (91 Hz PRF) from the lesion location.

previous case even though the exposure is higher, both in terms
of focal intensity and shot duration. This experiment represents
a situation often encountered in practice where the change in
echogenicity is very subtle before the strong change observed
upon tissue boiling. The boiling event often indicates overexposure where the excessive HIFU energy is used for forming the
lesion. In fact, we have run numerous experiments where thermal lesions where formed without reaching the boiling event
seen here. In these cases, temperature imaging or other tissue
characterization imaging methods may provide better indicators
of lesion formation that avoids overexposure.
IV. DISCUSSION
The major goal of this paper is to introduce the DMUA approach to IgHIFU as a platform technology, which allows highresolution spatiotemporal visualization of HIFU-tissue interactions in real time. To the best of our knowledge, the results
shown in this paper represent the first real-time demonstration
of DMUA use in monitoring the lesion formation dynamics (including cavitation activity) using grayscale and RF data in vivo.
We have also presented results that demonstrate the feasibility
of using DMUA image data in the identification and tracking of
peripheral vessels in vivo in a large animal model, with significant practical implications in IgHIFU.
We emphasize that neither the DMUA nor the HST images
shown in this paper are of diagnostic quality. This is primarily
due to imaging through the water bolus which, together with the
large aperture of the DMUA, causes reverberations to interfere
with the imaging data in the region of interest. For example,
a standard linear array probe in direct contact with the swine
skin, produces images of the femoral artery and vein far superior
to those shown in Fig. 4. Despite these limitations, the results
shown in this paper illustrate two opportunities for real-time
feedback possible with DMUA imaging. First, the feasibility of
speckle tracking using beamformed DMUA echo data as illustrated in Fig. 4(b). This will open the door for the implementation of real-time US thermography [15] and elastography [36]
using DMUA data allowing for tissue property measurements
at the lesion formation site with specificity unmatched by any
other image guidance mechanism. Fig. 5 is one illustration of
this point where one can see that the change in echogenicity at
the HIFU focus location is visible on the DMUA images, while
hardly seen on those obtained using the diagnostic probe. In
addition to the inherent registration between the imaging and

2757

therapy beams, the high focusing gain and lateral resolution of
the DMUA maximize the sensitivity and specificity to localized bubble activity within the therapeutic HIFU focus. Second,
the feasibility of detection and localization of abrupt changes
in echo signals from the treatment site is illustrated by Figs. 6
and 8.
The real-time imaging results from in vivo lesion formation
experiments shown in this paper illustrate the need for continuous monitoring of lesion dynamics. For example, even though
the intensity levels were comparable in both experiments, the
nature of the cavitation activity appeared to be markedly different. In one case, sporadic activity was observed with what
appears to be generation and depletion of bubbles. In the other,
a gradual structural change was observed for the first 600 ms
before tissue boiling occurred resulting in a significant increase
in echogenicity as observed on both the DMUA and HST imaging. The high-frame rate STF imaging ensures anomalous events
are recognized before they can lead to unintended damage. In
addition, high-frame rate STF could also provide the spatial
and temporal feedback for the initiation and control of bubble
clouds to improve the heating rate as suggested in [30]. Highframe rate STF imaging can also be used in adaptive refocusing
in the presence of strongly scattering objects. For example, the
image-based refocusing approach described in [18] can now be
implemented in real time where hundreds of refocusing vectors
can be safely tested in a fraction of a second before choosing
the optimal vector.
While the DMUA system described herein is being used in
preclinical real-time IgHIFU applications, there continue to be
active areas of research to move closer to clinical use. One
area of research is in how to further refine the DMUA imaging
capability. The low fnumb er array combined with the transmit/receive capability of this DMUA system provide an ideal
platform for reconstructive imaging. The ability to obtain highresolution images would greatly enhance targeting as well as
provide additional information on pre- and post-treatment lesion site analysis. With the availability of HPC FPGA/GPU
platforms for postbeamforming processing of DMUA data, it
will be possible to employ quantitative imaging methods such
as those described in [36] for mechanical property measurements, in [15] for thermal property measurement, and in [37]
for nonlinearity imaging. Of course, traditional and modern
quantitative imaging techniques [38]–[41] can still be used to
characterize structural changes due to lesion formation. With
these quantitative imaging methods, it will be possible to use
the DMUA as a theranostic system providing diagnostic quality
imaging of the tissue response to therapeutic HIFU.
V. CONCLUSION
Real-time imaging of in vivo targets in small- and largeanimal models demonstrate the potential advantages and unique
features of the DMUA approach to IgHIFU applications. First,
DMUA images capture anatomically-correct features consistent with predicted and measured psf. These results are further
corroborated using a diagnostic imaging probe with a coregistered imaging slice in a synchronous manner. Images from QA

2758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

phantoms provide quantitative support for this conclusion. Second, high-frame rate STF imaging during lesion formation capture the spatiotemporal changes in echogenicity associated cavitation activity during therapeutic HIFU exposure. Examining
the M-mode data and associated multimedia files from the experiment described in Section III-C1 show how DMUA imaging
captures the spatial (axial and lateral) and temporal changes in
the echoes around the focal region with over 45 dB dynamic
range. This form of feedback can be used to achieve fine control
of the lesion formation process with millimeter precision and
with minimal collateral damage. The latter is an inherent advantage of STF imaging as we have described in [3]. Combining the
spatial localization of HIFU-tissue interactions with the hightemporal resolution of the image-based feedback will allow for
the real-time implementation of feedback control strategies [34]
providing high levels of safety and efficacy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. J. Bischof and his
group for excellent collaboration on the small animal studies.
Dr. I. Shehata [Cairo University and Ultrasound Imaging and
Signal Processing Lab (UISPL), University of Minnesota], A.
Haritonova, and M. Almekkawy (UISPL) are also acknowledged for their contributions to the imaging studies and excellent discussions. They are also thankful to Dr. H. Lee for his
contributions to the multichannel dual-mode wideband linear
amplifier design.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Vaezy, X. Shi, R. W. Martin, E. Chi, P. I. Nelson, Ml. R. Bailey, and
L. A. Crum, “Real-time visualization of high-intensity focused ultrasound
treatment using ultrasound imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 33–42, 2001.
[2] K. Hynynen, “MRI-guided focused ultrasound treatments,” Ultrasonics,
vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 221–229, Feb. 2010.
[3] E. S. Ebbini, H. Yao, and A. Shrestha, “Dual-mode ultrasound phased
arrays for image-guided surgery,” Ultrason. Imag., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 65–
82, Apr. 2006.
[4] B. Larrat, M. Pernot, G. Montaldo, M. Fink, and M. Tanter, “MR-guided
adaptive focusing of ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1734–1737, Aug. 2010.
[5] G. T. Haar and C. Coussios, “High intensity focused ultrasound: Physical
principles and devices,” Int. J. Hypertherm., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 89–104,
Mar. 2007.
[6] V. Auboiroux, E. Dumont, L. Petrusca, M. Viallon, and R. Salomir, “An
MR-compliant phased-array HIFU transducer with augmented steering
range, dedicated to abdominal thermotherapy,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56,
no. 12, pp. 3563–3582, Jun. 2011.
[7] C. Mougenot, M. Tillander, J. Koskela, M. O. Köhler, C. Moonen, and
M. Ries, “High intensity focused ultrasound with large aperture transducers: A MRI based focal point correction for tissue heterogeneity,” Med.
Phys., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1936–1945, Apr. 2012.
[8] F. M. Fennessy, N. J. McDannold, M. H. So, G. Hesley, H. S. Kim,
G. A. Holland, D. A. Sarti, K. Hynynen, F. A. Jolesz, and E. A. Stewart,
“Uterine leiomyomas: MR imaging-guided focused ultrasound surgery results of different treatment protocols,” Radiology, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1099–
1110, Nov. 1996.
[9] N. T. Sanghvi, F. J. Fry, R. Bihrle, R. S. Foster, M. H. Phillips, J. Syrus,
A. V. Zaitsev, and C. W. Hennige, “Noninvasive surgery of prostate tissue
by high-intensity focused ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr.
Freq. Control, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 89–104, Mar. 2007.
[10] H. E. Cline, K. Hynynen, C. J. Hardy, R. D. Watkins, J. F. Schenck, and
F. A. Jolesz, “MR temperature mapping of focused ultrasound surgery,”
Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 628–636, Jun. 1994.

[11] S. Roujol, M. Ries, B. Quesson, C. Moonen, and B. D. de Senneville,
“Real-time MR-thermometry and dosimetry for interventional guidance
on abdominal organs,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 1080–1087,
Apr. 2010.
[12] S. Chen, M. Urban, C. Pislaru, R. Kinnick, Y. Zheng, A. Yao, and
J. Greenleaf, “Shearwave dispersion ultrasound vibrometry (SDUV) for
measuring tissue elasticity and viscosity,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 55–62, Jan. 2009.
[13] L. Sandrin, M. Tanter, S. Catheline, and M. Fink, “Shear modulus imaging
with 2-D transient elastography,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 426–435, Apr. 2002.
[14] C. Jensen, R. Ritchie, M. Gyongy, T. Leslie, and C. Coussios, “Spatiotemporal monitoring of high-intensity focused ultrasound therapy with
passive acoustic mapping,” Radiology, vol. 262, no. 1, pp. 252–261, Jan.
2012.
[15] D. Liu and E. S. Ebbini, “Real-time 2-D temperature imaging using ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 12–16, Jan.
2010.
[16] F. Wu, Z. B. Wang, W. Z. Chen, J. Z. Zou, J. Bai, H. Zhu, K. Q. Li,
C. B. Jin, F. L. Xie, and H. B. Su, “Advanced hepatocellular carcinoma:
Treatment with high-intensity focused ultrasound ablation combined with
transcatheter arterial embolization,” Radiology, vol. 235, no. 2, pp. 659–
667, May 2005.
[17] E. Cochard, C. Prada, J. F. Aubry, and M. Fink, “Ultrasonic focusing
through the ribs using the DORT method,” Med. Phys., vol. 36, no. 8,
pp. 3495–3503, Aug. 2009.
[18] J. R. Ballard, A. Casper, Y. Wan, and E. S. Ebbini, “Adaptive transthoracic
refocusing of dual-mode ultrasound arrays,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 93–102, Jan. 2010.
[19] F. Marquet, J. F. Aubry, M. Pernot, M. Fink, and M. Tanter, “Optimal
transcostal high-intensity focused ultrasound with combined real-time 3D
movement tracking and correction,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, no. 22,
pp. 7061–7080, Nov. 21, 2011.
[20] J. Song, B. Lucht, and K. Hynynen, “Large improvement of the electrical impedance of imaging and high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU)
phased arrays using multilayer piezoelectric ceramics coupled in lateral
mode,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 59, no. 7,
pp. 1584–1595, Jul. 2012.
[21] G.-S. Chen, C.-Y. Lin, J. S. Jeong, J. M. Cannata, W.-L. Lin, H. Chang,
and K. K. Shung, “Design and characterization of dual-curvature 1.5dimensional high-intensity focused ultrasound phased-array transducer,”
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 150–
155, Jan. 2012.
[22] L. Marsac, D. Chauvet, B. Larrat, M. Pernot, B. Robert, M. Fink,
A. L. Boch, J. F. Aubry, and M. Tanter, “MR-guided adaptive focusing of
therapeutic ultrasound beams in the human head,” Med. Phys., vol. 39,
no. 2, pp. 1141–1149, Feb. 2012.
[23] C. M. Coviello, R. J. Kozick, A. Hurrell, P. P. Smith, and C.-C. Coussios,
“Thin-film sparse boundary array design for passive acoustic mapping during ultrasound therapy,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control,
vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2322–2330, Oct. 2012.
[24] G. Bouchoux, C. Lafon, R. Berriet, J.-Y. Chapelon, G. Fleury, and
D. Cathignol, “Dual-mode ultrasound transducer for imageguided interstitial thermal therapy,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 607–616,
Apr. 2008.
[25] Y. Wan and E. S. Ebbini, “Imaging with concave large-aperture therapeutic
ultrasound arrays using conventional synthetic aperture beamforming,”
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 368–
383, Feb. 2008.
[26] C. D. Herickhoff, E. D. Light, K. F. Bing, S. Mukundan, G. A. Grant,
P. D. Wolf, and S. W. Smith, “Dual-mode intracranial catheter integrating
3d ultrasound imaging and hyperthermia for neurooncology: Feasibility
study,” Ultrason. Imag., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 81–100, Apr. 2009.
[27] N. R. Owen, J. Y. Chapelon, G. Bouchoux, R. Berriet, G. Fleury, and
C. Lafon, “Dual-mode transducers for ultrasound imaging and thermal
therapy,” Ultrasonics, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 216–220, Feb. 2010.
[28] T. D. Mast, P. G. Barthe, I. R. S. Makin, M. H. Slayton, C. P. Karunakaran,
M. T. Burgess, A. Alqadah, and S. M. Rudich, “Treatment of rabbit liver
cancer in vivo using miniaturized image-ablate ultrasound arrays,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 1609–1621, Oct. 2011.
[29] C. H. Farny, R. G. Holt, and R. A. Roy, “The Correlation between bubbleenhanced HIFU heating and cavitation power,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 175–184, Jan. 2010.
[30] Y. Inaba, M. Tatsuya, S. Yoshizawa, and S.-I. Umemura, “Ultrasonic
coagulation of large tissue region by generating multiple cavitation clouds

CASPER et al.: REAL-TIME IMPLEMENTATION OF A DUAL-MODE ULTRASOUND ARRAY SYSTEM: IN V I V O RESULTS

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]

in direction perpendicular to ultrasound propagation,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.,
vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 07HF13-1–07HF13-7, Jul. 2011.
C. Lafon, L. Somaglino, G. Bouchoux, J. Ml Mari, S. Chesnais, J. Ngo,
J.-L. Mestas, S. L. Fossheim, E. A. Nilssen, and J.-Y. Chapelon, “Feasibility study of cavitation-induced liposomal doxorubicin release in an AT2
Dunning rat tumor model,” J. Drug Target., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 691–702,
2012.
D. Liu, J. R. Ballard, A. Haritonova, J. Choi, J. Bischof, and E. S. Ebbini,
“Real-time Monitoring of Thermal and Mechanical Tissue Response to
Modulated Phased-array HIFU Beams In Vivo,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Therapeut. Ultrasound, 2011, vol. 1481, pp. 227–232.
E. S. Ebbini and C. A. Cain, “Multiple-focus ultrasound phasedarray pattern synthesis—Optimal driving-signal distributions for hyperthermia,”
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 540–
548, Sep 1989.
A. Casper, D. Liu, and E. S. Ebbini, “Realtime control of multiple-focus
phased array heating patterns based on noninvasive ultrasound thermography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 95–105, Jan. 2012.
R. F. Wagner, M. F. Insana, and S. W. Smith, “Fundamental correlation
lengths of coherent speckle in medical ultrasonic images,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 34–44, Jan. 1988.
D. Liu and E. S. Ebbini, “Viscoelastic property measurement in thin tissue
constructs using ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq.
Control, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 368–383, Feb. 2008.
P. Phukpattaranont and E. S. Ebbini, “Post-beamforming secondorder
Volterra filter for pulse-echo ultrasonic imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason.
Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 987–1001, Aug. 2003.
K. Nam, I. M. Rosado-Mendez, L. A. Wirtzfeld, G. Ghoshal,
A. D. Pawlicki, E. L. Madsen, R. J. Lavarello, M. L. Oelze,
J. A. Zagzebski, W. D. OBrien, Jr., and T. J. Hall, “Comparison of ultrasound attenuation and backscatter estimates in layered tissue-mimicking
phantoms among three clinical scanners,” Ultrason. Imag., vol. 34, no. 4,
pp. 209–221, Oct. 2012.
E. J. Feleppa, J. Mamou, C. R. Porter, and J. Machi, “Quantitative ultrasound in cancer imaging,” Semin. Oncol., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 136–150, Feb.
2011.
A. C. Luchies, G. Ghoshal, W. D. OBrienJr, and M. L. Oelze, “Quantitative ultrasonic characterization of diffuse scatterers in the presence of
structures that produce coherent echoes,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 893–904, May 2012.
G. Ghoshal, A. C. Luchies, J. P. Blue, and M. L. Oelze, “Temperature
dependent ultrasonic characterization of biological media,” J. Acoust. Soc.
Amer., vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 2203–2211, Oct. 2011.

Andrew J. Casper (S’08) received the B.S. and
M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, TwinCities, MN, USA, in 2008
and 2011, respectively, where he is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering.
His research interests include ultrasound imaging
and signal processing with special focus on phased
arrays and real-time systems.

2759

Dalong Liu (S’10–M’13) was born in China in 1977.
He received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in biomedical engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China, in 2001 and 2004, respectively. He received
the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in
2010.
He is currently with Siemens Medical Solutions,
Malvern, PA, USA. His research interests include ultrasound elastography and thermography, ultrasound
imaging and signal processing.

John R. Ballard (S’02–M’12) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI, USA, in 2005 and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 2007 and 2012, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at Ultrasound Imaging and Signal Processing Lab, University
of Minnesota. His research interests include minimal
and noninvasive surgery with special emphasis on
ultrasound guided focused ultrasound surgery for oncological and cardiovascular applications.

Emad S. Ebbini (S’82–M’90–SM’08–F’11) received the B.Sc. degree in EE/communications in
1985 from the University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in EE from the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
IL, USA, in 1987 and 1990.
From 1990 to 1998, he was with the faculty of the
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Michigan Ann Arbor. Since
1998, he has been with the Department of electrical
and computer engineering, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. His research interests include signal and array processing with applications to biomedical ultrasound and medical devices.
Dr. Ebbini was a member of AdCom for the IEEE Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,
and Frequency Control between 1994 and 1997. In 1996, he was a Guest Editor
for a special issue on therapeutic ultrasound in the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
ULTRASONICS, FERROELECTRICS, AND FREQUENCY CONTROL. He was an Associate Editor for the same transactions from 1997 to 2002. He is a member of the
standing technical program committee for the IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium.
He served as a member of the Board of the International Society for Therapeutic
Ultrasound (2002–2011) and is currently serving as its President (2012–2015).
In 1993, he received the NSF Young Investigator Award for his work on new
ultrasound phased arrays for imaging and therapy.

