IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

2735

Air-float Palpation Probe for Tissue Abnormality
Identification During Minimally Invasive Surgery
Indika B. Wanninayake∗ , Prokar Dasgupta, Lakmal D. Seneviratne, Member, IEEE,
and Kaspar Althoefer, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a novel palpation probe based on
optical fiber technology. It is designed to measure stiffness distribution of a soft tissue while sliding over the tissue surface in a near
frictionless manner. A novelty of the probe is its ability to measure
indentation depth for nonplanar tissue profiles which are commonly experienced during surgery. Since tumors are often harder
than the surrounding tissue, the proposed probe can intraoperatively aid the surgeon to rapidly identify the presence, location,
and size of the tumors through the generation of a tissue stiffness
map. The probe can concurrently measure tissue reaction force,
indentation depth, and the orientation of the probe with respect
to the tissue surface. Hence, it can generate an elasticity model
of the tissue with minimum measurement inaccuracies caused by
surface profile variations. Further, the probe has a tunable force
range and the indentation force can be adjusted externally to match
tissue limitations. The performance of the probe developed was
validated using simulated soft tissues samples. Our tumor identification experiments showed that the probe can accurately identify
the location and size of tumors hidden inside nonflat tissue surfaces. Further, the probe has clearly demonstrated its potential to
identify tumors with tumor–tissue stiffness ratios as low as 2.1.
Index Terms—Cancer detection, medical robotics, optical sensors, tumors.

I. INTRODUCTION
N important goal in developing novel techniques for minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is to provide outcomes that
are equivalent to conventional surgery while completing the surgical procedure in a manner that is less disruptive and traumatic
for the patient body, minimizing postoperative pain, discomfort,
and risk of infections while helping to speed up the recovery

A

Manuscript received November 9, 2012; revised April 5, 2013; accepted May
6, 2013. Date of publication May 20, 2013; date of current version September
14, 2013. This research received financial support from the Guy’s-St Thomas
Trust (GSTT) London and the European Commission’s Seventh Framework
Programme under Grant agreement 287728 in the framework of EU project
STIFF-FLOP. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ I. B. Wanninayake is with King’s College London, Department of Informatics, The Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K., and also with Kingston University
London, School of Aerospace and Aircraft Engineering, London SW15 3DW,
U.K. (e-mail: w.wanninayake@kingston.ac.uk).
P. Dasgupta is with King’s College London, Department of Urology, Guys
Hospital, London SE1 9RT, U.K. (e-mail: prokarurol@gmail.com).
L. D. Seneviratne is with King’s College London, Department of Informatics, The Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K., and also with Khalifa University of
Science, College of Engineering, Technology and Research, Abu Dhabi, UAE
(e-mail: lakmal.seneviratne@kcl.ac.uk, lakmal.seneviratne@kustar.ac.ae).
K. Althoefer is with King’s College London, Department of Informatics, The
Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K. (e-mail: k.althoefer@kcl.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2264287

process. On the cutting edge of surgical technology are roboticassisted surgical systems. Recent advances in robotic-assisted
surgical systems such as the da Vinci (Intuitive Surgical [1])
have enabled surgeons to perform most complex and delicate
surgical procedures, such as Mitral valve repair [2] and pulmonary resection [3] procedures that were not possible in the
past with laparoscopy. Distinct features offered by these advanced surgical systems include enhanced 3-D high definition
vision, end wrist instruments with up to 7 degree of freedom
(DoF), motion scaling, trauma reduction as well as natural hand
eye alignment at the surgical console. However, the lack of tactile and force feedback still remains and is considered a major
drawback of robotic-assisted surgical systems currently in clinical use. With current systems the surgeon has to rely solely
on the visual information to assess tool tissue interaction forces
during a surgical procedure. This limited force perception could
lead to the application of inadvertent forces and may result in
an increase in tissue trauma and accidental tissue damage [4].
Hence, the lack of force and tactile feedback during an operation generally limits the application of robotic-assisted surgical
systems in many complex surgical procedures.
In addition to this, the force and tactile feedback, which is
readily available during open surgery, provides surgeons with
valuable information regarding the surgical field and the mechanical properties of the investigated soft tissue. As most of
the tumors tend to be harder than the surrounding tissue, tactile
information obtained through palpation can be used to indicate
the presence, location, and size of tumors, thereby enhancing
the chance of performing successful surgery with low error margins. However, in MIS surgery with limited access to the surgical
field, surgeons have to rely on other techniques for differentiating subsurface tumors from healthy tissues.
One such approach is the use of imaging techniques to visualize the surgical field and characterize tissue properties. Imaging
techniques such as MRI and computer tomography could be
used prior to surgery to develop a roadmap showing the location
of tumors in relation to the surrounding environment including
nerves and arteries. Certain specialized MRI techniques such as
magnetic resonance spectroscopy can detect even the functional
properties of cancers including their chemical structures [5].
However, to use such preoperative images during MIS surgery,
real time mapping of the intraoperative position of surgical instrument into preoperative imaging is essential. Although preregistration and mapping works well in rigid areas such as bones
and skull, the procedure is more challenging when soft tissue is
involved. This is mainly due to the deformability of soft tissues
and tissue shift that may occur during a surgical procedure [6].

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

2736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

On the other hand, to use MR imaging techniques intraoperatively, surgical robotic systems and the orthopedic hardware
used in MRI scanners need to be MR compliant. However, currently available robotic-assisted surgical systems such as the da
Vinci are not MR compliant and cannot be used intraoperatively.
Intraoperative ultrasound (IOUS) is a technique that can be used
to visualize the surgical field during an operation. Although this
is one of the most cost effective techniques, images obtained
through IOUS are relatively poor in quality [7] and may not be
effective in identifying surface lesions that are less than 1 cm in
diameter [8]. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is another
technique that can be used to visualize subsurface abnormalities with very high resolution. However, OCT is limited in the
detection of tumors as the penetration depth of OCT is limited
to 1–2 mm [9].
Another approach to differentiate subsurface tumors from
healthy tissues is the use of palpation technique within the laparoscopic surgery. However, direct palpation with long thin
laparoscopic instruments with limited maneuverability is not a
very effective way to locate tumors. Such methods can be time
consuming and especially with the limited perception of transmitted force signals, they could cause damage to the delicate
tissues of the internal organs [10]. Using remote palpation techniques with probes equipped with tactile sensors [11]–[14] could
be a better choice in such situations. These probes, when in contact with tissue, measure the distribution of pressure across the
tissue to characterize its properties and localize tumors. Further,
the information gathered at the surgical site could be relayed to
the surgical console to recreate tactile stimuli at the surgeon’s
fingertips. A number of attempts to develop tactile sensor for
MIS has been reported in the literature [15]–[20]. Although,
aforementioned tactile sensors have successfully proven their
ability to acquire tactile information they are mostly suitable
for localized tissue palpation. Acquiring tactile data over a large
tissue area could be time consuming, as palpation is usually
conducted in a discrete manner. Sliding such probes over tissue
surfaces to generate continuous maps of stiffness variation could
result in excessive tangential forces that may damage sensitive
tissue or the tactile sensor itself. Hence, acquiring tactile information over a large area should either be done through a tactile
array [21]–[23] or using a probe that can rapidly move over the
tissue surface. The tactile sensor presented in [24] uses a rolling
indentation technique with a force sensitive wheeled probe to
obtain stiffness distribution of a larger tissue in a relatively
short period of time. Following a similar approach, Althoefer
et al. [25] developed a palpation probe based on the displacement of a sphere floating on a thin film of air to acquire tactile
information. However, in both these methods, it is essential to
maintain a constant indentation depth throughout the palpation
activity. Although this could be achieved through the preregistration of the tissue surface, it could be time consuming and
may introduce errors due to tissue shifts during palpation.
The aim of this paper is to present a novel MRI compatible
palpation probe for MIS applications. Initial research leading to
the design of this probe was presented in [26]. Work described
in this paper extends the capability of the probe further by incorporating actual stiffness computations to aid tissue characteri-

zation. In addition to this, a number of tests have been carried
out to evaluate the actual potential of the probe to detect tumors
of different characteristics. Here, the effect of tumor size and
depth, tumor–tissue stiffness ratio and air pressure control and
regulation on tumor identification were evaluated. Further, the
ability of the probe to detect tumors hidden under nonflat tissue
surfaces has been verified.
II. DEVELOPMENT OF AIR-FLOAT STIFFNESS PROBE
A. Literature Survey for Indentation Depth Sensing
The evaluation of elastic modulus of a tissue involves the
measurement of the absolute indentation depth and relating it
to the component of the tissue reaction force that is normal to
the tissue surface. Here, the absolute indentation depth is the
normal distance from the tip of the indenter to the tissue surface. One method to estimate the indentation depth is by using
a depth-sensing camera that assesses the local deformability of
the tissue. According to Johnson [27], due to the high local deformability of soft tissues, indentation contours rise to the tissue
surface following an exponential curve. In [28], Fong estimate
the elasticity parameters of soft tissue using force field information obtained through a structured-light camera and a force
sensor. Following a similar approach, Frank et al. [29] developed a system to estimate elasticity parameters of deformable
objects using information acquired through a depth camera and a
force sensor and comparing it with a finite element model. Lang
et al. [30] used an active measuring facility with various sensors
including, a CCD color video camera and a force-torque sensor to acquire elastic properties of deformable objects. However,
the main disadvantage of the above-mentioned techniques is that
the manipulator used to deform the tissue may occlude the parts
of the deformed objects limiting the accuracy of the generated
elasticity model. In addition to the above techniques, a number
of other methods such as laser range scanning (LRS), stereo vision, and optoacoustic imaging are currently available in MIS to
assess tissue deformation and to track the orientation of surgical
tools with respect to anatomical structures. LRS is a noncontact
surface registration method that provides high-resolution 3-D
images. It has the ability to acquire surface registration data
without moving the sensor physically. However, the speed of
LRS is usually not suitable for real-time images and it performs
better if used together with additional sources for enhanced registration accuracy [31]. Stereovision is a technique that can be
used in real time for organ tracking and monitoring temporal
motion of deformable tissue surfaces [32]. However, the technique is not very effective when internal organs have curved
surfaces or are covered with fluids. A thorough review of such
techniques is available in [33]. In [34], Liu et al. use a different
approach to identify tissue deformations and tissue surface profile variations. They use four optical-fiber displacement-sensing
elements, each with a cylindrical rod that slides over the tissue
surface to track the tissue deformation. Although this method
can estimate indentation depth in real time, the system produces
accurate results only when the tool is held vertical. In any other
orientation, tool tissue contact cannot be guaranteed as gravity is used to extend the sliding rods outward. In view of the

WANNINAYAKE et al.: AIR-FLOAT PALPATION PROBE FOR TISSUE ABNORMALITY IDENTIFICATION

2737

Fig. 2. (a). Isometric view of the probe indicating the indenter and the three
surface profile sensors. (b). Top view of the stiffness probe indicating probe
dimensions.

Fig. 1. (a). Longitudinal section of the air-float palpation probe indicating the
location of fiber optic displacement sensors, SPSs, andS 1 , (b). Forces acting
on the surface profile sensors when in contact with tissue and also when sensor
tip is open allowing air to flow through (c). Detailed section of the end section
of the probe indicating circular air channels.

limitations associated with the above-mentioned techniques, a
new approach to track tissue deformation and tissue surface
profile variations are proposed in this paper.
B. Design of the Air-Float Stiffness Probe
The proposed air-float palpation probe consists of three surface profile sensors (SPS1 , SPS2 , and SPS3 ) and a spherical
indenter (S1 ) . These are designed and arranged within the probe
in such a way that when the probe slides over the tissue surface,
the indenter (S1 ) indents the tissue and rolls over it while the
three surface profile sensors SPSs slide over the tissue surface in
a near frictionless manner. As the three SPSs slide, they follow
the shape of the tissue surface and they generate a geometric
representation of the scanned tissue in real time. This is used
as a datum line for the measurements made by S1 to obtain
absolute indentation depth. Further, the information obtained
through the SPSs is used to evaluate the orientation of the probe
with respect to the tissue surface, which can then be used to
calculate the component of the indentation force normal to the
tissue surface. Indentation force Fn is a function of the supply
air pressure.
As illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2, indenter S1 is held at the end
of a cylindrical tunnel by a steady stream of air. It is free to
rotate and the airflow through the tunnel ensures a friction free
movement of S1 within the tunnel. An optical fiber pair that
includes a transmitting fiber and a receiving fiber is used to
measure the axial displacement of S1 . The three surface profile
sensors SPS1 , SPS2 , and SPS3 are arranged within the shield
in a circle surrounding the indenter at 120◦ to each other. Each
profile sensor consists of a hollow cylindrical rod and an optical
fiber displacement sensor. The three SPSs are designed and
mounted inside the shield in such a way that they are free to

move along the axial direction of the probe and can deliver and
discharge air out at the tip.
Airflow through the rods creates an air cushion at the tips and
ensures that the rods extend out just touching the tissue surface,
however, without indenting into it. As illustrated in Fig. 1(b),
when the SPS tips are open, the differential pressure on the upper
wall of each SPS moves them outward until the tip of the senor
is in contact with the tissue. Once the contact is established the
air channel is closed and air pressure on both sides of the upper
wall equalizes. This behavior of the SPS ensures continuous
tracking of the tissue surface profile.
The prototype was built using a 3-D rapid prototyping machine (ProJet HD 3000 Plus), which has a minimum layer resolution of 16 μm. Each displacement-sensing element consists of
a pair of optical fibers one for transmitting and one for receiving
light. Digital fiber optic amplifier (FS-N10MN, Keyence Corporation) combined with a 1-kHz low pass filter are used as the
optical detection circuit.
To calibrate the indenter S1 and the three SPSs, the prototype probe was attached vertically to the distal tip of a 6-DoF
robotic manipulator (Mitsubishi RV-6 SL) to allow accurate
motion control. The inlet of the probe was connected to a pressure regulated air supply and the probe was navigated on to a
flat rigid work surface. The robot arm was lowered until only
the tips of the surface profile sensors were touching the work
surface. The probe was pressurized to ensure the extension of
all four sensing element during the calibration procedure. The
maximum extension of each sensing element was 4 mm. The
robotic manipulator was programmed to advance toward and
retrieve from the work surface at a rate of 1 mm/s. During the
experiment, as the indenter S1 and the three SPSs gradually
pushed in and out of their channels, the voltage outputs of all
optical amplifiers were continuously recorded. A 16-bit data
acquisition (DAQ) module (NI-USB 6211) and software package Labview 8.0 were used to acquire the measured signals.
The sampling rate was 100 Hz. The experiment was repeated
for times to evaluate the repeatability of the results. Calibration
results are shown in Fig. 3.
C. Estimating Indentation Depth and Probe Orientation
As illustrated in Fig. 4, the indentation depth measuring system is defined in the Cartesian coordinate system with the origin

2738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Fig. 3. Calibration results for (a) the three surface profile sensors
(SPS 1 , SPS 2 , SPS 3 ) and (b) the indenter (S 1 ), showing measured voltage
and corresponding changes in displacement of the sensing elements.

Referring to Fig. 4(a), the coordinates of the three
SP S tips
√
a 3
D1 , D2 , and D3 can be written as (0, a, h1 ), (− 2 , − a2 , h2 ),
√
and ( a 2 3 , − a2 , h3 ), respectively. Here, h1 , h2 , and h3 are the
extensions of each SPSs (SPS1 , SPS2 , and SPS3 ) from the
face of the probe. OA is the normal distance from the center
of the probe face to the tissue plane while O B is the normal
drawn from the center of the sphere to the tissue plane. BC is
the effective maximum indentation depth. Height h4 − r is the
displacement of the center of the sphere from the origin in the
negative direction of the z-axis.
Considering the plane D1 D2 D3 , the unit vector np normal to
the tissue plane can be written as
np =

D1 D3 × D1 D2
|D1 D3 × D1 D2 |

(1)

where



 i

j
k


 √

 a 3

3a


−
(h
−
h
)
3
1 .
D1 D3 × D1 D2 =  2
2


√
 a 3 3a

−
−
(h2 − h1 ) 

2
2
Here, i, j, and k are the unit vectors along the x, y, andz
axes, respectively.
Considering the scalar product of the two vectors OD1 and
np , the normal distance dn from the origin to the tissue plane
can be written as
a (h1 + h2 + h3 )
dn = 
.
2
2((h2 − h1 ) + (h3 − h1 )2 + (h3 − h2 )2 ) + 9a2 )
(2)
Similarly, the inclined angle θz of the tissue upper surface can
be determined as
cosθz = np · k
=

3a

.

2((h2 − h1 )2 + (h3 − h1 )2 + (h3 − h2 )2 ) + 9a2 )
(3)

Fig. 4. Measuring the indentation depth and the orientation of the probe with
respect to the tissue surface, (a). Structural geometry of the probe, (b). Cross
section showing indentation,
coordinates of the three√surface profile sensor tips
√
are D 1 (0, a, h 1 ), D 1 (− a 2 3 , − a2 , h 2 ), and D 3 ( a 2 3 , − a2 , h 3 ).

Hence, dsp the height of the tissue surface profile and din the
effective indentation depth of S1 , can be estimated as
dsp =

“O” at the center of the probe face. The x − y plane is chosen
to coincide with the end face of the probe while the z-axis is
coinciding with the central axis of the probe. The three SPSs are
placed at 120◦ to each other on a circle.
The radius of the indenter S1 is r. As the S1 indents the tissue sample, three SPSs follow the tissue profile around S1 to
generate the plane D1 D2 D3 , approximating the tissue profile
underneath the probe. Then, the normal distance from the deepest indentation point of S1 (C) to the plane D1 D2 D3 , can be
used to establish an equation for absolute indentation depth.
Furthermore, the angle θz between the z-axis and the vector
normal to the tissue plane (D1 D2 D3 ) gives the orientation of
the probe with respect to the tissue surface.

dn
and
cos θz

din = r − dn − (r − h4 ) cos θz .

(4)
(5)

Considering a clearance of a minimum of 1 mm between the
probe and the tissue surface, the maximum indentation depth
achievable with this probe is 3 mm. This is when the probe is
held perpendicular to the tissue surface. Tissue scanning can
be carried out at any θz value, from 0 to a maximum of 18.4◦ .
However, as θz increases, the indentation of the probe decreases
reducing the sensitivity of the probe to detect tumors at deeper
levels. When θz = 18.4◦ the maximum achievable indentation
depth is 1.2 mm. Further, the indentation depth measuring system discussed above approximates the tissue profile under the
probe to a planer surface. This approximation is valid only when

WANNINAYAKE et al.: AIR-FLOAT PALPATION PROBE FOR TISSUE ABNORMALITY IDENTIFICATION

Fig. 5. Inlet air pressure—indenter displacement characteristics for the indenter s1 , pressure variation during advance and retrieval are marked as P-ADV
and P-RET, respectively.

2739

Fig. 6. Relationship between indentation force and inlet air pressure. The blue
dots represent the experimental data, while the red solid line represents the fitted
curve.

the curvature of the tissue is much higher than the radius of the
indenter. Hence, the air-float probe would be more suitable for
locating tumors in large solid organs such as the liver and the
kidney. Further, the organ under investigation should have a
smooth upper surface and be free from any edges or lumps.
Uneven surfaces could displace the SPSs and move the plane
D1 D2 D3 away from the actual tissue surface inducing errors to
the measurements.
D. Estimating Tissue Reaction Force From Inlet Air Pressure
Tissue reaction force Fr is the component of the indentation
force normal to the tissue plane. The two main factors deciding
the magnitude of Fr are supply air pressure Ps and the orientation of the probe with respect to the tissue plane. However, for
any given orientation the axial component of Fr , Fn depends
mainly on the supply air pressure. Here, it is assumed that any
tangential forces due to the movement of the probe are negligible
as the indenter is rolling and it is virtually frictionless. Hence, if
the probe is calibrated for a Fn − Ps relationship, then this relationship could be used to predict Fr at any given air pressure. In
order to evaluate the Fn − Ps relationship experimentally, a procedure similar to the calibration procedure listed in Section III
was carried out. For this experiment, the probe was pressed
against a force sensor (ATI Mini 40) rigidly mounted to a workbench. During calibration, the robot arm was slowly advanced
toward and retrieved from the Mini 40 and as the probe moves,
force information from the ATI Mini 40 and air pressure oscillations from the pressure sensor integrated with the pressure
regulator were collected and recorded, respectively. A 16-bit
DAQ card NI PCI 6013 and a 16-bit DAQ module USB 6211
were used to collect force and pressure information, respectively. From the experimental data, the variations of pressure Ps
and force Fn were plotted against the probe displacement (see
Figs. 5 and 7). The combined Fn − Ps relationship is shown in
Fig. 6. It is clear from Fig. 6 that there is a linear relationship
between the supply air pressure and the indentation force—a
relationship that can be modeled as follows:
Fn = 7.59 Ps − 2.34.

(6)

Although there is some hysteresis between the advancing and
retrieving cycles in both Ps and Fn curves, the linear relationship

Fig. 7. Relationship between indentation force and the indenter displacement.
The blue and red dots represent the experimental data, while the blue and red
solid lines represent the simulated curves. The RMSE during advancing (ADV)
is 0.0404, RMSE during retrieval (RET) is 0.0436

predicts the indentation force accurately for both these cycles
with an RMSE less than 0.0404.
E. Principle of Estimating Tissue Stiffness From Indentation
Depth and Tissue Reaction Force
A mathematical description for the elastic modulus of the tissue can be formulated by analyzing the relationship between the
indentation depth and the tissue reaction force. The nature of this
relationship depends mainly on the viscoelastic properties of the
tissue and the shape of the indenter. Most commonly used indenters include flat punches [35], [36], conical indenters [37], and
spherical indenters [38]–[42]. Of the different types of indenters listed above, spherical indenters produce the least amount
of stress and cause least damage to the material under investigation. For spherical indenters, the force-indentation depth
relationship is nonlinear as the contact area changes with the
indenter displacement. However, at lower indentation depths,
this relationship can be successfully approximated by a linear
elastic model such as Hertzian contact (see (7)) for spherical
indenters [43]


6Fr 1 − v 2
√
(7)
E=
8din rdin
where E and v are the Young’s modulus and the Poisson ratio
of the tissue sample, respectively. For incompressible materials
such as soft tissues, v could be approximated to 0.5 [44]. Suitability of such a model to estimate the elastic modulus of soft tissue and tissue mimicking phantoms at lower indentation depths

2740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Fig. 8. Relationship between the tissue reaction force and the indentation
depth; solid line represent experimental data while the dashed lines are the
estimations using (7) Source: [45].

Fig. 9. (a). Relation of tissue reaction force and the indentation depth for four
test locations in 28 kPa simulated tissue sample (b). Estimated elastic module
for each of the four test points using (7), (8) and (9).

(8), and (9)
have been validated in previous work within the group [45]. In
this paper (see Fig. 8), a number of indentation tests have been
carried out with a spherical indenter (6-mm diameter) on various soft tissue samples including pig liver, pig kidney, and pig
heart. According to this, a linear elastic model can accurately
represent the force-indentation depth relationship of soft tissue
and tissue mimicking phantoms for indentation depths up to
3.5 mm (R2 error > 0.97 if din < 3.5 mm). Considering a minimum clearance of 1 mm between the probe face and the tissue,
the maximum indentation depth achievable with our probe is
limited to 3 mm. For tissue surfaces that are not normal to the
probe the maximum indentation depth is much less than 3 mm
and at the maximum angle of 18◦ it is estimated to be around
1.2 mm. Hence, it is assumed that a linear elastic model can
successfully represent the force-indentation depth relationship
for the presented air-float palpation probe.
However, the above contact equation is accurate only when
the tissue sample thicknessd is large compared to the radius of
the indenter (d/r10) [40]. Most of the validation experiments
presented in this paper have been carried out using simulated
tissue samples with lower thickness-radius ratios (d/r < 10).
Hence, the model suggested by Dimitriadis et al. [40] which is
corrected for the thickness of the tissue sample was used here
to estimate tissue elasticity accurately (see (8))
E=



6Fr 1 − v 2
√
8din rdin (1 + 1.133χ + 1.283χ2 + 0.769χ3 + 0.0975χ4 )
(8)

where
√
χ=

rdin
.
d

To validate the outcome of the above linear elastic model further,
it was decided to test our experimental data against a nonlinear
elastic model for comparison. As suggested by Lin et al. [46],
the Fung model (see (9)) can be used to provide best fits of
data for both biological tissues and synthetic gels. Hence, the
experimental data for the air-float probe was tested against (7),


 5
t − 15rt4 + 75r2 t3
20Eπ
F =
9π (1 − v 2 ) 5rt2 − 50r2 t + 125r3
  3
	
t − 15rt2
× exp b
25r2 t − 125r3

(9)

where √
t = rdin and E and b are fitting parameters.
To investigate the applicability of the above contact equations
to model the air-float palpation probe, a series of indentation
tests were carried out on two silicon tissue samples made from
RTV6166 gel. The stiffness of the two silicone phantoms were
initially estimated using a series of indentation tests carried out
with a spherical indenter (8-mm diameter) attached to an ATI
mini 40 force sensor. Tests were carried out at eight different locations for each silicon sample. During each test, with the aid of
a robotic manipulator, the spherical indenter was forced into the
silicon sample up to 3 mm at a speed of 0.1 mm/s. Then, the elastic modules at each test location was estimated using (8). Thickness of the silicon samples was 20 mm (d/r = 5). Stiffness of
each of the sample measured were 26.4 ± 4 and 10.8 ± 2.8 kPa.
Then, the air-float probe was positioned onto each silicone
phantom leaving a clearance of 0.5 mm between the probe face
and the tissue surface. During the test, the supply air pressure
was increased at a constant rate (0.3 kPa/s) using the electrically controlled pressure (ECP) regulator and the variation of
both the indentation depth and the air pressure inside the probe
was monitored. The pressure increase continued until an indentation depth of 3.5 mm was reached. The experiment was
conducted at four different locations for each silicon sample. At
each location the same test was repeated three times. After each
test, the pressure variation inside the probe was used to compute
the indentation force. The Fig. 9(a) shows the variation of the
computed indentation force with the indenter displacement for
all the four test locations in the 26.4 kPa silicone sample. Each
test location has a different stiffness due to the nonuniformity
of the simulated tissue. Elastic modulus of each test location,
computed using (8) and (9) are given in Fig. 9(b). It is clear
from Fig. 9(b) that the (8) and (9) gives very similar estimates
for elastic modulus while (7) appears to be overestimating it.
Further, it is clear that the outcome of air-float probe is well
within the stiffness range measured initially with the ATI mini

WANNINAYAKE et al.: AIR-FLOAT PALPATION PROBE FOR TISSUE ABNORMALITY IDENTIFICATION

Fig. 10. Image of the 10.8 kPa silicone phantom indicating location size and
depth of nine embedded tumors.

40 force sensor. Same was true for the experiments carried out
with the 10.8 kPa sample.
III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS—FACTORS AFFECTING
TUMOR IDENTIFICATION
During an indentation test, the chance of positive identification of a tumor depends on a number of factors such as 1) size of
the tumor, 2) depth at which the tumor is buried, and 3) tumor–
tissue stiffness ratio. It further depends on the sensitivity of the
probe to characterize smaller stiffness variations. In this section,
experiments were carried out to evaluate the performance of the
probe under different conditions listed above. For this, two silicon tissue samples with embedded tumors were manufactured
from RTV6166 gel. The elastic modulus of each sample was
10.8 kPa (10.8 ± 2.8 kpa) and 26.4 kPa (26.4 ± 4 kPa) for the
second sample. These values were chosen to match the range of
elastic modulus found in the literature for various soft tissues
including liver (10–15 kPa [47]) and kidney (9–25 kPa [48]).
The simulated tumors used were up to nine times stiffer than the
phantom tissue simulating soft tissue organs. This is comparable
to standard tumor tissue–stiffness ratios found in the literature
for most biological tissues [49].
A. Effect of Tumor Size and Depth From Surface on
Tumor Identification
To investigate the effectiveness of the probe in identifying
tumors of various sizes at different depths, an experiment was
carried out with the first silicon tissue sample (10.8 kPa) which
had nine embedded spherical tumors. The dimensions of the
silicon phantom, location, size, and depth of each of the tumors
are shown in Fig. 10. The depth is measured from the surface
of the tissue to the top of the tumor. The elastic modulus of the
embedded tumors was 92 kPa. The tissue sample had a smooth
surface with an average height variation less than ±0.5 mm.
During the test, the silicone phantom was fixed rigidly to a
workbench and the robotic manipulator was used to drive the
probe across the tissue surface. The probe was navigated onto
the silicone phantom and air pressure was increased using the
ECP to achieve an indentation depth of 3 mm. The robotic
manipulator was programmed to follow multiple paths parallel
to the y-axis of the tissue to cover the entire tissue surface. The
coordinates of the starting point of the probes were (10, 10). The

2741

Fig. 11. Stiffness map generated for the 10.8 kPa silicon tissue phantom.
Locations of tumors show up as high-stiffness regions.

silicone rollover was carried out at a speed of 5 mm/s and the
experiment was repeated three times to evaluate the repeatability
of results. It is noted that according to [45], unless the probe is
held stationary, the elastic modules has no significant correlation
with the speed of the indenter.
After each test, data gathered through the three SPSs were
used to compute the change in dn and θz along each rolling
path. Employing (5) and the recorded dn and θz signals, the
change in effective indentation depth din . Then elastic modulus
E along each rolling path was computed using (8). Estimated
elastic modulus E along each rolling path was then used to
generate the stiffness map of the investigated silicon tissue (see
Fig. 11).
Locations of identified tumors show up as regions of high
stiffness in the generated map. To use a stiffness map to differentiate tumors with relatively less prominence, an image threshold
for the healthy tissue needs to be defined. The regions where
this threshold is exceeded can be considered as possible tumor
locations. The image threshold can be based on existing data or
it can be estimated by conducting indentation tests in tumor free
areas. However, stiffness for a healthy tissue can vary slightly
over its tissue area. Hence, a mean stiffness with upper and
lower bounds within a 95% confidence interval is used here to
set the image thresholds.
From the results shown in Fig. 11, it was clear that the probe
has the potential to identify tumors as small as 3 mm in diameter
when they are embedded close to the tissue surface (depth =
2 mm). However, the effectiveness of the probe to detect tumors
decreases as the tumor depth increases. The probe failed to detect
tumors B3, C3, and C2 while tumor A3 (10-mm diameter) is
barely visible on the map. Hence, we conclude that the capability
of the probe is limited up to 10-mm depth for large tumors
(diameter ≥ 10 mm) and the depth sensitivity further decreases
with decreasing tumor size.
However, a positive identification of a tumor as small as 3 mm
in diameter is guaranteed when the tumor depth is around 2 mm
or less. Further, to evaluate the repeatability, the location and
the area identified as tumors were compared with the ground
truth data. There is a phase shift between curves generated in
the three tests. It is assumed that this is due to the phantom tissue
being slightly shifted during the experimental procedure. The
peaks of the identified tumors were well within ±2 mm from
the center of the actual tumor location. This verifies the probes

2742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Fig. 12. Image of the 26.4 kPa silicone phantom indicating location size and
depth of the four embedded tumors.

Fig. 14. Comparison between (a) the relative stiffness map and (b) the stiffness map produced by the air-float probe with three surface profile sensors, in
(a), average height variations from the mean curvature was ±0.7 mm.

Fig. 13. Stiffness map generated for 26.4 kPa simulated silicone tissue sample
for the four different pressure settings (a). 33.7 kPa, (b). 35 kPa, (c). 36.5 kPa
and (d). 39.3 kPa. Locations of identified tumors shown up as high-stiffness
regions.

Using a pressure setting higher or lower than the required value
could reduce the sensitivity of the indenter and reduce the SNR.
Hence, it is essential to tune the indentation force to match tissue
sensitivity requirements and tissue limitations.
C. Effect of Tissue Curvature on Tumor Identification

ability to generate consistent results in tumor identification and
localization.
B. Tumor–Tissue Stiffness Ratio and Effect of Air Pressure
on Tumor Identification
To investigate the effect of the tumor–tissue stiffness ratio on
the tumor identification, a second silicone phantom with four
embedded spherical tumors was used (see Fig. 12). For the probe
movement, eight paths parallel to each other along the y-axis
were defined. The probe was navigated to a position with coordinates (10, 10) and the experiment proceeded as described
in the previous section. In addition to this, to assess the effect
of air pressure regulation on tumor detection, the same procedure was repeated with three other ECP readings around the
pressure setting used previously. Each test was repeated three
times to evaluate the robustness of the results. Fig. 13 shows the
generated stiffness map for each of the pressure settings.
The results show that the probe has the ability to identify
small tumors (ø 5 mm) with a tumor–tissue stiffness ratio as low
as 2.1. It is also clear from the stiffness map that the higher the
stiffness ratio, the easier it is to identify and locate tumors in the
stiffness map. However, from the test carried out with different
pressure settings, it is clear that the supply air pressure has a
direct impact on the effectiveness of the probe to detect tumors.

A third experiment was carried out to investigate the effect
of tissue curvature on tumor identification. For this, the silicon
phantom used for the previous experiment was positioned on
top of an ABS plastic block, with a square base (60 mm ×
60 mm) and a convex upper surface profile; the profile height
varied along the y-axis of the tissue. Thickness of the block is
4 mm at the center and it reduces to 2 mm toward the edges. The
section of the surface in the y-direction approximate to an arc
of a circle. The base was made using a 3-D rapid prototyping
machine (Dimension 768) which has a minimum layer resolution of 0.245 mm. Similar to previous experimental procedures,
the robotic manipulator was programmed to scan the tissue in
a series of parallel paths. The probe was held vertically and the
scanning was done horizontally parallel to the y-axis, i.e., the
robot paths were deliberately chosen to not follow the curved
surface of this phantom allowing us to explore the ability of our
sensor to cope with irregular surfaces.
To highlight the advantage of employing the three surface
profile sensors, two maps were created from the output of this
experiment. Results are shown in Fig. 14. In Fig. 14(a), the
displacement of the indenter is fused with the rolling paths to
generate a map, without compensating for the geometry of the
scanned surface. In Fig. 14(b), the actual stiffness variation of
the tissue is displayed; i.e., the stiffness calculated using (8) with

WANNINAYAKE et al.: AIR-FLOAT PALPATION PROBE FOR TISSUE ABNORMALITY IDENTIFICATION

the indentation depth corrected for tissue profile variations. It
is clear that without using the output from the three SP S s,
the indenter’s reaction to the surface profile variations appear as
stiffness changes on the color map. Hence, the tumors are less
clearly marked in the stiffness map. However, when the output
of S1 is combined with the output of the SPSs, the tumors are
easily identified.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a novel probe capable of accurately profiling changes in tissue stiffness for use in minimally invasive
surgery. The probe is designed to slide over tissue surfaces in
a near frictionless manner and it can generate an image that
qualitatively relates to the stiffness distribution of the tissue. A
novelty of the probe is in its ability to measure indentation depth
for nonplanar tissue surface profiles. Results from the tests carried out on simulated tissues showed that the probe is capable
of identifying the presence and location of tumors hidden under
tissue surfaces with a high degree of accuracy and repeatability.
Hence, the probe discussed here has the potential to aid surgeons
in surgical procedures that involve identification of malignant
areas.
While the probe described here shows significant advances in
the design and use of palpation probes, some of its limitations
needs to be discussed. First, in order for the indentation depth
measuring system to be valid, the curvature of the tissue needs
to be relatively large compared to the diameter of the indenter.
Hence, the probe is more suitable for locating tumors in large
solid organs such as the liver and the kidneys. Second, the experimental results here are validated based on the assumption that
the tissue material has linear elastic properties. Estimated tissue
stiffness may be erroneous if these assumptions do not hold.
In order to preserve the linearity of the tissue, an indentation
depth of 3 mm or less was maintained. In addition, it has been
shown that the control and regulation of air pressure within the
probe is important. With an optimum pressure setting, the probe
can detect tumors with tumor–tissue stiffness ratios as low as
2.1. However, as the pressure increases, the sensitivity of the
indenter decreases leaving tumors with smaller size or lower
tumor–tissue stiffness ratios undetected. Similarly, using a pressure setting below the optimum value may reduce the effective
indentation depth and hence leave the tumors buried deep under
the tissue surface undetected. Further, ambient pressure fluctuations could potentially interfere with the sensor measurements
since the sensor is pneumatically controlled. It is likely that this
effect would be more pronounced in minimally invasive surgery
where insufflation is often required.
To further improve the air-float palpation probe, work needs to
be directed to meet MIS requirements including miniaturization.
However, this would be challenging as the decrease in the size
of the indenter could reduce the effective indentation depth,
lowering the SNR. In addition to this, research into the selection
of materials to ensure the MR compatibility and sterilizability
of the probe needs to be included in future work. It is also noted
that, due to the dynamic nature of the pneumatically operated
system, the movements of one displacement-sensing element

2743

could affect the sensitivity of the other displacement sensing
elements. These interactions should be evaluated and work is
currently conducted modeling such interactions.
REFERENCES
[1] G. S. Guthart and J. K. Salisbury, “The intuitive tm telesurgery system:
Overview and application,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2000,
pp. 618–621.
[2] J. K. Kam, S. D. Cooray, J. K. Kam, J. A. Smith, and A. A. Almeida, “A
cost-analysis study of robotic versus conventional mitral valve repair,”
Heart Lung Circ., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 413–8, Mar. 2010.
[3] M. R. Dylewski, A. C. Ohaeto, and J. F. Pereira, “Pulmonary resection
using a total endoscopic robotic video-assisted approach,” Semin. Thorac.
Cardiovasc. Surg., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 36–42, 2011.
[4] B. Deml, T. Ortmaier, and U. Seibold, “The touch, and feel in minimally
invasive surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Haptic Audio Visual Environ. Appl., Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2005, pp. 33–38.
[5] A. Karatopis, S. Anastasopoulos, S Drakopoulos, M. Douskou,
G. S. Panagiotakis, and I. Kandarakis, “Assessment and optimization of
tea-press sequences in 1 H MRS and MRSI of the breast,” in IEEE Int.
Workshop Imaging Syst. Tech., 2008, pp. 297–301.
[6] T. Carter, M. Sermesant, D. M. Cash, D. C. Barratt, C. Tanner, and
D. J. Hawkes, “Application of soft tissue modelling to image-guided
surgery,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 27, pp. 893–909, 2005.
[7] R. A. Lathrop and D. M. Hackworth, “Minimally invasive holographic
surface scanning for soft-tissue image registration,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1497–1506, Jun. 2010.
[8] A. K. James, S. M. Charles, R. F. Isaac, M. R. Jonathan, B. Judith, and
E. C. Alfred, “Comparisons of dynamic infusion and delayed computed
tomography, intraoperative ultrasound, and palpation in the diagnosis of
liver metastases,” Am. J. Surg., vol. 165, no. 1, pp. 81–88, Jan. 1993.
[9] A. M. Zysk, F. T. Nguyen, A. L. Oldenburg, D. L. Marks, and
S. A. Boppart, “Optical coherence tomography: A review of clinical development from bench to bedside,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 0514031–051403-21, 2007.
[10] A. P. Miller, W. J. Peine, J. S. Son, Z. T. Hammoud et al., “Tactile imaging
system for localizing lung nodules during video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Rome, Italy, 2007,
pp. 2996–3001.
[11] M. V. Ottermo, O. Stavdahl, and T. A. Johansen, “Palpation instrument for
augmented minimally invasive surgery,” Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., vol. 4, pp. 3960–3964, Sep. 2004.
[12] R. D. Howe, W. J. Peine, D. A. Kantarinis, and J. S. Son, “Remote palpation technology,” IEEE Mag. Med. Biol., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 318–323, May
1995.
[13] P. Puangmali, H. Liu, K. Althoefer, and L. D. Seneviratne, “Optical fiber
sensor for soft tissue investigation during minimally invasive surgery,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2008, pp. 2934–2939.
[14] P. Puangmali, P Dasgupta, L. D. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Miniaturized triaxial optical fiber force sensor for MRI-Guided minimally invasive
surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2010, pp. 2592–
2597.
[15] M. P. Ottensmeyer and J. K. Salisbury, “In vivo data acquisition instrument for solid organ mechanical property measurement,” in Proc. 4th
Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI
2001, vol. 2208, pp. 975–982.
[16] D. O. Uribe, R. Stroop, T. Hemsel, and J. Wallaschek, “Development of a
biomedical tissue differentiation system using piezoelectric actuators,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Freq. Control Symp., 2008, pp. 91–94.
[17] P. Puangmali, K. Althoefer and L.D. Seneviratne, “Mathematical modeling
of intensity-modulated bent-tip optical fiber displacement sensors,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 283–291, 2010.
[18] J. Dargahi, S. Najarian, V. Mirjalili, and B. Liu, “Modeling and testing of
a sensor capable of determining the stiffness of biological tissues,” Can.
J. Electr. Comput. Eng., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 45–51, 2007.
[19] B. Hannaford, J. Trujillo, M. Sinanan, M. Moreyra, J. Rosen, J. Brown,
R. Leuschke, and M. MacFarlane, “Computerized endoscopic surgical grasper,” in Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, J. D. Westwood,
H. M. Hoffman, D. Stredney, and R. A. Robb, Eds. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: IOS, 1998, pp. 265–271.
[20] P. Polygerinos, A. Ataollahi, T. Schaeffter, R. Razavi, L.D. Seneviratne
and K. Althoefer, “MRI-compatible intensity-modulated force sensor for
cardiac catheterization procedures,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 3, pp. 721–726, 2011.

2744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

[21] P. S. Wellman and R. D. Howe, “Extracting features from tactile maps,” in
Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention,
1999, vol. 1679, pp. 1133–1142.
[22] S. M. Hosseini, S. M. Towliat Kashani, S. Najarian, F. Panahi,
S. M. Mousavi Naeini, and A. Mojra, “A medical tactile sensing instrument for detecting embedded objects with specific application for breast
examination,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput.-Assisted Surg., vol. 6, pp. 73–
82, 2010.
[23] R. A. Beasley and R. D. Howe, “Tactile tracking of arteries in robotic
surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Washington, DC, USA,
2002, vol. 4, pp. 3801–3806.
[24] H. Liu, D.P. Noonan, B.J. Challacombe, P. Dasgupta, L.D. Seneviratne
and K. Althoefer, “Rolling mechanical imaging for tissue abnormality
localization during minimally invasive surgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 404–414, 2010.
[25] K. Althoefer, D. Zbyszewski, H. Liu, P. Puangmali, L. Seneviratne,
B. Challacombe, P. Dasgupta, and D. Murphy, “Air-cushion force sensitive probe for soft tissue investigation during minimally invasive surgery,”
in Proc. IEEE Sensors, 2008, pp. 827–830.
[26] I. B. Wanninayake, L. D. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Novel indentation depth measuring system for stiffness characterization in soft tissue
palpation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., pp. 4648–4653, 2012.
[27] K. L. Johnson, Contact Mechanics. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1985.
[28] P. Fong, “Sensing, acquisition, and interactive playback of data-based
models for elastic deformable objects,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 28, no. 5,
pp. 630–655, May 2009.
[29] B. Frank, R Schmedding, C. Stachniss, M. Teschner, and W. Burgard,
“Learning the elasticity parameters of deformable objects with a manipulation robot,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Oct. 2010,
pp. 1877–1883.
[30] J. Lang, D. K. Pai, and R. J. Woodham, “Acquisition of elastic models for
interactive simulation,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 713–733,
Aug. 2002.
[31] M. I. Miga, T. K. Singha, D. M. Cash, R. L. Galloway, and R. J. Weil,
“Cortical surface registration for image-guided neurosurgery using laser
range scanning,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 973–985,
2003.
[32] D. Stoyanov, A. Darzi, and G. Z. Yang, “A practical approach towards accurate dense 3D depth recovery for robotic laparoscopic surgery,” Comput.
Aided Surg., vol. 10, pp. 199–208, 2005.
[33] T. Peters, Image-Guided Interventions: Technology and Applications.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2008.
[34] H. Liu, J. Li, Q. Poon, L. D. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Miniaturized
force-indentation depth sensor for tissue abnormality identification during
laparoscopic surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2010,
pp. 3654–3659.
[35] W. C. Hayes, L. M. Keer, G. Herrmann, and L. F. Mockros, “A mathematical analysis for indentation tests of articular cartilage,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 5, pp. 541–551, Sep. 1972.

[36] L. Cheng, X. Xia, W. Yu, L. E. Scriven, and W. W. Gerberich, “Flat-punch
indentation of viscoelastic material,” J. Polym. Sci., vol. 38, pp. 10–22,
Jan. 2000.
[37] M. Sakai, “Time-dependent viscoelastic relation between load and penetration for an axisymmetric indenter,” Philos. Mag. A, vol. 82, no. 10,
pp. 1841–1849, 2002.
[38] M. Sakamoto, G. Li, T. Hara, and E. Y. S. Chao, “A new method for theoretical analysis of static indentation test,” J. Biomech., vol. 29, pp. 679–
685, May 1996.
[39] N. E. Waters, “The indentation of thin rubber sheets by cylindrical indentors,” Brit. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 1387–1392, 2002.
[40] E. K. Dimitriadis, F. Horkay, J. Maresca, B. Kachar, and R. S. Chadwick,
“Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft material using the
atomic force microscope,” Biophys. J., vol. 82, pp. 2798–2810, May 2002.
[41] M. L. Oyen, “Spherical indentation creep following ramp loading,” J.
Mater. Res., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 2094–2100, 2005.
[42] J. M. Mattice, A. G. Lau, M. L. Oyen, and R. W. Kent, “Spherical indentation load-relaxation of soft biological tissues,” J. Mater. Res., vol. 21,
no. 8, pp. 2003–2010, 2006.
[43] C. Anthony and F.- Cripps, Introduction to Contact Mechanics, 2nd ed.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2007, ch. 6, pp. 101–114.
[44] B. Qiang, J. Greenleaf, M. Oyen, and X. Zhang, “Estimating material
elasticity by spherical indentation load-relaxation tests on viscoelastic
samples of finite thickness,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1418–1429, Jul. 2011.
[45] H. Liu, J. Li, X. Song, L. D. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Rolling
indentation probe for tissue abnormality identification during minimally
invasive surgery,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 450–460, Jun.
2011.
[46] D. C. Lin, D. I. Shreiber, E. K. Dimitriadis, and F. Horkay, “Spherical
indentation of soft matter beyond the Hertzian regime: Numerical and
experimental validation of hyperelastic models,” Biomechanics Model.
Mechanobiol., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 8345–358, 2009.
[47] E. Samur, M. Sedef, C. Basdogan, L. Avtan, and O. Duzgun, “A robotic
indenter for minimally invasive measurement and characterization of soft
tissue response,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 361–373, 2007.
[48] J. L. Gennisson et al., “Multiwave technology introducing shear wave
elastography of the kidney: Pre-clinical study on a kidney fibrosis model
and clinical feasibility study on 49 human renal transplants,” in Proc.
IEEE Ultrason. Symp., Oct. 2010, pp. 1356–1359.
[49] T. A. Krouskop, T. M. Wheeler, F. Kallel, B. S. Garra, and T. Hall, “Elastic moduli of breast and prostate tissues under compression,” Ultrason.
Image, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 260–274, 1998.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

