2716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Evaluation of Ultrasound Synthetic Aperture Imaging
Using Bidirectional Pixel-Based Focusing:
Preliminary Phantom and In Vivo Breast Study
Choye Kim, Changhan Yoon, Jong-Ho Park, Yuhwa Lee, Won Hwa Kim, Jung Min Chang, Byung Ihn Choi,
Tai-Kyong Song, Member, IEEE, and Yang-Mo Yoo∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—In medical ultrasound imaging, lateral resolution is
limited when using a fixed transmit focusing. Various synthetic
aperture (SA) techniques, in which two-way dynamic focusing is
enabled by utilizing prebeamformed radio-frequency (RF) data
have been proposed for improving the spatial resolution. However,
SA methods were not extensively evaluated in terms of their clinical
performance. In this paper, a phantom and an in vivo evaluation
of the SA method with bidirectional pixel-based focusing (BiPBF)
is presented in comparison with the conventional beamforming.
The performance of the proposed SA-BiPBF was assessed with a
blind study and the established breast imaging–reporting and data
system (BI-RADS), in addition to measuring contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Prebeamformed RF
data were acquired from a tissue mimicking phantom (Model 040,
CIRS Inc., Norfolk, VA, USA) and from patients with breast lesions
by using a commercial ultrasound scanning system with a linear
array transducer equipped with a research package and parallel
data acquisition system (SonixTouch, SonixDAQ, and L14-5/38,
Ultrasonix Corp., Canada). In phantom and in vivo experiments,
a default setting of a breast preset was applied (e.g., the center
frequency of 10 MHz and acoustic output of MI = 0.66). In phantom experiment, the SA-BiPBF method showed higher CNR and
SNR values compared to the conventional method (3.4 and 23.9 dB
versus 3.1 and 15.8 dB, respectively). In addition, the lateral resolution and penetration depth were increased by 95.4% and 40.3%,
respectively. Consistent with the phantom experiment, in the in vivo
experiment with ten patients, the CNR value for the SA method
was 3.3 ± 0.5 compared to 2.8 ± 0.8 for the conventional method.
Similarly, the SNR values with the SA-BiPBF and conventional
methods were 34.0 ± 3.6 and 27.2 ± 3.4 dB, respectively. From the
experiments, it was shown in side-by-side comparisons that the image quality of the SA-BiPBF method was considerably improved in

Manuscript received January 10, 2013; revised March 26, 2013 and April
23, 2013; accepted April 29, 2013. Date of publication May 15, 2013; date
of current version September 14, 2013. This work was supported in part by
the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Education,
Science and Technology (2012K001496 and 2012K001499) and in part by the
Ministry of Science, ICT&Future Planning (MSIP), Korea, under the Convergence Information Technology Research Center (C-ITRC) support program
(NIPA-2013-H0401-13-1007) supervised by the National IT Industry Promotion Agency (NIPA). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
C. Kim, C. Yoon, J.-H. Park, Y. Lee, and T.-K. Song are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea
(e-mail: choye@sogang.ac.kr; yoonch@sogang.ac.kr; parkjongho@sogang.ac.
kr; yhlee@sogang.ac.kr; tksong@sogang.ac.kr).
W. H. Kim, J. M. Chang, and B. I. Choi are with the Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Korea (e-mail:
greenoaktree9@gmail.com; imchangjm@gmail.com; bichoi@snu.ac.kr).
∗ Y.-M. Yoo is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea, and also with the Interdisciplinary Program of
Integrated Biotechnology, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea (e-mail:
ymyoo@sogang.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2263310

both phantom and in vivo breast images. However, the SA-BiPBF
image showed different features compared to the conventional one
in the in vivo experiments. These features are resulting from the increased image quality of the SA-BiPBF method but are not always
perceived as improvements by the radiologists.
Index Terms—Bidirectional pixel-based focusing (BiPBF),
breast ultrasound imaging, clinical evaluation, synthetic aperture
(SA).

I. INTRODUCTION
YNAMIC receive focusing was a major breakthrough in
enhancing the lateral resolution of medical ultrasound
imaging [1]–[3]. However, in conventional imaging, a fixed
focus is used on transmit, in order to preserve a high frame
rate [>30 frames per second (fps)]. As a consequence, two-way
focusing is only achieved in the vicinity of the transmit focal
depth. To mitigate this problem, multizone transmit focusing
(MZTF), in which ultrasound is transmitted at two or more focal depths for each scanline, is typically used [4]. However,
this method leads to the reduction of frame rates by a factor of
the number of transmit focusing points. Retrospective dynamic
transmit focusing (RDTF) was also suggested for alleviating the
problem [5]. In RDTF, in-focus transmit is produced by deconvolving the defocused transmit pattern with a depth-dependent
inverse filter bank applied in the lateral direction [5]. However,
in practice, finding true point spread function for all imaging
depth would be challenging since the propagating medium is
typically unknown in medical ultrasound imaging.
Synthetic aperture (SA) techniques were originally investigated in radar systems in the 1950s and extensive researches
have been conducted to adopt them into medical ultrasound
imaging systems since the 1980s [6]–[9]. Based on the superposition of unfocused ultrasound waves, SA techniques could
provide a uniform lateral resolution for all imaging fields, that
is, an achievement of two-way dynamic focusing. Traditional
SA images were obtained by transmitting unfocused ultrasound
consecutively from each array element [6]. In this method, only
one-way dynamic receive focusing can be achieved since it
utilized a one active channel for transmission and reception;
thus, it suffers from insufficient signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) (i.e.,
10 log M where M is the number of subapertures used in synthesizing) and high sidelobe levels (∼−13 dB) compared to dynamic receive focusing [8], [9]. To overcome the low SNR issue,
a defocusing method, in which multiple elements are transmitting simultaneously with defocusing delays, was proposed [8].

D

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

KIM et al.: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND SYNTHETIC APERTURE IMAGING USING BIDIRECTIONAL PIXEL-BASED FOCUSING

However, a small subaperture size (i.e., number of channels less
than 12) should be utilized to emulate the transmit response of a
single element in the defocusing method, especially in the near
field [8].
Alternatively, a high SNR (i.e., 10 log Nt Nr M , where Nt
and Nr are the number of channels for transmission and reception, respectively) with full two-way dynamic focusing can be
achieved by using bidirectional pixel-based focusing (BiPBF).
In this technique, the same excitation sequence as in the conventional array imaging is used in transmission, but RF data
collected using adjacent subapertures are compounded on reception [10]–[12]. The pixel-based time delays used for compounding are calculated using the distances between pixels and
virtual sources located at the successive lateral positions of the
transmit focus [13]. Recently, efficient architecture for SA imaging was proposed and implemented in a prototype imaging system, possibly accelerating the commercialization of SA imaging
techniques [14].
Although theoretical studies and simulations of SA techniques have been carried out, an extensive evaluation with phantom and in vivo data has not been performed due to the poor
accessibility of prebeamformed RF data. Previously, the image
quality of SA based on the defocusing method was evaluated
in abdominal regions from healthy volunteers [15], [16]. The
results that were evaluated by clinicians demonstrated that SA
images provided statistically significant improvement of image
quality (p < 0.001) and penetration depth (0.48 cm, p < 0.008)
compared to the conventional B-mode images. However, it was
difficult to show the clinical benefits of SA techniques since
only healthy volunteers participated in the previous study [15],
[16].
In this study, the performance of the SA method BiPBF
(SA-BiPBF) was evaluated in a tissue mimicking phantom and
in breast in vivo using data sets acquired by a commercial ultrasound system. In the phantom experiments, the lateral resolution, contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR), SNR, and penetration depth
from the SA images were quantitatively investigated and compared with the conventional one-way dynamic focusing methods, including multizone transmit focusing. In vivo data were
acquired from breast lesions from ten patients (i.e., five benign
and malignant breast lesions each) for preliminary study. For
quantitative comparison, CNR and SNR were measured. In addition, in vivo images were reviewed by two radiologists with
regard to their clinical performance.
II. METHODS
A. Synthetic Aperture Imaging Technique With BiPBF
The SA method used in the present study was BiPBF, capable
of providing two-way dynamic focusing at all imaging depths
[10], [11]. The SA-BiPBF method used a subaperture (e.g.,
64 channels) for transmitting ultrasound waves in exactly the
same manner as in the conventional B-mode imaging. In the
conventional B-mode imaging, ultrasound waves are transmitted
in a spherical form by applying appropriate transmit focusing
delays at each element. Transmitted ultrasound waves converge
at a transmit focal point and diverge in the form of spherical

2717

Fig. 1. (a) Transmit wavefronts model with two virtual source located at each
transmit focal point and (b) principle of transmit synthetic focusing with the
virtual source. As shown in (a), transmit focal point could be regarded as a virtual
source where spherical waves are propagated back and forth. By assuming a
virtual source located at transmit focal point, the principle of SA-BiPBF method
could be applied as described in (b).

wavefronts with a limited angular directivity as distance from
the focal depth is increased. This could be regarded as a virtual
source that is located at the transmit focal point where spherical
waves are propagated back and forth from the point as shown
in Fig. 1(a). Thus, by assuming a virtual source located at the
transmit focal point, the principle of traditional SA methods
could be applied in two half planes, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Accordingly, transmit synthetic focusing delay with a virtual
source can be calculated by [10], [11]

zf ± (xf − x)2 + (zf − z)2
(1)
τT X (x, z) =
c
where (xf , zf ) is the transmit focal point (i.e., virtual source),
(x, z) is the imaging point, and c is the speed of sound. The
positive and negative signs in (1) are used for imaging area after
and before the focal depth, respectively. The receive focusing
delay of the ith element (xi , zi ) for the imaging point at (x, z)
is the same as in the conventional one-way dynamic focusing

2718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

method and is given by

(x − xi )2 + (z − zi )2
.
τi,R X (x, z) =
c

(2)

Consequently, with the computed synthetic transmit and receive
focusing delays, the beamforming of the SA-BiPBF method can
be achieved with the following sum:
M
−1 N
−1



A(x, z) =

wn · rm ,n (t − (τT X (x, z) + τn ,R X (x, z)))

m =−M n =0

(3)
where wn is the apodization function, rm ,n (t) is the RF data
received by the nth element for the mth scanline, 2M is the
number of subapertures used in synthesizing, and N is the number of channels at each subaperture. The continuous-wave (CW)
lateral beam pattern ΨS A (x, z) of the SA-BiPBF method at far
depth can be expressed by [9], [12]

 

M
−1

md
sin π Nλzd x
 d  e −j 2π λz e q x
ΨS A (x, z) ∝
(4-1)
sin π λz x
m =−M

 

md
sin π Nλzd x
 d  e −j 2π λz e q x
sin π λz x
m =−M


 Nd 
Md
sin
π
x
sin π λz x
λz e q


 d  ·
∝
sin π λz
x
sin π λzde q x
M
−1


(4-2)

where λ is the wavelength, d is the element width, zeq is the
equivalent distance, which is defined by the transmit focal depth
zf and the imaging depth z as follows:
zeq =

1
.
(1/z) + (1/ |z − zf |)

(5)

In (4-2), the first term of the final expression is the receive
beam pattern by the conventional receive dynamic focusing,
whereas the second term represents the synthetic transmit beam
pattern obtained by summing the transmit beam pattern from
each subaperture with the synthetic transmit phase delays, that
is, e(−j 2π m dx/λz e q ) .
B. Experimental Setup
Raw RF ultrasound channel data were acquired with a commercial ultrasound scanner equipped with a research package using a linear array transducer (SonixTouch, SonixDAQ, and L14–
5/38, Ultrasonix Corp., Canada). For both conventional and SA
imaging, the transmit center frequency was set to 10 MHz that
is a default setting at a breast preset and a 64-channel transmit
and receive subaperture was used. The fractional bandwidth of
the transducer was 70%, and the element height and width were
4 and 0.3048 mm, respectively. In the conventional B-mode
imaging, the transmit focal depth was 20 mm for phantom experiments and was adjusted according to the location of breast
lesions (i.e., 10 and 15 mm) for in vivo experiments. However, in
SA imaging, the transmit focal depth was set at the end of or outside the imaging plane (i.e., 50 mm for phantom experiments and

Fig. 2. Transmit focal point for acquiring RF data in (a) the conventional
and (b) the SA-BiPBF imaging. Dotted box represents the imaging plane. In
SA-BiPBF imaging, the transmit focal depth set at the end of or outside the imaging plane in order to maximize the number of subapertures to be synthesized.

40 mm for in vivo experiments) to maximize the number of subapertures to be synthesized, as shown in Fig. 2(b). For phantom
experiments, a multipurpose multitissue ultrasound phantom
(Model 040, CIRS Inc., Norfolk, VA, USA) containing 100-μm
diameter nylon monofilament wires, anechoic stepped cylinders
and gray-scale targets. The attenuation and speed of sound in the
phantom were 0.5 dB/cm·MHz and 1540 ± 10 m/s, respectively.
The same transmit acoustic output (MI = 0.66), which is within
the FDA ultrasound regulations, was used for all experiments
and half-circle function was utilized as an apodization for both
the conventional and SA-BiPBF methods.
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
(IRB) and a written consent was obtained from all patients. Ten
breast lesions from ten patients were scanned in supine position
by a radiologist. To evaluate the performance of the SA-BiPBF
method in various clinical conditions, the patients who had been
diagnosed with benign or malignant tumors were scanned. All
of the in vivo cases were confirmed by the results of biopsies
or surgical excisions. Two sets of RF data from each patient

KIM et al.: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND SYNTHETIC APERTURE IMAGING USING BIDIRECTIONAL PIXEL-BASED FOCUSING

2719

Fig. 3. B-mode phantom images of (a) the conventional, (b) MZTF method, and (c) SA-BiPBF method with 2M = 64. The transmit focal depths were set
20 mm for (a), 10 and 30 mm for (b), and 50 mm for (c). The conventional and MZTF images provide fine resolution at transmit focal depth, while SA-BiPBF
image presents fine resolution along all depths.

were acquired sequentially for conventional and SA imaging,
respectively.

study, the penetration depth was determined by
Penetration depth = arg min(|(Pecho (z) − σecho )
d

C. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of the SA-BiPBF method, acquired prebeamformed RF data were processed off-line using
MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA). For the quantitative evaluation, the −6-dB lateral resolution obtained from the
line targets of a tissue mimicking phantom was measured from
the conventional B-mode and SA images. The improvement of
contrast resolution was quantified using the CNR given by [17],
[18]
|μm − μb |
CNR = 
2 + σ2 )
(σm
b

(6)

where μm and μb is the mean intensity of lesion and background,
respectively, and σm and σb is the standard deviation of lesion
and background, respectively. For in vivo study, the regions of
lesions and backgrounds were selected to be the same size and
located at the same depth to avoid variations from the attenuation
and diffraction of ultrasound.
In addition, the SNR was measured. The system noise of scanner was measured by acquiring prebeamformed RF data without
transmission. The acquired system noise data were processed in
the same manner for each method (i.e., conventional B-mode
and SA-BiPBF) and the SNR values for different depths were
calculated by

	
Pecho (z)
(7)
SNR (d) = 10 × log10
Pnoise (z)
where Pecho (z) and Pnoise (z) are the powers of the echo and
noise signals along the imaging depth (z), respectively. The
power at each imaging depth was computed by summing the
envelope signal laterally. The last quantitative measurement was
the penetration depth. The penetration depth was defined as the
depth at which power of the echo signal equals or falls just
below the power of the noise signal. Therefore, in the present

− (Pnoise (z) + σnoise )|)

(8)

where σecho and σnoise is the standard deviation of the echo
and noise signals, respectively. Standard deviation terms were
considered for the worst case. To obtain smooth curves, a 21-tap
low-pass FIR filter with the normalized cutoff frequency of 0.06
was used.
For the in vivo study, two radiologists reviewed the conventional B-mode and SA-BiPBF images in terms of clinical utility.
In the blind test, the images were listed side-by-side in a random
left-right order without any technical information. The radiologists were asked to compare the two images with respect to a
clinical view.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Phantom Study
Fig. 3 shows the B-mode images generated by the conventional, multizone transmit focusing (MZTF) and SA-BiPBF
methods, respectively. The transmit focal depth for the conventional method was 20 mm, whereas those for the MZTF
method were 10 and 30 mm. In this experiment, the SA-BiPBF
image was obtained with 2M = 64, where 2M is the number of
subaperture used in synthesizing, and at a transmit focal depth
of 50 mm. All the images were logarithmically compressed with
a dynamic range of 60 dB.
For quantitative comparison, the −6-dB lateral resolutions
at each wire target were measured and plotted in Fig. 4. The
conventional and MZTF methods achieved the best lateral resolutions at each transmit focal depth, but they became broadened
as imaging distance from the focal depth was increased. With the
SA-BiPBF method, a uniform lateral resolution was obtained.
However, the lateral resolution in the near field was degraded
in the SA-BiPBF method compared to the other methods, as

2720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

TABLE I
CNR AND MEAN SNR VALUES FROM PHANTOM EXPERIMENTS WITH THE
CONVENTIONAL, MZTF AND SA-BiPBF METHODS

Fig. 4. Lateral resolutions (−6 dB) from the conventional, MZTF (transmit
focused at 10 and 30 mm), and SA-BiPBF methods with 2M = 64. The conventional and MZTF methods showed best lateral resolution at focal depth but
the lateral resolution deteriorated as the imaging point gets far from focal depth.
However, with SA-BiPBF method, a uniform lateral resolution was obtained.

Fig. 6. B-mode phantom images of (a) the conventional and (b) SA-BiPBF
method with 2M = 64 for measuring penetration depth. White dashed box in
(a) indicates the region where penetration depth was measured. The wire target
located at 60 mm in conventional image is not visible, while wire targets up to
70 mm is observable in the SA-BiPBF image.

Fig. 5. SNRs along the depth from the conventional, MZTF (transmit focused
at 10 and 30 mm), and SA methods with 2M = 64. The measured SNR values were filtered with low-pass filter to obtain smooth curves. The SA-BiPBF
method provided the improved SNR value along the depth while high SNR
value was achieved only at focal depth in the conventional and MZTF methods.

shown in Fig. 4; the −6-dB lateral resolution of the MZTF and
conventional method were 0.5 and 0.4 mm at depths of 10 and
20 mm, respectively, whereas those of the SA-BiPBF method
were 0.7 and 0.6 mm. In the near field, phase terms are not fully
compensated [19]; thus, these uncompensated phase terms contributed to broadening the lateral resolution in the SA-BiPBF
method. By increasing the f -number (e.g., 1.5), the degradation
in the near field could be avoided. For the wire target located
at 40 mm where the f -number was 2, the lateral resolution
was significantly improved. The lateral resolution was 1.70 and
1.48 mm for the conventional and MZTF methods, while that of
the SA-BiPBF method was 0.87 mm (an improvement of 95.4%
and 70.1%, respectively).
Fig. 5 shows the SNR along the depth obtained from the
three methods. Only speckle regions were selected for calculating SNR values. To obtain a smooth SNR curve, the measured
SNR values calculated by (7) were filtered with the 21-tap lowpass filter applied earlier. As shown in Fig. 5, a high SNR was
achieved only at the focal depth in the conventional and MZTF
methods. In MZTF, the SNR sharply decreased after the first
transmit focal depth (i.e., 10 mm) due to diffraction of trans-

mit ultrasound waves and increased at the other transmit focal
depth, i.e., 30 mm. Similarly, in CON, the maximum SNR was
obtained around 20 mm that was the transmit focal depth and it
decreased as depth increased. On the other hand, the SA-BiPBF
method produced relatively uniform SNR values compared to
other methods and achieved higher SNR for entire imaging
depth. As expected, the mean SNR value was improved in the
SA-BiPBF method, as listed in Table I. The CNR values from
each method were also measured and are summarized in Table I.
The region of interest (ROI) for the CNR is indicated with white
boxes in Fig. 3(a). The SA-BiPBF method provided a higher
CNR value compared to the conventional method, i.e., 3.4 versus 3.1, respectively. However, the improvement of CNR value
seems to be unimpressive. As shown in the result of spatial
resolution, the SA-BiPBF method provided improved spatial
resolution in comparison with conventional method. The improvement in the spatial resolution results in an increase in the
speckle variance [8], which, in turn, increases the denominator
of (6), resulting in the meager improvement of the CNR value.
In the MZTF method, the CNR value was the same as the SABiPBF method since the ROI for the CNR measurement was
located at one of the transmit focal depths, i.e., at 30 mm.
The penetration depth was measured in the speckle region,
which is indicated with a white dashed box in Fig. 6(a). As
shown in Fig. 6, the wire target located at 60 mm is not visible
in the conventional B-mode image, while the wire targets up
to 70 mm can be identified by the visual assessment in the SABiPBF image. Furthermore, the speckle region in the SA-BiPBF
image is more distinct and uniform than that of the conventional

KIM et al.: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND SYNTHETIC APERTURE IMAGING USING BIDIRECTIONAL PIXEL-BASED FOCUSING

2721

TABLE II
CNR AND MEAN SNR VALUES OF BREAST LESIONS FROM TEN PATIENTS
WITH THE CONVENTIONAL AND SA-BiPBF METHODS

Fig. 7. (a) Smoothed magnitude of echo and noise signal used for measuring
the penetration depth and (b) the penetration depth along the number of subaperture (2M ) of SA-BiPBF method. The magnitude of echo signal from the
SA-BiPBF method was increased when compared with conventional method. In
(b), the penetration depth increased as the number of the subaperture used in the
SA-BiPBF image increased, where M = 0 indicates the conventional method.

B-mode image. Fig. 7(a) shows the filtered magnitudes of echo
and noise signals from the conventional and SA-BiPBF methods. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the magnitude of the echo signal
was increased in the SA-BiPBF method since the echo signal
was constructively added during synthesization. Fig. 7(b) shows
the penetration depth according to the number of the subaperture, where M = 0 indicates the conventional method. As the
number of the subaperture used in the SA-BiPBF image was increased, the penetration depth increased; the penetration depths
were 35.2 and 49.4 mm for M = 0 and 2M = 64, respectively.
However, the penetration depth with 2M = 64 was similar to
that with 2M = 32 due to the narrow beam directivity (e.g.,
20.2 mm at a depth of 40 mm computed by λz/d, where z and d
are the imaging depth and element width, respectively), which
resulted from the wide element width [20]; the element width of
the transducer used in the present study was 0.3048 mm, which
is equal to 1.98λ.
B. In Vivo Study
The CNR and SNR values of in vivo cases were measured
in the same manner as phantom evaluation, and the results are
summarized in Table II. For the in vivo study, the number of
subaperture (2M ) in the SA image was 32. In the evaluation,
the CNR and SNR values were measured for all the cases (ten

cases), and the mean, standard deviation, and the p-value were
computed. As listed in Table II, the SA-BiPBF method provided
higher CNR and SNR values compared to the conventional
method (3.3 versus 2.8 of CNR and 34.0 dB versus 27.2 dB
of SNR, respectively). The p-value of SNR was 0.0004. On the
other hand, the p-value of CNR was 0.1, which implies that
the improvement in CNR is not statistically significant. These
quantitative results with in vivo breast data are consistent with
those from the phantom experiments.
Fig. 8 shows four representative cases of the in vivo breast
ultrasound images obtained with the conventional (left panel)
and SA-BiPBF (right panel) methods. As shown in Fig. 8,
improved contrast and spatial resolutions in the SA-BiPBF
images provided clearer morphological information (e.g., the
margin of breast lesions), which is important in distinguishing
benign from malignant breast lesions [21], than the conventional images. Both radiologists agreed that the images with the
SA-BiPBF method provided an improved image quality compared to the conventional images. In the blind evaluations, the
image evaluation in terms of a clinical view was stated with
lesion conspicuity, margin sharpness and contrast, which are
defined as the general visibility or clarity of the lesion compared
with the adjacent structures, the capacity to properly display the
lesion boundary, and the subjective difference in the echo intensities between the lesion and the background, respectively. The
specific evaluations on the images are summarized as follows:
1) Case 1: Patient diagnosed with benign fibroadenomas [see
Fig. 8(a)]. The borderline of the lesion in the SA-BiPBF
image is more conspicuous and the margin sharpness has
increased compared to the conventional image. Furthermore, the SA-BiPBF image has better contrast between
the mass and the gland than that of the conventional image and contrast between the fat and the gland also has
been improved. In the deep portion, the strand of pectoralis and the surface of the bone are more distinct in the
SA-BiPBF image compared to the conventional image
(white arrow).
2) Case 2: Patient diagnosed with adenosis [see Fig. 8(b)].
The SA-BiPBF image shows an improvement in conspicuity and margin sharpness, especially the left margin of the
lesion indicated with the white arrow A. The lesion in the
SA-BiPBF image appears more homogenous and shows
a higher contrast resolution than the conventional image.
The strand of pectoralis muscle (white dotted box) is more
clearly observed, and the refraction artifact (arrow B) has
been reduced in the SA-BiPBF image compared to the
conventional image. However, the reflection artifact from
the bone (arrow C) is more obvious in the SA-BiPBF
image.

2722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Fig. 8. B-mode breast images obtained with the conventional (left panel) and the SA-BiPBF method with 2M = 32 (right panel). (a) Patient diagnosed a benign
fibroadenomas (case 1); (b) adenosis (case 2); (c) and (d) malignant infiltrating ductal carcinoma (cases 3 and 4). All images were compressed with dynamic range
of 60 dB. SA-BiPBF images provide clear morphological information when compared to conventional images which increases the differentiation between benign
and malignant.

3) Case 3: Patient diagnosed with a malignant infiltrating
ductal carcinoma [see Fig. 8(c)]. Improvement of conspicuity, margin sharpness, contrast resolution, and spatial
resolution of the deep portion can be seen in the SA-BiPBF
images. The mass in the SA-BiPBF image is closer to a
hypoechoic mass due to the improvement of contrast and
conspicuity. The echogenic halo around the mass, indicated with white arrows, implies a high possibility of the
mass being malignant. In the deeper portion, improvement of the resolution is visible and the noisy signal in
deep portion has been relieved.
4) Case 4: Patient diagnosed with a malignant infiltrating
ductal carcinoma [see Fig. 8(d)]. The SA-BiPBF image
shows the improvement of conspicuity, margin sharpness,
contrast resolution, and spatial resolution of the deep portion compared to the conventional image. In addition, the
hypoechoic shadow artifact, indicated with a white dotted
box, has been decreased in the SA-BiPBF image. However, the reflection artifact from the surface of the bone,
indicated with a white arrow, is more noticeable in the
SA-BiPBF image.
As summarized in the blind evaluations, the SA-BiPBF images have potential clinical benefits and flaws. Overall, the
SA-BiPBF images showed improved conspicuity, margin sharpness, contrast, and resolution of the deep portion. Particularly,
in Fig. 8(c), the echogenic halo around the mass from the
SA-BiPBF image was more distinct than that from the conven-

tional image; this is an important indicator of malignancy [21].
In Fig. 8(d), the hypoechoic shadow artifact was reduced, while
the artifact above the strong reflector (i.e., the bone) was seen in
the SA-BiPBF image due to the saturation. The saturation problem was also reported in a previous study [16]. In Fig. 8(b),
the edge-shadowing artifact stemming from the solid breast
nodule was reduced in the SA-BiPBF image; this also can be
seen in spatial compound imaging [22]. The reduction of the
edge-shadowing artifact is considered beneficial since it reduces
the excessive manipulation of the transducer and the scanning
time [22], [23]. However, it must be noted that since the edgeshadowing artifact has been regarded as an indicator of breast
tumor malignancy [21], further clinical studies are needed for
the SA-BiPBF that substantially suppresses this artifact.
Breast imaging–reporting and data system (BI-RADS) assessments were also performed with in vivo data and the results
are summarized in Table III. Among ten breast lesions, five
were malignant and five were benign. There were two cases of
infiltrating ductal carcinoma, two cases of fibroadenoma, two
cases of adenosis, and one case of fibrocystic change. Using
the cutoff between BI-RADS category 3 and 4 A, the conventional beamforming method had 100% (5 of 5) sensitivity and
40% (2 of 5) specificity. On the other hand, the SA-BiPBF
method showed 100% (5 of 5) of sensitivity and 60% (3 of 5)
of specificity. One adenosis was considered to be category 4 A
lesion only by the conventional beamforming method. No statistical significance was noted for both sensitivities (p = 1.0) and

KIM et al.: EVALUATION OF ULTRASOUND SYNTHETIC APERTURE IMAGING USING BIDIRECTIONAL PIXEL-BASED FOCUSING

TABLE III
SENSITIVITY AND SPECIFICITY VALUES OF BREAST LESIONS FROM TEN
PATIENTS WITH THE CONVENTIONAL AND SA METHODS

Fig. 9. ROC curves for conventional and SA images with AUC values of 0.82
and 0.86, respectively.

specificities (p = 1.0). Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC)
curves for conventional B-mode and SA-BiPBF images are
shown in Fig. 9. On ROC analysis, the SA-BiPBF method
showed higher area under curve (AUC) values than that of conventional beamforming (0.860 ± 0.12 [95% confidence interval
(CI): 0.508, 0.991] and 0.820 ± 0.13 [95% CI: 0.465, 0.981],
respectively). However, statistical significance was not found
(p = 0.6). No significant difference was found when probability of malignancy was used for obtaining AUC values (0.800
± 0.16 [95% CI: 0.444, 0.975] versus 0.800 ± 0.16 [95% CI:
0.444, 0.975], p = 1.0). The reason of this meager improvement shown earlier in BI-RADS assessments can be thought as
the small number of cases used in the experiment. After incorporating the SA-BiPBF method into a commercial ultrasound
machine, the further prospective study needs to be performed.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, quantitative and qualitative performance evaluations were conducted to validate the effectiveness of the
SA-BiPBF method. From the experiments, it was shown in sideby-side comparisons that the image quality of the SA-BiPBF
method was considerably improved in both phantom and in
vivo breast images. However, as demonstrated in the in vivo
experiments, the SA-BiPBF image showed different features
compared to the conventional one. These features are resulting
from the increased image quality of the SA-BiPBF method but
are not always perceived as improvements by the radiologists.

2723

REFERENCES
[1] J. H. Kim, T. K. Song, and S. B. Park, “Pipelined sampled-delay focusing
in ultrasound imaging systems,” Ultrason. Imaging, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 75–
91, 1987.
[2] T. K. Song and B. Park, “A new digital phased array system for dynamic
focusing and steering with reduced sampling rate,” Ultrason. Imaging,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 1990.
[3] M. O’Donnell, W. E. Engeler, J. T. Pedicone, A. M. Itani, S. E. Noujaim,
R. J. Dunki-Jacobs, W. M. Leue, C. L. Chalek, L. S. Smith, J. E. Piel,
R. L. Harris, K. B. Welles, and W. L. Hinrichs, “Real-time phased array
imaging using digital beam forming and autonomous channel control,” in
Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 1990, pp. 1499–1502.
[4] R. J. Pittaro, “Ultrasound system with dynamic transmit focus,” U.S.
Patent 5 113 706, May 19, 1992.
[5] S. Freeman, P.-C. Li, and M. O’Donnel, “Retrospective dynamic transmit
focusing,” Ultrason. Imaging, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 173–196, 1995.
[6] G. S. Kino, D. Corl, S. Bennet, and K. Peterson, “Real time synthetic
aperture imaging system,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 1980, pp. 722–
731.
[7] M. Soumekh, Synthetic Aperture Radar Signal Processing With MATLAB
Algorithms. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1999, pp. 137–175.
[8] M. Karaman, P.-C. Li, and M. O’Donnell, “Synthetic aperture imaging for
small scale systems,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelect. Freq. Control,
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 429–442, May 1995.
[9] T.-K. Song, “Analysis of synthetic aperture techniques for ultrasound
linear-scan imaging,” J. Biomed. Eng. Res., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 503–513,
1999.
[10] M.-H. Bae and M.-K. Jeong, “Bidirectional pixel based focusing in conventional B-mode ultrasound imaging,” Electron. Lett., vol. 34, no. 22,
pp. 2105–2107, 1998.
[11] M.-H. Bae and M.-K. Jeong, “A study of synthetic-aperture imaging with
virtual source elements in B-mode ultrasound imaging systems,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelect. Freq. Control, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 1510–1519,
Nov. 2000.
[12] K.-S. Kim and T.-K. Song, “High frame rate and high resolution imaging
with synthetic aperture,” Key Eng. Mater., vol. 270–273, pp. 168–173,
2004.
[13] C. H. Frazier and W. D. O’Brien, “Synthetic aperture techniques with a
virtual source element,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelect. Freq. Control,
vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 196–207, Jan. 1998.
[14] J.-H. Park, C. Yoon, J. H. Chang, Y. Yoo, and T.-K. Song, “A real-time
synthetic aperture beamformer for medical ultrasound imaging,” in Proc.
IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2010, pp. 1992–1995.
[15] M. H. Pedersen, K. L. Gammelmark, and J. A. Jensen, “Preliminary invivo evaluation of convex array synthetic aperture imaging,” in Proc. SPIE
Prog. Biomed. Optics Imaging, 2004, vol. 5373, pp. 33–34.
[16] M. H. Pedersen, K. L. Gammelmark, and J. A. Jensen, “In-vivo evaluation of convex array synthetic aperture imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 37–47, 2007.
[17] K. F. Üstüner and G. L. Holley, “Ultrasound imaging system performance
assessment,” presented at the AAPM Annual Meeting, San Diego, CA,
USA, 2003.
[18] G. Kim, C. Yoon, S. Kye, Y. Lee, J. Kang, Y. Yoo, and T.-K. Song, “A
single FPGA-based portable ultrasound imaging system for point-of-care
application,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 59,
no. 7, pp. 1386–1394, 2012.
[19] K.-S. Kim, J. Liu, and M. F. Insana, “Efficient array beam forming by
spatial filtering for ultrasonic B-mode imaging,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 120, no. 2, pp. 852–861, 2006.
[20] Y. Tasinkevych, I. Trots, A. Nowicki, and P. A. Lewin, “Modified synthetic
transmit aperture algorithm for ultrasound imaging,” Ultrasonics, vol. 52,
no. 2, pp. 333–342, 2012.
[21] A. T. Stavros, Breast Ultrasound. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2004, pp. 947–978.
[22] S. Huber, M. Wagner, M. Medl, and H. Czembirek, “Real-time spatial
compound imaging in breast ultrasound,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 28,
no. 2, pp. 155–163, 2002.
[23] R. Entrekin, P. Jackson, J. R. Jago, and B. A. Porter, “Real time spatial
compound imaging in breast ultrasound: Technology and early clinical
experience,” MedicaMundi, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 35–43, 1999.

Choye Kim, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

2724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Changhan Yoon received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, in 2009 and 2013, respectively.
His current research interests include medical ultrasound imaging and therapy, portable ultrasound
imaging system, digital signal processing, digital system design, and photoacoustic imaging and its clinical applications.

Jong-Ho Park received the B.S. and M.S. degrees,
in 2009 and 2011, respectively, from the Department
of Electronic Engineering and the Interdisciplinary
Program of Integrated Biotechnology, Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, where he is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electronic Engineering.
His current research interests include medical ultrasound system and its signal and image processing
algorithms.

Yuhwa Lee received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
electronic engineering in 2007 and 2009, respectively, from Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, where
she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
the Department of Electronic Engineering.
Her current research interests include medical
ultrasound imaging and therapy, and digital signal
processing.

Won Hwa Kim received the M.D. degree
from Kyungpook National University College of
Medicine, Daegu, Korea, in 2006, and the M.S.
degree from Seoul National University Graduate
School, Seoul, Korea, in 2011.
She is currently a Radiology Clinical Assistant Professor in the Department of Radiology,
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul. Her current research interests include breast ultrasound and
elastography.

Jung Min Chang received the M.D. degree from
Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea, in 2001, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from Seoul National University Graduate School,
Seoul, in 2006 and 2009, respectively.
She is currently a Clinical Assistant Professor in
the Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital. Her current research interests include
breast screening and cancer detection using ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron
emission tomography (PET), and computed tomography (CT).

Byung Ihn Choi received the M.D. degree from
Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea, in 1974, and the M.S and Ph.D. degrees
from Seoul National University Graduate School,
Seoul, in 1977 and 1983, respectively.
From 1979 to 1982, he was a Radiologist-inChief, Major, in the Department of Radiology, Capital Armed Forces Hospital, Korean Army. In 1984,
he joined as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea, where he was became a Professor
in 1994. He has authored or coauthored more than 650 publications.
Dr. Choi has received 88 honors and awards, and delivered more than 580
invited lectures internationally and nationally. From 2003 to 2006, he was the
Vice President of the World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology. From 1999 to 2006, he was the President of the 11th Congress of World
Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology, Organizing Committee.

Tai-Kyong Song (M’97) received the B.S. degree
in electronic engineering from Sogang University,
Seoul, Korea, in 1984, the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Seoul, in 1985 and 1990,
respectively.
For two years, he was a Research Fellow in the Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA. From 1993 to 1995, he was as
an Adjunct Professor in the Department of Information and Communication Engineering, KAIST. From 1995 to 1997, he was a
Staff Scientist with Siemens Medical-System Inc., Issaquah, WA, USA. In 1997,
he joined as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering,
Sogang University, Seoul, where he became a Professor in 2006 and has been
the Director of the Center for Medical Solution Research since 1997. Currently,
he is the Vice Director of the Sogang Institute of Advanced Technology, Sogang
University. His current research interests include hand-held ultrasound imaging
systems, real-time three-dimensional (3-D) scanning algorithm and system development, high-end digital ultrasound imaging systems, and ultrasound signal
and imaging processing.
Dr. Song was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ULTRASONICS, FERROELECTRICS, AND FREQUENCY CONTROL from 2002 to 2007. He
is currently the Vice President for Research and the Dean of the IndustryUniversity Cooperation Foundation.

Yang-Mo Yoo (S’99–M’07) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees from the Department of Electronic Engineering from Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, in
1999 and 2001, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the Department of Bioengineering, University
of Washington, Seattle, USA, in 2007.
From 2007 to 2009, he was a Systems Design Engineer at Philips Healthcare, Bothell, WA, USA. He
is currently an Associate Professor of Electronic Engineering and Interdisciplinary Program of Integrated
Biotechnology at Sogang University. His current research interests include medical ultrasound imaging and its clinical applications
in diagnostics and therapy.

