3036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Electronic Cleansing for 24-H Limited Bowel
Preparation CT Colonography Using
Principal Curvature Flow
Vincent F. van Ravesteijn∗ , Thierry N. Boellaard, Marije P. van der Paardt, Iwo W. O. Serlie, Margriet C. de Haan,
Jaap Stoker, Lucas J. van Vliet, Member, IEEE, and Frans M. Vos

Abstract—CT colonography (CTC) is one of the recommended
methods for colorectal cancer screening. The subject’s preparation is one of the most burdensome aspects of CTC with a cathartic
bowel preparation. Tagging of the bowel content with an oral contrast medium facilitates CTC with limited bowel preparation. Unfortunately, such preparations adversely affect the 3-D image quality. Thus far, data acquired after very limited bowel preparation
were evaluated with a 2-D reading strategy only. Existing cleansing algorithms do not work sufficiently well to allow a primary
3-D reading strategy. We developed an electronic cleansing algorithm, aimed to realize optimal 3-D image quality for low-dose CTC
with 24-h limited bowel preparation. The method employs a principal curvature flow algorithm to remove heterogeneities within
poorly tagged fecal residue. In addition, a pattern recognitionbased approach is used to prevent polyp-like protrusions on the
colon surface from being removed by the method. Two experts independently evaluated 40 CTC cases by means of a primary 2-D
approach without involvement of electronic cleansing as well as by
a primary 3-D method after electronic cleansing. The data contained four variations of 24-h limited bowel preparation and was
based on a low radiation dose scanning protocol. The sensitivity
for lesions ≥6 mm was significantly higher for the primary 3-D
reading strategy (84%) than for the primary 2-D reading strategy
(68%) (p = 0.031). The reading time was increased from 5:39 min
(2-D) to 7:09 min (3-D) (p = 0.005); the readers’ confidence was
reduced from 2.3 (2-D) to 2.1 (3-D) (p = 0.013) on a three-point
Likert scale. Polyp conspicuity for cleansed submerged lesions was
similar to not submerged lesions (p = 0.06). To our knowledge,
this study is the first to describe and clinically validate an electronic cleansing algorithm that facilitates low-dose CTC with 24-h
limited bowel preparation.

Manuscript received October 12, 2012; revised February 27, 2013 and April
18, 2013; accepted April 26, 2013. Date of publication May 7, 2013; date of current version October 16, 2013. The first and second author contributed equally.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ V. F. van Ravesteijn is with the Quantitative Imaging Group, Delft University of Technology, Delft 2628 CJ, The Netherlands (e-mail: v.f.vanravesteijn@
tudelft.nl).
T. N. Boellaard, M. P. van der Paardt, M. C. de Haan, and J. Stoker are with
the Department of Radiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam 1100 DD,
The Netherlands (e-mail: t.n.boellaard@amc.uva.nl; M.P.vanderpaardt@amc.
uva.nl; m.c.dehaan@amc.uva.nl; j.stoker@amc.uva.nl).
I. W. O. Serlie is with the Philips Healthcare, Best 5682GL, The Netherlands
(e-mail: iwo.serlie@philips.com).
L. J. van Vliet is with the Quantitative Imaging Group, Delft University
of Technology, NL-2628 CJ Delft, The Netherlands (e-mail: l.j.vanvliet@
tudelft.nl).
F. M. Vos is with the Quantitative Imaging Group, Delft University of Technology, Delft 2628 CJ, The Netherlands, and also with the Department of
Radiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam 1100 DD, The Netherlands
(e-mail: f.m.vos@tudelft.nl).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2262046

Index Terms—CT colonography (CTC), electronic cleansing.

I. INTRODUCTION
OMPUTED tomography colonography (CTC) is a structural radiological examination of the colorectum and is
widely studied for use in colorectal cancer screening [1]. An
important issue for large scale application is the adherence,
which is closely related to the perceived burden of the employed
screening technique [2]. The subject’s preparation is one of the
most burdensome aspects of CTC with a cathartic bowel preparation [3]. Although such a cathartic bowel preparation ensures
optimal image quality, it also leads to excessive diarrhea and
discomfort. Tagging of the bowel content with oral iodine or
barium contrast facilitates CTC with noncathartic bowel preparation. Recently, several studies have shown that the diagnostic
accuracy for polyps ≥6 mm remains high while using a 24-h
limited bowel preparation (i.e., least burdensome type of noncathartic preparations) [4], [5]. In fact, a limited bowel preparation significantly improves the acceptance and, therefore, likely
the screening adherence [4], [6], [7]. Liedenbaum et al. showed
that a 24-h limited iodine-based bowel preparation yields a significantly better subject’s acceptance and less burden compared
with a 48-h preparation [8].
Unfortunately, such preparations can adversely affect the
3-D image quality. Particularly, untagged stool can cause artifacts like incomplete cleansing or pseudosoft tissue structures [9], [10]. These artifacts limit a primary 3-D reading and
hinder 3-D problem solving after a primary 2-D reading. Still,
accurate electronic cleansing can result in shorter reading times
in a primary 3-D reading strategy and to a higher confidence and
less reader effort in a primary 2-D reading strategy [11]. Juchems
et al. [12] studied reader performance with the use of electronic
cleansing and found a significant improvement in polyp sensitivity using 3-D reading with electronic cleansing versus 3-D
reading without electronic cleansing. Importantly, less experienced readers achieve a higher sensitivity with a 3-D reading
strategy as compared to a 2-D reading strategy [13]. Recent
guidelines, summarizing the evidence by experts in the field,
emphasize the need for both 2-D and 3-D visualization [14],
[15].
Apart from the burden associated with the bowel preparation,
the acceptance of CTC as a screening technique is also influenced by the radiation exposure. The radiation burden should
be as low as possible to ensure a high benefit-risk ratio. At
the same time, a low-dose scanning protocol leads to increased

C

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

VAN RAVESTEIJN et al.: ELECTRONIC CLEANSING FOR 24-H LIMITED BOWEL PREPARATION CT COLONOGRAPHY

3037

image noise which complicates electronic cleansing and significantly affects polyp detection [16].
We developed a new electronic cleansing algorithm, aimed
to realize optimal 3-D image quality for low-dose CTC with
24-h limited bowel preparation. We hypothesize that electronic
cleansing does not lead to a degradation of a polyp’s conspicuity
in a 3-D viewing mode and, even stronger, that it enables a
primary 3-D reading strategy. To our knowledge, no earlier study
described an electronic cleansing algorithm for low-dose CTC
with 24-h limited bowel preparation.

A. Related Work
Much of the previous technical work on electronic cleansing
has been validated on data obtained with extensive patient preparation. The following summary was largely adapted from [17].
Initially, Lakare et al. [18], [19] addressed the cleansing problem by exploiting the unique local signature caused by partial
volume voxels bordering on the fluid mask. The intensity profile is considered a unique property of each type of material
transition. Typical edge profiles that are present between materials, e.g., air and tagged material, are identified by rigorously
“exploring” some 3-D CT datasets in a separate learning phase
prior to the actual cleansing. During cleansing, for each edge
voxel, the profile is selected from the learning set that fits best to
the encountered intensity profiles. A transfer function is defined
for each such profile in order to remove the partial volume problem during rendering. In later work, Lakare et al. [20] created
23-D feature vectors of local data values that are reduced to five
dimensions by principal component analysis. Clustering takes
place in this low-dimensional space using a vector similarity
measure. A threshold on the average intensity of each class is
used to classify voxels to be tagged residue.
Zalis et al. [21], [22] constructed a binary subtraction mask
to segment the bowel content and addressed the partial volume problem using a colon-surface reconstruction routine. Data
values represent a distance measure to the subtraction mask.
Wang et al. [23] presented an improved electronic colon cleansing method based on a partial volume image segmentation
framework, which is based on the well-established statistical
expectation-maximization algorithm.
Franaszek et al. [24] developed a segmentation procedure
which represents individual air- and fluid-filled regions by a
graph that enables identification and prevention of undesired
leakage through the colon wall. The proposed hybrid algorithm
uses modified region growing, fuzzy connectedness, and level
set segmentation. Wang et al. [25] also investigated a maximum
a posterioriexpectation–maximization image segmentation algorithm which simultaneously estimates tissue mixture percentages within each image voxel and statistical model parameters
for the tissue distribution.
Cai et al. [9], [10] developed an electronic cleansing method,
called structure analysis cleansing. A structure enhancement
function and a local roughness measure are integrated into the
speed function of a level set method for delineating the tagged
fecal material.

Fig. 1. Examples of typical cases emanating from a limited bowel preparation
and a low radiation dose.

To our opinion, the variety of presently proposed algorithms
reflect that a perfect solution has not been found yet. Accordingly, incomplete processing is still reported to leave artifacts [11]. A specifically noticeable problem is posed by the
distracting bumps emanating from locations where air, soft tissue, and tagged material meet. Lately, an electronic cleansing
algorithm was proposed aiming to improve the accuracy at such
three material junctions [11], [17], [26]. The method is automated and adapts to patient specific conditions, such as the
local variation of the tagged material density. The algorithm assumes that the measured CT value arises due to a combination of
three materials: air, tagged material, and soft tissue. It estimates
the percentages of these materials in each voxel. Subsequently,
the tagged material fraction is simply “replaced” by air, to arrive at a new, cleansed CT value. Unfortunately, this method
still assumes that the three materials constituting the junction
have a homogeneous composition which makes the method not
adequate to deal with the limited bowel preparation data.
Recent work by Cai et al. describes an electronic cleansing
technique based on a mosaic decomposition method for use with
a limited bowel preparation [9], [10], [27]. This method solved
the artifacts often associated with a limited bowel preparation.
It was tested on cases that underwent a 48-h bowel preparation
consisting of a low-fiber, low-residue diet, and oral administration of Omnipaque with a total ingested amount of 75 mL of
iodine (300 mg I/mL concentration). No clinical evaluation of
this cleansing method was performed yet.
Visualization techniques can be found in [28]–[30].
B. Objective
The objective of this study is to enable 3-D visualization of
CTC data for use with a 24-h limited bowel preparation and a
reduced radiation dose. This is, to the best of our knowledge,
currently not feasible. Examples of typical artifacts prevalent in
such data are shown in Fig. 1.
The properties that an electronic cleansing algorithms must
possess to allow a limited patient preparation are:
1) ability to cope with heterogeneous bowel content;
2) reconstruction of a smooth colon surface that does not
distract the radiologist;
3) preservation of polyps in badly tagged regions.

3038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF THE DATA SETS USED IN THIS PAPER

Heterogeneous mixing of materials as well as highly curved
and irregular material interfaces as depicted in Fig. 1 complicates a simple solution to electronic cleansing. In order to
visualize the colon wall such that it accurately represents the
shape of the colon wall and that it does not show distracting
artifacts to the radiologist, a subvoxel precision is required.
Thereby, the main challenge is to retain all polyps in the data,
even when polyps are submerged in a heterogeneously tagged
fluid. To secure the preservation of polyps, we will make use of
the extensive knowledge about the appearance of colonic polyps
that was acquired in developing techniques for computer-aided
detection of polyps [32], [33].
In this paper, we present a plug-in preprocessing method to
the electronic cleansing method by Serlie et al. [11], [17], [26].
The preprocessing acts as a preconditioning step which fills the
inhomogeneities in poorly tagged fecal material to meet the input requirement of Serlie’s electronic cleansing method. Several
novelties are introduced in order to do so. First, the removal of
heterogeneities in poorly tagged fecal matter by a principal curvature flow algorithm. Second, a robust reconstruction of the
colon surface, including all polyp candidates, using a logistic
classifier. This corrects the negative side effects of the first step
such as erroneously removal of polyp-like protrusions on the
bowel wall. Third, we demonstrate the effects of our technique
on the sensitivity, reading time, and lesion conspicuity in a clinical evaluation on data acquired with a reduced radiation dose
after a 24-h limited bowel preparation.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. CT Colonography Data
The new electronic cleansing method will be evaluated on
four subject groups, each with a different variation of limited
bowel preparation scheme and a low radiation dose scanning
protocol (Table I, groups “A”–“D”). Fifteen CTC examinations
were randomly selected from one former study (group “A”) [4],
supplemented by all (three times fifteen) examinations from
another recent study (groups “B”–“D”) [8]. Each subject was
scanned in prone and supine position. CT reconstruction of all
datasets was done using standard filtered back projection. All
participants underwent a low-fiber diet starting the day before
the CTC examination. The fifteen subjects from the first study
were scanned at a tube current of 40 reference mAs whereas the
subjects from the second study were scanned at a tube current

of 25 reference mAs. Note that both radiation levels are lower
than in previous studies on electronic cleansing. The amount
of tagging agent (meglumine-ioxithalamate; Telebrix Gastro
300 mg I/mL; Guerbet, Cedex, France) ranged from 4 × 50 mL
(group “A”) to 3 × 25 mL (group “D”). This is relevant as it
is well known that the tagging agent has a laxative effect and,
therefore, a low tagging dose is preferred. We are unaware of
any electronic cleansing algorithm that has been developed and
evaluated for CTC with 24-h limited bowel preparation as in the
aforementioned studies [4], [8].
One third of these data, i.e., five subjects per group, was
randomly selected for development and training of the algorithm. The other ten subjects of each group were reserved to
be included in the evaluation study. Colonoscopy served as the
reference standard for all cases. All annotated lesions were reviewed by a research fellow to determine whether the polyps
measuring ≥6 mm were (partially) covered by fecal material
or surrounded exclusively by air. Considering prone and supine
positions as separate cases yielded three lesions in the training
set that were covered by fecal matter. The test set contained
66 lesions; 58 of them were not covered by fecal matter; eight
were covered by fecal matter. The effective radiation dose of
the employed protocols for an average person (hermaphrodite
of 70 kg) is: 3 mSv for 40 reference mAs and 2 mSv for 25
reference mAs [34], [35].
The training set based on datasets “A”–“D” did not contain sufficient polyps for reliably training the classifier. For the
training of the classifier, we also included data from another
study [31], only to extend the number of samples in the polyp
class, see Table I (group “O”). We showed in earlier work on
computer-aided detection of polyps that our classifier is robust
against this approach. This study originally concerned 1233 patients in total that all adhered to an extensive laxative regime,
including contrast agents for stool tagging (50 mL barium [Scan
C, Lafayette Pharmaceuticals] and 120 mL of diatrizoate meglumine and diatrizoate sodium [Gastrografin, Bracco Diagnostics]). CTC was performed in prone and supine position at a
tube current of 100 reference mAs. The reference standard was
optical colonoscopy. In total, 210 polyps larger than or equal
to 6 mm were identified as such. Radiologists had retrospectively indicated the location of polyps based on the reference
standard. A research fellow selected all those patients that were
considered to harbor polyps larger than 6 mm and that were
fully submerged in the contrast medium in either scan position.

VAN RAVESTEIJN et al.: ELECTRONIC CLEANSING FOR 24-H LIMITED BOWEL PREPARATION CT COLONOGRAPHY

3039

Fig. 2. Image shows poorly tagged fecal matter. The heterogeneity is resolved by iteratively applying the principal curvature flow algorithm. Below the figure is
the number of iterations of the algorithm. After 70 iterations, the image does not change significantly. (a) Unprocessed. (b) 5 iterations. (c) 10 iterations. (d) 15
iterations. (e) 25 iterations. (f) 70 iterations.

In the end, this delivered 15 such patients with 15 polyps. More
details about these data may be retrieved from [31]. Note that
these data were only used for the development of the classifier
and not in evaluating the performance of the new electronic
cleansing method.
B. Step 1: Filling Inhomogeneous Tagging
The normal anatomy of the colon surface can be globally
considered a cylindrical structure which is interrupted by indentations, the so-called haustral folds. Colorectal polyps/cancer
typically appears as spherical protrusions into the bowel lumen.
Analysis of the surface curvature (cylindrical, ridge-like, or caplike) facilitates the distinction of those structures, which is common practice in CTC. We exploit the fact that the local shape
of all surfaces can be characterized by the principal curvatures
of an isophote surface patch, even the dark objects formed by
inhomogeneous tagging. The principal curvature flow method
described below incorporates this a prior knowledge of the local
shape of the colon surface.
Now, observe that heterogeneities within poorly tagged matter appear as irregularly shaped dark gray objects on a white
background (properly tagged fecal remains). Although these
heterogeneities have an irregular shape—they consist of locally
convex patches (see Fig. 2) which are characterized by two negative principal curvatures, κ2 ≤ κ1 ≤ 0. We present a principal
curvature flow algorithm inspired by Van Wijk et al. [32] in
which these convex regions shrink by evolving the structure
in such a way that negative first principal curvatures κ1 are
raised until they approach zero curvature. During the evolution,
the shape of the dark objects become strictly convex before
disappearing completely. This process is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Specifically, since the local shape characteristics of the inhomogeneities are determined by the first principal curvature, the
locally convex (dark) regions shrink by raising the intensities in
areas where the first principal curvature was negative according
to
∂I
= g(κ1 , κ2 ) |∇I|
(1)
∂t
with κ1 and κ2 the first and second principal curvatures, |∇I|
the gradient magnitude of the input image I, and g(·) a curvature dependent function characterizing the flow. g(κ1 , κ2 ) is a
continuous function to avoid a discontinuous deformation, especially at locations where the sign of κ1 changes. Moreover, it
must be small on folds with a small negative value of κ1 so that

Fig. 3. Dumbbell object that simulates an heterogeneity in tagged fecal matter.
The diagram shows the evolution of a cross section of the object. The first
iterations raise the intensities of the voxels in the local convex parts of the
object. This moves the object’s contour inwards. After that, the whole object
is shrunken until it completely vanishes. Each line represents the shape after a
certain number of iterations.

the deformation on such locations is negligible. Reversely, the
response to local inhomogeneities with two large negative principal curvatures should be large. In the end, g(κ1 , κ2 ) was chosen such that the following partial differential equation (PDE)
was solved

Iu u , (κ1 < 0)
∂I
=
(2)
∂t
0,
(κ1 ≥ 0)
in which Iu u is the second derivative in the direction of the first
principal curvature [36] and Iu u is related to κ1 as follows
Iu u = −κ1 |∇I| .
This shows that the intensity will increase until the largest
curvature vanishes and there only is positive curvature left. This
also means that the image intensities are not conserved, which is
different from, for example, a diffusion process. Fig. 2 shows a
typical example. Considering the normal shape of the colon, the
effect of this evolution scheme is negligible around the colon
surface bordering air as the first principal curvature is large at
polyps and haustral folds and close to zero in all other parts of
the surface. For the submerged colon surface in which the sign
of the curvatures are inverted with respect to colon–air interface
things work out differently. A side effect to this evolution is
that it affects the shape of submerged polyps, i.e., these polyps
are gradually removed whereas the remainder of the submerged
colon surface remains undisturbed.
The number of iterations is largely determined by the size
of an object. In general, it takes only a few iterations for small

3040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

objects, but more for large objects to reach convergence. As
such the method adapts to the scale of an object (see also [32]).
Consequently, there is some variation over a whole dataset. In
practice, about 100 iterations appeared to work well.
C. Step 2: Reconstruction of Colon Surface
The reconstruction phase addresses the issue that submerged
polyps should be retained in the data even though they also
display negative κ1 . The approach to do so is to first obtain
an accurate estimate of the colon surface without protrusions
by applying the original electronic cleansing algorithm (see
Section II-D) to the preprocessed data. Subsequently, this estimate can be used to delineate the polyp candidates and to
determine whether a candidate is connected to the colon wall.
Previously, a principal curvature flow algorithm served as
an initial candidate detection step for automated polyp detection [32], [33]. Characteristic features were derived from the
candidates after which polyps were identified by a sophisticated
multistage logistic classifier. We adapted this classifier to the
specific nature of the problem at hand. Automatic polyp detection requires that the sensitivity for polyps is maximal at the
expense of as few false positive detections as possible. Here,
the aim is to reconstruct the normal bowel wall and leave as
little fecal material as possible. The classification system must
reconstruct all polyps to permit a 100% sensitivity for polyps
in subsequent reading strategies. To achieve this, (non polypoid) protrusions of the normal bowel may be restored as well,
but (preferably) not the fecal residue. Therefore, the classifier
does not need to be as strict in separating polyps from other
protrusions as in automated polyp detection. We realize that
this requires a different way of setting the decision boundary
of the classification system. The reconstruction technique was
developed using a training set of five subjects from each of the
four patient groups “A”–“D” in Table I supplemented by fifteen
subjects from group “O” to raise the number of samples of the
polyp class (excluded from the experiments below). By adding
the polyps from group “O” to training set, it becomes possible
to get a sufficiently good description of the polyp class.
Practically, candidates for restoration are defined as regions
with an increase in intensity of more than 200 HU. This value is
(approximately) the lower bound for the difference between the
tagged material and tissue. The limit of 200 HU is comparable
to the threshold that was previously used for polyp candidate
selection [32]. The objects not retained after this step typically
correspond to noise and (irrelevant) small protrusions of the
bowel wall, i.e., smaller than a 6 mm polyp.
Among the candidates detected one finds “floating debris.” In
addition, candidates may (partially or fully) cover areas with a
high signal intensity surrounded by material with even higher
intensities. Reversely, there may also be areas with low intensities, e.g., due to the presence of air. Therefore, we impose the
requirement that candidate areas must be connected to the colon
wall and contain intensities in the soft tissue range. To do so, the
electronic cleansing algorithm (see below) tentatively identifies
the colon’s inner surface after the application of second-order
curvature flow. Subsequently, we propagated [37] the bowel sur-

Fig. 4. Feature space indicating the objects from the training set; black circles
are lesions from subject group “O,” black dots are lesions from the training
dataset from subject groups “A”–“D” and gray dots are nonpolypoid structures.
The dashed line indicates the classifier.

face into connected candidate voxels with signal values higher
than −200 HU. Note that this may yield smaller candidate objects, while air is discarded. The parameters associated with all
these heuristic conditions were set to have 100% sensitivity for
polyps in the training set. One might observe that candidate
objects of higher intensity are not considered in this step of
the algorithm, because they will be removed by the cleansing
step (see below) which is designed to remove all (tagged) high
intensities voxels.
Subsequently, a simple classifier will be applied to discard
most of the remaining false positives, caused by untagged stool,
mixing with air, etc. Conventionally, automated polyp detection
relies on the two properties used by radiologists: the shape of
a candidate and the intensity distribution inside a candidate.
Unfortunately, the shape of a candidate appeared to be a nondistinguishing feature for the current problem. We attribute this to
the variety in shapes of poorly tagged material due to which it
may closely resemble both polyps as well as nonpolypoid structures. Therefore, we rely on intensity features of the candidate
objects represented by the candidate’s mean intensity and its
minimum intensity. We use a linear logistic classifier that acts
on these features, trained on the objects in our training set. This
classifier was used previously for automated polyp detection and
is robust against severe class imbalances [38]. Again, we require
that the sensitivity for polyps is 100% in the training set. Also,
we do not have to be very strict in the classification as restoring
normal (healthy) bowel wall does not affect the goals of this
study. To guarantee high lesion sensitivity while the number of
training examples is low, the resulting decision boundary was
shifted to at least three times the standard deviation away from
the mean of the lesion examples composed by subjects from
training datasets “A”-“D.” Fig. 4 shows a feature space of the
previously mentioned characteristics measured on the training
set as well as the resulting decision boundary.
Finally, the restoration of detected objects simply boils down
to resubstituting the original intensity values (i.e., prior to principal curvature flow).

VAN RAVESTEIJN et al.: ELECTRONIC CLEANSING FOR 24-H LIMITED BOWEL PREPARATION CT COLONOGRAPHY

D. Electronic Cleansing
The final step of the method is to perform electronic cleansing,
for which we use the technique described by Serlie et al. [26]
(see the Appendix for a more extensive description of this
method). It was found that this method leads to shorter evaluation time, lower assessment effort, and greater observer confidence than CTC without electronic cleansing on patients that underwent extensive bowel preparation [11]. This rigorous preparation simplifies electronic cleansing somewhat because the fecal remains typically have a more homogeneous appearance than
in a limited bowel preparation. The principal curvature flow algorithm effectively acts as a preprocessing step that removes
heterogeneities from tagging. As such the data become suitable
for processing by this electronic cleansing algorithm.

3041

TABLE II
LIKERT SCALES USED FOR ASSESSMENT OF READING EFFORT (a),
CONFIDENCE (b), and LESION CONSPICUITY (c)

E. Running Times
The algorithm ran on a Dell Precision T3600 workstation
incorporating a quad-core, 2.33 GHz Intel Xeon processor, and
3.25 GB Ram system memory. All preprocessing as described in
this paper took approximately 1 min per dataset (thus, per patient
position). In addition to that, the (standardly used) electronic
cleansing algorithm also took about 1 min per dataset.
III. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
Assessing the performance of an electronic cleansing algorithm is a complex problem. Effectively, one would like to determine the performance of reading electronically cleansed data as
well as the extent to which the algorithm modifies polyp shape
so that it is not detected anymore. The former is accomplished
by a clinical evaluation (part I, below), the latter by a polyp
conspicuity study (part II). After all, if the electronic cleansing
algorithm would change polyp shape in a destructive manner,
this might lead to a different conspicuity. This evaluation of
the method was performed much in the same way as by Serlie
et al. [11].
1) Part I: Two observers independently evaluated the 40
cases by means of a primary 2-D approach without involvement
of electronic cleansing as well as by a primary 3-D method
after electronic cleansing (employing the unfolded cube flythrough technique [30]). As the focus of this study was to evaluate the electronic cleansing algorithm, the readers were not
offered the possibility to observe the uncleansed 3-D data. Both
observers had a previous experience of evaluating more than
200 colonoscopy verified CTC cases. The cases were evaluated
twice, in two sessions. In the first session, cases were randomly
assigned to be evaluated either by means of the primary 3-D or
the primary 2-D approach. Subsequently, in the second session,
the alternative reading method was used. In both sessions, the
cases were presented in random order. There was a six-week
interval before reading the identical case for the second time to
avoid a recall bias. For each lesion, the size, location, and morphology was annotated. Furthermore, the observers rated, per
case, their assessment effort on a 4-point Likert scale and their

Fig. 5. Result of the 3-D unfolded-cube fly-through visualization of the cleansing (a) before and (b) after the electronic cleansing as proposed in this paper.
(a) Visualization without preprocessing. (b) Visualization with preprocessing.

confidence in the reading on a 3-point Likert scale (Table IIa
and b). All evaluation times were recorded.
The performance of the observers in reading the data was
evaluated by assessing the sensitivity of lesion detection as
well as the diagnostic accuracy of case classification. The latter
represents the fraction of correctly classified cases. The sensitivity and diagnostic accuracy of the observers were determined by an independent research fellow (prior experience:
>200 colonoscopy verified CTC cases) in comparison to the

3042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 6. Examples of principal curvature flow for objects that are covered by fecal remains: (top row) floating stool; (middle row) heterogeneities, floating stool of
which some are close to the colon wall; (bottom row) polyp on a fold. The first column shows the original data, columns 2–4 show the data after various number
of iterations, columns 5–6 show the results after cleansing. Note that the polyp on the last row reappears in the reconstruction step as described in Section II-C.

colonoscopy data. For primary 2-D and primary 3-D reading,
the per-lesion (polyps and cancers) sensitivity and the percase
diagnostic accuracy were compared with a generalized estimating equation (GEE) analysis [39]. This test corrects for related
misses and findings of the two observers. For submerged lesions
we performed McNemar’s test because there were insufficient
lesions to do a GEE analysis. McNemar’s test was also used
to test the differences in polyp sensitivity of the two observers
separately. The reading efforts and reading confidences were assessed by means of a Wilcoxon signed-rank test. For comparison
of the reading times a paired t-test was performed.
2) Part II: The conspicuity of the polyps with and without electronic cleansing was examined by the same two observers more than six weeks after all readings of part I were
completed. Prone and supine acquisitions were considered as
separate cases in this part of the evaluation. The polyps initially covered by tagged material were shown after electronic
cleansing; all polyps surrounded by air were presented as is.
The lesions were presented in a 3-D reading to the same two
observers in random order. The observers indicated the level of
conspicuity on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “inadequate”
to “good” (Table II(c)). For the cases classified as “inadequate”
or “moderate,” the observers indicated, if possible, the cause.
The lesion conspicuity of the polyps residing in air were compared with the polyps partly or fully covered by fecal material
using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
The results of the evaluation are presented in Sections III-C
and III-D. For all calculations a p-value <0.05 is considered to
indicate a statistically significant difference.
B. Pictorial Results
Fig. 5 displays a typical instance of the 3-D unfolded cube
fly-through visualization without and with the proposed preprocessing, i.e., principal curvature flow followed by colon surface
reconstruction. It can be observed that the view of the colon sur-

face is severely hampered in the visualization of the original data
[see Fig. 5(a)]. These artifacts emanate from heterogeneously
tagged fecal matter. These artifacts made it impossible to evaluate such limited preparation data in a primary 3-D way and hinder 3-D problem solving in primary 2-D reading approaches.
The heterogeneity filter removes the nonpolyp-like objects as
can be seen in the image resulting after electronic cleansing.
Fig. 6 shows examples of the preprocessing, reconstruction and
cleansing of typical structures that are covered by fecal remains.
The first two rows show examples of heterogeneities of which
at least one is close to the air–fluid border and at least one is
close to the colon wall. The last row shows a polyp on a fold.
C. 2-D and 3-D Case Reading Results (Part I)
The results are collated in Tables III and IV. The overall
sensitivity for lesions ≥6 mm was significantly higher for the
primary 3-D reading strategy after electronic cleansing than for
the primary 2-D approach (p = 0.031). The overall sensitivity
for lesions ≥10 mm was also higher with primary 3-D reading, but the difference was not significant (p = 0.160). The
percase accuracies were not significantly different. In total (for
the two readers combined) there were eleven false positive findings ≥6 mm for primary 2-D reading (94% percase specificity)
and twelve for primary 3-D reading (96% percase specificity).
We also tested the differences in polyp sensitivity of the two
observers separately. For lesions ≥6 mm, the p-values were
0.18 and 0.07 for observers I and II, respectively (i.e., both not
significant).
The sensitivity for primary 3-D reading after electronic
cleansing was significantly higher and the reader confidence
was significantly lower compared with primary 2-D reading.
The effort values were slightly, but not significantly decreased
for 3-D reading compared with primary 2-D reading, see Fig. 7.
The mean effort value (4-point Likert scale) was reduced from
2.8 (2-D) to 2.6 (3-D) (p = 0.060). The average confidence value

VAN RAVESTEIJN et al.: ELECTRONIC CLEANSING FOR 24-H LIMITED BOWEL PREPARATION CT COLONOGRAPHY

TABLE III
SENSITIVITY AND ACCURACY FOR 2-D AND 3-D READINGS

3043

TABLE VI
CONSPICUITY SCORING. LESIONS IN PRONE AND SUPINE ACQUISITIONS ARE
CONSIDERED SEPARATELY

3D Reading
Sensitivity (lesions%)

Accuracy (cases% )

Group

≥ 6 mm

≥ 10 mm

≥ 6 mm

≥ 10 mm

‘A’
‘B’
‘C’
‘D’

80 (24/30)
71 (10/14)
100 (4/4)
95 (19/20)

88 (14/16)
88 (7/8)
100 (2/2)
93 (13/14)

85 (17/20)
100 (20/20)
95 (19/20)
100 (20/20)

90 (18/20)
100 (20/20)
100 (20/20)
100 (20/20)

Overall

84 (57/68)

90 (36/40)

95 (76/80)

98 (78/80)

2D Reading
‘A’
‘B’
‘C’
‘D’
Overall

70
57
0
85

(21/30)
(8/14)
(0/4)
(17/20)

75 (12/16)
75 (6/8)
0 (0/2)
100 (14/14)

85 (17/20)
100 (20/20)
80 (16/20)
100 (20/20)

90 (18/20)
100 (20/20)
85 (17/20)
100 (20/20)

68 (46/68)

80 (32/40)

91 (73/80)

94 (75/80)

The sensitivity is determined on a per-lesion basis. Accuracy represents the diagnostic
accuracy per patient. The results for both observers are combined, hence doubling the
total number of lesions and cases in this table (68 lesions ≥6mm, 40 lesions ≥10mm,
80 cases).

TABLE IV
OVERALL SENSITIVITIES FOR SUBMERGED AND NOT SUBMERGED
POLYPS ≥6 mm

Fig. 7. Comparison of the reading effort and confidence values of the observers
for 2-D and 3-D reading.
TABLE V
AVERAGE READING TIMES OF THE TWO OBSERVERS

(3-point Likert scale) was reduced from 2.3 (2-D) to 2.1 (3-D)
(p = 0.013).
Also, the overall reading time for both observers combined is
significantly lower for 2-D reading compared with 3-D reading
(p = 0.005); see Table V. The 2-D reading time is particularly

The scores are based upon the Likert scale for conspicuity in Table IIc.

lower for observer II (p = 0.0001); for observer I this difference
is not significant.
D. Conspicuity Scoring Results (Part II)
Table VI shows the median values of the conspicuity scores
for the two observers. The combined median conspicuities (for
observers I + II) do not differ more than half a scale point and
are not significantly different between the submerged and not
submerged lesions (p = 0.092).
IV. DISCUSSION
This study shows that our proposed electronic cleansing
method enables primary 3-D reading of low-dose CTC with
a 24-h limited bowel preparation. Even for the most limited
patient preparation (group “D”) the sensitivity and accuracy remained high. The sensitivity of the primary 3-D reading was
significantly higher compared with the primary 2-D reading for
lesions ≥6 mm. The sensitivity of the primary 3-D reading was
also higher than the sensitivity of the primary 2-D reading for
lesions ≥10 mm, but the difference was not significant. Reader
confidence was significantly lower and reading time was significantly higher compared with a 2-D primary reading; there
was no significant difference in the reader effort. There was no
significant difference in 3-D lesion conspicuity for submerged
lesions after electronic cleansing compared with polyps residing
in air. The higher sensitivity that we found using the primary
3-D reading strategy has been reported previously as well [40],
[41]. However, certainly not all studies point toward an improved detection with a primary 3-D reading [42], [43]. We
noted that in our data some lesions, which were surrounded
by poorly tagged stool, were difficult to see in a 2-D reading, but conspicuous enough in 3-D to initiate a careful 2-D
characterization.
The decreased reader confidence for primary 3-D reading may
seem in conflict with the improved sensitivity results. We believe
that the decreased reader confidence, and also the higher reading
times in a primary 2-D reading strategy, relate to the prior experience of observer II. Observer II had scored image quality in
900 CTC cases in a 2-D fashion, compared to a smaller number
of 200 CTC cases that were read in both primary 2-D and primary 3-D manner [7]. Another explanation for reduced reader
confidence may be the result of small holes that were occasionally present in the colon wall as well as on a few spots a large
number of small irregularities that prevented a 2-D verification
for all of them. The latter might have required extra reading
time, although primary 3-D evaluation was more often found to
take longer than primary 2-D evaluation [13], [42], [44]. On the

3044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

other hand, the holes and irregularities did not seem to have a
negative influence on the diagnostic performance. Furthermore,
it should be noted that although the primary 3-D reading time
was longer compared with the 2-D primary reading time, these
reading times are well below the average reading times reported
in the literature [31], [45]. Hence, our cleansing algorithm facilitates time-efficient primary 3-D reading as well. In this study
we did not evaluate primary 3-D reading strategy without electronic cleansing. Furthermore, a separate study on the effect of
the low radiation dose on the data quality was outside the scope
of this study and can be found elsewhere [16], [46].
This study has a few limitations. As mentioned previously,
the rendered colon wall sometimes contained small holes. For
these datasets, the number of iterations of the principal curvature
flow may have been too high. Although these holes typically
appear in areas with very thin soft tissue structures (not likely
to contain polyps or cancers), we would have preferred to avoid
this effect. The small irregularities on the bowel wall are likely
the result of poorly tagged bowel content. Areas inside the colon
where the intensity of the tagged material is below 200 HU will
remain problematic since such poorly tagged material simply
bears a very close resemblance to soft tissue. Furthermore, data
on submerged lesions as well as the number of readers were
limited.
V. CONCLUSION
Thus far, data from CTC with a reduced radiation dose and
with very limited bowel preparation were evaluated using a
2-D reading strategy only. Existing cleansing algorithms did
not work sufficiently well to allow a primary 3-D reading strategy. This study shows that the presented cleansing method allows a primary 3-D reading strategy with high lesion sensitivity
for low-dose CTC with 24-h limited bowel preparation. Moreover, the results indicate that the primary 3-D evaluation significantly outperforms the primary 2-D evaluation with respect to
sensitivity for polyps ≥6 mm. To our knowledge this study is
the first to describe an electronic cleansing algorithm that has
been verified to be able to handle such very limited prepared
data.
APPENDIX
ELECTRONIC CLEANSING
The following description has been taken from [11]. The electronic cleansing algorithm uses the environment of CT densities
around each voxel to solve the partial volume effect. Effectively,
three types of environments are modeled: pure materials, transitions between two materials, and junctions in which three materials meet. Initially, it is assessed whether the local environment
matches “pure” soft tissue, tagged material, or air. If so, the voxel
under investigation is labeled to contain 100% of that material.
Alternatively, the local environment is compared with models of
two-material transitions. This procedure involves selecting the
type of transition (e.g., air or tagged material) and, subsequently,
estimating the percentages of the (two) constituting materials.
Effectively, the voxel is assigned material percentages depend-

ing on its location with respect to the transition. Simply applying
this algorithm to a sample dataset leads to artifacts emanating
from the band-shaped area where three materials meet (also
described in the study by Pickhardt and Choi [47]). Separate
models were created for potential junctions, such as a thin layer
of tagged material and tagged material attached to the colon
wall under various angles. The type of junction is identified by
the model that best fits the local configuration of CT values and
the material percentages derived from the considered voxel’s
location with respect to the junction. The algorithm takes into
account that the image values of the materials may vary (this
specifically holds for tagged material). We implemented the
electronic cleansing method on a proprietary, experimental version of the ViewForum workstation (Philips Healthcare).

REFERENCES
[1] E. G. McFarland, J. G. Fletcher, P. Pickhardt, A. Dachman, J. Yee, C. H.
McCollough, M. Macari, P. Knechtges, M. Zalis, M. Barish, D. H. Kim, K.
J. Keysor, C. D. Johnson, and the American College of Radiology, “ACR
colon cancer committee white paper: Status of CT colonography 2009,”
J. Amer. Coll. Radiol., vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 756–772, Nov. 2009.
[2] T. R. de Wijkerslooth, M. C. de Haan, E. M. Stoop, P. M. Bossuyt,
M. Thomeer, M.-L. Essink-Bot, M. E. van Leerdam, P. Fockens,
E. J. Kuipers, J. Stoker, and E. Dekker, “Burden of colonoscopy compared to non-cathartic CT-colonography in a colorectal cancer screening
programme: Randomised controlled trial,” Gut, vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 1552–
1559, 2012.
[3] R. E. van Gelder, E. Birnie, J. Florie, M. P. Schutter, J. F. Bartelsman,
P. Snel, J. S. Laméris, G. J. Bonsel, and J. Stoker, “CT colonography and
colonoscopy: Assessment of patient preference in a 5-week follow-up
study,” Radiology, vol. 233, no. 2, pp. 328–337, 2004.
[4] M. H. Liedenbaum, A. H. de Vries, C. I. Gouw, A. F. van Rijn, S. Bipat,
E. Dekker, and J. Stoker, “CT colonography with minimal bowel preparation: Evaluation of tagging quality, patient acceptance, and diagnostic
accuracy in two iodine-based preparation schemes,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 20,
no. 2, pp. 367–376, Feb. 2010.
[5] E. Neri, F. Turini, F. Cerri, P. Vagle, and C. Bartolozzi, “CT colonography: Same-day tagging regimen with iodixanol and reduced cathartic
preparation,” Abdom. Imag., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 642–647, Sep./Oct. 2009.
[6] K. Nagata, T. Okawa, A. Honma, S. Endo, S. E. Kudo, and H. Yoshida,
“Full-laxative versus minimum-laxative fecal-tagging CT colonography
using 64-detector row CT: Prospective blinded comparison of diagnostic performance, tagging quality, and patient acceptance,” Acad. Radiol.,
vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 780–789, Jul. 2009.
[7] E. M. Stoop, M. C. de Haan, T. R. de Wijkerslooth, P. M. Bossuyt, M. van
Ballegooijen, C. Y. Nio, M. J. van de Vijver, K. Biermann, M. Thomeer,
M. E. van Leerdam, P. Fockens, J. Stoker, E. J. Kuipers, and E. Dekker,
“Participation and yield of colonoscopy versus non-cathartic CT colonography in population-based screening for colorectal cancer: A randomised
controlled trial,” Lancet Oncol., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 55–64, 2012.
[8] M. H. Liedenbaum, M. J. Denters, F. M. Zijta, V. F. van Ravesteijn,
F. M. Vos, S. Bipat, E. Dekker, and J. Stoker, “Reducing the oral contrast dose in CT colonography: Evaluation of faecal tagging quality and
patient acceptance,” Clin. Radiol., vol. 66, pp. 30–37, 2011.
[9] W. Cai, M. E. Zalis, J. Näppi, G. J. Harris, and H. Yoshida, “Structureanalysis method for electronic cleansing in cathartic and noncathartic CT
colonography,” Med. Phys., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 3259–3277, Jul. 2008.
[10] W. Cai, H. Yoshida, M. E. Zalis, J. J. Näppi, and G. J. Harris, “Informatics
in radiology: Electronic cleansing for noncathartic CT colonography: A
structure-analysis scheme,” Radiographics, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 585–602,
May/Jun. 2010.
[11] I. W. O. Serlie, A. H. de Vries, F. M. Vos, Y. Nio, R. Truyen, J. Stoker, and
L. J. van Vliet, “Lesion conspicuity and efficiency of CT colonography
with electronic cleansing based on a three-material transition model,” AJR,
vol. 191, no. 5, pp. 1493–502, 2008.
[12] M. S. Juchems, A. Ernst, P. Johnson, S. Virmani, H.-J. Brambs, and
A. J. Aschoff, “Electronic colon-cleansing for CT colonography: Diagnostic performance,” Abdom. Imag., vol. 34, pp. 359–364, 2009.

VAN RAVESTEIJN et al.: ELECTRONIC CLEANSING FOR 24-H LIMITED BOWEL PREPARATION CT COLONOGRAPHY

[13] A. H. de Vries, M. H. Liedenbaum, S. Bipat, R. Truyen, I. W. O. Serlie,
R. H. Cohen, S. G. van Elderen, O. Kesselring, W. de Monyé, L. te Strake,
T. Wiersma, and J. Stoker, “Primary uncleansed 2D versus primary electronically cleansed 3D in limited bowel preparation CT-colonography. Is
there a difference for novices and experienced readers?” Eur. Radiol.,
vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1939–1950, Aug. 2009.
[14] E. Neri, T. Mang, M. Hellstrom, A. Mantarro, L. Faggioni, and C.
Bartolozzi, “How to read and report CTC,” Eur. Radiol., 2012, DOI:
10.1016/j.ejrad.2012.03.035.
[15] D. Burling, “CT colonography standards,” Clin. Radiol., vol. 65, no. 6,
pp. 474–480, 2010.
[16] A. H. de Vries, H. W. Venema, J. Florie, C. Y. Nio, and J. Stoker, “Influence of tagged fecal material on detectability of colorectal polyps at CT:
Phantom study,” AJR, vol. 191, no. 4, pp. W181–W189, 2008.
[17] I. W. O. Serlie, F. M. Vos, R. Truyen, F. H. Post, J. Stoker, and L. J. van
Vliet, “Electronic cleansing for computed tomography (CT) colonography
using a scale-invariant three-material model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1306–1317, Jun. 2010.
[18] S. Lakare, M. Wan, M. Sato, and A. Kaufman, “3-D digital cleansing
using segmentation rays,” in Proc. Vis., 2000, pp. 37–44.
[19] S. Lakare, D. Chen, L. Li, A. Kaufman, M. Wax, and Z. Liang, “Electronic
colon cleansing using segmentation rays for virtual colonoscopy,” in Proc.
SPIE Med. Imag. Physiol. Funct. Multidimens. Imag., 2002, pp. 412–418.
[20] S. Lakare, D. Chen, L. Li, A. Kaufman, M. Wax, and Z. Liang, “Robust
colon residue detection using vector quantization based classification for
virtual colonoscopy,” in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag. Physiol. Funct. Multidimens. Imag., 2003, pp. 515–520.
[21] M. Zalis, J. Perumpillichira, C. D. Frate, and P. Hahn, “CT colonography:
Digital subtraction bowel cleansing with mucosal reconstruction initial
observations,” Radiology, vol. 226, no. 3, pp. 911–917, 2003.
[22] M. Zalis, J. Perumpillichira, and P. Hahn, “Digital subtraction bowel
cleansing for CT colonography using morphological and linear filtration
methods,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1335–1343, Nov.
2004.
[23] Z. Wang, Z. Liang, X. Li, L. Li, B. Li, D. Eremina, and H. Lu, “An
improved electronic colon cleansing method for detection of colonic
polyps by virtual colonoscopy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 8,
pp. 1635–1646, Aug. 2006.
[24] M. Franaszek, R. Summers, P. Pickhardt, and J. Choi, “Hybrid segmentation of colon filled with air and opacified fluid for CT colonography,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 358–368, Mar. 2006.
[25] S. Wang, L. Li, H. Cohen, S. Mankes, J. Chen, and Z. Liang, “An EM
approach to MAP solution of segmenting tissue mixture precentages with
application to CT-based virtual colonography,” Med. Phys., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 5787–5798, 2008.
[26] I. W. O. Serlie, F. M. Vos, R. Truyen, F. H. Post, and L. J. van Vliet,
“Classifying CT image data into material fractions by a scale and rotation invariant edge model,” IEEE Trans. Imag. Process., vol. 16, no. 12,
pp. 2891–2904, Dec. 2007.
[27] W. Cai, J.-G. Lee, M. E. Zalis, and H. Yoshida, “Mosaic decomposition:
An electronic cleansing method for inhomogeneously tagged regions in
noncathartic CT colonography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 559–574, Mar. 2011.
[28] L. Hong, S. Muraki, A. E. Kaufman, D. Bartz, and T. He, “Virtual voyage:
Interactive navigation in the human colon,” in Proc. SIGGRAPH, 1997,
pp. 27–34.
[29] C. F. Beaulieu, R. B. Jeffrey, C. Karadi, D. S. Paik, and S. Napel, “Display
modes for CT colonographyPart II,” Radiology, vol. 212, pp. 203–212,
1999.
[30] F. M. Vos, R. E. van Gelder, I. W. O. Serlie, J. Florie, C. Y. Nio, A. S. Glas,
F. H. Post, R. Truyen, F. A. Gerritsen, and J. Stoker, “Three-dimensional
display modes for CT colonography: Conventional 3D virtual colonoscopy
versus unfolded cube projection,” Radiology, vol. 228, pp. 878–885, 2003.
[31] P. J. Pickhardt, J. R. Choi, I. Hwang, J. A. Butler, M. L. Puckett,
H. A. Hildebrandt, R. K. Wong, P. A. Nugent, P. A. Mysliwiec, and
W. R. Schindler, “Computed tomographic virtual colonoscopy to screen
for colorectal neoplasia in asymptomatic adults,” N. Engl. J. Med.,
vol. 349, pp. 2191–2200, 2003.
[32] C. van Wijk, V. F. van Ravesteijn, F. M. Vos, and L. J. van Vliet, “Detection
and segmentation of colonic polyps on implicit isosurfaces by second
principal curvature flow,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 688–
698, Mar. 2010.

3045

[33] C. van Wijk, V. F. van Ravesteijn, F. M. Vos, R. Truyen, A. H. de Vries,
J. Stoker, and L. J. van Vliet, “Detection of protrusions in curved folded
surfaces applied to automated polyp detection in CT colonography,” in
Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist- Intervention Conf., 2006,
vol. 4191, pp. 471–478.
[34] G. Stamm and H. Nagel, “CT-Expo–a novel program for dose evaluation
in CT,” Fortschr. Roentgenstr., vol. 174, pp. 1570–1576, 2002.
[35] ICRP, “The 2007 recommendations of the international commission on
radiological protection,” Ann. ICRP, vol. 37, no. 103, pp. 2–4, 2007.
[36] L. J. van Vliet and P. W. Verbeek, “Curvature and bending energy in
digitized 2-D and 3-D images,” in Proc. 8th Scandinav. Conf. Imag. Anal.,
1993, pp. 1403–1410.
[37] L. J. van Vliet and B. J. H. Verwer, “A contour processing method for fast
binary neighbourhood operations,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 27–36, 1988.
[38] V. F. van Ravesteijn, C. van Wijk, F. Vos, R. Truyen, J. F. Peters, and
L. J. van Vliet, “Computer aided detection of polyps in CT colonography
using logistic regression,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 120–
131, Jan. 2010.
[39] J. Hardin and J. Hilbe, Generalized Estimating Equations. London,
U.K.: Chapman& Hall, 2003.
[40] P. J. Pickhardt, A. D. Lee, A. J. Taylor, S. J. Michel, T. Winter, A. Shadid,
R. J. Meiners, P. J. Chase, J. L. Hinshaw, J. G. Williams, T. M. Prout,
S. H. Husain, and D. H. Kim, “Primary 2-D versus primary 3-D polyp
detection at screening CT colonography,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 189,
no. 6, pp. 1451–1456, Dec. 2007.
[41] M. Chaparro, J. Gisbert, L. Del Campo, J. Cantero, and J. Maté, “Accuracy
of computed tomographic colonography for the detection of polyps and
colorectal tumors: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Digestion,
vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2009.
[42] R. E. van Gelder, J. Florie, C. Y. Nio, S. Jensch, S. W. de Jager, F. M. Vos,
H. W. Venema, J. F. Bartelsman, J. B. Reitsma, P. M. M. Bossuyt,
J. S. Laméris, and J. Stoker, “A comparison of primary two- and threedimensional methods to review CT colonography,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 17,
no. 5, pp. 1181–1192, 2007.
[43] C. D. Johnson, J. G. Fletcher, R. L. MacCarty, J. N. Mandrekar,
W. S. Harmsen, P. J. Limburg, and L. A. Wilson, “Effect of slice thickness and primary 2-D versus 3-D virtual dissection on colorectal lesion
detection at CT colonography in 452 asymptomatic adults,” AJR, vol. 189,
no. 3, pp. 672–680, 2007.
[44] D. K. Lenhart, J. Babb, J. Bonavita, D. Kim, E. J. Bini, A. J. Megibow,
and M. Macari, “Comparison of a unidirectional panoramic 3-D endoluminal interpretation technique to traditional 2–D and bidirectional 3-D
interpretation techniques at CT colonography: Preliminary observations,”
Clin. Radiol., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 118–125, Feb. 2010.
[45] C. D. Johnson, M.-H. Chen, A. Y. Toledano, J. P. Heiken, A. Dachman,
M. D. Kuo, C. O. Menias, B. Siewert, J. I. Cheema, R. G. Obregon,
J. L. Fidler, P. Zimmerman, K. M. Horton, K. Coakley, R. B. Iyer,
A. K. Hara, R. A. Halvorsen, G. Casola, J. Yee, B. A. Herman,
L. J. Burgart, and P. J. Limburg, “Accuracy of CT colonography for detection of large adenomas and cancers,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 359, no. 12,
pp. 1207–1217, 2008.
[46] J. Florie, R. van Gelder, M. Schutter, A. van Randen, H. Venema, S. de
Jager, V. van de Hulst, A. Prent, S. Bipat, P. Bossuyt, L. Baak, and J. Stoker,
“Feasibility study of computed tomography colonography using limited
bowel preparation at normal and low-dose levels study,” Eur. Radiol.,
vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 3112–3122, 2007.
[47] P. J. Pickhardt and J. H. R. Choi, “Electronic cleansing and stool tagging in
CT colonography: Advantages and pitfalls with primary three-dimensional
evaluation,” AJR, vol. 181, pp. 799–805, 2003.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at this time of publication.

