IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

967

Evolution-Based Hierarchical Feature Fusion
for Ultrasonic Liver Tissue Characterization
Cheng-Chi Wu, Wen-Li Lee, Yung-Chang Chen, Fellow, IEEE, and Kai-Sheng Hsieh

Abstract—This paper presents an evolution-based hierarchical
feature fusion system that selects the dominant features among
multiple feature vectors for ultrasonic liver tissue characterization. After extracting the spatial gray-level dependence matrices,
multiresolution fractal feature vectors and multiresolution energy
feature vectors, the system utilizes evolution-based algorithms to
select features. In each feature space, features are selected independently to compile a feature subset. As the features of different
feature vectors contain complementary information, a feature fusion process is used to combine the subsets generated from different
vectors. Features are then selected from the fused feature vector to
form a fused feature subset. The selected features are used to classify ultrasonic images of liver tissue into three classes: hepatoma,
cirrhosis, and normal liver. Experiment results show that the classification accuracy of the fused feature subset is superior to that
derived by using individual feature subsets. Moreover, the findings
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm is capable of selecting
discriminative features among multiple feature vectors to facilitate
the early detection of hepatoma and cirrhosis via ultrasonic liver
imaging.
Index Terms—Evolution-based, genetic algorithms, hierarchical
feature fusion (HFF), liver, particle swarm optimization (PSO),
ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
RIMARY malignancy of the liver (hepatocellular carcinoma, also called hepatoma) and cirrhosis are common
liver diseases. Hepatoma, one of the major cancers in certain
regions of Asia, is usually fatal if it is not detected early; while
cirrhosis carries the potential risk of developing into hepatoma.
Distinguishing between the two diseases is important because
their treatments differ significantly. Thus, to facilitate the early
detection of hepatoma and cirrhosis, there is an urgent need for
a method that is noninvasive, reliable and easy to perform.
In modern medicine, ultrasonic imaging technology is one of
the most widely used diagnostic tools because it is effective in

P

Manuscript received August 12, 2012; revised January 9, 2013 and March
19, 2013; accepted April 27, 2013. Date of publication May 6, 2013; date of
current version August 30, 2013. This work was supported by a grant from the
National Science Council of Taiwan under Contract NSC 99-2221-E-130-014.
C.-C. Wu and Y.-C. Chen are with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: dennis@benz.ee.
nthu.edu.tw; ycchen@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
W.-L. Lee is with the Department of Healthcare Information and Management, Ming Chuan University, Taoyuan 330, Taiwan (e-mail: wllee2002@msn.
com).
K.-S. Hsieh is with the Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung 813, Taiwan
(e-mail: kshsieh@isca.vghks.gov.tw).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2261819

visualizing soft tissue and organs, and it is relatively inexpensive compared to other modalities. Therefore, it is commonly
adopted for routine liver examinations and early detection of
liver disease.
B-mode ultrasound images present various granular structures as textures that represent the acoustic properties of human tissues. Currently, ultrasonic liver tissue characterization
depends primarily on the clinician’s ability to identify certain
textural characteristics. Because the visual interpretation of the
liver tissue is subjective, the characterization may not always be
accurate. Therefore, a quantitative method of diagnosing liver
disease based on ultrasonic liver images is desirable. Tissue
differentiation in ultrasound images can be modeled as a texture classification problem [1]. However, extracting meaningful
features is one of the most difficult aspects of texture analysis.
Among the popular texture descriptors, the spatial gray-level
dependence matrix (SGLDM) [2], [3] is a general procedure for
extracting the textural properties of blocks defined in the spatial
domain of image data. The properties contain information about
the image’s textural characteristics, such as the contrast, variance, correlation, and entropy. In ultrasound image analysis, the
multiresolution fractal vector and SGLDM are used to extract
textural information [4]–[6].
Recently, there has been a major development in texture classification with the use of multiresolution analysis, which decomposes an original image into a set of subimages. The technique
is a powerful tool that extracts information about the original
image in the time-frequency space to describe similar textures.
The wavelet transform and Gabor filters [4]–[10] are two popular multiresolution transform algorithms that are used for texture
classification.
After multiresolution decomposition, feature representation
methods are applied to the subimages to extract a set of multiresolution features. Among the feature descriptors, the fractal dimension and the energy are employed to extract features
from the subimages. The fractal dimension, which provides
fractal information about different subbands, was proposed by
Mandelbrot [11] to describe the shape and appearance of objects that have the properties of self-similarity and scale invariance. The intensity surface of B-mode ultrasound images can
be viewed as a rugged surface that can be described by fractal
geometry. The fractal dimension, one of the most significant
fractal features, describes a dimension that is strictly larger than
the topological dimension. Evaluation of the dimension provides a way to measure the degree of boundary irregularity or
surface roughness numerically. However, the fractal dimension
of the original intensity surface does not provide sufficient discriminative information due to the limited dynamic range. The

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE

968

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

combination of multiresolution analysis and fractal dimension
computation has been used successfully for ultrasonic liver tissue classification [5]. Different fractal sets may share the same
fractal dimension, but they have very different appearances or
textures. The energy and energy deviation values, which are utilized to describe an image’s texture in MPEG-7 [12], are applied
to improve the classification accuracy.
Normally, it is not feasible to use all features for classification in applications based on the SGLDM and multiresolution
features. Some features have less discriminative ability and are
regarded as redundant. Using such features would reduce the
classification accuracy and cause unnecessary computation operations [13]. The feature selection process involves choosing
a subset of features in the original feature space while maintaining the discriminative ability of different classes. Generally,
it is not known in advance which feature subset will provide
the best discriminative ability among the classes. The selection
of SGLDM features and multiresolution features is empirical
in most approaches. For example, in [5], the selection of the
multiresolution fractal feature subset used for ultrasonic liver
tissue characterization is based on observation of the Fourier
spectrum and a predefined threshold for the fractal dimension.
The manual selection of SGLDM features is inconsistent in
different applications. In [2], the angular second moment, sum
average, and entropy are selected for textural characterization of
head and neck cancer. Meanwhile, in [3], the following eleven
measures are used in the detection of prostate cancer: angular
second moment, contrast, correlation, variance, inverse difference moment, sum average, sum variance, sum entropy, entropy, difference variance, and difference entropy. In [6], the
correlation and sum entropy features are exploited to detect diffuse liver disease because they achieve the best performance in
experiments.
A large number of algorithms have been proposed to resolve
the problem of inconsistent and subjective manual feature selection. They can be divided into two categories: 1) filter methods,
which rank and select features based on certain statistical criteria
and 2) wrapper methods in which feature selection is wrapped
in a learning algorithm. Generally, wrapper methods outperform
filter methods.
Among the wrapper methods, particle swarm optimization (PSO) [14] and Genetic Algorithms (GA) [15]–[17] are
two popular approaches in evolutionary computation. PSO, a
population-based stochastic algorithm, proposed by Kennedy
and Eberhart in [18], was motivated by simulations of simplified social models, such as flocking birds and schooling fish
models. In PSO, each candidate solution is a position with a fitness value in the search space. Each particle remembers its own
best solution and also knows the best solution of its neighbor in
the current swarm. The individual particles traverse the search
space looking for an optimal solution based on global and local
information.
Genetic algorithms (GAs) are evolutionary methods. They are
based on the natural search and selection processes that ensure
survival of the fittest individuals in a population. The objective
of a GA is to find an optimal binary vector in which each bit is
associated with a feature. A binary vector can be viewed as the

genes of an individual; thus, each individual in a population is a
potential solution. During the generation phase, individuals are
evaluated and reproduced according to their fitness values, and
genetic operators are manipulated to produce a new population
from the current population. The generation phase is repeated
until a stopping criterion is met.
The fitness function plays an important role in evolutionary
computation algorithms. In this study, a fitness function is designed to give priority to the classification rate, reflecting the
importance of correct diagnoses in medical applications. The
proposed fitness function automatically determines the weights
of objectives, which are adaptive to the length of the feature
vector and the total number of samples involved in feature selection. Under the proposed fitness function, individuals with
lower classification accuracy never achieve higher fitness values than individuals with higher accuracy.
In most applications that adapt the SGLDM and multiresolution features, feature selection is applied on a single feature
vector. Even if multiple feature vectors are available, feature
selection is applied to each vector separately. Features extracted
from the same pattern by different feature extraction methods
may contain complementary information. Fusion technology
can be used to combine information extracted from different
feature vectors.
Information fusion technology has developed rapidly in recent years. There are three types of fusion strategies [19],
namely, data fusion, feature fusion, and decision fusion. Data
fusion simply combines different domains of raw data to form
a new raw dataset; decision fusion [20]–[22] combines multiple
classifiers to provide a better result; and feature fusion [23]–[28]
selects and combines features extracted from different domains
to obtain a better feature subset. For a survey of decision fusion
and feature fusion strategies for pattern classification, readers
may refer to [29].
In this study, we extract five feature vectors from the region of interest (ROI) in ultrasonic liver images. The feature
spaces include the SGLDM, multiresolution fractal feature vectors, and multiresolution energy feature vectors. We propose an
evolution-based hierarchical feature fusion (HFF) method that
selects the dominant features from multiple feature vectors. HFF
is comprised of two levels: 1) feature selection in individual feature spaces and 2) feature selection in the fused feature space. In
the first level, individual feature subsets are obtained by selecting features in each feature space. Next, in the second level, the
individual feature subsets are combined to form the fused feature
space. Then, features are selected from the fused feature space
to compile a more discriminative feature subset that contains
independent and discriminative features extracted from different feature spaces. Based on the above selection strategy, we
develop two HFF schemes called PSO-based HFF (PSO-HFF)
and GA-based HFF (GA-HFF).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we introduce the methods used to extract features from ultrasonic liver images. We describe the proposed
evolution-based HFF scheme in Section III, and present the
experimental results in Section IV. Then, in Section V, we summarize our conclusions.

WU et al.: EVOLUTION-BASED HIERARCHICAL FEATURE FUSION FOR ULTRASONIC LIVER TISSUE CHARACTERIZATION

Fig. 1.

Feature extraction methods for different feature spaces.

II. FEATURE EXTRACTION
The proposed approach extracts five feature vectors from each
ultrasonic liver tissue pattern. Fig. 1 shows the feature extraction methods used for different feature spaces. The M -band
wavelet transform and Gabor filters facilitate multiresolution
analysis. Two texture descriptors are applied to the decomposed
subimages to extract the following four multiresolution feature vectors: the fractal dimensions of the wavelet subimages
(Wavelet-fd), the energy and energy deviation of the wavelet
subimages (Wavelet-eng), the fractal dimensions of the Gabor
subimages (Gabor-fd), and the energy and energy deviation of
the Gabor subimages (Gabor-eng). The last feature space is the
SGLDM.
A. Multiresolution Feature Vectors
Multiresolution analysis decomposes a signal into numerous
details at various resolutions, each of which characterizes the
distinct physical structure of the signal. The M -band wavelet
transform and the Gabor filter bank are used to decompose
the original image into subimages. Two descriptors, namely,
the fractal dimension and the energy and energy deviation, are
applied to two sets of subimages to extract four multiresolution
feature vectors.
1) M -Band Wavelet Transform: Traditional multiresolution
analysis uses a two-channel filter bank to decompose subimages
recursively in the low frequency channel. However, significant
texture information may also be found in the middle frequency
channel, so just decomposing subimages in the lower frequency
channel may not provide information that is sufficiently discriminative for classification [30]. Multiresolution analysis that
is based on the M -band scaling function and wavelet function provides a more flexible tiling of the time-scale plane than
two-band multiresolution analysis. For the background and implementation details of the M -band wavelet transform, readers
may refer to [5].
2) Gabor Filter Bank: It has been shown that the Gabor
wavelets are optimal in the sense that they minimize the uncertainty in the space and frequency domains [31], [32]. The Gabor
filters are self-similar, which means that all filters can be generated from one filter through dilation and rotation. Each filter is
in the shape of plane waves with a frequency W , restricted by a

969

Gaussian envelop function with relative widths σx and σy . The
parameters of a Gabor filter are the central frequency W , the
orientation θk , the number of levels, and the relative widths σx
and σy of the Gaussian function. Extracting useful features from
a signal normally requires a set of Gabor filters with different
frequencies and orientations that cover the appropriate spatial
frequency space.
3) Texture Feature Representation by the Fractal Model: If
we regard the intensity of image pixels as their height above a
plane, the intensity surface can be viewed as a rugged surface,
and the fractal dimension can provide a quantitative measure of
the roughness of an image. The box-counting approaches [33],
[34] are popular for estimating the fractal dimension of images.
Among the box-counting approaches, we utilize the revised
differential box counting (DBC) method [35] because it covers
a higher dynamic range and it can be computed efficiently. The
revised DBC method is applied to decomposed subimages to
extract a multiresolution fractal feature vector, which is defined
as
F Vfractal = (f0 , f1,1 , f1,2 , . . . , fm ,1 , . . . , fm ,i , . . .)

(1)

where f0 is the fractal dimension of original image and fm ,i
denotes the fractal dimension of the ith subimage at level m.
4) Texture Feature Representation by Energy and Energy
Deviation: The energy and energy deviation texture descriptor
[12] is based on a filter bank approach. The descriptor comprises
the first and second moments of energy in subimages, which are
defined as
H −1 W −1
1  
|Ii,j (x, y)|
W · H y =0 x=0


−1
−1 W

 1 H
=
(|Ii,j (x, y)| − Ei,j )2
W · H y =0 x=0

Ei,j =

(2)

σi,j

(3)

where Ii,j (x, y) is the intensity of a filtered image of size W ×
H at level i in the orientation j. If S levels and K orientations
are considered in the implementation, the corresponding feature
vector can be derived as follows:
F Venergy = (E0 , σ0 , E1,1 , σ1,1 , E1,2 , σ1,2 , . . .
Ei,j , σi,j , . . . , ES,K , σS,K )

(4)

where E0 and σ0 represent the first and second moments of
energy in the original image, respectively.
B. SGLDM
Suppose that an image to be analyzed is rectangular and that it
has Rx resolution cells in the horizontal direction and Ry resolution cells in the vertical direction. Let Rg denote the number of
distinct quantized gray levels in each resolution cell. There are
eight nearest-neighbor resolution cells for each resolution cell,
resulting in four angular spatial gray-level dependence matrices. Let I(i, j) be the SGLDM entry at gray levels i and j. Each
(i, j)th entry of the matrix indicates the frequency that two gray
levels i and j being neighbors under the given neighborhood
definition. The following thirteen textural features are extracted

970

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

particles’ velocities and positions until a stopping criterion is
met. Each particle i remembers its own best search position
pBesti , and particles can share information with their neighbors. A particle knows the global best position, gBest, of all the
members if we regard the whole population as its topological
neighborhood. Each particle adjusts its trajectory based on the
information about its own best position and the global best position. The velocities and positions of the particles are updated
by the following equations:
vik +1 = vik + ϕ1

(pBestki − xki )
(gBestk − xki )
+ ϕ2
Δt
Δt

(6)

xki +1 = xki + vik +1 Δt

(7)

and

where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are random variables with a uniform distribution in the range [0.0, 1.0], k and k + 1 represent the current
iteration and the next iteration, respectively, and Δt is the time
interval between successive iterations.
Fig. 2.

Flowchart of the evolution-based hierarchical feature fusion scheme.

from each SGLDM: the angular second moment, contrast, correlation, variance, inverse difference moment, sum average, sum
variance, sum entropy, entropy, difference variance, difference
entropy, and two information measures of correlation.
For each resolution cell, there are four angular spatial graylevel dependence matrices. In this study, we derive a set of
four values for each of the 13 measures, resulting in a feature
vector with 52 elements. The evolution-based algorithm is used
to select the SGLDM feature subset for ultrasonic liver tissue
characterization. The SGLDM feature vector is formulated as
follows:
F VSGLDM = (f1,1 , f1,2 , f1,3 , f1,4 , . . . , fn ,1 , fn ,2 , fn ,3 , fn ,4
. . . , f13,1 , f13,2 , f13,3 , f13,4 )

(5)

where fn ,1 , fn ,2 , fn ,3 , fn ,4 comprise the set of four values of
the nth textural feature.
III. EVOLUTION-BASED HIERARCHICAL FEATURE FUSION
As mentioned earlier, the proposed two-level HFF system
selects dominant discriminative features from multiple feature
spaces. In the first-level, evolution-based feature selection is
performed on individual feature spaces to obtain separate feature subsets. Then, in the second-level, the derived subsets are
combined to form a fused feature space, and the above selection process is applied on the fused feature space to obtain the
fused feature subset. The flowchart of the evolution-based HFF
system is shown in Fig. 2.
A. Particle Swarm Optimization
A swarm contains a certain number of particles in the
D-dimensional search space. Particles are initialized with random positions xi and velocities vi . For each position x in the
search space, a fitness value is determined by the fitness function f (x). During the iterative process, the PSO updates the

B. PSO-Based Feature Selection
In most cases, some of the features in a feature space are
strongly correlated. Usually, it is not feasible to use all the features for classification because some of them have less discriminative ability and can be regarded as redundant. The objective
of feature selection is to choose a subset of features in the original feature space, while maintaining the discriminative ability
between classes. Generally, it is not known in advance which
feature subset will provide the best discriminative ability between classes. As mentioned earlier, the selection of SGLDM
features and multiresolution features is empirical in most approaches. For example, in [5], selection of the multiresolution
fractal vector used for ultrasonic liver tissue characterization is
based on observation of the Fourier spectrum and a predefined
threshold value for the fractal dimension. The manual selection
of the SGLDM feature is inconsistent in different applications.
In contrast to manual feature selection, the proposed PSObased feature selection algorithm selects features objectively.
The search space in binary feature selection problems is a Ddimensional state space, where the binary value of each dimension represents the decision of the corresponding feature. If a
feature is to be selected, the corresponding bit value is set at 1;
however, if the feature is to be discarded, the corresponding bit
value is set at 0. PSO-based feature selection is implemented
with a binary version of a PSO algorithm [36]. In binary PSO,
particles move in a state space restricted to 0 and 1 on each dimension. The velocity of a particle is described by the number
of bits changed per iteration. The velocity update equation of
binary PSO is similar to that of continuous PSO, except that
pBesti , gBest, and xi are binary strings whose length is equal
to the dimension of the search space. The binary PSO velocity
update equation becomes
(pBestkid − xkid )
(gBestkd − xkid )
+ ϕ2
(8)
Δt
Δt
where d denotes the dth dimension, and Δt = 1. The velocity
of each dimension is restricted to the interval [0.0, 1.0]. The
k +1
k
= vid
+ ϕ1
vid

WU et al.: EVOLUTION-BASED HIERARCHICAL FEATURE FUSION FOR ULTRASONIC LIVER TISSUE CHARACTERIZATION

position update rule of binary PSO is represented as follows:

xid = 1 if rand() < S(vid )
(9)
xid = 0 otherwise
where S() is a sigmoid limiting transformation, and rand() is
a random number selected from a uniform distribution in the
range [0.0, 1.0].
In the initialization stage, a population of n particles is generated randomly. Particles are initialized with random positions
and velocities. Before the stopping criterion is met, particles update their positions and velocities based on their fitness values.
The fitness value of a specific position is evaluated by the fitness
function as follows:
f (x) = CR(x) −

|x|
Ntotal × D

(10)

where x is the specific position; CR(x) is the leave-one-out
classification accuracy using the selected features, Ntotal denotes the total number of samples used for feature selection,
and |x| is the cardinality of the feature subset.
C. GA-Based Feature Selection
The GA is a stochastic method that mimics natural evolution.
It is similar to PSO in many respects. The basic iterative model
of the GA is an evaluation-selection-reproduction loop. The
population pool consists of a set of individuals, each of which
is a potential solution. An individual can be represented by a
chromosome, which is encoded as a binary string whose length
is defined by the number of candidate features. The binary string
can be viewed as a mask vector of the feature vector. Each
bit of the string represents the decision of the corresponding
feature. If a feature is to be selected, the corresponding bit of
the binary string is set at 1; and if the feature is to be discarded,
the corresponding bit is set at 0.
In the population initialization stage, a population of n individuals is generated randomly. Given the population of the
current generation, the next generation is produced by a threestage process: evaluation, selection and reproduction.
In the evaluation stage, the fitness of each individual is determined by a fitness function. The individuals with higher fitness
values will have a better chance of survival and reproduction.
The fitness function of the GA is similar to (10) except that PSO
evaluates the fitness value for a specific position x, while the GA
evaluates the fitness value of each individual i in the population,
1 ≤ i ≤ n.
In the selection process, we use the roulette wheel selection
scheme to choose individuals for the mating pool. The
probability of an individual i being selected is p(i) = f (i)/ N
j =1 f (j).
In the reproduction stage, genetic operators are manipulated
to produce a new population (offspring) from the current population (parents). The genetic operators perform two operations:
crossover and mutation. To retain the most suitable individuals,
the first-half of the individuals are reserved as an elite group,
and the remainder are regenerated by a two-point crossover
operation. Two individuals in the mating pool are selected as
parents, and they exchange substring information at a random

971

section to generate two children. The crossover rate Pc controls
the probability that the crossover operation will be applied to
each couple. The crossover is invoked only when a randomly
generated number between 0 and 1 is smaller than Pc .
After crossover, the whole population is subjected to mutation. The objective is to prevent the evolutionary process from
being trapped in a suboptimal solution. The mutation operator
randomly flips some of the bits in the population. The mutation rate Pm gives the probability of each bit to be flipped. The
GA stops when the number of generations reaches a predefined
value.
D. Fitness Function
The fitness function is the objective function to be optimized.
In this study, the fitness function is a popular form that maximizes the classification accuracy while minimizing the size of
the feature subset. However, methodologies with empirically
derived weightings of the objectives cannot guarantee that the
selected feature subset will have the highest classification accuracy among all evaluated subsets. The proposed fitness function
selects the feature subset with the minimum feature length from
the group with the highest classification accuracy. In the training
phase, the leave-one-out classification accuracy is represented
as CR(x) = Ncorrect /Ntotal , where Ncorrect is the number of
correctly classified samples. The proposed fitness function in
(10) can be rewritten as
Ncorrect
|x|
−
Ntotal
Ntotal × D
1
× (Ncorrect × D − |x|)
=
Ntotal × D
1
× g(x).
=
Ntotal × D

f (x) =

Hence,
arg max f (x) = arg max g(x).
x

x

Let Ncorrect = n, 0 ≤ n ≤ Ntotal , such that
nD − D ≤ gn (x) ≤ nD − 1.
If Ncorrect = n + 1,
(n + 1)D − D ≤ gn +1 (x) ≤ (n + 1)D − 1.
From the previous two inequalities, we get the inequality gn (x) ≤ nD − 1 < nD ≤ gn +1 (x), which implies that
gn (x) < gn +1 (x). Since the lower bound of gn +1 (x) is greater
than the upper bound of gn (x), the proposed fitness function
guarantees that positions with higher classification accuracy are
superior to positions with lower classification accuracy. In the
candidate set of positions that achieve the same classification accuracy, positions with smaller |x| will have better fitness values.
In summary, the proposed evolution-based feature selection algorithm searches for the solution that selects the fewest features
from the set with the highest classification accuracy.

972

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

E. Hierarchical Feature Fusion (HFF)
Recall that the first stage of the HFF approach selects individual feature spaces. Let Fi be the feature vector extracted by the
ith feature extraction method. After feature extraction, the vector
{F1 , F2 , . . . , FM } is generated, where M is the total number of
feature spaces. For the ith feature space, a corresponding binary
feature mask, M aski , represents the best solution after feature
selection. The masked feature vector F̃i can be computed by
F̃i = M aski  Fi , where  denotes component-wise multiplication. If the best-fitting feature mask of the individual feature
space is not unique, the best-fitting feature masks are combined
to filter out the corresponding features.
The second stage of the HFF system involves feature fusion
and selection of the fused feature vector. Masked feature vectors of different feature spaces should be normalized before
fusion. The fused feature space is the combination of the normalized feature subsets selected from individual feature spaces,
i.e., Ffused = {F˜1 , F˜2 , . . . , F˜M }. The feature selection method
is applied to Ffused to select the final feature subset.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset Description: The ultrasonic liver images used
in this research were captured by a phased-array system
(Aloka SSD-265) with a 3.5-MHz transducer, and scanned with
32-pixel/cm and 8-bit/pixel resolution. All images were standardized to the same mean intensity (i.e., 128) and verified by a
specialist physician. The participating patients were given biopsies for pathological diagnosis to provide the ground truth. The
ultrasonic liver image dataset contains 432 tissue patterns, which
can be categorized into three classes: hepatoma (166 samples
from 44 patients), cirrhosis (176 samples from 46 patients), and
normal liver (90 samples from 23 patients). For each sample, a
ROI of 64 × 64 pixels with 256 gray levels is chosen. The ROI
only includes liver parenchyma, without major blood vessels,
acoustic shadowing, or any type of distortion. In clinic, nodules
less than 2 cm in diameter are difficult to characterize by radiological or pathological examination [37], [38]. As the ultrasonic
liver images were scanned with 32-pixel/cm in our experiments,
we set the ROI to 64 × 64 pixels, which is equal to 2 cm × 2 cm
in physical size. The first row of Fig. 3 shows tissue patterns of
hepatoma, cirrhosis, and normal liver.
Since there exist no publicly available dataset for ultrasound
liver images to serve as a standard training set, we split the
samples in our dataset at subject level into two disjoint sets:
50% serve as the training set and 50% serve as the test set.
These two sets were taken from separate patients. The training
set contains 216 samples that came from 56 patients and the
test set contains 216 samples that came from 57 patients. The
feature selection and feature fusion algorithms are applied to
the training set. Tests are performed on the test set to verify the
robustness of the selected features.
To reduce variability, three-fold cross validation is implemented on the test set ten times with different partitions. Ten
random seeds are generated, each of them separates the test

Fig. 3. Original tissue patterns, Wavelet subimages and Gabor subimages for
the three liver classes. (a)–(c) are the tissue patterns extracted by experienced
clinicians for hepatoma, cirrhosis, and normal liver respectively, (d)–(f) are the
subimages after first-level decomposition by the M -band wavelet transform for
hepatoma, cirrhosis, and normal liver respectively, (g)–(i) are the subimages after
second-level decomposition by the M -band wavelet transform for hepatoma,
cirrhosis, and normal liver respectively, and (j)–(l) are the subimages after
decomposition by the Gabor filter bank for hepatoma, cirrhosis, and normal
liver, respectively. The subimages highlighted with red rectangles correspond
to the features selected by the proposed approach.

set into three disjoint subsets. Each subset is used as a test
set for a classifier trained on the remaining two subsets. Each
three-fold cross validation produces 216 classification results
(83 instances for hepatoma, 88 instances for cirrhosis, and 45
instances for normal liver). Thus, the total number of instances
for hepatoma, cirrhosis, and normal liver are 830, 880, and 450
respectively. The overall classification accuracy is averaged over
the ten rounds.
2) Feature Extraction: Five feature vectors are extracted for
each tissue pattern. Four multiresolution feature vectors are extracted by the combination of multiresolution analysis and feature representation. From the viewpoint of discrete-time signal
processing, an M-channel filter can be obtained by cascading
smaller systems [39]. A mixture of two-channel and threechannel filter banks [5], [35] is applied to facilitate decomposition by the M -band wavelet transform. A tissue pattern is
decomposed into 45 sub-images by the M -band wavelet transform. The Gabor filter bank is implemented with five radial

WU et al.: EVOLUTION-BASED HIERARCHICAL FEATURE FUSION FOR ULTRASONIC LIVER TISSUE CHARACTERIZATION

center frequencies and six orientations, generating 31 subimages
each tissue
√
√ pattern.
√ The radial
√ frequencies used are
√ for
2/25 , 2/24 , 2/23 , 2/22 , and 2/2. The orientations
used are 0◦ , 30◦ , 60◦ , 90◦ , 120◦ , and 150◦ . Fig. 3(d)– (f) shows
the subimages after the first-level decomposition by the M -band
wavelet transform; Fig. 3(g)–(i) shows the subimages after the
second-level M -band wavelet decomposition; and Fig. 3(j)–(l)
shows the subimages decomposed by the Gabor filter bank for
the hepatoma, cirrhosis, and normal liver. The Wavelet-fd and
Gabor-fd feature vectors are extracted by estimating the fractal
dimensions of the wavelet subimages and the Gabor subimages;
the Wavelet-eng feature vector is generated by calculating the
energies of the wavelet subimages; and the Gabor-eng feature
vector is generated by calculating the energies and energy deviations of the Gabor subimages. The SGLDM feature vector
contains 52 elements, which are extracted by the four angular
spatial gray-level dependence matrices of the 13 measures.
3) Feature Selection: Feature selection is essential in the
HFF method. In this study, we utilize the PSO and GA for feature
selection with the k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classifier. The PSObased feature selection is implemented based on Standard PSO
2007 (SPSO 07, [40]) with default parameters. The swarm size
for PSO is set at 100, and the maximum number of evaluations
is 20,000. An evaluation is a position update for a particle. For
GA-based feature selection, the parameters are set as follows.
Population size = 100
Number of generations = 200
Probability of crossover (Pc ) = 0.8
Probability of mutation (Pm ) = 0.01
4) Brief Introduction of the Compared Feature Fusion Algorithms: We compare the performance of HFF with that of two
existing feature fusion schemes: the serial feature combination
scheme and the serial feature fusion scheme [28].
a) Serial feature combination: Suppose A and B are two
feature spaces defined on the pattern sample space Ω. For an
arbitrary sample ζ ∈ Ω, the corresponding two feature vectors
are α ∈ A and β ∈ B, where α is n-dimensional and β is mdimensional.
The serial combined feature of ζ is defined by γ =
α 	
,
where
γ
is
a (n + m)-dimensional feature vector. All serial
β
combined feature vectors of pattern samples form a (n + m)dimensional serial combined feature space. In this study, the
five individual feature spaces form a 235-dimensional serial
combined feature space.
b) Serial feature fusion: The serial feature fusion is a process of feature selection based on the serial feature combination
method, and the resulting feature is called a serial fused feature.
5) Pattern Classifiers: There are four different classifiers
adopted for performance comparisons in this study. We briefly
review these four classification techniques.
a) k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) Classifier: In a kNN classifier, each class is represented by a set of prototype vectors. The k
closest neighbors of a pattern vector are found from among all of
the prototypes. Hence, the class label is determined by the
 majority rule. Let the number of voting neighbors be k = i Ki ,
the classification rule assigns the test sample to the class that
has the largest proportion ki /k. In this study, the value of k is
set at 9.

973

b) Fuzzy k-Nearest Neighbor (Fuzzy-kNN) Classifier:
The fuzzy kNN classifier is defined as a function of the number
of neighborhoods (k), class membership degrees, and distances
between a pattern to be classified and patterns for which the
class membership degrees were previously determined. A class
membership degree between 0 and 1 is computed using the first
minimum distances and the known class membership degrees
of the patterns. In fuzzy-kNN classifier, we use nine nearest
neighbors and 3.2 for fuzziness.
c) Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN): Suppose there
are k patterns, each of which is d-dimensional. The class number
is c. The PNN consists of d input units comprising the input
layer. Each input unit is connected to each of the k pattern units.
Each pattern units are connected to one and only one of the c
category units. The connection from the input to pattern units
represent the weights to be trained. The network is trained by
setting the weight vectors in one of the pattern units equal to
each pattern in the training set.
The trained network is then used for classification. A test
pattern X is placed at the input units. Let Xk i , k = 1, 2, . . . Li
be the sample pattern belonging to a class ci . The estimator of
this class is



Li

1
1
(X − Xk i )T (X − Xk i )
exp −
fi (x) =
Li (2π)N /2 σ N
2σ 2
k =1
(11)
where Li is the total number of training patterns belonging to
the class ci , Xk i is the kth training pattern from the class ci .
The smoothing parameter σ is used to describe the sharpness of
each sample pattern distribution, which was set at 0.05. For the
background and implementation details of the PNN classifier,
readers may refer to [41].
d) Support Vector Machine (SVM): The goal of SVM
[42], [43] is to produce a model (based on the training data)
which predicts the target values of the test data. In the training
stage, SVM finds an maximum-margin hyperplane to separate
the training data of different classes. The LIBSVM [44] library,
which was a software implementation of SVM, was used in this
study. In the SVM training stage, the radial basis function (RBF)
kernel is adopted, the gamma of the kernel function γ is set at
12, and the tradeoff parameter C is 7.
B. Results
Table I shows the feature selection results of different feature
spaces. The features of the fused feature subset distributed in the
five feature spaces. The features selected by the PSO-HFF and
GA-HFF for ultrasonic liver tissue characterization is listed in
Table II. For the SGLDM feature space, the 18th feature represents the inverse difference moment calculated from the 45◦ angular SGLDM, and the 25th feature is the sum variance derived
from the 0◦ angular SGLDM. For the multiresolution feature
vectors, the subimages corresponding to the selected features
are highlighted with red rectangles in Fig. 3. The first wavelet
subimage is the original sample. The tenth wavelet subimage is
distributed in the low frequency channel, and the 37th wavelet
subimage is distributed in the middle frequency channel. These

974

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

TABLE I
FEATURE SELECTION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT FEATURE SPACES

TABLE II
LIST OF THE FEATURES SELECTED BY THE PSO-HFF AND GA-HFF FOR
ULTRASONIC LIVER TISSUE CHARACTERIZATION

TABLE III
TEST RESULTS FOR THE ULTRASONIC LIVER IMAGE DATABASE FOR EACH
FEATURE SPACE (CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY, UNIT: %)

*The Fused feature space without feature selection is the 235-D serial
combined feature space.

findings verify that the most significant texture information often appears in the middle frequency and low frequency channels.
The information can be extracted by the M -band wavelet transform.
In the Gabor-fd feature vector, the 1st, 15th, and 21st features
are selected; and in the Gabor-eng feature vector, the 1st, 19th,
27th, and 53rd features are selected, which are the energies of the
1st, 10th, 14th, and 27th Gabor subimages, respectively. The first
feature of the Gabor-fd is the fractal dimension generated from
the original sample. It is identical to the first feature of Waveletfd. The 15th, 21st, and 27th Gabor subimages are extracted by
the Gabor filter bank with θ = 30◦ and level = 3, 4, 5, respectively. The 10th Gabor subimage is extracted by the Gabor filter
bank with θ = 60◦ and level = 2; the 14th Gabor subimage is
extracted with θ = 0◦ and level = 3.
Table III summarizes the classification results without feature
selection. In terms of the fused feature space, the five individual feature spaces form a 235-D serial combined feature space,
which is generated without feature selection. Then, we compare
the performance of HFF with that of the serial feature combination scheme and the serial feature fusion scheme. Table IV
shows the test results of the compared schemes. The accuracy
of serial combined feature space is slightly higher than that of

individual feature spaces with the kNN, fuzzy-kNN, and SVM
classifiers, which indicates that the various feature vectors contain complementary information. However, the serial combined
feature space is a high dimensional feature space and contains
some redundant information. The evolution-based feature selection scheme is applied to the serial combined feature space to
extract the serial fused feature subset. The serial feature fusion
scheme can select about 10% of the serial combined features,
and the classification accuracy of the serial fused feature subset is generally higher than that of the serial combined feature
space.
Compared with the serial feature fusion scheme, HFF selects
features with more discriminative ability for classification. The
test accuracy of the HFF feature subset is superior to that of the
serial feature fusion feature subset. The GA-HFF feature subset contains eight features distributed in the five feature spaces.
Compared with the total number of features in the original five
feature spaces, the feature reduction rate of GA-HFF is 96.6%.
Classification algorithms are based on different theories; hence,
their performance varies for different applications. However,
the fused feature subset is robust for the four classifiers in this
study. The accuracy of the fused feature subset reaches 95.05%
when the simple kNN classifier is used. The accuracy is even
higher under the PNN and SVM classifiers, which are relatively
complicated classifiers. We observe that the accuracy of the
fused feature subset is higher than that of the individual feature
subsets. Thus, the concept of fusing complementary information from different feature spaces to obtain a better decision is
proved.
The confusion matrix of the PNN-classified test results with
the fused feature subset obtained by PSO-HFF is shown in
Table V. In the table, the columns show the correct results
proven by biopsies and the rows show the classification results.
The fused feature subset can be exploited for ultrasonic liver
tissue characterization to avoid misclassification, especially
false-negative misclassification. The false-negative rate is the
probability of misclassification such that the patients are classified as normal or as having mild liver disease, but the actual
diagnosis is more severe liver disease. A different trabecular pattern is the most common and characteristic form of hepatoma.
The trabecular pattern of the hepatoma is typically wider and
less regular than that of a normal liver; hence, the image of a
liver with hepatoma is rougher than that of a normal liver. The
major characteristic of cirrhosis is the hepatic fibrosis associated
with developing or fully established nodules [45]. The nodules

WU et al.: EVOLUTION-BASED HIERARCHICAL FEATURE FUSION FOR ULTRASONIC LIVER TISSUE CHARACTERIZATION

975

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF THE TEST RESULTS OF DIFFERENT FEATURE FUSION SCHEMES (CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY, UNIT: %)

TABLE V
THE CONFUSION MATRIX OF THE TEST DATA CLASSIFIED BY THE
PSO-SELECTED FUSED FEATURE SUBSET WITH THE PNN CLASSIFIER

rithms that facilitate the search process by sharing information
among members of the population. The PSO and GA are similar
in many respects, and both can be used in the proposed feature
fusion system. A fitness function is designed to identify the feature subset with minimal feature length from the set with the
highest classification accuracy. The PSO-based and GA-based
feature selection algorithms utilize the fitness function to select
dominant features and improve the classification accuracy, and
thereby reduce the computational costs.
Feature vectors extracted by different feature descriptors reflect different characteristics of the same pattern. HFF can select
more discriminative features hierarchically from multiple feature vectors. Experiments on an ultrasonic liver image dataset
demonstrate that classification accuracy of the fused feature
subset is superior to that of the individual feature subsets.
The results also verify that the proposed algorithm is effective
in selecting discriminative features for ultrasonic liver tissue
characterization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Fig. 4. Execution time of GA-based and PSO-based feature selection (of
different feature spaces).

cause a block structure that makes the image of a cirrhotic liver
rougher than the image of a normal liver, but not as rough as that
of hepatoma. Images of the two liver diseases exhibit varying
degrees of roughness. The hepatoma samples and the cirrhosis
samples are never classified as normal if they are classified by
the fused feature subset.
The algorithms are implemented in MATLAB (7.8.0) R2009a
environment on a PC with Intel Core 2 Quad processor
(2.4 GHz), 6 GB RAM. Fig. 4 demonstrates the execution time
of GA-based and PSO-based feature selection of different feature spaces. The execution time of PSO-based feature selection
is about five times longer than that of GA-based algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed an evolution-based HFF system that selects
dominant features from multiple feature vectors for ultrasonic
liver tissue characterization. The five feature vectors extracted in
this study are the Wavelet-fd, the Wavelet-eng, the Gabor-fd, the
Gabor-eng, and the SGLDM. The feature selection process removes redundant features. In most approaches that use the above
five feature vectors, the selection of feature subsets is empirical
but inconsistent. We propose PSO-based and GA-based feature
selection schemes, which select the feature subsets of individual
feature vectors. Both schemes are population-based search algo-

The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their
helpful comments and suggestions, which have improved the
presentation.
REFERENCES
[1] B. S. Garra, M. F. Insana, T. H. Shawker, R. F. Wagner, M. Bradford, and
M. Russell, “Quantitative ultrasonic detection and classification of diffuse
liver disease: Comparison with human observer performance,” Investigat.
Radiol., vol. 24, pp. 196–203, 1989.
[2] H. Yu, C. Caldwell, K. Mah, and D. Mozeg, “Coregistered fdg pet/ct-based
textural characterization of head and neck cancer for radiation treatment
planning,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 374–383, Mar.
2009.
[3] R. Llobet, J. C. Perez-Cortes, A. H. Toselli, and A. Juan, “Computer-aided
detection of prostate cancer,” Int. J. Med. Inf., vol. 76, no. 7, pp. 547–556,
2007.
[4] H. Cheng, J. Shan, W. Ju, Y. Guo, and L. Zhang, “Automated breast cancer
detection and classification using ultrasound images: A survey,” Pattern
Recognit, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 299–317, 2010.
[5] W.-L. Lee, Y.-C. Chen, and K.-S. Hsieh, “Ultrasonic liver tissues classification by fractal feature vector based on m-band wavelet transform,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 382–392, Mar. 2003.
[6] C.-M. Wu and Y.-C. Chen, “Multi-threshold dimension vector for texture
analysis and its application to liver tissue classification,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 137–144, 1993.
[7] N. Tsiaparas, S. Golemati, I. Andreadis, J. Stoitsis, I. Valavanis, and
K. Nikita, “Comparison of multiresolution features for texture classification of carotid atherosclerosis from b-mode ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 130–137, Jan. 2011.
[8] W.-L. Lee, Y.-C. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, and K.-S. Hsieh, “Unsupervised segmentation of ultrasonic liver images by multiresolution fractal feature
vector,” Inf. Sci., vol. 175, no. 3, pp. 177–199, 2005.
[9] S. Li and J. Shawe-Taylor, “Comparison and fusion of multiresolution
features for texture classification,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 26, no. 5,
pp. 633–638, 2005.

976

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

[10] H. Yoshida, D. D. Casalino, B. Keserci, A. Coskun, O. Ozturk, and
A. Savranlar, “Wavelet-packet-based texture analysis for differentiation
between benign and malignant liver tumours in ultrasound images,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 48, no. 22, pp. 3735–3753, 2003.
[11] B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, 1st ed. San Francisco, CA, USA: W. H. Freeman, Aug. 1982.
[12] Y. M. Ro, M. Kim, H. K. Kang, B. S. Manjunath, and J. Kim, “Mpeg-7
homogeneous texture descriptor,” ETRI J., vol. 23, pp. 41–51, 2001.
[13] M. Kudo and J. Sklansky, “Comparison of algorithms that select features
for pattern classifiers,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 25–41, 2000.
[14] H. Gao and W. Xu, “A new particle swarm algorithm and its globally
convergent modifications,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., B, Cybern.,
vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1334–1351, Oct. 2011.
[15] U. Maulik, “Medical image segmentation using genetic algorithms,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 166–173, Mar. 2009.
[16] D. Muni, N. Pal, and J. Das, “Genetic programming for simultaneous
feature selection and classifier design,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B,
Cybern., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 106–117, Feb. 2006.
[17] I.-S. Oh, J.-S. Lee, and B.-R. Moon, “Hybrid genetic algorithms for feature selection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 26, no. 11,
pp. 1424–1437, Nov. 2004.
[18] J. Kennedy and R. C. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Networks, Nov./Dec. 1995, vol. 4, pp. 1942–1948.
[19] B. Dasarathy, Decision Fusion. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley- IEEE Press,
1994.
[20] W.-L. Lee, “Ultrasonic liver tissue characterization by multiresolution
feature vector and an ensemble of classifiers,” Int. J. Innovat. Comput. Inf.
Control, vol. 7, pp. 6541–6558, 2011.
[21] M. Qian, M. Aguilar, K. Zachery, C. Privitera, S. Klein, T. Carney, and
L. Nolte, “Decision-level fusion of EEG and pupil features for singletrial visual detection analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 7,
pp. 1929–1937, Jul. 2009.
[22] A. S. Constantinidis, M. C. Fairhurst, and A. F. R. Rahman, “A new multiexpert decision combination algorithm and its application to the detection of circumscribed masses in digital mammograms,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1527–1537, 2001.
[23] C.-C. Wu, W.-L. Lee, Y.-C. Chen, C.-H. Lai, and K.-S. Hsieh, “Ultrasonic
liver tissue characterization by feature fusion,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 39,
pp. 9389–9397, 2012.
[24] S. Ahmed, K. Iftekharuddin, and A. Vossough, “Efficacy of texture, shape,
and intensity feature fusion for posterior-fossa tumor segmentation in mri,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 206–213, Mar. 2011.
[25] S. Li and Z. Li, “Effects of image fusion algorithms on classification
accuracy,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Geoinformat., Jun. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[26] L. Huang and Z. Li, “Feature-based image registration using the shape
context,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 2169–2177, 2010.
[27] D. Clausi and H. Deng, “Design-based texture feature fusion using gabor filters and co-occurrence probabilities,” IEEE Trans. Imag. Process.,
vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 925–936, Jul. 2005.
[28] J. Yang, J.-Y. Yang, D. Zhang, and J.-F. Lu, “Feature fusion: Parallel
strategy vs. serial strategy,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1369–
1381, 2003.
[29] U. Mangai, S. Samanta, S. Das, and P. Chowdhury, “A survey of decision
fusion and feature fusion strategies for pattern classification,” IETE Tech.
Rev., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 293–307, 2010.
[30] T. Chang and C.-C. Kuo, “Texture analysis and classification with treestructured wavelet transform,” IEEE Trans. Imag. Process., vol. 2, no. 4,
pp. 429–441, Oct. 1993.
[31] J. Wu, G. An, and Q. Ruan, “Independent gabor analysis of discriminant
features fusion for face recognition,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 16,
no. 2, pp. 97–100, Feb. 2009.
[32] G. Ascensi and J. Bruna, “Model space results for the gabor and wavelet
transforms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 2250–2259, May
2009.
[33] J. Li, Q. Du, and C. Sun, “An improved box-counting method for image
fractal dimension estimation,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 2460–
2469, 2009.
[34] B. S. Raghavendra and D. N. Dutt, “Computing fractal dimension of signals using multiresolution box-counting method,” Int. J. Inf. Mathemat.
Sci., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 50–65, 2010.
[35] W.-L. Lee and K.-S. Hsieh, “A robust algorithm for the fractal dimension
of images and its applications to the classification of natural images and
ultrasonic liver images,” Signal Process., vol. 90, no. 6, pp. 1894–1904,
2010.

[36] M. Clerc and J. Kennedy, “The particle swarm - explosion, stability, and
convergence in a multidimensional complex space,” IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 58–73, Feb. 2002.
[37] L. Andreana, G. Isgro, M. Pleguezuelo, G. Germani, and A. K. Burroughs,
“Surveillance and diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with
cirrhosis,” World J. Hepatol., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 48–61, 2009.
[38] R. Badea and S. Ioanitescu, “Ultrasound imaging of liver tumors current
clinical applications,” in Liver Tumors. Manhattan, NY, USA: InTech,
2012, pp. 75–102.
[39] G. Strang and T. Nguyen, Eds., Wavelets and Filter Banks. Cambridge,
MA, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1996.
[40] M. Clerc. (2007, Aug.). Standard PSO 2007. Particle Swarm Central Website, [Online]. Available: http://www.particleswarm.info/standard_pso_
2007.c
[41] T. Song, M. Jamshidi, R. Lee, and M. Huang, “A modified probabilistic
neural network for partial volume segmentation in brain MR image,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1424–1432, Sep. 2007.
[42] Y. Sela, M. Freiman, E. Dery, Y. Edrei, R. Safadi, O. Pappo, L. Joskowicz,
and R. Abramovitch, “FMRI-based hierarchical SVM model for the classification and grading of liver fibrosis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 9, pp. 2574–2581, Sep. 2011.
[43] J. Virmani, V. Kumar, N. Kalra, and N. Khandelwal. (2012). Svmbased characterization of liver ultrasound images using wavelet packet
texture descriptors. J. Digital Imag., pp. 1–14, [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10278-012-9537-8
[44] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. (2001). LIBSVM: A Library for Support Vector
Machines, [Online]. Available: http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm
[45] J. H. Lefkowitch, “Pathologic diagnosis of liver disease,” in Hepatology:
A Textbook of Liver Disease, 1990, p. 719.

Cheng-Chi Wu received the B.S. degree in power
mechanical engineering from National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2003, where he is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering.
His research interests include medical image processing and computer graphics.

Wen-Li Lee received the Ph.D. degree in electric
engineering from National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2002.
During 1988–2000, he was with the Chung-Shan
Institute of Science and Technology, Ministry of
National Defense of Taiwan to study digital image
processing and pattern recognition. He is currently
an Associate Professor at Ming Chuan University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan . His research interests include medical image processing, soft computing, fractal geometry, and pattern recognition.

Yung-Chang Chen (F’05) photograph and biography not available at the time
of publication.

Kai-Sheng Hsieh, photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.

