IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

335

Compressive-Sampling-Based Positioning
in Wireless Body Area Networks
Mehdi Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Jamshid Abouei, Member, IEEE, and Konstantinos N. Plataniotis, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Recent achievements in wireless technologies have
opened up enormous opportunities for the implementation of ubiquitous health care systems in providing rich contextual information
and warning mechanisms against abnormal conditions. This helps
with the automatic and remote monitoring/tracking of patients
in hospitals and facilitates and with the supervision of fragile,
elderly people in their own domestic environment through automatic systems to handle the remote drug delivery. This paper
presents a new modeling and analysis framework for the multipatient positioning in a wireless body area network (WBAN) which
exploits the spatial sparsity of patients and a sparse fast Fourier
transform (FFT)-based feature extraction mechanism for monitoring of patients and for reporting the movement tracking to a
central database server containing patient vital information. The
main goal of this paper is to achieve a high degree of accuracy
and resolution in the patient localization with less computational
complexity in the implementation using the compressive sensing
theory. We represent the patients’ positions as a sparse vector
obtained by the discrete segmentation of the patient movement
space in a circular grid. To estimate this vector, a compressivesampling-based two-level FFT (CS-2FFT) feature vector is synthesized for each received signal from the biosensors embedded
on the patient’s body at each grid point. This feature extraction
process benefits in the combination of both short-time and longtime properties of the received signals. The robustness of the proposed CS-2FFT-based algorithm in terms of the average positioning error is numerically evaluated using the realistic parameters
in the IEEE 802.15.6-WBAN standard in the presence of additive white Gaussian noise. Due to the circular grid pattern and
the CS-2FFT feature extraction method, the proposed scheme represents a significant reduction in the computational complexity,
while improving the level of the resolution and the localization
accuracy when compared to some classical CS-based positioning
algorithms.
Index Terms—Compressive sampling (CS), patient localization,
spatial sparsity, wireless body area networks (WBANs).

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT advances in wireless sensor technologies have
opened up a new generation of ubiquitous body-centric
systems, namely wireless body area networks (WBANs), for

R

Manuscript received October 25, 2012; revised February 11, 2013; accepted
April 27, 2013. Date of publication May 7, 2013; date of current version December 31, 2013. The work was supported in part by an Ontario Research Fund
project entitled “Self-Powered Sensor Networks.”
M. Banitalebi-Dehkordi and J. Abouei are with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran (e-mail: mahdibanitalebi@stu.yazd.ac.ir; abouei@yazd.ac.ir).
K. N. Plataniotis is with the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4,
Canada (e-mail: kostas@comm.utoronto.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2261997

providing efficient health care services in medical/nonmedical
applications [1], [2]. For remote monitoring of the vital signs
of patients, security, supply chain management, and real-time
tracking of patients during emergency response to casualty disasters, the central control unit (CCU) is often necessary to know
each patient’s location in advance. For this purpose, the protocols used for the patient localization must support a high
degree of accuracy and reliability with a relatively low cost and
complexity in the implementation in such wireless networking
applications.
Generally, the target localization estimation is an important
task in various wireless communication systems including wireless sensor networks (WSNs) for an accurate tracking and motion analysis of the source. Broadly, source localization algorithms in WSNs can be classified into three categories [3]: Angle of Arrival (AOA) measurement techniques, also known as
Direction Of Arrival (DOA) measurement [4], Time of Arrival
(TOA) or Time Difference Of Arrival (TDOA) measurement
schemes [4], and Received Signal Strength (RSS) measurement
algorithms [5]. Central to this classification is the RSS technique
that is based on the attenuation of the radio signal as a function of the source distance. Most RSS techniques are suitable
for outdoor localization applications where the task of predicting the behavior of radio signals is much simpler compared to
application scenarios including indoor cases (e.g., health care
centers) [5]. TOA and TDOA techniques measure the source distance using the signal propagation time. These algorithms along
with AOA measurement schemes provide better accuracy than
RSS measurement techniques, as the amplitude of the received
signal in RSS-based schemes is affected by environmental factors such as multipath fading and/or shadowing effects. However, this higher degree of accuracy is achieved at the expense
of a higher computational complexity. Thus, it is reasonable
to claim that in patient localization algorithms, although AOA,
TOA, and TDOA techniques could be used to track the patient’s
position, these algorithms are more efficient for dense WSNs
(i.e., a large number of sensors are typically deployed over a
fixed geographical area) at the expense of a higher complexity
at the receiver nodes [5]. Indeed, the above range-based source
localization algorithms are less applicable for real-time tracking
of multipatients in sparse WBANs [6], where the density of patients is sufficiently low that they cannot communicate to each
other through multihop paths, or even directly. In order to make
communication feasible, data gathering in sparse WBANs can
be accomplished by means of aggregation nodes to collect and
aggregate the received data from on-body biosensors.
To overcome the above challenges, several approximation approaches including Bayesian compressive sensing strategy for

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

336

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

the DOA estimation [4], localization of wireless sensors using
compressive sensing for manifold learning [5], and multiple
target localization using compressive sensing [7] formulate the
source localization in sparse networks which aim to achieve
a computational complexity reduction and a more resolution.
The main idea behind these approaches is that the source’s position is estimated by searching for the sparsest solution of a
predetermined linear equation system that frequently arises in
the localization problem [6], [8]. Among the approaches, compressive sampling (CS)-based algorithms are good candidates
in finding the sparsest solution for this localization formulation.
The CS theory provides a novel framework for recovering signals that are sparse or compressible under a certain basis, with
far fewer noisy measurements than that needed by the Nyquist–
Shannon sampling theorem [8], [9]. The sparse nature of patient
localization in the spatial domain motivates us to exploit the CS
theory in proposing an efficient algorithm with a low degree of
complexity for the accurate positioning of multiple patients in
a WBAN, which attains the exact deterministic recovery of the
received signals from wearable on-body biosensors. Although,
there are few references in the literature to use the sparse approximation approach for the CS-based source positioning in
nonmedical wireless applications [7], [10]–[12], to the best of
our knowledge, there is no existing work addressing the patient
localization by means of CS theory in a sparse WBAN. For instance, Cevher et al. [10] demonstrate the feasibility of a wireless
sensor array to estimate multiple source bearings by passing the
CS-based quantized data among the sensors. The authors in [10]
exploit the sparsity of the sources in the angle domain and obtain
their sparsity patterns to determine the number of targets and
their corresponding bearings. Following the same assumptions
as in [10], the proposed distributed target localization (DTL)
algorithm in [11] uses high-dimensional signals received at every point of a square grid for the source positioning; however,
the algorithm leads to a high computational complexity when
used for the patient localization. In addition, the square grid
assumption leads to a low resolution in multitarget positioning
applications.
With the above insights in mind, this paper presents for the
first time “a new modeling and analysis framework” for the
multipatient positioning in a WBAN which exploits the spatial
sparsity of patients and a sparse fast Fourier transform (FFT)based feature extraction mechanism for monitoring of patients.
We represent the patients’ positions as a sparse vector obtained
by this discrete segmentation of the patient movement space in
a circular grid. To further reduce the dimensionality in our patient positioning problem, a CS-based two-level FFT (CS-2FFT)
feature vector is synthesized for each received signal from the
biosensors embedded on the patient’s body at each grid point.
This feature extraction process benefits in the combination of
both short-time and long-time properties of the received signals
to compensate the deficiency of the short-term feature analysis,
while at the same time utilizes the statistical properties of the
long-term feature analysis. The robustness of the proposed CS2FFT-based algorithm, in terms of the average positioning error,
is numerically evaluated using the realistic parameters in the
IEEE 802.15.6-WBAN standard [13] in the presence of additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN). Due to the circular grid pattern and the CS-2FFT feature extraction method, the proposed
scheme represents a higher degree of the patient localization accuracy as well as the computational complexity reduction when
compared to some classical CS-based positioning methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the
system model and the objective of this paper are described. The
multipatient positioning algorithm based on the CS-2FFT feature extraction method is introduced, analyzed, and discussed in
Section III. Section IV provides simulation evaluations, experiment with synthetic results, and interpretation of the findings.
Finally, in Section V, an overview of the results and conclusions
are presented.
Notations: Throughout this paper, we use normal letters for
scalars. Boldface lowercase and capital letters denote vectors
and matrices, respectively. The transposition of vector x is denoted by xT . Finally, the number of nonzero coefficients of
vector θ is denoted by θ0 .
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS
This paper considers a wireless system in a medical environment such as hospital with K patients randomly localized
in an isotropic area where both K and the position of patients,
denoted by χk = [χR k , χθ k ]T , k = 1, . ., K, are considered unknown. To discretize the localization problem, we consider that
the unknown patient’s position occupies one of N distinct points
ϕb = [ϕR b , ϕθ b ]T , b = 1, 2, . . . , N , of a discrete circular grid,
as depicted in Fig. 1. Each patient k is equipped with n on-body
biosensors Sk ,1 , . . . , Sk ,n to transmit their sensed data over the
same frequency band toward the corresponding wearable onbody CCU denoted by Ck , k = 1, . ., K. To avoid multiple access interference at Ck , we consider a code division multiple
access (CDMA)-based body-centric signaling for each patient
k, where the bit stream of each biosensor Sk ,i is directly multiplied by a preassigned cyclic orthogonal Walsh–Hadamard
code (COWHC) proposed in [14] and [15]. It is proved in
[15] that COWHCs guarantee the zero cross correlation in all
phases at the receiver side of any asynchronous CDMA-based
WBAN.
We assume a proactive communication between Sk ,i ’s and
the corresponding Ck meaning that each biosensor Sk ,i of kth
patient transmits periodically an equal amount of data per time
unit to its Ck where the transmission is statistically independent of data transmitted from Sk ,j , j = i. Due to the time and
data rate asynchronicity of active biosensors for each patient
k, the arrival times of the packets in Ck are different. Thus,
each Ck , as an aggregation node, controls its aggregation time
in order to aggregate and transfer data from biosensors of patient k to P receiver nodes denoted by Rj at known positions ζ j = [ζR j , ζθ j ]T , j = 1, 2, . . . , P , on the ground plane
(see Fig. 1). In addition, for extracting the CS-2FFT feature vectors from receiver nodes’ signals, each receiver unit has knowledge about other receiver unit locations. Based on the above
arguments, the main tasks of each CCU are two things: 1) each
CCU must collect various vital signals of the corresponding patient for removing the redundancy (common information) and

BANITALEBI-DEHKORDI et al.: COMPRESSIVE-SAMPLING-BASED POSITIONING IN WIRELESS BODY AREA NETWORKS

Fig. 2.

337

Dimensions in the CS-2FFT feature extraction algorithm.

obtained as follows:
xk (t) =

n

j =1



2Et
wk ,j cos(2π(f0 + mk ,j .Δf )t)
Ts

(1)

where mk ,j = 0, 1 and wk ,j is the COWHC corresponding to
jth biosensor of kth patient. In the proposed patient positioning algorithm, an arbitrary patient would occupy one point
ϕn = [ϕR n , ϕθ n ]T , n = 1, . . . , N , in the assumed concentric
circles. In addition, due to the broadcast nature of the CCUs,
each receiver node Ri , i ∈ {1, . . . , P }, receives all the aggregated signals from the CCUs which are essential for the patient
localization estimation. Let γij ∝ d−α
ij denote the path-loss between ith receiver and jth CCU (with distance dij ) that would be
one of N circular grid points, where α represents the path-loss
exponent. For this case, the received signal at the ith receiver
Ri , denoted by xr i (t), is given by

xr i (t) =

N


δj γij xj (t) + ni , i = 1, . . . , P

(2)

j =1

Fig. 1.

Hypothetical health care center plane with the proposed circular grid.

performs some preprocessing on the aggregated signals before
sending those to other central nodes such as a nurses station in
an health care department. In this case, each CCU is known as an
aggregation node, 2) each CCU must broadcast (retransmit) the
aggregated sinusoidal signals for the patient positioning in such
a way that each receiver node Ri , i ∈ {1, . . . , P }, can receive
all the aggregated signals from the CCUs which are essential
for the patient localization estimation. To provide a good compromise between high data rate, simple radio architecture, low
power consumption, and requirements on linearity of the modulation scheme, we assume that each biosensor uses the binary
frequency shift keying (BFSK), known as the green modulation [16], [17]. A BFSK scheme is widely utilized in energyconstrained wireless applications [17], including WBAN [18]
and the IEEE 802.15.6 WPAN Work Group (WG) (e.g., see
[19]). Denoting Et as the BFSK transmit energy per symbol
with symbol 
duration Ts , the BFSK transmitted signal is given
t
by xm (t) = 2E
T s cos(2π(f0 + m.Δf )t), m = 0, 1, where f0
is the first carrier frequency in the BFSK modulator and Δf
is the minimum carrier separation which is equal to T1s for the
noncoherent BFSK [20, p. 114]. Taking the above considerations into account, the aggregated BFSK modulated data corresponding to all n biosensors of kth patient, k = 1, 2, . . . , K, is

where δj = 1, if the jth grid point includes one patient, and
δj = 0, otherwise, and ni is the noise at the receiver end Ri .
To discretize xr i (t), an M -dimensional receiver unit vector
xri = [xr i (1), . . . , xr i (M )]T is extracted from the continuous
signal xr i (t), sampling at f ≥ 2/Ts , where 1/Ts is the bandwidth of the BFSK modulation signal [20]. The vector xri is
then converted to the M  -dimensional feature vector xi extracted by utilizing the proposed CS-2FFT feature extraction
method, where M   M (see Fig. 2). Under the above considerations, the main objective of this paper is to determine the
patients’ positions χk = [χR k , χθ k ]T , k = 1, . ., K, using the
CS-2FFT feature extraction block in Fig. 2 for decreasing the
signal dimension and also using the circular grid pattern in Fig. 1
for the discrete segmenting of the ground plane.
III. PROPOSED PATIENT POSITIONING ALGORITHM
Table I summarizes the main characteristics of the proposed
CS-2FFT-based patient positioning algorithm which rely on
some processing blocks deployed on the receiver unit’s signal
in (2). The proposed scheme consists of two parts: 1) feature extraction algorithm described in Section III-A, where we use two
layers of FFT for combining long-time and short-time features
extracted from the receiver unit’s signals, 2) spatial sparsity to
address the patient positioning by utilizing the knowledge obtained in the CS-based feature extraction method as analyzed in
detail in Section III-B.

338

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE I
PROPOSED CS-2FFT-BASED PATIENT POSITIONING ALGORITHM

A. CS-Based Feature Extraction Algorithm
For the proposed CS-based feature extraction scheme, we exploit two types of features from the receiver unit’s signal xri
described in Section II: 1) short-time features where the received signal xri at receiver i ∈ {1, . . . , P } is partitioned into
successive frames using small sized windows, and 2) long-time
features that are computed in a texture window and usually
characterize the variation of the spectral shape or beat information within a long segment. Under an appropriate window
size, the signal within each frame could be stationary. Since the
low-pass content of the modulated signal in (2) cannot be effectively captured using a too short analysis window, we propose
an effective and simple method through combining the shortterm and long-term features to improve the deficiency of the
short-term feature analysis. Optimal number of features is an
important factor in our patient localization process. Too many
features usually degrade the patient positioning performance,
since those may include irrelevant information. Moreover, too
many features could entail excessive computation and increase
the energy consumption in such an energy-constrained WBAN.
The above challenges motivate us to utilize CS as a good
mechanism for the optimum selection of the number of features
to achieve a high degree of accuracy in the patient positioning
process. CS provides a novel framework for recovering signals
that are sparse or compressible under a certain basis, with far
fewer noisy measurements than that needed by the Nyquist–
Shannon sampling theorem [8], [9]. As demonstrated in Table I,
we use CS in both feature extraction block (for random sampling) and in the positioning algorithm (for recovering patient
location). Recent results in the CS-based algorithms demonstrate that it is possible to reconstruct a K-sparse signal of length
M from O(K log M ) measurements. CS takes nonlinear measurements in the form of randomized projections as described
shortly in this section.
In this paper, we propose the CS-2FFT feature extraction
method described in Fig. 3 for an efficient time-frequency
representation of the signal xri at receiver i ∈ {1, . . . , P }.
Traditional signal analysis techniques such as spectrum estimation schemes assume that the signal under analysis would
be time invariant. However, this assumption is not feasible

Fig. 3.

CS-based feature extraction method.

since signals are time varying where the parameters of a signal such as the amplitude, frequency, and phase change with
time. Therefore, it is desirable to segment a captured signal into analysis frames to satisfy the time-invariant (stationary) assumption for each frame. For this reason, in our feature extraction algorithm depicted in Fig. 3, the M × 1 vector
xri = [xr i (1), xr i (2), . . . , xr i (M )]T is partitioned into B vec(j )
tors xw i = [xw i ((j − 1)n + 1), . . . , xw i (jn)]T , j = 1, . . . , B,
	

using a Hamming window function where n = M/B denotes the

BANITALEBI-DEHKORDI et al.: COMPRESSIVE-SAMPLING-BASED POSITIONING IN WIRELESS BODY AREA NETWORKS

(j )

cardinality of the vector xw i . It is assumed that M is divisible
by B, and hence, n = M/B is an integer number.
To justify using the FFT coefficients in Fig. 3, we note that
the Fourier analysis is a process that decomposes a signal into
the summation of a series of sine and cosine waves with different amplitudes, frequencies, and phases. Each Fourier transform
coefficient can be interpreted in frequency domain corresponding to the original signal in the spatial domain. Therefore, it is
reasonable to use the FFT as a standard method in feature representation [21]. According to (1) and (2), since our signal xr i (t)
is a summation of sinusoidal waves, we can use the signal’s
FFT coefficients or equivalently the spectrogram as a starting
point in our CS-2FFT feature extraction process. Deploying the
(j )
first FFT on each frame xw i results in the FFT coefficients
(j )
vector xF (w i ) = [xF (w i ) ((j − 1)n + 1), . . . , xF (w i ) (jn)], j =
(j )

1, . . . , B. It should be noted from xF (w i ) that the size of the
(j )

used FFT is equal to the length of xw i . The amplitudes of the
FFT coefficients in each frame are normalized by dividing those
by the maximum value to make the M × 1 vector xn or i . A
new B × 1 feature vector xsu m i is then formed, in which each
component is the sum of the normalized coefficients from consecutive frames. To make better time-invariant properties in the
output of the “summation of window coefficient” block in Fig. 3,
short-time features (i.e., the FFT coefficients of each window)
are added together.
Deploying the second FFT on the vector of feature samples
of the time-invariant data results in the B × 1 vector F (xsu m i )
representing the obtained feature vector. Similar to the first FFT,
it is sensible from F (xsu m i ) that the size of the second FFT
is equal to the length of xsu m i . It is worth mentioning that
the second FFT process provides a sparse representation of the
feature vector obtained by applying a predetermined amplitude
threshold. For this case, the length of this feature vector is equal
to the number of the windows. Note that while the first FFT
represents the time variations inside any frame of the received
signal (i.e., short-time properties of the signal), the second FFT
is deployed to indicate the variations of the short-time properties
during consecutive frames.
Random Sampling: Since the vector yri is sparse meaning
that it has only very few nonzero coefficients on the unknown
supports, we can use the CS theory in the above sparse representation. CS is a recent development in digital signal processing
that displays a potential of high resolution capture of physical
signals from relatively few data measurements, typically below
the number of data obtained from the Shannon/Nyquist sampling
theorem. The CS theory deals with the sparse representation
through an appropriate choice of linear basis for the class of signals under study. In addition, the CS theory combines the above
sparse representation with incoherent measurements of the signal to achieve the maximum amount of information extracted
from the signal using a minimum amount of measurements.
Aided by this knowledge, we use a random sampling with CS
theory assumptions [9] to create samples from the sparse feature
vector extracted from the output of the amplitude filter block in
Fig. 3. Let the vector yri , i ∈ {1, . . . , P }, with length B denote

339

the output of the amplitude filter block in Fig. 3 that includes
K  nonzero coefficients on the sparse B × B basis matrix Γ.
According to the matrix notation in [8], we have y r i = Γθ,
in which θ is an B × 1 vector and can be approximated using only K   M nonzero entries. The CS theory states that
this vector can be reconstructed by taking linear and nonadaptive measurements selected with an M  × B measurement basis
matrix Ω with M   B. The rows of Ω are incoherent with the
columns of Γ as xi = Ωyri = ΩΓθ = Ψθ, where xi represents an M  × 1 sampled vector and Ψ = ΩΓ is an M  × B
matrix [8]. The reconstruction process is equivalent to finding
the signal’s sparse coefficient vector θ, which can be cast into
an 
0 optimization problem [8]:
min θ0 s.t. xi = ΩΓθ = Ψθ.

(3)

Taking the above considerations into account, we use a random sampling block in Fig. 3 to create samples from the sparse
feature vector yri extracted from the output of the amplitude filter block. The main advantage of the proposed CS-2FFT-based
feature extraction process is that the length of feature vector is
reduced to M   B  M which displays a low complexity in
the implementation.
B. Patient Positioning via Spatial Sparsity
Now, we are ready to present the main part of the proposed
patient positioning algorithm under the assumptions of K patients and P receiver nodes located on the ground plane in Fig. 1.
The patient positioning process can be cast as a sparse approximation problem of the received signal, in which we estimate a
sparse vector θ ∈ RN called the location indicator vector from
the received feature vector extracted from the received signals in
(2). Toward this goal and similar to notations as in [11] and [22],
the signal propagation operator Fχ→ζ is defined that takes the
extracted feature vector (Q) of a patient at location χ and computes the recorded feature vector by the receiver unit at location
ζ. A simple sample operator can be written as
Fχ→ξ (Q) =

1
Q
dαχ,ξ

(4)

where dαχ,ζ is the distance from patient χ to the receiver unit ζ,
and α is the path-loss exponent. The propagation of the patient
signal in the proposed feature space is modeled as a distancedependent amplitude attenuation without any time shift effect in
(4). We can justify this issue by considering the effect of the FFT
and the normalized amplitude blocks in the feature extraction
process in Fig. 3.
Assuming that a patient is located at χ, we define the pseudoinverse operator F̂ζ→χ that takes an observed feature vector
by the receiver unit at location ζ and computes the patient feature
vector. Moreover, denoting the feature vector from kth patient
as Qk , we express the feature vector received at receiver unit i
as z i = S i θ, where
S i = [Fχ1 →ζ i (Q1 ), Fχ2 →ζ i (Q2 ), . . . , FχN →ζ i (QN )]

(5)

is the ith receiver unit’s source matrix. Similarly, we can
extract the feature vector ensemble as a single vector z =

340

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[z T1 , z T2 , . . . , z TP ]T . By linking the source matrices together
into a single dictionary, we have Ψ = [S T1 , S T2 , . . . , S TP ]T . The
same sparse vector θ used for each feature vector generates the
feature vector ensemble as z = Ψθ. An estimate of jth receiver
unit’s source matrix S j is determined using the received signal at a given receiver unit i. Assuming that the feature vector
z i observed at receiver unit i is produced from the single jth
patient, we can estimate jth receiver unit source matrix as
Ŝ j |i = [Fχ1 →ζ j (F̂ζ i →χ1 (z i )), . . . , FχN →ζ j (F̂ζ i →χN (z i ))].
(6)
In all circular grid points, by evaluating (6), by taking the
summation Ŝ j |i over all values of j in all gird points, we calculate an estimate of each source matrix S i . Having the extracted
feature vector z and Ψ, z = Ψθ can be solved by deploying CS
reconstruction methods such as the orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) technique. This yields an estimate of the location
indicator vector θ̂ that contains the amplitudes of the patient’s
signal located at the N potential patient locations. Finally, a
thresholder produces a binary vector so that θˆi = 1 represents
a patient on the ith grid point. Therefore, the number of elements in the estimated location indicator vector θ̂ presents an
estimated number of the patients or equivalently the unknown
parameter K.
It should be noted that in the proposed patient positioning
algorithm, we use the CS theory two times, first, in the feature
extraction method used for extracting the feature vectors from
the received signals (as illustrated in Fig. 3). This process does
not deploy the CS reconstruction; thus, there is no need of
the information of the used dictionaries. Second, as previously
mentioned, after calculating the estimation of each source matrix
S i over all values of j in all gird points, we obtain an estimate
of the utilized dictionary Ψ. Having the extracted feature vector
z and Ψ, the expression z = Ψθ can be solved by deploying
CS reconstruction methods such as the OMP technique.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm
in terms of the computational complexity and the localization
accuracy, a set of experiments are conducted to examine the
performance of the proposed CS-2FFT-based patient positioning scheme using the assumed system model in Section II. Toward this goal in this section, we present the numerical results
using some realistic parameters in the IEEE 802.15.6-WBAN
standard [13] to evaluate the efficiency of the proposed patient localization algorithm. The simulation setup consists of
a WBAN with K ∈ {2, 3, . . . , 7} patients randomly placed in
an isotropic area similar to the circular grid in Fig. 1. This
circular grid contains 27 concentric circles with radiuses k/2
meters, k = 1, 2, . . . , 27, where each circle contains 16 equally
spaced points. Thus, the uniform circular grid is composed of
N = 432 points in the localization procedure. We consider the
BFSK modulation scheme operating in the carrier frequency
f0 = 435 MHz according to the frequency band requirement in
the narrow-band physical layer of the IEEE 802.15.6-WBAN
standard. We assume the path-loss exponent α = 4 which is
a feasible value for the lossy and indoor environments. Our

Fig. 4. Variations of (a) the receiver unit’s signals, and (b) the CS-2FFT feature
extracted from the receiver unit’s signals.

simulation utilizes P = 6 receiver nodes for patients’ positions
estimation where each receiver node receives all the aggregated
signals from the CCUs which are essential for the patient localization. The CS-2FFT feature vectors are extracted by preprocessing on the receiver unit’s signals. All simulations have been
run in the MATLAB v7.11 environment using the CVX toolbox
on a PC with Intel Core 2 due P8700 2.56 CPU and 4 GB RAM.
First, we present some characteristics of the proposed CS2FFT feature extraction method for the following two scenarios:
1) the feature vectors extracted from the signals of two receiver
units related to an arbitrary patient (same class), and 2) the feature vectors extracted from the received signals (at an arbitrary
receiver unit) randomly chosen from different patients (different classes). Fig. 4(a) shows the variations of sampled signals
of two receiver nodes corresponding to two different patients.
The horizontal axis in this figure shows the number of samples taken at the receiver unit. The plots in Fig. 4 graphically
demonstrate the within-class compactness and between-class
separability properties of the extracted features.
We compare the performance of the CS-2FFT-based scheme
with that of two CS-based target localization algorithms, namely
DTL [10] and CS-based neural network (CSNN) [23]. We also

BANITALEBI-DEHKORDI et al.: COMPRESSIVE-SAMPLING-BASED POSITIONING IN WIRELESS BODY AREA NETWORKS

341

TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED CS-2FFT BASED SCHEME AND THE
EML, CSNN, AND THE DTL LOCALIZATION METHODS

compare our proposed scheme with that of a non-CS-based target localization algorithm, namely expectation-maximization
(EM) scheme for the energy-based multisource localization
(EML) [24]. Along with the spatial sparsity assumption, it is
assumed that the received signals for the DTL scheme are also
sparse in some known basis, and the localization is performed in
near and far fields. In addition, the CSNN algorithm employs a
neural network for computing the spectral feature vectors in each
receiver node. The EML algorithm employs an efficient EM algorithm for the EML to estimate the complete set of parameters
of sources, such as source locations, source energy, and decay
factor, using the received signal energy by sensors. To keep the
consistency of the experiments and to make a fair comparison
between algorithms, we use the OMP scheme for the reconstruction in (3) in all methods. In addition, the simulation setup
and the parameters have been kept the same for all schemes.
Fig. 5 illustrates the localization performance of the proposed
CS-2FFT-based scheme compared to the DTL, CSNN and the
EML algorithms in [10], [23], and [24] in the case of three patients and six receiver nodes. The results are obtained through
averaging over 40 repetitions of the experiments, where in each
repetition, we estimate the location of fixed patients. In addition, the localization error is computed as the distance between
each estimated location and the corresponding true location. Although in every run of the localization method, each patient’s
position is one of the circular grid points, due to the averaging
over 40 repetitions of the experiment, the estimated patient’s
positions are not necessarily located on the circular grid points.
To get more insight into the results in Fig. 5, Table II shows
the localization error measured in meters, and the convergence
time, measured in seconds, as a measure of the computational
complexity for the aforementioned CS and non-CS-based methods. Interestingly, it is seen that the accuracy of the proposed
CS-2FFT-based algorithm has improved compared to the other
schemes. In addition, the run time of our scheme has reduced
which displays a lower degree of complexity when compared to
the EML, the CSNN, and the DTL algorithms. It should be noted
that although the CSNN method tries to reduce the complexity
using the compressive sensing concept, it is still computationally
inefficient due to the usage of the neural network.
In the next part of our simulations, we evaluate the robustness
of the proposed algorithm for different SNRs, where we assume
that the received signals at receiver nodes are corrupted with
an AWGN. The SNR level is assumed to vary from −5 dB
(low-SNR regime) to +15 dB (high-SNR regime) with 5 dB
as a step size. The average positioning error (in meters) of the
CS-2FFT-based algorithm is compared with that of the EML,
the DTL, and the CSNN schemes in Table III for different
values of SNRs and K = 3. It is seen from Table III that the

Fig. 5. Localization performance of (a) the proposed scheme, (b) DTL algorithm in [10], and (c) CSNN algorithm in [23], for three patients and six receiver
nodes.

342

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE III
EFFECT OF THE NOISE ON THE LOCALIZATION RESULTS FOR K = 3

TABLE IV
AVERAGE POSITIONING ERROR IN TERMS OF THE NUMBER OF PATIENTS K

TABLE V
EFFECT OF THE HIGHER RESOLUTION OF THE CIRCULAR GRID ON THE LOCALIZATION RESULTS (SNR = 5 dB AND THREE PATIENTS)

TABLE VI
EFFECT OF THE RECEIVER UNIT ARRAY DISTANCE ON THE LOCALIZATION
RESULTS AT SNR = 5 dB

proposed method is more robust against noise than the other
schemes, in particular for the low-SNR regimes. To complete
the evaluation of our CS-2FFT-based algorithm, we examine the
performance of the proposed method described by the resulted
localization error for different values of K and SNR = 5 dB in
Table IV. For the circular grid pattern, it is observed that when
the number of patients K increases, the average positioning
error for all localization algorithms increases as well; however,
for our patient positioning method, this growth is much less than
that of the EML, the DTL, and the CSNN algorithms. Obviously,
this advantage comes from the fact that the proposed algorithm
is more robust against the noise.
Although, for the patient localization in a hospital environment, an error around 0.1 m is enough and we do not need more
resolution, we perform some simulations on the behavior of
the system with the higher resolution circular grid illustrated in
Table V. It is seen from this table that the higher resolution circular grid leads to the higher accuracy; however, this results in
a higher computational complexity and in effect the higher cost.
In the next part of our simulations, we examine the effect
of the receiver unit array distance and the number of receiver
units on the localization performance (described in the relative
error) of the proposed CS-2FFT scheme along with some existing CS and non-CS based localization algorithms such as the
DTL, CSNN, and the EML methods presented in Tables VI

TABLE VII
EFFECT OF THE NUMBER OF RECEIVER UNITS ON THE LOCALIZATION
PERFORMANCE AT SNR = 5 dB AND BASED ON 100 RUNS OF EXPERIMENT
(EACH ESTIMATION POINT IS OBTAINED BY AVERAGING
OVER 40 ESTIMATIONS)

and VII. The relative error in Table VI is calculated as the proportion of the localization error (RMSE) to the real receiver
unit array center distance, while the relative error in Table VII
is calculated as the proportion of the number of false position
estimation (estimated positions that have more than 0.01 m of
the average distance with true locations) to the true position
estimation (estimated positions that have less than 0.01 m of
the average distance with true locations). It is observed that the
deployed circular grid partitioning reduces the relative localization error for all schemes. This can be justified by increasing
the grid points (or equivalently the space resolution) near the
receiver array. Based on the above arguments and simulations,
it is seen that the minimum system requirements on the number
of receiver units in the environment are two receiver units, and
an increase in the number of receiver units leads to an increase
on the patient positioning performance.
To complete our simulation results, we study the effect of
the mobility on the performance of each patient positioning
algorithm. Numerical results in Table VIII illustrate that our
CS-2FFT positioning algorithm has better performance than
other classical positioning algorithms for different values of the
patient’s mobility. Since the error does go up with the speed
and the performance does not improve, the performance of
our scheme still remains better than the other algorithms in

BANITALEBI-DEHKORDI et al.: COMPRESSIVE-SAMPLING-BASED POSITIONING IN WIRELESS BODY AREA NETWORKS

TABLE VIII
EFFECT OF THE PATIENTS’ MOBILITY ON THE LOCALIZATION PERFORMANCE AT
SNR = 5 dB, NUMBER OF PATIENTS = 3 AND BASED ON 100 RUNS OF
EXPERIMENT (EACH ESTIMATION POINT IS OBTAINED BY AVERAGING
OVER 40 ESTIMATIONS)

Table VIII. To justify the results, we can say that our maximum data communication rate between the patient’s biosensors
and the receiver units leads to the smallest convergence time
in comparison with other positioning algorithms; therefore, increasing the speed of patients improves the performance of our
algorithm compared to other positioning schemes. In comparison with other classical positioning algorithms, the proposed
CS-2FFT feature extraction process in our scheme has the computational complexity of order


(7)
O P [B[(M/B)1/3 log(M/B)2 R(M/B)]]
where R(M/B) stands for the complexity of the chosen multiplication algorithm. The interesting point is that due to the
small length of utilized feature vectors in our CS-2FFT-based
algorithm, the computational complexity in (7) is reduced to the
order of O((P B 2 )2 ) on the positioning part of our algorithm.
In fact, due to the simple sample operator defined in (4), our
scheme displays a lower computational complexity when compared to other classical positioning algorithms such as the EML,
DTL, and CSNN approaches in [10] and [23].
Remark 1: For health care applications, the latency resulting from the underlying network such as a WBAN should be
minimized. While power saving in every energy-constrained
wireless system is definitely beneficial, replacement of batteries
in WBAN nodes is much easier than in WSNs, in which nodes
may be physically unreachable after deployment. Therefore, it
may be necessary to maximize the battery life in a WSN at
the expense of higher latency. However, in the WBAN applications, “the latency is critical for monitoring the vital signs of
the patients.” Thus, it is reasonable to deploy an efficient patient localization algorithm with lower computation complexity
(or lower run time) to decrease the latency in analyzing the vital
signs of the patients. As illustrated in the above experimental results, in our CS-2FFT positioning algorithm used for the feature
extraction and for the positioning process, the computational
complexity of our algorithm is much less than other classical
positioning algorithms; therefore, our scheme has better battery
life and displays less latency than other existing positioning
algorithms.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we addressed the problem of multipatient positioning in a WBAN. A novel algorithm which combines the
CS-2FFT-based feature extraction method and the spatial sparsity of patients was proposed. The considered circular grid pattern for the patients’ localization estimation leads to the sparse
representation of the received signal from the biosensors embedded one the patient’s body. It was numerically shown that

343

even for the low-SNR regimes at the receiver node, the extracted features are very similar to those of the cleaned receiver
unit’s signal. Simulation results showed that due to the circular
grid pattern and the CS-2FFT feature extraction method, the
proposed scheme displays a significant reduction in the computational complexity, while improving the level of the resolution
and the localization accuracy when compared to some classical
CS-based positioning algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Schmidt, T. Norgall, J. Mörsdorf, J. Bernhard, and T. von der Grün,
“Body area network BAN: A key infrastructure element for patientcentered medical applications,” Biomed. Tech. (Berl), vol. 47, pp. 365–
368, Jan. 2002.
[2] R. C. Luo and O. Chen, “Wireless and pyroelectric sensory fusion system
for indoor human/robot localization and monitoring,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 845–853, Jun. 2013.
[3] L. M. Pestana, L. de Brito, and L. M. R. Peralta, “An analysis of localization problems and solutions in wireless sensor networks,” Polytech. Stud.
Rev., vol. VI, no. 9, pp. 146–172, 2008.
[4] M. Carlin, “A Bayesian compressive sensing strategy for direction-ofarrival estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. Antennas Propagat., Mar.
2012, pp. 1508–1509.
[5] C. Feng, S. Valaee, and Z. Tan, “Localization of wireless sensors using
compressive sensing for manifold learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2009, pp. 2715–2719.
[6] G. Sun, J. Chen, W. Guo, and K. J. R. Liu, “Signal processing techniques
in network-aided positioning: A survey of state-of-the-art positioning designs,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 12–23, Jul. 2005.
[7] C. Feng, S. Valaee, and Z. Tan, “Multiple target localization using compressive sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov./Dec.
2009, pp. 1–6.
[8] E. J. Candes and M. B. Wakin, “An introduction to compressive sampling,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 21–30, Mar. 2008.
[9] D. L. Donoho, “Compressive sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Sep. 2006.
[10] V. Cevher, A. C. Gurbuz, J. H. McClellan, and R. Chellappa, “Compressive wireless arrays for bearing estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust. Speech Signal Process., Apr. 2008, pp. 2497–2500.
[11] V. Cevher, M. F. Duarte, and R. G. Baraniuk, “Distributed target localization via spatial sparsity,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Signal Process., Lausanne,
Switzerland, Aug. 2008, pp. 2197–2202.
[12] D. Yang, H. Li, G. D. Peterson, and A. Fathy, “Compressive sensing
TDOA for UWB positioning systems,” in Proc. IEEE Radio Wireless
Symp., Jan. 2011, pp. 194–197.
[13] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 15.6:
Wireless Body Area Networks, IEEE Standard 802.15.6, Feb. 2012
[14] J. Abouei, “A set of cyclic orthogonal codes acquired from WalshHadamard matrix,” presented at the 34th Int. Math. Conf., Shahrood,
Iran, Sep. 2003.
[15] A. Tawfiq, J. Abouei, and K. N. Plataniotis, “Cyclic orthogonal codes
in CDMA-based asynchronous wireless body area networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., Kyoto, Japan, Mar. 2012,
pp. 1593–1596.
[16] J. Abouei, K. N. Plataniotis, and S. Pasupathy, “Green modulation in dense
wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
Process., Dallas, TX, USA, Mar. 2010, pp. 3382–3385.
[17] J. Abouei, K. N. Plataniotis, and S. Pasupathy, “Green modulations in
energy-constrained wireless sensor networks,” IET Commun., vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 240–251, Jan. 2011.
[18] J. Abouei, J. D. Brown, K. N. Plataniotis, and S. Pasupathy, “Energy
efficiency and reliability in wireless biomedical implant systems,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 456–466, May 2011.
[19] H. Chebbo et al.. (2009, May). Proposal for partial PHY and MAC including emergency management in IEEE 802.15.6. IEEE 802.15 WPAN TG6
in Body Area Network (BAN), [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.
org/15/pub/TG6.html
[20] F. Xiong, Digital Modulation Techniques, 2nd ed. Norwood, MA, USA:
Artech House, 2006.
[21] A. S. Pandya and R. B. Macy, Pattern Recognition With Neural Networks
in C++, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1996.

344

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[22] M. Banitalebi-Dehkordi, H. R. Aboutalebi, and M. R. Taban, “Sound
source localization using compressive sensing-based feature extraction
and spatial sparsity,” Digital Signal Process. Elsevier, vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 1239–1246, Jul. 2013.
[23] M. Banitalebi-Dehkordi, H. R. Abutalebi, and H. Ghanei, “A compressive
sensing based compressed neural network for sound source localization,”
in Proc. Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Signal Process., Jun. 2011, pp. 6–10.
[24] W. Meng, W. Xiao, and L. Xie, “An efficient EM algorithm for energybased multisource localization in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1017–1027, Mar. 2011.

Mehdi Banitalebi-Dehkordi received the B.Sc. degree in electronics engineering from Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran, and the M.Sc. degree in
communication systems engineering from Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, in 2007 and 2012, respectively.
Since 2008, he has been an active member of
Speech Processing Research Lab, Yazd University.
From 2011 to 2013, he was a faculty member (lecturer) in the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Technical University and in Payame-Noor University.
He is also a Lecturer in the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Technical University, Iran. His research interests
are in general areas of wireless and speech signal processing with particular
reference to source localization systems.

Jamshid Abouei (M’11) received the B.Sc. degree
in electronics engineering and the M.Sc. degree in
communication systems engineering (with the highest honor) both from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1993 and 1996, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada,
in 2009.
From 2009 to 2010, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow
in the Multimedia Lab, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, ON,
Canada. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran. His research interests
are in general areas of wireless ad hoc and sensor networks, with particular
reference to energy efficiency and optimal resource allocations.

Konstantinos N. Plataniotis (F’12) received the
B.Eng. degree in computer engineering from the University of Patras, Greece and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Florida Institute
of Technology Melbourne, FL, USA.
He is currently a Professor with the Edward S.
Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada, and an Adjunct Professor with the School
of Computer Science, Ryerson University, Toronto.
He is the Director of The University of Toronto’s
Knowledge Media Design Institute (www.kmdi.utoronto.ca), and the Director
of Research for the Identity, Privacy and Security Institute at the University of
Toronto. His research interests include biometrics, communications systems,
multimedia systems, and signal and image processing.
Prof. Plataniotis was the Editor-in-Chief for the IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING
LETTERS from 2009 to 2011. He chairs the Examination Committee for the
IEEE Certified Biometrics Professional Program. He served on the IEEE Educational Activities Board (EAB) and was the Chair (2008–2009) of the IEEE
EAB Continuing Professional Education Committee. He has served as the Chair
(2000–2002) of IEEE Toronto Signal Processing Chapter, Chair (2004–2005) of
the IEEE Toronto Section. He was a member of the 2006 and 2007 IEEE Admissions & Advancement Committees. He is the recipient of 2005 IEEE Canada’s
Outstanding Engineering Educator Award “for contributions to engineering education and inspirational guidance of graduate students” and the corecipient
of the 2006 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS Outstanding Paper
Award for the paper entitled “Face Recognition Using Kernel Direct Discriminant Analysis Algorithms” published in 2003. He is a Registered Professional
Engineer in the province of Ontario, and a Fellow of the Engineering Institute
of Canada.

