IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

2567

Debulking From Within: A Robotic Steerable
Cannula for Intracerebral Hemorrhage Evacuation
Jessica Burgner, Member, IEEE, Philip J. Swaney, Student Member, IEEE, Ray A. Lathrop, Student Member, IEEE,
Kyle D. Weaver, and Robert J. Webster III∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—New approaches to intracerebral hemorrhage management are motivated by its high incidence and 40% mortality
rate. Surgery is sometimes attempted to decompress the brain, although patient outcomes are similar regardless of whether surgery
occurs. We hypothesize that surgical decompression is not more
effective because current open surgical techniques disrupt healthy
brain tissue to access the clot formed by the hemorrhage, offsetting
the benefits of surgery. To address this, we propose a less invasive
needle-based approach in which the clot is debulked from within
using a superelastic, precurved aspiration cannula that is deployed
from a needle. The tip of this aspiration cannula is controlled by
coordinated insertion and retraction of the cannula and needle,
as well as axial rotation of the cannula. We describe the design of
a sterilizable and biocompatible robot that can control the three
degrees of freedom of the needle and cannula. Image guidance is
achieved by adapting an approach originally developed for brain
biopsy. We provide an optimization method for the selection of the
precurvatures of one or more sequentially used aspiration cannulas
to maximize hemorrhage evacuation, based on preoperative medical image data. In vitro experiments demonstrate the feasibility
of evacuating 83–92% of hemorrhage volume, depending on the
number of tubes and deployment method used.
Index Terms—Active cannula, concentric tube robot, continuum
robot, minimally invasive neurosurgery, robot-assisted surgery.

I. INTRODUCTION
PPROXIMATELY 1 in 50 people will have an intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) at some point in their lives, and the
one-month mortality rate is approximately 40% [1]. ICH occurs
when a blood vessel in the brain ruptures and blood accumulates within the cranial cavity, compressing the brain. It may be

A

Manuscript received January 7, 2013; accepted April 25, 2013. Date of publication April 30, 2013; date of current version August 16, 2013. This work
was funded by the National Science Foundation under Grant IIS-1054331 and a
Graduate Research Fellowship. The work of J. Burgner was supported in part by
a fellowship from the German Academic Exchange Service. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
J. Burgner is with the Hannover Centre for Mechatronics, Leibniz Universität Hannover, D-30060 Hannover, Germany (e-mail: burgner@mzh.
uni-hannover.de).
P. J. Swaney and R. A. Lathrop are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235 USA (e-mail: philip.j.
swaney@vanderbilt.edu; Ray.A.Lathrop@vanderbilt.edu).
K. D. Weaver is with the Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37235 USA (e-mail: kyle.weaver@
vanderbilt.edu).
∗ R. J. Webster III is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235 USA and also with the Department
of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232 USA (e-mail: robert.webster@vanderbilt.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2260860

treated with drugs or surgical evacuation via open craniotomy.
While one would expect decompression via hemorrhage evacuation to result in improved patient outcomes, there is no clinical
data supporting this for the majority of ICH patients. Benefits
of various treatments have only been shown to date in patients
selected for factors like small, superficial lesions and a good
preoperative performance status [2]–[6], and there remains no
treatment of proven clinical benefit for typical ICH patients [7].
In standard open surgical procedures, where the brain substance
is cut with electrocautery, tubular retraction systems with or
without endoscopic assistance and Archimedes screw-type devices have been applied, but with only minimal improvement in
outcomes [3], [8], [9].
A proportion of this failure may be due to permanent injury
by the hemorrhage, which is irreversible even with evacuation.
However, it is generally believed by neurosurgeons that there is
a volume of brain tissue that is a risk but which may be salvaged
and returned to preinjury function if its conditions are optimized, and it is known that decompression can help to optimize
brain conditions [10]. However, this is currently challenging
to accomplish for all hemorrhage locations and particularly for
deep hemorrhages. For many hematomas, an operative trajectory of any significant dimension would result in more tissue
volume disruption than would be saved by the evacuation of the
hematoma. This results in only superficial hematomas currently
being candidates for evacuation and may be partially responsible for the lack of encouraging clinical data on the benefit of
surgical decompression.
Although there have been several minimally-invasive surgical
approaches proposed, such as locally delivered ultrasound with
thrombolysis and endoscopic aspiration of the clot [11], [12],
these have only been applied in small case studies and have not
been adopted as the standard treatment for ICH. While it is possible that one of these new minimally-invasive approaches may
ultimately succeed in solving the problem of ICH decompression, until one achieves widespread clinical use and is successful
in reducing the high mortality and complication rates of ICH,
there is ample motivation to pursue new approaches such as the
one we propose in this paper. We hypothesize that a robot that
can access the site of the hemorrhage through a needle-sized
entry path and then debulk the clot from within will reduce the
trauma to healthy brain tissue currently associated with surgical
decompression.
The problem of needle-based neurosurgery is not new in the
field of surgical robotics. Indeed, the first surgical robot was used
for this purpose [13], and much subsequent progress has been
made on stereotactic robotic systems, as reviewed in [14]–[16].

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

2568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

These prior systems use straight needle trajectories with imageguidance to hit specific targets within the brain. The system
described in this paper is similar to prior systems in its use of
image-guidance to hit specific intracerebral targets, but different in its need for dexterous motion of the needle tip within the
lesion. This desire for motion within the lesion was an early motivation for bevel-steered needles [17], [18], but maximum curvature and interventional tool integration challenges have thus
far prevented ICH experiments from being conducted with bevel
steering. Interventional tool manipulation within a hemorrhage
was first addressed robotically through an entry path of endoscopic surgery dimensions when a straight morcellator was used
to debulk a hematoma in the brain [19]. This study showed that
while manual hematoma removal was faster, robotic hematoma
removal resulted in less damage to the surrounding brain tissue in in vitro studies [19]. However, despite these promising
results, robotic assistance has yet to become routinely used in
treating ICH patients.
In this paper, we present a needle-based robotic system for
image-guided evacuation of ICHs that is no more invasive than
a standard brain biopsy, yet enables ICH clots to be debulked
from within via articulation of an aspiration cannula that extends
from the needle tip. We note that such a robot system does not
need to debulk the entire clot [20]. Based on the judgment of
experienced neurosurgeons, we anticipate clinically meaningful
decompression to begin at approximately 25–50% removal of
the clot volume, though future clinical studies will be needed to
verify this estimate.
Our system uses a simple two-tube, 3 degree-of-freedom
(DOF) concentric tube robot, also known as an active cannula [21], [22], which consists of a straight, stiff outer needle
and an inner curved superelastic cannula. In contrast to bevel
steered needles, the active cannula does not depend on tissue
interaction to achieve steering. In addition, the combination of
tubes enables straight entry pathways toward the hemorrhage
and high curvatures within the clot for dexterous aspiration. In
prior tube property design research for these robots, it has been
assumed that the robot will consist of multiple tubes (usually at
least 3) whose properties (precurvatures, stiffnesses, etc.) must
be selected a priori based on task requirements and then remain
fixed throughout use of the robot [23]–[26].
Here, we consider a somewhat different paradigm for design
and use of these robots, namely that tubes can be added and
removed from the robot during surgery. Thus, in ICH evacuation, the clot is debulked not by one complex concentric tube
robot, but by what can be thought of as multiple simple concentric tube robots, used sequentially. A preliminary version
of some results in this manuscript can be found in [27]. This
archival version combines the results in [27] with additional
material that comprises the entirety of Section III, as well as a
new patient case study (Section IV) and new experimental results (Section V-B). In the sections that follow, we describe the
design of a biocompatible actuation unit to control the needle
and cannula, an image-guidance protocol, tube design algorithms, and in vitro experiments illustrating the feasibility of
evacuating hematoma phantoms matching the geometry of ICH
patient cases.

Fig. 1. Robot-assisted ICH evacuation prototype setup attached to a phantom
skull. The robot is positioned and held in place with a passive articulated arm.
The aspirator is attached to the aspiration cannula that enters the brain through
a trajectory guide attached to the skull. A reference frame is rigidly attached to
the robot for optical tracking.

II. ROBOT SYSTEM
The ICH robot system is shown in Fig. 1. It includes a sterilizable robotic actuation unit capable of controlling a two-tube active cannula, a head-mounted trajectory guide to enable imageguided targeting of the hemorrhage, a passive articulated arm
(MA60003, NOGA, USA), and an aspirator to evacuate the
hemorrhage. The robot controls 3 DOF of two tubes. The outer
tube (referred to as “the needle” in the introduction) is a straight,
stiff tube made of stainless steel. The inner aspiration cannula
is a tube that is precurved and made of superelastic nitinol. As
it passes through the outer tube, it is straightened, but it returns
to its precurved shape when it exits the tip of the outer tube. The
actuation unit controls insertion and retraction of both tubes,
and axial rotation of the inner tube.
A. Sterilizable, Biocompatible, Robotic Actuation Unit
The robotic actuation mechanism was designed to be both
sterilizable and biocompatible. Safety, ease of use, and streamlined integration into the surgical workflow were also primary
considerations. Most prior actuation units for concentric tube
robots have been research lab prototypes, and sterilization and
workflow considerations have been left to future work. The exception is the work of Graves et al., who suggested a fully
disposable approach in which the entire robot is thrown away
after each surgery [28]. A sterilizable manual version without motors was also described in [29]. It remains to be seen
whether surgeons can learn to use a system like ours sufficiently
well for a manual approach to be viable (we suspect not), and
economic considerations will likely dictate the choice between
the disposable or reusable paradigm in an eventual commercial
system, though both approaches have merit. Our design contribution here is the first reusable, sterilizable, and operating room
ready actuation unit for concentric tube robots. It is constructed

BURGNER et al.: DEBULKING FROM WITHIN: A ROBOTIC STEERABLE CANNULA FOR INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE EVACUATION

2569

Fig. 4. Oldham couplings are used to transfer rotation of motor shafts through
a tortuous path to the sterile lead screws and square shaft for translation and
rotation of the cannula tubes. (a) Oldham coupling made from PEEK plastic.
(b) Aluminum plate is brought down over the Oldham coupling and secured
in place. (c) Aluminum plate creates the tortuous path between the nonsterile
bagged motor pack and the sterile robot.

Fig. 2. Two carriers are translated via threaded blocks using lead screws and
slide along a linear track. One carrier translates the straight outer tube, and the
second carrier translates the precurved aspiration tube, which is rotated with a
square shaft attached to a small gear that meshes with the large gear attached to
the tube hub.
Fig. 5. Tubes are permanently attached to hubs using a biocompatible glue
and can be autoclaved. The precurved aspiration tube has an additional gear
attached to the hub to rotate the tube.

Fig. 3. Sterile barrier concept. (a) Motor plate is removed from the robot before
sterilization. (b) Sterile bag is attached to the sterile robot using an aluminum
clamp, enabling the motor plate to be subsequently attached and the motors to
engage with the Oldham couplings (see Fig. 4). (c) Motor plate is reattached
and the bag pulled over it. The robot is now sterile.

entirely from autoclavable and biocompatible components, with
a modular motor pack that can be bagged.
The actuation unit mechanism is depicted in Fig. 2. The
straight outer tube is inserted and retracted using a lead screw
that acts on the tube’s carrier, which rides on a linear slide. The
same concept applies to the second carrier, which actuates the
inner aspiration tube. Rotary motion is transmitted to the tube
from the motor pack using a square shaft that interfaces with a
gear train (see Fig. 2). Both lead screws and the square shaft are
actuated by motors housed in the motor pack at the end of the
robot furthest from the patient. Three motors are mounted on a
motor plate that can easily be attached and detached from the
robot.
The motors are isolated from the sterile field by a tortuous path
sterility barrier with Oldham couplings that transmit rotational
motion through a sterile bag (see Figs. 3 and 4). To set up the
robot in the operating room, all components except the motor
pack are first autoclave sterilized with the motor pack detached.
A sterile bag is attached to the robot using an aluminum bag
clamp, followed by attachment of the motor plate. The sterile
bag is then pulled over the motor pack.
The tubes of the active cannula are bonded to their respective hubs using biocompatible and autoclavable glue (Loctite,
M-21 HP). Example tubes are shown in Fig. 5. We note that
all materials used in this actuation unit are either Ultem or
PEEK (biocompatible polymers), stainless steel (which would
be passivated before clinical use), or aluminum (which would

Fig. 6. Quick-release mechanism for the tubes. Either tube can be quickly
released from the mechanism by removing a screw and swinging a retaining bar
out of the way.

be anodized before clinical use). The trajectory guide components described in the next section are currently rapid prototype
plastic, and would be replaced with a clinical-grade plastic (e.g.,
PEEK) before clinical use.
The system was designed to enable several aspiration tubes to
be used sequentially (see Section III), so the actuation unit features the quick-release mechanism shown in Fig. 6. Removing
a screw and swinging a retaining bar out of the way allows one
to release a tube from the mechanism and introduce a new tube.
In addition, a quick release is provided for the carriers so that in
an emergency situation, the tubes can be retracted manually by
disengaging the carriers from the lead screws (see Fig. 7). In an
eventual clinical system, we intend to replace the three screws
in this quick-release mechanism with a thumb screw approach
to allow for faster operation.
B. Open Loop Robot Positioning Accuracy
To evaluate the accuracy of the robot in terms of tip position
error, we recorded the position of the tip of the aspiration tube

2570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Fig. 7. Quick-release mechanism for carriers enabling them to be detached
from the lead screws and manually slid backward, for manual tube retraction.
The mechanism works by (a) loosening holding screws, followed by (b) swinging the threaded block away from the carrier.

To set up and align the needle, the surgeon first creates a
hole in the skull, opens the dura, and attaches the base of the
trajectory guide to the skull using three small titanium screws.
The trajectory stem is then snapped into the base and loosely secured with the locking ring. An alignment probe (which enables
visualization of the insertion trajectory on the image-guidance
system, see Fig. 8(b)) is then inserted into the trajectory stem,
and image guidance is used to align it (as it pivots in the base)
with the desired target. The locking ring is then tightened to fix
the trajectory stem in place, and the alignment probe removed.
Next, the robot (attached to a passive arm) is moved into the
surgical field, and the robot front plate is coupled to the trajectory stem. The active cannula then passes through the trajectory
stem and into the brain, along the desired trajectory. Lastly, note
that in traditional biopsy with the Navigus system, the rotation
of the needle about its own axis is not important. However, it is
important in our system and can be obtained via optical tracking
of the robot itself, which is the reason for the tracking frame
shown in Fig. 1.
III. ASPIRATION TUBE DESIGN

Fig. 8. Image guidance for robot-assisted ICH evacuation. (a) Commercial
neuronavigation system (Navigus, Medtronic, Inc.) consists of a trajectory stem
that can be securely fastened to a bone-anchored base. (b) Trajectory stem is
adjusted to the desired insertion trajectory using a tracked alignment probe that
enables visualization of the trajectory in registered medical images. (c) Robot
system attaches to the trajectory stem.

used for the experiment in Section V-B, which was inserted
through a stiff, straight outer tube, using an optical tracker and
tracked point probe (Claron MicronTracker, Ontario, Canada).
We used the actuation unit to move the tip of the aspiration
tube to 33 evenly distributed Cartesian grid points (10-mm grid
spacing) within a sphere 4 mm in diameter, representing a clot.
The average root-mean-square error between kinematic model
predictions and optical tracking data was 0.78 mm, with a standard deviation of 0.31 mm and maximum error of 1.41 mm. We
note that this is the open loop accuracy of the robot, and that in
a clinical implementation we envision use of imaging to servo
the tip to the correct location. Hence, an open loop error is not
a lower bound for overall system error.
C. Surgical Workflow and Image-Guidance
Our robot incorporates image-guidance using preoperatively
acquired computed tomography (CT) images of the patient combined with the registration procedure employed in modern clinical image-guidance systems. In these, registration is accomplished using a surface scan of the patient’s face, which is then
matched to the corresponding surface in the CT image volume
using a standard surface-based registration. After registration,
we employ a needle alignment approach conceptually identical
to that of the Navigus system (Medtronic, Inc., USA), which is
illustrated in Fig. 8, where the only difference is that we have
made our own version of Navigus alignment hardware via rapid
prototyping, so that we can couple the trajectory stem to our
robot.

In principle, any precurvature (including those that vary with
arc length) that can be straightened completely with a maximum
material strain within the elastic range of nitinol (approximately
8–10%) can be preset into the aspiration cannula via a heat
treatment process. The shape and workspace of the device can
be computed using the mechanics-based model described in [21]
and [22]. In the future for clots with complex geometry, tubes
with variable curvature may be desirable. However, as a starting
point, in this paper we consider only the special case where the
aspiration cannula has constant precurvature (i.e., its shape is
an arc of a circle).
A. Kinematics
We parametrize the 3 DOF of a cannula with a straight outer
tube and circularly precurved inner tube using the variables ρ1
and ρ2 to describe the linear insertion distance of the outer
straight tube and inner aspiration cannula, respectively. The
angle α describes the axial angle of the aspiration tube and can
be controlled directly by the robotic actuation unit described
in the previous section. Thus, the joint space of the robot is
q = (ρ1 , ρ2 , α). The aspiration tube is composed of an initial
straight section with length Ls followed by a planar constant
curvature section with length Lc with radius r (see Fig. 9(a)).
The mapping from joint space to configuration space parameters
describing the curve of the robot (i.e., “arc parameters,” see [30])
is as follows:
1 = ρ1

ρ2 − ρ1 − Lc if ρ2 − ρ1 > Lc
2 =
0
else

Lc
if ρ2 − ρ1 > Lc
3 =
ρ2 − ρ1 else
κ3 = r−1 .

BURGNER et al.: DEBULKING FROM WITHIN: A ROBOTIC STEERABLE CANNULA FOR INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE EVACUATION

Fig. 9. (a) Each aspiration tube has a straight section with length L s followed
by a circular curved section of length L c with a radius of curvature r. (b) When
inserted into a straight outer tube (lighter colored tube that ends at 1 in the
image), there are three regions to model kinematically, with lengths 1 , 2 , and
3 .

These parameters define a
Tα T12 T3 , where
⎡
cos α − sin α
⎢ sin α cos α
⎢
Tα = ⎢
⎣ 0
0
0
⎡

T12

forward kinematic mapping T =

0

0 1
⎤

0

0

1

0

0

⎥
⎥
⎥
1 1 + 2 ⎦

0

0

0

are determined by the neurosurgeon, who selects the burr hole
point on the skull, and then verifies that the shortest path to the
hemorrhage does not pass through any critical brain structures.
We now describe the formulation of a volumetric objective
function quantifying the coverage of a given clot achievable by
a given cannula design. The surface model of the hemorrhage
is converted into a set of isotropic voxels. We use a binary
voxel representation to differentiate between voxels inside and
outside the hemorrhage. We then use as our objective function
for clot coverage by a given design (d) the percentage of the
total clot volume that is accessible to the tip of the cannula.
The portion of the cannula workspace volume that lies within
the hematoma V (d) is generated for each d by discretizing
the joint space of the robot with 1 mm translational and 1◦
rotational increments and computing the cannula tip position for
each combination of joint values. We also perform a secondary
check that keeps only configurations in which the entire curve
of the aspiration tube is within the clot. The voxels that contain
remaining tip points are labeled as covered voxels, while others
are labeled as uncovered. Finally, the percentage of the clot
covered is computed by dividing the total number of clot voxels
by the number of covered voxels. Our current implementation
(C++, Intel Core i7 2600) requires on average less than 1min to
calculate the covered clot volume for one design d and a given
entry path. We expect a speed-up through parallelization to a
few seconds per tube design evaluation.

0

IV. PATIENT-SPECIFIC OPTIMIZATION CASE STUDIES

1

1
0
⎢ 0 cos (κ  )
⎢
3 3
T3 = ⎢
⎢
⎣ 0 sin (κ3 3 )
0

⎤

0 0⎥
⎥
⎥
1 0⎦

1
⎢0
⎢
=⎢
⎣0
⎡

0

0 0

2571

0

0

0

− sin (κ3 3 )

cos(κ 3  3 )−1
κ3

cos (κ3 3 )

sin(κ 3  3 )
κ3

0

1

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥.
⎥
⎦

B. Tube Design Optimization
An optimal aspiration tube results in a two-tube active cannula
with a workspace that completely covers the volume of the
hemorrhage. For some clots, this may not be possible with one
aspiration cannula, so two or more may be used sequentially,
while leaving the outer needle in place. Given that we have
restricted our tube shapes to circular in this paper, the parameters
available for design are the curvature and arc length of the
aspiration cannula, such that a given design is defined as d =
{Lc , r}.
We begin with CT medical image data that is routinely acquired during the diagnosis of ICH. A surface model of the skull
can be determined by a simple threshold, while the hemorrhage
is identified via manual segmentation in 3d Slicer [31]. We then
discretize the joint space q = (ρ1 , ρ2 , α) of the active cannula,
and compute the workspace of the device by using the kinematic
model for each discrete combination of joint positions. The last
step is to compare the overlap of this workspace and the segmented clot. To evaluate this overlap, we must first know the
entry point and entry vector of the cannula into the clot. These

We conducted a retrospective, IRB approved study using
seven CT datasets from patients with ICH previously treated at
Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Surface models of each
skull and hemorrhage are shown in Fig. 10. For each case a
neurosurgeon selected a desired entry path, and for each path
all possible aspiration tube sets were evaluated using the objective function in the previous section. Tube parameters were as
follows:
1) Aspiration tubes were considered to have an outer diameter of 1.14 mm and an inner diameter of 0.91 mm,
matching the experimental tubes used in Section V-B.
2) A 10% recoverable strain threshold was used.
3) The curved section length Lc was first discretized in 5mm steps starting at 10 mm. Then, the same procedure
was used with a finer resolution of 2 mm. Tables I–III
show the best choices across both discretizations.
4) Minimum and maximum radii of curvature were 6.4 and
150 mm, respectively, with 2.5 mm discretization within
this range.
For selection of the optimal aspiration tube(s), three scenarios
of use are now considered.
A. Scenario 1: Single Aspiration Tube
In this first scenario, we require the aspiration tube to remain
within the clot at all times, and consider that only one aspiration
tube is available to be deployed through the straight outer tube.
For each patient case, we computed the tube curvature and arc

2572

Fig. 10.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Seven cases of patients with an ICH (hemorrhage shown in red).
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF OPTIMAL ASPIRATION TUBES FOR SCENARIO 1

Fig. 11. This figure illustrates the tissue deflection threshold td , which applies
only to Scenario 2 (Section IV-B). The quantity td is the maximum distance
between the entry axis of the device and the point at which the curved tube
enters the clot. It is a surgeon-specified parameter.

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF OPTIMAL ASPIRATION TUBES FOR SCENARIO 2

the volume of clot accessible to a single constant curvature
aspiration tube as the results in Table II illustrate (here we used
a maximum td of 15 mm; td is in general based on the preference
of the specific surgeon using the system, and if it is set to zero,
then Scenario 2 is identical to Scenario 1). Note also that one can
achieve a configuration like that shown in Fig. 11 without cutting
brain tissue by first deploying the aspiration tube within the clot,
and then retracting the straight outer tube and the aspiration tube
simultaneously.

TABLE III
SCENARIO 3: SEQUENTIAL USE OF TWO ASPIRATION TUBES
WITH COMBINED COVERAGE f ∗

C. Scenario 3: Two Aspiration Tubes in Succession

length that maximizes coverage of the hematoma (f )
f ∗ = arg maxf (d)

(1)

with results summarized in Table I . While this level of coverage
exceeds the 25–50% minimum coverage target mentioned in the
introduction, we also went on to consider two other scenarios of
use, in order to provide additional options for the neurosurgeon
if increased coverage is desired.
B. Scenario 2: Single Aspiration Tube With Brain Deformation
We now relax the requirement that the entire curved tube
remains inside the clot at all times, and instead permit small
lateral deflection at the surface of the clot up to some threshold td
as shown in Fig. 11. By doing this, we can significantly increase

In this scenario, we sought to maintain the high coverage
achieved in Scenario 2 while eliminating the need for brain
deflection (i.e., keeping the aspiration tube completely within
the hematoma as was done in Scenario 1). We achieve this by
selecting two aspiration tubes with different curvatures, which
will be sequentially used. After the first tube has evacuated
all of the clot it is able to reach, it is removed with the outer
straight tube remaining in place in the patient’s brain, such that
the system maintains registration, and a second aspiration tube
is introduced to remove additional clot material. The goal is to
choose the parameters of the two tubes simultaneously, such
that the overall volume of the clot removed is maximized
f ∗ = arg max(f (d1 ) ∩ f (d2 )).

(2)

Results are shown in Table III.
The similarity in curvatures of both tubes across all cases is
noteworthy, as is the high overall volume of clot removed. To
determine how well a single set of two tubes could work across
all patients, we reran the optimization seeking to maximize the
average coverage across all patients. This resulted in a first

BURGNER et al.: DEBULKING FROM WITHIN: A ROBOTIC STEERABLE CANNULA FOR INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE EVACUATION

2573

TABLE IV
SCENARIO 4: SEQUENTIAL USE OF FIVE PRESELECTED TUBES AND INFLUENCE
OF ENTRY PATH PERTURBATION

tube with Lc = 58 mm, r = 13.23 mm and a second tube with
Lc = 40 mm, r = 6.37 mm. This tube set enables an average
coverage of 79% across all patients, with a minimum of 60%
and a maximum of 95%.
D. Scenario 4: Discrete Tube Set
In this scenario, we evaluated the performance of a fixed set
of five tubes (radii of curvature: 6, 8.5, 11, 13.5, and 16 mm),
where the radii were chosen to span the optimal tube curvatures
of Scenario 3. The five tubes used in sequence are able to remove
an average of 95% of each clot in our patient dataset (see column
2 of Table IV).
Noting that there will be some uncertainty in burr hole placement and also in targeting the desired clot entry point, we performed a perturbation study. In considering the level of error
that can be expected in clinical use, note that the accuracy of
the Navigus in targeting locations within the skull has been
experimentally found to be 1 mm with a standard deviation of
0.28 mm [32], [33]. Also note that the surgeon will have access
to image-guidance when selecting the burr hole location, and
thus, in principle should be able to place the burr hole at the
desired location approximately as accurately as internal skull
points can be targeted (the same image-guidance system being
used for both purposes). To establish a conservative level of
error, we went out a little over three standard deviations, considering a maximum burr hole error of 2.5 mm and a maximum
clot entry point error of 2 mm.1 Worst case needle angular misalignment within these bounds occurs when both burr hole error
and clot entry error are simultaneously deviate maximally from
the planned locations, and do so in the worst possible direction
(worst both with respect to one another, and with respect to clot
geometry).2
We generated 25 perturbation cases for each of our seven
patient cases by considering all combinations of five evenly angularly distributed points at a radial distance of 2.5 mm on the
skull surface around planned burr hole location and five evenly
angularly distributed points at a radial distance of 2 mm around
the planned clot entry point. Column 3 of Table IV shows the
minimum clot volume coverage across all patient and perturbation cases. It can be concluded from this study that if surgeons
1 Burr hole error was set slightly higher than the clot targeting error to account
for the fact that the surgeon may be slightly more careful in internal point
targeting than in burr hole placement.
2 We note that since the errors are likely Gaussian in nature, it is statistically
unlikely that both errors would be maximal simultaneously (let alone in the
worst possible direction), but considering such a case provides a useful lower
bound on worst case clot coverage.

Fig. 12. Phantom experiment. (a) Robot is attached to the passive arm and
secured to the trajectory guide, which is mounted onto the top of an acrylic
box. The active cannula is deployed to the clot and the aspiration tube is used
to debulk the clot. (b) Blood clot is shown prior to beginning the experiment,
(c) progress midway through the removal experiment, and (d) the same area
after aspiration.

are correct in their estimate that decompression benefit begins
when 25–50% of the clot is removed, it is statistically improbable that a small number of discrete tubes will be incapable of
accessing the requisite geometry.
V. IN VITRO DEMONSTRATIONS
A. In Vitro Phantom Experiment
To explore the practical feasibility of robot-assisted ICH evacuation using a single tube with allowed tissue deflection (see
Section IV-B), we conducted a phantom experiment. The aspiration tube used had a straight section with Ls = 260 mm
followed by a section with constant curvature of r = 30.3 mm
with Lc = 55 mm. The aspiration tube had an outer diameter of
1.75 mm and a wall thickness of 0.3 mm. The outer tube had an
outer diameter of 3.2 mm and a wall thickness of 1 mm.
The experiment was conducted using a gelatin phantom (see
Fig. 12(a)). The clear tissue in the phantom simulated regular
brain tissue and was made from 10% by weight Knox gelatin
(Kraft Foods Global, Inc., USA), and the red tissue that simulated the clot was made from Jell-O gelatin. This made the
hematoma softer than the surrounding brain tissue. This phantom is similar to the one used in [19]. The hemorrhage was
approximately spherical with a 63.5-mm diameter.
The trajectory stem was aligned with the clot and secured
using the locking ring. The robot was then affixed to the passive
arm and attached to the trajectory stem as discussed in Section II-C. The outer tube was then inserted into the clot, with the
inner tube retracted fully inside it, and the tubes were then used
to evacuate the clot. Motion planning was conducted manually
by the experimenter who visually observed the debulking process through the wall of the phantom and input new desired
target locations to the robot manually using the computer keyboard. The robot was able to remove 92% of the clot material,

2574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Fig. 14. Slices from CT scans of the phantom (a) before aspiration and
(b) after aspiration. The robotic system was able to remove 83.1% of the clot.

Fig. 13. In vitro skull experiment. The robot was aligned using the trajectory
stem and the aspirator was connected to the end of the inner tube. The clot was
then removed by moving the tip of the cannula within the clot while applying
suction.

determined by initially measuring the amount of red gelatin
used. The surface of the clot was visually inspected for positive margins and none were detected. The residual red gelatin
at the end of the experiment was scooped out and weighed. The
achieved results are similar to the 99% theoretical coverage of
this clot using Scenario 2 from the previous section, and the
system could have removed more material at the clot-brain interface had we been less concerned with damaging healthy brain
tissue. Fig. 12 shows the experimental setup and before, during,
and postexperiment photos of the clot.
B. In Vitro Skull Experiment
We next performed an experiment in vitro using an anatomically correct skull model and one of the patient clots from
Section IV. The goal was to experimentally demonstrate the
system under conditions like those in patient case 1 of Scenario
3 from Section III. To replicate the geometry of patient case 1,
we used a two-piece, semitransparent plastic skull (A20/T, 3B
Scientific, USA), which we filled with gelatin. The segmented
clot from patient case 1 was made using a rapid prototyping
machine, and we also prototyped the negative form of the clot.
A thin acrylic sheet was laser cut to fit in between the two halves
of the skull, and a hole was laser cut in the sheet such that the
prototyped clot would sit at the correct height and orientation in
the skull. The plate and skull were assembled and sealed using
silicone before the liquid gelatin was introduced. The net result
was a two-piece gelatin mold with an empty cavity for the prototyped clot. We then used the negative form of the clot to mold
a Jell-O model of the clot, and added barium at a mixture of
0.5g/ml to enable visualization of the clot in CT.
We shape set the nitinol tubes used in this experiment using
heat treatment. Although we attempted to achieve the curvatures listed on Table III for patient case 1, the tubes relaxed
slightly as they were removed from the fixture that held them
in the oven, such that the measured radii of curvature were 19.8
and 12.6 mm. The robot was aligned with the entry path selected by an experienced neurosurgeon (see Fig. 13). Because
the skull was not completely transparent, the top of the skull

was removed after the robot was aligned to enable visualization of the tubes in the clot. Motion planning, robot position
commands, and determination of the removed clot volume were
implemented the same way as in the previous experiment. The
robot was able to remove 83.1% of the clot (see Fig. 14), which
was measured using the same procedure as in the previous experiment. Based on the curvatures of the experimental tubes, the
expected clot removal percentage was 80.6%. The fact that the
experimental results slightly exceeded the theoretical prediction
can be attributed to minor tissue deformation as suction is applied, which brings more material within reach of the cannula
tip. We note that deformation is likely to be present in human
brain tissue, so the theoretical percentages given in this paper
(which consider only rigid geometry) may be conservative. See
the conclusion for further discussion of the future work that we
envision to compensate for deformation effects.
VI. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have explored the feasibility of a new approach to debulking ICH clots from within using a procedure
with invasiveness comparable to a standard brain biopsy. As
first steps toward clinical deployment of the technique, we have
described the design of a sterilizable robotic actuation unit, several methods for tube curvature design, and several deployment
scenarios. A retrospective simulation study on patient CT images demonstrated that one or two circularly curved tubes are
sufficient to cover a high percentage of clot geometry across
all subjects in our dataset. In vitro experiments illustrated our
proposed approach. As mentioned in the introduction, surgeons
estimate that clinical benefit will begin to occur for patients if
25–50% of the clot can be removed. Our simulations and in vitro
experiments indicate that percentages significantly higher than
this are accessible with even simple constant curvature cannulas.
Many challenges remain before our proposed approach can
be implemented clinically. Since brain deformation may be significant in ICH removal, we believe that intraoperative imaging
and brain deformation modeling (together with motion planning
algorithms that leverage both) will be important to ensure that
the cannula does not accidentally leave the clot and impinge on
brain tissue as the clot changes shape. An additional layer of
safety in a human case can be obtained by being less aggressive
than we were in our in vitro experiments and not attempting to
remove 100% of the clot; one could intentionally leave a margin of clot around the edges, debulking the middle of the clot

BURGNER et al.: DEBULKING FROM WITHIN: A ROBOTIC STEERABLE CANNULA FOR INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE EVACUATION

only. Furthermore, while we believe that aspiration will locally
remove clot material, this remains to be tested, and we may find
that morcellation will ultimately be necessary. Fortunately, it is
possible to include a morcellator on the tip of a concentric tube
robot as was shown in [34].
In summary, in this paper, we have pursued early feasibility
studies on a new concept for ICH decompression that may eventually bring the benefits of less invasive decompression to many
patients. Our hope is that our new decompression approach will
eventually save the lives of some of the 40% of patients who
currently die from ICH, and also that it may eventually reduce
the instances of brain damage in those patients who survive.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge insights on biocompatibility, safety,
and usability features provided by E. Clif Burdette and his team
at Acoustic MedSystems, Inc., which inspired aspects of the
design presented in Section II-A. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] C. J. van Asch, M. J. Luitse, G. J. Rinkel, I. van der Tweel, A. Algra, and
C. J. Klijn, “Incidence, case fatality, and functional outcome of intracerebral haemorrhage over time, according to age, sex, and ethnic origin:
A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 167–176, 2010.
[2] R. A. Kaya, O. Türkmenolu, I. M. Ziyal, T. Dalkiliç, Y. Ahin, and Y. Aydin,
“The effects on prognosis of surgical treatment of hypertensive putaminal
hematomas through transsylvian transinsular approach,” Surg. Neurol.,
vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 176–183, 2003.
[3] G. Maira, C. Anile, C. Colosimo, and G. F. Rossi, “Surgical treatment
of primary supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage in stuporous and comatose patients,” Neurol. Res., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 54–60, 2002.
[4] J. M. Murthy, G. V. Chowdary, T. V. Murthy, P. S. Bhasha, and
T. J. Naryanan, “Decompressive craniectomy with clot evacuation in large
hemispheric hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage,” Neurocritical Care,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 258–262, 2005.
[5] S. H. Tan, P. Y. Ng, T. T. Yeo, S. H. Wong, P. L. Ong, and
N. Venketasubramanian, “Hypertensive basal ganglia hemorrhage: A
prospective study comparing surgical and nonsurgical management,” Surg.
Neurol., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 287–292, 2001.
[6] Y. Zuo, G. Cheng, D.-K. Gao, X. Zhang, H.-N. Zhen, W. Zhang, and
S.-C. Xiao, “Gross-total hematoma removal of hypertensive basal ganglia
hemorrhages: A long-term follow-up,” J. Neurol. Sci., vol. 287, no. 1–2,
pp. 100–104, 2009.
[7] L. Elijovich, P. V. Patel, and J. C. Hemphill, “Intracerebral hemorrhage,”
Seminars Neurol., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 657–667, 2008.
[8] C.-H. Chen, H.-T. Lee, C.-C. Shen, and M.-H. Sun, “Aspiration of hypertensive intracerebral hematoma with frameless and fiducial-free navigation
system: Technical note and preliminary result,” Stereotactic Functional
Neurosurg., vol. 86, no. 5, pp. 288–291, 2008.
[9] C.-C. Chen, D.-Y. Cho, C.-S. Chang, J.-T. Chen, W.-Y. Lee, and H.-C. Lee,
“A stainless steel sheath for endoscopic surgery and its application in
surgical evacuation of putaminal haemorrhage,” J. Clin. Neurosci., vol. 12,
no. 8, pp. 937–940, 2005.
[10] N. Etminan, K. Beseoglu, B. Turowski, H. J. Steiger, and D. Hanggi, “Perfusion CT in patients with spontaneous lobar intracerebral hemorrhage:
Effect of surgery on perihemorrhagic perfusion,” Stroke, vol. 43, no. 3,
pp. 759–763, 2012.
[11] D. W. Newell, M. M. Shah, R. Wilcox, D. R. Hansmann, E. Melnychuk,
J. Muschelli, and D. F. Hanley, “Minimally invasive evacuation of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage using sonothrombolysis,” J. Neurosurg.,
vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 592–601, 2011.
[12] C. M. Miller, P. Vespa, J. L. Saver, C. S. Kidwell, S. T. Carmichael,
J. Alger, J. Frazee, S. Starkman, D. Liebeskind, V. Nenov, R. Elashoff,

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]

2575

and N. Martin, “Image-guided endoscopic evacuation of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage,” Surg. Neurol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 441–446, 2008.
Y. S. Kwoh, J. Hou, E. A. Jonckheere, and S. Hayati, “A robot with improved absolute positioning accuracy for CT guided stereotactic brain
surgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 153–160, Feb.
1988.
D. F. Louw, T. Fielding, P. B. McBeth, D. Gregoris, P. Newhook, and
G. R. Sutherland, “Surgical robotics: A review and neurosurgical prototype development,” Neurosurg., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 525–536, 2004.
R. Taylor, “A perspective on medical robotics,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94, no. 9,
pp. 1652–1664, Sep. 2006.
G. Dogangil, B. L. Davies, and F. Rodriguez y Baena, “A review of medical
robotics for minimally invasive soft tissue surgery,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng.
Part H: J. Eng. Med., vol. 224, no. 5, pp. 653–679, 2010.
J. A. Engh, G. Podnar, D. Kondziolka, and C. N. Riviere, “Toward effective needle steering in brain tissue,” in Proc. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Aug./Sep. 2006, vol. 1, pp. 559–562.
R. J. Webster III, J. S. Kim, N. J. Cowan, G. S. Chirikjian, and
A. M. Okamura, “Nonholonomic modeling of needle steering,” Int. J.
Robot. Res., vol. 25, no. 5–6, pp. 509–526, 2006.
T. M. Goradia, R. H. Taylor, and L. M. Auer, “Robot-assisted minimally
invasive neurosurgical procedures: First experimental experience,” in First
Joint Conf. Vision, Virtual Reality, Robotics Med. Med. Robot. Comput.Assisted Surgery, 1997, pp. 319–322.
J. M. Simard, “Plenary lectures: Problems in neurosurgery—a rich environment for engineers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot.
Biomechatron., 2012, p. L. DOI: 10.1109/BioRob.2012.6290953.
P. E. Dupont, J. Lock, B. Itkowitz, and E. Butler, “Design and control of
concentric-tube robots,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 209–225,
Apr. 2010.
D. C. Rucker, B. A. Jones, and R. J. Webster III, “A geometrically exact
model for externally loaded concentric-tube continuum robots,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 769–780, Oct. 2010.
T. Anor, J. R. Madsen, and P. E. Dupont, “Algorithms for design of continuum robots using the concentric tubes approach: A neurosurgical example,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2011, pp. 667–673.
C. Bedell, J. Lock, A. Gosline, and P. E. Dupont, “Design optimization of
concentric tube robots based on task and anatomical constraints,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2011, pp. 398–403.
J. Burgner, P. J. Swaney, D. C. Rucker, H. B. Gilbert, S. T. Nill,
P. T. Russell, K. D. Weaver, and R. J. Webster, “A bimanual teleoperated system for endonasal skull base surgery,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Sep. 2011, pp. 2517–2523.
J. Burgner, H. B. Gilbert, and R. J. Webster III, “On the computational
design of concentric tube robots: Incorporating volume-based objectives,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013.
P. J. Swaney, J. Burgner, R. A. Lathrop, H. B. Gilbert, K. D. Weaver, and
R. J. Webster III, “Minimally-invasive intracerebral hemorrhage removal
using an active cannula,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013.
C. M. Graves, A. Slocum, R. Gupta, and C. J. Walsh, “Towards a compact
robotically steerable thermal ablation probe,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., May 2012, pp. 709–714.
J. Burgner, P. J. Swaney, T. L. Bruns, M. S. Clark, D. C. Rucker,
E. C. Burdette, and R. J. Webster, “An autoclavable steerable cannula
manual deployment device: Design and accuracy analysis,” J. Med. Devices, vol. 6, no. 4, 2012.
R. J. Webster III and B. A. Jones, “Design and kinematic modeling of constant curvature continuum robots: A review,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29,
no. 13, pp. 1661–1683, 2010.
(2012). 3d Slicer. [Online]. Available: http://www.slicer.org
M. Mcdonald, N. Konyer, and M. J. Bronskill, “MRl-guided neurosurgery:
Accuracy of the navigus trajectory guide,” Int. Soc. Magn. Resonace Med.
10, vol. 94, no. 1, p. 2075, 2002.
A. Quiñones Hinojosa, M. L. Ware, N. Sanai, and M. W. McDermott,
“Assessment of image guided accuracy in a skull model: Comparison
of frameless stereotaxy techniques vs. frame-based localization,” J. Neurooncol., vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 65–70, 2006.
A. H. Gosline, N. V. Vasilyev, A. Veeramani, M. Wu, G. Schmitz, R. Chen,
V. Arabagi, P. J. del Nido, and P. E. Dupont, “Metal MEMS tools for
beating-heart tissue removal,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
May 2012, pp. 1921–1926.

Authors’s photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

