2904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

A Flexible Base Electrode Array for Intraspinal
Microstimulation
Imad Khaled, Salma Elmallah, Cheng Cheng, Walied A. Moussa,
Vivian K. Mushahwar, Member, IEEE, and Anastasia L. Elias∗

Abstract—In this paper, we report the development of a flexible
base array of penetrating electrodes which can be used to interface with the spinal cord. A customizable and feasible fabrication
protocol is described. The flexible base arrays were fabricated and
implanted into surrogate cords which were elongated by 12%. The
resulting strains were optically measured across the cord and compared to those associated with two types of electrodes arrays (one
without a base and one with a rigid base connecting the electrodes).
The deformation behavior of cords implanted with the flexible base
arrays resembled the behavior of cords implanted with individual
microwires that were not connected through a base. The results
of the strain test were used to validate a 2-D finite element model.
The validated model was used to assess the stresses induced by the
electrodes of the three types of arrays on the cord, and to examine how various design parameters (thickness, base modulus, etc.,)
impact the mechanical behavior of the electrode array. Rigid base
arrays induced higher stresses on the cord than the flexible base
arrays which in turn imposed higher stresses than the individual
microwire implants. The developed flexible base array showed improvement over the rigid base array; however, its stiffness needs to
be further reduced to emulate the mechanical behavior of individual microwire arrays without a base.
Index Terms—Electrical stimulation, electrode array, finite element model, mechanical compliance, mechanical properties, spinal
cord, spinal cord injury.

I. INTRODUCTION

S

PINAL cord injury (SCI) leads to an interruption in the neural signals between the brain and the intact motor neurons

Manuscript received February 1, 2013; revised April 15, 2013; accepted May
20, 2013. Date of publication June 5, 2013; date of current version September
14, 2013. This work was supported by the Alberta Innovates—Health Solutions (AIHS), Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research (AHFMR),
and the National Institutes of Health (NIH). V. K. Mushahwar and A. L. Elias
contributed equally to this work. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
I. Khaled and W. A. Moussa are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 Canada (e-mail:
ikhaled@ualberta.ca; walied.moussa@ualberta.ca).
S. Elmallah and C. Cheng are with the Department of Chemical and Materials
Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 Canada (e-mail:
selmallah@ualberta.ca; ccheng6@ualberta.ca).
∗ A. L. Elias is with the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 Canada (e-mail:
aelias@ualberta.ca).
V. K. Mushahwar is with the Division of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Centre for Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB T6G 2E1 Canada (e-mail: vivian.
mushahwar@ualberta.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2265877

below the lesion site, and often causes the loss of function in the
lower extremities [1], [2]. Intraspinal microstimulation (ISMS)
is a neuroprosthetic technique that involves the implantation of
micro-sized-electrodes within the spinal cord below the site of
injury [3]. Electrical stimulation through these microelectrodes
activates the remaining motoneuronal pools and elements of the
neural networks involved in locomotion, thus producing coordinated movements of the legs [4], [5]. In animal models, this
technique has shown substantial promise for restoring standing
and walking after SCI [1], [3], [6]–[8].
The ISMS implants used for restoring standing and stepping
to date are comprised of 8–12 microwires individually implanted
in each side of the spinal cord [6], [7], [9], [10]. The wires are
manually positioned; thus, allowing for flexibility in placement
within the cord. However, the process of inserting individual
microwires can be tedious and may be susceptible to placement errors which can reduce the overall yield of the ISMS
implant [9]. The use of arrays of electrodes that are held together by a base could improve the accuracy of tip placement in
the ventral horn of the cord, while reducing the time of surgery.
By adhering to the surface of the pia mater, the base will also
increase the stability of the electrodes within the spinal cord.
Currently available electrode arrays are capable of recording
from or stimulating various regions of the brain. Examples of
such arrays include the Utah, Michigan and Huntington Medical Research Institute (HMRI) arrays, all of which consist of
arrangements of multiple electrodes that are held together by a
rigid, glassy polymer, or silicon base [11]–[14].
Studies have suggested that within the brain, mechanical
mismatch between stiff electrodes and soft tissue can lead to
adverse inflammatory responses [15], [16]. To address this issue, a number of electrode designs incorporating flexible polymers into the electrodes themselves have been implemented,
ranging from multisite neural probes fabricated on polyimide
substrates [17], [18], microthread electrodes based on organic
materials [19], to mechanically adaptive cortical implants fabricated from polymer nanocomposites which undergo a dramatic
change in modulus upon implantation as water is absorbed [20].
Each of these devices could potentially be utilized in the spinal
cord as an independent unit, and a base would be advantageous
to simplify the insertion process.
The mechanical properties of electrode arrays intended for
use in the spinal cord must be carefully controlled. The spinal
cord undergoes large deformations during daily motion (average
maximal elongations of 10.1% were observed in human volunteers by MRI along the posterior side of the cervical side during
flexion [21]), and arrays that are able to deform with the cord

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

KHALED et al.: FLEXIBLE BASE ELECTRODE ARRAY FOR INTRASPINAL MICROSTIMULATION

are needed. With the exception of the HMRI electrode arrays, a
version of which has been implanted in the spinal cord [22], the
interaction of the above-mentioned arrays with spinal cord tissue as well as their long-term stability in the spinal cord remains
unknown [23].
One approach to improving the mechanical properties of microelectrode arrays in vivo has been to engineer devices integrating biodegradable materials, which will be suitably stiff
to manipulate and implant, but then gradually erode upon implantation, leaving only wires [24], or micropatterned neural
probes [18], [25]. However, this approach is not suitable for
ISMS electrode arrays for two reasons: 1) Degradation needs to
occur within a few hours of implantation, allowing the solid base
to erode fully prior to the patient’s commencement of movement
following recovery from anesthesia. This ensures that the stiff
base does not cause damage to the mobile cord. However, the
solid base cannot erode too fast (as would be the case when
utilizing sucrose-based approaches) such that contact with fluids during the implantation procedure dissolves the base prior
to proper positioning within the cord. 2) For most materials,
swelling is an integral part of the degradation process, which
may disturb the electrodes themselves.
Therefore, we propose that a flexible base electrode array
may be a suitable alternative for ISMS interfaces. During normal
daily motion, the flexible base of the array would conform to the
surface of the pia mater and undergo the same deformations as
the cord. This in turn would allow the penetrating electrodes to
“float” within the spinal cord tissue as it moves, thus providing
enhanced interfacial stability. Devices with bases could also
potentially be utilized to improve the longevity of recording
in the central or peripheral nervous system. The base stiffness
of currently available electrode arrays likely contributes to the
inflammatory response, electrode encapsulation, and ultimately
the failure of these devices [26].
The fabrication of an FBEA to interface with the spinal cord
requires the development of a customizable protocol to accommodate for variations in curvature and size of the lumbosacral
spinal cord between recipients of the device. Moreover, depending on the leg movements to be restored, the target regions
for stimulation within the ventral horn could vary [4]. Unlike
the brain, the ISMS interface does not require an array with a
high density of electrodes [3], [8], [11]–[13]. Because the target locations for producing various synergistic movements are
distributed along the rostro-caudal extent of the lumbosacral enlargement, an array with a sparse arrangement (instead of dense
distribution) of electrodes along the length of the enlargement
would be suitable for interfacing with the spinal cord [3], [8].
The relatively large length requires the use of a more flexible
device than in applications where the target region is smaller in
dimension. While various flexible arrays have been described
previously in the literature [21]–[23], [27]–[29], the electrodes
in these devices are patterned in the plane of the surface. For
intraspinal microstimulation, protruding, high aspect ratio electrodes that can access the ventral horn region of the cord are
required.
In this paper, we describe the development of a FBEA that
could be used for ISMS. A fabrication protocol which enables

2905

Fig. 1. Schematic of the flexible electrode array. The array is shown implanted
in the spinal cord with rapid prototyped handle to facilitate insertion (plan view).

customization of the array was developed. The devices were
implanted into surrogate cords which mimicked the mechanical
properties of the natural spinal cord [30], and the mechanical
behavior of the implanted FBEAs under tension was assessed
and compared to the behavior of implanted arrays of individual
microwire without a base as well as arrays with rigid bases. Similar rigid base arrays have been successfully utilized previously
for stimulation in the cat spinal cord in acute experiments; these
arrays consist of iridium wires (75 μm diameter) in a rigid epoxy
base [22]. Finally, a validated finite element model (FEM) of the
surrogate spinal cord was used to analyze the stresses that various electrode array types impose on spinal cord tissue. When
implanted in surrogate cords, FBEAs were able to undergo significantly higher deformations than rigid bases, comparable with
the deformations achieved by individual microwires. The FEM
also showed that the electrodes of the FBEA impose smaller
stresses on the surrogate cord than the rigid arrays, yet somewhat higher stresses than the individual electrodes.
II. METHODS
A. Array Fabrication
The flexible array consisted of a curved flexible base with
two rows of protruding electrodes (30 μm wires each, 4 mm in
length), as illustrated in Fig. 1. Thin stainless steel (SS) wires
with 30-μm diameter (insulated with 4 μm of polyimide) were
selected in our design to minimize the overall stiffness of the
base itself, as each lead and corresponding electrode was comprised of a continuous wire. The upper and lower surfaces of the
base were designed with a curved profile to match the curvature
of the spinal cord itself, as can be determined by MRI [9]. Employing a curved base is expected to increase the adherence of
the array to the surface of the pia mater, and reduce the extent
of connective tissue formation between the spinal cord and the
base of the array, thus diminishing the chances of array dislodgement [31]. The thickness of the base of the array was a key
design parameter. Ideally, this dimension should be minimized
to enable the array to be implanted in the available space between the pia mater and dura mater surrounding the spinal cord.
At the same time, the base should be thick enough to form a
continuous layer around the leads connecting to the electrodes

2906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Fig. 2. Rapid prototype mold and liner. CAD drawings of the female (a) and
male components (b) of the molds are shown. The female component includes
an array of six holes, through which the wires of the electrodes can be fed. When
working with thin layers of silicone elastomer, it was necessary to line the mold
with a thin piece of polypropylene to ensure that polymerization would occur,
as shown in (c) and (d).

and to resist tearing during deformation. To engineer a base that
can be tested in a feline model, a target thickness of 300 μm
was selected. The shape of the base was controlled by curing
the elastomer in a customized, rapid-prototyped mold, in which
the electrode wires were placed. The elastomer was the biocompatible silicone “MED 6215” (NuSil Technology, Carpinteria,
CA, USA). This was selected as the base material because silicone elastomers are commonly used in medical implants and
neural interface applications [27], [32]–[36], and have moduli
of elasticity (∼1 MPa, vide infra) orders of magnitude smaller
than that of other polymers such as polyimide (3.5 GPa [37])
and parylene (3.2 GPa [37]). MED 6215 was used as received
and prepared in the suggested elastomer to cross-linker mixing
ratio of 10:1. Samples were cured for 60 min at temperatures of
66 ◦ C.
The design of the mold was prepared using 3D CAD software (Pro/Engineer Wildfire 3.0, Parametric Technology Corporation, Needham, MA, USA). It consisted of two parts:
1) A female component [see Fig. 2(a)] which controlled the
length and curvature of the base and the location of electrodes. Small holes were included in the female half of the
mold, through which the electrodes could be inserted. 2) A
male component [see Fig. 2(b)] controlled the thickness, length,
and width of the base (300 μm, 2 cm, and 0.7 cm, respectively) of the base and ensured that its thickness was uniform
throughout its length by matching the curvature of the female
mold. The mold had openings at both ends to facilitate solvent
evaporation.
Rapid prototyping (3-D printing) was used to fabricate transparent plaster molds with glossy smooth surfaces, using Objet
FullCure720 (Objet Ltd, Billerica, MA, USA). A glossy surface

was selected to weaken any potential bond between the silicone
elastomer and the surface of the molds. The fabricated molds
were cleaned first using a water jet. The pressure of the water
removed all particles and resins that were attached to the surface. The molds were then placed in sodium hydroxide solution
prepared by mixing 10 g of NaOH (Anachemia Canada, Inc.,
QC, Canada) in 500 mL of distilled water. After 1 h, the molds
were removed, dried, and cleaned again by a water jet. The
dried molds were then silanized in a vacuum chamber dessicator,
with a drop of trichloro(1,1,2,2-perfluorooctyl)silane. The silane
layer was used to prevent the polymerized silicone elastomer
from sticking to the surface of the molds. For base thicknesses
of 300 μm, it was difficult to achieve full polymerization due to
surface inhibition effects that became dominant as the separation between the molds was reduced. Therefore, it was necessary
to utilize a larger separation (398 μm), lined on each side with
a thin (49 μm) layer of acrylic adhesive-backed polypropylene
(Tartan 3690 Clear Packaging Tape, 3M), as shown in Fig. 2(c)
and (d). A thin hypodermic needle was used to puncture holes
in the film that corresponded to the holes in the female part of
the mold to facilitate the insertion of the electrodes through the
holes in the liner.
Once the molds were prepared, the electrodes were inserted
through customized positioning holes. The location of the electrodes in the array was determined by the location of small
(235 μm) holes in the mold through which the wires were fed
prior to pouring in the monomer mixture composing the base.
The location of these holes could be varied to match the location of the electrodes to the target regions within the ventral
horn of the lumbosacral enlargement (as determined, for example, by MRI). Mushahwar et al. [4] mapped the approximate
size and location of different motor neuron pools that innervate
various muscle groups, and similar to earlier work [38]–[41],
found that the different pools have different sizes and mediolateral, dorso-ventral arrangements within the lumbosacral enlargement. Therefore, to activate different muscles and movement synergies, the electrodes within the array should reach the
target motor neuron pools.
The electrodes themselves consisted of SS microwires. In
the literature, both Platinum/Iridium (Pt/Ir) and SS microwires
30 μm in diameter [6]–[8], [42], as well as multicontact microfabricated cylindrical electrodes 85 μm in diameter [32], [42],
have been used for ISMS applications. For this paper, 30 μm SS
wires (insulated with 4 μm of polyimide) were obtained from
California Fine Wire (Grover Beach, CA, USA). The microwires
were bent to the desired height (depth) to form a continuous
electrode-lead as described previously [6], [8]. After placement
of the electrodes in the mold, the base precursor could be introduced into and set in the mold. A completed array is shown in
Fig. 3.

B. Rapid Prototyped Handles
To facilitate the handling of the array and structural preservation during implantation, a temporary handle was adhered to
the top of the flexible base.

KHALED et al.: FLEXIBLE BASE ELECTRODE ARRAY FOR INTRASPINAL MICROSTIMULATION

2907

Fig. 3. FBEAs. The flexible base electrode array, with rapid-prototyped handle. The handle was used to increase the stiffness of the flexible base temporarily.
This improved the ease of handling and preserved the structural integrity of the
array during implantation.

Handles were designed in 3-D CAD software and rapid prototyped. To adhere the handles to the bases, a photopolymerizable glue was prepared by mixing polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA, molecular weight 575, Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville,
ON, Canada) with 0.5 wt % photoinitiator (CIBA Irgacure 651,
BASF, Mississauga, ON, USA). The top surface of the silicone
base was treated by UV ozone for 10 min to allow better adhesion to the PEGDA layer. A small drop of the glue mixture
was applied and the handle was positioned in place. The glue
was then polymerized for 10 min by placing the base and handle
approximately 5 cm away from an 8 W UV lamp at 365 nm.

Fig. 4. In-vitro testing of FBEAs. Surrogate cord mounted in a teflon stand
for empirical testing of mechanical compatibility of FBEAs (a), and schematic
illustrating the markings used for measurements (b). Two rows of reference
dots placed on the surrogate cord (upper and lower) were used to assess the
interaction between the array and the cord. Strain values were measured between
the different reference dots (L1–L4) after the surrogate cord, implanted with
various types of electrode arrays, was elongated by 12%.

C. Tensile Testing
An Instron single column tabletop system with 1 kN load
cell (Model 5943, Instron, Norwood, MA, USA) was utilized to
characterize the elastic modulus of the silicone base material,
according to ASTM standard D412D, which is briefly summarized here. Samples were cured in dogbone-shaped Al molds
(ASTM D412 type D, with a 3 mm × 3 mm × 32 mm testing range) for 90 min at 66 ◦ C. Samples were clamped using
self-tightening roller grips (Instron 2713) and preloaded with
0.05 N of force to ensure that the samples were straight before
deformation. They were then loaded at a rate of 50 mm/min until
an elongation of 10 mm was reached. Assuming a Poisson’s ratio of 0.5 (for incompressible materials), Young’s modulus was
calculated from the slope of the stress–strain curve between 1
and 2 mm of deformation.
D. In Vitro Testing: Elongation
To assess the mechanical compatibility of the FBEAs with the
spinal cord, arrays with two rows of four electrodes with a diameter of 30 μm, and a base thickness of 300 μm embedded with
straight lead wires (30 μm in diameter) were fabricated. The
interrow separation was 4 mm and interelectrode spacing was
3 mm, resembling the average microwire separations utilized in
ISMS implants [3]. The FBEAs were implanted into surrogate

spinal cords designed to have mechanical properties (bulk modulus, surface frictional forces, dimensions) that mimic those of
the actual human spinal cord [30]. These cords consisted of hydrated gelatin (12 wt% in water), which were crosslinked with
a small amount of formaldehyde (19.4 mmol/100 mL solution),
and molded in a cylindrical shape with elliptical cross section
(6 × 8 mm). These dimensions were selected to mimic those of
an actual cat spinal cord. The cords were mounted in a Teflon
stand [see Fig. 4(a)], and implanted with the desired electrode
arrays. Beyond implantation, further steps to anchor the arrays
to the surface of the cords were not taken, thus allowing the
arrays to float freely within the cord. In vivo settings, the arrays
would be covered by a thin plastic film to prevent the adhesion
of muscles and surrounding tissue. After implantation, the cords
were subjected to 12% uniaxial tensile strain (midway between
the average (10.1%) and maximum (13.6%) values described in
the literature for the cervical spinal cord during flexion [21]).
The results were then compared to those obtained in similar experiments conducted using: (a) surrogate cords implanted with
electrode arrays in which the electrodes (with 80 μm diameter) were joined by a rigid base; and (b) surrogate cords with
implanted electrode arrays comprised of individual microwires
(30 μm diameter) without a base. Note that data for (a) were
published previously in [30].

2908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

The same strain analysis technique reported in [30] was used.
Briefly, reference dots were drawn on the surrogate cord [see
Fig. 4(b)]. At least three pictures were taken of the surrogate
cords before and after the application of 12% strain using a
Canon EOS 1000D (Canon Inc., Rockville, MD, USA). The
distances between the reference dots were measured using Carl
Zeiss AxiVision Rel. 4.6 software. The dimensions of the stand
were used for the calibration and conversion of measurements
from pixels to millimeters.

were then performed and the stresses induced by the electrodes
of flexible arrays, rigid arrays, and arrays without bases were
examined. Due to the symmetry of model geometry, stresses
caused by the two outer electrodes (1 and 4) were assumed to be
similar; so were the stresses applied to the two inner electrodes
(2 and 3). Therefore, the stresses due to 1 outer and 1 inner
electrode are presented.
III. RESULTS
A. Tensile Testing

E. Finite Element Model
A 2-D FEM was constructed using ANSYS 11 (ANSYS, Inc.,
Canonsburg, PA, USA) to simulate the in vitro strain test and
calculate the stresses experienced by the tissue around the implanted arrays. The dimensions and material properties of the
surrogate cord and FBEAs were obtained from empirical measurements. FBEAs with eight (2 × 4) electrodes with diameters
of 30 μm and heights of 4 mm, base thicknesses of 300 μm,
600 μm, and 1 mm, and a modulus of elasticity of 1000 kPa
(based on tensile testing results) was modeled. The electrodes
themselves were assumed to be in full contact (i.e., no slippage)
with a cord of diameter 7.5 mm and length 40 mm, and to have
a slanted tip. To best approximate the actual conditions encountered in our experiments, slippage was allowed between the
surface of the array and the surface of the cord, and between the
base and the electrodes themselves (due to imperfect bonding
between the surface of the electrodes and the silicone base. This
allowed the electrodes limited freedom both to travel laterally
within the snuggly fitting channels that surround them in the
base, and to rotate with respect to the substrate normal). The
modulus of elasticity of the cord (without pia mater and dura
mater) was assumed to be 90 kPa [34]. An eight node quadrilateral element with two degrees of freedom was used to mesh the
model. The cord and the silicone elastomer base were assumed
to operate in the elastic range and static analysis was performed.
A 12% uniaxial tension was evenly distributed between the
left and right boundaries of the cord. The location of the nodes
in the model coincided with the actual location of the reference
dots drawn on the cord in the experimental work. The distance
between the nodes was measured before and after the application
of the 12% deformation and strains were calculated. The results
obtained from the model were validated against the experimental
results obtained for the cords implanted with flexible and rigid
base arrays. In the model, the rigid base array was simulated by
increasing the modulus of elasticity of the base to 1 GPa.
The validated model was then used to study the effective (Von
Mises) stresses applied by the electrodes on the spinal cord tissue. To decrease the effect of singularities at the electrode tips,
the stress values were measured and plotted for a region 10 μm
away from the interfacial layer between the electrode and the
surrounding medium. The distance was chosen so that the obtained stresses were within the set of elements interfacing the
electrodes and the spinal cord. The model assumed that the
spinal cord was isotropic, and contained no hydrostatic pressures. Simulations of implanted cords with 12% uniaxial tension (applied from one end while the other end remained fixed)

The FBEA consisted of three main parts: the base, the electrodes, and the lead wires. For ISMS applications, the base of the
array needs to have the same curvature and stiffness of that of
the spinal cord. Moreover, customizable electrode spacing and
adequate stress-relief in the lead wires are needed. The Young’s
modulus of MED 6215—the elastomer used to fabricate the
bases of the array—was measured to be 1.06 ± 0.14 MPa.
This value is considered acceptable as it is within the range of
moduli measured for human cervical and thoracic spinal cord
tissue with pia mater characterized in vitro under tension, for
strains of 9% (1.2 ± 0.5 MPa) [35]. The measured value (1.06 ±
0.14 MPa) was utilized in the FEM, and calculated the stiffness
(K) of the base (0.105 N/mm), using the equation K = EA/L
(approximating the array as a beam with a flat rectangular cross
section rather than a curved one).
B. In Vitro Testing: Elongation
The surrogate cord with the implanted FBEAs was subjected
to 12% axial strain and the distances between reference marks
on the cord [see Fig. 4(b)] were optically measured before and
after the application of strain. The results were compared to
those obtained by Cheng et al. [30] for surrogate cords implanted
with electrode arrays in which the electrodes were held by a rigid
base; and surrogate cords with implanted individual, 30-μm SS
electrodes. The rigid base arrays and the individual electrodes
had the same electrode layout as the FBEAs in this study.
Surrogate cords implanted with FBEAs showed deformations
that were very similar to those implanted with individual microwires (see Fig. 5). The strains measured between the reference points in the surrogate cord implanted with the FBEAs
ranged between 9 ± 2% and 12 ± 1% which was within the
range of uncertainty for the strain values obtained for the individual microwires (10 ± 2% to 12 ± 1%).
The strains measured in cords implanted with FBEAs were
significantly different from those measured in cords implanted
with rigid base arrays. The strains observed in the rigid base
arrays were particularly low in the region located beneath the
electrode array itself (see Fig. 5): the strain values associated
with L1 and L2 were only 3 ± 1% and 5 ± 1% respectively. As
the reference lengths along longer sections of cord are considered, these values increased to 8 ± 1% and 9 ± 1%, respectively.
C. Finite Element Model
1) Model Validation: The calculated strains in the numerical
model of the cords implanted with FBEAs and rigid base arrays

KHALED et al.: FLEXIBLE BASE ELECTRODE ARRAY FOR INTRASPINAL MICROSTIMULATION

2909

Fig. 5. In-vitro testing and modeling of various electrode arrays. Experimental
results for the strain observed along reference lines L1, L2, L3, and L4 are shown
for 300 μm FBEAs (filled squares), rigid base arrays (filled triangles), and
arrays comprised of 30-μm stainless steel microwires. Finite element results for
300-μm FBEAs (open squares) and rigid base arrays (open triangles) are also
shown. The data for the rigid base arrays (experimental) are reproduced from
[30]. For experimental values, average values and standard deviations are shown.

were plotted against the empirical measurements obtained from
the physical model (see Fig. 5). For the cords implanted with
the FBEAs, the strains calculated along all reference lines (L1
through L4) in the numerical model were within the standard
deviations of the respective strains in the physical model. Similar results were observed for the rigid base arrays, although the
value predicted by the FEM model for the strain along line L2
was slightly more than one standard deviation below the average value seen experimentally (1.1 standard deviations lower),
and the difference between the calculated value of L4 and the
average experimental value was 1.84 times the standard deviation. In both cases, these values are therefore within the 95%
confidence interval (i.e., within two standard deviations). The
results obtained numerically were therefore in good agreement
with the models.
2) Stresses Induced by the Arrays: The validated numerical
model was used to calculate the stresses induced by the electrodes of various types of arrays on the surrounding spinal cord
tissue. Cords implanted with individual wires were modeled by
allowing electrodes to move freely with the cord. This simulation was based on the assumption that no external forces are
transferred to the individual electrodes by the lead wires which
connect to the power supply (ideal case). The calculated stresses
induced by electrodes in arrays with individual wires, flexible
base, and rigid base arrays on spinal cord tissue are shown in
(see Fig. 6). The stress induced by electrodes in all array types
was highest at the interfacing edge with the cord (distance from
interfacing edge = 0), decreased exponentially along the length
of the electrode and increased again around the tip. The spike in
stress at the tip occurs because of the discontinuity in materials
at this point, while the higher value at the surface results from
the boundary conditions at this interface which constrain the deformation of the wire and lead to higher stress. The magnitude
of the stresses induced by the electrodes differed between the

Fig. 6. Stress analysis. Modeled stress along the electrode/cord interface during 12% elongation, 10 μm from the electrode. The abscissa of the x-axis
corresponds to the surface of the cord, while the tip of the electrode is at
4.0 mm. The stress on the outer pair of electrodes (averaged) is shown in (a),
and the stress on the inner pair of electrodes (averaged) is shown in (b). The
ratio of stress between the outer and inner electrodes is shown in (c).

three different arrays. The stress magnitudes on the surrounding
tissue induced by the outer and inner electrodes in the arrays
without a base were nearly identical; however, substantial differences between the stresses induced by the outer and inner
electrodes were seen in the flexible and rigid base arrays. The
outer electrodes in the arrays comprised of individual 30-μm
wires induced a stress of 36.6 and 26.8 kPa at the top and tip,
respectively [see Fig. 6(a)]; while the inner electrodes induced
35.2 and 26.0 kPa at the top and tip [see Fig. 6(b)]. In contrast,
the outer electrodes in the rigid base array induced much higher
stress at the top (66.3 kPa) than in the individual wires, but lower
stress at the tip (20.6 kPa) [see Fig. 6(a)]. Meanwhile the inner
electrodes in the rigid base array induced lower stresses than for

2910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

the individual wires (20.0 and 19.1 kPa) [see Fig. 6(b)]. These
results show that in the individual wires, stress at the interface
between the electrodes and the tissue is more evenly distributed
throughout the device, while in the rigid base array, stress is
more highly concentrated on the outer electrodes, particularly
at the top. The stresses induced by the 300 μm thick FBEA
fell in between those induced by the arrays without bases and
the rigid base arrays. The outer electrodes induced a stress of
50.4 kPa at the top and 22.5 kPa at the tip [see Fig. 6(a)] while
the inner electrodes induced 30.2 and 25.6 kPa at the top and tip,
respectively [see Fig. 6(b)]. As the base thickness was increased
to 1 mm, the stress at the top of the outer electrodes (66.8 kPa)
increased toward the value seen for the 1-mm thick rigid base
array (66.3 kPa). This trend is due to the fact the base thickness
has a significant effect on the value of the base stiffness, and
can raise the stress concentration close to the base, particularly
at the outer electrodes. In contrast, the stress at the tips was
slightly less than for the rigid base (17.8 kPa compared with
20.6 kPa). To verify that the higher stresses observed for the
rigid base arrays were due to properties of the base and not the
dimensions of the electrodes themselves (75 μm versus 30 μm),
this value was also utilized in the model. Significant differences
were not observed (results not shown).
The ratio of stresses induced by the outer to inner electrodes,
from the surface of the spinal cord to 1 mm below the tip of the
electrodes, for the various electrode arrays is shown in Fig. 6(c).
The ratio of induced stresses by the outer to inner electrodes
in the rigid base array was 3.3:1 and 1.1:1 at the top and tip,
respectively. This ratio was 1.7:1 and 0.9:1 for the 300 μm
FBEA and 1.0:1 and 1.0:1 for the arrays without bases.

IV. DISCUSSION
A. Overview
The goal of this paper was to develop a customizable, rapid
fabrication process for a multielectrode array for ISMS applications. Such an array could facilitate the implantation procedure
and increase the targeting accuracy of the electrodes. Most of
the currently available arrays are rigid and have been developed
to interface with the brain [11]–[14], [31]. Due to the small
size of the arrays relative to the brain, the imposed mechanical and geometrical constraints on the interfacing rigid arrays
may not be significant. In contrast to existing systems, ISMS
implants for restoring standing and walking require low density
electrodes that span 3–5 cm of the spinal cord. Therefore, the
region of the implant undergoes relatively more pronounced deformations during natural movements and requires that arrays
implanted within the spinal cord possess mechanical properties
that are compatible with the tissue. In this study, we fabricated
several FBEAs and characterized the developed prototypes. The
design was modified to produce the maximal mechanical compliance between the array and the human spinal cord. The prototypes were then implanted in surrogate cords and subjected to
uniaxial strain tests that mimicked the highest strain experienced
by the human cord during daily motion.

B. Mechanical Compatibility of the Implanted Array
and the Spinal Cord
Previous in vitro testing suggested that the mechanical compliance between the surrogate spinal cord and the implanted
arrays significantly influences the mechanical behavior of the
cord [30]. Rigid base arrays in particular impeded the motion of
the cords when elongated. Rousche et al. [29] proposed flexible
base intracortical arrays which consisted of polyimide base and
electrodes. The polyimide layers had a modulus of elasticity of
∼3 GPa which is more than three orders of magnitude larger
than that of the spinal cord. Thus, it was important to develop
a new type of compliant array with a stiffness that matches that
of the spinal cord. In this study, a soft, biocompatible silicone
elastomer was used as the base material.
C. Cords Implanted With FBEAs Undergo Similar
Deformations as Cords Implanted With Individual Microwires
The spinal cord undergoes three types of deformations during daily movements: elongation, torsion, and flexion. These
deformations have been quantified [35], and a maximal strain
of 13.6% of the posterior surface during flexion was reported,
where the average value seen across the five study participants
was 10.1%. To our knowledge, similar studies have not been
performed in people with spinal cord injury; therefore, the elongation (12%) used in this study was selected based on the average value observed in uninjured individuals. We have previously
presented a methodology to assess the influence of implanted
arrays on the mechanical behavior of the spinal cord [30]. The
methodology studied the behavior of surrogate cords elongated
by 12% when implanted with rigid base arrays, and arrays comprised of individual microwires without a base. We showed that
the rigid base arrays impede the motion of the cord, while individual wires move with the cord without significantly affecting
its mechanical behavior. We hypothesize that the impediment
of motion caused by the rigid base arrays may cause physical
damage to the cord if chronically implanted. In the study presented here, the influence of our newly developed FBEA on
the surrogate spinal cord was assessed using the same method.
The strains observed in surrogate spinal cords implanted with
FBEAs were similar to those measured for the cords implanted
with individual wires (see Fig. 5). The similarity in strain to
individual wires suggests that the FBEAs may be mechanically
compatible with the cord and that they could be well tolerated
by the spinal cord in this regard if chronically implanted [42].
D. Stresses Induced by Electrodes in the FBEA on
Surrounding Tissue
The finite element model served as an important tool to further
understand the mechanical interaction between the electrodes
of different types of arrays and the spinal cord. To validate the
model, the strain behavior of cords implanted with various types
of arrays was evaluated, and compared with the experimental
results. Good agreement between the experimental data and the
model was seen, as shown in Fig. 5. This validated model is an
important tool that can be used to quickly assess how various

KHALED et al.: FLEXIBLE BASE ELECTRODE ARRAY FOR INTRASPINAL MICROSTIMULATION

design parameters (such as base thickness, electrode diameter,
etc.) affect the mechanical behavior of a spinal cord into which
the array is implanted. Furthermore, the model allowed for a
comparison of the stresses imposed by the electrodes of the
FBEAs (with calculated base stiffness of ∼ 0.105 N/mm) and
rigid-base arrays (with calculated base stiffness of ∼350 N/mm
for a device with the same dimensions, i.e., 2 cm long, 0.7 cm
wide, and 1 mm thick) on the cord to those induced by arrays of
individual microwires currently used in ISMS implants [3], [9],
[10], [42].
The stresses were maximal at the interfacing layer between
the base and the cord (see Fig. 6) due to the mismatch in the
stiffness between the base, the electrode, and the spinal cord.
The increase in the stress at the tip was largely due to the discontinuities caused by the sharp edge of the tip [43]. The inner
and outer electrodes in arrays of individual microwires without a base induced similar stresses against the cord, giving an
approximately uniform stress ratio of 1 (see Fig. 6). This is
due to the similarity of deformations across the cords implanted
with no base arrays; i.e., the electrodes moved freely with respect to each other due to the absence of any base. The outer
electrodes exerted twice as much stress at the interfacing edge
relative to the inner electrodes in the FBEAs; while the outer
electrodes exerted three times more stress than the inner electrodes in the solid-based arrays. This effect is referred to as
“stress shielding,” where an entity, such as the outer electrodes,
in the loaded domain will bear the majority of the stress applied
on the domain and shield other entities, such as the inner electrodes in its shadow, from most of the stress. The stress shielding
induced by the outer electrodes, especially in the solid-based arrays, corresponds to the smaller deformation and lower strain
values measured at L1 relative to L2 (see Fig. 5). The higher
strains/stresses around the outer electrodes in the solid-based
arrays indicate that more tissue damage could be induced at
these locations if the arrays were to be implanted in vivo. The
substantially smaller stress shielding caused by the outer electrodes in FBEAs would likely produce much less pronounced
tissue damage. Nonetheless, the best case, which is that of individual wires, showed almost no shielding. Arrays of individual
wires correspondingly were well tolerated by the spinal cord
and caused minimal tissue damage when implanted chronically
in cats and rats [9], [10], [42]. Therefore, to ensure higher mechanical compliance between the FBEA and the spinal cord,
the stiffness of the flexible base should be further decreased by
decreasing its thickness and modulus of elasticity.
E. Study Limitations
The 2-D FEM used in this study considered the spinal cord
an isotropic medium. The spinal cord is an anisotropic structure
that allows for unique electrochemical and electrophysiological functions. Nonetheless, for mechanical testing of indwelling
electrodes, the isotropic structure with a modulus of elasticity
that matches that of the human spinal cord provided an acceptable medium for the assessment of tensile deformations. The
models also did not take into account the change in material
properties of the cord immediately post implantation. The natu-

2911

ral immune response to implanted foreign bodies will initiate a
cascade of reactions leading to initial swelling (increased stiffness of the spinal cord) and ending with fibrous encapsulation
of both the implanted electrodes.
While the present model was executed in two dimensions,
we believe that it sufficiently describes the system, since there
are no forces or constraints within the third (omitted) dimension
that should influence the electrodes (provided that the spacing
between the adjacent rows of electrodes is sufficiently large).
This is a special 3-D case known as a plane strain condition.
Nonetheless, an explicitly 3-D model could potentially be utilized in the future to present a more complete map of the stress
profiles around the electrodes.

F. Future Work
Development of the FBEAs is ongoing. While the flexible
base arrays presented in this study had straight leads that were
embedded in the base, future arrays will include embedded
coiled leads. The lead material and coiling will be chosen to
have a modulus of elasticity similar to that of the flexible base
for an elongation that matches that experienced by the spinal
cord during natural movement.
To enable the array to be utilized in a clinical setting, the
mechanism and integrity of all connections must be optimized
to prevent failure of the devices at these points.
While the surrogate cord has been a useful tool for preliminary
studies, studies in an animal model are critical to ensure that
similar behavior is observed under deformation, and also to
verify that the electrodes can be inserted without deforming
or buckling. Experiments in an animal model will also enable
the development of a suitable insertion protocol. Additionally,
histological assessments of arrays implanted chronically in vivo
will be conducted.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents the first study to assemble microwire
electrodes into a flexible base array. It is also the first to assess the
influence of these arrays on the mechanical behavior of surrogate
spinal cords. A feasible, customizable fabrication process for
such arrays was presented. The flexibility of the design allows
for variations in the curvature and geometry of the base. The
density and location of the electrodes can also vary.
The high flexibility of the developed design makes it an ideal
candidate to interface with other neural systems, such as the
brain or dorsal root ganglia. The arrays will be modified to
match the curvature of the targeted system to ensure full contact between both surfaces. The mechanical properties of the
array will also be tuned to match the target stiffness resulting
in maximal mechanical compliance between the two interfacing
media. The fabrication protocol also allows for the use of different kinds and densities of electrodes depending on the targeted
neural tissue.

2912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. K. Todd and K. Paw for
providing critical advice regarding the likely histological consequences of various electrode array properties, and K. Parseyan
for preparing and photographing the array shown in Fig. 3. The
tensile tester was purchased through the Canada Foundation for
Innovation (CFI) Leaders Opportunity Fund. V. K. Mushahwar
is an AHFMR Senior Scholar.
REFERENCES
[1] V. K. Mushahwar and K. W. Horch, “Proposed specifications for a lumbar
spinal cord electrode array for control of lower extremities in paraplegia,”
IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 237–243, Sep. 1997.
[2] J. Hunter and P. Ashby, “Secondary changes in segmental neurons below
a spinal cord lesion in man,” Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 65, pp. 702–705,
Nov. 1984.
[3] V. K. Mushahwar, P. L. Jacobs, R. A. Normann, R. J. Triolo, and
N. Kleitman, “New functional electrical stimulation approaches to standing and walking,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 4, pp. S181–S197, Sep. 2007.
[4] V. K. Mushahwar and K. W. Horch, “Selective activation of muscle groups
in the feline hindlimb through electrical microstimulation of the ventral
lumbo-sacral spinal cord,” vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 11–21, Mar. 2000.
[5] V. K. Mushahwar, D. M. Gillard, M. J. Gauthier, and A. Prochazka,
“Intraspinal micro stimulation generates locomotor-like and feedbackcontrolled movements,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 68–81, Mar. 2002.
[6] R. Saigal, C. Renzi, and V. K. Mushahwar, “Intraspinal microstimulation
generates functional movements after spinal-cord injury,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 430–440, Dec. 2004.
[7] B. Lau, L. Guevremont, and V. K. Mushahwar, “Strategies for generating prolonged functional standing using intramuscular stimulation or
intraspinal microstimulation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 273–285, Jun. 2007.
[8] V. K. Mushahwar, D. F. Collins, and A. Prochazka, “Spinal cord microstimulation generates functional limb movements in chronically implanted
cats,” Exp. Neurol., vol. 163, pp. 422–429, Jun. 2000.
[9] J. A. Bamford and V. K. Mushahwar, “Intraspinal microstimulation for
the recovery of function following spinal cord injury,” Prog. Brain Res.,
vol. 194, pp. 227–239, 2011.
[10] L. Guevremont and V. K. Mushahwar, “Tapping into the spinal cord for
restoring motor function after spinal cord injury,” in Neural Engineering:
Research, Industry, and the Clinical Perspective. Boca Raton, FL, USA:
CRC Press, 2008, pp. 19–26.
[11] P. K. Campbell, K. E. Jones, R. J. Huber, K. W. Horch, and
R. A. Normann, “A silicon-based, three-dimensional neural interface:
Manufacturing processes for an intracortical electrode array,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 758–768, Aug. 1991.
[12] E. M. Maynard, C. T. Nordhausen, and R. A. Normann, “The Utah intracortical electrode array: A recording structure for potential brain-computer
interfaces,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 102, pp. 228–
239, Mar. 1997.
[13] A. C. Hoogerwerf and K. D. Wise, “A three-dimensional microelectrode
array for chronic neural recording,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 41,
no. 12, pp. 1136–1146, Dec. 1994.
[14] D. McCreery, A. Lossinsky, V. Pikov, and X. Liu, “Microelectrode array for chronic deep-brain microstimulation and recording,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 726–737, Apr. 2006.
[15] V. S. Polikov, P. A. Tresco, and W. M. Reichert, “Response of brain tissue to chronically implanted neural electrodes,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 148, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Oct. 2005.
[16] J. P. Harris, A. E. Hess, S. J. Rowan, C. Weder, C. A. Zorman, D. J. Tyler,
and J. R. Capadona, “In vivo deployment of mechanically adaptive
nanocomposites for intracortical microelectrodes,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8,
no. 4, p. 046010, Aug. 2011.
[17] A. Tooker, V. Tolosa, K. G. Shah, H. Sheth, S. Felix, T. Delima, and
S. Pannu, “Optimization of multi-layer metal neural probe design,” Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., vol. 2012, pp. 5995–5998, 2012.
[18] F. Wu, M. Im, and E. Yoon, “A flexible fish-bone-shaped neural probe
strengthened by biodegradable silk coating for enhanced biocompatibility,” in Proc. 16th Int. Solid-State Sensors, Actuators Microsyst. Conf.,
2011, pp. 966–969.

[19] T. D. Y. Kozai, N. B. Langhals, P. R. Patel, X. Deng, H. Zhang,
K. L. Smith, J. Lahann, N. A. Kotov, and D. R. Kipke, “Ultrasmall implantable composite microelectrodes with bioactive surfaces for chronic
neural interfaces,” Nature Mater., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 1065–1073, Dec.
2012.
[20] J. P. Harris, J. R. Capadona, R. H. Miller, B. C. Healy,
K. Shanmuganathan, S. J. Rowan, C. Weder, and D. J. Tyler, “Mechanically adaptive intracortical implants improve the proximity of
neuronal cell bodies,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 6, p. 066011, Dec. 2011.
[21] Q. Yuan, L. Dougherty, and S. S. Margulies, “In vivo human cervical
spinal cord deformation and displacement in flexion,” Spine, vol. 23,
no. 15, pp. 1677–1683, Aug. 1998.
[22] D. McCreery, V. Pikov, A. Lossinsky, L. Bullara, and W. Agnew, “Arrays
for chronic functional microstimulation of the lumbosacral spinal cord,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 195–207, Jun.
2004.
[23] D. E. Harrison, R. Cailliet, D. D. Harrison, S. J. Troyanovich, and
S. O. Harrison, “A review of biomechanics of the central nervous system—
Part II: Spinal cord strains from postural loads,” J. Manipulative Physiol.
Therapeutics, vol. 22, pp. 322–332, Jun. 1999.
[24] P. J. Gilgunn, R. Khilwani, T. D. Y. Kozai, D. J. Weber, X. T. Cui,
G. Erdos, O. B. Ozdoganlar, and G. K. Fedder, “An ultra-compliant, scalable neural probe with molded biodissolvable delivery vehicle,” in Proc.
IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst., 2012, pp. 56–59.
[25] D. Lewitus, R. J. Vogelstein, G. Zhen, Y.-S. Choi, J. Kohn, S. Harshbarger,
and X. Jia, “Designing tyrosine-derived polycarbonate polymers for
biodegradable regenerative type neural interface capable of neural recording,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 204–212,
Apr. 2011.
[26] R. Biran, D. C. Martin, and P. A. Tresco, “The brain tissue response to
implanted silicon microelectrode arrays is increased when the device is
tethered to the skull,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 169–178,
Jul. 2007.
[27] K. W. Meacham, R. J. Giuly, L. Guo, S. Hochman, and S. P. DeWeerth,
“A lithographically-patterned, elastic multi-electrode array for surface
stimulation of the spinal cord,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 10, pp. 259–
269, Oct. 2007.
[28] K. W. Meacham and S. Hochman, “Selective stimulation of the spinal
cord surface using a stretchable microelectrode array,” Front Neuroeng.,
vol. 4, p. 5, 2011.
[29] P. J. Rousche, D. S. Pellinen, D. P. Pivin, J. C. Williams, R. J. Vetter, and
D. R. Kirke, “Flexible polyimide-based intracortical electrode arrays with
bioactive capability,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 361–
371, Mar. 2001.
[30] C. Cheng, J. Kmech, V. K. Mushahwar, and A. L. Elias, “Development
of surrogate spinal cords for the evaluation of electrode arrays used in
intraspinal implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1667–
1676, Jun. 2013.
[31] P. J. Rousche and R. A. Normann, “Chronic recording capability of the
Utah intracortical electrode array in cat sensory cortex,” J. Neurosci.
Methods, vol. 82, pp. 1–15, Jul. 1998.
[32] S. Snow, S. C. Jacobsen, D. L. Wells, and K. W. Horch, “Microfabricated
cylindrical multielectrodes for neural stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 320–326, Feb. 2006.
[33] S. Snow, K. W. Horch, and V. K. Mushahwar, “Intraspinal microstimulation using cylindrical multielectrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53,
no. 2, pp. 311–319, Feb. 2006.
[34] E. L. Mazuchowski and L. E. Thibault, “Biomechanical properties of the
human spinal cord and pia mater,” presented at the Summer Bioengineering Conf., Sonesta Beach Resort in Key Biscayne, FL, USA, 2003,
pp. 1205–1206.
[35] L. E. Bilston and L. E. Thibault, “The mechanical properties of the human
cervical spinal cord in vitro,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 67–74,
Feb. 1996.
[36] S. S. Margulies, D. F. Meaney, L. B. Bilston, L. E. Thibault,
N. G. Campeau, and S. J. Riederer, “In vivo motion of the human cervical spinal cord in extension and flexion,” in Proc. Int. IRCOBI Conf.
Biomechanics Impacts, Verona, Italy, 1992, pp. 213–224.
[37] H. Noh, K. Moon, A. Cannon, P. J. Hesketh, and C. P. Wong, “Wafer
bonding using microwave heating of parylene intermediate layers,” J.
Micromech. Microeng., vol. 14, no. 4, p. 625, Apr. 2004.
[38] V. G. Vanderhorst and G. Holstege, “Organization of lumbosacral motoneuronal cell groups innervating hindlimb, pelvic floor, and axial
muscles in the cat,” J. Comp. Neurol., vol. 382, pp. 46–76, May
1997.

KHALED et al.: FLEXIBLE BASE ELECTRODE ARRAY FOR INTRASPINAL MICROSTIMULATION

[39] G. J. Romanes, “The motor cell columns of the lumbo-sacral spinal cord
of the cat,” J. Comp. Neurol., vol. 94, pp. 313–363, Apr. 1951.
[40] R. E. Burke, P. L. Strick, K. Kanda, C. C. Kim, and B. Walmsley,
“Anatomy of medial gastrocnemius and soleus motor nuclei in cat spinal
cord,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 40, pp. 667–680, May 1977.
[41] J. M. Van Buren and K. Frank, “Correlation between the morphology and
potential field of a spinal motor nucleus in the cat,” Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 19, pp. 112–126, Aug. 1965.
[42] J. A. Bamford, K. G. Todd, and V. K. Mushahwar, “The effects of intraspinal microstimulation on spinal cord tissue in the rat,” Biomaterials,
vol. 31, pp. 5552–5563, Jul. 2010.
[43] J. Subbaroyan, D. C. Martin, and D. R. Kipke, “A finite-element model
of the mechanical effects of implantable microelectrodes in the cerebral
cortex,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2, pp. 103–113, Dec. 2005.

Imad Khaled received the B.E. degree in mechanical
engineering from the American University of Beirut,
Beirut, Lebanon, in 2009 and the M.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2012.
Mr. Khaled is currently an Engineer-in-Training
with ATCO Gas, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

Salma Elmallah is currently working toward the undergraduate degree in electrical engineering at the
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
In 2012, she worked with the Alberta InnovatesHealth Solutions Interdisciplinary Team in Smart
Neural Prostheses under the supervision of Dr.
Elias in the Department of Chemical and Materials
Engineering.

Cheng Cheng received the exchange certificate in
mechanical engineering from the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, in 2008, the B.Sc.
degree in materials engineering from Shandong University, Shandong, China, in 2009, and the M.Sc.
degree in materials engineering from the University
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2012.
Ms. Cheng is currently with Canadian Advanced
ESP Inc, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

2913

Walied A. Moussa received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the American University of Cairo, Cairo,
Egypt, in 1991 and 1993, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from Carleton University, OT, Canada, in
2000.
He is currently a Professor at the University of
Alberta, with coappointment to the Mechanical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, and the Department of Surgery. His current research interests and
publication of more than 100 articles are in MEMS
and NEMS research and development in the biomedical, aerospace, mechanical, and environmental fields. His research work involves
both experimental and numerical approaches to this field.
Dr. Moussa was the Chair of the International Conference on MEMS, NEMS,
and Smart Systems (ICMENS) from 2003 to 2006 and is on the editorial board
of a number of related journals. He is a member of the Alberta Innovates-Health
Solutions Interdisciplinary Team in Smart Neural Prostheses.

Vivian K. Mushahwar (M’97) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT, USA, in 1991, and the Ph.D.
degree in bioengineering from the University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, UT, in 1996.
She was a Postdoctoral Researcher at Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA, and the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. She is currently an
Associate Professor in the Centre for Neuroscience,
University of Alberta. Her research interests include
identification of spinal cord systems involved in locomotion, development of spinal-cord-based neuroprostheses, incorporation of
motor control concepts in functional electrical stimulation applications, and development of systems for alleviating secondary side effects of immobility such
as pressure ulcers.
Dr. Mushahwar is a member of the International Functional Electrical Stimulation Society, the New York Academy of Sciences, the American Physiological
Society, the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, and the
Society for Neuroscience. She is also an Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research Senior Scholar.

Anastasia L. Elias received the B.Sc. degree in engineering physics and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2002
and 2007, respectively.
From 2003 to 2006, she was a Visiting Researcher
at the Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands. Since 2007, she has been a Visiting
Worker at the National Research Council National
Institute for Nanotechnology. She is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical and
Materials Engineering, University of Alberta. Her research interests include designing and fabricating biocompatible electrode arrays for implantation, developing new techniques for shaping materials on the
micro- and nanoscale, and engineering smart materials.
Dr. Elias is a member of the Alberta Innovates-Health Solutions Interdisciplinary Team in Smart Neural Prostheses.

