3314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Active and Progressive Exoskeleton Rehabilitation
Using Multisource Information Fusion From
EMG and Force-Position EPP
Yuanjie Fan and Yuehong Yin∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Although exoskeletons have received enormous attention and have been widely used in gait training and walking
assistance in recent years, few reports addressed their application during early poststroke rehabilitation. This paper presents a
healthcare technology for active and progressive early rehabilitation using multisource information fusion from surface electromyography and force-position extended physiological proprioception.
The active-compliance control based on interaction force between
patient and exoskeleton is applied to accelerate the recovery of the
neuromuscular function, whereby progressive treatment through
timely evaluation contributes to an effective and appropriate physical rehabilitation. Moreover, a clinic-oriented rehabilitation system, wherein a lower extremity exoskeleton with active compliance
is mounted on a standing bed, is designed to ensure comfortable
and secure rehabilitation according to the structure and control
requirements. Preliminary experiments and clinical trial demonstrate valuable information on the feasibility, safety, and effectiveness of the progressive exoskeleton-assisted training.
Index Terms—Extended physiological proprioception (EPP)
feedback, exoskeleton robot, multisource information fusion, personalized rehabilitation, real-time evaluation.

I. INTRODUCTION
TROKE is one of the most common causes of death worldwide and the leading cause of permanent disability which
affects the patient’s ability to perform activities of daily living (ADL). Clinical researches indicate that inappropriate treatment of neurological impairment after stroke frequently leads
to the hemiparesis or paralysis. A delay in interventions may
negatively influence a patient’s functional capability restoration and increases his/her duration of rehabilitation [1]. Some
works reported that early initiation of stroke-specific rehabilitation contributes to good physical ADL for motor function [2].

S

Manuscript received February 13, 2013; revised April 16, 2013; accepted June
1, 2013. Date of publication June 11, 2013; date of current version November 18,
2013. This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program
of China under Grant 2011CB013203 in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61075101, and in part by the Science and
Technology Intercrossing Research Foundation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
under Grant LG2011ZD106. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Y. J. Fan is with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration, the Robotics Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240,
China (e-mail: fantian@sjtu.edu.cn.
∗ Y. H. Yin is with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration, the Robotics Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240,
China (e-mail: yhyin@sjtu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2267741

Although there is still no sufficient evidence to support the effectiveness [3], early rehabilitation is a useful and feasible attempt
to promote the functional capability of the poststroke patients.
However, traditional physical therapy is inefficient and effortconsuming. The development of wearable robot-assisting devices, namely Exoskeletons, makes feasible rehabilitation protocols with higher efficiency and less manpower costs. [4], [5].
Historical efforts began in the 1970s to develop powered orthoses to aid in paraplegic mobility. [6], [7]. Emerging commercial devices, such as the powered lower limb orthosis HAL
[8], the active leg exoskeleton [9], the LokoHelp (LokoHelp
Group) [10], andthe Berkeley Exoskeleton (BLEEX) [11], are
developed specifically for gait training or walking assistance of
poststrokes [12]. Many researchers agree in the effectiveness of
poststroke robot-assisted rehabilitation [13]. Nevertheless, there
are yet few reports describing the application of exoskeletons
during early rehabilitation. Robot-assisted rehabilitation is not
fully supported to some extent, since the structure and control
requirements are quite different from traditional gait training or
walking assistance, and a compliance control for human–robot
interaction is still not satisfied. In general, the structure should
be secure, comfortable, and capable of functional rehabilitation.
Although HAL and BLEEX are well suited for walking assistance of healthy pilot, the devices with rigid structure and lower
stability may result in discomfort and will easily fall down for
poststrokes. Series elastic actuators (SEAs) are compliant actuator that can achieve force control, impedance control, and back
drivability [14]. They have already been applied in lower limb
exoskeleton for gait rehabilitation [15]. However, it still faces a
common fundamental limitation: the spring constant of the elastic element is fixed between different subjects. The traditional
architecture can hardly meet the harmonious coordination of
force and position between patient and exoskeleton. An actuator integrating skin-tight airbags with air pressure sensors is
founded in this paper as a variable stiffness actuator to solve
the problem. The stiffness can change in accordance with stroke
stage through the pneumatic system. Standing bed is generally
used in early poststrokes due to its high safety, but its simplicity
limits the rehabilitation modes and efficacy. Thus, a device that
integrates stable standing bed with intelligent exoskeleton and
flexible SEA is required to provide both secure and effective
rehabilitation for the poststroke survivors.
Moreover, real-time evaluation and active compliance control that can provide appropriate and comfortable assistance are
necessary during the progressive physical therapy of poststroke
rehabilitation. Then the biosignals of the human body should

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

FAN AND YIN: ACTIVE AND PROGRESSIVE EXOSKELETON REHABILITATION USING MULTISOURCE INFORMATION FUSION

be carefully determined to realize precise force estimation and
motion decoding. SurfaceElectromyographic (sEMG) signals
are the summation of overall intramuscular electrical activity
induced by recruited muscle fibers, through the skin surface. It
can imply motion intension and contraction force of underlying
muscle indirectly. sEMG has been widely used in muscular fatigue estimation [16], [17], muscle behavior prediction, [18] and
motion identification [19] during the clinical rehabilitation [20].
However, the real-time performance and precision of motion
decoding based on sEMG signals are still at issue [21]. Neural
network [22], fuzzy clustering, wavelet packet, fractal, independent component analysis, etc. are some of the typical methods
to extract information from the non-stationary sEMG [23]–[25].
Unfortunately, these methods are complicated and require huge
amount of signal samples. Moreover, they cannot meet the strict
requirement of active compliance control. Differential sEMG
analysis is applied to realize precise feature extraction in real
time. Meanwhile, it is recognized that compared with the angle and force information, biological sEMG signal can imply
muscle contraction force 30∼100 ms in advance [26] and others
found that sEMG is the synthesis of original motion intention
from somatic nervous system and proprioception feedback from
sensory organ, which may result in misestimation of muscle
force only by sEMG [27]. Hence, angle and force information
which can provide kinematic or dynamic data of the humanmachine system are collected simultaneously as compensation
signals for precise real-time evaluation and stable active compliance process control of active training. Furthermore, human
proprioception is a third distinct sensory modality that provides
internal feedback solely on the status of the body internally [28].
It helps the humans to perform precise movements. An artificial extended-physiological-proprioception (EPP) feedback system [29] based on tactile stimuli is developed to transmit motion
information back to human body in the form of air pressure of
airbag, and help the patients who are injured in peripheral nervous system rebuild the closed-loop motion control system.
The aim of this work is to develop an active and progressive
exoskeleton rehabilitation system for early rehabilitation of the
poststrokes based on our previously developed exoskeleton and
human-machine interface [30]–[32]. A standing bed featuring
exoskeleton is integrated with skin-tight airbag based variable
stiffness actuator [33] to provide safe, comfortable and flexible treatment. Active-compliance control of the human-machine
system is established based on real-time muscle force estimation
and human-machine interactive force detection, while progressive treatment in accordance with stroke stage is realized by
timely evaluation. EPP feedback system based on tactile stimuli is developed to help rebuild the closed-loop control system
of human body. Preliminary experiments and clinical trial indicate the human-machine system can move coordinately, which
demonstrates the feasibility, safety and effectiveness of the progressive exoskeleton-assisted training.
II. MATERIALS
A. Rehabilitation Robot
As shown in Fig. 1, the integrated rehabilitation exoskeleton
system consists of the exoskeleton robot, a personal computer,

3315

Fig. 1.

Experiment setup and its coordinated control system.

Fig. 2.

Prototype of lower extremity exoskeleton and its mechanics diagram.

a self-made integrated sensor, and a signal processor. The exoskeleton robot is the combination of a standing bed and an
exoskeleton robot. The standing bed can turn from horizontal to
85◦ . Each leg of the exoskeleton has two 1-DOF joints: hip and
knee. The joint is driven by a slider-crank mechanism, which
has better structural compactness and high stability. The range
of the hip and knee goes from −30◦ to 65◦ and 0◦ to 120◦ respectively, in order to fulfill the kinematic requirements of human
joints. The key parameters of the prototype exoskeleton shown
in Fig. 2 are as follows: l1 = 422.0 mm, d1 = 266.8 mm, d2 =
55.7 mm, m1 = 4.3 kg, m2 = 0.5 kg, α = 8.4◦ , β = 14.5◦ .
B. Integrated Multisensor
Information including sEMG, joint angle, and force are collected and analyzed in real time. The sEMG signals are acquired
by self-made sEMG signal acquisition processor with 10 times
pre-amplification, 10∼500 Hz band pass filter, 50 Hz notch
filter, final amplification factor of 500, and A/D conversion.
Meanwhile, the equivalent interaction force acting between human body and exoskeleton robot is detected by integrated force
sensor. It features airbags, air pressure sensors, and a pneumatic
control system. The skin-tight airbag can be interpreted as a
spring-damper connection and make the SEA a variable stiffness actuator. The air pressure sensor detects the pressure of
the airbag. The interaction force is the pressure difference of
the airbags mounted on the anterior and posterior between the
human calf and the exoskeleton. The interaction force is sampled with a rate of 200 Hz. Sampled with the same rate; the

3316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

with full body weight support, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The parameters that determine the assist torque, movement range ,and
frequency are decided by a regulator based on real-time interactive force and sEMG signals. Switching between different
treatments is done via an evaluator according to following rules:
If the interactive force is bigger than a threshold, Fsec , flexion
(extension) will be turned into extension (flexion). As shown in
Fig. 3(b), passive F/E mode will be chosen when human joint
range of motion (ROM) is smaller than setting value. Interactive
force will be also used to determine the frequency of passive
F/E according to (1). In the second step, active force of human
joint will be evaluated, and active F/E will be executed if the
active force is smaller than threshold. Assist force is determined
by the sEMG according to (2). In the third step passive walk is
applied if abnormal gait is observed.. Walking frequency is also
updated according to (1). Finally, active walk training will be
implemented if the patient is still unable to walk independently.
Similar to the active F/E, the assist force will also be determined
by (2).
r = r0 − kr Fint · sgn(θ̇), (|Fint | ≤ Fsec )


 T
FsEM G · sgn(θ̇)
dt lfatigue ,
FA = F0 − kF
T
0
(|Fint | ≤ Fsec )
Fig. 3. (a) Progressive rehabilitation strategy and (b) parameters updating
based on real-time monitoring and evaluation.

joint angle is derived from the angular encoder. The integrated
multisensor makes it possible to test isometric and isokinetic
muscular strength, while sEMG signals are recorded at the same
time. The EPP system features an air pressure sensor, a gasbag,
and a pneumatic control system. The air pressure sensor detects
the pressure of the gasbag that is mounted at arm. Information
including the joint angle or joint torque is converted into air
pressure and then transmitted to human body by the airbag,
which is controlled by a pneumatic control system. It will be
described in detail in next part.
III. METHODS
Personalized treatment is applied in this paper to realize effective and appropriate physical rehabilitation. It is achieved
by a monitoring system and an active compliance controller, as
shown in Fig. 3(a). The monitor system determines the rehabilitation mode and parameters based on real-time evaluation
and motion decoding, while the active compliance controller
controls the human-machine system based on interactive information and hybrid dynamics.

lfatigue = kl (τave − τ0 ) + 1

(1)

(2)
(3)

In which r is the desired frequency and r0 is the set frequency
for rehabilitation, kr and kF are the compensation coefficients,
Fint is theinteractive force, sgn(θ̇) is a sign function that is
related with the direction of rotation, FA is the desired assist
force, F0 is the preliminary set assist force, FsEM G is the active
human force that is derived from sEMG signals via the method
that is described in next part, T is the period of one repetition. It
is reasonable that muscle and mental fatigue will result in time
extension of training repetition in general. Thus, fatigue level,
lfatigue , is evaluated by (3), where kl is fatigue coefficient, τave is
average period of three repetitions, τ0 is average period of first
three repetitions. FA will be updated every repetition. Since
fatigue is a relative long-term effect, lfatigue will be updated
after every three repetitions.
B. Real-Time Motion Decoding
Real-time motion decoding is necessary to predict human
motion intention and help the human-machine system move
coordinately. The active joint torque TF is as (4):

F i · li
(4)
TF =
i

A. Real-Time Monitoring and Evaluation
Progressive rehabilitation is achieved by monitoring the patient’s condition and updating the parameters of the control
system in real-time. According to the suggestion of the doctor specialized in rehabilitation of poststrokes, four commonly
used progressive rehabilitation modes are applied: passive flexion/ extension (F/E), active F/E, passive, and active gait training

In which li is the moment arm of corresponding muscle, which
can be obtained by knowledge of anatomy, and Fi is the muscle
contraction force. According to [34], the active contraction force
of the muscle, Fa , can be expressed as (5):

Az αβn0 c L
Fa = η
xρ(x, t)dx ≈ η · β · Fm ax
(5)
s
0

FAN AND YIN: ACTIVE AND PROGRESSIVE EXOSKELETON REHABILITATION USING MULTISOURCE INFORMATION FUSION

β=
≈

[Ca2+ ]2sp

[Ca2+ ]2sp
+ [Ca2+ ]sp k−1 /k1 + k−0 k−1 /k0 k1

a
+c
1 + e−b·f

(6)

Where Fm ax is the maximum contraction force, β is muscle’s activation level, defined in (6), which is fitted by sigmoid function
to simplify the calculation, the parameters of the function can be
obtained by least square method: a = 2.014, b = 0.02107 and
c = −1.06. f is the characteristic frequency of sEMG signal;
η is the active ratio of muscle fiber, calculated by normalized
RMS value of sEMG. Function (5) and (6) are described in detail
in [34]. According to (6), the firing rate of motor unit (MUs) enrolled in muscle contraction is necessary to predict active joint
torque [35]. It can be extracted from frequency domain of sEMG
signals by effective spectrum analysis. Normal power spectrum
estimation methods include: Fourier transform and mode based
spectrum estimation. Autoregressive power spectrum estimation (AR PSE) regards signal samples as an AR process with
p order. It is not based on the common assumption of a data
window on the signal samples, which gives the estimation a better frequency resolution and variation. AR PSE based on Burg
algorithm is used to estimate the spectrum density of sEMG, as
(7):
 
SAR ej ω =

σ2
σ2
=

2
2
p
|A (ej ω )|
1 + | k =1 ak e−j ω k |

(7)

in which ω = 2πk/N, k = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1. The system input is a
white-noise sequence with 0 average and σ 2 variance. According to the power spectrum derived from AR PSE, the median
frequency (MF) can be expressed as (8):

 −1
N
−1

	  jω
	  j ω
	
 N
	
	
	
	S e , xk 	 (8)
S e , xk · ωi
f=
i=0

3317

i=0

j

in which S(e ω, x) is the PSE of signal samples x, ωi is frequency, and N is the length of PSE.
However, sEMG is 10–400 Hz, PSE with signal samples
less than 200 ms will result in lower frequency resolution and
cannot estimate the signals with lower frequency. Meanwhile,
PSE with longer signal samples will result in an average effect,
and reduces the MF. Differential method is applied to solve
the problem. Conventional PSE is asymptotically unbiased to
the ideal power spectrum density when N → +∞. Hence it
can be proved that the increment of the PSE [right part of (9)] is
asymptotically unbiased to the PSE of additional signal samples
(left part of (9)). According to (9), S(ej ω , dx) has the same
frequency resolution with S(ej ω , xs + dx), which is higher than
the frequency resolution obtained by direct PSE.
|S(ej ω , dx)| = ||S(ej ω , (xs + dx))| − |S(ej ω , xs )||

(9)

Where xs is signal samples, dx is the additional signal, and the
lengths are N and ΔN respectively. Theoretically, the shortest
length of ΔN can be 1 and the variation of AR PSE will result in
huge error when ΔN is small. ΔN is 20 in this paper. S(ej ω , xs )
is linear interpolated to have the same length with S(ej ω , xs +
dx). The amplitude of S(ej ω , dx) is the amplitude-frequency

Fig. 4.

Control block diagram of active mode.

characteristic of the signal samples dx. The MF of dx can be
obtained by replacing S(ej ω , x) with S(ej ω , dx) in (8). Since
dx is much shorter than xs , the average effect of conventional
method is reduced and the real-time performance is improved.
C. Active Compliance Control With Force
& Position EPP Feedback
Active position control of the exoskeleton is exemplified
through a 1 DOF example. This figure schematically depicts
the master (a human leg) interacting with the slave. The exoskeleton knee is powered by a single actuator that generates
an angular displacement θM . There is a belt driven motor axis
and ball screw, which can be interpreted as a spring-damper
connection. The interaction force, Fint , between human leg and
exoskeleton leg is detected by two airbags mounted on the front
and back of human shank respectively. It is also interpreted as
a spring-damper connection in this example. k1 , k2 , c1 and c2
represents the stiffness and damping of the belt and airbag.
Passive mode is controlled by a position proportional−
integral−derivative (PID) controller, whose input is required
angle and output is joint angle of exoskeleton. Fig. 4 shows
the control block diagram of active mode, where Freq is the
required assistant force, Fint is the interactive force, Fa is the
actual assistant force, kp , ki and kd are coefficients of the PID
controller, and s is the complex variable for the Laplace transformation. The transfer function H, maps the pulses onto the
angular increment of exoskeleton joint. T is the transfer function from features of sEMG signal to active joint torque τsEM G ,
dθact is applied as the feed forward item and is the product of ks
and τsEM G . G1 , G2 , G3 and G4 represent interaction dynamics
between the pilot and the exoskeleton, and the kinematics of
the pilot limb and exoskeleton leg (e.g., velocity, position, or a
combination thereof). Tm and Ts are delay of motor and sensor.
Tactile stimulation is a better way to indicate the human body
the kinematic or dynamic information, because one can perceive the information easily in real time with high sensitivity
and safety. The proposed extended proprioceptor transmits information in the form of different pressure of the gasbag. It
can feed dynamic information including joint torque and interaction force, which are important in clinical rehabilitations,
back to the human body. Thus, a closed-loop controller of the
human-machine system is built based on the EPP feedback. The
feedback pressure can be determined by (10):
P1 = P0 + k1 · θ
P2 = P0 + k2 · Tknee

(10)

3318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

in which P1 , P2 are the pressures that feed back joint angle and
torque information; P0 is the original pressure, which was 8 kPa
in experiment; k1 , k2 are proportional coefficients where k1 was
65 Pa/rad and k2 was 50 Pa/Nm; θ is joint angle; and Tknee is
joint torque.
IV. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS AND CLINICAL TRIAL
A. Experimental Protocol
In order to evaluate the ability of the integrated rehabilitation
robot to provide early rehabilitation, the previously described
exoskeleton and controller were implemented in preliminary
experiment and clinical trial. Two channels of EMG signals are
applied to control the knee flexion and extension: ch1, biceps
muscle of thigh; ch2, quadriceps muscle of thigh.
The preliminary experiment has been carried out on three
healthy male subjects of age 27, 25 and 24. The first one was
an active compliance control experiment, which includes follow F/E, assist F/E and resist F/E. Each leg was bound with
the leg of the exoskeleton. The assist force, detected by the
airbags described in Section II-B, was set to 0 N (follow training), 60 N (assistance training) and −40 N (resistance training)
respectively. The exoskeleton followed the subjects’ movement
by the aforementioned active compliance controller. Joint angle, assist force and interactive force were recorded during the
experiments. Then, experiments on real-time evaluation and parameters updated during active F/E were executed. F0 is set to
40 N, kF is 0.1 and kl is 0.001. EPP feedback based on haptic
device was also tested to evaluate the performance. The subjects
adapted their movement to the pressure feedback and learned
to control the machine by the EPP feedback at first and then
the subjects controlled the knee joint of exoskeleton to 30◦ and
60◦ according to the pressure feedback that informed the joint
information during follow F/E.
A clinical trail on rehabilitation of poststrokes was carried
out at Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital (Shanghai, China), a
general hospital specializing in rehabilitation of poststrokes.
The subjects were a 54-year-old man 2 months after left-sided
stroke (S1), a 30- year-old woman 1 month after left-sided stroke
(S2), and a 68-year-old man 2 years after right-sided stroke
(S3). The joint ROM were respectively 0∼80◦ , 0∼103◦ and
0∼92◦ , the peak active joint forces measured by the exoskeleton
system were respectively 36 N, 60 N and 47 N for flexion
and 65 N, 52 N and 62 N for extension when the joint angle
was 60◦ . According to progressive rehabilitation strategy, the
treatment included passive F/E, active F/E, passive and active
gait training. The subjects were asked to challenge their maximal
effort level at each session during the progressive rehabilitation.
Meanwhile, low pulse electrotherapy and infrared therapy were
applied as additional treatment to relieve pain, improve blood
circulation and reduce inflammation.
B. Results
The experiment results of active compliance control are
shown in Figs. 5 and 6. During follow F/E experiment, the
interactive force remains from − 10 N to 10 N, and the RMS

Fig. 5. RMS values of errors. (a) Errors between the required assist force
and interactive force during active F/E, when assist force is 20, 40, and 60 N,
(b) Errors between desired angle and real angle, when desired angle is 30◦ and
60◦ .

value is 4.35 N. It indicates the exoskeleton joint can follow the
movement of human knee. The RMS value of the errors between
the required assist force and interactive force is shown in Table I.
The average RMS value of force error during active F/E, when
the assist or resist force is 20 N, 40 N and 60 N respectively, is
shown in Fig. 5(a). And the average RMS value of angle error
during coordination control is shown in Fig. 5(b).
Fig. 7(a) shows the result of parameters updating during active
F/E rehabilitation according to (2) and (3). The assist force is
updated with the active force and fatigue rate, while the fatigue
rate is changed with the average period of flexion and extension.
The experimental results of coordination control of the humanmachine system are shown in Fig. 7(b). The root mean square
values are 2.9956◦ and 3.9385◦ when the desired angles are 30◦
and 60◦ .
Fig. 8 shows the results of clinical trail. The passive F/E
training of the three subjects lasts 14 days, 4 days and 8 days
respectively according to their Joint ROM. The joint ROM is
improved from 80◦ to 95◦ for S1, 103◦ to 103◦ for S2 and 92◦ to
99◦ . And the active flexion force is improved from 35 N to 50 N
for S1, 60 N to 148 N for S2 and 47 N to 50 N for S3, while the
active extension force is improved from 65 N to 90 N for S1,
52 N to 115 N for S2 and 62 N to 66 N for S3, in the second
stage. After three weeks’ gait training stage, S1 and S2 were
able to walk independently. The pace is about 0.2 m/sec and
0.8 m/sec. The subjects’ self report on pain and discomfort level
did not show any significant increase during therapy sessions.

FAN AND YIN: ACTIVE AND PROGRESSIVE EXOSKELETON REHABILITATION USING MULTISOURCE INFORMATION FUSION

3319

Fig. 7. (a) Parameters updating during active F/E, the figure below is the active
force, the figure above is assist force (solid blue line) and corresponding fatigue
rate (dashed red line) and (b) coordination control based on EPP feedback.

Fig. 6. Active compliance control experiments. (a) Follow F/E, (b) assist F/E,
and (c) resist F/E. The dark blue line indicates the angle of exoskeleton joint,
the green line is the interactive force, the red line is the assist force, and the sky
blue line is the error between desired assist force and interactive force.
TABLE I
RMS VALUES OF ERRORS BETWEEN THE REQUIRED
ASSIST FORCE AND INTERACTIVE FORCE

V. DISCUSSION
The experimental results of active compliance control suggest
that the exoskeleton can follow the subject’s movement, and in
the same time provide assisting force according to setting values,
meeting the requirement of active force training of the stroke.

Fig. 8. Evaluation during training process. (a) Joint ROM of the three subjects,
(b) Active joint force of Subject 1 (S1), (c) Active joint force of Subject 2 (S2),
and (d) active joint force of Subject 3 (S3).

3320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Although sEMG feed forward item and differential analysis
method make it possible to predict human motion intention
precisely in advance, some errors exist when compared with the
desired assist force, since the direction of assisting force changes
with the alternate of flexion and extension rapidly as shown in
Fig. 6. Such error is more evident during assist training, in which
flexion and extension is altered more rapidly than resist training,
so the RMS value is higher during assist training as shown in
Fig. 5(a). The performance can probably further improved by
real-time information extraction from sEMG signals based on
novel understanding of closed-loop control mechanism of the
human body. The misestimation of hybrid dynamic model of
the human-machine system may also affect the performance of
active compliance control, which will be considered in future
design.
Experiments also indicate that the fatigue rate can be evaluated in real time by (3). The assisting force is higher when the
average active force is low and the subject is tired, and vice versa.
The control strategy is capable of providing personalized rehabilitation and preventing further injuries or over-fatigue during
active rehabilitation. However, the parameters and actual fatigue level will be determined according to a series of research
in future work.
Coordination control experiments show that the EPP feedback system can transmit motion information to the human body
since the subjects can perceive the condition of the lower limb
and control the exoskeleton with the pressure feedback of EPP.
Although the pressure of the airbag can feed back the joint information accurately in real time as illustrated in the experiments,
the perception of the human body is fuzzy. Inadequate training
will make subjects incapable of perceiving the pressure accurately, which will result in control errors during experiments. It
is possible that long-term training will make a person fully adapt
to the new system and will reduce the value of errors. It provides
an alternative way to imitate the proprioception of human body
and introduces a more natural method for the human-machine
interface.
Results of clinical research demonstrate that the passive F/E
training can provide continuous passive motion. The active F/E
training can help muscle recovery for a poststroke patient. Although the effect is not so obvious for S3, it may result from
lack of exercise for so a long time and muscular atrophy of the
patient. Compared with traditional gait training, the exoskeleton assisted treatment is convenient for physical therapist and
effective for patient. Another key factor to consider is the safety
of robotic training. Based on the findings of the clinical trail, no
adverse events are observed and the repetitive robotic exercises
did not result in significant fatigue or discomfort as reported by
the subjects.
VI. CONCLUSION
A personalized healthcare technology with lower extremity
exoskeleton system for active and progressive early rehabilitation of poststrokes has been proposed. Progressive rehabilitation
is realized based on real-time evaluation through multisource
information fusion. Differential sEMG analysis is applied to re-

alize real-time feature extraction and active compliance control
of the human-machine system. A tactile stimuli based EPP feedback system is developed to transmit motion information from
the lower limb back to human body and rebuild closed-loop control system. Results of preliminary experiments demonstrate that
the human-machine system is able to move coordinately while
the controlling parameters are updated with the condition of the
subject. Meanwhile, one can correctly perceive the information
implied by the pressure of the gasbag. Clinical experimental
results from a left-sided poststroke patient indicate that the rehabilitation robot is capable of providing effective progressive
training.
This work presents a rationale for performing larger controlled clinical studies to further evaluate the safety, feasibility
and efficacy of using the proposed exoskeleton- assisted rehabilitation in poststrokes in the future. And in order to make
the system more effective, additional device includes functional electrical stimulation and infrared therapy will be integrated. Besides, new methods, including wavelet, fractal, modified kernel method [36], [37] and integrated information technology [38]–[41], etc. will be introduced to make information
extraction more precise and make the controller more stable.

REFERENCES
[1] S. C. Kirshblum, M. M. Priebe, C. H. Ho, W. M. Scelza, A. E. Chiodo,
and L.-A. Wuermser, “Spinal cord injury medicine. 3. rehabilitation phase
after acute spinal cord injury,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 88, no. 3,
Suppl 1, pp. S62–S70, 2007.
[2] M. Sumida, M. Fujimoto, A. Tokuhiro, T. Tominaga, A. Magara, and
R. Uchida, “Early rehabilitation effect for traumatic spinal cord injury,”
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 82, no. 3, pp. 391–395, 2001.
[3] J. Bernhardt, M. N. Thuy, J. M. Collier, and L. A. Legg, “Very early versus
delayed mobilisation after stroke,” Stroke, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 489–490,
2009.
[4] R. Riener, L. Lünenburger, S. Jezernik, M. Anderschitz, G. Colombo, and
V. Dietz, “Patient-cooperative strategies for robot-aided treadmill training: First experimental results,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 380–394, Sep. 2005.
[5] J. F. Ryan, A. Q. Hugo, and G. Michael, “Preliminary evaluation of a
powered lower limb orthosis to aid walking in paraplegic individuals,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 652–659, Dec.
2011.
[6] M. Vukobratovic, D. Hristic, and Z. Stojiljkovic, “Development of active
anthropomorphic exoskeletons,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 12, pp. 66–
80, 1974.
[7] M. Townsend and R. Lepofsky, “Powered walking machine prosthesis for
paraplegics,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 14, pp. 436–444, 1976.
[8] A. Tsukahara, R. Kawanishi, Y. Hasegawa, and Y. Sankai, “Sit-to-stand
and stand-to-sit transfer support for complete paraplegic patients with
robot suit HAL,” Adv. Robot., vol. 24, pp. 1615–1638, 2010.
[9] S. K. Banala, S. H. Kim, S. K. Agrawal, and J. P. Scholz, “Robot assisted
gait training with active leg exoskeleton (ALEX),” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 2–8, Feb. 2009.
[10] S. Freivogel, J. Mehrholz, T. Husak-Sotomayor, and D. Schmalohr, “Gait
training with the newly developed “LokoHelp” -system is feasible for nonambulatory patients after stroke, spinal cord and brain injury. A feasibility
study,” Brain Injury, vol. 22, no. 7–8, pp. 625–632, 2008.
[11] H. Kazerooni and R. Steger, “The berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton,”
Trans. ASME, J. Dyn. Syst., Meas., Control, vol. 128, pp. 14–25, 2006.
[12] M. D. Aaron and H. Hugh, “Lower extremity exoskeletons and active
orthoses: Challenges and state-of-the-art,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24,
no. 1, pp. 144–158, Feb. 2008.
[13] P. Sale, M. Franceschini, A. Waldner, and S. Hesse, “Use of the robot
assisted gait therapy in rehabilitation of patients with stroke and spinal
cord injury,” Eur J. Phys. Rehab. Med., vol. 48, pp. 111–121, 2012.

FAN AND YIN: ACTIVE AND PROGRESSIVE EXOSKELETON REHABILITATION USING MULTISOURCE INFORMATION FUSION

[14] G. A. Pratt and M. M. Williamson, “Series elastic actuators,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Pittsburg, PA, USA, 1995,
vol. 1, pp. 399–406.
[15] H. Vallery, J. Veneman, and E. V. Asseldonk, etc., “Compliant Actuation
of Rehabilitation Robots,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 60–69, Sep. 2008.
[16] M. Yochum, T. Bakir, R. Lepers, and S. Binczak, “Estimation of muscular
fatigue under electromyostimulation using CWT,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 3372–3378, Dec. 2012.
[17] M. González-Izal, A. Malanda, E. Gorostiaga, and M. Izquierdo, “Electromyographic models to assess muscle fatigue,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 22, pp. 501–512, 2012.
[18] D. Staudenmann, K. Roeleveld, D. F. Stegeman, and J. H. van Dieën,
“Methodological aspects of SEMG recordings for force estimation—A
tutorial and review,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 20, pp. 375–387,
2010.
[19] J. W. L. Pau, S. S. Q. Xie, and A. J. Pullan, “Neuromuscular interfacing:
Establishing an EMG-driven model for the human elbow joint,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2586–2593, Sep. 2012.
[20] X. Zhang and P. Zhou, “High-density myoelectric pattern recognition
toward improved stroke rehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 6, pp. 1649–1657, Jun. 2012.
[21] T. Lenzi, S. M. M. De Rossi, N. Vitiello, and M. C. Carrozza, “Intentionbased EMG control for powered exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2180–2190, Aug. 2012.
[22] S. Kwon and J. Kim, “Real-time upper limb motion estimation from
surface electromyography and joint angular velocities using an artificial
neural network for human-machine cooperation,” IEEE T. Inf. Technol.
B., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 522–530, Jul. 2011.
[23] A. Holobar and D. Zazula, “Multi-channel blind source separation using
convolution kernel compensation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 8,
no. 55, pp. 4487–4496, Sep. 2007.
[24] S. Rasheed, D. W. Stashuk, and M. S. Kamel, “Integrating heterogeneous
classifier ensembles for EMG signal decomposition based on classifier
agreement,” IEEE T. Inf. Technol. B., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 866–882, May
2010.
[25] S. Zhou and L. Xu, “A new type of recurrent fuzzy neural network for
modeling dynamic systems,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 14, pp. 243–
251, 2001.
[26] E. N. Kamavuako and J. C. Rosenvang, “Hysteresis in the
electromyography-force relationship: Toward an optimal model for the
estimation of force,” Muscle Nerve, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 755–758, 2012.
[27] A. Christie, J. G. Inglis, G. Kamen, and D. A. Gabriel, “Relationships
between surface EMG variables and motor unit Wring rates,” Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 107, pp. 177–185, 2009.
[28] C. S. Sherrington, “On the proprioceptive system, especially in its reflex
aspect,” Brain, vol. 29, pp. 467–482, 1907.
[29] J. A Doubler and D. S. Childress, “An analysis of extended physiological
proprioception as a prosthesis-control technique,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 5–18, 1984.
[30] Y. H. Yin, Y. J. Fan, and L. D. Xu., “EMG & EPP-integrated human–
machine interface between the paralyzed and rehabilitation exoskeleton,”
IEEE T. Inf. Technol. B., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 542–549, Jul. 2012.
[31] Y. J. Fan, Z. Guo, and Y. H. Yin, “sEMG-based neuro-fuzzy controller for
a paraller ankle exoskeleton with proprioception,” Int. J. Robot. Autom.,
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 450–460, 2011.
[32] Y. H. Yin, Z Guo, X. Chen, and Y. J. Fan, “Studies on biomechanics of
skeletal muscle based on the working mechanism of myosin motors: An
overview,” Chin. Sci. Bull., vol. 57, no. 35, pp. 4533–4544, 2012.
[33] F. Daerden and D. Lefeber, “Pneumatic artificial muscles: Actuators for
robotics and automation,” Eur. J. Mech. Environ. Eng., vol. 47, no. 1,
pp. 11–21, 2002.

3321

[34] Z. Guo and Y. H. Yin, “A dynamic model of skeletal muscle based on
collective behavior of myosin motors-biomechanics of skeletal muscle
based on working mechanism of myosin motors (I),” Sci. Chin., Ser. E,
vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1589–1595, 2012.
[35] Y. H. Yin and X. Chen, “Bioelectrochemical control mechanism with
variable-frequency regulation for skeletal muscle contraction- biomechanics of skeletal muscle based on the working mechanism of myosin motors
(II),” Sci. China Ser. E, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 2115–2125, 2012.
[36] S. C. Li, L. D. Xu, and X. H. Wang, “A continuous biomedical signal
acquisition system based on compressed sensing in body sensor networks,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., to be published.
[37] H. Li and L. Xu, “Feature space theory—A mathematical foundation for
data mining,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 14, pp. 253–257, 2001.
[38] L. Li, R. L. Ge, S. M. Zhou, and R. Valerdi, “Guest editorial integrated
healthcare information systems,” IEEE T. Inf. Technol. B., vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 515–517, Jul. 2012.
[39] L. Li, L. Xu, H. A. Jeng, D. Naik, T. Allen, and M. Frontini, “Creation
of environmental health information system for public health service: A
pilot study,” Inf. Syst. Front., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 531–543, 2008.
[40] L. D. Xu, “Enterprise systems: State-of-the-art and future trends,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 630–640, Nov. 2011.
[41] L. D. Xu, “Editorial: Inaugural issue,” Ent. Inform. Syst., vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 1–2, 2007.

Yuanjie Fan was born in Shanghai, China, in 1985.
He received the B.E. degree in mechanical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China, in 2007. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree at the Research Institute of Robotics,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai.
His research interests include robotics, rehabilitation, automatic control, and signal process.

Yuehong Yin (M’12) received the B.E. degree in
mechanical engineering from the Nanjing Institute of
Aeronautics, Nanjing, China, in 1990, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing, in 1995 and 1997, respectively.
From December 1997 to December 1999, he
was a Postdoctoral Fellow at Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, where he became an Associate
Professor in July 1999. Since December 1999, he
has been with the Robotics Institute, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China, where he became a Professor in December
2005. His research interests include robotics, force control, exoskeleton robot,
molecule motor, artificial limb, robotic assembly, reconfigurable assembly system, and augmented reality.
Dr. Yin became an Associate Member of the International Academy of Production Engineering in 2011.

