368

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

An Assistive Navigation System Based on
Augmented Reality and Context Awareness for
People With Mild Cognitive Impairments
Ramón Hervás, José Bravo, and Jesús Fontecha

Abstract—This paper presents a system for supplying spatial orientation and support to cognitively impaired people in their daily
activities. The system is a technological solution based on external
aid at a practical level (substitution-based rehabilitation). In particular, we propose a model focused on points of interest or wellknown places, in which user-friendly routes to a destination are
generated based on the user context rather than the conventional
street names and quantitative distances. Moreover, the system offers augmented reality views that include contextual information.
This philosophy of navigation more closely matches the needs of
the user than do conventional navigation systems; the proposal is
especially useful for users who are not accustomed to using new
technologies (e.g., elderly people), people experiencing disorientation and, more generally, individuals with a slight cognitive deficit.
The system also includes an application that allows the relatives of
the user to establish tasks that must be performed at a specific location and to monitor the activities of the user to detect potentially
risky situations.
Index Terms—Ambient assisted living, cognitive impairments,
context awareness, mobile computing, monitoring.

I. INTRODUCTION
N the modern world, many people use software systems
to receive reminders regarding their daily tasks and events
and reach destinations in both their accustomed environments
and unfamiliar places. Concepts such as ubiquitous computing
and ambient intelligence promote the use of new technologies
adapted to the specific situations of users to support them in
their routine needs and improve the performance of their daily
activities. Some of these applications provide the shortest route
to a destination using geolocation (traditionally for vehicular
use but also for pedestrians).
However, classical navigation systems are not designed in a
user-friendly fashion; they often present information in nonintuitive ways and include confusing instructions that require good
spatial orientation skills to be understood. It is easier to follow
instructions based on well-known places (buildings, businesses,

I

Manuscript received December 21, 2012; revised April 10, 2013; accepted
May 31, 2013. Date of publication June 6, 2013; date of current version December 31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the E.U. Ambient Assisted
Living Joint Program (Call 5, PIA Project).
The authors are with the University of Castilla–La Mancha, Ciudad
Real CR 13071, Spain (e-mail: ramon.hlucas@uclm.es; jose.bravo@uclm.es;
jesús.fontecha@uclm.es).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2266480

monuments, etc.), as would be provided by a human giving
directions, rather than the street names and absolute distances
provided by traditional vehicular navigators. This point is far
more critical in elderly people or individuals with slight cognitive deficits, who often suffer from disorientation. The perception of cognitively impaired people regarding the environment
where they perform their activities is specified by familiar places
such as a medical clinic, drugstore, bakery, or known square. As
these individuals may also have difficulty using a mobile device,
technological solutions must be focused on usability, intuitive
interaction, and easy learning. Classical navigation systems do
not account for the specific preferences, environment, and activities of the user. In general, applications tend to neglect the
user context.
We propose a system based on well-known places to suggest
routes according to the user context. The system moves through
a series of familiar location points in guiding the user to a given
destination. The navigation information can be displayed on
the screen in an augmented reality view, showing the locations
of landmarks along the chosen path in addition to contextual
information related to the user, such as locations of relatives
and tasks that must be performed at specified places.
The system not only provides a solution for the user but also
includes social features allowing relatives and friends to supervise the activities of the user. These close people can monitor
situations in which the user becomes lost, establish additional
familiar places, and add events or required activities at specific
locations. The closest relatives can check whether the user’s
activity is safe, detect and solve situations in which he or she
is lost, establish new known points, and remind the user of the
tasks that must be carried out at specific locations.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the
motivation for this work. Section III presents the overall system and proposed model. A particular implementation based
on the Android mobile platform is described in Section IV.
Section V discusses the evaluation that was performed to validate our proposal. Section VI reviews the background to this
work and other related works, highlighting the differences and
similarities between these works and our proposal. Finally,
Section VII discusses the lessons learned from this work and
suggests directions for future research, and Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. JUSTIFICATION
People with cognitive impairments suffer from significant
limitations in their intellectual functions, such as reasoning,

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HERVÁS et al.: ASSISTIVE NAVIGATION SYSTEM BASED ON AUGMENTED REALITY AND CONTEXT AWARENESS FOR PEOPLE

learning, and problem solving. These limitations affect their
conceptual, social, and practical skills, which can have a substantial emotional and behavioral impact on their lives. Cognitive impairments lead to difficulties in performing everyday activities, and these difficulties are augmented when people leave
their homes.
Methods to mitigate and rehabilitate cognitive deficits are of
great importance. Rehabilitation typically consists of a set of interventions that help to increase the functional capabilities of the
individual. The interventions can be focused on either functionality (enhancement of cognitive skills) or processes (improvement of functioning). Rehabilitation strategies can be divided
into three main categories: restitution, or stimulation of the affected neuropsychological connections; compensation, or enhancement of functioning through healthy neuropsychological
systems; and substitution, which employs external procedures
that help the affected individual at the practical level (external
aid).
Substitution is the most widely used method for treating cognitive deficits caused by brain damage as these deficits cannot be
easily restored. Neuropsychological rehabilitation using external aids (e.g., diaries, computers, and environmental changes)
lends more autonomy and independence to people with cognitive disabilities.
This paper is focused on providing a substitution-based solution using mobile computing, geolocation, and context awareness, as described in the following sections. In particular, we
propose a solution for people with slight cognitive impairments
who live on their own but frequently require support in their daily
activities. These users face various challenges in their everyday
lives, including disorientation, short-term memory lapses, and
oblivion to important tasks. These problems can lead to deterioration of their quality of life. When the first symptoms of
a cognitive disorder appear, technological support can help the
affected individual to maintain autonomy and avoid stressful situations caused by disorientation episodes or other risk factors.
Our proposal aims to assist cognitively impaired people in
meeting their daily needs, increasing their independence and
improving their performance of everyday tasks. Mobile technology has become the standard in rehabilitation applications
because of its adaptivity to the user’s environment and minimal
impact on his/her life.
III. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The proposed system integrates several functionalities to provide a solution for individuals with slight cognitive impairments
and reduce their dependency on others:
1) A novel method (implemented as a software application)
that provides spatial guidance by means of a personal
navigation system based on well-known places and the
particular orientation requirements and characteristics of
the current user and route (e.g., the distance from home or
other safe places).
2) A diary application to remind the user of daily tasks
recorded by the user or his/her relatives. This application
uses the navigation service to guide the user to the place

369

where the activities should be performed. The navigation
application also obtains information on places familiar to
the user based on his/her activities (apart from the wellknown places explicitly entered into the system).
3) A monitoring application for supervision of the user’s
activities by relatives or clinicians. The user can explicitly
launch alarms or alarms can be automatically sounded if
a risky situation is detected.
The following subsections are focused on the system functionalities. The main elements of the context model are described
along with the algorithms and metrics designed to obtain the optimal route to a given destination based on well-known places
or points of interest (POI).

A. General Data Model
The main entities comprising the basic data model are as
follows:
1) POIs: well-known places in the user’s environment, which
the system uses as orientation references. Users, relatives
and friends can define POIs and incorporate them into the
system.
2) Tasks: actions that the user must perform at a specific place
in the environment. The user or a close person such as a
relative or friend can define tasks. It is also possible to
associate multimedia resources with a task.
3) Contacts: People (typically friends or relatives) with a
specified physical location on the map. The contacts can
share information with the user.
The entities in the model are represented on a map or in the
augmented reality view by characteristic icons. Each entity has a
physical location specified by its geographic latitude, longitude,
and altitude coordinates.

B. Algorithm for Route Acquisition
Each route consists of an origin point (typically, the user’s
current location) and a destination point or target from among
the information entities of the current user. The system first
identifies the set of all well-known places located between the
origin and target. More specifically, a circle with a diameter
equal to the distance between the origin and destination points
is virtually drawn (see Fig. 1), and the area inside this circle
determines the POI used to calculate the route. The set of all
combinations of points inside the circle determines the candidate
paths for the current user. Each possible route contains between
0 and n waypoints, and the total number of calculated paths is
2n . We then assign a quantitative value to each candidate route
based on the suitability of the path (see Section III-C) instead
of applying traditional algorithms that just obtain the shortest
path.

C. Metric for Determining the Suitability of a Route
A metric has been designed for calculating the suitability of
a given route. The metric is based on the following criteria:

370

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 2. Fuzzy sets defined for (a) route distance, (b) home distance, and (c)
known points.

Fig. 1.

Example of candidate POI.

1) Proximity of a known environment (e.g., user home or
workplace): It is more likely for the user to become lost
when he/she is far away from these known environments.
2) Orientation requirement: This criterion is based on the
number of identified well-known points along the route,
by which the user can be easily guided. A larger number
of well-known points indicate an easier route for the user.
3) Distance to the destination point: A greater distance to the
destination point leads to a higher probability of becoming
lost.
We assign a value to each route based on the above criteria,
considering the path to be followed, the distance of the user
from his/her known environment(s) and the total number of
well-known points along the path. The assigned value (see (1))
falls in the range [0–1], with 0 being the least favorable and 1
being the most favorable:
[0...1] =

sdr
npoir
·α+
(1 − α)
npoit
dr

(1)

Where npoir is the number of POI along the path, npoit is the total number of POI in the area between the origin and destination,
sdr is the shortest length among the routes generated between
the origin and destination, dr is the length of the current route,
and α is a weight factor between 0 and 1, which determines the
importance of the number of POI visited. The factor α depends
on the current situation of the user; α is higher when the user is
far from known environments or the destination is far away.
The factor α depends on subjective parameters that cannot
be easily quantified and the specific characteristics of the user,
which may be influenced by his/her particular situation at a
given moment. For example, each user has different orientation
requirements. The perception of whether a route is short or long
may also depend on the user and the day; for example, a fatigued
user may perceive a given route as being longer. The factor α is
therefore recalculated for each route.
Because of the uncertainty inherent in estimating the α factor,
we propose the use of fuzzy sets to represent this information.
Fuzzy sets are especially useful to tolerate imprecise and arbitrary data: the perception of the world that users have is subjective. Moreover, fuzzy logic is based on natural language and,

consequently, it is valuable to represent users’ preferences, as
we show in Fig. 2.
The fuzzy rules are based on the following linguistic criteria:
1) route distance [RD]; 2) home distance [HD], defined by the
closest familiar environment; and 3) importance of visiting wellknown points (or orientation requirement) [αON].
Each linguistic variable has associated borderline values to
define the fuzzy sets. There are three possible values of each
variable: small (S), normal (N), and big (B). The system provides
mechanisms to configure these variables based on the specific
features, preferences and physical and cognitive situation of
each user. For example, one user may consider a distance of
500 m to be very long because of a physical impairment, while
other users may consider the same distance to be short. Fuzzy
sets are suitable for these subjective characteristics and provide
the required flexibility. In addition, the bounds of the fuzzy sets
can be adapted to each user through the personal configuration
of the application. The fuzzy sets defined for each linguistic
variation are illustrated in Fig. 2.
Using the fuzzy sets and our main assumptions, it is possible
to define a set of fuzzy inference rules to combine the knowledge
obtained from the various fuzzy sets. For example:
R1 : if RD is S and HD is S → α is S
R2 : if RD is B and HD is B → α is B
R3 : if RD is B and HD is S → α is N.
The set of rules was composed based on the method of Mandani [1], which is used in many automatic control problems.
First, the system calculates the membership weights [see (2)].
Second, the partial conclusions are constructed using the aggregation method, and the final conclusion is obtained [see (3)].
Finally, a defuzzification process is applied to obtain the α value,
where the result is calculated from the fuzzy group using the
center of gravity technique
W1 = min [μS (rd) , μS (hd)]

(2)

with rd being the route distance to follow by the user, hd the
distance from the current location to the user’s friendly environment, and μS(x) being the membership degree of the value x
to the fuzzy set S
μS (rd, hd) = min [W1, μS (z)]

∀ z ∈ Z.

(3)

D. Representation of Information Entities Through
Augmented Reality
Each information entity has a graphical representation in the
augmented reality view. The geographic coordinates of the entity

HERVÁS et al.: ASSISTIVE NAVIGATION SYSTEM BASED ON AUGMENTED REALITY AND CONTEXT AWARENESS FOR PEOPLE

and orientation of the mobile device determine the location of
each element on the screen. The points to be compared correspond to physical points on the earth. Therefore, a proximity model must be used to calculate the angle between the
user location and entity location. We have applied earth model
WGS84 [2] to obtain the initial bearing (in degrees) between
two different locations.
E. Monitoring and Social Sharing
Another important functionality of the proposed system is
the monitoring application. This application enables the family
members of the user to check the user’s current location and
observe the routes that he/she has followed previously. The
relatives can obtain information based on the following three
user states:
1) Navigation: The user has accessed a map where the available information entities are displayed, including tasks to perform, relatives and friends, and well-known places.
2) In route: The user is currently moving to reach a destination. The user can display the navigation information using the
two-dimensional (2-D) map or augmented reality view.
3) Lost: The user has become lost and explicitly activates this
state. The system launches an alarm, attempts to place a call
to the person in charge, and sends a message to all relatives of
the user. The system is also capable of automatically detecting
this risky situation. Consider a route as a succession of geographic points, with each consecutive pair of points separated
by a given distance and the last point being the destination.
We can approximately determine when the user becomes disoriented, as follows. Let d (user, pn) be the distance of the user
from the nearest point on the route. The user is lost when this
distance exceeds the distance between two consecutive points
on the route multiplied by a factor (1 + β), where β is between
0 and 1 and indicates the restriction level of the algorithm (0
does not allow any deviation from the route, while 1 allows
deviations up to twice the distance between two points on the
route). This algorithm is shown in Listing 1:
user_lost=true
points = getPointsRoute(route)
for each p in points and user_lost==true:
if(d(user,p)<=d(p,p+1)*(1+ ))
user_lost=false
return user_lost
Listing 1.

Algorithm to determine user disorientation states

IV. IMPLEMENTATION
A. General Architecture
The implemented prototype is based on a classic client–server
approach. The client application is used to support the daily
activities of the user, guide him/her through the environment,
and make his/her activities known to relatives and friends. A
central server is used to enforce synchronization between client
applications using the simple object access protocol (SOAP)

371

and web services technology.1 The mobile application has been
developed for Android devices.
B. Route Generation and Obtaining the Optimal Route
The routes are generated using the Google Directions API,2
and the Google Maps service3 provides cartographic maps that
are displayed on the device screen. Fig. 3 shows the mobile
application screen (a) when the user is selecting a destination,
(b) when a route has been obtained based on the POI, and (c) in
the monitoring view.
Fig. 4 shows several examples of routes obtained by two
different users, the first with higher orientation needs and the
second with lower orientation needs (as represented by the fuzzy
sets). The first column shows the shortest route, the middle
column shows the route for the first user, and the last column
shows the route offered to the second user.
The top row shows a typical example in which the user with
higher orientation needs obtains a route compounded by more
POIs. The second example shows an extreme case in which user
one must walk significantly farther to obtain a route including
well-known places. The bottom row contains another special
case, in which both users obtain the same route because the route
including the larger number of POIs is only slightly longer.
C. Navigation Through Augmented Reality
When the system calculates a new route to the destination
point, the user can activate the augmented reality navigation
mode. The information entities are then shown including their
geographic coordinates. The data that determine the position of
each entity on the screen is obtained from the mobile device via
global positioning system (GPS) and digital compass, and the
entities are displayed as graphical icons. A set of identifying
colors and other visual characteristics has been established to
distinguish each type of entity (see Fig. 5).
The user can interact with the augmented reality view by
touching an entity. A description of the area is then displayed,
and it is possible to open the multimedia resources related to the
task or location.
D. Social Features
The social features of the system allow relatives and friends
to monitor the location and situation of the user, as described in
Section III-E. This monitoring provides knowledge of the routes
taken by the user, including the starting point, destination entity,
and current location of the user. Moreover, this feature enables
social interactions between different users of the system. For
example, it is possible to send messages to friends to arrange
meetings at a specific place, notify relatives that a task has
been successfully performed, or publish a diary entry on social
networks.
1 W3C©.

Web Service Architecture. http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-arch/
Google Directions API https://developers.google.com/maps/
documentation/directions/
3 Google Maps API – Google Developers https://developers.google.
com/maps/
2 The

372

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 3. Application showing the three main views: the interface for selecting a destination or task to perform, in this case to obtain a blood pressure check (left),
the optimal route obtained using the proposed method based on fuzzy logic and POIs (middle), and the view for monitoring the user’s activities (right).

V. EVALUATION
The evaluation was performed by real end users thanks to
the collaboration with the eSmile psychology clinic. A total
of ten users between the ages of 10 and 71 years participated
in the evaluation. This population included two teenagers with
Asperger syndrome, three persons with early Alzheimer’s symptoms, and five persons with slight age-related cognitive deficits.
Our validation of the proposal in this paper relies on two types
of evaluations. The first attempts to formally quantify certain
features of the proposed system: the efficiency of the algorithm
in calculating routes and the efficacy of the final route offered.
The algorithm has a complexity of 2n , where n is the number
of candidate POIs. Our test yielded measures between 0.32 and
2.59 s for routes with 1–12 candidate POIs (following a linear
scaling). This measure is acceptable for this type of application
when the number of POIs is reasonable.
The validity of the suggested routes was measured using a
simple statistical measure known as the precision, given by the
number of routes to which the user agreed divided by the total
number of retrieved routes in the test session. On average, the
precision obtained in the tests was 82.4%. The reasons for obtaining routes that were explicitly refused by the user or caused
disorientation are analyzed in Section IV.
We also evaluated the usability of the system with respect
to the user interfaces and methods of visualizing information.
This evaluation consisted of two tests, one using a commercial GPS navigator and the second using our application (not
necessarily in that order). The users followed several routes
obtained randomly from a poll. To assess the usability of the application, we administered the MoBiS-Q questionnaire [3]. The
average agreement was 62% for the commercial GPS-based
application and 81% for our system. The initial results are satisfying. However, we also detected certain points needing improvement, including textual information that was not always
clear and patterns tagged by users as confusing. We also analyzed the variance of this independent factor using a one-way

analysis of variance (ANOVA) model with a = 0.05 to study
the three groups of users (individuals with Asperger syndrome
and Alzheimer’s disease and elderly people). No statistically
significant differences were detected between the three groups.
However, we must perform the ANOVA with a larger group of
users to obtain more reliable conclusions.
VI. RELATED WORK
The evolution of technology promotes the creation of intelligent environments and the adaptation of devices and communication networks to solve many problems in our lives. Modern
solutions are expected to be transparent to users and distributed
across the environment, a concept known as ubiquitous computing. Many applications in the current market can display
relevant information regarding the environment in which the
user is located, using augmented reality or other types of user
interfaces.
Few recent publications have discussed these issues in depth.
In [4] using semantic rule engines. Another related proposal
is MUGGES [5], a mobile platform to enable services from
mobile phones that integrates the system outputs with heterogeneous location methods. A mechanism to incorporate user
preferences into vehicular navigation systems using a fuzzy genetic approach was explored in [6].
Several interesting systems have also been proposed for
guiding individuals with special needs. A general and adaptive model for transforming physical information from objects into an augmented reality view to guide elderly people in their daily activities is described in [7]. Other studies
propose alternative solutions to facilitate the daily activities
of adults and elderly people who suffer from mild cognitive
impairments. For example, Sohlberg [8] discussed the limitations of adults with cognitive impairments in terms of navigation, highlighting the importance of establishing strategies for
daily routines and assisted methods during walking trips, for
example.

HERVÁS et al.: ASSISTIVE NAVIGATION SYSTEM BASED ON AUGMENTED REALITY AND CONTEXT AWARENESS FOR PEOPLE

Fig. 4.

Three examples of routes obtained for two types of users.

Fig. 5. Augmented reality view showing the next step in the current route
(information icon and textual information at the top), the closest POIs (star
icon), the user’s home (house icon), tasks to perform (tic icon), and relatives
and friends near the location of the user (people icon).

Adults with mild cognitive deficits are often independent and
live alone at home. In this case, relatives and caregivers must
continuously monitor the location of the person and the activities
in which he/she is engaged. The development of new technologies provides mechanisms to improve the personal autonomy of
people with cognitive impairments and help relatives to monitor
their states by tracking their trips and being aware of their daily
tasks in a specific environment.

373

Mobile navigation systems based on GPS sensors are widely
used to determine the optimal route based on several parameters provided by the user. However, everyone cannot use these
general-purpose systems. We find several options relevant to the
guidance of adults and elders with mild cognitive impairments
in the literature.
The use of companion robots to provide guidance is discussed
in several studies. Gross et al. [9] described an assistive home
robot for people with mild cognitive impairments who live alone.
This robot provides support in taking medication, performing
stimulation exercises, phoning relatives/caregivers, and detecting falls, among other functions. It is also used for tracking and
user navigation in the home environment. Morris et al. [10] proposes a robotic walker as an assistive system for frail elderly
people with cognitive impairment to promote the performance
of physical activity using localization mechanisms.
The integration of navigation systems with mobile devices
for individuals with cognitive impairments is also developed
in other research studies. For example, Chang et al. [11] proposed an indoor way-finding system based on navigational photographs and Bluetooth sensors to promote the independence
of cognitively impaired people. The system developed by Liu
et al. [12] uses a decision-theoretic approach to provide a personalized and intuitive navigation system.
In recent years, augmented reality on mobile devices has
been used in combination with navigation systems to provide
a more enriching user experience, in some cases focused on
people with disabilities such as cognitive impairments. Gebril
et al. [13] described the advantages of these advanced technologies. The inclusion of three-dimensional (3-D) virtual objects in a realistic environment improves the learning process
of the studied patients. Biocca et al. [14] described the need
for mobile-augmented reality systems to provide assistance in
visual searches, task sequencing, and spatial navigation, e.g., to
avoid dangerous situations and obstacles.
In contrast to our adaptive approach, all previously described
studies consider only input data and static contextual information. Very few systems consider dynamic run-time adaptation of
the routes based on the context, and most applications that apply
run-time adaptability are based on very simple parameters. The
Navig system [15] is a notable exception; it increases personal
autonomy via a virtual augmented reality system to guide visual
impaired people through semantic audio rendering. This system
takes into account lots of environmental elements and user features to guide users. However, our proposal can be more flexible
to dynamically generate routes due to the use of fuzzy logic.
As summary, most of these applications include neither personalization mechanisms nor intuitive interfaces and use only
a small portion of the user context. Moreover, most traditional
navigation systems are based on GPS. However, these systems
do not account for the behavior of the particular user or acquired
spatial knowledge [16] General-purpose GPS-based mobile systems are not appropriate because of their ineffectiveness in many
daily situations. In these terms, we have proposed a dedicated
navigation system to solve those limitations. Also our proposal
works as an integrated solution providing adaptive guidance,
support of daily activities and monitoring of potential risks.

374

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

REFERENCES

In this paper, we have focused on one primary research question: the suitability of routes based on visiting POIs rather than
the shortest route. The resulting longer and more complex routes
could possibly disorient the user more than a direct route. However, the tests described in Section V have demonstrated the
validity of the POI-based method in the majority of cases. By
analyzing the examples in which the user became lost or felt
disorientated, we learned that the POIs were suitable points of
reference for the user, but the route to a given POI was not always appropriate to the user’s needs. There is a need for future
work addressing the topology of maps in relation to the knowledge and characteristics of the user, including not only POIs
but also suitable walking areas. This topology-based approach
could include more contextual information, for example, suitability for people with physical disabilities. A more complex
context model would require a formalization process and a system to manage it. We hope to integrate the current system with
previous work to represent the context using semantic web principles [17], [18] and generate information (in this case, the POIs)
automatically based on the user context [19].

[1] E. H. Mandani, “Applications of fuzzy algorithms for control of simple
dynamic plant,” Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., vol. 121, no. 12, pp. 1585–1588,
1974.
[2] E. D. Kaplan, Understanding GPS Principles and Applications. Norwood,
MA, USA: Artech House Mobile Communications, 1996.
[3] M. Vuoll, M. Tiainen, T. Kallio, T. Vainio, M. Kulju, and H. Wigelius,
“Developing a questionnaire for measuring mobile business service experience,” presented at Int. Conf. Human Comput. Interaction Mobile
Devices Serv., New York, NY, USA, 2008.
[4] D. López-De-Ipiña, B. Klein, J. Pérez, C. Guggenmos, and G. Gil, “Useraware semantic location models for service provision,” presented at Proc.
Int. Sym. Ubiquitous Comput. Ambient Intell., Riviera Maya, Mexico,
2011. ISBN: 978-84-694-9677-0.
[5] C. Lamsfus, D. Martı́n, A. Alzua-Sorzabal, D. López-de-Ipiña, and
E. Torres-Manzanera, “Context-based tourism information filtering with
a semantic rule engine,” J. Sensors, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 5273–5289, 2012.
[6] B. Chakraborty and R. Ching Chen, “Fuzzy-genetic approach for incorporation of driver’s requirement for route selection in a car navigation
system,” presented at IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Syst., Jeju Island, Korea,
2009.
[7] R. Hervas, A. Garcia-Lillo, and J. Bravo, Mobile, “Augmented reality
based on the semantic web applied to ambient assisted living,” in Proc.
3rd Int. Work. Ambient Assisted Living, (LNCS 6693). Springer, Torremolinos, Spain, 2011, pp. 17–24, ISBN: 978-3-642-21302-1.
[8] M. M. Sohlberg, B. Todis, S. Fickas, P.F. Hung, and R. Lemoncello, “A
profile of community navigation in adults with chronic cognitive impairments,” Brain Inj., vol. 19, no. 14, pp. 1249–1259, 2005.
[9] H. Gross, C. Schroeter, S. Mueller, M. Volkhardt, E. Einhorn, A. Bley,
T. Langner, C. Martin, and M. Merten, “I’ll keep an eye on you: Home
robot companion for elderly people with cognitive impairment,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., 2011, pp. 2481–2488.
[10] A. Morris, R. Donamukkala, A. Kapuria, A. Steinfeld, J. T. Matthews,
J. Dunbar-Jacob, and S. Thrun, “A robotic walker that provides guidance,”
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., pp. 25–30, 2003.
[11] Y. Chang, Y. Chu, C. Chen, and T. Wang, “Mobile computing for indoor wayfinding based on bluetooth sensors for individuals with cognitive
impairments,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Sym Wireless Pervasive Comput., 2008,
pp. 623–627.
[12] A. L. Liu, H. Hile, G. Borriello, P. A. Brown, M. Harniss, H. Kautz, and
K. Johnson, “Customizing directions in an automated wayfinding system
for individuals with cognitive impairment,” in Proc. 11th Int. ACM Conf.
Comput. Accessibility, 2009, pp. 27–34.
[13] Z. M. Gebril, I. M. Tele, M. A. Tahir, B. Parhizkar, A. Ramachandran,
and A. H. Lashkari, “Ubiquitous medical learning using augmented reality
based on cognitive information theory,” Adv. Intell. Softw. Comput., vol. 2,
pp. 305–312, 2012.
[14] F. Biocca, C. Owen, A. Tang, and C. Bohil, “Attention issues in spatial
information systems: Directing mobile users’ visual attention using augmented reality,” J. Manage. Inform. Syst., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 164–184,
2007.
[15] B. F. G. Katz, S. Kammoun, G. Parseihian, O. Gutierrez, A. Brilhault,
M Auvray, P. Truillet, M. Denis, S. Thorpe, and C. Jouffrais, “NAVIG:
Augmented reality guidance system for the visually impaired, virtual reality,” Virtual Reality, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 253–269, 2012.
[16] T. Ishikawa, H. Fujiwara, O. Imai, and A. Okabe, “Wayfinding with a
GPS-based mobile navigation system: A comparison with maps and direct
experience,” J. Environ. Psychol., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 74–82, 2008.
[17] R. Hervas and J. Bravo, “COIVA: Context-aware and ontology-powered
information visualization architecture,” Softw. Pract. Exp. J., vol. 41, no. 4,
pp. 403–426, 2011.
[18] R. Hervas and J. Bravo, “A context model based on ontological languages:
A proposal for information visualization,” J. Univ. Comput. Sci., vol. 16,
no. 12, pp. 1539–1555, 2010.
[19] R. Hervas and J. Bravo, “Towards the ubiquitous visualization: Adaptive
user-interfaces based on the semantic web,” Interact. Comput. J., vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 40–56, 2011.

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have described a mobile assistive system to
guide and support the daily activities of people with slight cognitive impairments. We have proposed a generic model for obtaining routes based on contextual information, including tasks to be
performed, social relationships, POI and well-known places. We
have observed that it is more useful to offer indications based
on contextual information rather than using street names and
absolute distances. In addition, the proposed system includes an
augmented reality mode, allowing the user to know the position of each relevant element or entity in the real environment.
Based on the well-known points, the system generates a route
for the user to follow to a specific destination. The system also
allows relatives or friends to know the user’s situation and tasks,
increasing the social interaction between users and enabling the
monitoring of tasks for people with special needs.
One of the main contributions of our proposal is the adaptability of the application to the particular characteristics of the
user and his/her current situation. Cognitively impaired people
are highly diverse in their etiology as well as their functionality.
Therefore, each person has different needs, and personalized
strategies and techniques are called for. To personalize the behavior of our application, we have used a mechanism based on
fuzzy logic that enables adaptability to each user. The suitability of the proposed system has been demonstrated through an
end-user evaluation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the support of Tania Mondejar
from the eSmile psychology clinic (www.esmile.es), who made
the end-user evaluation of this study possible.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

