2896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Computer-Aided Diagnosis in Phase Contrast
Imaging X-Ray Computed Tomography for
Quantitative Characterization of ex vivo Human
Patellar Cartilage
Mahesh B. Nagarajan∗ , Paola Coan, Markus B. Huber, Paul C. Diemoz, Christian Glaser, and Axel Wismüller

Abstract—Visualization of ex vivo human patellar cartilage matrix through the phase contrast imaging X-ray computed tomography (PCI-CT) has been previously demonstrated. Such studies
revealed osteoarthritis-induced changes to chondrocyte organization in the radial zone. This study investigates the application of
texture analysis to characterizing such chondrocyte patterns in
the presence and absence of osteoarthritic damage. Texture features derived from Minkowski functionals (MF) and gray-level
co-occurrence matrices (GLCM) were extracted from 842 regions
of interest (ROI) annotated on PCI-CT images of ex vivo human
patellar cartilage specimens. These texture features were subsequently used in a machine learning task with support vector regression to classify ROIs as healthy or osteoarthritic; classification performance was evaluated using the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUC). The best classification performance was observed with the MF features perimeter (AUC:
0.94 ± 0.08) and “Euler characteristic” (AUC: 0.94 ± 0.07),
and GLCM-derived feature “Correlation” (AUC: 0.93 ± 0.07).
These results suggest that such texture features can provide a
detailed characterization of the chondrocyte organization in the

Manuscript received January 18, 2013; revised April 26, 2013 and May 25,
2013; accepted May 30, 2013. Date of publication June 5, 2013; date of current
version September 14, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National
Institute of Health under Award R01-DA-034977, the Clinical and Translational
Science under Award 5-28527 within the Upstate New York Translational Research Network of the Clinical and Translational Science Institute, University
of Rochester, by the Center for Emerging and Innovative Sciences, a NYSTARdesignated Center for Advanced Technology, and by the DFG Cluster of Excellence Munich-Centre for Advanced Photonics, Munich, Germany. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. B. Nagarajan is with the Department of Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA (e-mail:
mahesh.nagarajan@rochester.edu).
P. Coan is with the Faculty of Medicine and Institute of Clinical Radiology,
Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich 80336, Germany, with the Faculty of
Physics, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich 85748, Germany, and also
with the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, 38000 Grenoble, France
(e-mail: Paola.Coan@med.uni-muenchen.de).
M. B. Huber is with the Department of Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA (e-mail:
mbh@bme.rochester.edu).
P. C. Diemoz is with the Faculty of Physics, Ludwig Maximilians University,
Munich 85748, Germany and also with the European Synchrotron Radiation
Facility, 38000 Grenoble, France (e-mail: p.diemoz@ucl.ac.uk).
C. Glaser is with the Faculy of Medicine and Institute of Clinical Radiology, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich 80336, Germany (e-mail:
Christian.glaser@med.uni-muenchen.de).
A. Wismüller is with the Department of Imaging Science and Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA, and also with
the Department of Radiology, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich 80336,
Germany (e-mail: axel_wismueller@urmc.rochester.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2266325

cartilage matrix, enabling classification of cartilage as healthy or
osteoarthritic with high accuracy.
Index Terms—Gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM),
Minkowski functionals (MF), osteoarthritis (OA), phase contrast
imaging X-ray computed tomography (PCI-CT), support vector
regression (SVR), texture analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
STEOARTHRITIS (OA) is widely recognized as one of
the leading causes of disability worldwide [1]–[3]. This
disease is characterized by loss of the articular cartilage, thickening of the underlying subchondral bone, and osteophyte formation. Currently, monitoring OA progression to evaluate patient
health and assess the impact of drug intervention is of significant
interest. Diagnostic markers that are used for this purpose, such
as joint pain or observation of joint space narrowing on conventional radiography, are only sensitive at advanced stages of the
disease. It would be desirable to have an imaging modality that
could provide early detection and visualization of any degenerative modifications to the cartilage [4]–[8]. Several imaging
techniques have been proposed to detect changes in cartilage
quality through evaluation of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) content, such as delayed gadolinium-enhanced MR imaging of cartilage (dGEMRIC) [9], 23 Na MRI [10], T1ρ [11], GAG chemical
exchange saturation transfer [12], etc. However, none of these
techniques currently possess the capability to visualize cartilage matrix structure at a cellular level. In this context, Coan
et al. demonstrated the ability of phase contrast imaging X-ray
computed tomography (PCI-CT) to visualize the internal architecture of the cartilage matrix at micrometer scale resolution
in ex vivo samples of the human patellae and recorded differences in chondrocyte organization in healthy and osteoarthritic
subjects [13].
Phase contrast imaging (PCI) has emerged as a novel X-raybased imaging approach owing to its ability to provide enhanced
image contrast for visualizing structural details in the soft tissue. PCI exploits the fact that X-rays are not just absorbed when
passing through matter but also refracted [14], [15]. The phase
contrast effect associated with such refraction can be more pronounced than the conventional absorption contrast, specifically
for the energy range of X-rays used in diagnostic modalities,
and for the soft tissue encountered in clinical studies [16]. This
allows PCI to be effective in imaging tissue types where the

O

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

NAGARAJAN et al.: COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS IN PHASE CONTRAST IMAGING X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY

conventional absorption contrast is either unable to resolve differences between different soft tissue types, i.e., breast [17],
[18], or poor/absent, i.e., cartilage [13], [19], [20]. Among different PCI techniques, we specifically focus on the analyzer-based
imaging (ABI) scheme [15], [21], [22] that has been applied
in different ex vivo breast [17], [18], brain [23], and cartilage
studies [13], [19].
We specifically focus on cartilage in the retropatellar joint
which has significant potential for enabling early detection of
treatable osteoarthritic changes to the cartilage matrix. Patellar
cartilage, unlike femoro–tibial cartilage, is the thickest cartilage tissue compartment in the human body which still shows
macroscopic differences in appearance between healthy and
osteoarthritic states. PCI-CT imaging of ex vivo healthy and
osteoarthritic specimens of human patellar cartilage matrix revealed specific differences in their internal architecture. Of specific interest was osteoarthritic-induced changes to the chondrocyte organization in the radial zone of the cartilage matrix.
Chondrocytes in normal samples maintained a zone specific architecture; this was specifically visualized in the radial zone
where the chondrocytes were aligned in a direction perpendicular to the tide mark (also known as Benninghoff’s arch). This
zone-specific organization of chondrocytes was not observed
in osteoarthritic samples and was instead replaced by a more
generalized clustering of cells throughout the matrix [13]. The
primary goal of this study was to identify quantitative measures
that could characterize such differences in chondrocyte patterns
and evaluate their ability to serve as diagnostic biomarkers for
osteoarthritic-induced changes to the cartilage matrix. In particular, we focus on the use of texture analysis, which to our
knowledge, has not been previously used for quantitative analysis of cartilage matrix structure as visualized by PCI-CT.
Texture analysis involves quantifying spatial properties of
pixel distributions, i.e., image patterns, from a specified region
of interest (ROI). In this study, we pursued two approaches:
1) second-order statistical texture features derived from graylevel co-occurrence matrices (GLCM) [24]; and 2) topological texture features derived from the Minkowski functionals
(MF) [25]. GLCM has been previously investigated in a wide
range of medical image analysis tasks such as distinguishing
pathological patterns from healthy lung tissue on chest CT [26],
classifying benign and malignant lesions through characterization of the lesion enhancement pattern on dynamic breast
MRI [27], and quantitative analysis of carotid atherosclerotic
plaques on ultrasound B-mode scans [28]. However, texture
features derived through more novel techniques such as MF can
provide a detailed topological characterization of the gray-level
pattern being analyzed. This approach has been previously investigated in fibrotic tissue classification on lung CT [29], [30],
dynamic characterization of tissue lesions on breast MRI [31],
and hip-fracture prediction in post-menopausal women [32].
Given the wide applicability of texture features derived from
GLCM and MF to medical image processing tasks, we investigate the ability of such features in quantifying chondrocyte
patterns in the radial zone of the cartilage matrix as visualized
by PCI-CT. These features are evaluated in their ability to classify ROIs as being normal or osteoarthritic in a machine learning

2897

Fig. 1. Coronal reconstructions of healthy (top) and osteoarthritic (bottom)
cartilage specimens as visualized by PCI-CT. The boxes are representative of
ROIs annotated in this study.

task using support vector regression (SVR) [33], as discussed in
the following sections.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Samples
The selection of the patellae was based on age of the donor,
macroscopic visual inspection, and probing of the cartilage
surface at autopsy. Donors older than 40 years were a priori
excluded for harvest of normal samples; no constraint in age
was imposed on potential donors for osteoarthritic samples.
A smooth, white, and shiny surface present across the entire
patellar cartilaginous surface and prompt resilience to manually
performed focal indentation probing were criteria that defined
macroscopically normal cartilage. Lack of these criteria in addition to visually perceived defects in the joint surface were
used to select osteoarthritic samples. IRB was waived by the institutional review board of the Ludwig Maximilians University,
Munich, Germany. Based on these inclusion criteria, two healthy
and three osteoarthritic cylinder-shaped osteochondral samples
(diameter: 7 mm) were extracted within 48 h postmortem from
the lateral facet of the four human patellae using a shell auger.
Cylinders were trimmed to a total height of 12 mm including the
complete cartilage tissue and the subchondral bone. The samples were continuously rinsed by 0.9% saline during extraction,
trimming, and removal of soiling from sawing. During image
acquisition, samples were dipped into a 10% formalin solution.
The grade of the osteoarthritic samples was assessed to be 3–4
based on a histological standard proposed in [34].

2898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

B. PCI Experimental Setup
The ABI setup consisted of a parallel monochromatic X-ray
beam, used to irradiate the sample, and of a perfect crystal, the
analyzer, placed between the sample, and the detector [35]. The
analyzer acts as an angular filter of the radiation transmitted
through the object and only the X-rays traveling in a narrow
angle window close to the Bragg condition are diffracted onto
the detector [22]. Before being detected, the beam is modulated
by the angle-dependent reflectivity of the crystal; its rocking
curve (RC) has a full width at half maximum typically of the
order of a few microradians. All images were acquired at the
half maximum position on one slope of the RC (50% position),
which was chosen to achieve the best sensitivity. Further details
of the ABI technique used in this study can be found in [13].
Experiments were performed at the Biomedical Beamline
(ID17) of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF,
France). A highly collimated X-ray beam was produced by a
21-pole wiggler after monochromatization by means of a double
Si (111) crystal system and an additional single Si (333) crystal
[36]. The emerging, refracted, and scattered radiation from the
sample was analyzed with a Si (333) analyzer crystal. Quasimonochromatic X-rays of 26 keV were used. Given the laminar
shape of the stationary synchrotron beam, images were obtained
by rotating and vertically scanning the sample through the X-ray
beam [37]. The imaging detector used was the Fast Readout Low
Noise (FReLoN) CCD camera developed at the ESRF [38]. The
X-rays were converted to visible light by a 60 μm thick Gadox
fluorescent screen; this scintillation light was then guided onto
a 2048 × 2048 pixel 14 × 14 m2 CCD (Atmel Corp, U.S.) by
a lens-based system. The effective pixel size at the object plane
was 8 × 8 μm2 .
C. Tomographic Image Reconstruction
To acquire the CT images with synchrotron radiation, the
sample was rotated about an axis perpendicular to the incident
laminar beam; it was vertically displaced at the end of each rotation to image a different region. Both the beam and the detector
were kept stationary; the detector acquisition was synchronized
with the sample angular scanning. A flat field normalization
was performed for each angular projection image to reduce the
effects of the spatial and temporal X-ray beam inhomogeneities.
Tomographic images were reconstructed using a direct
Hamming filter backprojection algorithm [39]. An image volume of dimensions 1120 × 1124 × 805 was acquired for each
specimen and subsequently trimmed to eliminate background
regions. For data analysis, coronal slices of slice thickness 8
μm were reconstructed from the original data and subjected to
edge-preserving median filtering with a [5 5] sliding window to
smoothen noise artifacts.

was not captured by different ROIs by ensuring that annotated
slices were atleast 32 μm apart. 842 ROIs were annotated in
total, of which 439 were osteoarthritic and 403 were healthy.
All ROIs extracted from healthy cases were healthy, while those
from the OA cases were abnormal, i.e., no healthy ROIs were
extracted from the OA samples in this study. The annotations
were made using a square of 101 × 101 pixels; ROIs of smaller
size (11, 21, . . . , 91) were then extracted without any manual intervention using the same ROI center. The ground truth was extracted using analysis performed by two independent observers
as described in [13]. Examples of a healthy and osteoarthritic
ROIs annotated on PCI-CT images are shown in Fig. 1.
E. Texture Analysis
MF were computed by first binarizing each ROI through the
application of several thresholds between its minimum and maximum intensity limits [25]. The number of thresholds applied
was a free parameter; a suitable choice for this parameter was
investigated here. On each binarized image, three MF, i.e., area,
perimeter, and Euler characteristic, were computed as follows:
M Farea = ns
M Fp erim eter = −4ns + 2ne
M FEuler = ns − ne + nv

(1)
(2)
(3)

where ns was the total number of white pixels, ne was the
total number of edges, and nv was the number of vertices. The
area feature recorded the area of the white pixel regions in the
binary image, the perimeter measure calculated the length of
the boundary of white pixel regions, and the Euler characteristic
was a measure of connectivity between the white pixel regions.
Further explanation of how these formulae were derived can be
found in [25]. Once computed for every binary image derived
from a specific ROI, these values were stored in three highdimensional vectors corresponding to each MF. This is further
illustrated in Fig. 2.
GLCM were extracted from the ROIs as described in [24].
The interpixel distance d was a free parameter; a suitable choice
for this parameter was investigated here. On each ROI, the graylevels were quantized to 32 gray-level values. GLCMs were then
generated in the four principal directions and then, summed up
element-wise resulting in one nondirectional GLCM. From this,
the least correlated and most frequently used statistical features
were computed, i.e., absolute value, entropy, contrast, energy,
correlation, and homogeneity [40].
Statistical moments of the gray-level distributions within the
ROIs, i.e., mean and standard deviation, were used both individually and combined as a 2-D vector to serve as a baseline for
comparison with texture features derived from GLCM and MF.
F. Classification

D. Annotation
Chondrocyte patterns were annotated with 2-D square ROIs
in the radial zone of the cartilage matrix on the acquired
PCI-CT images of all five specimens. In each specimen, special
care was taken to ensure that the same cluster of chondrocytes

The extraction of texture features was followed by a supervised learning step where the ROIs were classified as healthy or
osteoarthritic. We note here that since GLCM features are 1-D
while MF feature vectors are 20-D, classification was univariate
for GLCM features and multivariate for MF. In this paper, SVR

NAGARAJAN et al.: COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS IN PHASE CONTRAST IMAGING X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY

7

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

9

Area

11

0.25

13

Perimeter

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
5

10
15
Threshold

20

0

5

10
15
Threshold

2899

15

Euler Char.

0.005
0.0025
0
−0.0025
−0.005

20

5

10
15
Threshold

20

Fig. 2. Illustration of MF. The upper and middle rows correspond to normal and osteoarthritic ROIs as shown in Fig. 1. The ROIs on the far left are binarized for
five thresholds. In the bottom row, the three MF features—area, perimeter, and Euler characteristic, are plotted as a function of the threshold for the healthy (gray)
and osteoarthritic (black) ROIs; the subset of the five thresholds (of 20) used to create the binary images are marked as vertical-dotted lines. These curves depict
the morphological properties of the binary images and distinguish between healthy and osteoarthritic patterns.

1
d=1

d=2

d=3

d=4

d=5

1

t=5

t = 10

t = 15

t = 20

t = 25

.
ea ter ar
Ar ime Ch
r
r
Pe Eule

.
ea ter ar
Ar ime Ch
r
r
Pe Eule

.
ea ter ar
Ar ime Ch
r
r
Pe Eule

.
ea ter ar
A r i m e Ch
r
r
Pe Eule

.
ea ter ar
Ar ime Ch
r
r
Pe Eule

0.9
0.9

AUC

AUC

0.8
0.8

0.7
0.7

0.6
0.6

0.5 e
t
t
t
t
t
e
e
e
e
lu py as rgyion ity
lu py as rgyion ity
lu py as rgy ion ity
lu py as rgyion ity
lu py as rgyion ity
Va tro tr ne lat ne
Va tro tr ne lat ne
Va tro tr ne lat ne
Va tro tr ne lat ne
Va tro tr ne lat ne
s. EnCon E rre oge
s. EnCon E rre oge
s. EnCon E rre oge
s. EnCon E rre oge
s. EnCon E rre oge
b
Ab
Ab
Ab
Ab
A
Coom
Coom
Coom
Coom
Coom
H
H
H
H
H

Fig. 3. Comparison of classification performance achieved with GLCM when
different interpixel distances (d) are used for computation of features. For each
distribution, the central mark corresponds to the median and the edges are the
25th and 75th percentile. The best results are observed for correlation when
d = 1.

with a radial basis function kernel was used for the machine
learning task [33]. The SVR implementation was taken from
the libSVM library [41].
Owing to the practical limitations imposed by the small size
of the patient population used in this study, we specified the
following patient constraints to the supervised learning step:
1) ROIs from the same patient were not simultaneously used
in both training and test sets; and 2) the same number of ROIs
was used from every patient to ensure that the classifier did not

Fig. 4. Comparison of classification performance achieved with the MF when
different thresholds (t) are used for computation of features. For each distribution, the central mark corresponds to the median and the edges are the 25th
and 75th percentile. The best results are obtained with Euler characteristic for
20 thresholds; increasing the number of thresholds further did not yield significantly better results.

get overtrained on patterns from a specific patient. Based on
these constraints, each iteration of the supervised learning step
involved randomly sub-sampling 100 ROIs from each of the
five patients and randomly designating one of the healthy and
osteoarthritic subjects as the test set (the other samples comprised the training set). Such a strategy ensured that training
sets used in different iterations of supervised learning were not
identical despite the patient constraint. In the training phase,

2900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

TABLE 1
COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE (MEAN AUC ± STD)
ACHIEVED WITH STATISTICAL MOMENTS, GLCM FEATURES AND MF.

1

0.9

AUC

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

The best results (bold) are obtained with Euler characteristic (MF), Perimeter
(MF), and correlation (GLCM).

models were created from labeled data by employing a random
sub-sampling cross-validation strategy where the training set
was further split into 70% training samples and 30% validations samples—the purpose of the training was to determine the
optimal classifier parameters that best captured the boundaries
between the two classes of ROIs. The free parameters for the
classifier used in this study were the cost parameter for SVR and
the shape parameter of the radial basis function kernel. Then,
during the testing phase, the optimized classifier predicted the
class of ROIs in the independent test set. A receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve was generated and used to compute
the area under the ROC curve (AUC) which served as a measure
of classifier performance on the independent test set.
G. Statistical Analysis
A Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare two AUC
distributions corresponding to different texture features. Significance thresholds were adjusted for multiple comparisons
using the Holm–Bonferroni correction to achieve an overall
type I error rate (significance level) less than α (where α =
0.05) [42], [43].
Texture, classifier, and statistical analysis were implemented
using Matlab 2010a (The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA).
III. RESULTS
A. Free Parameter Exploration
Fig. 3 shows the classification performance of the GLCMderived features when computed with different interpixel distances (d = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5). The texture features were computed
from ROIs of size 101 × 101 pixels. As seen here, the classification performance deteriorated as the interpixel distance was
increased. The best classification performance was noted with
GLCM feature correlation (0.93 ± 0.07) for d = 1.
Fig. 4 shows the classification performance of topological
texture features derived from MF when extracted using different number of thresholds. As with GLCM, these texture features were also computed from ROIs of size 101 × 101 pixels.

101

91

81

71

61
51
ROI Size

41

31

21

11

Fig. 5. Comparison of classification performance achieved with Euler characteristic (square), correlation (circle), and standard deviation (triangle) when
extracted from ROIs of different sizes. For each distribution, the central mark
corresponds to the median and the edges are the 25th and 75th percentile. The
best results are observed for the largest ROI size of 101 × 101 pixels; Euler
characteristic and correlation exhibits the best performance when extracted from
such ROIs.

The best classification performance was observed for features
perimeter (0.94 ± 0.08) and Euler characteristic (0.94 ± 0.07)
obtained with 20 thresholds; increasing the number of thresholds further did not improve the performance achieved.

B. Classification Performance Comparison
Table I compares the classification performance achieved
with the statistical moments, GLCM-derived features (using
d = 1) and MF (with 20 thresholds). The best performance was
observed with MF perimeter (0.94 ± 0.08) and Euler characteristic (0.94 ± 0.07), and GLCM feature correlation (0.93 ±
0.07). Both features significantly outperformed all statistical
moments (p < 10−4 ). Standard deviation produced the best performance from the statistical moment features (0.66 ± 0.06). All
texture features were computed from ROIs of size 101 × 101
pixels.

C. Impact of ROI Size
Fig. 5 shows the effect of ROI size on the classification performance of the best feature from GLCM (correlation), MF (Euler characteristic) and statistical moments (mean
and standard deviation). The performance for all features
was observed to be best when texture features were extracted from ROIs of the largest size used in this study, i.e.,
101 × 101 pixels. For ROIs of size 51 × 51 pixels and greater,
both Euler characteristic and correlation achieve comparable
classification performance. However, for smaller sized ROIs,
correlation outperformed Euler characteristic. Regardless of
ROI size, both features significantly outperformed standard deviation (p < 10−4 ).

NAGARAJAN et al.: COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS IN PHASE CONTRAST IMAGING X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY

0.005

2901

0.01
Diseased
Healthy
2nd Principal Component

Euler Characteristic

0.0025

0

−0.0025

Diseased
Healthy

−0.005

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01
2

4

6

8

10
12
Threshold

14

16

18

20

−0.01

−0.005
0
0.005
1st Principal Component

0.01

Fig. 6. Illustration of the high-dimensional feature space of MF Euler characteristic. LEFT: The two corridors represent the Euler characteristic feature distribution
for healthy (gray) and osteoarthritic (black) ROIs. Each corridor is enclosed by the standard 25th and 75th percentile as a function of the threshold; the solid
lines represent the median. RIGHT: 2-D representation of the Euler characteristic feature space using the first two principal components computed from principal
component analysis (PCA). As seen here, the Euler characteristic provides suitable discrimination between healthy and osteoarthritic ROIs.

IV. DISCUSSION
PCI has emerged as a novel X-ray-based imaging modality
for providing enhanced image contrast in certain biological tissue types [13], [17]–[20]. In the field of cartilage imaging, Coan
et al. previously demonstrated the ability of PCI-CT to visualize
structural details of the cartilage matrix with high-spatial resolution, and reported differences in chondrocyte organization
within the cartilage matrix, specifically in the radial zone
[13]. In this study, we investigated the use of texture features
derived from topological and statistical approaches, i.e., MF
and GLCM, in characterizing such differences and potentially
serving as diagnostic bio-markers for OA. Our results show that
such textural descriptors can classify chondrocyte patterns as
being healthy or osteoarthritic with high accuracy.
MF enable the characterization of the underlying topology as
a function of the gray-level threshold by capturing information
pertaining to size (area), boundary (perimeter), and connectivity
(Euler characteristic). In this study, such detailed topological information was stored in high-dimensional feature vectors which
were subsequently processed in a machine learning task. The
best classification performance was noted with Euler characteristic which suggests that connectivity can serve as a major
distinguishing factor between healthy and osteoarthritic ROIs.
This is supported by the fact that the chondrocytes are more clustered in the osteoarthritic ROIs than they are in healthy ROIs;
such a clustering could influence the topology of the gray-level
patterns being captured by the ROIs. The ability of Euler Characteristic to distinguish between healthy and osteoarthritic ROIs
is further illustrated in Fig. 6. We also note that the MF area performed the worst suggesting that analyzing the behavior of pixel
regions with high intensity values as a function of the gray-level
threshold does not really contribute toward distinguishing between the two classes of chondrocyte patterns. This could also
suggest that topological characterization of these chondrocyte
patterns needs to be sufficiently complex in order to accurately
distinguish between the two classes.

Most features derived from GLCM or statistical moments
such as mean and standard deviation did not yield a comparable performance to Euler characteristic in terms of classifying
healthy and osteoarthritic ROIs, as seen in Table I. The failure
of such statistical features adds further credence to the complexity of the pattern classification problem being investigated
in this study; simpler feature descriptors that account for the
distribution of intensity values, brightness, etc, alone are not
sufficient to characterize the differences between the two classes
of chondrocyte patterns. We do note one exception, i.e., GLCM
feature correlation, that exhibited comparable classification performance to MF Euler characteristic. This feature measures the
gray-level linear dependencies between neighboring pixels [24].
Since chondrocytes are more clustered in osteoarthritic ROIs,
these ROIs tend to exhibit higher correlation values than healthy
ROIs which capture more extra cellular space. This could explain the effectiveness of the correlation feature in distinguishing
between healthy and osteoarthritic ROIs annotated on PCI-CT
images.
The impact of the ROI size on the classification performance
of different features was also investigated in this study. The best
performance was achieved with the largest ROI size, i.e., 101
× 101 pixels, as shown in Fig. 5. Such ROIs would capture
larger portions of the chondrocyte patterns being investigated
leading to better characterization by the texture features. While
performance deteriorates as the ROI size is reduced, AUC values of 0.9 are noted at an ROI size of 51 × 51 pixels, which
suggests that such texture features could be used for purposes
of segmenting regions of the cartilage matrix that are indicative
of healthy or osteoarthritic chondrocyte organization. Such a
segmentation algorithm would involve assigning a healthy or
osteoarthritic label to every pixel in the radial zone based on
texture features computed from the surrounding neighborhood.
This would be useful in quantifying the percentage of the radial
zone affected by OA, especially in cases where some portions of
the cartilage remain healthy. Such quantitative measures could

2902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

extend this study from a binary classification problem of differentiating between healthy and osteoarthritic cartilage samples
to that of a bio-marker that tracks osteoarthritic progression in
the cartilage matrix over time. This will be explored in further
detail in future studies.
One limitation of this study was the small number of patients (five) from whom cartilage specimens were acquired for
image acquisition. As a result, the classifier was trained with a
smaller subset of patients and could be overtrained to the limited
variations of healthy and osteoarthritic patterns found in these
subjects. Future studies should include more patients to ensure
that the classifier is trained with a potentially larger variation of
healthy and osteoarthritic patterns. However, even with the small
sample size used in this study, the separation between the two
classes of chondrocyte patterns is adequately captured by highdimensional feature vectors of Euler characteristic, as shown
in Fig. 6. The inclusion of more patients would also enable
extending our work for characterization of the entire patellar
specimen based on local properties, and subsequent classification. We have taken a step in this direction by extracting texture
features from smaller ROIs within each specimen, each of which
be treated as a local neighborhood and the corresponding texture features characterize local spatial properties. Future studies
could also focus on characterizing the alignment of chondrocytes in healthy ROIs where the current study focused more of
the clustering of chondrocytes in osteoarthritic ROIs. Further
improvements to textural characterization of chondrocyte organization could include volumetric analysis as both GLCM and
MF can be computed for 3-D volumes of interest.
We also note a practical limitation with the experimental
setup used in this study where the imaging technique relies on
synchrotron radiation. This restricts its use to imaging ex vivo
specimens such as those used in the study, rather than in vivo
exams of the entire cartilage tissue, since the radiation source is
stationary. Future research will be necessary to investigate the
possibility of implementating PCI methods with high-brilliance
and high-energy compact X-ray sources that are currently under development [44]–[46]. These technologies currently show
significant promise for transferring PCI-CT imaging from synchrotron radiation facilities, which offer highly collimated, high
fluence, and partially coherent X-rays, to a clinical environment. Another advantage of PCI-CT is its promising potential
to save radiation by employing higher energy X-rays for the image acquisition which may be associated with a lower effective
radiation dose for the patient [13]. The results of our proof-ofprinciple study demonstrate the potential role that PCI-CT could
play in OA detection, which suggests that an implementation of
an adapted PCI setup in one of these new sources could have a
great impact in OA diagnosis.
V. CONCLUSION
This study introduced an automated and nonsubjective
computer-aided diagnosis approach in the context of PCI-CT for
purposes of characterizing chondrocyte organization observed
in the radial zone of the cartilage matrix of ex vivo human
patella specimens. Our results suggest that textural character-

ization with topological features such as Euler characteristic
or second-order statistical features such as correlation can provide high-classification performance in distinguishing between
healthy and osteoarthritic ROIs annotated in this region. We hypothesize that such texture features could serve as PCI-based
diagnostic bio-markers for evaluation and monitoring of OA.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the ESRF for providing the
experimental facilities and the ESRF ID17 team for assistance
in operating the facilities. The authors would also like to thank
Dr. E. Brun for his assistance with the data sharing process, B.
Mintz for his assistance in developing the annotation tool used
in this study, Dr. A. Horng for her clinical insights and assistance with preparing this manuscript, and Dr. M. Reiser, FACR,
FRCR of the Department of Radiology, Ludwig Maximilians
University, for his continued support.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Woolf and B. Pfleger, “Burden of major musculoskeletal conditions,”
Bull. World Health Org., vol. 81, pp. 646–656, 2003.
[2] E. Yelin, “Cost of musculoskeletal diseases: Impact of work disability and
functional decline,” J. Rheumatol., vol. 68, pp. 8–11, 2003.
[3] C. Maclean, K. Knight, H. Paulus, R. Brook, and P. Shekelle, “Costs
attributable to osteoarthritis,” J. Rheumatol., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2213–
2218, 1998.
[4] F. Eckstein, W. Wirth, and M. Nevitt, “Recent advances in osteoarthtiris
imaging—The osteoarthritis initiative,” Nature Rev.: Rheumatol., vol. 8,
pp. 622–630, 2012.
[5] J. Raya, A. Horng, O. Dietrich, S. Krasnokutsky, L. Beltran, P. Storey,
M. Reiser, M. Recht, D. Sodickson, and C. Glaser, “Articular cartilage:
In vivo diffusion-tensor imaging,” Radiology, vol. 262, no. 2, pp. 550–559,
2012.
[6] M. Crema, F. Roemer, M. Marra, D. Burstein, G. Gold, F. Eckstein,
T. Baum, T. Mosher, J. Carrino, and A. Guermazi, “Articular cartilage
in the knee: Current MR imaging techniques and applications in clinical
practice and research,” Radiographics, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 37–61, 2011.
[7] D. Hunter, M.-P. Le Graverand, and F. Eckstein, “Radiologic markers
of osteoarthritis progression,” Curr. Opin. Rheumatol., vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 110–117, 2009.
[8] F. Eckstein and C. Glaser, “Measuring cartilage morphology with quantitative magnetic resonance imaging,” Semin. Musculoskeletal Radiol.,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 329–353, 2004.
[9] A. Bashir, M. Gray, R. Boutin, and D. Burstein, “Glycosaminoglycan
in articular cartilage: In vivo assessment with delayed Gd(DTPA)(2-)enhanced MR imaging,” Radiology, vol. 205, no. 2, pp. 551–558, 1997.
[10] R. Reddy, S. Li, E. Noyszewski, J. Kneeland, and J. Leigh, “In vivo sodium
multiple quantum spectroscopy of human articular cartilage,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 207–214, 1997.
[11] R. Stahl, A. Luke, X. Li, J. Carballido-Gamio, C. Ma, S. Majumdar, and
T. Link, “T1rho, T2 and focal knee cartilage abnormalities in physically
active and sedentary healthy subjects versus early OA patients: A 3.0-Tesla
MRI study,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 132–143, 2009.
[12] B. Schmitt, S. Zbyn, D. Stelzeneder, V. Jellus, D. Paul, L. Lauer, P. Bachert,
and S. Trattnig, “Cartilage quality assessment by using glycosaminoglycan
chemical exchange saturation transfer and 23 Na MR imaging at 7 T,”
Radiology, vol. 260, no. 1, pp. 257–264, 2011.
[13] P. Coan, F. Bamberg, P. Diemoz, A. Bravin, K. Timpert, E. Mützel, J. Raya,
S. Adam-Neumair, M. Reiser, and C. Glaser, “Characterization of osteoarthritic and normal human patella cartilage by computed tomography
X-ray phase-contrast imaging: A feasibility study,” Investigat. Radiol.,
vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 437–444, 2010.
[14] A. Snigirev, I. Snigireva, V. Kohn, S. Kuznetsov, and I. Schelokov, “On the
possibility of X-ray phase contrast microimaging by coherent high-energy
synchrotron radiation,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 5486–5492,
1995.

NAGARAJAN et al.: COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS IN PHASE CONTRAST IMAGING X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY

[15] T. Davis, D. Gao, T. Gureyev, A. Stevenson, and S. Wilkins, “Phasecontrast imaging of weakly absorbing materials using hard X-rays,” Nature, vol. 373, pp. 595–598, 1995.
[16] T. Takeda, A. Momose, Y. Itai, W. Jin, and K. Hirano, “Phase-contrast
imaging with synchrotron X-rays for detecting cancer lesions,” Acad.
Radiol., vol. 2, no. 9, pp. 799–803, 1995.
[17] J. Keyriläinen, M. Fernández, M. Karjalainen-Lindsberg, P. Virkkunen,
M. Leidenius, K. von Smitten, P. Sipilä, S. Fiedler, H. Suhonen, P. Suortti,
and A. Bravin, “Toward high-contrast breast CT at low radiation dose,”
Radiology, vol. 249, pp. 321–327, 2008.
[18] T. Schneider, P. Coan, D. Habs, and M. Reiser, “Application of brilliant
X-rays in mammography: Development and perspectives of phase contrast
techniques,” Der Radiologe, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 345–350, 2008.
[19] P. Coan, J. Mollenhauer, A. Wagner, C. Muehleman, and A. Bravin,
“Analyzer-based imaging technique in tomography of cartilage and metal
implants: A study at the ESRF,” Eur. J. Radiol., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 41–48,
2008.
[20] C. Muehleman, S. Majumdar, A. Issever, F. Arfelli, R. Menk, L. Rigon,
G. Heitner, B. Reime, J. Metge, A. Wagner, K. Kuettner, and
J. Mollenhauer, “X-ray detection of structural orientation in human articular cartilage,” Osteoarthritis Cartilage, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 97–105,
2004.
[21] D. Chapman, W. Thomlinson, R. Johnston, D. Washburn, E. Pisano,
N. Gmür, Z. Zhong, R. Menk, F. Arfelli, and D. Sayers, “Diffraction
enhanced X-ray imaging,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 2015–
2025, 1997.
[22] A. Bravin, “Exploiting the X-ray refraction contrast with an analyser: The
state of the art,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 36, no. 10A, pp. 24–29,
2003.
[23] D. Connor, H. Benveniste, F. Dilmanian, M. Kritzer, L. Miller, and
Z. Zhong, “Computed tomography of amyloid plaques in a mouse model
of Alzheimer’s disease using diffraction enhanced imaging,” NeuroImage,
vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 908–914, 2009.
[24] R. M. Haralick, K. Shanmuga, and I. Dinstein, “Textural features for
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. SMC-3, no. 6,
pp. 610–621, Nov. 1973.
[25] K. Michielsen and H. Raedt, “Integral-geometry morphological image
analysis,” Phys. Rep., vol. 347, no. 6, pp. 461–538, 2001.
[26] P. Korfiatis, C. Kalogeropoulou, A. Karahaliou, A. Kazantzi,
S. Skiadopoulos, and L. Costaridou, “Texture classification-based segmentation of lung affected by interstitial pneumonia in high-resolution
CT,” Med. Phys., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 5290–5302, 2008.
[27] M. Nagarajan, M. Huber, T. Schlossbauer, G. Leinsinger, A. Krol, and
A. Wismüller, “Classification of small lesions on breast MRI: Evaluating
the role of dynamically extracted texture features through feature selection,” J. Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 59–68, 2013.
[28] J. E. Wilhjelm, M. L. M. Gronholdt, B. Wiebe, S. K. Jespersen,
L. K. Hansen, and H. Sillesen, “Quantitative analysis of ultrasound
B-mode images of carotid atherosclerotic plaque: Correlation with visual
classification and histological examination,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 910–922, Dec. 1998.
[29] H. Boehm, C. Fink, U. Attenberger, C. Becker, J. Behr, and M. Reiser,
“Automated classification of normal and pathologic pulmonary tissue by
topological texture features extracted from multi-detector CT in 3D,” Eur.
Radiol., vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 2745–2755, 2008.
[30] M. Huber, M. Nagarajan, G. Leinsinger, R. Eibel, L. Ray, and
A. Wismüller, “Performance of topological texture features to classify
fibrotic interstitial lung disease patterns,” Med. Phys., vol. 38, no. 4,
pp. 2035–2044, 2011.
[31] M. Nagarajan, M. Huber, T. Schlossbauer, G. Leinsinger, A. Krol, and
A. Wismüller, “Classification of small lesions in dynamic breast MRI:
Eliminating the need for precise lesion segmentation through spatiotemporal analysis of contrast enhancement,” in Machine Vision and Applications. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2012.

2903

[32] H. Boehm, T. Vogel, A. Panteleon, D. Burklein, H. Bitterling, and
M. Reiser, “Differentiation between post-menopausal women with and
without hip fractures: Enhanced evaluation of clinical DXA by topological analysis of the mineral distribution in the scan images,” Osteoporosis
Int., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 779–787, 2007.
[33] H. Drucker, C. Burges, L. Kaufman, A. Smola, and V. Vapnik, “Support vector regression machines,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 9,
pp. 155–161, 1996.
[34] K. Pritzker, S. Gay, S. Jimenez, K. Ostergaard, J.-P. Pelletier, P. Revell,
D. Salter, and W. van den Berg, “Osteoarthritis cartilage histopathology:
Grading and staging,” Osteoarthritis Cartilage, vol. 14, pp. 13–29, 2006.
[35] V. Ingal and E. Beliaevskaya, “X-ray plane-wave topography observation
of the phase contrast from a non-crystalline object,” J. Phys. D: Appl.
Phys., vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 2314–2317, 1995.
[36] S. Fiedler, A. Bravin, J. Keyriläinen, M. Fernández, P. Suortti,
W. Thomlinson, M. Tenhunen, P. Virkkunen, and M. KarjalainenLindsberg, “Imaging lobular breast carcinoma: comparison of synchrotron
radiation DEI-CT technique with clinical CT,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 49,
no. 2, pp. 175–188, 2004.
[37] J. Brankov, M. Wernick, Y. Yang, J. Li, C. Muehleman, Z. Zhong, and
M. Anastasio, “A computed tomography implementation of multipleimage radiography,” Med. Phys., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 278–289, 2006.
[38] P. Coan, A. Peterzol, S. Fiedler, C. Ponchut, J. Labiche, and A. Bravin,
“Evaluation of imaging performance of a taper optics CCD ‘FReLoN’
camera designed for medical imaging,” J. Synchrotron Radiat., vol. 13,
no. 3, pp. 260–270, 2006.
[39] F. Dilmanian, Z. Zhong, B. Ren, X. Wu, L. Chapman, I. Orion, and
W. Thomlinson, “Computed tomography of X-ray index of refraction
using the diffraction enhanced imaging method,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 45,
no. 4, pp. 933–946, 2000.
[40] H. Anys and D. He, “Evaluation of textural and multipolarization radar features for crop classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 33,
no. 5, pp. 1170–1181, Sep. 1995.
[41] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. (2011). LIBSVM: A library for support vector
machines. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. [Online]. 2, pp. 27:1–27:27,
Software Available: http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/˜cjlin/libsvm
[42] S. P. Wright, “Adjusted P-values for simultaneous inference,” Biometrics,
vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 1005–1013, 1992.
[43] S. Holm, “A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure,” Scand.
J. Statist., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 65–70, 1979.
[44] T. Hirai, H. Yamada, M. Sasaki, D. Hasegawa, M. Morita, Y. Oda,
J. Takaku, T. Hanashima, N. Nitta, M. Takahashi, and K. Murata,
“Refraction contrast 11x-magnified x-ray imaging of large objects
by MIRRORCLE-type table-top synchrotron,” J. Synchrotron Radiat.,
vol. 13, pp. 397–402, 2006.
[45] F. Grüner, S. Becker, U. Schramm, T. Eichner, M. Fuchs, R. Weingartner,
D. Habs, J. Meyer-ter Vehn, M. Geissler, M. Ferrario, L. Serafini, B. van
der Geer, H. Backe, W. Lauth, and S. Reiche, “Design considerations for
table-top, laser-based VUV and X-ray free electron lasers,” Appl. Phys.
B, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 431–435, 2007.
[46] D. Habs, M. Hegelich, J. Schreiber, M. Gross, A. Henig, D. Kiefer, and
D. Jung, “Dense laser-driven electron sheets as relativistic mirrors for
coherent production of brilliant X-ray and γ-ray beams,” Appl. Phys. B,
vol. 93, no. 2–3, pp. 349–354, 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

