2914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Characterization and Modeling of Muscle
Sympathetic Nerve Spiking
Eugene Zaydens∗ , J. Andrew Taylor, Michael A. Cohen, and Uri T. Eden

Abstract—Muscle sympathetic nerve activity is a primary source
of cardiovascular control in humans. Traditional analyses smooth
away the fine temporal structure of the sympathetic recordings,
limiting our understanding of sympathetic activation mechanisms.
We use multifiber spike trains extracted from standard microneurography voltage trace to characterize the sympathetic spiking
at rest and during sympathoexcitation. Our analysis corroborates
known features of sympathetic activity, such as bursting behavior,
cardiac rhythmicity, and long conduction delays. It also elucidates
new features such as large heartbeat-to-heartbeat variability of firing rates and precise pattern of spiking within cardiac cycles. We
find that at low firing rates, spikes occur uniformly throughout the
cardiac cycle, but at higher rates, they tend to cluster in bursts
around a particular latency. This latency shortens and the clusters
tighten as the firing rates grow. Sympathoexcitation increases firing rates and shifts the burst latency later. Negative rate/latency
correlation and the sympathoexcitatory shift suggest that spike
production of the individual fibers contributes significantly to the
control of the sympathetic bursts strength. Access to fine scale
temporal information, more physiologically accurate description
of nerve activity, and new hypotheses about the nervous outflow
control establishes sympathetic spiking as a valuable tool for the
cardiovascular research.
Index Terms—Point process, spike detection, statistical modeling, sympathetic nerve activity.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECAUSE of its importance in maintaining cardiovascular
homeostasis, efferent muscle sympathetic nerve activity
(MSNA) in humans has been an active area of research for several decades [1]. It is traditionally assessed by collecting raw
voltage traces with an electrode subcutaneously inserted into
a peroneal nerve, and converting these traces into temporally
smoothed signals with clearly identifiable bursts of sympathetic
activity [2]. The bursts are quantified using the following measures: strength (e.g., burst amplitude or burst area), frequency

B

Manuscript received November 29, 2012; revised May 3, 2013; accepted May
22, 2013. Date of publication June 5, 2013; date of current version September
14, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under Grant IIS-0643995. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ E. Zaydens is with the Department of Cognitive and Neural Systems, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: ezaydens@cns.bu.edu).
J. A. Taylor is with the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School and Cardiovascular Research Laboratory,
Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 USA (e-mail: jandrew_
taylor@hms.harvard.edu).
M. A. Cohen is with the Department of Cognitive and Neural Systems, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: mike1947@gmail.com).
U. T. Eden is with the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: tzvi@bu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2266342

(e.g., number of bursts per minute or per 100 heartbeats), and
crude timing information (e.g., burst latencies). These measures have been successful in identifying human sympathetic
activity patterns across reflex activations such as baroreflex
and metaboreflex [3]–[5] as well as examining characteristic
changes in outflow with pathological conditions such as hypertension, congestive heart failure, and obstructive sleep apnea
[6]–[8].
Animal models reveal that high-frequency content of the sympathetic activity can substantially influence vascular responses.
For instance, the constriction of resistance vessels is augmented
by the intraburst pulse frequencies during stimulation with fixed
interburst frequencies; the maximal response is attained at 10 Hz
in rabbits [9] and at 40 Hz in cats [10]. Also, the perfusion pressure was strongly correlated with the carrier wave frequency
of up to 20 Hz during a frequency-modulated stimulation of
the sympathetic nerve trunk in the dog hind limb [11]. The
smoothing inherent in the traditional MSNA analysis technique
leads to a substantial loss of temporal resolution in the recorded
sympathetic activity, leaving it unable to account for such highfrequency sympathetic activity content.
Augmenting the microneurography setup by increasing the
impedance of the electrodes allowed researchers to record some
of the action potentials emitted by the individual sympathetic
fibers, thus capturing a portion of high-frequency structure
present in the sympathetic output. More importantly, the analysis of single-fiber firings identified the causes of the interindividual and cross-conditional burst size variability for a large
number of conditions [12]–[16]. Increasing the electrode
impedance to meticulously track the firings of single fibers
considerably limits the number of axons that are sensed. For
instance, only 14 total units from eight subjects were recorded
by Macefield et al. [17], 34 total units from 16 subjects were
recorded by Elam et al. [15], and 39 total units from five subjects were recorded by Tsukahara and Mano [14]. This is compared with 1100 sympathetic axons found in the rat peroneal
nerve [18]. The number in humans is likely close: the lateral
fascicles of deep peroneal nerve innervating muscle and not skin
were found to contain a minimum of 195 (S.E. = 18) myelinated fibers [19], and mammalian peroneal nerve is known to
have unmyelinated C to myelinated A fiber ratio >1 [20], [21].
Accessing such a small subset of available axons makes it hard
to asses in humans the complex patterns of sympathetic nerve
firing exhibited by animal models (e.g., only 57% of rat muscle
sympathetic neurons responded to nociception stimulus [22],
8% of such neurons had no respiratory modulations [23]; a detection in cat of muscle sympathetic efferents with low cardiac
rhythmicity [24]).

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

ZAYDENS et al.: CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELING OF MUSCLE SYMPATHETIC NERVE SPIKING

A new technique was designed that addressed the limitation
on the number of recorded fibers: the extraction of individual
spike information directly from the raw mutlifiber voltage
trace obtained using standard-impedance microneurography
[25]–[27]. A large number of such studies identified the action
potential composition of the multifiber sympathetic bursts obtained with the traditional MSNA analysis [28]–[31]. To do so,
individual action potentials were extracted and classified based
on their shape, obtaining up to 24 morphology types per subject [28]. Focusing on the burst structure left parts of the spike
train unutilized, however. For instance, Steinback et al. [28]
and Salmanpour and Shoemaker [32] extracted spikes from the
whole recording, but only used the ones that coincided with the
bursts. Maslov et al. [31] only extracted spikes from parts of
the recording that formed the multifiber bursts. In addition, a
full characterization of the statistical properties of the MSNA
spiking patterns is, to our knowledge, currently missing. For example, the physiologically important high-frequency multifiber
firing within the MSNA bursts (e.g., spike placement variability) remains unexplored, as does its relationship to the lowfrequency spiking structure (e.g., variability in burst sizes). In
fact, most multifiber studies do not use the spikes themselves.
For instance, Brychta et al. [33], [34] smoothed the spike train to
analyze MSNA spectral signature and to model low-frequency
arterial pressure oscillations. Also, while inhomogeneous Poisson models have been successfully applied to the analysis of
spiking structure in a number of neural systems, we are not
aware of them being utilized to identify specific spike patterns
in multifiber sympathetic efferent activity. Moreover, statistical
tools ignoring the precise spike timing (a critical information
carrier for many neural systems [35]–[38]) are often favored. For
example, Murai et al. [13], Brychta et al. [34], and Greenwood
et al. [38] first inferred firing rates and then applied standard
statistical methodology (e.g., least squares regression) to test
hypotheses and fit models. Therefore, the information currently
present in the multifiber spike trains is not fully exploited. In particular, we do not know how the placement of spikes changes as
a function of time from the associated R-peak; we do not know
if such placement is different for large versus small bursts; we
do not know if spikes occur between bursts.
We address some of these questions in this paper, which
has two main goals. Methodologically, we aim to combine in
a novel way the existing standard-impedance spike extraction
algorithm with a successful modeling framework in order to
extract and utilize more information from the raw voltage trace
than was previously possible. Scientifically, we aim to describe
the aggregate firing patterns of the multifiber sympathetic spike
trains (including firing within regions traditionally considered
silent) and examine in detail the interactions between their highand low-frequency components.
Our analysis is structured as follows: first, the raw voltage
trace is denoised and sequences of action potentials are extracted. The temporal structure of the resultant multifiber spike
trains is visualized using rasters plots. A point process model
is applied to assess the distribution of high-frequency spikes
as a function of the average spike rate. The model is fit to the
spike trains observed at rest and during a sympathoexcitatory

2915

maneuver. Maximum likelihood estimates of the model parameters are compared across subjects. Finally, the similarities and
differences in spiking are examined in the context of known
physiology.
II. METHODS
A. Spike Extraction
A sympathetic activity assessment technique was devised [27]
that discriminates neural firing from physiologically irrelevant
information, and which accurately identifies multifiber nerve activity independent of any a priori criteria. This method is based
on the statistical characteristics of the different artifacts, noise,
and multifiber nerve activity that compose the unfiltered recording. A variant of the Expectation–Maximization algorithm was
used at successive stages of processing to separate these components to extract the multifiber spike train. The details of the algorithm are described in [27], and, briefly, consist of the following
steps: line noise and muscle twitches are removed from raw
voltage recordings, producing a set of action potentials. These
are then treated as a convolution of a set of pulses (Kronecker
delta functions) with a prototypical spike template, which is extracted from the data. The posterior probability of a spike given
the data is computed at each sample by deconvolving the spike
template from the signal and removing the background noise
using a mixture of distributions model. The posterior probabilities are then thresholded and binarized, producing a spike
train at 40 kHz. Note that by using the action potential template,
we assumed that the shape of a subset of action potentials in
the signal is roughly similar and that some fraction of the action potentials is considerably larger in peak amplitude than the
noise source. Beyond that, both spike shape and amplitude are
explicitly ignored because they are heavily influenced by the
distance from the axon to the electrode and are highly variable
across recording sessions. We did not sort the spikes because
we were aiming to characterize how the spike patterns produced
by all active fibers change as a function of outflow intensity and
were not looking to study how different fiber types influenced
the pathway activation responses. The output of the spike extraction algorithm, therefore, is a binary multifiber spike train
where neuronal firings by different axons cannot be differentiated. A refractory period was enforced by removing any of
the spikes within 0.5 ms of each other. Average morphology
templates were then collected and compared to noise samples
and prototypical action potentials to ensure that spike locations
in the binary train mark voltage deviations that are statistically
significant and resemble actual spikes. We used this technique
to extract multifiber spike trains from eight subjects under baseline and sympathoexcitatory conditions. Baseline activity was
collected during supine rest, and an isometric handgrip exercise
(IHE) served as a sympathoexcitatory stimulus.
B. Subjects and Protocols
All volunteers gave their written informed consent to participate. All protocols were approved by either the ethical committee at the Grenoble University Hospital Center or Institutional

2916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

TABLE I
SUBJECT CHARACTERISTICS

Review Board at Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, and conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki.
We studied healthy men (n = 4) and women (n = 4) with no
signs or symptoms of hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular or
neurological disease or cancer, with normal resting ECG, and
no regular use of tobacco. The population statistics are available
in Table I.
Baseline activity data were derived from a 5-min period of
supine rest. Sympathoexcitatory data were obtained by subjects performing IHE at 35% maximal voluntary contraction
(MVC) force sustained to fatigue. (The subject had previously
performed three MVCs on a handgrip dynamometer to determine 35% MVC.) During the exercise, target force was displayed on a computer monitor. Subjects had continuous visual
and auditory feedback from the investigators to ensure maintenance of target force until exhaustion, which was defined by
the inability to maintain a target force for more than 3 s despite
continued effort and verbal encouragement [40].
C. Visualization
Extracting individual spikes allowed us to analyze the sympathetic activity using visualization techniques designed specifically for spiking data. We constructed raster plots, which display
spikes as individual dots in time on the x-axis, with multiple trials or time intervals stacked on top of each other on the y-axis.
In our case, the intervals are triggered by the ECG R-peaks,
and the spiking activity for the following 2-s period is displayed
as a function of time elapsed from the R-peak (latency). Each
2-s interval includes the spiking activity over a minimum of two
cardiac cycles following each R-peak (possibly more for shorter
RR intervals during IHE).
Based on these visualizations, and on the known conduction
delays for sympathetic firing [41], [42], we focused on an interval of high-density spiking from 700 to 1400 ms after each
R-peak. We computed the average latency within each interval
as a sum of latencies of spikes within the interval divided by its
number of spikes. We also computed an average firing rate for
each interval as the number of spikes in an interval divided by
its duration. We visualized the distribution of these average firing rate values over heartbeats using box plots, histograms, and
by directly plotting the average rate time series. To assess the
heartbeat-to-heartbeat variability of the sympathetic outflow, we
computed the Fano factor, a ratio of the variance of cardiac cycle spike counts to their mean. The Fano factor has a theoretical
value of one for Poisson processes.
In order to visualize the patterning of spiking activity as a
function of the average firing rate, we modified the raster plots
by sorting the intervals on the y-axis from those with the highest
average rate to those with the lowest average rate. We also
examined two subsets of intervals: those with low average firing

rates below 10 Hz, and those with high firing rates above 40 Hz,
and computed for each a smoothed histogram of the spiking
as a function of latency. This was accomplished by convolving
the histogrammed spikes with a boxcar kernel with a width of
10 ms.
D. Modeling Techniques
We constructed a probability model to describe a pattern of
spiking activity of the multifiber sympathetic nerve bundle as
a function of the average firing rate over each interval of highdensity spiking. Specifically, we binned the spiking data (1 ms
bin width) and modeled it as an inhomogeneous Poisson process
conditioned on the average firing rate within each interval. At
any given rate, the model describes the probability distribution
of the latency relative to the associated R-peak, at which the
spikes are likely to occur. Mathematically, let R be the average
firing rate computed in a given interval of high-density spiking,
let τ be the latency relative to the associated R-peak, and let
p be the probability that a randomly chosen spike within the
interval occurs at latency τ , given that the interval has an average
firing rate of R. Then, p is related to the firing rate function
λ(τ ) 
of the spiking process according to the formula: p(τ ) =
 τ en d
λ(τ ) τ star t λ(u)du, where τ _start and τ _end are starting
and ending latencies of the interval, respectively. We fit the
following model of the spike latency probability p:
⎧
⎫
β τ + β2 τ 2 +
⎪
⎪
⎨ 1
⎬
2
3
p(τ ) = C · exp + β3 τ R + β4 τ R + β5 τ R +
. (1)
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎭
2
2 2
3 2
+ β6 τ R + β7 τ R + β8 τ R
Here, C is a normalization constant that ensures that p integrates to 1, and the exponential function guarantees that the
probability density is positive. The model parameters β =
(β1 ,β2 ,β3 ,β4 ,β5 ,β6 ,β7 ,β8 ) are fit by maximum likelihood, i.e.,
they are selected to maximize the probability of observing the
data.
For each interval of high-density spiking in the recording, we
plug its average firing rate R into the model to obtain a probability distribution function for the location τ of any arbitrary spike.
We compute the mode of this probability distribution to find the
expected latency of the spiking relative to the associated R-peak,
and we compute the variance of this distribution to describe the
concentration of spiking about the expected latency. We also
compute the maximum instantaneous rate reached within an
interval, which defines the peak latency and describes the maximum output of the spike train in spikes/s.
Along with maximum likelihood estimators of the model
parameters β, we compute their variance-covariance matrix.
Using that information, we draw 100 000 samples from the
asymptotic distribution of β. We use these drawn values to
approximate the sampling distribution of the expected latency,
the spike concentration, and the maximum instantaneous rate as
well as to construct their 95% confidence intervals.
The latency range for each condition was computed by subtracting the expected latency for the burst with the highest rate
from the expected latency of the burst with the rate of 10 Hz,

ZAYDENS et al.: CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELING OF MUSCLE SYMPATHETIC NERVE SPIKING

2917

TABLE II
SUMMARY STATISTICS

Fig. 1. Raster plot of MSNA spiking activity triggered by ECG R-peaks for
baseline (left, black) and IHE (right, gray) conditions. Each row illustrates 2 s of
the spiking activity following an R-peak. The x-axis represents the time elapsed
since the corresponding R-peak. The y-axis depicts the time of the R-peak
corresponding to that row. Note that one particular spike might appear on multiple rows at various latencies relative to different R-peaks. For each heartbeat,
the spiking activity increases 900–1300 ms after the R-peak, consistent with
conduction delays reported in the literature. This latency is consistent across
baseline and IHE conditions, despite the increasing heart rate during IHE. The
intensity of spiking progressively increases during IHE. “Horizontal streaking”
in the observed spiking activity is indicative of the heartbeats with reduced
activity followed by heartbeats with elevated activity.

which is the slowest spiking rate at which latency is reliably
computed. Latency ranges were then averaged across subjects
for baseline and IHE to obtain a cross-subject mean latency
range for each condition.
E. Statistics
Simple linear regression was performed to compute linear
changes in average spike rates over time and the significance
of the estimated slope parameters. The significance of the parameter estimates in (1) was calculated based on the observed
Fisher information computed from the data. Paired t test was
used to compare RR lengths, mean rates, and mean interval
latency across conditions. P -value <0.05 was considered significant. Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) tests that compared the
modeled spike latency distribution p [see (1)] and the empirical one were used to assess the model goodness-of-fit for each
subject/condition.
III. RESULTS
Table II displays the spiking statistics for all subjects in this
study. The recording duration varied from subject to subject,
was generally longer at rest, and reached a maximum of about
10 min. As expected, the length of an average RR interval decreased from 1.04 s during baseline to 0.79 s during IHE, reflecting increased heart rate across all subjects during IHE. The
spiking rates were different for each subject and varied about
threefold within each condition. During isometric exercise, the

mean spiking rate averaged across all subjects was 14.8 Hz,
about twice that at rest. Fano factors were highly variable across
subjects, with the minimum value of 1.99 for all recordings in
the study. All values were significantly larger than 1 (p-values
<10−5 for all subjects), showing higher heartbeat-to-heartbeat
variability in the firing rate than would be observed for Poisson
Processes. The cross-subject means of average spike latencies
for both baseline and IHE were 1.27 and 1.29 s (see Table II).
The means were not statistically different. The cross-subject
mean latency range obtained with the spiking model was 79
(S.E. = 20) ms for baseline and 86 (S.E. = 19) for handgrip.
A. Visualizations
Fig. 1 depicts the raster plots for a representative subject
under baseline (left, black) and IHE (right, gray) conditions
and highlights the aggregate characteristics of the sympathetic
spiking by marking the latencies of all spikes trailing each Rpeak by less than 2 s. The most visually striking feature is the
presence of the three regions of increased sympathetic firing
in a 2-s interval following every R-peak: one at a latency of
about 300 ms, one at 1100 ms, and the third at about 2 s. The
latency of the second high-density area (700–1400 ms) matches
the average conduction delay described in the literature [4]. The
reported progressive increases in the sympathetic outflow and
the decreases in the RR intervals during IHE [43] do not affect
the latency of the spikes in the second area of high activity.
This is observed by comparing the values of the three highdensity areas in the right plot of Fig. 1: the latency of the middle
one stays constant at around 1100 ms for the duration of the

2918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

recording, but the latencies of the first and the third areas have
shifted at the conclusion of the IHE experiment. In addition,
the shortening of the average RR intervals and the increase in
the average spiking rates (see Table II) contributed to the higher
density of spikes during IHE; notice that the individual spikes
are distinguishable in the beginning of the IHE recording in
Fig. 1, but blur together toward its end. These features were
observed in all subjects. The only cross-subject variation was
the timing of the high-density spiking from their corresponding
R-peaks; the ranges of the mean spike latency for the second
high-density region are found in Table II.
Another salient characteristic of the sympathetic spiking was
the white spaces cutting through the columns of high activity
(see Fig. 1). These horizontal streaks represent heartbeats with
limited or no sympathetic firing interspersed with the cardiac
cycles exhibiting high density of spikes. Such changes in the
number of sympathetic spikes from one heartbeat to the next
can be thought of as beat-to-beat variability of spiking, a quantity that is commonly measured by the Fano factor. Table II
shows the sample Fano factor values ranging from 1.99 to 47.95
across all subjects/conditions; they are considerably larger than
the theoretical value of one that Fano factor attains for an inhomogeneous Poisson process. This large discrepancy indicates
that heartbeat-to-heartbeat variability of the spike counts is significantly larger than what an inhomogeneous Poisson process
would predict.
The intensity of the sympathetic activity for each recording
was assessed by analyzing the average firing rates within intervals of elevated firing occurring at latencies of 700–1400 ms.
The following were constructed to describe the rates: box plots,
time series diagrams, and histograms of the rate distribution. The
top panel of Fig. 2 displays box plots that describe the quartiles
of the average rate distribution for a representative subject under
baseline (left, black) and IHE (right, gray) conditions. Note that
the top whisker in baseline and IHE conditions is large when
compared to both the size of the box and of the lower whisker.
This indicates that the range of the rates contained in the top
quartile is much higher than that of the rates contained in the
lower three quartiles. Also note that the maximum rate attained
for both recordings is much higher than the upper boundary of
the box, indicating that the rates in the top quartile of the distribution are appreciably higher than in the rest of the quartiles.
In fact, the rate distributions for all subjects demonstrate similar
patterns: the maximum rate for some recordings was 7–15 times
higher than the 75th percentile and 9–16 times higher than the
mean. Note, however, that while there was a clear increase in
sympathetic firing in IHE when compared to baseline, the maximum firing rates were not considerably different between baseline and IHE for five out of eight subjects (see Table II). For
instance, while subject 4 had IHE maximum rate higher than
baseline, subject 5 had this relationship reversed.
The diagrams in the middle panel of Fig. 2 revealed the timedependent features of the spiking. First, average rates are increasing as a function of time during handgrip exercise (for a
subject in Fig. 2 the IHE slope is 0.0273 Hz/s, significantly larger
than zero at p = 4.14 × 10−6 ). This upward trend was found
in all subjects; the average slope was 0.0609 (S.E. = 0.0257)

Fig. 2. Average spiking rates in baseline (left, black) and IHE (right, gray)
conditions. (Top panel) Box plots of spiking rates across heartbeats. Median and
upper whisker of the firing rate are increased in IHE. (Middle panel) Scatter plot
of firing rate on each heartbeat with linear regression fit. Firing rate is stable in
baseline condition and increasing in IHE. (Bottom panel) Histogram of firing
rates. Firing rates range from 0 to about 65 Hz in both conditions, but IHE
has increased beat-to-beat variability relative to baseline; more heartbeats have
virtually no spiking, and more heartbeats exhibit high rates of firing. Linear
regression equation is R = 16.0183 − 0.0043t for baseline and R = 13.4179 +
0.0273t for IHE.

Hz/s, significantly larger than zero (p = 0.0248). Second, there
is a large variability in the rates of the neighboring regions.
For instance, the highest rate in Fig. 2 baseline is 66.9 Hz; the
region exhibiting this rate is surrounded by regions with significantly lower rates of 12.7 and 3.2 Hz. Third, the amount of
high-rate relative to low-rate regions stays constant for baseline
but slightly increases for IHE (note a large quantity of the lowrate regions still present at the end of IHE, where the expected
rate is highest). In addition, sympathoexcitation increases the
rates within the high-frequency bursts of sympathetic spiking.
For example, the mean rate for the regions with rates over 10 Hz
occurring in the last 30 s of IHE was 39.64 (S.E. = 5.96) Hz,
which was significantly larger than the mean rate for similarly
high-rate regions in the first 30 s of IHE (25.94, S.E. = 1.51 Hz,
p = 0.0257) and in the last 30 s of baseline (22.75, S.E. =
2.24 Hz, p = 0.0095).
In order to directly compare the outflow strength at rest with
that during peak sympathoexcitatory response, we compared
mean rates in the first and last 30 s of IHE. A large increase
was found in all subjects; the cross-subject means are 8.60
(S.E. = 0.96) Hz in the first 30 s of IHE to 21.94 (S.E. = 4.85)
Hz in the last. To ensure that the difference is not an artifact of
the time window placement within a recording, we compared
the mean rates in the last 30 s of baseline to the last 30 s of
IHE; an increase was found in all subjects with means of 6.83
(S.E. = 0.74) Hz versus 21.94 (S.E. = 4.85) Hz (statistically
significant).
The bottom panel of Fig. 2 shows the distributions of the
average firing rates over heartbeats. Note that the distribution is
either unimodal or continuously decreasing, with the majority
of the mass concentrated around the lower rates. All subjects

ZAYDENS et al.: CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELING OF MUSCLE SYMPATHETIC NERVE SPIKING

Fig. 3. (Top panel) Histogram of spike latencies for low spiking (<10 Hz,
solid) and high spiking (>40 Hz, dot-dashed) regions for baseline (left, black)
and IHE (right, gray) conditions. Low-rate spiking occurs uniformly across all
latencies shown, while high-rate spiking tends to concentrate about a preferred
latency with a bell-shaped distribution for both conditions. (Bottom panel)
Raster plots of the MSNA spiking activity triggered by the ECG R-peaks,
sorted by firing rate. Each row illustrates the spiking activity 700–1400 ms
following an R-peak, with rows ordered by the firing rate in this interval. The
y-axis depicts the indices of cardiac cycles in the ordering. For instance, index
50 indicates a cardiac cycle with the 50th smallest rate; index 300 denotes 300th
smallest rate (which makes it one of the highest rates in baseline). The rates
for both conditions are shown in the middle axes: black circles denote baseline,
gray triangles denote IHE.

exhibit skewed firing rate distributions, indicating a large number of cardiac cycles with region rates that are much higher
than the distribution mean. The tails of the IHE distribution
were heavier than those for baseline for all subjects, suggesting
an increase in the quantity of the high-rate heartbeats during
sympathoexcitation.
Overall, the visualization analysis revealed a similarly high
variability in both baseline and sympathoexcitatory spiking. Our
primary focus was the high-frequency within-heartbeat firing
patterns, which varied similarly as a function of rates during
the two conditions. Because of such high-frequency focus and
because it was reflected in the average spiking rates, we did not
explicitly measure condition-dependent low-frequency variability. It was, however, clearly present as there was an abundance
of very low and very high rates of firing as well as a poor
predictability of their occurrence in both conditions. Progressive sympathoexcitation was accompanied by an increase in the
number of high-rate sympathetic bursts as well as by a rise in
the firing rates within them. These observations suggest that
the sympathetic outflow intensity is governed by two factors:
the adjustment of the firing rate within high-frequency bursts
of spikes and the modification of the number of cardiac cycles
containing such bursts relative to the number exhibiting low-rate
firing or no activity at all.
B. Modeling
Extracting individual spikes granted us a closer look at the
structure of the sympathetic bursts. Fig. 3 highlights, for a representative subject’s baseline (left, black) and IHE (right, gray)

2919

Fig. 4. Fit to a model of the spike latency probability distribution as a function
of the firing rate under baseline (left) and IHE (right) conditions. Similarly to
Fig. 3, the x-axis represents the latency within the high-density spiking region
for each condition and y-axis represents the average firing rate within that region.
Distribution is close to uniform for the low-rate regions and becomes increasingly concentrated about a preferred latency as the firing rate increases. Also,
the preferred latency occurs earlier and the distribution becomes progressively
more concentrated with increasing firing rate.

conditions, how the precise timing of spikes within a region
of high-frequency firing depends on the region’s average rate.
Specifically, the top panel displays the pronounced differences in
the organization of the spikes between regions with low average
firing rates and those with high average firing rates. The firing
in the low-rate intervals is approximately uniformly distributed
along the latencies, but spike distribution in the higher rate regions acquires a Gaussian shape, with spikes concentrated about
a particular latency. We constructed rasters sorted by the average
rate within these intervals to evaluate the progression from the
uniform to the concentrated firing states (see the bottom panel of
Fig. 3). Specifically, as we move from the low- to high-rate regions, there is a gradual emergence of spike concentration about
a specific peak latency, which shifts closer to the corresponding
R-peak as the average region rate increases. Importantly, the
additional spikes that boost the average spiking rate occur predominantly around the peak latency, progressively increasing
the spike concentration around it. A few spikes, however, occur
further away from the peak latency, making the spiking bursts
appear wider as a function of the increasing rate. Notice that this
progressive change in the firing structure of high-density spiking regions was not qualitatively altered by sympathoexcitation
and was present during both baseline and IHE experiments for
all subjects.
We fit the model in (1) to the extracted spike trains using
maximum likelihood; Fig. 4 displays the results for a representative subject under baseline (left) and IHE (right) conditions. Specifically, each row represents a region of intense firing
with an average rate indicated on the y-axis. The colors indicate a probability density that a randomly selected spike occurs
at a specified latency. The model captured two main spiking

2920

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

TABLE III
GOODNESS OF FIT

Fig. 5. Features of the cardiac cycle spike latency distribution as a function
of the firing rate. Subjects were pooled within baseline (black) and IHE (gray)
conditions. The peak latency identifies the time after an R-peak with the highest
intensity of spiking. In both conditions, peak latency decreased with the increasing firing rate; it was, however, significantly higher during IHE than at baseline
for all rates. The standard deviation indicates the concentration of spiking about
the peak latency. It is statistically indistinguishable between baseline and IHE
for a large number of rates, but its reduction implies that spiking becomes
more concentrated at higher rates in both conditions. Shaded regions represent
bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals of the mean parameter estimates.

features. First, the structure of the low- and high-rate regions
of high-density spiking differed. Specifically, the low-rate distribution had high variance that spanned most of the modeled
region (see the light gray color spanning most of the bottom rate
regions in Fig. 4). In contrast, the spike location distributions
for the high-rate spiking bursts were narrow; most of their mass
was located around peak latency, indicated by the relatively
narrow areas of dark gray near the top of Fig. 4. Second, the
transition from low- to high-rate firing mode was achieved by
a gradual constriction of the density and a progressive heightening of the probability distribution (see progressive narrowing
of the dark gray area as rates increase; they also become darker
for higher rates). Moreover, the location of the peak probability
has progressively shifted to the shorter latencies.
The probability structure was described using two features of
the distribution: peak latency and standard deviation. The values
of these features pooled for all subjects in the study within baseline (black) and IHE (gray) conditions are shown in Fig. 5. For
both conditions, the peak latency shifts closer to the corresponding R-peak as the firing rate increases, indicating that the spiking
starts earlier for the cardiac cycles with increased activity. The
standard deviation of the spike locations becomes smaller with
higher rates, indicating that the spikes are progressively more
concentrated about the peak latency.
It is important to note that the two parameters used to describe
the intraregion spiking vary identically as a function of the
increasing firing rate for all subjects; specifically, the latencies
get progressively shorter, and the standard deviation decreases.
What is more remarkable is that this pattern is retained for
two different states of the cardiovascular system: a dynamic

equilibrium at baseline and a vigorous response to a strong
sympathoexcitatory stimulus during IHE.
The expected latency showed significant differences between
conditions. It occurred consistently earlier for baseline than for
handgrip (see the left panel in Fig. 5), indicating that the point
of maximum spiking is attained later during sympathoexcitation
than it is at rest. This is true for cardiac cycles at all firing rates.
The standard deviation was statistically different for most firing
rates, but the differences were rate-dependent, pointing to the
lack of clear differentiation in spike concentration between the
conditions.
The models’ goodness-of-fit is described in Table III. The left
column for each condition contains the values of the KS statistic calculated from the data. Right-hand-side columns contain
corresponding critical values: a maximal KS statistic value for
the model to pass the test. Two things are worth noting. First,
models for seven out of 16 datasets passed the KS test as indicated by their KS statistics being smaller than critical values. The
small differences between the KS statistic and the critical values
suggest that the model fits for other subjects/conditions came
close to passing the KS test. Second, the number of samples for
each test is large (varies from about 600 to over 5000), which
substantially shrinks KS statistic confidence intervals. This indicates that even a relatively mild deviation of the modeled from
the actual probability distribution will force the KS statistic to
become insignificant. While higher order polynomial models are
likely to improve this goodness-of-fit marginally, no low-order
polynomial model will provide a perfect fit to the data, and
we expect KS tests to fail as the amount of data become large.
Therefore, we opted to use a cubic model that parsimoniously
described the main important features of the distribution, and
which reliably and consistently produced parameter estimates
with well-defined error bounds for all data.
IV. DISCUSSION
The primary purpose of this paper is to highlight the utility
of using multifiber spike trains for assessment of sympathetic
outflow to the vasculature. We showed that spiking is capable
of expressing the aggregate features of sympathetic activity as

ZAYDENS et al.: CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELING OF MUSCLE SYMPATHETIC NERVE SPIKING

well as traditional analysis methods are. Moreover, spikes provide information about sympathetic activity at a high temporal
resolution. We used this information to assess the structure of the
pulse synchronous bursts of spiking in terms of a peak systemic
response and spiking concentration. In comparing statistical features of spiking activity at rest and during sympathoexcitation,
we identified a number of striking similarities as well as one key
difference between these conditions. Specifically, the latency of
the peak response shortened and the spiking became more concentrated with increasing burst average rate during both conditions. The peak response latency, however, was consistently and
significantly longer during the sympathoexcitatory maneuver
than at rest. These findings support the conclusion that similar
mechanisms underlie the production of sympathetic spiking at
rest and during excitation, and that these states differ only in the
spike rates required to produce a particular spiking pattern.
A. Why Spikes?
The coarse features of the sympathetic outflow that have
previously been detected using traditional analysis methods
were evident in the extracted spiking. First, several researchers
showed that sympathetic outflow progressively increases during a sympathoexcitatory maneuver [43]–[46]. In fact, both the
number and the amplitude of the sympathetic bursts were shown
to increase. Similarly, we see a progressive rise in the average
spiking rates and the number of sympathetic bursts exhibiting
high rates (>10 Hz) of firing. Second, we find the average latency of the sympathetic spike bursts to be close to the burst
peak latencies detected in earlier studies: 1.27 (S.E. = 0.05) s
for baseline and 1.28 (S.E. = 0.04) for IHE, compared to 1.30
(S.D. = 0.1, no S.E.) reported by Fagius et al. [41] and 1.33
(S.E. = 0.03) s reported by Wallin et al. [42]. Third, we see the
peak latency decrease as a function of the average firing rate
within the MSNA burst. Similarly, Wallin et al. [42] reported
negative correlation between relative burst amplitude and burst
peak latency.
Also, the variability present in the spiking was similar to
the cardiovascular variability reported using traditional MSNA
analysis techniques. For instance, we found a strong phase locking between sympathetic spiking and the cardiac cycle (see
Fig. 1). Similar rhythmicity has been reported in both animals [47], [48] and humans [49], [50] using traditional analysis
methods; in fact, cardiac rhythmicity was one of the earliest
MSNA features detected, and it is used today to differentiate
muscle from the skin sympathetic activity [51]. Also, variability
of spiking across heartbeats was shown to have a slow rhythmic
structure (with a period of approximately 10–15 s in Fig. 1)
consistent with frequency bands with increased power (0.1 and
0.25 Hz) reported by other researchers [52], [53].
In addition to the gross sympathetic outflow features, the extraction of individual spikes from the raw voltage trace granted
us access to the information not previously available. Specifically, traditional methods involve a manual identification of the
bursts of sympathetic activity based on their shape and amplitude; the statistics of these bursts are subsequently analyzed,
while MSNA regions that fail the selection criteria are ignored.

2921

Here, we used the entire spike train. For instance, intervals that
were thought to be completely silent due to systolic inhibition
turn out to have sparse spiking (note spikes present at 400–800
and 1300–1700 ms latencies in Fig. 1). In addition, we actively
use the heartbeats that were traditionally dismissed as having
too low or no sympathetic activity. Juxtaposing these areas with
periods of high activity was a key to detecting the striking similarities in how the fine temporal MSNA patterns change at rest
and during sympathoexcitation. Specifically, we found that the
latencies for the low-rate bursts are distributed uniformly: the
spikes are equally likely to occur at any latency within a burst.
As the firing rate increases, the spikes converge around a specific latency, and the spike latency distribution becomes more
concentrated. Such differences in the distribution structure suggest the presence of two classes of fibers: one that is active
tonically at low rates and displays lesser strict cardiac rhythmicity, and another—reflexively activated—more closely phase
locked to the cardiac cycle. This suggests in humans what has
been shown in animals: that cardiac rhythmicity might be weak
in up to one-fifth of sympathetic neurons [22], [54]. Additional
studies (e.g., ganglionic blockade) would be needed to validate
this hypothesis and to ensure that the spikes we observed are
produced by the muscle sympathetic efferents and not by other
fiber types (e.g., skin afferents) contaminating the recording.
The additional information we extracted from the spike trains
yielded a much more precise and physiologically interpretable
description of sympathetic outflow. The main improvement is
the removal of the chronological distortions introduced into the
MSNA signal by the temporal smoothing used in traditional
analyses [2]. For instance, the conduction delay is usually defined as a temporal difference between the ECG R-peak and the
top of its corresponding integrated neurogram burst [41], [49],
[55]. The neurogram peak denotes a point where the MSNA
starts to ebb just enough to offset the increase in the integrated
neurogram signal due to sympathetic activation. This point can
fluctuate from burst to burst and can be hard to interpret physiologically. In contrast, we measure the latency between the
R-peak and the point when the spiking distribution is maximal.
This makes the latency more physiologically interpretable: it is
a delay between the initiation of a hemodynamic event from
myocardial depolarization to maximum sympathetic response.
This difference in the quantities measured likely also contributed
to numerical discrepancies found between the latencies in our
study and in the literature. For instance, the intrarecording latency variability obtained with spiking is smaller than the one
seen in a traditional MSNA signal. Specifically, the cross-subject
mean latency range obtained with the spiking model is 79
(S.E. = 20) ms for baseline and 86 (S.E. = 19) ms for IHE.
In contrast, Wallin et al. [42] reported a cross-subject mean
burst peak latency ranges (obtained with linear regression) to be
200 (S.E. = 20) ms.
B. Mechanisms and Significance
The similarities in spiking patterns between rest and sympathoexcitation were present in both the coarse features of the
spiking and in the structure of the individual bursts. For instance,

2922

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

a large number of cardiac cycles with little or no activity occur
during both conditions despite a substantial increase in the nerve
outflow during sympathoexcitation; the burst rate variability remains large as well. The spiking structure of individual bursts is
also similar: the mean of the spike latency distribution shortens
and its variance decreases with increasing average rate. These
many similarities suggest that the mechanisms producing these
spiking patterns are similar.
Studies show that the primary source of variability in the
sizes of the traditional MSNA bursts depends on the specific
sympathoexcitatory reflex activated. For instance, burst size
was increased by fiber recruitment during end-inspiratory apnea [28], [29], but not during moderate orthostatic stimulus [30].
Our results suggest that the increase in MSNA outflow during
IHE (when compared to baseline) is triggered primarily by the
increase in the output of the already active neurons. We hypothesize this to be the case because the shift of the rate/latency curve
in the left panel of Fig. 5 denotes that the rate produced by the
fibers firing at a specific latency increases. The additional spikes
can be produced by either recruiting more neurons with the same
latency or by increasing the output of the fibers that are already
active. The former seems unlikely because fiber recruitment is
suggested to occur in order from the slowest and smallest fibers
to the fastest and largest [28], [30]. There is, however, strong
evidence that various sympathoexcitatory maneuvers produce
increases in the individual fiber output [16], [17], [56], [57],
suggesting it to be the primary cause of the rate/latency curve
shift. Murai et al. [13] came to a similar conclusion by analyzing the firing properties of individual fibers recorded with
increased-impedance microneurography.
Our results also allow us to speculate about the mechanisms
of the firing rate increases within a single experimental condition. Fig. 3 shows the dense spiking to begin at earlier latencies
for higher rates than for lower rates; the shifting peak spiking
latency in the left panel of Fig. 5 shows that our model captures these spiking dynamics. We also observe a decrease in the
variance of spike probability p [see (1)] with rising rates, which
denotes a progressively tighter organization of the spikes around
the point of maximal spiking. Taken together, these observations
indicate that as rates increase, a progressively higher proportion
of the spikes occur at earlier latencies, and, therefore, the rate is
controlled by these shorter-latency spikes.
There is conflicting evidence in the literature about the potential source for these spikes. On the one hand, some studies indicate that the neurons at shorter latencies are likely to be different
from the neurons at higher latencies. Specifically, the size of the
traditional MSNA bursts was found to correlate strongly with the
number of action potential types present in the bursts [28], [30],
increasing the probability that the low-frequency spikes at high
rates came from a distinct population of neurons. More importantly, all the studies that classified human sympathetic efferents
and tested them for size/latency relationship found that larger
action potentials tend to have shorter latencies [28], [30], [58].
Because the size of the action potential correlates with neuron’s
axon diameter [59], the population of neurons contributing the
most to high rates in our study might be larger than the neurons
most active at the lower rates.

On the other hand, Macefield et al. [17] found large variability in the spike latencies for individual fibers (358, S.E.
= 33 ms), raising a possibility that short-latency spikes, we
observed at high rates came from the same neurons that produced spikes at longer latencies during lower rates. In the same
study, he found that the spiking onset latency for individual
fibers correlates well with the onset latency of the traditional
MSNA bursts. Since large bursts have short onset latencies and
because high region rates in our study correspond to larger bursts
in the traditional MSNA analysis, this suggests that the additional earlier spikes we observe causing rate increases might
come from the fibers active in smaller bursts and not from the
newly recruited ones. In the subsequent study, Macefield and
Wallin [16] showed that the MSNA increase seen in subjects
with high spontaneous baseline activity versus those with low
such activity can be attributed to an increased number of heart
beats that fibers contribute a single spike to. This provides further evidence that fiber recruitment is not responsible for MSNA
increases within a single experimental condition.
Considering the conflicting evidence in the literature and
because we did not sort the spikes, we hypothesize that both
fiber recruitment and increased active fiber output contribute
to the rate increase we observe within individual experimental
conditions.
We also hypothesize that the latency shift during sympathoexcitation has functional significance. Specifically, there exists a
negative correlation between rates and peak latency (see the left
panel of Fig. 5), which implies that a recording with a higher
average spiking rate should have a shorter average peak latency. However, as we see in Table II, the average spike latency
during baseline is statistically indistinguishable from that during sympathoexcitation. We believe that by shifting the entire
rate/latency curve to the higher latency dynamic range, the cardiovascular system is able to compensate for the higher average
firing rate during sympathoexcitation and maintain a consistent range of mean latencies across conditions. Our hypothesis
is consistent with effects shown to occur during other sympathoexcitatory maneuvers: Salmanpour et al. [30] showed an
existence of a consistent latency shift across multiple outflow
intensities during lower body negative pressure. The potential
latency difference between his baseline and LBNP recordings
(as indicated by the range of latencies recorded across individual
fibers) was 75 ms, while the actual latency disparity (measured
by average burst peak latency) was 10 ms. End-inspiratory apnea exhibited an analogous effect with a 100-ms potential [28]
and 10-ms actual latency [41]. Similar situations might arise
in other sympathoexcitatory conditions that have small mean
latency differences with baseline: cold pressor (0 ms), propranolol injections (10 ms), and sodium nitroprusside injections
(20 ms) [41].
Our work does not directly address the physiology of the
rate/latency dynamic range resetting; thus, we can only broadly
speculate about its mechanisms. Fig. 5 shows that out of three
distribution parameters, only the rate is altered, which requires
the spike distribution for a particular rate to shift but to not
otherwise transform. This suggests that any partial changes in
spike production that modify the distribution (e.g., recruitment

ZAYDENS et al.: CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELING OF MUSCLE SYMPATHETIC NERVE SPIKING

of some slower fibers, neural pathways sharing, etc.) are not
likely to cause the shift. A delay that is consistent for all rates
is a more likely culprit. One such possibility is additional time
required for central drive processing, especially at the end of
handgrip when subjects must overcome fatigue. Switching of
all processing to a slower central pathway (akin to the discrete
latency variabilities during sinus nerve stimulation of vagal cardiac motoneurones [60], [61]) is another possibility. A study
specifically targeting this issue is useful to clarify the mechanisms introducing this constant delay.
C. Conclusion
Overall, the use of the spike trains extracted directly from the
raw multifiber voltage trace allowed us to assess the properties of
the sympathetic outflow on both coarse and fine time scales. Access to individual spikes elucidated features of the sympathetic
outflow that were previously inaccessible, such as the spiking
patterns of the individual bursts and interburst spiking activity.
It also revealed a presence of multiple categories of fibers, some
of which are more explicitly locked to the cardiac cycle, and
some of which are less so. Applying to spike trains a modeling
method based on the theory of point processes provided new
evidence about the mechanisms of human sympathetic control,
specifically that the increase of spike production by the individual fibers contributes substantially to sympathoexcitation. These
results represent a first successful step in the utilization in the
peripheral nervous system of analysis methods fruitfully used
in analyzing the dynamics of central nervous system spikes.
REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Berne and M. N. Levy, Cardiovascular Physiology (Physiology
Monograph Series), 8th ed. St. Louis, MO, USA: Mosby, 2001.
[2] K. E. Hagbarth and A. B. Vallbo, “Mechanoreceptor activity recorded
percutaneously with semi-microelectrodes in human peripheral nerves,”
Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 121–122, 1967.
[3] A. B. Vallbo, K. E. Hagbarth, H. E. Torebjörk, and B. G. Wallin, “Somatosensory, proprioceptive, and sympathetic activity in human peripheral
nerves,” Physiological Rev., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 919–957, Oct. 1979.
[4] B. G. Wallin and J. Fagius, “Peripheral sympathetic neural activity in
conscious humans,” Annu. Rev. Physiol., vol. 50, pp. 565–576, 1988.
[5] J. Fagius, “Sympathetic nerve activity in metabolic control—Some basic
concepts,” Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, vol. 177, no. 3, pp. 337–343,
2003.
[6] J. T. Carlson, J. Hedner, M. Elam, H. Ejnell, J. Sellgren, and B. G. Wallin,
“Augmented resting sympathetic activity in awake patients with obstructive sleep apnea,” Chest, vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 1763–1768, Jun. 1993.
[7] M. Esler, “The sympathetic system and hypertension,” Amer. J. Hypertension, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. S99–S105, Jun. 2000.
[8] J. S. Floras, “Sympathetic activation in human heart failure: Diverse
mechanisms, therapeutic opportunities,” Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, vol. 177, no. 3, pp. 391–398, 2003.
[9] S. Ando, “Effects of patterns of sympathetic nerve stimulation on vasoconstricting responses in the hindquarter of rabbits,” J. Autonomic Nervous
Syst., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 225–233, 1993.
[10] P. O. Andersson, “Comparative vascular effects of stimulation continuously and in bursts of the sympathetic nerves to cat skeletal muscle,” Acta
Physiologica Scandinavica, vol. 118, no. 4, pp. 343–348, 1983.
[11] M. Rosenbaum and D. Race, “Frequency-response characteristics of vascular resistance vessels,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 215, no. 6, pp. 1397–1402,
Dec. 1968.
[12] V. G. Macefield, M. Elam, and B. G. Wallin, “Firing properties of single
postganglionic sympathetic neurones recorded in awake human subjects,”
Autonomic Neurosci.: Basic Clin., vol. 95, no. 1–2, pp. 146–159, Jan.
2002.

2923

[13] H. Murai, S. Takata, M. Maruyama, M. Nakano, D. Kobayashi,
K.-I. Otowa, M. Takamura, T. Yuasa, S. Sakagami, and S. Kaneko, “The
activity of a single muscle sympathetic vasoconstrictor nerve unit is affected by physiological stress in humans,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol., vol. 290, no. 2, pp. H853–860, Feb. 2006.
[14] R. Tsukahara and T. Mano, “The recruitment pattern of single vasoconstrictor neurons in human,” J. Autonomic Nervous Syst., vol. 66, no. 1–2,
pp. 26–34, Sep. 1997.
[15] M. Elam, Y. B. Sverrisdottir, B. Rundqvist, D. McKenzie, B. G. Wallin,
and V. G. Macefield, “Pathological sympathoexcitation: How is it
achieved?” Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, vol. 177, no. 3, pp. 405–
411, Mar. 2003.
[16] V. G. Macefield and G. B. Wallin, “Firing properties of single vasoconstrictor neurones in human subjects with high levels of muscle sympathetic
activity,” J. Physiol., vol. 516, no. 1, pp. 293–301, Apr. 1999.
[17] V. G. Macefield, B. G. Wallin, and A. B. Vallbo, “The discharge behaviour
of single vasoconstrictor motoneurones in human muscle nerves,” J. Physiol., vol. 481 (Pt 3), pp. 799–809, Dec. 1994.
[18] H. Schmalbruch, “Fiber composition of the rat sciatic nerve,” Anatomical
Rec., vol. 215, no. 1, pp. 71–81, 1986.
[19] J. C. Stevens, E. P. Lofgren, and P. J. Dyck, “Histometric evaluation of
branches of peroneal nerve: Technique for combined biopsy of muscle
nerve and cutaneous nerve,” Anatomical Rec., vol. 215, no. 1, pp. 71–81,
1986.
[20] C. B. Jenq, L. L. Jenq, and R. E. Coggeshall, “Numerical patterns of axon
regeneration that follow sciatic nerve crush in the neonatal rat,” Exp.
Neurol., vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 492–499, 1987.
[21] B. Povlsen, N. Stankovic, P. Danielsson, and C. Hildebrand, “Fiber composition of the lateral plantar and superficial peroneal nerves in the rat
foot,” Anatomy Embryol., vol. 198, no. 5, pp. 393–399, 1994.
[22] H. J. Häbler, W. Jänig, M. Krummel, and O. A. Peters, “Reflex patterns
in postganglionic neurons supplying skin and skeletal muscle of the rat
hindlimb,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 2222–2236, Nov. 1994.
[23] H. J. Häbler, W. Jänig, and M. Michaelis, “Respiratory modulation in
the activity of sympathetic neurones,” Progr. Neurobiol., vol. 43, no. 6,
pp. 567–606, 1994.
[24] A. Boczek-Funcke, H. J. Häbler, W. Jänig, and M. Michaelis, “Respiratory modulation of the activity in sympathetic neurons supplying muscle,
skin and pelvic organs in the cat,” J. Physiol., vol. 449, pp. 333–361,
1992.
[25] A. Diedrich, W. Charoensuk, R. J. Brychta, A. C. Ertl, and R. Shiavi,
“Analysis of raw microneurographic recordings based on wavelet denoising technique and classification algorithm: Wavelet analysis in microneurography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 41–50,
Jan. 2003.
[26] R. J. Brychta, R. Shiavi, D. Robertson, and A. Diedrich, “Spike detection
in human muscle sympathetic nerve activity using the kurtosis of stationary
wavelet transform coefficients,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 160, no. 2,
pp. 359–367, 2007.
[27] C. O. Tan, J. A. Taylor, A. S. H. Ler, and M. A. Cohen, “Detection of
multifiber neuronal firings: A mixture separation model applied to sympathetic recordings,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 147–158,
Jan. 2009.
[28] C. D. Steinback, A. Salmanpour, T. Breskovic, Z. Dujic, and
J. K. Shoemaker, “Sympathetic neural activation: An ordered affair,” J.
Physiol., vol. 588, no. 23, pp. 4825–4836, 2010.
[29] T. Breskovic, C. D. Steinback, A. Salmanpour, J. K. Shoemaker, and
Z. Dujic, “Recruitment pattern of sympathetic neurons during breathholding at different lung volumes in apnea divers and controls,” Autonomic
Neurosci.: Basic Clin., vol. 164, no. 1–2, pp. 74–81, 2011.
[30] A. Salmanpour, L. J. Brown, C. D. Steinback, C. W. Usselman,
R. Goswami, and J. K. Shoemaker, “Relationship between size and latency of action potentials in human muscle sympathetic nerve activity,” J.
Neurophysiol., vol. 105, no. 6, pp. 2830–2842, Jun. 2011.
[31] P. Z. Maslov, T. Breskovic, D. N. Brewer, J. K. Shoemaker, and Z. Dujic,
“Recruitment pattern of sympathetic muscle neurons during premature
ventricular contractions in heart failure patients and controls,” Amer. J.
Physiol., vol. 303, no. 11, pp. R1157–R1164, Jun. 2012.
[32] A. Salmanpour and J. K. Shoemaker, “Baroreflex mechanisms regulating the occurrence of neural spikes in human muscle sympathetic nerve
activity,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 107, no. 12, pp. 3409–3416, Jun. 2012.
[33] R. J. Brychta, W. Charoensuk, L. Bernardi, R. Furlan, R. Shiavi, and
A. Diedrich, “Spectral analysis of multiunit action potential trains of
muscle sympathetic nerve activity in humans,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol.,
2002, pp. 457–460.

2924

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

[34] R. J. Brychta, R. Shiavi, D. Robertson, I. Biaggioni, and A. Diedrich, “A
simplified two-component model of blood pressure fluctuation,” Amer. J.
Physiol. Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 292, no. 2, pp. H1193–H1203,
2007.
[35] J. P. Segundo, G. P. Moore, L. J. Stensaas, and T. H. Bullock, “Sensitivity
of neurones in aplysia to temporal pattern of arriving impulses,” J. Exp.
Biol., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 643–667, Dec. 1963.
[36] C. E. Carr and M. Konishi, “A circuit for detection of interaural time
differences in the brain stem of the barn owl,” J. Neurosci., vol. 10, no. 10,
pp. 3227–3246, Oct. 1990.
[37] S. N. Baker, J. M. Kilner, E. M. Pinches, and R. N. Lemon, “The role of
synchrony and oscillations in the motor output,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 128,
no. 1–2, pp. 109–117, Sep. 1999.
[38] J. P. Greenwood, J. B. Stoker, and D. A. Mary, “Single-unit sympathetic
discharge: Quantitative assessment in human hypertensive disease,” Circulation, vol. 100, no. 12, pp. 1305–1310, Sep. 1999.
[39] R. Barbieri and E. N. Brown, “Application of dynamic point process
models to cardiovascular control,” Biosystems, vol. 93, no. 1–2, pp. 120–
125, 2008.
[40] A. Borovik, V. Golubinskaya, O. Narasova, C. Aalkjaer, and H. Nilsson,
“Phase resetting of arterial vasomotion by burst stimulation of perivascular
nerves,” J. Vascular Res., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 165–173, 2005.
[41] J. Fagius, G. Sundlöf, and B. G. Wallin, “Variation of sympathetic reflex
latency in man,” J. Autonomic Nervous Syst., vol. 21, no. 2–3, pp. 157–165,
Dec. 1987.
[42] B. G. Wallin, D. Burke, and S. Gandevia, “Coupling between variations in
strength and baroreex latency of sympathetic discharges in human muscle
nerves,” J. Physiol., vol. 474, no. 2, pp. 331–338, Jan. 1994.
[43] A. Kamiya, D. Michikami, Q. Fu, Y. Niimi, S. Iwase, T. Mano, and
A. Suzumura, “Static handgrip exercise modifies arterial baroreflex control
of vascular sympathetic outflow in humans,” Amer. J. Physiol. Regulatory,
Integrative Comparative Physiol., vol. 281, no. 4, pp. R1134–R1139, Oct.
2001.
[44] M. Saito, T. Mano, H. Abe, and S. Iwase, “Responses in muscle sympathetic nerve activity to sustained hand-grips of different tensions in
humans,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occupational Physiol., vol. 55, no. 5,
pp. 493–98, 1986.
[45] D. R. Seals, “Sympathetic neural discharge and vascular resistance during
exercise in humans,” J. Appl. Physiol. (Bethesda, Md.: 1985), vol. 66,
no. 5, pp. 2472–478, May 1989.
[46] M. Ichinose, M. Saito, N. Kondo, and T. Nishiyasu, “Time-dependent
modulation of arterial baroreflex control of muscle sympathetic nerve
activity during isometric exercise in humans,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart
Circulatory Physiol., vol. 290, no. 4, pp. H1419–H1426, Apr. 2006.
[47] E. D. Adrian, D. W. Bronk, and G. Phillips, “Discharges in mammalian
sympathetic nerves,” J. Physiol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 115–133, Feb. 1932.
[48] D. W. Bronk, L. K. Ferguson, R. Margaria, and D. Y. Solandt, “The activity
of the cardiac sympathetic centers,” Amer. J. Physiol. —Legacy Content,
vol. 117, no. 2, pp. 237–249, Sep. 1936.

[49] W. Delius, K. E. Hagbarth, A. Hongell, and B. G. Wallin, “General characteristics of sympathetic activity in human muscle nerves,” Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 65–81, Jan. 1972.
[50] W. Delius, K. E. Hagbarth, A. Hongell, and B. G. Wallin, “Manoeuvres affecting sympathetic outflow in human muscle nerves,” Acta Physiologica
Scandinavica, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 82–94, Jan. 1972.
[51] T. Mano, S. Iwase, and S. Toma, “Microneurography as a tool in clinical neurophysiology to investigate peripheral neural traffic in humans,”
Clinical Neurophysiol., vol. 117, no. 11, pp. 2357–2384, Nov. 2006.
[52] J. P. Saul, R. F. Rea, D. L. Eckberg, R. D. Berger, and R. J. Cohen, “Heart
rate and muscle sympathetic nerve variability during reflex changes of
autonomic activity,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 258, no. 3 Pt 2, pp. H713–
H721, Mar. 1990.
[53] A. Malliani, M. Pagani, F. Lombardi, and S. Cerutti, “Cardiovascular
neural regulation explored in the frequency domain,” Circulation, vol. 84,
no. 2, pp. 482–492, Aug. 1991.
[54] W. Jänig, “Organization of the lumbar sympathetic outflow to skeletal
muscle and skin of the cat hindlimb and tail,” Rev. Physiol., Biochemistry
Pharmacology, vol. 102, pp. 119–213, 1985.
[55] J. Fagius and B. G. Wallin, “Sympathetic reflex latencies and conduction
velocities in normal man,” J. Neurological Sci., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 433–448,
Sep. 1980.
[56] B. Wallin, “Regulation of sympathetic nerve traffic to skeletal muscle in
resting humans,” Clinical Autonomic Res., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 262–269,
2006.
[57] G. Horeyseck and W. Jänig, “Reflex activity in postganglionic fibres within
skin and muscle nerves elicited by somatic stimuli in chronic spinal cats,”
Exp. Brain Res., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 155–168, 1974.
[58] A. Salmanpour, M. F. Frances, R. Goswami, and J. K. Shoemaker, “Sympathetic neural recruitment patterns during the Valsalva maneuver,” in
Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 6951–6954.
[59] H. P. Clamann and E. Henneman, “Electrical measurement of axon diameter and its use in relating motoneuron size to critical firing level,” J.
Neurophysiol., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 844–851, 1976.
[60] R. M. McAllen and K. M. Spyer, “The baroreceptor input to cardiac vagal
motoneurones,” J. Physiol., vol. 282, pp. 365–374, 1978.
[61] D. I. McCloskey and E. K. Potter, “Excitation and inhibition of cardiac
vagal motoneurones by electrical stimulation of the carotid sinus nerve,”
J. Physiol., vol. 316, pp. 163–175, 1981.

Authors’, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

