3298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Simulation and Feasibility Study of Flow Sensor on
Flexible Polymer for Healthcare Application
Debashis Maji, Student Member, IEEE, and Soumen Das∗

Abstract—Development of microfabrication technology, along
with an ever-increasing demand for reliable, low-cost clinical
healthcare has led to the realization of various BioMEMS devices. Present study aims at developing a flexible flow sensor on
polymer substrate to monitor real-time blood flow and determine
plague formation satisfying sensitivity, biocompatibility, and reliability requirements. Transient simulation of temperature and
velocity profile of the thermal-anemometer-based sensor wrapped
around the catheter has been studied. Initial fabrication of the sensor over polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) polymer along with thermal coefficient of resistance (TCR) measurement and flow sensing
over straight heater has also been performed. The simulation and
fabrication works show promising results toward successful development of a flow sensor for effective healthcare delivery.
Index Terms—BioMEMS, flexible flow sensor, microfabrication,
polymer substrate, thermal coefficient of resistance (TCR).

I. INTRODUCTION
HE in vivo measurement of any parameter of a human body
using MEMS device always remains a challenging issue
for the engineers. However, rapid advancement of microfabrication technology has led to the realization of various BioMEMS
devices [1], [2] for low cost point-of-care clinical healthcare
monitoring sensors like sheer stress sensors [3]–[5], flow sensors [6], [7], pressure sensors [8], implantable micro-chips [9],
etc., and actuators like micromotors, microvalves, and microfluidic devices for cell separation, drug delivery systems [10], [11],
etc.
Catheter-based MEMS devices have been explored by several
researchers to deliver effective healthcare solution. Integration
of microfabrication technology with catheter-based diagnosis
has gained wide popularity in healthcare applications due to
high spatial and temporal sensitivity at point of care. The first
silicon pressure sensor mounted over catheter guide wire for cardiovascular pressure measurement was developed by Kalvesten
et al. [12]. Silicon flow sensor with on-chip CMOS readout
electronics over catheter surface have been reported by Kersjes
et al. [13]. In this case, however, the sensor is fixed at one side

T

Manuscript received February 15, 2013; revised April 14, 2013; accepted May
21, 2013. Date of publication May 30, 2013; date of current version November
18, 2013. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
D. Maji is with the School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India (e-mail: debashismaji.
iitkgp@gmail.com).
∗ S. Das is with the School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India (e-mail: sou@smst.iitkgp.ernet.in).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2265319

with minimum utilization of the catheter area. A disposable
CMOS catheter tip pressure sensor have been realized by Liew
and Bright [8] where pressure due to blood flow is measured
by the deflection of silicon dioxide (SiO2 ) membrane. This sensor, however, has a longer response time and its output shows a
drift due to packaging by SU8 polymer. A combination of blood
pressure/flow/oxygen sensor chip has also been developed [14]
over a catheter to measure blood pressure, a thermal flow sensor
to measure blood velocity, and a color sensor to measure blood
oxygen saturation. Further applications involves MEMS-based
manometric catheter for diagnosis of swallowing disorders [15]
and development of optical coherence tomography (OCT) endoscopic catheter having MEMS-based lens scanning [16].
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a leading cause of premature morbidity and mortality due to plaque formation in blood
vessel and is triggered by chemical as well as mechanical interaction of the blood particles with the vessel wall. Catheterbased MEMS flow sensor provides high spatial and temporal resolution for real-time monitoring in the vasculature for
stenotic lesions [3]–[5]. A polymer-based cardiovascular shear
stress sensor built on catheter for atherosclerosis diagnosis has
been developed by Hsiai et al. [3]. Present study is an extension of [17] and aims at the development of MEMS-based flow
sensors on flexible polymer to monitor real-time blood flow
thereby determining plague formation and satisfying sensitivity, biocompatibility, and reliability requirements. The sensing
element in this present study is designed to be wrapped completely around the catheter tip in order to sense the blood flow
rate near stenotic arteries. The flow sensor is based on the principle of thermal anemometry that measures fluid velocity by
accounting the amount of heat dissipated in the fluid from an
electrically heated sensing element exposed in the fluid medium.
The sensing element in the present study is a nichrome (80% Ni
and 20% Cr) thin film resistor fabricated on biocompatible and
flexible elastomers like PDMS mounted around the catheter tip.
Initial modeling of the sensor and its response characteristics
in the blood vessel with and without the presence of stenosis
has been simulated using COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3. Sheet resistance (Rs ) and thermal coefficient of resistance (TCR) were
measured for the thin film microheaters fabricated over PDMS,
SiO2 , and glass surface. SiO2 and glass substrates were kept
as controls to measure Rs and TCR of fabricated heaters over
them and compare the same. Initial flow measurement study
was performed on straight sensors without any bending over a
catheter and voltage requirement for 6 ◦ C increment in sensor
temperature (above the normal body temperature) under a constant flow rate and no flow condition was tested and compared.
Variation in heater temperature and resistance drop for different
flow rates was also studied.

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

MAJI AND DAS: SIMULATION AND FEASIBILITY STUDY OF FLOW SENSOR ON FLEXIBLE POLYMER FOR HEALTHCARE APPLICATION

3299

Fig. 1. Temperature distribution over simulated nichrome heater structure
showing 6 ◦ C rise over different substrates at input voltages of: (a) 28 V for
SiO2 , (b) 4 V for glass, and (c) 2.8 V for PDMS substrate.

II. SIMULATION
Simulation of the flow sensor has been carried out using
COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3. Appropriate heater design was simulated and verified with that of a fabricated one. Simulation of
the heater element on different substrates like SiO2 , glass, and
PDMS was also simulated for appropriate substrate selection.

Fig. 2. Simulation results showing velocity profile across the sensor and blood
vessel cross section for: (a) normal artery and (b) stenotic artery and (c) temperature profile of the sensor for a stenotic artery.

A. COMSOL Modeling of Straight Heater
Thin-film nichrome heater without any bending around the
catheter was modeled using the “shell model” approximation
for thin geometries (e.g., thin film resistors) under the physics
“Electric Currents, Shell interface (ecs)” module available in
the software that enabled meshing of very thin elements present
over a very thick substrate. “Heat transfer (ht)” physics was used
along with this model to solve the amount of heat generated by
the heater elements.
Modeling of the straight heaters was performed on three different substrates viz. SiO2 , glass, and PDMS. Substrate area of
2 cm × 7 cm was chosen for simulation. Thickness of various
substrates was chosen as per the fabrication process. Nichrome
thin film thickness and resistivity was also specified in the COMSOL model according to the fabrication results. Similar microheater structures over various substrates were tested for the voltage required to increase the temperature of the sensor by 6 ◦ C
above room temperature, as shown in Fig. 1, which helped in
the choice of appropriate substrate. Simulation results were also
compared with that of a fabricated sensor that helped to validate
the COMSOL “shell model,” thereby enabling extension of the
model for blood flow simulation with bend heaters around the
catheter.

B. Blood Flow Modeling With Bend Heater
Blood vessel was modeled using a cylindrical tube of 8 cm
length having inner diameter of 2 cm. A cylindrical catheter of
diameter 2 mm was modeled coaxially with the blood vessel and
was placed 4 cm from the velocity inlet end of the blood vessel.
The meanderline heater structure was designed surrounding the
catheter and was placed at about 2.5 cm from the catheter tip.
This ensured a laminar flow distribution of the blood near the
sensor assembly even after flow disturbances near the catheter
tip. Transient analysis of the heater structure was performed
using “Electric Currents, Shell (ecs)” along with “Conjugate
heat transfer (nitf)” physics to solve for the fluid flow velocity as
well as temperature distribution. Simulation has been performed
with blood as the external fluid flowing in a direction opposite to
that of the catheter insertion, as shown in Fig. 2. Pulsatile flow,
having a pulsed velocity of 1 s pulse duration with an average
velocity of 0.2 m/s and a variation of ±0.1 m/s was provided at
the inlet, as shown in Fig. 3(a).
The model was further extended to include a constriction in
the blood vessel, thus mimicking the deposition of plague over
the vessel wall. A 20% stenosis was thus introduced at 6.5 cm

3300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 3. (a) Input pulse–velocity plot, (b) velocity plot near the sensor surface,
and (c) temperature plot near the sensor surface.

from the inlet end of the blood flow immediately above the
sensor assembly. The velocity distribution profile for pulsatile
flow near the sensor in a normal as well as a stenotic artery and
the temperature profile of the sensor inserted in a stenotic artery
are shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 4. Schematic of litho steps involved for patterning nichrome heater over
PDMS substrate: (a) PVA spin coating, (b) PDMS spin coating,(c) sputtered
nichrome over PDMS, (d) spin coating of positive photoresist, (e) UV exposure, (f) developed pattern on photoresist, (g) nichrome etching, (h) photoresist
stripping, (i) peeling off the PDMS between two chip areas, and (j) dissolution
of PVA layer and release of individual polymer chips.

III. EXPERIMENT
Fabrication of the nichrome microheaters have been successfully realized over PDMS elastomer using standard lithography process. PDMS is used as a substrate because of its optical transparency, chemical and thermal stability, low thermal conductivity, biocompatibility, high flexibility, and ease of
fabrication [1], [11].
A. Substrate Preparation
Silicon wafers from Semiconductor Wafer, Inc. (thickness:
275 ± 25 μm; resistivity of 1–10 Ω·cm) were chosen as the base
substrate for fabrication of microheaters over the PDMS polymer. The details of fabrication process have been schematically
shown in Fig. 4. A water soluble sacrificial layer of polyvinyl
alcohol (PVA) was initially spin coated over precleaned silicon
substrates at 1000 r/min using a spin coater unit (Laurell Technologies, WS-650) followed by drying at 70 ◦ C for 30 min.
The resulting film was about 20 μm thick as measured using a
surface profiler (Dektak 150, Veeco Instruments, Inc.). PDMS
samples were prepared by mixing Sylgard 184 (Dow-Corning
Corporation, USA) elastomer and the curing agent in 10:1 (w/w)
ratio followed by proper degassing in vacuum for about 15 min.
Subsequently, it was spin coated over the PVA-coated silicon

wafers at 500 r/min for 20 s and cured at 120 ◦ C for 2 h in a
convection oven to ensure complete polymerization. Thickness
of the resulting PDMS substrates was about 200 μm ± 10 μm.
N-type, 1 0 0 SSP silicon wafers (Semiconductor Wafer, Inc.;
thickness: 275 ± 25 μm; resistivity of 1–10 Ω·cm) with SiO2
thickness of about 1 μm and glass substrates obtained from
HIMEDIA (CG007-0) were used as controls for microheaters
fabrication along with PDMS substrates for TCR testing and validation of COMSOL model. Glass substrates were thoroughly
cleaned with piranha solution (H2 O2 :H2 SO4 ::1:1) for 15 min
followed by rinsing in deionized (DI) water thoroughly and heating in convection oven at 150 ◦ C for 30 min before nichrome
sputtering.
B. Nichrome Deposition
The resulting PDMS surface is hydrophobic having very low
surface energy that results in poor adhesion of metal thin film
over the polymer surface [18], etc. PDMS surface was therefore
treated with oxygen plasma (FEMTO system from Diener Electronics) for 30 s at an RF power of 40 W prior to nichrome sputtering over it to ensure better adhesion of the sputtered nichrome

MAJI AND DAS: SIMULATION AND FEASIBILITY STUDY OF FLOW SENSOR ON FLEXIBLE POLYMER FOR HEALTHCARE APPLICATION

3301

Fig. 5. Optical photographs of (a) crack-free nichrome thin film over PDMS
surface deposited under optimized sputtering conditions and (b) fabricated sensor over PDMS substrate at ×10 magnification.

thin film [18]. SiO2 as well as glass substrates were also kept as
controls along with PDMS in the sputtering chamber.
Deposition of thin metal films over elastomeric surface is
associated with the formation of random buckles of the thin
film [19], [20]. In addition to the formation of buckles, cracks
might often be introduced in the deposited film during sputtering [21]. Nichrome targets (Ni/Cr –80/20 wt.% and 99.95%
purity) were obtained from Leico Industries, Inc. for sputtering. Base pressure was reduced to 5 × 10−6 mbar before the
introduction of Argon. Deposition chamber was flushed with
argon gas three times prior to nichrome sputtering. Sputtering
pressure was varied from 0.002 to 0.1 mbar at different input
power levels and sputtering time to obtain crack free nichrome
deposition over PDMS. Notable changes in plasma color were
also observed to be associated for deposition under different
sputtering conditions [22]. The details of the various sputtering conditions are summarized in [23]. Nichrome thin film was
deposited over the PDMS surface under optimized sputtering
conditions of 0.009 mbar deposition pressure for 10 min of deposition at 60 W input power to obtain a crack free continuous
film over PDMS, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Nichrome thin film
was also deposited over SiO2 and glass substrates under these
conditions and sheet resistance was measured for all.
C. Photolithography and Sensor Chip Release
Nichrome heaters over PDMS, SiO2 , and glass substrates
were patterned using conventional lithography process. Positive
photoresist, HPR 504 from Fujifilm was spin coated over the
nichrome-deposited PDMS surface at 3000 r/min for 20 s followed by prebaking at 90 ◦ C for 30 min. Samples were then exposed to UV for 20 s and subsequently developed in positive developer HPRD 429 followed by postbaking at 120 ◦ C for 30 min.
Etching was performed by first dipping in nichrome etchant
having a chemical composition of H2 O:H2 O2 :HNO3 :HCl in
1:1:2:2 ratio with an etch rate of about 0.3 μm/min for about
40 s followed by dipping in chromium etchant for about 5 min to
remove a very thin residual layer of chromium. The etched samples are often found to be associated with a very thin rainbow
colored film of chromium that was removed by dipping the samples in chromium etchant for about 5 min. Finally, the positive
photoresist was stripped off using acetone, thereby exposing
the fabricated nichrome microheaters over PDMS surface, as
shown in Fig. 5(b). Similar process was followed to obtain the
microheater patterns over SiO2 and glass substrates.

Fig. 6. Experimental setup for TCR measurement of patterned microheaters.
Inset picture shows microphotograph of heater assembled with the flow tube.

In order to release the individual microheaters, PDMS was
peeled off from the area between two neighboring microheaters
by cutting the PDMS film using a sharp razor. The resulting
structure had the nichrome microheaters on PDMS islands over
PVA-coated silicon substrate. This assembly was then dipped
under warm water at about 60 ◦ C with occasional stirring for
10 min to enable dissolution of the underlying PVA layer and
facilitate stress-free self-release of the individual microheaters
on PDMS islands.
D. TCR and Flow Measurement
Sheet resistance (Rs ) of the crack-free nichrome thin film
over PDMS as well as that over SiO2 and glass under optimized
deposition conditions were measured by four-point probe technique using FPP5000 from Veeco Instruments, Inc. Initial TCR
and flow measurements were performed over the microheaters
on PDMS islands over the silicon substrates without employing the self release of individual sensor chips to ensure stable
electrical connections.
Fabricated test structures were used to measure the TCR value
of the film using a setup, as shown in Fig. 6. The sensor was
placed over a custom build heating plate having a ceramic insulator mounted over a probe station (PM5 from Cascade Microtech). Tungsten carbide probes (25 μm tip diameter) were
used to probe the fabricated resistor pads (400 μm × 400 μm) to
determine the resistance of the fabricated structures at various
temperatures using a high-resolution resistance meter having
an accuracy of ±0.1 Ω. A thermocouple with an accuracy of
±0.1 ◦ C was mechanically fixed near to the microheater using
another probe holder to monitor the temperature over the heater
surface. The temperature of the heating plate was increased
slowly by 5 ◦ C and allowed to equilibrate for 15 min before
measurements were taken. Room temperature was maintained
at 24 ◦ C ± 1 ◦ C during the entire experiment. TCR value was
calculated by averaging the values obtained for five different
samples of same dimensions. TCR measurements of fabricated
microheaters over PDMS were very difficult due to thermal
expansion of PDMS at higher temperatures resulting in unstable electrical connections. Stable connections were obtained by

3302

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

TABLE I
SENSOR VOLTAGE REQUIRED FOR ΔT ∼ 6 ◦ C OVER NICHROME
MICROHEATERS ON DIFFERENT SUBSTRATES

also studied. Surface temperature of the fabricated microheater
was recorded ex vivo to demonstrate the sensor functionality
using an Infrared Thermal Imager (Ti32 from FLUKE) having
a 320 × 240 infrared (IR) resolution with 76 800 IR pixels
with an accuracy of ±2 ◦ C. Temperature of the microheater was
recorded using a point indicator, near the heater surface.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Initial simulation results were analyzed and sensor response
was calculated. Sensor fabrication was completed and preliminary flow study with straight sensor without wrapping around
the catheter was performed.
A. Simulation Results

Fig. 7. TCR measurement: (a) electrical probing over fabricated microheaters
on PDMS and (b) variation of film resistance with temperature of microresistors
fabricated over PDMS substrate.

probing over narrow continuous lines of silver conductive adhesive paste (from Alfa Aesar – Rs : <0.025 Ω/ at 0.001 in
thick) drawn immediately after the fabrication from the heater
pads over PDMS surface onto the underlying supporting Si
wafer, as shown in Fig. 7(a). Resulting measurements were very
stable, and it was observed from Fig. 7(b) that the resistance
value increases linearly with temperature for a typical heater
sample fabricated over PDMS.
A preliminary attempt was made to demonstrate the deployment of fabricated flow sensor in ex vivo for gas flow measurement in ambient condition. The inset microphotograph of
Fig. 6 shows the measurement setup where the outlet of gas flow
tube was mounted within close proximity of the sensor surface.
Flow measurements were performed over the sensors by directly
probing over the nichrome bond pads. Controlled nitrogen gas
was flowed over the fabricated microheater through a standard
flow tube rotameter (model P type from Aalborg). Variation of
heater temperature and resistance drop for different flow rates
was studied. Input voltage was applied across the sensor through
a potential divider circuit and the voltage required to maintain
6 ◦ C increment in temperature at a particular flow rate was investigated and compared for the same microheater pattern over
various substrates. Difference in the sensor voltage required to
maintain ΔT ∼ 6 ◦ C under no flow and a constant flow rate was

Fig. 1 shows the COMSOL simulation for voltage required by
straight microheaters over various substrates for an increment
of 6 ◦ C using the CMSOL model as explained earlier. Results
showed that the power requirement by the microheater fabricated over PDMS substrate was 7.525 mW, which was much
lower as compared to 23.36 and 752.25 mW for the heaters fabricated over glass or SiO2 substrate for the same increment of
temperature, due very low thermal conductivity of the PDMS
compared to the other materials. Moreover, the results of the
heater simulation over PDMS were comparable with that of the
fabricated device, as shown in Table I, which validated the use of
shell model approximation of the thin film heater in COMSOL.
Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows the simulated velocity profiles of the
blood flow with catheter insertion in a normal and stenotic artery
for a pulsatile flow. The color bar indicates that the maximum
velocity reached above the sensor, mounted on the catheter surface is about 0.33 m/s for a normal artery and about 0.57 m/s in
a stenotic artery. Simulated data show an average blood velocity
of almost 0.26 and 0.32 m/s above the sensor for a normal and
a stenotic artery indicating that the velocity increases during
stenosis formation. Fig. 2(c) shows the temperature profile of
the sensor inserted in the blood stream of a stenotic artery.
Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the average velocity at the vessel inlet (0.2 m/s) and near to the stenosis (0.32 m/s), respectively.
Fig. 3(c) shows the transient response of the heater temperature
exposed to the pulsating inlet flow having an average temperature of about 45 ◦ C, i.e., about 8 ◦ C above the normal body temperature of 37 ◦ C for an input voltage of about 12.8 V. Simulation
results show a concomitant decrease in temperature profile for
a higher velocity pulse and vice versa. Transient analysis of the
sensor shows a response time of about 0.1 s to reach steady-state

MAJI AND DAS: SIMULATION AND FEASIBILITY STUDY OF FLOW SENSOR ON FLEXIBLE POLYMER FOR HEALTHCARE APPLICATION

3303

value after every pulse. Further simulation with actual
pulsatile profile and flow velocity for different degree of stenosis
needs to be performed.
B. Microheater Fabrication: Self-Release of Heater Chips
The nichrome heaters over PDMS islands on PVA-coated
silicon substrate were dipped under warm water for almost 4 h to
enable dissolution of PVA and facilitate stress-free self-release
of the individual microheaters on PDMS islands. Individual
nichrome heaters over PDMS showed good electrical continuity
after the self-release form underlying rigid Si substrate, which
otherwise would have been electrically discontinuous due to the
formation of microcracks over the pattern by manual peeling off
from the PDMS islands.
C. Sheet Resistance and TCR Measurements
Sheet resistance of the crack-free nichrome thin film over
PDMS as well as that over SiO2 and glass under the optimized
deposition conditions were measured by four-point probe technique using FPP5000 from Veeco Instruments, Inc. Sheet resistance of a 10 min deposited thin film at a sputtering power of
60 W and pressure of 0.008 mbar, measured immediately after
deposition was 4.34, 4.8, and 3.96 Ω/ over PDMS, SiO2 , and
glass surface, respectively, for a film thickness of about 0.195,
0.18, and 0.214 μm, respectively. The slight variation in film
thickness was possibly due to variation in deposition rate due
to local fluctuation in deposition pressure and power between
different experimental trails. The average thickness of 10 min
deposited film was thus 0.2 ± 0.02 μm with Rs ∼ 4.34 Ω/.
Similarly, for a 5 min deposited film the average deposition
thickness was 0.135 ± 0.02 μm with Rs ∼ 9 Ω/ under similar sputtering conditions. It was thus observed that the sheet
resistance values decreased with increasing thickness of the deposited film. The results so obtained are comparable to that
obtained by Kazi et al. [24].
TCR was measured for the fabricated microheaters over
PDMS, SiO2 , and glass substrate. The measured resistance value
of the patterned nichrome microresister was 2.74 kΩ ± 200 Ω
for the various samples fabricated over 0.135 μm thick nichrome
film with Rs ∼ 9 Ω/. As explained earlier, TCR measurement
at higher temperature resulted in unstable readings over PDMS.
However, TCR measurement was successfully performed after
probing over silver conductive adhesive paste on silicon substrate drawn from the microheater bond pads. TCR value thus
obtained for nichrome thin film microresistors over PDMS was
found to be ∼411 ppm/◦ C, as shown in Fig. 7, and that over
SiO2 and glass was found to be ∼ 270 and ∼350 ppm/◦ C, respectively. Thus, the TCR value for nichrome film deposited
over PDMS was found to be comparatively higher than that
over oxide substrate possible due to higher surface roughness of
the PDMS surface [25].
D. Flow Measurements Over Fabricated Microheaters
Initial flow experiments were conducted on microheaters over
PDMS without employing self-release of the PDMS chips. Flow

Fig. 8. Variation of temperature and resistance with flow rate. Continuous
lines represent polynomial curve fittings.

Fig. 9. Variation of sensor temperature with i/p sensor voltage at a flow rate
of 28 mm/s for nichrome heaters fabricated on PDMS and SiO2 substrate. Inset
shows IR image of a fabricated microheater on PDMS for an input sensor voltage
of 4.8 V (IR temperature is 29.4 ◦ C; room temperature was approximately
23 ◦ C).

measurements were performed by blowing controlled nitrogen
gas over the fabricated microheaters using a standard flow tube
rotameter. Fig. 8 shows the variation of temperature and resistance drop with flow velocity. It was observed that the resistance
varies linearly with temperature. Nitrogen flow rate was varied
from 2.5 to 37.5 mm/s, which were much less than the simulated flow rate of 0.2 m/s, resulting in higher response time.
Moreover, initial experiments were performed with commercial
nitrogen gas unlike blood used in the simulation results. Further experiments are in progress to compare the actual sensor
response time with simulation data.
Input voltage was applied across the sensor and increase in
microheater temperature with increasing input sensor voltage
for a constant flow rate of 28 mm/s was tested and compared for
the microheaters over different base substrates. Fig. 9 shows the
variation of sensor voltage with microheater temperature for the
sensors fabricated over PDMS and SiO2 substrate under no flow
and a constant flow rate. Inset of Fig. 9 shows a typical image
of the fabricated microheater over PDMS obtained through the

3304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

IR thermal imager. Table I shows the sensor voltage required
to increase the microheater temperature by 6 ◦ C for the sensors
fabricated over PDMS, glass, and SiO2 substrate under no flow
and a constant flow rate condition. It was observed that voltage
required for ΔT ∼ 6 ◦ C over PDMS was 4.8 V, which was
much less as compared to that over SiO2 (31 V) under no flow
condition due to low thermal conductivity of PDMS. Similar
results were obtained under a constant flow rate of 28 mm/s,
as shown in Table I. Moreover, higher voltage was required
to sustain the same ΔT of 6 ◦ C for all the variants under a
constant flow rate of 28 mm/s as compared to that under no
flow condition, to compensate for the heat loss due to flow.
Preliminary flow study without wrapping the sensor around a
catheter was thus successfully performed.
V. CONCLUSION
The present study attempts to develop a flow sensor on flexible polymer substrate for healthcare application. Miniature thin
film nichrome heater was designed on PDMS polymer for its
use as flow sensor based on thermal anemometer principle. Simulation study of the sensor was carried out using COMSOL 4.3.
Simulated data were correlated with fabricated sensors and the
COMSOL model was verified. Velocity profile across a blood
vessel and temperature profile of the sensor placed in a normal
and stenotic artery have been performed. It was observed that
the average velocity is much higher at stenotic region compared
to normal region of the blood vessel. The response time of the
designed sensor was about 0.1 s simulated under pulsatile flow
condition.
Thin-film nichrome microheater was successfully fabricated
on PDMS polymer using microfabrication technology. Crackfree nichrome thin film was deposited over PDMS surface under
optimized sputtering conditions having a base pressure of 5 ×
10−6 mbar and deposition pressure of 0.009 mbar for 10 min at
60 W input power. A water soluble sacrificial layer of PVA was
employed to enable stress-free self-release of individual polymer chips for final packaging around the catheter tip. Individual
nichrome heaters over PDMS showed good electrical continuity
after the self release. Sheet resistance for the deposited nichrome
film was measured and was observed to vary inversely with film
deposition thickness. Initial TCR and flow measurements were
performed over straight sensors on PDMS without any bending
around the catheter. The measured TCR value was found to be
411, 270, and 350 ppm/◦ C for nichrome thin film microresistors
over PDMS, SiO2 , and glass respectively. Initial flow measurements indicate a linear response for temperature and resistance
drop with different flow rate characteristics. Flow measurements
showed that microheaters over PDMS required only 7.6 V for
ΔT ∼ 6 ◦ C as compared to 35.1 V for that over SiO2 substrate
for a nitrogen flow rate of 28 mm/s. The preliminary work thus
demonstrates the feasibility of the polymer sensor as a successful flow sensor for biomedical application.
Future work includes further simulation work with different
degree of stenosis under actual pulsatile flow condition unlike
normal pulsed flow as shown here. Further flow studies at different flow rates and the corresponding voltage required to sustain

ΔT ∼ 6 ◦ C needs to be performed also. Issues like mounting at
catheter tip and packaging with electrical leads also need to be
considered for deployment of the sensor in in vivo testing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the valuable guidance and
suggestions of Prof. S. K. Lahiri, Research Adviser, SRIC, IIT
Kharagpur, in carrying out this research work and also CeNSE,
IISc Bangalore, for mask making facility required for the above
research work. The authors would also like to thank the staff
members of MEMS & Microelectronics Lab of ATDC for their
help.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Bashir, “BioMEMS: State-of-the-art in detection, opportunities and
prospects,” Adv. Drug Del. Rev., vol. 56, pp. 1565–1586, 2004.
[2] T. James, M. Mannoor, and D. Ivanov, “BioMEMS—Advancing the frontiers of medicine,” Sensors, vol. 8, pp. 6077–6107, 2008.
[3] T. K. Hsiai, S. K. Choi, P. K. Wong, M. H. Ing, A. Salazar, S. Hama,
M. Navab, L. L. Demer, and C.-M. Ho, “Micro sensors: Linking realtime oscillatory shear stress with vascular inflamatory responses,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 32, pp. 189–201, 2004.
[4] Y. Hongyu, A. Lisong, M. Rouhanizadeh, D. Patel, E. S. Kim, and
T. K. Hsiai, “Flexible polymer sensors for in vivo intravascular shear
stress analysis,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 17, pp. 1178–1186, 2008.
[5] H. Yu, L. Ai, M. Rouhanizadeh, R. Hamilton, J. Hwang, E. Meng,
E. S. Kim, and T. K. Hsiai, “Polymer-based cardiovascular shear stress
sensors,” in Proc ASME Conf. Proc., 2007, pp. 29–30.
[6] T. H. Kim and S. J. Kim, “Development of a micro-thermal flow sensor with thin-film thermocouples,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 16,
pp. 2502–2508, 2006.
[7] T. H. Kim, D.-K. Kim, and S. J. Kim, “Study of the sensitivity of a thermal
flow sensor,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, vol. 52, pp. 2140–2144, 2009.
[8] L.-A. Liew and V. M. Bright, “Disposable CMOS catheter-tip pressure
sensor for intracranial pressure measurement,” in Proc. 1st Annu. Int.
IEEE-EMBS Special Topic Conf. Microtechnol. Med. Biol., Lyon, France,
2000, pp. 130–135.
[9] A. Y. Chow, V. Y. Chow, K. H. Packo, J. S. Pollack, G. A. Peyman, and
R. Schuchard, “The artificial silicon retina microchip for the treatment
of visionloss from retinitis pigmentosa,” Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 122,
pp. 460–469, 2004.
[10] M. Focke, D. Kosse, C. Muller, H. Reinecke, R. Zengerle, and F. Von
Stetten, “Lab-on-a-foil: Microfluidics on thin and flexible films,” Lab
Chip, vol. 10, pp. 1365–1386, 2010.
[11] S. K. Sia and G. M. Whitesides, “Microfluidic devices fabricated in
poly(dimethylsiloxane) for biological studies,” Electrophoresis, vol. 24,
pp. 3563–3576, 2003.
[12] E. Kalvesten, L. Smith, L. Tenerz, and G. Stemme, “The first surface micromachined pressure sensor for cardiovascular pressure measurements,”
in Proc.1998 11th Annu. Int. Workshop MEMS, pp. 574–579.
[13] R. Kersjes, F. Liebscher, E. Spiegel, Y. Manoli, and W. Mokwa, “An
invasive catheter flow sensor with on-chip CMOS readout electronics for
the on-line determination of blood flow,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 54,
pp. 563–567, 1996.
[14] J. F. L. Goosen, P. J. French, and P. M. Sarro, “Pressure, flow and oxygen
saturation sensors on one chip for use in catheters,” in Proc.13th Annu.
Int. Conf. MEMS, 2000, pp. 537–540.
[15] H. Y. Hsu, A. J. Hariz, T. Omari, M. F. Teng, D. Sii, S. Chan, L. Lau, S. Tan,
G. Lin, M. Haskard, D. Mulcahy, and M. Bakewell, “Development of a
MEMS based manometric catheter for diagnosis of functional swallowing
disorders,” J. Phys.: Conf. Series, vol. 34, pp. 955–960, 2006.
[16] H.-C. Park, C. Song, M. Kang, Y. Jeong, and K.-H. Jeong, “Forward
imaging OCT endoscopic catheter based on MEMS lens scanning,” Opt.
Lett., vol. 37, pp. 2673–2675, 2012.
[17] D. Maji and S. Das, “Simulation and feasibility study of flow sensor on
flexible polymer for healthcare application,” in Proc. IEEE-EMBS Special
Topic Conf. Point-Care Healthcare Technol. (PHT), 2013, India, pp. 132–
135.

MAJI AND DAS: SIMULATION AND FEASIBILITY STUDY OF FLOW SENSOR ON FLEXIBLE POLYMER FOR HEALTHCARE APPLICATION

[18] R. Morent, N. D. Geyter, F. Axisa, N. D. Smet, L. Gengembre,
E. D. Leersnyder, C. Leys, J. Vanfleteren, M. Rymarczyk-Machal,
E. Schacht, and E. Payen, “Adhesion enhancement by a dielectric barrier
discharge of PDMS used for flexible and stretchable electronics,” J. Phys.
D, Appl. Phys., vol. 40, pp. 7392–7401, 2007.
[19] N. Bowden, S. Brittain, A. G. Evans, J. W. Hutchinson, and
G. M. Whitesides, “Spontaneous formation of ordered structures in thin
films of metals supported on an elastomeric polymer,” Nature, vol. 393,
pp. 146–149, 1998.
[20] W. T. S. Huck, N. Bowden, P. Onck, T. Pardoen, J. W. Hutchinson, and
G. M. Whitesides, “Ordering of spontaneously formed buckles on planar
surfaces,” Langmuir, vol. 16, pp. 3497–3501, 2000.
[21] S. Bhattacharya, A. Datta, J. M. Berg, and S. Gangopadhyay, “Studies on
surface wettability of poly(dimethyl) siloxane (PDMS) and glass under
oxygen-plasma treatment and correlation with bond strength,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 14, pp. 590–597, 2005.
[22] A. Bogaerts, A. Quentmeier, N. Jakubowski, and R. Gijbels, “Plasma
diagnostics of an analytical Grimm-type glow discharge in argon and in
neon: Langmuir probe and optical emission spectrometry measurements,”
Spectrochim. Acta B, Atomic Spectrosc., vol. 50, pp. 1337–1349, 1995.
[23] D. Maji, P. Manocha, and S. Das, “Deposition and characterization of
nichrome thin film over PDMS elastomer,” in Proc Int. Conf. Syst. Med.
Biol., 2010, pp. 339–343.
[24] I. H. Kazi, P. M. Wild, T. N. Moore, and M. Sayer, “Characterization of
sputtered nichrome (Ni–Cr 80/20 wt.%) films for strain gauge applications,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 515, pp. 2602–2606, 2006.
[25] B.-J. Lee and P.-K. Shin, “Fabrication and characterization of Ni-Cr alloy
thin films for application to precision thin film resistors,” J. Electr. Eng.
Technol., vol. 2, pp. 525–531, 2007.

Debashis Maji (S’07) received the B.Tech. degree in
electronics and communication engineering from the
Bengal College of Engineering & Technology, Durgapur, India, in 2005, and the M.Tech. degree in sensor system technology from the Vellore Institute of
Technology, VIT University, Vellore, India, in 2008.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree from
the School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India.
His current research interests include design and
fabrication of thin film sensors, BioMEMS, and microfluidic biochips for biomedical applications.
Dr. Maji has been a Member of the IEEE-EMBS since 2010.

3305

Soumen Das received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
India, in 1988 and 1996, respectively.
Since 2007, he has been an Associate Professor
at the School of Medical Science and Technology,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He has
authored or coauthored more than 50 research papers in reputed international journals and conference
proceedings. He is the principal investigator of several research and consultancy projects in the area of
MEMS and microsystems funded by various government and private agencies. His current research interests include biomedical and
inertial MEMS transducers, BioMEMS and microfluidic biochips for electrophysiological characterization of biospecies for clinical diagnostics, microinstrumentation like microvalve, microniddle, micropump, medical electronics,
and very large scale integration unit processing.

