IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

3425

An Electroplating-Free and Minimal Noise Polyimide
Microelectrode for Recording Auditory Evoked
Potentials From the Epicranius
Jeong Hun Kim, Inho Song, Seung Min Lee, Ho Seok Choi, Hangjin Byeon, Inyoung Kim, Member, IEEE,
and Sang-Hoon Lee∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we introduce an electrode for measuring
auditory evoked potentials by employing the advantages of polyimide (PI), which is a well-known substrate material for producing
flexible electrodes using MEMS technology. The PI multimicroelectrode array has four fingers that include 16 electrodes in order
to achieve sufficient adhesion to the curved surface of the animal
skull. For high-quality signal acquisition, we optimized the device
to decrease crosstalk and improve contact impedance by adding
ground channels and fabricating a raised electrode structure. In
addition, implantation of the device was facilitated by the addition of an alignment site to ensure optimal positioning and enable
signal measurement from the specific part of the cerebral cortex
in charge of auditory sensing. After the implantation of the PI
electrode on the skull surface, electrical signals were measured following stimulation at different stimulus frequencies (5 or 10 kHz).
Unlike other techniques, administration of this PI electrode is less
invasive, reducing patient recovery time dramatically in comparison with other electrocorticographic operations. Furthermore, as
the exterior of the brain would not be exposed at any point, the
chance of infection is minimized.
Index Terms—Auditory evoked potential, epicranial EEG, multichannel electrode array, polyimide (PI) electrode.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE brain is the center of the nervous system of all vertebrate animals and the most complex organ in the body.

Manuscript received November 28, 2012; revised March 18, 2013; accepted
May 2, 2013. Date of publication May 31, 2013; date of current version November 18, 2013. This research was supported by the Public Welfare and Safety
Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)
funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology under Grant
2012-0006510, a grant of the Korea Healthcare technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health, Welfare & Family Affairs, Republic of Korea (A092052), and
supported by a Korea University Grant R1210001. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
J. H. Kim, S. M. Lee, and H. Byeon are with the Department of
Biomedical Engineering, College of Health Science, Korea University, Seoul
136-703, Korea (e-mail: neromijung@gmail.com; phd.smlee@gmail.com;
hjbyeon@naver.com).
I. Song is with the Medical Device Development Center, Osong Medical Innovation Foundation, Chungbuk 363-951, Korea (e-mail: nanayana@hanmail.net).
H. S. Choi is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Graduate
School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, Korea (e-mail: hosuk88@bme.hanyang.ac.kr).
I. Kim is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea (e-mail: iykim@hanyang.ac.kr).
∗ S.-H. Lee is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Health Science, Korea University, Seoul 136-703, Korea (e-mail:
dbiomed@korea.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2263226

It plays a central role in controlling most organs of the body
by generating muscle activity, driving secretion of hormones,
or responding to the changes in the environment. The cerebral
cortex, which is synaptically networked by large-scale neurons,
mediates complex tasks of the brain including cognition, thinking, and sensorimotor functions. Despite the enormous significance of brain function, little is known about the development
of these networks and the processes by which they mature and
distant networks become connected. Several recent studies have
revealed that distinct regions of the brain are related to each
different organ, and that biosignals from body motion and the
senses activates anatomically and functionally separated brain
areas [1]. Therefore, improving our understanding of the relationship between sensorimotor function and evoked signals from
the brain is important for comprehending brain functionality and
its complicated neuronal networks. Although current advanced
medical technologies enable the discovery of such relationships
by the use of diverse methods including intrinsic signal optical
imaging [2], functional magnetic resonance imaging [3], thermoencephaloscopy [4], magnetoencephalography [5], and EEG,
their temporal resolution is limited to the order of seconds. This
means that technologies based on metabolic time-course analysis are not able to discriminate between the primary or secondary
cortical signals generated by a specific sensory stimulation. In
contrast, the recording of field potentials allows a higher temporal resolution, limited only by the acquisition-sampling rate
(typically around 1 ms); however, the spatial resolution is inferior [6]. To address this limit of spatiotemporal resolution, in
vivo implantation of microelectrodes, which enables the recording of biosignals using a higher acquisition-sampling rate, is
commonly employed. Several electrodes for measuring signals
from the epidural, subdural, and intracortical regions were developed for obtaining higher spatiotemporal resolution (see Fig. 1).
However, the invasiveness of electrode implantation into sensitive places and the complicated surgical procedure are critical
problems. Therefore, there has to be a tradeoff between invasiveness and resolution.
In this paper, we describe the development of a multichannel microelectrode for recording signals from the surface of the
skull, and the assessment of its performance using measurements of evoked potential from the auditory cortex region of a
rat brain. Such epicranial recording is minimally invasive and
provides better resolution than an EEG. Despite these advantages however, the evoked signal from the cortex is attenuated
by the skull and by incomplete contact, so a highly flexible

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

3426

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Schematic of the various positions used for electrode placement.

multichannel microelectrode that covers the surface of the
curved skull with close contact is required for enhancing the
contact impedance [7]. For this purpose, we constructed an
embossed recording site using a patterned PI layer. In addition, ground lines were added between the signal lines to reduce
crosstalk between neighboring recording sites, and an alignment
site was designed to obtain accurate placement of the recording site just above the auditory cortex. For the enhancement of
contact resistance at the recording site, electroplating with Pt
black has been commonly used [8]. However, the mechanical
weakness of Pt black and chemical attack of the electroplating
solution offset the ease and robustness of the recording of epicranial signals [9]. Here, we have developed a recording site with
an embossed structure that has raised recording site to enhance
the contact and can be fabricated using a simple procedure, and
investigated its potential through the use of animal experiments.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

Fig. 2. Layout of the PI multichannel electrode array. (a) Overall schematic of
the electrode array, consisting of a recording site, alignment site, ribbon cable,
and connection pad. (b) Cross section of the ribbon cable. (c) Alignment on the
skull of a rat.

Fig. 3. Process of electrode fabrication. (a) Deposition of metal (Au/Ti).
(b) Embossing of the PI structures. (c) Second base layer of PI. (d) Deposition of metal and patterning of channels. (e) Top layer of PI. (f) Hard baking in
a nitrogen atmosphere. (g) Electrochemical detachment of the electrode from
the wafer.

A. Layout and Design
The epicranial PI electrode consists of four parts: the recording site, alignment site, ribbon cable, and connection pad. The
total length of the electrode was 33.91 mm and the width
was 11.07 mm. The recording site electrode array (5.5 mm
× 5.5 mm) covered an area of the rat auditory cortex, including
the primary auditory cortex (AI) and the anterior (AAF), ventral
(VAF), and suprarhinal (SRAF) auditory fields. The electrode
had four fingers, each including four electrodes [see Fig. 2(a)],
with a finger structure suitable for close contact of the electrode
on the curved skull. The diameter of the recording site was 1 mm
and the distance between the recording sites was 0.5 mm. The
width of the lines was 60 μm at the recording site and the channels at the cable site were 60 μm wide with spacing of 40 μm
between channels. To reduce crosstalk in the electrode, ground
lines were placed between the signal lines [see Fig. 2(b)]. As
shown in Fig. 2(c), the shape of the electrode was designed
specifically according to the anatomy of the rat skull, based on
the report by Paxinos and Watson in 1998, and the location of
recording site was designed to accurately match the auditory
cortex region on the skull. For this purpose, the alignment site

was designed in order to align the cross mark on the bregma
region shown in Fig. 2(c).
B. Fabrication of the Electrode
A standard photolithography process commonly used for
MEMS technology was employed. A metal layer (Ti 300 and
Au 500 Å) was first deposited onto a silicon wafer in order to
enable detachment of the resulting PI electrode at the end of the
processing without requiring the use of a dangerous chemical
reaction for removing the sacrificial layer [see Fig. 3(a)] [10].
To construct the embossed structures, a PI layer (Durimide7505,
Fuji-film Electronic Materials, Japan) [7], [11], [12] was next
spin coated onto the surface at 1500 r/min for 30 s and baked
on a hotplate for 3 min at 100◦ C. The desired embossed pattern was crosslinked with UV radiation using a mask aligner
(MDA-400 S, MIDAS System, Korea). After the exposure, the
wafer was left at room temperature for 20 min. The pattern was
then developed with QZ 3501 (Fuji-film Electronic Materials,
Japan) and rinsed with QZ 3512 (Fuji-film Electronic Materials, Japan), removing all the PI that was not contained within

KIM et al.: ELECTROPLATING-FREE AND MINIMAL NOISE POLYIMIDE MICROELECTRODE

Fig. 4. Process of assembling the electrode. (a). The electrode is put on kapton
tape. (b). PCB is aligned on the electrode and fixed by kapton tape. (c). Fill the
carbon paste in the holes of PCB. (d). PCB is coated encapsulated by PDMS
except connector.

the pattern [see Fig. 3(b)]. On the patterned wafer, a second PI
layer was spin coated at 1500 r/min for 30 s (see Fig. 3(c)]. A
metal layer (Ti 500 Å, Au 1500 Å) was then deposited using an
electron-beam evaporator (SNTek, Korea). For patterning of the
deposited metal layer, AZ GXR-601 (16cp, positive photoresist (PR), AZ Electronic Materials, Japan) was spin coated at
3000 r/min for 30 s and prebaked on hotplate for 3 min at 100◦ C.
The PR was patterned by UV irradiation followed by developing with AZ 300 MIF (AZ Electronic Materials, Japan) and the
uncovered metal layer was etched using HCl/HNO3 (3:1) for
the Au layer and H2 O/HF/HNO3 (50:1:1) for the Ti layer [see
Fig. 3(d)]. Subsequently, another PI layer was spin coated on
the wafer at 2000 r/min for 30 s and soft baked at 100◦ C for
3 min. The PI on the electrodes of the recording and connector
sites was removed by developing and rinsing [see Fig. 3(e)].
Finally, the wafer was hardbaked on a hot plate under a nitrogen
atmosphere at 200◦ C for 2 h [see Fig. 3(f)]. By applying 2.0 V
to the base metal layer, the PI electrode was then easily detached
from the base metal layer with experiment setup that connected
the cathode and anode to the base metal layer of the wafer and
the Pt net, respectively, in saline solution [see Fig. 3(g)].
C. Assembly and Packaging
A custom-made printed circuit board (PCB) was designed
to connect a preamp and the PI electrode easily. As shown in
the Fig. 4, the connection pad of the electrode was aligned and
fixed on the PCB by Kapton tape with carbon paste used for
the electrical connection. Subsequently, polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS, Sylgard 184 Silicone Elastomer, Dow Corning, USA),
which is a well-known biocompatible material [13]–[16], was
applied onto the PCB and around the connector to encapsulate
and fix the components mechanically.
D. Electrode Characterization
1) Impedance Analysis: To verify the electrical properties,
the impedance of each electrode was measured using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Series G300, Gamry instrument, USA). Three electrodes were used for the measurement, including a target electrode, a Pt counter electrode, and
a Ag/AgCl reference electrode in physiological saline solution

3427

at room temperature. The impedance spectrum was obtained
between 1 Hz and 100 kHz.
2) Cyclic Voltammetry: Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is characterized by important parameters such as the anodic and cathode
peak potentials and peak currents. To measure the performance
of electrode surface, we prepared like as experiment setup of
impedance. We measured with two type electrodes that are
embossed and nonembossed electrodes in 0.15 M NaCl solution that is similar concentration as our body fluid [17] (E0 =
−1.5 V; Eh = 1.5 V; Scan rate = 0.1 V/s; Sample interval =
0.001 V; Sensitivity = 1e–5 A/V).
3) Crosstalk Measurement: Crosstalk between neighboring
electrodes is a critical problem with microelectrode arrays. In
order to reduce crosstalk, ground lines were inserted between the
signal lines [18], [19]. To investigate the decrease in crosstalk, a
sine wave with a frequency from 1 Hz to 100 kHz was applied to
one floating electrode by a function generator (SFG-2110, GW
Instek, Taiwan) and the signal induced to the neighboring electrode was measured using an amplifier (PRA2, Plexon, USA).
The spectrum of induced signal from two types of electrode
(one is the electrode without ground channel, the other is the
electrode with ground channel) was measured to demonstrate
the effect of the ground channel [20].
E. Implantation
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (10 weeks old, weighing
290–320 g) were purchased from KOATECH in Korea and the
experimental procedures were approved by the Hanyang University Animal Care Committee. Each of the seven rats was
anesthetized before surgery with 10% diluted urethane (1.5 g/kg,
i.p., Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and fixed to a stereotaxic holder. The body temperature of the rats was maintained
at 36–37◦ C throughout the experiment using a heating pad. To
expose the lateral surface of the skull, the temporalis muscle
was resected on one side. A small hole was drilled in the occipital bone of the skull 2 mm posterior from the lambda above
the cerebellum for the ground electrode screw, and it was isolated using dental cement [see Fig. 5(a)]. The cross mark in
the electrode was aligned on the bregma, and the electrode was
parallelized on the sagittal suture to the lambda [see Fig. 5(b)].
Subsequently, the electrode was fixed by dental cement and the
recording electrode array was spread out over the left auditory
cortex 3–6.82 mm posterior from the bregma and 2–6.4 mm ventral to the dorsal surface of the skull. To improve the stability of
the signal recording and contact with the skull, a PDMS block
(5.5 mm × 5.5 mm) was placed on top of the microelectrode
array [see Fig. 5(c)]. After this procedure, the microelectrode
array and the PDMS block were fixed and covered by dental
cement. Finally, the surgical incision was sutured and the PCB
was mounted on the head of the rat [see Fig. 5(d)].
F. Recordings and Analysis
Each epicranial AEP from 16 recording sites was amplified
with a gain of 5000 V/V and band pass filtered from 1 to 1000 Hz.
To record stimuli tone simultaneously, each signal was digitized at a sampling rate of 40 kHz and then the signals were

3428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 5. Process of electrode implantation. (a) Exposure of the skull and insertion of a screw electrode above the cerebellum. (b) Alignment and fixation
of the cross mark on the bregma and the electrode parallelized on the sagittal
suture to the lambda. (c) Electrode was mounting over the left auditory cortex.
(d) Suturing of surgical incision and mounting of the PCB on the head.

downsampled to 1 kHz. The intensity of stimuli tone bursts was
adjusted to 80-dB SPL using a soundmeter (SC-30, CESVA instruments, Spain) and two different frequencies of 5 and 10 kHz,
with a rise and fall time of 5 ms and duration of 300 ms, were
tested. The tone burst was delivered every 1.3 s to the ear contralateral to the site of the microelectrode array. In total, 150
responses were recorded and filtered again from 1 to 200 Hz
during offline analysis. AEPs were averaged by the start point
of the recorded tone burst.
The positive effect of the embossed structure was validated by
the means of statistical analysis. An electrode designed with a
pattern of cross stripes by locating embossed and nonembossed
electrodes at alternating rows and columns of the array was additionally prepared to compare these structures. Statistical significance was computed with one sample t-test for every sampled
point (0–1000 ms) and accumulated for each new measurement.
A p-value less than 0.001 was considered to be significant.

Fig. 6. Optical and SEM images of the electrode. (a) Optical image of the
recording site and alignment site of the electrode. (b) The fully assembled
electrode. (c) SEM image of an embossed structure. SEM images of the cross
section of the embossed and nonembossed electrode.

Fig. 7. Impedance and CV spectra of electrodes and crosstalk testing of the
electrode. (a) Impedance magnitude. (b) Impedance phase of each recording
channel. (c) CV of embossed and nonembossed electrodes. (d) The red line is
measured in the absence of ground channels between signal channels. The blue
line is measured in the presence of ground channels.

III. RESULTS
A. Fabrication and Evaluation of Electrical Properties
The multichannel microelectrode was successfully fabricated
and assembled. Fig. 6(a) and (b) shows images of the recording
site and alignment site in addition to the final assembled electrode module. The fixation using carbon paste and PDMS was
robust enough for the device to be handled easily during characterization and surgery. Neither mechanical damage nor electrical
disconnection of the electrode was observed during the fabrication, packaging, implantation, and measurement processes.
The shape of the embossed recording site, investigated using
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), is shown in Fig. 6(c),
and the cross-sectional image in Fig. 6(d) clearly shows the
embossed structure. The impedance spectrograms of 16 arrayed

electrodes are shown in Fig. 7(a), and it can be seen that all electrodes behaved in a similar manner, indicating uniform electrical
characteristics. The magnitude of the electrode impedances varied from 5.6 to 7.8 kΩ at 1 kHz [see Fig. 7 (a)]. In addition,
the impedance phase of whole channels shows similarity in the
1 Hz to 1 kHz range of signal analysis used [see Fig. 7 (b)]. CVs
of embossed (channel 1) and nonembossed (channel 5) electrode are measured using the same electrode arrays. As shown
in Fig. 7 (c), CVs of two type electrode showed similar results.
The crosstalk between neighboring electrodes was tested, and
the red line in Fig. 7(d) shows the spectral density of the signal
induced by the sinusoidal wave of a neighboring electrode. As
expected, the crosstalk was reduced by almost 15 dB simply by
the insertion of a ground line.

KIM et al.: ELECTROPLATING-FREE AND MINIMAL NOISE POLYIMIDE MICROELECTRODE

Fig. 8. Optical images of the auditory cortex with the electrode. (a) Image of
the electrode on the skull of a rat. (b) Exposure of the auditory cortex. (c) The
electrode on the opened auditory cortex. [R, rostral; C, caudal; D dorsal; and
V, ventral; primary auditory cortex (AI), anterior auditory field (AAF), ventral
auditory field (VAF)]. Scale bars are 1 mm.

3429

Fig. 10. Cortical map of AEPs recorded at (a) 5, (b) 10 kHz. The potentials
at all 16 channels are shown for 400 ms after a tone burst stimulus. Surface
potential maps of AEP wave P1 at (c) 5, (d) 10 kHz. (R, rostral; C, caudal; D
dorsal; and V, ventral.)

Fig. 9. Onset and offset of the AEP waves (P1, N1, P o ﬀ , N o ﬀ ) by the tone
burst. Tone burst duration is 300 ms and rise/fall time is 5 ms. Therefore,
stimulation sound would be delivered by 80 dB SPL for 290 ms. After the tone
burst, the offset AEP wave (P o ﬀ /N o ﬀ ) is shown. AEP P1 and N1 amplitudes
are bigger than P o ﬀ and N o ﬀ amplitudes.

B. In Vivo Test

Fig. 11. Average signals and repetition graphs of embossed electrode and
nonembossed electrode. (a) and (c) with embossed electrode. (b) and (d) with
nonembossed electrode.

To demonstrate that the electrode was correctly positioned
above the auditory cortex, the area was exposed by opening the
skull and the pattern of veins was observed [see Fig. 8(a) and
(b)]. The AI, AAF, and VAF could be distinguished based on
the positions of the veins. After covering the opened skull, the
electrode was replaced and the vein patterns under the skull
were again observed, as clearly seen in Fig. 8(c). The electrode
covered the vein patterns that were identified as the auditory
cortex region, including the posterior to the ascending branch
of the inferior cerebral vein in the caudal part of the temporal
cortex [21]–[23].
As shown in Figs. 9 and 10, the epicranial AEP comprised a
large N9 that occurred at 9 ms (8.9 ms, 1.44 S.E.M), a large P22 at
22 ms (21.6 ms, 1.98 S.E.M), and a large N39 at 39 ms (39.1 ms,
4.06 S.E.M) through all electrode sites. In some cases, this wave
was then followed by a biphasic offset wave consisting of Poﬀ
and Noﬀ waves (see Fig. 9). The P22 wave was chosen in order to

visualize the auditory cortical activation, and the peak amplitude
of the P22 wave was measured. As shown in Fig. 10, distinct
spots were produced depending on the stimulus frequencies so
it was possible to observe the spatial distribution of the AEPs.
The potential distribution evoked by a 5 kHz tone burst stimulus
included that evoked by a 10 kHz tone burst stimulus, and the
direction of activation area in response to auditory stimuli was
in the caudal-to-rostral direction.
Statistical analysis showed that the electrode with the embossed structures was more efficient than that with nonembossed. As trials were accumulated [24], the p-values at the peak
of each AEPs simultaneously decreased for both electrodes, as
illustrated in Fig. 11(a) and (b). With the 5 kHz stimulus, the
p-value for the embossed structured electrode decreased to below 0.001 by accumulation of only averagely 36.0 ± 13.7 trials,
however, 63.0 ± 17.6 trials were required to get below the same

3430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

p-value for the nonembossed structure. The standard deviation
of the results for the embossed structured electrode (68.8 ±
3.5 μV at positive peaks) was also less than for the nonembossed
(86.6 ± 9.3 μV at positive peaks). For the 10 kHz stimulus, it
took averagely 46.25 ± 4.7 trials for the embossed structure
and 50.25 ± 3.26 trials for the nonembossed structure for the
level of significance to be achieved. These results suggest that
by embossing the electrode shape, the required measurement
time was reduced and the signal quality was improved.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have demonstrated the recording of epicranial EEG signals using an embossed PI microelectrode array.
AEPs from the auditory cortex of a rat have been previously
recorded by several groups using diverse electrodes, with typical positive and negative peaks being observed at 6–11, 16–23,
25–35, and 35–55 ms [23], [25]–[28]. As expected, our PI multimicroelectrode array showed a typical AEP wave consisting
of N9 , P22 , and N39 waves, even though the measurements were
taken from above the skull. These results are consistent with
other reports on epipial and epidural recording [23], [27], [28],
indicating that the developed PI multimicroelectrode array has
the ability to acquire a comparable quality of epidural AEPs.
This stems from the beneficial effects provided by the embossed structures and the added ground lines. Although several
safe implantable electrodes have been developed in the past,
the intracranial tissue still recognizes them as foreign bodies,
resulting in tissue reactions such as gliosis or hypervascularization. For small animals such as mice and rats in particular, it
is less appropriate to remove a large part of the skull to enable
the implantation of a measuring device. This can affect both
the stability and quality of the cortical evoked responses [29].
Moreover, long-term experiments with implanted electrodes are
highly challenging. Reossification can disrupt the contact of the
epidural implanted multielectrode array with the tissue [25].
Screw electrodes are widely used to record cortical signals and
evoked potentials above the skull because of their noninvasiveness, but their spatial resolution is poor due to their size [30].
In addition, existing epicranius electrode has some problems
such as using an electrolyte gel and recording the EEG signal
on opened the skull, therefore it is difficult to acquire signals
for a long time [31]. The PI multimicroelectrode array proposed in this paper is extremely useful for recording epicranial
signals in small mammals because of their ability to maintain
close contact with the skull’s curvature, and it has the potential
to overcome many of problems associated with conventional
measuring methods.
In summary, we have demonstrated the feasibility of utilizing
a newly developed PI multimicroelectrode array to acquire highquality epicranial signals from the auditory cortex. Our results
demonstrate that the electrode is highly useful for acquiring
epicranial cortical neuronal activation measurements for visualizing spatial patterns of AEP signals. This is due to the small
size of the electrode, the presence of ground lines to minimize
interference from neighboring recording sites, and the enough
low impedance of each electrode to measure high-quality local

field potential signals [32], as well as the superior contact of the
device with the curved surface of the skull.
REFERENCES
[1] M. A. Lebedev and M. A. Nicolelis, “Brain-machine interfaces: Past,
present and future,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 29, pp. 536–546, Sep. 2006.
[2] S. A. Masino, M. C. Kwon, Y. Dory, and R. D. Frostig, “Characterization
of functional-organization within rat barrel cortex using intrinsic signal
optical imaging through a thinned skull,” Proc. Nat. Academy Sci. United
States Amer., vol. 90, pp. 9998–10002, Nov. 1, 1993.
[3] N. K. Logothetis, J. Pauls, M. Augath, T. Trinath, and A. Oeltermann,
“Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the fMRI signal,” Nature,
vol. 412, no. 6843, pp. 150–7, Jul. 12 2001.
[4] I. A. Shevelev, “Functional imaging of the brain by infrared radiation
(thermoencephaloscopy),” Progress Neurobiol., vol. 56, pp. 269–305, Oct.
1998.
[5] A. E. Walker, “Electroencephalography, basic principles, clinicalapplications and related fields—Niedermeyer, E., da Silva, L.F.,” J. Nervous Mental Disease, vol. 170, pp. 709–710, 1982.
[6] E. Troncoso, D. Muller, S. Czellar, and J. Z. Kiss, “Epicranial sensory
evoked potential recordings for repeated assessment of cortical functions
in mice,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 97, pp. 51–58, Apr. 1, 2000.
[7] D. H. Baek, E. J. Lee, J. H. Moon, J. H. Choi, J. J. Pak, and S. H. Lee,
“Polyimide-based multi-channel arrayed electrode for measuring EEG
signal on the skull of mouse,” in Proc IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
2009, vol. 2009, pp. 7022–7025.
[8] Y. F. Rui, J. Q. Liu, B. Yang, K. Y. Li, and C. S. Yang, “Parylene-based implantable platinum-black coated wire microelectrode for orbicularis oculi
muscle electrical stimulation,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 14, pp. 367–
373, Apr. 2012.
[9] J. Ordonez, M. Schuettler, C. Boehler, T. Boretius, and T. Stieglitz, “Thin
films and microelectrode arrays for neuroprosthetics,” MRS Bull., vol. 37,
pp. 590–598, Jun. 2012.
[10] S. Metz, A. Bertsch, and P. Renaud, “Partial release and detachment of microfabricated metal and polymer structures by anodic metal dissolution,”
J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 14, pp. 383–391, Apr. 2005.
[11] Y. Sun, S. P. Lacour, R. A. Brooks, N. Rushton, J. Fawcett, and R. E.
Cameron, “Assessment of the biocompatibility of photosensitive polyimide for implantable medical device use,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res.: Part
A, vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 648–655, Sep. 2009.
[12] D. H. Baek, J. S. Park, E. J. Lee, S. Shin, J. H. Moon, J. J. Pak, and
S. H. Lee, “Interconnection of multichannel polyimide electrodes using
anisotropic conductive films (ACFs) for biomedical applications,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, pp. 1466–1473, May 2011.
[13] C. Hassler, T. Boretius, and T. Stieglitz, “Polymers for neural implants,”
J. Polymer Sci. Part B: Polymer Phys., vol. 49, pp. 18–33, Jan. 2011.
[14] S. J. Kim, J. K. Lee, J. W. Kim, J. W. Jung, K. Seo, S. B. Park, K. H.
Roh, S. R. Lee, Y. H. Hong, S. J. Kim, Y. S. Lee, S. J. Kim, and K. S.
Kang, “Surface modification of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) induced
proliferation and neural-like cells differentiation of umbilical cord bloodderived mesenchymal stem cells,” J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med., vol. 19,
pp. 2953–2962, Aug. 2008.
[15] S. H. Kim, J.-H. Moon, J. H. Kim, S. M. Jeong, and S.-H. Lee, “Flexible,
stretchable and implantable PDMS encapsulated cable for implantable
medical device,” Biomed. Eng. Lett., vol. 1, pp. 199–203, 2011.
[16] G. S. Jeong, D. H. Baek, H. C. Jung, J. H. Song, J. H. Moon, S. W. Hong,
I. Y. Kim, and S. H. Lee, “Solderable and electroplatable flexible electronic
circuit on a porous stretchable elastomer,” Nature Commun., vol. 3, p. 977,
2012.
[17] C. Cannes, F. Kanoufi, and A. J. Bard, “Cyclic voltammetry and scanning electrochemical microscopy of ferrocenemethanol at monolayer
and bilayer-modified gold electrodes,” J. Electroanalytical Chemistry,
vol. 547, pp. 83–91, Apr. 2003.
[18] L. K. Baxter, “Capacitive sensors offer numerous advantages,” Electron.
Design, vol. 46, p. 46, Jan. 1998.
[19] Y. G. Lim, K. H. Hong, K. K. Kim, J. H. Shin, S. M. Lee, G. S. Chung,
H. J. Baek, D. U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Monitoring physiological signals
using nonintrusive sensors installed in daily life equipment,” Biomed. Eng.
Lett., vol. 1, pp. 11–20, 2011.
[20] H. W. Ott and H. W. Ott, Noise Reduction Techniques in Electronic Systems. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1988.
[21] S. L. Sally and J. B. Kelly, “Organization of auditory-cortex in the albinorat: Sound frequency,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 59, pp. 1627–1638, May
1988.

KIM et al.: ELECTROPLATING-FREE AND MINIMAL NOISE POLYIMIDE MICROELECTRODE

[22] J. Horikawa, S. Ito, Y. Hosokawa, T. Homma, and K. Murata, “Tonotopic
representation in the rat auditory-cortex,” Proc. Jpn. Academy Series BPhys. Biological Sci., vol. 64, pp. 260–263, Oct. 1988.
[23] H. Takahashi, M. Nakao, and K. Kaga, “Interfield differences in intensity
and frequency representation of evoked potentials in rat auditory cortex,”
Hear Res., vol. 210, pp. 9–23, Dec. 2005.
[24] C. Grozea, C. D. Voinescu, and S. Fazli, “Bristle-sensors–low-cost flexible
passive dry EEG electrodes for neurofeedback and BCI applications,” J.
Neural Eng., vol. 8, p. 025008, Apr. 2011.
[25] H. Nakano, K. Saito, and K. Suzuki, “Chronic implantation technique
for monopolar EEG monitoring of epileptic seizures in mice,” Brain Res.
Bull., vol. 35, pp. 261–268, 1994.
[26] H. K. Meeren, A. M. van Cappellen van Walsum, E. L. van Luijtelaar, and
A. M. Coenen, “Auditory evoked potentials from auditory cortex, medial
geniculate nucleus, and inferior colliculus during sleep-wake states and
spike-wave discharges in the WAG/Rij rat,” Brain Res., vol. 898, pp. 321–
331, Apr. 2001.
[27] H. Takahashi, T. Ejiri, M. Nakao, N. Nakamura, K. Kaga, and T. Herve,
“Microelectrode array on folding polyimide ribbon for epidural mapping of functional evoked potentials,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
pp. 510–516, Apr. 2003.
[28] H. Takahashi, M. Nakao, and K. Kaga, “Distributed representation of
sound intensity in the rat auditory cortex,” Neuroreport, vol. 15, pp. 2061–
2065, Sep. 2004.
[29] P. J. Rousche and R. A. Normann, “Chronic recording capability of the
Utah Intracortical Electrode Array in cat sensory cortex,” J. Neurosci.
Methods, vol. 82, pp. 1–15, Jul. 1998.
[30] J. D. Yeager, D. J. Phillips, D. M. Rector, and D. F. Bahr, “Characterization
of flexible ECoG electrode arrays for chronic recording in awake rats,” J.
Neurosci. Methods, vol. 173, pp. 279–285, Aug. 2008.
[31] C. Quairiaux, P. Megevand, J. Z. Kiss, and C. M. Michel, “Functional
development of large-scale sensorimotor cortical networks in the brain,”
J. Neurosci., vol. 31, pp. 9574–9584, Jun. 2011.
[32] B. Rubehn, C. Bosman, R. Oostenveld, P. Fries, and T. Stieglitz, “A
MEMS-based flexible multichannel ECoG-electrode array,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 6, p. 036003, Jun. 2009.
Jeong Hun Kim was born in Korea in 1985. He
received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering
from Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, in 2010. He is
currently working toward the M.S. degree in biomedical electronics and information engineering, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea.
His current research interests include microelectrode, biological microelectromechanical system, MEMS, and neural engineering.

Inho Song received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronics
and computer engineering from Hanyang University,
Seoul, Korea, in 1996, 1998, and 2006, respectively.
From 2007 to 2012, he was a Research Professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. He is currently a
Team Manager at Medical Device Development Center, Osong Medical Innovation Foundation, Osong,
Korea. His current research interests include neural
signal processing and implantable neural prostheses.
Seung Min Lee received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from Sogang University, Seoul,
Korea, in 2005, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
interdisciplinary program for bioengineering from
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2007 and
2012, respectively. His Ph.D. research was focused
on the nerve recording using implantable devices and
analyzing physiological signal.
He is currently a Research Professor at Korea University, Seoul, Korea. His research interests include
active microelectrodes, new electronic materials, and
electronic devices for biomedical engineering.

3431

Ho Seok Choi was born in Seoul, Korea, in 1988. He
received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering
from Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea, in 2011.
Since 2009, he has been a Researcher in the
Department of Biomedical Engineering of Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea. His current research interests include brain computer interface and biosignal
processing.

Hangjin Byeon received the B.S. degree in control
and instrumentation engineering from Korea University, Seoul, Korea, in 2012. He is currently working
toward the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering,
Korea University.
His current research interests include active electrode and system for biopotential measurement and
neural engineering.

Inyoung Kim (M’90) was born in Seoul, Korea,
in 1965. He received the M.D. degree in 1989 and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in
1991 and 1994, respectively.
From 1994 to 2000, he worked at the Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul, Korea, in the
area of Medical Instrumentation. Since 2000, he has
been a Professor and the Director of the Department
of Biomedical Engineering of Hanyang University,
Seoul, Korea. His current research interests include
biosignal processing and neural engineering.

Sang-Hoon Lee (M’96) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea, in 1983, 1987, and 1992,
respectively.
From 1985 to 1992, he was a Researcher in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National
University Hospital. From 2006, he was a Professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Dankook University. In 2002, he was a Visiting Scientist in the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
University of Wisconsin-Madison. He is currently a Professor in the Department
of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. His current research
interests include the development of cell on a chip, micro tissue engineering
and bio-artificial organ, design, and development of microfluidic devices for
biomedical applications and flexible implantable sensor for U-healthcare system, and brain-to-machine interface.

