2848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

Epidermal Impedance Sensing Sheets for Precision
Hydration Assessment and Spatial Mapping
Xian Huang, Huanyu Cheng, Kaile Chen, Yilin Zhang, Yihui Zhang, Yuhao Liu, Chenqi Zhu, Shao-chi Ouyang,
Gil-Woo Kong, Cunjiang Yu, Yonggang Huang, and John A. Rogers∗

Abstract—This paper presents a class of hydration monitor
that uses ultrathin, stretchable sheets with arrays of embedded
impedance sensors for precise measurement and spatially multiplexed mapping. The devices contain miniaturized capacitive electrodes arranged in a matrix format, capable of integration with skin
in a conformal, intimate manner due to the overall skin-like physical properties. These “epidermal” systems noninvasively quantify
regional variations in skin hydration, at uniform or variable skin
depths. Experimental results demonstrate that the devices possess
excellent uniformity, with favorable precision and accuracy. Theoretical models capture the underlying physics of the measurement
and enable quantitative interpretation of the experimental results.
These devices are appealing for applications ranging from skin care
and dermatology, to cosmetology and health/wellness monitoring,
with the additional potential for combined use with other classes of
sensors for comprehensive, quantitative physiological assessment
via the skin.
Index Terms—Depth profiling, epidermal electronics, hydration
sensing, multiplexing, spatial mapping.

I. INTRODUCTION
UMAN skin is composed of complex structures in which
water influences synthetic pathways for lipids [1] and
DNA [2], and defines mechanical characteristics [3] and electrical properties [4], as well as the overall appearance and surface texture [5]. Decreases in skin hydration levels can lead
to eczema, acne, itching, and cracking of the stratum corneum

H

Manuscript received March 3, 2013; revised April 12, 2013; accepted May
17, 2013. Date of publication May 31, 2013; date of current version September
14, 2013. This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy
under Grant DE-FG02-07ER46453 and Grant DE-FG02-07ER46471. The work
of J. A. Rogers was supported by the National Security Science and Engineering
Faculty Fellowship. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
X. Huang, K. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Zhu, S.-C. Ouyang, G.-W. Kong,
and C. Yu are with the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (e-mail:
xh2123@illinois.edu; chen95@illinois.edu; zhang163@illinois.edu; liu104@
illinois.edu; zhu47@illinois.edu; ouyang4@illinois.edu; kong7@illinois.edu;
yu.cunjiang@gmail.com).
H. Cheng and Y. Huang are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA (e-mail:
huanyucheng2014@u.northwestern.edu;y-huang@northwestern.edu).
Y. Zhang is with the Northwestern University, Mechanical Engineering,
Evanston, IL 60208 USA, and also with Center for Mechanics and Materials, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100082, China (e-mail: yihui.zhang@
northwestern.edu).
∗ J. A. Rogers is with the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (e-mail:
jrogers@illinois.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2264879

(SC), all of which can increase skin roughness and compromise
its ability to prevent transdermal water loss (TEWL). Accurately
measuring hydration levels of the skin can, therefore, be important in dermatology and cosmetology as a means for analyzing
various disease states (e.g., eczema, psoriasis, atopic dermatitis,
and ichthyosis) [6]–[9] and assessing factors (e.g., environmental, age, stress, and hormone) [10]–[13] that can be associated
with abnormal skin responses. Hydration can also determine the
effectiveness of medical therapies [9], [14]–[16], and cosmetic
treatments [17]–[20].
Skin hydration levels are typically characterized by measurements of electrical impedance [4], [21], [22], thermal conductivity [23], spectroscopic properties [24]–[26], and mechanical
characteristics [27], [28]. Impedance, however, represents one
of the most direct indications, due to the strong influence of
water content on conductivity and permittivity of the skin. Instrumental simplicity, low cost, and minimally invasive operation with commercially available tools existing in both single
point [29]–[32] and multipoint mapping [33]–[35] formats provide further advantages over other measurement methods. The
precision of the measurement, however, depends critically on
the effectiveness of contact between the soft, curved, and textured surface of the skin and the rigid, planar metal electrodes
that are typically used [29]. As a result, such devices often incorporate pressure sensors to facilitate application of specific,
repeatable levels contact force during measurements [29]. Such
sensors help minimize, but do not eliminate, problems in irreproducibility that arise from uncontrolled variations in contact
properties [36], thereby resulting in random fluctuations in the
device output. Furthermore, redistribution of water within the
SC as a consequence of mechanical stress of compression forces
on the skin surface tends to alter the skin hydration [37]–[39],
and thus affects the accuracy of hydration measurement.
We recently reported a hydration sensor technology based on
differential impedance measurements using a soft, conformal
system designed to offer mechanical properties well matched to
the epidermis itself [40]. This class of “epidermal” sensor enables spontaneous contact with the skin, driven by van der Waals
forces alone, without application of pressure, thereby leading to
precise, completely noninvasive hydration determination, with
minimized common-mode disturbances. One limitation of our
previously described sensor is that, as with commercially available meters, hydration levels are measured only in a single,
confined area, due to the small number of sensing electrodes. A
concept for a epidermal device capable of hydration mapping
was recently described [40]. This work builds on those ideas
and provides systematic experimental and theoretical studies of

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

HUANG et al.: EPIDERMAL IMPEDANCE SENSING SHEETS FOR PRECISION HYDRATION ASSESSMENT AND SPATIAL MAPPING

all essential aspects of device operation. The resulting systems
noninvasively quantify regional variations in skin hydration, at
uniform or variable skin depths, in modes that are mechanically
invisible to user, due to the epidermal physical properties of the
devices. In addition, we report theoretical models, supported by
systematic experimental data that can account for the underlying physics of the measurement, and also aid in quantitative
interpretation of the results. The results demonstrate highly uniform device response with irregularities that primarily reflect
the skin variations. The collective sensor output can be used
for continuous hydration imaging with characteristic measurement depths defined by the frequency and the geometry of the
electrodes [41]–[43]. Choices of design parameters of the array, such as the electrode sizes, spacings, and numbers of pairs
of electrodes, define the spatial resolution. With modest effort,
spatial coverage of the device can be further expanded while
maintaining conformal skin attachment with maximized sensitivity to skin impedance. These attributes suggest that this type
of technology, particularly when combined with other classes
of sensors in a single system, can be integrated intimately with
the epidermis, providing valuable, wide-ranging applications
in human healthcare and wellness evaluation via quantitative
measurements through the skin.
II. PRINCIPLE AND SENSOR DESIGN
Hydration mapping is conducted directly on the skin using
multiplexing impedance measurements with epidermal devices.
Similarity in measurement principles of epidermal devices and
commercial hydration sensors (CHS) allows direct conversion
of measured skin impedance to hydration level provided by the
CHS. In particular, both the conductivity and permittivity of
the skin change with hydration levels due to primarily variations in the electrical contributions from free and bound water
in the skin [44]. Individually isolated capacitive electrodes allow multiplexed operation with relatively simple measurement
systems.
A. Epidermal Impedance Sensors for Spatial
Hydration Mapping
Fig. 1 shows images and schematic illustrations of an epidermal skin hydration mapping sensor that consists of 64 channels
of planar electrode pairs designed to quantify skin impedance
across an area of 15 × 15 mm2 . Each pair of electrodes includes
an inner circular disk and an outer annulus, equally distributed
across the overall area of the device, in an 8 × 8 array format. Circular electrodes in a given row act as current sources
that share a common current supply; annulus electrodes in a
given column provide current sinks that are connected in series.
As a result, any electrode pair can be individually selected for
impedance measurement. Fig. 1(f) provides a cross-sectional illustration of two adjacent electrodes that form direct contacts to
the skin. The associated electrical field penetrates the skin but is
mostly confined within the SC region, for the electrode geometries and frequencies of applied current explored here. Devices
used for measuring skin hydration over large areas with uniform
or different skin depths (by use of different geometries and/or

2849

Fig. 1. (a) Optical micrograph of an epidermal hydration mapping system.
(b) Representative pair of sensors, showing central circular electrode pads with
radii rc and surrounding concentric ring electrodes with inner and outer radii
(ra i and ra o ). (c) Two electrodes on a hydration depth-profiling sensor with
different rc to allow measurement at a different skin depth. (d) A fabricated
device under a stretching deformation. (e) A fabricated device under bending
and twisting. (f) Diagram of skin integration and measurement principle.

frequencies, as described subsequently) adopt similar designs
and are referred to as epidermal hydration mapping sensors and
depth profiling sensors, respectively. In particular, inner circular
electrodes have fixed radii rc throughout the mapping array [see
Fig. 1(b)], while radii of the circular electrodes on the depth profiling sensors are varied between rows to alter the distribution of
electrical field within the skin [see Fig. 1(c)]. The device configured for depth profiling does so across the area of the array,
where different electrode pairs measure to different characteristic depths. Depth profiling at a single location, with a single
electrode pair, can be achieved by scanning the measurement
frequency. The electrodes terminate at circular bonding pads
aligned vertically and horizontally near the edge of the overall
system, and are joined through serpentine interconnects in mesh
layouts. The latter design feature provides epidermal mechanics
when the system is implemented on soft, thin elastomeric substrates. Physical isolation between inner and outer electrodes
allows each pair in the array to be individually selected with
minimal crosstalk, for mapping in a simple, multiplexed mode.
The fabrication processes are similar to those recently reported for related devices [40]. Briefly, a sacrificial layer of
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA; 500 nm thick) and a layer
of polyimide (PI; 1 μm thick) are spin-cast onto a silicon (Si)
wafer [see Fig. 2(a)]. Serpentine interconnect traces consist of
photolithographically patterned bilayers of Cr (5 nm) and Au
(400 nm). A subsequent coating of PI (1 μm) [see Fig. 2(b)]
electrically insulates the top surfaces. Selected regions of PI are
removed by reactive ion etching (RIE) to form via contacts

2850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

water [see Fig. 2(j)], to yield an integrated device with excellent
stretchability [see Fig. 1(d)] and flexibility [see Fig. 1(e)].
B. Conformal Contact of Epidermal Hydration
Sensors to the Skin
The epidermal hydration mapping sensors can be integrated
onto the skin using a previously introduced physical lamination
process followed by rinsing in water to remove the temporary
carrier substrate [45] resulting in intimate and conformal skin
contact (see Fig. 2(k)]. Devices mounted in this way exhibit
excellent compliance and ability to follow skin motions without
constraint or delamination (see Fig. 2(i)–(o)]. Devices with comparatively thicker silicone substrates (e.g., 50 to 100 μm) provide
sufficient mechanical toughness, and only slightly compromised
mechanics, to allow repeated measurements by removing and
reattaching to the skin [see Fig. 2(p)]. These reusable devices
are fixed at one corner with a small piece of surgical tape, which
also partially attaches to the skin. The tape facilitates device
handling and improves the consistency of the measurement.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND METHODS
A. Epidermal Impedance Sensors for Spatial
Hydration Mapping

Fig. 2. (a) to (j) Schematic illustration of steps for fabricating epidermal
hydration sensors. (k) to (p) Epidermal hydration sensor mounted on the skin
of the forearm. This sequence of images shows the device, undeformed (k), and
uniaxially stretched along the horizontal (l), vertical (m), diagonal right (n),
and diagonal left (o) directions. Here, the device adheres to the skin by van der
Waals interactions alone, thereby allowing it to be easily peeled from the skin
using tweezers (p).

[see Fig. 2(c)]. An additional patterned bilayer of Cr/Au
(5 nm/200 nm) forms the electrodes [see Fig. 2(d)]. Patterned
etching through entire stacked layers by RIE defines the open
mesh layout [see Fig. 2(f)]. Eliminating the sacrificial PMMA
layer by immersion in acetone for 5 min at 100◦ C enables
removal of the device with a water-soluble poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) tape (Wave Solder Tape 5414, 3M Company) (see
Fig. 2(g)]. Layers of Ti/SiO2 (5/40 nm) [see Fig. 2(h)] deposited onto the backside allows chemical bonding to a thin,
low-modulus silicone substrate (Solaris, Smooth-On, Inc.) [see
Fig. 2(i)]. Finally, the PVA tape on the device is removed by

The circular electrodes in mapping sensors for uniform skin
depths involve concentric designs [see Fig. 1(b)], consisting of
inner disks (rc ) (200 μm in radius) surrounded by rings (inner
radius rai : 300 μm, outer radius rao : 450 μm). For sensors designed for various skin depths, rc increases from 60 to 200 μm
with a step of 20 μm across the array, while rai and rao are
fixed at 300 and 400 μm, respectively [see Fig. 1(c)]. In both of
these two cases, each electrode pair is 2 mm away from its nearest neighbors. The electrodes connect to corresponding bonding
pads (diameter: 1.2 mm, spacing: 2 mm) through serpentine
traces (width 55 μm; ∼225 μm radii of curvature). The circular geometries of the electrodes offer symmetries that facilitate
theoretical analysis. Similar layouts are common in the types of
conventional, rigid macroscale electrodes found in CHS [29],
[30].
B. Multiplexing Impedance Analyzer
for Hydration Measurement
An LCR meter (E4980 A, Agilent Technologies) equipped
with multiplexing measurement capability serves as a system
for quantifying the response of the sensors [see Fig. 3(a) and
(b)]. Here, the meter sequentially provides an ac voltage (Vin ;
2 V peak to peak) at frequencies between 20 Hz and 2 MHz to
each channel [A1 to A8; labeled horizontally from right to left in
Fig. 3(b)] of the hydration sensor through a row scanning multiplexer (multiplexer1, ADG 708, Analog Devices). The output
voltage Vout of each channel [B1 to B8; labeled vertically from
top to bottom in Fig. 3(b)] is scanned by the meter with a column
multiplexer (multiplexer2, ADG 708, Analog Devices). A computer controlled I/O card (USB-8451, National Instruments) selects pins (a1 to a3, b1 to b3) in the multiplexers that correspond
to channels A1 through A8 and B1 through B8. These channels

HUANG et al.: EPIDERMAL IMPEDANCE SENSING SHEETS FOR PRECISION HYDRATION ASSESSMENT AND SPATIAL MAPPING

Fig. 3. (a) Image and (b) diagram of the hydration measurement setup, with
multiplexed acquisition. (c) and (d) Images of use of an epidermal hydration
sensor and a commercial hydration sensor. (e) Application of an epidermal sensor on a phantom skin model for in vitro characterization of sensor response.
(f) Image and (g) diagram of a microfluidic device for determining the measurement depth of the sensor. (h) Voltage distribution among different columns
on an epidermal sensor. Here, column 5 provides a current injection channel.
Voltage presented on other columns arises from capacitive coupling of ac signals
between columns. (i) Frequency response of a representative epidermal sensor
at various hydration levels.

are physically isolated, but capacitively coupled. At any given
time, only one row and one column are selected by the multiplexers. Thus, the impedance analyzer measures only the impedance
associated with the electrode pair that lies at the crossing point
defined by the selected row and the column. Other electrode
pairs are electrically isolated from the impedance analyzer by
the multiplexers. The LCR meter converts the corresponding
Vout to an impedance value by comparing the amplitude and
the phase of Vout to Vin , while preventing significant capacitive
coupling to neighboring channels [see Fig. 3(h)]. Repeated row
scanning followed by column scanning allows individual addressing of all of the electrode pairs in the device. The collected
impedance values can be combined to yield spatial maps.
C. Experimental Methods and Materials
Experimental evaluations involve in vitro and in vivo testing. Both the magnitude and phase of the sensor impedance
can be used to quantify skin hydration [40]. However, only the
impedance magnitude is presented, to reflect the collective effects of changes in skin conductivity and permittivity due to
hydration variations [46]–[48]. In vitro studies use a thickness-

2851

controlled microfluidic setup to evaluate the dependence of the
effective measurement depth, defined by the depth beyond which
the sensor impedance ceases to increase, on electrode geometry
and sensing frequency [41]–[43]. The uniformity of the sensor
response is characterized in air and on a phantom skin sample [49], [50] made of a combination of water, agar, polyethylene, sodium chloride, sodium azide, and TX 151 (Oil Center
Research). The agar provides a solid matrix; polyethylene and
sodium chloride set the permittivity and conductivity; sodium
azide is used as a preservative. The addition of TX-151 alters
the mechanical properties of the phantom skin, resulting in a
gelatin-based material that can be molded to form a planar surface with hydration levels and electrical properties comparable
to the human skin. The thickness-controlled microfluidic setup
and the phantom skin serve to characterize different aspects of
device operation: depth profiling and uniformity in response.
The platforms either have stacked layers or electrical properties
similar to skin. These structures are not, of course, complete
skin replicas with similar detailed properties, which leads to
some limitations in their use.
In vivo studies are conducted by attaching epidermal hydration mapping sensors to the skin of the ventral forearm and
then measuring impedance changes associated with hydration
levels across the array at sweeping or fixed frequencies. The
epidermal sensors can be easily removed from the skin upon the
completion of array scanning to avoid accumulation of water
vapor underneath the device from TEWL, which can otherwise
decrease the skin impedance. Repeated measurements without
removal are less instructive due to such effects, as reported in
evaluations using other technologies [30], [51], [52]. Sweeping the frequency of the applied voltage reveals the frequencydependent impedance changes associated with hydration levels
across the array. Hydration measurements are typically conducted at frequencies with maximum observed sensitivity, based
on in vitro control experiments using the microfluidic setup.
With in vivo demonstrations, patterns of hydration manually defined on the skin by local application of moisturizing lotions
(Intensive Rescue Moisture Body Lotion, Vaseline, Inc.) are
revealed by hydration mapping with arrayed sensors. Measurement results are quantitatively converted to hydration levels by
calibration against a CHS (MoistureMeterSC Compact, Delfin,
Inc.) [29], which measures skin impedance at an excitation frequency of 1.25 MHz and is widely considered as a reliable tool
for skin hydration assessment [12], [29], [53], [54].
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. In Vitro Characterization of Depth Profiling Sensors
Systematic studies reveal the dependence of the measured
impedance on frequency and geometry. Test structures that consist of molded PDMS with microfluidic chambers whose heights
hD varies from 10 to 60 μm [see Fig. 3(f) and (g)] provide a
platform to approximate, in a rough sense, the structure of human skin. Semipermeable cellulose membranes (Spectra/Por
Dialysis Membrane, Spectrum Laboratories, Inc.) with thicknesses (hSC ) of ∼20 μm seal the chambers, to prevent leaking of phosphate buffered saline solutions introduced through

2852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

lus electrodes increases the effective measurement depth. These
in vitro depth profiling results demonstrate the ability to define measurement depths by suitable selection of measurement
frequency and electrode spacing.
B. In Vitro Characterization of Sensor Uniformity

Fig. 4. Changes in impedance as a function of microfluidic chamber height at
a frequency of (a) 15 kHz, (b) 250 kHz, (c) 500 kHz, and (d) 1.25 MHz with
inner electrode radii changed from 60 to 200 μm. In vitro impedance mapping
using an epidermal hydration sensor (e) in air and (f) on a phantom skin sample,
both recorded at 15 kHz.

inlets/outlets at the periphery. The resulting overall chamber heights (hD + hSC ) are then varied from 30 to 80 μm.
Depth profiling hydration sensors that exploit different electrode
radii attach to the cellulose membrane. Measurements of the
impedance using various sensor geometries for different chamber heights reveal the effective depth of hydration assessment.
As shown in Fig. 4(a)–(d), the electrodes respond to the changes
of chamber heights differently. The dependence on height is
determined by the measurement frequencies and the electrode
radii, with the former representing the dominant effect for the
systems explored here. For example, at a frequency of 15 kHz,
all electrodes exhibit decreasing impedance with hD up to 40 μm
[see Fig. 4(a)]. When including the hSC , the effective measurement depth corresponds to a value greater than 60 μm. This
depth decreases quickly with frequency. At 250 kHz, most electrodes show impedances that cease to depend on hD greater than
20 μm, equivalent to a 40 μm effective measurement depth [see
Fig. 4(b)]. The impedance shows no appreciable change with
height at frequencies of 500 kHz and 1.25 MHz, indicating an
effective measurement depth less than 20 μm.
The influence of the electrode radii is most prominent at low
frequencies. For example, at 15 kHz, the impedance associated
with electrodes that have radii rc of 80 μm show height independent responses for heights above 35 μm. Electrodes with
rc of 200 μm exhibit impedances that decrease steadily up to
heights of 60 μm. This observation indicates that increasing the
radii of the inner electrodes while fixing the radii of outer annu-

Measurements of the impedance of individual sensors in air
and on planar phantom skin samples define the uniformity of the
responses [see Fig. 3(e)]. As is evident from the data of Fig. 4(e)
and (f), the hydration mapping sensor shows highly uniform behavior. When the sensor is exposed to air, the average impedance
of the sensors is ∼91.6 MΩ with a standard deviation of 0.3 MΩ,
or 0.36%. While on the phantom skin, the average impedance
reduces to 274.9 kΩ with variations within 1%. These levels of
uniformity exceed those observed in later evaluations on real
skin, suggesting that the influence from the skin contours and
the intrinsic nonuniformities in hydration across the measured
regions of the skin [55], [56] contribute in a significant way to
observed variations of impedance among electrodes. In addition,
the variation (0.36%) of electrode impedance in air indicates minor inconsistencies introduced during the fabrication processes
and potentially within the experimental setup. The uniformity
of the hydration sensors can be further improved by applying
reference detection and optimizing the fabrication processes as
well as the experimental setup.
C. In Vivo Frequency Dependence of Impedance
The amplitude of the impedance measured at each of the
sensor channels changes monotonically with the level of skin
hydration, throughout the RF range from 15 kHz to 2 MHz.
Representative responses of a single sensor channel appear in
Fig. 3(i). As the hydration level changes from 56 to 120 (arbitrary units from the CHS), the impedance amplitude decreases
from 1.81 to 0.57 MΩ at 15 kHz and from 2.25 to 2.02 kΩ
at 2 MHz. Furthermore, at a fixed hydration level of 80, the
impedance amplitude decreases with increasing frequency, from
1.2 MΩ at 15 kHz to 2.15 kΩ at 2 MHz. These trends on the
skin coincide with the reported dielectric behavior of aqueous
electrolyte solutions [57]–[60], in which electrical conductivity
is relatively stable throughout the measured frequency range,
while the permittivity decreases with increasing frequency until
the frequency reaches that characteristic of the dipolar polarization time. The results also indicate that changes in impedance
with hydration are most substantial at low measurement frequencies (e.g., 15 kHz) where the capacitive components of
the complex impedance are large. Decreased sensor impedance
at higher hydration levels can be attributed to an increase in
electrical skin conductivity and permittivity [32], [44]. Water
molecules in the skin create ionic pathways for charge transport, increase the density of dipoles, and improve the flexibility
of keratin in the SC, all of which leads to enhanced ability of
the skin to store electrical energy and respond more readily to
applied electrical fields [61].
Fig. 5(a)–(d) show changes in impedance with hydration at
frequencies of 15 kHz and 1.25 MHz, for all sensor channels. As
the hydration increases, the conductivity and permittivity of the

HUANG et al.: EPIDERMAL IMPEDANCE SENSING SHEETS FOR PRECISION HYDRATION ASSESSMENT AND SPATIAL MAPPING

2853

with the fabrication processes. The data indicate that impedance
values can be converted into hydration levels using a simple linear relationship [40], whose coefficients can be calculated using
two reference hydration levels and the corresponding impedance
values (amplitude and/or phase). The converted results shown
in Fig. 5(e) and (f) exhibit excellent agreement with the CHS.
Results of six repeated measurements obtained by removing the
device and reattaching it to the skin are consistent and vary
within ∼3% [see Fig. 5(g)]. These changes are much smaller
than those associated with observed variations in hydration [up
to ∼70%, in Fig. 5(a) and (b)].
D. Modeling Results
Analytical study can be used to reveal the frequency and geometry dependence of electrode impedance. Each stacked skin
layer can be equivalent to a parallel RC circuit with capacitance
C and resistance R, both of which can be obtained from the
electric field in the skin. The electric potential ϕ in an electrical
field formed by a concentric pair of circular electrodes can be
written as
∂ 2 ϕ 1 ∂ϕ ∂ 2 ϕ
+
+
=0
(1)
∂r2
r ∂r
∂z 2
where r is the radial distance from the central axis of electrodes and z is the depth from the electrode/skin interface. As a
result, the electric potentials on inner circular and the outer annulus electrodes can be obtained through Hankel transform [62],
resulting in the determination of the potential difference Δϕ between the electrodes, as well as the charge Q on each electrode
in a form
 r1
∂ϕ
|z =0,0< r < r 1 rdr
(2)
Q = −2πε
∂z
0
Fig. 5. Hydration map recorded with an epidermal sensor at a measurement
frequency of 15 kHz, for skin with known hydration level between (a) 112 and
(b) 45. A different measurement with similar map for skin with known hydration
levels of (c) 114 and (d) 40 recorded at 1.25 MHz, calibrated hydration levels
recorded with selected electrodes in an epidermal sensor at (e) 15 kHz and
(f) 1.25 MHz, with comparison to results from a commercial sensor.
(g) Impedance variation of all electrode pairs on row 4 and column 4 of the
epidermal sensor at a constant hydration level of 45 and a frequency of 15 kHz
of six repeated measurements.

which in turn determines the capacitance C as C = Q/Δϕ.
The resistance can be approximately related to the capacitance
by RσSC = εSC /(C) = L/A, where σSC is the conductivity of
stratum corneum, L the effective length of the dielectric material
layers, and A the area of electrodes. Thus, the impedance of the
electrodes can be obtained as
2

|Z| =
2
σ
πεSC ε 2S C + 4π 2 f 2
SC

skin both increase, leading to a decrease in the real (resistive)
and imaginary (capacitive) parts of the complex impedance. The
result is a monotonic decrease of skin impedance. The magnitude of the change in impedance diminishes with increasing
frequency. For example, the impedance decreases by 71.1% and
5.4% at 15 kHz and 1.25 MHz, respectively, when the hydration level increases from 40 to 114. These observations suggest
that the sensitivity is best at low frequencies (e.g., 15 kHz) for
the range examined. The impedance values measured from individual channels vary by 5% across the array, indicating good
uniformity in sensor response. As shown subsequently through
in vitro measurements on phantom skin samples and in air, these
variations mostly arise from skin contours underneath the sensor
and intrinsic variations in hydration over the measured regions
of the skin, with additional effects of slight variations associated

	2 ⎫
⎧ 
1 J1 (ξrc ) rao J1 (ξrao ) − rai J1 (ξrai ) ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
−
⎪
 ∞⎪
2 − r2
⎨ξ 2
⎬
rc
rao
ai
dξ.
·
⎪
0 ⎪
⎪
⎪
tanh
(ξh
)
tanh
(ξh
)
+
ε
ε
D
SC
D
SC
⎪
⎪
⎩ ·
⎭
εD tanh (ξhD ) + εSC tanh (ξhSC )
(3)
In the case of in vitro experiments, we have rc , rai , and rao
much larger than hSC and hD . Thus, equation (2) can be simplified as
2χ
π (εD hD + εSC hSC )
 



	
rao rai
rao rai εD hD hSC
,
,
. Z3
+ Z1
(4)
rc rc
rc rc
εSC rc2

|Z| ≈

2854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

where rc is radius of inner circular electrode, rai and rao the
inner and outer radii of outer annulus electrodes, hSC and hD the
depths of the SC and deep tissue layer, εSC and εD the permittivity of SC and deep tissue layer, respectively. In addition, χ =
2
/ε2SC + 4π 2 f 2 )−1/2 and the nondimensional functions Z3
(σSC
and Z1 are given by
	2
 ∞
dη
aJ1 (aη) − bJ1 (bη)
(5)
J1 (η) −
Zm (a, b) =
2 − b2
m
a
η
0
where f is the frequency conducted in the measurements, J1 is
the Bessel function of the first kind. Equation (4) analytically
gives the dependence of impendence on all material parameters,
thicknesses, geometry, and frequency.
For in vivo experiments that involve a thick deep tissue layer,
i.e., hD  hSC , the impedance can then be written as

 

⎧
ε2SC hSC
rao rai ⎫
⎪
⎪
1
−
,
Z
⎪
⎪
1
⎪
⎪
⎪
ε2D
rc
rc rc ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪

	
⎨
⎬
2χ
rao rai εD rc
(6)
|Z| ≈
−Y
,
,
⎪
πεSC rc ⎪
rc rc εSC hSC
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪


⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
r
ε
r
⎪
⎪
SC
ao
ai
⎩ +
⎭
Z2
,
εD
rc rc
where Z1 and Z2 are given in (5) and
	2
 ∞
dη
aJ1 (aη) − bJ1 (bη)
.
Y (a, b, c) =
J1 (η) −
2 − b2
a
η
+c
0
(7)
The permittivity of the SC and deep tissue layer decreases
as the frequency increases and the opposite holds for the conductivity [63]. For frequencies between 15 kHz to 1.25 MHz,
εSC /ε0 and εD /ε0 decrease from 1.47 × 103 and 3.79 × 102
to 7.48 × 104 and 2.34 × 103 , respectively, whereas σSC increases from 1.62 × 10−4 to 1.97 × 10−2 S/m. For electrodes
with rc = 100 μm, rai = 300 μm, rao = 400 μm, and for
hSC = 20 μm, the modeling result of the frequency dependence
of the sensor impedance shown in Fig. 6(a) indicates that the
sensor impedance decreases consistently with hydration levels
at all simulated frequencies between 15 kHz to 1.25 MHz. The
result also indicates that the sensor has higher sensitivity at
lower measurement frequencies, which is consistent with the
experimental data. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the impedance in
(3) versus the chamber height hD agrees well with the in vitro
experiments (shown in the same figure) for an interfacial capacitance of 0.25 [64] at frequencies varied from 15 kHz to
1.25 MHz. The geometry dependence of the sensor impedance
at various frequencies appears in Fig. 6(c), in which the sensor impedance decreases monotonously with decreasing electrode spacing (hSC = 20 μm, rai = 300 μm, rao = 400 μm,
and varying rc ). When rc increases from 60 to 200 μm, the
impedance decreases by 29.6%, agreeing well with the in vitro
experimental data shown also in Fig. 6(c). In addition, both the
measurement frequencies and the sensor geometry influence the
effective measurement depths of the sensor (see Fig. 6(b)–(d)],
in a manner consistent with experiments. The effective measurement depths (hD + hSC ) of the sensor are close to 50 μm
at 15 kHz at rc = 60 μm; at rc of 180 μm, the effective depth is

Fig. 6. (a) Simulated sensor impedance as a function of hydration (indicated by
different levels of ρsc ) at frequencies from 15 kHz to 1.25 MHz. (b) Simulated
sensor impedance (labeled with S.) of as a function of chamber heights at
frequencies from 15 kHz to 1.25 MHz, with comparison to in vitro experimental
results (labeled with E.). (c) Simulated sensor impedance (labeled with S.) as
a function of electrode spacing at frequencies from 15 kHz to 1.25 MHz and
a chamber height of 30 μm, with comparison to in vitro experimental results
(labeled with E.). (d) Simulated sensor impedance as a function of chamber
height for electrode radii between 60 to 180 μm, at a frequency of 15 kHz.

greater than 80 μm, again compatible with in vitro studies. The
simulated results indicate that the measurement frequency and
sensor geometry can both affect sensor impedance and the effective measurement depths. Measurements of hydration levels
at different skin depths, therefore, can be achieved by adjusting
the frequency and geometry.
E. Responses of Depth Profiling Hydration Sensors
to Hydration Changes
In vivo measurements involve evaluations at a fixed frequency
of 15 kHz, where the impedance depends strongly on hydration levels and the electrode spacing controls the measurement
depth. As illustrated in Fig. 7(a)–(c), the impedance varies systematically with electrode spacing and with hydration levels.
For example, at a fixed hydration level of 47.8, the impedance
decreases consistently with the radii of the inner circular electrodes rc from 1.7 to 0.25 MΩ when rc varies from 60 to
200 μm in Fig. 7(c), indicating a strong expected geometry
dependence. In addition, as the hydration level decreases from
96 [see Fig. 7(a)] to 47.8 [Fig. 7(c)], the differences between
impedances measured using electrodes with rc of 60 μm and
200 μm diminish, suggesting that the effect of geometry dependence is more prominent at low hydration levels. Fig. 7(d) shows
that the hydration determined by CHS changes from 64 to 114
shortly after the application of lotion, and then decreases back to
56 over the next ∼35 min. Sensors with electrodes that have rc
of 60 and 140 μm follow the same trend. By contrast, electrodes
with rc of 200 μm reveal an initial impedance that is larger than
the final impedance, indicating that the hydration levels measured by these electrodes are higher than the original values.

HUANG et al.: EPIDERMAL IMPEDANCE SENSING SHEETS FOR PRECISION HYDRATION ASSESSMENT AND SPATIAL MAPPING

2855

Fig. 8. Demonstration of depth profiling and spatial mapping with epidermal
devices. Lotion was selectively applied to the skin in patterned geometries
(illustrations in the insets) of (a) a vertical line, (b) two horizontal lines, and
(c) a vertical line.

Fig. 7. Measurement results obtained with a depth profiling epidermal hydration sensor operating at a frequency of 15 kHz, for hydration levels of (a) 96,
(b) 63, and (c) 47.8 when the radii of the inner circular electrodes (rc ) changes
from 60 to 200 μm. (d) Impedance of selected electrodes at 15 kHz with comparison to results from a commercial sensor.

These results are consistent with the in vitro experiments; they
suggest that electrodes with rc of 60 and 140 μm follow the
hydration levels in the SC, while electrodes with rc of 200 μm
may partially capture the hydration levels below the SC, where
the improvement of the barrier function of the SC after applying
the lotion could increase the hydration level by minimizing the
rate of TEWL.
F. Skin Hydration Imaging
In multiplexed array formats, epidermal hydration sensors
can reveal spatial gradients in hydration across the surface of
the skin. As a demonstration, variations in hydration level are
intentionally created through application of lotion in horizontal
and vertical lines. The skin absorbs the lotion, to change the hydration level in the skin itself. Spatial patterns in the application
of lotion create corresponding spatial variations in hydration,
thereby providing situations similar to those during transdermal
drug delivery [65], atopic eczema [66], and wound and burn
healing processes [67], in which hydration levels in the skin
are nonuniform. To minimize the variations of impedance between electrodes due to skin contours, experimental results are
shown as relative impedance changes (see Fig. 8) obtained by
subtracting impedance values measured prior to and 1 min after applying the lotion. The average impedance decrease over
most of the area is ∼1.9 MΩ, indicating large increases in hydration. Areas that are free of lotion show impedance changes
of ∼0.2 MΩ, consistent with expected minimal changes in hydration. Regions between lines of applied lotion [see Fig. 8(b)]
exhibit impedance changes of ∼1.2 MΩ, perhaps due to some
lateral diffusion of the lotion. A result using depth profiling devices with layouts of Fig. 1(c) also reveals impedance changes
consistent with the patterns of lotion [see Fig. 8(c)]. Here, the
overall impedance increases from top to bottom, as expected
based on differences in electrode geometries. Some nonsystem-

atic variations are also observed, due to likely nonuniformities
of the skin itself. As any endogenous and exogenous patterns
on the skin can potentially change the localized skin hydration
due to underlying changes of water barrier function. The ability
of the hydration mapping sensor to identify spatial gradients in
hydration indicates a capacity for recognizing these invisible
patterns.
V. CONCLUSION
The sensor technology introduced here provides a soft, “skinlike” device that can integrate with the skin intimately and noninvasively to quantify the regional hydration levels. The spatial
sensitivity and ability to monitor large areas can be achieved by
scaling the electrode spacing and number, in a straightforward
manner that requires no significant changes in sensor design
measurement setups. Epidermal impedance mapping devices
provide appealing means to monitor biophysical signals over
large areas. The data acquisition electronics can be reduced
in size [40] and, potentially, be integrated into the epidermal
platform itself. Also, stretching, bending, and other mechanical
deformations can alter the capacitance of the electrode pairs,
in a manner that could affect the assessment of hydration. One
possible solution involves a differential measurement mechanism based on an additional pair of reference electrodes that
are decoupled from the skin but located adjacent to the sensing
electrodes.
REFERENCES
[1] K. R. Feingold, “The outer frontier: The importance of lipid metabolism
in the skin,” J. Lipid. Res., vol. 50, pp. S417–S22, 2009.
[2] S. P. Song, C. Z. Lv, K. R. Feingold, Q. N. Hou, Z. Y. Li, C. Y. Guo,
P. M. Elias, and M. Q. Man, “Abnormalities in stratum corneum function
in patients recovered from leprosy,” Skin Pharmacol. Physiol., vol. 22,
pp. 131–6, 2009.
[3] F. M. Hendriks, D. Brokken, C. W. J. Oomens, and F. P. T. Baaijens, “Influence of hydration and experimental length scale on the mechanical
response of human skin in vivo, using optical coherence tomography,”
Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 10, pp. 231–41, 2004.
[4] S. Sasai, Y.-X. Zhen, and H. Tagami, “High-frequency conductance measurement of the skin surface hydration state of dry skin using a new probe
studded with needle-form electrodes (MT-8 C),” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 2,
pp. 173–6, 1996.
[5] B. Eberlein-Konig, T. Schafer, J. Huss-Marp, U. Darsow,
M. Mohrenschlager, O. Herbert, D. Abeck, U. Kramer, H. Behrendt, and
J. Ring, “Skin surface pH, stratum corneum hydration, trans-epidermal
water loss and skin roughness related to atopic eczema and skin dryness in

2856

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2013

a population of primary school children,” Acta Derm. Venereol., vol. 80,
pp. 188–91, 2000.
J. Gupta, E. Grube, M. B. Ericksen, M. D. Stevenson, A. W. Lucky,
A. P. Sheth, A. H. Assa’ad, and G. K. Khurana Hershey, “Intrinsically defective skin barrier function in children with atopic dermatitis correlates
with disease severity,” J. Allergy Clin. Immunol., vol. 121, pp. 725.e2–
730.e2, 2008.
K. L. Hon, K. Y. Wong, T. F. Leung, C. M. Chow, and P. C. Ng, “Comparison of skin hydration evaluation sites and correlations among skin hydration, transepidermal water loss, SCORAD index, Nottingham Eczema
severity score, and quality of life in patients with atopic dermatitis,” Am.
J. Clin. Dermatol., vol. 9, pp. 45–50, 2008.
S. D. Kim, C. H. Huh, K. I. Seo, D. H. Suh, and J. I. Youn, “Evaluation
of skin surface hydration in Korean psoriasis patients: A possible factor
influencing psoriasis,” Clin. Exp. Dermatol., vol. 27, pp. 147–52, 2002.
C. Blichmann and J. Serup, “Hydration studies on scaly hand eczema,”
Contact Dermatitis, vol. 16, pp. 155–9, 1987.
B. Cravello and A. Ferri, “Relationships between skin properties and
environmental parameters,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 14, pp. 180–6, 2008.
J. W. Choi, S. H. Kwon, C. H. Huh, K. C. Park, and S. W. Youn, “The
influences of skin visco-elasticity, hydration level and aging on the formation of wrinkles: A comprehensive and objective approach,” Skin. Res.
Technol., pp. 1–7, 2012.
B. W. Tran, A. D. Papoiu, C. V. Russoniello, H. Wang, T. S. Patel,
Y. H. Chan, and G. Yosipovitch, “Effect of itch, scratching and mental
stress on autonomic nervous system function in atopic dermatitis,” Acta.
Derm. Venereol., vol. 90, pp. 354–61, 2010.
P. G. Sator, J. B. Schmidt, T. Rabe, and C. C. Zouboulis, “Skin aging
and sex hormones in women—Clinical perspectives for intervention by
hormone replacement therapy,” Exp. Dermatol., vol. 13, no. suppl. 4,
pp. 36–40, 2004.
M. Boguniewicz, N. Nicol, K. Kelsay, and D. Y. M. Leung, “A multidisciplinary approach to evaluation and treatment of atopic dermatitis,” Semin.
Cutan. Med. Surg., vol. 27, pp. 115–27, 2008.
V. M. Sharma, K. Sridharan, G. Pichan, and M. R. Panwar, “Influence
of heat-stress induced dehydration on mental functions,” Ergonomics,
vol. 29, pp. 791–9, 1986.
S. M. Kleiner, “Water: An essential but overlooked nutrient,” J. Am. Diet.
Assoc., vol. 99, pp. 200–6, 1999.
S. Verdier-Sévrain and F. Bonté, “Skin hydration: A review on its molecular mechanisms,” J. Cosmetic. Dermatol., vol. 6, pp. 75–82, 2007.
M. Zhang and A. F. T. Mak, “In vivo friction properties of human skin,”
Prosthet. Orthot. Int., vol. 23, pp. 135–41, 1999.
J. W. Choi, S. H. Kwon, C. H. Huh, K. C. Park, and S. W. Youn, “The
influences of skin visco-elasticity, hydration level and aging on the formation of wrinkles: A comprehensive and objective approach,” Skin. Res.
Technol., vol. 19, pp. 1–7, 2012.
L.-C. Gerhardt, V. Strässle, A. Lenz, N. D. Spencer, and S. Derler, “Influence of epidermal hydration on the friction of human skin against textiles,”
J. R. Soc. Interface., vol. 5, pp. 1317–28, 2008.
H. Tagami, M. Ohi, K. Iwatsuki, Y. Kanamaru, M. Yamada, and B. Ichijo,
“Evaluation of the skin surface hydration in vivo by electrical measurement,” J. Investig. Dermatol., vol. 75, pp. 500–7, 1980.
M. Paye, D. Van de Gaer, and B. M. Morrison, “Corneometiy measurements to evaluate skin dryness in the modified soap chamber test,” Skin.
Res. Technol., vol. 1, pp. 123–7, 1995.
P. Xiao, L. I. Ciortea, H. Singh, Y. Cui, E. P. Berg, and R. E. Imhof, “Optothermal in-vivo skin hydration measurements—A comparison study of
different measurement techniques,” in J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2010, vol. 214,
p. 012026.
T. Frodin, P. Helander, L. Molin, and M. Skogh, “Hydration of human stratum corneum studied in vivo by optothermal infrared spectrometry, electrical capacitance measurement, and evaporimetry,” Acta. Derm. Venereol.,
vol. 68, pp. 461–7, 1988.
E. M. Attas, M. G. Sowa, T. B. Posthumus, B. J. Schattka, H. H. Mantsch,
and S. L. Zhang, “Near-IR spectroscopic imaging for skin hydration: The
long and the short of it,” Biopolymers, vol. 67, pp. 96–106, 2002.
F. Kadlec, M. Berta, P. Kužel, F. Lopot, and V. Polakovič, “Assessing skin
hydration status in haemodialysis patients using terahertz spectroscopy:
A pilot/feasibility study,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53, pp. 7063–71, 2008.
F. M. Hendriks, Mechanical Behaviour of Human Epidermal and Dermal Layers In Vivo.Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands: Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, 2005.
G. Tan, P. Xu, L. B. Lawson, J. He, L. C. Freytag, J. D. Clements, and
V. T. John, “Hydration effects on skin microstructure as probed by high-

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]

[46]
[47]

[48]

[49]
[50]

resolution cryo-scanning electron microscopy and mechanistic implications to enhanced transcutaneous delivery of biomacromolecules,” J.
Pharm. Sci., vol. 99, pp. 730–40, 2010.
E. Alanen, J. Nuutinen, K. Nicklén, T. Lahtinen, and J. Mönkkönen, “Measurement of hydration in the stratum corneum with the MoistureMeter and
comparison with the Corneometer,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 10, pp. 32–7,
2004.
J. W. Fluhr, M. Gloor, S. Lazzerini, P. Kleesz, R. Grieshaber, and
E. Berardesca, “Comparative study of five instruments measuring stratum corneum hydration (Corneometer CM 820 and CM 825, Skicon 200,
Nova DPM 9003, DermaLab)—Part I: In vitro,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 5,
pp. 161–70, 1999.
A. O. Barel and P. Clarys, “In vitro calibration of the capacitance method
(Corneometer CM 825) and conductance method (Skicon-200) for the
evaluation of the hydration state of the skin,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 3,
pp. 107–13, 1997.
P. Clarys, A. O. Barel, and B. Gabard, “Non-invasive electrical measurements for the evaluation of the hydration state of the skin: comparison beR
R
tween three conventional instruments—the Comeometer
, the Skicon
R
and the Nova DPM
,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 5, pp. 14–20, 1999.
R
J. L. Lévêque and B. Querleux, “SkinChip
, a new tool for investigating
the skin surface in vivo,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 9, pp. 343–7, 2003.
D. Batisse, F. Giron, and J. L. Que, “Capacitance imaging of the skin
surface,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 12, pp. 99–104, 2006.
E. Uhoda, J. L. Lévêque, and G. E. Piérarda, “Silicon image sensor technology for in vivo detection of surfactant-induced corneocyte swelling
and drying,” Dermatology, vol. 210, pp. 184–8, 2005.
E. Alanen, T. Lahtinen, and J. Nuutinen, “Variational formulation of openended coaxial line in contact with layered biological medium,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 45, pp. 1241–8, 1998.
T. J. Ryan, M. Thoolen, and Y. H. Yang, “The effect of mechanical forces
(vibration or external compression) on the dermal water content of the
upper dermis and epidermis, assessed by high frequency ultrasound,” J.
Tissue Viability, vol. 11, pp. 97–101, 2001.
C. G. Rylander, T. E. Milner, S. A. Baranov, and J. S. Nelson, “Mechanical tissue optical clearing devices: Enhancement of light penetration in ex
vivo porcine skin and adipose tissue,” Laser Surg. Med., vol. 40, pp. 688–
94, 2008.
A. A. Gurjarpadhye, W. C. Vogt, Y. Liu, and C. G. Rylander, “Effect of
localized mechanical indentation on skin water content evaluated using
OCT,” Int. J. Biomed. Imag, vol. 2011, p. 817250, 2011.
X. Huang, W.-H. Yeo, Y. Liu, and J. Rogers, “Epidermal differential
impedance sensor for conformal skin hydration monitoring,” Biointerphases, vol. 7, pp. 1–9, 2012.
Ø. G. Martinsen, S. Grimnes, and E. Haug, “Measuring depth depends on
frequency in electrical skin impedance measurements,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 5, pp. 179–81, 1999.
M. S. Kim, Y. Cho, S. T. Seo, C. S. Son, H. J. Park, and Y. N. Kim, “A
new method for non-invasive measurement of skin in the low frequency
range,” Healthc Inf. Res., vol. 16, pp. 143–8.
A. O. Barel and P. Clarys ,Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the
Skin, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 337–44.
T. Yamamoto and Y. Yamamoto, “Electrical properties of the epidermal
stratum corneum,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 14, pp. 151–8, 1976.
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu,
S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T.-I. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying,
L. Xu, M. Li, H.-J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, Liu P., Y.-W. Zhang,
F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, T. Coleman, and J. A. Rogers, “Epidermal electronics,” Science, vol. 333, pp. 838–43, 2011.
E. J. Clar, C. P. Her, and C. G. Sturelle, “Skin impedance and moisturization,” J. Soc. Cosmetic Chemists, vol. 26, pp. 337–53, 1975.
G. McKeen and M. Lindinger, “Prediction of hydration status using
multi-frequency bioelectrical impedance analysis during exercise and recovery in horses,” Equine Comp. Exerc. Physiol., vol. 1, pp. 199–209,
2004.
H. Scharfetter, P. Brunner, M. Mayer, B. Brandstatter, and H. HinghoferSzalkay, “Fat and hydration monitoring by abdominal bioimpedance analysis: Data interpretation by hierarchical electrical modeling,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 975–82, Jun. 2005.
B. Esler, T. Lyons, S. Turovets, and D. Tucker, “Instrumentation for low
frequency EIT studies of the human head and its validation in phantom
experiments,”,” in J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2010, vol. 224, p. 012007.
K. Ito, K. Furuya, Y. Okano, and L. Hamada, “Development and characteristics of a biological tissue-equivalent phantom for microwaves,” Electron.
Commun. Jpn. (Part I: Communications), vol. 84, pp. 67–77, 2001.

HUANG et al.: EPIDERMAL IMPEDANCE SENSING SHEETS FOR PRECISION HYDRATION ASSESSMENT AND SPATIAL MAPPING

[51] G. Pellacani and S. Seidenari, “Water sorption-desorption test and moisture accumulation test for functional assessment of atopic skin in children,”
Acta Derm. Venereol., vol. 81, pp. 100–3, 2001.
[52] D van Neste, “In vivo evaluation of unbound water accumulation in stratum corneum. The influence of acute skin irritation induced by sodium
laurylsulfate,” Dermatologica, vol. 181, pp. 197–201, 1990.
[53] T. Zioni, N. Perkas, Y. Wolfus, Y. Soroka, I. Popov, M. Oron, I. Perelshtein,
Y. Bruckental, F. M. Brégégère, Z. Ma’or, A. Gedanken, Y. Yeshurun,
R. Neuman, and Y. Milner, “Strontium hexaferrite nanomagnets suspended in a cosmetic preparation: A convenient tool to evaluate the biological effects of surface magnetism on human skin,” Skin. Res. Technol.,
vol. 16, pp. 316–24, 2010.
[54] V. R. Leite e Silva, M. A. Schulman, C. Ferelli, J. M. Gimenis, G. W. Ruas,
A. R. Baby, M. V. Velasco, M. E. Taqueda, and T. M. Kaneko, “Hydrating
effects of moisturizer active compounds incorporated into hydrogels: In
vivo assessment and comparison between devices,” J. Cosmet. Dermatol.,
vol. 8, pp. 32–9, 2009.
[55] H. N. Mayrovitz, M. Bernal, F. Brlit, and R. Desfor, “Biophysical measures of skin tissue water: Variations within and among anatomical sites
and correlations between measures,” Skin. Res. Technol., vol. 19, pp. 47–
54, 2013.
[56] E. Cronin and R. B. Stoughton, “Regional variations and the effect of
hydration and epidermal stripping,” Brit. J. Dermatol., vol. 74, pp. 265–
72, 1962.
[57] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, “The dielectric properties of
biological tissues—Part I: Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41,
pp. 2231–49, 1996.
[58] C. Gabriel, A. Peyman, and E. H. Grant, “Electrical conductivity of tissue
at frequencies below 1 MHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. 4863–78,
2009.

2857

[59] T. Sunaga, H. Ikehira, S. Furukawa, H. Shinkai, H. Kobayashi,
Y. Matsumoto, E. Yoshitome, T. Obata, S. Tanada, H. Murata, and
Y. Sasaki, “Measurement of the electrical properties of human skin and
the variation among subjects with certain skin conditions,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 47, pp. N11–N5, 2002.
[60] V. Raicu, N. Kitagawa, and A. Irimajiri, “A quantitative approach to the
dielectric properties of the skin,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 45, pp. L1–L4,
2000.
[61] J. L. Leveque and J. D. Rigal, “Impedance methods for studying skin
moisturization,” J. Cosmet. Sci., vol. 34, pp. 419–28, 1983.
[62] A. E. Siegman, “Quasi fast Hankel transform,” Opt. Lett., vol. 1, pp. 13–5,
1977.
[63] T. Yamamoto and Y. Yamamoto, “Electrical properties of the epidermal
stratum corneum,” Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 14, pp. 151–8, 1976.
[64] R. M. Williams, M. E. Loveland, B. Jeffries-Nakamura, M. L. Underwood,
C. P. Bankston, H. Leduc, and J. T. Kummer, “Kinetics and transport at
AMTEC electrodes,” J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 137, pp. 1709–16, 1990.
[65] H. A. Benson, “Transdermal drug delivery: Penetration enhancement techniques,” Curr. Drug Del., vol. 2, pp. 23–33, 2005.
[66] E. A. Holm, H. C. Wulf, L. Thomassen, and G. B. E. Jemec, “Instrumental
assessment of atopic eczema: Validation of transepidermal water loss,
stratum corneum hydration, erythema, scaling, and edema,” J Amer. Acad.
Dermatol., vol. 55, pp. 772–80, 2006.
[67] C.-C. Chang, Y.-F. Kuo, H.-C. Chiu, J.-L. Lee, T.-W. Wong, and S.-H. Jee,
“Hydration, not silicone, modulates the effects of keratinocytes on fibroblasts,” J. Surg. Res., vol. 59, pp. 705–11, 1995.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

