IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

959

Quantitative Assessment of Fetal Well-Being
Through CTG Recordings: A New Parameter
Based on Phase-Rectified Signal Average
Andrea Fanelli, Giovanni Magenes, Marta Campanile, and Maria G. Signorini

Abstract—Since the 1980s, cardiotocography (CTG) has been
the most diffused technique to monitor fetal well-being during
pregnancy. CTG consists of the simultaneous recording of fetal
heart rate (FHR) signal and uterine contractions and its interpretation is usually performed through visual inspection by trained
obstetric personnel. To reduce inter- and intraobserver variabilities
and to improve the efficacy of prenatal diagnosis, new quantitative
parameters, extracted from the CTG digitized signals, have been
proposed as additional tools in the clinical diagnosis process. In this
paper, a new parameter computed on FHR time series and based
on the phase-rectified signal average curve (PRSA) is introduced. It
is defined as acceleration phase-rectified slope (APRS) or deceleration phase-rectified slope (DPRS) depending on the slope sign of the
PRSA curve. The new PRSA parameter was applied to FHR time
series of 61 healthy and 61 intrauterine growth restricted (IUGR)
fetuses during CTG nonstress tests. Performance of APRS and
DPRS was compared with 1) the results provided by other parameters extracted from the PRSA curve itself but already existing in the
literature, and 2) other clinical indices provided by computerized
cardiotocographic systems. APRS and DPRS indices performed
better than any other parameter in this study in the distinction between healthy and IUGR fetuses. Our results suggest this new index
might reliably contribute to the quality of early fetal diagnosis.
Index Terms—Cardiotocography (CTG), fetal monitoring, heart
rate variability (HRV), phase-rectified signal average (PRSA).

I. INTRODUCTION
HE activity of the fetal heart appears very early during
pregnancy and depends on the progressive development
of the nervous system of the embryo. During this process of
maturation, the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of
the autonomic nervous system (ANS) play a fundamental role
in controlling and modulating fetal heart rate (FHR).
Recording FHR and measuring its variability represent a noninvasive way to collect information about the fetal state and
the proper development of the ANS [1]. Moreover, some FHR
patterns can be directly connected to the level of fetal oxygenation that is essential for fetal well-being.

T

Manuscript received June 13, 2012; revised January 21, 2013; accepted May
31, 2013. Date of publication June 12, 2013; date of current version August 30,
2013. This work was supported by the PRIN 2008 of the Italian Government.
A. Fanelli and M. G. Signorini are with the Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering (DEIB), Politecnico di Milano, Milano 20133, Italy
(e-mail: andrea.fanelli@mail.polimi.it; mariagabriella.signorini@polimi.it).
G. Magenes is with the Department of Industrial Engineering and Information,
Universita’ di Pavia, Pavia 27100, Italy (e-mail: giovanni.magenes@unipv.it).
M. Campanile is with the Dipartimento di Scienze Ostetrico-Ginecologiche
Urologiche e Medicina della Riproduzione, Universitaria Federico II, Napoli,
Italy (e-mail: telefetus@unina.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2268423

For these reasons, FHR monitoring is considered crucial to
identify risky conditions in the fetus. Their early detection
contributes to the reduction of complications and fetal death
episodes as well as diminishes the need for invasive interventions. FHR monitoring is also very important to minimize risks
of fetal morbidity and mortality and to evaluate the optimal
timing for delivery. Fetal pathological conditions such as intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), diabetes, infections, and
placental abruption can be diagnosed thanks to heart rate variability (HRV) analyses [2].
IUGR is one of the most severe causes of perinatal morbidity and mortality: it consists of a pathological inhibition of
fetal growth, with a consequent failure of the fetus to attain its
growth potential. It is strictly connected to fetal hypoxia and
asphyxia. The incidence of IUGR is approximately 5% of all
pregnancies [3]. Thus, fetal monitoring is extremely important
to detect IUGR or other risky conditions in the fetus, supporting
the decision process of clinicians.
The use of FHR monitoring strongly increased in the last
decades, as statistical data about U.S. pregnancies show: 45%
of laboring women in 1980, 62% in 1988, 74% in 1992, and
85% in 2002 were submitted to this screening procedure [4].
FHR can be measured using several technological approaches. The most diffused technique is cardiotocography
(CTG), which combines the measure of FHR through a Doppler
ultrasound probe with the detection of uterine contractions using a pressure sensor. Doppler ultrasound allows the detection
of heart beat events by sensing fetal heart movements. The device generates a trace reporting the heart rate changes during
the screening process [5].
An alternative approach to record FHR is fetal electrocardiography (FECG), made by external or internal electrodes, depending on the gestational age. External (or abdominal) FECG
consists of placing the electrodes on the maternal abdomen,
recording the electrical activity of both fetal and mother’s heart
and then separating the two signals, when possible, by means of
dedicated algorithms [2]. Internal FECG can be recorded during
labor only, after the rupture of the membranes, and consists of
placing an electrode directly on the fetal scalp [6].
The CTG approach, although less accurate than internal
FECG in the detection of FHR, is commonly employed in
antepartum monitoring, because it is noninvasive and performs
better than abdominal ECG in FHR detection.
In recent years, new ideas emerged in the field of fetal
well-being assessment, with the goal of reducing invasiveness
and allowing continuous and remote fetal monitoring. These

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE

960

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

efforts have been mainly produced in the technological domain
by designing and developing new monitors and devices based
on different approaches (Echo4D, ST segment analysis (STAN)
for intrapartum electronic fetal monitoring). Nonetheless
reliable and quantitative indices, directly related to pathological
events, are still the weak link in the fetal diagnostic chain.
In 2009, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) tried to define the standards for nomenclature
and interpretation of fetal monitoring [7]. The ACOG guidelines
also summarize all statistics about the efficacy of fetal monitoring and underline the main problems in this field. As a matter
of fact, most diagnostic conclusions derived from the analysis
of CTG recordings rely on qualitative visual inspection of CTG
traces and, thus, on the clinician’s experience. This causes a
diffused intraobserver and interobserver variabilities in CTG
traces interpretation. An interesting paper [8] reports that when
four obstetricians examined 50 cardiotocograms, they agreed in
only 22% of cases. Two months later, the same clinicians interpreted 21% of the same tracings in a different way from what
they did the first time. Moreover, eye inspection is unable to
depict more complex events that can be extracted only by using
quantitative approaches that investigate the information content
of FHR variability signal. Thus, it is important to improve
the reliability of FHR analysis by introducing new indicators
related to the pathophysiological condition of the fetal heart.
For this reason, we have been working for many years, trying
to quantify fetal well-being in an objective way and to overcome inter- and intraobserver variabilities [9], [10]. The purpose of this paper is to improve the quality of early diagnosis of fetal distress and disease conditions by introducing and
applying a new index computed on the phase-rectified signal
average (PRSA) curve [11]. The manuscript presents the results
obtained after applying a set of parameters to a selected population of healthy and IUGR fetuses (61 + 61). Our objective
is to combine and compare diagnostic performance of traditional parameters based on the time domain analysis, such as
short time variability (STV) [12], Delta, long term irregularity
(LTI) [12] and interval index [13], nonlinear parameters, such
as approximate entropy (ApEn) [14], with this new proposed index. The performance of the new acceleration (or deceleration)
phase-rectified slope [acceleration phase-rectified slope (APRS)
or deceleration phase-rectified slope (DPRS)] parameter is also
compared with other parameters computed on the PRSA curve
by other research groups [15], [16].
The final goal of this study is to add the new proposed index to
a set of parameters able to improve the early prenatal diagnosis.
These indices are extremely important to reduce the inter- and
intraobserver variabilities and, at the same time, to identify and
diagnose risky conditions in the fetus, supporting clinicians in
the decision process.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data Collection
Our system consists of a HP-1350 CTG fetal monitor connected to a computer using a RS-232 serial port. However, our
computerized system is compatible with any other CTG monitor
using the HP data protocol (Agilent, Corometrics 170, Philips

TABLE I
PREGNANCY AND DELIVERY DETAILS

50 A, etc.). The U.S. probe generates 998.4-kHz ultrasound
bursts that repeat with a frequency of 3.2 kHz. The received
echo is amplified thanks to a high-frequency amplifier with a
gain of 120. Then, the signal is demodulated and band-pass
filtered (100–500 Hz).
The CTG monitor is endowed with an autocorrelation control
to compare every heart beat with the following one. The Doppler
signal is sampled at 200 Hz (time sampling window: 5 ms). The
autocorrelation function (ACF) is computed over a window of
1.2 s, corresponding to a minimum FHR of 50 bpm. A peak
detection algorithm then detects the heart period from the ACF
and a FHR value in bpm is produced. The CTG system updates
the FHR value every 250 ms. In the commercially available
system, the PC reads ten consecutive values of the buffer every
2.5 s and determines the actual FHR as the average of the ten
values (corresponding to a sampling frequency of 0.4 Hz). In
our previous works [9], [10], [17], [18] we decided to average
two consecutive FHR values every 0.5 s in order to obtain FHR
series of 2 Hz (1 sample every 0.5 s). The choice of taking a
FHR value each 0.5 s represents a reasonable compromise to
achieve an enough large bandwidth and an acceptable accuracy
of the beat-to-beat intervals (<2 ms) [9].
B. Experimental Protocol
CTG recordings were collected at the Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Federico II, Napoli, Italy. Population was composed of 122 subjects (61 healthy and 61 IUGR). Both populations were defined “a posteriori,” after delivery, on the basis of
standard parameters (Apgar scores, weight, abdominal circumference): IUGR fetuses were selected by weight below the 10th
percentile for their gestational age and abdominal circumference
below the 10th percentile.
The healthy population was then selected from our database,
consisting of more than 800 subjects, by trying to match as
close as possible the gestational age of the IUGR recordings.
Only CTG signals acquired during the 34th and 35th gestational
week were included in the study, in order to have a population
comparable to the IUGR one in terms of pregnancy period.
Table I summarizes population details. All recordings were
acquired in a controlled clinical environment, with the pregnant
woman lying on a bed. The average length of the recordings was
2730 ± 615 s for healthy subjects and 3418 ± 1033 s for IUGR
fetuses.

FANELLI et al.: QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF FETAL WELL-BEING THROUGH CTG RECORDINGS

961

C. Processing of FHR signals
The HP-1350 quantifies the quality of the acquired FHR signal with a color index: good (green), acceptable (yellow), and
bad (red). This quality evaluation is based on the output of
the autocorrelation procedure computed during data acquisition.
Each FHR recording is then divided into windows of 360 data
points (3 min). The red quality points are replaced by the average of the nearest five FHR points. If the trace contains more
than five consecutive red-quality points or a subinterval includes
more than 5% red quality values, that subinterval is left off the
analysis. This approach allows correcting noisy segments or
discarding them when the SNR ratio is too poor (insufficient)
for further analysis. Acquisition and preprocessing procedure is
fully described in [9].
D. Phase-Rectified Signal Average
PRSA is a technique introduced by Bauer et al. [11].
This approach allows the detection and the quantification of
quasi-periodic oscillations in nonstationary signals affected by
noise and artifacts, by synchronizing the phase of all periodic
components.
This method demonstrated its usefulness in FHR signal analysis, when episodes of increasing and/or decreasing FHR appear [15]. In fact, occurrence or absence of such periods can
be related to the healthy status of the fetus [7]. Increases and
decreases of FHR are controlled by the ANS, which modulates
heartbeat intervals receiving inputs from heart, lungs, and blood
vessels. In the Ob-Gyn literature, these increases and decreases
of FHR are commonly referred as “accelerations” and “decelerations.” These are not the terms we decided to adopt in this study
as they do not necessary correspond to the definitions provided
by the ACOG (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists) in 2009 [7]. Anyway, these modulation events could
be studied by evaluating signal oscillations. For this reason, we
introduced the PRSA method to quantify fetal well-being states
and extract information on the ANS development and functioning from FHR modulation.
Computational procedure: Computing the PRSA curve requires a time series i = 1, . . . , N , characterized by periodicities
and correlations, as well as containing nonstationary and noise
events. The first step is the computation of the so-called anchor
points (APs). APs are fiducial points selected according to the
average value of the signal before and after a certain instant k,
within a selected time window.
In our analysis, we define as APs those xi , belonging to the
FHR time series, such as the following inequality stands, within
a time window of length 2T :
T −1
T
1
1 
xi+j >
xi−j .
T j =0
T j =1

(1)

The inequality (1) identifies APs that mark a signal increase. A
similar inequality can be used to identify decreases by replacing
the > symbol with the < symbol. According to this definition,
around half of all points in the time series are identified as APs
(see Fig 1, upper diagram). The T parameter can be used to

Fig. 1. Fetal heart rate series after the preprocessing steps (up): the APs are
detected using disequality (1) and are highlighted as red points in the graph.
Computation of PRSA curve (down): 400 samples windows around each AP
are synchronized and averaged to obtain the PRSA curve, in red.

control the upper frequency of the periodicities that are detected
by PRSA. In our analyses, T values from T = 5 to T = 100,
step 5, were tested.
APs can be used to phase-rectify the signal [10], removing
noise and preserving only periodic oscillations in the time series.
After detecting the AP, windows of 2L samples are built around
each AP. Since many of the APs are adjacent, many of the
defined windows will overlap. The parameter L should be larger
than the period of slowest oscillation that one wants to detect.
We tested several values of L, ranging from 50 to 1000, step 20.
Fig. 1 (lower diagram) shows all 2L windows, obtained from
the previous step, synchronized in their APs and averaged, in
order to obtain a single PRSA curve per patient (red curve in
the diagram). The averaging process filters out all nonperiodic
components that are not synchronized, preserving the events
with a fixed phase relationship with the APs only. For a more
detailed description of the algorithm, please refer to [11].
After obtaining the PRSA curve, it is useful to summarize
the information within a single parameter, which describes the
dynamical characteristics of the curve. Bauer et al. [16] employed the acceleration (or deceleration) capacity parameter
and applied it to identify a mortality predictor after myocardial
infarction
AC(DC) = [X(0) + X(1) − X(−1) − X(−2)]/4

(2)

where X(0) is the sample corresponding to the AP. This equation is a quantification of X by Haar wavelet analysis, where the
scale of 2 is used. The same parameter was also employed by
Kantelhardt et al. [19] to predict risk in heart attack survivals.
Huhn et al. [15] applied for the first time PRSA to FHR series.
They employed a parameter very similar to the AC to identify
and classify IUGR fetuses. They used the average acceleration
(or deceleration) capacity (AAC), corresponding to the integral

962

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

The STV is computed over windows 1 min long. After
that, the values of STV obtained from different windows
are averaged. Using this approach each patient is described
by a unique value of STV.
2) Long-Term Irregularity (LTI). The LTI is used to quantify
the variability over longer time scales. For the analyses,
we employed the LTI index proposed by Haan et al. [21],
which shows less correlation with the STV index. LTI is
computed over 3 min windows of the T24 signal. It is defined as the interquartile range [1/4; 3/4] of the distribution
of the modal m24 (j), where

2 (j + 1) + T 2 (j) , j = 1, . . . , 71. (6)
m24 (j) = T24
24
Fig. 2. Computation of the acceleration phase-rectified slope: the new parameter is defined as the slope of the PRSA curve in the AP.

measure of all periodic acceleration-related oscillations. The
AAC was defined as follows:
T −1

−1

1 
X(i) −
X(i) .
(3)
AAC(T ) =
2T i=0
i=−T

In our analysis, we introduced a new parameter computed on
the PRSA curve. Indeed, since in FHR signals the diagnostic
information is contained in the number and the temporal characteristics of increases and decreases in heart rate, we define
the acceleration (or deceleration) phase-rectified slope (APRS
or DPRS), as the slope of the PRSA curve computed in the AP
(see Fig. 2)

∂X(i) 
.
(4)
APRS =
∂i i A P
This parameter is a descriptor of both the average increase
(and decrease) in FHR amplitude (absolute change of heart
frequency) and the time length of the increase (or decrease)
event. According to [7], these two measures are the most used
in clinical practice to quantify fetal well-being.

The values of LTI obtained from different windows are
averaged to obtain a unique value per patient.
3) Interval Index (II). The II is another parameter that describes the variability of FHR over a short period. The
definition proposed by Arduini et al. [20] was used for the
analysis
II =

std [|T24 (i + 1) − T24 (i)|]
, i = 1, . . . , 23
STV

(7)

where T24 (i) is 1 min of RR signal. As we did with the
previous parameters, the II values computed over different windows are averaged to obtain a single II value per
patient.
4) Delta. Delta is the simplest parameter we used in the
analysis. It simply describes the range of the signal in a
given interval of time. Delta was computed over windows
1 min long using the following equation:
Delta = max [T24 (i)] − min [T24 (i)] , i = 1, . . . , 23.
i

i

(8)
The Delta values computed over different windows are averaged in order to describe each patient with a unique Delta
value.
F. Approximate Entropy

E. Time-Domain Parameters
In order to provide a precise and complete picture of fetal
well-being, we also considered a set of time domain parameters
that are commonly and traditionally used to quantify fetal wellbeing. These parameters describe the temporal properties of
the FHR series. Parameters were computed by the commercial
version of the CTG system, on FHR series obtained by averaging
ten FHR values over 2.5 s windows (ten samples). Thus, every
minute of signal contains 24 points, 2.5 s spaced. This signal is
expressed in ms and we will refer to it as T24 .
1) Short time variability (STV). The STV is a parameter
that quantifies FHR variability over a short time scale.
The index was computed using the definition provided by
Arduini et al. [20]
STV = mean[|T24 (i + 1) − T24 (i)|]i
23
|T24 (i + 1) − T24 (i)|
, i = 1, . . . , 23. (5)
= i=1
23

In the analysis, the ApEn was used to quantify the nonlinear
dynamics of FHR series and to verify if nonlinear characteristics
of the signal are able to distinguish healthy fetuses from IUGR
ones. ApEn is a descriptor of the regularity of the system under
study. ApEn was defined by Pincus [14]: given N points u(i),
the algorithm constructs sequences xm (i) obtained by taking
xm (i) = [u(i), . . . , u(i + m − 1)], and it computes, for each
i ≤ N – m + 1, the quantity
1
{#j ≤ n − m + 1|d [xm (i) , xm (j)] ≤ r} .
N
(9)
Cim measures, with a tolerance r, the regularity of patterns comparing them to a given pattern of length m (m and r are fixed
values: m is the detail level at which the signal is analyzed and
r is a threshold, which filters out irregularities). The ApEn is
then defined as
Cim (r) =

ApEn (m, r) = Φm +1 − Φm

FANELLI et al.: QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF FETAL WELL-BEING THROUGH CTG RECORDINGS

TABLE II
RESULTS FROM THE ANALYSIS OF HRV SIGNALS IN FETUS POPULATIONS

where
Φm (r) =

1
(N − m + 1)

N −m
+1

ln Cim (r).

(10)

i=1

The ApEn was computed over 3 min windows using r =
0.2 and m = 1. Then, ApEn values computed over different
windows were averaged in order to get a unique parameter per
patient.
III. RESULTS
All parameters were computed on the cardiotocographic
recordings of 61 healthy and 61 IUGR fetuses. For each parameter, we obtained a single value per subject. Table II summarizes
all parameters for the two populations. We have reported only
the results obtained using T = 40 samples (20 s) for AP identification, and L = 200 (200 s window) for PRSA construction.
Those values showed the best performance in classifying IUGR
and healthy subjects.
Before direct comparison, we verified that the two populations showed Gaussian distributions for all parameters using the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.
We tested the performance of the parameters in discriminating
healthy from IUGR patients using the t-test. Table III summarizes the results. Between the time parameters, Delta and STV
show the best performance in the discrimination task (Delta:
p-value of 1.45e–9; STV: p-value of 1.22e–9). LTI is also efficient in the discrimination (p-value: 2.08e–4). II is the only
time parameter which fails to reject the null hypothesis of the
t-test. The nonlinear parameter we employed in the analysis,
ApEn, does not allow the rejection of the null hypothesis at 5%
significance level.
The parameter we introduced in this paper shows overall
the best performance. Indeed the APRS allows the rejection
of the null hypothesis with a p-value of 1.12e–9. The DPRS
behaves even better, with a p-value of 9.57e–12. The DPRS is
the parameter in the analyses which exhibits the smallest p-value
in the discrimination between healthy and IUGR patients. On

963

TABLE III
RESULTS OF THE T -TEST COMPARISON BETWEEN HEALTHY
AND IUGR PATIENTS

the contrary, with our data, AC and AAC are not efficient in
the discrimination. Fig. 3 shows the boxplots, which summarize
the results for the two populations. The boxplots confirm the
statistics described above, since Delta, STV, APRS, and DPRS
are the parameters that behave most efficiently in discriminating
healthy and IUGR patients.
In order to determine the optimal discrimination threshold,
we computed the ROC curves for the most efficient parameters. Fig. 4 shows the ROC curves computed for the APRS,
DPRS, and STV. For APRS, we obtained a cut-off point of
0.1327, which guarantees a sensitivity of 0.7413 and specificity
of 0.8033. The corresponding AUC is 0.8235. For DPRS, we
obtained a cut-off value of −0.1426, corresponding to a sensitivity of 0.7705 and specificity of 0.7541 (AUC = 0.8371). For
STV, we obtained a cut-off point of 5.4658, corresponding to a
sensitivity of 0.7636 and specificity of 0.75. The AUC for the
STV parameter was 0.8160.
Finally, we also quantified the correlation between the new
parameter introduced in the analysis, APRS, and the two parameters that are traditionally and most commonly used in the
clinical practice, STV and Delta. APRS shows significant correlation with both the parameters. As Fig. 5 displays, the healthy
and IUGR population are clearly recognizable as two very separate clouds of points in the graphs. This result confirms how
efficient the new parameter is. Comparable results were obtained
using the DPRS in place of APRS (results are not shown but are
summarized in Table IV).
IV. DISCUSSION
The aim of this paper was to find more reliable indices for
the evaluation of fetal states thus preventing possible disease
conditions. We introduced a new parameter able to reliably discriminate IUGR fetuses from normal ones. APRS and DPRS
indices were defined as the slope of the phase-rectified signal
average curve computed on FHR recordings. The parameter is
quantitatively linked to the increase and decrease events (accelerations and decelerations) of the HRV signal. The strength
of this index was verified by comparing its performance with

964

Fig. 3.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

Boxplots summarize the performances of the computed parameters in the discrimination between healthy and IUGR patients.
TABLE IV
CORRELATION VALUES BETWEEN STANDARD PARAMETERS AND THE INDICES
INTRODUCED IN THE ANALYSIS

Fig. 4. (Left) ROC curves of APRS (blue thin line) and DPRS (red thick line)
computed using 150 intervals. Cut-off value is 0.1327 for APRS and –0.1426
for DPRS. (Right) ROC curve for STV computed using 150 intervals. Cut-off
value = 5.4658.

Fig. 5. Correlation between APRS and STV (up) and between APRS and
Delta (down). Blue circles represent healthy subjects and red squares mark
IUGR fetuses. The two populations are clearly recognizable as two distinct
clouds of points.

three different sets of parameters that are employed in fetal heart
rate analysis: 1) time domain parameters, 2) nonlinear parameters (ApEn), and 3) other parameters computed on the PRSA
curve. The results on a population of 122 subjects (61 normal
and 61 IUGRs, carefully selected) show that the parameter we
are proposing performs better than any other considered in the
comparison. This is confirmed both by the t-tests on the two
populations and by the ROC curves shown in Fig. 4.
According to [14], the PRSA curve describes the main increase and decrease episodes (or patterns) in the FHR time series
under analysis. Although these events do not correspond exactly
to the definitions, usually employed in the clinical routine, of
“acceleration” and “deceleration” of FHR signal, they provide
almost the same information about the FHR time course.
As a matter of fact accelerations and decelerations are the
FHR increase and decrease patterns mostly used by clinicians
to quantify fetal well-being. The practice bulletin guideline by
the ACOG [7] defined the standards for the interpretation of
FHR series: risky conditions are often associated with changes
in the entity of accelerations and, mainly, decelerations, in terms
of amplitude, duration, and shape. For this reason, we worked to
define a global index descriptive of the entity of FHR increases
and decreases. The slope of the PRSA curve depends both from
the amplitude and duration of such events and that is the reason
why it has been proposed to distinguish healthy and IUGR
patients.
Results we obtained are coherent with the existing literature
on fetal monitoring. Indeed, according to [7], FHR decelerations

FANELLI et al.: QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF FETAL WELL-BEING THROUGH CTG RECORDINGS

are more significant than accelerations to quantify fetal risky
conditions because their time courses are strictly related to the
physiological recovery from possible hypoxic states. The results
obtained applying DPRS and APRS confirm this observation.
DPRS performed better than APRS in the discrimination task.
We obtained a lower p-value in the t-test and, at the same time,
we also obtained a larger AUC in the ROC curve.
APRS and DPRS proved to be correlated with short term
variability (STV) and delta, two time domain indices that are
generally considered as fundamental to assess fetal well-being
in the clinical practice. Interestingly, correlation values between
these time domain indices and our APRS and DPRS are statistically significant, even if the computational process to obtain
them is extremely different. As a matter of fact, the parameters
are computed on two totally different version of the original
time series: Delta and STV are computed on the FHR signal,
by excluding accelerations and decelerations (as suggested by
Arduini et al. [20]), while APRS and DPRS are computed on
the PRSA curve, a 400 samples time series obtained after an
averaging process. This confirms that APRS and DPRS can be
used as additional parameters to help clinicians in the difficult
task of identifying IUGR fetuses during pregnancy.
As a further outcome, by applying the approach proposed by
Huhn [15] to our sample population, we obtained significantly
different results in the discrimination of IUGR from normal
fetuses. Indeed in our analysis both the indices proposed by
Huhn (AAC and ADC) [15] failed in the discrimination between
healthy and IUGR patients, while those parameters were highly
discriminating in their paper. We believe this difference could
be partially explained by the great difference in the gestational
age of the two groups in the paper of Huhn et al. (33th gestational week for IUGR fetuses versus 37th for healthy ones), by
the different sampling frequency and by the preprocessing steps
we introduced in our paper. As a matter of fact, we preventively
removed artifacts and bad quality FHR segments before computing time parameters, nonlinear parameters and PRSA curve,
in order to standardize the temporal series that were used in the
analysis. In this way, a more efficient and unbiased comparison
can be obtained.
However, even our study presents few critical issues that
should be discussed.
Although the two populations of fetuses we selected for the
analysis (Healthy and IUGRs) had comparable and partially
overlapping gestational ages at the moment of the cardiotocographic monitoring (healthy = 34.78 ± 0.53 weeks and IUGR =
32.27 ± 2.79 weeks), their average values and distribution are
not exactly the same. Gestational age might affect the value of
the computed parameters, which are subject to changes during
the development of the fetus in the evolution of the pregnancy.
In order to minimize this problem, we selected for the healthy
population only CTG recordings performed during the 34th and
35th gestational week. Recording CTG data before the 34th
week was unfeasible, because healthy pregnant women usually
are not submitted to fetal monitoring before this week of gestation. IUGR fetuses are delivered (usually by a cesarean section)
well in advance the normal end of the pregnancy, while healthy
patients are usually monitored only during the final part of the
gestational period.

965

Second, in our population sample, the CTG recordings of
healthy patients are shorter than the recordings of IUGR patients and the length of time series in the two groups differs
by 1000 s on average. This difference might bias the results:
longer recordings are associated with a larger number of APs
and, so, more windows are included in the averaging process
to build the PRSA curve. Anyway, in order to use all the available information, we decided to proceed with the analysis of
the complete time series without cutting the longer ones. Additional tests confirmed that the difference in signal length does
not involve significant changes in the computed DPRS or APRS
parameters. This happens because the number of windows that
are averaged in the process, over a certain threshold, does not
affect the slope value of the curve.
Third, as other research groups, we have proposed other indices to assess fetal well-being that have not been included in
this comparative analysis [17]. They are parameters based on
the frequency content of FHR signals [18], other nonlinear parameters (sample entropy or Lempel Ziv Complexity [10], [18]),
and parameters based on the energy content of FHR [20]. We
tried to focus our comparison on few significant and popular
indexes, currently used in the clinical practice. They represent a
limited set but provide an accurate picture of the state of the art
in this field. This allows a one to one comparison of the different
indices and avoids an excessive dispersion of the analysis.
The most important remark about the new APRS (DPRS)
parameter, is that this index integrates in one figure of merit,
the complex physiological mechanisms that affect the number,
amplitude, and time course of the increases (or decreases) of the
FHR signal related to fetal well-being. Its computation allows
an immediate evaluation of the fetal condition, which can be
automatically extracted by a computer procedure, without the
identification of each acceleration (or deceleration) episode as
it is usually done in the clinical practice.
V. CONCLUSION
The final goal of our research is to define a set of indices that
could help the clinicians in the critical task of detecting fetal
pathological conditions. A new index APRS (DPRS) has been
proposed, able to discriminate IUGR from healthy fetuses. It is
computed as the slope of the PRSA curve at the anchor point.
It shows very good performance when compared with a set of
indices that are usually considered to quantify fetal well-being
in the clinical practice. APRS and DPRS show the best performance in the discrimination task, behaving better than other
parameters computed from the PRSA curve as well as than standard time parameters such as short time variability, long-term
irregularity, and Delta. Moreover the two slopes of the PRSA
curve do not represent only statistically significant indices, but
they are strictly related to physiological events affecting FHR.
In some way they summarize the average time course of accelerations and decelerations throughout the whole recording
session. This means that the information about the capabilities
of fetal cardiovascular control is partially condensed in only two
numbers.
APRS and DPRS turned to be simple and reliable indicators
of the correct behavior of the ANS in the fetus. They are easily

966

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2013

computed in “one shot” analysis of the whole tracing, without
any need to segment the recording in 1 min chunks as it happens
for STV and Delta indices, and to identify, separate, and analyze
individually each acceleration and deceleration.
Obviously they do not represent the “panacea” for reliably
assessing fetal well-being, but they can simplify the automatic
analysis of FHR recordings and can be included in a set of
quantitative parameters helping the clinicians in the hard task of
the prenatal diagnosis.
REFERENCES
[1] M. V. Kamath and E. L. Fallen, “Power spectral analysis of heart rate
variability: A noninvasive signature of cardiac autonomic function,” Crit.
Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 245–311, 1993.
[2] M. A. Hasan et al., “Detection and processing techniques of FECG signal
for fetal monitoring,” Biol. Proced. Online, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 263–295,
2009.
[3] D. Peleg, C. M. Kennedy, and S. K. Hunter, “Intrauterine growth restriction: Identification and management,” Amer. Family Physician, vol. 58,
no. 2, pp. 453–460, 1998.
[4] J. A. Martin, B. E. Hamilton, P. D. Sutton, S. J. Ventura, F. Menacker, and
M. L. Munson, “Births: Final data for 2002,” Nat. Vital Stat. Rep., vol. 52,
no. 1, pp. 1–102, 2003.
[5] M. J. Stout and A. G. Cahill, “Electronic fetal monitoring: Past, present
and future,” Clin. Perinatol., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 127–142, 2011.
[6] C. Peters, R. Vullings, J. Bergmans, G. Oei, and P. Wijn, “Heart rate
detection in low amplitude non-invasive fetal ECG recordings,” in Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006, pp. 6092–6094.
[7] “Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring: Nomenclature, interpretation,
and general management principles,” Clin. Manage. Guidelines Obstet.—
Gynecol., vol. 106, pp. 192–202, 2002.
[8] P. V. Nielsen, B. Stigsby, C. Nickelsen, and J. Nim, “Intra- and interobserver variability in the assessment of intrapartum cardiotocograms,”
Acta Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 66, pp. 421–4, 1987.
[9] M. G. Signorini, G. Magenes, S. Cerutti, and D. Arduini, “Linear and
nonlinear parameters for the analysis of fetal heart rate signal from cardiotocographic recordings,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 3,
pp. 365–374, Mar. 2003.
[10] M. Ferrario, M. G. Signorini, and G. Magenes, “Complexity analysis of
the fetal heart rate variability: Early identification of severe intrauterine growth-restricted fetuses,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 47, no. 9,
pp. 911–919, 2009.
[11] A. Bauer, A. Bunde, P. Barthel, R. Schneider, M. Malik, and G. Schmidt,
“Phase rectified signal averaging detects quasi-periodicities in nonstationary data,” J. Phys. A, vol. 364, pp. 423–434, 2006.
[12] R. K. Laros, W. S. Wong, D. C. Heilbron, J. T. Parer, S. M. Shnider,
H. Naylor, H. , and J. Butler, “A comparison of methods for quantitating fetal heart rate variability,” Amer. J. Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 128,
no. 4, pp. 381–392, 1977.
[13] S. Y. Yeh, A. Forsythe, and E. H. Hon, “Quantification of fetal heartbeatto-beat interval differences,” Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 355–363,
1973.
[14] S. M. Pincus, “Approximate entropy (ApEn) as a complexity measure,”
Chaos, vol. 5, pp. 110–117, 1995.
[15] E. A. Huhn, S. Lobmaier, T. Fischer, R. Schneider, A. Bauer,
K. T. Schneider, and G. Schmidt, “New computerized fetal heart rate analysis for surveillance of intrauterine growth restriction,” Prenat. Diagn.,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 509–514, 2011.
[16] A. Bauer, P. Barthel, and R. Schneider, “Deceleration capacity of heart
rate as a predictor of mortality after myocardial infarction: Cohort study,”
Lancet, vol. 367, pp. 1674–1681, 2006.
[17] G. Magenes, M. G. Signorini, D. Arduini, and S. Cerutti, “Fetal heart
rate variability due to vibroacoustic stimulation: Linear and nonlinear
contribution,” Methods Inf. Med., vol. 43, pp. 47–51, 2004.
[18] M. Ferrario, M. G. Signorini, G. Magenes, and S. Cerutti, “Comparison
of entropy-based regularity estimators: application to the fetal heart rate
signal for the identification of fetal distress,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 119–125, Jan. 2006.
[19] J. W. Kantelhardt, A. Bauer, A. Y. Schumann, P. Barthel, and R. Schneider,
“Phase-rectified signal averaging for the detection of quasi-periodicities
and the prediction of cardiovascular risk,” Chaos, vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 015112-1–015112-9, 2007.

[20] D. Arduini, Rizzo, G. Piana, A. Bonalumi, P. Brambilla, and C. Romanini,
“Computerized analysis of fetal heart rate—Part I: description of the system (2CTG),” J. Matern. Fetal Invest., vol. 3, pp. 159–164, 1993.
[21] J. D. Haan, J. V. Bemmel, B. Versteeg, A. Veth, L. Stolte, J. Janssens,
and J. Eskes, “Quantitative evaluation of fetal heart rate patterns—Part I:
Processing methods,” Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 3, pp. 95–102, 1971.
Andrea Fanelli received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in biomedical engineering from Politecnico
di Milano, Milano, Italy, in 2007, 2009, and 2013,
respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Associate at the
Computational Physiology and Clinical Inference
Group, Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA. During the draft of this paper, he was a Ph.D.
student of the Department of Electronic, Information
and Bioengineering (DEIB), Politecnico di Milano.
His research interests include image and signal processing applied to neural and
cardiovascular systems, development of wearable technologies, circuit design,
and algorithm implementation. During the Ph.D. degree, he developed a wearable device for fetal monitoring.

Giovanni Magenes was born in Genova, Italy, in
1956. He received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering (cum laude) from the University of Pavia,
Pavia, Italy, in 1981, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the Politecnico di Milano,
Milano, Italy, in 1987.
He was a Visiting Researcher at the Institut Nationale de la Santé et Réchèrche Medicale, Lyon,
France, and a Visiting Professor at the Faculté des
Sciences, Université de la Mediterraneé, Luminy,
France. He is currently a Full Professor of biomedical
signal and image processing at the Faculty of Engineering, University of Pavia,
Pavia, Italy, where he was also the Director of the Department of Computer
Engineering and Systems Science and the Director of the Tissue Engineering
Interdepartmental Centre up to 2012. He is also with the Technological Innovation Section, European Centre for Training and Research in Earthquake
Engineering, Pavia. He has been involved in various international and national
research projects in the field of biomedical engineering. His research interests
include soft computing methods in biomedical applications, biomimetic sensors and systems, artificial sensorimotor systems, hybrid tissues, and wearable
devices.
Marta Campanile received the Graduate degree
from the Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Federico
II University of Napoli, Naples, Italy.
She specialized in obstetrics and gynecology at
Federico II University. Since 2000, she has been the
Head-in-Chief of telemedicine and computerized cardiotocography service at Prenatal Medicine, Operative Unit, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
Urology, University Department of Public Health,
Federico II University.
Maria G. Signorini received the Master’s degree
in electronic engineering and Ph.D. degree in bioengineering both from the Department of Electronic,
Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy.
Since 2004, she has been coordinating the Ph.D.
program in bioengineering. She is currently an Associate Professor at the Politecnico di Milano. She
is author of more than 120 international scientific
contributions in the bioengineering field. She participates in national and international scientific programs. Her main research interests include nonlinear analysis and modeling of
biological signals and systems, fetal heart rate monitoring, wearable technologies, soft computing, and knowledge-based systems, dialysis patient monitoring, multiparametric time series analysis improving medical diagnostic tools,
neuroengineering.

