IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

3131

Soft Tissue Artifact Assessment During Treadmill
Walking in Subjects With Total Knee Arthroplasty
Arnaud Barré, Jean-Philippe Thiran, Senior Member, IEEE, Brigitte M. Jolles, Nicolas Theumann,
and Kamiar Aminian∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Accurate measurement of knee kinematics during
functional activities suffers mainly from soft tissue artifact (STA):
the combination of local surface deformations and rigid movement of markers relative to the underlying bone (also called rigid
STA movement: RSTAM). This study proposes to assess RSTAM
on the thigh, shank, and knee joint and to observe possible features between subjects. Nineteen subjects with knee arthroplasty
were asked to walk on a treadmill while a biplane fluoroscopic
system (X-rays) and a stereophotogrammetric system (skin markers) recorded their knee movement. The RSTAM was defined as
the rigid movement of the cluster of skin markers relative to
the prosthesis. The results showed that RSTAM amplitude represents approximately 80–100% of the STA. The vertical axis of
the anatomical frame of the femur was influenced the most by
RSTAM. Combined with tibial error, internal/external rotation
angle and distraction–compression were the knee kinematics parameters most affected by RSTAM during the gait cycle, with average rms values of 3.8◦ and 11.1 mm. This study highlighted higher
RSTAM during the swing phase particularly in the thigh segment
and suggests new features for RSTAM such as the particular shape
of some RSTAM waveforms and the absence of RSTAM in certain
kinematics during the gait phases. The comparison of coefficient of
multiple correlations showed some similarities of RSTAM between
subjects, while some correlations were found with gait speed and
BMI. These new insights could potentially allow the development
of new methods of compensation to avoid STA.
Index Terms—Biplane fluoroscopy, human motion analysis, knee
kinematics, soft tissue artifact (STA), stereophotogrammetry.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

CCURATE measurement of the knee kinematics during
gait is essential for the functional evaluation in orthopedic

Manuscript received February 13, 2013; revised April 26, 2013; accepted May
29, 2013. Date of publication June 14, 2013; date of current version October 16,
2013. This study was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under Grant 205320-137940 and Grant 205321-120136 and in part
by the Interinstitutional Centre of Translational Biomechanics (CBT) foundation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Barré is with the Laboratory of Movement Analysis and Measurement, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland (e-mail: arnaud.barre@epfl.ch).
J.-P. Thiran is with the Signal Processing Laboratory, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (email: jeanphilippe.thiran@epfl.ch).
B. M. Jolles is with the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, CHUV and University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland
(e-mail: brigitte.jolles-haeberli@chuv.ch).
N. Theumann is with the Department of Radiology, CHUV and University
of Lausanne and Clinique Bois-Cerf, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail:
nicolas.theumann@hirslanden.ch).
*K. Aminian is with the Laboratory of Movement Analysis and Measurement, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland (e-mail: kamiar.aminian@epfl.ch).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2268938

disease. Currently, these measures are mainly based on
stereophotogrammetric marker-based motion capture (mocap)
systems, which historically make noninvasive tracking of segmental movement during possible activities [1]. Depending on
their configuration, efficient mocap systems are now able to
provide accurate 3-D global position and orientation with errors
of approximately 0.1–0.2 mm and 0.6◦ , respectively [2], [3].
However, these accuracies are not applicable for human movement analysis due to the soft tissue artifact (STA): a complex
combination of skin elasticity, muscle contraction, and segment
inertia, which creates a relative deformation between the affixed
markers on the skin and the underlying bones. Several studies
showed significant STA effects on the measurement of skin
markers and joint kinematics during various activities. Their
conclusions showed that STA effects are dependent on the activity, the markers’ location, the moving segments, and the characteristics of the subject [4], [5]. The STA can be represented
as a sum of two contributions: a local surface deformation of
the markers’ cluster and a rigid body movement of the cluster relative to the underlying bone [6]. However, if the latter is
considered as the most critical source of error during dynamic
activities [6], [7], it has not yet been assessed efficiently due to
the uncertainty of the reference data available in the literature [5]
and the limited number of subjects in each study [8].
In previous studies, two main approaches were used to measure directly bone motion. One approach consisted of the fixation of references directly in the bones by using intracortical pins [9]–[12], external fixators [13], or percutaneous trackers [14], [15]. These methods are invasive and could introduce
limitations in the motion of the skin around the fixation. A
second approach overcame this issue by using a monoplane
fluoroscopic system and showed the possibility of directly measuring the motion of the bone [16]. However, the accuracy of
such a system is still debated due to error introduced in the 3-D
model fitting procedure, which is then propagated in the measured knee kinematics [17], [18]. The analyzed task can also be
restricted due to the limited field of view of a fluoroscope. To our
knowledge, two studies have examined STA during gait using
a fluoroscope, one study analyzed gait between the midswing
to midstance during a single cycle [19] and the second during
a single stance phase [20], other studies reported STA assessments for functional tasks such as stair-ascent, sit-to-stand, or
knee flexion activities [19]–[24]. Another alternative proposed
to measure bone motion is based on a biplane fluoroscopic
system and has been used to measure gait and running activity [25], [26]. Compared to the monoplane system, the former
has the advantage of being more accurate with errors in the knee

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

3132

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

kinematics of less than 0.4 ± 0.9◦ and 0.4 ± 0.4 mm [27], [28],
but also capable of measuring activities with large range of motions. However, no known study has used this system to assess
STA during gait.
In this study, we propose to separate the two components of
STA, i.e., the rigid movement of the cluster of markers relative
to the underlying bone (called rigid STA movement in this study
or RSTAM) and the local deformation of the cluster relative to
RSTAM (called local STA deformation or LSTAD). After confirming the importance of the RSTAM relative to LSTAD, this
study aims at quantifying RSTAM as the main source of STA error. Different measures are proposed for this quantification. First
the amplitude of the RSTAM is estimated for the thigh, shank,
and knee kinematics using a large cluster of markers spread over
each segment to have a representation of the RSTAM independent of markers’ location [29]. Second, by including a relatively
large dataset, the similarity of RSTAM patterns between subjects is discerned. Finally the influence of gait speed or body
mass index (BMI) on RSTAM is evaluated. This study will thus
bring new insights about STA modeling and compensation, by
comparing the RSTAM with the actual magnitude of the bone
movement.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Acquisition Setup
A group of 19 subjects (8 men and 11 women) with one posterostabilized total knee prosthesis (F.I.R.S.T., Symbios, CH)
participated in this study. The mean and standard deviation (SD)
of age, weight, and height are 70 (6) years, 80 (14) kg, and 168
(9) cm, respectively. The local ethical committee approved the
protocol and all subjects gave written informed consent. For
each subject, 80 reflective markers (Ø = 4 mm) were spread
over one lower limb and apposed to the skin to cover completely
the anterior and lateral side of the thigh and shank segments,
with at least a cluster of 35 markers per segment. Within each
cluster, each marker was separated from the others by 25–40 mm
depending on the morphometry of the subjects. A static acquisition in the upright position was followed by a treadmill gait
acquisition at a self-defined comfortable speed over 15 s.
The acquisition system was composed of two fluoroscopes
(BV Pulsera 300, Philips, NL) and a mocap system (see Fig. 1)
including seven cameras (MX3+, Vicon, U.K.). The fluoroscopes were configured to acquire X-ray images at a maximal frame rate (30 Hz, beam energy: 60 kV, current beam:
5.95 mA, pulse duration: 8 ms). To correct for distortions in the
X-ray images, a calibration was performed using the software
MB-RSA (Medis Specials, NL) by fitting a ninth-order polynomial model [30] to data extracted from a plate composed of
569 holes (Ø = 1 mm). The sampling frequency for the mocap system was set to 240 Hz. Both systems were synchronized
a posteriori using an additional X-ray detector (Monitor 4EC,
S.E. International, Inc., U.S.A.) providing a synchronous square
signal with the fluoroscopes and connected to an analog input
of the Vicon system. The latter signal was sampled at 2400 Hz
to assure a delay of less than 0.4 ms between samples for both
systems. To compute the transformation between both systems,

Fig. 1. Acquisition system setup used to measure the motion of the left side
during treadmill (T) walking. The subject is surrounded by two fluoroscopes
(F1, F2) and 7 MX3+ cameras (C1–C7). The presented setup is configured for
a subject with a height of 170 cm. The security frame (S) is set to ensure that
the hands are at the same height as the shoulders.

calibration was performed with three reflective markers attached
to a box located at the center of the system and visible by each
system. The extraction of the coordinates for each marker in
the fluoroscopic frame was accomplished with MB-RSA. The
labeling of the markers on each X-ray image was performed
manually with a circle tool fitted to the shape of the marker. The
rigid transformation between both systems was computed by a
least squares method [31]. Applied on the dataset of this study,
the average residual for this method was less than 0.08 mm
with a SD below 0.03 mm. Finally, the fluoroscopic frame was
selected as the reference frame.
B. Knee Joint Kinematics Estimation From X-Ray Images
The software MB-RSA was used to fit the 3-D models of
the prosthesis to the X-ray images’ content [30]. Each model
was virtually projected on the image planes and fitted to the selected contours using an iterative inverse perspective-matching
algorithm followed by a contour difference algorithm [32]. The
poses extracted from MB-RSA were then converted into quaternion [33] and position. A recursive time-invariant orientation
filter [34] was applied to the quaternion, while components of
the position were filtered independently by a recursive digital
filter. Both filters used
yi = λi−2 xi−2 ⊕ λi−1 xi−1 ⊕ λi xi ⊕ λi+1 xi+1 ⊕ λi+2 xi+2
(1)
where operator ⊕ is the spherical average operator for the quaternion [35] and the arithmetic addition operator for the position.
The mask coefficients were set to
λ = 1/24 · [−1, 4, 18, 4, −1] ·

(2)

This filter corresponds to a low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 9 Hz. Finally, the filtered data were used to compute the orientation (α, β, γ) and the position (x, y, z) of

BARRÉ et al.: SOFT TISSUE ARTIFACT ASSESSMENT DURING TREADMILL WALKING IN SUBJECTS WITH TOTAL KNEE ARTHROPLASTY

3133

Fig. 2. Illustration of the tibial (left) and femoral (right) components of the
F.I.R.S.T. prosthesis and their corresponding frames used as the anatomical
frame of the tibia and the femur. JCS axes (e1, e2, e3) are also represented.

each segment along the axes (X, Y, Z) of their corresponding anatomical frame (AF) (see Fig. 2). The orientations correspond to the rotation vector extracted from the quaternion.
We used the joint coordinate system JCS (e1, e2, e3) [36]
to estimate knee flexion/extension (FE), abduction/adduction
(AA), and internal/external (IE) rotation angles as well as
latero–medial (LM), postero–anterior (PA), and distraction–
compression (DC) displacements. The horizontal lateral axis
of the femoral component (defined by the manufacturer as the
axis of flexion/extension of the knee between 0–90◦ ) was used
as the axis of flexion/extension (e1). The vertical axis of the
tibial component, designed to support the polyethylene rotating platform, was used for the axis of internal/external rotation
(e3). Finally, the cross product of these two axes gave the axis
of abduction/adduction (e2). The displacements were defined as
the difference between the position of the femur and the tibia
projected on the nonorthogonal basis e1, e2, and e3. The point
chosen for the femur is the origin of the femoral AF. The point
chosen for the tibia is a virtual point corresponding to the origin of the femoral AF registered during the static calibration.
With this definition, the displacements were independent of the
bones/prosthesis size.
Gait cycles (GCs) were detected manually by using the vertical trajectory of the heel marker to define heel strike contact
events. All kinematics were estimated as percentages of GC
by normalizing the data in the time domain to 41 samples by
GC (which correspond to the typical number of samples for a
GC sampled at 30 Hz). Finally, for each subject, 18 waveforms
(Wavg,X -ray ) averaged over the first seven GCs were extracted
for each kinematic variable, i.e., three orientations (α, β, γ) and
three positions (x, y, z) for each segment and three rotations (FE,
AA, IE) and three displacements (LM, PA, DC) for the knee.
C. Knee Joint Kinematics From Skin Marker Clusters
To compute the knee joint kinematics of the prosthesis AFs
from the technical frames (TFs) attached to the skin markers
clusters, a static calibration was performed during a standing
posture to obtain AF–TF rigid transformations (TTF→AF ). TF

Fig. 3. General flowchart to assess STA, LSTAD, and RSTAM on markers’
trajectory and RSTAM on segments’ pose and knee joint kinematics. The dashed
lines/blocks are calibration information. Blocks with round corners are the
outputs.

was built as the eigenvectors of the cloud of markers defined in
each cluster. Thigh (shank) AF–TF registration was computed
as a rigid transformation between thigh (shank) TF and femoral
(tibial) prosthesis component frame extracted from X-ray data
(cf. Fig. 3). Then, during the gait trial acquisition, for each sampling period, the poses of TFs (PTF (t)) were reconstructed
using a least squares pose (LSP) estimator [37] based on quaternion algebra [31]. The poses of AFs (Pskin -m arkers (t)) were
then computed using AF–TF transformations obtained during
static calibration, as in (3)
Pskin -m arkers (t) = PTF (t) · TTF→AF .

(3)

The benefit of LSP is twofold as it gives the optimal pose of
each TF and can be used even if some markers are occluded for a
given instant during the acquisition. Finally, each AF orientation
and position was downsampled to 30 Hz and filtered with the
same digital filters as the X-ray data. Knee kinematics was then
estimated as defined previously with JCS. Similarly to the X-ray
data the 18 kinematics waveforms (Wavg,skin -m arkers ), averaged
over the first seven GCs, were estimated as the percentage of
GC.

3134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

D. RSTAM Assessment
The assessment of RSTAM during treadmill gait was performed at three different levels using markers trajectory, segments’ pose, and knee joint kinematics as depicted in Fig. 3.
Extracted parameters were then analyzed in terms of amplitude,
variability, and correlation.
RSTAM amplitude—The RSTAM waveforms for each subject
(Wavg,RSTAM ) were defined as the rigid body movement of
the clusters relative to the prosthesis. The differences for each
segment were expressed in the prosthesis axes and calculated
as in (4), between the prosthesis’ pose (PX -ray (t)) and the
corresponding AF defined in (3).


ΔR Δt
−1
ΔPRSTAM (t) = PX -ray (t) · Pskin -m arkers (t) =
0
1
(4)
Then, for each segment the rotation part (ΔR) was transformed into axis-angle (Δθ, Δa) to extract three orientation
waveforms
⎤
⎡
⎤ ⎡
Δα
Δθ · ΔaX
⎥
⎢
⎥ ⎢
(5)
⎣ Δβ ⎦ = ⎣ Δθ · ΔaY ⎦
Δγ

Δθ · ΔaZ

while the translation part (Δt) presented in (4) corresponded
to three position waveforms. Similarly, the difference between
the cluster and prosthesis knee kinematics were reported as the
RSTAM knee angles (ΔFE, ΔAA, ΔIE) and RSTAM knee
displacements (ΔLM, ΔPA, ΔDC).
For each subject the rms value of RSTAM waveforms was
assessed along [0–60]%GC and ]60–100]%GC of the waveform, which correspond closely to the stance and swing phase
of gait. In addition for each subject the similarity between both
systems (X-ray and skin markers) among the first seven GC
waveforms was estimated using the intersystem coefficients
of multiple correlation (CMCis) [38] using Wavg,X -ray and
Wavg,skin -m arkers . CMCis measures the change in waveform
pattern due to RSTAM. The rms values and CMCis values were
averaged over the number of subjects and the population mean
and SD were estimated.
In order to estimate the relative weight of RSTAM in the total
STA, the local STA deformation (LSTAD) of each skin marker
relative to RSTAM was estimated. It was assumed that for each
marker we have
dSTA,i = dRSTAM ,i + dLSTAD,i

(6)

where dSTA,i is the total STA distance vector for the ith marker
measured as the difference between the position of the marker,
registered in the AF of the bone, and the position measured on
the skin. dRSTAM ,i is the difference between the position of the
marker registered in the AF of the bone and the position reconstructed by the LSP method (see “Markers reconstruction”
in Fig. 3). dLSTAD,i is then the difference between dSTA,i and
dRSTAM ,i . For each marker, the STA, RSTAM, and LSTAD was
then extracted for 0–60%GC and 60–100%GC and averaged. Finally, for each cluster and each subphase of the GC, the median,

Fig. 4. Surface distribution error of the markers on the thigh during the midswing for a male subject walking at 1.7 km/h with a BMI of 31.7 (large abdomen
but muscled legs).

the 10th percentile, and the 90th percentile were computed for
the total STA and for its components (RSTAM, LSTAD).
RSTAM variability—The similarity of RTSAM waveforms
between subjects was estimated using coefficient of multiple
correlation (bCMC) [39] on Wavg,RSTAM . These waveforms
were centered on zero to remove a possible offset dependent
on the subjects’ calibration during the AF–TF registration. The
subtraction of JCS angles was possible as the main rotation is
on the first axis of rotation [40]. Finally, for each subject, the
similarity of RSTAM waveforms between GCs was estimated
with the CMC within system CMCws [38] using Wavg,X -ray
and Wavg,skin -m arkers . CMCws assesses the between GC similarity removed from the intersystem variability. This allows us
to determine if the RSTAM waveforms suffer from GC variability. All CMCs were classified as low (<0.65), moderate
(0.65–0.75), good (0.75–0.85), very good (0.85–0.95), or excellent (>0.95) [41].
RSTAM correlation to speed and BMI—In order to evaluate
whether RSTAM is dependent on gait speed or BMI, Pearson coefficients were computed between the range, the SD of RSTAM
waveforms and BMI, and gait speed.
III. RESULTS
A. RSTAM Amplitude
Fig. 4 illustrates for a typical subject, at mid-swing of the
GC, the two STA components for the thigh. RSTAM involves
both orientation error and translation error, while only displacement can be illustrated by LSTAD. The total displacement of
each marker resultant from RSTAM and LSTAD vector is also
depicted. The amplitude (median, 10th, and 90th percentile) related to STA, LSTAD, and RSTAM for marker displacements

BARRÉ et al.: SOFT TISSUE ARTIFACT ASSESSMENT DURING TREADMILL WALKING IN SUBJECTS WITH TOTAL KNEE ARTHROPLASTY

TABLE I
STA, LSTAD, RSTAM AMPLITUDE REPORTED ON MARKERS’ DISPLACEMENT
ALONG GAIT CYCLE

3135

similarity with Wavg,X -ray with a CMCis of 0.81–1.00 for the
femur and 0.97–1.00 for the tibia (see Table II). For knee kinematics Wavg,skin -m arkers and Wavg,X -ray showed only excellent
similarity for FE (CMCis > 0.97), while all other CMCis values
were low or complex.
B. RSTAM Variability

over all subjects are presented in Table I, where the similarity
between RSTAM and STA amplitudes is noticeable.
Fig. 5 compares Wavg,X -ray and Wavg,skin -m arkers waveforms obtained by both systems for the knee after removing
the mean value of each waveform, as well as the corresponding
Wavg,RSTAM . Table II contains rms values for Wavg,RSTAM and
include for comparison purpose rms values for Wavg,X -ray .
During 0–60% GC, the largest rms values of RSTAM in the
knee joint kinematics were for the internal/external rotation angle and the distraction/compression (ΔIE = 3.9◦ and ΔDC =
4 mm). We observed a near constant rms amplitude for AA
less than 1◦ and less than 1 mm for LM and DC, while rms
values for ΔAA reached 1.4◦ and ΔLM and ΔDC reached 3
and 4 mm, respectively. It is likely that on average AA, LM,
and DC movements are not present with the prosthesis, while
RSTAM values are significant. This is more visible in ΔDC
with growing amplitude (see knee ΔDC in Fig. 5). During 60–
100%GC, the amplitude of the knee prosthesis was higher than
1.1◦ and 2.9 mm in term of rms values for all angles and displacements. The RSTAM on the knee joint was mainly present on the
flexion/extension angle (ΔFE = 4.1◦ ), the internal/external rotation (ΔIE = 3.8◦ ), and the distraction–compression (ΔDC =
11.1 mm). Fig. 5 also shows that RSTAM was more pronounced
for ΔAA and ΔPA during the 60–100%GC. Moreover, an alternating pattern of RSTAM waveforms is notable for ΔFE and
ΔDC during the two phases of GC.
Fig. 6 depicts the Wavg,RSTAM waveforms for tibia and femur
with their rms values in Table II. The largest RSTAM femoral
amplitudes, due to higher quantities of thigh soft tissue, are
confirmed.
The most significant RSTAM orientation was found on the
femoral AF along its vertical axis (Δβ) with a mean rms of
4◦ during 0–60%GC, whereas only 1.2◦ was obtained for the
tibial AF. The RSTAM was significant for the femoral posterior–
anterior axis (ΔZ) with a rms value of 4.2 mm. During 60–
100%GC, RSTAM was significant in Δβ of both segments (4.4◦
for femur and 1.9◦ for tibia), on Y axis (10.1 mm) and Z axis
(12.1 mm) of the femoral AF and on Y axis (3.1 mm) of the
tibial AF. Here also an alternating pattern of RSTAM waveforms
was noticeable for Δα (femur), ΔY (femur and tibia), and ΔZ
(femur) during the two phases of a GC (see Fig. 6).
For segment kinematics (excepted femoral α, β, y parameters), the Wavg,skin -m arkers waveforms showed good to excellent

The between subjects variability of the RSTAM on the
femoral AF was very good (bCMC: 0.88–0.93) for the orientation on the medial axis (Δα), the position along the vertical
(Δy), and anterior axes (Δz), and moderate to low for other
parameters (see Table III). For tibial kinematics, the RSTAM
variability was low to moderate (bCMC: 0.14–0.68). For knee
kinematics, the between subject variability was very good for
ΔFE, good for ΔDC, but low or complex for other kinematics.
The repeatability within the system (CMCws) was very good
to excellent, with values ranging from 0.86 to 0.99 for the
femoral and tibial AF poses and the knee joint kinematics.
C. RSTAM Correlation with BMI and Gait Speed
The speed range was 1.0–2.3 km/h with an average of
1.8 km/h (SD = 0.3 km/h). The BMI range was 23.0–37.8
with an average of 28.4 (SD = 4.1). Our results showed that for
the femur only the range of orientation along the vertical axis
of the RSTAM (Δβ) was inversely correlated to the BMI (r =
–0.53, p = 0.019). For the tibia, only the SD of orientation along
the medial axis and vertical axis was correlated with gait speed
(Δα: r = 0.54, p = 0.020, Δβ: r = 0.51, p = 0.029). Finally,
for the knee joint kinematics, we had only significant correlation with BMI for the range of RSTAM in the internal/external
rotation angles (ΔIE) (r = –0.56, p = 0.013).
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, the STA was measured during treadmill gait
from skin markers obtained by stereophotogrammetry and from
X-rays of knee prosthesis obtained by a biplane fluoroscopic
system. We separated and quantified the two components of
STA, i.e., the local displacement of the markers (LSTAD) and
the rigid body motion of the segment relative to the underlying
bone (RSTAM). The results of Table I showed the RSTAM amplitude is approximately 80–100% of the STA, while LSTAD
magnitude is around 35–50%. These results confirmed objectively the importance of the RSTAM relative to LSTAD. Considering RSTAM as the main source of STA error, the amplitude
and the pattern of the RSTAM were studied. According to our
knowledge, this is the first study assessing RSTAM using a biplane fluoroscopic system during treadmill gait with the largest
number of subjects reported in the literature (n = 19).
This first result about RSTAM significance is in agreement
with a recent study [7] where principal components analysis
revealed that the STA is mainly governed by translations and
rotations. This suggests that new compensation methods could
model the main component of STA by helical-like motion.
As in previous studies it was found that the thigh is most
influenced by STA than the shank [4] with the most significant

3136

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 5. Median (zero-centered) knee joint kinematics (black line), 25th–75th percentiles (gray band), and zero-centered mean error by subject (gray lines) during
GC. First and third rows present knee kinematics measured by X-ray (dash lines) and skin markers (solid lines), while the second and fourth rows present their
differences.
TABLE II
MEAD (SD) FOR COEFFICIENTS OF MULTIPLE CORRELATION INTERSYSTEM (CMCIS) ON SEGMENTS AND KNEE JOINT WAVEFORMS; MEAD (SD) FOR RSTAM RMS
VALUES ON SEGMENTS AND KNEE JOINT WAVEFORMS; AND X-RAY RMS VALUES FOR KNEE JOINT WAVEFORMS ARE PRESENTED FOR COMPARISON

BARRÉ et al.: SOFT TISSUE ARTIFACT ASSESSMENT DURING TREADMILL WALKING IN SUBJECTS WITH TOTAL KNEE ARTHROPLASTY

3137

Fig. 6. Median (zero-centered) RSTAM error (black solid line), 25th–75th percentiles (gray band), and zero-centered mean error by subject (gray solid lines) for
the pose of the anatomical frame of the femur (first and second row) and the tibia (third and fourth row).

error around the vertical axis of the femoral AF. Compared to
the values reported in the literature, the reported amplitudes in
this study were generally smaller [4]. However, this comparison
is difficult since several methodological details differ in the assessment of the STA. Indeed, as reported previously, the location
and number of markers [29], [37], [42], the pose estimator used
to compute segments’ motion [37] and the calibration between
the technical frame and the anatomical frame [43] influence
the error induced by the STA. Hence, from the designed experimental protocol, STA assessment can be related to the local
deformation of the skin, the rigid movement of the segment, and
also the anatomical landmarks misplacement (ALM). Table IV
compared our results with the results of main studies assessing
STA during gait and show differences between experimental
protocols. The activity analyzed can also explain these differences with the literature. The reported results are for treadmill
walking which can make differences compared to overground

TABLE III
COEFFICIENTS OF MULTIPLE CORRELATIONS (CMCWS AND BCMC) ON
SEGMENTS AND KNEE JOINT WAVEFORMS

3138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF MAIN STUDIES ASSESSING STA DURING GAIT ACTIVITY

walking as the muscle contraction strategy can slightly change
within a controlled environment [44].
The results of this study show that RSTAM is more pronounced during the swing phase than the stance phase. This
finding is in agreement with previous work [45]. Even if no
electromyography was used in this study, the RSTAM on markers show clearly a large deformation on the area of the quadriceps during the swing phase. This deformation also exists for
the shank. The largest marker errors are in the lower part of the
shank and are most likely due to the contraction of the tibial
anterioralis and the lateral gastrocnemius as both muscles are
activated during the swing phase.
The excellent results of the coefficients of multiple correlations within system (CMCws) prove the existence of similar
RSTAM patterns for each subject and are consistent with the
literature [9], [14]. The analysis of the intersystem coefficients
of multiple correlations (CMCis) indicate that RSTAM does not
modify the waveform of shank motion and most of the waveforms for the thigh along a GC. Only the CMCis for the rotation
along the vertical axis of the femur (β) contain complex values.
This can be explained by the position of the foot and the hip
internal/external rotation at the initial contact with the treadmill.
Indeed, an initial contact realized with the heel combined with
an external rotation of the hip could create an external rotation
of the soft tissue due to the inertia of the lower limb. On the other
hand, an initial contact on the toes with an internal hip rotation
could create an internal rotation of the soft tissue. Regarding
the knee joint kinematics waveforms, all of them were largely
modified by the RSTAM as all the CMCis contain complex values (except for the FE angle). The propagation of both RSTAM
(i.e., from the femur and the tibia) creates a crosstalk effect

on the estimated knee kinematics [46]. This suggests that the
compensation of RSTAM directly on the knee joint kinematics
could be less efficient than compensating on the pose of each
segment individually.
The results of the coefficients of multiple correlations between subjects (bCMC) are mixed. Several results for the
bCMC are poor (< 0.65 or complex) and agree with the literature which mention that STA is not reproducible among subjects [9], [45], [47]. However, some parameters for the femur
(Δα, Δy, Δz) and the knee kinematics (ΔFE, ΔDC) have very
good results. This implies that RSTAM is reproducible across
subjects for some parameters. As already mentioned earlier, the
technique used to assess the STA as well as the analysis of a
treadmill gait task could explain these differences with the literature. Moreover, RSTAM values used for bCMC were centered
on zero by removing the constant offset computed for each error
and each subject throughout their average GC. This leads to less
variability among subjects. Actually, this offset was interpreted
as an initial error during the static calibration for the AF–TF
registration. However, the AF used is the gold standard; thus
no misalignment error should exist. As a consequence, we conclude that RSTAM influences also the static calibration (e.g.,
small initial knee flexion or hyperextension or isometric muscle contraction to stay in the upright position). This last point
should also be taken into account during kinematic analysis, by
using for example, a double calibration method or similar [6].
Regarding the pattern of the above parameters (Δα, Δy, Δz,
ΔFE, ΔDC), an alternative-like effect is visible in each case
(Figs. 5 and 6). There is roughly a linear increasing (or decreasing) of RSTAM during the first 50% of the GC followed by
a nonlinear change during the remaining part of the GC. One

BARRÉ et al.: SOFT TISSUE ARTIFACT ASSESSMENT DURING TREADMILL WALKING IN SUBJECTS WITH TOTAL KNEE ARTHROPLASTY

can interpret that approximately during all the stance phase, the
thigh TF is shifted linearly in the proximal and posterior directions as if the skin is pulled to the pelvis. Between 50%GC
and 80%GC, RSTAM acts in the opposite direction to reach a
displacement amplitude similar to that found during the stance
phase. Finally, during the last 20%GC RSTAM was decreased.
This finding suggests that some patterns in RSTAM have a
systematic change of sign which may be modeled for further
compensation. Interestingly, this pattern is very similar to the
estimated hip flexion/extension angle during overground and
treadmill gait [44]. New STA compensation methods could use
the hip flexion/extension angle to drive the estimation of some
RSTAM components which can be further removed from estimated thigh motion. This enforces a recent study which proposed a STA model driven by hip kinematics [48] where the
goal was to model STA displacement and not RSTAM. No such
result was found for the RSTAM on the shank and the knee joint
kinematics.
A particular finding of this study is the existence of nearly
pure RSTAM period during gait for subjects with knee prosthesis. Indeed, the knee adduction/abduction (AA), the latero–
medial (LM) displacement, and the distraction–compression
(DC) measured by X-rays show null or very small motion (<0.1
±0.1◦ ; <0.3 ±0.5 mm) from 30% to 50%GC (see Fig. 5). This
information could be very useful for a compensation method
which can be used to tune a RSTAM model. This assumption
of pure RSTAM might be also used for healthy knees as no
postero–anterior motion was measured during the same period
for overground walking [9].
Interestingly, some RSTAM parameters without similarity
between subjects were found to be correlated with gait speed
and BMI. For example, the range of error for rotation along
the vertical axis of the femur (Δβ) has no similarity between
subjects but is inversely correlated with BMI. These findings
suggest the importance of BMI and gait speed to further simplify
and personalize new STA compensation methods.
This study also entails some limitations. First, the gait speed
was slower (1.8 km/h) compared to a similar population walking on a treadmill with an average speed of 3.0 km/h [49], most
likely due to the volume constraints of the treadmill instrumentation (see Fig. 1). This difference could affect the pattern
and the magnitude of the RSTAM on the segments. Second,
some marker occlusions did occur due to the obstruction of the
stereophotogrammetric system by the fluoroscopes. Therefore,
in some frames, fewer markers were used for the reconstruction
of the clusters, which could result in a possible loss of accuracy of the RSTAM measurement. Third, X-ray images during
the swing phase may be blurred due to the pulse duration time
(8 ms). This phenomenon could reduce the quality of the 3-D
model fitting. However, from preliminary results, the RMSE on
the fitting of each component was less than 0.18◦ during simulated gait task. The method chosen to reconstruct cluster pose
has also an impact on the measure of RSTAM and LSTAD. As
the goal of this study was to focus on the rigid component of
the STA, a least square method was used to estimate the pose of
a rigid cluster. Thus, the values of dLSTAD,i are directly related
to the cluster pose estimation PTF as the sum of their squared
components corresponds to the residual of the estimated pose.

3139

This residual might not be a good indicator regarding the quality of the bone pose estimation [50]. However, in this study
dLSTAD,i was not used to quantify the accuracy of the estimated bone pose, but rather to show the contribution of LSTAD
against RSTAM. Other reconstruction methods based on Kriging or radial basis function (RBF) take into account homothetic
transformation and stretching effects during the reconstruction
of deformable cluster [51]. This should give better representations of LSTAD and maybe a more accurate measure of RSTAM.
Further analysis should investigate these methods to see their
benefits. Finally, it was recently indicated that CMC was limited
in the analysis reliability for kinematic gait data [52]. As CMCs
are still the best known tools to measure curve similarities, they
were preserved to estimate the intersubject RSTAM similarities. Moreover, as most of the CMC within system (CMCws)
and intersystem (CMCis) are excellent for segments’ pose and
no offset was removed for them, the authors believe that similarities exists. On the other hand, the low bCMC scores, especially
on the tibia, can be explained by the limitation of this tool as it
is affected by the range of analyzed values [52].
In conclusion, this study provided new insights on STA during treadmill gait, particularly by showing the importance of
the rigid body component of the STA (RSTAM). Some features
of RSTAM can be further exploited to devise new STA compensation methods, e.g., consider marker configuration to lower
RSTAM, the higher RSTAM during swing particularly for the
thigh segment, the particular shape of some RSTAM waveforms,
the absence of RSTAM in some kinematics during gait phases,
some similarities between subjects as well as correlations with
gait speed and BMI. These results could lead to an improvement
in knee kinematics accuracy during functional activities.
REFERENCES
[1] D. A. Winter, R. K. Greenlaw, and D. A. Hobson, “Television-computer
analysis of kinematics of human gait,” Comput. Biomed. Res., vol. 5,
pp. 498–504, Oct. 1972.
[2] A. E. Kedgley, T. Birmingham, and T. R. Jenkyn, “Comparative accuracy
of radiostereometric and optical tracking systems,” J. Biomech., vol. 42,
pp. 1350–4, Jun. 2009.
[3] M. Windolf, N. Gotzen, and M. Morlock, “Systematic accuracy and precision analysis of video motion capturing systems—Exemplified on the
Vicon-460 system,” J. Biomech., vol. 41, pp. 2776–80, Aug. 2008.
[4] A. Leardini, L. Chiari, U. Della Croce, and A. Cappozzo, “Human movement analysis using stereophoto-grammetry—Part 3: Soft tissue artifact
assessment and compensation,” Gait Posture, vol. 21, pp. 212–25, Feb.
2005.
[5] A. Peters, B. Galna, M. Sangeux, M. Morris, and R. Baker, “Quantification
of soft tissue artifact in lower limb human motion analysis: A systematic
review,” Gait Posture, vol. 31, pp. 1–8, Jan. 2010.
[6] A. Cappello, R. Stagni, S. Fantozzi, and A. Leardini, “Soft tissue artifact
compensation in knee kinematics by double anatomical landmark calibration: Performance of a novel method during selected motor tasks,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, pp. 992–8, Jun. 2005.
[7] M. S. Andersen, M. Damsgaard, J. Rasmussen, D. K. Ramsey, and D. L.
Benoit, “A linear soft tissue artefact model for human movement analysis:
proof of concept using in vivo data,” Gait Posture, vol. 35, pp. 606–11,
Apr. 2012.
[8] B. Gao and N. N. Zheng, “Investigation of soft tissue movement during
level walking: Translations and rotations of skin markers,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 41, pp. 3189–95, Nov. 14, 2008.
[9] D. L. Benoit, D. K. Ramsey, M. Lamontagne, L. Xu, P. Wretenberg, and
P. Renstrom, “Effect of skin movement artifact on knee kinematics during
gait and cutting motions measured in vivo,” Gait Posture, vol. 24, pp. 152–
64, Oct. 2006.
[10] J. Fuller, L. J. Liu, M. C. Murphy, and R. W. Mann, “A comparison of lower-extremity skeletal kinematics measured using skin- and

3140

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

pin-mounted markers,” Human Movement Sci., vol. 16, pp. 219–242,
1997.
C. Reinschmidt, A. J. van den Bogert, A. Lundberg, B. M. Nigg, N.
Murphy, A. Stacoff, and A. Stano, “Tibiofemoral and tibiocalcaneal motion during walking: External vs. skeletal markers,” Gait Posture, vol. 6,
pp. 98–109, 1997.
J. Houck, H. J. Yack, and T. Cuddeford, “Validity and comparisons of
tibiofemoral orientations and displacement using a femoral tracking device
during early to mid stance of walking,” Gait Posture, vol. 19, pp. 76–84,
2004.
A. Cappozzo, F. Catani, A. Leardini, M. G. Benedetti, and U. D. Croce,
“Position and orientation in space of bones during movement: Experimental artefacts,” Clin. Biomech. (Bristol, Avon), vol. 11, pp. 90–100, Mar.
1996.
J. P. Holden, J. A. Orsini, K. L. Siegel, T. M. Kepple, L. H. Gerber, and
S. J. Stanhope, “Surface movement errors in shank kinematics and knee
kinetics during gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 5, pp. 217–227, 1997.
K. Manal, I. McClay Davis, B. Galinat, and S. Stanhope, “The accuracy
of estimating proximal tibial translation during natural cadence walking:
Bone vs. skin mounted targets,” Clin. Biomech. (Bristol, Avon), vol. 18,
pp. 126–31, Feb. 2003.
S. A. Banks and W. A. Hodge, “Accurate measurement of threedimensional knee replacement kinematics using single-plane fluoroscopy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 43, pp. 638–49, Jun. 1996.
S. Acker, R. Li, H. Murray, P. S. John, S. Banks, S. Mu, U. Wyss, and
K. Deluzio, “Accuracy of single-plane fluoroscopy in determining relative position and orientation of total knee replacement components,” J.
Biomech., vol. 44, pp. 784–7, Feb. 24 2011.
M. R. Mahfouz, W. A. Hoff, R. D. Komistek, and D. A. Dennis, “A
robust method for registration of three-dimensional knee implant models
to two-dimensional fluoroscopy images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22,
pp. 1561–74, Dec. 2003.
M. Akbarshahi, A. G. Schache, J. W. Fernandez, R. Baker, S. Banks, and
M. G. Pandy, “Non-invasive assessment of soft-tissue artifact and its effect
on knee joint kinematics during functional activity,” J. Biomech., vol. 43,
pp. 1292–301, May 7, 2010.
T.-Y. Tsai, T.-W. Lu, M.-Y. Kuo, and H.-C. Hsu, “Quantification of threedimensional movement of skin markers relative to the underlying bones
during functional activities,” Biomed. Eng.: Appl., Basis Commun., vol. 21,
pp. 223–232, 2009.
E. H. Garling, B. L. Kaptein, B. Mertens, W. Barendregt, H. E. Veeger, R.
G. Nelissen, and E. R. Valstar, “Soft-tissue artefact assessment during stepup using fluoroscopy and skin-mounted markers,” J. Biomech., vol. 40,
suppl. 1, pp. S18–24, 2007.
M. Sati, J. A. de Guise, S. Larouche, and G. Drouin, “Quantitative assessment of skin-bone movement at the knee,” Knee, vol. 3, pp. 121–138,
1996.
R. Stagni, S. Fantozzi, A. Cappello, and A. Leardini, “Quantification of
soft tissue artefact in motion analysis by combining 3D fluoroscopy and
stereophotogrammetry: A study on two subjects,” Clin. Biomech. (Bristol,
Avon), vol. 20, pp. 320–9, Mar. 2005.
T. Y. Tsai, T. W. Lu, M. Y. Kuo, and C. C. Lin, “Effects of soft tissue
artifacts on the calculated kinematics and kinetics of the knee during
stair-ascent,” J. Biomech., vol. 44, pp. 1182–8, Apr. 2011.
G. Li, M. Kozanek, A. Hosseini, F. Liu, S. K. Van de Velde, and H. E.
Rubash, “New fluoroscopic imaging technique for investigation of 6DOF
knee kinematics during treadmill gait,” J. Orthop. Surg. Res., vol. 4, p. 6,
2009.
S. Tashman, D. Collon, K. Anderson, P. Kolowich, and W. Anderst, “Abnormal rotational knee motion during running after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction,” Amer. J. Sports Med., vol. 32, pp. 975–83, Jun.
2004.
G. Li, S. K. Van de Velde, and J. T. Bingham, “Validation of a noninvasive fluoroscopic imaging technique for the measurement of dynamic
knee joint motion,” J. Biomech., vol. 41, pp. 1616–22, 2008.
C. A. Myers, M. R. Torry, K. B. Shelburne, J. E. Giphart, R. F. Laprade,
S. L. Woo, and J. R. Steadman, “In vivo tibiofemoral kinematics during 4
functional tasks of increasing demand using Biplane fluoroscopy,” Amer.
J. Sports Med., vol. 40, pp. 170–8, Oct. 2011.
A. Cereatti, U. Della Croce, and A. Cappozzo, “Reconstruction of skeletal
movement using skin markers: Comparative assessment of bone pose
estimators,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 3, p. 7, 2006.
E. H. Garling, B. L. Kaptein, K. Geleijns, R. G. Nelissen, and E. R. Valstar,
“Marker configuration model-based Roentgen fluoroscopic analysis,” J.
Biomech., vol. 38, pp. 893–901, Apr. 2005.

[31] B. K. P. Horn, “Closed-form solution of absolute orientation using unit
quaternions,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer., vol. 4, pp. 629–642, Apr. 1987.
[32] B. L. Kaptein, E. R. Valstar, B. C. Stoel, P. M. Rozing, and J. H. Reiber,
“Evaluation of three pose estimation algorithms for model-based roentgen
stereophotogrammetric analysis,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. H, vol. 218,
pp. 231–8, 2004.
[33] J. B. Kuipers, Quaternions and Rotation Sequences: A Primer With Applications to Orbits, Aerospace, and Virtual Reality. Princeton, NJ, USA:
Princeton Univ. Press, 2002.
[34] J. Lee and S. Y. Shin, “General construction of time-domain filters for
orientation data,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 8, pp. 119–128,
Apr.–Jun. 2002.
[35] S. R. Buss and J. P. Fillmore, “Spherical averages and applications to
spherical splines and interpolation,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 20, pp. 95–
126, Apr. 2001.
[36] E. S. Grood and W. J. Suntay, “A joint coordinate system for the clinical
description of three-dimensional motions: application to the knee,” J.
Biomech. Eng., vol. 105, pp. 136–44, May 1983.
[37] A. Cappozzo, A. Cappello, U. Della Croce, and F. Pensalfini, “Surfacemarker cluster design criteria for 3-D bone movement reconstruction,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, pp. 1165–74, Dec. 1997.
[38] A. Ferrari, A. G. Cutti, and A. Cappello, “A new formulation of the
coefficient of multiple correlation to assess the similarity of waveforms
measured synchronously by different motion analysis protocols,” Gait
Posture, vol. 31, pp. 540–542, 2010.
[39] E. Growney, D. Meglan, M. Johnson, T. Cahalan, and K. N. An, “Repeated
measures of adult normal walking using a video tracking system,” Gait
Posture, vol. 6, pp. 147–162, Oct. 1997.
[40] B. Michaud, M. I. Jackson, F. Prince, and M. S. Begon, “Can
one angle be simply subtracted from another to determine range
of motion in three-dimensional motion analysis?” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., Jul. 2012. Available: http://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10255842.2012.696104.
[41] A. Ferrari, A. G. Cutti, P. Garofalo, M. Raggi, M. Heijboer, A. Cappello,
and A. Davalli, “First in vivo assessment of “Outwalk”: a novel protocol
for clinical gait analysis based on inertial and magnetic sensors,” Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 48, pp. 1–15, Jan. 2010.
[42] J. H. Challis, “A procedure for determining rigid body transformation
parameters,” J. Biomech., vol. 28, pp. 733–7, Jun. 1995.
[43] U. Della Croce, A. Leardini, L. Chiari, and A. Cappozzo, “Human
movement analysis using stereophoto-grammetry—Part 4: Assessment of
anatomical landmark misplacement and its effects on joint kinematics,”
Gait Posture, vol. 21, pp. 226–37, Feb. 2005.
[44] J. R. Nymark, S. J. Balmer, E. H. Melis, E. D. Lemaire, and S. Millar,
“Electromyographic and kinematic nondisabled gait differences at extremely slow overground and treadmill walking speeds,” J. Rehabil. Res.
Dev., vol. 42, pp. 523–34, Jul./Aug. 2005.
[45] C. Reinschmidt, A. J. van den Bogert, B. M. Nigg, A. Lundberg, and N.
Murphy, “Effect of skin movement on the analysis of skeletal knee joint
motion during running,” J. Biomech., vol. 30, pp. 729–32, Jul. 1997.
[46] S. J. Piazza and P. R. Cavanagh, “Measurement of the screw-home motion
of the knee is sensitive to errors in axis alignment,” J. Biomech., vol. 33,
pp. 1029–34, Aug. 2000.
[47] K. Manal, I. McClay, S. Stanhope, J. Richards, and B. Galinat, “Comparison of surface mounted markers and attachment methods in estimating
tibial rotations during walking: An in vivo study,” Gait Posture, vol. 11,
pp. 38–45, Feb. 2000.
[48] V. Camomilla, A. Cereatti, L. Cheze, and A. Cappozzo, “A hip joint
kinematics driven model for the generation of realistic thigh soft tissue
artefacts,” J. Biomech., vol. 46, pp. 625–30, Feb. 1, 2013.
[49] K. Turcot, R. Aissaoui, K. Boivin, M. Pelletier, N. Hagemeister, and J.
A. de Guise, “The responsiveness of three-dimensional knee accelerations
used as an estimation of knee instability and loading transmission during
gait in osteoarthritis patient’s follow-up,” Osteoarthritis Cartilage, vol. 17,
pp. 213–9, Feb. 2009.
[50] R. Stagni and S. Fantozzi, “Can cluster deformation be an indicator of soft
tissue artefact?” Gait Posture, vol. 30, suppl. 1, p. S55, 2009.
[51] R. Dumas and L. Cheze, “Soft tissue artifact compensation by linear 3D
interpolation and approximation methods,” J. Biomech., vol. 42, pp. 2214–
7, Sep. 2009.
[52] J. Roislien, O. Skare, A. Opheim, and L. Rennie, “Evaluating the properties
of the coefficient of multiple correlation (CMC) for kinematic gait data,”
J. Biomech., vol. 45, pp. 2014–2018, Jul. 2012.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

