222

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

The Single Equivalent Moving Dipole Model Does
Not Require Spatial Anatomical Information to
Determine Cardiac Sources of Activation
Kwanghyun Sohn, Wener Lv, Kichang Lee, Anna M. Galea, Gordon B. Hirschman, Senior Member, IEEE,
Alison M. Hayward, Richard J. Cohen, and Antonis A. Armoundas, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Radio-frequency catheter ablation (RCA) is an established treatment for ventricular tachycardia (VT). A key feature of
the RCA procedure is the need for a mapping approach that facilitates the identification of the target ablation site. In this study, we
investigate the effect of the location of the reference potential and
spatial anatomical constraints on the accuracy of an algorithm
to identify the target site for ablation therapy of VT. This algorithm involves processing body surface potentials using the single
equivalent moving dipole (SEMD) model embedded in an infinite
homogeneous volume conductor to model cardiac electrical activity. We employed a swine animal model and an electrode array of
nine electrodes that was sutured on the epicardial surface of the
right ventricle. We identified two potential reference electrode locations: at an electrode most far away from the heart (R1) and at the
average of all 64 body surface electrode potentials (R2). Also, we
developed three spatial “constraining” schemes of the algorithm
used to obtain the SEMD location: one that does not impose any
constraint on the inverse solution (S1), one that constrains the solution into a volume that corresponds to the heart (S2), and one
that constrains the solution into a volume that corresponds to the
body surface (S3). We have found that R2S1 is the most accurate approach (p < 0.05 versus R1S1 at earliest activation time—
EAT) for localizing epicardial electrical sources of known locations
in vivo. Although the homogeneous volume conductor introduces
systematic error in the estimated compared to the true dipole location, we have observed that the overall error of the estimated
interelectrode distance compared to the true one was 0.4 ± 0.4 cm
and 0.4 ± 0.1 cm for the R1S1 and R2S1 combinations, respectively, at the EAT (p = N.S.) and 1.0 ± 0.6 and 0.5 ± 0.4 cm,
respectively, at the pacing spike time (PST, p < 0.05). In conclu-

Manuscript received October 24, 2012; revised March 8, 2013; accepted May
13, 2013. Date of publication June 12, 2013; date of current version December
31, 2013. The work was supported by NIH under Grant 1RO1HL103961 and
4 R44 H L079726-02. K. Sohn and W. Lv are equally contributing authors.
K. Sohn is with the Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129 USA (e-mail: ksohn@partners.org).
W. Lv and K. Lee are with the Institute for Medical Engineering and Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail:
lvwener@MIT.EDU; kclee@mit.edu).
A. M. Galea and G. B. Hirschman are with the Vivonics Corporation,
Waltham, MA 02451 USA (e-mail: agalea@vivonics.com; ghirschman@
vivonics.com).
A. M. Hayward is with the Veterinary Services, Concord Biomedical Sciences and Emerging Technologies, Inc., Lexington, MA 02421 USA (e-mail:
ahayward@cbset.org).
R. J. Cohen is with the Institute for Medical Engineering and Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail:
rjcohen@mit.edu).
A. A. Armoundas is with the Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129 USA, and also with Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail: aarmoundas@partners.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2268012

sion, our algorithm to estimate the SEMD parameters from body
surface potentials can potentially be a useful method to rapidly and
accurately guide the catheter tip to the target site during a RCA
procedure without the need for spatial anatomical information obtained by conventional imaging modalities.
Index Terms—Ablation, body surface potentials, cardiac arrhythmias, catheter guiding, equivalent dipole.

I. INTRODUCTION
catheter ablation (RCA) is an established treatment for ventricular tachycardia (VT). A key
feature of the RCA procedure is the need for a mapping approach
that facilitates the identification of the target ablation site. Thus,
techniques that employ monitoring of the activation sequence
of the ongoing arrhythmia, or electrically map the endocardial
surface of the heart have been introduced [1]–[9]. However,
existing techniques used to locate the target site require that
patients be maintained in arrhythmia for a significant period of
time, limiting the procedure to treatment of slow VTs in patients
who are hemodynamically stable during the arrhythmia.
Thus, new methods are needed to accurately identify the ablation site and help to reduce the duration of the RCA procedures.
We have introduced a new method to guide the ablative therapy of cardiac arrhythmias, in which we model both the site of
the origin of the arrhythmia and current pulses generated from
a pair of electrodes at the tip of the ablation catheter with a
single equivalent moving dipole (SEMD). The method employs
a three-step approach: 1) it models cardiac electrical activity
during the arrhythmia with a SEMD, 2) it models current pulses
that are emitted from the tip of the catheter also with a SEMD,
and 3) it attempts to superimpose the two SEMDs by moving
the catheter tip.
We have demonstrated that while we can achieve rapid identification of the SEMD parameters, and that we can also use
these SEMD parameters to identify spatially separated epicardial sources and accurately reconstruct potentials on the
body surface that are highly correlated with the original values [10], [11]. In subsequent computational studies [12]–[14]
in which we estimated the accuracy of the guiding process as
the tip of the ablation catheter approaches the target site, we
observed that despite differences in the systematic error across
the left and the right ventricles, for a target site anywhere on
the endocardial ventricular wall, our algorithm has been able to

R

ADIO-FREQUENCY

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SOHN et al.: SINGLE EQUIVALENT MOVING DIPOLE MODEL DOES NOT REQUIRE SPATIAL ANATOMICAL INFORMATION

guide the catheter tip very close to the target site, the absolute
error is ∼0.2 cm, which is appropriate for RCA procedures.
In this study, we employ swine body surface ECG data
to assess our optimization algorithm in vivo. Specifically, we
seek to systematically examine 1) the role of a reference electrode in the ability of the algorithm to accurately and rapidly
identify the absolute and relative location of epicardial pacing sites, and 2) the role of spatial constraints in improving
the accuracy of the algorithm in resolving epicardial pacing
sites.
II. METHODS
A. Animal Studies
We evaluated the applicability of our algorithm to identify
the SEMD parameters, and the ability of that model to represent cardiac electrical activity, in a swine animal model. The
experimental protocol was approved by the MIT Committee on
Animal Care. We performed seven swine studies. Weight, thoracic radius and length of the pigs were 38.5 ± 4.6 kg, 13.9 ±
0.7 cm, and 59.3 ± 1.9 cm, respectively.
The surgical preparation has been described previously [10],
[11]. Briefly, following sternotomy, a linear electrode array was
sutured on the epicardial surface of the right ventricle; there
were nine electrodes (A1–A9) on that electrode array. A1-A2
interelectrode distance was 2 mm, and all other interelectrode
distances for adjacent electrodes were 10 mm. The distance between the two poles of each electrode was 1 mm. The electrode
cables were passed subcutaneously through an intercostal space
to the craniolateral thorax, exteriorized and fixed by stay sutures. The chest was closed in layers, and air evacuated from
the chest. At all times the animals were monitored using ECG,
pulse oximetry, blood pressure, and body temperature. The heart
was paced from each epicardial electrode for ∼50 beats at
120 beats/min. At the conclusion of the experiment, the chest
and the pericardium were reopened, and the exact coordinates
of the heart boundaries as well as the 3-D locations of all pacing
electrodes on the right- and left-ventricles were measured with
an accuracy of 2–3 mm, in real space.
Sixty four recording electrodes were placed on the torso to
measure body surface potentials. Eight electrodes were evenly
placed in a linear array on a single electrode strip, and eight
electrode strips were used for this study. Interelectrode distance between adjacent electrodes on an array was 4.5 cm.
Each electrode strip was aligned longitudinally to the torso.
Two electrode strips were positioned on the left and right lateral posterior region, two others on the left and right lateral
sides, two others on the left and right lateral anterior region,
and the last two were placed on the left and right anterior
torso.
The ECG acquisition system included the high-fidelity
BioSemi amplifiers (Active Two, BioSemi, The Netherlands),
a very flexible, 24-bit, true dc, battery-powered front-end, with
fiber optic data transfer system, which allowed the recording
64 body-surface potentials that were digitized at 8192 Hz (Labview, National Instrument Corp, Austin, TX, USA). Data were
analyzed offline using custom-built software.

223

B. Data Processing
After acquisition of body surface data, potentials were recalculated in two different ways based on two different reference
potentials (Ri, where i = 1 or 2): 1) the reference potential was
determined to be a remote electrode from the heart (R1); 2) the
reference potential was the average of 64 body surface electrode
potentials (R2).
Then each of the surface ECG channels was visually inspected
to ensure good data quality. The R wave in the QRS complex
then was identified for each ECG beat and for each channel.
The baseline of each beat was subsequently adjusted relative
to an 8 ms isoelectric segment that started 13 ms prior to the
pacing spike. After QRS complexes were identified, an iterative,
adaptive QRS template matching scheme was used to refine
initial fiducial point estimates [15]. Next, a median beat was
computed for each ECG lead by aligning each beat within the
lead data segment according to the R-wave and identifying the
median value on a point-by-point basis within the beat. After
the estimation of the median beat for each channel, a noise
estimate was obtained from each median beat (and channel) by
measuring the standard deviation of the signal fluctuations in a
predefined window in the same isoelectric segment preceding
the pacing spike.
C. Algorithm for the Inverse-Problem Estimation
In the inverse algorithm, we used the SEMD model embedded
in an infinite homogeneous volume conductor [10], [12]. Then,
the potential φi at location ri (xi , y i , z i ) on the body surface
due to the dipole at r  (x , y  , z  ) with moment p (px , py , pz ) in
a medium of conductivity g, is given by
φi (r , p) =

1 p • (ri − r )
.
4πg |ri − r |3

(1)

The SEMD solution is defined as a dipole that minimizes the
sum of squared residuals (SSR, ψ), and the equation of SSR
depends on the reference system. In R1 system
ψ=

N

 i
 
2
φc − φrc − φim − φrm

(2)

i=1

where φic and φim are calculated and measured potentials, respectively, at ith body surface electrode, and φrc and φrm are
calculated and measured potentials, respectively, at the reference body surface electrode; N is the total number of body
surface electrodes. In R2 system
ψ=

N

 i
 
2
φc − φc − φim − φm

(3)

i=1

where φc and φm are the mean values of calculated and measured
body surface potentials, respectively,
φc =

N
1  j
φ ,
N j =1 c

φm =

N
1  j
φ .
N j =1 m

We defined the optimal dipole moment components po (pox ,
poz ) at an arbitrary location as the ones that minimize ψ at

poy ,

224

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

the location r  (x , y  , z  ) [10]–[12]

The solution was regarded as converged if two convergence
criteria
were satisfied simultaneously. Those two convergence
∂ψ
0=
, k = 1, 2, 3.
(4) criteria were (i) the maximum coordinate difference between the
∂pk
best point (a vertex with the lowest function value) and the other
Then, from (1)–(4) we obtain
vertex points in the Simplex, was not larger than TolX (0.02 cm),
and (ii) the maximum difference in function evaluations between
3

poj αk j = βk , po = α−1 β
(5) vertices was not larger than TolFun (10−10 ). The estimation
result was regarded as not converged if the convergence criteria
j =1
were not satisfied, that is either the number of iterations or
where α and β depend on the reference system. In R1 reference
function evaluations reached its maximum allowed value.
method
We defined the “heart center,” “heart radius,” and “torso


N
ryr − ry
1  ryi − ry
boundary” as follows: the “heart center” was defined as the
αxy =
−
geometrical center of the measured minimum and maximum
4πg i=1 |ri − r |3
|rr − r |3
heart coordinates in each orthogonal direction; the heart radius
	 i


rx − rx
rxr − rx
was defined as the longest among the three distances from the
×
−
(6)
heart center to the three orthogonal maximum heart coordinates
|rr − r |3
|ri − r |3
multiplied by 1.2; the torso boundary was defined by an assem

	
N

 i
 rxi − rx
rxr − rx
bly of triangles, each of which was defined by three adjacent
r
φm − φm
−
.
(7)
βx =
r − r  |3
i − r  |3
torso electrodes.
|r
|r
i=1
Thereafter, we modified the MATLAB “fminsearch” funcIn R2 reference method
tion, to evaluate the three spatial optimization algorithms (Sj,
⎛
⎞
N
N
where j = 1–3), as follows: (i) S1: there was no constraint of
1  ⎝ rxi − rx
1  rxj − rx ⎠
αxy =
−
the search volume. (ii) S2: we constrained the search volume
4πg i=1 |ri − r |3
N j =1 |rj − r |3
within the heart sphere, which was defined by the heart center
⎛
⎞
and heart radius; if at an iteration step a vertex was outside of
N

ryi − ry
ryj − ry
1
⎠ (8) the heart (that is when the distance between the center of the
×⎝
3 − N
3
heart and the vertex was larger than the heart radius), we rei

j

|r − r |
|r − r |
j =1
placed that vertex by the center of the heart in order to constrain
⎛
⎞
the solution within the heart. (iii) S3: we constrained the search
N
N

 i
 rxi − rx
1  rxj − rx ⎠
⎝
φm − φm
. (9) volume within the torso, that was similar to (ii), however when
βx =
−
i − r  |3
j − r  |3
N
|r
|r
a vertex was outside of the torso, we replaced that vertex by the
i=1
j =1
center of the heart.
In this case, the dipole location is the only variable of the
optimization function, SSR. We used the simplex method to
search for a dipole location that minimizes SSR. Briefly, the E. Statistical Analysis
algorithm search started from random seeds (distributed in a
For a specific time point during the cardiac cycle, we estivolume approximately representing the heart) that represented
mate the median distance between the spatial dipole parameters
the SEMD initial location and this process repeated a maximum
resulting from any two pacing protocols, (D, where, D2 =
of ten times. A spatial criterion was imposed to force solu(r1,x -m edian − r2,x -m edian )2 + (r1,y -m edian − r2,y -m edian )2 +
tions to land inside a predefined volume that includes the heart
(r1,z -m edian − r2,z -m edian )2 ), using the corresponding SEMD
[10]–[12], [14]. The search was terminated if two solutions that
locations obtained from the analysis of the median beat of each
started from two different seeds were found to be closer than
protocol.
0.5 cm [10], [11]. If after ten seeds there were no solutions that
Our results are presented as median ± standard deviation of
satisfied the spatial criterion and were closer than 0.5 cm apart,
normally distributed variables. Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
the algorithm outcome was considered to be nonconvergent (inwas used for the comparison of continuous variable. The
dicated in the tables).
95% confidence interval was used to determine the statistical
significance.
D. Optimization Algorithms and Convergence Criteria
The MATLAB (Mathworks) function “fminsearch” was used
to implement the Simplex method to estimate the SEMD location, by minimizing ψ. A Simplex in 3-dimensional space was
characterized by 4 vertices. The initial 4 vertices were randomly
selected in a 4 cm radius sphere, the center of which was coincident with the center of the heart. At each step of the search
process, a new position was generated, and this process repeated
until previously specified convergence criteria were satisfied or
the maximum number of iterations (600) or function evaluations
(600) was exceeded.

III. RESULTS
In this study, we employ body-surface ECG data recorded
during epicardial pacing in a swine animal model to assess an
optimization algorithm designed to estimate the SEMD parameters. Specifically, we seek to systematically examine 1) the role
of a reference electrode in the ability of the algorithm to accurately and rapidly identify epicardial pacing sites, 2) the role of
spatial constraints in improving the accuracy of the algorithm
in resolving epicardial pacing sites.

SOHN et al.: SINGLE EQUIVALENT MOVING DIPOLE MODEL DOES NOT REQUIRE SPATIAL ANATOMICAL INFORMATION

225

TABLE I
PERCENT OF CONVERGENT SOLUTIONS AT THE EARLIEST ACTIVATION TIME AND THE PACING SPIKE TIME

We employed data recorded during pacing from nine different
epicardial locations (A1 to A9) on the right ventricle, and used
two different reference potentials Ri and three different spatial
optimization algorithms Si, to estimate the SEMD corresponding to each of the pacing sites. In each case, 100 independent
solutions were obtained that resulted from 100 random initial
SEMD locations.
We evaluate the ability of the optimization algorithm to estimate the SEMD parameters at two instances during the cardiac
cycle 1) at the pacing spike time (PST) and 2) at the earliest
activation time (EAT). The activation time at each body surface
electrode is defined as the time instant of the maximum potential
change in 2.3 ms, either increase or decrease; then, the earliest
activation time is determined as the earliest time among the
activation times of the 64 electrodes. We choose these two instances because 1) the pacing spike, resulting from two closely
separated (1 mm) wires, reflects electrical activity that can be
best approximated by a SEMD, 2) the EAT reflects the earliest
activation of the ventricular myocardium.
A. Ability of the Algorithm to Converge in a Constrained Area
in the Body
To assess the ability of our optimization algorithm to converge
in a constrained area in the body, we compared the convergence
rate for each of the reference potential Ri and spatial constraint
algorithm Sj at the EAT and at the PST (see Table I), in sets
of 100 simulations. To establish convergence to a point in the
search space at or near the global minimum, we should choose
multiple initial seed coordinates for starting the Simplex search.
We have empirically found that 10 seeds would give the optimal
result [10], [11], but also that number appeared to be a good
tradeoff between computational speed versus accuracy of the
optimization algorithm.
Table I shows the convergence rate (or percent) of within
and out of the heart solutions, as well the nonconvergence rate,
for each of the Ri and Sj combinations. Although the number

of iterations for each of the Ri and Sj combinations to obtain
a convergent solution within the heart is not different, R2 has
the highest convergence rate, especially at the EAT. Regarding
the spatial constraint algorithms, S1 has highest rate of out of
the heart solutions and zero nonconverged solutions. On the
other hand, S2 exhibits zero out of the heart solutions and the
highest rate of not converged solutions. Overall, R2S1 and R2S3
provided the highest convergence within the heart rate among
all combinations.
We next sought to evaluate the ability of the algorithm to
converge to a global minimum. We evaluated the percent of
solutions that converged within a distance 0.2 or 0.5 cm from
the best solution (the solution with the smallest SSR), at the
EAT and PST (see Table IIA). We again observe that, among all
combinations, R2S1 and R2S3 provided the highest convergent
rate, while the converged solutions provided the smaller distance
and standard deviation from the best solution (best localization).
ANOVA comparisons for each of the Ri between the results
obtained for 0.2 and 0.5 cm were not statistically significantly
different for either the EAT or the PST (see Table IIB). Since, in
prior studies [10], [11] the algorithm was deemed convergent to
a global minimum if two solutions that started from two different
seeds were found to be closer than 0.5 cm, the present results
suggest that due to its superior spatial localization, this criterion
can be as low as 0.2 cm.
B. Ability of the Algorithm to Accurately Identify the Location
of Epicardial Pacing Electrodes
For each of the combinations of reference and search constraints, we examined the ability of the algorithm to accurately
localize each of the nine epicardial electrodes on the right ventricle. In Table III, we estimate the distance between each pacing
electrode and the 100 estimated SEMD locations at the EAT and
PST, respectively. We observe that the error is similar (p = NS)
across the three different spatial optimization algorithm Sj for
the same reference system Ri. Although reference R2 yielded

226

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE II
PERCENTAGE OF SOLUTIONS WITHIN A CERTAIN DISTANCE FROM THE BEST SOLUTION AT THE EARLIEST ACTIVATION TIME AND PACING SPIKE TIME

TABLE III
ESTIMATION OF THE OVERALL ERROR ACROSS ALL EPICARDIAL
PACING ELECTRODES

smaller errors than R1 for each Sj, comparison of the error
between electrodes (A1–A9) using ANOVA indicated no statistically significant differences between R1Sj and R2Sj either at
the EAT or PST.
C. Ability of the Algorithm to Accurately Determine the
Separation Distance of Epicardial Pacing Electrodes
Having shown in Tables I and II that spatial constraint algorithm S2 is less efficient and accurate than S1 and S3, we then
sought to compare their ability of combinations R1S1, R1S3,
R2S1, and R2S3 to determine the separation distance of the epicardial pacing electrodes (A1–A9). We chose to analyze only the
difference of neighboring electrodes to reduce the confounding
error resulting from the curvature of the heart.
Specifically, to examine the ability of the algorithm to converge to a global minimum when the target dipole originates at
nine different sites of the right ventricle we estimated the median, standard deviation of the distance of neighboring pacing
electrodes from 100 solutions obtained for each right ventricu-

Fig. 1. Statistics of interelectrode distances. Statistics of interelectrode distances using R1S1, R1S3, R2S1, and R2S3 at the earliest activation and pacing
spike times.

lar pacing site. In Fig. 1(a), we present results obtained using
R1S1 and R1S3 and Fig. 1(b) results obtained using R2S1 and
R2S3. We observe that R2S1 and R2S3 combinations provided
better accuracy than R1S1 and R2S1 with respect to their ability
to converge at the global minimum. ANOVA has indicated that
the differences of the error reached significant difference between R1S1 and R2S1 and between R1S3 and R2S3 (p = 0.01
for both pairs) when the estimated solutions were obtained at
the PST. But, there were no significant differences at the EAT
(p = 0.14 for both R1S1/R2S1 and R1S3/R2S3). We observe
that the overall error of the estimated distance compared to the

SOHN et al.: SINGLE EQUIVALENT MOVING DIPOLE MODEL DOES NOT REQUIRE SPATIAL ANATOMICAL INFORMATION

R1
B

H

H
10

10

10

0

0

0

-10
F

-10
T
-10

0

10

R

-10
T
-10

L

0

10

R

-10

0

10

F

L

B

R2
B

H

H

10

10

10

0

0

0

-10
F

-10
T

-10
T

-10

R

0

10

-10

L

R

0

10

-10

L

F

0

10

B

Fig. 2. Spatial distribution of the sum of squared residuals (SSR). ECGs were
obtained from a swine during pacing from electrode A7 and SSR distributions
were calculated at EAT. The SSR distributions are displayed on the three mutually perpendicular planes in each reference system. The three planes cross
at the “within the heart” minimum point, which is indicated as “+” on each
plot. Black/white areas indicate the lowest/highest SSR values, respectively. The
dashed-line circle represents the heart sphere, which is the search area constraint
in S2, and the outermost dashed lines represent the torso boundary which is the
search area constraint in S3. R/L: right/left hand side. F/B: front/back side. H/T:
head/tail side.

true one was 0.4 ± 0.4 and 0.4 ± 0.1 cm for the R1S1 and R2S1
combinations, respectively, at the EAT (p = NS) and 1.0 ± 0.6
and 0.5 ± 0.4 cm, respectively, at the PST (p < 0.05).
In prior studies [10], [13], [14], [16], [17], we have observed
that the systematic error (due to inhomogeneities in anatomic
geometry) introduces a consistent offset of the estimated compared to the true SEMD location. However, since in the intended
application our goal is to superpose the dipole corresponding to
the catheter tip to the dipole corresponding to the site of origin
of the arrhythmia we have shown [13], [14] that the effect of
the systematic error would be precisely canceled when the two
dipoles were superposed. To further investigate this hypothesis in this study we also estimated the error in identifying the
distance between two neighboring electrodes in the case that
all solutions were considered. Interestingly, the overall error of
the estimated distance compared to the true one was 0.8 ± 1.0
and 0.4 ± 0.2 cm for the R1S1 and R2S1 combinations, respectively, at the EAT (p < 0.05) and 1.0 ± 0.8 and 0.6 ± 0.6 cm,
respectively, at the PST (p < 0.005). These findings suggest that
although in this study too, the systematic error does not diminish
the ability of our algorithm to accurately resolve the location of
epicardial pacing sites, the error in estimating these locations is
smaller when the average potential is used as the reference one.

D. Analysis of the SSR Distribution of Each
of the Reference Systems
The data of this study show that there is a global SSR minimum of the SEMD location, which however can be found outside of the torso (see Fig. 2).

227

As seen in Table I, reference R2 is most likely to generate
global SSR minima that are located within the heart. In order
to further probe the spatial distribution of SSR of our inverse
algorithm for each of the reference potential configurations Ri,
in Fig. 2 we plot the SSR function for each reference Ri on three
mutually perpendicular planes. The origin of the coordinate
system of these planes is at the center of the heart, and the
location of the best solution is the crossing point of the three
perpendicular planes. A circle with dashed line on each plot
in Fig. 2 represents the heart sphere within which the search
process is constrained in S2 configuration. Dashed lines outside
the heart sphere in Fig. 2 represent the torso surface (defined
by virtual triangles formed by three adjacent electrodes), within
which the search process in S3 configuration is constrained.
In the left panels, SSR distributions are displayed on the
transversal section of the torso. There is a “within the heart”
minimum SSR solution, and there are many maxima along the
torso surface lines. As the SSR value approaches infinity at each
body surface electrode location as shown in (1), the maxima of
SSR at body surface electrodes form a barrier and separate the
“within the heart” minimum from other minima outside of the
torso. The left panels show the “within the heart” solutions are
well “protected” by the surrounding SSR maxima, especially in
the R2 reference system.
However, the center and right panels that represent longitudinal sections of the torso display not a clear separation between
inner and outer SSR maxima at the upper part of the torso. The
lack of electrodes on the upper part of the torso is reflected on the
SSR distributions. The center panels show that the body surface
electrode maxima form a strong barrier at the lower part of the
torso, but this barrier is not clear at the upper part because there
are not enough maxima points; consequently, this allows migration of the Simplex vertices toward an outside maximum point.
Although the upper part electrode barriers are not clear in both
R1 and R2, the R2 center panel shows a steeper SSR function
gradient around the inner SSR minimum along the long axis of
the body, which means better separation of the inner minimum
from the outer ones. This difference in separation results to the
difference in the observed rates of “within the heart” solutions
(see Table I). As a result, in the example presented in Fig. 2,
the percentage of “within the heart” solutions is 96% in R2S1
combination but only 67% in R1S1 combination.

IV. DISCUSSION
RCA procedures have evolved to become an established option in treating patients with a variety of cardiac arrhythmias.
While ablation of supraventricular tachycardia has been highly
successful, due to the known anatomy of the atrioventricular
node that enables precise identification of the ablation site [18],
[19], ablation of VT presents a greater challenge, since the ablation site could be anywhere in the ventricles [20], [21]. However, the selection of the appropriate ablation site is achieved
by painstaking mapping of the electrical activity on the inner
surface of the heart and often, this recording must be done while
the arrhythmia is ongoing.

228

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

In an attempt to better establish the relationship between cardiac electrical activity and torso surface potentials, electrode
arrays have been used to achieve denser spatial sampling of the
thorax. This led to the development of the technique of body
surface potential mapping (BSPM) [3]–[10]. However, a fundamental limitation of BSPM is the nonuniqueness of the inverse
problem [11]—that is, it is not possible to reconstruct the 3-D
distribution of electrical sources in the heart from body surface
measurements since the solution is not unique. To overcome
these challenges, we have developed a method that models cardiac electrical activity with a SEMD, and we have performed
a detailed evaluation in a swine animal model of the ability of
this method to accurately identify the location of the SEMD.
Specifically, it has been shown that under realistic conditions,
the algorithm we have used to identify the SEMD location corresponding to epicardial pacing sites, first, achieves rapid convergence to a global minimum and that the systematic error
has minimal effect in accurately identifying the epicardial sites;
second, we have shown that the reference electrode location
has a significant effect on the ability to accurately estimate the
SEMD parameters; third, although the homogeneous volume
conductor introduces systematic error in the estimated compared to the true dipole location, we find that referencing body
surface potential to a “mean” potential and using a spatially unconstrained optimization approach (R2S1) is the most accurate
and efficient approach to localize epicardial electrical sources in
vivo; fourth, the algorithm to obtain the SEMD parameters can
accurately resolve the location of epicardial electrical sources;
fifth, the algorithm does not require spatial anatomical information to determine cardiac sources of activation.
The findings of this study have important clinical and practical implications. Motivation in using a remote electrode as a
reference (R1), stems from the requirement that the distance of
each pair of epicardial pacing electrodes should be “infinitesimal” small compared to the distance of the pair from a recording
electrode. On the other hand, reference to the mean signal (R2)
is likely to be less sensitive to noise and thus more robust. We
have been interested in probing whether we could relax the
above-mentioned requirement for the benefit of improving the
quality of the recorded signals and the ability of our algorithm
to estimate the SEMD parameters. Furthermore, due to the inherent inability to place body surface electrodes above the heart
along the long axis of the body, the presented search methods
present a different SSR function gradient along the long-axis
direction, which results in different separation of the inner SSR
minimum from the outer ones; this difference in separation results to higher percentage of “within the heart” solutions in
R2S1 compared to R1S1, and thus a higher convergence speed.
After the pacing spike, the SNR ratio of body-surface ECG
signals is very low since only a very small portion of the heart
has been activated. At the EAT, the wavefront is still close to
the initial activation site, however it is still localized enough to
be simulated with a SEMD. While the estimation of the SEMD
at the PST is likely to represent the most dipolar electrical
activity and the best time to estimate the initial location of the
activation wavefront, in a clinical setting the lack of a pacing
spike during VT prompted us to use the EAT of the recorded

ECG to determine the SEMD location of the earliest activation.
To probe the validity of the choice of EAT we used R2S1 to
estimate the time of EAT from PST across all pacing electrodes
and we found it to be 38.7 ± 9.0 ms. We also estimated the
distance of the SEMD locations corresponding to PST and EAT
and found it to be 1.78 ± 1.27 cm. Interestingly, assuming a
propagation velocity of ∼50 cm/s, it appears that the wavefront
in 38.7 ms will travel ∼1.9 cm, a distance that is in agreement
with that obtained from the SEMD locations between the PST
and EAT, that provides remarkable validation of the methods
used in this study.
From a clinical point of view, it is evident that the ability of the
physician to deliver radio-frequency energy, through a catheter,
at the reentry site depends on the limitations of the current technology to allow him/her to guide the catheter to that site. Today
use of fluoroscopy for the guidance of the ablation catheter is
common to all clinical catheter ablation strategies for the delivery of the curative radio-frequency energy. However, the guiding
of the ablation catheter to the reentry site by exclusive use of
fluoroscopy may be problematic for the following reasons: 1)
the inability to accurately associate intracardiac electrograms
with their precise location within the heart, 2) the endocardial
surface is not visible using fluoroscopy and the target sites can
only be approximated by their relationship with nearby structures such as ribs, blood vessels as well as the position of other
catheters, 3) due to the limitations of 2-D fluoroscopy, navigation
is frequently not exact, time consuming and requires multiple
views to estimate the 3-D location of the catheter; 4) the inability to accurately return the catheter precisely to a previously
mapped site; 5) exposure of the patient and medical personnel to
radiation.
The CARTO (BiosenseWebster, Johnson and Johnson, Diamond Bar, CA, USA) system has been an established method
that provides an electroanatomical map of the heart. This method
for nonfluoroscopic catheter mapping is based on activation
mapping to localize the tip of the mapping catheter in conjunction with electrical activity recorded by the catheter. This
approach has been used in VT [1], [2], atrial flutter [3], [4],
and atrial tachycardia [5], [6] ablation. The basic assumption of
this method is that the activation pattern and chamber geometry
are constant from beat to beat. However, the limitations of this
method are common to empirical methods that use sequential
sampling of endocardial sites; catheter activation sequence mapping is limited to precisely identify local activation in regions
of scar and also to reliably identify bystander regions. Moreover, the tachycardia must be hemodynamically stable to allow
activation sequence for mapping. Finally, in patients with scar
related VT, multiple morphologies of VT are common thus forcing the clinician to switch back and forth between maps. Thus,
monitoring of the activation sequence of the ongoing arrhythmia [20], [22] has resulted in a success rate of terminating the
target VT of 82%, while when targeting all inducible monomorphic VTs the complete procedural success was 64%.
An alternative to CARTO system has been the Ensite (St.
Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) system that employs a noncontact 64 electrode basket catheter that is placed inside the
heart to map the endocardial cardiac electrical activity. It has

SOHN et al.: SINGLE EQUIVALENT MOVING DIPOLE MODEL DOES NOT REQUIRE SPATIAL ANATOMICAL INFORMATION

been used in mapping VT during sinus rhythm [22]. However,
one of the drawbacks of this methodology is that the movement
of the heart during systole is not taken into account. Overall,
mapping the endocardial surface of the heart [7], [8] may be
hampered by reduced accuracy of electrogram reconstruction
beyond 4.0 cm of the center of the balloon, which might limit
the clinical applicability of this system in patients with large
cardiac chambers, or it could require balloon repositioning to
the areas of interest [9].
To overcome the above-mentioned limitations, new cardiac
imaging techniques [23] have been introduced that provide clinically acceptable accuracy in identifying and localizing cardiac
activation, however the acquisition of 3-D anatomical information either by MRI [24]–[26], CT [27]–[29], or ultrasound [30]
combined with the time required to solve the corresponding inverse algorithms (i.e., a few minutes), makes them particularly
time consuming.
In conclusion, it appears that existing techniques used to
locate the target ablation site require that patients be maintained in arrhythmia for a significant period of time, limiting
the procedure to the treatment of slow VTs during which patients are hemodynamically stable [7], [8], [20], [22], or require 3-D anatomical information that make them time consuming [24]–[30]. Therefore, the need for a new technique that
would be effective in accurately identifying the ablation site and
help to reduce the duration and complication of the RCA procedures remains high. This study shows that the SEMD model
may be used to guide the ablative therapy of cardiac arrhythmias,
since the proposed algorithm to obtain the SEMD parameters
does not require spatial anatomical information to determine cardiac sources of activation therefore not requiring 3-D anatomical
information by an imaging modality, which helps to reduce costs
and the duration of the procedure.

V. STUDY LIMITATIONS
Our algorithm remains to be validated under actual ablation
conditions where the ability of our technique in accurately guiding the ablation catheter to the ablation site will be evaluated.
We have also assumed that the electrode noise is uncorrelated
from electrode to electrode. However, in reality, correlated noise
always exists to some degree in physiologic signals, which may
impact the solutions obtained. Other limitations include the fact
that the animal studies involved only epicardial pacing and the
lack of direct comparison with other methods.

REFERENCES
[1] W. G. Stevenson, “Ventricular tachycardia after myocardial infarction:
from arrhythmia surgery to catheter ablation,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 6, pp. 942–50, 1995.
[2] W. G. Stevenson and E. Delacretaz, “Strategies for catheter ablation of
scar-related ventricular tachycardia,” Curr. Cardiol. Rep., vol. 2, pp. 537–
44, 2000.
[3] W. G. Stevenson and E. Delacretaz, “Radiofrequency catheter ablation of
ventricular tachycardia,” Heart, vol. 84, pp. 553–9, 2000.
[4] W. G. Stevenson, P. L. Friedman, and L. I. Ganz, “Radiofrequency
catheter ablation of ventricular tachycardia late after myocardial infarction,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 8, pp. 1309–19, 1997.

229

[5] W. G. Stevenson, P. L. Friedman, D. Kocovic, P. T. Sager, L. A. Saxon,
and B. Pavri, “Radiofrequency catheter ablation of ventricular tachycardia
after myocardial infarction,” Circulation, vol. 98, pp. 308–14, 1998.
[6] W. G. Stevenson, P. L. Friedman, and M. O. Sweeney, “Catheter ablation
as an adjunct to ICD therapy,” Circulation, vol. 96, pp. 1378–80, 1997.
[7] C. C. Gornick, S. W. Adler, B. Pederson, J. Hauck, J. Budd, and
J. Schweitzer, “Validation of a new noncontact catheter system for
electroanatomic mapping of left ventricular endocardium,” Circulation,
vol. 99, pp. 829–35, 1999.
[8] R. J. Schilling, D. W. Davies, and N. S. Peters, “Characteristics of sinus
rhythm electrograms at sites of ablation of ventricular tachycardia relative
to all other sites: a noncontact mapping study of the entire left ventricle,”
J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 9, pp. 921–33, 1998.
[9] K. Okishige, M. Kawabata, S. Umayahara, K. Yamashiro, M. Gotoh,
M. Isobe, and S. A. Strickberger, “Radiofrequency catheter ablation of
various kinds of arrhythmias guided by virtual electrograms using a noncontact, computerized mapping system,” Circ. J., vol. 67, pp. 455–60,
2003.
[10] A. A. Armoundas, A. B. Feldman, R. Mukkamala, and R. J. Cohen, “A
single equivalent moving dipole model: an efficient approach for localizing
sites of origin of ventricular electrical activation,” Annu. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 31, pp. 564–76, 2003.
[11] A. A. Armoundas, A. B. Feldman, R. Mukkamala, B. He, T. J. Mullen,
P. A. Belk, Y. Z. Lee, and R. J. Cohen, “Statistical accuracy of a moving
equivalent dipole method to identify sites of origin of cardiac electrical
activation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, pp. 1360–70, 2003.
[12] A. A. Armoundas, A. B. Feldman, D. A. Sherman, and R. J. Cohen, “Applicability of the single equivalent point dipole model to represent a spatially distributed bio-electrical source,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 39,
pp. 562–70, 2001.
[13] Y. Fukuoka, T. F. Oostendorp, and A. A. Armoundas, “Method for guiding
the ablation catheter to the ablation site: A simulation and experimental
study,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 47, pp. 267–78, 2009.
[14] Y. Fukuoka, T. F. Oostendorp, D. A. Sherman, and A. A. Armoundas,
“Applicability of the single equivalent moving dipole model in an infinite
homogeneous medium to identify cardiac electrical sources: A computer
simulation study in a realistic anatomic geometry torso model,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, pp. 2436–44, 2006.
[15] J. M. Smith, E. A. Clancy, C. R. Valeri, J. N. Ruskin, and R. J. Cohen,
“Electrical alternans and cardiac electrical instability,” Circulation,
vol. 77, pp. 110–21, 1988.
[16] M. E. Barley, A. A. Armoundas, and R. J. Cohen, “A method for guiding
ablation catheters to arrhythmogenic sites using body surface electrocardiographic signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, pp. 810–9, 2009.
[17] M. E. Barley, K. J. Choppy, A. M. Galea, A. A. Armoundas,
T. S. Rosbury, G. B. Hirschman, and R. J. Cohen, “Validation of a novel
catheter guiding method for the ablative therapy of ventricular tachycardia in a phantom model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, pp. 907–10,
2009.
[18] M. A. Lee, F. Morady, A. Kadish, D. J. Schamp, M. C. Chin,
M. M. Scheinman, J. C. Griffin, M. D. Lesh, D. Pederson, and
J. Goldberger, “Catheter modification of the atrioventricular junction with
radiofrequency energy for control of atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia,” Circulation, vol. 83, pp. 827–35, 1991.
[19] J. J. Langberg, M. Harvey, H. Calkins, R. El-Atassi, S. J. Kalbfleisch, and
F. Morady, “Titration of power output during radiofrequency catheter ablation of atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 16, pp. 465–70, 1993.
[20] K. Nademanee and E. M. Kosar, “A nonfluoroscopic catheter-based mapping technique to ablate focal ventricular tachycardia,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 21, pp. 1442–7, 1998.
[21] W. G. Stevenson, P. T. Sager, P. D. Natterson, L. A. Saxon,
H. R. Middlekauff, and I. Wiener, “Relation of pace mapping QRS configuration and conduction delay to ventricular tachycardia reentry circuits
in human infarct scars,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 26, pp. 481–8, 1995.
[22] W. G. Stevenson, E. Delacretaz, P. L. Friedman, and K. E. Ellison, “Identification and ablation of macroreentrant ventricular tachycardia with the
CARTO electroanatomical mapping system,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 21, pp. 1448–56, 1998.
[23] Y. Wang, P. S. Cuculich, J. Zhang, K. A. Desouza, R. Vijayakumar,
J. Chen, M. N. Faddis, B. D. Lindsay, T. W. Smith, and Y. Rudy, “Noninvasive electroanatomic mapping of human ventricular arrhythmias with
electrocardiographic imaging,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 3, p. 98ra84,
2011.
[24] T. Berger, G. Fischer, B. Pfeifer, R. Modre, F. Hanser, T. Trieb,
F. X. Roithinger, M. Stuehlinger, O. Pachinger, B. Tilg, and F. Hintringer,

230

[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

“Single-beat noninvasive imaging of cardiac electrophysiology of ventricular pre-excitation,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 48, pp. 2045–52, 2006.
R. Modre, B. Tilg, G. Fischer, F. Hanser, B. Messnarz, M. Seger,
M. F. Schocke, T. Berger, F. Hintringer, and F. X. Roithinger, “Atrial
noninvasive activation mapping of paced rhythm data,” J. Cardiovasc.
Electrophysiol., vol. 14, pp. 712–9, 2003.
N. P. Smith, M. L. Buist, and A. J. Pullan, “Altered T wave dynamics
in a contracting cardiac model,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 14,
pp. S203–9, 2003.
C. Ramanathan, R. N. Ghanem, P. Jia, K. Ryu, and Y. Rudy, “Noninvasive
electrocardiographic imaging for cardiac electrophysiology and arrhythmia,” Nature Med., vol. 10, pp. 422–8, 2004.
C. Ramanathan, P. Jia, R. Ghanem, K. Ryu, and Y. Rudy, “Activation and
repolarization of the normal human heart under complete physiological
conditions,” in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 103, pp. 6309–14, 2006.
X. Zhang, I. Ramachandra, Z. Liu, B. Muneer, S. M. Pogwizd, and B. He,
“Noninvasive three-dimensional electrocardiographic imaging of ventricular activation sequence,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 289,
pp. H2724–32, 2005.
L. K. Cheng, G. B. Sands, R. L. French, S. J. Withy, S. P. Wong,
M. E. Legget, W. M. Smith, and A. J. Pullan, “Rapid construction of a
patient-specific torso model from 3D ultrasound for non-invasive imaging
of cardiac electrophysiology,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 43, pp. 325–
30, 2005.

Kwanghyun Sohn received the B.S. degree in
physics and the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the Pohang University of Science and
Technology, Pohang, Korea, in 1992 and 1994, respectively. He received the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the University of Utah, UT, USA, in
2010.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at
the Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA. His current research interests include cardiac electrophysiology, biomedical signal processing, and inverse problem solutions.

Wener Lv was born in Hunan, China. He received
the B.S. and the M.S. degrees in instrument science
and technology from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China, in 2003 and 2006, respectively. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
His research interests include biomedical signal
processing, forward and inverse problem solutions
(experimental and modeling), and medical sensor
design.

Kichang Lee received M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
biomedical engineering from Iowa State University,
Ames, IA, USA.
He is currently a Research Scientist in the HarvardMIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA. His research interests include cardiovascular physiology, thermoregulation,
biomedical signal analysis, cardiovascular system
identification, and bioinstrumentation.

Anna M. Galea received the B.A.Sc. degree in
biomedical engineering from the University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, the M.S. degree in
electrical engineering from Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, a M.S. degree in quantitative physiology, and the Ph.D. degree
in biomedical engineering from Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA.
She is currently a Principal Biomedical Engineer
at Vivonics, Waltham, MA, USA, where she leads the
development of novel medical devices in the fields of
noninvasive monitoring, artificial organs, and medical simulation.

Gordon B. Hirschman (SM’99) was born in New
York, NY, USA. He received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, in 1978, and the M.Eng. degree in electrical
engineering in 1979.
He has been involved in the development or engineering management of a wide range of technological
innovations including local area networks, machinery
monitoring and diagnostic systems, engineering analysis software products, and biomedical devices. He is
currently the President and the CEO of Vivonics, Inc.,
Waltham, MA, USA, a small business he founded in 2012 to develop innovative
technologies that improve or maintain health, or that optimize the effectiveness
of humans in complex systems.

Alison M. Hayward was born in Kent, England, on
September 20, 1969. She received the B.Sc. (Hons.)
degree in zoology from the University of Manchester, Manchester, England, in 1992 and a Doctor of
Veterinary Medicine degree from the Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton,
MA, USA, in 1999.
She spent 12 years at MIT in the Division of Comparative Medicine and is currently the Director of
Veterinary Services at Concord Biomedical Sciences
and Emerging Technologies, Inc., MA. Her research
interests include veterinary care, comparative medicine, and surgical model
development.
Richard J. Cohen was born in Boston, MA, USA.
He received the A.B. degree summa cum laude
in chemistry and physics from Harvard College,
Cambridge, MA, in 1971, the M.D. degree from Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, in 1976, and the
Ph.D. degree in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, in 1976.
He is currently the Whitaker Professor of biomedical engineering in the Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is also on the faculty of the Harvard-MIT
Program in Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge. He has authored more
than 250 journal and book articles and is an inventor of more than 30 U.S.
patents.
Antonis A. Armoundas (M’91–SM’06) was born
in Mytilini, Greece. He received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from the National Technical
University of Athens, Athens, Greece, in 1991, the
M.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Boston
University, Boston, MA, USA, in 1994, and the Ph.D.
degree in nuclear engineering from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), MA, in 1999.
He is currently with the Cardiovascular Research
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA, and an Assistant Professor at Harvard
Medical School, while he maintains an appointment at MIT. His research interests include biomedical signal processing, forward and inverse problem solutions, and cellular electrophysiology methods (experimental and modeling).

