IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

3291

Real-Time Monitoring of Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
Concentration Using a Novel Electromagnetic
Sensors Microfluidic Cell Structure
Richard Blakey, Ismini Nakouti, Olga Korostynska, Alex Mason∗ , and Ahmed Al-Shamma’a

Abstract—This study demonstrates an electromagnetic wavebased sensor embedded within a fluidic cell for the purposes of
quantifying Pseudomonas aeruginosa in real time, which implies
it could be applied for provision of point-of-care diagnostics. The
sensors operates through the interaction of the electromagnetic
field with the analyte flowing through the fluidic system, and via
the sensor head which has a specifically designed planar pattern
to maximize the sensor sensitivity for the given bacteria type. The
sensor is demonstrated to respond linearly (R2 = 0.9942) to OD5 5 0
25 × 10−3 – 1.0 bacteria concentration through changing resonant
frequency and peak quality factor. This innovative approach is
expected to contribute to better provision of healthcare services,
minimizing the need for hospital visits through real-time point-ofcare diagnostics as opposed to lengthy laboratory assays.
Index Terms—Electromagnetic sensor, fluidic cell, microwave
spectrum, point-of-care diagnostics, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
real-time monitoring.

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTROMAGNETIC (EM) wave sensors continue to be
attractive to medical practitioners and the biomedical industry. They offer a number of unique advantages such as affordability, rapid analysis, portability, and high levels of reliability. In addition, for a number of applications, EM wave sensors can be applied to provide analysis in situ, which removes
the necessity for expensive and time consuming laboratory
measurements.
The aim of this study is to show the development of a reproducible, EM-wave based, method which can rapidly analyze biological samples. Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01 (ATCC
15692) [P. aeruginosa] has been used in this study. This bacterium is gram-negative, motile, rod shaped, and it is recognized
as an emerging opportunist pathogen of significant clinical interest [1]–[5]. During infection, it enters the host’s bloodstream

E

Manuscript received February 15, 2013; revised April 25, 2013; accepted June
10, 2013. Date of publication June 12, 2013; date of current version November
18, 2013. This study is in part financially supported by the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme through the FP7-PEOPLE-2010-IEF
Marie-Curie Action Project 275201, Water-Spotcheck. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
R. Blakey, I. Nakouti, O. Korostynska, and A. Al-Shamma’a are with the
Built Environment and Sustainable Technologies Research Institute, School
of the Built Environment, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool,
L3 3AF, U.K. (e-mail: R.T.Blakey@2010.ljmu.ac.uk; I.Nakouti@ljmu.ac.uk;
o.korostynska@ljmu.ac.uk; a.al-shamma’a@ljmu.ac.uk).
∗ A. Mason is with the Built Environment and Sustainable Technologies Research Institute, School of the Built Environment, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, L3 3AF, U.K. (e-mail: A.Mason1@ljmu.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2268277

and competes for iron. P. aeruginosa produces siderophores,
low-molecular weight compounds that allow the organism to
sequester the host’s iron with high affinity [6]. Siderophore isolation has recently been characterized [7], [8]. Siderophore production is directly linked to the organism’s virulence. Moreover,
regulation of exotoxin A is iron dependent [9].
Upon infection, P. aeruginosa colonizes the lungs of the patients suffering from Cystic Fibrosis (CF), producing an extracellular polysaccharide that attaches to bronchial mucus, thus
causing obstruction of the respiratory system. Although most
infants and children with CF, survive to adult life, P. aeruginosa is the primary cause of morbidity and mortality in such
cases [10], [11]. It can also infect critical organs and the results
can be fatal. P. aeruginosa is notoriously resistant to antibiotic
treatments and it is difficult to eradicate [12]–[15].
Due to the nature of P. aeruginosa, it is important that rapid
and early biomedical diagnostic techniques are developed in
order to detect it early in its development, therefore enhancing
the chance and the rate of patient recovery. For example, it is
one of the main species of pathogenic bacteria commonly found
in burn wound infections [1]. It is also found in human skin flora
and associated with virulence factors for the suspected lysis of
healthy eukaryotic cells, and tissue matrices upon infection.
To this end, this study aims to evaluate the performance of
interdigitated electrode (IDE) planar EM wave designs excited
at microwave frequencies. In addition, the viability of different
methods of introducing a sample to the sensor are investigated
(namely a droplet method and a fluidic cell with embedded
sensor).
The sensors and fluidic cell system are designed by the
authors, and are currently patent pending (GB1219016.1 and
GB1219929.4) [16], [17], and thus represent a novel aspect of
this study. In addition, further novelty is demonstrated in the
application of EM wave sensors, excited at microwave frequencies, to the detection of P. aeruginosa.

II. CURRENT METHODS OF Pseudomonas
Aeruginosa DETECTION
Current detection of P. aeruginosa involves the collection of
early morning sputum from the patient and analysis in a routine
microbiological laboratory. Isolates form mucoid colonies on
growth [18]. Although the current test is reliable, the whole
procedure can be laborious and time consuming, with up to two
weeks of the expected results. DNA extraction and bacterial gene
amplification methods are not yet widespread due to limitations

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

3292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

and high cost [19]. Biomedical scientists are still looking for an
alternative method which is rapid and sensitive.
Alternative methods for the detection of P. aeruginosa have
been investigated. A notable body of work by Waszczuk et al.
[20], [21], has reported on the use of quartz tuning forks. The
shape of conductive pattern on the forks in particular has meant
that they can be used as impedance sensors for monitoring
biofilm formation of P. aeruginosa strains throughout its growth
phases. The method is said to have a resolution of the order of
40 pg · L−1 , and impedance measurements are taken in the range
of 20 Hz to 1 MHz.
Pang et al. [22], [23] have reported the real-time quantification of P. aeruginosa using a wireless magnetoelastic sensing
device. The sensor is fabricated by coating a magnetoelastic ribbon with a polyurethane protecting film. In response to an externally applied time varying magnetic field, the magnetoelastic
sensor vibrates at a resonance frequency that can be remotely
determined by monitoring the magnetic flux emitted by the sensor. The resonance frequency changes in response to property
changes of a liquid culture medium, and bacteria adhesion to
the sensor as P. aeruginosa consumes nutrients from the culture
medium in growth and reproduction. This method is able to determine cell quantities in the order of 103 to 108 CFU · mL−1 ,
with a detection limit of 103 CFU · mL−1 .
He and Liu [24] discuss a DNA biosensor for the detection of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which was set up based
on the modification of two membranes (nano-TiO2 and nanoTiO2 —polyethylene glycol hybrid membrane) to an electrodeseparated piezoelectric sensor surface. The detection was accomplished by modifying single stranded DNA on the sensitive membrane, and then hybridizing with their complementary
strands from the P. aeruginosa in liquid phase. The detection
linear range was from 10−1 to 10−3 g · L−1 , and the limit of
detection was 10−4 g · L−1 , although it is noted that the sensor
life time was <2 h due to peeling on the membrane from the
sensor surface.
A label-free immunosensor system for detecting a P. aeruginosa was developed by Kim et al. [25], using four anti-P. aeruginosa antibodies, individually chemisorbed onto one-side gold
electrodes of piezoelectric quartz crystals. A biosensor response
was detected by measuring a steady-state resonant frequency
shift after the response time of around 8 min. The frequency
shifts obtained were quite specific according to the antibody
types and P. aeruginosa strains. The biosensor responses to
varying concentrations of the P. aeruginosa cells ranging from
1.3 × 107 to 1.3 × 108 CFU · mL−1 were determined at 17–
176 Hz and a linear calibration curve (r = 0.942) was obtained
by plotting the responses in a double-logarithmic scale. Notably,
the sensor chip could be reused at least seven times without an
appreciable decrease in sensitivity.
Many of the current technologies that report on measurement
of P. aeruginosa do not allow for in situ monitoring, which is
vital for efficient point-of-care diagnostic provision. In contrast,
the system reported in this paper proposes the development of
an EM sensor technique which supports real time in situ quantification of P. aeruginosa, with high levels of repeatability and
linearity. In addition the sensor offers an affordable alternative

to existing technologies since the sensing element is fabricated
from easily obtainable materials.

III. EM SENSORS
EM sensing is a novel but rapidly developing technology
which has been successfully used as a sensing method for
various industrial applications including solution concentrations [26], fluid level measurements [27], material moisture
content [28], [29], for continuous process monitoring of biogas plants [30], for the determination of moisture content in
soil [31], in the food industry for the verification of the vegetable oil types [32] and in the healthcare industry, for example
for real-time monitoring of glucose in diabetic patients [33],
[34], and for noninvasive monitoring of bodily fluids [35]–[37].
As a particular example, the authors have been working for
some time [37]–[41] toward developing a method which could
make use of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected during endovascular aneurysm repair procedures. At the moment any CSF
collected would normally be discarded as biological waste,
but it is now thought that this bodily fluid could be used to
identify the onset of paraplegia in patients. This notion that
CSF might harbor such important information is supported by
Drenger et al. [42], who observed that lactate concentration
in CSF increased with the onset of patient paraplegia. One
would normally expect to see physiological levels of lactate
in blood around 1 mmol · L−1 ; in pathology this may rise to 10–
15 mmol · L−1 , or higher in the case of exercise [43]. In this case,
the authors’ work has demonstrated that EM wave techniques
are sensitive to changes in lactate concentration in the order of
0–20 mmol · L−1 , which adds weight to support the use of the
EM sensing technique proposed in this study for point-of-care
diagnostics.
It is thought that the use of EM sensors for the purpose of
monitoring P. aeruginosa, as in the previously mentioned applications, will provide an affordable and rapid diagnostics tool to
benefit healthcare providers and users. Notably, the technique is
nonionising, utilizing (at most) one-tenth the power required for
transmission by a typical modern day mobile phone. Therefore,
while the use of EM waves often raises safety concerns, there
is a good argument to say that the method is safe, or at least no
worse than what we are already subjected to on a daily basis.
In this study, captured EM signals are presented in the form of
scattering parameters (commonly referred to as S-parameters),
with measurement of the reflected (S11 ) and transmitted (S21 )
microwave signal being possible. These signals vary depending
upon properties of the analyte presented to the sensing structure,
such as conductivity and permittivity [44]. Conductivity is a
measure of a material’s ability to conduct an electric current.
Permittivity is a measure of how an electric field is affected
by a dielectric medium, which is determined by the ability of
a material to polarize in response to the field, and reduce the
total electric field inside the material. Therefore, permittivity
(εr ) as defined in (1) relates to a material’s ability to transmit an
electric field and is a complex value which varies with changing
frequency, and accounts for both the energy stored by a material

BLAKEY et al.: REAL-TIME MONITORING OF PSEUDOMONAS AERUGINOSA CONCENTRATION

3293

Fig. 2. Dissipation of the sensor electric field, only a short distance from
the sensor surface, which is particularly beneficial in removing environmental
effects and interference.
Fig. 1.

SEM micrographs of P. aeruginosa biofilms grown on glass.

B. IDE Sensor Structure

(ε ) as well as any losses of energy (ε ) which might occur
εr = ε + jε .

(1)

As a material alters in concentration or type, it is likely that its
permittivity will change leading to a change in sensor response,
if the material is the target of EM radiation. By measuring this
response over a range of frequencies, one can characterize materials in order to infer their properties. In the case of this study,
we are particularly interested in the ability of the technique to
quantify P. aeruginosa cells. For this study, selectivity is not
so important, since it has already been demonstrated by Kim
et al. [25] that antibodies can be used for this means.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
A. P. Aeruginosa Solution Preparation
P . aeruginosa was inoculated into 50 ml of sterile nutrient
broth (NB) and incubated for 24 h at 37 ◦ C, 250 r/min. Following incubation, the optical density (OD) was measured at
550 nm (OD550 ). OD550 of the overnight culture was 1.74. For
the purposes of experimentation, this study used dilution to an
OD550 of 1.0, to ensure there was sufficient quantity for testing, and also to prevent clogging of the fluidic system, since
P . aeruginosa is particularly known for its ability to adhere to
surfaces. For the purposes of comparison with other techniques,
a 1.0 OD550 reading was found, via a filtration method, to be
equivalent to 0.583 g/L−1 . In other works [45]–[47], where the
units CFU · ml−1 are used, 0.6 OD550 is typically approximated
to 108 CFU · ml−1 ; using this approximation, the original sample here contained 16.7 × 108 CFU · ml−1 .
In order to verify the growth of the bacteria, it was grown
on glass at 30 ◦ C for 48 h. A sample of P. aeruginosa biofilm
was treated with 1% gluteraldehyde, washed twice with distilled
water, and left in air to dehydrate for 24 h. The sample was then
coated using a gold sputter coater (Emitech K550X) at 25 mA,
for 2.5 min, giving it a thickness of 12 nm. It was then examined
under a scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta 200 ESEM).
The result is shown in Fig. 1.

The novel structure used in this study is based upon a coplanar
design. This design was chosen in order to minimize losses and
interferences which might occur from external sources, and also
due to the fact that they can be made suitably small in order to
be embedded within fluidic cell structures. Coplanar devices are
well known for exhibiting this vital property, and therefore in this
application they offer a great deal of control in relation to how
the sensor responds to analyte materials [48]. In particular, the
sensor is constructed to ensure that only a small area is sensitive
to dielectric change, which significantly enhances its robustness
for the aforementioned use. In addition, and as demonstrated
in Fig. 2, the electric field created by the sensor is dissipated
significantly within 2 mm of its surface.
The sensor is constructed in-house using an end mill process.
An FR4 epoxy substrate is used which is coated on both sides
with a 35 μm copper layer. After the milling process, the copper is tin plated, and a side mount SMA connector is attached
to provide connectivity to a vector network analyser (VNA),
discussed later, or other appropriate hardware.
The sensor is embedded in a bespoke fluidic cell constructed
of polymethyl-methacrylate, which has high-performance liquid
chromatography compatible inlet and outlet ports in order to
allow the fluid to pass through the cell and come into contact
with the sensor device itself. A novel aspect of this design is
that it allows the fluidic material to pass through the sensor,
maximizing the possibility of interaction between EM field and
the analyte. O-rings on either sides of the sensor maintain a water
tight seal, and nylon screws maintain adequate compression for
the application. The sensor and fluidic cell combination is shown
in Fig. 3.
C. Measurement Procedure and Data Processing
The bacteria and a NB were fed as inputs to a quaternary
pump (Perkin Elmer), which was used to introduce samples to
the fluidic cell. The cell OD550 ranged from 0.025 to 1.0, in the
following steps: 0.025, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.0. The NB
acted as a diluting media. The experimental work was repeated
six times (alternating between high–low and low–high concentrations). Between each repetition the fluidic cell was cleaned

3294

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Sensor and fluidic cell combination.

with deionized water in order to eliminate possible contamination, and to remove any cell build up or clogging; this issue is
discussed later in the paper.
Each individual measurement took approximately 3 min;
1 min was allowed for the system to be flooded with the analyte and a further 2 min settling time was allowed. A low
(2 ml · min−1 ) pumping speed was selected to minimize the
build up of air in the fluidic cell resulting from turbulence, particularly in the area contacted by the sensor.
The EM sensor was connected, via a single SMA connector
and a coaxial lead, to an Agilent Technologies (Hewlett Packard)
8720 ET VNA to allow measurements to be taken. SMA is a very
common, popular, and readily available connector, which is used
to excite microstrips. The connector used is a 50 Ω probe with a
central conductor extended to connect to the microstrip element.
Depending on the size of the pattern or substrate, the connector
dimensions may be different [49]. Molex 50 Ω edge mount connectors were used in this study, as they are designed to excite
a printed IDE sensor horizontally thus minimizing discontinuities and therefore source/load mismatch. The instrument was
set to generate a signal between 100 MHz and 1 GHz over 1601
data points for ten linear frequency sweeps and calculate the
S11 (reflected signal) parameters. The sensor had a fundamental
resonance at approximatelty 292 MHz when the fluidic cell was
loaded with nutrient broth. Data (peak frequency and Q-factor)
were collected at this frequency using bespoke LabView software and later analyzed, as shown in Section V of this paper.
The complete experimental setup is shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. Overview of the experimental setup, including quaternary pump, vector
network analyzer, and sensor system.

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Results from the data collected at the sensor resonant peak
of approximately 292 MHz are shown in Figs. 5 and 6 for peak
and Q-factor shift respectively. Results from all sixconcentration
repetitions, low–high and high–low, were averaged and error
bars show the range of readings at each concentration. Table I
shows statistical data for the measurements taken.
As evidenced in Figs. 5 and 6, there is a clear relationship between sensor response and OD550 (and therefore concentration)

Fig. 5. Plot of average resonant peak with changing P . aeruginosa optical
density. Error bars indicate the range over which measurements vary during
repetitions.

BLAKEY et al.: REAL-TIME MONITORING OF PSEUDOMONAS AERUGINOSA CONCENTRATION

3295

TABLE I
STATISTICAL DATA FOR SENSOR PEAK AND Q-FACTOR MOVEMENT WITH RESPECT TO CHANGING CONCENTRATION OF P. Aeruginosa

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF THE DEVELOPED SENSOR SYSTEM WITH CURRENT SYSTEMS
FOR THE DETECTION OF P. aeruginosa

Fig. 6. Plot of average Q-factor with changing P . aeruginosa optical density.
Error bars indicate the range over which measurements vary during repetitions.

of P . aeruginosa. Even more encouraging is the near linear relationship demonstrated with both sets of results. In Fig. 5, the
linear best fit line has an R2 value of 0.993, while in Fig. 6 R2 =
0.994.
Furthermore, the sensor has been demonstrated to have a
good level of repeatability. In the range over which the sensor
was tested (OD550 0.025–1.0), the resonant peak shifted by
3.8 MHz and the Q-factor changed by 0.222. Therefore, the
maximum percentage error, over the tested range and using the
information in Table I, can be calculated to be 20.4% (peak) and
18.5% (Q-factor).
By way of comparison with previous works, where information is available, the sensor has demonstrated a linear operating
range of OD550 0.025-1.0. In addition, the resolution of the sensor has been demonstrated to be at least OD550 0.075. Table II
shows the relative performance of the sensor against current
technology demonstrated for the detection of P . aeruginosa; all
units are normalized to give a comparison of existing technologies with that demonstrated in this paper; all units are converted
to g · L−1 for consistency. From this table, it is shown that the
sensor demonstrates performance, particularly in terms of operating range, comparable with results reported by others. This
suggests that this novel technique is a valuable alternative for

the current methods for point of care diagnostics. Importantly,
the proposed technique gives a real-time response, and has the
ability of instantaneous diagnostics of presence and concentration of P . aeruginosa. The repeatability of measurements and
reusable nature of the sensor makes this technique a welcome
cost effective tool for clinical use.
The proposed solution would not require specialized medical
training and therefore could be carried out by nonexperts such as
technicians, nurses, etc. In addition, the system could potentially
be made portable for use by emergency service providers, when
combined with hardware to replace the VNA used in this study,
as demonstrated by the authors in previous work [50]. This
would be possible by selecting a particular frequency of interest
at which P . aeruginosa shows a response, and therefore allows
its concentration to be determined. Importantly, other types of
bacteria may be more sensitive to other frequencies. Based on
this, the proposed EM sensor technique has the unique capability of not only determining the type of the bacteria present in
the analyte, but also providing tools for real-time quantitative
assessment, which is vital for early medical diagnostics.
VI. CONCLUSION
A novel EM wave sensor system for the real-time detection and quantification of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is reported. It employs a bespoke planar sensor embedded within a

3296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

microfluidic cell structure which allows instantaneous assessment of bacteria concentration in the range of OD550 25 × 10−3
–1.0, which is comparable with other currently reported techniques. However, the proposed system is reusable, cost efficient,
and has the potential to be converted into a portable unit for rapid
response to healthcare needs in rural areas and disaster sites via
emergency services.
REFERENCES
[1] N. T. Thet, S. H. Hong, S. Marshall, M. Laabei, A. Toby, and A. Jenkins,
“Visible, colorimetric dissemination between pathogenic strains of
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa using fluorescent
dye containing lipid vesicles,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 41, pp. 538–
543, 2013.
[2] F. M. Husain and I. Ahmad, “Doxycycline interferes with quorum sensingmediated virulence factors and biofilm formation in Gram-negative bacteria,” World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1–9, Jun. 2013.
[3] R. Benabid, J. Wartelle, L. Malleret, N. Guyot, S. Gangloff, F. Lebargy,
and A. Belaaouaj, “Neutrophil elastase modulates cytokine expression:
Contribution to host defense against pseudomonas aeruginosa-induced
pneumonia,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 287, pp. 34883–34894, 2012.
[4] J. T. Hodgkinson, W. R. J. D. Galloway, M. Wright, I. K. Mati,
R. L. Nicholson, M. Welch, and R. D. Spring, “Design, synthesis and
biological evaluation of non-natural modulators of quorum sensing in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” Org. Biomol. Chem., vol. 10, pp. 6032–6044,
2012.
[5] I. Vaz-Moreira, O. C. Nunes, and C. M. Manaia, “Diversity and antibiotic
resistance in Pseudomonas spp. from drinking water,” Sci. Total Environ.,
vol. 426, pp. 366–374, 2012.
[6] R. Saha, N. Saha, R. S. Donofrio, and L. L. Bestervelt, “Microbial
siderophores: A mini review,” J. Basic Microbiol., vol. 52, pp. 1–15,
Jun. 2012.
[7] I. Nakouti, P. Sihanonth, and G. Hobbs, “A new approach to isolating
siderophore-producing actinobacteria,” Lett. Appl. Microbiol., vol. 55,
pp. 68–72, 2012.
[8] I. Nakouti and G. Hobbs, “Characterisation of five siderophore producing
actinomycetes from soil samples and the use of antibiotic resistance to
differentiate the isolates,” Int. J. Agriculture Sci., vol. 4, pp. 202–206,
2012.
[9] T. A. Hunt, W. T. Peng, I. Loubens, and D. G. Storey, “The pseudomonas
aeruginosa alternative sigma factor PvdS controls exotoxin A expression
and is expressed in lung infections associated with cystic fibrosis,” Microbiology, vol. 148, pp. 3183–93, 2002.
[10] M. I. Gómez and A. Prince, “Opportunistic infections in lung disease:
Pseudomonas infections in cystic fibrosis,” Curr. Opin. Pharmacol., vol. 7,
pp. 244–251, 2007.
[11] D. J. Hassett, T. R. Korfhagen, R. T. Irvin, M. J. Schurr, K. Sauer,
G. W. Lau, M. D. Sutton, H. Yu, and N. Hoiby, “Pseudomonas aeruginosa
biofilm infections in cystic fibrosis: Insights into pathogenic processes and
treatment strategies,” Expert Opin. Ther. Targets, vol. 14, pp. 117–130,
2010.
[12] L. E. Bryan, S. D. Semaka, H. M. Van den Elzen, J. E. Kinnear, and
R. L. Whitehouse, “Characteristics of R931 and other Pseudomonas aeruginosa R factors,” Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., vol. 3, pp. 625–37, 1973.
[13] A. M. Chakrabarty, “Plasmids in Pseudomonas,” Annu. Rev. Genet.,
vol. 10, pp. 7–30, 1976.
[14] S. Iyobe, K. Hasuda, A. Fuse, and S. Mitsuhashi, “Demonstration of R
factors from Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.,
vol. 5, pp. 547–52, 1974.
[15] P. Kontomichalou, E. Papachristou, and F. Angelatou, “Multiresistant plasmids from Pseudomonas aeruginosa highly resistant to either or both
gentamicin and carbenicillin,” Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., vol. 9,
pp. 866–73, 1976.
[16] D. P. Evenson, J. E. Parks, M. T. Kaproth, and L. K. Jost, “Rapid determination on sperm cell concentration in bovine semen by flow cytometry,”
J. Dairy Sci., vol. 76, pp. 86–94, 1993.
[17] J. Gabrielson, M. Hart, A. Jarelöv, I. Kühn, D. McKenzie, and R. Möllby,
“Evaluation of redox indicators and the use of digital scanners and spectrophotometer for quantification of microbial growth in microplates,” J.
Microbiol. Methods, vol. 50, pp. 63–73, 2002.
[18] P. Deschaght, S. Van Daele, F. De Baets, and M. Vaneechoutte, “PCR and
the detection of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in respiratory samples of CF
patients. A literature review,” J. Cyst. Fibros, vol. 10, pp. 293–297, 2011.

[19] A. Van Belkum, N. H. Renders, S. Smith, S. E. Overbeek, and
H. A. Verbrugh, “Comparison of conventional and molecular methods
for the detection of bacterial pathogens in sputum samples from cystic
fibrosis patients,” FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol., vol. 27, pp. 51–7,
2000.
[20] K. Waszczuk, G. Gula, M. Swiatkowski, J. Olszewski, Z. Drulis-Kawa,
J. Gutowicz, and T. Gotszalk, “Evaluation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
biofilm formation using piezoelectric tuning forks mass sensors,” Procedia
Eng., vol. 5, pp. 820–823, 2010.
[21] K. Waszczuk, G. Gula, M. Swiatkowski, J. Olszewski, W. Herwich,
Z. Drulis-Kawa, J. Gutowiczb, and T. Gotszalk, “Evaluation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm formation using piezoelectric tuning fork
mass sensors,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem., vol. 170, pp. 7–12, 2012.
[22] P. Pang, S. Huang, Q. Cai, S. Yao, K. Zeng, and C. A. Grimes, “Detection of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa using a wireless magnetoelastic sensing device,”
Biosensors Bioelectron., vol. 23, pp. 295–299, 2007.
[23] P. Pang, X. Xiao, Q. Cai, S. Yao, and C. A. Grimes, “A wireless
magnetoelastic-sensing device for in situ evaluation of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa biofilm formation,” Sens. Actuators B, Cheml, vol. 133,
pp. 473–477, 2008.
[24] F. He and S. Liu, “Detection of P. aeruginosa using nano-structured
electrode-separated piezoelectric DNA biosensor,” Talanta, vol. 62,
pp. 271–277, 2004.
[25] N. Kim, I.-S. Park, and D.-K. Kim, “Characteristics of a label-free piezoelectric immunosensor detecting Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem., vol. 100, pp. 432–438, 2004.
[26] B. Kapilevich and B. Litvak, “Microwave sensor for accurate measurements of water solution concentrations,” in APMC Asia-Pacific Microwave
Conf., 2007, pp. 1–4.
[27] J. D. Boon and J. M. Brubaker, “Acoustic-microwave water level sensor
comparisons in an estuarine environment,” in Proc.OCEANS, 2008, pp. 1–
5.
[28] B. Jackson and T. Jayanthy, “A novel method for water impurity concentration using microstrip resonator sensor,” in Proc. Recent AdvancesSpace
Technol. Services Climate Change , 2010, pp. 376–379.
[29] C. Bernou, D. Rebière, and J. Pistré, “Microwave sensors: A new sensing
principle. Application to humidity detection,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem,
vol. 68, pp. 88–93, 2000.
[30] T. Nacke, A. Barthel, C. Pflieger, U. Pliquett, D. Beckmann, and A. Goller,
“Continuous process monitoring for biogas plants using microwave sensors,” in Proc. 12th Biennial Baltic Electronics Conf. Baltic, 2010,
pp. 239–242.
[31] K. Y. You, J. Salleh, Z. Abbas, and L. L. You, “A rectangular patch antenna
technique for the determination of moisture content in soil,” in Proc.
Progress. Electromagn.s Res. Symp., Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 5–8,
2010, pp. 850–854.
[32] O. Korostynska, R. Blakey, A. Mason, and A. I. Al-Shamma’a, “Novel
method for vegetable oil type verification based on real-time microwave
sensing,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., 2013.
[33] O. Korostynska, A. Arshak, P. Creedon, K. Arshak, L. Wendling, and
A. I. Al-Shamma’a, “Glucose monitoring using electromagnetic waves
and microsensor with interdigitated electrodes,” in Proc. IEEE Sensors
Appl. Symp., 2009, pp. 34–37.
[34] A. Mason, S. Wylie, A. Thomas, H. Keele, A. Shaw, and A. I. AlShamma’a, “HEPA filter material load detection using a microwave cavity
sensor,” Int. J. Smart Sens. Intell. Syst., vol. 3, p. 16, Sep. 2010.
[35] A. Al-Shamma’a, A. Mason, and A. Shaw, “Patent: non-invasive monitoring device,” US2012150000 (A1), WO2010131029 (A1), EP2429397
(A1), Nov. 18, 2010.
[36] A. Mason, A. Shaw, and A. I. Al-Shamma’a, “A Co-planar microwave
sensor for biomedical applications,” Procedia Eng., vol. 47, pp. 438–441,
2012.
[37] J. H. Goh, A. Mason, M. Field, P. Browning, and A. I. Al-Shamma’a,
“Using a microwave sensor as an online indicator of neurological impairment during surgical procedures,” Key Eng. Mater., vol. 543, pp. 368–371,
2013.
[38] J. H. Goh, A. Mason, A. I. Al-Shamma’a, M. Field, and P. Browning,
“Lactate detection using microwave spectroscopy for in-situ medical applications,” Int. J. Smart Sens. Intell. Syst., vol. 4, pp. 338–352, Sep.
2011.
[39] J. H. Goh, A. Mason, A. I. Al-Shamma’a, S. Wylie, M. Field, and P. Brown,
“Lactate detection using a microwave cavity sensor for biomedical applications,” presented at the 5th Int. Conf. Sens. Technol., Palmerston North,
New Zealand, 2011.
[40] J. H. Goh, A. Mason, A. I. Al-Shamma’a, M. Field, M. Shackloth, and
P. Browning, “Non invasive microwave sensor for the detection of lactic

BLAKEY et al.: REAL-TIME MONITORING OF PSEUDOMONAS AERUGINOSA CONCENTRATION

[41]

[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]

acid in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., vol. 307, p. 012017,
2011.
J. H. Goh, A. Mason, O. Korostynska, A. I. Al-Shamma’a, P. Browning,
and M. Field, “Real-time monitoring of bodily fluids using a novel electromagnetic wave sensor,” J. Public Health Frontier, vol. 2, no. 3, Sep.
2013.
B. Drenger, S. D. Parker, S. M. Frank, and C. Beattie, “Changes in cerebrospinal fluid pressure and lactate concentrations during thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgery,” Anesthesiology, vol. 86, pp. 41–47, 1997.
R. Dawson, D. Elliott, W. Elliott, and K. Jones, Data for Biochemical
Research, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Oxford Univ. Press, 1986.
D. Kajfez, “Temperature characterization of dielectric-resonator materials,” J. Eur. Ceramic Soc., vol. 21, pp. 2663–2667, 2001.
A. Gupta and S. K. Khare, “A protease stable in organic solvents from
solvent tolerant strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” Bioresource Technol.,
vol. 97, pp. 1788–1793, 2006.
S. J. Grunzinger, P. Kurt, K. M. Brunson, L. Wood, D. E. Ohman, and
K. J. Wynne, “Biocidal activity of hydantoin-containing polyurethane
polymeric surface modifiers,” Polymer, vol. 48, pp. 4653–4662, 2007.
D. Kim, S. Chung, S. Lee, and J. Choi, “Relation of microbial biomass to
counting units for Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” African J. Microbiol. Res.,
vol. 6, pp. 4620–4622, 2012.
C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 3rd ed. Hoboken,
NJ, USA: Wiley, 2005.
D. Guha and Y. M. M. Antar, Microstrip and Printed Antennas: New
Trends, Techniques and Applications. New York: Wiley, 2010.
E. Bader, A. Attar, A. Mason, L. Wendling, and A. I. Al-Shamma’a, “Investigation of an embedded microwave spectrometer for alcohol detection
and measurement,” presented at the 4th Int. Conf. on Sensing Technol.,
Lecce, Italy, 2010.

Richard Blakey received the B.Sc. (Hons.) degree
in biomedical science from the University of Central
Lancashire, Lancashire, U.K., in 2010, and is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at Liverpool
John Moores University, Liverpool, U.K.
His research interests include biological dielectric
dispersions at microwave frequencies, differential dielectric sensor design, and health and disease monitoring. He is also particularly concerned with finding the solution for realtime detection of biomarkers
related to malignant cells at early stages of cancer
development.

Ismini Nakouti received the B.Sc. degree in microbiology, from Liverpool University, Liverpool, U.K., in
2001, the M.Sc. degree in industrial biotechnology in
2002, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical sciences in
2008, both from Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, U.K.
She has been involved with a number of consultancy projects which include the production of
small biomolecules from bacteria, production of yeast
biomass, screening for fungal paper degraders, design
and implementation of biofilm models, and investigations of skin microflora. She is currently a researcher in Liverpool John
Moores University and her research interests include detection and prevention
of biofilms, microbial interactions, and biomedical applications.

3297

Olga Korostynska received the B.Eng and the
M.Sc degrees in biomedical engineering both from
National Technical University of Ukraine, Kiev,
Ukraine, in 1998 and 2000, respectively,and the Ph.D.
degree in electronics and computer engineering in
2003,from the University of Limerick, Castletroy,
Limerick, Ireland.
She is currently a EU Research Fellow in Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, U.K., developing microwave sensors for real-time water quality
monitoring. Before Previously, she was an Engineer
in the National Telecommunication Institute in Ukraine, then a Postdoctoral
Researcher in the University of Limerick, working on a number of projects,
including those funded by IRCSET, EI and EU FP7 and later a Lecturer in
Physics in Dublin Institute of Technology, Dublin, Ireland. She has published
a book, 3 book chapters and more than 170 scientific papers in peer-reviewed
journals and conference proceedings.

Alex Mason received the Graduation degree (with a
first class Hons.) in computer and multimedia systems from the University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
U.K., and the Ph.D. degree in wireless sensor networks and their industrial applications from Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, in 2008.
He concentrated for two years solely on research,
working on the aspects of noninvasive and nondestructive sensing for the healthcare, automotive, and
defense sectors. Since 2010, he has been a a Senior
Lecturer in the School of Built Environment, Liverpool John Moores University researching many areas, developing an interest in
structural health monitoring and building performance analysis, and utilizing his
background in computing and electronics to issues relevant to the built environment. In addition to teaching materials, energy management and environmental
studies, he is responsible for a number of Ph.D. students who are working on a
wide variety of topical research projects.

Ahmed I. Al-Shamma’a received the B.Sc. degree in
electrical engineering and electronics from the University of Baghdad, Afghanistan, in 1987 and the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K., in 1990 and 1993, respectively.
He is the Director of the Built Environment
and Sustainable Technologies Research Institute, the
School of Built Environment, Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, U.K. He is one of the EU Scientific Officers on Renewable Energies and has obtained various supported applied research projects funded nationally and internationally by the EU, U.K., and USA Ministry of Defense, Carbon Trust,
Technology Strategy Board and direct funding from industry. He has extensive research interests that cover a wide range of applied industrial sciences,
including advance microwave technologies for renewable energies from waste
including biodiesel, bioethanol and biobutanol, waste recycling, environmental
and sustainable agendas. He has extensive experience in the design and construction of wireless sensors for the construction, healthcare, automotive and
aerospace industries as well as bespoke software solutions to monitor real time
energy levels, in various industrial applications and near zero carbon initiatives
for the energy sectors. He has published more than 300 peer reviewed scientific
publications, 15 patents, and coordinated more than 30 research projects.

