IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

3113

Localized, Macromolecular Transport for Thin,
Adherent, Single Cells Via an Automated, Single
Cell Electroporation Biomanipulator
Kelly Sakaki, Member, IEEE, Hadi Esmaeilsabzali, Shabnam Massah, Gratien G. Prefontaine,
Nikolai Dechev, Member, IEEE, Robert D. Burke, and Edward. J. Park∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Single cell electroporation (SCE), via microcapillary,
is an effective method for molecular, transmembrane transport
used to gain insight on cell processes with minimal preparation.
Although possessing great potential, SCE is difficult to execute and
the technology spans broad fields within cell biology and engineering. The technical complexities, the focus and expertise demanded
during manual operation, and the lack of an automated SCE platform limit the widespread use of this technique, thus the potential
of SCE has not been realized. In this study, an automated biomanipulator for SCE is presented. Our system is capable of delivering
molecules into the cytoplasm of extremely thin cellular features of
adherent cells. The intent of the system is to abstract the technical
challenges and exploit the accuracy and repeatability of automated
instrumentation, leaving only the focus of the experimental design
to the operator. Each sequence of SCE including cell and SCE site
localization, tip-membrane contact detection, and SCE has been
automated. Positions of low-contrast cells are localized and “SCE
sites” for microcapillary tip placement are determined using machine vision. In addition, new milestones within automated cell
manipulation have been achieved. The system described herein
has the capability of automated SCE of “thin” cell features less
than 10 μm in thickness. Finally, SCE events are anticipated using visual feedback, while monitoring fluorescing dye entering the
cytoplasm of a cell. The execution is demonstrated by inserting a
combination of a fluorescing dye and a reporter gene into NIH/3T3
fibroblast cells.

Manuscript received March 12, 2013; revised May 23, 2013; accepted June
7, 2013. Date of publication June 12, 2013; date of current version October
16, 2013. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under Grant RGPIN/298219-2012 and Grant
EQPEQ/406188-2011. The work of K. Sakaki was partly supported under the
British Columbia Innovation Scholars Award. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
K. Sakaki and H. Esmaeilsabzali are with the Faculty of Applied Sciences,
Simon Fraser University, Surrey, BC V3T 0A3, Canada and also with the Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, V5A 1S6, Canada
(e-mail: kelly.sakaki@sfu.ca; hesmaeil@sfu.ca).
S. Massah and G. G. Prefontaine are with the Faculty of Health Sciences,
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada (e-mail: smassah@
sfu.ca; ggp1@sfu.ca).
N. Dechev is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 3P6, Canada (e-mail: dechev@uvic.ca).
R. D. Burke is with the Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 3P6, Canada (e-mail: rburke@uvic.ca).
∗ E. J. Park is with the School of Mechatronic Systems Engineering, Faculty
of Applied Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Surrey, BC V3T 0A3, Canada,
and also with the Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby,
V5A 1S6, Canada (e-mail: ed_park@sfu.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2268387

Index Terms—Electroporation, machine vision, microcapillary
transfection, microelectrode, robot-assisted manipulation, single
cell.

I. INTRODUCTION
RANSPORTING proteins, DNA, and other metabolites
across the cell membrane is a fundamental mechanism
used to investigate human processes at the cellular level. However, the cell membrane forms an effective barrier to foreign
molecules and alternative means are required to coerce entry [1].
One effective method of overcoming this barrier is single cell
electroporation (SCE) via microcapillary, which can be applied
to cells directly in culture or to tissue with minimal preparation. SCE, via microcapillary, is a highly localized, repeatable
method for gene transfection and molecular uptake for both in
vitro and in vivo single cell manipulation [2]–[6]. SCE induces
reversible pores [7] in the membrane by channeling an electric field through a microcapillary [3], [8] and concentrating the
electric field at the cell surface [see Fig. 1(a)]. Charged ions
and molecules, contained within microliters of solution loaded
in a microcapillary, are inserted through the pores via an iontophoretic flow and diffusion. Since the diameter of the tip is
small, a high spatial selectivity of the cell and the location on
the cell is achievable allowing the tip to be placed on extremely
small cell features [4].
SCE is a versatile single cell manipulation method; however,
the technical complexity limits its operation to highly trained
operators. The complexities of single cell manipulation technologies in general, and the demand for more versatile instrumentation have coupled focused methods of molecular transport
using robot-assisted technology. As a result, the capabilities of
robot-assisted, single cell manipulation technologies, such as
SCE and intracytoplasmic, and capillary pressure microinjection (CPM), have rapidly advanced over the last decade as single
cell research evolves.
Robot-assisted manipulation of large, single cells and embryos in suspension (i.e., diameters on the order of 102 and 103
μm’s) is frequently performed using intracytoplasmic injection
techniques. This involves piercing through the cell membrane
and using CPM to deliver molecules into the cytoplasm. Suspended cells can be immobilized with one microcapillary. Using visual servoing, a second microcapillary approaches and
microinjects the cell in the same focal plane as the holding
microcapillary [9]. Others have developed methods combining

T

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

3114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 1. Automated SCE. (a) Thin features on cells are targeted with microcapillary SCE to create (inset) reversible pores in the membrane used to insert
molecules. (b) Nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE sites are localized on the cell using machine vision. (c) SCE site is positioned below the focal point and the
tip is localized. The platform rises and brings the cell into contact with the tip.
(d) Sinusoidal, sensing signal aids tip-membrane contact detection in the presence of a low SNR environment. Samples are input to the Discrete Fourier
Transform. The signal is isolated on the frequency spectrum at fs producing
a measure of the current, ic c t , through the electrode to sense changes during
tip-membrane contact. ic c t is relatively constant when the tip approaches the
cell and abruptly decreases upon contact. This abrupt change is detected using
statistical process control and tip motion is halted. Fluorescent molecules entering the cell via SCE are measured during (e) cytoplasmic and (f) nucleic SCE.
A 1.5 times increase in fluorescent intensity in B (red boundary) signals an
end to the SCE routine.

“sensing” capabilities, including machine vision and force data
[8], [9]. Further, designs increased throughput by trapping embryos and suspended cells using suction ports [12] and grooves
[10] fabricated directly into the substrate.
Manipulating single cells that have been trapped, or adhered
to substrates typically require an out-of-plane [13] delivery
method, and a framework of high precision instrumentation to

position a microcapillary on a cell with a cross- sectional height
hC as small as several micrometers. Conventional microscopy
formats (e.g., upright and inverted microscopes) typically reduce the working environment to a 2-D image and impede the
ability to visually detect tip-membrane contact. A CPM system
attempted to overcome such challenges using machine vision
to estimate the height of the microcapillary with respect to the
position of adherent cells [14].
Alternatively, visual servoing methods can be substituted
for, or combined with microcapillary-based, microelectrode
measurements [3], [15]–[17], which sense the degree of “tipmembrane” contact as the tip indents the membrane. Decreasing
the amplitude of a low-potential, sensing signal provides an indication of the seal created between the microcapillary tip and the
cell membrane. However, in microcapillary-based methods, the
resolution of the sensing signal used during the tip-membrane
placement routine is hampered by a poor signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR). This is common in electrode-based devices and was
demonstrated in our previous work [18]. Large cells provide
sufficient membrane deflection distance to achieve significant
amplitude changes at a specified threshold beyond the SNR
with classic filtering techniques. Therefore, a little chance of
damage to the cell or the tip is likely. In contrast, thin cells
10 μm or less, are problematic where the distance from the tip
to the membrane (i.e., tip-membrane) cannot be accurately resolved and the distance from the initial tip membrane contact to
the substrate is small. Subsequently, the use of fixed-threshold
contact methods [3], [15], [17] can impede operational throughput as a result of damaged tips, ruptured cell membranes, or
false tip-membrane detections, especially where a low SNR is
present.
Even after achieving significant advances in automated cell
manipulation, the limitations with respect to the size of adherent cells has rarely been discussed. Microcapillary SCE can
insert molecules into a cell without piercing the membrane and
can be executed, while the microcapillary is in contact with
the membrane surface [15], [17], [18] or positioned several micrometers away [8]. Where novel solutions have automated the
full sequence or a partial sequence of the stages of SCE, greater
efforts are required to localize and manipulate cells with thin
cross sections and exploit one of the most significant advantages
of microcapillary SCE.
Prior work has achieved significant milestones toward fully
automated solutions. Rae and Levis [3] suggested a method of
estimating the potential at the membrane during tip-membrane
contact for SCE. In [15], a semiautomated solution for SCE
was demonstrated by inserting fluorescing dye into aortic endothelial cells. Kallio et al., provides an electrical model describing current flowing through the microcapillary and used
microcapillary electrodes [16] to indicate contact in SH-SY5Y
cells (mouse neural blastoma) using a CPM robot-assisted manipulator. He also describes conditions for detecting broken and
clogged microcapillaries. Our laboratory provided an automated
solution to localize and manipulate large, sea urchin eggs that
were chemically adhered to a substrate [17] using SCE.
Although many technological milestones have been achieved
in microcapillary-based SCE and similar technologies, further

SAKAKI et al.: LOCALIZED, MACROMOLECULAR TRANSPORT FOR THIN, ADHERENT, SINGLE CELLS

3115

advances are necessary where methods and designs in the literature fall short of, or have not been developed for an automated
solution for the SCE of thin, adherent cells. The broad technical requirements and the fragile nature of cell structures limit
the efficiency of manual-throughput and subsequently rates of
processing are sufficiently slow [5], [6]. Furthermore, the full
sequence of tasks have not been adequately achieved by automated efforts, thus the true potential of SCE has not been
realized.
In this study, a novel system for fully automated SCE is
described. Our system utilizes a machine vision algorithm, developed in our laboratory, to detect low-contrast, thin, adherent
cells and SCE sites on cells for molecular delivery [19]. Applying SCE on the most suitable location of a cell is rarely
discussed in experimental methods. Therefore, two sites were
proposed and include the “nucleic SCE site” and the “cytoplasmic” SCE site [see Fig. 1(b)]. In addition, we demonstrate a
more versatile and robust, tip-contact detection algorithm, based
on statistical process control [18], for cells less than 10 μm in
thickness. This achievement eliminates limitations imposed by
thin, adherent cells and provides a transmembrane transport
method for a much broader range of applications. Finally, an
endpoint for SCE is estimated using visual feedback from fluorescing molecules that are inserted in and diffuse throughout
the cytoplasm of a cell during SCE
The operation of the system is demonstrated by inserting a fluorescent dye (Alexa Fluor Hydrazide 488) and a plasmid DNA
with a reporter gene (pcDNA6-dsRed, 5.8 kbp) into NIH/3T3
fibroblasts. Two video demonstrations are provided as supplementary downloadable material and demonstrate the automation
routine methodologies used in this study.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Three Stages of Automated SCE
Automated SCE can be partitioned into three, sequential
stages including, Stage 1: cell localization and SCE site determination; Stage 2: tip-membrane contact detection, and Stage
3: SCE, which is monitored using visual feedback.
Stage 1 (cell and SCE site localization): Cell and SCE site
localizations were executed using a two-step algorithm [see
Fig. 2]. First, the nucleus of a cell was localized and modeled
as an ellipse, N . The center of the ellipse determined the nucleic SCE site and the ellipse provided a bounded region B ,
used to monitor visual feedback of the increase in fluorescent
dye entering the cell during SCE. The localization of the cells
and the corresponding SCE sites on the nucleus or cytoplasm
was accomplished by first extracting the relatively high contrast features associated with the nuclei and surrounding rough
endoplasmic reticula (RER) of cells in differential interference
contrast (DIC) images. A sequence of an adaptive threshold
and mathematical morphology operations coarsely located the
nucleus of each cell. Next, each segmented nucleic region was
estimated by an ellipse of similar geometrical and spatial properties. Fine localization of the nucleus was then realized using an
iterative, k-means, clustering-based algorithm. Gradients associated with the nucleoli and other intranuclear organelles were

Fig. 2. Cell and SCE site localization. The gradient data associated with
the nuclei and surrounding rough endoplasmic reticula in smoothed images is
extracted and clustered to produce binary objects corresponding to each nucleus.
Each binary object is then estimated with a nucleic ellipse (NE), and a k-means
clustering algorithm iteratively repositions each NE until it encloses the nucleus.
The final NE will be used to monitor the completion of SCE process, and its
center may be selected as a nucleic SCE site. In the second stage, the Growing
Circle Algorithm (GCA) uses a number of probe circles initiated around each
NE to detect the cytoplasmic regions to the maximum extent possible. Upon
completion of the GCA routine for each cell, the center of a probe circle that
covers the thickest detected portion of the cytoplasm will be chosen as the
cytoplasmic SCE site.

exploited in order to relocate the estimated nucleic ellipse in
the image until N enclosed the nucleus. Second, a modified
region-growing algorithm called Growing Circles [19], used the
results obtained during nucleic localization to localize the cell
cytoplasm and determines a suitable SCE site over the cytoplasm

3116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

sumed to be a sequence of n independent and random variables
(xk )1≤k < n with a mean value, μi .
In this study, xk represents icct , the current measured through
the electrode and μi is calculated using the cumulative moving
average
1 
xk +1
k+1
n

μi =

(2)

k =1

and updated after each sample, k. At the start of the tipmembrane approach sequence, the standard deviation of icct
measurements,σ, is acquired, while the tip is in motion and well
before tip-membrane contact occurs (i.e., while icct is relatively
constant).
The standard deviation provides a measure of the SNR,
μ1 − μ0
(3)
σ
and defines the signal level required to discern a change beyond
the noise about the mean, μ0 . In this study, μ0 is calculated as the
average of the cumulative sum using (2). The residual (i.e., the
difference between the measured data and the average), xk − ui ,
is normalized with σ,
xk − ui
yk =
(4)
σ
then yk is input to the double-sided, cumulative sum [20] or
“cusum”—a statistical process control algorithm. The cusum
defines two recursive statistics, Ck+ and Ck− as follows:


Ck+ = max 0, Ck+−1 + yk − λ
(5)


Ck− = max 0, Ck−−1 − yk − λ
(6)
SNR =

Fig. 3. Tip-template matching. Before the automation sequence begins, a
microcapillary is attached to the platform for SCE. The tip is lowered to the
focal plane and an image template is created and used for the duration of the
automation. Prior to each tip-membrane approach, the tip is accurately located
using template matching allowing placement of the tip on thin, cell features.
The tip passes through the focal plane by several micrometers and template
matching provides the highest correlation score obtained during the descent.

adjacent to the nucleus (i.e., cytoplasmic SCE site localization).
Following localization of the cells and SCE sites, the cell is
positioned 15 μm below the focal point [see Fig. 1(c)]. The tip
descends to the focal point and was localized by using templatematching [see Fig. 3]. The SCE site on the localized cell is
moved directly beneath the tip and ascends toward the tip at a
constant velocity of 1 μm/s.
Stage 2 (tip-membrane approach sequence): Early detection
of tip-membrane contact is a critical requirement for avoiding
damage to thin cell structures and to the microcapillary, thus
high resolution, tip-membrane placement is a requirement. Tipmembrane contact is achieved by detecting an abrupt decrease
in measurements of the current icct through the microcapillary
electrode. S(t) is a low amplitude, sinusoidal “sensing signal”
[see Fig. 1(d)], set at a fixed frequency, fs . S(t) is generated
within a circuit that includes the microcapillary electrode, the
cell bath solution, a cell bath electrode, and analog and digital circuitry used to measure and amplify the signal. Inherent
noise, within electrode-based and electromechanical environments cause icct to fluctuate randomly about the mean of, icct ,
μ0 , which is relatively constant during the tip-membrane approach.
Data are acquired in the basic form of discrete measurements
xk = θk + ek

(1)

where xk , is the kth measurement that includes θk the desired
signal and ek is the noise signal. These measurements are as-

where λ is the slack variable. The value of Ck+ or Ck− increases
when yk > λ or −yk > λ, respectively. If an abrupt change in
one direction occurs, an alarm d is signaled when either Ck+ or
Ck− exceeds the threshold ν,

0 if Ck+ < ν ∩ Ck− < ν
(7)
d=
1 if Ck+ ≥ ν ∪ Ck− ≥ ν.
A sharp decrease in icct is observed when tip-membrane contact occurs causing Ck− to exceed ν signaling a tip-membrane
contact condition. Should Ck+ exceed ν, an alarm is activated
indicating a faulty electrode or broken tip. The values of λ and
ν are set relative to σ and are discussed in Section II-B. Greater
detail on the tip-membrane approach sequence can be found
in [18]. A full statistical analysis on the cusum and the parameters are discussed in [20]–[23].
Stage 3 (SCE): Following tip-membrane contact detection, a
low duty-cycle, square wave pulse initiating SCE is activated.
Fluorescent molecules enter the pores induced by SCE at lower
potentials than for larger molecules (e.g., plasmid DNA) and
serve as a mechanism to correlate the transmembrane transport
of molecules. SCE event detection is monitored by analyzing
changes in the relative fluorescent intensity within a bounded
region B in the cell using machine vision [see Fig. 4].
The averaged fluorescent intensity Ik within B is acquired
and compared to the background or initial average fluorescent

SAKAKI et al.: LOCALIZED, MACROMOLECULAR TRANSPORT FOR THIN, ADHERENT, SINGLE CELLS

3117

resulting output was input to an Otsu threshold routine (i.e.,
clustering) to remove T from N and was followed by an erosion operation. This effectively reduces dispersion effects of the
gradient between T and N effectively leaving the remainder
of N for analysis.

B. Tip-Membrane Approach and Cusum Initialization

Fig. 4. SCE detection using visual feedback. Nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE
are observed, while measuring increases in fluorescent intensity inside the cell
during SCE pulses. If nucleic SCE is being performed, the image is applied
to a power, lookup table to increase the pixel intensity of the fluorescent tip.
This result provides a well-defined area where pixels are saturated due to the
fluorescing tip. The tip region, T , can then be removed from the nucleic
ellipse, N , using Otsu clustering where overlap of T and N occurs during
nucleic SCE. In both cytoplasmic and nucleic SCE, measurements of the average
fluorescent intensity, IK , in B can then be acquired and compared to the initial
fluorescent intensity I0 , measured at the beginning of the routine.

intensity I0 measured prior to SCE. In addition, a SCE endpoint threshold set to 1.5I0 was used in this study. When Ik
exceeds this threshold, a signal is issued indicating that SCE is
complete. Relative fluorescence intensity measurements occur
concurrently as SCE pulses are applied. Analyzing the increasing pixel average Ik during electroporative pulses within B
provides an indicator that SCE is occurring.
The nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE routines execute similarly
with the exception of nucleic SCE, where the brightly fluorescing tip is excluded from fluorescence measurements. B is
represented by one of two bounded regions depending on the
type of SCE site selected and are defined for cytoplasmic SCE
sites [see Fig. 1(e)]) by
B = N

(8)

where N is the localized nucleus, and for nucleic SCE sites
[see Fig. 1(f)] by
B = N ∧ T

(9)

where T is the bounded region of the fluorescent tip. A rectangular, region of interest surrounding the location of the tip and
the entire nucleic ellipse is applied to an exponential lookup
table to increase the regions of high fluorescent intensity. The

Prior to routine operation, a system calibration routine was
performed to estimate suitable values for the threshold ν and the
slack variable λ. Adjustments to λ and ν affect the indentation
depth of the tip and the cusum algorithm’s sensitivity to noise.
In general, decreasing λ reduces the indentation depth (i.e.,
number of samples) before tip-membrane contact detection,
but increases the possibility of generating a false tip-membrane
contact alarm. Increasing ν gradually increases the indentation
depth before detecting tip-membrane contact. The value of σ
is estimated at the beginning of each tip-membrane approach
sequence.
Six calibration test-runs were performed. Each test-run consisted of executing the tip-membrane contact detection routine
to collect icct data on sample cells with the exception that the
tip indentation continued until tip-breakage occurred. Three test
runs were executed with the center of the nucleic ellipse as the
target and three test runs were performed with the cytoplasmic
SCE site used as the target. Sequential icct data were collected
during the approach sequence, during tip-membrane contact
(i.e., abrupt decrease in icct ), and during the tip-substrate contact (i.e., abrupt increase in icct ). SCE was purposely omitted
throughout these runs.
Following the calibration test runs, offline simulations were
performed on the icct datasets. Each icct dataset was input to
the cusum routine and an iterative routine, described in [18],
which stepped through each pair of ν, and λ to evaluate where
the cusum would signal an alarm condition. The parameter pairs
of λ and ν varied over a wide range to determine suitable pairs
for operational use. In this study, the range of values for λ and
ν was—[0.1, 30]
After each pair was tested by the iterative routine, a contour
plot (i.e., performance surface) was generated using the indentation distances over the λ–v parameter space. Lower indentation
values were generated directly after tip-membrane contact first
occurred (i.e., transition from the constant icct to the abrupt decrease of icct ) and before the tip contacted the substrate (i.e.,
before the abrupt increase in icct ). Pairs that caused a false tipmembrane contact detection, pairs that failed to detect contact
before the tip contacted the substrate, or pairs that did not detect
contact at all were assigned a high indentation value to indicate
unsuitable parameters. In this study, a value of 20 μm was assigned to these pairs, which is greater than twice the average
height of the cells measured [18]. The three runs of each group
were averaged producing two contour plots—one for the nucleic
runs and the other for the cytoplasmic runs shown in Fig. 5(a)
and (b), respectively. In this study, parameters for operational
use were selected such that the indentation was approximately
1.5 μm in depth (λ = 20, ν = 4).

3118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

E. System Control Architecture
The system control software was structured using supervisory control with the automation core designed as a queued
state-machine [see Fig. 6(b)] using LabVIEW 2011. Submodules were used to collect data from independent peripherals and
execute low-level processing. Information compiled by the submodules was returned to and was collectively processed by the
supervisory module. Data transfer latency between the submodules and the supervisory module and the time of the data spent
in the queue was negligible.
Fig. 5. Performance surface plots generated for the tip-membrane calibration
runs. (a) Surface generated for nucleic and (b) cytoplasmic SCE sites. Each
plot was generated using the ic c t data during three tip-membrane approach
sequences. Each set of ic c t data is tested once for each pair of parameters (ν, λ)
during an offline analysis producing an estimated indentation depth. Plotting
the indentation depths over the range of parameters produced a performance
surface allowing the selection of suitable system parameters for use. In this
study, parameters were chosen such that the tip indentation was approximately
1.5 μm (ν = 20, λ = 4). Contour units are in μm.

C. Experimental SCE Parameters
The automated routine was validated using two sets of parameters for nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE. A pulse width of
1 ms was used in all sets. Two pulse frequencies, 10 and 40 Hz
were used in combination with an SCE pulse potential, VSCE ,
of −6 and −10 V for nucleic SCE. These parameters have been
demonstrated using manual methods of SCE [3]; however, the
SCE site in [3] was not specified. For cytoplasmic SCE, only a
VSCE of −6 V was used as high potentials and high frequencies
adversely affected the NIH/3T3 cells (e.g., −10 V and 40 Hz). A
complete analysis relating the efficiency of the SCE parameters,
SCE site location, and uptake of electroporated molecules were
not the focus of this study.

D. SCE Biomanipulator Platform
The custom platform [see Fig. 6(a)] consisted of an X, Y,
and Z linear, direct-drive platform (ALS 1000, Aerotech, Inc.).
Each stage was powered by an Aerotech BA-10 amplifier and
submicrometer precision was obtained using MXH-500 highresolution, encoder signal multipliers. Aerotech drivers were
interfaced to a National Instruments (NI) NI-7358 and two NI
UMI-7774 interfaces. Software control of the motors was performed using the LabVIEW Motion API.
A custom optical train integrating Nikon CFI-60 and DIC elements consisted of a 40X, extra-long working distance objective. Fluorescence observation was performed using epifluorescence illumination with a red filter (Chroma Technology Corp.
49008/ET-Texas Red) for the dsRed and green filter (Chroma
Technology Corp. 49002/ET-GFP) for the Alexa Fluor 488, respectively. All images were captured using a 12-bit CCD camera (Retiga, QImaging) at a maximum rate of 10 frames/s using
two-times binning.

F. SCE Module
The SCE module is an embedded system designed to generate signals, acquire icct measurements indicating tip-membrane
proximity, and deliver electroporative pulses to induce SCE.
The SCE module is comprised of three submodules including
the signal generator, the data acquisition module (DAQ), and the
data processing module which is integrated into the supervisory
module. Signal acquisition and signal generation occurred near
the microcapillary. The block diagram is shown integrated into
the system control architecture in Fig. 6(b).
A digital signal processor (DSP, Microchip dsPIC 30f3013,
Microchip Technology) and LabVIEW coordinated using serial,
asynchronous communications at 19.2 kb/s. Signal generation
was completed by the DSP, which sent 16-bit words, representing the voltage, to a 16-bit digital-to-analog converter (DAC,
Analog Devices AD660) over an 8-bit bus. The DAC output a
signal of up to ±10 V and was amplified by 1.8 times providing a maximum amplitude pulse of ±17.3 V to the electrode.
Hardware filters were avoided to maintain a wide bandwidth
reducing pulse signal distortion.
Two signals were generated during the automated sequence.
During the tip-membrane approach sequence, S(t) was generated
with a peak amplitude, A0 , of 0.3 Vp and at a frequency fs of
186 Hz. Following tip-membrane contact detection, a unipolar,
rectangular wave pulse at a potential of VSCE was activated
in order to induce SCE. The low potential sensing signal was
applied intermittently between pulses to acquire measurements
of icct during SCE by combining the two signals at the output.
The sensing signal and the pulses for inducing electroporation
were output from the DAC to a discrete network of amplifiers in a
current-to-voltage (C2V) configuration, and provided a measure
of icct through the electrode. The output of the instrumentation
amplifier was reduced to a maximum ± 10 V and was sampled
by a NI USB-6009 DAQ at 44 kHz.
Raw data samples of the sinusoidal signal were transferred to
LabVIEW in 712 sample windows and were analyzed using the
discrete Fourier transform (DFT). The resulting icct amplitude
of the sinusoidal signal, representing xk in (1), was conveniently
isolated on the frequency spectrum at fs using the DFT. The
value of u0 was updated in (2). xk was normalized with σ in (4)
and output at a rate of 25 Hz to the cusum in (5) and (6), while
checking for alarm conditions in (7).

SAKAKI et al.: LOCALIZED, MACROMOLECULAR TRANSPORT FOR THIN, ADHERENT, SINGLE CELLS

3119

Fig. 6. SCE biomanipulator. (a) Biomanipulator used during experimentation to conduct automated SCE. (inset) A view of the cell chamber and the microcapillary
used for SCE during the automated routine. (b) Hardware and software system block diagram.

G. Microcapillaries and Microelectrodes for SCE
Microcapillaries were fabricated on a Flaming/Brown P-97 ,
using fire polished microcapillaries (Sutter BF150-110-10) and
the “bee-stinger” protocol [24]. Microcapillaries were backfilled
with a 4 μL solution containing 63 ng/μL dsRed plasmid [25],
150 mM KCl, and 3.8 mM Alexa Fluor 488.
The electrode was fashioned by immersing 0.25-mm diameter
silver wire (64-1319, Harvard Apparatus) in bleach for 30 min
until an even coating of silver-chloride coated the bare wire.
This wire was cleaned with 70% EtOH, washed with distilled
water, and allowed to dry. The microcapillary was inserted in
an electrode holder (1-HL-U, Molecular Devices) and the tip of
the wire was immersed beyond 2 mm of solution from the end
of the microcapillary. The electrode assembly was then inserted
on the SCE module. After experimentation, the electrode wires
were sufficiently rinsed with 70% EtOH followed by distilled
water and allowed to dry.
H. Cell and Reagent Preparation
NIH/3T3 cells (ATCC #CRL-1658) were cultured in alpha Modified Eagle Medium (α-MEM, Invitrogen, 32571–
028) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Invitrogen, 16000–036) and 1% Penicillin–Streptomycin (Invitrogen,
15140–122).
For the purpose of experiments and to achieve high-resolution
imaging, the cells were prepared and cultured in a coverslip
bottom, cell chamber [Quorum Technologies, Chamlide, WL2460–1, Fig. 6(a, inset)]. The complete cell chamber assembly,
including a No. 1.5, 24 × 60 mm coverslip (VWR, CA48383–
252–1), were autoclaved prior to use. Cells were cultured in
100 mm Petri dishes for 72 h. At 90% confluence, the cells were
rinsed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and treated with
0.4 mL of 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA for 1 min in 37 ◦ C. After detachment, the cells were diluted by culture media to 8 mL. The
concentration of the diluted cell solution was further reduced by
addition of the culture media in a 1:10 volumetric ratio. The final
cell solution was added to the cell chambers and incubated for

24 h prior to experimentation. Following the incubation period,
the cells were rinsed three times with PBS followed by adding
fresh media (Invitrogen, 41061-029—no phenol red). The cells
were placed back in the incubator for 3 h prior to experimentation. Following the incubation period, a cell chamber was placed
on a custom cell heater on the robotic platform. A dual temperature controller (Warner Instruments, TC-344B) was connected
to the cell heater maintaining the temperature at 37 ◦ C. Cells remained viable for durations greater than 30 min; however, were
kept outside the incubator for no longer than 20 min at a time.
10–15 cells were processed during each round of experimentation and were incubated for 24 h prior to inspection.
III. RESULTS
The automated SCE sequence was completed for 200 nucleic
SCE and 100 cytoplasmic SCE runs. Examples of data acquired
during automation of each type of sequence are shown in Fig. 7.
A video demonstration is also provided and shows several cells
and SCE sites being localized and then processed using the
automated routine (Video 1—supplementary information).
In Fig. 7(a), a localized cell selected for nucleic SCE during Stage 1, is shown in Image i. The initial localized nucleic
ellipse is shown as a green outline around the nucleus. During
the tip-membrane approach sequence [see Fig. 7(a)] of Stage 2,
icct measurements were constant until the tip-membrane contact
was detected (Image ii) after approximately 1.3 μm of indentation. An abrupt increase in Ck− can be seen in Fig. 7(b) as
icct samples decreased in value during contact. At that moment,
epifluorescent illumination was activated (see Image iii) and the
bright fluorescing tip region T was removed from N allowing
increases in fluorescing intensity to be monitored in B during
SCE. During the SCE pulses in Stage 3, relative measurements
of the fluorescent intensity within the nucleus increased linearly
[see Fig. 7(c)] to the threshold, 1.5I0 ending SCE pulses. The
change in fluorescent intensity can be observed in coarse pixel
plots before SCE pulses begin (see Image iv) and directly before
SCE pulses end (see Image v). The minimum intensity in the
8-bit images is 0 (dark blue) and the maximum pixel intensity

3120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 7. Examples of the automation SCE sequence. During Stage 1 nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE sites are localized in Image i. (a) ic c t samples are shown during
the tip-membrane approach sequence (Stage 2). (b) During tip-membrane contact, shown in Image ii, ic c t samples, in (a), decreased from the average current, μ 0
and the negative cusum exceeded the threshold signaling an alarm, d, after an estimated indentation of 1.3 μm. Epifluorescent illumination was activated in Image
iii and the average fluorescent intensity in B was measured during SCE pulses. (c) During SCE pulses, relative fluorescence measurements, Ik /I0 , increased in a
linear fashion until the fluorescence intensity reached 1.5 I0 . Coarse pixel intensity plots are shown in Image iv, before pulses began, and in Image v, immediately
before pulses ended. Similar results are seen for cytoplasmic SCE in (d–f).
TABLE I
TIP-MEMBRANE CONTACT AND FLUORESCENT DYE DETECTION
SUCCESS RATIOS

is 255 (red). Following SCE, in Stage 3, the tip is raised and
icct returns to the level at the onset of Stage 2. Similar data
from a sequence for cytoplasmic SCE are shown in Fig. 7(d–f).
In Video 2 (supplementary information), the SCE sequences are
shown for the nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE datasets from Fig. 7.
In all cells localized for both nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE,
tip-membrane contact detection was successful without tipbreakage and 98.8% successful in tip-membrane placement (N
= 300)—failed runs occurred due to pierced cells and pierced
cells exhibited dye immediately prior to SCE pulses (see Table I). The processing time for each run was an average of 81 s
per cell. During the tip-membrane placement routine, the average σ measured was 0.44 nA (SD = 0.38 nA, N = 300) and the
average icct measured at the beginning of the run was 39.9 nA
(SD = 10.6 nA, N = 300). A total of 24 microcapillaries were
used and fabricated using identical “pulling” parameters [24].
When the microcapillary was placed over the nucleus, a success rate of 96.5% electroporation of the dye was achieved (N =
200) and was 19.0% successful at transfection and expression of
plasmid DNA for all cells. However, when regions lateral to the
nucleus are targeted (i.e., cytoplasmic sites), a success rate of
86.9% electroporation of the dye is achieved and no successful

TABLE II
DsRed TRANSFECTION RATIO 24 h AFTER SCE

transfection of plasmid DNA (N = 100). The average elapsed
time during SCE pulses measured for Ik to reach 1.5I0 and the
success ratio of detecting dsRed in cells following 24 h after
SCE is tSCE and summarized in Table II for each parameter set.
A followup study was performed in the absence of viability data validating cytoplasmic SCE due to the lack of dsRed
expression in all cells. Cytoplasmic SCE site sequences were
repeated for 20 trials. Following cytoplasmic SCE, cells were
monitored over a 24-h period and image data were acquired in
6 h intervals to ensure the viability and the continuity of the location of the cells [see Fig. 8]. Continuity of the cells’ location
was observed by monitoring bright field images [see Fig. 8(a–
e)] and fluorescent microscopy images of the fluorescent dye
over a 24-h duration [see Fig. 8(f–i)]. Following the 24-h period, the media was replaced with media containing calcein-AM
red. After incubating the cells in calcein-AM for 1 h in 37 ◦ C,
the media was replaced with media without calcein-AM. The
cells were then inspected using epifluorescent microscopy and
cells fluorescing under a red filter indicated cell viability [see
Fig. 8(j)]. For all cells, the average viability was 60% (N = 20)

SAKAKI et al.: LOCALIZED, MACROMOLECULAR TRANSPORT FOR THIN, ADHERENT, SINGLE CELLS

Fig. 8. Cytoplasmic SCE viability test. Viable cells, following cytoplasmic
SCE, were observed over 25 h. An example of a cell targeted using cytoplasmic
SCE is shown. Images collected using (a–e) DIC and (f–i) epifluorescent microscopy were collected in six h intervals. Green fluorescing dye is observed in
the manipulated cell. (j) At 25 h, cells were exposed to calcein red. Viable cells
were identified by continuous observation over 24 h and by observing calcein
production in the cell after 1 h incubation in calcein AM.
TABLE III
VIABILITY ANALYSIS FOR CYTOPLASMIC SCE SITES

and for each parameter set the average viability was also 60%
(N = 10 for each). The data are summarized in Table III.
IV. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The system, methods, and instrumentation proposed in this
study are intended to provide a seamless transition between the
three, sequential stages of automated SCE including localization
of cells and SCE sites, tip-membrane contact detection, and

3121

SCE. Our method is capable of precise and repeatable targeting
of thin, adherent cells for electroporation with an accuracy of
nearly 100% success (see Table I). Our technology achieved
new milestones in automated SCE.
Adherent cells less than 10 μm and SCE sites were localized using our machine vision algorithm described in [19]. Tipmembrane contact detection was executed using a statistical
process control algorithm developed in [18] and visual feedback was implemented during nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE.
In this discussion, we identify a site-specific dependence contributing to the success of SCE and identify areas of future work
to improve the existing methods.
Targeted delivery of molecules, using SCE, is an effective
means for conducting manipulation assays requiring greater access to cellular regions such as the nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE
sites. However, little is known or has been reported on what region of the cell is best suited for SCE of macromolecules and
specifically DNA of up to 14 kb/s [3]. When the microcapillary
was placed over the nucleus, a success rate of 96.5% electroporation of the dye was achieved (see Table I) and was 19.0%
successful at transfection of the plasmid DNA (see Table II)
for all cells, which is similar to manual efficiencies [2], [3].
However, when regions lateral to the nucleus are targeted (i.e.,
cytoplasmic sites), a success rate of 86.9% electroporation of
the dye is achieved and no successful electroporation of plasmid
DNA (n = 100) was detected even though subsequent viability
tests demonstrated 60% of the cells remained viable 24 h after
SCE (see Table III). This demonstrates that the site placement
of the microcapillary is a critical factor in successful SCE, and
to the best of our knowledge, has not been previously reported
in the literature.
Detecting tip-membrane contact is a critical event when processing thin cells to avoid rupturing the cells and breaking the
microcapillary tip. At the beginning of each run, a measure of
the noise σ was acquired relating noise levels to, λ and ν. As
σ varies, the value of λ is scaled accordingly and is less susceptible to fluctuations in noise causing false contact detections.
The residual, xk − μ0 , is normalized with σ, and samples must
satisfy yk > λ or −yk > λ to increase Ck+ or Ck− , respectively. Variability in σ can influence the indentation distance
(i.e., number of samples before the threshold is exceeded) as
a low SNR will reduce the ability to discern a change from
μ0 . Greater control and system versatility could be achieved by
implementing a control routine in response to variations in σ.
Previous tip-membrane approach sequences, or simulated approach sequences based on a model of tip and membrane could
be processed between runs to control the number of samples to
achieve an alarm condition in response to variations in σ that
occur. Performance surfaces, similar to those created during
the calibration routine, could be generated or updated each sequence and incorporated with optimization routines to estimate
more efficient parameters. Minor adjustments to λ and ν would
be updated prior to the next run.
Differences in the compliance between cells and cell structures (e.g., nucleic and cytoplasmic SCE sites) could vary the
rate of the formation of a seal. Thus, it is possible for variations between cells and cell lines to influence the tip-membrane

3122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

approach sequence. We tested our tip-membrane contact and
SCE algorithm briefly on other cell lines including human
breast cancer cells (MCF-7) and mouse neural blastoma cells
(SH-SY5Y) with positive success. Although an extensive study
was not performed, no significant differences were observed in
comparison to NIH/3T3 cells during the tip-membrane contact
algorithm or SCE while inserting fluorescing molecules. Establishing an electromechanical model of the seal created between
a tip and a membrane would be a valuable contribution in future
work for microcapillary-based, microelectrode methods of manipulation. This model could be experimentally verified using
atomic force microscopy, and provide greater insight and to subtle differences encountered during the seal formation between
cells, cell structures, and various cell lines.
Visual feedback was used during SCE which provided an
effective indicator for SCE conditions and a suitable endpoint
of the automated sequence. Where the light-collecting, capacity
of the microscopy methods permits, future methods could visualize SCE using the molecules (e.g., DNA) attached directly
to fluorescent molecules indicating SCE. Alternatively, conventional methods [2], [3] of SCE without visual indicators could
be applied by modifying Stage 3, but lack visual feedback of
molecules entering the cell and is nonspecific where the variability observed in tSCE indicates SCE varies from cell to cell
(see Tables II, and III).
The methods in this study were designed to manipulate thin,
adhered cells, allowing cell analysis over extended durations.
The utility of the system could be increased by adapting similar
infrastructure such as holding microcapillaries [9] or mechanical
restraints [10], [12] to restrain and manipulate suspended cells
similar to sizes used in this study (hC < 10 μm). Alternatively,
chemical methods (e.g., Poly-D-lysine, Poly-L-lysine) may offer a simple method, where cells can be restrained sufficiently
on conventional glass or plastic substrates.
V. CONCLUSION
SCE has the potential to drive single cell research where
accuracy, repeatability, and higher-than-manual throughput are
required. Our system provides a versatile, automated solution
with capabilities of accurately localizing cytoplasmic or nucleic
SCE sites on single cells and inserting exogenous molecules
into cell features with micrometer thicknesses via SCE. Our
system exceeded the throughput of manual SCE by reducing
the cell processing rate to one-third (81 s/cell) in comparison to
rates reported in the literature (e.g., 480 s/cell [5] and 240 s/cell
[6]). In addition, we provided a visual feedback to monitor the
progress of SCE and reported a site-specific dependence in the
transfection ratio when targeting cytoplasmic SCE sites and
nucleic SCE sites.
The instrumentation and methods described are intended to
provide the framework for a powerful method of manipulation
to the scientific community. The engineered architecture is intended as a significant stepping stone in the development of
future designs to provide even greater capabilities and a broader
selection of methods not achievable by manual processes. While
a complete solution for automated SCE has been presented, it is

the opinion of the authors that the technology is only in its infancy and the true power of SCE has yet to be unleashed. Further
optimization of our routines, and maturation of automated SCE
in general, will inevitably improve the efficiency and latencies
of cell-processing reported in this study.

REFERENCES
[1] N. Blow, “Journeys across the membrane,” Nat. Methods, vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 305–309, Apr. 2009.
[2] K. Haas, W. C. Sin, A. Javaherian, Z. Li, and H. T. Cline, “Single-Cell
electroporation for gene transfer in vivo,” Neuron, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 583–
591, 2001.
[3] J. Rae and R. Levis, “Single-cell electroporation,” Pflügers Arch., vol. 443,
no. 4, pp. 664–670, Feb. 2002.
[4] P. Lovell, S. H. Jezzini, and L. L. Moroz, “Electroporation of neurons and
growth cones in Aplysia Californica,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 151,
no. 2, pp. 114–120, Mar. 2006.
[5] M. Wang, O. Orwar, and S. G. Weber, “Single-cell transfection by electroporation using an electrolyte/plasmid-filled capillary,” Anal. Chem.,
vol. 81, no. 10, pp. 4060–4067, May 2009.
[6] M. Tanaka, Y. Yanagawa, and N. Hirashima, “Transfer of small interfering
RNA by single-cell electroporation in cerebellar cell cultures,” J. Neurosci.
Methods, vol. 178, no. 1, pp. 80–86, 2009.
[7] E. Neumann, S. Kakorin, and K. Toensing, “Fundamentals of electroporative delivery of drugs and genes,” Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., vol. 48,
no. 1, pp. 3–16, 1999.
[8] K. Nolkrantz, C. Farre, A. Brederlau, R. L. Karlsson, C. Brennan,
P. S. Eriksson, S. G. Weber, and O. Orwar, “Electroporation of single
cells and tissues with an electrolyte-filled capillary,” Anal. Chem., vol. 73,
pp. 4469–4477, 2001.
[9] Y. Sun and B. J. Nelson, “Biological cell injection using an autonomous
microrobotic system,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 21, no. 10/11, pp. 861–868,
2002.
[10] H. Huang, D. Sun, J. K. Mills, and S. H. Cheng, “Integrated vision and
force control in suspended cell injection system: Towards automatic batch
biomanipulation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Robot. Autom, 2008, pp. 3413–
3418.
[11] Y. Xie, D. Sun, H. Y. G. Tse, C. Liu, and S. H. Cheng, “Force sensing
and manipulation strategy in robot-assisted microinjection on zebrafish
embryos,” IEEE Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1002–1010, Dec.
2011.
[12] W. Wang, X. Liu, D. Gelinas, B. Ciruna, and Y. Sun, “A fully automated
robotic system for microinjection of zebrafish embryos,” Plos One, vol. 2,
no. 9, p. e862, Sep. 2007.
[13] H. Huang, D. Sun, J. K. Mills, W. J. Li, and S. H. Cheng, “Visual-based
impedance control of out-of-plane cell injection systems,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 565–571, Jul. 2009.
[14] W. Wang, Y. Sun, M. Zhang, R. Anderson, L. Langille, and W. Chan, “A
system for high-speed microinjection of adherent cells,” Rev. Sci. Instrum.,
vol. 79, no. 10, p. 104302, 2008.
[15] C. Bae and P. Butler, “Automated single-cell electroporation,” BioTechniques, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 399–402, Oct. 2006.
[16] P. Kallio, T. Ritala, M. Lukkari, and S. Kuikka, “Injection guidance system
for cellular microinjections,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 26, pp. 1303–1313,
2007.
[17] K. Sakaki, N. Dechev, R. D. Burke, and E. J. Park, “Development of an
autonomous biological cell manipulator with single-cell electroporation
and visual servoing capabilities,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 8,
pp. 2064–2074, Aug. 2009.
[18] K. Sakaki, H. Esmaeilsabzali, N. Dechev, R. D. Burke, and E. J. Park,
“A generalized tip-membrane contact detection algorithm for automated
single cell electroporation using statistical process control,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 226–236, Apr. 2012.
[19] H. Esmaeilsabzali, K. Sakaki, N. Dechev, R. D. Burke, and E. J. Park,
“Machine vision-based localization of nucleic and cytoplasmic injection
sites on low-contrast adherent cells,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50,
no. 1, pp. 11–21, Sep. 2012.
[20] E. S. Page, “Continuous inspection schemes,” Biometrika, vol. 41,
pp. 100–115, Jun. 1954.
[21] M. Basseville and I. V. Nikiforov, Detection of abrupt change theory and
applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice–Hall, 1993.

SAKAKI et al.: LOCALIZED, MACROMOLECULAR TRANSPORT FOR THIN, ADHERENT, SINGLE CELLS

[22] J. O. Westgard, T. Groth, T. Aronsson, and C. H. De Verdier, “Combined
Shewhart-cusum control chart for improved quality control in clinical
chemistry,” Clin. Chem., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1881–1887, 1977.
[23] D. C. Montgomery, Introduction to Statistical Quality Control, 4th ed.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2001.
[24] P-1000 & P-97 Pipette Cookbook 2011. Sutter Instrument Company Novato, CA, USA, 2011.
[25] R. E. Campbell, O. Tour, A. E. Palmer, P. A. Steinbach, G. S. Baird,
D. A. Zacharias, and R. Y. Tsien, “A monomeric red fluorescent protein,”
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 99, no. 12, pp. 7877–7882, 2002.

Kelly Sakaki (M’09) received the Telecommunications Engineering Technologist Diploma degree from
the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2001, the B.Eng. degree in computer systems engineering, and the M.A.Sc. degree in
mechanical engineering from the University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada in 2005 and 2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in mechatronic systems
engineering from the School of Engineering Science,
Simon Fraser University, BC, Canada, in December
2012. He has recently joined the Brain Research Centre at the University of British columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, as a Postdoctoral Fellow.
His research interests include automation, electrical and mechanical design, signal processing, and machine vision. He is currently investigating novel
methods of single cell analysis and manipulation using robotics-assisted instrumentation, microfluidics and MEMS.

Hadi Esmaeilsabzali received the B.A.Sc. degree in
biomedical engineering from the School of Medicine,
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran, in 2003 and the M.A.Sc. degree in control engineering from the School of Electrical Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2006. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in mechatronic systems engineering from Simon Fraser University, BC,
Canada.
His research interests include immunomagnetic
cell manipulation, development of lab-on-a-chip bioMEMS for rare-cell detection, isolation, characterization and point-of-care testing devices, single-cell
biomanipulation, and machine vision applied to these areas.

Shabnam Massah received the B.Sc. degree in cell
and molecular biology (microbiology), from Azad
University of Karaj, Karaj, Iran, in 2006. She is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the
Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC, Canada.
Her research interests include understanding the
role of epigenetic modifications, specifically, DNA
methylation in regulation of gene expression. She is
also interested in identification of molecules that can
interpret or sense chromatin modifications, and maintain the normal or disease-related gene expression profiles.

3123

Gratien G. Prefontaine received the B.Sc. degree,
the M.Sc. degree and the Ph.D. degree in biochemistry in 1993, 1996, and 2001, respectively, all from
the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
From 2001 to 2008, he was engaged in Postdoctoral Research Training at the University of California, San Diego, USA, and he became an Assistant
Project Scientist in 2007. He is currently an Assistant
Professor in the Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon
Fraser University Burnaby, BC, Canada, and he is
also an Associate Member in the Faculty of Science,
Departments of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry as well as Biological Sciences. His research interests include gene regulation, DNA methylation, DNA
pyrosequencing, microarray technology, bacterial artificial chromosome recombination technology, and developmental biology.

Nikolai Dechev (M’04) received the B.A.Sc.,
M.A.Sc., and the Ph.D. degrees in 2004, all from
the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, in 1996, 1999, and
2004, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor in Mechanical Engineering at the University of Victoria,
Victoria, BC, Canada. His research interests include
biomedical systems design in the areas of advanced
hand prosthesis, implantable sensors and prosthesis
control, MEMS sensors, and robotic micromanipulation and automation technologies for MEMS and biological cells.
Dr. Dechev is a Member of the ASME.

Robert D. Burke received the B.Sc. (Hons.) degree,
and the Ph.D. degree in 1978, both from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, in 1974 and
1978, repectively.
He has been at the University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada since 1980, and is currently the
Chair of the Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology. His research interests include cellular and
developmental biology. He has published more than
100 journal papers in these areas.

Edward J. Park (M’03) received the B.A.Sc. degree
from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, and the M.A.Sc. and the Ph.D. degrees
from the University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, in
1996, 1999, and 2003, respectively, all in mechanical
engineering.
Previously, he was an Assistant Professor at the
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University
of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, from 2003 to 2008.
He is currently an Associate Professor of the School
of Mechatronic Systems Engineering at the Simon
Fraser University, Surrey, BC, Canada, and the Director of the Biomechatronic
Systems Laboratory. He is also an Associate Member of the Faculty of Health
Sciences. He has authored/coauthored more than 80 journal and conference
papers in these areas. His current research interests include biomechatronics
and biomedical technologies for life sciences, rehabilitation and medicine, and
mechatronics applied to next generation vehicular, robotic, and space systems.

