3074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Multistep Prediction of Physiological Tremor for
Surgical Robotics Applications
Kalyana C. Veluvolu∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, Sivanagaraja Tatinati, Sun-Mog Hong, Member, IEEE,
and Wei Tech Ang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Accurate canceling of physiological tremor is
extremely important in robotics-assisted surgical instruments/procedures. The performance of robotics-based hand-held
surgical devices degrades in real time due to the presence of phase
delay in sensors (hardware) and filtering (software) processes. Effective tremor compensation requires zero-phase lag in filtering
process so that the filtered tremor signal can be used to regenerate
an opposing motion in real time. Delay as small as 20 ms degrades
the performance of human–machine interference. To overcome this
phase delay, we employ multistep prediction in this paper. Combined with the existing tremor estimation methods, the procedure
improves the overall accuracy by 60% for tremor estimation compared to single-step prediction methods in the presence of phase
delay. Experimental results with developed methods for 1-DOF
tremor estimation highlight the improvement.
Index Terms—Autoregressive (AR), band limited multiple linear Fourier combiner (BMFLC), inertial sensors, Kalman filter,
multistep prediction, physiological motion, tremor.

I. INTRODUCTION
OBOTICS-ASSISTED surgical instruments/procedures
are increasingly playing an important role for biological
motion compensation [1]–[3] due to their robustness, high precision, and estimation accuracy [4]. With the aid of this robotic
technology, significant research was focused on compensation
of various biological motions like heart beat in intracardiac
surgery [1], [5], respiratory motion in treatment of lung tumor [2], pathological tremor [6], and physiological tremor [3],
[7]–[10].
Physiological tremor exists in all humans with amplitude
ranges between 50 and 100 μm in each principal axis and lies

R

Manuscript received December 19, 2012; revised March 24, 2013; accepted
May 9, 2013. Date of publication June 12, 2013; date of current version October 16, 2013. This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology Grants under 2011-0023999 and
20110013475). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ K. C. Veluvolu is with the School of Electronics Engineering, College of IT
Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Korea (e-mail:
veluvolu@ee.knu.ac.kr).
S. Tatinati and S.-M. Hong are with the School of Electronics Engineering,
College of IT Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701,
Korea (e-mail: tatinati@ee.knu.ac.kr; smhong@ee.knu.ac.kr).
W. T. Ang is with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: wtang@
ntu.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2264546

in the frequency range of 8–12 Hz [11], [12]. This tremor
leads to an intolerable imprecision of the surgical procedure
(e.g., vitroretinal surgery) which requires a positioning accuracy of about 10 μm [13]. The high level of manual accuracy
demanded by microsurgery restricts the number of qualified surgeons. Significant amount of research has been conducted on
tremor characteristics (pathological and physiological tremors)
and its real-time compensation with robotic procedures [6]–[8],
[14]–[17]. To retain the advantages possessed by the human
surgeons and to augment tip positioning accuracy, hand-held
robotic instruments were developed for compensation of physiological tremor in real time [9], [14], [18]. In these instruments,
filtering plays a vital role in attaining high accuracy. The filtered tremor signal from the sensed motion is used to generate
an opposing motion to compensate for the tremor motion in
real time. For effective tremor compensation, zero-phase lag is
required in the filtering process. Although linear filters are successful in filtering the tremor, they introduce phase delay into
the process [19]. In [20], it was shown that delay as small as
30 ms may degrade the performance in human–machine control
applications.
To overcome the inherent disadvantages of linear filters, several adaptive algorithms are developed. In [7], [14], and [15],
Fourier-series-based adaptive algorithms named as weighted
frequency Fourier linear combiner (WFLC) and band limited multiple linear Fourier combiner (BMFLC) are proposed.
In [21]–[23], the autoregressive (AR)-method-based tremor estimation methods are proposed. Comparative performance of
all zero-phase physiological tremor estimation methods can be
found in [7].
In robotics-assisted hand-held instruments, accelerometers
form the core part for tremor sensing due to its small size and
versatility [9]. Although adaptive tremor estimation introduces
no additional phase delay, real-time tremor compensation accuracy depends on several factors such as prefiltering, numerical
integration, noise, jerk, and drift. It will be later shown that a
phase delay of 16–20 ms is unavoidable for tremor compensation and this delay adversely effects the physiological tremor
cancellation.
Multistep prediction is popular where time delay is inevitable
or posteriori information is required [24]. Multistep prediction
has been successfully applied for several physiological motion
predictions [1], [23], [25] and time series forecasting [26], [27].
For compensation of heart beat in intracardiac surgery, multistep prediction was employed to avoid latency of 90 ms in the
procedure [1], [5]. In [1], WFLC with extended Kalman filtering (EKF) was employed for multistep prediction of heart beat.

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

VELUVOLU et al.: MULTISTEP PREDICTION OF PHYSIOLOGICAL TREMOR FOR SURGICAL ROBOTICS APPLICATIONS

Fig. 1.

3075

Block diagram for real-time implementation.

Adaptive radiotherapy requires the respiratory motion prediction to track and compensate for lung tumor [2], [25]. Recently,
in [23], multistep prediction was employed for pathological
tremor estimation based on EKF. Physiological tremor prediction is more challenging due to its low amplitude and highfrequency range (8–12 Hz) compared to respiratory and cardiac
motions that have low-frequency range (< 1 Hz).
In this paper, we analyze the suitability of multistep prediction
for real-time tremor estimation. Two existing methods BMFLC
and AR are modified to develop multistep prediction methods.
A study was conducted with the tremor data of five surgeons
and five novice subjects for various prediction lengths and various sampling frequencies. Several variants of these methods are
reviewed to check the suitability for real-time tremor compensation. The phase delay involved in the real-time tremor cancellation is analyzed. Experimental results for 1-DOF tremor
estimation in the presence of delay show good improvement
compared to earlier methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II,
tremor data collection and experimental setup employed are
first discussed. Later multistep-based methods are discussed.
Section III presents simulation and experimental results. Discussions are provided in Section IV. Section V concludes the
paper.
II. METHODS
In this section, we first discuss about the physiological tremor
data collection. The experimental setup employed for evaluation
of the method is also discussed together with the delay characteristics. Later, multistep prediction of physiological tremor with
BMFLC- and AR-based methods is discussed.
A. Physiological Tremor Data
Tremor recordings are performed through the micro-motion
sensing system (M 2 S 2 ). The resolution, minimum accuracy,
and sampling rate of the M 2 S 2 are 0.7μm, 98%, and 250 Hz,
respectively [28]. Several surgeons and novice subjects participated in this study. All subjects gave informed consent prior
to the test and reported no physical or cognitive impairments.
The subjects had their wrists rested on a small platform of the
(M 2 S 2 ) and were asked to take a comfortable seating position.
They had to hold the stylus between their index finger and thumb

in order to ensure that all subjects have similar grip across trials.
Two types of tasks are performed by subjects.
1) Stationary Task: In this task, subjects are instructed to
point the laser light at the center point of the platform
with the stylus provided for 30 s duration.
2) Tracing Task: In this task, subjects trace the circumference
of a circular path on the platform for 30 s, with the speed
that is realistic for surgical micromanipulation tasks.
Several trials were conducted with all the subjects under different magnification and force conditions. Subjects performed
two trials for each different setting with approximately 1 min
break in between settings. Sampling rate of 500 Hz is employed.
For more information about magnification and force conditions,
see [29]. Data of five healthy subjects and five surgeons, and six
trial data per subject are considered for analysis in this paper.
B. Experimental Setup and Latency
The block diagram representation for experimental setup and
filtering is shown in Fig. 1. Accelerometers (ADXL 203, Analog devices, USA) are employed to sense the motion. The
tremor-like motion is generated using a commercially available
nanopositioning stage (P-561.3CD from Physik Instrumente,
Germany) on which a physiological tremor compensation instrument (ITrem [28]) consisting of accelerometers is mounted. For
more information about placing accelerometers in the robotics
instrument, see [28].
The nanopositioning stage is driven in one axis to replicate
the tremor motion within 100 nm, the maximum range of the
stage. The orientation and accelerometer along with the direction motion are shown in the schematic diagram (see Fig. 1).
The voltage output from the accelerometer is acquired at 500 Hz
using a 16-bit data acquisition card (PD2-MF-150, United Electronic Industries, Inc, USA). QNX operating system is employed
for real-time implementation. Before the experiment, static calibration of the accelerometer is performed using a gravity value
of 9.81 m/s2 . The sensitivity value of the accelerometer obtained from the calibration is 980 mV/g. The voltage readings
acquired from accelerometer are converted to acceleration with
a quadratic function. Furthermore, the gravitational component
is subtracted from the measured acceleration.
The accelerometer contains an on-board low-pass filter; the
hardware filter time constant calculated from the step-response
is approximately 3 ms. Numerical integration is performed for

3076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

(a)

(a)
Fig. 3.

(b)

(a) Signal model. (b) Block diagram for multistep prediction.

the number of samples and sk is the input signal at instant k.
Based on RMS, %Accuracy is defined as
(b)
Fig. 2. Frequency response of fifth-order Butterworth bandpass filter. (a) Phase
response. (b) Input tremor signal (solid line) and delayed tremor signal due to
bandpass filtering (dotted line).
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE OF BMFLC-KF [7] IN THE PRESENCE OF PHASE DELAY

%Accuracy =

RMS(s) − RMS(e)
× 100
RMS(s)

where e is the prediction error between an actual signal and a
predicted signal.
It can be seen that a delay as small as 16–20 ms can adversely
affect the performance of the robotic instrument in canceling
the tremor in real time. To overcome this phase delay, multistep
prediction based on BMFLC and AR methods is developed in
this paper for tremor estimation.
C. Multistep Prediction With BMFLC (MS-BMFLC)

converting acceleration to position. After this stage, to separate
the tremulous motion from the voluntary motion and to remove
the unwanted integration drift and noise [30], a fifth-order Butterworth filter with passband 2–20 Hz is employed as shown in
the block diagram. The filter order and cutoff frequency need
to be chosen so that the filter removes unwanted low-frequency
drift significantly. The choice depends on the sensor noise level
and the frequency spectrum of the tremor signal.
This filtering stage is the main source for phase delay in real
time. For illustration, phase response of fifth-order Butterworth
bandpass filter with passband 2–20 Hz is shown in Fig. 2(a).
To highlight the phase delay, a bandpass-filtered tremor signal
and an original signal are shown in Fig. 2(b). Phase delay is frequency dependent and the actual phase delay depends on tremor
frequency characteristics. As dominant frequency of tremor lies
within the range of 8–12 Hz, an average 12–16 ms phase delay
is identified. Piezo-electric actuators are employed to generate
the tremor signal in opposite direction for active cancellation
and this stage requires 1 ms. Thus, a total of 16–20 ms phase
delay is unavoidable due to hardware and software filtering as
shown in Fig. 1.
In order to study the effect of phase delay on estimation accuracy, various delays are incorporated into the BMFLC-KF
method. Estimation accuracy for various phase delays with
single-step prediction is tabulated in Table I. To quantify the
performance, in this paper, we
the root mean square
 employ
k =m
(RMS) defined as RMS(s) = ( k =1 (sk )2 /m), where m is

To overcome the problems with tremor signals comprising
of multiple dominant frequencies, BMFLC [7] was recently
developed. To estimate the tremor signal in the predefined band
[ω1 − ωn ], a series comprising of sine and cosine components
are combined to form BMFLC
yk =

n


ar k sin(ωr k) + br k cos(ωr k)

(1)

r =1

where yk denotes the estimated signal at sampling instant k.
ar k and br k represent the adaptive weights corresponding to
the frequency ωr at instant k. Δω represents the step size in
the frequency band [ω1 − ωn ] division and n = |ω1 − ωn |/Δω.
The series only considers “n” fundamental frequencies in the
band.
The signal model employed for adaptive estimation is shown
in Fig. 3(a). sk represents the amplitude of the signal at the
kth sample. The model xk together with the adaptive weights
wk represents the time-varying model for the signal sk in the
state-space form as
sk = wkT xk + ek
wk +1 = wk + ηk

(2)
(3)

where ek and ηk are measurement noise and process noise,
respectively. The state-space representation for BMFLC can be
described in the form


[ sin(ω1 k) · · · sin(ωn k) ]T
xk =
(4)
[ cos(ω1 k) · · · cos(ωn k) ]T

VELUVOLU et al.: MULTISTEP PREDICTION OF PHYSIOLOGICAL TREMOR FOR SURGICAL ROBOTICS APPLICATIONS

3077

TABLE II
ADAPTATION SCHEMES


wk =

[ a1k

a2k

···

an k ]T

[ b1k

b2k

···

bn k ]T


.

(5)

When no priori information is available, the state dynamics
can be best described by a random walk model (3) [31]. Adaptive algorithms like least mean square (LMS) and Kalman filter
(KF) can be employed for adaptive estimation of state wk . For
amplitude adaptation with LMS, the adaptation scheme is provided in Table II. μ is the adaptive gain parameter that controls
the adaptation rate [32] for estimation of ŵk . With the assumption that ek and ηk are uncorrelated, zero-mean, Gaussian white
noise processes with covariances R and Q. The estimates for
state ŵk and the state error covariance Pk can be obtained recursively by KF [33] with proper initial conditions w0 and P0 .
The KF adaptation scheme is provided in Table II. Kk is the
Kalman gain vector. Although the premise of the noise may not
hold for the signal, the KF can provide the minimum meansquared error estimators within the class of linear estimators.
Employing LMS or KF, the estimated output yk and prediction
error k [shown in Fig. 3(b)] can be obtained as
yk = ŵkT xk

(6)

k = sk − yk .

(7)

In contrast to aforementioned, multistep prediction requires
prediction of the signal yk +h several samples ahead (say h
samples), based on its past observations sk , sk −1 . . ., as shown in
Fig. 3(b). The model is represented by the reference vector, and
the weights (ŵk ) represent the estimated adaptive parameters
(states). In BMFLC, the reference vector (xk ) comprises sine
and cosine components of predefined input frequencies. Hence,
the input reference can be accurately known for prediction.
Assuming adaptive weights to remain constant over prediction
length, an accurate multistep prediction can be obtained. With
the reference vector (xk +h ) accurately known at the time instant
k + h, the estimated parameters (weights) at the current sample
(ŵk ) can be employed to obtain multistep prediction for output
yk +h as
ŷk +h = ŵkT xk +h .

(8)

The model parameters of BMFLC used for the estimation
of tremor are amplitude weights (wk ) and the reference vector
(xk ). The block diagram representation for multistep prediction
with BMFLC is shown in Fig. 4. The amplitude of the signal h
samples ahead can be predicted as
ŷk +h = xTk +h ŵk +h
where

(9)

Fig. 4.

Multistep prediction with BMFLC.

Fig. 5.

Multistep prediction with the AR method.

1) ŵk +h = ŵk (amplitude weight vector (state vector) remains constant
for k to k + h samples);


[ sin(ω1 (k + h)) · · · sin(ωn (k + h)) ]T
2) xk +h =
.
[ cos(ω1 (k + h)) · · · cos(ωn (k + h)) ]T
Hereafter, multistep prediction-based BMFLC-LMS and
BMFLC-KF are referred as MS-BMFLC-LMS and MSBMFLC-KF, respectively.
D. Multistep Prediction With the AR model (MS-AR)
The AR model is a type of random process which is popular
for prediction of various types of natural phenomena. It is also
one of the linear prediction methods that is designed to predict
an output of a system based on the previous outputs. The AR
model of order M can be represented as AR(M ), described as
sk =

M


wi sk −i .

i=1

By denoting
wk = [ −w1

−w2

···

−wM ]T

xk = [ sk −1

sk −2

···

sk −M ]

the AR model can be represented in the state-space form (2),
(3). Adaptive algorithms both LMS and KF can be employed as
discussed in the previous section.
The AR model prediction is dependent on the delayed input vector xk and amplitude weights wk . Multistep prediction
scheme with the AR model is shown in Fig. 5. The amplitude
of the signal predicted at h samples ahead using the AR model

3078

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Performance analysis.

can be obtained as
ŷk +h = x̂Tk +h ŵk +h

(10)

where
1) ŵk +h = ŵk (the amplitude weight vector remains constant for k to (k + h) samples);
2) x̂k +l = [ ŷk −l−1 ŷk −l−2 · · · ŷk −l−M ] ; l = 1, 2, · · · , h (the
input vector x̂k is updated iteratively).
III. RESULTS
In this section, we analyze the performance of the proposed
multistep prediction methods through simulations and experiments. To quantify the performance, we employ %Accuracy as
defined in (1).
A. Performance Analysis
In this section, we present performance analysis of all methods through simulations for the data of ten subjects. We also include WFLC-LMS/KF methods for comparison. To accurately
analyze the performance in the presence of delay, we induce a
known delay into the process as shown in Fig. 6. A zero-phase
bandpass filter is employed to remove the voluntary motion. We
then analyze the comparative performance of all methods for
various prediction lengths and various sampling rates.
1) Parameter Selection: For adaptive estimation algorithms,
parameter selection and initialization can affect the estimation
accuracy. Parameter selection for BMFLC- and WFLC-based
methods is well documented. For more information, see [3], [7],
and [15]. For the AR model, optimal order selection and initialization depends on data characteristics. For the tremor data
collected in our study, Akakie information criterion (AIC) [34]
identified the third-order of the AR model as the optimal order.
Furthermore, to reduce the initial adaptation period required for
the weights of AR methods, analysis was conducted on steadystate weights for all the subjects. Results show that the variance
of the steady-state weights across all subjects and tasks is negligible. For the sake of initialization, we select a common set
of filter coefficients as w0 = {−2.88, −0.94, 2.83} to initialize
both the methods AR-LMS and AR-KF. Parameter selection
and initialization for all methods are tabulated in Table III.
2) Estimation Accuracy Versus Prediction Length: We
choose various prediction lengths [4 (2 samples), 8, 16, and
20 ms (ten samples)] for the tremor signal to analyze the performance of all methods. To quantify the performance, analysis is

conducted on the tremor data of ten subjects (five surgeons and
five subjects) with six trials/subject. The statistical results (mean
and variance) obtained for all the methods are shown in Fig. 7.
Results for different prediction lengths (4, 8, 16, and 20 ms) are
shown together with single-step prediction for comparison.
For all prediction lengths, KF-based methods outperform
its LMS counterparts. For single-step prediction methods
%Accuracy decreases as prediction length increases. With the
multistep prediction method, a good estimation accuracy can
be obtained for higher prediction lengths as shown in Fig. 7.
For example, the estimation accuracy obtained with AR-KF is
8 ± 3% for 20 ms ahead prediction, whereas with MS-AR-KF
the estimation accuracy increases to 81 ± 2%. MS-AR-KF and
MS-BMFLC-KF perform better than MS-WFLC-KF for higher
prediction lengths.
For illustration, the prediction errors for all methods for 20 ms
(ten samples) of prediction length for Subject #3 (tracing task)
are shown in Fig. 8. The tremor signal and the prediction error
obtained with BMFLC-KF for 20 ms is shown in Fig. 8(a) and
(b), respectively. The results obtained with multistep prediction
methods (MS-WFLC-KF, MS-BMFLC-KF, and MS-AR-KF)
are shown in Fig. 8(c)–(e). This clearly highlights the robustness
and suitability of the multistep prediction methods for tremor
prediction.
3) Estimation Accuracy Versus Sampling Rate: The number
of samples required for prediction is proportional to the sampling frequency employed; this indeed affects the prediction accuracy for high sampling frequencies. The optimal order for the
AR model is identified with AIC for different sampling frequencies. With 1000 Hz sampling frequency, AIC identified 32-order
as the optimal order for 16 and 20 ms prediction lengths. For the
rest of prediction lengths (4 and 8 ms), third order is identified
as optimal order for the AR model. Prediction accuracies obtained for various sampling frequencies for all multistep tremor
estimation methods are shown in Fig. 9. MS-BMFLC-KF accuracy remained constant irrespective of the sampling rate. For the
case of the MS-AR-KF method, estimation accuracy decreased
with increase of the sampling frequency.
4) Computational Complexity: For real-time tremor compensation in robotics instruments, computational complexity
also plays an important role in minimizing the delay. The computational complexity of adaptive algorithms mainly relies on
observation and state-space dimensions of the method [35]. The
computational complexity of KF is given by O(3ln2 ); l and n
are observation and state dimensions, respectively [35]. As error is a scalar quantity, the computational complexity of LMS is
given by O(N ), where N is the order of the filter. For the case
of WFLC and AR, prefiltering is required to remove the voluntary component in tremor. For real-time implementation of a
Butterworth N th-order filter, the number of operations required
is 2(2N + 1). Thus, a fifth-order filter will require 22 operations.
A comparative study is conducted on all the methods for computational complexity and the number of operations is tabulated
in Table IV. BMFLC-KF requires more operations compared to
other methods, whereas AR requires less number of operations.
Depending on the available memory and computational power,
the suitable method can be selected for real-time applications.

VELUVOLU et al.: MULTISTEP PREDICTION OF PHYSIOLOGICAL TREMOR FOR SURGICAL ROBOTICS APPLICATIONS

3079

TABLE III
METHODS AND PARAMETERS

(a)
Fig. 7.

(b)

(c)

Multistep prediction for various prediction lengths: (a) xBMFLC, (b) AR, and (c) WFLC. Representation is standard deviation around mean.

(a)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 9. Multistep prediction accuracy for various sampling frequencies and
various prediction lengths. (a) Prediction length 4 ms. (b) Prediction length
8 ms. (c) Prediction length 16 ms. (d) Prediction length 20 ms.

(d)
TABLE IV
COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY

(e)
Fig. 8. (a) Tremor signal (Subject #3, tracing task). (b) Prediction error with
single-step prediction for BMFLC-KF. (c)–(e) Prediction error during the multistep prediction with 20 ms (ten samples) of prediction length for WFLC-KF,
BMFLC-KF, and AR-KF.

B. Experimental Validation
In this section, we present the experimental results for
MS-AR-KF and MS-AR-LMS methods. Since BMFLC was

3080

Fig. 10.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Experimental procedure.

evaluated experimentally earlier [36] and as the performance
was similar to AR-based methods, we only evaluate AR methods experimentally in this section. In order to simulate the realtime estimation/cancellation scenario, we employ the procedure
shown in Fig. 10 for experimental validation. To include the delay caused by hardware low-pass filter at the beginning and delay
incurred at the cancellation end, a 4 ms delay is induced into the
procedure as shown in Fig. 10. To obtain the ground truth for
performance validation, we employ zero-phase bandpass filter
in offline. A zero-phase bandpass filter processes the data in
bidirections to remove the phase delay involved. As such, this
procedure can only be used for offline analysis.
As discussed earlier in Section II-B, the nanopositioning stage
is driven in one axis to replicate the tremor motion from the
subject as shown in Fig. 10. Experiments are conducted with
data of three subjects [S#1 (tracing task), S#2 (tracing task),
and S#4 (pointing task)] with two trials per subject. Parameters
and initial conditions for real-time experiments are similar to
simulation experiments.
For illustration, results obtained with the tremor data of subject #1 (tracing task) are shown in Fig. 11. The zero-phase
bandpass-filtered tremor signal is shown in Fig. 11(a). With
the bandpass filter stage employed, an average phase delay in
the range of 14–16 ms is introduced depending on the tremor
characteristics. Together with the induced delay 4 ms, ten samples ahead prediction (20 ms) is considered. With MS-AR-LMS
and MS-AR-KF prediction methods, accuracies obtained are
51 ± 2% and 66 ± 1%, respectively. For the sake of comparison, a single-step prediction error with AR-KF is shown in
Fig. 11(b). Due to 20 ms phase delay, the %Accuracy for singlestep prediction with AR-KF is 7 ± 1%. The results obtained for
all the three subjects show similar performance. The % accuracies obtained with MS-AR-LMS and MS-AR-KF methods
are 53 ± 4% and 64 ± 2%, respectively. Experimental results
show that MS-AR-KF improves prediction accuracy by over
60% compared to single-step prediction. Although 1-DOF cancellation is discussed in this paper, the proposed method can be
applied for the three axes separately and 3-DOF cancellation of
tremor can be achieved simultaneously.
IV. DISCUSSIONS
For separation of the voluntary motion and tremor motion, a
bandpass filter is employed in this paper. Although a bandpass

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
Fig. 11. Experimental results. (a) Tremor signal (Subject #1, tracing task).
(b) Prediction error with AR-KF. (c) Prediction error with MS-AR-LMS.
(d) Prediction error with MS-AR-KF.

filter introduces delay, it is also required to remove the drift
caused by the double integration of acceleration data to obtain
position. The bandpass filter serves for dual purpose in eliminating the voluntary motion and the integration drift. Recently,
in [6], a filter based on the ARMA model stochastic framework
was proposed for online filtering of the pathological tremor
and voluntary motion. Indeed, physiological and pathological
tremors have different etiology and exhibit different characteristics in both time and spectral domains [37]. So, the filter in [6]
is not suitable for the physiological tremor with multiple dominant frequency components.
BMFLC can filter the voluntary motion and tremor motion
without the need of bandpass filtering [7], whereas AR methods

VELUVOLU et al.: MULTISTEP PREDICTION OF PHYSIOLOGICAL TREMOR FOR SURGICAL ROBOTICS APPLICATIONS

and WFLC require an additional bandpass filtering stage (as
performed in this paper) for the removal of the voluntary motion
in the tremor signal. Further, these methods are not suitable
when accelerometers are involved for sensing position as double
integration is required. Comparatively, BMFLC can separate the
voluntary and involuntary motion and can provide the tremor
signal in the displacement domain without the need of numerical
integration [7].
Microsurgery involves a lot of complex gestures, e.g., a intentional sudden jerk caused by a surgeon is a huge challenge
for identification and filtering in real time. Moreover, when accelerometers are employed, unwanted drift is introduced due to
numerical integration. Although BMFLC does not require the
bandpass filter, due to presence of these high-frequency components and noise, a bandpass filter stage is always required
when accelerometers are employed. Furthermore, for applications where tremor characteristics are not known, BMFLC requires a large bandwidth (e.g., 2–20 Hz bandwidth as employed
in this paper) and this highly increases the computational complexity and affects the performance of BMFLC. Moreover, the
bandpass filter stage can filter the tremor within a small bandwidth and it improves the filtering accuracy of BMFLC- and
AR-based methods.
For the case of surgical devices, BMFLC-KF or AR-KF can
both be employed for tremor prediction. However, for applications that requires onboard tremor estimation, with limited
memory and processing speed, computational complexity can
severely affect the performance. For those kinds of applications,
AR-KF is more suitable.
For most of the subjects, 18–20 ms delay was identified as
most surgeons tremor is in the high-frequency range. Although
the phase delay caused by the bandpass filter can be time varying, an approximate constant phase lag can be estimated. Based
on this lag, the multistep prediction was employed. For the case
of time-varying delay, an adaptive multistep method that adjusts
to the time delay can also be implemented. This issue will be
discussed elsewhere.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, multistep prediction with BMFLC- and ARbased methods are developed for real-time tremor estimation
for active cancellation. The analysis conducted for multistep
prediction revealed that it largely improves the prediction accuracy. Comparatively, KF-based methods performed better compared to their LMS-based counterparts. WFLC-based methods
are not suitable for multistep prediction due to the presence of
single dominant frequency in the signal model. Both AR-KF
and BMFLC-KF show similar performance and are more suitable for the tremor applications. Results with various prediction
lengths and sampling frequencies highlight the robustness of the
proposed approach. With an accurate estimation of delay, good
estimation accuracy can be obtained for real-time applications.
REFERENCES
[1] S. G. Yuen, D. T. Kettler, P. M. Novotny, R. D. Plowes, and R. D. Howe,
“Robotic motion compensation for beating heart intracardiac surgery,”
Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 28, pp. 1355–1372, 2009.

3081

[2] J. R. S. Koste, J. P. Cuijpers, F. G. Geest, F. J. Lagerwaard, B. J. Slotman,
and S. Senan, “Verifying 4d gated radiotheraphy using time-integrated
electronic portal imaging: A phantom and clinical study,” Radiat. Oncol.,
vol. 2, pp. 1–9, 2007.
[3] C. N. Riviere, J. Gangloff, and M. Mathelin, “Robotic compensation of
biological motion to enhance surgical accuracy,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94,
no. 9, pp. 1706–1716, Sep. 2006.
[4] G. P. Moustris, S. C. Hiridis, K. M. Deliparaschos, and K. M. Konstantinidis, “Evolution of autonomous and semi-autonomous robotic surgical systems: A review of the literature,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput.
Assist. Surg., vol. 7, pp. 375–392, 2011.
[5] T. Ortmaier, M. Groger, D. H. Boehm, V. Falk, and G. Hirzinger, “Motion
estimation in beating heart surgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52,
no. 10, pp. 1729–1740, Oct. 2005.
[6] A. P. L. Bo, P. Poignet, and C. Geny, “Pathological tremor and voluntary
motion modeling and online estimation for active compensation,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 177–185, Apr. 2011.
[7] K. C. Veluvolu and W. T. Ang, “Estimation of physiological tremor from
accelerometers for real-time applications,” Sensors, vol. 11, pp. 3020–
3036, 2011.
[8] A. Ghorbanian, M. Zareinejad, S. M. Rezaei, H. Sheikhzadeh, and K. Bahestan, “A novel control architecture for physiological tremor compensation
in teleoperated systems,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg., 2012.
Available: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rcs.1436/abstract
[9] W. T. Ang, C. N. Riviere, and P. K. Khosla, “An active hand-held instrument for enhanced microsurgical accuracy,” Med. Image. Comput.
Comput. Assist. Interv., vol. 1935, pp. 878–886, 2000.
[10] W. T. Latt, U. X. Tan, C. Y. Shee, C. N. Riviere, and W. T. Ang, “Compact
sensing design of a handheld active tremor compenstaion instrument,”
IEEE Sens. J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1864–1871, Dec. 2009.
[11] R. J. Elbe and W. C. Koller, Tremor. U. MD, Ed. Baltimore, MD, USA:
John Hopkins Univ. Press, 1985.
[12] G. Deuschl, J. Raethjen, and M. Lindemann, “The pathophysiology of
tremor,” Muscle Nerve, vol. 24, pp. 716–735, 2001.
[13] S. Charles, “Computer integrated surgery: Technology and clinical
applications,” in Dexterity Enhancement for Surgery, R. H. Taylor, Ed.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1996.
[14] C. N. Riviere and W. T. Ang, and K. P. K., “Toward active tremor canceling in handheld microsurgical instruments,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.,
vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 793–800, Oct. 2003.
[15] J. A. Gallego, E. Rocon, J. O. Roa, J. C. Moreno, and J. L. Pons, “Realtime estimation of pathological tremor parameters from gyroscope data,”
Sensors, vol. 10, pp. 2129–2149, 2010.
[16] B. Carignan, J. F. Daneault, and C. Duval, “The organization of upper
limb physiological tremor,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 112, pp. 1269–
1284, 2012.
[17] J. G. Gonzalez, E. A. Heredia, T. Rahman, K. E. Barner, and G. R. Arce,
“Optimal digital filtering for tremor suppression,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 664–673, May 2000.
[18] W. T. Latt, K. C. Veluvolu, and W. T. Ang, “Drift-free position estimation of periodic or quasi-periodic motion using inertial sensors,” Sensors,
vol. 11, pp. 5931–5951, May 2011.
[19] A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schaefer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing.
Bergen Country, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2001.
[20] H. N. Jacobus, A. J. Riggis, C. J. Jacobus, and Y. Weinstein, “Implementation issues for telerobotic handcontrollers: Human-robot ergonomice,” in
Human Robot Interaction, M. Rahimi and W. Karwowski, Eds. London,
U.K.: Taylor & Francis, 1992.
[21] J. Zhang and F. Chu, “Real-time modeling and prediction of physiological
hand tremor,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Acoust., Speech,
Signal Process., 2005, pp. 645–648.
[22] B. C. Becker, H. Tummala, and C. N. Riviere, “Autoregressive modeling
of physiological tremor under microsurgical conditions,” in Proc. IEEE
30th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vancouver, Canada, 2008,
pp. 1948–1951.
[23] A. P. L. Bo, P. Poignet, F. Widjaja, and W. T. Ang, “Online pathological
tremor characterization using extended Kalman filtering,” in Proc. IEEE
30th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vancouver, Canada, 2008,
pp. 1753–1756.
[24] G. Favier and D. Dubois, “A review of k-step-ahead predictors,” Automatica, vol. 26, pp. 75–84, 1990.
[25] S. M. Hong, B. H. Jung, and D. Ruan, “Real-time prediction of respiratory
motion based on a local dynamic model in an augmented space,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 56, pp. 1775–1789, 2011.
[26] J. G. D. Gooijer and R. J. Hyndman, “25 years of time series forecasting,”
Int. J. Forecasting., vol. 22, pp. 443–473, 2006.

3082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

[27] H. Cheng, P. N. Tan, J. Gao, and J. Scripps, “Multistep-ahead time series
prediction,” Lecture Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 3918, pp. 765–774, 2006.
[28] W. T. Latt, U. X. Tan, A. Georgiou, A. E. Sidarta, C. N. Riviere, and
W. T. Ang, “A micro motion sensing system for micromanipulation tasks,”
Sens. Actuat. A-Phys., vol. 173, pp. 254–266, 2012.
[29] L. M. S. Eileen, W. T. Latt, W. T. Ang, T. C. Lim, C. L. Teo, and E. Burdet,
“Micromanipulation accuracy in pointing and tracing investigated with a
contact-free measurement system,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Annu. Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2009, pp. 3960–3963.
[30] Y. K. Thong, M. Woolfson, J. A. Crowe, B. R. Hayes-Gill, and
D. A. Jones, “Numerical double integration of acceleration measurements
in noise,” Measurement, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 73–92, Jul. 2004.
[31] S. Haykin, Adaptive Filter Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA:
Prentice-Hall, 2001.
[32] B. Widrow and S. D. Stearns, Adaptive Signal Processing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1985.
[33] M. P. Tarvainen, J. K. Hiltunen, P. O. Ranta-aho, and P. A. Karjalainen,
“Estimation of nonstationary EEG with Kalman smoother approach: An
application to event-related synchronization (ERS),” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 516–524, Mar. 2004.
[34] H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identification,” IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, Dec. 1974.
[35] H. Das, H. Zak, J. Johnson, J. Crouch, and D. Frambach,“Evaluation of
a telerobotic system to assist surgeons in microsurgery,” Comput. Aided
Surg., vol. 4, pp. 15–25, 1999.
[36] K. C. Veluvolu, W. T. Latt, and W. T. Ang, “Double adaptive bandlimited
multiple fourier linear combiner for real-time estimation/filtering of physiological tremor,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control., vol. 5, pp. 37–44,
Jan. 2010.
[37] J. Timmer, C. Gantert, G. Deuschl, and J. Honerkamp, “Characteristics of
hand tremor time series,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 70, pp. 75–80, May 1993.

Kalyana C. Veluvolu (S’03–M’06–SM’13) received
the B.Tech. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur,
India, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore, in 2006.
Since 2009, he has been with the College of IT Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Korea, where he is currently an Associate Professor. During 2006–2009, he was a Research Fellow
in Biorobotics Group, Robotics Research Center,
Nanyang Technological University. His current research interests include nonlinear estimation and filtering, sliding mode control, brain–computer interface,
biomedical signal processing, and surgical robotics.

Sivanagaraja Tatinati received the B.Tech. degree
in electronics and communication engineering from
Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur, India, in
2010. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree at Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Korea.
His current research interests include robotics
assisted medical instruments, adaptive filtering, application of control, and estimation algorithms in
biomedical engineering.

Sun-Mog Hong (S’86–M’89) received the B.S. degree from Korea Aerospace University, Seoul, Korea,
in 1978, and the M.S. degree from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejon,
Korea, in 1980, both in electronic engineering, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in aerospace engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA, in 1985 and 1989, respectively.
Since 1980, he has been with the School of Electronics Engineering, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Korea, where he is currently a Professor. His
current research interests include motion prediction for robotic surgical systems
and target tracking/track fusion in radar networks.

Wei Tech Ang (S’98–M’04) received the B.E. and
M.E. degrees in mechanical and production engineering from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 1997 and 1999, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in robotics from Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 2004.
Since 2004, he has been with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, where he is currently an Associate Professor and holds the appointment of Head
of Engineering Mechanics Division. His research
focuses on robotics technology for Biomedical applications, which include
surgery, rehabilitation and cell micromanipulation.

