3176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Validation of the Inverse Pulse Wave Transit Time
Series as Surrogate of Systolic Blood Pressure in
MVAR Modeling
Pedro Giassi, Jr.∗ , Sergio Okida, Maurı́cio G. Oliveira, and Raimes Moraes

Abstract—Short-term cardiovascular regulation mediated by
the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the autonomic
nervous system has been investigated by multivariate autoregressive (MVAR) modeling, providing insightful analysis. MVAR models employ, as inputs, heart rate (HR), systolic blood pressure
(SBP) and respiratory waveforms. ECG (from which HR series
is obtained) and respiratory flow waveform (RFW) can be easily sampled from the patients. Nevertheless, the available methods
for acquisition of beat-to-beat SBP measurements during exams
hamper the wider use of MVAR models in clinical research. Recent studies show an inverse correlation between pulse wave transit
time (PWTT) series and SBP fluctuations. PWTT is the time interval between the ECG R-wave peak and photoplethysmography
waveform (PPG) base point within the same cardiac cycle. This
study investigates the feasibility of using inverse PWTT (IPWTT)
series as an alternative input to SBP for MVAR modeling of the
cardiovascular regulation. For that, HR, RFW, and IPWTT series
acquired from volunteers during postural changes and autonomic
blockade were used as input of MVAR models. Obtained results
show that IPWTT series can be used as input of MVAR models,
replacing SBP measurements in order to overcome practical difficulties related to the continuous sampling of the SBP during clinical
exams.
Index Terms—Autonomic blockade, cardiovascular control,
closed-loop system identification, multivariate autoregressive
model (MVAR).

I. INTRODUCTION
ONTROL mechanisms involved in the maintenance of
the cardiovascular homeostasis have been investigated to
characterize and quantify their role in health and disease [1]. The
sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the autonomic

C

Manuscript received March 4, 2013; revised May 17, 2013; accepted June
14, 2013. Date of publication June 21, 2013; date of current version October
16, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Brazilian Research Council
(CNPq). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ P. Giassi, Jr. is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis 88040-900, Brazil (e-mail:
pedro.giassi@eel.ufsc.br).
S. Okida is with the Department of Electronics, Federal University of Technology of Paraná, Ponta Grossa 84016-210, Brazil (e-mail: sergiookida@
utfpr.edu.br).
M. G. Oliveira is with the Medical School Hospital, Federal University
of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis 88040-900, Brazil (e-mail: magool@brturbo.
com.br).
R. Moraes is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis 88040-900, Brazil (e-mail:
raimes@eel.ufsc.br).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2270467

nervous system (ANS) are the main responsible for the cardiovascular short-term regulation. They keep the arterial blood
pressure (ABP) within a narrow range by modulating, among
others, the heart rate (HR) and peripheral vascular resistance;
the unbalance of their functions is associated to several diseases such as hypertension, neurocardiogenic syncope, congestive heart failure, and sudden cardiac death [2], [3].
The autonomic regulatory activity may be indirectly observed
from the analysis of the respiratory flow waveform (RFW), HR,
and ABP. Time and frequency-domain techniques have been
applied to these physiological signals to obtain a noninvasive
assessment of the sympathetic and parasympathetic activities as
well as their interactions to maintain the homeostasis [4], [5].
Among these techniques, cardiovascular models have provided
insightful views of the autonomic regulation.
Open-loop and closed-loop models have been used to study
the cardiovascular regulation during neurocardiogenic syncope
[6], postural changes, and pharmacological blockade [5], [7].
These investigations have shown that system identification techniques allow the assessment of the ANS in such scenarios, being potential tools for diagnosis and follow-up of cardiovascular
diseases.
Multivariate autoregressive (MVAR) modeling is a mathematical method that describes the outputs of a system as a linear
combination of its previous values and other inputs, added to
a prediction error [8]. Cardiovascular MVAR models employ
HR, systolic blood pressure (SBP), and RFW as inputs and outputs such that their current values can be suitably estimated.
The obtained equations allow a better understanding of their
interactions during a given clinical context. ECG (from which
the HR series is obtained) and RFW can be easily and noninvasively sampled from the patients. Nevertheless, the wider use of
cardiovascular models in clinical research is hampered by the
requirement of continuous SBP acquisition. The beat-to-beat
fluctuations of SBP may be registered invasively (catheter tip
pressure transducer inserted into the radial or brachial artery)
and noninvasively (inflatable finger cuff/Finapress or arterial
tonometry) [9]. Due to health risks, intra-arterial recordings are
not usually carried out in routine clinical exams, such as the
tilt test; besides, it is not suitable for studies involving children, pregnant women or severely ill patients [10]. Noninvasive
methods overcome the aforementioned aspects, but they are
generally expensive, cumbersome, and, currently, not available
in many clinical facilities. It has also been reported that their
measurements are not very accurate when compared to invasive
measurements [11], [12].

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

GIASSI, Jr. et al.: VALIDATION OF THE INVERSE PULSE WAVE TRANSIT TIME SERIES AS SURROGATE OF SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE

Recent studies have investigated the relation between the
pulse wave transit time (PWTT) and arterial pressure. The
PWTT is the time interval between the ECG R-wave peak and
the infrared photoplethysmography waveform (PPG) base point
within the same cardiac cycle. The PWTT series is the set of
these measurements for consecutive heart beats. Payne et al. [12]
studied the association between PWTT series and intra-ABP under different vascular tones (modified by means of vasoactive
drugs). Despite concluding that the PWTT series is unreliable
as an indirect measurement of ABP, their findings showed an
inverse correlation between PWTT series and SBP fluctuations,
even under the effects of pharmacological agents. As MVAR
modeling is related to the interactions among physiological signals fluctuations, SBP measurements may be replaced by such
indirect index of SBP fluctuations. Therefore, the inverse of the
PWTT series (IPWTT = 1/PWTT) is a potential candidate for
SBP surrogate in MVAR modeling, dispensing the constraint of
invasive beat-to-beat SBP measurements in clinical research.
This study investigates the feasibility of using IPWTT series
as an alternative input to invasive SBP measurements in MVAR
modeling of the cardiovascular regulation.
For that, IPWTT series acquired from volunteers during postural changes and autonomic blockade were used as inputs of
MVAR models and the results obtained are compared to those of
studies that employed invasive SBP measurements. The comparison shows that MVAR modeling using IPWTT series as input
has similar results, overcoming practical difficulties related to
the continuous sampling of the SPB during clinical exams.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
First, this section briefly describes the system used to acquire
the physiological signals from volunteers during two different
experimental protocols: postural change and autonomic blockade (approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Federal
University of Santa Catarina (UFSC); Process number: 529).
Next, each experimental protocol is described.
Afterward, the signal processing techniques and the MVAR
model used to assess the cardiovascular regulation based on
the IPWTT series are detailed. Indices and statistical tools to
analyze the obtained results are also presented.
A. Data Acquisition System
Using a portable device developed in this laboratory [13],
ECG, RFW, and PPG were continuously recorded from each
volunteer. The ECG was acquired using Ag-AgCl electrodes on
the thorax (lead II), being amplified and filtered (bandwidth:
0.5–100 Hz). The RFW was sampled with a circuit based on
thermal anemometry. For that, a bead NTC thermistor (QTMB16C3—Quality Thermistor) belonging to a Wheatstone bridge
was positioned ahead of the volunteer nostril; the airflow produced voltage imbalance of the bridge output that was amplified and filtered (bandwidth: 0–6 Hz). To sample the PPG, an
infrared light emitting diode (λ = 850 nm) and a photodiode
(OPT101—Burr-Brown) placed on opposite faces of the volunteer’s finger were used; they detect the wavelength attenuation
produced by the blood perfusion and other tissues, correspond-

3177

ing to the PPG waveform that was amplified and filtered (bandwidth: 0.26–15 Hz). These three waveforms were sampled by a
12-bit-resolution ADC at the rate of 1000 SPS and transmitted
to a laptop computer via RF (Bluetooth) where they were stored.
Details of the electronic circuits and software to visualize and
store the signals in the laptop are given elsewhere [13].
B. Experimental Protocol
Seventeen subjects took part in the experimental protocols
(described later). They were not taking any medication and were
also instructed to avoid alcohol and caffeine consumption on the
same day of the recordings. The subjects initiated each respiratory cycle guided by a visual metronome that presented, on
the laptop screen, a pulse (inspiratory trigger mark) at irregular
periods (established according to the Poisson distribution). The
respiratory periods ranged from 1 to 15 s with a mean interval
of 4 s. Such breathing pattern provides a respiratory signal with
a broad frequency bandwidth (below 0.5 Hz) that allows more
reliable system identification [14]. Each subject comfortably
controlled the breathing volume throughout the experiment to
preserve normal ventilation [15].
1) Postural Changes: Twelve healthy nonsmoking volunteers (2 women and 10 men; age: 20–43 years, median 28.75)
took part in this study. No subject had history of cardiopulmonary disease.
The experimental protocol proposed by Saul et al. [15] was
followed. Briefly, recordings were carried out from the volunteers between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. in a room at 24 ◦ C, 2–4 h after
the last meal. The signals (ECG, PPG, and RFW) were recorded
from all volunteers for 6 min at two different postures: supine
and standing. There was an interval of at least 5 min between
the two recordings sessions to allow hemodynamic recovery and
avoid transient nonstationarities.
2) Autonomic Blockade: All recordings took place at a surgical room at the Medical School Hospital, UFSC; 6 min of
signals (ECG, PPG, and RFW) were acquired from a total of
five volunteers (one woman and four men; age: 26–46 years,
median 32) in supine posture before and after autonomic blockade.
The autonomic regulatory function was obstructed by means
of a combination of the parasympathetic blocker atropine and
the sympathetic blocker esmolol. Esmolol, a cardioselective beta
receptor blocking agent, was used instead of propranolol (more
often employed in similar studies) due to its rapid onset and short
action duration [16]. Bolus doses of atropine (0.01 mg/kg) were
administered intravenously by an infusion pump in consecutive
intervals of 3 min until there was no further change of HR,
characterizing the parasympathetic blockade, as described by
Jose and Taylor [17]; the procedure was then repeated using
esmolol (1 mg/kg) to obtain total autonomic blockade. For two
volunteers, the blocking agents were administered in reverse
order.
C. Signal Processing of the Input Series
Digital FIR filters were applied to the acquired signals in order
to further attenuate the interfering signals (stopband rejection

3178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 2. MVAR model used to characterize the short-term cardiovascular control mechanisms. The circles stand for the system inputs and outputs (HR,
IPWTT, and RFW series); the arrows represent the transfer relations among
them. The errors (e1 , e2 , and e3 ) resulting from the estimation processes are
also depicted.

Fig. 1. Examples of RR-interval measurement and PWTT measurement (time
interval between the R-wave peak and the PPG base point that corresponds to
the intersection of the tangent through the steepest part of the PPG slope with
its baseline).

below –40 dB). The ECG, PPG, and RFW bandwidths were
limited by the digital filters to 0.5–40, 0.8–10, and 0–2 Hz,
respectively.
The R-waves of the ECG were detected based on the algorithm presented in [18]. Next, the RR intervals were automatically measured to generate the HR series that was interpolated
at 1.5 SPS by means of cubic spline [19], [5], [7].
The PWTT is the time interval between the R-wave peak and
the PPG base point located within the same cardiac cycle (see
Fig. 1). The PPG base point of each cardiac cycle was identified
as proposed in [20]; it corresponds to the intersection of the
tangent through the steepest part of the PPG slope (determined
by the first derivative peak) with its baseline. The IPWTT series
consists of the inverse of each PWTT measurement carried out
for the consecutive cardiac cycles; it is also interpolated at 1.5
SPS.
The RFW was decimated to 1.5 SPS such that all the three
series were sampled at the same rate.
The three series were detrended as proposed in [21]; then, HR
and IPWTT series were normalized by their respective mean
values; the RFW was normalized by its standard deviation [22].
All data are assumed to be stationary, since the records were
made over short-time periods and during stable experimental
conditions [3].
D. System Identification Procedure
Approximately 6 min of normalized HR, IPWTT, and RFW
series were used as inputs to the closed-loop MVAR model
sketched in Fig. 2. This closed-loop model is based on simple
assumptions regarding the physiological couplings among the
variables that involve feedforward and feedback mechanisms

[23]. Each path is a parametric black box to be identified from
the data.
The MVAR model is described by (1)–(3). The HR and
IPWTT sequences are represented as a linear function of its
own previous values, instantaneous and previous values of the
two other variables, and a prediction error sequence called estimation noise [24]. The respiration is an exogenous input, not
being affected by the HR or SBP (replaced here by the IPWTT);
therefore, the RFW sequence depends only on its previous values, being also associated to an estimation noise:
HR [n] = −

p


a11 [i] HR [n − i] +

i=1

+

p


p


a12 [i] IPWTT [n − i]

i=s12

a13 [i] RFW [n − i] + e1 [n]

(1)

i=s13
p
p


IPWTT [n] = −
a22 [i] IPWTT [n−i] +
a21 [i]HR [n−i]
i=1

+

p


i=s21

a23 [i] RFW [n − i] + e2 [n]

(2)

i=s23

RFW [n] = −

p


a33 [i] RFW [n − i] + e3 [n]

(3)

i=1

where n is the discrete time index, p is the model order, sxy
corresponds to the initial values of the delays between the x
input and the y output; e1 , e2 , and e3 are the prediction errors
of the estimation processes; a11 , a22 , and a33 are the autoregressive (AR) coefficients vectors of the HR, IPWTT, and RFW
series, respectively. The moving average (MA) coefficients vectors of the model are given by: a12 that stands for the autonomic
mediated effects of the SBP fluctuations on the HR variability
(IPWTT→HR), that is, the baroreflex feedback; a21 quantifies
the mechanical effects of the HR on the SBP (HR→IPWTT);
a13 represents the respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RFW→HR)
and a23 corresponds to the direct mechanical effects of the respiration on the SBP (RFW→IPWTT) [25].

GIASSI, Jr. et al.: VALIDATION OF THE INVERSE PULSE WAVE TRANSIT TIME SERIES AS SURROGATE OF SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE

The modulation of the HR by the breathing is named respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA); the RR intervals decrease during
inspiration and increase during expiration. Mediated by central
nervous mechanisms, HR increase may precede the inspiratory onset [26]. This noncausal coupling requires an adjustment
in the model, achieved by making s13 (RFW→HR) equal to
–2 [19]. The fast and intrabeat coupling HR→IPWTT and the
causal influence IPWTT→HR are taken into account by making
s21 equal to 0 and s12 equal to 1 [27], [25].
In this study, the initial orders of the MVAR coefficients were
determined by means of the Rissanen’s minimum description
length (MDL) criterion [28]
  log N


[p] +
pd2
(4)
MDL [p] = log 
N
where N is the samples 
number, p is the model order, d is the
number of variables, and [p] is the prediction error covariance
matrix of the system [29].
Next, the linear dependent and statistically nonsignificant coefficients contained in the initial model (estimated MDL order) were removed using the vector optimal parameter search
(VOPS) method, retaining only the true model coefficients [30].
This method allows finding the significant coefficients of the
model even when the variables are severely contaminated by
noise.
The model coefficients were identified by using the least
squares method [29]. A posteriori model validation was carried out by analyzing the whiteness and the uncorrelation of the
prediction errors (residual ex ) [27], [29].
E. Indices for Analyzing the Results
The impulse response characterizes the behavior of a linear
time-invariant system [31]. In the MVAR modeling context,
the impulse response quantitatively describes the transfer relation between the coupled variables [5]. Therefore, the impulse
responses obtained will be qualitatively and quantitatively compared to those obtained by other researchers that used the SBP
as input.
For the quantitative analysis of the impulse responses, two indices proposed in [5] were computed: the peak amplitude (PA)
and the characteristic time (CT). These indices have been widely
used to quantify the parasympathetic activity and sympathetic–
parasympathetic balance during short-time cardiovascular regulation [5], [22]. These parameters are given by
PA =

|min [h (t)]| for IPWTT → HR impulse response
max [h (t)] for other impulse responses

CT =

+∞
t |h (t)| dt
∫−∞
+∞
∫−∞ |h (t)| dt

where h(t) is the impulse response function.
F. Statistical Analysis
The PA and CT indices obtained for each trial situation have
Gaussian distributions according to the Shapiro–Wilk test. Comparison of the indices between the different postures or blockade
conditions was carried out with the two-tailed Students’s t-test

3179

Fig. 3. Six minutes of representative HR, IPWTT, and RFW series (sampled
at 1.5 SPS) obtained from a supine subject breathing at a random pace before
administration of autonomic blockers. The coherence (right panels) stresses the
significant (>0.5) linear relation between their fluctuations for a relative wide
bandwidth (n.u.: normalized units).

for paired observations. Differences were considered significant
for p less than 0.05.
III. RESULTS
This section contains the results of the MVAR modeling using
the IPWTT as input for the two experimental protocols; the
model orders, the impulse responses and the quantitative indices
(PA and CT) are presented.
A. Postural Change
Fig. 3 depicts representative examples of detrended and normalized HR, IPWTT, and RFW discrete-time sequences obtained from a subject in supine posture; their squared coherence
functions (see Fig. 3, right side) stress the wide bandwidth correlation between their fluctuations driven by the random respiratory pattern (Poisson distribution [14]).
The initial model orders obtained with the MDL criterion for
the 12 subjects during the supine and standing postures were
[mean ± standard error (SE)]: 5.75 ± 0.57 and 5.00 ± 0.63,
respectively. Thereafter, the VOPS method was used to remove
the nonsignificant coefficients from each transfer function. To
the specific parameter a33 , the model order was made equal
to 10, as suggested in [23] for single-channel black box models. Table I shows the average model orders for each transfer
function.
After reestimating the coefficients of the MVAR model using the VOPS orders by the generalized least squares method,
all impulse responses resulting from the interactions between
each pair of variables of the proposed model were calculated.
Fig. 4 depicts a typical set of impulse responses, obtained from
a subject in supine posture during the control stage, containing
the four coupling mechanisms involved in the short-time cardiovascular regulation. Each impulse response is presented in
normalized unit, expressing its magnitude as fractional variation
around the mean values of the coupled variables [4].
Fig. 5 shows the averaged impulse responses curves (mean ±
SE) from the models of the 12 subjects in the supine and standing
postures (active ANS control). Table II presents the variations of

3180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

TABLE I
MODEL ORDERS OBTAINED WITH THE VOPS ALGORITHM FOR DIFFERENT EXPERIMENTS

Fig. 4. Typical set of impulse responses obtained from the MVAR model of a supine subject during the control stage. They describe the coupling mechanisms
involved in the short-time cardiovascular regulation (horizontal axis: time (s); vertical axis: normalized units).

the PA and CT indices (mean ± SE) due to the postural change,
obtained from the averaged impulse responses.
B. ANS Blockade
The initial model orders obtained with the MDL criterion for
the five subjects during control and blockade were (mean ± SE):
4.20 ± 0.20 and 4.60 ± 0.40, respectively. Table I presents the
average model orders for each coefficients set after applying the
VOPS.

Fig. 6 shows the averaged impulse response curves (mean ±
SE) from the models of the five subjects in the supine posture
before (control stage) and after total autonomic blockade (atropine + esmolol). Table III presents the alterations, due to the
autonomic blockade, of the PA and CT indices (mean ± SE)
calculated from the averaged impulse responses.
In Fig. 7, two sets of impulse responses obtained from subject
1 in supine position during esmolol blockade and from subject
2 in standing posture during atropine blockade are presented.

GIASSI, Jr. et al.: VALIDATION OF THE INVERSE PULSE WAVE TRANSIT TIME SERIES AS SURROGATE OF SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE

3181

TABLE II
PA AND CT MEASURED FROM THE IMPULSE RESPONSES OF THE MVAR
MODELS: SUPINE VERSUS STANDING

Fig. 5. Impulse responses obtained from subjects in supine (left panels) and
standing (right panels) postures. The thick line is the averaged impulse response;
the shaded region corresponds to the standard error.

These two conditions represent pure vagal and pure sympathetic
states, respectively [15], and are herein presented to be compared
to the waveforms obtained in a previous work [5].
IV. DISCUSSION
This section presents the analysis of the system identification
results, describing the associations among HR, IPWTT, and
RFW series according to the model of Fig. 2.
A. General Observations on the Impulse Response Waveforms
The modeling results of all experiments corresponded to the
expected physiological responses. A typical set of impulse responses obtained from a supine subject not submitted to drugs
is shown in Fig. 4. Observations about the physiological activity drawn from these waveforms reveal the relations between
each pair of variables [32]. For a better understanding of the
results, descriptions of the impulse responses based on previous
works [5], [22] are given.

The RFW→HR impulse response represents the modeled
HR response to the inspiratory effort (impulse). It depicts a
fast increase of HR, followed by a transient decrease below the
baseline value, returning gradually to the baseline. This response
behavior characterizes the respiratory modulation of the HR,
known as RSA. The HR rise precedes the onset of inspiration,
that is, the HR anticipates the respiratory activity, exposing that
the coupling between respiratory and HR is mediated by central
nervous mechanisms [26].
The RFW→IPWTT impulse response characterizes the mechanically mediated coupling between respiration and SBP. In
response to inspiration, the SBP has an initial decrease followed
by a small and fast increase. This behavior reflects the fluctuations of the intrathoracic vessels and heart chambers filling
due to the intrathoracic pressure variation during the respiratory
cycle [33].
The baroreflex control is represented by the IPWTT→HR
impulse response; there is a fast HR decrease in response to
a transient SBP raise, then returning to the baseline. This behavior reflects the fast negative feedback response due to the
autonomic baroreflex that contributes to keep the ABP within
the physiological range.
The HR→IPWTT impulse response shows a SBP rising due
to a HR increase, followed by a slow return to the baseline. This
behavior represents the circulatory mechanics that comprises
the contractile properties of the heart and peripheral vasculature
resistance.

3182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

TABLE III
PA AND CT MEASURED FROM THE IMPULSE RESPONSES OF THE MVAR
MODELS: CONTROL VERSUS DOUBLE BLOCKADE

Fig. 6. Impulse responses obtained from subjects before (left panels) and after
double autonomic pharmacological blockade (right panels). The thick line is the
averaged impulse response; the shaded region corresponds to the standard error.

All these impulse response waveforms are similar to those
obtained by other researchers that employed SBP in their models
[5], [32].
B. Postural Change Indices
For healthy individuals, a postural change from supine
to standing increases the sympathetic tone and inhibits the
parasympathetic activity [34]. This physiological behavior was
used to assess the validity of the responses of the proposed
model.
The pure vagal and pure sympathetic states (see Fig. 7) stress
the different actions of the cardiovascular control. The PA and
CT changes associated, respectively, to the parasympathetic activity and to the sympathetic–parasympathetic balance [5] denote the expected tonus fluctuations of the autonomic activity of
each state. Thus, the shift from parasympathetic-dominant to the
sympathetic-dominant cardiovascular control resulted from the
postural change (see Fig. 5) can be detected by the PA and CT
indices. Fig. 8 compares the PA and CT measurements obtained
for the two postures (upper half) and between control and ANS

Fig. 7. Two sets of impulse responses obtained from subject 1 in supine
position during esmolol blockade (solid lines) and from subject 2 in standing
posture during atropine blockade (dashed lines) corresponding to pure vagal
and pure sympathetic states, respectively.

blockade (bottom half); the indices trends are similar to those
of previous works [5], [22].
The RFW→HR (RSA) and IPWTT→HR (baroreflex) impulse responses obtained from the supine and standing postures
have similar form. Nevertheless, for the standing posture, there
is significant reduction of PA due to vagal withdrawal and significant CT increase associated to higher sympathetic activity.
The contribution of these two factors raise the sympathetic/
parasympathetic ratio as expected for such postural change [5].

GIASSI, Jr. et al.: VALIDATION OF THE INVERSE PULSE WAVE TRANSIT TIME SERIES AS SURROGATE OF SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE

3183

Fig. 8. (Left panels) PA and (right panels) CT indices calculated from the impulse responses of the subjects during supine and standing postures (upper panels)
as well as during control and double blockade states (bottom panels).

When compared to the baroreflex and RSA, the HR→IPWTT
impulse response had an opposite behavior. It was observed that
the PA rose and the CT decreased related to alpha and beta
sympathetic predominance during the standing posture [3].
The RFW→IPWTT impulse response presented a small
PA increase and a small CT reduction, that is, nonsignificant
changes. These findings are related to the mechanical influence
of the respiration on the SBP that is not modified by postural
changes.
C. Control Versus ANS Blockade Indices
The sensitivity of the model fed with the IPWTT to identify
changes of the cardiovascular control was assessed by comparing the impulse responses of five subjects before (control) and
after total ANS blockade, as previously carried out in [5].
As expected, the impulse responses related to the baroreflex (IPWTT→HR) and the RSA (RFW→HR) were practically
abolished during the ANS blockade as well as their PAs (see
Fig. 8); the CTs presented a significant reduction. These findings were expected since both control mechanisms are mediated
by the ANS.
During the double blockade, the PA and CT indices of the
HR→IPWTT raised significantly due to α-sympathetic activity increase (not influenced by esmolol) that occurs to adjust
the peripheral resistance and the systemic venous volume. This
behavior stresses the role of the α-sympathetic branch of the
nervous system to maintain the cardiovascular homeostasis.
From control to ANS blockade state, the average
RFW→IPWTT impulse response had small PA and CT changes.
These variations are not significant and may be related to bronchoconstriction associated to the esmolol infusion or to the noncompliance of the subject to the random breathing rate, as outlined in [5].
D. Limitations of the Study
In this study, it would be ideal to compare the modeling results
obtained with the IPWTT series to those using the SBP series.
Nevertheless, the invasive acquisition of the SBP by means of a

pressure-tip catheter (gold standard) would produce discomfort
and health risks to the volunteers. Therefore, the results obtained
with the IPWTT were compared to those previously published
that used SBP series as input [5], [22].
The used MVAR model describes the transfer relations among
the physiological variables HR, SBP, and RFW, allowing a better understanding of their interactions during the short-term
cardiovascular regulation. However, due to the complexity of
their couplings, the transfer relations lumps different physiological mechanisms. For instance, the HR → IPWTT transfer
relation lumps the mechanical influences of the HR on the ABP
(Starling and Windkessel effects), Mayer waves and baroreflex
control on vessels; the IPWTT → HR block lumps central nervous oscillations and baroreflex directed to the sinus node [35]
as well as the cardiopulmonary and arterial contributions of the
baroreflex [36]. It should be mentioned that more elaborated
models have been proposed to disentangle further the intricate
mechanisms of the cardiovascular regulation [23].
V. CONCLUSION
The continuous acquisition of SBP measurements during routine clinical exams can be really difficult since cumbersome devices are required. For instance, postural change of a patient
connected to different equipments during tilt test may preclude
the acquisition of good quality signals.
This study investigated the feasibility of using the IPWTT
series as input of MVAR models, replacing the SBP series.
For that, system identification techniques were applied to data
obtained from two different experimental protocols, postural
change and pharmacological ANS blockade.
The impulse responses that describe the physiological interactions among HR, IPWTT, and RFW are similar to those
obtained for other researchers who used SBP. Besides, the impulse responses of models fed with the IPWTT series had PA
and CT indices with similar behaviors when compared to those
obtained with SBP.
We conclude that the IPWTT series can be used as noninvasive
SBP surrogate input of MVAR models in order to extract useful

3184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

clinical information that may assist the diagnosis and follow-up
of cardiovascular regulation as pointed out by several research
groups.
The required signals for the MVAR modeling of the cardiovascular regulation can be more easily acquired during clinical
exams, using portable and low-cost devices such as the one described in [13]. Therefore, this study may contribute for a more
intensive investigation of cardiovascular diseases by means of
system identification techniques during routine clinical exams.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Batzel, G. Baselli, R. Mukkamala, and K. H. Chon, “Modeling and disentangling physiological mechanisms: Linear and nonlinear identification
techniques for analysis of cardiovascular regulation,” Philos. Trans. A.
Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 367, no. 1892, pp. 1377–1391, 2009.
[2] A. Malliani, M. Pagani, F. Lombardi, and S. Cerutti, “Cardiovascular
neural regulation explored in the frequency domain,” Circulation, vol. 84,
pp. 482–492, 1991.
[3] X. Xiao, T. J. Mullen, and R. Mukkamala, “System Identification: A multisignal approach for probing neural cardiovascular regulation,” Physiol.
Meas., vol. 26, pp. R41–R71, 2005.
[4] S. Akselrod, D. Gordon, L. B. Madwed, N. C. Snidman, D. C. Shannon,
and R. J. Cohen, “Hemodynamic regulation: Investigation by spectral
analysis,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 249, pp. H867–H875, 1985.
[5] T. J. Mullen, M. L. Appel, R. Mukkamala, J. M. Mathias, and R. J. Cohen,
“System identification of closed-loop cardiovascular control: Effects of
posture an autonomic blockade,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 272, pp. H448–
H461, 1997.
[6] L. T. Mainardi, A. M. Bianchi, R. Furlan, S. Piazza, R. Barbieri, V. di Virgilio, A. Malliani, and S. Cerutti, “Multivariate time-variant identification
of cardiovascular variability signals: A beat-to-beat spectral parameter
estimation in vasovagal syncope,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44,
no. 10, pp. 978–989, 1997.
[7] X. Chen and R. Mukkamala, “Selective quantification of the cardiac sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems by multisignal analysis of
cardiorespiratory variability,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 294, pp. H362–H371,
2008.
[8] S. Kalli, J. Grönlund, H. Ihalainen, A. Siimes, I. Välimäki, and K. Antila,
“Multivariate autoregressive modeling of autonomic cardiovascular control in neonatal lamb,” Comput. Biomed. Res., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 512–530,
1988.
[9] G. L. Pressman and P. M. Newgard, “A transducer for the continuous
external measurement of arterial blood pressure,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 10, pp. 73–81, Apr. 1963.
[10] G. Parati, R. Casadei, A. Groppelli, M. Di Rienzo, and G. Mancia, “Comparison of finger and intra-arterial blood pressure monitoring at rest and
during laboratory testing,” Hypertension., vol. 13, no. 6, Pt. 1, pp. 647–
655, 1989.
[11] B. M. Weiss, D. R. Spahn, H. Rahmig, R. Rohling, and T. Pasch, “Radial
artery tonometry: Moderately accurate but unpredictable technique of
continuous non-invasive arterial pressure measurement,” Br. J. Anaesth.,
vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 405–411, 1996.
[12] R. A. Payne, C. N. Symeonides, D. J. Webb, and S. R. J. Maxwell, “Pulse
transit time measured from the ECG: An unreliable marker of beat-to-beat
blood pressure,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 136–141, 2006.
[13] P. GiassiJr., J. R. B. Baggio, M. G. Oliveira, and R. Moraes, “Wireless
device for noninvasive recordings of cardio-respiratory signals,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Biomed. Electron. Devices, 2011, pp. 363–367.
[14] R. D. Berger, J. P. Saul, and R. J. Cohen, “Assessment of autonomic response by broad-band respiration,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 36,
no. 11, pp. 1061–1065, Nov. 1989.
[15] J. P. Saul, R. D. Berger, P. Albrecht, S. P. Stein, M. H. Chen, and
R. J. Cohen, “Transfer function analysis of the circulation: Unique insights
into cardiovascular regulation,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 261, pp. H1231–
H1245, 1991.
[16] R. J. Gray, “Managing critically ill patients with esmolol. An ultra shortacting beta-adrenergic blocker,” Chest, vol. 93, no. 2, pp. 398–403, 1988.
[17] A. D. Jose and R. R. Taylor, “Autonomic blockade by propranolol and
atropine to study intrinsic myocardial function in man,” J. Clin. Investig.,
vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2019–2031, 1969.

[18] A. Ghaffari, H. Golbayani, and M. Ghasemi, “A new mathematical based
QRS detector using continuous wavelet transform,” Comput. Electr. Eng.,
vol. 34, pp. 81–91, 2008.
[19] M. H. Perrott and R. J. Cohen, “An efficient approach to ARMA modeling of biological systems with multiple inputs and delays,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 1996.
[20] Y. C. Chiu, P. W. Arand, S. G. Shroff, T. Feldman, and J. D. Carroll,
“Determination of pulse wave velocities with computerized algorithms,”
Amer. Heart J., vol. 121, no. 5, pp. 1460–1470, 1991.
[21] M. P. Tarvainen, P. O. Ranta-Aho, and P. A. Karjalainen, “An advanced detrending method with application to HRV analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 172–175, Feb. 2002.
[22] X. Xiao, R. Mukkamala, N. Sheynberg, S. M. Grenon, M. D. Ehrman,
T. J. Mullen, C. D. Ramsdell, G. H. Williams, and R. J. Cohen, “Effects
of simulated microgravity on closed-loop cardiovascular regulation and
orthostatic intolerance: Analysis by means of system identification,” J.
Appl. Physiol., vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 489–497, 2004.
[23] G. Baselli, S. Cerutti, F. Badilini, L. Biancardi, A. Porta, M. Pagani,
F. Lombardi, O. Rimoldi, R. Furlan, and A. Malliani, “Model for the
assessment of heart period and arterial pressure variability interactions
and of respiration influences,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 143–152, 1994.
[24] H. Hytti, R. Takalo, and H. Ihalainen, “Tutorial on multivariate autoregressive modeling,” J. Clin. Monit. Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 101–108,
2006.
[25] I. Korhonen, L. T. Mainardi, G. Baselli, A. Bianchi, P. Loula, and
G. Carrault, “Linear multivariate models for physiological signal analysis:
Applications,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 51, pp. 121–130,
1996.
[26] J. P. Saul, R. D. Berger, H. C. Mind, and R. J. Cohen, “Transfer function
analysis of autonomic regulation II. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia,” Amer.
J. Phyiol., vol. 256, pp. H153–H161, 1989.
[27] G. Baselli, A. Porta, O. Rimoldi, M. Pagani, and S. Cerutti, “Spectral decomposition in multichannel recordings based on multivariate parametric
identification,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 1092–1101,
Nov. 1997.
[28] J. Rissanen, “Modeling by shortest data description,” Automatica, vol. 14,
no. 5, pp. 465–471, 1978.
[29] L. Ljung, System Identification: Theory for the User. Prentice Hall Information and System Sciences Series), Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA:
Prentice Hall, 1999.
[30] S. Lu, K. H. Ju, and K. H. Chon, “A new algorithm for linear and nonlinear
ARMA model parameter estimation using affine geometry,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 1116–1124, Oct. 2001.
[31] J. D. Enderle, S. M. Blanchard, and J. D. Bronzino, Introduction to
Biomedical Engineering. 2nd ed, San Diego, CA, USA: Elsevier, 2005.
[32] K. Yana, J. P. Saul, R. D. Berger, M. H. Perrott, and R. J. Cohen, “A
time domain approach for the fluctuation analysis of heart rate related to
instantaneous lung volume,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 74–81, Jan. 1993.
[33] K. H. Chon, R. Mukkamala, K. Toska, T. J. Mullen, A. A. Armoundas,
and R. J. Cohen, “Linear and nonlinear system identification of autonomic
heart-rate modulation,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 96–
105, Sep./Oct. 1997.
[34] A. C. Guyton and J. E. Hall, Textbook of Medical Physiology. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Elsevier, 2006.
[35] A. Porta, G. Baselli, O. Rimoldi, A. Malliani, and M. Pagani, “Assessing
baroreflex gain from spontaneous variability in conscious dogs: Role of
causality and respiration,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 279, pp. H2558–H2567,
2000.
[36] D. Lucini, A. Porta, O. Milani, G. Baselli, and M. Pagani, “Assessment of
arterial cardiopulmonary baroreflex gains from simultaneous recordings of
spontaneous cardiovascular and respiratory variability,” J. Hypertension,
vol. 18, pp. 281–286, 2000.

Authors, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

