IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

813

Conceiving THz Endometrial Ablation: Feasibility,
Requirements and Technical Challenges
Perambur S. Neelakanta and Bharti Sharma, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—Shallow-ablation of endometrial lining using microwaves has been traditionally indicated as a minimally invasive
treatment option for dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB).
Known as microwave endometrial ablation (MEA), relevant
procedure is used as an alternative to hysterectomy considering its
safety, simplicity and effectiveness. In lieu of the prevailing MEA
techniques, it is attempted in this study to foresee the possibility of
conceiving an alternative and a newer option on endometrial ablation using mm-wave/THz frequencies. Commensurate with this
motivated impetus, objectively considered are merits and design
issues of using electromagnetic (EM) spectrum of mm-wave/THz
region toward optimal conversion of EM energy into a thermal
ablative source so that, the basal layer of endometrium can be
effectively destroyed in surgical contexts as necessary. Hence,
the feasibility of designing appropriate TEA applicators for
controlled and safe procedures so as to ablate just the unwanted
tissues within a localized zone of energy field is addressed. Lastly,
a quantitative analysis on the interaction of THz EM-energy
versus the lossy dielectric characteristics of endometrial medium
is indicated to model the underlying (THz-energy)-to-(thermal
energy) transduction. Relevant prospects of conceiving TEA and
the associated pros and cons are identified specific to the prospects
of feasibility, requirement considerations and technical challenges.
Index Terms—Endometrial ablation, medical application of
THz-band, similitude principle, terms-mm-wave/THz spectrum.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE scope of this paper is to foresee the possibility of conceiving a newer option of using electromagnetic (EM) energy at mm-wave/THz frequencies for ablation procedures pertinent to the endometrial lining in the uterus.
Ablation literally implies removal of material from the
surface of an object. Classically, surgical ablation has been
the strategy in clinical contexts involving scalpel-and-scissors with cut-and-sew procedures; and, relevant Cox–Maze
technique [1] involved incisions that were technically difficult
to perform with added risks due to the extended time on an
already time-consuming surgery (such as in open-heart bypass
procedure). Hence, it resulted in a limited use and alternative methods like, using laser (laser ablation) to vaporize the
tissue without surgery as well as other invasive applications
This paper is part of the Special Mini-Issue on Terahertz Imaging and
Spectroscopy for Biology and Biomedicine. This paper is reprinted from IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON TERAHERTZ SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, vol. 3, no. 4, July
2013.
Manuscript received October 02, 2012; revised March 19, 2013; accepted
March 21, 2013. Date of publication April 15, 2013; date of current version
June 27, 2013.
The authors are with the Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Florida Atlantic university, Boca Raton, FL 33431 USA
(e-mail: neelakan@fau.edu; bsharma@fau.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2267352

of low-temperature cooling (cryoablation), chemical (ethanol
ablation) or heat induced via high-frequency electromagnetic
(EM) energy (called radio-frequency (RF) ablation). All such
efforts focus on eradicating or substantially destroying the
pathogenic tissue at desired anatomical sites.
With the advent of developments in microwave technology,
more advanced methods of using EM energy to induce localized-heating (at desired locations in the tissue-medium) also
came into existence. Known as microwave ablation, the underlying technique uses EM waves at compatible frequencies in the
spectrum ranging from 900 to 2500 MHz [2]; hence, a variety
of clinical indications on successful use of microwave ablation
have emerged. Patient’s option, tissue-sparing, multiple tumor
syndrome or previous organ resection are precursors in adopting
such microwave ablation as a selective procedure; and, it is indicated as a viable candidate typically directed at anatomical sites
like, liver, lung, kidney, prostate, bone, breast, thyroid, brain,
spleen, cardiac/arterial region, endometrial lining, collagenous
tissues, varicose veins, esophagus, etc.
The considerations in using microwaves in the ablation
procedure and the associated conceivable drawbacks are as
follows. 1) At the working microwave frequency (like 2.45
GHz), the depth of penetration of EM energy is in the range 1–3
cm in biological tissues. As such, the heating precision may
not be as exquisite vis-à-vis the associated energy absorption.
2) Rapid heating and high temperature realization across a
large volume are critical posing relevant safety evaluations in
monitoring standpoint, when rapid heating might be difficult to
capture without real-time imaging. 3) Feeding the applicator
with microwave energy drawn from a generator via a cabling
system may cause overheating of the cable and resulting in a
loss of power supplied to the applicator. In order to offset such
cable-loss and reduction in efficiency, adjunct cable-cooling
may be required. 4) Further, the undesirable heating of tissues
along the transmission-line (cable) is also feasible unless, it is
counter-measured. 5) The critical part of microwave ablation
design is concerned with the applicator-antenna. It requires
a tradeoff between the required heating-profile, the extent of
permissible invasion of the applicator at the ablation site (in
percutaneous devices), power-handling capability, efficiency
of EM-to-thermal energy transduction and cost-effectiveness.
Further, the prevailing antenna designs largely produce elongated ablations that may not be desirable in certain contexts.
Notwithstanding the developments and practice of microwave ablation as narrated above, the scope of the present
study is to consider newer options of using upper mm-wave
band through THz spectrum of EM energy for ablation purposes
in lieu of the existing RF/microwave ablation techniques. The
motivation thereof stems from the following considerations.

2168-2194/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE

814

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

• Futuristic EM applications are seriously sought to explore
the unused windows of mm waveband and the unallocated
regime of THz band. These spectral windows can accommodate a broadband of EM energy yielding variety and
flexibility toward ablation system designs. Though, relevant EM spectra are sparsely known in terms of the underlying EM wave interaction characteristics with the media
such as biological substances, indicated, nevertheless, in
the present study are certain merits that can be foreseen in
adopting these spectra (either in supplanting or when used
in conjunction with microwaves) for specific ablation applications and anatomical sites.
• To implement the proposed ablation method with EM
energy spanning 30
GHz through terahertz spectrum,
corresponding details on dielectric dissipation-loss characteristics (in the lossy biological medium) and the
associated thermal energy realized are not per se available; and, almost little known efforts have been reported
in designing relevant ablation techniques deploying such
millimeter and/or micrometer wavelengths of EM spectrum. As such, unique considerations are required to
formulate fresh algorithms and compute details pertinent
to: 1) lossy dielectric characteristics of biological media at
the test mm/THz band [3]; 2 ) elucidating the transduction
aspects of (EM energy)-to-(thermal energy); 3) deducing
relevant heat energy proliferation and convection profiles
[4]–[7]; 5) formulating the associated dynamics of rate of
heat absorption and convection details; and 6) identifying
the steady-state thermal conditions conducive for the
desired ablation at a specific site.
• The extremely high-frequency test-band of mm-wave/THz
EM spectrum being considered also implies concurrently,
a significantly lower wavelength (relative to traditional
microwaves) falling in millimeter through micrometer
regime. Hence, the feasible ablation designs would correspond to the possibility of: 1) Conceiving “scaled-down”
(miniaturized) applicator structures vis-à-vis the wavelengths of interest; 2) selecting highly-localized and
critically specific, spotty ablation sites for precision procedures (consistent with the site-dimension and zone of
ablation being comparable to the wavelengths involved);
and 3) constraining/restricting deep-body heating at the
localized ablation site, inasmuch as the depth-of-penetration (skin-depth) of EM energy in the dissipative medium
is an inverse function of frequency; as such, unnecessary
heat pervasiveness to other proximal anatomical regions
can be avoided.
• With super high frequencies of THz band and corresponding dielectric losses, the intratumoral temperatures
can be driven consistently higher. This may enable conceiving spotty-to-extended zones of ablation with ease
and considerably less treatment time.
• Relatively small and miniaturized applicator feed-shaft dimensions (prorated to the wavelength involved) may reduce the risk of shaft-related abnormal heating/burning of
tissues at the feeding-end.
• Physically small antenna dimensions (consistent with
mm m wavelengths) would permit an array of distributed framework of antenna elements leading to the

choice of ablation zones to be small or large on ad hoc
basis.
• With the physical size of antenna/shaft paraphernalia
scaled-down, appropriate cooling system can also be
designed and housed conveniently.
Hence reviewed in this paper is the feasibility aspect of
knowing whether mm-wave/THz band spectrum of EM energy
could be a possible candidate for medical ablation procedures.
A specific case thereof in realizing endometrial ablation using
the test band of EM spectrum of interest is investigated identifying the pros and cons relevant to the requirements and
underlying challenges.
II. EM-ENERGY BASED SHALLOW-ABLATION
ENDOMETRIAL SURFACE

OF

Traditional method of shallow-ablation or “scouring” of
endometrium with thermal source induced via MEA, is broadly
discussed in [8]–[10]. In all such studies however, the scope
of MEA is described largely in qualitative details concerning
system development, applicator design and modeling, experimental/clinical trials and treatment dynamics (pertinent to
dysfunctional uterine bleeding, or DUB, also known as menorrhajia).
The present study as stated earlier, proposes an alternative
method parallel to MEA to conceive THz endometrial ablation
(TEA); and, attempted thereof are foreseeable considerations
to evaluate the efficacy of the proposed suite on feasibility aspects, requirements and technical challenges. Hence, evolved is
a comprehensive modeling of (EM energy)-to-(thermal energy)
conversion at the mm-wave/THz-band frequencies vis-à-vis the
TEA applications as detailed below.
In modeling the phenomenon of interaction of EM energy
versus a biological locale in the human-body and deducing the
associated thermal considerations (such as, heat generated, rate
of heating, heat absorbed by the medium, conduction of the heat
across the zone(s) of interest and the dynamics of associated
temperature profile across the zone), it is necessary to first consider the following parameters: Frequency/wavelength of EM
excitation, geometry of the region being exposed to EM energy,
associated EM parameters (such as, complex permittivity) and
thermal characteristics of the bio-medium.
One of the authors has comprehensively studied elsewhere (in
different bioelectromagnetic contexts), relevant interaction aspects of EM-energy versus bio-medium, specific to ocular lens
in human eye [4], human embryo in uterus [5], frozen red-blood
cells [6] and rewarming of human limbs [7]. The prior knowledge from such efforts is invoked in this study to gather a host
of details on EM-to-thermal energy transduction (across a biomedium) and apply them to the heating of endometrial lining
specific to TEA considerations. The EM and thermal considerations toward modeling the TEA are outlined below.
Assuming a normal uterus, it typically has the size and shape
of an upside-down pear weighing approximately six ounces
(170 g). Its dimension is about 8–10 cm
6 mm Further,
the wall thickness of the uterus is approximately 1 cm [5].
Available in [3] are electromagnetic and thermal constants of
a typical tissue medium. For analysis proposes, the uterus can
be modeled as a thin-walled pouch excited by a current source
(depicting an intravaginal applicator).

NEELAKANTA AND SHARMA: CONCEIVING THz ENDOMETRIAL ABLATION

Further, inasmuch as, the uterine wall gets thickened with a
smear of heavy blood during DUB, the EM power applied while
ablation procedure should be adequate to increase the endometrial surface temperature with the presence of blood. So, energy
absorption due to blood-content should also be duly considered
in deciding the EM power source required.
III. ELECTROMAGNETIC HEATING OF THE BIO-MEDIUM
In order to estimate the steady-state thermal conditions and
temperature distribution profile in the interior lining of the
uterus pouch, relevant model will involve the thermal parameters of a tissue medium [3], the body temperature (in C) and
the flux density of conducted heat energy, (in joules s/m ).
Further, the intravaginal applicator facilitated for EM excitation
of the endometrium can be assumed as a current source.
Now, considering any point
within the uterus-wall
medium subjected to EM ablation, the heat-flux density (under
a steady-state condition) along the three coordinates
can
be written as follows: (
;
;
and,
where
depicts the heat conductivity
(in calories m C s). Further, under steady-state conditions, it
is assumed that the heat diverging from an infinitesimal volume
at any point of observation (x, y, z) must be equal to the heat
generated due to EM absorption within that volume. Therefore,
if is the electrical conductivity (in S/m) of the bio-medium and
is the electric intensity at the point of consideration,
conforms to the following gradient relation:
then
(1)
Hence, it follows that
(2)
The Poisson’s (2) has the following solution:
(3)
where U(x, y, z) denotes an auxiliary potential function (at the
denotes a
point of observation in the medium) and
constant potential function. Further,
and, the set
represents the electric field intensity
components excited
as a result of EM energy applied. Hence, explicitly (2) can be
written as follows:
(4)

815

However, the temperature gradients tangential to the
endometrium can be reasonably neglected within the short-duration of ablation procedure involved. That is, along the
boundary surface of the endometrial-lining, the temperature
gradient would consequently vanish, provided
is presumed
as the conductor potential, namely, the bio-medium being fairly
conductive.
The initial rise of temperature
at an
-point
in the medium due to EM absorption will depend mainly on the
heat capacity
of the medium; and as a function of time,
t is determined from the relation:
.
Hence, it follows that
(6)
where
is a constant, which can be taken as the initial condition of body-temperature prior to ablation procedure.
Suppose specifies the electric-field intensity per ampere induced as a result of the current source (depicting the applicator)
supporting I amperes; then, the incremental temperature
can be specified via (6) as follows:
(7)
denotes the scalar potential function at the point
under consideration; and
denotes the resistance
(in ohms) to the high-frequency current-flow in the medium.
Further, accounting for the curved feature of the endometrial-lining surface having a radius of curvature m , the
following explicit details can also be specified.
Typically, would vary as a function of as follows. Assuming a remote source of excitation, the electric field as a
function of can be written in terms of microscopic Ohm’s
law via the associated current-density,
as follows:
. Further, inasmuch as denotes the
resistance of the medium along the curved surface, it is approximately equal to (
therefore, it can be written that
where

Relevantly, for a homogenous, isotropic medium depicting
the endometrial surface, it is reasonable to assume the nearsurface temperature (neglecting convection and radiation heat
transfers) as
; with an initial temperature
. Therefore
(8)
And, the increase in temperature is given by:
(9)

However,
(Laplace equation) for a potential function at any point in the medium free of heat-source. As such,
(5)

Corresponding near-surface temperature
as follows:

can be deduced

(10)
, the temFurther, assuming
perature gradients can be deduced from (3):
;
and
.

where is the excitation magnetic-field intensity due to the current source,
is the free-space intrinsic impedance
and depicts the dielectric constant of the medium.

816

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

IV. EM POWER DISSIPATION IN THE ENDOMETRIUM
CALCULATION OF TEMPERATURE RISE

AND

When a bio-medium is exposed to EM energy, a specific absorption rate (SAR in W/kg) can be defined to quantify the rate
at which energy is absorbed by the medium. Thus, SAR can be
calculated in terms of the electric field within the bio-medium
, where
as follows:
is the density of the sample at the spatial variable, r of the sample
geometry.
Suppose a comparison is made between MEA and TEA on
their bioelectromagnetic aspect of ablation with the traditional
microwave frequency adopted specified as
Hz. Let the frequency envisaged in the proposed TEA be . Then, the following explicit relations can be derived:
(11)
where

is the incremental surface temperature (in C) and
denotes the time-involved
(in seconds) in heating the medium.
In order to evaluate the relative performance of TEA versus
MEA, relevant frequency-scaling can be imposed on the ablation-related parameters. For this purpose, the concept of Buckingham’s similitude principle [11] can be used. Relevant considerations are as follows:
Knowledge on lossy-dielectric and related thermal characteristics of various biological media in the lower strata of radio-frequency (RF) band has been fairly comprehended [3]; however,
pertinent details across the submillimeter wave-band and THz
spectrum are rather sparse. Hence, indicated in this study is a
method of judiciously sharing “similarity” details of bio-media
already available as “models” in the traditional, lower-side EM
spectrum, (namely, VLF through micro/mm-wave) so as to deduce the “inferential prototypes” that represent EM properties
of biological media at submillimeter/THz frequencies. For this
purpose, the principle of similitude due to Buckingham [11] can
be adopted to obtain the model-to-(inferential) prototype transformations on generic dielectric and conducting properties of
biological materials, which can be used to make a comparison
on the relative efficacy of MEA versus TEA. The computational
details using the model indicated above for endometrial ablation
are presented below.
V. MEA/TEA RELATED COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS
ENDOMETRIAL HEATING

Fig. 1. Electrical conductivity
, dielectric constant
of a typical (wet) tissue medium versus frequency.

and the ratio

through THz band. Then, the skin-depth can be evaluated as a
function of frequency.
In the literature [3], versus frequency of tissue medium (wet
with water-content) is available over 1 MHz through 1GHz
range along with corresponding values of dielectric constant as
illustrated in Fig. 1.
In terms of the assigned frequency for MEA namely,
(in
Hz) and the assumed test frequency of TEA as , as indicated
earlier, (11) can be rewritten as follows:
(12a)
In other words, the similitude ratio of: (temperature-rise at
in C )/(temperature-rise at
in C ) is given by:
(12b)

ON

Endometrial ablation implies heating uterus-lining so as to
“ablate” the underlying myometrium to an extent of 6 to 8 mm.
That is, the heating enabled by EM energy is confined to a superficial zone dictated by the depth of penetration (skin-depth,
in m) of the EM waves applied. This skin-depth, (in m)
where f is the frequency in Hz,
is given by:
(in S/m) denotes the electrical conductivity of the medium and
is the permeability of the medium; further,
is
the relative permeability, (which is equal to 1 for the tissue
medium) and
H m depicts the free-space
permeability. Suppose the value of of a tissue-medium (such
as, endometrium) is known across the spectrum of microwave

That is, (12) implies a scaled up “prototype” at
relative to
a “model” at
written in terms of the so-called dimensionless
Buckingham’s -format. It thus specifies the temperature-rise
(in C s) in the prototype-structure of TEA being conceived at
in terms of the corresponding temperature-rise in the known
model-structure of MEA for a given EM power-level of excitation. It can be noted that, heating involved in TEA will be a prorated value observed in MEA and the prorating coefficient is a
simple ratio, namely,
. Thus, using the
as a function of frequency ( ) as illustrated in
pattern of
Fig. 1, the principle of similitude permits deducing the heating
performance (expressed in terms of temperature-rise in C s) in
TEA procedure relative to corresponding results in MEA.

NEELAKANTA AND SHARMA: CONCEIVING THz ENDOMETRIAL ABLATION

Fig. 2. Skin-depth ( in mm) versus frequency (in GHz) of a wet tissue
medium.

VI. OBSERVATIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
In endometrial ablation, the anticipated design optimizations
include: 1) realizing consistently high myometrium temperatures; 2) enabling desirable heat conduction profiles; 3) accommodating large ablation regions (viewed in terms of the surface
area and depth of the endometrium to be ablated; 4) facilitating
faster ablation times toward quick procedure; and 5) achieving
reduced procedural complexity via less painful ablation method
set compatible for the anatomical site in question.
The concept designs and experiments of EM-energy based
ablation envisaged in practice [12] mostly offer qualitative details on basic physics concerning EM interactions with the tissue
and corresponding conversion of EM (RF/microwave) energy
into thermal energy; and, the method of applying EM-energy
using an applicator (made of a feed plus antenna combination) is
emphasized vis-à-vis the focused ablation site. Commensurate
with the associated thermodynamics of heat patterns generated
specific to achieve an effective ablation via (EM energy)-to(biomedia) interactions, designing a proper applicator is a primary design objective. It should be consistent with related details on EM power generation, effective feeding of EM energy
to the site of ablation (via a transmission-line such as a coaxial
cable) and applying the EM-field to the zone of interest with a
controlled proliferation. Safe transduction of (EM energy)-to(thermal energy) without hot-spots, overheating and/or failures,
cooling the antenna/feeding structure as necessary so as to avoid
unnecessary heating of zones en route and achieving efficient
ablation are desired features in the design optimizations.
As indicated before, techniques traditionally developed for
various ablations use designated frequencies like 915 MHz and
2.45 GHz (ISM band). Notwithstanding the existence of such
MEA, the transition design being proposed here refers to identifying the pros and cons of using upper EM spectrum spanning
mm-wave through THz band (in lieu of RF/microwaves). In this
context, the feasibility aspects, transition design issues and technical challenges vis-à-vis clinical requirements are reviewed in
the following subsections as regard to the proposed TEA.
A. TEA: Feasibility Considerations
1) Skin-Depth Specific Constraints: The major aspect of conceiving TEA relies on its feasibility linked to the depth of EM
wave penetration at the endometrium consistent with ablation
zone (surface area and volume) of medical interest. Hence, considered in Fig. 2 is the profile of skin-depth computed as a function of frequency.

817

It can be observed from Fig. 2 that the skin-depth of a tissue
medium at the traditional microwave frequency (2.45 GHz) is
about 7.35 mm and it reduces to about 0.8 mm at 250–300
GHz range. Hence in any attempted transitional design from
MEA-to-TEA, choice of mm-wave/THz frequency should be
consistent with surgical requirement specified by the depth of
shallow ablation required in myometrium. Currently, no specific frequency has been designated for medical applications of
mm-wave/THz frequency spectrum. Hence, with any such future prescription of frequency, corresponding depth of EM-energy penetration (skin-depth) and ablation across the transversal
depth into myometrium will be design trade-off features in implementing the proposed TEA.
Selection of source frequency in the mm-wave/THz range
should also take into consideration of possible dielectric relaxation and resonant absorptions involved [3]. At present,
comprehensive details on the dynamics of EM wave interaction with the biomedia of complex dielectric permittivity and
heterogeneity (due to coexistence of solid and fluid phases)
are lacking and relevant research is warranted to decide on
optimal choice of frequency for maximum absorption and
thermodynamic heat-release.
2) Heating of Endometrium: For a given EM-energy input,
the rise in temperature per second in TEA relative to MEA context is given by equation (12). There are two examples of experimental MEA reported in literature one at 10.2 GHz [8] and
the other at 2.45 GHz [9]. The general indication thereof is to
realize a temperature rise of about 75 C–85 C; and, the ablation procedure lasts for about 150-180 seconds with a typical
microwave source of 30–70 W power. Compatible non-bending
catheter tip or dielectric-filled waveguide version of applicators
are used in the above studies.
Relevant to the zone (surface area and volume) of endometrial ablation constrained by medical considerations, the EM-energy based heating should enable a fast heating and uniform
heat distribution profile (devoid of hot/cold spots) with sufficient thermal flux so as to realize the required temperature rise
in the zone.
Suppose
and
depict EM power requirements
respectively at THz and microwave frequencies for endometrial ablation. To realize a medically decided temperature rise
of
C, it can be shown on the basis of SAR-based heuristics that:
m
where
and
denote the mass of the endometrial space
subjected to heating via THz and microwave frequencies respectively. Considering the skin-depth of EM wave penetration
in the tissue-lining, microwave would enclave a larger volume
(and hence a larger mass) of interaction with the endometrial
tissue than the THz excitation. As such,
can be expected
to be less than
. In other words, while EM power requirements for MEA is about 30–70 W to realize a temperature elevation to 75 C–85 C, as reported in [8], [9], the corresponding
power requirement at THz frequency will be smaller; and as
such, with TEA the burden of having large power requirement
is reduced.
At present, tunable high-power sources of terahertz radiation
are not per se available for clinical desktop usage. However,
inasmuch as EM power requirement at THz frequencies will be
less than that for MEA, possibly a few watts may be required

818

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

Fig. 3. Plot of frequency versus surface temperature-rise per second for a given
EM power applied across 30 GHz through 350 GHz relative to conventional
temperature-rise per second at microwaves (2.54 GHz) in the endometrial
lining: (a) to realize 85 C (or 53 C elevation above the body-temperature) and
(b) to realize 75 C (or 43 C elevation above the body-temperature).

corresponding to SAR-based scaled-down value of 30–70 W
indicated for MEA. Elucidating exact power requirements for
TEA via modeling and/or experiments with phantoms is an
open-question for future research.
Adopting Gunn or Schottky diodes plus frequency multipliers
in 100 GHz regime and use of evolving direct optical sources
like quantum cascade lasers and other electro-optical methods
like gyrotrons and terahertz wave parametric oscillators, etc.
[13] could be expected options in future for the TEA.
Relevant to the data on temperature elevation of 43 C–53 C
above the body temperature needed during ablation of the endometrium, the computed results (obtained using equation (12)
on temperature-rise per second versus frequency across 30–350
GHz relative to conventional temperature-rise per second feasible with microwaves (at 2.45 GHz) is plotted in Fig. 3 as a
function of frequency. It can be inferred from Fig. 3, that for
a given EM power applied at mm-wave/THz band frequencies,
the increase in temperature could be an order faster than with
traditional microwaves. Thus, the proposed mm-wave/THz can
facilitate faster heating; that is, a faster growth rate of ablation
zone temperature is feasible with the proposed method.
3) Proliferation of Thermal Energy Across the Myometrium:
The zone of endometrium ablation includes the surface area
and a volume underneath in the myometrium as constrained by
medical requirements. As such, consistent with the rate of surface-temperature rise indicated above, the associated heat energy at the surface should be conducted into the myometrium
uniformly. Hence, based on the thermal conductivity (of about
0.5 10 W m C), it can be surmised that a fair heat conduction into the thin layer beneath the endometrium can be facilitated. Again, relevant system design calculations on such heat
conduction profile and exposure duration involved (to achieve
the steady-state conditions) should be viewed in the light of EM
power supplied and the type of applicators adopted.
B. TEA: Requirements
1) Applicator: In MEA/TEA techniques, the EM-energy is
applied to the endometrial region via an intra-cervical/vaginal
applicator. It consists of a feed arrangement, an antenna and
a supporting shaft, which may accommodate some cooling facility also. For example, the applicator used for MEA in [9]
supports 2.5 GHz and has a coaxial-feed with non-bending tip
designed for safe operation regardless of the size and shape of

uterine cavity. Its design conforms to the transmission of 70
W microwave power. Another applicator for MEA described
in [8] supports 9.2 GHz microwaves consistent with the goal to
achieve at least 5 mm necrosis required for a complete ablation
of basal layer of the endometrium. Further, it is designed with a
diameter less than 10 mm for easy access to uterine cavity via
cervix and its feed-end shaft facilitated with cooling to avoid
unwanted heating of endocervical tissues en route and avoid
any possible post-operative infections. Further, the diameter of
the applicator is minimized by loading the transmission-line
(coaxial-line/waveguide) with a high permittivity dielectric ceramic up to the radiating tip. The dielectric-loading concurrently
offers heat-sinking and higher power-handling capabilities. Further, the radiator is designed for minimal VSWR characteristics to avoid reflected wastage of microwaves. Apart from MEA
contexts, a variety of applicator designs have been indicated in
the literature for other organs. For example, triaxial antennas
for ablation in the kidney [12], rigid and longer shaft applicator
that emits radiation topically over a required distance to create
linear lesion in endocardial and epicardial contexts [14], [15],
distributed antennas for a designated zonal footprint [16] etc.
are candidates indicated as radiating structures of applicators in
microwave ablation methods.
From the existing knowledge on antenna requirements for ablation purposes, it may be possible to conceive compatible EM
radiating structures for TEA applications. However, the foreseeable technical challenges can be identified as follows.
• Designing miniaturized structures consistent with small
wavelengths: Scaled-down structures are better in some
contexts where the accessibility of the ablation zone is constrained by the passage dimensions as in intravaginal applicator designs.
• Effectively “matched-to-source” antenna: The distal end
of the applicator namely, the radiating antenna should
maximize the energy transfer offering minimal reflection
coefficient for low return-loss. This is required to avoid
load on the generator as well as to reduce return path
tissue-heating. Designing mm-wave/THz band antennas
with matched VSWR is critical, though feasible.
• Desirable radiation pattern: This is dependent on application. Typically broadside mode directly launching EM
energy radially outward is designed for tumor ablation
wherein the omnidirectional radiation pattern conforms
to the near-spherical focal tumors. Likewise, end-fire
antennas are required for localized heating as in cardiac ablation. This version of antenna is configured to
end-fire at a catheter tip. In all, for low return-loss and
focused/zone-specific heating a variety of designs with
handle-shaft structure with slot, monopole, dipole, triaxial
and choked radiating elements have been conceived [16].
Further, looped and helical antennas have also been suggested.
• In the context of TEA under consideration, a broadside
structure may be warranted to heat the endometrial surface,
(unless a point ablation is required on a specific spot such
as a polyp). In such cases, matched antenna designs can be
conceived as sleeve versions as indicated, for example in
[17], [18]. Thus, despite of technical challenges conceiving
applicators/antennas for TEA is feasible.

NEELAKANTA AND SHARMA: CONCEIVING THz ENDOMETRIAL ABLATION

• Cooling the applicator: In MEA/TEA as well as in other
ablation techniques, avoidance of incidental heating of
nearby tissues is required. For this purpose, typically
cooling-jackets (carrying water) are improvised consistent
with applicator dimensions, if the jacket does not prohibitively augment the size of the applicator. Other cryogenic
cooling is also doable. In TEA, since the applicator is
down-sized, accommodating appropriate, smaller cooling
system is conceivable and advantageous.
• Transmural considerations: In certain ablation efforts,
heating of a certain zone will be implicated by a large
fluid flow on the other side of the associated anatomical
wall, typically as in cardiac ablation. In such transmural
situations, use of ablation would warrant special considerations regardless of using microwaves or THz. However,
in TEA such transmural implication is not indicated.
C. TEA: Technical Challenges
Experimental/Clinical Studies: To the best of authors’
knowledge, no known studies on TEA have been reported.
This may be due to the fact that no known frequency band has
been formally specified as a standard for ablation applications
in mm-wave/THz band. (though use of 120 and 380 THz and
mid-infrared 12–120 THz are indicated in medical imaging to
achieve high resolutions). As such, the effort addressed here
is a heuristic proposal yet to be investigated via experimental
studies so as to elucidate the underlying technical challenges.
At least, modeling uterus and endometrium with bio-phantom
materials and designing an appropriate applicator system at
some mm-wave/THz frequency can be the first step; and, it is
being planned by the authors in the near future.
Knowledge on athermal effects due to mm-wave/THz frequencies (such as invasive interactions at DNA level causing
possible damages to genes expression) is currently sparse [19].
Futuristic studies thereof are necessary and relevant considerations should duly be specified in TEA designs vis-à-vis the procedure time (of exposure) and intensity of EM power source
requirements.
VII. CLOSURE
In short, the present study offers a proposal to evaluate the
feasibility of using mm-wave/THz band EM-energy for the purpose of ablation techniques. Specifically, the endometrial ablation is considered and preliminary details on the proposed
strategy are outlined.
REFERENCES
[1] S. L. Gaynor, G. D. Byrd, M. D. Diodato, Y. Ishii, A. M. Lee, S.
M. Prasad, J. Gopal, R. B. Schuessler, and R. J. Damiano, Jr, “Microwave ablation for atrial fibrillation: Dose-response curves in the cardioplegia-arrested and beating heart,” Annu. Thorac. Surgery, vol. 81,
no. 1, pp. 72–76, Jan. 2006.
[2] C. J. Simon, D. E. Dupuy, and W. W. Mayo-Smith, “Microwave
ablation: Principles and applications,” Radio Graphics, vol. 25, pp.
S69–S83, Oct. 2005.
[3] P. S. Neelakanta, Handbook of Electromagnetic Materials: Monolithic
and Composite Versions and Their Applications. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC, 1995, pp. 570–582.

819

[4] P. S. Neelakanta and K. P. Ramakrishnan, “Microwave-induced hazardous non-linear thermoelastic vibrations of the ocular lens in the
human eye,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 205–210, 1979.
[5] P. S. Neelakanta, “Microwave-induced injurious effects on the humanembryo in utero,” Biomed. Techn., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 263–269, 1978.
[6] P. S. Neelakanta, “Electromagnetic heating in a model of frozen red
blood-cells, Rep. III IPGA assignment,” Naval Aerospace Med. Lab.,
Pensacola, FL, 1988.
[7] P. S. Neelakanta, “Rewarming of hypothermic human-limbs in vivo by
RF induction heating: Theoretical considerations, Rep. II IPGA assignment,” Naval Aerospace Med. Lab., Pensacola, FL, 1988.
[8] I. B. Feldberg and N. J. Cronin, “A 9.2 GHz microwave applicator
for the treatment of menorrhajia,” in 1988 IEEE MTT-S Int. Symp.,
Baltimore, MD, 1998, pp. 755–758.
[9] S. Yeasmin, K. Nakayama, M. Ishibashi, A. Katagiri, K. Iida, N.
Nakayama, S. Aoki, Y. Kanaoka, and K. Miyazaki, “Microwave
endometrial ablation as an alternative to hysterectomy for the emergent control of uterine bleeding in patients who are poor surgical
candidates,” Arch. Gynecol. Obstet., vol. 280, no. 2, pp. 279–282,
Aug. 2009.
[10] L. Mettler, “Long-term results in the treatment of menorrhajia and hypermenorrhea with a thermal balloon endometrial ablation technique,”
J. Soc. Laproendosc. Surgeons, vol. 6, pp. 305–309, 2002.
[11] E. Buckingham, “Model experiments and the form of empirical equations,” Trans. ASME, vol. 37, pp. 263–296, 1915.
[12] P. F. Laeseke, F. T. Lee, Jr., L. A. Sampson, D. W. van der Weide,
and C. L Brace, “Microwave ablation versus radiofrequency ablation
in the Kidney: High power triaxial antennas create larger ablation zones
than the similarly sized internally cooled electrodes,” J. Vasc. Interv.
Radiol., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1224–1229, Sep. 2009.
[13] J. Yao, X. Degang, S. Bo, and L. Huan, “Tera-HZ radiation source by
deference frequency generation (DFG) and TPO with all solid state
lasers,” Terahertz Sci. and Technol., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 161–168, Sep.
2008.
[14] A. E. Saltman, “Completely endoscopic microwave ablation of atrial
fibrillation on the beating heart using bilateral thoracoscopy. clinical
techniques,” Jul. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://www.ctsnet.org/sections/clinicalresources/adultcardiac/expert_tech-11.html
[15] A. E. Saltman, “Microwave ablation: A new use for an old technology,”
Bus. Briefing: US Cardiol., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2004.
[16] C. L. Brace, “Microwave tissue ablation: Biophysics, technology and
applications,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 65–78, 2010.
mode coaxial
[17] T. S. Bird and G. L. James, “Input mismatch of
waveguide feeds,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. AP-34, no. 8,
pp. 1030–1033, Aug. 1986.
mode excitation of flanged circular axial coaxial
[18] T. S. Bird, “
waveguide with an extended center conductor,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. AP-35, no. 32, pp. 1358–1366, Dec. 1987.
[19] B. S. Alexandrov, V. Gelev, A. R. Bishop, A. Usheva, and K. O. Rasmussen, “DNA breathing dynamics in the presence of a terahertz field,”
Phys. Lett. A, vol. 374, no. 10, pp. 1214–1217, Feb. 2010.
Perambur S. Neelakanta received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras, India, in 1975.
Since 1988, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering and Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University (FAU), Boca
Raton, FL, USA, where he is currently a Professor He has 37 years of academic and 5 years of corporate experience. He has published over 150 journal
papers and 6 books, 3 of which are in the area of telecommunications and one in
EM materials. His research interests include bioengineering, bioinformatics and
complex systems, wireline and wireless telecommunications, electromagnetics
and EM-materials, stochastical communication theory, and information-theoretics in neural networks.
Dr. Neelakanta is a Fellow of IET (U.K.) and a Chartered Engineer.

Bharti Sharma (S’12) received the B.E. degree in electronics and telecommunications from University of Pune, Pune, India, and is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree at Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and
Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University (FAU), Boca Raton, FL, USA.
Following her Bachelor’s degree, she worked as a Lecturer at the Delhi College of Engineering, New Delhi, India. Subsequently, she joined Florida Power
& Light Company as a Systems Analyst.

