IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

785

Development and Testing of a Single
Frequency Terahertz Imaging System for
Breast Cancer Detection
Benjamin St. Peter, Sigfrid Yngvesson, Life Fellow, IEEE, Paul Siqueira, Member, IEEE,
Patrick Kelly, Member, IEEE, Ashraf Khan, Stephen Glick, and Andrew Karellas

Abstract—The ability to discern malignant from benign tissue in
excised human breast specimens in Breast Conservation Surgery
(BCS) was evaluated using single frequency terahertz radiation.
Terahertz (THz) images of the specimens in reflection mode were
obtained by employing a gas laser source and mechanical scanning.
The images were correlated with optical histological micrographs
of the same specimens, and a mean discrimination of 73% was
found for five out of six samples using Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis. The system design and characterization is
discussed in detail. The initial results are encouraging but further
development of the technology and clinical evaluation is needed to
evaluate its feasibility in the clinical environment.
Index Terms—Breast cancer, medical imaging, reflectivity,
refractive index, single frequency THz imaging (SFTI), THz.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

PPLICABILITY of terahertz (THz) radiation to the fields
of biology and medicine has already been established
[1], [2]. Early progress was made by the University of Cambridge/Teraview group, which employed THz pulsed imaging
(TPI), also termed time-domain spectroscopy (TDS), to produce scanned images of skin cancer specimens and differentiate
malignant (cancerous) from benign tissue [3]. More recently,
the potential of THz radiation for such tissue differentiation
in excised breast, cervical, and colon cancer samples has been
demonstrated [4], [5], [6]. THz radiation has advantages over
X-rays because, as determined with TPI, it has greater contrast
between tissue types [5], [6], [7]. Also, THz photons have energies of only a few millielectronvolts (meV) and are, therefore,
expected to be non-ionizing, meaning that they are incapable
of breaking standard chemical bonds. More subtle effects have
This paper is part of the Special Mini-Issue on Terahertz Imaging and
Spectroscopy for Biology and Biomedicine. This paper is reprinted from IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON TERAHERTZ SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, vol. 3, no. 4, July
2013.
Manuscript received September 28, 2012; revised December 08, 2012; accepted January 02, 2013. Date of publication February 21, 2013; date of current
version June 27, 2013. This work was supported by the National Cancer Institute under Award 1R21CA143660. The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Cancer Institute or the National Institutes of Health. This work was funded by
an R21 grant from the NIH National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) under Grant 1R21CA143660–01A1.
B. St. Peter, S. Yngvesson, P. Siqueira, and P. Kelly are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA 01003 USA (e-mail: yngvesson@ecs.umass.edu).
A. Khan, S. Glick, and A. Karellas are with the University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655 USA.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2267351

been hypothesized and studied, however, which can occur at
power levels of a few milliwatts (mW) during exposure on
the order of hours, not unlike the conditions produced by our
apparatus [8], [9]. These effects could be equivalent to thermal
effects [8] or could have a more complex interaction which
produces changes in cell function [9]. In any case, only excised
samples were studied for this project and so no harmful effects
due to THz exposure were considered.
This project, a collaboration between the University of Massachusetts in Amherst (UM/A) and the University of Massachusetts Medical School in Worcester (UMMS), evaluates the
ability of single-frequency THz radiation to discern malignant
from benign human breast tissue in surgical resection specimens. This was done by the assessment of samples excised
during Breast Conservation Surgery (BCS). In BCS, surgeons
remove tissue until surfaces of excised tissue appear not to contain cancer. Afterward, if pathologists on histology do not find a
margin of benign breast tissue around the excised sample, a repeat surgery is necessary. This is also known as verification of
the surgical resection margin. Estimates of how often surgeries
must be repeated varies from publication to publication, but
most seem to agree that it occurs for 20%–70% of procedures
[10]–[14].
An operating room device for the quick assessment of tissue
margins would reduce the number of repeat surgeries while enabling surgeons to be more conservative with tissue removal. A
THz camera for real-time imaging might offer a compact, inexpensive and safe solution. Such a solution could achieve reduced cost and complexity if designed to use the continuouswave single frequency THz imaging (SFTI) method rather than
a time domain method. Technology which might be utilized in
the design of such a camera has been described by Öjefors et
al. [15]. Recently, SFTI has been employed for the imaging of
skin cancer with transmission measurements [16] and reflection
measurements [17].
This pilot project evaluates the potential of SFTI reflectance
measurements to assist with BCS, for which a THz system based
on a molecular gas laser has been constructed. For the evaluation, specimens were excised at UMMS, sent to UM/A for
THz imaging, then returned to UMMS for standard histology
analysis. Histology results served as the true references against
which the THz results were compared. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) results for five of the six samples were comparable to those obtained with TPI by Fitzgerald et al. [6]. Although more samples would be required for a proper statistical
analysis, our results are encouraging and suggest the practicability of future SFTI THz cameras.

2168-2194/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE

786

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

Fig. 1. Focusing element layout.

85 mTorr of difluoromethane gas in the FIR tube, a 650 W
beam is generated with a frequency of 1.8913 THz[19]. This
frequency was proximately verified using a Michelson interferometer. The frequency produced an easily-reproducible beam
of relatively high power. The work of Ashworth et al. suggests
that choosing a lower THz frequency could have increased
refractive index contrast between cancerous and healthy fibrous
tissues by a few percent, but this advantage was outweighed by
the aforementioned practical benefit [20]. Furthermore, higher
frequencies afford higher spatial resolution. The refractive
index of breast tissues at THz frequencies is further explored in
Section II-G. Polarization is perpendicular to the optics table as
tested by having rotated a grating of thin and uniformly aligned
wires until the beam was most severely attenuated.
The FIR laser is modulated by periodically diverting the CO
beam path with an acousto-optic modulator (AOM). This type of
modulator works by allowing the compression and rarefaction
of sound waves to effectively change refractive index within a
transparent material. Our particular device uses germanium. It
may be operated as a Raman-Nath device, which has many diffracted orders; or as a Bragg device, which concentrates most
of the power into the zeroth and first orders. The Bragg configuration is preferred for application as a modulation switch
and is achieved when
, where is the interaction
length between the laser beam and sound field, is the sound
wavelength, and is the laser wavelength [21]. For maximum
efficiency in a Bragg device, the incident laser beam must make
an angle of incidence with the sound field of
.
For this application, the minimal reflection, carefully controlled
diffraction, and precise timing afforded by the AOM give it an
advantage over standard modulators such as chopper wheels.
B. Beam Splitter

Fig. 2. Photograph of focusing element layout.

II. MEASUREMENT APPARATUS AND METHODS
The apparatus consists primarily of a THz laser source and a
series of optical elements for focusing the beam onto a sample
and then focusing the reflected beam onto a detector. A computer records detector output while positioning the sample in a
plane using two motorized platforms. Images are created by calculating refractive index based on reflected power and mapping
it to a color scale. The general layout of the system is shown in
the diagram of Fig. 1 and in the photograph of Fig. 2.
A. Laser Source and Modulator
THz radiation is in the far-infrared (FIR) region and may be
generated with a laser system. The laser source available to this
project was originally constructed for radio astronomy at the
South Pole [18]. It is a cascade of two lasers with the output of
a CO laser entering an FIR laser tube. This system is capable
of operation at one of many frequencies, depending on FIR gas
selection, FIR gas pressure, and fine adjustment of the CO laser
tube length.
The CO laser has a wavelength of approximately 10 m
and a power of 30 W. When tuned to a 9P10 laser line, and with

The laser beam was made normal to the sample in consideration of potential future in-vivo applications and for avoidance of
the birefringence effects possible in crystal sample covers. Since
incident and reflected beams occupy the same space, normal incidence requires the use of a beam splitter. Our beam splitter is
oriented at 45 degrees and is made of 25 m Mylar, which has
a refractive index of 1.79 [22].
As shown in Fig. 1, the beam is reflected by the beam splitter,
reflected by the sample, then transmitted through the beam
splitter on its way to the detector. Minimization of beam splitter
losses therefore becomes maximization of
, such that
, where
and are reflected and transmitted
power. The solution is
for a best possible efficiency of
25%. Standard techniques were used to calculate a 73% transmission for our 45 degree beam splitter [23]. The efficiency is
then
.
C. Focusing Elements
The layout of focusing elements was designed in the same
way that Gaussian beam telescopes are designed. For this, mirrors were regarded as lenses of infinitesimal thickness. The design was evaluated using ray transfer matrices, which utilize the
simplifying assumptions of Gaussian beam optics, a technique
commonly employed in the design of THz systems [24].
1) Initial Design Using the Gaussian Beam Telescope
Method: A Gaussian beam telescope, or Newtonian telescope

ST. PETER et al.: SINGLE FREQUENCY TERAHERTZ IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

787

TABLE I
DETAILS OF FOCUSING ELEMENT LAYOUT

Fig. 3. Beam width by position. Mirror numbers are as given in Fig. 1.

[25], is a telescope in which the sum of the focal lengths
between any two focusing elements is equal to the distance
between those elements [23]. This technique simplifies design
because knowing focal points requires consideration of only
the previous element. In our setup, these afocal telescopes are
formed by mirrors
and
, as well as
and
of the
reflection path.
A basic representation of the final design is shown in Fig. 1,
where non-focusing flat mirrors are unlabeled. Specifications
for each of the focusing elements are given in Table I. Although
this design began with the Gaussian beam telescope concept,
small adjustments have been made such that the distance between elements is not always equal to the sum of their focal
lengths.
2) Evaluation Using Ray Transfer Matrices: Ray transfer
matrices, sometimes called ABCD matrices, were used to
find Gaussian beam width for all points along the beam path.
Gaussian beam optics uses the paraxial approximation to avoid
a full treatment of the diffraction of electromagnetic waves. A
paraxial ray is a ray which forms only small angles with the
axis of propagation so that simplifying approximations such as
,
, and
may be used. First-order
ray transfer matrices were applied with an iterative technique
using the complex beam parameter, , which is a combination
of the two beam dispersion parameters
(1)
The beam width, , is the first beam dispersion parameter
and follows from the definition of electric field strength in a
Gaussian beam, described by
(2)
where is the distance from the axis of propagation,
is the
field magnitude at
, and is the beam width for that particular point along the axis [23]. At the focal plane, beam width is
referred to as beam waist and denoted . The equiphase wavefront may be thought of as a patch on the surface of a sphere of
radius . This is the second beam dispersion parameter, known
as Gaussian beam radius. , , and are functions of , where
is the position along the axis of propagation. In the general ray
transfer matrix equation,
represents the present value,
represents the previous value, and is a normalization constant
[25]
(3)

The ABCD matrix of (3) may be replaced with a cascade of matrices, each representing either an empty space segment or a focusing element of the optics setup [23]. Iterative multiplication
was seeded by knowing beam width at the source and setting
initial beam radius to infinity. By evaluation of
(4)
in which aperture radius is denoted , more than 99% of
Gaussian beam power is found to pass through a hole of diameter
[25]. The initial beam width is then approximately
mm
for our 4 mm circular aperture. Real-valued beam
width may be extracted from the final complex beam parameter
(5)
The beam width radius is shown as a function of position in
Fig. 3. The maximum value is about mm. The largest mirror
must, therefore, have a diameter of at least
mm
cm.
Fig. 3 also shows that beam width at the detector and sample
are about 600 m. A more careful treatment of beam width at
the sample is provided in Section II-J. The beam is collimated
only at the focal plane, before which it is converging and after
which it is diverging. The axial range over which the beam may
be considered reasonably collimated is known as the Rayleigh
range [26]:
(6)
Evaluation of (6) yields an acceptable margin of error for sample
placement along the beam axis of 7 mm.
D. Detectors
The detectors measure laser power, which is amplitude modulated by a 10 Hz, 50% duty cycle square wave. Detector outputs
connect to lock-in amplifiers and the square wave reference. Initial measurements were made using only a Molectron P4-42
pyroelectric detector. Sensitivity was insufficient so it was replaced with a liquid-helium cooled bolometer. The current setup
uses both detectors in the manner described in Section II-E-1).
1) Pyroelectric Detector: The Molectron P4-42 pyroelectric
detector operates by allowing radiation to heat a lithium tantalate (LiTaO ) crystal. As temperature increases, crystal lattice spacings change, thus changing the polarization properties,

788

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

REFRACTIVE INDEX

AND

TABLE II
POWER REFLECTIVITY BY CALIBRATION FLUID
AND TISSUE TYPE

where cancels when a ratio of
and
is taken. The remaining gain terms may be aggregated into a constant, , as
in

Fig. 4. Bolometer Detector Frequency Response.

thereby changing current flow through a transimpedance amplifier. Noise equivalent power of 90nW Hz is valid, according
to the datasheet, for 10–800 Hz [27].
2) Bolometer: The liquid-helium cooled bolometer, a model
HDL-5 from Infrared Laboratories, has a noise equivalent
power of approximately 1 pW Hz. It works by allowing
signals to heat a bulk silicon resistor. This detector has a faster
frequency response than the pyroelectric detector and can
be used with a higher modulation frequency. The frequency
response is shown in Fig. 4.
For highest detector response, it seems reasonable to use the
lowest practical modulation frequency for both detectors. However, below a certain modulation frequency, waveforms from
the detectors contain high frequency components and variance
increases. A good balance for the pyroelectric detector is 10 Hz.
Although the bolometer operates best at modulation frequencies
of 50 Hz or more, 10 Hz was chosen to accommodate the lesser
of the two detectors.
E. Calibration
1) Dual Detector Method: To counteract the effect of laser
source fluctuations, a method was developed which uses two
detectors for continuous calibration. Near the output aperture of
the laser source, a 25 m beam splitter diverts half the beam to
be focused onto the pyroelectric detector (a.k.a. pyro). For this,
a 150 mm off-axis paraboloidal mirror (OAP) was placed 700
mm after the laser aperture and the pyro was placed 200 mm
after the OAP. The beam splitter is placed between elements
and
of the original setup.
The power of the laser source, , is attenuated by
along its path to the pyroelectric detector, which
has a response of
. Power reported by the pyro, , can be
calculated using
(7)
The power of the laser source, , is attenuated by
along its path to the sample, where sample power reflectivity
may be denoted as . The power is then attenuated by
along its path to the bolometer, which has a
response of
. The power reported by the bolometer,
, is calculated using
(8)

(9)
where
may be determined by evaluating
for a
sample of known . Silicon is used, which has
.
[28].
After solving for with a calibration measurement, the silicon may be replaced with any sample of interest. Sample power
reflectivity follows from evaluation of
. Because
contains only system constants, re-calibration is unnecessary. It
should be mentioned that what has been referred to as a sample
in this section, except for the silicon wafer, was a combination of a sample material and a quartz cover. To compensate for
cover effects, additional calculations are necessary as described
in Section II-G.
2) Ethanol Solution Method: The system can be calibrated
by measuring any material of known reflectivity. A method of
using water and ethanol mixtures as calibration references is
described by Yngvesson et al. [29]. The two-detector method
was found to be more convenient and accurate than using liquid
references.
F. Terahertz Reflectivity of Breast Tissues
Expected power reflectivities for human tissues were calculated using dielectric properties as measured by Ashworth et
al. [20]. This reference gives the refractive index for frequencies ranging from 0.3 to 1.9THz for breast tumor (carcinoma),
healthy fibrous tissue, and fatty (adipose) tissue. The effects of
the imaginary part of the refractive index, which is related to the
absorption coefficient, were found to be negligible and so only
the real part was used. The relationship between power reflectivity and refractive index is as shown below [30]
(10)
Table II summarizes the reflectivity of water, ethanol, and the
is predicted to be
three types of breast tissue. Note that
20% higher for carcinoma than for fibrous tissue. The ratio between carcinoma and adipose tissue is more than a factor of two.
Clearly, distinguishing carcinoma and healthy fibrous tissue is
the greatest challenge in this project. Also note that the reflectivities of water and carcinoma are very close at 1.89 THz.

ST. PETER et al.: SINGLE FREQUENCY TERAHERTZ IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

789

G. Sample Cover
Because the system measures reflected power, it cannot distinguish between rough reflective surfaces and flat absorptive
surfaces. For this reason, it is desirable to flatten the samples
with a material which is reasonably transparent to THz. Surface roughness of the sample must be small relative to the THz
wavelength of 159 m [31]. After testing several Mylar and
quartz sample covers, 1.9113 mm single crystal z-cut quartz was
chosen. The selection of this cover was of great importance to
the production of quality images.
1) Mylar: Available Mylar thicknesses were 6 m and
25 m. Every attempt was made to keep the plastic taut over
the sample, including heat-shrinking. Even so, usefulness was
limited by the persistence of bulges.
2) Quartz of 1.9113 mm: The rigidity of quartz gives it an
advantage over Mylar. It has a tensile modulus of more than
70 N m . It can be shown that more than 2.5 N of force applied
to the center of the cover would be required for a m deflection
at our dimensions—a deflection that would be negligible at our
wavelength of 159 m. Also, quartz has a Moh’s hardness of 7,
making it difficult to scratch.1 A quartz plate was characterized
as follows.
1) Separate power reflectivity measurements were made with
air and water below the quartz cover as shown in Fig. 5.
The difference between those measurements was 14.5 dB.
Each of the two measurement values was an average of 100
measurements at a single spatial point, taken according to
the general measurement description given in Section II-I1.
Standard deviation values for air and water power reflectivity were 0.0024% and 0.089%, respectively.
2) Agilent ADS software simulations (http://www.agilent.com) were run for air
and water
THz , plotting power reflectivity as a
function of cover thickness. The refractive index value
for water was calculated using the Double Debye Model
as described by Jepsen et al. [32]. The 14.5-dB difference found in (1) corresponded to cover thicknesses of
mm
and
mm
.
Although thickness could have been any of several periodic values (see Fig. 7), 1.9113 and 1.9128 mm were
closest to an approximate measurement made with a micrometer.
3) Diffraction and dielectric absorption effectively attenuate
the beam as it passes through the cover. From simulation,
which does not consider diffractive losses, power reflectivity was 11.22% for covered water. The simulation also
used a loss tangent value which was only an approximation. This simulated reflectivity value, which is equal to
9.5 dB, can be seen in Fig. 6 for
at the relevant
thicknesses. From measurement, which necessarily includes diffractive losses and unknown loss tangent, power
reflectivity was 4.40%. The ratio of these reflectivities,
2.55, may be regarded as a correction factor.
4) For quartz thicknesses of 1.9113 and 1.9128 mm,
was determined from simulation for a
range of refractive indices expected for lumpectomy/mastectomy samples (see Table II). The result was virtually
1Almaz Optics Inc., Marlton, NJ, USA. [Online] Available: http://www.almazoptics.com/quartz.htm

Fig. 5. Conceptual illustration of air and water calibration measurements.

Fig. 6. Simulation of the reflected power from quartz covered samples as a
function of the quartz thickness. The air and water samples have refractive inand
, respectively. The thickness of 1.9128 mm that
dices of
corresponds with the measured calibration data is marked.

identical for both thicknesses and is shown in Fig. 8. Because there would be no performance difference between
a 1.9113 mm cover and a 1.9128 mm cover, the thickness
is arbitrarily regarded as 1.9113 mm for ease of communication. Before using the mapping of Fig. 7, measured
power reflectivities must be multiplied by the correction
factor given above.
All simulations were based on the schematic of Fig. 9. The
leftmost component represents air above the sample cover, the
middle component represents the sample cover, and the rightmost component represents the sample. Schematic parameters
are defined in Table III.
The refractive index value was taken from Bréhat et al., who
reported for quartz of
at 1.89 THz. This value
was used in the calculation of dielectric constant, attenuation
constant, and loss tangent.
H. Sample Holder
The sample holder design is shown in Fig. 10. It consists of
two pieces of acrylic, each approximately 6.5 cm by 6.5 cm by
0.5 cm. The top square has a 3 cm thru-hole cut from its center.
The bottom piece has a 3 cm square milled from its center with
a depth of roughly 0.25 cm. Using screws, the sample cover is
tightly sandwiched between the two squares, with the sample
itself pressed within the 0.25 cm milled hole.
I. Lock-in Amplifiers and Data Capture
1) Discrete-Position Measurements: Each of the two detectors is connected to a separate lock-in amplifier (a.k.a.
lock-in). For an explanation of the role of each detector, see
Section II-E-1).
While reading values from the lock-in amplifiers, the computer controls two motorized platforms which position the

790

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

Fig. 7. Periodic points of minimum reflectivity..

Fig. 9. Agilent ADS Simulation Model.

Fig. 10. Acrylic sample holder.

Fig. 8. Mapping between

and

.

TABLE III
QUARTZ PROPERTIES FOR SCHEMATIC MODEL.

velocity for each horizontal sweep. These measurements
were made when the bolometer, which can operate at high
modulation frequencies, was the only detector in the system.
Experimentation with this method has been suspended until
either the pyroelectric detector is replaced by a detector having
a faster response or the modulation scheme is changed (see
Section V-C).
J. Spatial Resolution
The THz beam is cropped by a circular aperture as it exits
the laser source. The Gaussian beam diameter, , at the mirror
above the sample (
in Fig. 1 and Table I) is
mm
mm. The focal length of
is 89 mm for an F/D ratio of 3.6.
The Gaussian radius of the beam waist is given by [25]:
mm

sample. The number of rows, number of columns, and spatial
intervals between pixels are all variable. Generally, 2 cm square
images are made at 1 mm intervals. This interval was chosen
to roughly correspond with the expected system resolution and
also to permit a sample to be scanned in a practical amount of
time.
The lock-in which connects to the bolometer has a time constant of 0.5 s. The lock-in which connects to the pyroelectric detector has a time constant of 1 s. These values were chosen qualitatively by monitoring signal volatility. They also fall within
reasonable quantitative bounds, because each time constant contains at least 5 modulation cycles and each pixel measurement
has a duration of at least 5 time constants (5 s). We also estimate
that the noise power is about 3 times less for the lock-in setup
than for a practical LNA and filter combination.
Typically, measurements of breast cancer samples took 45
minutes. This is not a fundamental limitation but is due to the
makeup of this particular prototypical system.
2) Continuous-Velocity Measurements: For continuous-velocity measurements, the sample was moved at a constant

m
mm

m

(11)
The resolution diameter is, therefore,
m
mm.
The integrated power within this diameter is 86.5% of the total
power. A resolution metric that can be directly applied to our
case of locating a straight margin is the distance between the
10% and 90% power points in a measurement of something approximating a unit step function. For this, a gold mirror was
masked with absorptive tape to create a reflective section in a 20
mm line measurement. The length of this section was 5.1 mm for
the horizontal measurement and 5 mm for the vertical. The discrepancy is a result of the tape strips not being perfectly parallel.
Fig. 11 shows the result for the horizontal measurement and the
resolution was about 1.8 mm for both cases. Another way of determining resolution is to consider that the measured power reflectivity result is the convolution of a squared Gaussian cross
section with a single rectangular pulse. The squared Gaussian
cross section was stretched and compressed along the horizontal
axis until the convolution result resembled the measured data.
This final convolvement result is also shown in Fig. 11. Discrepancies between the measurements and the fit curves could be due
to the sample not being a perfectly reflective stripe, excitation

ST. PETER et al.: SINGLE FREQUENCY TERAHERTZ IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

791

Fig. 13. Off-sample mask, sample 7A.
Fig. 11. Horizontal resolution measurement.

Fig. 12. Superimposed optical and THz images of sample 7A (a) Optical. (b)
Optical and THz. (c) THz.

of higher-order modes in the FIR laser tube, or the beam having
diffracted into higher order Gaussian modes in our multi-mirror
system. According to Siegman, a center coupling hole in an FIR
tube can introduce higher-order Hermite-Gaussian modes [25].
To match the measured 10% to 90% resolution value of 1.8 mm,
the estimated beam diameter (
) would be 1.8 mm, 35%
wider than the theoretical value of (11). This is larger than the
1 mm interval used in scanning of the motorized platform (see
Section II-I1), so the system therefore oversamples with regard
to the point spread function (PSF). The power within one pixel
is estimated to be 75% of the total. We note that the system is
still expected to perform the task of locating margins of carcinomas within the specified accuracy of 1 mm.
K. Post-Processing
1) Technique and Calculations: Reflectivity is determined
from THz measurements as described in Section II-E-1). Refractive index is then calculated from reflectivity using (10).
Next, a projective planar transformation is applied to an optical
photograph for image superposition as shown in Fig. 12, accounting for variations in orientation and position of the optical
camera. For the projective transformation, six corresponding
points were chosen between the optical and THz images. Most
of the image processing was done with Matlab and the Image
Processing Toolbox. Sample 7A is used as an example in this
section.
The discrete-position measurement technique is used to
produce images such as the rightmost image of Fig. 12.
Smoothened versions of these images, which can be seen in the
results section and in Fig. 14, are created with spline interpolation for ease of comparison with optical images. Suggestions
for a more-advanced interpolation technique are provided in
Section V-C.

Fig. 14. Spline interpolation, sample 7A.

A mask is created (Fig. 13) to exclude those pixels which
are not part of the medical sample. The resolution matches the
measurement grid, which is usually 20 mm by 20 mm.
Cancerous regions are identified using histological micrographs which have been annotated by surgical pathologists. An
example of such a micrograph is shown in Fig. 15. Histological
micrographs are made into maps, which are made into masks. A
map is a mapping of cancerous regions, as determined by histology, onto the optical photograph taken at the time of THz
measurement. Masks are made by applying a color thresholding
algorithm to the maps and are regarded as the true references
against which THz images must be compared. Maps and masks
can be seen in the results in Section V, and also in Fig. 16.
Histology maps are made manually from micrographs with
assistance from GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP)
software. Simple projective transformations, of the type utilized
for mapping THz images onto optical images, would have been
inadequate for correction of the multi-dimensional squashing
and stretching that occurs during the histology process.
Because cancer is the most reflective of our tissue types, it
suffices to set some limit,
, such that tissue is regarded
as cancerous if
. As this limit is varied, a
succession of masks is created for comparison to, for example,
the mask of Fig. 16.
Fig. 17(a) has the lowest
and identifies every pixel
as a cancerous region. By doing this, the system has coincidentally classified every cancerous pixel as cancerous and so the
true positive rate is 1. In other words, the sensitivity is 1.
Fig. 17(e) has the highest
and no cancer has been
identified. By doing this, the system has coincidentally classi-

792

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

Fig. 17. Varying Refractive Index Threshold (a)
(c)
(d)
(e)

(b)
.

Fig. 15. Histological micrograph.

Fig. 18. ROC with Color Mapping for

Fig. 16. Map and mask. (a) Histology map. (b) Cancer mask.

fied every non-cancerous pixel as non-cancerous and so the true
negative rate is 1. In other words, the specificity is 1.
It is common to illustrate sensitivity and specificity using a
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot as shown in Fig. 18.
The medical community requires false positive rate (FPR) along
the abscissa, which is equivalent to one minus the specificity.
The refractive index threshold has been mapped to a color scale.
These plots are useful when, for example, we would like
to know with 90% certainty that a malignant region of tissue
will be identified by the test as being malignant. In the case of
Fig. 18, we would know to set
to 1.43 by using the color
code. At that operating point, we would expect (1-specificity)
to be 0.6 = 60%, i.e., a 40% chance that a non-malignant region

.

of tissue will be identified as non-malignant by the test. However, due to variations in refractive index values for the same
tissue types across different samples, the usefulness of setting
using the ROC is limited.
A figure of merit for ROC plots is the area under the curve,
sometimes called the discrimination. Discrimination is closer
to 1 for systems having coincidentally high sensitivity and
specificity.
III. LOGISTICS AND PRACTICAL MEDICAL SAMPLE CONCERNS
Clinical samples were transported from The University of
Massachusetts Medical School (UMMS) in Worcester to UMass
Amherst for THz processing while submerged in saline solution. This is true of all samples except 11A and 12A, which were
preserved in formalin before THz measurement. After measurement, the samples were submerged in formalin and sent to a laboratory for histological analysis. The samples were generally in

ST. PETER et al.: SINGLE FREQUENCY TERAHERTZ IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

saline for one or two days before measurement. Also, the samples were refrigerated while at UMass Amherst. During measurement, the sample was in the sample holder of Section II-H
for at least 45 minutes.
There are differences between the THz responses of fresh and
necrotic tissue as documented by Png et al. [33]. Two ways
of preserving samples without protein fixing are saline submersion and Hank’s buffer submersion. Hank’s buffer is a glucose-enriched buffer that approximates the environment that
tissue would encounter in-vivo. We chose to use saline, which
is commonly used at UMMS.
Too much time in saline destroys medical samples. Interestingly, the deterioration seems to happen in two opposite ways.
One sample which had been in saline for more than a week
turned soft and gelatinous. A similar sample, which had been in
saline for the same amount of time, became harder. Although the
reason for this is unknown, it is possible that the softer sample
had a higher fat content or had experienced putrefaction as a result of bacterial growth.
One approach to the necrosis and saline problems is preservation of tissue in formalin. Formalin does what is known as
cross linking of proteins, which prevents decomposition that
could affect THz measurements [34]. However, analysis of formalin-fixed samples might not be useful in regards to the eventual goal of having an operating room device.
Residual hydration is another concern. Since it is hypothesized that water is the bio-marker, handling of samples before THz measurement is critical to consistent measurement results. This problem is further complicated by the fact that dehydration rates vary according to tissue type, with denser tissues drying more slowly [35]. One solution is lyophilization or
freeze-drying [33]. Lyophilization preserves freshness while removing water. However, this would be impractical for the eventual goal of operating room use and difficult or impossible to use
with the necessary quartz sample cover.

MEAN VALUES

793

OF

TABLE IV
CANCEROUS AND NON-CANCEROUS PIXEL
REFRACTIVE INDICES

Fig. 19. Compound normalized refractive index, off-sample mask, and cancer
mask for samples 7A, 8A, 9A, 10A, 11A, and 12A.

IV. RESULTS
Initially, phantom materials allowed for test and development
of the system without using valuable medical samples [29], [36].
The phantom materials were typically deli meats. These showed
some contrast, but were not useful for quantitative system evaluation due to a lack of comparative data in the literature. After
considerable system development, usable results began with the
seventh medical sample.
Only one side of each specimen received THz and histological analysis. Marked and unmarked histology slides for those
samples, along with large-scale THz images, are available as
part of a thesis through the UMass Scholarworks system (http://
scholarworks.umass.edu/) [36].
The measured refractive index was higher for cancerous
tissue than for non-cancerous tissue (except for Sample 8A),
as expected [5], [6]. However, average refractive index values,
as determined by the THz setup and shown in Table IV, were
generally lower than the values expected from earlier TPI work
([20]; see Table II). Reasons for this, which might include
sample hydration levels, are considered in the Conclusion
section. Sample hydration is important because it is believed
that the increased amount of interstitial fluid resulting from
angiogenesis affects THz absorption [6], [37]. Angiogenesis,

Fig. 20. Compound ROC (72% discrimination).

the physiological process through which new blood vessels
form from pre-existing vessels, is a fundamental step in the
transition of tumors from dormant to malignant states. Whether
and how other structural differences in cancerous tissue affect
reflectivity is a subject requiring further study.
Measurements from all six medical samples were combined
to create the ROC of Fig. 20. This ROC was made by combining
refractive index images and masks as shown in Fig. 19, then
using the same post-processing technique for those compound
files as for the files of individual samples.
Refractive index was normalized across samples by subtracting respective means and dividing by respective standard

794

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

TABLE V
ROC DISCRIMINATION

Fig. 21. Refractive index of non-cancerous areas, 7A.

Fig. 23. Distribution of cancerous and non-cancerous pixels.

contribute to the long-term goal of helping patients by encouraging future SFTI projects in the field.
B. Evaluation of System Capability
Fig. 22. Refractive index of cancerous areas, 7A.

deviations. Consequently, there is no valid refractive index
color mapping in the ROC of Fig. 20. Lack of valid refractive
index thresholds across multiple samples is a problem that
remains to be solved, as discussed in the Conclusion section.
ROC plots for individual samples, with the exception of Sample
8A, are qualitatively similar to this compound ROC. A potential
reason for Sample 8A results being different from the rest is
given in the Conclusion section. The discrimination values for
each separate ROC are shown in Table V.
For some measurements, slight reshaping of areas marked as
cancerous by pathologists would have substantially improved
discrimination values. For example, sensitivity would have increased if the area marked with A in Fig. 21 had been identified
as cancerous by histology. Likewise, specificity would have increased if the area marked with B in Fig. 22 had been identified
as non-cancerous by histology.
By collecting the cancerous and non-cancerous pixels from
the six normalized images, distributions can be plotted to illustrate the difficulty level with which each pixel may be classified.
The probability mass function (PMF) of the combined result is
shown in Fig. 23.
V. CONCLUSION
A. Contributions of This Project
An apparatus has been designed and built which uses power
reflectivity measurements at 1.89THz to locate cancer in excised
human breast tissue samples. This system is able to use SFTI
techniques to provide absolute refractive index values of such
specimens for the first time. This pilot project will hopefully

As noted in the Results section, one way of summarizing the
effectiveness of this imaging setup is with discrimination values
from the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. The
discrimination mean of about 73% (excluding Sample 8A) is
comparable to what was obtained for the best single parameter
when using the TPI technique [6]. For clinical usage, doctors
at the University of Massachusetts Medical School recommend
specificity and sensitivity values of at least 90%. This requirement is roughly equivalent to a 90% discrimination value as
could be demonstrated with an ROC plot composed of two line
segments. TPI researchers have been able to increase discrimination values by employing support vector machines (SVM)
and principal component analysis (PCA) involving as many as
10 parameters [6]. Similar improvement may be expected from
SFTI if several parameters are analyzed.
Sample 8A was the only sample to give a discrimination value
of less than 70%. A potential reason for this is that the tissues
measured by the THz setup were shaved-away during the histological micrograph preparation. Other conclusions include the
following:
• Mean refractive index results, as shown in Table IV, indicate that malignant tissue has consistently and significantly
higher refractive index than benign tissue and especially
adipose tissue. This is in agreement with previous TPI results [5], [6].
• Refractive index thresholds vary between samples. This
might be caused by any of several possible reasons. 1)
The samples might not have been handled and prepared
identically. However,
was different for Sample 9A
and Sample 10A although they were excised together and
imaged consecutively. For a 90% sensitivity level,
would be 1.55 for Sample 9A but 1.9 for Sample 10A. 2)
Different samples might have reacted differently to time

ST. PETER et al.: SINGLE FREQUENCY TERAHERTZ IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

in saline solution. An instance of this was mentioned in
Section III. Also, we note that the TPI data were generally
obtained from freshly cut samples without immersion in
any liquid. 3) There may be real differences between SFTI
and TPI, especially since the TPI data at our frequency of
1.89THz are at the upper end of the useful range of the
TPI technique. This might be tested by performing SFTI
imaging at frequencies lower than 1.89THz. 4) The need
for the correction factor mentioned in Section II-G2 may
indicate subtle optical problems necessitating further investigation. 5) Although the Rayleigh range should be 7
mm as calculated in Section II-C2, there may be small variations in the sample position which must be controlled.
• The system sometimes has trouble differentiating carcinoma from benign dense fibrous tissue. This is probably
because, as can be seen in Table II, these tissues have refractive index differences of only a few percent. A solution to this problem might be to increase the signal-to-noise
ratio of the system, for which some ideas are presented in
Section V-C.
• Needle biopsy nectrotic fat is falsely identified as cancer
tissue.
C. Future Work Suggestions
In general, THz imaging technology lags behind other
imaging modalities such as MRI, Raman spectroscopy, and
confocal microscopy. One way to proceed in the further development of SFTI is to combine THz imaging with other
imaging techniques that might make it a more competitive
tool to aid in cancer diagnosis. An example of this, albeit at
optical frequencies, is the work of Patel et al., which combines dye-enhanced macroscopic polarization imaging with
multimodal confocal microscopy for the detection of breast
cancer [38]. Other suggestions for more short-term future work
include additional continuous-velocity measurements, quartz
surface normalization, polarization measurements, additional
phantom experiments, additional measurements of ethanol
solutions, measurements at multiple discrete frequencies, and
normalization of hydration differences between samples.
1) Logistics might somehow be streamlined such that samples
would not need to spend time in saline or formalin before
THz imaging. This would address two of the four concerns
in the second item of Section V-B.
2) There are filtering techniques that can use the point spread
function (PSF) to improve the THz images, two of which
are the Wiener–Kolmogorov and Richardson-Lucy algorithms. These would be especially useful if the current
setup were adapted to use the continuous-velocity measurement technique, which could collect thousands of
points rather than the current discrete-position measurement grid of 400 points for a typical 20 mm by 20 mm
sample. With the modulation frequency set to 10Hz, there
is some doubt as to whether continuous-velocity measurements could be accomplished in a practical amount of
time. However, modulation frequency, platform velocity,
and time constant could be experimentally adjusted in the
mature setup. If necessary, the pyroelectric detector could
be replaced with a detector having a faster response. Another possibility is a double modulation scheme in which

795

low and high modulation frequencies, for accommodation
of both detectors, would be simultaneously present.
3) A technique could be devised for the normalization of potential quartz surface aberrations. Calculation shows that,
at our operating point, a difference of only a few micrometers could significantly effect measurements [36]. Unfortunately, sample cover position and orientation have not been
consistent and so this could not easily be retroactively applied.
4) The system might be modified to measure polarization of
the reflected beam, in hopes that a difference might be detected between healthy and cancerous tissue. This type of
method was employed at optical frequencies by Patel et
al. [38]. As far as we know, there are no published results
related to such effects at THz frequencies. These effects
could potentially occur due to differences in microscopic
structure between tissues.
5) It is possible that some phantom recipes did not work because the THz system was in an immature state. This could
be revisited.
6) Ethanol and water solutions, each having a different known
dielectric constant as explained in Section II-E2, could be
measured for verification or enhancement of the refractive
index mapping in Section II-G2. Multiple measurements
could be made within the expected medical sample ranges
of refractive index.
7) Measuring samples at multiple discrete frequencies might
improve tissue characterization. Such a multiple parameter space might be conceptually similar to the work of
Fitzgerald et al. [6].
8) The system combines two calibration techniques. Absolute values are found by calibration with a silicon wafer,
and fluctuations of the laser source are normalized by the
simultaneous usage of two detectors. A third calibration
scheme might be included to account for hydration differences across samples. This might involve timing various
sample preparation phases or somehow measuring sample
hydration immediately before THz measurement.
Finally, we return to the long-range future potential of SFTI
technology as mentioned in the introduction. THz cameras with
up to 10,000 pixels have recently been developed based on lowcost CMOS technology [15]. Such cameras can produce video
rate images and are compatible with the SFTI technology described in this paper. CMOS THz cameras can be made as small
as standard optical digital cameras and thus would consume
little space in an operating room. In high volume production,
CMOS THz cameras will be orders of magnitude less expensive than TPI technology such as the TPI probe presented by
Ashworth et al. [39]. The remaining problem is to develop a
correspondingly low-cost and compact THz source. The next
stage of SFTI may employ THz multiplier sources that are now
commercially available and much more compact than our gas
laser. Ultimately, an SFTI system for clinical use would require
something from a future generation of THz sources, such as for
example the one described by Muthee et al. [40].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Dr. D. Gupta, of NewLans Technology and Adjunct Professor of Electrical and Computer En-

796

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, JULY 2013

gineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, for his early
support in this effort.

REFERENCES
[1] P. Siegel, “Terahertz technology in biology and medicine,” IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 2438–2447, Oct.
2004.
[2] D. Mittleman, Sensing with Terahertz Radiation. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[3] R. Woodward, V. Wallace, D. Arnone, E. Linfield, and M. Pepper, “Terahertz pulsed imaging of skin cancer in the time and frequency domain,” J. Biol. Phys., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 257–259, 2003.
[4] Y. Calvin, S. Fan, Y. Sun, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, “The potential
of terahertz imaging for cancer diagnosis: A review of investigations
to date,” Quant Imag. Med, Surgery, vol. 2, pp. 33–45, 2012.
[5] A. J. Fitzgerald, V. P. Wallace, M. Jimenez-Linan, L. Bobrow, R. J.
Pye, A. D. Purushotham, and D. D. Arnone, “Terahertz pulsed imaging
of human breast tumors,” Radiology, vol. 239, no. 2, pp. 533–540, May
2006.
[6] A. Fitzgerald, S. Pinder, A. D. Purushotham, P. O’Kelly, P. C. Ashworth, and V. P. Wallace, “Classification of terahertz-pulsed imaging
data from excised breast tissue,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 17, no. 1, pp.
016005-1–10, Jan. 2012.
[7] E. Pickwell-MacPherson, T. Lo, A. Fitzgerald, E. Provenzano, S.
Pinder, A. Purushotham, and V. Wallace, “Application of finite difference time domain methods to terahertz spectroscopy measurements
of breast cancer,” in IEEE MTT Symp., Honolulu, HI, USA, 2007, pp.
1379–1381.
[8] G. J. Wilmink, B. D. Rivest, C. Roth, B. L. Ibey, J. A. Payne, L. X.
Cundin, J. E. Grundt, X. Peralta, D. G. Mixon, and W. P. Roach, “In
vitro investigation of the biological effects associated with human
dermal fibroblasts exposed to 2.52 THz radiation,” Lasers in Surgery
Med., vol. 43, pp. 152–163, 2011.
[9] P. H. Siegel and V. Pikov, “THz in biology and medicine: Towards
quantifying and understanding the interaction of millimeter and submillimeter waves with cells and cell processes,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 7562,
2010.
[10] L. Jacobs, “Positive margins: The challenge continues for breast surgeons,” Ann. Surgical Oncol., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1271–1272, Mar. 2008.
[11] L. E. McCahill, R. M. Single, E. J. A. Bowles, H. S. Feigelson, T.
A. James, T. Barney, J. M. Engel, and A. A. Onitilo, “Variability in
re-excision following breast conservation surgery,” J. AMA, vol. 307,
no. 5, pp. 467–475, 2012.
[12] N. Bijker, J. L. Peterse, L. Duchateau, J. P. Julien, I. S. Fentiman, C.
Duval, S. D. Palma, J. Simony-Lafontaine, I. de Mascarel, and M. J. van
der Vijver, “Risk factors for recurrence and metastasis after breast-conserving therapy for ductal carcinoma in-situ: analysis of European organization for research and treatment of cancer trial 10853,” J. Clinic.
Oncol., vol. 19, pp. 2263–2271, 2001.
[13] S. Singletary, “Surgical margins in patients with early stage breast
cancer treated with breast conservation therapy,” Amer. J. Surgery,
vol. 184, pp. 383–393, 2002.
[14] M. Keskek, M. Kothari, B. Ardehali, N. Betambeau, N. Nasiri, and
G. P. Gui, “Factors predisposing to cavity margin positivity following
conservation surgery for breast cancer,” Eur. J. Surgical Oncol., vol.
30, pp. 1058–1064, 2004.
[15] E. Öjefors, U. Pfeiffer, A. Lisauskas, and H. Roskos, “A 0.65 THz
focal-plane array in a quarter-micron CMOS process technology,”
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 1968–1976, Jul. 2009.
[16] C. Joseph, A. Yaroslavsky, V. Neel, T. Goyette, and R. Giles, “Continuous wave terahertz transmission imaging of non-melanoma cancers,”
Lasers in Surgery and Medicine, vol. 43, pp. 457–462, 2012.
[17] C. Joseph, A. Yaroslavsky, V. Neel, T. Goyette, and R. Giles, “Continuous-wave terahertz reflection imaging of ex-vivo nonmelanoma skin
cancers,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 8261, 2012.
[18] E. Gerecht, S. Yngvesson, J. Nicholson, Y. Zhuang, F. R. Morales,
X. Zhao, D. Gu, R. Zannoni, M. Coulombe, J. Dickinson, T. Goyette,
W. Gorveatt, J. Waldman, P. Khosropanah, C. Groppi, A. Hedden, D.
Golish, C. Walker, J. Kooi, R. Chamberlin, A. Stark, C. Martin, R.
Stupak, N. Tothill, and A. Lane, “Deployment of TREND—a low noise
receiver user instrument at 1.25 THz to 1.5 THz for AST/RO at the
South Pole,” in 14th Int. Symp. Space THz Technol., Tucson, AZ, USA,
Apr. 2003.

[19] N. G. Douglas, Millimetre and Submillimetre Wavelength Lasers:
A Handbook of CW Measurements. Amsterdam, the Netherlands:
Springer-Verlag, 1989.
[20] P. C. Ashworth, E. Pickwell-MacPherson, E. Provenzano, S. E. Pinder,
A. D. Purushotham, M. Pepper, and V. P. Wallace, “Terahertz pulsed
spectroscopy of freshly excised human breast cancer,” Opt. Express,
vol. 17, no. 15, pp. 12 444–12 454, Jul. 2009.
[21] IntraAction, Model AG-406B21 Infrared Acousto-Optic Modulator Instruction Manual.
[22] X. Zhao, “Integrated antennas for THz hot electron bolometer mixers,”
Master’s thesis, Univ. Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA, 2005.
[23] P. F. Goldsmith, Quasioptical Systems: Gaussian Beam Quasioptical
Propagation and Applications. New York: IEEE Press, 1998.
[24] X. Zhang and J. Xu, Introduction to THz Wave Photonics. New York:
Springer, 2009.
[25] A. E. Siegman, Lasers. Mill Valley, CA, USA: University Science
Books, 1986.
[26] W. Demtröder, Laser Spectroscopy: Basic Concepts and Instrumentation, 3rd ed. New York: Springer, 2003.
[27] Molectron Detector, Inc, “P4–40 Low Noise Instruments” pp.
4–30 [Online]. Available: http://www.coherent.com/downloads/
P430P440DataSheet.pdf
[28] M. Ji, C. Musante, S. Yngvesson, A. Gatesman, and J. Waldman,
“Study of parylene as anti-reflection coating for silicon optics at THz
frequencies,” in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Space THz Technol. ISSTT),
Ann Arbor, MI, USA, May 2000, pp. 398–406.
[29] S. Yngvesson, B. St. Peter, P. Siqueira, P. Kelly, S. Glick, A. Karellas,
and A. Khan, “Feasibility demonstration of frequency domain terahertz
imaging in breast cancer margin determination,” in SPIE Photon. West
Conf., Jan. 2012.
[30] F. Ulaby, Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics, 5th ed. Upper
Saddle River, NJ, USA: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006.
[31] A. Jagannathan, A. J. Gatesman, and R. H. Giles, “Characterization
of roughness parameters of metallic surfaces using terahertz reflection
spectra,” Opt. Lett., vol. 34, no. 13, pp. 1927–1929, Jul. 2009.
[32] P. Jepsen, U. Moller, and H. Merbold, “Investigation of aqueous alcohol and sugar solutions with reflection terahertz time-domain spectroscopy,” Opt. Express, vol. 15, no. 22, pp. 14 717–14 737, 2007.
[33] G. Png, J. Choi, B. Ng, S. Mickan, D. Abbott, and X. Zhang, “The
impact of hydration changes in fresh bio-tissue on THz spectroscopic
measurements,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53, pp. 3501–3501, 2008.
[34] J. Bruce-Gregorios, Histopathologic Techniques. Quezon City,
Philippines: Goodwill Trading Co., Inc. .
[35] P. Knobloch, C. Schildknecht, T. Kleine-Ostmann, M. Koch, S. Hoffmann, M. Hofmann, E. Rehberg, M. Sperling, K. Donhuijsen, and G.
Hein, “Medical THz imaging: an investigation of histo-pathological
samples,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, p. 3875, 2002.
[36] B. St. Peter, “Terahertz imaging for cancer detection,” Master’s thesis,
Univ. Massachussetts, Amherst, MA, USA, 2012.
[37] C. B. Reid, A. Fitzgerald, G. Reese, R. Goldin, P. Tekkis, P. S. O’Kelly,
E. Pickwell-MacPherson, A. P. Gibson, and V. P. Wallace, “Terahertz
pulsed imaging of freshly excised human colonic tissues,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 56, pp. 4333–4353, Jun. 2011.
[38] R. Patel, A. Khan, D. Wirth, M. Kamionek, D. Kandil, R. Quinlan, and
A. N. Yaroslavsky, “Multimodal optical imaging for detecting breast
cancer,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 066008-1–9, Jun. 2012.
[39] P. C. Ashworth, P. O’Kelly, A. D. Purushotham, S. E. Pinder, and M.
Kontos, “An intra-operative THz probe for use during the surgical removal of breast tumors,” in Int. Conf. Infrared, Millim. Waves THz
Technol., Sep. 2008.
[40] M. Muthee, E. Carrion, J. Nicholson, and S. K. Yngvesson, “Antennacoupled terahertz radiation from joule-heated single-wall carbon nanotubes,” AIP Adv., vol. 1, no. 042131, 2011.

Benjamin A. St. Peter received the B.S. degree
from the University of Maine in 2003, and the M.S.
from the University of Massachusetts/Amherst in
2012, both in electrical engineering.
He was a research assistant in the Microwave
Remote Sensing (MIRSL) and THz laboratories with
the University of Massachusetts/Amherst. He has
worked in industry as an RF Engineer and also as
a software developer. His research interests include
medical imaging, adaptive optics and vision science.

ST. PETER et al.: SINGLE FREQUENCY TERAHERTZ IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

Sigfrid K. Yngvesson (M’62–SM’92–F’98–LF’02)
received the Civilingenjor, Tekn. Lic., and Tekn. Dr.
degrees in electrical engineering from Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden., in 1958,
1965, and 1968, respectively.
Since 1970, he taught in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of
Massachusetts/Amherst, becoming a full professor in
1978, and Professor Emeritus in 2006. His research
work has included low-noise receivers for radio astronomy, and integrated antenna arrays. His present
main research interests are applications of nano-technology to the terahertz field
as well as terahertz imaging for biomedical applications.
Dr. Yngvesson is a life fellow of the IEEE.

Paul Siqueira (S’92–M’96) is an Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at
the University of Massachusetts in Amherst, MA,
USA, where he is co-director of the Microwave
Remote Sensing Laboratory (MIRSL) and Director
of the department’s Biomedical Sensing and Signal
Processing center (BIOSSP). Prior to joining the university, he was a senior engineer in the Radar Science
and Engineering section at NASA’s Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, where he was a system engineer working
in the laboratory’s Radar Science and Engineering
Section. He is well known for his work in microwave system development,
applied signal processing and analytic modeling of electromagnetic fields.
Dr. Siqueira is a recipient of a Harvard University Bullard Fellowship for
forest studies and is a Science Team member for NASA’s DESDynI mission, an
L-band SAR meant to launch before the end of the decade.

Patrick A. Kelly (S’81–M’84) received the B.S.E
degree in electrical engineering and computer
science from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ in
1978, and the M.S.E degree in electrical engineering
and the Ph.D. degree in computer, information
and control engineering from the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1979 and 1985,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA,
USA. His research interests include processing of biomedical signals and
images.

797

Ashraf Khan received the M.B.B.S. medical degree
from Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, AMU,
Aligarh, India, in 1980, following which he completed postgraduate training in pathology at the same
institution, receiving the M.D. (Pathology) degree in
1983. In 1985, Dr. Khan moved to the U.K., where
he trained in histopathology at the Lewisham and
Guy’s Hospital, University of London, U.K., and
received the MRCPath (Histopathology) degree in
1991.
He is a currently Professor of Pathology and
Director of Surgical at University of Massachussetts (UMass) Memorial
Medical Center and the University of Massachusetts Medical School (UMMS),
Worcester, MA, USA. In 1993, joined the Department of Pathology at UMMS,
first as a surgical pathology fellow for one year, and later, in 2005, as a faculty
member progressing to the rank of full Professor of Pathology. His translational
research interests include investigating biomarkers for the diagnosis and
outcome prediction of thyroid and breast cancers, as well as evaluating various
imaging modalities in the diagnosis of breast cancer.
In 1999, Dr. Khan became a Fellow of the Royal College of Pathologists,
London, U.K.

Stephen J. Glick received the B.S.E.E. degree in
electrical engineering from University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT, USA, in 1982, and the Ph.D.
degrees in biomedical engineering from Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA, USA, in 1988
and 1991, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Department
of Radiology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA, USA. His research interests
include medical imaging with a focus on imaging of
breast cancer.

Andrew Karellas received the Ph.D. degree in medical physics from the University of California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
He is a Professor of Radiology and Director of
Radiological Physics at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. He
has published extensively on novel X-ray imaging
techniques. His current research interests are on
the development of new X-ray imaging techniques
that include tomographic imaging of the breast,
and fusion between tomographic X-ray and optical
imaging of the breast.
Dr. Karellas is a Fellow of the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine and of the American College of Radiology.

