384

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Statistical Anomaly Detection for Individuals With
Cognitive Impairments
Yao-Jen Chang, Kang-Ping Lin, Li-Der Chou, Member, IEEE, Shu-Fang Chen, and Tian-Shyan Ma

Abstract—We study anomaly detection in a context that considers user trajectories as input and tries to identify anomalies for
users following normal routes such as taking public transportation
from the workplace to home or vice versa. Trajectories are modeled as a discrete-time series of axis-parallel constraints (“boxes”)
in the 2-D space. The anomaly can be estimated by considering two
trajectories, where one trajectory is the current movement pattern
and the other is a weighted trajectory collected from N norms.
The proposed system was implemented and evaluated with eight
individuals with cognitive impairments. The experimental results
showed that recall was 95.0% and precision was 90.9% on average
without false alarm suppression. False alarms and false negatives
dropped when axis rotation was applied. The precision with axis
rotation was 97.6% and the recall was 98.8%. The average time
used for sending locations, running anomaly detection, and issuing warnings was in the range of 15.1–22.7 s. Our findings suggest
that the ability to adapt anomaly detection devices for appropriate
timing of self-alerts will be particularly important.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, cognitive Impairments, GPS.

I. INTRODUCTION
OGNITIVE impairments include ones that are present at
birth (such as Down’s syndrome and intellectual and developmental disabilities, IDD), ones that are acquired due to
some form of traumatic brain injury or illness (such as aphasia,
a speech and language disorder, or amnesia), ones that emerge
through the normal aging process (such as Alzheimer’s disease), and ones that arise due to complicated causes such as
schizophrenia. In the U.S. alone, an estimated 4.32 million people have intellectual and developmental disabilities [1]. Approximately 4.5 million individuals had Alzheimer’s disease in
2006; this number is projected to grow to 14 millions by 2050.

C

Manuscript received November 30, 2012; revised March 22, 2013 and June 2,
2013; accepted June 25, 2013. Date of publication June 28, 2013; date of current
version December 31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National
Research Program for the Department of Industrial Technology (DoIT) of the
Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA), Taiwan, under Grant 99-EC-17-A-19S1-163 and in part by National Science Council, Taiwan, under Grant NSC
101-2218-E-033 -006.
Y.-J. Chang, K.-P. Lin, and T.-S. Ma are with the Department of Electronic
Engineering, Chung Yuan Christian University, Chung-Li 320, Taiwan (e-mail:
yjchang@cycu.edu.tw; kplin@cycu.edu.tw; mstjsw@gmail.com).
L.-D. Chou is with the Computer Science and Information Engineering Department, National Central University, Taoyuan 320, Taiwan (e-mail:
cld@csie.ncu.edu.tw).
S.-F. Chen was with the Center for Occupational Therapy, Taipei Municipal Hospital, Taipei 106, Taiwan. She is now with the Association of Employment Rights for People with Disabilities, Taipei 104, Taiwan (e-mail:
ab10721zi@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2271695

Aphasia impacts approximately 1.1 million individuals in North
America [2].
Since individuals with disabilities are frequently dependent
on others for support across environments, strategies and skills
must be introduced that directly lead to access of those supports. Care providers are at the center of the support they have.
Unfortunately, their care providers are often overloaded by too
much work, including preservice training, coaching, and escorting them to workplaces. To relieve their care providers from
labor-intensive aids with traveling back and forth from work,
we propose to use a personal digital assistant (PDA) carried by
an individual with cognitive impairments. The PDA enables individuals to respond to unexpected situations such as being lost
by effectively using the handheld device to alert themselves or
call for assistance from the support system. The trajectories are
compared against norms which are user transportation routines.
An anomaly is detected in case a deviation from the norms is
determined by the proposed algorithm.
The problem considered in the paper—to identify deviated
trajectories traversed by disabled people—is novel. In this paper, we build an anomaly detection system and conduct field
experiments in community-based settings for individuals with
cognitive impairments. Our study is aimed at three novel contributions: 1) develop a nonvisual approach to anomaly detection,
2) propose a statistical method dealing with multiple norms for
anomaly detection, and 3) recruit disabled people to test the proposed system and evaluate its accuracy and usability. The rest
of the paper is organized as follows. In the following section,
we review existing research. Then we describe the main components of the proposed solution and the interactions among
its modules. Experimental results in the context of supported
employment are presented next. Conclusion is presented in the
last section.
II. RELATED WORK
Patterson et al. developed Opportunity Knocks (OK) [3], [4]
which used dynamic Bayesian networks as the system model
and used goals and trip segments to model long-range dependencies. Later, the same team used hierarchical conditional random
fields [5], which performed significant place identification and
location, not abnormality detection. In their continuous work on
learning and inferring transportation routines, a new version of
OK was developed which extracted destinations by statistical
methods based on particle filters for estimation and Kalman filter for prediction and correction [6]. Their method was applied
to an individual on his way between home and office. One of the
unique strengths in OK [6] is its use of Rao-Blackwellized particle filter and Kalman filter for guiding probabilistic inference

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHANG et al.: STATISTICAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS

and accelerating error convergence. In particular, the Kalman
filter can be either used to correct a path error or predict a path
based on the GPS information. For example, when making a
prediction at an intersection, the Kalman filter uses the street
graph as a natural discretization of continuous 2-D space to narrow down the choice of a path to be either heading straight, left,
or right. Similarly, when a position is detected at somewhere in
the middles of two streets, the Kalman filter corrects it to either
street based on street maps to minimize errors in probability. In
a word, the street graph is crucial for inference and learning in
OK. In contrast, our proposed algorithm uses no street maps in
detecting anomalies.
Deviation detection considers trajectories as input and tries
to identify anomalies in following normal routes such as taking
public transportation from the workplace to home or vice versa.
Trajectory clustering is one of the methods for the identification. There exist several recent publications on clustering moving objects and trajectories. The problem of clustering moving
objects is studied by Li et al. [7] who use moving microclusters (MMC) for handling very large datasets of mobile objects.
The SCUBA algorithm of Nehme and Rundensteiner [8] is proposed for efficient cluster-based processing of large numbers
of spatio-temporal queries on moving objects. However, trajectory clustering is performed only when trajectories of trips are
completed. This makes the clustering algorithms less useful in
identifying anomalies and discovering route deviation on the fly.
Predicting personal destinations is the main principle behind
much previous work in pervasive computing on modeling and
predicting transportation routines. Many studies in this area
share the trait that candidate destinations are extracted from
GPS histories, i.e., places that subjects have actually visited.
Murmasse and Schmandt [9] used the loss of a GPS signal to
indicate that a user had entered a building which is marked
as candidate destination for future prediction. Ashbrook and
Starner [10] cluster GPS-measured locations where a user spent
a certain amount of time to extract possible destinations. Krumm
and Horvitz [11] designed predestination to predict the destination, not necessarily the route. In contrast, our work in anomaly
detection is more focused on extracting anomalies at times users
are trying to follow transportation routines, not necessarily inferring personal destinations [6], [11].
Bu et al. [12] utilized local continuity characteristics of trajectories to build local clusters upon trajectory streams and
monitored anomalies via efficient pruning strategies. In the established work of Anagnostopoulos et al. [13], Chan and Mahoney [14], and Elnekave et al. [15], trajectories are modeled
as a discrete-time series of axis-parallel constraints (“boxes”) in
the 2-D space—each dimension is constrained between a minimum and a maximum value. As shown in Fig. 1, a trajectory is
represented by a series of boxes, each with four attributes: the
maximum value of longitude, the minimum value of longitude,
the maximum value of latitude, and the minimum value of latitude for a box Bk with time index k. Therefore, Bk represents
a box with two endpoints for the kth time interval for a travel
divided into fixed time intervals. By using this structure close
data-points can be summarized into one box, such that instead of
recording the original data-points, only the four elements need

Fig. 1.

Trajectory represented by a series of boxes.

Fig. 2.

Color coding the number of overlapping trajectory boxes.

385

to be recorded. The number of boxes in a trajectory depends on
the time elapsed in a trip. The size of the box depends on the
sampling time interval. For a specific traveling speed, the shorter
the sampling time interval, the smaller the box. Summarizing
a spatio-temporal dataset that records locations of multiple objects at fixed intervals (e.g., every 10 s) can significantly reduce
running time of anomaly detection [15].
III. DESIGN BASED ON NORMS
A norm is considered as a routine trajectory for pedestrians or
individuals travelling by vehicle. There is no deviation in norms.
In our case, a norm is composed of a time series of trajectory
boxes. In reality, travel may result in multiple norms because
of the noise such as mobile clients’ motion behavior, the road
network topology complication, and other potential interference
such as mobile density and hot mobility spots. To deal with
multiple norms, we propose a statistical method, called anomaly
detection for traveling individuals (ADTI), which creates boxbased trajectories and computes similarities between the current
incoming box and the norms.
In ADTI, deviation is estimated by computing overlapping
between the current incoming box and the norms. First of all,
we calculate overlapping trajectory boxes for all the N norms, as
shown in Fig. 2. For each overlapping areas, an integer weight
from 2 to N is assigned according to the number of trajectory
boxes overlapping with each other. If no overlapping exists, the
weight remains one. The resultant weighted set of N norms is
called a weighted sum of N norms, denoted as WSN(N). WSN
is constructed ahead of time before ADTI detects deviation.
Note in Fig. 2, the overlapping areas may not be rectangles
any more. We identify each nonrectangles and divide them into
smaller rectangles until there are no more nonrectangles. One
example of transforming nonrectangles into smaller rectangles
is shown in Fig. 3. After such a transformation, the overlapping
trajectory boxes in Fig. 2 become the set of rectangles in Fig. 4.

386

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 3.

Transforming overlapping boxes into smaller rectangles.

Fig. 4.
boxes.

Color-coded weights of rectangles indicate the number of overlapping

Fig. 6. Recursive algorithm to transform overlapping boxes into smaller rectangles and add them into norms.

Fig. 5.

Weighted sum of N norms.

An example of a weighted sum of N norms with color-coded
weights is shown in Fig. 5.
The process of transforming nonrectangles into smaller rectangles is recursive. The recursive algorithm is illustrated in
Fig. 6 where NT stands for all of the norms used to compute
WSN(N). Initially, NT is empty. After collecting a norm, there is
only one norm in NT. Gradually there are more and more norms
in NT. Because a norm is composed of a time series of trajectory
boxes, adding a new norm T to NT is equivalent to adding the
series of boxes of T one by one. The algorithm shows how to
add a norm into NT by adding one box of T , denoted by T.B, at
a time.
Estimation of deviation on the fly is straightforward given the
set of norms NT and WSN(N). First of all, the current trajectory T
generates an incoming box T.Bk with time index k. The box has
four attributes: the maximum value of longitude, the minimum
value of longitude, the maximum value of latitude, and the
minimum value of latitude. Therefore, T.Bk represents a box
with two endpoints for the kth time interval for a travel divided
into fixed time intervals. We propose an index of overlapping to
estimate anomalies P(Bi ) for Box Bi . The index is a real number
between 0 and 1. The index goes to 1 and deviation is unlikely
if there is substantial overlapping between the current box and
the normal routines. Otherwise, it goes to 0 and deviation is
likely. The calculation of P(Bi ) is algorithmically defined in the

Fig. 7.

Computing the index of deviation on the fly.

algorithm illustrated in Fig. 7 where we calculate the weighted
areas of overlapping between T.Bk and NT.
Using an index avoids a dichotomy between “lost” and “not
lost.” For example, one can say the index of getting lost is 0.25
at time interval k instead of just saying no. For the reason of
issuing alerts, one can for sure set thresholds to manage alert
generation. In this case, the threshold values that define alerts
can be determined according to a Gaussian law [16], [17] so that
these threshold parameters make the alerts capture at least 95%
of the observation. In practice, we can choose the N norms as
the most recent N ones. We define “norms” as the “most recent
N ones” assuming that the user keeps similar travel patterns in
a period of days. It may not be the case for a period of months
or years.

CHANG et al.: STATISTICAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS

TABLE I
PROFILES OF EIGHT PARTICIPANTS

387

TABLE II
RECORDED DATA AND THE NUMBER OF INSTANCES

which makes her unable to distinguish ambient sounds from
those imagined from within. The participants, except Fiona,
were receiving pretraining programs in community-based employment projects sponsored by affirmative action initiatives.
Our proposed system was developed to help them become more
qualified for job positions such as mail courier and parking
patrollers.
B. Settings

IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Volunteer Recruitment
Individuals of disabilities and ages in various ranges were
recommended by the participating rehabilitation institutes that
we have been partnering with, and screened according to degrees
of cognitive impairments, the ability to achieve daily living
tasks, and severity of loss in short-term memory. Table I lists
the basic profiles of eight volunteers with sensitive and irrelevant
data omitted.
Al has TBI after a car accident. He has received very good rehabilitation and has been able to remain employed on a paid job
as a janitor. Al has been looking for but not yet found a more demanding job with higher pay such as kitchen assistance and gas
station management. Ben has IDD and he has mild difficulties in
memorizing routine procedures in his workplace. He occasionally gets lost and has to call for help by cellular phones. Craig
has schizophrenia and currently he is unemployed although he
really wants a job. Doug has dementia and is forgetful about
the routes or work procedures. He has been unemployed since
he had a car accident some years ago. However, he works very
hard in the occupational rehabilitation center in order to get employed in the future. Ed has schizophrenia. Fiona has organic
brain syndromes and exhibits exercise fatigue. Her family hires
a caregiver to accompany her all day long. However, she was
found to become playful with the PDA in hand and enthusiastic
in the experiment. Gordon had a car accident 2 years ago and
remained hospitalized in an ICU for 11 months until earlier this
year. Now he is receiving occupational therapy. Getting a paid
job is one of his wishes. Helen has both IDD and schizophrenia,

The data were collected during a period of approximately 34
months from April 2008 to January 2011. During the experiment, each of the eight subjects participated in 20 independent
sessions, resulting in a total of 160 sessions as a whole. One
session with a single participant was conducted a day. For days
when the participants did not go to work, no session was scheduled. Furthermore, for days with participants calling in sick,
the session was rescheduled. Note that not all trajectories are
equally probable—for example, a likely trajectory on a weekend may be very different from that on weekdays. Therefore,
experiments were conducted only on weekdays. As a result,
the study spanned a total of 755 calendar days. However, only
160 days of data were collected. Each session was a trip with
an individual returning home from community-based training
in the afternoon. The travel time ranged from 0.5–1.5 h with the
mean trip time 41 min. The recorded data and the number of
instances are summarized in Table II. Public transportation in
Metropolitan Taipei was used throughout the experiments. For
each user, the first 10 trips followed norms built earlier while
in the other 10 trips we let the test subjects take the bus at will,
some of the trips resulting in deviations in the middle of the
trips. In such cases, the test subjects used the system in a natural
setting to see how well the system could detect different types of
deviations. In each session, a shadow team of three always followed the subject during the trip for the purpose of maintaining
security, observing, and recording.
We tested the functions of the ADTI system and evaluated its
performance with regard to its ability to identify the anomalies.
The PDA used in the prototype is an ETEN Glofish X800,
equipped with 400 MHz CPU, 256 MB Flash ROM, 64MB
SDRAM, a screen size of 640 × 480 (VGA), Wi-Fi 802.11b,
Bluetooth, and HSDPA. It runs on Windows Mobile 6.0. The
ADTI algorithm was coded in Microsoft C#.

388

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 8. (a) Index of not getting lost for trajectories without anomalies. (b)
Index of not getting lost for trajectories with anomalies after epoch 61 and 62,
respectively.

C. Field Experiments
Performance was measured in terms of the extent of exactness and completeness. A measure of exactness or fidelity is
precision, whereas a measure of completeness is recall [18]. In
our scenario, what matters is whether a subject deviates from
a normal routine path. Therefore, precision is defined as the
number of true anomalies identified divided by the total number
of anomalies returned by the match (which may include certain
false alarms). Recall is defined as the number of true anomalies
identified by a match divided by the total number of true anomalies (which should have been identified). A user is considered
lost and put on alert if P (Bi ) < μ. The threshold value that defines alerts μ is set to 0.2 according to a Gaussian law so that the
threshold parameter makes the alerts capture at least 95% of the
observation [16], [17]. Each weighted trajectory was composed
by N = 10 norms. Furthermore, the algorithm generated each
box every second throughout the trip.
Sample trajectory plots are depicted in Fig. 8(a) and (b) to
illustrate typical behaviors of our proposed algorithm. Fig. 8(a)
indicates a scenario where no anomalies were found in the whole
trajectory. Fig. 8(b) depicts trajectories which have anomalies.
False alarms may happen when a trajectory is mostly horizontal or vertical due to the fact that the box is axis parallel and
there is intrinsic inaccuracy in GPS. For a person who travels in
a horizontal path, the two bounds of longitudes are very close to
each other. The box will look like a horizontally stretched rectangle. In case the GPS is not accurate enough during the period
of a trip, the box comparison will be negatively impacted. When
users travel in a city with squared city blocks (a Manhattan style

Fig. 9.

Precision for the eight participants.

Fig. 10.

Recall for the eight participants.

city) which has streets parallel to original latitude and longitude, one way of fixing the problem is rotating the axes of data
(X, Y ) into (X , Y ) at a certain angle. With axis rotation, the
box formed may have an aspect ratio closer to 1.0 even if users
travel horizontally or vertically. The rotation angle is calculated
with respect to original latitude and longitude axes.
The numbers of episodes of user deviations for participants
1–8, each with 20 trips, are 1, 2, 1, 3, 1, 3, 4, and 2, respectively.
After a user made an error, the researchers intervened, protected
the user from keep deviating, and escorted him/her home. The
data were preprocessed to remove obvious sensor errors (e.g.,
GPS reflections off of buildings). We discarded data when estimated GPS errors are above 10 m. In our system, GPS readings
were not “snapped” to nearby roads because street maps in electronic forms were not required. In Figs. 9 and 10, we summarize
the experimental outcomes based on the observations of the field
trips. On average, the recall was 95.0% and precision was 90.9%
without axis rotation. However, both false negatives and false
alarms dropped when the axis rotation was applied by 45◦ . Recall and precision with axis rotation were on average 98.8%
and 97.6%, respectively. The average elapsed time used for the
sending location data, running anomaly detection, and issuing
warnings was in the range of 15.1–22.7 s. In case anomalies
were detected, a SMS notice was issued to the shadow team and
the PDA alerted its user by vibrating and sounding voice-over
alarms.
Furthermore, we studied the sensitivity of precision and recall versus axis rotation angles in a pilot run before the eight
volunteers were recruited. For each specific angle of axis rotation that we compared, namely 0◦ , 15◦ , 30◦ , 45◦ , 60◦ , 75◦ , we

CHANG et al.: STATISTICAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS

389

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF APPROACHES

Fig. 11.

Sensitivity of precision and recall versus axis rotation.

performed ten trials based on travel in a horizontal path of 3 km
in Taipei. Then t-tests were performed to evaluate whether the
difference is statistically significant compared to 45◦ . For rotation angles of 0◦ , 15◦ , and 75◦ , the recall and precision values
are statistically different from the values obtained setting the rotation to 45◦ (for recall: p = 0.001, p = 0.023, and p = 0.008,
respectively; for precision, p = 0.002, p = 0.038, and p = 0.01,
respectively). However, with the rotation angle equal to 30◦ or
60◦ , neither recall nor precision values are statistically different
(for recall: p = 0.5017 and p = 0.456, respectively; for precision, p = 0.288 and p = 0.329, respectively). Fig. 11 depicts
the result. According to Fig. 11, the angle in the range of 30–
60 is a good choice. Unless the angle is below 15◦ or above
75◦ , the sensitivity of precision and recall versus axis rotation
is limited. The effects of the axis rotation method depend upon
the city having a Manhattan-style grid layout at a certain angle.
If the city does not have a uniform grid layout, one can still
perform the rotation method. However, axis rotation may not be
as effective.
In the literature, OK, MMCs [7], SCUBA [8], and Predestination [11] are similar to our algorithm. Therefore, we tried
to compare the ADTI method against other approaches, using
a simple baseline: i.e., marking as abnormal if a location is
more than X meters away from any previously recorded location. However, the original version of OK [3], [4] is for place
identification and location, not abnormality detection. The latest version of OK [6] is for learning and inferring transportation
routines, not abnormality detection. MMCs [7] and SCUBA [8]
are for trajectory clustering, not abnormality detection. Furthermore, neither of the methods performed on the fly. Krumm and
Horvitz [11] designed predestination to predict the destination,
not necessarily the route. Therefore, we believe our proposed
method is the first attempt to detect anomalies according to
GPS-based trajectories and norms. Table III compares the features of related work against the proposed approach. In Table III,
“GIS-free” means no street map is required. We consider the no-

street-map approach an improvement. Although the street maps
are vastly available nowadays, working with street maps involves more computation time. Furthermore, an algorithm that
does not rely on street maps can be applied to situations where
users do not travel on streets, such as beaches and trails.
V. CONCLUSION
We design a statistical method of anomaly detection that
transforms a user’s previous trajectory into a series of boxes
and compare similarity against these boxes. The method evaluates the effectiveness using eight disabled people and shows
good performance. Despite a small number of subjects, such
evaluation is very valuable and hard to conduct. Our data provide preliminary evidence that the system is able to identify the
anomalies on the fly. The system has enhanced previous work on
location-based services and added care providing interactions.
Therefore, the system may be helpful for reducing risk while increasing independence in the process of community integration.
Our study suggests a promising avenue for further research in
providing ambient intelligence to people with cognitive deficits.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Braddock, R. Hemp, M. Rizzolo, and S. Parish, “The state of the
states in developmental disabilities: Study summary,” in Disability at the
Dawn of the 21st Century and the State of the States, D. Braddock, Ed.
Washington, DC, USA: American Association on Mental Retardation,
2002.
[2] The Aphasia Institute. (2005, Sep.). What is Aphasia? [Online]. Available:
http://www.aphasia.ca/about/whatis.html
[3] J. Patterson, L. Liao, K. Gajos, M. Collier, N. Livic, K. Olson, S. Wang,
D. Fox, and H. Kautz, “Opportunity knocks: A system to provide cognitive
assistance with transportation services,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous
Comput., 2004, pp. 433–450.
[4] L. Liao, D. Fox, and H. Kautz, “Learning and inferring transportation
routines,” presented at 19th Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell., San Jose, CA, USA,
2004.
[5] L. Liao, D. Fox, and H. Kautz, “Location-based activity recognition using
relational Markov networks,” in Proc. 19th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
Edinburgh, Scotland, 2005, p. 773-778.
[6] L. Liao, D. Patterson, D. Fox, and H. Kautz, “Learning and inferring
transportation routines,” Artif. Intell., vol. 171, pp. 311–331, 2007.
[7] X. Li, J. Han, and S. Kim, “Motion-Alert: Automatic anomaly detection
in massive moving objects,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security
Inf., 2006, pp. 166–177.
[8] R. Nehme and E. Rundensteiner, “SCUBA: Scalable cluster-based algorithm for evaluating continuous spatio-temporal queries on moving

390

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

objects,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Extending Database Technol. (Adv.
Database Technol.—EDBT), Munich, 2006, pp. 1001–1019.
N. Marmasse and C. Schmandt, “A user-centered location model,” Pers.
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 6, pp. 318–321, 2002.
D. Ashbrook and T. Starner, “Using GPS to learn significant locations
and predict movement across multiple users,” Pers. Ubiquitous Comput.,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 275–286, 2003.
J. Krumm and E. Horvitz, “Predestination: Inferring destinations from
partial trajectories,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Comput., 2006,
pp. 243–260.
Y. Bu, L. Chen, A. Fu, and D. Liu, “Efficient anomaly monitoring over
moving object trajectory streams,” in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Paris, France, 2009, pp. 159–168.
A. Anagnostopoulos, M. Vlachos, M. Hadjieleftheriou, E. Keogh, and
P. Yu, “Global distance-based segmentation of trajectories,” in Proc. 12th
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2006, pp. 34–43.
P. Chan and M. Mahoney, “Modeling multiple time series for anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2005, pp. 1–8.
S. Elnekave, M. Last, O. Maimon, Y. Ben-Shimol, H. Einsiedler,
M. Friedman, and M. Siebert, “Discovering regular groups of mobile
objects using incremental clustering,” in Proc. 5th Workshop Positioning,
Navigat. Commun., 2008, pp. 197–205.
G. Virone, M. Alwan, S. Dalal, S. Kell, B. Turner, J. Stankovic, and
R. Felder, “Behavioral patterns of older adults in assisted living,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 387–398, May 2008.
G. Virone, N. Noury, and J. Demongeot, “A system for automatic measurement of circadian activity deviation in telemedicine,” IEEE Trans.
Biomedical. Eng., vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 1463–1469, Dec. 2002.
R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto, Modern Information Retrieval.
New York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 1999.

Yao-Jen Chang received the Ph.D. degree from the
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1992.
He is currently a Professor in the Department of
Electronic Engineering, Chung Yuan Christian University, Chung Li, Taiwan. Since 2006, he has been
actively involved in promoting supported employment for people with mental impairments. He is the
Founding Chair of the Taiwanese Employment Rights
Association for People with Disabilities.
Prof. Chang is a member of the Association for
Computing Machinery’s Special Interest Group on Accessible Computing.

Kang-Ping Lin received the Ph.D. degree from
the Department of Biomedical Physics, School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA, in 1994.
He is currently a Distinguished Professor in the
Department of Electrical Engineering, Chung Yuan
Christian University, Taiwan, and the Editor-in-Chief
of IFMBE News, the newsletter of International Federation for Medical and Biological Engineering. He
was the Director of Medical Engineering Technology
Division, Biomedical Engineering Center, Industrial
Technology Research Institute in Taiwan, from 2001 to 2004. He was the Editorin-Chief of the Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering from 2000 to
2007. He was the President of Taiwanese Society of Biomedical Engineering
from 2007 to 2010. His research interests include physiological signal processing, medical image processing, and kinetic modeling of PET.

Li-Der Chou (M’95) received the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electronic engineering from National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei,
Taiwan, in 1991 and 1995, respectively.
He is currently the Deputy Director General with
the National Center for High-Performance Computing, Taiwan, and a Distinguished Professor with the
Department of Computer Science and Information
Engineering, National Central University. He is the
author or coauthor of more than 200 journal and conference papers in the area of computer networks. His
research interests include vehicular networks, network management, broadband
wireless networks, and Internet services. He is a member of the IEEE Communication Society.

Shu-Fang Chen received the Master’s degree from
the Graduate Institute of Rehabilitation Counseling,
National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan.
She is currently the Deputy Director of the Association of Employment Rights for People With Disabilities, Taipei.

Tian-Shyan Ma received B.S. and M.S. degrees from
the Department of Electronic Engineering, Chung
Yuan Christian University, Chung Li, Taiwan, in 2008
and 2010, respectively.
He joined Uniring Technology in 2011. His research interests include mobile computing and assistive technology.

