IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

3149

Heart Rate Turbulence Analysis Based on
Photoplethysmography
Eduardo Gil∗ , Pablo Laguna, Senior Member, IEEE, Juan Pablo Martı́nez, Óscar Barquero-Pérez,
Arcadi Garcı́a-Alberola, and Leif Sörnmo, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The goal of this paper is to determine whether the photoplethysmography (PPG) can replace the ECG-based detection of
heart rate turbulence. Using the PPG, classification of ventricular
premature beats (VPBs) is accomplished with a linear classifier.
The two conventional parameters turbulence onset and slope are
studied together with a recently introduced parameter characterizing turbulence shape. Performance is studied on a dataset with
4131 VPBs, recorded from a total of 27 patients in different clinical
contexts (hemodialysis treatment, intensive care monitoring, and
electrophysiological study). The sensitivity/specificity of VPB classification was found to be 90.5/99.9%, with an accuracy of 99.3%,
suggesting that classification of VPBs can be reliable made from
the PPG. The main difference between the two types of turbulence
analysis stems from the fact that the pulse transit time varies largely
immediately after the VPB. Out of the 22 patients which had a sufficient number of VPBs, the outcome of the ECG- and PPG-based
analysis was identical in 21. It is concluded that the PPG may serve
as a surrogate technique for the ECG in turbulence analysis.
Index Terms—Heart rate turbulence (HRT), hemodialysis, photoplethysmography (PPG), pulse rate turbulence (PRT), pulse
transit time (PTT), ventricular premature beat (VPB).

Manuscript received January 30, 2013; revised March 10, 2013 and June
7, 2013; accepted June 14, 2013. Date of publication June 19, 2013; date of
current version October 16, 2013. This work was supported by the Ministerio
de Economı́a y Competitividad (MINECO), FEDER under Project TEC201021703-C03-02, CIBER de Bioingenierı́a, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina
through Instituto de Salud Carlos III, ARAID, Ibercaja project “Programa
de APOYO A LA I+D+i,” CAI under “Programa Europa,” Grupo Consolidado GTC from DGA-FSE, and Gambro Lundia AB, Sweden. The work of Ó.
Barquero-Pérez was supported by a FPU Grant AP2009-1726 from Ministerio
de Educación (Spanish Government). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ E. Gil is with the Communications Technology Group (GTC), Aragón Institute of Engineering Research (I3A), Universidad de Zaragoza, 50004 Zaragoza,
Spain, and also with the Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Bioingenierı́a, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN), 50018 Zaragoza, Spain
(e-mail: edugilh@unizar.es).
P. Laguna and J. P. Martı́nez are with the Communications Technology
Group (GTC), Aragón Institute of Engineering Research (I3A), Universidad
de Zaragoza, 50004 Zaragoza, Spain, and also with the Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red en Bioingenierı́a, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBERBBN), 50018 Zaragoza, Spain (e-mail: laguna@unizar.es; jpmart@unizar.es).
Ó. Barquero-Pérez is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, Rey Juan Carlos University, 28943 Madrid, Spain (e-mail: oscar.
barquero@urjc.es).
A. Garcı́a-Alberola is with the Arrhythmia Unit, Hospital Universitario
Virgen de la Arrixaca de Murcia, 30008 Murcia, Spain (e-mail: arcadi@
secardiologia.es).
L. Sörnmo is with the Department of Electrical and Information Technology and Center of Integrative Electrocardiology, Lund University, 22100 Lund,
Sweden (e-mail: leif.sornmo@eit.lth.se).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2270083

I. INTRODUCTION
EART rate turbulence (HRT) refers to a short-term fluctuation in the heart rate, triggered by a ventricular premature
beat (VPB) [1], [2]. Such turbulence is considered to be a blood
pressure regulating mechanism which, in normal subjects, compensates for the VPB-induced drop in the blood pressure by an
initial, accelerated sinus rate. The heart rate then decelerates,
causing an overshoot in its response, and returns to the baseline;
the blood pressure returns to its preextrasystolic level. In normal
subjects, the presence of HRT can be detected and characterized
once ensemble averaging of several VPB-aligned RR interval
series has first been performed to provide a more stable estimate
than does the series of a single VPB. Blunted or missing HRT
reflects autonomic dysfunction and is associated with various
conditions. In particular, HRT has been established as a powerful
risk predictor of mortality and sudden cardiac death following
acute myocardial infarction [1], [3], [4], but HRT has also been
found useful to study in many other clinical applications, for
example, in patients with congestive heart failure and diabetes
mellitus [5].
The frequent occurrence of VPBs in dialysis patients renders
it possible to compute parameters which characterize HRT [6].
Since autonomic neuropathy is known to be associated with a
marked fall in the blood pressure during hemodialysis, HRT may
convey clinical information in those patients [7]. To date, one
study has addressed the issue whether higher propensity to intradialytic hypotension is reflected by HRT [8]. The results showed
that the acceleration in heart rate that follows a VPB is significantly lower in patients prone to intradialytic hypotension than
in resistant patients. Using ambulatory ECG recordings, Celik
et al. [9] studied changes in the conventional HRT parameters
before and after hemodialysis treatment, but not during treatment. The parameters were found to be significantly blunted in
all patients, although they were not affected by hemodialysis
treatment.
From a clinical viewpoint, ECG monitoring is not commonly
performed during hemodialysis because of the inconvenience to
wear the ECG electrodes [10]. Considering that pulse oximetry, thanks to its ease of use, was recently employed for online
monitoring during hemodialysis [11], [12], it is of considerable
interest to study whether the photoplethysmography (PPG) can
serve as a surrogate technique for the ECG when characterizing
HRT. PPG-based analysis is, however, challenged by a signal
which is quite vulnerable to motion artifacts. For example, artifacts caused by arm movements may compromise the analysis
accuracy when the PPG sensor is attached to the nonfistula
arm during hemodialysis [10], [13]. Several methods have been

H

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

3150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

developed for artifact detection [14]–[16], and some also for the
reduction of noise and artifacts [17].
The goal of this paper is to investigate whether the PPG can
serve as a surrogate technique for the ECG in HRT analysis.
To test this hypothesis, both numerical and categorical studies
have been performed, using HRT derived from the ECG as
the reference in all cases. Since the analysis should be fully
automated, it is necessary to first develop a PPG-based method
for VPB classification; the few efforts described in the literature
on PPG-based analysis of VPBs have been performed manually
[18].
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the
annotated databases used for performance evaluation. Section III
presents the approach taken to PPG-based VPB detection and
classification, and describes the related analysis of HRT, which
in the following is referred to as pulse rate turbulence (PRT).
Performance is evaluated in Section IV by comparing the results
from PPG- and ECG-based analysis. Special attention is paid to
the influence of pulse transit time (PTT) on different turbulence
parameters.
II. DATA
The data used for performance evaluation were selected from
patients in three clinical contexts, namely, hemodialysis treatment, intensive care monitoring, and electrophysiological (EP)
investigation. The ECG served as “gold standard” for evaluating
VPB classification performance and PRT characterization.
A. Hemodialysis Database
Eleven patients with end-stage renal disease, classified as hypotension prone by a nephrologist, participated in the study.
The patients underwent regular hemodialysis treatment thrice a
week at Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen. Data were acquired continuously during treatment, which lasted from 3 to 5 h. The
dialysis machines Gambro AK 200 or AK 200 Systems (Gambro Lundia AB, Sweden) were used for treatment. The dialyzer
filters were selected according to each patient’s individual requirements; for further details, see [12]. The three ECG leads
V1 , V5 , and II were acquired using the Biopac ECG100C amplifier, sampled at a rate of 1000 Hz with the Biopac MP150 data
acquisition system (BIOPAC Systems Inc., Goleta, CA, USA).
The PPG signal was acquired with a pulse oximeter (LifeSense
R, Medair AB, Sweden), also sampled at a rate of 1000 Hz with
the Biopac MP150. This database was used for developing and
evaluating the VPB classifier, see Section III-B.
B. MIMIC Database
The multiparameter intelligent monitoring in intensive care
(MIMIC) database was acquired from a large number of patients
in intensive care units of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA, and includes signals as well as data from
the patients’ medical records [19]. The database contains a wide
range of clinical classes, including hemodynamically unstable
patients. The ECG and PPG signals were originally sampled at
rates of 500 and 125 Hz, respectively, but digitally interpolated

TABLE I
NUMBER OF VPBS FOR EACH PATIENT

to a sampling rate of 1000 Hz in order to match the time resolution of the other two databases as well as to comply with the
recommendations in [20].
C. EP Database
VPBs were induced in ten patients, with structurally normal hearts, during EP investigation at the Hospital Universitario
Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain. The acquisition protocol
was approved by the local ethics committee. The EP database
was especially acquired for this paper to ensure that patients
with pronounced HRT were also included, since the two aforementioned databases include patients with varying degrees of
impaired autonomic function.
Sequences of VPBs were delivered under controlled conditions, and induced in sinus rhythm by cyclic pacing from the
right ventricular apex after every 21 spontaneous beats. The
12-lead ECG was recorded with the LabSystem Pro EP System
(Bard Inc., Murray Hill, NJ, USA), and the PPG was recorded
with the Masimo Radical-7 pulse oximeter. Both types of signals were acquired at a sampling rate of 2000 Hz and decimated
to 1000 Hz.
D. VPB Annotation and HRT Criteria Using the ECG
The annotation of VPBs was based on information derived
from the ECG. Following wavelet-based QRS detection [21],
VPBs were determined from information on rhythm and beat
morphology [22]. VPBs were excluded from further analysis
when either excessive noise was present in the ECG or PPG
signals (visually identified) or when other VPBs occurred within
the 5 previous or 20 subsequent beats.
Table I presents the number of VPBs for each patient of the
three databases which were subjected to analysis. At least 20
VPBs were required for turbulence analysis, resulting in a total
of 22 patients.
III. METHODS
A. PPG Pulse Types
Different pulse patterns can be discerned in the PPG signal
when a VPB occurs [18]. Depending on the degree of blood
pumping efficiency, the VPB may, or may not, be accompanied
with a pulse. The following four pulse types are defined, of
which the last three are VPB-related (see Fig. 1):

GIL et al.: HEART RATE TURBULENCE ANALYSIS BASED ON PHOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHY

(a)

3151

PPG signal is denoted x(n). The onset no i and apex location
na i of the ith pulse are determined once the zero-crossing of the
derivative of x(n) is located.
Three simple pulse parameters are studied which characterize
upslope/downslope pulse amplitude
a+ (i) = x(na i)−x(no i )

(1)

a− (i) = x(na i)−x(no i + 1 )

(2)

and the apex-to-apex interval
daa (i) = na i −na i −1 .

(b)

(3)

This interval definition is well suited for all pulse types, including intervals with mixed pulse types. A more precise pulse-topulse interval definition is introduced in the next section where
the analysis is confined to normal pulses.
The feature set used for classification of the ith pulse also
includes the parameters of the previous pulse in order to account for the close relationship between PV and PN 1 . Thus, the
investigated feature set is defined by
{a+ (i), a− (i), daa (i), a+ (i − 1), a− (i − 1), daa (i − 1)}. (4)

Fig. 1. Example of a VPB (a) with and (b) without an accompanying pulse in
the PPG signal associated with the VPB. Note that PV pulse does not exist in
(b). Significant points are indicated that define the parameters for classification.

1) normal pulse associated with a normal beat (PN );
2) pulse associated with a VPB (PV );
3) normal pulse occurring immediately after a VPB which
does not cause a pulse (PN 0 );
4) normal pulse occurring immediately after a VPB which
causes a pulse (PN 1 ). Note that PN 1 always follows a
pulse of type PV .
The “binary” classification problem was also studied in which
the three VPB-related pulse types, i.e., PV , PN 0 , and PN 1 were
merged into one type, denoted PV N .
The pulse type PV was manually annotated in the hemodialysis database and used as a training set; a total of 201 pulses were
annotated. Normal pulses surrounding a VPB—three preceding
and ten following—were also annotated, resulting in 812 PN 0 ,
201 PN 1 , and 13169 PN . Note that the numbers of PV and PN 1
are always identical, and that the number of PN is given by
(3 + 10) · (812PN 0 + 201PN 1 ) = 13169.
B. PPG-Based Classification of VPBs
Noise in the PPG signal is reduced by a finite impulse response low-pass filter with cutoff frequency at 35 Hz; the filtered

Prior to classification, all features are normalized with their
respective mean values computed from the five preceding normal pulses. Linear discriminant analysis is employed for VPB
classification, where the discriminant function is evaluated for
each pulse type. The ith pulse is assigned to that pulse type
PN , PV , PN 0 , and PN 1 , which produces the largest value [23].
The wrapper-based forward approach was used for feature
selection in which each step of the procedure adds that feature
which improves performance accuracy the most. Cross validation was then used for performance evaluation. A confusion
matrix was determined for each subject by comparing the classifier outcome with the annotation of all pulses of the training
set, except for those of the current subject. Finally, the classifier
confusion matrix was computed by accumulating the confusion
matrices of all subjects. The different pulse types were balanced
in the training process so that the same weight could be assigned
to all types, regardless of their prior probability.
C. Pulse Rate Turbulence
The PRT analysis requires that a fiducial point of the pulse is
defined so that the interval series can be aligned to the fiducial
point of other VPBs, and then subjected to ensemble averaging
(similar to HRT analysis). Although the pulse onset no i or the
apex location na i may both serve as fiducial point, the time for
half the pulse amplitude defined by


x(no i ) + x(na i )
x(n) −
np i = arg min
(5)
2
n ∈[n o i ,n a i ]
is employed due to a smaller localization error than for na i [24].
The pulse-to-pulse interval series, denoted dpp (i), that follows
the VPB is, therefore, determined from the intervals defined by
np i (see Fig. 1).
In this paper, turbulence is characterized not only by turbulence onset (TO) and turbulence slope (TS) but also by the
novel shape parameter TΣ [25]. The latter parameter is based on

3152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

the extended integral pulse frequency modulation model, and
uses second-order statistics for characterizing the signal subspace, defined by the three most significant functions of the
Karhunen–Loève (KL) transform. The KL basis applied here
was previously determined from a population of 90 patients
with ischemic cardiomyopathy and mild-to-moderate congestive heart failure [25]. Thus, the KL basis is not matched to the
databases of this paper.

TABLE II
(a) PERFORMANCE FIGURES AND (b) CONFUSION MATRIX
WHEN CLASSIFYING INTO FOUR DIFFERENT PULSE TYPES

D. Pulse Transit Time
The PTT is computed for the purpose of better understanding
differences between the heart rate and pulse rate [26]. The PTT
is defined as the time that elapses between the R wave peak,
occurring at nR i , and the fiducial point of the related PPG pulse,
occurring at np i , i.e.,
dPTT (i) = np i − nR i

(6)

TABLE III
(a) PERFORMANCE FIGURES AND (b) CONFUSION MATRIX
WHEN CLASSIFYING INTO TWO DIFFERENT PULSE TYPES

(see Fig. 1). With the definition of the pulse-to-pulse interval as
dpp (i) = np i − np i −1

(7)

it is easily shown that pulse-to-pulse intervals and RR intervals
are related through
dpp (i) = dR R (i) + ΔdPTT (i)

(8)

where ΔdPTT (i) = dPTT (i) − dPTT (i − 1).
E. Performance Evaluation
The nonparametric Mann–Whitney U-test was applied to the
dpp (i)-based parameters TO, TS, and TΣ for the purpose of evaluating their power to detect turbulence with the ECG-derived
cutoff values. For TO and TS, turbulence was judged to be
present when the conventional cutoff values were applied, i.e.,
0% and 2.5 ms/beat, respectively [1]. For the shape parameter
TΣ , the cutoff value defined by the lower tertile of the population studied in [25] was applied, i.e., -0.75 arbitrary units. Note
that these cutoff values must be adapted for each population in
clinical applications.
Pearson’s correlation coefficient ρ was determined for TO,
TS, and TΣ for quantifying the agreement between HRT and
PRT analysis based on dR R (i) and dpp (i), respectively. Bland–
Altman plots were also produced for characterizing the agreement. The performance of the PRT analysis was evaluated in
terms of sensitivity (Se), specificity (Sp), and accuracy (Acc),
using the HRT analysis as gold standard.
IV. RESULTS
A. PPG-Based Classification of VPBs
A classification accuracy of Acc = 96.8% was achieved for
the four-class problem using the two temporal features daa (i)
and daa (i − 1) (see Table II). Classification based on all six
features, i.e., including also a+ (i), a− (i), a+ (i − 1), a− (i − 1),
did not further improve accuracy since Acc = 96.9%. Hence,
VPB classification based on daa (i) and daa (i − 1) was only
considered.

Sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy when classifying either
four or two pulse types are presented in Tables II and III, respectively, together with related confusion matrices. The aforementioned classification accuracy of Acc = 96.8% for four pulse
types was found to increase to Acc = 99.3% when only two pulse
types were considered. Note that the latter result on accuracy is
the one that applies to PRT analysis.
B. Pulse Rate Turbulence
The two interval series dR R (i) and dpp (i) are displayed in
Fig. 2 for a number of patients: two patients exhibiting pronounced turbulence and two patients completely lacking turbulence. It is obvious from these four cases that the agreement
between dR R (i) and dpp (i) is good, except for the interval immediately after the VPB where the two series differ quite considerably. This difference may be explained by the term ΔdPTT (i)
in (8) as a cause to the increase in dpp (i).
Fig. 3 presents boxplots of TO, TS, and TΣ for turbulence (T)
and nonturbulence (N) patients, computed from both dR R (i) and
dpp (i). For dR R (i)-based analysis, the T and N boxes are, by
definition, separated by the parameter-specific cutoff values, so
T and N groups are not necessarily the same for each parameter.
The cutoff values were also applied to dpp (i)-based analysis.
Statistical analysis of the dpp (i)-based results showed that
TO, TS, and TΣ were all significantly different (p < 0.001)
between T and N patients (see Fig. 3). When instead comparing
the results of dpp (i)-based analysis with the results of dR R (i)based analysis, no significant differences were found, neither

GIL et al.: HEART RATE TURBULENCE ANALYSIS BASED ON PHOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHY

3153

Fig. 2. RR intervals dR R (i) (blue line) and pulse-to-pulse intervals dp p (i)
(red line) are displayed in the left column. Boxplots of the PTT dP T T (i) surrounding the VPBs are displayed in the right column. The results are displayed
for patients M1, A7, M2, and M5 (top to bottom). The interval series have been
subjected to VPB-aligned ensemble averaging.

Fig. 4. Bland–Altman plots (mean ±1.96 std black solid and dashed lines)
and correlation coefficients for the parameters (a) TO, (b) TS, and (c) TΣ .
The attached parameter index indicates whether dR R (i) or dp p (i) has been
analyzed. The cutoff value (green line) distinguishes between T (“o”) and N
(“x”) patients. The mean is indicated for T (blue line) and N patients (red line).

Fig. 3. Boxplots of TO, TS, and TΣ for turbulence (T) and nonturbulence
(N) patients, from analysis based on either dR R (i) or dp p (i). The cutoff value
for each parameter is indicated with a horizontal dashed line. The character
“§” indicates that the parameter is significantly different (p < 0.001) between
turbulence (T) and nonturbulence (N) patients, and “∗” indicates (p < 0.05)
between dR R (i) and dp p (i).

for T nor for N patients, except for TO which was significantly
larger (p < 0.05) when computed from dpp (i) in N patients.
The Bland–Altman plots in Fig. 4, displaying the difference
in results between dpp (i)- and dR R (i)-based analysis, indicate
that bias is present in both TO and TS, but not in TΣ . The main
reason to the overestimation of TO and TS when analyzing
dpp (i) is the influence of PTT—a finding which is discussed
below. Correlation coefficients for each parameter are ρTO =
0.94, ρTS = 0.99, and ρT Σ = 0.94. When analyzing only five
VPBs in each recording rather than all VPBs, the correlation
coefficients reduce to ρTO = 0.89, ρTS = 0.92, and ρT Σ =
0.77.

3154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS FOR THE PARAMETERS TO, TS, AND TΣ

B. Turbulence Analysis
The turbulence patterns in dR R (i) and dpp (i) were almost
identical in shape, as illustrated by Fig. 2. However, Fig. 2
also shows that PTT causes an increased variability in dpp (i)
since the heart, after the compensatory pause, is filled with
more blood than usual. This observation implies that the beat
occurring immediately after a VPB is associated with a higher
pressure which, in turn, causes the pulse wave to travel faster,
as reflected by a shorter PTT. Then, a reverse, compensatory
effect occurs with the beat that follows. According to (8), this
phenomenon explains the main difference between dR R (i) and
dpp (i) that occurs at the first beat after a VPB (see Fig. 2).
C. Turbulence Onset

Classification performance and confusion matrices are presented in Table IV for dpp (i)-based analysis with all VPBs. For
the 22 patients, both types of analysis were found to produce the
same results with respect to T/N outcome, except in one case.
Patients with discrepant results were H1 for TO, M5 for TS, and
M1 for TΣ .

V. DISCUSSION
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time VPBinduced perturbations in the cardiovascular system are studied
in terms of information derived from the PPG signal. The characteristics of PRT, as well as of PTT in the presence of a VPB,
were studied on three databases with widely different clinical
origin.

A. VPB Classification
Although VPB classification is rendered difficult by the fact
that a VPB may, or may not, be accompanied by a PPG pulse,
an accuracy as high as Acc = 96.8% was achieved when classifying into four classes (see Table II), and Acc = 99.3% for two
classes (see Table III). These results, achieved for two simple
pulse features and a linear classifier, suggest that VPBs can be
reliably detected from the PPG. For classification of pulse type,
the apex-to-apex interval daa (i) was employed since Acc was
found to be 5% better with daa (i) than with dpp (i) for four-class
classification. The use of dpp (i) was, however, preferred over
daa (i) for the PRT analysis due to its more stable fiducial point
definition [24]; in addition, a difference of only 0.1% in favor of
daa (i) was observed when classifying into two instead of four
classes.
The inclusion of pulse amplitude features did not improve
classification performance significantly. The main reason is that
the amplitude features are correlated with the temporal features,
which may be explained as follows. When dpp (i) increases, e.g.,
during a compensatory pause, the downslope amplitude a− (i)
or the upslope amplitude a+ (i + 1) of the following pulse will
also increase (cf., Fig. 1).

TO was the only one of the three parameters that exhibited a
significant difference between dR R (i)- and dpp (i)-based analysis, and then only for N patients—a difference which is due
to a shortened PTT that accompanies a VPB. In T patients, on
the other hand, the baroreflex increases the heart rate so that the
first beat after a VPB will arrive earlier, with less blood into the
ventricles as a consequence. For T patients, the PTT is, therefore, shorter than it is before the VPB, although not as much as
in N patients.
Since the influence of PTT is essentially isolated to the first
interval after the VPB, an alternative definition of TO was tested
in which the relative difference was computed between the average of the two normal intervals before the VPB and the average
of the second and third normal intervals after the VPB. In the
original definition of TO, the first and the second intervals are
averaged instead. However, the modified TO was found to perform much worse than the original one since Acc dropped from
0.95 (cf., Table IV) to 0.77.
D. Turbulence Slope
The bias in TS is, just as for TO, caused by PTT-induced variability (cf., Fig. 2). To gain further insight on why bias occurs,
the location of the window with the maximum slope was determined. In N patients, the index of the first beat in the window
occurred earlier in dpp (i) than in dR R (i), the median beat index
being i = 6 and i = 10, respectively. Furthermore, the variability of the beat index was found to be larger for dpp (i) than for
dR R (i), with a standard deviation of 5.6 and 4.1, respectively.
Thus, since the location of the maximum turbulence slope is
closer to the VPB where PTT-induced variability is larger, TS
computed from dpp (i) exhibits, in general, a larger value than
the one computed from dR R (i).
In T patients, the influence of PTT increased the variability
of the beat index in dpp (i)-based analysis, whereas the median
beat index remained the same for both types of analysis (3±4.3
for dpp (i), 3±1.3 for dR R (i)). This result explains why the bias
in TS is larger in N than in T patients (see Fig. 4).
E. TΣ
The KL basis needed to compute TΣ was determined from
the ECG, not the PPG, and from a group of patients completely

GIL et al.: HEART RATE TURBULENCE ANALYSIS BASED ON PHOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHY

unrelated to this paper. The larger variability in TΣ for T patients
[see Fig. 4(c)] is explained by the fact that the KL basis is not
matched to any of the present PPG databases. By choosing a
KL basis which better reflects the PTT-related difference in the
first few beats after the VPB, the performance can be expected
to improve. For obvious reasons, the selection of basis is less
critical in N patients than in T patients.
F. Limitations
Atrial premature beats were not considered in this paper.
Since such beats may also cause HRT, PPG-based analysis
would be of interest to perform. For example, the relationship
between type of ectopic beat and the presence or absence of
pulse in PPG signal and its value as marker of risk could be
studied.
Since the present dataset is rather small, it is desirable to
pursue a future study for the purpose of establishing the clinical
significance of the PRT analysis.
VI. CONCLUSION
The results from the PPG- and ECG-based analysis of three
different clinical contexts (hemodialysis treatment, intensive
care monitoring, and EP study) suggest that the parameters TO,
TS, and TΣ can be computed from the PPG, and thus, serve as
surrogates for the ECG-derived parameters. The PTT was found
to have increased variability immediately after the VPB, influencing especially TO. PPG-based turbulence analysis may be
considered in clinical applications where the ECG electrodes are
inconvenient to wear or where oxygen saturation measurements
are needed.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Schmidt, M. Malik, P. Barthel, R. Schneider, K. Ulm, L. Rolnitzky,
A. J. Camm, J. T. Bigger, Jr., and A. Schomig, “Heart-rate turbulence
after ventricular premature beats as a predictor of mortality after acute
myocardial infarction,” Lancet, vol. 353, pp. 1390–1396, 1999.
[2] A. Bauer, M. Malik, G. Schmidt, P. Barthel, H. Bonnemeier,
I. Cygankiewicz, P. Guzik, F. Lombardi, A. Müller, A. Oto, R. Schneider,
M. Watanabe, D. Wichterle, and W. Zareba, “Heart rate turbulence: Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use: International society for Holter and noninvasive electrophysiology consensus,”
J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol, vol. 52, pp. 1353–1365, 2008.
[3] A. Bauer, P. Barthel, A. Müller, K. Ulm, H. Huikuri, M. Malik, and
G. Schmidt, “Risk prediction by heart rate turbulence and deceleration
capacity in postinfarction patients with preserved left ventricular function
retrospective analysis of 4 independent trials,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 42,
no. 6, pp. 597–601, 2009.
[4] C. S. Zuern, P. Barthel, and A. Bauer, “Heart rate turbulence as riskpredictor after myocardial infarction,” Front Physiol., vol. 9, no. 2, 2011.
[5] M. Watanabe and G. Schmidt, “Heart rate turbulence: A 5-year review,”
Heart Rhythm, vol. 1, pp. 732–738, 2004.
[6] S. Abe, M. Yoshizawa, N. Nakanishi, T. Yazawa, K. Yokota, M. Honda,
and G. Sloman, “Electrocardiographic abnormalities in patients receiving
hemodialysis,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 131, pp. 1137–1144, 1996.
[7] C. Calvo, S. Maule, F. Mecca, R. Quadri, G. Martina, and P. C. Perin, “The
influence of autonomic neuropathy on hypotension during hemodialysis,”
Clin. Auton. Res., vol. 12, pp. 84–87, 2002.

3155

[8] K. Solem, A. Nilsson, and L. Sörnmo, “An ECG-based method for early
detection of abrupt changes in blood pressure during hemodialysis,”
ASAIO J., vol. 52, pp. 282–290, 2006.
[9] A. Celik, M. Melek, S. Yuksel, E. Onrat, and A. Avsar, “Cardiac autonomic
dysfunction in hemodialysis patients: The value of heart rate turbulence,”
Hemodial. Int., vol. 15, pp. 193–199, 2011.
[10] L. Sörnmo, F. Sandberg, E. Gil, and K. Solem, “Noninvasive techniques
for prevention of intradialytic hypotension,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol.
5, pp. 45–59, 2012.
[11] F. Javed, P. M. Middleton, P. Malouf, G. S. Chan, A. V. Savkin,
N. H. Lovell, E. Steel, and J. Mackie, “Frequency spectrum analysis of finger photoplethysmographic waveform variability during haemodialysis,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 31, pp. 1203–1216, 2010.
[12] K. Solem, B. Olde, and L. Sörnmo, “Prediction of intradialytic hypotension using photoplethysmography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng, vol. 57,
no. 7, pp. 1611–1619, Jul. 2010.
[13] E. Mambelli, E. Mancini, and A. Santoro, “A continuous and non-invasive
arterial pressure monitoring system in dialysis patients,” Nephron. Clin.
Pract., vol. 107, pp. c170–c176, 2007.
[14] Y. Yan, C. Poon, and Y. Zhang, “Reduction of motion artifact in pulse
oximetry by smoothed pseudo Wigner–Ville distribution,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 2, 2005.
[15] M. J. Hayes and P. R. Smith, “A new method for pulse oximetry possessing
inherent insensitivity to artifact,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 4,
pp. 452–461, Apr. 2001.
[16] E. Gil, J. M. Vergara, and P. Laguna, “Detection of decreases in the amplitude fluctuation of pulse photoplethysmography signal as indication of
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in children,” Biomed. Signal Process
Control, vol. 3, pp. 267–277, 2008.
[17] B. Yang and K. H. Chon, “A novel approach to monitor nonstationary dynamics in physiological signals: Application to blood pressure,
pulse oximeter, and respiratory data,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 11,
pp. 3478–3488, 2010.
[18] D. Zheng, J. Allen, and A. Murray, “Determination of aortic valve opening
time and left ventricular peak filling rate from the peripheral pulse amplitude in patients with ectopic beats,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, pp. 1411–
1419, 2008.
[19] G. B. Moody and R. G. Mark. (1996). A database to support
development and evaluation of intelligent intensive care monitoring. Comput. Cardiol., vol. 23, pp. 657–660, [Online]. Available:
http://physionet.org/physiobank/database/mimicdb/
[20] D. Smith, K. Solem, P. Laguna, J. P. Martı́nez, and L. Sörnmo, “Modelbased detection of heart rate turbulence using mean shape information,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 334–342, Feb. 2010.
[21] J. P. Martı́nez, R. Almeida, S. Olmos, A. P. Rocha, and P. Laguna, “A
wavelet-based ECG delineator: Evaluation on standard databases,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 570–581, Apr. 2004.
[22] J. Mateo and P. Laguna, “Analysis of heart rate variability in the presence
of ectopic beats using the heart timing signal,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 334–343, Mar. 2003.
[23] F. van der Heijden, R. Duin, D. de Ridder, and D. Tax, Classification, Parameter Estimation and State Estimation. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
2005.
[24] J. Y. A. Foo and C. S. Lim, “Pulse transit time as an indirect marker
for variations in cardiovascular related reactivity,” Technol. Health Care,
vol. 14, pp. 97–108, 2006.
[25] J. P. Martı́nez, I. Cygankiewicz, D. Smith, A. Bayés de Luna, P. Laguna,
and L. Sörnmo, “Detection performance and risk stratification using
a model-based shape index characterizing heart rate turbulence,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, pp. 3173–3184, 2010.
[26] E. Gil, M. Orini, R. Bailón, J. M. Vergara, L. Mainardi, and P. Laguna,
“Photoplethysmography pulse rate variability as a surrogate measurement
of heart rate variability during non-stationary conditions,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 31, pp. 1271–1290, 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

