IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

3185

In Vitro Study of Oscillatory Growth Dynamics of
Camellia Pollen Tubes in Microfluidic Environment
Amir Sanati Nezhad, Muthukumaran Packirisamy∗ , Rama Bhat, and Anja Geitmann

Abstract—A hallmark of tip-growing cells such as pollen tubes
and fungal hyphae is their oscillatory growth dynamics. The multiple aspects of this behavior have been studied to identify the regulatory mechanisms that drive the growth in walled cells. However, the
limited temporal and spatial resolution of data acquisition has hitherto prevented more detailed analysis of this growth behavior. To
meet this challenge, we employed a microfluidic device that is able
to trap pollen grains and to direct the growth of pollen tubes along
microchannels filled with liquid growth medium. This enabled us
to observe the growth behavior of Camellia pollen tubes without
the use of the stabilizer agarose and without risking displacement
of the cell during time lapse imaging. Using an acquisition interval
of 0.5 s, we demonstrate the existence of primary and secondary
peak frequencies in the growth dynamics. The effect of sucrose
concentration on the growth dynamics was studied through the
shift in these peak frequencies indicating the pollen tube’s ability
to modulate its growth activity.
Index Terms—Cell trapping, dynamic growth, microfluidics, oscillation frequency, pollen tube, tip-growing cell.

Fig. 1. (a) Scanning electron micrograph of pollen tube germinated from a
pollen grain of Camellia japonica. (b) Schematic representation of the tip growth
process illustrating the gradient in material properties of the cell wall (soft at
the apex) resulting in the formation of a cylinder under the effect of the internal
turgor pressure.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE pollen tube is the carrier of sperm cells in the flowering
plants. It is a cellular protuberance formed by the pollen
grain and elongates through the pistil of the receptive flower to
reach an ovule located deeply within the flower tissues [1]. To
reach the ovule, the pollen tube elongates by expanding at its
tip which is able to sense the guidance signals emitted from the
female tissues and orient its growth direction accordingly.
Both growth velocity and growth direction in the pollen tube
are tightly regulated by complex internal control mechanisms.
The shape of the cell is cylindrical with a hemisphere shaped
tip (see Fig. 1) and a typical diameter of 5 to 20 μm. The
driving force for the cellular growth process is provided by the
internal turgor pressure that results in cell wall stretching at the

T

Manuscript received February 13, 2013; revised March 30, 2013 and April
12, 2013; accepted April 20, 2013. Date of publication June 25, 2013; date of
current version October 16, 2013. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Sanati Nezhad is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, OpticalBio Microsystem Laboratory, Concordia University, Montreal QC H3G 1M8,
Canada (e-mail: a_sana@encs.concordia.ca).
∗ M. Packirisamy is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, OpticalBio Microsystem Laboratory, Concordia University, Montreal QC H3G 1M8,
Canada (e-mail: pmuthu@alcor.concordia.ca).
R. Bhat is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal QC H3G 1M8, Canada (e-mail: rbhat@vax2.concordia.ca).
A. Geitmann is with the Institut de recherche en biologie végétale, Department of biological sciences, University of Montreal, Montreal H1X 2B2, Canada
(e-mail: anja.geitmann@umontreal.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2270914

tip since the material properties of the wall in this region are
much softer than in the cylindrical shank [2], [3] [see Fig. 1(b)].
The growth process is sustained by a continuous supply of new
cell wall and membrane material delivered to the apical cellular
envelope through exocytosis (vesicle fusion to the apical plasma
membrane).
Similar to other tip growing cells such as fungal hyphae [4]
and neurons [5], pollen tubes do not elongate in steady manner
but display a complex growth dynamics that is subject to modulation in response to extracellular conditions. The dynamics
varies between plant species and has been categorized as 1) sinusoidal oscillations in pollen tubes of Lilium longiflorum [6];
2) pulsatory oscillations in pollen tubes of Petunia hybrida and
Nicotiana tabacum [7]–[9]; or 3) steady growth with random
small fluctuations around a trend line such as Hemerocallis [10].
The presence of some type of oscillatory change in the elongation rate is, therefore, considered as the common feature of the
extension of the pollen tube [11]. The type of the growth dynamics is dependent on the plant species, but it also varies with
the age of tubes and the growth environment [3]. The effect of
growth regulators on the growth mechanism of the pollen tube
has been widely studied [11]–[13]. A change in the ion concentration of the extracellular growth medium affects the complex
mechanism regulating the growth as evident from an altered pattern of the growth dynamics, typically in the form of an altered
amplitude and/or frequency [14]. Many physiological processes
seem to be affected by or involved in regulating the rate of pollen
tube growth. Cellular parameters such as intracellular ion gradients, transmembrane ion fluxes, and the positioning of polarity

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

3186

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

markers display oscillatory patterns whose period is identical to
that of the growth rate but whose phase is shifted relative to the
maximum growth rate [15], [16].
To characterize the oscillatory behavior of pollen tubes, past
studies have mostly focused on the following parameters: average growth rate, oscillation period, and oscillation amplitude [6], [15], [16]. The time domain data show that the period
of growth rate oscillation varies between 15–50 s for lily pollen
tubes [15], [17], and several minutes for Nicotiana tabacum and
Petunia hybrida [6], [8], [9], [16]. The frame rate at which time
lapse imaging was carried out in these studies depended on the
species used, on the spatial resolution of the microscope, and on
the temporal resolution of the camera, with typical rates being
between one image per 1 s [16] and one image per 5 s [18].
Oscillation periods in the tens of seconds are easily detected in
this manner, but the direct measurement of the time response
may not reveal all the details of the oscillatory behavior. Especially in pollen tube species that change their behavior with
the age of the cell (e.g., Lilium [10]), important characteristics
of the different growth stages might be missed. Furthermore,
while dramatic changes in the growth conditions induce visible changes in oscillation frequency, more subtle changes might
be overlooked when using simple quantification of the time response. One of the best investigated pollen tube systems is that of
Lilium longiflorum, which has tubes of a width of approximately
17 μm. In the majority of studies on this species, a relatively
long oscillation period with the time period of 30–50 s (primary
oscillation) has been detected [15]. However, no shorter periods
were reported for the growth rate of lily pollen tubes even when
image acquisition was carried out at frame rates of 1/s [16].
These examples show that time domain analysis is not sufficient
to comprehensively analyze the dynamic pattern of pollen tube
growth.
To provide a more detailed characterization of the oscillatory behavior of pollen tubes, advanced wave function analysis
including Fourier transforms, power spectra, wavelet analysis,
and correlation analysis have been employed [17]–[19]. These
methods were not only used to detect the variation in oscillatory
frequency due to a change in growth environment [10], [20], but
also to establish the phase shift between cellular events and the
growth rate [6]. Any kind of medium change has the potential
to influence the spectral profile by inducing a shift in oscillation frequency. Minor changes in the environmental conditions
are likely to cause small frequency shifts, while major changes
cause the emergence of new peak frequencies. Reducing the
sucrose concentration of the medium was found to increase the
primary peak frequency and average growth rate [3]. Reductions in frequency were also noticed as a consequence of a
change in medium pH [11], increased concentrations of boric
acid [15], and inhibition of calcium channels [8]. How these
extracellular changes translate into a biological response has
been modeled theoretically [21]. A secondary oscillation frequency has been detected for transmembrane H+ fluxes using
wavelet time–frequency spectrum, but only for few pollen tubes
within the sample set based on the tobacco species [18]. Importantly, for the growth rate, no secondary peak frequency has been
reported (except for anecdotal evidence [3]) due to lack of suf-

ficient resolution imaging. Higher resolution images and higher
effective sample rates are essential to achieve this. Therefore,
developing the techniques for capturing spatial imaging with
high resolution and employing software with the capability of
tracking the pollen tube tip will be necessary to systematically
assess putative secondary peak frequencies in the growth rate
and hence characterize the dynamics of pollen tube growth.
In this study, the dynamic growth behavior of the Camellia
japonica pollen tube is characterized using an enhanced microfluidic device. Pollen grains are trapped at the entrances of
microchannels and the pollen tube growth direction is guided
along the microchannel in a controlled microenvironment to
capture high-resolution images. A frame rate of 2/s was used
to detect both primary and secondary frequencies in the growth
rate using fast Fourier transform (FFT) and power spectral density (PSD) analysis. In order to assess the significance of these
peaks, the influence of a change in growth conditions was tested
and the frequency shift was analyzed.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Pollen Collection and Germination
Pollen grains of Camellia japonica were collected from a
plant in the Montreal Botanical Garden. Pollen grains were
dehydrated and stored in gelatin capsules at –20 ◦ C. Prior to
use, the pollen was rehydrated in a humid chamber for 1 h at
room temperature. Few milligrams of pollen were suspended
in growth medium containing 2.54 mM Ca(NO3 )2 ·4 H2 O,
1.62 mM H3 BO3 , 1 mM KNO3 , 0.8 mM MgSO4 ·7 H2 O, and
8% sucrose (w/v). When the grains started germinating, the
pollen suspension was introduced into the microfluidic device.
B. Microscopy
Brightfield imaging of microfluidic chip and pollen tube was
done on Nikon Eclipse 80i digital imaging microscope system
equipped with Infinity 1 digital CCD Camera and Capture Analyze software. Pollen tubes growth was observed with a 80×
objective (0.65 NA). The time intervals between successive images were 0.5 to 1 s. The displacement of the pollen tube tip is
traced by MTrack2 tracking programs in NIH ImageJ software.
III. RESULTS
A. Design and Fabrication of Microfluidic Device
In order to capture the images of the growing apex of the
pollen tube in focus over extended periods of time, the pollen
grain should be immobilized such that pollen tube elongates in
a controlled direction with minimum change in z-position during the growth. To accomplish this, a flow-assisted microfluidic
platform is employed to trap pollen grains at the entrances of a
series of growth microchannels. Briefly, the microfluidic design
involves 1) one inlet to introduce pollen grains suspended in
the growth medium into the fluidic chip; 2) a main distribution
chamber to receive the pollen grains and conduct them toward
the growth microchannels; 3) a series of growth microchannels connected to the distribution chamber in order to guide the

SANATI NEZHAD et al.: I N V I T R O STUDY OF OSCILLATORY GROWTH DYNAMICS OF C A M E L L I A POLLEN TUBES

Fig. 2.

3187

(a) Fabricated microfluidic design optimized for pollen tube growth. (b) Fabricated microdevice.

Fig. 3. (a) Trapped pollen grain at the entrance of a growth microchannel. (b) Brightfield micrograph of Camellia pollen tube growing along microchannel
captured with 80× objective. (c) The dark area representing the apical cell wall is the moving region of interest. (d) Time-series of growth rate for a Camellia
pollen tube captured with acquisition interval of 0.5 s. Marked regions shows that a sampling frequency of 2 Hz is able to detect both primary and secondary peak
frequencies.

pollen tube elongation; 4) two outlets to evacuate medium at
the far ends of the growth microchannels; and 5) an outlet drain
to evacuate excess pollen grains from the chip in order to prevent their accumulation at the far end of distribution chamber
[see Fig. 2(a)]. The pollen grains are independently trapped at
the entrances of the microchannels under hydrodynamic flow
loading [see Fig. 2(b)]. Computational particle–fluid interaction
analysis and experimental testing were carried out to estimate
the performance of the device on trapping the desired number
of pollen grains at the entrance of each microchannel. The dimensions of the distribution chamber, outlet drain, and the inlet
flow rate are selected based on the simulation and experimental

enhancement testing to provide 1) trapping of only a few pollen
grains at each microchannel entrance to prevent accumulation
of pollen grains and 2) identical growth condition for all the
growth microchannels.
Conventional photolithography and standard PDMS microfluidic techniques were used to fabricate the SU8 mold and
the microfluidic device [22], [23]. Since the pollen grain is
physically trapped, applying medium flow or exchanging one
medium for another does not displace the pollen grain or relocate the pollen tube. Refocusing was rarely necessary since
the pollen tube usually stayed at the bottom of the channel. The
PDMS layer forming the microfluidic network is sealed with a

3188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

glass cover slip with a thickness of 170 μm, thus enabling us
to capture the growth using a 80× objective lens. Fig. 2 shows
the schematic design of the enhanced design and the fabricated
microfluidic device.
B. Measurement of the Growth Rate
To monitor pollen tube growth, pollen grains were inserted
into the microchip and once the tube had achieved at least
a length of 200 μm time lapse imaging was performed [see
Fig. 3(b), (c)]. In order to confirm whether the chosen frame
rate was sufficient for monitoring the primary and putative secondary peak frequencies, movies taken from normally growing pollen tubes were analyzed in detail and it was found that
Camellia pollen tubes typically display a primary oscillation
frequency with a long time period in the range of 20–40 s as
well as secondary oscillation frequency with shorter time period
in the range of 3–5 s, corresponding to frequencies of 0.01–0.05
and 0.2–0.3 Hz, respectively. Based on the Nyquist–Shannon
sampling theorem, a sampling rate of 1 Hz (or frame rate of 1/s)
would be sufficient to reliably detect these secondary frequency
assuming that these are not higher than 0.4 Hz.
However, due to the limitations of the tracking software in
tracing the tip and the resulting noise in the time-series of the
growth rate, the monitored frequency can be higher than the
expected maximum secondary frequency. In this case, by increasing the sampling rate to 2 Hz and employing filtering techniques, the effect of unwanted higher frequencies and the forced
noise is eliminated. It must be noted that there is a limit on selecting higher sampling rates due to the spatial resolution of the
micrographs. Due to this limitation, a sampling rate of 4 Hz
actually deteriorates the detection of the secondary frequency
due to emerging new peak frequencies. The time variation in the
growth rate of a Camellia pollen tube growing along microchannel captured with 80× objective with sampling frequency of
2 Hz is shown in Fig. 3(d). Oscillations with both primary and
secondary frequencies are clearly observed.
C. Measurement of Peak Oscillation Frequencies
Initially, the stationary nature of oscillatory growth rate signal
was verified. A stationary process is one in which statistical
properties including the mean value and standard deviations of
the signal’s amplitude do not change over time. In order to assess
these variations for each pollen tube, the growth rate of pollen
tube was windowed and the statistical properties of each window
were calculated. The results of mean and standard deviation
values for different windows with window size of 60 s are shown
in Fig. 4 for several pollen tubes captured with a sampling rate of
2 Hz and with a total sampling length of 240 s. For each pollen
tube, the variation of statistical properties between different
windows was small indicating the stationary pattern of pollen
tube growth growing under microfluidic conditions.
It is difficult to identify the frequency components only by
evaluating the original signal. Therefore, to obtain discrete data,
the time domain signal was converted to the frequency domain
using discrete Fourier transform (DFT) in order to detect the
peak frequencies of oscillation. DFT of the signal is calculated

Fig. 4. Mean and standard deviations (bars) of growth rate for different windowed samples of a several pollen tubes. The variation is confined to a limited
range reflecting the stationary pattern of pollen tube growth. The windows were
equally spaced to cover the 240 s total period without overlap.

using the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm [3]. Prior to the
transform, the average growth rate data were subtracted from the
time series in order to remove the nonoscillating component of
the time series. Power spectral density (PSD) was then used to
obtain waveform analysis reflecting the power of each frequency
components associated with the oscillatory growth.
Assuming stationary growth, FFT and PSD were obtained
for the growth rate signal. As stated, if the sampling rate frequency fs is chosen at least twice the maximum frequency of
the signal fm , no aliasing effect in the FFT analysis would be
detected. However, due to the limitation of the tracking software, noise influenced the time-series growth rate signal which
led to the maximum frequency of interest in signal (fm ) to be
significantly higher than our maximum expected frequency (fc )
(secondary frequency in the range of 0.2–0.3 Hz). In this case,
setting the sampling frequency to more than 2 fm might be
impractical to prevent aliasing. Hence, it is preferred to use a
low-pass filter (antialiasing filter) which attenuates the amplitude of the frequencies above fc [24]. The maximum frequency
of the filtered signal (fm ) is now still higher than fc , but lower
than the value before filtering. In our analysis, we applied a
low-pass Butterworth filter with a cut-off frequency in the range
of 0.35–0.5 Hz and a filter order between 1 to 5 was applied
to eliminate the effect of aliasing frequencies generated by the
noise in the time domain data. For the chosen sampling time of
0.5 s, the first-order Butterworth filter with a cut-off frequency
of 0.4 Hz was generally sufficient to detect both primary and
secondary frequencies. The FFT and PSD analysis of a sample
pollen tube growth rate is shown in Fig. 5(a). Two dominant
peak frequencies around f = 20 and 220 mHz are shown corresponding to the primary and secondary peak frequencies of
the growth rate oscillations. The windowed PSD analysis also
shows similar peak frequencies [see Fig. 5(b)] where all three
PSD graphs with three windowing functions, namely Hamming,
Kaiser, and Chebyshev identified the peak frequencies at 20 and
220 mHz.
For the majority of the pollen tubes within the sample set
(n = 15), FFT and PSD detected both primary and secondary

SANATI NEZHAD et al.: I N V I T R O STUDY OF OSCILLATORY GROWTH DYNAMICS OF C A M E L L I A POLLEN TUBES

3189

four of the previously analyzed samples. The results show that
in the absence of any change in growth conditions, the primary
frequency shows up to 13% variation, while the secondary frequency varies up to 10% between the windows of a single sample
[see Fig. 7(a)]. This variation is well within the natural variation occurring in individual pollen tubes [10], [11], [16]. The
peak frequencies did not vary significantly for different window
spans. Hence, FFT analysis over a long window covering all
subwindows can define the overall peak frequencies of pollen
tube growing in normal conditions.
E. Effect of Sucrose Concentration on Growth Oscillation
Frequencies

Fig. 5. (a) FFT analysis on the time-series data of a sample Camellia pollen
tube growth rate. Two peak frequencies are seen around f = 20 mHz and f =
220 mHz. (b) Windowed PSD analysis of sampled Camellia pollen tube.

frequencies. However, in two of these specimens only weak
or no primary oscillation frequency was detected, but the secondary frequency was clearly present [see Fig. 6(a)]. In addition,
in several specimens, FFT analysis revealed unexpected peaks
[around 280 mHz, Fig. 6(b)]. This is likely due to a phenomenon
called leakage, caused by the fact that the sampled value of the
particular frequency at the start of the sampling interval was
different from the value at the end of sampling interval [24].
The common method to deal with this problem is the use of
proper windowing function to attenuate the signal at the beginning and the end of sampled range. Different types of windowing
functions were tested and all successfully removed the leakage
effect [see Fig. 6(c) corresponding to the same data as those
shown in Fig. 6(b)]. This treatment confirms that there are no
two truly independent frequencies adjacent to each other around
f = 280 mHz. Clearly, the selection of the proper windowing
function is important to determine the true peak frequencies of
oscillation.
D. Stability of Peak Frequencies Over Time for Pollen Tubes
Growing in Normal Condition
The dynamic growth characterization shows that most Camellia pollen tubes growing under normal conditions oscillate with
a primary frequency in the range of 20–50 mHz and a secondary
frequency in the range of 200–300 mHz (n = 15). Next, we used
short-time Fourier transform (STFT) in order to determine how
the peak frequencies vary within the sampling interval. To assess
the baseline variations during undisturbed growth, we analyzed

In order to assess how the primary and secondary oscillation
frequencies in the pollen tube growth rate are affected by a
change in growth conditions, the sucrose concentration in the
growth medium was modified. Sucrose is both taken up and
metabolized, and it alters the turgor pressure of the cell. The
latter effect is caused by an osmotic shock and is transient. The
cell usually compensates for the change in osmotic conditions
within a few minutes.
Here, we observed that changing the concentration of sucrose
from 8% in normal medium to 10% caused the pollen tubes to
interrupt the normal growth in a transient manner followed by
an adjustment to a new stable condition. In order to identify the
transient and stationary phases of this behavior, the variation in
the mean growth rate within 50 s time spans before change of the
growth medium (BT) and after change (AT) was analyzed [see
Fig. 8(a)]. The variations within the subregions at the moment
of change of sucrose concentration (from region BT2 to region
AT2) are depicted in Fig. 8(b). Region BT1 identifies the normal
growth of the pollen tube before treatment, region AT1 is the
transient period during which the growth is disrupted, region
AT2 is the time period when the pollen tube resumes growth
under the new environmental condition and AT3 identifies the
stationary growth of pollen tube once it has adapted to the new
condition.
In the case of a change from 8 to 10% sucrose concentration,
the duration of the transient interruption of pollen tube growth
varied between 1–3 min in three pollen tube. Once the pollen
tube had recovered from the osmotic shock it established a new
stationary grow pattern (regions AT2 and AT3). FFT analysis
was applied to the stationary signal in region AT3 to identify
the new peak frequencies of the growth rate [see Fig. 9(a), (b)].
In the pollen tube shown here, a shift of 8 mHz for the primary
frequency toward longer oscillation periods was detected. The
secondary peak frequency on the other hand was reduced by
30 mHz. Moreover, the mean growth rate was reduced by 25%
compared to the value observed before the increase in sucrose
concentration [see Fig. 9(c)]. On average, for the three tested
Camellia pollen tubes the primary frequency was reduced by
68% and the secondary frequency was reduced by 12%.
The windowing function was used not only to remove the
leakage phenomenon, but also to detect more precise peak
frequencies as seen in Fig. 9(a). In points A and C, all three
windows act similarly to detect a significant peak frequency. In

3190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

Fig. 6. (a) Time series of pollen tube without strong primary frequency. (b) and (c) FFT analysis of pollen tube growth rate (sample rate = 1 s). No strong
primary peak frequency was detected. The secondary frequency was detected at 280 mHz. Due to a leakage effect, three peaks are seen around the frequency of
280 mHz. c) Windowed PSD analysis clearly detect the secondary frequency at 280 mHz.

IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 7. STFT analysis of different pollen tube to detect the variation of primary
and secondary peaks in different time interval of normally growing pollen
tube (n = 4), Window size is 50 s. The average variation of peak frequencies
among the three windows is 13% for primary frequency and 10% for secondary
frequency.

the case of point B, the Chebyshev windowing function did not
clearly detect a peak at this point.

The oscillatory growth behavior in pollen tubes offers an
extraordinary phenomenon that can be used to understand the
mechanisms that regulate cellular growth in plants both in space
and time. Our detailed analyses have shown that the pollen
tube displays at least two superimposed frequencies which are
maintained constant over extended periods of time in stable
growth conditions. Hence, any stable shift in the peak frequencies that is larger than the regular variations encountered during
normal growth is a sign for a disturbance. Frequency analysis thus provides us with a tool to detect and assess quantitatively the effect of disturbances on cellular growth behavior
that might not necessarily be detected by looking at the overall
growth rate. We demonstrated the use of this tool by comparing
pollen tube growth rate in stationary regions before and after the
change of growth medium revealing a clear shift in peak oscillation frequencies. During the transition period, the pollen tube
lost its primary frequency peak and only displayed a secondary
peak frequency. After adapting to the new growth condition, the
pollen tube recovered and displayed again a primary and secondary oscillation frequency, but both were significantly shifted
compared to the original growth conditions. An analysis of the
growth dynamics therefore provides us with several independent parameters that can be measured to quantitatively assess
the effect of a pharmacological or other external agent on cellular functioning: the duration of the transition period, and the
shift in both primary and secondary frequencies in the growth
rate both during the transition and after the establishment of a
new stable behavior.
These quantitative parameters will not only enable the characterization of the pollen tube growth rate upon external triggers,
but they also provide a tool to understand the cellular feedback

SANATI NEZHAD et al.: I N V I T R O STUDY OF OSCILLATORY GROWTH DYNAMICS OF C A M E L L I A POLLEN TUBES

3191

Fig. 8. (a) Pollen tube growth rate shown as an average rate calculated over 100 sampling points before the treatment (BT region) and after the administration
(AT region) of higher concentration of sucrose. Sampling rate = 2 Hz. (b) Time course of a pollen tube growth rate before and after treatment. Pollen tube growth
was interrupted for about 1 min in region AT1 and resumed with a lower mean growth rate from region AT2. Points A and B clearly show the oscillation with
secondary frequency in stationary growth region before medium change and in transient region after the change, respectively.

Fig. 9. (a) FFT analysis of a pollen tube growing in the presence of 8% sucrose within the stationary regions of growth (region BT1). The pollen tube displays
oscillations with a primary frequency of 13 mHz and secondary frequency of 260 mHz. (b) FFT analysis of the same pollen tube within the stationary regions
of growth after change of sucrose concentration (region AT3). The primary frequency has shifted to 5 mHz and and the secondary frequency to 230 mHz,
corresponding to a shift of 8 mHz and 30 MHz, respectively. (c) Primary peak frequencies before treatment (BT) and after treatment (AT) for the analyzed pollen
tubes, (d) Secondary peak frequencies before treatment (BT) and after treatment (AT) for the same pollen tubes.

3192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2013

mechanisms that regulate normal growth. The extracellular and
intracellular concentrations and fluxes of various ions such as
calcium [25] and protons, as well as the dynamics of cellular
features such as vesicles and the cytoskeleton are known to
oscillate with the same frequency as the growth rate (primary
frequency) [15], [16], [26], but with a phase delay [27]. In the
present study, we successfully detected a secondary oscillation
peak frequency in the growth rate and we should therefore expect to observe the corresponding secondary peak frequencies
in the dynamics of these cellular processes. Detecting these will
pose a challenge to the measuring techniques required such as
the vibrating probe (for ion flux) and the sensitivity of fluorescent markers (for ion concentrations and motion of cytoplasmic
structures such as vesicles and organelles), but future implementations of our microfluidic device will be used to meet these
challenges.
A detailed analysis of secondary oscillation frequencies may
contribute to solving outstanding questions in this field such
as the controversy around the fundamental underpinnings of
the change in growth rate [28], [29]. Two different models have
been proposed for the cellular functioning of oscillatory growing
pollen tube including 1) the fluctuation in mechanical properties
of cell wall under a relatively stable turgor pressure [3], [28], [29]
and 2) variation of turgor pressure as the controlling driving
force of cell wall stretching [30]. The experimental manipulation
of both features can shift the oscillation frequencies, amplitudes,
or average growth rate. For instance, the administration of more
borate and pectin methyl esterase, MES buffer and pH in the
medium reduced the primary oscillation frequency [11], [15],
[31] while auxin increased the primary oscillation frequency [3].
Similarly, a change in turgor pressure has been documented to
change oscillation frequencies [3], [30], [32], [33] and our data
are consistent with these earlier observations on pollen tubes
of Papaver rhoeas, Petunia hybrid, and Nicotiana tabacum. As
shown for these other species, a decrease in turgor causes the
oscillation frequency to decrease, and vice versa.
Because of this experimentally observed turgor induced effect
on the frequency, oscillations in turgor pressure were suggested
as the cause of the oscillatory changes in growth rate [11]. However, periodic changes in intracellular turgor were not confirmed
experimentally either by pressure probe [34] or microindentation [35]. This does not exclude that there might be oscillations
in turgor pressure with an amplitude below the resolution of
measuring technique and more detailed analyses are warranted.
On the other hand, the presence of a complicated oscillation pattern with primary and secondary frequencies is probably easier
to reconcile with variations in the material properties of the cell
wall as postulated earlier [15], [36]. The material properties are
influenced by subtle changes in the ion flux pattern and exocytosis rate [21], [37], but more research is warranted to clarify this
issue. The analyses of secondary frequencies offer a promising
avenue to do so.
The frequency shifts can be considered as the dynamic response of a pollen tube to the change of growth conditions,
whereas the change of mean growth rate can considered as the
static response of the pollen tube. By incorporating static and
dynamic response of pollen tube to the change of growth en-

vironment, the proposed microfluidic platform reported in this
paper has application to be used as a point-of-care microdevices
for detecting the existence of biological or toxic agents in the
growth medium. The microfluidic device and the proposed signal processing technique can also be modified for studying the
variation of oscillatory dynamic growth in response to the chemical signals for tip-growing plant cells such as root, fungi, root
hairs and pollen tube [38]–[40], and animal cells such as migratory or neural cells [41], [42], those their growth in confined
microenvironment has been previously proven.
V. CONCLUSION
The present study demonstrates how the use of a microfluidic
device combined with high-resolution imaging, which has the
potential for point of care devices, increases the precision of the
analyses of cellular behavior. Unlike earlier dynamic analyses of
pollen tube growth, we were able to detect secondary oscillation
frequencies with higher frequency values superimposed on the
previously reported primary frequency. Our findings illustrate
that even in the apparent absence of low frequency oscillations
—a phenomenon that is typical for young pollen tubes—there
are always secondary peak frequencies indicating that pollen
tube growth is dynamically varying. Our finding, that small
changes in the growth environment change both frequencies,
offers a promising avenue for the investigation of the feedback
mechanisms governing cellular growth.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Y. Chebli and L. Pelletier
for preparing the scanning electron micrograph (see Fig. 1).
They would also like to thank research support from a Fonds
de Recherche du Québec (FQRNT) Team Grant and Concordia
Research Chair.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Krichevsky, S. V. Kozlovsky, G. W. Tian, M. H. Chen, A. Zaltsman,
and V. Citovsky, “How pollen tubes grow?” Develop. Biol., vol. 303,
pp. 405–420, 2007.
[2] P. Fayant, O. Girlanda, Y. Chebli, C. É. Aubin, I. Villemure, and
A. Geitmann, “Finite element model of polar growth in pollen tubes,”
The Plant Cell, vol. 22, pp. 2579–2593, 2010.
[3] R. Zerzour, J. Kroeger, and A. Geitmann, “Polar growth in pollen tubes
is associated with spatially confined dynamic changes in cell mechanical
properties,” Develop. Biol., vol. 334, pp. 437–446, 2009.
[4] R. Lopez-Franco, S. Bartnicki-Garcia, and C. E. Bracker, “Pulsed growth
of fungal hyphal tips,” Proc. Nat. Academy Sci., vol. 91, pp. 12228–12232,
1994.
[5] T. Betz, D. Lim, and J. A. Käs, “Neuronal growth: A bistable stochastic
process,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 96, p. 98103, 2006.
[6] E. Pierson, D. Miller, D. Callaham, J. Van Aken, G. Hackett, and P. Hepler,
“Tip-localized calcium entry fluctuates during pollen tube growth,” Develop. Biol., vol. 174, pp. 160–173, 1996.
[7] E. Pierson, Y. Li, H. Zhang, M. Willemse, H. Linskens, and M. Cresti,
“Pulsatory growth of pollen tubes-investigation of a possible relationship
with the periodic distribution of cell-wall components,” Develop. Biol.,
vol. 174, pp. 160–173, 1995.
[8] A. Geitmann and M. Cresti, “Ca2 + channels control the rapid expansions
in pulsating growth of Petunia hybrida pollen tubes,” J. Plant Physiol.,
vol. 152, pp. 439–447, 1998.
[9] A. Geitmann, Y. Q. Li, and M. Cresti, “The role of the cytoskeleton and
dictyosome activity in the pulsatory growth of Nicotiana tabacum and

SANATI NEZHAD et al.: I N V I T R O STUDY OF OSCILLATORY GROWTH DYNAMICS OF C A M E L L I A POLLEN TUBES

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

Petunia hybrida pollen tubes,” Botanica Acta, vol. 109, pp. 102–109,
1996.
J. A. Feijo, J. Sainhas, T. Holdaway-Clarke, M. S. Cordeiro, J. G. Kunkel,
and P. K. Hepler, “Cellular oscillations and the regulation of growth: the
pollen tube paradigm,” Bioessays, vol. 23, pp. 86–94, 2001.
M. A. Messerli and K. R. Robinson, “Ionic and osmotic disruptions of
the lily pollen tube oscillator: testing proposed models,” Planta, vol. 217,
pp. 147–157, 2003.
Y. Chebli and A. Geitmann, “Mechanical principles governing pollen tube
growth,” Function. Plant Sci. Biotechnol, vol. 1, pp. 232–45, 2007.
K. L. Wilsen and P. K. Hepler, “Sperm delivery in flowering plants: The
control of pollen tube growth,” Bioscience, vol. 57, pp. 835–844, 2007.
J. Kroeger and A. Geitmann, “The pollen tube paradigm revisited,” Current Opinion Plant Biol., vol. 15, pp. 618–624, 2012.
T. L. Holdaway-Clarke and P. K. Hepler, “Control of pollen tube growth:
Role of ion gradients and fluxes,” New Phytologist, vol. 159, pp. 539–563,
2003.
S. T. McKenna, J. G. Kunkel, M. Bosch, C. M. Rounds, L. Vidali,
L. J. Winship, and P. K. Hepler, “Exocytosis precedes and predicts the
increase in growth in oscillating pollen tubes,” The Plant Cell, vol. 21,
pp. 3026–3040, 2009.
T. L. Holdaway-Clarke, J. A. Feijó, G. R. Hackett, J. G. Kunkel, and
P. K. Hepler, “Pollen tube growth and the intracellular cytosolic calcium
gradient oscillate in phase while extracellular calcium influx is delayed,”
The Plant Cell, vol. 9, pp. 1999–2010, 1997.
E. Michard, P. Dias, and J. A. Feijó, “Tobacco pollen tubes as cellular
models for ion dynamics: improved spatial and temporal resolution of
extracellular flux and free cytosolic concentration of calcium and protons using pHluorin and YC3. 1 CaMeleon,” Sexual Plant Reproduction,
vol. 21, pp. 169–181, 2008.
M. A. Messerli, G. Danuser, and K. R. Robinson, “Pulsatile influxes of
H+ , K+ and Ca2 + lag growth pulses of Lilium longiflorum pollen tubes,”
J. Cell Sci., vol. 112, pp. 1497–1509, 1999.
J. Crutchfield, D. Farmer, N. Packard, R. Shaw, G. Jones, and R. Donnelly,
“Power spectral analysis of a dynamical system,” Phys. Lett. A, vol. 76,
pp. 1–4, 1980.
J. H. Kroeger, A. Geitmann, and M. Grant, “Model for calcium dependent
oscillatory growth in pollen tubes,” J. Theor. Biol., vol. 253, pp. 363–374,
2008.
C. G. Agudelo, A. Sanati Nezhad, M. Ghanbari, M. Naghavi,
M. Packirisamy, and A. Geitmann, “TipChip: A modular, MEMS-based
platform for experimentation and phenotyping of tip-growing cells,” Plant
J., vol. 73, pp. 1057–1068, 2013.
C. Agudelo, A. Sanati, M. Ghanbari, M. Packirisamy, and A. Geitmann,
“A microfluidic platform for the investigation of elongation growth in
pollen tubes,” J. Micromechan. Microeng., vol. 22, p. 115009, 2012.
A. J. Wheeler and A. R. Ganji, Introduction to engineering experimentation. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice–Hall, 1996.
E. S. Pierson, D. D. Miller, D. A. Callaham, A. M. Shipley, B. A. Rivers,
M. Cresti, and P. K. Hepler, “Pollen tube growth is coupled to the extracellular calcium ion flux and the intracellular calcium gradient: effect of
BAPTA-type buffers and hypertonic media,” Plant Cell, vol. 6, pp. 1815–
1828, 1994.

3193

[26] R. Parton, S. Fischer-Parton, M. Watahiki, and A. Trewavas, “Dynamics
of the apical vesicle accumulation and the rate of growth are related in
individual pollen tubes,” J. Cell Sci., vol. 114, pp. 2685–2695, 2001.
[27] M. A. Messerli, R. Créton, L. F. Jaffe, and K. R. Robinson, “Periodic
increases in elongation rate precede increases in cytosolic Ca2 + during
pollen tube growth,” Develop. Biol., vol. 222, pp. 84–98, 2000.
[28] L. J. Winship, G. Obermeyer, A. Geitmann, and P. K. Hepler, “Under
pressure, cell walls set the pace,” Trends Plant Sci., vol. 15, pp. 363–369,
2010.
[29] L. J. Winship, G. Obermeyer, A. Geitmann, and P. K. Hepler, “Pollen
tubes and the physical world,” Trends Plant Sci., vol. 16, pp. 353–355,
2011.
[30] L. Zonia and T. Munnik, “Understanding pollen tube growth: the hydrodynamic model versus the cell wall model,” Trends Plant Sci., vol. 16,
pp. 347–352, 2011.
[31] E. Parre and A. Geitmann, “Pectin and the role of the physical properties
of the cell wall in pollen tube growth of Solanum chacoense,” Planta,
vol. 220, pp. 582–592, 2005.
[32] L. Zonia and T. Munnik, “Life under pressure: Hydrostatic pressure in cell
growth and function,” Trends Plant Sci, vol. 12, pp. 90–97, 2007.
[33] L. Zonia, M. Müller, and T. Munnik, “Hydrodynamics and cell volume
oscillations in the pollen tube apical region are integral components of the
biomechanics of Nicotiana tabacum pollen tube growth,” Cell Biochem.
Biophys., vol. 46, pp. 209–232, 2006.
[34] R. Benkert, G. Obermeyer, and F. W. Bentrup, “The turgor pressure of
growing lily pollen tubes,” Protoplasma, vol. 198, pp. 1–8, 1997.
[35] A. Geitmann and E. Parre, “The local cytomechanical properties of growing pollen tubes correspond to the axial distribution of structural cellular
elements,” Sexual Plant Reproduct., vol. 17, pp. 9–16, 2004.
[36] A. Geitmann, “The rheological properties of the pollen tube cell wall,”
Fertilizat. Higher Plants, Mol. Cytology. Aspects, 1999.
[37] J. Kroeger and A. Geitmann, “Modeling pollen tube growth: Feeling the
pressure to deliver testifiable predictions,” Plant Signal. Behavior, vol. 6,
pp. 1828–1830, 2011.
[38] G. Grossmann, W. Guo, D. W. Ehrhardt, W. B. Frommer, R. V. Sit,
S. R. Quake, and M. Meier, “The RootChip: An integrated microfluidic
chip for plant science,” The Plant Cell, vol. 23, pp. 4234–4240, 2011.
[39] M. Held, A. P. Lee, C. Edwards, and D. V. Nicolau, “Microfluidics structures for probing the dynamic behaviour of filamentous fungi,” Microelectron. Eng., vol. 87, pp. 786–789, 2010.
[40] M. Meier, E. M. Lucchetta, and R. F. Ismagilov, “Chemical stimulation of
the Arabidopsis thaliana root using multi-laminar flow on a microfluidic
chip,” Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 2147–2153, 2010.
[41] E. M. Balzer, M. R. Dallas, W. Hung, K. J. Stebe, and K. Konstantopoulos,
“Chemotaxis of cell populations through confined spaces at single-cell
resolution,” PLoS One, vol. 7, p. e29211, 2012.
[42] M. A. Scott, Z. D. Wissner-Gross, and M. F. Yanik, “Ultra-rapid laser
protein micropatterning: Screening for directed polarization of single neurons,” Lab chip, vol. 21, pp. 2265–2276, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

