3468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

A Molecular Communication System Model for
Particulate Drug Delivery Systems
Youssef Chahibi∗ , Member, IEEE, Massimiliano Pierobon, Member, IEEE, Sang Ok Song, Fellow, IEEE,
and Ian F. Akyildiz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The goal of a drug delivery system (DDS) is to convey a drug where the medication is needed, while, at the same
time, preventing the drug from affecting other healthy parts of
the body. Drugs composed of micro- or nano-sized particles (particulate DDS) that are able to cross barriers which prevent large
particles from escaping the bloodstream are used in the most advanced solutions. Molecular communication (MC) is used as an
abstraction of the propagation of drug particles in the body. MC
is a new paradigm in communication research where the exchange
of information is achieved through the propagation of molecules.
Here, the transmitter is the drug injection, the receiver is the drug
delivery, and the channel is realized by the transport of drug particles, thus enabling the analysis and design of a particulate DDS
using communication tools. This is achieved by modeling the MC
channel as two separate contributions, namely, the cardiovascular
network model and the drug propagation network. The cardiovascular network model allows to analytically compute the blood
velocity profile in every location of the cardiovascular system given
the flow input by the heart. The drug propagation network model
allows the analytical expression of the drug delivery rate at the
targeted site given the drug injection rate. Numerical results are
also presented to assess the flexibility and accuracy of the developed model. The study of novel optimization techniques for a more
effective and less invasive drug delivery will be aided by this model,
while paving the way for novel communication techniques for Intrabody communication networks.
Index Terms—Advection-diffusion equation, communication
channels, molecular communication, nanonetworks, Navier–
Stokes equation, targeted drug delivery, time-varying channels,
transmission line modeling.

Manuscript received February 1, 2013; revised May 14, 2013; accepted June
14, 2013. Date of publication June 27, 2013; date of current version November
18, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Samsung Advanced Institute of
Technology (SAIT) and in part by Global Research Outreach (GRO) Program,
project title: “Molecular Communication Fundamentals in Action Potentialtriggered Particulate Drug Delivery Systems.” Asterik Indicates corresponding
author.
∗ Y. Chahibi is with the Broadband Wireless Networking Laboratory, School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: youssef@ece.gatech.edu).
M. Pierobon and I. F. Akyildiz are with the Broadband Wireless Networking
Laboratory, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: maxp@ece.gatech.edu;
ian@ece.gatech.edu).
S. O. Song is with the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology,
Bio Research Center, Gyeonggi-Do 449-712, Korea (e-mail: so4057.song@
samsung.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2271503

I. INTRODUCTION
ARGETED drug delivery systems (DDSs) are nowadays
under intensive study as they are at the cutting edge of
modern medical therapeutics [1]. In particular, the goal of the
DDS is to provide a localized drug presence where the medication is needed, while, at the same time, preventing the drug
from affecting other healthy parts of the body. The most advanced solutions use drugs composed of micro- or nano-sized
particles (particulate DDS), which are able to diffuse into the
blood stream to be transported into arteries, veins, and capillaries
and to cross barriers that prevent large particles and organisms
from escaping the bloodstream.
The transport of drug particles in the human body can be
viewed as a communication system using the molecular communication (MC) paradigm, where information is conveyed
through the transport of molecules. The MC paradigm will give
us a clear understanding of how the drug particles diffuse in the
body and the evolution of their distribution over time, which is
of primary importance for the design of a particulate DDS. In the
past literature, statistical modeling methods, such as the first reaction method based on dynamic Monte Carlo [2], [3], have been
often used to solve for this purpose. In this paper, we proposed
an analytical approach based on the abstraction of a particulate
DDSs as a communication mechanism, where the drug particles
are information carriers, which propagate messages (drug chemical properties) from the location of transmission (intravascular
injection) until the location of reception (targeted site).
The targeted DDS has been envisioned as one of the most
important applications of the MC paradigm [4]. MC abstracts
the propagation of information between a sender and a receiver
realized through mass transport phenomena. In the context of
targeted DDS, the information conveyed by the particles is the
therapeutic action. MC is increasingly attracting the interest of
the research community working in the field of nanonetworking [4]. MC is a bioinspired paradigm that, amongst others,
has been developed by nature for communication among living organisms, such as cells for intracellular and intercellular
signaling [5]. In MC, information is exchanged by the release,
the propagation, and the reception of molecules [6]. Due to its
inherent biocompatibility, MC is a competitive solution to the
problem of communication in nanonetworks [7], especially for
bio- nano-medical applications. Many different types of MC
have been studied so far, which involve either passive transport
of molecules (diffusion-based architectures [8], [9]) or active
transport (molecular motors [10], bacteria chemotaxis [11]).
The MC paradigm can pave the way for new approaches to
the analysis of immune system attacks from a security and

T

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

safety perspective in analogy with telecommunication security
techniques.
A particulate DDS takes an advantage of the blood distribution network for the propagation of drug particles from a
location where they are injected into the blood flow to a targeted
site within the reach of the cardiovascular system. The mass
transport phenomena operated by the cardiovascular system for
the propagation of the drug particles are two, namely, advection
and diffusion. As a consequence of advection, the drug particles are subject to their translation while in suspension in the
blood, which flows at different velocities in different locations
of the cardiovascular system. The blood velocity profile follows
the laws of fluid dynamics and, in particular, the Navier–Stokes
equation [12]. On top of this, as a result of diffusion, the drug
particles are subject to the Brownian motion spread in the blood
from a region of higher concentration to a region of lower concentration. This is interpreted by the laws of particle diffusion
and, in particular, by the diffusion-advection equation [2]. In
this paper, we realized the molecular communication abstraction of a particulate DDS by developing an MC channel model
of the drug particle propagation through the cardiovascular system. For this, we identified two separate contributions within
the model, namely, the cardiovascular network model and the
drug propagation network model.
The cardiovascular network model is developed in this paper
as a solution to the Navier–Stokes equation [12] in the cardiovascular system, and it is based on the application of the
transmission line theory [13]. We have restricted our model of
the cardiovascular network to the blood arteries, which are the
network of blood vessels that provide organs and tissues with
oxygen and nutrients, because it is the best medical administration to provide targeted drug delivery to these organs. Our
objective is to administer a drug dose to a target location in
the extremity. Systemic arteries are the best candidate route of
administration for targeted DDS because they allow delivering
a localized drug dose to the periphery without affecting healthy
organs and tissues [14]. On the contrary, veins are more appropriate in the case when the drug must be evenly distributed
to the extremities of the cardiovascular network. By mapping
the fluidic parameters of each artery to electrical circuit components, the cardiovascular network model allows to analytically
compute the blood velocity profile in every artery of the cardiovascular system given the blood flow input from the heart. A
similar approach has been suggested in [13], where, differently
from our study, a bulk section of the arterial system is modeled
with one circuit component and does not allow obtaining the
blood velocity profile at every possible location. In [15], a complete fluid dynamic analysis of a pressure pulse propagation in
the cardiovascular system is performed, but without the flexibility and clarity of a circuit analogue of the blood flow dynamics
in the transmission line model we developed. In [16], a transmission line model is developed which takes into account only
the blood dynamics in the large systemic artery tree, while our
model covers in detail both large and small artery trees. In [17],
the lumped model of any artery is developed, but without taking
into account their bifurcations and the transmission line network
solution of an artery tree.

3469

The drug propagation network model is developed in this paper as a solution to the advection-diffusion equation [2], and it
stems from the knowledge of the blood velocity profile computed through the cardiovascular network model. Through the
application of the harmonic transfer matrix (HTM) theory [18]
to the drug particle transport in the arteries and their bifurcations, the drug propagation network allows the analytical expression of the drug delivery rate at the targeted site given the
drug location of injection and injection rate profile. The derived model takes into account also the individual specificities
in the physiological parameters of the cardiovascular system,
such as the compliance of the arteries, the heartbeat rate profile,
and the heartbeat stroke volume. Molecular mass transport over
a network has been very recently approached from the point
of view of complex system theory in [2]. While this method
takes into account the time-variance of the flow, the algorithm
couples a graph-based approach and numerical resolution of
partial-differential equations for every vessel, which are not required in our HTM-based approach. Such method implies a high
computation and memory cost. Also, this model does not yield
analytical expressions that can be of practical use to solve problems such as the optimization of the drug delivery. The rest of
this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the main processes that compose a particulate DDS and their abstractions as
the components of an MC system are introduced, together with
the main objective of this study. In Section III, the scheme of
the MC channel model of a particulate DDS is detailed into two
main contributions, namely, the cardiovascular network model
and the drug propagation network model. Section IV details the
cardiovascular network model, while Section V describes the
drug propagation network model. Section VI analyzes the numerical results stemming from the proposed solution. Finally,
Section VII concludes the paper.
II. MC ABSTRACTION OF A PARTICULATE DDS
A particulate DDS takes an advantage of the blood circulation
in the cardiovascular system for the propagation of drug particles
from a location where they are injected into the blood flow until
they reach a targeted site. We describe a particulate DDS as composed of three main processes, namely, injection, propagation,
and delivery, as shown in Fig. 1. The MC paradigm abstracts
the exchange of information through the emission of particles
from a transmitter, their propagation through mass transport
phenomena in the channel, and their reception at the destination
by a receiver. We define the particulate DDS processes and their
MC abstractions as follows:
1) The injection process is the introduction of the drug particles in the blood flowing in the cardiovascular system at
a predefined location of injection I. The injection is performed according to a particle injection rate x(t) defined
as the first derivative with respect to the volume v in the
number of injected particles in the location of injection as
the function of the time t:
x(t) =

∂{# injected particles}(t)
.
∂v

(1)

3470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 2. Scheme of the MC channel model of a particulate DDS with the two
contributions.

Fig. 1. Graphical sketch of the main processes in a particulate DDS and their
MC abstractions.

We abstract the injection process as the MC Transmitter
where I is the transmitter location and x(t) is the transmitted molecular signal.
2) The propagation process is the spread of the drug particles throughout the cardiovascular system. The cardiovascular system shows a topology of interconnected blood
vessels, where the blood flows due to the heart pumping action, which is expressed as the cardiac input qin (t),
defined as the blood flow input to the cardiovascular system as function of the time t. Drug particles propagate
through the blood vessels according to the superposition
of two physical phenomena, namely, advection and diffusion. Advection is the transport of particles suspended
in a fluid due to the fluid’s bulk motion. Diffusion is the
spontaneous spread of particles suspended in a fluid from
a space region where they are in a higher concentration
to another region where they are in a lower concentration.
We abstract the propagation process as the MC channel,
where the transmitted molecular signal is propagated via
advection-diffusion through the blood flow in the cardiovascular system.
3) The delivery process is the arrival of the drug particles at
the targeted site O, where they are expected to perform
their healing action. The drug delivery process is characterized by the particle delivery rate y(t) at the targeted
site, defined as the first derivative with respect to the volume v in the number of particles present at the targeted
site as function of the time t:
y(t) =

∂{# particles at targeted site}(t)
.
∂v

(2)

We abstract the delivery process as the MC receiver where
O is the receiver location and y(t) is the received molecular signal.
One of the main objectives in the study of a particulate DDS is
to develop a model to analytically compute the particle delivery
rate y(t) at the targeted site as function of the time t from the
knowledge of the location of injection I, the particle injection
rate x(t), the cardiac input qin (t), and the targeted site O. This
is expressed as follows:
y(t) = f (I, x(t), qin (t), O)

(3)

where the function f (.) represents the analytical model. We abstract this objective as the modeling of the MC channel between
the MC transmitter located at I and the MC receiver located at
O, where the input transmitted molecular signal x(t) is propagated by advection and diffusion in the blood flowing through
the cardiovascular system as function of the cardiac input qin (t).
The output of this MC channel is the received molecular signal
y(t).
The outcome of the model expressed in (2) through the MC
abstraction is twofold.
1) To study optimization techniques for particulate DDSs
which could allow a careful selection of the location of
injection I and a definition of the particle injection rate
x(t) as function of the time t with the goal of obtaining a
desired particle delivery rate y(t) as function of the time t
at a targeted site O, while minimizing the drug spread in
the rest of the cardiovascular system [1].
2) To develop a novel MC technique to realize intrabody
communication (IBC) networks [19] by modulating at the
transmitter, the injection of particles in the blood according to the signal to be transmitted, and, upon their propagation through the cardiovascular system, by demodulating
the received signal from the delivery rate of incoming
particles at the receiver.
III. SCHEME OF THE MC CHANNEL MODEL OF A
PARTICULATE DDS
The MC channel model of a particulate DDS developed in
this paper is divided into two main contributions, namely, the
Cardiovascular Network Model and the Drug Propagation Network Model, as shown in Fig. 2. These two contributions are
summarized as follows:
1) The cardiovascular network model is developed as a solution to the Navier–Stokes equation [12], which relates
the blood velocity vector ul (r, t), function of the radial
coordinate r and the time variable t, in every location of
the cardiovascular system to the blood pressure p(t) as
functions of the time t. This is expressed as follows:


∂ul (r, t)
+ ul (r, t) · ∇ul (r, t) = −∇p(t)
ρ
∂t
+μ∇2 ul (r, t) + f

(4)

where ρ is the blood density, which we assume homogeneous, ∇ is the Nabla vector differential operator, μ is the

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

3471

blood viscosity, and f represents the contribution of blood
vessel wall properties [20]. As detailed in Section IV,
the cardiovascular network model allows to compute the
blood velocity ul (r, t) as function of the time t in every
artery l of the cardiovascular system CV from the knowledge of the cardiac input qin (t), expressed as follows:
Cardiovascular Network M o del

qin (t) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ {ul (r, t)|l ∈ CV }
(5)
where qin (t) is the blood flow input to the cardiovascular
system, {.} is the set symbol, and CV denotes the set of
all the arteries included in the cardiovascular system. As
explained in Section IV, the cardiovascular network model
is developed through the application of the transmission
line theory [13] to the modeling of the interconnection of
the arteries in the cardiovascular network.
2) The drug propagation network model is developed as a
solution to the advection-diffusion equation [21], which
relates the drug concentration c(t) in every location of the
cardiovascular system to the blood velocity vector ul (r, t)
as functions of the time t. It is expressed as follows:
∂c(t)
= −∇. [−D∇c(t) + ul (r, t)c(t)]
(6)
∂t
where ∇ is the Nabla vector differential operator, and D is
the particle diffusion coefficient. As detailed in Section V,
the drug propagation network model allows to compute
the particle delivery rate y(t) at the targeted site as a
function of the time t from the knowledge of the location
of injection I, the particle injection rate x(t), the blood
velocity ul (r, t) as a function of the time t in every artery
l of the cardiovascular system CV , and the targeted site
O, expressed as follows:

Fig. 3.

2)

3)

Drug Propagation

I, x(t), {ul (r, t)|l ∈ CV } , O −−−−−−−−−−−→ y(t) (7)
Network M o del

where {.} is the set symbol and CV denotes all the arteries included in the cardiovascular system. The drug
propagation network model is developed by applying the
HTM theory [18] to express the transfer function of each
artery and bifurcation in the cardiovascular system CV ,
as explained in Section V.
The MC channel model, composed by the two aforementioned contributions, allows to find the analytical solution to the
objective expressed in (2) by using the particulate DDS MC
abstraction. The cardiovascular network and drug propagation
network models are detailed in Sections IV and V, respectively.
IV. CARDIOVASCULAR NETWORK MODEL
The cardiovascular network model allows to compute for every artery l the blood velocity ul (r, t) as function of the distance
r from the blood vessel axis and the time t, and it stems from the
closed-form solutions to the Navier–Stokes equation (4) applied
to the cardiovascular system. As shown in Fig. 3, the cardiovascular network model is composed of the following elements.
1) The cardiac input Qin (ωk ), which is the flow Qin (ωk )
exerted by the heart as functions of the heartbeat frequency
component ωk . The blood pressure is defined as the force

4)

5)

Path between the cardiac input and the small artery l.

induced by the blood on the walls of a blood vessel, while
the blood flow is defined as the quantity of blood traversing
the cross section of a blood vessel per unit time. The
computation of Qin (ωk ) is detailed in Section IV-A.
The small arteries model. Small arteries are defined as
the systemic circulation vessel with a radius comprised
between 0.05 and 2 mm. They have muscular walls
and deliver blood to capillaries. This model is developed
in Section IV-B and gives the transfer matrix and load
impedance for a small artery l.
The large arteries model. Large arteries are defined as
the systemic circulation vessels with a radius larger than
2 mm. They have elastic walls and branch ultimately into
small arteries. Their model is developed in Section IV-C
and also yields the transfer matrix and load impedance for
a large artery l.
The general transfer matrix and load impedance T(ωk ).
It characterizes the cardiovascular network between the
heart and any small or large artery l, and it is computed
from the aforementioned elements by applying the transmission line theory [13]. We express T(ωk ) as a 2 × 2
matrix with elements A(ωk ), B(ωk ), C(ωk ), and D(ωk )
in Section IV-D.
The blood velocity. The output of the cardiovascular network is the blood velocity ul (r, t) in a large or a small
artery l. We suppose that it is homogeneous along the
longitude of the artery and that it only depends on time
variable t and the radial coordinate r in the artery. We find
in Section IV-E a final relationship that gives the blood velocity ul (r, t) of any artery l of the cardiovascular system
CV from the cardiac input Qin (ωk ) through the following
formula:
ul (r, t) =

r 2 +∞
r l2 
πrl2
k =−∞

1−

Qin (ωk )
ej ω k t .
Zl (ωk )C(ωk ) + D(ωk )
(8)

3472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

where Qin (ωk ) is the cardiac input, Zl (ωk ) is the load
impedance of the artery l, and C(ωk ) and D(ωk ) are the
first and second elements of the second row of the transfer matrix T(ωk ) representing the cardiovascular network
between the heart and the artery l sampled at angular frequency ωk , respectively.
A. Cardiac Input
The cardiac input Qin (ωk ) is the blood flow ejected by the
heart in the cardiovascular system as functions of the heartbeat frequency component ωk . Qin (ωk ) is considered to be the
Fourier coefficients of the blood flow qin (t) taken from clinical measurements provided in [20] and performed by using
magnetic resonance (MR) on a set of human individuals. By
exploiting the periodicity of the cardiac input, we compute the
Fourier coefficients [22] and obtain the cardiac input Qin (ωk )
as function of the Fourier series index k:
 T
2
1
qin (t)e−j ω k dt.
(9)
Qin (ωk ) =
T − T2

Equation (11) is similar to Ohm’s law [24] if pressure is seen
as voltage and flow as current. More importantly, the harmonic
impedance at the inlet of the small artery Zl (ωk ) and the harmonic impedance at the outlet of the small artery Zlout (ωk ) are
related by the following relationship [23]:
Zl (ωk ) =

B. Small Arteries Model
1) Load Impedance of a Small Artery: The modeling of a
small artery l as an electrical component with a load impedance
Zl (ωk ) is explained in the following. The load impedance
Zl (ωk ) is calculated recursively according to the algorithm described in Algorithm 1. The harmonic impedance Zl (ωk ) of the
sister branch is calculated similarly.
Small arteries possess the following properties.
1) The scaling parameters α and β, which are scaling parameters that relate the radii of the two bifurcating arteries
rl at the left and rl at the right to the radius rl−1 of their
parent artery l − 1 (rl = αrl−1 and rl = βrl−1 ).
The tree is terminated when the radius is no larger than a
minimal radius rm in . The tree representation for the renal
artery is given in Fig. 16.
2) The length l , which is proportional to the radius rl of the
small artery. Since, the tapering is no longer significant in
small arteries, it is possible to consider small arteries as
cylinders. It has been observed from measurements that
the length–radius ratio lr r is constant for small arteries.
In fact the length of a small artery l can be expressed
approximately in function of its radius rl as follows:
l = lr r rl = (50 ± 10) rl .

(10)

3) The volume compliance cl , which is supposed to be similar
to the volume compliance for large arteries (20).
Due to the different mechanical and geometric properties
between large and small arteries, we use a different transmission
line model for small arteries.
According to [23], the harmonic pressure Pl (ωk ) and the
harmonic flow Ql (ωk ) in a small artery l can be related by a
load impedance Zl (ωk ) as follows:
Pl (ωk ) = Zl (ωk )Ql (ωk ).

(11)

jτl (ωk ) sin (τl (ωk )) /l + Zlout (ωk ) cos (τl (ωk ))
cos (τl (ωk )) + jl Zlout (ωk ) sin (τl (ωk )) /τl (ωk )
(12)

with [23]:
lr r
τl (ωk ) = √
π


1−

ρcl
2J 1 (j r l2 ω /ν )
j r l2 ω /ν J 0 (j r l2 ω /ν )

(13)

where rl is the small artery radius, l is the small artery length,
lr r is the length-to-radius ratio, ρ is the blood density, μ is the
blood viscosity, υ = μ/ρ is the blood kinematic viscosity, cl is
the small artery volume compliance, j is the imaginary unit, J0
and J1 are the Bessel function of the first kind and, respectively,
zero and first order [25].
For ωk = 0, we calculate the limit of the function Zl (ωk ) in
(12) as ωk → 0 to get
Zl (ωk ) =

8μl
+ Zlout (ωk ).
πrl4

(14)

The conservation of flow at the bifurcation, and continuity
of pressure justify the modeling of bifurcations as the branching of perfectly conducting wires in the electric analogue of
blood flow and pressure, and allow the application of Kirchhoff’s current and voltage laws [26]. The harmonic impedance
at the output Zlout (ωk ) can be related to the harmonic impedance
at the daughter small artery l + 1 Zl+1 (ωk ) and the harmonic
impedance of its sister Zl  +1 , by the following relationship:

−1
1
1
out
+
Zl (ωk ) =
.
(15)
Zl+1 (ωk ) Zl  +1 (ωk )
The tree of small arteries is truncated when the radius rl
is no larger than rm in . The harmonic impedance of a small
artery l such as rl < rm in is taken to be zero. With this condition, we can compute the load impedance Zl (ωk ) of a small
artery l according to the recursive function in Algorithm 1,
where f (ZOut, r), implementing the expression defined in (12),

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

Fig. 4.

3473

Transmission line model for a tree of small arteries.
Fig. 6. Electrical scheme of the transmission line representation of a large
artery segment.

Fig. 7. Large artery m as an axisymmetric tube with tapering radius in the
(r, z) plan.

m − 1 which is computed as in the following:
Fig. 5.

Small arterial tree as a network of impedances.

ΔZm −1 (ωk ) = Zm −1 (ωk ) −

returns the impedance ZIn given the output impedance ZOut
and the radius r.
2) Small Artery Transfer Matrix: Here, we find a transfer
matrix Tl (ωk ) that relates the harmonic flow and pressure
[Pl (ωk ) Ql (ωk )] in a small artery l located in a tree of small
arteries to the flow and pressure at the root il of the tree of small
arteries [Pi l (ωk ) Qi l (ωk )] (cf., Fig. 5).
By calculating the harmonic impedance at the root artery
Zi l (ωk ), the harmonic impedance at the small artery l Zl (ωk )
and at its sister small artery Zl  (ωk ), we can represent the tree
of small arteries by the two-port network in Fig. 4. Using Kirchhoff’s circuit laws, we find a linear system involving the input
pressure Pi l (ωk ), the input flow Qi l (ωk ), the output pressure
Pl (ωk ), and the output flow Ql (ωk ). Hence, the flow and pressure in a small artery l and the root of the tree of small arteries i
are related by the following matrix relationship using the transmission line theory




Pl (ωk )
Pi l (ωk )
= Tl (ωk )
(16)
Qi l (ωk )
Ql (ωk )
with:

⎡

ΔZm −1 (ωk )
1+
 (ω )
	 ⎢
Zm
k
⎢
Tl (ωk ) =
⎢
⎣
1
m ∈S l

Zm  (ωk )

⎤
ΔZm −1 (ωk ) ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
1

(17)

where Sl = (. . . , m, . . . , l − 1, l) is the sequence of all small
arteries carrying blood from the interface to the small artery l,
[Pl (ωk ) Ql (ωk )] is the harmonic flow and pressure in a small
artery l, and [Pi l (ωk ) Qi l (ωk )] is the harmonic flow and pressure at the root of the tree of small arteries il , and ΔZm −1 (ωk )
is the impedance between the inlets the small arteries m and

Zm (ωk )Zm  (ωk )
.
Zm (ωk ) + Zm  (ωk )

(18)

Zm (ωk ), Zm  (ωk ), and Zm −1 (ωk ) are, respectively the harmonic impedance of the small artery m, its sister small artery
m , and its parent small artery m − 1. At the interface, we take
that ΔZi l (ωk ) = 0.
C. Large Arteries Model
The objective of this section is to present an expression of the
transfer matrix Tl (ωk ) for a large artery l, and an algorithm to
calculate the load impedance Zl (ωk ) for a large artery located
in the cardiovascular system.
1) Large Artery Transfer Matrix: The transfer matrix
Tl (ωk ) for a large artery l depends on its geometric dimensions and physiological parameters of the artery, which are as
follows:
1) Radius tapering. A large artery l is considered as an axisymmetric tube with decreasing radius as illustrated in
Fig. 7 and length l . The inlet of the large artery l has
a top radius rltop and its outlet has a bottom radius rlb ot ,
where rlb ot ≤ rltop . The numerical values for rltop ,rlb ot ,
and l are found from anatomical measurements (cf., Table I). We consider z as the longitude coordinate along the
axis of the large artery, and rm (z) as the radial distance
of the tube surface to the axis at z, the radius rl (z) deb ot
at z = l ,
creases exponentially from rltop at z = 0 to rm
as follows:
rl (z) = rltop exp(−kl z)

(19)

where kl , the tapering factor for a large artery l, is defined
log (r lt o p /r lb o t )
.
as kl =
l
2) The volume compliance, which quantifies the tendency
of the artery walls to yield to pressure and other external forces. Using statistical studies of physiological

3474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013



TABLE I
LIST OF LARGE ARTERIES AND THEIR DIMENSIONS

length Cl =


π rl 2
k 1 exp(−k 2 r l )+k 3

, and the admittance per unit length

Gl = 0, and are expressed as function of the physiological parameters previously defined, with rl = rl (z = l ). Stemming
from these electrical components, two important parameters are
hence defined for a large artery segment l.
1) The propagation coefficient γl (ωk ), which is expressed by

 




Rl + jωk Ll Gl + jωk Cl .
(23)
γl (ωk ) =
2) The characteristic impedance Zl◦ (ωk ), defined as the
impedance that the transmission line segment would have
if it was a part of an infinitely long transmission line with
homogeneous parameters [28]



Rl + jωk Ll
◦
(24)
Zl (ωk ) =

 .
Gl + jωk Cl
By applying the two-port network circuit analysis [24], the
Fourier coefficients of the pressure Pl (ωk ) and flow Ql (ωk ) in
the large artery segment l can be related to the Fourier coefficients of the pressure Pl+1 (ωk ) and flow Ql+1 (ωk ) of the next
large artery segment l + 1 as follows:




Pl (ωk )
Pl+1 (ωk )
= Tl (ωk )
(25)
Ql+1 (ωk )
Ql (ωk )
with


Tl (ωk ) =

Al (ωk )

Bl (ωk )

Cl (ωk )

Dl (ωk )


(26)

where Al (ωk ), Bl (ωk ), Cl (ωk ), and Dl (ωk ) are the elements of
the transfer matrix Tl (ωk ) of the large artery l, defined as [29]
measurements [20], the volume compliance cl can be estimated by the following equation:
cl (z) =

πrl 2 (z)
k1 exp(−k2 rl (z)) + k3

(20)

where k1 = 1.34 × 107 g/(s2 .cm), k2 = 22.53 cm−1 , and
k3 = 5.77 × 105 g/(s2 .cm).
The blood flow in a large artery is assumed to be laminar,
viscous, and incompressible, and that pressure is constant over
the cross section of the large artery. Starting from the Navier–
Stokes equation (4), equating the variance of the flow in a large
artery with the volume absorbed by the large artery due to its
compliance, we get a system of coupled differential equations
[27] for 1-D blood flow qˆl (z, t) and 1-D blood pressure pˆl (z, t):
−

ρ ∂ q̂l (z, t)
8μ
∂ p̂l (z, t)
= 2
+
q̂l (z, t)
∂z
πrm
∂t
πrl 4

(21)

∂ q̂l (z, t)
∂ p̂l (z, t)
= cl
.
(22)
∂z
∂t
This system is governed by differential equations which resemble Telegrapher’s equations. Telegrapher’s equation have an
electrical circuit analogue as illustrated in Fig. 6. The compo
nents of this circuit are the resistance per unit length Rl = π8μ
rl 4 ,

inductance per unit length Ll = π rρl 2 , the capacitance per unit
−

Al (ωk ) = cosh (γl (ωk )l )
Bl (ωk ) = Zl◦ (ωk ) sinh (γl (ωk )l )
Cl (ωk ) =

1
sinh (γl (ωk )l )
Zl◦ (ωk )

Dl (ωk ) = cosh (γl (ωk )l ) .

(27)

where γl (ωk ) is the propagation coefficient of large artery segment l, Zl◦ (ωk ) is the characteristic impedance of large artery
segment l, and l is its length.
2) Load Impedance of a Large Artery: The load impedance
of a large artery Zl (ωk ) is a measure of the opposition experienced by the blood flow at the inlet of a large artery l. It depends
on the topology of all large arteries that branch out from large
artery l and their geometric dimensions. Large arteries are arranged in a tree-like structure. The arteries grow out from the
aorta, the systemic artery originating at the heart, and branch out
to reach the peripheral body tissues and organs. The measurements of the position of arteries and the points of bifurcations
are available from anatomy books [30], and are presented in
Table I. The large arteries are ended by a tree of small arteries
which are presented in Section IV-B.
Fig. 8 illustrates the topology of the tree of large arteries
branching out from a large artery l. As shown in Fig. 9, the
tree of large arteries is terminated by trees of small arteries with

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

3475

Fig. 8. Branching large artery terminated by trees of small arteries and their
lengths.

Fig. 9.

Tree of large arteries as branching transmission lines.

load impedance Zi l  + 1 (ωk ), Zi l  + 2 (ωk ), Zi l + 1 (ωk ), etc. which
are calculated according to the algorithm presented in Section
IV-B1.
Using transmission line theory [28], it is possible to express
the load impedance of the large artery l in function of the load
impedance at its outlet, which is denoted Zlout (ωk ).
Zl (ωk ) = Zl◦ (ωk )

Zlout (ωk ) + Zl◦ (ωk ) tanh (γl (ωk )l )
(28)
Zl◦ (ωk ) + Zlout (ωk ) tanh (γl (ωk )l )

where Zl◦ (ωk ) and γl (ωk ) are, respectively, the propagation
coefficient and characteristic impedance for the large artery l as
found in (23) and (24). If the large artery l branches out into two
large arteries l + 1 and l + 1, the load impedance at the outlet
of large artery l is given by

−1
1
1
out
+
.
(29)
Zl (ωk ) =
Zl+1 (ωk ) Zl  +1 (ωk )
Otherwise, if the large artery l is terminated by a tree of
small arteries, the load impedance at the outlet of large artery
l is exactly the load impedance of interface with small arteries
Zi l (ωk ):

−1
1
1
+
(30)
Zlout (ωk ) = Zi l (ωk ) =
Zl+1 (ωk ) Zl  +1 (ωk )
where l + 1 and l + 1 are the indexes of the small arteries
branching out of the large artery l.
We can describe the procedure required to get the load
impedance Zl (ωk ) of the large artery l by the recursive algorithm in Algorithm 2 by defining:
1) f : (ZOut, L, R) → ZIn as the function that returns the
load impedance ZIn of a large artery with radius R and
length L, and the load impedance at its outlet ZOut;
2) r(l), rBot(l), and l(i) as the functions that return the
radius at the top, the radius at the bottom, and the length
of the large artery i, respectively;

Fig. 10.
system.

Overview of the transmission line network of the cardiovascular

3) IdR(i) and IdL(i) as the functions that return the index
of the large artery branching out of the artery i to the right
and to the left, respectively.
These functions are based on the data provided in Table I and
the topology of the large arteries in Fig. 19.
We present in this section the expression of the transfer matrix
T(ωk ). This transfer matrix represents the propagation effect of
the cardiovascular network between the heart where the cardiac
input Qin (ωk ) is pumped and an artery l experiencing a blood
flow Ql (ωk ) and a pressure Pl (ωk ).

D. General Transfer Matrix and Load Impedance
The part of the cardiovascular vascular system between the
heart and the artery l in the direction of the flow is called here the
pre-l network, and the part between the artery l and the venous
system in the direction of the flow is called the post-l network
as illustrated in Fig. 10.
1) The pre-l network is characterized by a a transfer matrix T(ωk ) that imposes a linear relationship between the
cardiac input Qin (ωk ), the pressure exerted by the heart
Pin (ωk ), the blood flow Ql (ωk ), and the pressure Pl (ωk )
in the artery l as follows:


Pin (ωk )
Qin (ωk )




= T(ωk )

Pl (ωk )
Ql (ωk )


(31)

3476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 12.

Fig. 11.

Path between the cardiac input and a small artery l.

where A(ωk ), B(ωk ), C(ωk ), and D(ωk ) are the matrix
elements of Tl (ωk ):

T(ωk ) =

A(ωk )

B(ωk )

C(ωk )

D(ωk )


.

(32)

2) The post-l network is characterized by a load impedance
Zl (ωk ) that imposes a relationship between the blood flow
Ql (ωk ) and the pressure Pl (ωk ) in artery l as follows:
Pl (ωk ) = Zl (ωk )Ql (ωk ).

(33)

We have previously presentend the algorithms that return the
load impedance Zl (ωk ) for a small artery l in Section IV-B1 and
for a large artery l in Section IV-C2.
By cascading the transfer matrices [28] of all large arteries m
carrying blood from the heart to the large artery l and the transfer
matrices of large artery branches along this path (cf. Fig. 11), the
transfer matrix T(ωk ) for a large artery is calculated as follows:
⎡

Bm (ωk )
Am (ωk ) +
⎢
Zm  (ωk )
	 ⎢
T(ωk ) = T1 (ωk )
⎢
⎣
Dm (ωk )
m ∈L l
Cm (ωk ) +
Zm  (ωk )

⎤
Bm (ωk ) ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
Dm (ωk )

(34)
where Ll = (. . . , m, . . . , l − 1, l) is the sequence of all large
arteries carrying blood from the heart to the artery l, A(ωk ),
B(ωk ), C(ωk ), and D(ωk ) are the matrix elements of the transfer matrix Tm (ωk ) of an artery m (27), T1 (ωk ) is the transfer
matrix of the aorta (the large artery directly connected to the
heart), Tl (ωk ) is the transfer matrix of the artery l, whether it
is a small artery (17) or a large artery (27), and Zm  (ωk ) is the
load impedance of the artery m parallel to m (See Fig. 11).

Drug propagation network model.

For a small artery, we further multiply by the small artery
transfer matrix as follows:
⎡
⎤
Bm (ωk )
A
B
(ω
)
+
(ω
)
m
k
m
k ⎥
Zm  (ωk )
	 ⎢
⎢
⎥
T(ωk ) = T1 (ωk )
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦
Dm (ωk )
m ∈L l
Dm (ωk )
Cm (ωk ) +
Zm  (ωk )
Tl (ωk )

(35)

where Si l = (. . . , m, . . . , il ) is the sequence of all large arteries
carrying blood from the heart to the interface il of the tree of
small arteries to which l belongs.
E. Blood Velocity
The objective of this section is to present the expression of
the blood velocity ul (r, t) given the cardiac input Qin (ωk ), the
transfer matrix T(ωk ), and the load impedance Zl (ωk ), which
were expressed in the preceding section. By connecting a pre-l
network with load impedance Zl (ωk ) to the post-l network with
transfer matrix T(ωk ), we enforce the equations (31) and (33),
and we collapse the two-port network into a one-port network.
Therefore, we eliminate the pressures Pin (ωk ) and Pl (ωk ), and
the harmonic flow Q(ωk )l in the artery l can be computed directly from the cardiac input Qin (ωk ) by
Ql (ωk ) =

Qin (ωk )
Zl (ωk )C(ωk ) + D(ωk )

(36)

where C(ωk ) and D(ωk ) are the first and second elements of
the second row of the transfer matrix representing the cardiovascular network between the heart and the artery l sampled at
angular frequency ωk , respectively, and Zl (ωk ) is the harmonic
impedance of the artery l.
We can get the blood velocity ul (r, t) as function of r, the
distance from the axis of the vessel, and the time t from the
periodic blood flow in the time-domain ql (t) by assuming a
parabolic profile for the blood velocity, which gives
ul (r, t) =

r 2 +∞
r l2 
Ql (ωk )ej ω k t .
πrl2
k =−∞

1−

(37)

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

3477

V. DRUG PROPAGATION NETWORK MODEL
The drug propagation network model allows to compute the
drug delivery rate y(t) at the targeted site as function of the
time t from the knowledge of the blood velocity ul (r, t) in
every artery l of the cardiovascular system, function of the distance r from the artery axis and the time t, computed through
the cardiovascular network model detailed in Section IV. The
drug propagation network model stems from the solutions to
the advection-diffusion equation expressed in (6), and it is composed of the following elements:
1) Artery Link Models. An artery link is defined as the arterial
blood vessel segment which connects two adjacent bifurcations. The artery link models are derived from the solution to the General Taylor Dispersion equation [31], which
is a simplification of the advection-diffusion equation (6)
in case of advection in a cylindrical pipe. Each artery
link l model is expressed by a linear periodically time(t, t ) as function
varying (LPTV) impulse response hlink
l
as function of the time variables t and t , as detailed in
Section V-A.
2) Junction Node Models. A junction node is defined as the
arterial location where an incoming blood flow is split into
two outgoing diverging flows. The junction node models
are derived from the principle of mass conservation [32]
in fluid mechanics, and each junction node n model is
expressed by an LPTV impulse response hn (t, t ), as detailed in Section V-B.
3) Bifurcation Node Models. A bifurcation node is defined
as the venal location where two incoming blood flows are
joined into one single flow. Similarly, the bifurcation node
n is characterized by an LPTV impulse response hn (t, t ),
as detailed in Section V-C.
From the knowledge of the location of injection I and the
targeted site O, the drug propagation network model is expressed
by an LPTV impulse response hI ,O (t, t ) as function of the time
variables t and t , through which we compute the drug delivery
rate y(t) given the drug injection rate x(t), functions of the time
t, as follows:
 +∞
hI ,O (t, t )x(t ) dt .
(38)
y(t) =
−∞

In Section V-D, we detail the procedure to compute the expression of the LPTV impulse response hI ,O (t, t ), function of the
time t and the periodic time variable t , by applying the HTM
theory [18] to the artery link and bifurcation node models.
A. Artery Link Models
The model of the artery link l, as illustrated in Fig. 13, corresponds to the relation between the drug delivery rate yl (t) at
the output of the artery link and a drug injection rate xl (t) at
the input of the artery link l, functions of the time t. This model
(t, t ),
is expressed through the LPTV impulse response hlink
l

function of the time variables t and t , as follows:
 +∞
hlink
(t, t )xl (t )dt .
(39)
yl (t) =
l
−∞

Fig. 13.

Segment of a blood vessel modeled as an artery link.

The LPTV impulse response hlink
(t, t ), function of the time
l

variables t and t , corresponds to the the drug particle concentration cl (z, t) at the artery link longitudinal coordinate z = l
when the drug injection rate xl (t) at the input of the artery link
l is equal to a Dirac delta δ(t − t ) centered at time t . This is
expressed as follows:
(t, t ) = cl (l , t)|x l (t)=δ (z )δ (t−t  )
hlink
l

(40)

where l is the length of the artery link l.
The drug particle concentration cl (l , t) is computed through
the inhomogeneous advection-diffusion equation [21], simplified into the inhomogeneous General Taylor Dispersion equation [31], since in the artery link the drug particles are subject
to advection in a cylindrical pipe.
The inhomogeneous General Taylor Dispersion equation
when the input drug injection rate is equal to a Dirac delta
δ(t − t ) centered at time t is expressed as follows:
∂cl (z, t)
∂cl (z, t)
+ ūl (t)
= δ(z)δ(t − t )
∂t
∂z
∂ 2 cl (z, t)
(41)
∂z 2
where cl (z, t) is the drug particle concentration at longitudinal
coordinate z in the artery link l, ūl (t) is the average crosssectional velocity in the artery link l, defined as
 rl
2
rul (r, t)dr
(42)
ūl (t) = 2
rl 0
+ Dleﬀ (t)

where ul (r, t) is the blood velocity at the output of the artery l
as function of the distance r from the artery axis and the time
t. Dleﬀ (t) is the effective diffusivity [31] in the artery link l,
expressed as follows:
rl 3 ūl 2 (t)
8D
 r  r
 R
1
2
rūl (t)
r ul (r , t)dr dr
+

Drl 0
0 r
0
 r  r
 R
1
2
−
rul (r, t)
r ul (r , t)dr dr

Drl 0
0
0 r
 R 3
r
2
ūl (t)ul (r, t)dr
+
(43)
Drl 0 4

Dleﬀ (t) = D −

3478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

where rl is the radius of the artery link, and D is the diffusion coefficient [33] of the drug particles in the blood, whose
expression is
D=

KB T p
6πηa

(44)

where KB is the Boltzmann’s constant, Tp is the blood absolute
temperature, η is the intrinsic viscosity of the particle, which
depends on the geometry of the drug particles, and a is the
radius of the drug particles.
To obtain the expression of the drug particle concentration
cl (l , t), we apply the Fourier transform [34] F {·} with respect
to the variable z, which is the longitudinal coordinate in the
artery, to both terms of the advection-diffusion equation (41),
which results in
∂
F {cl (z, t)} + 2iπξ ūl (t)F {cl (z, t)} = δ(t − t )
∂t
+ 4π 2 ξ 2 Dleﬀ (t)F {cl (z, t)}

(45)

where ξ is the frequency variable along the artery link longitudinal coordinate z. Using Green’s method for solving inhomogeneous differential equations [35], we obtain


σ 2 (t, t ) 2
F {cl (z, t)} = exp − π 2 l
ξ +2iπξμl (t, t ) U (t − t )
2
(46)
where U (·) is the Heaviside step function [36], and where
μl (t, t ) corresponds to the particle displacement as function
of the time variables t and t . It depends on the average crosssectional velocity ūl (t) in the artery link l as follows:
 t
μl (t, t ) =
ūl (τ )dτ
(47)
t

and σl (t, t ) corresponds to the particles spread as function of
the time variables t and t . It depends on the effective diffusivity
Dleﬀ (t) of the particles (43), and the radius of the link rl :
  t



(48)
Dleﬀ (τ )dτ  .
σl2 (t, t ) = 2
t

Finally, the expression of the LPTV impulse response hlink
(t, t )
l
is obtained through the inverse Fourier transform [34] of (46)
computed at the artery link longitudinal coordinate z = l ,
which has the following expression:


(l − μl (t, t ))2
1
link

exp −
hl (t, t ) = 
(49)
2σl2 (t, t )
2πσl2 (t, t )
where μl (t, t ) is given by (47), σl2 (t, t ) is given by (48), and l
is the length of the artery link l.
B. Junction Node Model
The model of a junction node n, as illustrated in Fig. 14,
corresponds to the relation between the drug delivery rates yn (t)
at the output branch of the junction node n and a drug injection
rate xn (t) at the input of the bifurcation node n, functions of
the time t. This model is expressed through the LPTV impulse
de
(t, t ), function of the time variables t and t , as
response hno
n

Fig. 14.

Blood vessel junction modeled as a cardiovascular network node.

follows:


yn (t) =

+∞

−∞

de
hno
(t, t )xn (t )dt .
n

(50)

de
(t, t ), function
To compute the LPTV impulse response hno
n

of the time variables t and t , we assume that in a junction
node the propagation of the drug particles is given mainly by
their advection in the blood flows, while the contribution of
their diffusion is negligible. Under this assumption, the relation
between drug delivery rate yn (t) of the junction node n and a
drug injection rate xn (t) at the input of the bifurcation node n,
functions of the time t is computed through the the principle of
mass conservation [32] in fluid mechanics, which is expressed
as follows:

yn (t) =

ūn (t) + ūn  (t)
xn (t)
ūn (t)

(51)

where n is the index of the sister of the input branch n, ūn (t)
and ūn  (t) are the average cross-sectional blood velocities at
the input branches indexed by n and n , respectively. As a consequence, by comparing the expressions in (50) and (51), we
obtain the following expression for the LPTV impulse response
de
(t, t ) as function of the time variables t and t :
hno
n
de
(t, t ) =
hno
n

ūn (t) + ūn  (t)
δ(t)
ūn (t)

(52)

where δ(t) is the Dirac delta time function, n is the index of the
junction node input branch, and n is the index of the sister of
the input branch n.
C. Bifurcation Node Model
The model of a bifurcation node n, as illustrated in Fig. 15,
corresponds to the relation between the drug delivery rates yn (t)
at the output branch of the junction node n and a drug injection
rate xn (t) at the input of the bifurcation node n, functions of
the time t. Similarly, this model is characterized by an LPTV
de
(t, t ), function of the time variables t
impulse response hno
n

and t , as follows:
de
hno
(t, t ) = δ(t).
n

(53)

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

3479

where model and m correspond either to link and l, or to
node and n, respectively, ω0 is the angular heartbeat frequency,
and τ is an auxiliary time variable. According to the Fourier
series theory [34], we can express the relation between the drug
delivery rate ym (t) at the output and a drug injection rate xm (t)
at the input of an artery link or a bifurcation model as
ym (t) =

k =+∞




+∞

jkω0 t

e

−∞

k =−∞

o del,m
hm
(τ )xm (t − τ )dτ . (58)
k

If we define Ym (s), Hkm o del,m (s), and Xm (s) as the respeco del,m
tive Laplace transforms of ym (t), hm
(τ ), and xm (t), (58)
k
becomes
Fig. 15.

Blood vessel bifurcation modeled as a cardiovascular network node.

Ym (s) =
This relationship stems from the fact that the concentration is
continuous in a bifurcation node.
D. LPTV Impulse Response of the Drug Propagation Network
Model
The LPTV impulse response hI ,O (t, t ) of the drug propagation network model having location of injection I and the
targeted site O, as function of the time variables t and t , is
computed from the Fourier coefficient hk (τ ) as follows:
hI ,O (t, t ) =

∞




hk (t − t )ej k ω 0 (t−t )

(54)

k =0

where ω0 is the angular heartbeat frequency, and each Fourier
coefficient hk (τ ) is computed from the equivalent HTM
HI ,O (s) of the drug propagation network model through the
following expression:
m −|k |

hk (τ ) =





{HI ,O (s)}k +n ,n 

n =−(m −|k |)

s=0

ej n ω 0 τ

(55)

where m is the matrix truncation index, |.| is the absolute value
operator, and {HI ,O (s)}k +n ,n denotes the element of the equivalent HTM HI ,O (s) of the drug propagation network model having k + nth row and nth column indexes. The equivalent HTM
HI ,O (s) of the drug propagation network model is computed
by applying the HTM theory to the LPTV impulse response
de
(t, t ) and hno
(t, t ) of the artery link and the bifurcahlink
n
l
tion node models, respectively. This is achieved by considering
de
(t, t ) and hno
(t, t ) are periodic with period T ,
that both hlink
n
l
which is the heartbeat period, with respect to both time variables
t and t , expressed as
hlink
(t + T, t + T ) = hlink
(t, t )
l
l
de
de
hno
(t + T, t + T ) = hno
(t, t ) ∀t, t ∈R.
n
n

k =+∞


Hkm o del,m (s − jkω0 )Xm (s − jkω0 ).

(59)

k =−∞

The expression in (59) can be transformed into a matrix multiplication by defining the infinite-dimensional vectors Y m (s),
o del
(s) as
X m (s), and the doubly infinite matrix Hm
m


X m (s) = [Xm (s + jkω0 )] k ∈Z

(60)



Y m (s) = [Ym (s + jkω0 )] k ∈Z


o del
(s) = Hkm o del,p−q (s + jqω0 )
Hm
m

(61)
p,q ∈Z

(62)

where [·] denotes the matrix transpose operation. As a consequence, the expression (59) is transformed into a linear matrix
relationship:
o del
Y m (s) = Hm
(s)X m (s).
m

(63)

o del
Hm
(s) is the HTM of the arterial link l, in case model =
m
link and m = l, or the bifurcation node n, in the case where
model = node and m = n. In practice, the infinite matrices
o del
(s) and the vectors Y m (s) and X m (s), are truncated to
Hm
m
contain only the significant harmonics [37].
Using the HTM for every link and node, it becomes possible
to obtain the HTM HI ,O (s) of the drug propagation network
model between the location of injection I and the targeted site O,
which allows to compute the LPTV impulse response hI ,O (t, t )
through the expressions in (55) and (54). This is accomplished
using the following two rules.
1) The cascade rule, which states that the HTM H◦m ,m  (s)
of the cascade of two network models m and m , which
can be links, nodes, or combination thereof, is obtained
o del
(s) and
by multiplying their respective HTMs Hm
m
o del 
(s)
as
follows:
Hm
m


o del
o del
H◦m ,m  (s) = Hm
(s)Hm
(s).
m
m

(64)


(56)

This periodicity allows to compute Fourier series [34] coeffide
cients for both hlink
(t, t ) and hno
(t, t ):
n
l

1 T m o del
m o del,m
hk
(τ ) =
h
(t, t − τ )e−j k ω 0 t dt
(57)
T 0 k

2) The parallel rule, which states that the HTM Hm ,m  (s) of
the parallel of two network models m and m , which can be
links, nodes, or combination thereof, is obtained by sumo del
o del 
(s) and Hm
(s)
ming their respective HTMs Hm
m
m
as follows:




o del
o del
Hm ,m  (s) = Hm
(s) + Hm
(s).
m
m

(65)

3480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 16. Tree of small arteries at the end of the renal artery with their corresponding link numbers.

By using the cascade rule (64) and the parallel rule (65), the
HTM HI ,O (s) of the drug propagation network model between
the location of injection I and the targeted site O is:
HI ,O (s) =



	

de
Hlink
(s)Hno
(s)
l
n

(66)

p∈P (I ,O ) (l, n )∈p

where P (I, O) is the set of parallel paths p linking the location of injection I to the targeted site O. Every path p ∈
P (I, O) is a sequence of link l and node n couples (l, n)
(p = {. . . , (l, n), . . .}). Finally, the LPTV impulse response
hI ,O (t, t ) is computed by applying (66) to the expressions in
(55) and (54).

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Topology
As a numerical application of our model, we choose to study
drug propagation between one location of injection I and four
different targeted sites O2 , O4 , O8 , and O17 . These locations
are different points in the small artery tree taking root at the
renal artery as represented in Fig. 16. The blood velocity calculation takes into account the numerical values for large arteries
dimensions presented in Table I and their topology represented
in Fig. 19 collected from anatomical data [20].
In Fig. 16, the geometry of the renal arterial tree is illustrated.
The topology reflecting the asymmetry of small arteries geometry and their reducing lengths are explained in Section IV-B. The
numbers in the figures correspond to the link indexes l. The arteries with radius rl inferior to rm in = 0.8 mm are not included,
in fact, when the artery radius is smaller than rm in = 0.8 mm,
the subtree is truncated, and replaced with a leaf with null hydraulic impedance as explained in Section IV-B1. where γ is
called the asymmetry ratio and ξ is a parameter that characterizes the turbulence of the flow. Physiological studies yield
values γ = 0.41 of the asymmetry ratio and ξ = 2.76, which
characterizes the turbulence of the flow. Using these values, we
get asymmetry factors α = 0.9 and β = 0.6.

Fig. 17. Comparison of the flow rates calculated using the transmission line
model with physiological measurements in various locations of the cardiovascular system.

B. Cardiovascular Network Model
The blood velocity network model was validated against
the magnetic resonance measurements made available by [38],
which was used to validate a model implemented numerically
by finite difference methods. Fig. 17 compares the flow rate
measurements in three locations of the cardiovascular system,
namely, the descending aorta, the iliac, and the femoral arteries,
with the flow rates obtained using the transmission line model
developed in Section IV. We see a very good agreement between
the experimental measurements and the results of the developed
model. We used the same topology as in [38], and we used the
flow measured in the aortic arc as an input to the cardiovascular
network model.
C. Drug Propagation Network
The LPTV impulse response h(t, t ) is calculated for a fixed
location of injection I set at the inlet of the arterial tree, and different targeted sites O2 , O4 , O8 , and O17 , located, respectively,
at the outlet of links 2, 4, 8, and 17. A change of variables is

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

3481

Fig. 18. Time-varying impulse response for different vessel topologies.
(a) Path: (1). (b) Link: 2. (c) Path: (1 2). (d) Link: 4. (e) Path: (1 2 4).
(f) Link: 8. (g) Path: (1 2 4 8). (h) Link: 17.

performed on h(t, t ) for a better representation, such that

h (t, τ ) = h(t, t − τ ). t is the periodic time variable, in which


the LPTV impulse response is T-periodic: h (t, τ ) = h (t +
T, τ ). τ is the propagation time variable: h(t, τ ) → 0 as τ →

+∞. A 3-D representation of the functions h (t, τ ) is rendered
in Fig. 18. In Fig. 18(a), we can observe the LPTV impulse
response goes to zero after a propagation period of 1200 ms.
It can be seen that the time-variance is significant. In fact, we
obtain two main peaks in the impulse response for the link 2 in
Fig. 18(b), separated by an important fading, due to the considerable blood velocity fluctuations in that artery. In Fig. 18(e),
the drug propagates through link 2 with LPTV impulse response
hlink
2 (t, τ ), with radius r2 = 2.5 mm, and a link 2 with LPTV
impulse response hlink
4 (t, τ ), with radius r4 = 2.2 mm, passde
(t, τ ). Due
ing by a node 2 with LPTV impulse response hno
2
to the bifurcation, the cascading of these two links and node
causes a spread of the delay and slower convergences to zero
of the equivalent LPTV impulse response between I and O4 .
In Fig. 18(g), the drug propagates through an additional node
de
(t, τ ), and an additional
4 with LPTV impulse response hno
2
link 8 with LPTV impulse response hlink
8 (t, τ ). The bifurcation
effect is slightly more pronounced here, with a considerable portion of the drug rate that is lost at the node. The drug delivery rate
experiences a drop after the the peak and then converges slowly
to zero which would cause a dispersion of the drug between I
and O8 . In the preceding examples, we chose a path through the
left links which, by geometrical asymmetry, experience a higher
blood velocity compared with the right links. In Fig. 18(e), we
consider that the drug network includes an additional node 8

Fig. 19.

Topology of large arteries.

de
with LPTV impulse response hno
(t, τ ), and an additional link
8
17 with LPTV impulse response hlink
17 (t, τ ) which is positioned
to the right. Since the node 8 relays most of the drug rate to
the left link which has much higher effective diffusivity, a more
significant portion is lost to the left link. The asymmetry of the
small arteries tree causes most of the drug to be propagated
in the leftmost blood links in the tree of small arteries. Here,
the dispersion is more pronounced, and the reflections from the
preceding nodes is apparent.

VII. CONCLUSION
The goal of a DDS is to provide a localized drug presence
where the medication is needed, while, at the same time, preventing the drug from affecting other healthy parts of the body.
Among others, the most advanced solutions use drugs composed
of micro- or nano-sized particles (particulate DDS) that are able
to cross barriers to the transit of particles out of the bloodstream.
The MC paradigm abstracts the propagation of information between a sender and a receiver realized through mass transport
phenomena, since information-bearing molecules have to physically cover the distance from one location to the other. In this
paper, we advocate for the MC paradigm as a straightforward
and efficient abstraction of a particulate DDS, thus enabling the
control and prediction of particulate drug delivery by using tools
from communication engineering.
In this paper, we realized the molecular communication abstraction of a particulate DDS by developing an MC channel

3482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

model of the drug particle propagation through the cardiovascular system. For this, we identified two separate contributions
within the model, namely, the cardiovascular network model
and the drug propagation network model. The cardiovascular
network model allows to analytically compute the blood velocity profile in every location of the cardiovascular system from
the knowledge of the blood pressure profile and flow input from
the heart. The drug propagation network model allows the analytical expression of the drug delivery rate at the targeted site
from the knowledge of the drug location of injection and injection rate profile. The derived model takes into account also the
individual specificities in the physiological parameters of the
cardiovascular system, such as the compliance of the blood vessels, heartbeat rate profile, and the heartbeat stroke volume. An
example application of the developed model is also presented
through numerical results to assess the flexibility and accuracy
of the analytical results of this study.
We propose as future work to investigate the safety issues
of MC for the human being. First, care should be taken to ensure that the drug concentration does not reach toxic levels in
the body. Second, the interaction with naturally occurring MC
phenomena in the body such as the cell signaling through the
endocrine system should be considered. Third, the MC system
should be resilient against possible “malicious” attacks. Such
attacks may be undertaken by benign bacterial and viral organisms, which develop defenses against the therapy, or by the
immune system which considers the foreign therapeutic agent as
an intruder to the body. The safety issues of MC could be studied in analogy with security issues in classical communication
systems.
The results detailed in this paper open up the possibility to
study optimization techniques for particulate DDSs which could
allow a careful selection of the location of injection and drug
injection profile with the goal of obtaining a desired drug delivery profile at a targeted site while minimizing the drug presence
in the rest of the cardiovascular system. In addition, the models
developed in this research could potentially serve to investigate
novel communication techniques for intrabody communication
(IBC) networks.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Kumar, Handbook of Particulate Drug Delivery (Nanotechnology book
Series). Valencia, CA, USA: American Scientific Publishers, 2008, vol. 1.
[2] L. L. M. Heaton, E. López, P. K. Maini, M. D. Fricker, and N. S. Jones,
“Advection, diffusion, and delivery over a network,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 86,
pp. 021905-1–021905-10, Aug. 2012.
[3] P. K. Watkins, A. B. Walker, and G. L. B. Verschoor, “Dynamical Monte
Carlo modeling of organic solar cells: The dependence of internal quantum
efficiency on morphology,” Nano Lett., vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 1814–1818, 2005.
[4] I. F. Akyildiz, F. Brunetti, and C. Blazquez, “Nanonetworks: A new communication paradigm at molecular level,” Comput. Netw. (Elsevier) J.,
vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2260–2279, Aug. 2008.
[5] D. L. Nelson and M. M. Cox, Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry. San
Francisco, CA, USA: Freeman, 2005, ch. 12.2, pp. 425–429.
[6] M. Pierobon and I. F. Akyildiz, “A physical end-to-end model for molecular communication in nanonetworks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 602–611, May 2010.
[7] I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, and M. Pierobon, “Nanonetworks: A new
frontier in communications,” Commun. ACMs, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 84–89,
Nov. 2011.

[8] L. Parcerisa and I. F. Akyildiz, “Molecular communication options for
long range nanonetworks,” Comput. Netw. (Elsevier) J., vol. 53, no. 16,
pp. 2753–2766, Aug. 2009.
[9] M. Pierobon and I. Akyildiz, “Capacity of a diffusion-based molecular
communication system with channel memory and molecular noise,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 942–954, Feb. 2013.
[10] M. Moore, A. Enomoto, T. Nakano, R. Egashira, T. Suda, A. Kayasuga,
H. Kojima, H. Sakakibara, and K. Oiwa, “A design of a molecular communication system for nanomachines using molecular motors,” in Proc.
4th Annu. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun. Workshop, Mar.
2006, pp. 6–12.
[11] M. Gregori and I. F. Akyildiz, “A new nanonetwork architecture using
flagellated bacteria and catalytic nanomotors,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 602–611, May 2010.
[12] M. Potter and D. Wiggert, Fluid Mechanics (Schaum’s Outlines Series).
New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
[13] C.-W. Chen, Y.-W. Shau, and C.-P. Wu, “Analog transmission line model
for simulation of systemic circulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44,
no. 1, pp. 90–94, Jan. 1997.
[14] J. Siepmann, R. Siegel, and M. Rathbone, Fundamentals and Applications
of Controlled Release Drug Delivery (Advances in Delivery Science and
Technology Series). New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2011.
[15] F. N. van de Vosse and N. Stergiopulos, “Pulse wave propagation in
the arterial tree,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 467–499,
2011.
[16] N. Westerhof, F. Bosman, C. J. D. Vries, and A. Noordergraaf, “Analog
studies of the human systemic arterial tree,” J. Biomech., vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. 121–143, 1969.
[17] M. S. Olufsen and A. Nadim, “On deriving lumped models for blood flow
and pressure in the systemic arteries,” Math Biosci. Eng., vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 61–80, Jun. 2004.
[18] P. Vanassche, G. Gielen, and W. Sansen, “Symbolic modeling of periodically time-varying systems using harmonic transfer matrices,” IEEE
Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 21, no. 9,
pp. 1011–1024, Sep. 2002.
[19] H. Cao, V. Leung, C. Chow, and H. Chan, “Enabling technologies for
wireless body area networks: A survey and outlook,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 47, no. 12, pp. 84–93, Dec. 2009.
[20] J. Ottesen, M. Olufsen, and J. Larsen, Applied Mathematical Models in
Human Physiology (Siam Monographs on Mathematical Modeling and
Computation Series). Philadelphia, PA, USA: Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, 2004.
[21] B. Kirby, Micro- and Nano-scale Fluid Mechanics: Transport in Microfluidic Devices. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010.
[22] B. Davies, Integral Transforms and Their Applications. New York, NY,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[23] M. S. Olufsen, “Structured tree outflow condition for blood flow in larger
systemic arteries,” Amer. J. Physiol.—Heart Circulat. Physiol., vol. 276,
no. 1, pp. H257–H268, 1999.
[24] J. Irwin and R. Nelms, Basic Engineering Circuit Analysis. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2010.
[25] Á. Baricz, Generalized Bessel Functions of the First Kind (Lecture Notes
in Mathematics Series). New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2010, no.
1994.
[26] C. Paul, Fundamentals of Electric Circuit Analysis. New York, NY,
USA: Wiley, 2001.
[27] A. Cheer and C. Van Dam, Fluid Dynamics in Biology: Proceedings
of an AMS-IMS-SIAM Joint Summer Research Conference Held July
6–12, 1991 with Support from the National Science Foundation and NASA
Headquarters (ser. Contemporary Mathematics.) Providence, RI, USA:
American Mathematical Society, 1993.
[28] T. Esmailian, F. R. Kschischang, and P. Glenn Gulak, “In-building power
lines as high-speed communication channels: Channel characterization
and a test channel ensemble,” Int. J. Commun. Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 381–
400, 2003.
[29] P. L. D. Peres, I. S. Bonatti, and A. Lopes, “Transmission line modeling:
A circuit theory approach,” SIAM Rev., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 347–352, Jun.
1998.
[30] J. T. Ottesen, M. S. Olufsen, and J. K. Larsen, Applied Mathematical Models in Human Physiology. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, 2004.
[31] K. Azer, “Taylor diffusion in time-dependent flow,” Int. J. Heat Mass
Transf., vol. 48, no. 13, pp. 2735–2740, 2005.
[32] D. Basmadjian, Mass Transfer: Principles and Applications. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2004.

CHAHIBI et al.: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM MODEL FOR PARTICULATE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

[33] K. Dill and S. Bromberg, Molecular Driving Forces: Statistical Thermodynamics in Chemistry, Physics, Biology, and Nanoscience. New York,
NY, USA: Taylor & Francis, 2003.
[34] K. Howell, Principles of Fourier Analysis: A Text and Reference for Scientists, Engineers, and Mathematicians (Studies in Advanced Mathematics
Series). Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2001.
[35] A. Mandelis, Diffusion-Wave Fields: Mathematical Methods and Green
Functions. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[36] R. Hoskins and J. Pinto, Theories Of Generalised Functions: Distributions,
Ultradistributions and Other Generalised Functions. Cambridge, U.K.:
Horwood Pub., 2005.
[37] R. Müller and H.-J. Jentschel, “Determination of harmonic-transfermatrices by simulation,” Adv. Radio Sci., vol. 3, pp. 349–354, May 2005.
[38] M. S. Olufsen, C. S. Peskin, W. Y. Kim, E. M. Pedersen, A. Nadim, and
J. Larsen, “Numerical simulation and experimental validation of blood
flow in arteries with structured-tree outflow conditions,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 1281–1299, 2000.
Youssef Chahibi (S’09–M’12) received the M.S.
degree from the Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, USA, in 2012, and the Diplôme d’Ingénieur
in telecommunications and networks from Institut
National Polytechnique de Toulouse, France, in 2011,
and the Ph. D. degree from the Broadband Wireless
Networking Laboratory (BWN lab), School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute
of Technology.
During 2011, he was a Physical-Layer Engineer
at Alcatel-Lucent, Antwerp, Belgium. His research
interests include nanoscale biologically inspired communications and drug delivery systems.

Massimiliano Pierobon (S’09–M’13) received the
M.S. degree in telecommunication engineering from
the Politecnico di Milano, Italy, in 2005. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the
Broadband Wireless Networking Laboratory (BWN
lab), School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. He is currently
a Graduate Research Assistant at the BWN lab. During 2006, he was a Researcher in the R&D Department, Siemens Carrier Networks, Milan, Italy, where
he coauthored two filed patents on jitter buffer management. From January 2007 to July 2009, he was a Graduate Research Assistant at the Politecnico di Milano in the fields of signal processing and pattern
recognition. In November 2008, he joined the BWN lab, first as a Visiting Researcher and, from August 2009, as a Georgia Tech Ph.D. student. His current
research interests include molecular communication theory for nanonetworks,
communication engineering applied to intelligent drug delivery systems, and
bacteria-based network engineering.

3483

Sang Ok Song (S’97–M’99–F’04) received the B.S.
and M.S. degrees in chemical engineering from the
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1997 and
1999, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in chemical
and biological engineering from the same university,
in 2004.
From 2004 to 2006, he was a Senior Researcher
at the Automation Systems and Research Institute,
Seoul, Korea. In 2006, he joined the chemical and
biomolecular engineering at Cornell University, as
a Postdoctoral Research Associate. In 2009, he was
with the University of Pittsburgh Medical School as a research fellow. Since
April 2012, he has been with the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
(SAIT), Samsung Electronics co., Ltd., Korea, as a Research Staff Member. His
current research interests include computational systems biology, model-based
drug development, and systems pharmacology.
Dr. Song is a member of the International Society of Pharmacometrics, Population Approach Group in Korea, the American Institute of Chemical Engineers,
and the Korean Institute of Chemical Engineers.

Ian F. Akyildiz (F’96) received the B.S., M.S., and
Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering from the University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, in
1978, 1981, and 1984, respectively.
He is currently the Ken Byers Chair Professor
in Telecommunications with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA, the Director of
the Broadband Wireless Networking Laboratory and
Chair of the Telecommunication Group at Georgia
Tech. He is an Honorary Professor with the School
of Electrical Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) in
Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain, and founded the N3C (NaNoNetworking Center in Catalunya). He is also an Honorary Professor with the Department
of Electrical, Electronic, and Computer Engineering, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa, and the founder of the Advanced Sensor Networks Lab.
Since September 2012, he been a FiDiPro Professor (Finland Distinguished
Professor Program (FiDiPro) supported by the Academy of Finland) at the Department of Communications Engineering, Tampere University of Technology,
Tampere, Finland. His current research interests include in nanonetworks, Long
Term Evolution (LTE) advanced networks, cognitive radio networks, and wireless sensor networks.
He is the Editor-in-Chief of Computer Networks (Elsevier) Journal, and the
founding Editor-in-Chief of the Ad Hoc Networks (Elsevier) Journal, the Physical Communication (Elsevier) Journal and the Nano Communication Networks
(Elsevier) Journal. He is a ACM Fellow (1997). He received numerous awards
from IEEE and ACM.

