3458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Magnetic Resonance Imaging Duodenoscope
Richard R. A. Syms∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, Ian R. Young, Christopher A. Wadsworth,
Simon D. Taylor-Robinson, and Marc Rea

Abstract—A side-viewing duodenoscope capable of both optical
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is described. The instrument is constructed from MR-compatible materials and combines
a coherent fiber bundle for optical imaging, an irrigation channel
and a side-opening biopsy channel for the passage of catheter tools
with a tip saddle coil for radio-frequency signal reception. The
receiver coil is magnetically coupled to an internal pickup coil to
provide intrinsic safety. Impedance matching is achieved using a
mechanically variable mutual inductance, and active decoupling
by PIN-diode switching. 1 H MRI of phantoms and ex vivo porcine
liver specimens was carried out at 1.5 T. An MRI field-of-view
appropriate for use during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was obtained, with limited artefacts, and
a signal-to-noise ratio advantage over a surface array coil was
demonstrated.
Index Terms—Duodenoscope, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
microcoil.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE fiber-optic endoscope, originally developed in the late
1960s, has become the accepted tool for diagnosis and
therapy in the upper gastrointestinal tract, including of the biliary and pancreatic ductal systems [1]–[3]. Direct examination,
cytology, stone removal, dilation of strictures, and palliative care
through intraductal stent placement are all carried out by endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP), a nonsurgical procedure based on the use of a side-viewing flexible
duodenoscope equipped with an optical illumination source,
video camera, and monitor [4]–[7]. Instruments designed for
ERCP also carry a side-opening accessory or biopsy channel,
through which a range of disposable catheter tools can be passed.

T

Manuscript received January 23, 2013; revised April 17, 2013 and May 23,
2013; accepted June 14, 2013. Date of publication June 25, 2013; date of current
version November 18, 2013. This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ R. R. A. Syms is with the EEE Department, Imperial College London,
London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: r.syms@imperial.ac.uk).
I. R. Young is with the EEE Department, Imperial College London, London,
SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: youngimarl@aol.com).
C. A. Wadsworth is with the Liver Unit, Division of Diabetes Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, St. Mary’s
Hospital, London, W2 1PG, U.K., and also with Aintree University Hospitals
NHS Trust, Liverpool, L9 7AL,U.K. (e-mail: c.wadsworth@imperial.ac.uk).
S. D. Taylor-Robinson is with the Liver Unit, Division of Diabetes Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, St. Mary’s Hospital, London, W2 1PG, U.K. (e-mail: s.taylor-robinson@
imperial.ac.uk).
M. Rea is with the Department of Radiology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, St. Mary’s Hospital, London, W2 1NY, U.K. (e-mail:
marc.rea@imperial.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2271045

ERCP is primarily used for diagnosis and management of
gallstones impacted in the bile duct [8], [9], obstructive jaundice [10], [11], cholangiocarcinoma (cancer of the bile ducts)
[12]–[14], and pancreatic cancer [15]–[17]. The patient lies on
their side, and the duodenoscope is inserted through the throat
and down to the duodenum. Air is used to distend the upper
gut and thereby afford luminal views, and water and suction are
used to keep the imaging optics clean. The sphincter of Oddi
(the point at which the biliary and pancreatic ducts drain into the
duodenum in those patients with normal anatomy) is located by
endoscopic visualization, and a catheter is then inserted through
the sphincter into the common bile duct [18], [19]. This procedure is not straightforward. It is hard to see the sphincter, and
even more difficult to locate the bile duct behind it, since the
duct is not visible and runs at a highly variable retrograde angle
back toward the liver. To minimize the risk of pancreatitis, it is
important to avoid inadvertent insertion of a catheter into the
pancreatic duct (which is immediately adjacent to and joins the
bile duct behind the sphincter) [20]. As a result, ERCP is a demanding procedure with a substantial failure and complication
rate. A guidewire system is used to facilitate cannulation and
allow multiple catheter insertions without continually encountering the same difficulty [21].
After successful insertion, an X-ray contrast agent containing
iodine is injected into the duct [22]. X-ray fluoroscopic imaging
then allows the visualization of catheter tools and stents, together
with the outline of the duct (and hence any strictures or irregularities). However, owing to the lack of soft tissue contrast,
the quality of the images is relatively low and no extraductal
imaging is achieved. As a result, X-ray imaging is typically
not specific enough to differentiate reliably between blockages
caused by gallstones and malignant or nonmalignant strictures.
Furthermore, imaging cannot be too extensive; the X-ray dose
is limited and medical staff must wear protective aprons and
eyewear.
Owing to these difficulties, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is used as an alternative imaging modality for biliary disease, primarily for cholangiocarcinoma [23], [24]. MRCP involves imaging of the ductal system
using an external radio frequency (RF) surface coil array, and
offers an intrinsic soft-tissue contrast that may be further manipulated using contrast agents. Unfortunately, the relatively
large distance between the coils and the tissue of interest yields
relatively low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the sub-millimeterscale resolution required for early diagnosis and accurate staging of cancers such as cholangiocarcinoma. Small internal coils
placed close to the field of view (FOV) of interest can have
much higher SNR [25], and high-resolution images have been
obtained with vascular imaging coils inserted into percutaneous

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

SYMS et al.: MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING DUODENOSCOPE

drainage tubes [26]. However, the procedure is inherently invasive. There is, therefore, a strong case for development of MRimaging duodenoscopes, to assist with cannulation and carry
out high-resolution local imaging of the biliary and pancreatic
systems.
A commercial MR-imaging endoscope designed for 1 H imaging at 1.5 T and containing a single-turn RF detection coil embedded in its tip (the Olympus XGIF-MR30) was demonstrated
in the 1990s [27]–[31], and the development of related coils has
continued [32], [33]. A similar research instrument designed
for use at 0.5 T has also been investigated. This instrument
was initially based on a detached, projecting coil [34], [35] and
then on an inductively coupled saddle coil for intrinsic patient
safety [36]. Recently, a smaller system containing an expandable RF coil with automatic tuning has been demonstrated [37].
However, the above systems are typically used as colonoscopes
or gastroscopes and contain forward viewing optics designed
for colorectal or esophageal cancer staging. Furthermore, in
some instruments, the biopsy channel was occupied with a backthreaded RF cable, restricting usage to imaging.
In this paper, we describe the development of a fully functioning MR-imaging, side-viewing duodenoscope for use in
MRCP. Such instruments present additional challenges because
the space available for the RF receiver system is drastically restricted by the optical and mechanical systems required for side
viewing and cannulation. The design is introduced in Section II,
the hardware development process and the results of electrical
testing and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are presented in
Section III, and conclusions are drawn in Section IV.
II. INSTRUMENT DESIGN
The design is based on a 13 mm diameter nonmagnetic sideviewing duodenoscope previously developed by the UK company Endoscan (London, U.K.). This instrument contained a
fiber-optic bundle rather than a video camera chip at its tip, to
avoid interference between the optical and MR imaging systems. Because the instrument is already extremely complex, the
modifications needed to incorporate an RF receiver must be
deliberately minimized and achieved without alteration to the
clinical functionality. Here the main changes are centered on the
instrument tip, with the addition of a sub-miniature cable in the
shaft and an RF connector in the handle.
A. Design Overview
A simplified schematic of the tip of the modified instrument
is shown in Fig. 1, highlighting the most significant mechanical
and optical features. Tip deflection is controlled using wires
actuated by operating wheels mounted on the instrument handle.
Illumination is provided using a remote white-light source and
a fluidic optical fiber. Viewing is carried out using a coherent
fiber bundle that routes the image to an eyepiece or a video
camera (which can readily be screened from the MR system) on
the handle. The optical systems run parallel to the axis through
the majority of the instrument, but the light paths are turned
through 90◦ at the tip using prisms to allow side illumination and
viewing. An irrigation channel delivers water, air, and suction to

3459

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of duodenoscope tip, showing the modifications to
allow incorporation of an RF receiver for MRI.

clean the imaging optics. A coaxial biopsy channel has its exit
in the tip region but is immediately followed by a wire-actuated
deflector that is used to achieve the necessary retrograde angle
for an emerging catheter.
The design problem is to incorporate an additional RF receiver in a region already crowded with mechanical and optical
systems. The only space available for internal components lies
beyond the distal end. However, any significant increase in the
length of the tip will reduce its ability to deflect backwards during cannulation. The size of these components must, therefore,
be strictly limited. In addition, the receiver system must satisfy
several constraints. The first is an MR FOV compatible with
the optical FOV, but encompassing the ductal systems hidden
from the latter. The second is a local SNR higher than that obtainable using external coils and image uniformity higher than
that achievable with a single loop coil. The third is intrinsic
patient safety, and the fourth is a simple method of tuning and
matching. Additional electrical features must also be accessible
for repair, without having to tear down the whole instrument
(which is typically built up from the tip to the handle). Consequently, the main receive coil must lie outside the tip, and be
detachable for cleaning. Thin-film construction is then imperative, to avoid excessively increasing the final outside diameter.
A design satisfying the above constraints was developed for use
at f0 = 63.85 MHz (the operating frequency for 1 H MRI at
1.5 T).
B. RF Receiver Design
To achieve the first two aims, a single-turn saddle coil enclosing the tip was selected as the imaging coil, in an arrangement
close to the Ginsberg–Melchner design (which has 120◦ angles
between conductors and a 2:1 length-to-diameter ratio) [38].
This design achieves the most uniform internal sensitivity in the
saddle geometry, and excellent external uniformity. To avoid
increasing the tip diameter significantly, this component is fabricated as a thin-film printed circuit board (PCB), consisting of
a set of saddle windings with inductance L1 and resistance R1

3460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 3. RF receiver: (a) overall equivalent circuit; (b) PIN diode switch open
(receive mode); and (c) PIN diode switch closed (transmit mode).

Fig. 2. (a) External coil, (b) internal coil, (c) integration on duodenoscope,
(d) variable transformer, and (e) variation of mutual inductance with angle.

formed in copper on a flexible polyimide substrate as shown in
Fig. 2(a). Other possible coil arrangements, such as the opposed
solenoid [39], are certainly candidates. However, because it involves spiral windings, this design cannot easily be implemented
in thin film form.
The coil is made resonant at the operating frequency using
a pair of parallel plate capacitors C1A and C1B that use the
substrate as an interlayer dielectric. The overall capacitance
C1 = C1A C1B /(C1A +C1B ) is adjusted to set f0 by trimming
C1A with scissors while measuring the resonance with a network analyzer. SNR in imaging will be determined largely by
the unloaded Q-factor Q1 = ω0 L1 /R1 of this coil, where ω0 =
2πf0 is the angular resonant frequency; good SNR typically requires a Q-factor approaching 100. The use of thin-film circuits
instead of conventional inductors and capacitors degrades coil
Q-factors, due to the lower conductivity of thin-film copper [40]
and the moderate loss tangent of the substrate. However, the reduction is small, and mitigated by constructional simplicity. The
circuit is embedded in a plastic sleeve with an opening to allow
unobstructed optical imaging and catheter passage. The external
coil is held in place using a spring clip, and is removable for
cleaning.
To achieve the third aim, the arrangement used by Gilderdale
et al. [36] was adopted. This design avoids any direct connection
to the outer coil by mutual coupling to a smaller internal coil, and
hence provides intrinsic patient-system isolation. The use of an
entirely removable coil also allows thorough cleaning between

patients. The internal coil is mounted in a cavity, which leads to
a cable run alongside the imaging fibers. RF signals are routed
via miniature coaxial cable, and connected to a connector on
the operating handle. The internal coil remains in situ during
cleaning, but can be removed for repair by removing an end-cap.
This coil is again a thin-film PCB, arranged as a two-turn thinfilm saddle coil with inductance L2 and resistance R2 , as shown
in Fig. 2(b). Two discrete components (a surface mount capacitor
C2 used to make the coil resonant at the operating frequency
and a PIN diode used to control decoupling) are mounted on the
PCB. The internal coil is wrapped around a cylindrical plastic
shell and the PCB folded to place the components inside the
shell.
The overall placement of the two coils is shown in Fig. 2(c).
The external and internal coils are arranged to overlap, so the
two have a mutual inductance M . In contrast to [36], the use of
a saddle pickup allows M to be adjustable if the internal coil is
rotated about the instrument axis, as shown in the end-on view
of Fig. 2(d). M will have its maximum value Mm ax when the
relative angle θ between the coil axes is zero, falling to zero when
θ = 90◦ and reaching a minimum −Mm ax when θ = −180◦ .
More generally, M will vary approximately cosinusoidally with
θ, as shown in the sketch of Fig. 2(e), following M ≈Mm ax
cos(θ).
C. Impedance Matching and Decoupling
Matching and decoupling followed a simplified version of
the approach used in [36]. The equivalent circuit of the receiver
is as shown in Fig. 3(a), where external loading is neglected
for simplicity. It is assumed that the output is connected to an
MRI scanner, which has impedance Z0 via a cable of similar
impedance. It is also assumed that the scanner provides a dc
voltage to hold the PIN diode in reverse bias during the signal
reception phase of MRI. In this case, it appears as a small capacitance approximating an open circuit as shown in Fig. 3(b).
Although the circuit is technically doubly resonant, the Q-factor

SYMS et al.: MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING DUODENOSCOPE

of the internal coil is low at this point. To good approximation,
the circuit appears singly resonant, and inductive matching effectively inserts a resistance ω02 M 2 /(Z0 +R2 ) into the external
resonator at ω0 . Since Z0 will typically be much larger than
R2 , the second term in the denominator may be neglected. The
effective resistance of the external resonator is then R1 = R1 +
ω02 M 2 /Z0 .
√
If ω0 M can be made equal to (R1 Z0 ), impedance matching
can be achieved directly. This condition is extremely helpful
in simplifying construction. However, tight coupling between
the coils is required to achieve suitably high values of ω0 M .
Assuming that R1 ≈ 0.5 Ω and Z0 = 50 Ω, we require ω0 M ≈
5 Ω. If ω0 Mm ax is chosen to be slightly larger than this value,
exact matching can then be achieved by rotating the internal coil
to decrease M . At this point, R1 = 2R1 .
The effect of a lossless matching network is to convert the
signal source into one of output impedance Z0 , which may
therefore be matched effectively to the load. In this case, the
network has an additional series resistance R2 that degrades the
SNR. However, assuming R2 ≈ 0.5 Ω and Z0 = 50 Ω the SNR
penalty is extremely small and likely to be similar in an external
isolation transformer.
It is also assumed that the scanner provides a dc current to
drive the PIN diode into forward bias during the excitation phase
of MRI. In this case, it appears as a small resistance approximating a short circuit, as shown in Fig. 3(c). The complete
circuit then acts as a coupled resonator system, with split resonant frequencies. However at ω0 , the internal circuit effectively
transfers resistance into the external one, whose total resistance
is then given by R1 = R1 + ω02 M 2 /R2 . Assuming the circuit
is matched as described earlier, R1 = R1 +Z0 R1 /R2 . Since R1
and R2 are similar, the first term may be neglected and we may
take R1 ≈ Z0 R1 /R2 . This increased resistance significantly reduces any current directly induced during the excitation phase of
MRI. The ratio between the currents resulting from any induced
voltage in the transmit and receive states is R1 /R1 ≈ 2R2 /Z0 .
For the resistance values above, induced currents are reduced
by a factor of ≈50 or around 35 dB.
Prioritization of patient-system isolation does unfortunately
lead to a reduction in the effectiveness of the decoupling, due
to the use of an unshielded internal coil. For example, solution
of the circuit equations shows that the small current I1 in the
external coil is accompanied by a larger current
I2 in the internal
√
coil, with relative magnitude |I2 |/I1 = (R1 Z0 )/R2 . For the
resistance values above, this ratio is 10. This current may clearly
induce flip angle artifacts. However, its effect is mitigated by
the small size of the internal coil, which is buried inside the
instrument. Furthermore, during excitation, voltages may also
be induced directly in the internal coil. The resulting current
I1 in the external
I2 may, in turn, give rise to a larger current
√
coil, with relative magnitude |I1 |/I2 = (R1 Z0 )/R1 . However,
because of the much smaller surface area of the internal coil,
the induced voltage is much lower.
Since√
the external and internal coil rejection ratios depend on
Z0 and Z0 , respectively, increased rejection can be achieved
for both coils by inserting a matching network between the cable and the PIN diode to raise the apparent value of Z0 [36].

3461

However, this approach requires additional circuit components.
Furthermore, an increase in ω0 M is required for matching,
which, in turn, increases R2 . As a result, iteration is again required to achieve a significant improvement in performance.
Owing to the inherent space constraints, these complications
were avoided. Further difficulties are introduced by external
loading, which detunes the external coil and alters the matching
condition. To cope with a range of loading conditions, the external coil may be tuned slightly above the MRI frequency and the
internal coil arranged to match to a slightly higher resistance.
One further point deserves mention. There are many reports
of heating of long conductors during MRI (e.g., see [41]), due to
excitation of standing waves by the strong electric field of transmitter coil capacitors. The effect is highly significant during
intravascular procedures, when conductors with a thin insulating layer are closely surrounded by tissue with a high dielectric
constant, and the resonant length is therefore very short. Although long conductors such as the coaxial output are present
in an endoscope, these are surrounded by a much greater thickness of material with a low dielectric constant. Furthermore, the
surrounding tissue is likely to be in less intimate contact during
endoscopy, especially if air is used to ease the passage of the
instrument. As a result, the resonant length will be much longer
and the electrical and thermal insulation much greater. There
have been no reports to date of problems with MR imaging
endoscopes operating at 1.5 T.
III. CONSTRUCTION AND EVALUATION
Several iterations were required to implement the design concepts mentioned earlier. Particularly, optimization of the overlap
between the internal and external coils was required to achieve a
suitable value of ω0 Mm ax . To avoid contamination (and subsequent difficulties with obtaining authority to use the instrument
in patients), these iterations and their evaluations were carried
out using a dummy duodenoscope tip before proceeding to a
complete instrument.
A. Thin Film Circuits
Thin film circuits were fabricated by double-sided patterning
of copper-clad polyimide by the U.K. company Clarydon (Willenhall, West Midlands, U.K.). The starting material was 25 μm
thick Kapton HN (DuPont, Circleville, OH, USA), coated on
each side with a 35-μm-thick pressure-bonded layer of copper
and patterned by lithography and wet etching. Track layouts
were established by a combination of iteration and numerical
simulation. Circuits were fabricated in arrays with coils of different length to allow optimization of ω0 Mm ax . However, the
internal coil had a track width and track separation of 500 μm
throughout, while the external coil had a track width of 650 μm.
The circuits were separated using a scalpel, and mounted on
cylindrical mandrels formed in polyether–ether–ketone (PEEK)
for testing.
Electrical evaluation was carried out using an Agilent
E5061 A electronic network analyzer (ENA). Frequencies and
quality factors of resonators were established using inductive probes for input and output coupling. Inductances were

3462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 5. Variation of reflection with internal coil angle, unloaded, loaded, and
immersed in tissue-simulating solution.
Fig. 4. Dummy duodenoscope tip with biopsy channel, catheter deflector, and
RF receiver.

established by making coils resonant with known capacitors,
and resistances were found from quality factors. Internal capacitances were found from resonant frequencies and inductances,
and mutual inductances were found from resonance splitting in
coupled systems.
The internal pickup was constructed from a 9-mm-long twoturn saddle coil, with diameter 8 mm. The via connections
needed to complete the circuit were first formed by soldering
through pinholes, and the coil was then tuned to the resonant
frequency using two nonmagnetic capacitors totaling 50.3 pF
(SRT Micro Céramique, Vendome, France). The unloaded Qfactor was measured as 75. These data imply an inductance L2
= 123.5 nH and a resistance R2 = 0.66 Ω. A MA4P7464 F1072 nonmagnetic PIN diode (M/A-COM Technology Solutions, Lowell, MA, USA) and a length of 2.2 mm diameter
nonmagnetic coaxial cable (Axon Cable, Dunfermline, U.K.)
were then added.
The external coil was constructed from a 31-mm-long singleturn saddle coil, which was mounted on a 100-μm-thick cylindrical sleeve with diameter of 13 mm and tuned to frequency
by trimming C1A . The circuit was then encapsulated in epoxy
resin and machined to achieve a cylindrical shape and form the
viewing slot. To avoid significant alteration to the resonance due
to loading, an encapsulation thickness of 1.5 mm was used, increasing the tip diameter to 16 mm. The resonant frequency was
set slightly high, to compensate for the effect of loading. The
coil parameters were extracted as L1 = 140 nH, C1 = 43.5 pF,
Q1 = 90, and R1 = 0.6 Ω.
B. Dummy Duodenoscope
The dummy duodenoscope contained an internal receiver cavity and a biopsy channel with an operating catheter deflector,
as shown in Fig. 4, but omitted all illumination and imaging
optics. The tip itself was fabricated in PEEK and titanium, and
mounted on a Delrin (polyoxymethylene) mechanical support
that routed the biopsy channel, deflector wire, and signal cable
to a simplified handle. The internal cavity required a tip extension of ≈10 mm. Before insertion, the internal PCB was simply
wrapped around a cylindrical PEEK spring, and the output cable
was routed through the in-built cable run.

Fig. 6. Frequency responses of the RF circuit in receive and transmit states,
measured at the receiver midpoint (thick lines) and distal tip (thin lines).

The internal coil was then rotated to set M to the value needed
for impedance matching. Different values of θ were required for
different loads, which alter the effective value of R1 . For example, curve U in Fig. 5 shows the variation of the reflection coefficient S11 with θ, with the receiver unloaded. Here the reflection
is −12 dB when θ = 0, but may be reduced to a minimum when
θ = 35◦ (condition A, the impedance matching point). Curve L
shows similar results with the receiver loaded by a large copper
plate. Once again, the system may be matched, but at a smaller
value of θ (condition B). Finally, curve I shows results with
the receiver heavily loaded by immersion in a tissue simulating
solution (3.37 g/L NiCl2 ·6H2 O and 2.4 g/L NaCl with T1 =
500–800 ms and T2 = 100–200
√ ms). Here the additional load
is so large that ω0 Mm ax < (R1 Z0 ) and exact matching cannot be achieved. For “average” loads, the best compromise is
condition B. The cap was sealed, and the external coil locked in
place.
The performance of the assembled receiver was assessed,
by measuring the overall system transmission S21 in receive
and transmit states (using a signal generator to provide a lowfrequency control voltage, a large wire loop to simulate uniform
RF excitation, and a small wire loop as a local current probe).
Fig. 6 shows the transmission, measured at the midpoint of the
external coil (thick lines) and the distal tip near the internal coil
(thin lines). In the receive state, the circuit is singly resonant with
a loaded Q-factor of 30. In the transmit state, the circuit is doubly
resonant. Near the coil midpoint, the signal rejection is 35 dB
at ω0 , broadly in agreement with the design analysis; however,
the rejection is noticeably worse at the tip due to the unwanted

SYMS et al.: MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING DUODENOSCOPE

3463

currents discussed earlier. Similar results were achieved with
the tip immersed in a tissue simulating solution but with a slight
downshift in frequency and a reduction in the loaded Q-factor
to 20. From the Q-factors measured when the coil is dry and
immersed, and the condition that the impedance mismatch is
roughly the same in each case, the output impedance of the
receiver may be estimated as 30 Ω (unloaded) and 70 Ω (heavily
loaded).

C. Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The performance of the receiver was verified by MRI at St
Mary’s Hospital, Paddington, London, using a 1.5 T Signa Excite clinical scanner (GE, Milwaukee, WI). Initial imaging was
carried out using a spin echo sequence with TR = 520 ms and
TE = 8.6 ms. The body coil was used for excitation, and the duodenoscope receiver was connected to an auxiliary coil input for
signal reception. Decoupling and signal reception were assessed
first, by imaging with the dummy duodenoscope tip immersed
at a shallow angle in tissue-simulating solution. A catheter was
also passed through the biopsy channel to mimic cannulation.
This arrangement is particularly challenging, since the receiver
system is heavily loaded by salt solution surrounding the external coil, and also by the solution penetrating the biopsy channel.
However, it provides an extremely direct method of visualizing
and assessing performance.
Fig. 7(a) shows quasi-axial images of the receiver tip in the
region of the catheter deflector, obtained in a block of 18 slices
using 3 mm slice thickness and 4 excitations (NEX). Here the
image resolution is 0.78125 mm/pixel, and the image bandwidth
is 162.734 Hz/pixel. The left-hand (LH) half shows an image
obtained using the body coil in the vicinity of the catheter deflector. This image is generally bright, except in the region where
the signal source is occluded by the tip. There is some perturbation to the magnetization near the four coil conductors, and
also the 1 o’clock position to the right of the catheter. Both
are indicative of a failure of decoupling, whose effectiveness is
limited by the need to minimize the length of the tip extension
and further degraded by the heavy saline loading. Improvement
of the former would require design alterations, but the loading
is likely to decrease during actual use. The right-hand (RH) half
shows the corresponding image obtained using the duodenoscope receiver. Since the sensitivity of a saddle coil varies with
distance, a radial correction factor has been applied to the image
outside the coil diameter; a similar correction has been applied
to all subsequent axial images.
Fig. 7(b) shows corresponding sagittal images, obtained in
a block of 18 slices using a 2 mm slice thickness and 4 NEX.
The LH half shows a slice through the plane of the catheter
obtained using the body coil, while the RH half shows the corresponding image obtained using the duodenoscope receiver. In
the former case, it is clear that there is a small perturbation to
the magnetization above and below the tip. In the latter, the internal structure of the tip (including the biopsy channel, catheter
deflector and catheter) is well resolved, despite the short acquisition time (1 min 48 s). However, a characteristic pattern of

Fig. 7. (a) Quasi-axial and (b) sagittal slices across the immersed tip, obtained
using the body coil (LH) and the duodenoscope receiver (RH). 1/R scaling has
been applied to the duodenoscope axial image.

signal nulls associated with the saddle coil geometry may be
seen, behind and in front of the coil.
The spatial sensitivity of particular coil configurations may
be estimated via reciprocity [42]. Computed contour maps of
constant RF field magnitude obtained from a driven saddle coil
may be found in papers by a number of authors, e.g., [43].
For the transverse midplane, these show approximately uniform
patterns, falling off roughly as 1/R. Because the driven field
is approximately radial for this important plane, the usual cosine factors would be expected when the coil lies at an angle
with respect to the B0 field. X-ray fluoroscope images show
duodenoscope tips typically lying between 5◦ and 40◦ with respect to the spine during cannulation at ERCP, and hence in
this angular range with respect to the magnet bore. Under these
circumstances, the cosine factors will make relatively small difference to the sensitivity. To verify that usable images may still
be obtained, the coil axis was chosen to lie at ≈ 20◦ with respect

3464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 8. Overall and enlarged views of the arrangement for comparison of
eight-element surface array coil and duodenoscope receiver.

Fig. 10. Spatial dependence of SNR for duodenoscope receiver at different
longitudinal positions (circled) and surface array coil.

the array, and Fig. 9(b) and (c) shows the corresponding image
obtained using the duodenoscope receiver, with and without 1/R
scaling, respectively. In each case, the details of the resolution
phantom are clearly visible. The duodenoscope receiver clearly
provides increased brightness, but over a limited field of view.
The use of 1/R scaling can reduce the dynamic range required
for display, but clearly cannot mitigate the reduction in SNR at
large distance.
Using images of this type, the SNR of the two coil systems was
compared. Noise was estimated from a large region of interest
(ROI) nominally devoid of signal, while signal was estimated
from a small ROI moving radially away from the instrument
tip as shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 10 shows the variation of SNR for
the duodenoscope receiver with radius R, measured at different
points along the tip.
SNR is higher near the proximal and distal circumferential
conductors of the saddle coil and lower at the central point
between. However, in each case SNR falls off approximately
as 1/R. Also shown is the corresponding data for the surface
coil array. In this case the SNR is approximately constant. The
duodenoscope receiver provides a higher SNR to a radius of at
least 25 mm, suggesting a useful imaging volume.
Fig. 9. Axial slices across resolution test phantom obtained using (a) the eightelement cardiac array coil, and (b) and (c) the duodenoscope receiver, with and
without 1/R scaling.

to the B0 field in Fig. 7(b). However, images have also been
obtained at larger angles.
D. Image Quality
Image quality was then assessed quantitatively by comparison
with an eight-element GE HD cardiac array coil in the arrangement of Fig. 8. A resolution phantom consisting of a 14 mm
ID tube filled with smaller tubes with 0.4 mm wall thickness
immersed in tissue simulating solution was placed between two
cuboid phantoms. The arrangement was then imaged using the
array and the duodenoscope receiver in turn.
Fig. 9 shows axial images across the phantom arrangement,
acquired in a block of 13 slices, 2 mm slice thickness and 2
NEX (requiring a total acquisition time of 2 mins 49 s). Here the
image resolution is 0.3125 mm/pixel, and the image bandwidth
is 81.367 Hz/pixel. Fig. 9(a) shows an image obtained using

E. Ex Vivo Imaging
Tissue imaging was demonstrated using a conventionally
butchered ex vivo porcine liver. Porcine anatomy differs from
human anatomy in having the bile duct enter the duodenum separately from the pancreatic duct, 2–5 cm distal to the pyloric
sphincter at the end of the stomach (also known as the torus
pyloricus or pyloric ring) [44]. A liver specimen was obtained
from an abattoir, with attached gall bladder, biliary ductal system, and a section of duodenum. The duodenum was opened
with a scalpel to identify the torus pyloricus, sphincter, and bile
duct. The bile duct was filled with water using a syringe, the
duodenoscope receiver (covered with a latex sheath) was then
positioned and the duodenum folded over.
Imaging was carried using a three-dimensional (3-D) gradient
recalled sequence with a repeat time TR = 33 ms, an echo
time TE = 15 ms and a flip angle of 10◦ that had previously
delivered high contrast from similar specimens. Axial images
were obtained along the duodenum in a block of 32 slices of
1.2 mm thickness and separation, using a single excitation. The

SYMS et al.: MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING DUODENOSCOPE

3465

Fig. 13. (a) Optical imaging in the magnet room; images of (b) torus pyloricus
and (c) ampulla of ex-vivo porcine liver specimen.

Fig. 11. Axial slice image of porcine liver specimen obtained using the duodenoscope receiver (upper), and 3-D reconstructions (lower). 1/R scaling has
been applied to the duodenoscope axial image.

Fig. 12.

Operating handle and tip of completed instrument.

upper part of Fig. 11 shows a typical slice. Here the image
resolution is 0.78125 mm/pixel, and the image bandwidth is
92.968 Hz/pixel. The duodenoscope tip is located in the central
dark region and is surrounded by duodenum with the bile duct
on the left, the surgical incision on the right, and the underlying
liver tissue below. Bright spots indicate modest overexcitation
in the immediate vicinity of the coil conductors. Despite this,
the image quality is generally good, and high-contrast imaging
is achieved out to a useful distance. The lower image shows 3D reconstructions obtained from such images, which allow the
ampulla (A) and bile duct (BD) to be identified unambiguously.
F. Completed Instrument
A side-viewing duodenoscope incorporating the receiver design mentioned earlier was then constructed as shown in Fig. 12.
To ensure MR compatibility, nonferrous materials such as polymers, titanium metal, and glass were used for the flexible elements, the actuation wires, pivots and fixtures, and the imaging

components, respectively. The tip itself was fabricated in PEEK;
construction was largely as previously described but with the addition of optical systems and an irrigation channel. RF signals
were transmitted using the subminiature cable previously described, and an SubMiniature Version A-type connector was
provided on the instrument handle. The electrical performance
of the instrument was evaluated using a network analyzer and
found to be substantially the same as that of the dummy used for
development (with a loaded Q-factor of 28 and a signal rejection
ratio of 36 dB in air).
The flexible light guide was made over-length, to allow the
placement of a SN LB-24 tungsten filament light source (Welch
Allyn, Skaneateles Falls, NY, USA) in the scanner control room.
An eyepiece and a WAT-231 S MR-compatible video camera
(Watec, Orangeburg, NY, USA) were provided for viewing. The
umbilical was also made over-length, to allow connection to air
and suction services at the wall of the magnet room rather than
a standard service cart. Water was delivered from a MD-431
bottle (Olympus).
The duodenoscope was evaluated in the magnet room, and
no magnetic forces were observed. Optical images of ex vivo
porcine liver specimens were obtained by a clinician using the
eyepiece and also using the video camera as shown in Fig. 13(a);
examples of image quality are shown in Fig. 13(b) and (c). The
latter were transmitted to a PC in the scanner control room and
then projected on a screen in the magnet room.
Susceptibility effects and decoupling were observed by placing the instrument on a cuboid phantom, with the shaft parallel to the magnet axis, and obtaining MR images using the
system body coil. Little image disturbance was observed, suggesting that unwanted perturbations to the magnetization are
small. Preliminary MR images were obtained using phantoms,
in the arrangement described in Section III-D. Fig. 14(a) shows
the experiment, and Fig. 14(b)–(d) show three consecutive axial
slices from a block of 16 acquired in 1 min 9 s using a spin-echo
sequence with TE = 10.488 ms and TR = 520 ms, 1 NEX,
5 mm slice thickness, 5.5 mm slice separation, and 160 mm
FOV. The slice position ranges from the important deflector region [see Fig. 14(b)] to the distal tip [see Fig. 14(c)]. Image
quality is excellent in the former case, with a peak SNR of 250,

3466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. C. Besant and Dr. M.
Ristic for many valuable discussions, Endoscan for the construction of the duodenoscope, P. Jones and Dr. M. Ahmad for
workshop support, and Prof. W. Gedroyc for access to MRI
facilities.
REFERENCES

Fig. 14. (a) MR imaging trial of completed instrument; (b)–(d) consecutive
axial slice images of phantoms, with 1/R scaling applied.

but degrades slightly in the latter case due to the short-range
artifacts associated with the internal coil. These preliminary experiments demonstrate useful performance from the completed
instrument, and in vivo human imaging trials are planned as
soon as ethics approval has been obtained.

IV. CONCLUSION
An MR-imaging, side-viewing duodenoscope with full optical and mechanical functionality has been demonstrated. The
instrument is intended for MR guidance of ERCP and highresolution imaging of the biliary ductal system. The instrument
is constructed from MR-compatible materials and combines a
coherent fiber bundle for optical imaging, an irrigation channel,
and a side-opening biopsy channel for the passage of catheter
tools with a saddle coil for MR signal reception. The receiver
coil is magnetically coupled to an internal pickup coil for intrinsic safety, and the system is tuned, matched, and decoupled
using the minimum of internal components. The instrument is
designed for 1 H imaging in 1.5 T fields, and allows high-quality
images to be obtained over a wide field of view. The instrument
has been evaluated in a conventional MR imaging suite using
phantoms and ex vivo animal tissue and allows optical and MR
images to be combined without loss of clinical functionality.
Further study is required to demonstrate safety and clinical
utility before an application is made for ethics approval for human trials. For example, evaluation of the effects of motion
artefacts during in vivo imaging is required. A significant difference between the artefacts obtained using external coils and the
MR-imaging duodenoscope are to be expected, since the target
tissue is likely to be comoving with the receiver in the latter
case. In addition, it will be important to demonstrate that improvements in cannulation success rates can be achieved using
MR rather than optical imaging and that high-resolution MR
images of greater diagnostic value than fluoroscopic images can
be obtained.

[1] J. A. Rider, E. J. Puletti, and H. C. Moeller, “The fiber duodenoscope: A
preliminary report,” Amer. J. Gastroenterol., vol. 47, pp. 21–27, Jan. 1967.
[2] I. Oi, “Fiberduodenoscopy and endoscopic pancreatocholangiography,”
Gastrointest. Endosc., vol. 17, pp. 59–62, Nov. 1970.
[3] K. Takagi, S. Ikeda, Y. Nakagawa, N. Sakaguchi, and T. Takahashi, “Retrograde pancreatography and cholangiography by fiber duodenoscope,”
Gastroenterology, vol. 59, pp. 445–452, Sep. 1970.
[4] J. A. Vennes and S. E. Silvis, “Endoscopic visualization of bile and pancreatic ducts,” Gastrointest. Endosc., vol. 18, pp. 149–152, May 1972.
[5] O. T. Nebel and M. F. Fornes, “Endoscopic pancreatocholangiography,”
Amer. J. Dig. Dis., vol. 18, pp. 1042–1050, Dec. 1973.
[6] W. R. Brugge and J. Van Dam, “Pancreatic and biliary endoscopy,” New
Engl. J. Med., vol. 341, pp. 1808–1816, Dec. 1999.
[7] R. Kozarek, “Biliary ERCP,” Endoscopy, vol. 39, pp. 11–16, Jun. 2007.
[8] L. Safrany, “Duodenoscopic sphincterotomy and gallstone removal,” Gastroenterology, vol. 72, pp. 338–343, Feb. 1977.
[9] P. B. Cotton, “Non-operative removal of bile duct stones by duodenoscopic
sphincterotomy,” Brit. J. Surg., vol. 67, pp. 1–5, Jan. 1980.
[10] P. B. Cotton, “Duodenoscopic placement of biliary prostheses to relieve
malignant obstructive jaundice,” Brit. J. Surg., vol. 69, pp. 501–503, Sep.
1982.
[11] K. Huibregtse and G. N. Tygat, “Palliative treatment of obstructive jaundice by transpapilliary introduction of large bore bile duct endoprosthesis,”
Gut, vol. 23, pp. 371–375, May 1982.
[12] C. D. Anderson, C. W. Wright Pinson, J. Berlin, and R. S. Chari, “Diagnosis and treatment of cholangiocarcinoma,” Oncologist, vol. 9, pp. 43–57,
Feb. 2004.
[13] A. Parodi, D. Fisher, M. Giovannini, T. Baron, and M. Conio, “Endoscopic
management of hilar cholangiocarcinoma,” Nature Rev. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol., vol. 9, pp. 105–112, Feb. 2012.
[14] R. P. Venu, J. E. Geenen, M. Kini, W. J. Hogan, M. Payne, G. K. Johnson, and M. J. Schmalz, “Endoscopic retrograde brush cytology: A new
technique,” Gastroenterology, vol. 99, pp. 1475–1479, Nov. 1990.
[15] I. C. Roberts-Thomson and J. B. Hobbs, “Cytodiagnosis of pancreatic
and biliary cancer by endoscopic duct aspiration,” Med. J. Aust., vol. 1,
pp. 370–372, May 1979.
[16] N. Fujita, Y. Noda, G. Kobayashi, K. Kimura, and K. Ito, “Endoscopic approach to early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer,” Pancreas, vol. 28, pp. 279–
281, Apr. 2004.
[17] K. Huibregtse, R. M. Katon, P. P. Coene, and G. N. J. Tytgat, “Endoscopic
palliative treatment in pancreatic cancer,” Gastrointest. Endosc., vol. 32,
pp. 334–338, Oct. 1986.
[18] W. S. McCune, P. E. Shorb, and H. Moscovitz, “Endoscopic cannulation
of the ampulla of Vater: A preliminary report,” Ann. Surg., vol. 167,
pp. 752–756, May 1968.
[19] P. B. Cotton, L. H. Blumgart, G. T. Davies, J. W. Pierce, P. R. Salmon,
R. J. Burwood, B. W. Lawrie, and A. E. Read, “Cannulation of papilla
of Vater via fiber-duodenoscope: Assessment of retrograde cholangiopancreatography in 60 patients,” Lancet, vol. 299, pp. 53–58, Dec. 1972.
[20] M. L. Freeman, J. A DiSario, D. B. Nelson, M. B. Fennerty, J. G. Lee, D.
J. Bjorkman, C. S. Overby, J. Aas, M. E. Ryan, G. S. Bochna, M. J. Shaw,
H. W. Snady, R. V. Erickson, J. P. Moore, and J. P. Roel, “Risk factors for
post-ERCP pancreatitis: A prospective, multicenter study,” Gastrointest.
Endosc., vol. 54, pp. 425–434, Oct. 2001.
[21] E. L. A. Artifon, P. Sakai, J. E. M. Cunha, B. Halwan, S. Ishioka, and A.
Kumar, “Guidewire cannulation reduces risk of post-ERCP pancreatitis
and facilitates bile duct cannulation,” Amer. J. Gastroenterol., vol. 102,
pp. 2147–2153, Oct. 2007.
[22] H. I. Goldberg, M. K. Bilbao, E. T. Stewart, C. A. Rohrmann, and A. A.
Moss, “Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: Radiographic
technique,” Amer. J. Dig. Dis., vol. 21, pp. 270–278, Mar. 1976.
[23] B. K. Wallner, K. A. Schumacher, W. Weidenmaier, and J. M. Friedrich,
“Dilated biliary tract: Evaluation with MR cholangiography with a T2-

SYMS et al.: MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING DUODENOSCOPE

[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]
[37]

[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]

weighted contrast enhanced fast sequence,” Radiology, vol. 181, pp. 805–
808, Dec. 1991.
J. Laubenberger, M. Büchert, B. Schneider, U. Blum, J. Hennig, and
M. Langer, “Breath-hold projection magnetic resonance-cholangio pancreatography (MRCP): A new method for the examination of the bile and
pancreatic ducts,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 33, pp. 18–23, Jan. 1995.
P. A. Bottomley, E. Atalar, R. F. Lee, K. A. Shunk, and A. Lardo, “Cardiovascular MRI probes for the outside in and for the inside out,” Mag.
Res. Mater. Phys., Biol. Med., vol. 11, pp. 49–51, Jan. 2000.
C. R. Weiss, C. Georgiades, L. V. Hofmann, R. Schulick, M. Choti,
P. Thuluvath, D. A. Bluemke, and A. Arepally, “Intrabiliary MR imaging:
Assessment of biliary obstruction with the use of an intraluminal MR
receiver coil,” J. Vasc. Interv. Radiol., vol. 17, pp. 845–853, May 2006.
K. Inui, S. Nakazawa, J. Yoshino, K. Yamao, H. Yamachika, T. Wakabayashi, N. Kanemaki, and H. Hidano, “Endoscopic MRI: Preliminary
results of a new technique for visualization and staging of gastrointestinal
tumors,” Endoscopy, vol. 27, pp. 480–485, Sep. 1995.
K. Inui, S. Nakazawa, J. Yoshino, and H. Ukai, “Endoscopic MRI,” Pancreas, vol. 16, pp. 413–417, Apr. 1998.
D. R. Feldman, D. Kulling, R. H. Hawes, C. L. Kay, V. R. Muckenfuss,
P. B. Cotton, D. E. Bohning, and J. W. Young, “MR endoscopy: Preliminary experience in human trials,” Radiology, vol. 202, pp. 868–870, Mar.
1997.
D. Kulling, D. R. Feldman, C. L. Kay, B. J. Hoffman, C. E. Reed, J. W.
Young, and R. H. Hawes, “Local staging of esophageal cancer using
endoscopic magnetic resonance imaging: Prospective comparison with
endoscopic ultrasound,” Endoscopy, vol. 30, pp. 745–749, Nov. 1998.
T. Ichikawa, F. Kitahara, T. Araki, A. Nanbu, M. Hori, H. Kumagai,
S. Aoki, and M. Fujino, “MR endoscopy: Results in applying to the
upper gastrointestinal and pancreatobiliary tracts,” in Proc. 9th Ann. Conf.
ISMRM, Glasgow, U.K., Apr. 21–27, 2001, vol. 9, p. 2043.
Y. Matsuoka, K. Kuroda, E. Kumamoto, A. Saito, T. Mine, T. Shibasaki,
and B. Keserci, “An integrated MR-endoscope for diagnosis of luminal
organ,” in Proc. 12th Ann. Conf. ISMRM, Kyoto, Japan, May 15–21, 2004,
vol. 12, p. 969.
Y. Matsuoka, T. Ozaki, Y. Mori, K. Murakami, M. Matsumoto, E. Kumamoto, K. Imagawa, M. Gotanda, and K. Kuroda, “Development of RF
coil for integration system of endoscope for esophageal examination,” in
Proc. 14th Ann. Conf. ISMRM, May 6–12, 2006, vol. 14, p. 1405.
N. M. DeSouza, A. H. Gibbons, A. S. Hall, R. Puni, J. Calam, and I. R.
Young, “Magnetic resonance imaging during upper GI endoscopy: Technical considerations and clinical feasibility,” Min. Invas. Ther. All. Tech.,
vol. 4, pp. 277–281, Jan. 1995.
N. M. DeSouza, G. A. Coutts, D. J. Larkman, D. J. Gilderdale, A. D.
Williams, A. Thillainagayam, and I. R. Young, “Combined MRI and fibreoptic colonoscopy: Technical considerations and clinical feasibility,”
Min. Invas. Ther. All. Tech., vol. 9, pp. 25–30, Jan. 2000.
D. J. Gilderdale, A. D. Williams, U. Dave, and N. M. DeSouza, “An
inductively-coupled, detachable receiver coil system for use with magnetic
resonance compatible endoscopes,” JMRI, vol. 18, pp. 131–135, Jul. 2003.
J. L. Ackerman, E. Nevo, E. J. Zucker, A. J. Poitzsch, K. Vandenberg, A.
Zhigalin, and B. Fetics, “MR endoscope with software-controlled tuning,
device tracking and video,” in Proc. 19th Ann. Conf. ISMRM, Montréal,
QC, Canada, May 7–13, 2011, vol. 19, p. 4544.
D. M. Ginsberg and M. J. Melchner, “Optimum geometry of saddle shaped
coils for generating a uniform magnetic field,” Rev. Sci. Inst., vol. 41,
pp. 122–123, Jan. 1970.
A. J. Martin, D. B. Plewes, and R. M. Henkelman, “MR imaging of blood
vessels with an intravascular coil,” JMRI, vol. 2, pp. 421–229, Jul./Aug.
1992.
B. C. Johnson, “Electrical resistance of copper and nickel thin film connections,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 67, pp. 3018–3024, Mar. 1990.
M. K. Konings, L.W. Bartels, H. F. M. Smits, and C. J. G. Bakker, “Heating around intravascular guidewires by resonating RF waves,” JMRI,
vol. 12, pp. 79–95, Jul. 2000.
D. I. Hoult and R. E. Richards, “The signal-to-noise ratio of the magnetic
resonance experiment,” J. Magn. Reson., vol. 24, pp. 71–85, Oct. 1976.

3467

[43] C. E. Hayes, W. A. Edelestein, J. F. Schenck, O. Mueller, and M. Eash,
“An efficient, highly homogeneous radiofrequency coil for whole-body
NMR imaging at 1.5 T,” J. Magn. Reson., vol. 63, pp. 622–628, Jul. 1985.
[44] M. M. Swindle, Swine in the Laboratory: Surgery, Anesthesia, Imaging
and Experimental Techniques, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC
Press, 2007.

Richard R. A. Syms (SM’02) received the B.A. degree in 1979 and the D.Phil.
degree in 1982 from Oxford University, Oxford, U.K., both in engineering
science. He is currently a Professor of Microsystems Technology in the EEE
Department, Imperial College London, London, U.K., where he leads the Optical and Semiconductor Devices Group. He has authored or coauthored more
than 200 journal and conference papers on optics, electromagnetic theory, microelectromechanical systems, metamaterials, and medical imaging.
Prof. Syms is a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering, the Institute
of Electrical Engineers, and the Institute of Physics.

Ian R. Young received the B.Sc. degree in 1954 and the Ph.D. degree in 1958
from Aberdeen University, Aberdeen, U.K., both in physics. He is currently
a Senior Research Fellow in the EEE Department, Imperial College London,
London, U.K. He has authored or coauthored more than 300 papers on MRI. His
current research interests include in vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and MR-guided surgical robots.
Prof. Young is a Fellow of the Royal Society and a Fellow of the Royal
Academy of Engineering and a winner of the Gold Medal of SMRM and the Sir
Frank Whittle Prize.

Christopher A. Wadsworth received the Graduate degree in medicine from St.
George’s University London, London, U.K., and the Ph.D. degree from Imperial
College London, London, in 2012, for his work into the investigation of bile
duct cancer.
He completed his medical training in North West London. He is a currently
a Gastroenterologist and is the Advanced HPB Endoscopy Fellow at Aintree
University Hospitals NHS Trust.

Simon D. Taylor-Robinson received the M.B.B.S. degree in 1984 from London
University, London, U.K. He is currently the Dean of the Faculty of Medicine
of Imperial College and the Director of the Hepatology Clinical Research Facility, St Mary’s Hospital, London. He has built up the largest dedicated viral
hepatitis treatment centre in Europe. He also has research programs looking into
progression of liver fibrosis and has collaborated with the Engineering Faculty
at Imperial on EPSRC, Wellcome, and National Institute for Health Research
grants to produce new medical imaging devices.

Marc Rea received the Ph.D. degree from the Imperial College, London, U.K.,
in 2010, on MR-compatible systems for prostate biopsy.
He is currently a Clinical Scientist at St. Mary’s Hospital, London. His current
research interests include medical robotics, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)compatible device tracking, and high-intensity focused ultrasound.

