28

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Potential for Health Screening Using Long-Term
Cardiovascular Parameters Measured by Finger
Volume-Oscillometry: Pilot Comparative Evaluation
in Regular and Sleep-Deprived Activities
Takehiro Yamakoshi, Member, IEEE, Kenta Matsumura, Member, IEEE, Peter Rolfe, Member, IEEE, Shota Hanaki,
Akira Ikarashi, Jihyoung Lee, Student Member, IEEE, and Ken-Ichi Yamakoshi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We explored the potential of health screening based
on the long-term measurement of cardiovascular parameters using
the finger volume-oscillometric technique. An automated instrument made simultaneous measurements of key cardiovascular parameters, including blood pressure, pulse pressure, heart rate, normalized pulse volume as an index of α-adrenalin-mediated sympathetic activity, and finger arterial elasticity. These were derived
from finger photo-plethysmographic signals during application of
cuff pressure. To assess the feasibility of achieving a screening
function, measurements were made in ten healthy volunteers during 10 days of day-to-day living (normal condition), and carried
out several times at a fixed time every day. During successive 10day measurements, a 30-hour period of total sleep deprivation was
introduced as a physiological challenge (abnormal condition). A
linear discriminant analysis of the data was conducted to determine whether these two conditions could be discriminated. Periodic data collection was performed rapidly and easily, and the
%-correct classifications of normal and abnormal conditions were
78.2% and 77.5%, respectively. This ability of the method to discriminate between regular and sleep-deprived activities demonstrates its potential for healthcare screening during day-to-day
living. Further investigations using larger age and gender groups

Manuscript received March 12, 2013; revised June 16, 2013; accepted July
17, 2013. Date of publication July 23, 2013; date of current version December
31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Grant-in-Aid for Discovery of the Seeds, under Grant 07-053, and by
the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Grant-in-Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research under Grant 23650349 and Young Scientists (A)
under Grant 24680063.
T. Yamakoshi and K. Matsumura with the School of Mechanical Engineering, College of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi,
Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192 Japan (e-mail: takey@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp;
kenta16moon @se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp).
P. Rolfe is with the Oxford BioHorizons Ltd., Maidstone, ME14 5DZ, U.K.
(e-mail: PeterRolfe@aol.com).
S. Hanaki was with the Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192 Japan
(e-mail: shanaki198846@gmail.com).
A. Ikarashi is with the Department of Medical Engineering, Aino University,
Ibaraki-shi, Osaka 567-0012, Japan (e-mail: a-ikarashi@me-u.aino.ac.jp).
J. Lee is with the Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920–1192 Japan
(e-mail: jihyoung@stu.kanazawa-u.ac. jp).
K. Yamakoshi is with the School of Mechanical Engineering, College of
Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan, with the School of Medicine, Showa University,
Tokyo 142-8555, Japan, and also with the Faculty of Clinical Engineering, Hokkaido Institute of Technology, Hokkaido 006-8585, Japan (e-mail:
kyama@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2274460

of subjects including patients with cardiovascular diseases under
real-life situations are required.
Index Terms—Blood pressure, finger-artery elasticity index,
healthcare, heart rate, normalized pulse volume, pulse pressure.

I. INTRODUCTION
CADEMIC researchers and device companies are now
actively developing compact, low-cost technologies for
convenient and effective health screening, monitoring, and personalized healthcare [1]–[3]. A recognized goal is to produce
devices and the associated processing, transmission, and data
analysis tools capable of being integrated into the normal daily
lives of millions of citizens across the world. Such technologies are being developed to allow for the early detection and
therapeutic monitoring of infections, inflammatory and malignant diseases, and cardiovascular, neurological, and metabolic
disorders. Specific developments include point-of-care blood
analyzers [4], point-of-care testing of physiological variables
using a smartphone [1], [2], body area sensor networks [5], and
nonintrusive physiological monitoring instruments [6], [7]. In
all cases the roles of information technologies are critical.
Of relevance to this major medical and societal problem
are the continued advances in the monitoring and diagnostic
technologies that allow physiological measurements in ambulatory subjects and during normal daily life [1], [8]–[11].
These advances could be used to develop health screening instrumentation. It is, therefore, pertinent and timely to consider
how such measurement technologies may be further developed
and applied to achieve convenient screening for personalized
healthcare.
We have previously described the design of a compact and
convenient instrument, which accurately (compared to the conventinal method) and precisely (reproducibly) measures certain
cardiovascular indices with established methods [12]. Briefly,
measurements are taken from a single finger, using photoplethysmography for the detection of peripheral pulse volume
signals. The instrument then calculates: 1) systolic, mean, and
diastolic blood pressure (SBP, MBP, and DBP, respectively) using the volume-oscillometric method [13]–[15]; 2) pulse pressure (PP), which is a strong predictor of increased large artery
stiffness and high cardiovascular risk [16]; 3) heart rate (HR);

A

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YAMAKOSHI et al.: POTENTIAL FOR HEALTH SCREENING USING LONG-TERM CARDIOVASCULAR PARAMETERS MEASURED

29

Fig. 1. Outline of (a) prototype system and (b) schematic block diagram of the measuring unit. BP = blood pressure, HR = heart rate, lnNPV = ln normalized
pulse volume, FEI = finger-artery elasticity index, PPG = photo-plethysmogram, PGd c = direct-current component of PPG, PGa c = alternating-current component
of PPG, P c = cuff pressure, LED = light emitting diode, and PD = photo diode.

4) normalized pulse volume (NPV), which reflects α-adrenalinmediated sympathetic control of the finger arteriolar vessels
[17], [18]; and 5) the finger-artery elasticity index (FEI) derived
from a simple descriptive model of the exponential pressurevolume function for the finger vascular bed [17], [19], modified
by the volume elastic modulus [20].
These cardiovascular indices are simultaneously obtained using the present instrument and, whilst each is of interest and
significant in itself, the adoption of a comprehensive method
for handling the combined datasets is necessary if they are to
be of practical use. For example, the detection of measurements
falling outside of their normal range, followed by a sequence
of appropriate actions should be achieved automatically by efficient processing, transmission, and storage technologies. The
development of such systems to achieve a screening function
that might lead in the long term to improvements in healthrelated disorders is a significant aim of our on-going studies.
Meanwhile, the screening method for heart diseases and sleep
apnea syndrome using a single physiological index, e.g., blood
pressure or heart rate variability, has been reported [21]–[23].
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no published
studies concerning a comprehensive method for handling combined multiple physiological variables, and such studies are desirable to screen for some specific health conditions, including
cardiovascular abnormalities, at an early stage through general
daily healthcare. Therefore, we describe here an early pilot assessment of a simplified method for discriminating between regular and irregular daily activities in healthy young male volunteers, performed over 10-day periods, first during normal daily
living and second with the imposition of a 30-h period of sleep
deprivation as a physiological challenge intended to create some
cardiovascular effects. Discriminant analysis is then used to

determine whether the method could distinguish between normal and abnormal health conditions.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. System Description
Fig. 1 shows an outline of the prototype system for the
measurement of BP, PP, HR, NPV, and FEI, part of which
was reported in a preliminary publication in Japanese [12].
Briefly, the developed system comprises two main units [see
Fig. 1(a)]: 1) a control unit (laptop computer, vostro1200; Dell
Inc.; Kawasaki; Japan); 2) a measuring unit [268 W × 78H1
(37 H2 ) × 184D mm] comprising a finger cuff with a cylindrical
jig (ϕ35 × 54 H mm), a near-infrared light emitting diode (LED:
SMC810; peak emission wavelength 810 nm; Epitex Inc.; Kyoto; Japan) as a light source and a photo diode (PD: BPW34FAS;
OSRAM GmbH; Munich; Germany) as a detector, an air pump,
a pressure sensor, and associated components. In the measuring unit, the LED is driven in a pulsatile mode at a frequency of
300 Hz [see circuit block diagram, Fig 1(b)]. The signal from the
photodiode detector is first amplified by a preamplifier and then
conditioned to subtract ambient light. The resulting signal constitutes the photo-plethysmogram (PPG), comprising of a directcurrent (dc) component (PGdc ), and an alternating-current (ac)
component (PGac ), the latter representing the pulsatile arterial
blood volume, or pulse. The dc and ac components of the PPG
are further amplified. The ac amplifier has a bandpass frequency
characteristic of 1–20 Hz (−3 dB). The analogue signals PGdc
and PGac together with a signal representing the cuff pressure
Pc are sampled at a frequency of 100 Hz with a resolution
of 12 bits and sent to the digital data then sent to the control
unit via a USB2.0 connection. The signals are subsequently

30

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 2. Typical recordings of applied cuff pressure (P c ), photoplethysmographic pulsation signal (PGa c & PGd c ), and calculated beat-by-beat
lnNPV. SBP = systolic blood pressure, MBP = mean blood pressure, PP =
pulse pressure, HR = heart rate, lnNPV = ln normalized pulse volume, FEI =
finger-artery elasticity index, MAP = point of maximum amplitude, and SEP =
systolic end point.

displayed in real-time and calculations based on the principles
of each measurement are carried out using LabVIEW2009 software (National Instruments Japan Corp., Tokyo, Japan).
The measurement process, which is started with a serial command from the control unit, has two phases, as shown in Fig. 2.
First, Pc is maintained at 30 mm·Hg for 10 s to measure the NPV
and HR (see Step 1 in Fig. 2); second, whilst applying a gradual
change (5 mm·Hg/s) in counter-pressure, the BP, PP, and FEI are
measured by application of the volume-oscillometric procedure
(see Step 2 in Fig. 2).
B. Measurement Principle
Normalized pulse volume (NPV), shown to be a valid index
of α-adrenalin-mediated sympathetic activity [18], [24], was
calculated on a beat-by-beat basis by dividing the PGac by PGdc
on the condition that the counter-pressure is constant [17], [18],
[24], giving the following equation:
NPV = PGac /PGdc .

(1)

In this study, after applying a logarithmic transformation to
standardize the distribution, lnNPV was averaged over 10 s.
Heart rate (HR) was derived from the peak-to-peak intervals

of the PGac signal for the same duration as for the NPV measurement. This NPV value obtained with the current instrument
constitutes reference data in itself, because we applied the established methods in our present instrument.
Systolic and mean blood pressure (SBP and MBP, respectively) were measured from the right index finger artery using the volume-oscillometric method [13]–[15]. The volumeoscillometric method is based on the nonlinear nature of the
pressure-volume characteristics in the artery. When applying a
gradual change in counter-pressure externally to the anatomical
segment, characteristic changes in the amplitude of arterial volume pulsations produced by the pulse pressure are observed due
to the arterial tube law [14], [15]. The determination of SBP and
MBP by this method is given as the Pc values corresponding
to the systolic end point and the point of maximum amplitude
of volume pulsation, respectively (see Fig. 2). Diastolic blood
pressure (DBP) cannot be obtained by this method, but it can
be calculated from the SBP and MBP determined above along
with the volume determinant factor measured from the volume
pulsation waveform [25]. Pulse pressure (PP) is calculated by
subtracting DBP from SBP. This finger volume-oscillometric
method has previously been clinically validated against direct
and conventional upper arm-cuff methods using normotensive
and hypertensive subjects [26], [27]. In addition, we have already compared BP values obtained with the present instrument
to those obtained with the conventional upper arm-cuff method
in a previous report (in Japanese) [12]. According to these results, the fixed bias and precision of SBP, MBP, and DBP derived
from the Bland-Altman plots of data from the developed system and the upper arm-cuff method averaged, with a mean ±
standard deviation (data n = 625), −5.4 ± 7.0 mm·Hg, −2.5 ±
9.0 mm·Hg and −1.1 ± 9.7 mm·Hg, respectively. These results
clearly indicate that BP in the finger artery could be measured
with acceptable accuracy using the present instrument.
Finger-artery elasticity index (FEI), shown to be a valid index
of finger vascular elasticity [17], [19], and measured by the
volume-oscillometric procedure mentioned earlier, was defined
as the absolute value of the slope that follows the curvilinearity
in the pressure-volume function of the finger artery, and can be
calculated from the linear relationship of the log-transformed
compliance index (CI: = NPV/PP) to the transmural pressure
(Ptr : = MBP−Pc ), giving the following equation:
FEI = d(ln CI)/dPtr .

(2)

This FEI value obtained with the current instrument constitutes reference data in itself, because we applied the established
methods in our present instrument.
C. Experimental Method
1) Participants: Ten healthy young male participants, with
a mean ± standard deviation age, height, weight, and body mass
index of 21.8 ± 0.8 years, 169.9 ± 4.0 cm, 59.0 ± 6.5 kg, and
20.4 ± 1.6, respectively, and no known cardiovascular disorders
participated in the preliminary study. All subjects agreed to take
part in the study voluntarily and signed an informed consent
statement. The study was approved by the ethics commission

YAMAKOSHI et al.: POTENTIAL FOR HEALTH SCREENING USING LONG-TERM CARDIOVASCULAR PARAMETERS MEASURED

of the Faculty of Medicine of Kanazawa University, and was
performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down
in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments.
2) Apparatus: The experiment was conducted in a quiet experimental room at a temperature of approximately 25 ◦ C, which
was constructed at Kanazawa University. A desk and a comfortable chair for participants to sit on were made available in this
room. The prototype was placed on the right side of the participant and kept at heart level.
3) Experimental Design: The study had an ABA (A: regular activity, B: irregular activity) design. The participants
were asked to maintain their regular daily routines and sleeping/waking hours from at least 2 days before commencement
of the experiment, and continuing for the 10-day experimental
(ABA) period, which included a 3-day rest period immediately
after the B-period to avoid the possibility of influencing the
following A-period.
A-period: The participants were requested to sit down on
the seat. One-shot measurements (maximum 1-min) were made
after a 3-min rest period and were repeated throughout the morning, afternoon, and early-evening during the experimental period (3 times/day) for every participant, and were always made
a significant time before main meals. B-period: The participants
were asked to undergo a 30-hr period of total sleep deprivation,
from day 3 through day 4, as a physiological challenge. The reason for applying this sleep deprivation challenge was to create
physiological responses and it was anticipated that the cardiovascular variables simultaneously obtained from the present instrument would reflect such responses. During, and only during,
this awakening B-period, using a prepared timetable referred to
as Vaara’s method [28], the measurement was iteratively carried
out every 3 h from day 3 at 10:00 to day 4 at 16:00. In addition,
the participants completed a questionnaire for the subjective
rating of fatigue and sleepiness using a visual analogue scale
(VAS; [29]) for every measurement.
4) Data Reduction and Analyses: To evaluate whether or
not our system has the potential to screen for adverse effects on
health, a linear discriminant analysis using the cardiovascular
indices was conducted. We used MBP as a representative BP
value in this analysis. We classified the collected data as after
sleep deprivation and baseline; we defined sleep deprivation
as the data gathered on day 4 at 07:00 (20 hr), 10:00 (24 hr),
13:00 (27 hr), and 16:00 (30 hr). Baseline is the rest of the
data except for the balance of data during the 30-hr of total
sleep deprivation. In addition, a linear discriminant analysis was
conducted for total data. To exclude individual differences in the
absolute value, the delta change (Δ) in reactivity was calculated
by subtracting averaged baseline values at 10:00 from each
value. The analysis was carried out using IBM SPSS Statistics
21 for Windows (IBM Inc., Tokyo, Japan).
III. RESULTS
Fig. 3(a) is a typical example of a 10-day trend chart from
one subject, showing SBP, MBP, DBP, PP, HR, lnNPV, and FEI
together with VAS data for fatigue and sleepiness, and the selfreported sleep time. Fig. 3(b) shows an expanded time-scale

31

during the sleep deprivation period. The prototype instrument
allowed the periodic collection of physiological data without any
failed measurements. It can be seen that the variables changed
depending on the physical status as judged by the VAS. In
particular, it was clearly demonstrated that the BP, HR, and
lnNPV values varied during the period of 30-hr sleep deprivation
as compared with the values during the rest period.
We classified the dataset into baseline and sleep deprivation
groups [see the top of Fig. 3(a)]. Table I shows the summary of
the linear discriminant analysis for all subjects combined. The
classification function and its results are shown in the left and
right parts, respectively. Based on the p-values, the effective indices for discrimination were found to be HR (F1,254 = 55.48,
p < 0.01), lnNPV (F1,254 = 18.32, p < 0.01) and FEI (F1,254 =
7.73, p < 0.01). The %-correct classifications of baseline (i.e.,
specificity) and sleep deprivation (i.e., sensitivity) were 78.2%
and 77.5%, respectively, and the %-correct predictions of baseline (i.e., negative predictive value) and sleep deprivation (i.e.,
positive predictive value) were 95.0% and 39.2%, respectively.
IV. DISCUSSION
A simplified method ultimately intended for health screening,
based on the noninvasive simultaneous measurement of SBP,
MBP, DBP, PP, HR, NPV, and FEI using a finger cuff, was found
to perform reliably in preliminary tests with ten healthy young
male volunteers over 10 days of normal day-to-day living. The
method was found to be able to discriminate between the normal
status and an abnormal condition created by a 30-hr period of
total sleep deprivation.
It has been reported that 30-hr sleep deprivation changes
adjustments in the autonomic regulation of the heart, i.e., it
decreases heart rate [30], [31]. Taking the effective indices obtained here into consideration, our findings are consistent with
these reports. A decrease in lnNPV, representing peripheral
vasoconstriction, could imply compensatory behavior to regulate BP in response to a drop in HR. Such physiological reactions are plausible. Thus, the percentages of correctly classified
samples (baseline: 78.2%, sleep deprivation: 77.5%) might be
considered to be highly satisfactory.
The cardiovascular variables we used in the analysis were
MBP, PP, HR, lnNPV, and FEI, which were the key variables obtained from this prototype instrument. It has been reported that
the FEI reflects structural (not functional) changes in the finger
artery [17], [19], and the PP is also known to change with age
following the progressive stiffening of larger arteries [16]. For
these reasons, FEI and PP are generally recognized as long-term
cardiovascular risk factors. Concerning FEI, our present results
show that this index was effective for discriminating between
normal and the imposed acute sleep deprivation condition, as
shown in Table I. This is, in fact, inconsistent with the previous
findings mentioned above. Although a definite reason for this is
not yet clear, one possibility could be considered. According to
Tanaka et al.’s measurement procedure [19], FEI is calculated
from the average value of eight or nine measurements. Therefore, the one-shot measurement applied in the present prototype
might be inadequate to evaluate the long-term elasticity of small

32

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 3. Typical recordings of systolic, mean, and diastolic blood pressure (SBP, MBP, and DBP), pulse pressure (PP), heart rate (HR), log-transformed normalized
pulse volume (lnNPV), and finger-artery elasticity index (FEI) measured by the prototype system. (a) Visual analogue scale (VAS) of fatigue and sleepiness, and
self-reported sleep time during day-to-day living. (b) Recordings of an expanded time-scale during sleep deprivation.

arteries. However, if we use day-to-day values in an appropriate
database, we could estimate the long-term finger artery stiffness by calculating the moving-average of these accumulated
data. As for the PP measurements in our present results, these
were found to be ineffective indices for discriminating between
the normal and the sleep deprivation conditions. Although this
result was to be expected in this study, it is probably more appropriate to process the data in the same way as for FEI. In any
case, it seems reasonable to speculate that our system, by using
the measured FEI and PP individually, might be able to screen
for the development of cardiovascular diseases if data collected
over the medium to long term are used for the discriminant analysis; this needs to be validated adequately by recruiting patients
with cardiovascular diseases in a future study.
In contrast, abnormalities of health occurring in the shortterm, e.g., events of acute stress, will particularly be predicted

by the BP, HR, and/or lnNPV indices, as demonstrated here in
the sleep deprivation example. Naturally, the indices that act as
effective predictors of abnormality will be different for different health conditions, e.g., physical and/or mental exhaustion,
degradation of general health with aging, or a cardiac disease.
It is likely that there will also be differences in the most effective predictor among individuals for any given health condition.
Methodological development to achieve the most appropriate
discriminant function for each condition and the associated information and communication technology to create a complete
health screening system is therefore required. To achieve this,
further investigations will be needed in larger age and gender
groups of subjects with a variety of health conditions under reallife situations to develop and test the system for health screening.
Further physiological variables could be added in our system, and we are investigating blood constituent measurements,

YAMAKOSHI et al.: POTENTIAL FOR HEALTH SCREENING USING LONG-TERM CARDIOVASCULAR PARAMETERS MEASURED

33

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF LINEAR DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS IN ALL SUBJECTS

e.g., the levels of blood glucose, albumin, cholesterol, and alcohol, using multiple wavelength photo-plethysmography to assist with general daily healthcare. This study is still in its infancy [32]–[35], but future progress is expected, and these are
targets to be integrated eventually into our system. In connection
with this, blood alcohol measurement using the optical principle is interesting and significant. Our method is intended to
be a simpler technique that could lead to the development of
instrumentation for use by motor vehicle drivers in order to reduce health and alcohol related motor vehicle accidents as novel
vehicle safety locks.
This was an early pilot trial and there were therefore several
possible limitations. First, only ten healthy young men participated in the study. Studies with larger groups, with a wider
age range, including both male and female subjects and patients (e.g., with cardiovascular disease), need to be carried out.
Second, in this first pilot study we used the sleep deprivation
challenge to simulate an abnormal health condition in the laboratory environment and it will now be necessary to examine a
variety of common health conditions under real-life constraints
in order to test the suitability of this method for health screening more comprehensively. Finally, we only used discrete-time
measurements of cardiac phenomena for acute stress in this
preliminary study. Monthly or yearly long-term monitoring, if
possible by applying chronic stress, in healthy participants or
outpatients with cardiovascular diseases should be conducted in
a future study. In this manner, many technical, theoretical and
experimental challenges still need to be overcome in order to
improve the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular diseases
that may be caused by the events of chronic and acute stress.
The preliminary trial of our simplified method with a prototype
instrument in healthy young adults could open up new possibilities for the design of convenient systems for cardiovascular
health screening.

V. CONCLUSION
A simplified method for health screening based on noninvasive cardiovascular measurements from just one finger using the
volume-oscillometric technique and its preliminary assessment
are described. Assessment of the method for screening regular
and irregular daily activities using the cardiovascular parameters was conducted for ten healthy volunteers during 10 days of
day-to-day living. The method was able to discriminate between
the normal status and an abnormal condition created by a 30-hr
period of total sleep deprivation as a physiological challenge.
This ability of the method to discriminate between regular and
sleep-deprived activities demonstrates its potential for healthcare screening during day-to-day living. Further investigations
using larger age and gender groups of subjects including patients with cardiovascular diseases under real-life situations are
required.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to give their sincere thanks to
Mr. H. Konishi, Kanazawa University, for his assistance with
the experiment.

REFERENCES
[1] K. Matsumura and T. Yamakoshi, “iPhysioMeter: A new approach for
measuring heart rate and normalized pulse volume using only a smartphone,” Behavior Res. Methods, Feb. 2013. DOI: 10.3758/s13428-0120312-z.
[2] Y. G. Lee, W. S. Jeong, and G. Yoon, “Smartphone-based mobile health
monitoring,” Telemedicine J. e-Health, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 585–590, Oct.
2012.
[3] P. Klasnja and W. Pratt, “Healthcare in the pocket: mapping the space of
mobile-phone health interventions,” J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 184–198, Feb. 2012.

34

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[4] F. Olasagasti and J. C. Ruiz de Gordoa, “Miniaturized technology for protein and nucleic acid point-of-care testing,” Translational Res., vol. 160,
no. 5, pp. 332–345, Nov. 2012.
[5] S. Ullah, H. Higgins, B. Braem, B. Latre, C. Blondia, I. Moerman,
S. Saleem, Z. Rahman, and K. S. Kwak, “A comprehensive survey of
wireless body area networks: On PHY, MAC, and network layers solutions,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1065–1094, Jun. 2012.
[6] K. Motoi, M. Ogawa, T. Yamakoshi, and K. Yamakoshi, “Fusion physiological sensing system for healthcare,” Technological Advancements in
Biomedicine for Healthcare Applications, J. Wu, Ed., Pennsylvania, USA:
IGI Global, 2012, pp. 298–313.
[7] K. Yamakoshi, “Current status of noninvasive bioinstrumentation for
healthcare,” Sensors Mater., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–20, Jan. 2011.
[8] M. Z. Poh, D. J. McDuff, and R. W. Picard, “Advancements in noncontact, multiparameter physiological measurements using a webcam,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 7–11, Jan. 2011.
[9] S. Altunkan, K. Oztas, and B. Seref, “Arterial stiffness index as a screening
test for cardiovascular risk: A comparative study between coronary artery
calcification determined by electron beam tomography and arterial stiffness index determined by a VitalVision device in asymptomatic subjects,”
Eur. J. Internal Med., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 580–584, Dec. 2005.
[10] M. Y. Cortez-Cooper, J. A. Supak, and H. Tanaka, “A new device for
automatic measurements of arterial stiffness and ankle-brachial index,”
Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 91, no. 12, pp. 1519–1522, A9, Jun. 2003.
[11] K. Yamakoshi and A. Kamiya, “Noninvasive measurement of arterial
blood pressure and elastic properties using photoelectric plethysmography
technique,” Med. Progress Through Technol., vol. 12, no. 1–2, pp. 123–
143, Jan. 1987.
[12] T. Yamakoshi, K. Matsumura, S. Hanaki, A. Ikarashi, P. Rolfe, J. H. Lee,
Y. Yamakoshi, H. Hirose, and K. Yamakoshi, “[Development of a novel
system based on the simultaneous measurement of physiological variables
for safer driving and general daily healthcare],” Trans. Japanese Soc. Med.
Biological Eng., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 227–236, May 2012. (in Japanese).
[13] K. Yamakoshi, “Non-invasive cardiovascular haemodynamic measurements,” Sensors in Medicine and Health Care (Sensors Applications,
Volume 3), P. A. Oberg, T. Togawa, and F. Spelman, Eds. Weinheim:
Wiley-VCH Verlag, 2004, pp. 107–160.
[14] K. Yamakoshi, H. Shimazu, M. Shibata, and A. Kamiya, “New oscillometric method for indirect measurement of systolic and mean arterial
pressure in the human finger. Part 1: Model experiment,” Med. Biological
Eng. Comput., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 307–313, May 1982.
[15] K. Yamakoshi, H. Shimazu, M. Shibata, and A. Kamiya, “New oscillometric method for indirect measurement of systolic and mean arterial
pressure in the human finger. Part 2: Correlation study,” Med. Biological
Eng. Comput., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 314–318, May 1982.
[16] P. Verdecchia, G. Schillaci, C. Borgioni, A. Ciucci, S. Pede, and
C. Porcellati, “Ambulatory pulse pressure: A potent predictor of total
cardiovascular risk in hypertension,” Hypertension, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 983–
988, Dec. 1998.
[17] G. Tanaka, Y. Sawada, K. Matsumura, K. Yamakoshi, and T. Okayasu,
“Exponential model of pressure-volume relationship in the finger artery:
Theoretical and experimental evaluation of vascular tone under mental
stress and reactive hypermia,” Advances in Psychology, S. Shohov, ed.
New York, USA: Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 2005, pp. 89–109.
[18] Y. Sawada, G. Tanaka, and K. Yamakoshi, “Normalized pulse volume
(NPV) derived photo-plethysmographically as a more valid measure of
the finger vascular tone,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 1–10,
May 2001.
[19] G. Tanaka, K. Yamakoshi, Y. Sawada, K. Matsumura, K. Maeda, Y. Kato,
M. Horiguchi, and H. Ohguro, “A novel photoplethysmography technique
to derive normalized arterial stiffness as a blood pressure independent
measure in the finger vascular bed,” Physiological Meas., vol. 32, no. 11,
pp. 1869–1883, Nov. 2011.
[20] H. Shimazu, K. Yamakoshi, and A. Kamiya, “Noninvasive measurement of
the volume elastic modulus in finger arteries using photoelectric plethysmography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 795–798, Aug.
1986.
[21] A. Heitmann, T. Huebner, R. Schroeder, S. Perz, and A. Voss, “Multivariate short-term heart rate variability: a pre-diagnostic tool for screening
heart disease,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 41–50,
Jan. 2011.
[22] M. R. Law, N. J. Wald, and J. K. Morris, “The performance of blood pressure and other cardiovascular risk factors as screening tests for ischaemic
heart disease and stroke,” J. Med. Screening, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 3–7, 2004.

[23] F. Roche, J. M. Gaspoz, I. Court-Fortune, P. Minini, V. Pichot,
D. Duverney, F. Costes, J. R. Lacour, and J. C. Barthelemy, “Screening
of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome by heart rate variability analysis,”
Circulation, vol. 100, no. 13, pp. 1411–1415, Sep. 1999.
[24] J. H. Lee, K. Matsumura, T. Yamakoshi, P. Rolfe, N. Tanaka, K. H. Kim,
and K. Yamakoshi, “Validation of normalized pulse volume in the outer
ear as a simple measure of sympathetic activity using warm and cold pressor tests: towards applications in ambulatory monitoring,” Physiological
Meas., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 359–375, Mar. 2013.
[25] H. Shimazu, H. Ito, H. Kobayashi, and K. Yamakoshi, “Idea to measure
diastolic arterial pressure by volume oscillometric method in human fingers,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 549–554, Sep.
1986.
[26] Y. Imai, M. Nihei, K. Abe, S. Sasaki, N. Minami, M. Munakata, S. Yumita,
Y. Onoda, H. Sekino, K. Yamakosh, and K. Yoshinaga, “A finger volumeoscillometric device for monitoring ambulatory blood pressure: laboratory
and clinical evaluations,” Clinical Exp. Hypertension. Part A, Theory
Practice, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 2001–2025, 1987.
[27] Y. Imai, K. Abe, S. Sasaki, H. Sekino, K. Yamakoshi, and K. Yoshinaga, “A
new automated volume-oscillometric device for monitoring ambulatory
blood pressure in the human finger in man,” J. Hypertension, vol. 4,
pp. S662–S664, 1986.
[28] J. Vaara, H. Kyrolainen, M. Koivu, M. Tulppo, and T. Finni, “The effect
of 60-h sleep deprivation on cardiovascular regulation and body temperature,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 105, no. 3, pp. 439–444, Feb. 2009.
[29] R. C. Wilson and P. W. Jones, “A comparison of the visual analogue
scale and modified Borg scale for the measurement of dyspnoea during
exercise,” Clinical Sci., vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 277–282, Mar. 1989.
[30] A. L. Holmes, H. J. Burgess, and D. Dawson, “Effects of sleep pressure on
endogenous cardiac autonomic activity and body temperature,” J. Appl.
Physiology, vol. 92, no. 6, pp. 2578–2584, Jun. 2002.
[31] H. I. Chen, “Effects of 30-h sleep loss on cardiorespiratory functions at
rest and in exercise,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 193–198,
Feb. 1991.
[32] T. Yamakoshi, M. Ogawa, K. Matsumura, S. Miyazaki, Y. Itasaka, T. Ida,
Y. Yamakoshi, H. Hirose, and K. Yamakoshi, “[Towards non-invasive
optical blood alcohol measurement: Multi-variate analysis of in vitro NIR
spectra],” IEEJ Trans. Electron., Inf. Syst., vol. 132, no. 12, pp. 2059–
2064, Dec. 2012. (in Japanese).
[33] T. Yamakoshi, M. Ogawa, K. Matsumura, Y. Itasaka, S. Miyazaki,
Y. Yamakoshi, P. Rolfe, H. Hirose, and K. Yamakoshi, “[A preliminary
study on development of a novel optical instrument for non-invasive blood
alcohol measurement: Proposal of Pulse Alcometry],” Trans. Japanese
Soc. Med. Biological Eng., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 237–247, May 2012. (in
Japanese).
[34] M. Ogawa, T. Yamakoshi, K. Motoi, K. Nishida, Y. Yamakoshi, and
K. Yamakoshi, “Determination of concentrations of glucose and human
serum albumin in mixtures in phosphate-buffered solution by near-infrared
spectroscopy,” Sensors Mater., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 323–333, Jul. 2012.
[35] K. Yamakoshi and Y. Yamakoshi, “Pulse glucometry: A new approach
for noninvasive blood glucose measurement using instantaneous differential near-infrared spectrophotometry,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 11, no. 5,
pp. 054028-1–054028-9, Sep./Oct. 2006.

Takehiro Yamakoshi (M’06) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees in engineering from the Muroran Institute of Technology, Muroran, Japan, and the Ph.D.
degree in engineering from Fukui University, Fukui,
Japan.
In 2006, he was an Associate Professor in the
Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan, where since
2012, he has been a Postdoctoral Fellow in the School
of Mechanical Engineering, College of Science and
Engineering. His current research interests include
physiological measurement, biosignal analysis, biomedical optics, health informatics, and physiological measurement for safer driving.

YAMAKOSHI et al.: POTENTIAL FOR HEALTH SCREENING USING LONG-TERM CARDIOVASCULAR PARAMETERS MEASURED

Kenta Matsumura (M’13) received the B.A. degree in social welfare from Hokusei Gakuen University, Hokkaido, Japan, and the M.A. and Ph.D.
degrees in human sciences from Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan.
He was a Research Fellow of the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science from 2006 to 2008, and was
a Research Fellow of the National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry from 2008 to 2011, and has been
a Postdoctoral Fellow in the School of Mechanical
Engineering, College of Science and Engineering,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan, since 2011. His current research interests include cardiovascular psychophysiology, cognitive neuroscience, posttraumatic stress disorder, and soft computing.

Peter Rolfe (M’88) received the Ph.D. degree in
biomedical engineering from the Postgraduate Medical School, University of London, London, U.K.
He was the Founder Director of the Biomedical Engineering Centre, Oxford, U.K., the Centre/Institute Science and Technology in Medicine,
Keele, U.K., and a WHO Collaborating Centre,
Oxford. He is the Founder and Director of Oxford
BioHorizons Ltd., U.K., and a Visiting Professor in
the Department of Automatic Measurement and Control, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.
His research interests include invasive and noninvasive physiological measurement, cell/tissue engineering, near infra-red spectroscopy and biomedical optics,
micro- and nanosensors, environmental monitoring, and appropriate technology
for perinatal care in developing countries.

Shota Hanaki received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
engineering from Kanazawa University, Kanazawa,
Japan. He was a master course student in the Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Japan.
He is an Engineer in the Textile Machinery Division, Murata Machinery Ltd., Japan. His research
interests include a study examining the physiological
effects of various stresses on drivers aiming at safer
driving.

35

Akira Ikarashi received the B.S. degree in engineering from Niigata University, Niigata, Japan, and
the M.S. degree in engineering from Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan, and the Ph.D. degree in
engineering from Kanazawa University, Kanazawa,
Japan.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Medical Engineering, Aino University,
Osaka, Japan. He research interests include physiological measurement, biosignal analysis, and medical
instrumentation.

Jihyoung Lee (S’13) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in engineering from Dankook University,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea. He is currently working toward
the Doctoral degree in the Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa University,
Kanazawa, Japan.
He is currently conducting a study examining
the healthcare instrumentation. His research interests
include physiological measurement, medical device,
and analog circuit and system.

Ken-Ichi Yamakoshi (M’02) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees in engineering from Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan, and the Ph.D. degree in medicine
and engineering from Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan, and Waseda University,
respectively.
He was a Professor in the School of Mechanical
Engineering, College of Science and Engineering,
Kanazawa University, Japan, and has been its Emeritus Professor, as well as a Professor in the School
of Medicine, Showa University, Tokyo, Japan, and in
the Faculty of Clinical Engineering, Hokkaido Institute of Technology, Sapporo,
Japan, since 2013. His research interests include physiological measurement,
non-invasive biomedical sensors and instrumentation, and welfare engineering.

