3484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Towards BirthAlert—A Clinical Device Intended
for Early Preterm Birth Detection
Mozziyar Etemadi∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Philip Chung, J. Alex Heller, Student Member, IEEE,
Jonathan A. Liu, Larry Rand, and Shuvo Roy, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Preterm birth causes 1 million infant deaths worldwide every year, making it the leading cause of infant mortality.
Existing diagnostic tests such as transvaginal ultrasound or fetal
fibronectin either cannot determine if preterm birth will occur in
the future or can only predict the occurrence once cervical shortening has begun, at which point it is too late to reverse the accelerated parturition process. Using iterative and rapid prototyping
techniques, we have developed an intravaginal proof-of-concept
device that measures both cervical bioimpedance and cervical fluorescence to characterize microstructural changes in a pregnant
woman’s cervix in hopes of detecting preterm birth before macroscopic changes manifest in the tissue. If successful, such an early
alert during this “silent phase” of the preterm birth syndrome
may open a new window of opportunity for interventions that may
reverse and avoid preterm birth altogether.
Index Terms—Bioimpedance, bluetooth, fluorescence, physiologic sensing, sensors, spectroscopy.

I. INTRODUCTION
RETERM birth contributes to 35% of the world’s 3.1 million neonatal deaths each year, making it the leading cause
of infant mortality [1]. Of the 15 million babies born preterm
each year, almost 1 million of them die as a result of their
prematurity. For infants who survive preterm birth, prospective
studies have confirmed that a substantial portion of these infants
experience long-term morbidity and lifelong disability [2]. This
condition alone costs the United States over $26.2 billion per
year [3]. The last 30 years of preterm birth research has led to
the widely accepted theory that preterm birth is a syndrome—
the end result of a multitude of pathological mechanisms that
may be unrelated in origin [4]–[6]. These pathological mechanisms accelerate the normal timing of parturition, leading to

P

Manuscript received May 7, 2013; revised May 31, 2013; accepted June 27,
2013. Date of publication July 23, 2013; date of current version November 18,
2013. This work was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,
the Vodafone Americas Foundation, and the FDA under Grant 2P50FD003793.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Etemadi is with the Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158 USA (e-mail:
Mozziyar.Etemadi@ucsf.edu).
P. Chung and S. Roy are with the Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158 USA
(e-mail: philip.chung@ucsf.edu; shuvo.roy@ucsf.edu).
J. A. Heller is with the University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158
USA, and also with the University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
(e-mail: james.heller@ucsf.edu).
J. A. Liu is with the Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA (e-mail: liuja@usc.edu).
L. Rand is with the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143 USA (e-mail:
larry.rand@ucsf.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2272601

premature cervical softening, ripening, shortening, effacement,
dilation, and finally preterm birth (see Fig. 1).
A. Current Clinical Technologies
Current diagnostic gold standards include transvaginal ultrasound and the fetal fibronectin (fFN) immunoassay, which,
respectively, use cervical length and vaginal fetal fibronectin
concentration as surrogate metrics [7].
Diagnosis with transvaginal ultrasound hinges on the knowledge that a short cervix is correlated with the occurrence
of preterm birth [8], [9]. Perhaps the greatest limitation to
transvaginal ultrasound is that it relies on the examination of
macroscopic shortening of the cervix, which generally correlates with mid- or late-stage events in the parturition process
(see Fig. 1). Other limitations include data acquisition and interpretation being highly dependent on the ultrasound machine
operator, with poor resolution of ultrasound images contributing
to the difficulty in interpretation. Furthermore, diagnostic results
are strongly dependent on patient-specific gynecologic history,
gestational age at time of measurement, and can be complicated
by normal biological variability [10].
The fetal fibronectin (fFN) immunoassay is an in vitro biochemical test that detects the presence of fetal fibronectin in
the vaginal canal. Fetal fibronectin is a protein that originates
within the uterus and serves to bind the fetal membranes to the
uterine lining. From weeks 22 to 30 of gestation, low vaginal
fFN levels indicate preterm labor will not occur in the following
7–10 days [11], [12]. While this test has a high negative predictive value (NPV = 98–99%) for predicting no labor within
7 days, it has a low positive predictive value (PPV = 14–19%)
for predicting labor within 7 days [13]. Because clinicians cannot be reasonably confident that a positive-tested patient will
give birth preterm, these patients can only be prescribed bed
rest and watched closely. As a result, the fFN test is generally used only to monitor high risk or symptomatic pregnancies
in which negative results can definitively rule out imminent
preterm birth [14].
These shortcomings have led researchers to investigate diagnostic techniques that attempt to detect earlier signs of preterm
birth, such as changes in the cervical microstructure during the
cervical softening and ripening stages (Fig. 1).
B. Collagen During Parturition
The cervix comprises of approximately 10% smooth muscle
and 90% extracellular connective tissue, of which approximately
70–80% of the connective tissue in the cervix is collagen with the
rest consisting of proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans (GAGS),

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

ETEMADI et al.: TOWARDS BIRTHALERT—A CLINICAL DEVICE INTENDED FOR EARLY PRETERM BIRTH DETECTION

3485

Fig. 1. All pregnancies must progress through the same clinical stages of parturition: cervical softening, ripening, shortening, effacement, dilation, and delivery.
The currently held belief is that in preterm cases, various pathologies trigger pathological cascades long before preterm delivery occurs. These pathological cascades
accelerate the parturition process with the ultimate outcome being premature labor and delivery. Current diagnostic techniques such as transvaginal ultrasound can
only detect macroscopic changes in the parturition process such as cervical shortening. Clinicians currently do not have tools to objectively determine if and how
quickly cervical softening and ripening are occurring. However, it is known that tissue microstructural reorganizations occur in cervical softening and ripening
stages, notably a decrease in collagen crosslink concentration and an increase in tissue hydration. The ability to detect when these early parturition processes begin
and the rate at which these processes progress may afford clinicians enough time to diagnose the underlying pathology to preterm birth, enabling new care models
for managing preterm birth. Figure based on [4], [6], [32].

Fig. 2. Pyridinoline crosslinks are responsible for organizing tropocollagen
helices into semicrystalline collagen fibrils. Each collagen fibril is then bundled
into collagen fibers with proteoglycans such as decorin regulating packing density and arrangement. The cervical ripening process reduces both pyridinoline
crosslinks and proteoglycan concentration, resulting in increased disorganization spanning two orders of structural arrangement. Figure based on [32], [60],
[65].

and other fibers, such as elastin [15]–[18]. During collagen fibril
formation, tropocollagen is stabilized into semicrystaline collagen fibrils by covalent cross-links. One type of cross-link that
is present in cervical collagen contains an aromatic pyridinoline unit. Fibrils are then bundled together into collagen fibers,
with proteoglycans such as decorin helping determine size and
packing of fibrils (see Fig. 2) [19].

Throughout a majority of pregnancy, cervical collagen remains in fibers, imparting a great deal of structural rigidity
and mechanical stiffness to the cervix. However, during cervical softening and ripening, there is a decrease in both pyridinoline cross-link concentration and proteoglycan concentration [20]–[24]. Decrease in these collagen-organizing units at
both the fiber and fibril level of collagen dramatically increases
the disorganization of collagen in the cervix [25]. At the same
time, the concentration of GAGS such as hyaluronan (HA) increases [26]–[28]. Hyaluronan binds water, increasing tissue
hydration and filling the space created by the disorganization of
extracellular matrix fibers [29]–[32]. Thus, as gestational age
increases, cervical collagen crosslink concentration decreases
while cervical tissue hydration increases. This inverse relationship of tissue matrix organization and hydration is largely responsible for transforming the cervix from a closed gate sealing
the fetus in the uterus to an open gateway during delivery.
C. Noninvasive Detection Methods for Cervical
Microstructure Change
Two methods have gained traction in research for detecting
cervical tissue microstructure changes. These are light-induced
fluorescence spectroscopy (LIF) and electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).
LIF depends largely on the autofluorescent properties of
pyridinoline collagen cross-links, which become excited by light
around 370 nm and emit light around 420 nm. Prior research in

3486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 3. Collagen gels of concentrations 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 50 mg/mL were
subjected to (a) bench top fluorescence spectroscopy, which shows the 370 nm
excitation peak and the corresponding 420-nm emission peak characteristic
of stromal collagen in the cervix. Increasing collagen concentration shows a
proportional change in fluorescence counts. The same samples were also subjected to (b) bench top impedance spectroscopy from 55 kHz to 4 MHz. Results
indicate that, for our collagen gel model, increases in collagen concentration
are correlated with a decrease in impedance magnitude and phase. Collagen
concentration-dependent differences in phase were greater at low and high frequencies. These data were used to inform in vivo circuit design parameters.

rats, guinea pigs, and humans have shown strong correlations
between cervical LIF measurements and cervical ripening, and
a preliminary human study has shown LIF can be used to predict
if a woman will deliver within 24 h [16], [33]–[36].
EIS measures change in bioelectric impedance in cervical tissue as the extracellular matrix becomes more disorganized and
hydration increases. EIS involves injecting AC signals at various frequencies into cervical tissue. Tissue possesses inherent
signal filtering properties because low-frequency signals tend
not to penetrate cellular membranes, whereas high-frequency
signals generally penetrate cellular membranes. Thus, interrogation at different frequencies result in magnitude and phase
values reflective of different components within the tissue [37].
As cervical tissue becomes more disorganized and increasingly
hydrated during the softening and ripening process, the tissue’s
electrical permittivity changes and can be observed as variations in impedance magnitude and phase [38], [39]. Human
studies with tetra-polar pencil probe EIS implementations have
found that an impedance measurement is indicative of labor
within 24 h, but not a statistically better predictor than using the
Bishop score, which is the current clinical standard for assessing
the cervix to confirm if labor [40]–[42].
D. Our Approach
We have developed a prototype medical device that acquires
both cervical LIF and EIS measurements. This device involves

a removable probe that attaches to both a cervical LIF measurement system and a cervical EIS measurement system (see
Fig. 4). To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to use both
techniques in parallel for detection of preterm birth. However,
several differences in both approach and device design mark a
departure from existing detection efforts.
Many predecessor devices have been used to predict labor or
Phase III of parturition (see Fig. 1), which occurs during the
last few hours of pregnancy. At this point in pregnancy there
is a paucity of time for clinicians to diagnose exact cause of
preterm birth, making it difficult to treat the underlying pathology; instead, the current standard of care involves administering
tocolysis to try to stall the inevitable preterm birth and steroids
to force rapid development of fetal lungs before the baby is
born. In contrast, we have designed our device specifically with
the goal of earlier detection during the cervical softening and
ripening stages, which occur during Phase I and II of parturition
(see Fig. 1). An early alert days or weeks ahead rather than hours
would provide clinicians ample time and opportunity to conduct
further diagnostic tests to pinpoint the underlying pathology and
adjust patient care plans accordingly. However, the challenge is
that these earlier parturition processes do not manifest macroscopically and are thus clinically silent.
By acquiring preliminary cervical LIF and EIS measurements, we aim to capture the temporal changes in these signals
over gestation. We hypothesize that the trending of these signals in combination with signal fusion techniques will allow for
detection earlier than using either cervical LIF or EIS alone.
II. In Vitro COLLAGEN MEASUREMENT
Collagen gels were used to model extracellular components of
cervical tissue across gestation. Lyophilized type I collagen from
bovine calfskin (C3511, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)
was dissolved in an acidified phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
solution adjusted to pH 3.5 with 10-M acetic acid prepared in
PBS. The solution was allowed to stand at room temperature for
1 day. Gelation was induced by adding 10-M NaOH (prepared in
PBS) until pH 7.4 was achieved [24], [43], [44]. Serial dilution
with 1× PBS yielded samples with concentrations ranging from
1 to 50 mg/mL. Between dilutions, samples were degassed and
homogenized with centrifuge and vortex mixer, respectively.
Samples were then degassed in a desiccator and incubated in
96-well plates at 37 ◦ C overnight.
Electrical impedance and fluorescence of our collagen gels
were characterized using a precision impedance analyzer (Agilent Technologies 4294 A, Santa Clara, CA, USA) connected to
platinum wire electrodes, and a fluorescence microplate reader
(TECAN Infinite 200 Pro, Männedorf, Switzerland). Data from
these instruments are shown in Fig. 3.
III. DEVICE DESIGN
A. Intravaginal Probe
Seen in Fig. 4(a) and (b), the intravaginal probe consists of six
titanium electrodes and one optical fiber port for impedance and
fluorescence measurement, respectively. These sensor interfaces
are embedded within implant grade medical silicone (PN40029,

ETEMADI et al.: TOWARDS BIRTHALERT—A CLINICAL DEVICE INTENDED FOR EARLY PRETERM BIRTH DETECTION

3487

Fig. 4. (a) Head-on view of intravaginal probe showing the 6 electrodes and window for the fiber optic bundle. (b) Side view of intravaginal probe. (c) Block
diagram depicting intravaginal probe, electrical impedance spectroscopy measurement subsystem, and light-induced fluorescence measurement subsystem.

Applied Silicone, Santa Paula, CA, USA), which is molded into
a cup-like shape designed to form-fit the human cervix. Bulk
silicone was shaped and cured using a technique similar to liquid
silicone injection molding. Molds for the process were designed
in SolidWorks 3-D CAD software (Dassault Systems, Waltham,
MA, USA) and 3-D printed via fused deposition modeling with
a uPrint Plus (Stratasys, Eden Prairie, MN, USA). Three probe
sizes were designed and manufactured corresponding to cup
diameters of 22, 25, and 28 mm.
A custom-designed fiber optic tube in the intravaginal probe
serves as a female receptacle for the fiber optic bundle attached to the fluorescence measurement system. A BK-7 window (Swiss Jewel, Philadelphia, PA, USA) seals the cervixfacing part of the tube. The internal tube geometry is designed
to have a spacer that ensures consistent positioning of the fiber
optic bundle when it is clamped in place with a threaded end
cap.
Each electrode is wired to a modified micro USB 3.0 cable,
which is connected to the impedance measurement system via
female USB 3.0 receptacle. Electrodes were made from grade
2 titanium and custom designed to have circular fins on the
lateral sides of the electrode to increase surface area and provide
better adhesion to the silicone bulk material. Fins were treated
with medical grade primer (PN40096, Applied Silicone, Santa
Paula, CA, USA) and sealed using implant grade RTV silicone
adhesive (PN40076, Applied Silicone, Santa Paula, CA, USA).
Details of the fabrication process are described in Chung et al.
(in review).
B. Fluorescence Measurement System
The excitation subsystem (see Fig. 4(c)) comprises of a
dual LED light source (WFC-H2–0365–0385, Mightex, On-

tario, Canada) with UV LEDs centered at 365 and 385 nm connected to a USB-controlled monochromator with 6-nm bandwidth resolution (SMDC1–03, Optometrics, Ayer, MA, USA)
via optical fiber. Light exiting the monochromator is transmitted
along the excitation fibers of the fiber optic bundle (QF600–8VIS/NIR, Ocean Optics, Dunedin, FL, USA) and through the
BK-7 window to the cervical tissue. Fluorescent light emitted
from the cervical tissue is transmitted through the BK-7 window along the emission fibers of the fiber optic bundle through
two long-wave pass filters with cut-on frequencies at 400 nm
(FSR-GG400, Newport) and 420 nm (FSR-GG420, Newport).
The resultant light signal is detected by a USB fiber optic spectrometer (USB2000, Ocean Optics). We have written custom
software that controls wavelength selection of the monochromator as well as data acquisition through the spectrometer.
C. Impedance Measurement System
The impedance measurement system (see Fig. 4(c)) utilizes a
bipolar electrode measurement design. A tunable Wien bridge
oscillator was used to generate 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 50 kHz sine
wave signals. Three off the shelf square-wave oscillator ICs
(LTC6930, Linear Technology, Milpitas, CA, USA) followed by
seventh-order passive elliptical filters (Coilcraft, Cary, IL, USA)
were used for generation of 1, 2, and 4 MHz sine wave signals.
Frequency selection was accomplished via a signal multiplexer,
which outputs the signal to an op-amp-based voltage controlled
current source (VCCS). The VCCS was designed to output a
±10 μA signal and virtual ground reference, which enter multiplexers to select electrode pairs for sampling. A modified micro
USB 3.0 cable is used to interface the impedance measurement
system and the electrodes on the intravaginal probe. Two 9-V
batteries were used to power the impedance system.

3488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 5. Graphs depict a full scan measurement of raw LIF and EIS taken at the 12’o’clock position (BK7 window ventral) during week 37 of gestation. LIF
measurements comprise of fluorescence emission spectra that result from an excitation scan from 320 to 420 nm at intervals of 10 nm. EIS measurements comprise
of uncalibrated (see Section V-E) magnitude and phase measurements across pairs of electrodes that have different spatial orientations around the cervix.

Impedance measurement was accomplished by using a gain
phase detector IC (AD8302, Analog Devices, Norwood, MA,
USA) with the difference between the voltage input and output
from the VCCS being proportional to electrical impedance magnitude and phase. Magnitude and phase measurements were then
digitized via a 24-bit ADC (LTC 2400, Linear Technology, Milpitas, CA, USA) and transmitted wirelessly via Bluetooth 2.1
(RN-42, Roving Networks, Los Gatos, CA, USA) to a computer
with custom software for data acquisition. The same software
also controls frequency selection and electrode selection as well
as data acquisition through the fluorescence measurement system.
IV. CLINICAL PROOF OF CONCEPT
Under an IRB approved study at the University of California, San Francisco Medical Center, we have collected early
cervical EIS and LIF data from a high-risk pregnant woman using our prototype. During clinical examination, the subject was
placed in the dorsal lithotomy position. The intravaginal probe
was connected to both fluorescence measurement system and
impedance measurement systems via the fiber optic port and
USB connector, respectively. A Graves speculum was inserted
into the vagina and the cervix was visualized. Excess cervical
mucus was cleaned with a cotton-tipped swab and dH2 O. Then,
a sterilized intravaginal probe was inserted with firm force applied to ensure the silicone cup wrapped around the cervix. Test
measurements were taken via electrode pairs to ensure electrode
contact is achieved. Then, full EIS and LIF scans were taken.
Full scans were taken at two positions—“12-o-clock” and “6-oclock”. The former position indicates the BK-7 window oriented
ventrally or toward the patient’s navel, and the latter position
indicates the BK-7 window oriented dorsally. The first time a

subject was measured, the subject’s cervix is fitted to one of
the device sizes based on visual confirmation and test measurements. The best-fit device was then assigned to that subject
for future measurements. Preliminary results from a 12-o-clock
measurement from our first patient are shown in Fig. 5.
V. DISCUSSION
A. In Vitro Experiments
In vitro acellular collagen gels were designed to mimic the
dynamic range of the extracellular environment of cervical tissue across gestation with respect to its electrical and fluorescence properties. Gels were made chiefly to inform the overall design of our in vivo circuit (i.e., dynamic range), and not
necessarily reproduce all aspects of cervical biology. Typically,
pregnant women exhibit cervical collagen concentrations within
the range of 10–20 mg/mL of collagen depending on the extent of the cervical ripening process [23], [45]–[48]. The decrease in collagen concentration coincides with the decrease
in pyridinoline crosslink concentration. As collagen concentration decreases, proteoglycan and GAG concentration have been
shown to increase [23], [27]–[29], [48], [49]. Since GAGs such
as hyaluronic acid bind water, increases in proteoglycans and
GAGs result in increased tissue hydration. Our model approximates this effect with a lower collagen-to-PBS ratio in lower
density collagen gels. The results shown in Fig. 3 show the
fluorescent excitation/emission peaks for collagen lie around
370 nm/420 nm. Changes in fluorescence counts, impedance
magnitude, and impedance phase are a function of collagen
concentration, and the range of values is in concordance with
the literature [15], [24], [33]–[35], [39], [41]–[43], [50]–[52].
A clear limitation of our model is the lack of cervical
cells as well as other extracellular matrix components, such

ETEMADI et al.: TOWARDS BIRTHALERT—A CLINICAL DEVICE INTENDED FOR EARLY PRETERM BIRTH DETECTION

TABLE I
APPROXIMATE COST OF DEVICE ASSEMBLY FOR 30 SUBJECTS

as hyaluronic acid. In cervical tissue, epithelial and stromal
cells will contribute additional resistive and capacitive effects to
electrical impedance measurements, but the effect of collagen
concentration and tissue hydration on impedance measurements
is reasonably approximated with our model. With respect to fluorescence, the lack of cells means that all fluorescence can be
attributed solely to collagen.
B. Iterative Design Methodology
We have been successful in leveraging a combination of rapid
prototyping tools and bioengineering techniques to dramatically
lower both cost and time necessary for the development and
manufacturing of complex medical devices targeted for clinical
studies. By using physiologically relevant collagen gels to approximate cervical tissue progression throughout gestation, we
were able to create a bench-top model of the cervix that aided
iterative development of both electrical and optical design. Use
of a controlled model mimicking human-specific parameters allowed the development of a device specifically for clinical studies without requiring validation on tissue biopsies. We avoided
using an animal model because anatomical differences in cervical morphology would preclude useful feedback during the iterative design process given the pressure- and position-dependent
nature of electrical impedance measurements.
Having tuned a majority of design parameters in the electrical
and optical subsystems, we then proceeded to validate our design in nonpregnant human subjects. At the same time, human
testing allowed us to iteratively develop a mechanical design for
the intravaginal probe specific to human cervices. This approach
to medical device development enabled us to begin human testing just after 4 months. Notably, all test subjects claimed little
to no sensation of the device at all during placement and use,
with the exception of the speculum. Iterative refinement of the
intravaginal probe, electrical impedance, and fluorescence subsystems ensued for another year before we opened our clinical
study to high-risk pregnant women.
Our ability to achieve short design cycles of a few months was
due in part to the rapidly falling cost of electronics and growing
popularity of tools such as low-cost 3-D printing. These technologies enabled us to keep a majority of the development and
all of the testing in-house. Furthermore, despite low production
volumes, we were able to produce these devices at a relatively
low cost (see Table I).
C. Intravaginal Probe
By using an in-house 3-D printer to create molds for the
intravaginal probe and using a custom injection system similar to

3489

liquid silicone injection molding, we were able to inexpensively
iterate and hone in on a suitable design for the intravaginal
probe. Further details regarding this process, can be found in
Chung et al. (in review).
Molds were designed to enable precise alignment of electrodes as well as the fiber optic tube. Electrodes were positioned
to target stromal tissue, which is the site of extracellular matrix
changes during cervical softening and ripening. The cup-like
design for the tip of the intravaginal probe was a consequence
of arranging electrodes on both the bottom and sides of the
cup to generate spatial diversity in impedance measurements.
Furthermore, whereas other researchers have used loaded-spring
mechanisms in pencil-probe designs to saturate force-dependent
variability in impedance measurements, we exploited the elasticity of the bulk silicone material itself via the form-fitting
cup-like design to accomplish the same goal [52].
The intravaginal probe was designed with a fiber optic tube to
receive a fiber optic bundle to enable reuse of the same fiber optic bundle in multiple probes that are each individually assigned
to a study subject. BK-7 glass was chosen for the window because of its excellent transmission in both visible and ultraviolet
wavelengths.
Because metal and silicone do not easily bond to one another,
all metal components in the intravaginal probe were designed
with circular fins that allow liquid silicone to seep in between
the fins during the injection and curing process to better adhere
metal and silicone. Posttreatment with silicone primer and RTV
silicone adhesive enhanced the strength of this junction while
ensuring water tightness.
The difference in sizing for the intravaginal probe tip is to
account for the biological variability of human cervices. Cup
diameters of 22, 25, and 28 mm on the intravaginal probe were
chosen based on trial and error from our iterative development
process as well as existing data for cervical cap fitting [53]–[55].
D. Fluorescence Measuring System
We designed our cervical LIF measurement system based on
existing devices such as the SureTOUCH Collascope (Reproductive Research Technologies, Houston, TX, USA) as well
as excitation and emission data from our collagen gels (see
Fig 3) [15], [33]–[35], [50], [51], [56]–[59]. The Collascope
uses an excitation wavelength centered at 339 nm and segments
emitted wavelengths with a monochromator before detecting
with a CCD spectrometer. Our device differs in that it uses a
monochromator to select excitation wavelengths between 355
and 405 nm. Long-wave pass filters at 395 nm prior to the CCD
spectrometer attenuates reflected excitation light from our measurement and ensures only emitted light is detected (see Fig. 4).
A limitation to the current setup is the large physical size of the
optical setup as well as the need for many components, although
once excitation/emission peaks of interest have been selected,
the optical setup can be simplified to using only LEDs and photodetectors with filter coatings built into each photodetector.
Another limitation is that our range of excitation wavelengths
is dictated by the narrow wavelength spread of our LED light
sources. Furthermore, use of the long-wave pass filters result in
ignoring emission wavelengths below 395 nm.

3490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

We believe the limitations in wavelengths are acceptable because the main collagen peak can still be captured in the 400–
450 nm range. Interpreting fluorescence of in vivo collagen
around 420 nm is challenging due to the effects of hemoglobin
absorption around this wavelength, which makes collagen appear to have two overlapping peaks centered at approximately
excitation/emission 320 nm/400 nm and 370/450 nm [24]. This
effect is notably absent in our collagen gel models, which exhibits emission maxima at 420 nm. Another complication in
data interpretation arises from the fact that NADH from cervical cells also fluoresces at 450 nm when excited between 320
and 390 nm. Fortunately, collagen contributes approximately
70–80% to cervical tissue fluorescence, making it likely that we
can capture changes in the aggregate collagen-NADH peak [24],
[43], [60].
The benefits of using LED light sources include dramatic
reductions in size, cost, and power consumption when compared
to using other UV-generating light sources, such as xenon arc
lamps. We have explored other off-the-shelf UV-light sources,
including lower wavelength LEDs centered around 330–340 nm,
and have found that most are not bright enough to achieve a
measurable fluorescence.
E. Electrical Impedance Measuring System
The EIS measurement system is battery powered and data
are transmitted wirelessly to eliminate any physical connection
to electricity mains, maximizing the safety of the device. The
range of measurement frequencies was chosen to capture differences in magnitude and phase based on collagen gel impedance
data (see Fig. 3). A discrete set of representative frequencies
was chosen for practical reasons since scanning additional frequencies would dramatically increase the impedance scanning
time due to settling time for oscillators and electrode multiplexing, making measurements impractically long. We designed the
system to acquire all fluorescence and impedance data in approximately 1 min. Limitations of the current system include
the lack of power optimization and the large physical size of
the EIS printed circuit board, designed as such to facilitate hand
soldering of the board. The impedance magnitude and phase
from the EIS system are computed by converting the magnitude
and phase output voltages of the AD8302 to physical magnitude and phase using a first-order conversion obtained from the
manufacturer’s datasheet. Notably, this approach preserves additional phase shifts imparted on the output from the circuit
itself, namely, the inverting amplifier and patient protection circuitry. Future iterations of the device will calibrate out these
values, however, as the device is chiefly designed to trend measurements over time, such a calibration may not be required.
The EIS measurement system uses a bipolar electrode configuration in order to perform a four-terminal sensing to acquire
impedance signals. This differs from other researchers who
have pursued a tetrapolar configuration, which removes contact impedance that arises from the measurement electrodes and
epithelial tissue layer, but results in complex voxel-dependent
sensitivity, which can be either positive or negative within a
volume conductor such as tissue [37], [61]–[64]. In a bipolar

configuration, contact impedance decreases measurement accuracy, but the resultant measurement does not have a complex
spatial dependency with only positive sensitivity voxels within
the volume conductor.
We selected the bipolar electrode configuration to remove
the possibility of decreasing measurement sensitivities, especially given the complex electrode placement around the cuplike probe tip as shown in Fig. 4. Because bipolar measurements
have positive sensitivities at all voxels, we can vary electrode
pair placement in x-, y-, and z-dimensions and easily compare
impedance data between different electrode pairs since there is
no complex sensitivity field affecting measured impedance. To
our knowledge, researchers have thus far only examined cervical EIS at the distal face of the cervix and not at the lateral
sides of the cervix. Our motivation for tracking both the face and
lateral sides of the cervix is that impedance values may vary spatially in cervical tissue across gestation. Any force-dependencies
in contact impedance are removed by the unique design of
the intravaginal probe since the silicone cup-like structure fits
tightly around the cervix to provide sufficient pressure on the
electrodes in order to saturate force-dependency in impedance
measurement.
Many existing tetrapolar impedance measurement systems
are designed for use as a point-of-care device for either labor or
cervical cancer detection in which a single impedance scan is
used to make a diagnostic conclusion. This goal lends itself to
the tetrapolar method because of the requirements for boosting
measurement accuracy and removal of contact impedance contributions to attain an absolute measurement. However, we are
interested in monitoring the change of cervical impedance over
time as the cervical softening and ripening processes progresses.
In this case, we can leverage data comparisons over time to remove static impedances in our measurement system such as the
impedance of titanium electrodes. Difficult-to-control variables
such as cervical mucosa can also be similarly attenuated.
F. Human Data
Seven of 40 total pregnant subjects have been recruited to date
and detailed presentation of all data will be the subject of future
work. Fig. 5 depicts the preliminary data captured in a single
scan on one high-risk pregnant woman at 37 gestational weeks.
At this time, cervical collagen crosslinking is at a minimum
and should result in minimum collagen fluorescence. Despite
this, the collagen peak can still be observed at around emission
wavelengths of 500 nm, indicating that our device can capture
the full dynamic range of collagen fluorescence. Peaks at 400 nm
are excitation light that bleeds through our 395-nm cut-on filters.
The choice to allow light bleed-through is intentional to allow
emission data and perhaps impedance to be normalized to the
detected excitation light. Peaks at 800 nm are attributed to the
second-order harmonic excitation light, which serves as another
reference for normalizing collagen fluorescence.
Different electrode pair combinations provide results within
the expected range. However, it is interesting to note the spatialdependent differences in impedance signals. Differences in the
detected impedance magnitude and phase of electrode pairs on

ETEMADI et al.: TOWARDS BIRTHALERT—A CLINICAL DEVICE INTENDED FOR EARLY PRETERM BIRTH DETECTION

the left side (A-B, B-C) and right side (D-E, E-F) of the device
indicate that the cervix has shortened and effaced to the point
that it is difficult for the cup-like geometry of the device to fit
completely around the cervix. Visual observation of the cervix
confirmed that it had indeed shortened and approximately 2-cmdilated at the time this measurement was taken. The increased
magnitude and phase of impedance on the left side suggests that
electrodes A-B and B-C may have had poor tissue contact during
this measurement. However, given that the device was designed
to form-fit the cervix at earlier stages of parturition to track
early changes in cervical tissue, this is an acceptable limitation
for our device. As we continue to examine data throughout
pregnancy, we will determine whether trends in impedance can
be established earlier in the parturition process.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have utilized rapid prototyping and iterative techniques
to develop an intravaginal device using both bioimpedance and
fluorescence to characterize microstructural changes in a pregnant woman’s cervix in hopes of detecting preterm birth before
macroscopic changes manifest in the tissue. Data collected from
a high-risk pregnant woman are promising as we continue to examine clinical study data using data trending and signal fusion
techniques.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would also like to thank S. Lim for assisting in
collagen gel development, J. Jambulingam for assisting in the
production of devices for the clinical study, and R. GrossmanKhan and P. Ottoson for assisting in device production and
coordinating all of our clinical efforts. They would also like to
thank all pregnant and non-pregnant subjects for their time and
feedback in developing this device.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Blencowe, S. Cousens, D. Chou, M. Z. Oestergaard, L. Say, A. Moller,
M. Kinney, and J. Lawn, “15 million preterm births: priorities for action
based on national, regional and global estimates,” in Born Too Soon—
The Global Action Report on Preterm Birth, C. P. Howson, M. V. Kinney,
and J. E. Lawn, Eds. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization,
2012, pp. 17–31.
[2] D. Moster, R. T. Lie, and T. Markestad, “Long-term medical and social
consequences of preterm birth,” New England J. Med., vol. 359, no. 3,
pp. 262–273, Jul. 2008.
[3] R. E. Behrman and A. S. Butler, Preterm Birth: Causes, Consequences,
and Prevention. Washington, DC, USA: National Academies Press,
2007.
[4] F. Gotsch, R. Romero, O. Erez, E. Vaisbuch, J. P. Kusanovic, S. MazakiTovi, S. K. Kim, S. Hassan, and L. Yeo, “The preterm parturition syndrome and its implications for understanding the biology, risk assessment,
diagnosis, treatment and prevention of preterm birth,” J. Maternal-Fetal
Neonatal Med., vol. 22 (Suppl. 2), pp. 5–23, Jan. 2009.
[5] R. L. Goldenberg, J. F. Culhane, J. D. Iams, and R. Romero, “Preterm
birth 1: Epidemiology and causes of preterm birth,” Lancet, vol. 371,
pp. 75–84, 2008.
[6] R. Romero, J. Espinoza, J. P. Kusanovic, F. Gotsch, S. Hassan, O. Erez,
T. Chaiworapongsa, and M. Mazor, “The preterm parturition syndrome,”
BJOG: Int. J. Obstetrics Gynaecology, vol. 113 (Suppl.), pp. 17–42, Dec.
2006.
[7] J. D. Iams, “Prediction and early detection of preterm labor,” Obstetrics
Gynecol., vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 402–412, Feb. 2003.

3491

[8] J. D. Iams, “The length of the cervix and the risk of spontaneous premature
delivery,” New England J. Med., vol. 334, no. 9, pp. 567–572, Jun. 1996.
[9] J. Owen, N. Yost, V. Berghella, C. MacPherson, M. Swain, G. A. Dildy,
M. Miodovnik, O. Langer, and B. Sibai, “Can shortened midtrimester
cervical length predict very early spontaneous preterm birth?” Amer. J.
Obstetrics Gynecology, vol. 191, no. 1, pp. 298–303, Jul. 2004.
[10] V. Berghella, A. Roman, C. Daskalakis, A. Ness, and J. K. Baxter, “Gestational age at cervical length measurement and incidence of preterm birth,”
Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 110, no. 2 (Pt. 1), pp. 311–317, Aug. 2007.
[11] C. J. Lockwood, A. E. Senyei, M. R. Dische, D. Casal, K. Shah, S. Thung,
L. Jones, L. Deligdisgh, and T. J. Garite, “Fetal fibronectin in cervical and
vaginal secretions as a predictor of preterm delivery,” New England J.
Med., vol. 325, no. 10, pp. 669–674, 1991.
[12] H. Honest, L. M. Bachmann, J. K. Gupta, J. Kleijnen, and K. S. Khan, “Accuracy of cervicovaginal fetal fibronectin test in,” Brit. Med. J., vol. 325,
no. 301, pp. 1–10, 2002.
[13] E. F. Foxman and P. Jarolim, “Use of the fetal fibronectin test in decisions
to admit to hospital for preterm labor,” Clinical Chem., vol. 50, no. 3,
pp. 661–663, Mar. 2004.
[14] L. Sanchez-Ramos, I. Delke, J. Zamora, and A. M. Kaunitz, “Fetal fibronectin as a short-term predictor of preterm birth in symptomatic patients: A meta-analysis,” Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 114, no. 3, pp. 631–640,
Sep. 2009.
[15] R. E. Garfield, G. Saade, C. Buhimschi, I. Buhimschi, L. Shi, S.-Q. Shi,
and K. Chwalisz, “Control and assessment of the uterus and cervix during pregnancy and labour,” Human Reproduction Update, vol. 4, no. 5,
pp. 673–695, 1998.
[16] R. E. Garfield, “Instrumentation for the diagnosis of term and preterm
labour,” J. Perinat. Med., vol. 26, pp. 413–436, 1998.
[17] Y. Mori, A. Ito, and K. Hirakawa, “The change in solubility of type I
collagen in human uterine cervix in pregnancy at term,” Biochem. Med.,
vol. 21, pp. 262–270, 1979.
[18] H. P. Kleissl, M. van der Rest, F. Naftolin, F. H. Glorieux, and A. de Leon,
“Collagen changes in the human uterine cervix at parturition,” Amer. J.
Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 130, no. 7, pp. 748–753, 1978.
[19] E. G. Canty and K. E. Kadler, “Procollagen trafficking, processing and
fibrillogenesis,” J. Cell Sci., vol. 118, pp. 1341–1353, Apr. 2005.
[20] C. P. Read, R. A. Word, M. A. Ruscheinsky, B. C. Timmons, and
M. S. Mahendroo, “Cervical remodeling during pregnancy and parturition:
Molecular characterization of the softening phase in mice,” Reproduction
(Cambridge, England), vol. 134, no. 2, pp. 327–340, Aug. 2007.
[21] P. G. Drewes, H. Yanagisawa, B. Starcher, I. Hornstra, K. Csiszar,
S. I. Marinis, P. Keller, and R. A. Word, “Pelvic organ prolapse in fibulin-5
knockout mice: Pregnancy-induced changes in elastic fiber homeostasis in
mouse vagina,” Amer. J. Pathol., vol. 170, no. 2, pp. 578–589, Feb. 2007.
[22] H. Ozasa, T. Tominaga, T. Nishimura, and T. Takeda, “Lysyl oxidase activity in the mouse uterine cervix is physiologically regulated by estrogen,”
Endocrinology, vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 618–621, Aug. 1981.
[23] L. Granström, G. Ekman, U. Ulmsten, and A. Malmström, “Changes
in the connective tissue of corpus and cervix uteri during ripening and
labour in term pregnancy,” Brit. J. Obstetrics Gynaecol., vol. 96, no. 10,
pp. 1198–1202, Oct. 1989.
[24] K. Sokolov, J. Galvan, A. Myakov, A. Lacy, R. Lotan, and R. RichardsKortum, “Realistic three-dimensional epithelial tissue phantoms for
biomedical optics,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 148–156, 2002.
[25] M. B. Sennström, G. Ekman, G. Westergren-Thorsson, A. Malmström,
B. Byström, U. Endrésen, N. Mlambo, M. Norman, B. Ståbi, and
A. Brauner, “Human cervical ripening, an inflammatory process mediated
by cytokines,” Molecular Human Reproduction, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 375–381,
Apr. 2000.
[26] W. Rath, R. Osmers, B. C. Adelmann-Grill, H. W. Stuhlsatz,
M. Szevereny, and W. Kuhn, “Biochemical changes in human cervical connective tissue after intracervical application of prostaglandin E2,”
Prostaglandins, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 375–384, Apr. 1993.
[27] R. Osmers, W. Rath, M. A. Pflanz, W. Kuhn, H. W. Stuhlsatz, and
M. Szeverényi, “Glycosaminoglycans in cervical connective tissue during
pregnancy and parturition,” Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 88–92,
Jan. 1993.
[28] K. J. Straach, J. M. Shelton, J. A. Richardson, V. C. Hascall, and
M. S. Mahendroo, “Regulation of hyaluronan expression during cervical
ripening,” Glycobiology, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 55–65, Jan. 2005.
[29] E. El Maradny, N. Kanayama, H. Kobayashi, B. Hossain, S. Khatun,
S. Liping, T. Kobayashi, and T. Terao, “The role of hyaluronic acid as a
mediator and regulator of cervical ripening,” Human Reproduction (Oxford, England), vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 1080–1088, May 1997.

3492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

[30] J. R. Fraser, T. C. Laurent, and U. B. Laurent, “Hyaluronan: Its nature,
distribution, functions and turnover,” J. Internal Med., vol. 242, no. 1,
pp. 27–33, Jul. 1997.
[31] K. Meyer, “The biological significance of hyaluronic acid and
hyaluronidase,” Physiological Rev., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 335–359, 1947.
[32] F. G. Cunningham, K. J. Leveno, S. L. Bloom, J. C. Hauth, D. J. Rouse,
and C. Y. Spong, “Parturition,” in Williams Obstetrics, F. G. Cunningham,
K. J. Leveno, S. L. Bloom, J. C. Hauth, D. J. Rouse, and C. Y. Spong, Eds.,
23rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2010.
[33] D. Schlembach, L. Mackay, L. Shi, W. L. Maner, R. E. Garfield, and
M. Holger, “Cervical ripening and insufficiency: From biochemical and
molecular studies to in vivo clinical examination,” Eur. J. Obstetrics Gynecol. Reproductive Biol., vol. 144S, pp. S70–S76, 2009.
[34] H. Maul, L. Mackay, and R. E. Garfield, “Cervical ripening: Biochemical, molecular, and clinical considerations,” Clinical Obstetrics Gynecol.,
vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 551–563, Sep. 2006.
[35] R. E. Garfield, W. L. Maner, L. Shi, S. Q. Shi, and G. R. Saade, “Uterine
EMG and cervical LIF—Promising technologies in obstetrics,” Current
Women’s Health Rev., vol. 2, pp. 207–221, 2006.
[36] R. E. Garfield, H. Maul, W. Maner, C. Fittkow, G. Olson, L. Shi, and
G. R. Saade, “Uterine EMG and light induced fluorescence in the management of term and preterm labor.pdf,” J. Soc. Gynecol. Investig., vol. 9,
pp. 265–275, 2002.
[37] S. Grimnes and O. G. Martinsen, Bioimpedance and Bioelectricity Basics,
2nd ed. Waltham, MA, USA: Academic Press, 2008.
[38] N. J. Avis, S. W. Lindow, and F. Kleinermann, “In vitro multifrequency
electrical impedance measurements and modelling of the cervix in late
pregnancy,” Physiological Meas., vol. 17 (Suppl. 4), pp. A97–103, Nov.
1996.
[39] M. P. O’Connell, J. Tidy, S. J. Wisher, N. J. Avis, B. H. Brown, and
S. W. Lindow, “An in vivo comparative study of the pregnant and nonpregnant cervix using electrical impedance measurements,” BJOG: An
Int. J. Obstetrics Gynaecol., vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1040–1041, Aug. 2000.
[40] M. P. O’Connell, N. J. Avis, B. H. Brown, S. R. Killick, and S. W. Lindow,
“Electrical impedance measurements: An objective measure of prelabor
cervical change,” J. Maternal-Fetal Neonatal Med.: Official J. Eur. Assoc.
Perinatal Med., Fed. Asia Oceania Perinatal Societies, Int. Soc. Perinatal
Obstetricians, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 389–391, Dec. 2003.
[41] S. V Gandhi, D. C. Walker, B. H. Brown, and D. O. C. Anumba, “Comparison of human uterine cervical electrical impedance measurements derived using two tetrapolar probes of different sizes,” Biomed. Eng. Online,
vol. 5, pp. 1–7, Jan. 2006.
[42] R. P. Jokhi, B. H. Brown, and D. O. C. Anumba, “The role of cervical
electrical impedance spectroscopy in the prediction of the course and
outcome of induced labour,” BMC Pregnancy Childbirth, vol. 9, pp. 1–8,
Jan. 2009.
[43] R. Drezek and R. Richards-kortum, “Understanding the contributions of
NADH and collagen to cervical tissue fluorescence spectra: Modeling,
measurements, and implications,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 385–
396, 2001.
[44] N. Rajan, J. Habermehl, M.-F. Coté, C. J. Doillon, and D. Mantovani,
“Preparation of ready-to-use, storable and reconstituted type I collagen
from rat tail tendon for tissue engineering applications,” Nature Protocols,
vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 2753–2758, Jan. 2006.
[45] B. S. Oxlund, G. Ørtoft, A. Brüel, C. C. Danielsen, P. Bor, H. Oxlund,
and N. Uldbjerg, “Collagen concentration and biomechanical properties
of samples from the lower uterine cervix in relation to age and parity
in non-pregnant women,” Reproductive Biol. Endocrinol.: RB&E, vol. 8,
pp. 1–9, Jan. 2010.
[46] J. C. Buckingham, R. Selden, and D. N. Danforth, “Connective tissue
changes in the cervix during pregnancy and labor,” Ann. N Y Acad. Sci.,
vol. 97, pp. 733–742, 1962.
[47] M. Norman, G. Ekman, U. Ulmsten, K. Barchan, and A. Malmström,
“Proteoglycan metabolism in the connective tissue of pregnant and nonpregnant human cervix. An in vitro study,” Biochemical J., vol. 275, Pt 2,
pp. 515–520, Apr. 1991.
[48] B. Timmons, M. Akins, and M. Mahendroo, “Cervical remodeling during pregnancy and parturition,” Trends Endocrinology Metabolism: TEM,
vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 353–361, Jun. 2010.
[49] M. L. Akins, K. Luby-Phelps, R. A. Bank, and M. Mahendroo, “Cervical
softening during pregnancy: Regulated changes in collagen cross-linking
and composition of matricellular proteins in the mouse,” Biol. Reproduction, vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 1053–1062, May 2011.
[50] R. E. Garfield, H. Maul, L. Shi, W. Maner, C. Fittkow, G. Olsen, and
G. R. Saade, “Methods and devices for the management of term and
preterm labor,” Ann. New York Acad. Sci., vol. 943, pp. 203–224, 2001.

[51] C. T. Fittkow, H. Maul, G. Olson, E. Martin, L. B. Mackay, G. R. Saade,
and R. E. Garfield, “Light-induced fluorescence of the human cervix decreases after prostaglandin application for induction of labor at term,” Eur.
J. Obstetrics Gynecol. Reproductive Biol., vol. 123, pp. 62–66, 2005.
[52] Y. S. G. Hoe, E. D. Gurewitsch, A. Shaahinfar, E. S. Hu,
S. Sampattavanich, M. Ruffner, K. H. S. Ching, and R. H. Allen,
“Measuring bioimpedance in the human uterine cervix: Towards early
detection of preterm labor,” in Conf. Proc.: Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., Jan. 2004, vol. 4, pp. 2368–2372.
[53] D. Boehm, “The cervical cap: Effectiveness as a contraceptive,” J. NurseMidwifery, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 3–6, 1983.
[54] M. F. Gallo, D. A. Grimes, and K. F. Schulz, “Cervical cap versus diaphragm for contraception,” Cochrane Database Systematic Rev. (Online),
no. 4, pp. 1–7, Jan. 2002.
[55] M. G. Powell, B. J. Mears, R. B. Deber, and D. Ferguson, “Contraception
with the cervical cap: Effectiveness, safety, continuity of use, and user
satisfaction,” Contraception, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 215–232, Mar. 1986.
[56] R. E. Garfield and W. L. Maner, “Biophysical methods of prediction
and prevention of preterm labor: Uterine electromyography and cervical
light-induced fluorescence—New obstetrical diagnostic techniques,” in
Preterm. Birth, Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2007, pp. 131–144.
[57] H. Maul, G. Saade, and R. E. Garfield, “Prediction of term and preterm
parturition and treatment monitoring by measurement of cervical crosslinked collagen using light-induced fluorescence,” Acta Obstet. Gynecol.
Scand, vol. 84, pp. 534–536, 2005.
[58] H. Maul, G. Olson, C. T. Fittkow, G. R. Saade, and R. E. Garfield, “Cervical light-induced fluorescence in humans decreases throughout gestation
and before delivery: Preliminary observations,” Amer. J. Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 188, no. 2, pp. 537–541, Feb. 2003.
[59] W. S. Glassman, Q.-P. Liao, S.-Q. Shi, L. Goodrum, G. Olson, E. Martin,
G. Saade, and R. E. Garfield, “Fluorescence probe for cervical examination during various reproductive states,” in Proc. SPIE—Adv. Fluorescence
Sens. Technol. III, 1997, vol. 2980, pp. 286–292.
[60] D. R. Eyre and J.-J. Wu, “Collagen cross-links,” Top Curr. Chem., vol. 247,
pp. 207–229, 2005.
[61] J. G. Smith, “Bioimpedance mapping of the cervix,” Ph.D. dissertation,
School Phys. Chem. Sci., Queensland Univ. Technol., Brisbane, Qld.,
Australia, 2008.
[62] P. B. Filho, “Tissue characterisation using an impedance spectroscopy
probe,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Med. Phys. Clinical Eng., University of
Sheffield, South Yorkshire, U.K., 2002.
[63] B. H. Brown, A. J. Wilson, and P. Bertemes-Filho, “Bipolar and tetrapolar transfer impedance measurements from volume conductor,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 36, no. 25, pp. 2060–2062, 2000.
[64] S. Grimnes and Ø. G. Martinsen, “Sources of error in tetrapolar impedance
measurements on biomaterials and other ionic conductors,” J. Phys. D:
Appl. Phys., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 9–14, Jan. 2007.
[65] A. Gautieri, S. Uzel, S. Vesentini, A. Redaelli, and M. J. Buehler, “Molecular and mesoscale mechanisms of osteogenesis imperfecta disease in
collagen fibrils,” Biophysical J., vol. 97, no. 3, pp. 857–865, Aug. 2009.

Mozziyar Etemadi (S’07) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2008 and June 2009,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the University of California, San Francisco,
USA/University of California, Berkeley, USA, Joint
Graduate Group in Bioengineering in 2013, as part
of the joint M.D./Ph.D. program.
He is currently in the Medical Scientist Training
Program at the University of California, San Francisco. His current research interests include translational biomedical engineering for in-home monitoring of disease and biomedical
instrumentation for fetal surgery.
Dr. Etemadi was named Forbes Magazine’s “Top 30 Under 30” in Science in
January 2012 for some of the work described in this paper. In 2011, he helped
lead of a research team awarded second prize in the Vodafone Americas Wireless Innovation Challenge and the mHealth Alliance Award. While at Stanford
University in 2009, he received the Frederick E. Terman Award for Scholastic
Achievement in engineering and also received the Electrical Engineering Fellowship, providing full support for his graduate studies.

ETEMADI et al.: TOWARDS BIRTHALERT—A CLINICAL DEVICE INTENDED FOR EARLY PRETERM BIRTH DETECTION

Philip Chung received the B.S. degree in bioengineering from the University of California, Berkeley,
USA, in 2010 and the M.S. degree in bioengineering
jointly between the University of California, Berkeley, and University of California, San Francisco,
USA, in 2011.
He is currently a Junior Specialist at the University
of California, San Francisco, where he is conducting translational biomedical engineering projects in
collaboration with the Departments of Surgery and
Obstetrics and Gynecology.
Mr. Chung received the Berkeley Regents and Chancellors Scholars Award
and Alumni Leadership Award in 2006 and 2009, respectively. In 2011, his team
won the Berkeley Venture Labs Competition and was also selected as a finalist
to the 2012 GSMA Mobile Health University Challenge in Cape Town, South
Africa. He is a member of the Tau Beta Pi Engineering Honor Society.

J. Alex Heller (S’12) received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, USA, in 2008.
He then went on to work for Northrop Grumman, Marine Systems, Sunnyvale, CA, USA. Since
2010, he has been an Engineer and Researcher at
the University of California, San Francisco, for the
Biomedical Microdevices Laboratory and the Pediatric Device Consortium. He is currently enrolled in
the joint M.S. Bioengineering program between the
University of California, Berkeley, USA, and the University of California, San Francisco. His current research is focused on medical devices, specifically, on renal replacement therapy and obstetrics-related
devices.

Jonathan A. Liu received both the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2008 and 2009,
respectively.
Currently, he is a first-year medical student at
the Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California in Los Angeles, CA, USA. Prior to his
medical career, he was an electrical engineer in the
Roy Lab, under the direction of Professor S. Roy, and
in collaboration with the Pediatric Device Consortium at the University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA. His research interests include the development of low-cost medical devices, especially in the fields of surgery and pediatrics, and embedded
systems.

Larry Rand, biography not available at the time of
publication.

3493

Shuvo Roy (M’96) received the B.S. degree (magna
cum laude), with general honors for triple majors
in physics, mathematics (special honors), and computer science from Mount Union College, Alliance,
OH, USA, in 1992, and the M.S. degree in electrical
engineering and applied physics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science
from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH, USA, in 1995 and 2001, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the
Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, a joint Department of the Schools of Pharmacy and Medicine, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), and the Director of the UCSF
Biomedical Microdevices Laboratory. He holds the Harry Wm. and Diana V.
Hind Distinguished Professorship in Pharmaceutical Sciences II in the UCSF
School of Pharmacy. He is also a Founding Member of the UCSF Pediatric
Devices Consortium, which has a mission to accelerate the development of
innovative devices for children health, and a faculty affiliate of the California
Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3). From 1998 to 2008, he was the
Co-Director of the BioMEMS Laboratory in the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA, where he was with basic
scientists, practicing clinicians, and biomedical engineers to develop microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) solutions to high-impact medical challenges.
While pursuing his doctorate degree, he conducted research in the areas of
design, microfabrication, packaging, and performance of MEMS for harsh environments. He also investigated microstructural characteristics and mechanical
properties of MEMS materials, developed the requisite microfabrication technologies, and demonstrated operation of the first surface micromachined silicon
carbide transducers at high temperatures (up to 950 ◦ C). He has also developed miniaturized microrelays for high-performance electrical switching and
ice detection sensors for aerospace applications. He joined UCSF in 2008 to continue the development of biomedical devices including wireless physiological
monitoring systems and bioartificial replacement organs, and participate in the
training of professional students in the School of Pharmacy as well as graduate
students in the UCSF/University of California, Berkeley Joint Graduate Group
in Bioengineering. He has contributed to more than 90 technical publications,
coauthored three book chapters, been awarded 16 U.S. patents, and given more
than 70 invited presentations.
Dr. Roy is an Associate Editor of Biomedical Microdevices and Editorial
Board Member of Sensors and Materials. He is the recipient of a Top 40 under
40 Award by Crains Cleveland Business in 1999 and the Clinical Translation
Award at the second Annual BioMEMS and Biomedical NanotechnologyWorld
2001 meeting. In 2003, he was selected as a recipient of the TR100, which features the worlds 100 Top Young Innovators as selected by Technology Review,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Magazine of Innovation. In 2004,
he was presented with a NASA Group Achievement Award for his work on
harsh environment MEMS. In 2005, he was named as a Whos Who in Biotechnology by Crains Cleveland Business. In 2005 and 2007, he was recognized as
a Cleveland Clinic Innovator. In 2009, he was nominated for the Biotechnology
Industry Organizations Biotech Humanitarian Award, which is given in recognition of an individual has used biotechnology to unlock its potential to improve
the earth.

