3276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

An Interferometric Reflectance Imaging Sensor
for Point of Care Viral Diagnostics
Alexander P. Reddington, Student Member, IEEE, Jacob T. Trueb, David S. Freedman, Member, IEEE,
Ahmet Tuysuzoglu, Student Member, IEEE, George G. Daaboul, Carlos A. Lopez,
W. Clem Karl, Senior Member, IEEE, John H. Connor, Helen Fawcett, and M. Selim Ünlü∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The use of in vitro diagnostic devices is transitioning from the laboratory to the primary care setting to address
early disease detection needs. Time critical viral diagnoses are often made without support due to the experimental time required
in today’s standard tests. Available rapid point of care (POC) viral
tests are less reliable, requiring a follow-on confirmatory test before conclusions can be drawn. The development of a reliable POC
viral test for the primary care setting would decrease the time for
diagnosis leading to a lower chance of transmission and improve
recovery. The single particle interferometric reflectance imaging
sensor (SP-IRIS) has been shown to be a sensitive and specificdetection platform in serum and whole blood. This paper presents
a step towards a POC viral assay through a SP-IRIS prototype with
automated data acquisition and analysis and a simple, easy-to-use
software interface. Decreasing operation complexity highlights the
potential of SP-IRIS as a sensitive and specific POC diagnostic tool.
With the integration of a microfluidic cartridge, this automated instrument will allow an untrained user to run a sample-to-answer
viral assay in the POC setting.
Index Terms—Automation, biosensors, label-free, nanoparticle
detection, point-of-care, virus detection.

I. INTRODUCTION
OINT of care (POC) diagnostics devices are one of the
fastest growing sectors of the medical industry [1]. The
rapid market growth in this sector as compared to traditional di-

P

Manuscript received February 14, 2013; revised May 21, 2013; accepted June
25, 2013. Date of publication July 17, 2013; date of current version November
18, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under Accelerating Innovation Research Award 1127833, the National Institutes
of Health Award R01 AI1096159, and the Smart Lighting Engineering Research
Center Cooperative Agreement EEC-0812056. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. P. Reddington, A. Tuyuszoglu, and C. A. Lopez are with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
USA (e-mail: aredding@bu.edu; atuysuz@bu.edu; c1lopez@bu.edu).
J. T. Trueb and H. Fawcett are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: jtrueb@bu.edu;
hfawcett@bu.edu).
D. S. Freedman and W. C. Karl are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: dsf@bu.edu; wckarl@bu.edu).
G. G. Daaboul is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston
University, Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: gdaa1987@bu.edu).
J. H. Connor is with the Department of Microbiology, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: jhconnor@bu.edu).
∗ M. S. Ünlü is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA
02215 USA (e-mail: selim@bu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2272666

agnostic tests is attributed to the paradigm shift toward targeted
early disease detection, therapy, and sample-to-answer automation [2]. There are three standard diagnostic tests for viral infections that are performed in core laboratories. Viral cultures
have unparalleled sensitivity, but take several days to generate
results. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assays
offer quantitative results with good sensitivity, in few hours, but
usually require intensive sample purification and processing [3].
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays represent a fairly rapid
test with good sensitivity, but the sensitivity is less than the
other two methods. For time critical situations, commercially
available rapid diagnostic tests for viral infection take the form
of lateral flow immunoassays, which suffer from low sensitivity
and require production of antibodies against the pathogen [4].
The lack of a sensitive and specific rapid test in the primary care
setting requires clinical procedures to include a second confirmatory test in a core laboratory causing delays in diagnosis,
prolonged recovery, and an increased chance of transmitting the
infection to others [5]. Therefore, the development of a diagnostic platform capable of combining clinically relevant levels of
sensitivity and specificity in a physician’s office would represent
an invaluable tool in the fight against viral diseases.
On the one end of the spectrum, recent innovations in optical biosensors have pushed detection sensitivity to new limits.
For example, photonic crystal structures on the sensor surface
have been used to amplify the fluorescence signal [6]. Whispering gallery mode biosensors have created a high Q-factor
structure to achieve femtomolar and single-molecule sensitivities [7], [8]. These laboratory-based techniques, while sensitive,
are hindered by a complex fabrication process, a small sensor
surface (interaction volume), and a high noise floor from nonspecific interactions in serum.
On the other end of the spectrum, portable devices utilizing
standard microscopy imaging techniques and DNA amplification have been developed for POC applications. Hand-held microscopes have been developed to exploit the growing popularity
of smartphones for a compact and inexpensive system [9]–[11].
Microfluidics have been extensively developed to miniaturize
the popular and reliable polymerase chain reaction amplification
technique [12], [13]. These approaches demonstrate a high level
of portability. However, sample purification has yet to mature to
allow these techniques to achieve high levels of sensitivity [14].
The interferometric reflectance imaging sensor (IRIS) has
been shown to be a high-throughput microarray tool for dynamic monitoring of binding interactions [15], [16]. Recently,
a change in the optical path has led the IRIS technique to be

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

REDDINGTON et al.: INTERFEROMETRIC REFLECTANCE IMAGING SENSOR FOR POINT OF CARE VIRAL DIAGNOSTICS

Fig. 1. (a) Image of the prototype. (b) Patterned chip loaded into the sample
holder. The center square region is for spotting. (c) Image of an antibody spot
on the prototype.

3277

where r is the particle radius and ε0 , εp , and εm are the free
space, particle, and surrounding medium permittivity, respectively. Scattering-based detection techniques
have a
 therefore
2
detected signal I ∝ |Esca |2 which scales by r3  ∝ r6 . In other
words, comparing a 1-μm bacterium to a 100-nm viral particle,
the signal drops by 1 million fold and disappears into the detector’s noise. As explained by Daaboul et al. [17], the particle’s
signal can be strengthened through the use of interferometry.
The interference of the particle’s scattering field with the reference field Eref gives the following far-field response
Idet ∝ |Esca + Eref |2 = |Esca |2 + |Eref |2

reintroduced with single-molecule detection capabilities [17].
Utilizing a silicon-oxide on silicon sensor, this platform exploits
the common path interference between the scattering field of a
nanoparticle and the multilayer reflection from the sensor. Further analysis of the detected signal has shown to yield additional
information about the size, material, shape, and nanoparticle
aspect ratio [17]–[19] to identify the target molecules in the
presence of nonspecific binding. The digital detection scheme
and orthogonal verification measurements enable a dramatic increase in the sensor’s detection limit compared to traditional ensemble measurement techniques, such as fluorescence, in both
serum and whole-blood [20]. In this paper, we present an automated and easy-to-use biosensor imaging platform (see Fig. 1)
using the single particle detection modality which we term
the single particle interferometric reflectance imaging sensor
(SP-IRIS).
II. METHODS
For a biosensor platform to be successfully translated from a
research laboratory environment, it must be either automated (to
enable use by an untrained operator), or it should utilize a simple
operating process (e.g., glucose meter). Be it a primary physician
office (bedside), home (personal), or a low-resource location
(global health), the optimal design must take into consideration
the effect of environmental and infrastructural constraints. In the
case of a portable SP-IRIS instrument for a primary physician
office, the design must give priority to: 1) instrument size; 2)
vibration isolation; 3) simplicity; 4) cost; and 5) automation.
To achieve a robust, compact, and simple platform, off-theshelf optical and electrical components have been merged with
custom mechanical parts and robust software.
A. SP-IRIS Detection Principle
Optical detection of protein, DNA, and viruses is challenging
due to their small size, weakly scattering cross section, and low
index contrast to the surrounding medium. Classical scattering
theory describes the signal strength of light scattered off of
a particle as dipoles induced on a nonabsorbing particle [21].
The scattered electrical field Esca is proportional to the particle
polarizability α:
Esca ∝ α = 4πε0 r3

εp − εm
εp + 2εm

(1)

+ 2|Eref ||Esca |cosθrs

(2)

where θrs refers to the phase-angle difference between the fields,
and Idet is the intensity of the far-field response. In this case,
|Esca |2 is equivalent to the previous case and will be negligibly small; |Eref |2 contributes a constant background intensity,
and the third interference term forms the dominant optical response of the nanoparticle. By interfering the scattered field and
reference field, the signal now scales by the radius cubed.
SP-IRIS utilizes a common-path interferometer to create a
compact and robust platform with an improved dynamic range
and sensitivity to nanoparticles, over pure scattering modalities.
Further analysis of the detected signal as a function of signal
strength, wavelength response, defocus response, and polarization response yields information about the particle size, shape,
and material [17], [18]. SP-IRIS utilizes these additional methods of particle identification to eliminate false signals from nonspecific binding.
B. Hardware Design
In the following discussion, the parts and materials of individual design elements (the sensor chip, the optics, the electronics,
and the mechanics) are given. For each design component, the
specific part numbers are provided. These components were
selected to meet or exceed design requirements.
1) Sensor Chip Design: For silicon oxide on silicon substrates, a thickness of 100 nm has been selected to maximize the
phase angle term [19]. Silicon chips with thin layers of silicon
oxide, fabricated by SVMI, Inc. (Santa Clara, CA, USA), were
designed to be used with a reusable loading holder. Fiduciary
patterns enable the use of an automatic spot detection algorithm,
in addition to providing contrast for autofocusing algorithms.
The dimensions of the chips are 10 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm,
with a 2.3 mm × 2.3 mm active center region for spotting capture probes. Small, periodic etched squares (15 μm × 15 μm
every 143 μm) in the capture probe area ensure that regions of
high contrast are present in the field of view for coarse focusing,
independent of the precise location of each capture probe spot.
2) Optical Design: The SP-IRIS technique is based on a
top-illumination microscope scheme. The key parameters in the
optical path design are the illumination wavelength, uniformity,
numerical aperture (NA), magnification, and camera pixel size.
These parameters determine the accuracy of sizing, throughput,
and minimum detection size of the system.

3278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 2. Interferometric particle response. Simulated response of viral nanoparticles to a 528 nm center wavelength source. A contrast of one corresponds to
an unperturbed background response.

In imaging systems, the uniformity of illumination is vital
to obtain a comparable performance across the sensor. For
the SP-IRIS technique, improper illumination will affect the
detection and sizing capabilities. In particular, because sizing is
calculated via contrast of the central peak to near-neighbor background pixels, nonuniformity of the illumination will introduce
sizing ambiguity. For light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and filament sources, uniform illumination is achieved through either
the Nelsonian illumination or Kohler illumination. The Nelsonian illumination requires only a condenser lens; however, this
approach typically includes an image of the illumination source
in the image plane. The Kohler illumination scheme contains
an additional lens but overcomes the issue of the illumination
source image for a smoother image. Since sizing depends on uniform illumination, the Kohler illumination scheme is deployed
in this design.
Wavelength selection drives the system’s sizing capabilities.
As shown previously by Daaboul et al., the effective range
and accuracy of nanoparticle sizing are greatly affected by the
illumination wavelength [17]. In this prototype, a 528-nm LED
is used to directly detect 60–160 nm viral particles by their
simulated contrast values ( see Fig. 2).
Adjusting the NA offers a tradeoff between nanoparticle contrast and usable field of view. The image of the nanoparticle
is calculated from a forward model that is derived using the
angular spectrum representation, where the nanoparticles are
modeled as dipoles to determine the expected far-field signal
of the virus [22]. To ensure reliable detection of the virus, an
NA offering a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of at least 3 over the
background noise was selected. Fig. 3 shows the contrast response of a 100-nm virus (equivalent to H1N1) and the peak of
the response as a function of NA. Particle sizing in the SP-IRIS
technique is performed by comparing the detected particle peak
contrast to the predictive forward model. A potential source of
error in this comparison is undersampling of the point spread
function (PSF). Defining the minimum separation according
to the Rayleigh criterion, the calculated PSF of the system is
400 nm for the prototype. If the resolution of the camera undersamples the PSF, the central peak of a nanoparticle’s PSF

Fig. 3. Theoretical response of a 100 nm virus when the NA of the objective is varied. The dashed horizontal bar indicates an SNR of three above the
background noise. The dotted vertical line indicates the selected NA, 0.8.

could be blurred between multiple pixels. To guarantee proper
imaging of the PSF, an oversampling rate of at least 3 is recommended which, in this case, corresponds to an effective pixel
size of 138 nm × 138 nm. This system meets this requirement
with a 50×, 0.8 NA Nikon objective and the Grasshopper 2
GigE CCD camera (Point Grey Research, Inc., BC, Canada)
with 2 × 2 binning. The resulting optical parameters are an effective pixel size of 138 nm × 138 nm and a total field of view
of 168 μm ×141 μm.
3) Electrical Design: For rapid system development, an attempt was made to maximize the use of commercial off-theshelf subcomponents. This included a Gigabit Wireless Router
(AirStation HighPower N450 Gigabit Wireless Router, Buffalo
Technology, Inc., Austin, TX, USA), an industrial serial RS232
to Ethernet Converter (BF-431, Gridconnect Inc., Naperville,
IL, USA), a high-power LED (Golden Dragon LT W5 SM,
OSRAM Opto Semiconductors), and a high-speed Gigabit
CMOS Camera (GS2-GE-50S5M-C, Point Grey Research, Inc.,
Richmond, BC, Canada).
To integrate all these components together inside the
SP-IRIS enclosure some custom electronics were needed, to
control the LEDs and generate the necessary supply voltages
for all subcomponents from the single 24 V dc power supply.
To save space, four 64 mm × 64 mm, four-layer printed circuit
boards were vertically stacked and connected through a 26pin cable. Each board served a single purpose: high efficiency
regulation of the necessary 12 and 5 V power supplies, constant current led driving circuits (TL4242, Texas Instruments
Inc., Austin, TX, USA), Ethernet to UART interface, and a microcontroller (MSP430AFE221, Texas Instruments Incorporate,
Austin, TX, USA) to allow TCP/IP commands to be issued to
control the LEDs.
By using a gigabit router for all communications to subcomponents, standard TCP/IP networking protocols were used over
10/100/1000 Mbit Ethernet with category-6 unshielded twisted
pair cables. This allows a single interface for communication
with components and will enable a seamless transition to highspeed wireless interfaces (802.11n) for control and interfacing.
The system uses a peak power of 29 W during power-up and
acquisition, and 23–24 W while idle.

REDDINGTON et al.: INTERFEROMETRIC REFLECTANCE IMAGING SENSOR FOR POINT OF CARE VIRAL DIAGNOSTICS

4) Mechanical Design: A field of view of 168 μm × 141 μm
and a focus dependent particle sizing introduces the potential
for cross-dataset variability, as small differences in operator
technique can result in significant divergence in particle counts.
Designing an operator independent protocol is vital for POC
devices. The mechanical design of the system solves the issue
with rigidity and automation.
The SP-IRIS prototype utilizes a 3-axis orthogonal stack of
linear stages (VT-21, Micos, Irvine, CA, USA) to enable the
rapid scanning of samples. A removable chip holder secures
the sensor in a repeatable location with a spring-loaded latch.
The holder is then secured to the stage assembly via a series of
alignment pins and magnetic retention features. Fine alignment
adjustments are enabled via a pitch / yaw mechanism built into
the stage assembly.
All required optics, mechanics, and electronics are incorporated inside a robust and portable envelope measuring 43 cm ×
28 cm × 20 cm. An aluminum base plate equipped with vibration dampening feet provides a stable mounting platform for all
onboard components and doubles as a heat sink for the stage
components.
C. Software Design
The user interface of a POC diagnostic instrument must be
easy to use. Ideally, an untrained operator should be able to
use the instrument with a simple set of instructions. Creating
an easy-to-use interface requires a high level of mechanical
and software automation. Applying these criteria to a highresolution optical technique requires engineering in both image
acquisition and image processing. In the analysis of microarray
assays, the time to process each spotted condition becomes the
determining factor behind measurement time. Here, an easy-touse user interface and the novel image processing algorithms to
achieve acquisition times less than 1 min per spotted condition
are presented.
1) Graphical User Interface: Incorporating a simple, easyto-use, and readable user interface is pivotal in developing a tool
for POC settings. In these environments, the target user cannot
be required to have specialized training. With the algorithms
discussed in the following sections, the SP-IRIS instrument is
able to achieve a 5-click interface, as shown in Fig. 4. This
interface requires user interaction only for loading/unloading
and basic array information. Once the user clicks acquire and
analysis, the software precedes spot to spot acquiring data. The
first spot of the array is located through the use of fiducial marks
and subsequent spots are found through the user defined spot
pitch. At each spot, the instrument executes the focus algorithms
described in the following sections. Once focused, the number
of viral particles detected is tallied and recorded in the table.
2) Particle Detection: Robust, rapid, and automated particle detection is an enabling feature of an easy-to-use SP-IRIS
interface. The detection of the sparse nanoparticle diffraction
patterns in the image requires the implementation of several image processing techniques. To start, an important observation is
these nanoparticles are well localized and local extrema in the
pixel space. A profile of a 100-nm viral nanoparticles is shown

3279

Fig. 4. User Interface. The software shown here simplifies acquisition and
analysis for untrained to minimally trained users. The user defines the array
geometry (array size and spot pitch), loads the sensor chip, and then clicks once
for acquisition and analysis. When the instrument finishes, results are reported
in the table and saved into a spreadsheet. Additional functionalities are included
in other tabs for advanced users but not required for typical operation.

Fig. 5. Simulated response of a 100 nm spherical viral particle in the SP-IRIS
system.

in Fig. 5. Such features are the characteristic of an interest point
in computer vision. Interest point detection is a well-studied
subject, and tools from the existing literature have been adapted
for robust detection of the nanoparticles. Scale invariant feature
transform (SIFT) has been proven to be one of the most robust interest point detection methods and has been used in this
study [23].
Interest points exist at many different scales in a natural image. Likewise, in SP-IRIS images, a particle’s response can
change, depending on the particle type and size. Furthermore,
experimental variables such as magnification, pixel size, NA,
and particle defocus lead to different particle profiles. Given the
wide experimental conditions, it would be restrictive to search
particles at a fixed scale. SIFT resorts to scale-space methods
to eliminate the problem of identifying the correct scale of the
interest points.

3280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 6. Nanoparticle filtering at artifact edges is illustrated with these cropped
images. (a) Expected gradient behavior is relaxed leading to a large number
of false signals near the artifact edge. (b) Tightening the constraint eliminates
these false-edge signals

Scale-space methods form a multiresolution representation
of an image by incremental smoothing. A Gaussian kernel is
used for smoothing since it has been found that it does not introduce any spurious artifacts as the image is smoothed [24]. As
smoothing is applied the image can be subsampled since highfrequency information is reduced. The resulting image stack is
called a pyramid representation. Given this scale-space pyramid
representation, the SIFT detector computes the difference-ofGaussian function and treats scale-space extrema as potential
interest points.
Each pixel in the difference-of-Gaussian scale space representation is compared with its 26 neighboring pixels: eightpixels
on the same scale and 18 pixels from lower and upper scales.
A pixel is identified as a potential interest point if it is an extremum with respect to its neighbors. Once a pixel is identified
as a potential interest point, it is parameterized and evaluated
in its neighborhood. In particular, the SIFT detector fits a 3-D
quadratic function using the parameters of the potential interest
point, local gradient, and Hessian information. The evaluation
of the extremum of this function facilitates subpixel localization
of the interest point in the scale space. Furthermore, the function value at the extremum is used to eliminate unstable and low
contrast interest points. The details of the SIFT technique can
be found in [23].
In the case of large artifacts, nanoparticle responses near the
boundary of the artifact can exhibit unexpected behavior. These
particles are eliminated through the use of the corner-detection
method proposed by Harris and Stephens in SIFT [25]. The Harris detector measures the corner response of an interest point by
evaluating the gradient information in its neighborhood. A 2 × 2
second moment matrix is calculated using image derivatives, and
a comparison of eigenvalues of this matrix are used to assess the
eccentricity of an interest point and its neighborhood. Interest
points with a strong gradient in all directions have their second
moment matrices with large and close eigenvalues, whereas interest points that are on edges have one large and one small
eigenvalue. As seen in Fig. 6, when the gradient behavior is relaxed many false structures are identified as particles. However,
by increasing this constraint, the false signals are eliminated.
In SP-IRIS images, given the particle type of interest and other
experimental variables, the forward model is computed and the
expected normalized peak response of the particles of interest

Fig. 7. Anomaly Filtering. (a) Detected anomaly map of nonspecific structures. (b) Using the anomaly map to discard particles within those regions, the
nanoparticles of interest (green circles) are accurately identified.

Fig. 8. Simulated response of a 100 nm spherical virus at different z-planes.
The sensor surface is defined as z = 0. The detectable window (contrast >1.02)
is between −700 and 500 nm with the peak response occurring at −100 nm.

is known. For example, if one aims to image 100-nm viral
nanoparticles, the expected normalized peak value would be
around 1.06. This information is used to eliminate strong interest
points that are related to salts and large nonspecifically bound
particles. In order to detect strong interest points, the ratio of the
maximum to minimum value of a pixel in its local neighborhood
is computed and thresholding is used to find regions with highintensity differences. The resulting binary image is named as
the anomaly map. Fig. 7 shows the detection and elimination of
anomaly region. Note that for sizable anomalous structures, the
pixels toward the center of the large structures do not have a highintensity difference. In order to overcome this, a morphological
close operation is used to fill such gaps in sizable structures.
3) Closed-Loop Focusing: The automation of optical devices requires the use robust autofocusing. For POC devices,
a robust, precise, and real-time algorithm is imperative to minimize experimental time and prevent erroneous results. Choosing
the correct passive autofocusing algorithm weighs heavily on the
imaging modality and the target object [26]. For some applications, the sample alignment conditions are loose. However, in
the case of SP-IRIS, focusing is critical as the response of the
nanoparticle rapidly peaks, as shown in Fig. 8. The challenge
of a rapid focusing algorithm is compounded by two issues:
1) a narrow detectable window where the nanoparticle contrast is above the background and 2) the optimal focal plane
of the nanoparticles does not coincide with the sensor surface.

REDDINGTON et al.: INTERFEROMETRIC REFLECTANCE IMAGING SENSOR FOR POINT OF CARE VIRAL DIAGNOSTICS

To approach the autofocusing for the SP-IRIS technique in a
robust, rapid manner, two complementing algorithms have been
implemented.
When the sensor is loaded, the removable chip holder latches
into the stage assembly. Since the nanoparticle detection window
overlaps with the sensor surface, the coarse focusing algorithm
is executed to bring the imaging plane to the sensor surface by
focusing on the 15 μm square fiduciary marks within the field
of view. The stages are swept 30 μm acquiring an image every
micrometer. A fast Fourier transform is applied to the stack of
the images followed by a high-pass filter. The remaining high
frequencies are summed. The most in-focus plane corresponds
to the maximum sum. With the stages now within 2 μm of the
sensor surface focal plane, the algorithm is reiterated over 2 μm
with 100 nm steps. The resulting in-focus plane is somewhere
within the nanoparticle detection window.
For repeatable sizing, a nanoparticle detection feedback algorithm is executed to locate the nanoparticle peak contrast plane.
This algorithm swings from −300 to +300 nm of the current
location by 100 nm increments acquiring images. Each image is
then processed to detect and size the detected nanoparticles. The
optimal focal plane is determined by maximizing the number of
particles within the desired particle size range. This algorithm
in combination with the coarse focus requires less than 90 s.
These algorithms have shown high repeatability in clean data.
Nevertheless, nonspecific binding and salt occur in nonideal laboratory settings. Anticipating the situations where nonspecific
binding will bias the high-pass filter autofocus algorithm to the
wrong starting plane, the algorithm also performs shifting window detection. If the optimal plane is determined to be at either
extreme of the current window, the focal planes being analyzed
will be shifted. The new window of focal planes will be acquired
and processed. Shifting the focal plane increases the robustness
of the autofocusing but at a cost of time. To prevent runaway
situations, the number of iterations is limited to four per spot
giving a total analysis range of 2.2 μm to the nanoparticle detection feedback algorithm.
III. CHARACTERIZATION
A. Proof of Concept
Clinical diagnostic tests are rarely performed with a simple
sample solution. Typically, biomarker analytes are vastly outnumbered by endogenous proteins and macromolecules found in
unprocessed patient samples, ensuring that the diagnostic assay
can specifically and sensitively detect the target within a complex solution, which is imperative. The presence of other macromolecules can lead to nonspecific binding which decreases the
test confidence. A proof-of-concept experiment showing specific detection of wildtype vesicular stomatitis virus (wtVSV),
a biosafety level 2 pathogen, spiked in 100% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) is performed. To ensure that the constructed prototype
operates in a comparable capacity to our laboratory system, this
experiment is also used as a benchmark.
An antibody against the wtVSV surface glycoprotein (8G5
monoclonal antibody) and a negative control monoclonal antibody (specific for the Marburg virus glycoprotein) were arrayed

3281

Fig. 9. Specific virus capture and detection. The panels show detection of
wtVSV (circled in green) for 0 and 106 PFU/ml concentrations in 65 μm ×
65 μm area.

onto the sensor described in Section B-I, which is functionalized with the MCP-2 co-polymer from Lucidant Polymers LLC
(Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The array printed by the sciFlexarrayer
S3 spotter (Scienion AG, Berlin, Germany) consisted of five
replicates of each antibody. After an overnight incubation, the
surface was first treated with 50-mM ethanolamine (pH 8), then
washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.1%
tween-20 to remove any remaining unbound material followed
by blocking for 1 h in a petri dish with 1% bovine serum albumin with PBS. Finally, the sensors were thoroughly rinsed in
deionized water to remove salt. The images of the resulting antibody spots were acquired on both the prototype and laboratory
platforms to determine the number of preincubation bound particles. Next, the sensor was incubated in another petri dish with
undiluted FBS spiked with 5 × 105 plaque-forming units per
milliliter (PFU/mL) of wtVSV for 2 h. Following the incubation,
the sensor was washed with PBS and rinsed quickly in deionized
water. Finally, postincubation images of the spotted array were
acquired. Fig. 9 shows the specific detection of 100 to 140 nm
diameter particles in the postincubation images of SP-IRIS prototype. VSV is bullet shaped (80 nm × 160 nm); however,
when imaging with nonpolarized light, the average polarizability which is equivalent to a spherical particle with a 110 nm
diameter is observed [18], [19]. The comparison of the two platforms was conducted via the detected density of the wtVSV
particles on both the wtVSV-specific and Marburg-specific antibody spots. Fig. 10 demonstrates that the prototype is able to
detect virus particles trapped on the wtVSV-recognizing antibody with little to no binding on the non-specific spot. An equal
density between the platforms illustrates no loss in sensitivity.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
POC diagnostic tests have the potential to revolutionize primary care treatment. The translation of laboratory diagnostic
tests to the bedside has the potential to reduce medical costs,
while providing the primary care physician with supplementary
information for more accurate diagnoses. In cases of early viral

3282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

REFERENCES

Fig. 10. Benchmark comparison for 5 × 105 PFU/mL of wtVSV. Identical
areas of the wtVSV antibody and controls spots were analyzed on the prototype
and laboratory SP-IRIS platforms. The number of particles detected between 90
and 140 nm were tallied. The mean and standard deviation for each condition
were determined from particle counts on five replicate spots.

detection, these diagnostic tests cannot rely upon the detection
of antibodies but the virus directly.
This paper presents the development and characterization
of an automated SP-IRIS platform capable of multiplexed
pathogen detection at a clinically relevant sensitivity. The
SP-IRIS detection method has the capability to detect single
binding events on the interferometric surface. The specificity of the probe-target binding is supplemented by a
size-discrimination algorithm to enhance the limit of detection
of this technique beyond traditional detection methods [20].
The automation of the acquisition and processing enables
minimally trained operation or untraineduser operation. The
user interface sports a simple 4-button interface and tabular
readout for ease of use. System validation against the laboratory
platform was confirmed for whole virus detection at a clinically
relevant level (5 × 105 PFU/ml) of wtVSV spiked in undiluted
FBS.
The presented automated platform is the first step toward
reliable assays in the physician’s office to stem the spread of
infectious diseases. As a POC viral diagnostic platform, the
automation of these steps demonstrates the plausibility of SPIRIS with the incorporation of sample preparation. Future designs will eliminate the need to enter the array geometry by
building a reference database for the chip ID and incorporate a microfluidic sample preparation cartridge for a complete
sample-to-answer platform. For additional verification beyond
specific binding, material identification through focusing, and
shape discrimination, the next design iteration will also incorporate the polarization calculations demonstrated in previous
publications [18].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
A. P. Reddington would like to thank J. Greenspun for his
contribution to the focusing algorithm development and
P. Butala for his contribution to the camera interface software.

[1] A. Rajan and H. Glorikian, “Point-of-care diagnostics: Market trends and
growth drivers,” Expert Opin. Med. Diagnos., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2009.
[2] M. Debnath, G. B. K. S. Prasad, and P. S. Bisen, “Segments of molecular diagnostics—Market place,” in Molecular Diagnostics: Promises
and Possibilities. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 2010, pp. 503–
513.
[3] Y. J. Choi, H. S. Nam, J. S. Park, H. J. Kim, K. B. Park, M. H. Jeon,
C. J. Kim, Y. Hwangbo, K. S. Park, and K. A. Baek, “Comparative analysis of the multiple test methods for the detection of pandemic influenza
A/H1N1 2009 Virus,” J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1450–
1456, Oct. 2010.
[4] C. Chartrand, M. M. G. Leeflang, J. Minion, T. Brewer, and M. Pai, “Accuracy of rapid influenza diagnostic tests: A meta-analysis,” Ann. Internal
Med., vol. 156, pp. 500–511, 2012.
[5] S. A. Harper, J. S. Bradley, J. A. Englund, T. M. File, S. Gravenstein,
F. G. Hayden, A. J. McGeer, K. M. Neuzil, A. T. Pavia, M. L. Tapper,
T. M. Uyeki, and R. K. Zimmerman, “Seasonal influenza in adults and
children - diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and institutional outbreak management: Clinical practice guidelines of the Infectious Diseases
Society of America,” Clin. Infect. Dis., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 1003–1032, Apr.
2009.
[6] B. T. Cunningham and R. C. Zangar, “Photonic crystal enhanced fluorescence for early breast cancer biomarker detection,” J. Biophoton., vol. 8–9,
pp. 617–628, Jun. 2012.
[7] M. A. Santiago-Cordoba, M. Cetinkaya, S. V Boriskina, F. Vollmer, and
M. C. Demirel, “Ultrasensitive detection of a protein by optical trapping
in a photonic-plasmonic microcavity,” J. Biophoton., vol. 638, no. 8,
pp. 629–638, Jun. 2012.
[8] V. R. Dantham, S. Holler, V. Kolchenko, Z. Wan, and S. Arnold, “Taking
whispering gallery-mode single virus detection and sizing to the limit,”
Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 101, no. 4, pp. 043704–043708, 2012.
[9] H. Zhu, S. O. Isikman, O. Mudanyali, A. Greenbaum, and A. Ozcan,
“Optical imaging techniques for point-of-care diagnostics,” Lab Chip,
vol. 13, pp. 51–67, Oct. 2012.
[10] B. Veigas, J. M. Jacob, M. N. Costa, D. S. Santos, M. Viveiros, J. Inácio,
R. Martins, P. Barquinha, E. Fortunato, and P. V. Baptista, “Gold on paperpaper platform for Au-nanoprobe TB detection,” Lab Chip, vol. 12, no. 22,
pp. 4802–4808, Oct. 2012.
[11] O. Mudanyali, S. Dimitrov, U. Sikora, S. Padmanabhan, I. Navruz, and
A. Ozcan, “Integrated rapid-diagnostic-test reader platform on a cellphone,” Lab Chip, vol. 12, no. 15, pp. 2678–2686, Aug. 2012.
[12] F. Ahmad and S. A. Hashsham, “Miniaturized nucleic acid amplification
systems for rapid and point-of-care diagnostics: A review,” Analytica
Chimica Acta, vol. 733, pp. 1–15, Jul. 2012.
[13] M. D. Estes, J. Yang, B. Duane, S. Smith, C. Brooks, A. Nordquist, and
F. Zenhausern, “Optimization of multiplexed PCR on an integrated microfluidic forensic platform for rapid DNA analysis,” Analyst, vol. 137,
no. 23, pp. 5510–5519, Dec. 2012.
[14] A. Puren, J. L. Gerlach, B. H. Weigl, D. M. Kelso, and G. J. Domingo,
“Laboratory operations, specimen processing, and handling for viral load
testing and surveillance,” J. Infect. Dis., vol. 201, no. Suppl. 1, pp. S27–
S36, 2010.
[15] G. G. Daaboul, R. S. Vedula, S. Ahn, C. A. Lopez, A. Reddington,
E. Ozkumur, and M. S. Ünlü, “LED-based interferometric reflectance
imaging sensor for quantitative dynamic monitoring of biomolecular interactions,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2221–2227, Jan.
2011.
[16] C. A. Lopez, G. G. Daaboul, R. S. Vedula, E. Ozkumur, D. A. Bergstein,
T. W. Geisbert, H. E. Fawcett, B. B. Goldberg, J. H. Connor, and
M. S. Ünlü, “Label-Free multiplexed virus detection using spectral reflectance imaging,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 3432–3437,
Apr. 2011.
[17] G. G. Daaboul, A. Yurt, X. Zhang, G. M. Hwang, B. B. Goldberg, and
M. S. Ünlü, “High-throughput detection and sizing of individual lowindex nanoparticles and viruses for pathogen identification,” Nano Lett.,
vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 4727–4731, Nov. 2010.
[18] A. Yurt, G. G. Daaboul, J. H. Connor, B. B. Goldberg, and M. S. Ünlü,
“Single nanoparticle detectors for biological applications,” Nanoscale,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 715–726, Feb. 2012.
[19] G. G. Daaboul, C. A. Lopez, A. Yurt, B. B. Goldberg, J. H. Connor, and
M. S. Ünlü, “Label-Free optical biosensors for virus detection and characterization,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 1422–1433, Jul./Aug. 2012.

REDDINGTON et al.: INTERFEROMETRIC REFLECTANCE IMAGING SENSOR FOR POINT OF CARE VIRAL DIAGNOSTICS

[20] M. R. Monroe, G. G. Daaboul, A. Tuysuzoglu, C. A. Lopez, F. F. Little,
and M. S. Ünlü, “Single nanoparticle detection for multiplexed protein
diagnostics with attomolar sensitivity in serum and unprocessed whole
blood,” Analytical Chem., vol. 85, no. 7, pp. 3698–3706, 2013.
[21] C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by
Small particles. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1998.
[22] L. Novotny and B. Hecht, Principles of Nano-optics. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006.
[23] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–110, Nov. 2004.
[24] T. Lindeberg, “Scale-Space Theory : A basic tool for analysing structures
at different scales,” J. Appl. Statist., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 224–270, 1994.
[25] C. Harris and M. Stephens, “A combined corner and edge detector,” in
Proc. 4th Alvey Vis. Conf., 1988, pp. 147–152.
[26] J. M. Mateos-Pérez, R. Redondo, R. Nava, J. C. Valdiviezo, G. Cristóbal,
B. Escalante-Ramı́rez, M. J. Ruiz-Serrano, J. Pascau, and M. Desco,
“Comparative evaluation of autofocus algorithms for a real-time system
for automatic detection of mycobacterium tuberculosis,” Cytometry Part
A : J. Int. Soc. Advancement Cytometry, vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 213–221, Mar.
2012.

Alexander P. Reddington (S’06) received the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from West Virginia
University, Morgantown, WV, USA, in 2008 and the
M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Boston
University, Boston, MA, USA, in 2012. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Boston University with Professor
M. Selim Ünlü at the Optical Characterization and
Nanophotonics (OCN) Laboratory.
His research interest lies in optical instrumentation
development, more specifically label-free biosensors
for translational applications.

Jacob T. Trueb received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Tufts University in 2008 and the
M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Boston
University, Boston, MA, USA, in 2011. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
with Professor M. Selim Ünlü at the Optical Characterization and Nanophotonics (OCN) Laboratory.
His research interests lie in the design and automation of microfluidic lab-on-chip diagnostic platforms.

3283

Ahmet Tuysuzoglu (S’06–M’08–S’13) photograph and biography not available
at the time of publication.

George G. Daaboul, photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.

Carlos A. Lopez, photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.

W. Clem Karl (S’83–M’87–SM’00) photograph and biography not available at
the time of publication.

John H. Connor, photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.

Helen Fawcett, photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.
David S. Freedman (M’12) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and the B.A. degree
in economics from the University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA, in 2005, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from Boston University, Boston, MA, USA, in 2010 from the VLSI and
Neural Net Systems (VNNS) Laboratory.
He is currently a Research Engineer at the Center
for Neuroscience, Boston University, where his research goals are to develop wireless brain machine
interfaces. Prior to that, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with Professor M. Selim Ünlü at Boston University’s Optical Characterization and Nanophotonics (OCN) Laboratory where he developed addressable optically powered neural stimulators for use in the spinal cord.

M. Selim Ünlü (S’90–M’91–SM’95–F’07) photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

