562

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Nonparametric Network Design and Analysis of
Disease Genes in Oral Cancer Progression
K. Kalantzaki, E. S. Bei, K. P. Exarchos, M. Zervakis, Member, IEEE, M. Garofalakis, Member, IEEE,
and D. I. Fotiadis, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Biological networks in living organisms can be seen as
the ultimate means of understanding the underlying mechanisms in
complex diseases, such as oral cancer. During the last decade, many
algorithms based on high-throughput genomic data have been developed to unravel the complexity of gene network construction
and their progression in time. However, the small size of samples
compared to the number of observed genes makes the inference of
the network structure quite challenging. In this study, we propose
a framework for constructing and analyzing gene networks from
sparse experimental temporal data and investigate its potential in
oral cancer. We use two network models based on partial correlations and kernel density estimation, in order to capture the genetic
interactions. Using this network construction framework on real
clinical data of the tissue and blood at different time stages, we
identified common disease-related structures that may decipher
the association between disease state and biological processes in
oral cancer. Our study emphasizes an altered MET (hepatocyte
growth factor receptor) network during oral cancer progression.
In addition, we demonstrate that the functional changes of gene
interactions during oral cancer progression might be particularly
useful for patient categorization at the time of diagnosis and/or at
follow-up periods.
Index Terms—Gene network construction, kernel density
estimation (KDE), oral cancer, partial correlation (PC).

I. INTRODUCTION
RAL carcinogenesis is a multistep process implicating
numerous genetic events such as changes of oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes [1], justifying that oral cancer can
be conceptualized by means of networks of molecular interactions. Moreover, functional associations between different
genes within molecular networks that organize specific biological processes could reveal possible aetiopathological mech-

O

Manuscript received March 12, 2013; revised June 27, 2013; accepted July
17, 2013. Date of publication July 24, 2013; date of current version March 3,
2014. This work was supported in part by the “OASYS” project funded by the
NSRF 2007-13 of the Greek Ministry of Development, by the “YPERThEN”
project, which are funded by the INTERREG programs, and by the European
Commission NeoMark project (FP7-ICT-2007-224483—ICT enabled prediction of cancer reoccurrence).
K. Kalantzaki, E. S. Bei, M. Zervakis, and M. Garofalakis are with the
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Technical University of
Crete, Chania 73100, Greece (e-mail: kkalantzaki@isc.tuc.gr; abei@isc.tuc.gr;
michalis@display.tuc.gr; minos@acm.org).
K. P. Exarchos and D. I. Fotiadis are with the Department of Materials
Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, Ioannina 45110, Greece
(e-mail: kexarcho@gmail.com; fotiadis@cc.uoi.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2274643

anisms of various diseases, including oral cancer. A variety
of high-throughput experimental data, such as DNA microarray and ChIP-chip technology allow the simultaneous measurements of expression levels and generate large datasets associated
with various cellular procedures [2].
The extended study of such datasets has provided a new perspective in gene–gene network association studies, with the network construction from experimental data being a promising
approach in modeling functional processes. Gene regulatory
networks (GRN) [3] have provided insight in understanding
the working mechanisms of the cell under pathophysiological
conditions, as their structure allows the modeling of causal associations. Understanding molecular pathways at the wholegenome level, however, remains a major challenge. Thus, the
study of GRNs from diseased tissue is crucial to understanding
complex cancer phenotypes and inventing effective therapeutic
regimens [4].
Several computational methodologies have been applied to
construct biological networks using different data sources [5].
The main focus of networking approaches is to build targetindependent networks that describe the pair-wise relations between molecules. Within the last few years, several advanced
approaches to address the construction of biological networks
from gene-expression data have emerged. These include linear
and nonlinear models [6], [7], Boolean network models [8],
Bayesian networks [9], [10], Pearson’s correlation-based approaches [11], [12], and clustering and classification algorithms
[13]–[15]. Although these methods have been successfully used
to elucidate the functional relationship between genes and pathways, they are unlikely to directly output the specific gene networks in response to abnormal physiological conditions such
as diseases, due to experimental errors and the genetic complexity [5], [6], [16]. Their main drawback is their limited performance when the experimental data is insufficient, especially
when the number of the features under examination exceeds
the number of samples. This makes the estimation of a network
structure a challenging problem due to the uncertainty in the
computation of the correlation matrix. The information contained in the expression data is limited by the tissue quality, the
experimental design, noise, and measurement errors. These factors negatively affect the estimation of causal relationships in the
network structure and the derivations of dependences enclosed
between neighbored genes [12].
Kernel-based models have demonstrated very competitive
computational performance due to their ability to model nonlinear systems and high-dimension data [19]. Support vector machines and relevance vector machines [17] have been applied

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KALANTZAKI et al.: NONPARAMETRIC NETWORK DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF DISEASE GENES IN ORAL CANCER PROGRESSION

in prototype organisms and protein–protein networks. In this
context, the problem of data scarcity is addressed as a kernelapproximation problem for network estimation. Kernel regression model [18] is also a promising technique for gene network
analysis with high-throughput genomic data, which could be
effectively used for detecting possible altered associations of
modules at various disease states. Moreover, in order to identify
gene modules associated with diseases or changing conditions,
several methods [18] have been developed by integrating gene
expression data. A disease-associated active module can be considered as a connected subnetwork or dysfunctional pathway in
an interaction network, which has close relationship with a specific disease. Similarly, there exist studies [19] that analyze the
underlying mechanisms of differential pathways and molecules
responsible for abnormalities of a specific disease.
The analysis reported herein is an effort in revealing and
modeling the interrelationships of molecules in oral cancer that
participate in many different pathways incriminated for this
disease. The proposed method for network construction is based
on kernel density estimation (KDE), as an attempt to model the
nonlinear effect of gene interactions and fill the information loss
from the data samples. The novelty of our approach relates to
the use of kernels for identifying the genetic dependences in
the network structure, instead of using estimators as in previous
studies. Our framework is applied on experimental blood data of
oral cancer patients received from four successive follow-ups.
The goal is to reveal the differences in the network structure
between different time stages, in addition to conspicuous genes
that play a central role in all stages of the disease. Furthermore,
by applying our framework to tissue dataset, we successively
identify common disease-related structures which are known
as molecular modules responsible for oral cancer. Importantly,
our framework can be extended to other data types, besides gene
expression. According to receiver operator characteristic (ROC)
curves, KDE outperforms partial correlation (PC) with the area
under the curve (AUC) reaching 83% and 77%, respectively.
Our study exemplifies the central role of MET protooncogene
and MET network in oral cancer, as well as its interactions with
EGFR, HIF1A, and MAGEA6, which may be of importance in
oral cancer progression.
II. METHODS AND PROCEDURES
A. Proposed Framework
A generic framework for gene network construction composed of three parts is employed, i.e., network formation based
on direct relations, enhancement with indirect interactions, and
edge orientation. The first two parts referring to network construction are focusing on PC and KDE approaches, but any other
network construction method can also be applied. The third part
is enforcing genetic causality according to the Bayesian information criterion (BIC). One of the novelties of our framework
is the exploitation of not only direct but also indirect genetic
interaction. Furthermore, the framework emphasizes the use of
the cross-correlation metric, as demonstrated in the KDE approach, as well as the exploitation of causality, by means of
the BIC criterion. The application of our framework to specific

563

datasets provides insight into its effectiveness and reliability, as
presented in Section III.
1) PC Estimation: Pairwise associations of coexpressed
molecules can be modeled through Pearson’s correlation. The
interaction identification between two variables is reduced to
estimating the covariance matrix S. Each element in Sik , via
Sik = ρik σi σk and Sii = σi2 represents the correlation coefficient ρik between nodes Xi and Xk and indicates an association,
while σi2 denotes the variance of node Xi . A high correlation
coefficient between any two genes may be indicative of either
a direct interaction or an indirect interaction or a regulation by
a common gene. However, for the construction of a gene association network, only the direct interactions are of interest as
only these correspond to edges between two nodes (genes) in
the resulting graph.
The method of PCs [20] measures the correlation between
two variables after the common effects of all other variables
are removed. An appropriate notion of the strength for these
interactions is the PC matrix Π = (π ik ). Its coefficients πik ,
describe the correlation between genes i and k conditioned on
all remaining genes of the network. This property is reflected in
the inverse covariance matrix S −1 , with elements
πik = − 

−1
Sik

Sii−1 Sk−1
k

.

(1)

Given the experimental data, the covariance matrix is computed, and then, it is inverted. Indeed, using (1) the PCs, πik , can
be easily computed. Significantly small values of |π ik | indicate
conditional independence between i and k given the remaining
variables in graph. On the contrary, high values of |π ik | indicate
dependence between i and k, suggesting the addition of an edge
between these nodes.
Despite its straightforward nature, this approach is only applicable if the sample number in the dataset is larger than the
number of genes/proteins. Otherwise, the inversion of S is unstable making the estimation of S −1 a nontrivial task. To overcome
this obstacle, we invert S using the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse [11], an approximation of the standard matrix inverse,
based on the singular value decomposition.
2) KDE: The KDE [17], [18], [21], [22] is a nonparametric
approach that estimates the probability density function (pdf) of
a random variable. Assume that a generic network is developed
based on a limited genomic independent identically distributed
dataset X = (x1 , . . .,xn ), where xi denotes the sample i of gene
X. KDE allows the estimation of X as follows:


n
x − xi
1 
K
fˆh =
(2)
nh i=1
h
−1

2

1
e 2 u is a symmetric positive definite Gauswhere K(u) = 2π
sian function, n is dataset’s size of the gene X, and h > 0 is a
smoothing parameter, the bandwidth that controls the extent of
the kernel [21].
Genes interacting with each other can be expressed as a network. The gene expression data provides valuable information
on a gene’s activity, which can be represented by weights of
genes and interactions in the network. Formally, an interaction

564

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

network with weighted nodes and weighted edges can be expressed as G = (V, E), where node set V represents genes and
edge set E represents interactions. Under the assumption that
gene and gene products share similarities in datasets, the problem of network construction is reduced to the examination of
independence between nodes Xi and Xk , through the Pearson’s
cross correlation test:
fh (Xi , Xk ) = fh (Xi ) ∗ fh (Xk ).

(3)

The smaller the absolute difference between the two sides
of the equation, the more independent the corresponding nodes
are. In contrast, high absolute difference indicates dependence
between Xi and Xk , and thus, connection between the candidate
nodes. This means that Xi and Xk , share common information
characteristics that imply interaction. Reducing this scheme to
correlations tests, the more correlated the two sides of the aforementioned equation, the more independent genes Xi and Xk
are. Otherwise, the candidate genes share dependences which
imply association.
3) Effects of External Genes: The poor performance of biological network reconstruction is a well-known problem that
has been extensively addressed, especially when dealing only
with expression data. The problem is attributed to the large number of false-positive (FP) predicted interactions and a dominant
idea to address it is to characterize the produced associations
according to gene ontology (GO) terms at a higher level of processes [23], [24]. Other approaches [25], [26] introduce new
topological metrics that justify each molecular connectivity and
associate it with a biological process. Due to the complicated
nature of molecule associations, we propose to accept not only
known direct associations between pairs of genes, but also connections that are induced by external molecules [27], which can
be identified in various available databases [24]. By exploiting
this knowledge, we can examine indirect interactions between
the studied genes, taking into account all the possible external
pathways that connect these molecules. Thus, several initially
assigned FP edges can be characterized true positive as a result
of multiple effects of external molecules.
Other supporting evidence for revisiting the consideration
of edges as FP is that the actual interactions are either physical or genetic, which may not be direct interactions. Thus, the
computed precision may be lower than the actual performance,
since links may be missing in the databases of the known direct interactions. Similarly, the recall presented may be lower
than the actual recall, partly because some of the links reported
in the databases may be indirect [24] and partly because some
presently unsupported edges in the constructed network may
find experimental evidence in the near future. Therefore, many
unsupported edges may not necessarily be FPs.
In order to compare the performance of the proposed framework with and without external interactions, we employ the ROC
and precision–recall curves, as described by Davis and Goadrich
(2006) [28]. For this purpose, we consider a ground-truth network that encompasses the available biological knowledge
of many public databases and compare it with our network’s
structure. We use the following notation: TP is the number of
edges present in the ground-truth network and in the predicted

Fig. 1. Graphical representation of the TP, FP, TN, and FN edges according to
the existent knowledge of the ground-truth network. External genes are represented with triangles, while studied genes with circles. External pathways that
indirectly connect studied genes give TP connections.

network; FP is the number of edges not present in the groundtruth network but included in the predicted network; FN is the
number of edges present in the ground-truth network but not in
the predicted network; TN is the number of edges not present in
the ground-truth network and also not included in the predicted
network. The aforementioned definitions are graphically illustrated in Fig. 1. We consider TP as the existent edges in both
networks. Also, when a predicted interaction is verified through
indirect associations with external factors (triangle genes) then
the predicted association is set as TP. Finally, we consider FN
as nonexistent in the ground truth but predicted direct and/or
indirect interactions, while TN are edges that are not present
in the constructed and ground-truth networks neither as direct
nor as indirect connections. With this approach, we examine if
the predicted interactions are verified as indirect implications
through external genes that participate in different pathways.
4) Edge Orientation: Up to this point, we have reviewed two
approaches in revealing the network structure, thus providing an
intuition on whether two nodes interact. Nevertheless, these approaches do not imply anything about directionality, indicating
which node is the cause and which is the effect. In order to determine the edge orientation for the aforementioned networks,
we have to examine the causality between pairs of nodes. For
instance, considering two nodes, we can define two models, i.e.,
model M1 , where node Xi is the parent of node Xk and model
M2 , where node Xk is the parent of node Xi .
Model selection procedures cannot distinguish the aforementioned models because their distributions f (.) or likelihoods are
equivalent. In other words, the variation in the level of node Xi
causing a variation on node Xk yields the same joint density as
the reverse situation [29], [30]:
f (Xk |Xi ) f (Xi ) = f (Xi , Xk ) = f (Xk )f (Xi |Xk ) .

(4)

Therefore, the distinction between models M1 and M2 is
made by inferring direction of causality between nodes using a
scoring function, the BIC criterion [29]
BIC = −2 log L̂ + K log N

(5)

where L̂ is the maximum likelihood, K the number of parameters to be estimated in the model, and N denotes the sample

KALANTZAKI et al.: NONPARAMETRIC NETWORK DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF DISEASE GENES IN ORAL CANCER PROGRESSION

565

size. A model is better than another if it has a smaller BIC value.
Thus, for each edge orientation, a BIC score is computed and
the edge direction is decided in favor of the lowest BIC value.
BIC also offers the advantage of introducing larger penalty
for the number of parameters, resulting in highly reliable edge
directions [31]. In more complex networks, edges are oriented
by splitting the graph structure into smaller subnetworks. For
each node, the number of its connected edges is counted. Nodes
are then arranged in descending order in terms of the number
of connected nodes. A node and all the nodes that are directly
connected to it form a subnetwork. For each subnetwork, the
BIC score is computed for each edge that connects a pair of
nodes, containing all other causative nodes to that pair.

TABLE I
GENE–GENE INTERACTIONS FOR THE FIRST FOLLOW-UP ON BLOOD SAMPLESa

B. Oral Cancer Dataset

rectness (ERBB4) and as positive (FGFR1) or negative (BRCA1,
MBNL1, PARK7) reference for oral cancer (STable I). The estimated network structure from blood samples is compared with
all temporal stages, as well as with the network produced from
tissue samples at the first diagnosis.
In order to perform functional enrichment tests of the selected genes of each molecular network, we used WebGestalt
(WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit) for GO term analysis. WebGestalt (Version 2.0) applies the hypergeometric test
for the enrichment of GO terms in the selected genes, and the
Benjamini and Hochberg method for the multiple test adjustment (adjP ) [33].

The framework is applied on a dataset related to oral cancer [32] which includes 86 subjects [NeoMark project, FP7-ICT2007-224483, ICT enabled prediction of cancer reoccurrence—
D6.1: Research protocol] that have been enrolled from three
major clinical centers residing in Italy (University Hospital of
Parma and National Cancer Center Regina Elena) and Spain
(MD Anderson Cancer Center). All patients have been diagnosed with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and have
reached remission, after successful therapeutic intervention (i.e.,
surgery, chemo/radiotherapy). Thereafter, gene expression data
were collected both from the primary tumor as well as from circulating blood cells, at the baseline state of the patient. The clinical data contain standard measurements and laboratory markers
from the patient’s medical record as well as pathology and risk
factor data referring to the organism as a whole. More detailed
clinical information has been recently described by Exarchos
et al. [32].
The oral cancer dataset consists of 1) tissue genomic data from
diagnosis (86 samples), 2) blood genomic data (23 samples), and
3) blood genomic follow-up data (maximum 23 samples) [32].
Four different time stages were analyzed, corresponding to the
first, third, sixth, and ninth months after the initial diagnosis.
Notice that, during the follow-up periods the sample numbers
were reduced (from 23 at first to 10 at third, 13 at sixth, and 4
at ninth month). The network constructed from blood samples
is considered for all temporal stages, and is also compared with
the one produced by the tissue samples at the point of the first
diagnosis.
The proposed framework is applied on both blood and tissue
datasets. In order to discover functional associations between
genes in the constructed networks and possible network changes
during disease progression from a large amount of genomic expression data, we generated gene interaction networks by entering specific genes as input in the graphical model. These genes
are selected based on the literature, and particularly, on a set of
previously implicated genes for oral cancer [NeoMark project,
FP7-ICT-2007-224483, ICT enabled prediction of cancer reoccurrence], [32]. The final gene list consists of 110 genes that
are related to oral cancer disease and five control genes that are
not related to oral cancer (Supplementary (S) Table I). Control
genes are included in this list in order to test the algorithm cor-

III. RESULTS
A. Statistical Results
In order to investigate the statistical properties of the proposed methodology, we apply PC and KDE approaches to reveal
the network structure from gene expression data. In a previous
work [34], our framework was applied on the prototype organism Arabidopsis thaliana on developing seeds harvested at
5, 7, 9, 11, and 13 days after flowering. This analysis gave a
clear advantage for KDE over PC in revealing gene–gene and
gene and/or protein associations. For pdf estimation, we follow the Parzen approach with a Gaussian kernel function, since
the histogram of genes in the preprocessing stage approximate
Gaussian characteristics. In this study, we examine the biological performance on the human organism for the oral cancer
disease. We compare the performance of both algorithms and
investigate the biological implications of our results.
1) Direct Interactions: Table I presents the number of gene
interactions on blood samples, for the first follow-up. Accordingly, Table II presents the gene associations on tissue samples.
Both tables present the number of TP edges that PC and KDE
identified among a set of experimentally known genetic interactions [35]. The first column describes different thresholds th
for PC set on PC for (1) (πik ≥ th), while the second column
provides the thresholds of correlation r between the two members of (3) for KDE (r ≤ th). The 3–4 columns summarize the
verified numbers of direct and indirect gene to gene interactions
for both approaches. The fifth and sixth columns present the
number of new edges that have occurred for each threshold,

566

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

TABLE II
GENE–GENE INTERACTIONS ON TISSUE SAMPLESa

respectively, while the last two columns describe the number of
edges that changed orientation according to the BIC criterion.
We compared the performance of the two approaches, taking into account existing information on molecular interactions
from the BioGRID (Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets) public database (version 3.2.95), an interaction repository with data from model organisms and humans.
BioGRID is a database that archives and provides both genetic
and protein interactions from humans (150273 protein and 1622
gene interaction data) curated from high-throughput datasets as
well as individual focused studies, as derived from over 19000
primary publications [36]. For the 115 selected genes (110 oral
cancer related genes and five control genes), BioGRID database
derived 3380 direct and indirect interactions (65 genetic and
3315 protein interactions; accessed on December 2012) among
them and at most three external genes. Notice that the currently available information provided 63 direct interactions between the examined molecules. In addition, we validated all new
interactions created from our network-construction framework
using Human Integrated Protein-Protein Interaction rEference
(HIPPIE) and we discovered that only these 63 direct interactions have protein interaction annotations in the current human
interactome reference [35].
Thus, the goal of our study at this stage was to examine
how many of these available associations can be verified from
expression data. The results for the inferred networks with the
PC algorithm indicate that, as thresholds increase, the graph
becomes sparser with fewer interactions verified. This is due
to the lack of strong PCs between molecular units. However,
as the thresholds of KDE increase, correlation also increases.
This implies that genes are found to be less independent, more
interactions are identified and the graph becomes more cohesive.
The two approaches reveal that the molecules under examination do not present high association. This is deduced by the
extracted interactions for the various thresholds. For PC at high
thresholds, there are only few strong associations; for KDE at
lower thresholds of similarity, there is some indication of dependence. However, for these thresholds, the actual number of
intense associations is small. The aforementioned observation
indicates that molecules from various pathways are not likely to
directly interact. This is also verified by the small number of the
direct genetic interactions. Thus, in addition to direct interac-

tions it would be of great interest to take into consideration the
external influence of additional molecules, for which we expect
indirect associations with the 115 genes under examination.
Tables I and II provide the numbers of verified direct interactions. Comparing the performance of the two methodologies,
KDE appears to behave better in capturing the biological associations. More precisely, KDE identifies up to 86% of known
genetic direct interactions for the blood constructed network
and up to 79% of known direct interactions for the tissue network. These percentages for PC are 66% and 65%, respectively.
To further reinforce this statement, we present in Fig. 2 the
true positive rate for the networks constructed from all monthly
follow-ups. This figure (see Fig. 2) justify KDE’s superiority
in detecting existent interactions over PC for all oral cancer
stages. Surprisingly, for the last follow-up [see Fig. 2(d)], PC
was unable to generate a reliable network due to small patients’
attendance at that time. In fact, for this stage, PC gave for all
different thresholds almost 6500 new connections due to instabilities of the correlation matrix inversion.
To assess the network reconstruction ability, we counted true
positives-TP (correctly identified true edges), false positivesFP (spurious edges), true negatives-TN (correctly identified
zero-edges), and false negatives-FN (not recognized true edges)
edges. In order to specify the optimal threshold for each algorithm, the size of the graph has to be taken into consideration. This is necessitated by the fact that as the graph becomes
denser, more interactions are generated. Thus, the probability
of capturing preexisting associations increases. Fig. 3 presents
the performance of the two methodologies for all thresholds,
according to the F -score metric [28]
F =

2∗ precision∗ recall
.
precision + recall

(6)

For each temporal instant, the F-score analysis derives the
thresholds 0.7, 0.9, 0.75, and 0.75 for KDE and 0.5, 0.6, and
0.15 for PC, respectively. We note that the fourth instant does
not provide a reliable network for PC. Similarly, the appropriate
thresholds for both algorithms on the tissue network are 0.88
and 0.3, respectively.
From a statistical perspective, many FP edges were found
(leading to low F-score). However, this aspect needs further
discussion to reveal its valid implications. The FP rate of connections becomes large due to the fact that we consider only
the direct interactions that have been biologically confirmed.
In practice, the majority of molecules participate in a variety
of biological processes. As a consequence, they affect (or, are
affected) by many external factors participating in pathways
that connect indirectly with the molecules under examination.
Therefore, we expect that external factors define many more
interactions that have not been established yet. This inclusion
of direct connections through external pathways is a valid assumption that contributes to the consideration of relevant FPs
and the correct interpretation of the performance metric.
2) Indirect Interactions Using External Genes: In Section
II-A3, we stressed the need to examine the indirect associations through external genes that connect molecules in other

KALANTZAKI et al.: NONPARAMETRIC NETWORK DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF DISEASE GENES IN ORAL CANCER PROGRESSION

Fig. 2.

True positive rate for all time stages on blood samples.

Fig. 3.

F-score metric for all follow-ups on blood samples.

pathways, to justify interactions between the analyzed genes.
However, it is too expensive to validate the full set of predictions experimentally [27]. During the last decade, interaction databases have grown exponentially. More than 230 webaccessible biological pathway and network databases have been
created. In order to integrate molecular interactions and other

567

types of high-throughput data from different public databases
toward automatically building biological networks, we used
BioNetBuilder [24] which is an open- source client-server Cytoscape plug-in and offers a user-friendly interface to create
biological networks integrated from several databases. For the
studied genes, BioNetBuilder retrieved more than 300 000

568

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Fig. 4. (a–d) ROC comparison between KDE and PC for the blood samples. For the ninth month, PC cannot derive a reliable network structure. Apparently
KDE results in larger AUC for all cases. (e) ROC curve comparison between KDE and PC for the tissue network. KDE outperforms PC as it covers larger AUC.
(f) Precision versus Recall comparison between KDE and PC for the tissue network. The precision has been significantly improved from the initial approach,
which considers only 63 interconnections as TP.

interactions with more than 25 000 genes from the following
databases: (BIND, 11631); (BioGrid, 24313); (DIP, 1387); (IntAct, 20201); (Interologger, 24136); (KEGG, 112230); (MINT,
11411); (MPPI, 469); (Prolinks, 136770). The resulting network through extensive consideration of available biological
knowledge is considered as the ground truth, against which we
compare our analysis.
Bolded columns in Tables I and II present the results according to the above analysis for the blood and tissue samples,
respectively. According to ground-truth network, apart from the
63 direct edges there are 1558 indirect implications; these result when a maximum of three external genes is considered (see
Fig. 1). Furthermore, from the 115 analyzed genes, there are
22 uncharacterized, for which BioNetBuilder resulted in none
association; in our framework, we did not take into account
edges connecting these genes. Notice that for this reason the
number of new edges (columns 5 and 6) in Table II differs from
Table I, which include all edges. In order to specify the number
of TN associations, we found all the possible interactions between the 115 studied genes and from this set, we omitted the TP
interactions (direct, indirect). In total, the set of TN associations
comprised of 2657 edges.
Fig. 4 presents the ROC curves for the blood samples associated with the four follow-ups [see Fig. 4(a)–(d)], while
Fig. 4(e) presents the ROC curve for the tissue network. For
all listed cases, KDE outperforms PC as the AUC is larger compared to PC. Furthermore, both algorithms show improvement
in performance after taking the external genetic influence into
consideration. In fact, the equivalent plots of precision and recall, Figs. 5(a)–(d) and 4(f), show significant improvement for
all studied cases. The diagrams show the levels of precision
comparing the initial approach based on the 63 direct interactions, with the proposed idea based on the 1558 indirect external
interactions. In fact, the latter approach considers many more
edges for which there exists an indirect pathway through external
molecules. Considering these edges, precision greatly improves

for all network cases, reaching quite high levels, to support the
conclusion that expression data enclose dependences from a variety of sources. Therefore, when dealing with expression data,
direct associations obtained from statistical analysis should be
interpreted as possible indirect influences of external factors
and not as spurious edges. In fact, the MET-CD44 interaction
that was found as TP external association is also verified by the
updated HIPPIE version as direct association.
B. Biological Discussion
After the basic gene structure, we first analyze the global organization of the gene network by examining the major gene
clusters. Groups of genes that are densely connected to each
other in the network may represent functional modules in which
the genes are highly related in function and/or cooperate in
some biological processes. We performed k-means cluster analysis [37] on the primary gene expression data and recovered five
major clusters [see Fig. 6(a) and (b)]. As shown in Fig. 6(a) and
(b), the content and structure of blood and tissue networks based
on gene interactions are different at the first visit to the doctor.
For the remaining time stages, the network on blood samples
preserves a similar structure, with small variations among the
peripheral genes. To explore whether the selected genes share
specific functional features, we performed GO enrichment analysis using WebGestalt [33]. The genes in the same cluster are
densely connected with each other [see Fig. 6(b)], and GO analysis indicates that these five gene clusters are enriched in certain
GO annotation terms (STable II).
The enriched GO terms support the current knowledge about
the multiple functional roles of the implicated genes in oral cancer as well as in the disease progression [1], [38]. Regardless
of GO terms in the category of biological process, we found
that cell proliferation (adjP = 6.94 × 10−9 ), regulation of cell
proliferation (adjP = 2.58 × 10−7 ), and regulation of cell cycle
(adjP = 4.48 × 10−7 ) are significantly enriched in these gene

KALANTZAKI et al.: NONPARAMETRIC NETWORK DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF DISEASE GENES IN ORAL CANCER PROGRESSION

569

Fig. 5. (a–d) Precision versus Recall comparison between KDE and PC for all cases on blood samples. KDE (63) and PC (63) represent the networks considering
as TP the set of 63 direct interactions, while KDE and PC curves represent the performance considering as TP all direct and indirect edges. KDE outperforms PC
reaching higher levels of precision and recall for all periods. For the ninth month, PC could not result in a reliable network structure.

Fig. 6. (a) K-means clustering on the blood samples from the first follow-up and (b) on tissue samples. Five clusters were identified as presented in the grouped
areas in both networks. Highlighted are the common “intersection” genes MET, EGFR, HIF1A, and MAGEA6.

clusters of both blood and tissue samples, as well as in blood
follow up samples (see Fig. 6(a) and (b); SFigs. 1(a) and (b),
and 2(a) and (b); STable II). Overall, each cluster is dominated
by distinct GO terms, a number of which is also present in other
clusters, however, with varying statistical significance. More
importantly, the enrichment significance of specific GO terms
varies between blood and tissue samples and/or time stages
(e.g., cell cycle, regulation of cell cycle, regulation of apoptosis, positive regulation of locomotion), accompanied by the
reorganization of many genes (e.g., TP53, EGFR, MET, HIF1A,
CDH1, MMP2, MMP9, MMP11, CD44) in these five clusters
(STables I, II). Furthermore, OSCC development depends on

the accumulation of multiple genetic changes. During the multistep process of oral tumorigenesis, the normal functions of
protooncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are modified, thus
affecting regulation of cell cycle, cell proliferation and death,
DNA repair, cell differentiation and immunity [36], [38], and
cellular processes which are reflected by the above enriched GO
terms but also by less significant GO terms (SFigs. 1(a) and (b),
and 2(a) and (b); STable II).
To investigate the biological meaning of the proposed framework, we found the intersections of the blood-based networks
for all stages. The appropriate thresholds for each stage were
chosen according to the F-score metric, as is presented in

570

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Fig. 7. Network intersection for the blood and tissue. The left part (a) presents the intersection of all time stages for the blood samples; The Right part (b) presents
the network intersection between the tissue and the blood from the first follow-up. Highlighted are the common “intersection” genes MET, EGFR, HIF1A, and
MAGEA6.

section III-A1. Fig. 7 presents the “intersection genes,” i.e.,
genes that are induced by the network intersection for all time
stages for the blood samples (see Fig. 7(a); STable IIIc), as well
as the intersection of tissue network with the blood from the
first time stage (see Fig. 7(b); STable IIIc). Fig. 7(a) and (b)
depicts a number of oncogenes (e.g., EGFR), tumor suppressor
genes (e.g., TP53), transcription factors (e.g., RUNX3, HIF1A,
AR), and other important molecules in many aspects of multistep tumor development (e.g., KRT8, KRT18, MMP9, MMP11,
CDH1, CDH3, MAGEA6, ENO1, CDKN1C, SDC1, LEPRE1)
and highlight the central role of the protooncogene MET on both
tissue and blood/follow-up samples. The MET gene product,
hepatocyte growth factor receptor, is a protooncogenic receptor
tyrosine kinase and its activation elicits cell proliferation, cell
scattering, survival, invasion, and angiogenesis. MET deregulation promotes tumor formation, growth, progression and metastasis as well as resistance to therapy. Due to its key role in cancer
development and progression, it is also a potential candidate for
therapeutic intervention [1], [39].
In an attempt to investigate the network structure at different
stages in the oral cancer disease, we compute the intersections
of sequential follow-ups. Fig. 8 presents the networks in groups
which have a common degree. The degree as a topology metric
shows the number of links that a node has with another in the
network. Especially in biological networks, the degree is an
important metric that highlights genes with high connectivity
playing an important role in the disease development [26]. The
temporal development of the network is demonstrated in Fig. 8,
presenting the sequential network intersections of the blood
samples.
By examining the important molecules in Fig. 7, we conclude
on the following:
1) For the temporal development of network intersection of
the blood samples (see Fig. 7(a); STable IIIa and c):

a) all genes have extremely low degree (1 or 2 or 4)
on blood samples at the first time stage, with the
exception of MET (109);
b) all genes have higher degrees at the third and sixthmonth follow-up and acquire their highest degree
(107 or 114) at ninth-month follow-up;
c) MET degree is slightly higher (114) at the third and
sixth-month follow-up and very low (13) at ninthmonth follow-up, through the loss of genes [26], [40]
and possibly as a result of disease-causing mutations
[41].
2) For the intersection of tissue with the blood network for
the first time-stage (see Fig. 7(b); STable IIIa and c):
a) all genes have extremely low degree (1 or 2) on blood
samples at the first time stage, with the exception of
KRT18 (24) and MET (109);
b) all genes have higher degrees (39 to 114) with the
exception of MET that has lower degree (38) on
tissue samples (similar to blood follow-up samples
[26], [40], [42]).
3) For both network intersections (see Figs. 7 and 8; STable
IIIa and c):
a) MET interacts with EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor), HIF1A (transcriptional factor hypoxia
inducible factor 1 α) and MAGEA6 (melanoma antigen family A, 6);
b) MET interacts with important molecules that are not
or loosely connected themselves;
c) MET interactions with its neighboring molecules
appear to change drastically in time and among
tissue and blood samples compared to all other disease genes; this is demonstrated more clearly during
disease progression, in particular, at the last stage
considered.

KALANTZAKI et al.: NONPARAMETRIC NETWORK DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF DISEASE GENES IN ORAL CANCER PROGRESSION

571

Fig. 8. Network intersection for sequential time stages on blood samples. (a) Network intersection between the first and third month. (b) Network intersection
between the third and sixth month. (c) Network intersection between the sixth and ninth month. Highlighted are the common “intersection” genes MET, EGFR,
HIF1A, and MAGEA6.

It is obvious from the aforementioned results that MET plays
a crucial role in oral cancer. Further emphasizing on the biological effects of the aforementioned intersections, the proposed
dynamic networks exemplify the following issues: 1) MET interacts consistently with EGFR, HIF1 A and MAGEA6 at both
tissue and blood samples and during OSCC progression (Figs. 7,
8). Despite the known MET/EGFR association in cancer [43],
the existence of the MET/HIF1A and MET/MAGEA6 associations remain unknown. However, previous studies [44]–[47],
referring to the functional role of these molecules in cancer and
to their involvement in OSCC further support their potential
interaction with MET and their relevance to oral cancer initiation and progression. For example, the MAGEA6 gene product
(MAGEA6 isexpressed in OSCC) has been reported to bind to
p53 tumor suppressor (TP53) and impair its function causing
decreased apoptosis and increased cell growth [44]. Furthermore, the transcriptional activation of MET protooncogene during hypoxia via HIF1-mediated cascade could possibly explain
the MET overexpression reported in OSCC specimens [45]. In
addition, the EGFR increased expression and its ligand (i.e.,
transforming growth factor alpha) can play a critical role in
oral tumor development and progression; it is recently reported
that both EGFR and MET mediate cellular responses in partly
redundant and partly complementary ways [1], [46]. This counterbalancing activity of MET and EGFR pathways may also be

viewed as a potential target for oral cancer therapeutic intervention [47]. 2) MET interacts with EGFR oncogene and TP53
tumor suppressor gene at blood samples from all disease stages,
partly supporting the existence of a large complex consisting
of many oncogenes, tumor suppressors, and DNA repair proteins [48]. 3) MET loses many of its interactions through the
loss of genes [26], [40] and possibly as a result of diseasecausing mutations; deranged protein–DNA interactions, disruptions of protein–protein interactions due to protein misfolding,
new undesirable protein interactions or pathogen-host protein
interactions are examples of the impact of such disease-causing
mutations [41].
Finally, from k-means clustering,we infer that MET clusters
together with a few other molecules on both tissue and blood
samples; the clustered molecules are often different at different time stages (STable IIIb and c). This aspect illustrates the
contribution of complex signaling pathways in the activation or
repression of specific biological processes, which are indicative of tumor initiation, promotion and progression, and result
in genetic alterations [49]. This also highlights a dynamically
functional reprogramming of a number of implicated genes and
especially MET.
According to a recent study [26], MET could be characterized
as “broker” gene, i.e., a disease gene that holds a crucial position in the network topology as broker interacting with many

572

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

neighboring molecules that are less or not connected with each
other. Cai et al. (2010) suggested that disease genes are found in
especially vulnerable positions in networks, which is a reason of
identifiable disease phenotypes accompanied by their disorganization [26]. MET appears as a highly connected hub molecule
in a central position at the onset of cancer initiation; following
disease progression, it is dynamically reorganized and takes a
peripheral position in the constructed network. This central position has been reported in cancer, where disease genes tend to
encode hubs, although in other pathologies disease genes reside at the periphery of the networks [41]. In addition, recent
studies [50] support that hub proteins displaying modified modularity in the human interactome (like MET) could be useful
markers for predicting oral cancer outcome.
We suggest that MET is a key molecule with unique networktopological features, which are in agreement with its biological
role as protooncogene so that it may be considered vital for oral
cancer. Our findings also support the claim that the networks of
molecular interaction provide information about the alterations
of gene–gene/gene product and/or gene product–gene product
interactions in a complex disease, such as oral cancer. The consideration of the in vivo MET cellular network at a specific
disease state might be an important guide for screening patients
at the time of diagnosis, for predicting oral cancer progression
and for deciding on effective treatment plan.
Although this study attempts a coupling of the mathematical
or computational model to experimental data, the small sample size remains a limiting parameter in estimating the network
structure. Furthermore, even though it offers potential grounds
for biological validation, many predicted outcomes of this analysis are difficult to be validated for clinical use due to the extensive simulation procedures needed for this purpose.

IV. CONCLUSION
Clearly, the KDE approach models quite well the verified
direct and indirect associations among the participating genes in
oral cancer. On the contrary, the PC approach appears to capture
fewer of these associations. Thus, our results indicate that KDE
performs better on the network construction. In addition, while
PC fails in modeling genetic interactions with sparse data, KDE
due to the sample estimation succeeds in capturing biological
interactions. This supports the aforementioned statement that
KDE is resilient in modeling the genetic associations with sparse
experimental data.
Perhaps, the most important contribution of this study is that
it gives a different perspective in revealing genetic interactions
as a result of multiple genetic factors. Within this framework,
we proved that external factors that participate in different pathways affect the genetic expression. Thus, when statistical analysis gives a large amount of typically false edges, indirect pathways should be examined. Moreover, we focused on the edge
interpretation as existenting or not, solely based on expression
data. In fact, due to the analyzed obstacles many studies resort
to characterizing the predicted edges as TP according to the
biological process they participate. This gives an advantage in

boosting our framework’s performance but it introduces generality in justifying the genetic association.
From the biological knowledge point of view, the proposed
framework of analysis provides strong evidence on the importance of MET. More specifically, it suggests an initial central role
of this molecule. This is modified to peripheral with time and
disease progression, while other significant genes like EGFR
take the central role(s). It appears that the activation of the
MET network occurs earlier than the EGFR network, at the onset of the disease. Overall, the specific interplay of HIF1-MET,
MET-EGFR, and MET-MAGEA6 and their associated signaling
cascades may denote key mechanisms of oral cancer initiation
and progression and may carry therapeutic implications. The
provided MET network is not only validated by known interactions but also offer a predictive value of new interactions that
should be further considered experimentally.
APPENDIX
Supplementary (S) information on our work can be found on
http://www.display.tuc.gr/kalan.osccstudy/.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Choi and J. N. Myers, “Molecular pathogenesis of oral squamous cell
carcinoma: Implications for therapy,” J. Dental Res., vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 14–
32, Jan. 2008.
[2] M. Schena, D. Shalon, R. W. Davis, and P. O. Brown, “Quantitative monitoring of gene expression patterns with a complementary DNA microarray,” Science, vol. 270, no. 5235, pp. 467–470, Oct. 1995.
[3] N. Noman and H. Iba, “Inferring gene regulatory networks using differential evolution with local search heuristics,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput.
Biol. Bioinformatics, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 634–647, Oct. 2007.
[4] P. B. Madhamshettiwar, S. R. Maetschke, M. J. Davis, A. Reverter, and
M. A. Ragan, “Gene regulatory network inference: Evaluation and application to ovarian cancer allows the prioritization of drug targets,” Genome
Med., vol. 4, no. 41, pp. 1–15, May 2012.
[5] K. Wang, M. Narayanan, H. Zhong, M. Tompa, E. E. Schadt, and J. Zhu,
“Meta-analysis of inter-species liver co-expression networks elucidates
traits associated with common human diseases,” PLoS Comput. Biol.,
vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 1–16, Dec. 2009.
[6] X. Deng, H. Geng, and H. Ali, “EXAMINE: a computational approach
to reconstructing gene regulatory networks,” Bio Syst., vol. 81, no. 2,
pp. 125–136, Aug. 2005.
[7] Z. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Liang, and V. Vinciotti, “An extended Kalman
filtering approach to modeling nonlinear dynamic gene regulatory networks via short gene expression time series,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput.
Biol. Bioinformatics, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 410–419, Jul. 2009.
[8] I. Shmulevich, E. R. Dougherty, S. Kim, and W. Zhang, “Probabilistic
Boolean Networks: a rule-based uncertainty model for gene regulatory
networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 261–274, Oct. 2002.
[9] N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, and D. Pe’er, “Using Bayesian
networks to analyze expression data,” J. Comput. Biol., vol. 7, no. 3–4,
pp. 601–620, Jan. 2000.
[10] S. Bulashevska, A. Bulashevska, and R. Eils, “Bayesian statistical modelling of human protein interaction network incorporating protein disorder
information,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 11, no. 46, pp. 1–15, Jan. 2010.
[11] J. Schäfer and K. Strimmer, “An empirical Bayes approach to inferring
large-scale gene association networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 6,
pp. 754–64, Mar. 2005.
[12] B. F. Wong, C. K. Carter, and R. Kohn, “Efficient estimation of covariance
selection models,” Biometrika, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 809–830, Dec. 2003.
[13] D. Hanisch, A. Zien, R. Zimmer, and T. Lengauer, “Co-clustering of
biological networks and gene expression data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18,
Suppl. 1, pp. S145–S154, Mar. 2002.
[14] F. Rapaport, A. Zinovyev, M. Dutreix, E. Barillot, and J.-P. Vert, “Classification of microarray data using gene networks,” BMC Bioinformatics,
vol. 8, no. 35, pp. 1–15, Feb. 2007.

KALANTZAKI et al.: NONPARAMETRIC NETWORK DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF DISEASE GENES IN ORAL CANCER PROGRESSION

[15] A. Benso, S. Di Carlo, and G. Politano, “A cDNA microarray gene expression data classifier for clinical diagnostics based on graph theory,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinformatics, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 577–
91, May 2011.
[16] S. Huang, “Gene expression profiling, genetic networks, and cellular
states: an integrating concept for tumorigenesis and drug discovery,” J.
Molecular Med., vol. 77, no. 6, pp. 469–480, Jun. 1999.
[17] C.-C. Wu, S. Asgharzadeh, T. J. Triche, and D. Z. D’Argenio, “Prediction
of human functional genetic networks from heterogeneous data using
RVM-based ensemble learning,” Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 807–
813, Feb. 2010.
[18] Y.-Q. Qiu, S. Zhang, X.-S. Zhang, and L. Chen, “Detecting disease associated modules and prioritizing active genes based on high throughput
data,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 11, no. 26, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2010.
[19] W. Jiang, X. Li, S. Rao, L. Wang, L. Du, C. Li, C. Wu, H. Wang, Y. Wang,
and B. Yang, “Constructing disease-specific gene networks using pairwise relevance metric: Application to colon cancer identifies interleukin
8, desmin and enolase 1 as the central elements,” BMC Syst. Biol., vol. 2,
no. 72, pp. 1–15, Aug. 2008.
[20] J. Schäfer and K. Strimmer, “An empirical Bayes approach to inferring
large-scale gene association networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 6,
pp. 754–764, Sep. 2005.
[21] H. Wang, D. Mirota, and G. D. Hager, “A generalized Kernel Consensusbased robust estimator,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 178–184, Jan. 2010.
[22] R. Boscolo, H. Pan, and V. P. Roychowdhury, “Independent component
analysis based on nonparametric density estimation,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 55–65, Jan. 2004.
[23] F. Browne, H. Wang, H. Zheng, and F. Azuaje, “A knowledge-driven
probabilistic framework for the prediction of protein-protein interaction
networks,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 306–317, Jan. 2010.
[24] F. M. Alakwaa, N. H. Solouma, and Y. M. Kadah, “Construction of gene
regulatory networks using biclustering and Bayesian networks,” Theoretical Biol. Med. Modelling, vol. 8, no. 39, pp. 1–20, Oct. 2011.
[25] J. Chen, W. Hsu, M. L. Lee, and S.-K. Ng, “Increasing confidence of
protein interactomes using network topological metrics,” Bioinformatics,
vol. 22, no. 16, pp. 1998–2004, Jul. 2006.
[26] J. J. Cai, E. Borenstein, and D. A. Petrov, “Broker genes in human disease,” Genome Biol. Evolution, vol. 2, pp. 815–25, Oct. 2010.
[27] N. R. Clark, R. Dannenfelser, C. M. Tan, M. E. Komosinski, and
A. Ma’ayan, “Sets 2 Networks: Network inference from repeated observations of sets,” BMC Syst. Biol., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–22, Jul. 2012.
[28] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall and
ROC curves,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006, pp. 233–240.
[29] E. Chaibub Neto, C. T. Ferrara, A. D. Attie, and B. S. Yandell, “Inferring causal phenotype networks from segregating populations,” Genetics,
vol. 179, no. 2, pp. 1089–1100, Apr. 2008.
[30] X.-W. Chen, G. Anantha, and X. Wang, “An effective structure learning
method for constructing gene networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 11,
pp. 1367–1374, Mar. 2006.
[31] Z. Liu, B. Malone, and C. Yuan, “Empirical evaluation of scoring functions
for Bayesian network model selection,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 13,
no. Suppl 15, p. S14 (1–16), Jan. 2012.
[32] K. P. Exarchos, Y. Goletsis, and D. I. Fotiadis, “A multiscale and multiparametric approach for modeling the progression of oral cancer,” BMC
Med. Inf. Decision Making, vol. 12, no. 136, pp. 1–14, Nov. 2012.
[33] B. Zhang, S. Kirov, and J. Snoddy, “WebGestalt: an integrated system for
exploring gene sets in various biological contexts,” Nucleic Acids Res.,
vol. 33, pp. W741–W748, Apr. 2005.
[34] K. D. Kalantzaki, E. S. Bei, M. Garofalakis, and M. Zervakis, “Biological
Interaction Networks Based on Sparse Temporal Expansion of Graphical
Models,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Bioinformatics Bioeng., 2012,
pp. 460–465.

573

[35] M. H. Schaefer, J.-F. Fontaine, A. Vinayagam, P. Porras, E. E. Wanker,
and M. A. Andrade-Navarro, “HIPPIE: Integrating protein interaction networks with experiment based quality scores,” PloS One, vol. 7, no. 2,
e31826, pp. 1–8, Feb. 2012.
[36] C. Stark, B.-J. Breitkreutz, A. Chatr-Aryamontri, L. Boucher, R. Oughtred,
M. S. Livstone, J. Nixon, K. Van Auken, X. Wang, X. Shi, T. Reguly,
J. M. Rust, A. Winter, K. Dolinski, and M. Tyers, “The BioGRID Interaction Database: 2011 update,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 39, pp. D698–D704,
Nov. 2011.
[37] P. J. Lisboa, T. A. Etchells, I. H. Jarman, and S. J. Chambers, “Finding
reproducible cluster partitions for the k-means algorithm,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 14, Suppl. 1, no. S8, pp. 1–19, Sep. 2013.
[38] S. D. da Silva, A. Ferlito, R. P. Takes, R. H. Brakenhoff, M. D. Valentin,
J. A. Woolgar, C. R. Bradford, J. P. Rodrigo, A. Rinaldo, M. P. Hier, and
L. P. Kowalski, “Advances and applications of oral cancer basic research,”
Oral Oncology, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 783–791, Sep. 2011.
[39] C. M. Stellrecht and V. Gandhi, “MET receptor tyrosine kinase as a therapeutic anticancer target,” Cancer Lett., vol. 280, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Oct.
2009.
[40] J. P. A. Bánkfalvi, M. Krassort, I. B Buchwalow, A. Végh, and
E. Felszeghy, “Gains and losses of adhesion molecules (CD44, E-cadherin,
and β-catenin) during oral carcinogenesis and tumour progression,” J.
Pathology, vol. 198, no. 3, pp. 343–351, Jul. 2002.
[41] M. W. Gonzalez and M. G. Kann, “Chapter 4: protein interactions and
disease,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 8, no. 12, e1002819, pp. 1–11, Dec.
2012.
[42] Y. Fang, W. Benjamin, M. Sun, and K. Ramani, “Global geometric affinity
for revealing high fidelity protein interaction network,” PloS One, vol. 6,
no. 5, e19349, pp. 1–10, Jan. 2011.
[43] K. L. Mueller, Z.-Q. Yang, R. Haddad, S. P. Ethier, and J. L. Boerner,
“EGFR/Met association regulates EGFR TKI resistance in breast cancer,”
J. Molecular Signaling, vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 1–8, Jul. 2010.
[44] U. D. Müller-Richter, A. Dowejko, T. Reuther, J. Kleinheinz,
E. T. Reichert, and O. Driemel, “Analysis of expression profiles of
MAGE-A antigens in oral squamous cell carcinoma cell lines,” Head
Face Med., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 1–9, Apr. 2009.
[45] S. Pennacchietti, P. Michieli, M. Galluzzo, M. Mazzone, S. Giordano, and
P. M. Comoglio, “Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional
activation of the met protooncogene,” Cancer Cell, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 347–
361, Apr. 2003.
[46] I. J. Brusevold, M. Aasrum, M. Bryne, and T. Christoffersen, “Migration
induced by epidermal and hepatocyte growth factors in oral squamous
carcinoma cells in vitro: Role of MEK/ERK, p38 and PI-3 kinase/Akt,” J.
Oral Pathology Med., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 547–558, Feb. 2012.
[47] H. Xu, P. L. Stabile, T. C. Gubish, E. W. Gooding, R. J. Grandis, and
M. J. Siegfried, “Dual blockade of EGFR and c-Met abrogates redundant
signaling and proliferation in head and neck carcinoma cells,” Clinical
Cancer Res., vol. 17, no. 13, pp. 4425–4438, Jul. 2011.
[48] R. Raftogianis and A. Godwin, “Impact of protein interaction technologies on cancer biology and pharmacogenetics,” in Protein–Protein Interactions: A Molecular Cloning Manual. New York, NY, USA: Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2002, ch. 3, pp. 15–68.
[49] J. A. Gentles and D. Gallahan, “Meeting report: ‘Systems biology: Confronting the complexity of cancer’,” Cancer Res., vol. 71, no. 18, pp. 5961–
5964, Sep. 2011.
[50] A.-L. Barabási, N. Gulbahce, and J. Loscalzo, “Network medicine: A
network-based approach to human disease,” Nature Rev. Genetics, vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 56–68, Jan. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

