IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

25

Modeling and Analysis of Individualized
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
for Volatile Anesthesia
Alexandra Krieger, Nicki Panoskaltsis, Athanasios Mantalaris, Michael C. Georgiadis,
and Efstratios N. Pistikopoulos∗

Abstract—The presented procedure aims to establish an in-depth
understanding of a derived mathematical model for drug distribution, pharmacokinetics, and drug effect, pharmacodynamics,
during volatile anesthesia. A physiologically based, patient-specific
model is derived, where the pharmacokinetic (PK) part consists of
multiple blood and tissue compartmental models, each adjusted to
the weight, height, gender, and age of the patient. The pharmacodynamic (PD) part is described by an effect site compartment and
the Hill equation both linking the hypnotic effect measured by the
Bispectral Index (BIS) to the arterial anesthetic concentration. Via
a global sensitivity analysis the patient-specific PK and PD variables and parameters are analyzed regarding their influence on the
measurable outputs, which are the end-tidal concentration of the
volatile anesthetic and the BIS. Via this analysis, the uncertainty
introduced by PD variability is identified to be more significant
than the uncertainty introduced by PK variability. A case study of
isoflurane-based anesthesia shows that the simulation results of the
individualized PK variables are in good accordance with the measured end-tidal concentration. However, the PD parameters need
to be estimated online to predict the hypnotic depth, measured by
the BIS, correctly. As a result of this study, the aim should be to
focus on the individual identification of the PD parameters before
and during anesthesia with future application in safe and robust
model predictive control.
Index Terms—Anesthesia, compartmental modeling, interpatient variability, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, volatile
anesthetics.

I. INTRODUCTION

M

ATHEMATICAL modeling and model-based control of
anesthesia attracted the attention of researchers during

Manuscript received March 7, 2013; revised May 14, 2013 and July 2, 2013;
accepted July 22, 2013. Date of publication July 25, 2013; date of current version December 16, 2013. This work was supported by the European Research
Council (MOBILE, ERC Advanced Grant, No: 226462) and the CPSE Industrial Consortium. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Krieger and A. Mantalaris are with the Centre for Process Systems
Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London,
South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: a.krieger@
imperial.ac.uk; a.mantalaris@imperial.ac.uk).
N. Panoskaltsis is with the Department of Haematology, Imperial College
London, Northwick Park & St. Mark’s Campus, London, HA1 3UJ, U.K.
(e-mail: n.panoskaltsis@imperial.ac.uk).
M. C. Georgiadis is with the Department of Chemical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece (e-mail: mgeorg@
otenet.gr).
∗ E. N. Pistikopoulos is with the Centre for Process Systems Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, South Kensington
Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: e.pistikopoulos@imperial.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2274816

the past decades and are believed to benefit the safety of the patient undergoing surgery and provide anesthetists with valuable
insights. The expectations are that detailed modeling and optimized regulation of anesthesia could pave the way for personalized health care, where the individual patient characteristics are
taken into account for optimal and flexible drug administration.
This will improve the safety of the patient by minimizing side
effects and the risk of awareness and overdosing during anesthesia, [1]–[3]. In need of an adequate mathematical model describing the process of drug distribution, pharmacokinetics, and
drug effects, pharmacodynamics, employing model predictive
control is the method of choice. With respect to model predictive control, one of the key challenges is the high inter-patient
and intra-patient variability, which introduces a high degree of
uncertainty into the system.
The first essential step is to derive an adequate pharmacokinetic (PK) model describing the drug distribution. Physiologically based models for drug distribution go back to the 1920s and
the pioneering work of Teorell for drug uptake, distribution and
elimination, [4], [5]. Specific to volatile anesthesia an in-depth
analysis of the uptake of tissues and the influence of the partition
coefficient and physiological variables such as the cardiac output
is given by Kety [6]. In the first physiologically based models,
the tissues with similar properties, such as the well-perfused
organs, were grouped together as presented by Mapleson [7]
and extended by Fiserova–Bergerova [8] and Lerou [9], [10],
who derived a 14 compartment model for teaching and research
purposes. This so called physiologically based pharmacokinetic
(PBPK) modeling is the focus of researchers for drug delivery,
uptake, and distribution models, [11]. Pioneering work toward
individual patient variables of volatile agents, applying a model
mapping the circulation for the uptake of ether in a dog goes
back to Haggard [12].
Individualized modeling of the drug effect, pharmacodynamics, is the more challenging task, because of higher variability,
[13]. To determine the drug effect, i.e., the hypnotic depth during
anesthesia, anesthetists use the minimum alveolar concentration
(MAC) as a guideline. MAC is defined as the concentration required to prevent movement in response to surgical incision in
50% of the patients. Usually 1.3 MAC of the volatile anesthetic
is administered during anesthesia to assure sufficient anesthesia
in 90% of the patients, [14]. Hence, by definition this guideline
of the MAC is based on probability. This highlights the challenge of identifying the individual patient’s sensitivity and hypnotic depth to avoid awareness or overdosing. Individual factors

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

26

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

influencing the individual patient’s sensitivity are, for example,
the age. Studies by Brunner et al. [15] investigated the correlation of MAC with patient characteristics or analgesics administered simultaneously during anesthesia; e.g., elderly patients
are more sensitive to anesthetics; hence, MAC decreases with
the age, [16]. Furthermore the patient’s sensitivity to the anesthetic agent changes depending on the surgical stimulation or
the combination of drugs administered during anesthesia, such
as muscle relaxants and analgesics, [17], [18]. Recent advances
investigate the pharmacogenomic variability as an indicator of
individual patient’s sensitivity to anesthetic agents, [19].
In this study, PBPK modeling is applied to describe the
pharmacokinetics and address patient variability by including patient-specific characteristics in the mathematical description, [11]. The variability of the PK uncertainty is included analogously to Fiserova–Bergerova [8], where all volumes for blood
tissue and gas compartments are assigned specific to the individual patient’s weight, height, and age. By including these factors,
the aim is to reduce significantly the PK variability, which is
estimated to be around 60%–80%, [13]. However, the challenge
is the PD variability, assumed to be considerably higher, around
300%–400%, [13]. To include the full pharmacodynamic variability in the mathematical model representation, might be very
complex if not impossible. The consideration of all patientspecific factors might still not capture the full uncertainty and a
control strategy based on such a model might not be safe for the
patient if used as the underlying model of a model predictive
controller.
Motivated by this challenge of the implying uncertainty, this
paper presents a detailed PBPK–PD model. All relevant PK
and PD parameters and variables are analyzed with respect to
uncertainty imposed on the hypnotic depth measured by the
BIS and the end-tidal concentration, employed as a guideline
indicator of the anesthetic depth when no BIS measurements are
available. All PK parameters are determined as a function of the
individual patient, whereas the PD parameters are believed to be
captured best by on-line estimation, [20], therefore, individual
PD parameters as a function of drug interaction, age dependence,
or pharmacogenetics are not included in this study.
II. PHYSIOLOGICALLY BASED PATIENT MODEL
This section presents the physiologically based model for
the uptake, distribution, and effect of volatile anesthetic agents
based on our previous work, [21], [22].
A. Pharmacokinetics
The physiologically based compartmental model, shown in
Fig. 1(a), is based on Eger’s compartmental model, where the
tissues with similar properties are lumped together resulting
in three body compartments representing the vessel rich group
(VRG), the muscle group (M), and the adipose tissue (F), [23].
Each body compartment is further divided into an ideally mixed
blood and ideally mixed tissue part. This approach is based
on a model for cancer chemotherapeutic drugs first presented
by Bischoff [24]. The gas, blood, and tissue volumes are individually adjusted to the weight, height, gender, and age of the

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Structure of the physiologically based patient model. (a) Patient body.
(b) Fluxes in the lungs.

patient. A detailed list of all variables, their values, and units
can be found in the Appendix.
The compartments are described assuming a flow-limited formulation. Hence, the diffusion through the capillary vessel walls
is assumed to be rapid and the mass transfer of the drug into the
tissue is restricted by the perfusion of the compartment. This
approximation is not fundamental to the physiological PK approach, but commonly used due to the lack of sufficient physiological information, of, e.g., membrane permeabilities, diffusion
coefficients, and tissue surfaces, [24]. No inter-tissue diffusion
between the compartments, e.g., from the VRG to the adipose
tissue is included [25]. This implies that mass exchange only
occurs through the blood vessels. The transport time and the
pulsatile character of the blood flow are neglected, because the
equilibration times are large compared to the cardiac cycle, [25].
All fluxes leaving a gas, blood, or tissue compartment are in
equilibrium with the compartment. The uptake of the anesthetic
agent is determined by two factors, the ventilation of air and
the perfusion of the blood through the lungs. The ventilation is
given by the product of the respiratory frequency fR and the
tidal volume VT . Of the total minute ventilation V̇ only the
alveolar ventilation V̇A , the total ventilation less the dead-space
ventilation V̇D , is taking part in the gas exchange.
V̇A = V̇ − V̇D = fR (VT − VD )

(1)

Here, fR and VT are set by the anesthetic machine and the
anesthetist, respectively. Analogously to (1) the alveolar volume
VA is determined by the lung volume VL less the dead-space
volume VD
VA = VL − VD .

(2)

To illustrate the applied mass balances and assumptions, the
fluxes of gas and blood in the lungs are shown in Fig. 1(b).
During anesthesia, the concentration of the inhaled volatile
anesthetic agent CI is set by the anesthetist. To map the respiratory cycle and changing gas concentration in the lungs, the
concentration in the alveoli just after inspiration CA I is given
in (3) analogous to the Bohr equation for carbon dioxide, [14],
where the amount of inhaled anesthetic gas is ideally mixed with

KRIEGER et al.: MODELING AND ANALYSIS OF INDIVIDUALIZED PHARMACOKINETICS AND PHARMACODYNAMICS

27

TABLE I
CALCULATION OF PATIENT-SPECIFIC TISSUE MASS

the gas left in the lungs after expiration
CA I (VA + VT ) = CI VT + CE VA .

(3)

To determine the concentration during expiration, equilibrium
between the end-tidal expired concentration CE and the mixed
venous blood concentration Cv̄ is assumed. Both concentrations
are linked via the blood gas partition coefficient λ, [23],
Cv̄
.
(4)
λ
The driving factors of the anesthetic uptake are the perfusion of
the alveoli, given by the cardiac output Q̇ less the shunt flow
Q̇s , the blood gas partition coefficient and the concentration
difference between the mixed venous blood and the arterial
blood [14],
CE =

uL = (Q̇ − Q̇s ) (λCA I − Cv̄ ).

(5)

Given (5), the concentration in the arterial blood Ca is determined by a mass balance of inlet and outlet fluxes indicated in
Fig. 1(b) by the dashed line:
Ca Q̇ = Cv̄ Q̇ + uL

(6)

The mixed venous blood concentration is given by an average of
all the blood concentrations in the compartments multiplied with
the perfusion of the respective body compartment. To account
for the venous shunt, diversion of blood from the artery directly
to the vein, the last term in (7) is added.


rQ̇ ,i Cb,i + (1 −
rQ̇ ,i ) Ca
(7)
Cv̄ =
i

i

The concentrations of the anesthetic agent in the individual
compartments are given by mass balances for each blood and
tissue compartment in Fig. 1(a).
dCb,i
= Q̇i (Ca − Cb,i ) − ut,i
(8)
dt
dCt,i
= ut,i
Vt,i
(9)
dt
The mass balance of VRG includes an additional term for the
metabolism of the anesthetic agent in the liver mliv , where Q̇liv
describes the perfusion of the liver, [26].
Vb,i

dCt,VRG
= ut,VRG − Q̇liv Ct,VRG mliv
(10)
dt
The driving force of the anesthetic uptake by the tissue ut,i in
each compartment is the difference of the concentration in the
tissue at equilibrium for the given concentration in the blood
Cb,i and the actual concentration in the tissue Ct,i , [23], [27].
The partition coefficients λi relate the concentrations in the tissue Ct,i to the concentrations in the blood Cb,i at equilibrium.
Analogously to (5), the uptake of the tissue in the body compartments is described
Vt,VRG

ut,i = Q̇i (λi Cb,i − Ct,i ).

(11)

The perfusion of each compartment Q̇i is given by Q̇ and the
ratio of the cardiac output rQ̇ ,i perfusing the compartment
Q̇i = rQ̇ ,i · Q̇.

(12)

Similarly, the parameter rV b ,i describes the ratio of the total
blood volume Vb and rV ,i the ratio of total body volume V in
compartment i.
Vb,i = rV b ,i · Vb

(13)

Vt,i = rV ,i · V

(14)

1) Body Compartments: The volumes of the body compartments are given as a part of the total body volume. The mass of
the adipose tissue is a function of the body mass index (BMI),
age, and gender of the patient, [28]. The percentage of the body
mass of VRG and the vessel poor group (VPG) are not primarily
depending on the BMI of the patient. Thus, they are assigned
as a percentage of the ideal body weight for a person with the
patient’s height, BMI = 22 [kg/m2 ] for both genders, [29]. The
ideal body weight for a patient with height h is given in (15).
mideal = 22 · h2

with BMI =

m [kg]
(h [m])2

(15)

The body mass, which is neither allocated to the adipose tissue
nor to VPG or VRG, is assigned to the muscle group. The mass
and volume of VPG is calculated to determine the volume of
the muscle group and not further considered in the mathematical
model as the perfusion and anesthetic uptake of the VPG tissue
is negligible for short-term anesthesia. The equations for the
patient-specific tissue compartment mass are given in Table I.
The volume of the compartments is determined by the average
density of the tissue of the compartment, [30].
Vi =

mi
ρi

(16)

2) Blood Volume: The blood volume is adapted to height h
in [cm], weight m in [kg], and gender of the patient published
by Nadler et al. [31].
VB ,f = 0.3561 h3 + 0.03308 m + 0.1833

(17a)

VB ,m = 0.3669 h3 + 0.03219 m + 0.6041

(17b)

3) Cardiac Output: The cardiac output Q̇ in [L/min] as a
function of the patient’s BMI, age, and gender is adapted from
Stelfox et al. [32]; gender = 1 denotes a female and gender = 0
a male patient.
Q̇ = 5.84 + 0.08 BMI − 0.03 age − 0.62 gender

(18)

Further coefficients for additional predictors such as simultaneously administered agents or the patient’s heath state can be
found in [32].

28

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

4) Lung Volume: The ventilated lung volume less the dead
space determines the distribution volume of the inspired anesthetic in (2) and (3). On average, men have larger lungs than
women. During anesthesia, the ventilated lung volume reduces
to approximately the functional residual capacity, altered by atelectasis and anesthetic side effects. The patient-specific functional residual capacity as a function of the BMI in liters is given
by Pelosi et al. [33]
VL = 11.97 exp(−0.096 BMI) + 0.46.

TABLE II
RANGE AND DEFAULT VALUES FOR PK AND PD PARAMETERS AND VARIABLES,
PARTITION COEFFICIENTS AT 37o C FOR ISOFLURANE

(19)

B. Pharmacodynamics
The pharmacodynamics describe the link of the concentration of the anesthetic agent to the effect of the drug. An artificial
effect site compartment with effect site concentration Ce represents the delay in the drug action.
dCe
= ke0 (Ca − Ce )
(20)
dt
Here, Ca denotes the concentration in the arterial blood calculated in (6), and ke0 denotes the delay of the drug action. The
hypnotic effect is measured by the BIS, calculated as a function
of the concentration in the effect site compartment Ce by the
Hill equation.
BIS = BIS0 + (BISm ax − BIS0 )

Ceγ
,
+ Ceγ

γ
C50

(21)

where C50 is the concentration triggering 50% of the total effect
or the potency of the drug and γ the slope of the Hill equation in (22). BIS0 describes the initial effect at no anesthetic
concentration BIS0 = 100. BISm ax describes the maximum effect, BISm ax = 0. The three PD parameters ke0 , C50 , and γ are
individual patient characteristics and might change during the
course of anesthesia triggered by, e.g., surgical stimulation or
drug interaction.
C. Individualized Patient Variables and Parameters
In this section, the possible range of the PK and PD variables
and parameters as a function of the patient’s physiology, i.e.,
age, weight, height, and gender, are calculated. Here, variables
refer to values that might vary over time, whereas parameters
are constant.
For example, the cardiac output is referred to as a variable,
because it is likely to change during the course of anesthesia as a function of the concentration of the anesthetic agent,
other simultaneously administered drugs or surgical stimulation. For the presented model, the individual PK variables are
the cardiac output, the distribution of the cardiac output on the
compartments, the lung shunt, the dead-space volume and the
lung volume. Typically, PK parameters are the tissue volumes,
which are constant during the entire course of anesthesia. The
PK parameters are the partition coefficients, the tissue volumes,
and the blood volumes.
All PK and PD variables and parameters, their default values
and range are summarized in Table II.
The deviation for the blood gas partition coefficient λ and the
tissue partition coefficients λi were summarized and published

by Eger et al. [34]. The deviation for the cardiac output Q̇ is
calculated for patients with a body weight of 45–100 kg, 1.50–
1.90 m, 18–90 years, and both genders using (19). The shunt
flow Q̇s results from a 0% to 30% shunt of the cardiac output
increased by atelectasis, often occurring during anesthesia, [14].
For the distribution of the cardiac output on the different compartments, no deviation was found in the open literature. As the
baroreflex is still active during light to moderate anesthesia and
aims to provide the essential, well-perfused organs, with oxygen
their ratio is assumed to increase slightly, whereas the perfusion
of the fat and muscle group decrease, [14]. The tissue volumes
are calculated for patients of 45–100 kg, 1.50–1.90 m, and both
genders applying the equations in Table I. The blood volumes
are calculated based on the assumptions that the blood volume
Vb is proportional to the perfusion of the compartment and that
60% of the total blood volume is distributed on the systematic
tissue, [26].
Vb,i = 0.6 Vb rQ̇ ,i

(22)

The deviation in the lung volumes is given by (19) for patients
with a BMI in the range of 20–40 covered in the study by Pelosi
et al. [33]. The dead space is altered from a normal value of
VD =150 mL ≈ 30%VT to VD = 600 mL ≈ 60%VT caused by
atelectasis, [14].
The PD parameters are ke0 , C50 , and γ in (20) and (21).
The variation in the PD parameters were published in a study by
Gentilini et al. [35]. The values at the boundary of the estimation
problem were excluded. In [35], the effect site concentration Ce
is linked to the alveolar gas concentration, whereas in the model
presented here the effect site concentration is linked to the arterial blood concentration (20). To assure consistency between

KRIEGER et al.: MODELING AND ANALYSIS OF INDIVIDUALIZED PHARMACOKINETICS AND PHARMACODYNAMICS

29

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF THE CASES FOR SENSITIVITY ANALYSES

TABLE IV
RELATIVE SOBOL’ SIS USING GUI-HDMR [36] FOR Case 1–Case 4 GIVEN IN
TABLE III AFTER 5 MIN AND 20 MIN
Fig. 2. BIS for (left) PK and (right) PD variability in Table II. The solid line
marks the BIS for model adjusted to Patient 1. The gray dots mark the measured
BIS.

these two models, the value of C50,A found by [35] is multiplied with λ to scale Ce from alveolar to arterial concentration,
analogously to (4),
C50,a = λ C50,A .

(23)

III. MODEL ANALYSIS
In this section, an analysis via global sensitivity analysis, parameter estimation, and correlation of the physiologically based
model described in the previous sections is performed.
A. Uncertainty Identification Via Patient Variability Analysis
In this section, the imposed uncertainty given by patient variability is identified. Separate simulations for the full range of
PK and PD variability in Table II were performed for isofluranebased anesthesia with given time-varying inputs of fR , VT , and
CI . Details about the patient and the inputs are reported later in
this paper, Patient 1: Fig. 5, Table VII. The resulting envelopes
of uncertainty with respect to the BIS caused by PK and PD
variability are shown in Fig. 2.
By comparison of the envelopes of uncertainty in Fig. 2, the
uncertainty introduced by PD variability is identified more profound than the uncertainty introduced by PK variability. More
specifically, the maximum deviation from the BIS for default
PK values is 25%, whereas the maximum deviation of the BIS
including PD variability and PK values adjusted to Patient 1 is
56%.
Normally during anesthesia, the anesthetist modifies the inhaled concentration according to the obtained measurements in
order to maintain adequate anesthesia. The high deviation in
the variables clearly support the need for additional information
about the patient in order to assure adequate hypnosis.
B. Global Sensitivity Analysis
In this section, the relative influence of the uncertain PK and
PD parameters and variables on the measurable outputs is investigated via global sensitivity analysis. For volatile anesthesia,
the measurable outputs are the end-tidal volatile anesthetic concentration CE and the BIS. The results of the global sensitivity
analysis are several sensitivity indexes between 0 and 1, with
0 being noninfluential. The sensitivity index (SI) represents the
relative influence of the parameter or variable on the output of

CI = 1.1 vol% is kept constant during the entire analysis.

interest at the given time; the sum of all SIs for the applied
Sobol method converges to one. The SIs of the PK and PD parameters and variables presented in this section were calculated
with the GUI-HDMR software, [36]. To perform the analysis,
all PK and PD parameters and variables were varied between
their bounds; the resulting output and the scaled input from 0
to 1 for a large number of sampling points are required by the
GUI-HDMR software. For further details on how the SIs are
derived, refer [36] and [37].
In total, four sensitivity analyses for the PK and PD variables
and parameters with 26 000 sampling points were performed.
In Case 1, the influence of the PK variables and parameters
on the end-tidal concentration CE is investigated, because the
PK variables and parameters describe the distribution of the
anesthetic agent in the human body. In Case 2, the influence of
the PK variables and parameters on the BIS is investigated. The
PK variables and parameters influence the BIS via their effect on
the arterial concentration linked to the effect site concentration
and to the BIS, (20) and (21). In Case 3, the influence of the
PD parameters, which characterize the link of the arterial blood
concentration to the BIS is investigated. In Case 4, all PK and
PD variables and parameters were analyzed with respect to the

30

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Time-varying relative SIs for Case 1–Case 4. The three bottom plots show an enlarged section of Case 1, Case 2, and Case 4.

BIS. For Case 1 and Case 2, all PD parameters were fixed at their
default values, while in Case 3, the PK parameters were fixed
at their default values. In Case 4, all PK and PD variables and
parameters were varied between their lower and upper bounds
in Table II. The four cases are summarized in Table III.
For the sensitivity analysis, the inspired concentration, respiratory frequency and tidal volume were kept constant and all
concentrations were initialized with zero. The SIs of all PK and
PD variables and parameters for Case 1–Case 4 are summarized
in Table IV.
The time-varying PK and PD SIs of all cases defined in
Table III are shown in Fig. 3. The PK variables and parameters with an average SI<0.01 were excluded for the purpose of
clarity.
In Case 1, the distribution volume of the anesthetic agent, the
lung volume VL , has the highest SI with respect to the end-tidal
concentration CE during the entire course of anesthesia. The PK
variables with the next highest SIs are the cardiac output and the
shunt flow. Hence, as expected, the ventilation and perfusion are
the most influential factors determining the uptake of the volatile
anesthetic agent.
For Case 2, lung volume, cardiac output, and lung shunt are
identified, analogously to Case 1, as the crucial variables with
respect to the BIS, and hence, the arterial blood concentration
to which the BIS is linked via the effect site concentration Ce
in (21).
Case 3 shows that at the beginning the SIs of the PD parameters γ and ke0 are approximately identical, while C50 has
the highest index, and hence, the highest influence on the BIS.
Under the assumption of a constant inspired concentration, the
sensitivity of C50 increases to approximately 90% after 60 min.
The results of Case 3 in Fig. 3 are in accordance with the formulation of equations (20) and (21). Only C50 relates the BIS
to a given effect site concentration. The parameter γ changes
the slope of the Hill equation and defines the necessary change
in effect site concentration to achieve the desired change in the

BIS. The PD parameter ke0 determines how fast the BIS is
responding to a change in Ca and determines the delay of the
effect. Neither γ nor ke0 are affecting the steady-state BIS value.
In Case 4, the PD parameters are identified to have the highest
sensitivity toward the beginning of anesthesia, whereas for a
longer course of anesthesia, especially the lung volume’s SI is
increasing.
As a conclusion of the sensitivity analyses of Case 1 and
Case 2 from a physiological aspect, the cardiac output and shunt
flow, determine the anesthetic uptake in the circulation, while
the lung volume mainly determines the alveolar concentration
in the lungs, as the driving force for the anesthetic uptake from
the ventilation site. All other PK parameters have a considerably
lower SI and can be regarded as negligible compared to the lung
volume, the cardiac output and the lung shunt flow. Case 3 and
Case 4 illustrate that C50 is the most important parameter in
order to obtain the correct depth of anesthesia for the individual
patient.
For an in-depth understanding of the actual physical influence
of the PK and PD variables and parameters, it was investigated
whether an increase in the PK or PD variable or parameter
increases or decreases CE and/or BIS. For this study, the calculated outputs of CE and BIS were compared to the outputs of
CE and BIS when changing the respective PK or PD variable or
parameter one by one to the upper and the lower bound, while
keeping all other variables and parameters at their default values. The percentage of change comparing the default output of
CE and BIS to the range of change between the upper and the
lower bound are summarized in Table V. The simulations clearly
confirm the results obtained by the previous sensitivity analysis.
C. Parameter Estimation and Correlation
The envelope of BIS uncertainty by PK variability is significantly smaller than the envelope of uncertainty by PD variability in Fig. 2. This motivates an attempt to estimate the PD

KRIEGER et al.: MODELING AND ANALYSIS OF INDIVIDUALIZED PHARMACOKINETICS AND PHARMACODYNAMICS

TABLE V
PERCENTAGE OF CHANGE OF C E AND BIS AFTER 5, 20, AND 60 MIN,
COMPARED TO THE OUTPUT WITH DEFAULT PK AND PD VARIABLES AND
PARAMETERS; C I = 1.1 VOL%, fR = 12 AND V T = 500 ML PERFORMED
WITH GPROMS, [38]

31

TABLE VI
(LEFT) CORRELATION MATRIX OF THE PD PARAMETERS, ENTRIES FOR PK u
ABOVE DIAGONAL AND PK l BELOW DIAGONAL

(Right) estimated PD parameters for PKl and PKu.

Fig. 4. BIS output for estimated PD parameters in Table VI capturing PK
variability Fig. 2. PK l and PK u denote the upper and lower bound of the PK
uncertainty envelope and PK l , e st and PK u , e st the output for values of the PD
parameters given in Table VI.
TABLE VII
PATIENTS’ CHARACTERISTICS; CALCULATED VALUES OF THE LUNG VOLUME
AND CARDIAC OUTPUT AND ESTIMATED PD PARAMETERS; DETAILS OF THE
SURGERY AND SIMULTANEOUSLY ADMINISTERED DRUGS

parameters in order to capture the uncertainty as a consequence
of PK variability. This statement is investigated for the envelope
of PK variability in Fig. 2.
The parameter estimation problem is evaluated by the correlation matrix C of the estimated parameters. An entry in the
off-diagonal elements of the correlation matrix C close to one
(|Cij | ≈ 1) indicates a high correlation of the corresponding parameters i and j, whereas an entry of zero (|Cij | ≈ 0) indicates
no correlation. The entries of the correlation matrix are calculated based on the variance–covariance matrix V , the variance
of a parameter is given on the diagonal (Vii ) and the covariance
of two parameters i and j on the off-diagonal elements (Vij ).
Further details can be found in the gPROMS user guide, [38].
Cij = 
Cii = 1

Vij
, i = j
Vii Vj j

.
.
.

(24)

During the following analysis, the upper bound of the envelope
shown in Fig. 2 is referred to as PKu , while the lower bound is
referred to as PKl . The evaluation of the quality of the estimates
is performed for both cases.
All values of the PD parameters are obtained solving a maximum likelihood parameter estimation problem with gPROMS
and lie within their respective bounds in Table VI, [38], [39].
The correlation matrix of the PD parameters for PKl and
PKu and the final values for all PD parameters obtained using gPROMS [38] are summarized in Table VI. Here, the PD
parameters γ and C50 show minor correlation originated by the
nature of (22). The results of the fit are shown in Fig. 4.

This analysis shows that via PD parameter estimation it is
possible to capture the uncertainty introduced by potential PK
variability. Hence, the PD parameters C50 , ke0 , and γ are sufficient to predict the BIS under uncertainty in the PK and PD
variables and parameters. This statement is further investigated
for a set of clinical patient data in the next section.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
A simulation study for the course of isoflurane-based anesthesia of three patients is presented in this section. The anonymized
data were provided by the Department of Medical Informatics in
Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine of the University

32

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 5. Inspired and expired isoflurane concentrations and BIS for three patients. The measured data points are denoted with (meas), the BIS for individually
estimated PD parameters is denoted with (est) and the expected BIS for the PD default values is denoted with (def).

of Gießen in Germany. The data of isoflurane concentration were
measured with an anesthesia ventilator (Primus, Draeger medical) and BIS was measured by patient monitoring (IntelliVue
MP70, Phillips). The data were recorded online with an anesR
, IMESO
thesia information management system (NarkoData
GmbH). Anesthesia was induced by propofol and maintained
with isoflurane, simultaneously administered analgesics were
fentanyl and/or sufentanil. Cisatracurium was used for muscle relaxation. More details and drug doses are summarized in
Table VII. The individual PD parameters for each of the three
patients were obtained by a parameter estimation problem as
described in the previous section. For comparison, the expected
BIS for the default PD parameters in Table II were computed.
All simulation results and measurements are shown in Fig. 5.
The characteristics of the three patients and the values of the
estimated PD parameters are also summarized in Table VII.
The simulation results of the end-tidal concentration CE for
Patient 1 and Patient 3 are in good accordance with the measurements CE (meas). Hence, the PK model shows a good fit of
the data. However, for Patient 2, the model is not predicting the
measured end-tidal concentration as close. This might be related
to the underweight of the patient, BMI=14.5, for which the PK
parameters have to be modified with additional knowledge about
the patient’s health state. The expected BIS for the PD default
variables, BIS (def), show the best match with the measured
BIS for Patient 1. Especially for Patient 3, a considerable offset
between the measurement and the predicted BIS is observed.
For individually estimated PD parameters, the predicted BIS is
in good accordance with the measurement for all three patients.
The prediction of the end-tidal concentration CE by adjusting the PK variables and parameters according to the PK model
presented in Section II-A shows good results. The a high interpatient variability of the PD parameters, already observed in this
study for three patients, shows the need for on-line estimation

of the PD parameters. The strategy of choice to assure sufficient
and correct prediction of the depth of anesthesia through the
mathematical model is an on-line parameter estimation, [40].
V. CONCLUSION AND FINAL REMARKS
Motivated by the high PK and PD patient variability [13] and
our interest in applying the derived model as the underlying
model for model predictive control, this study provided an indepth analysis of an individualized physiologically based model
for volatile anesthesia and the influence of the individual patient
variables and parameters on the outputs of interest, which are
the BIS, as a measure of the hypnotic level, and the end-tidal
concentration of the volatile anesthetic agent.
First, the PK variables and parameters were individually adjusted to the specific patient characteristics and their influence
was investigated by a global sensitivity analysis and by changing the parameters one at a time within their bounds. Here, the
parameters primarily determining the ventilation and perfusion
of the lungs, the lung volume, the shunt flow, and the cardiac
output were found to be the crucial factors.
Second, motivated by the high variability in the PD parameters of up to 400% [13], the PD parameters were included in
the analysis and indeed proved to be the crucial parameters with
respect to the BIS, where C50 , the effect site concentration at
BIS=50 was found the parameter with the highest sensitivity.
As a final remark, when applying the presented model as
the underlying model for model predictive control, to assure
safe control action and safe anesthesia as well as account for
the high inter- and intra-patient variability, the PD parameters
are recommended to be estimated during the course of anesthesia based on the BIS measurements and updated accordingly, [41]. The adjustment of the PD parameters only was found
to be sufficient in a case study of three patients, where the PK

KRIEGER et al.: MODELING AND ANALYSIS OF INDIVIDUALIZED PHARMACOKINETICS AND PHARMACODYNAMICS

parameters and variables were individually calculated from the
derived PK model and the PD parameters were estimated based
on the measurements. As a consequence, even for a noncorrect
prediction of the PK variable or PK parameter by the presented
PK model, an estimate of the PD parameters can compensate for
the introduced mismatch. This strategy, of an on-line parameter
estimation of the PD parameters to update the underlying PD
model, is believed to be suitable to capture the imposed model
uncertainty by inter- and intra-patient variability. This is a subject of our ongoing research which will be reported in a future
publication.
APPENDIX
TABLE VIII
DENOTATION OF VARIABLES AND PARAMETERS OF THE PBPK/PD MODEL

TABLE IX
DENOTATION OF SUBSCRIPTS IN THE PBPK/PD MODEL

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. med. Rainer Röhrig and
the Department of Medical Informatics in Anesthesiology and
Intensive Care Medicine of the University of Gießen in Germany
for providing the anonymized patient data used in this study.
REFERENCES
[1] T. M. Hemmerling, “Automated anesthesia,” Curr. Opin. Anaesthesiol.,
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 757–63, Dec. 2009.
[2] A. L. Gentilini, C. W. Frei, A. H. Glattfelder, M. Morari, T. J. Sieber, R.
Wymann, T. W. Schnider, and A. M. Zbinden, “Multitasked closed-loop
control in anesthesia overview: Controlling anesthesia,” IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 39–53, Jan./Feb. 2001.
[3] P. Dua, V. Dua, and E. N. Pistikopoulos, “Modelling and multi-parametric
control for delivery of anaesthetic agents,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comp., vol. 48,
pp. 543–553, 2010.
[4] T. Teorell, “Kinetics of distribution of substances administered to the body,
I,” Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. Therap., vol. 57, pp. 205–225, 1937.
[5] T. Teorell, “Kinetics of distribution of substances administered to the body,
II,” Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. Therap., vol. 57, pp. 226–240, 1937.

33

[6] S. S. Kety, “The theory and applications of the exchange of inert gas at
the lungs and tissues.,” Pharmacol. Rev., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–41, 1951.
[7] W. W. Mapleson, “An electric analogue for uptake and exchange of inert
gases and other agents,” J. App. Physiol., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 197–204, Jan.
1963.
[8] V. Fiserova-Bergerova, “Inhalation anesthesia using physiologically based
pharmacokinetic models.,” Drug Metab. Rev., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 531–557,
Jan. 1992.
[9] J. G. C. Lerou, R. Dirksen, H. H. Beneken Kolmer, and L. H. Booij, “A
system model for closed circuit inhalation anesthesia I. Computer study,”
Anesthesiology, vol. 75, pp. 345–335, 1991.
[10] J. G. C. Lerou, R. Dirksen, H. H. Beneken Kolmer, L. H. Booij, and G. F.
Borm, “A system model for closed circuit inhalation anesthesia II. Clinical
validation,” Anesthesiology, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 230–237, 1991.
[11] C. Hall, E. Lueshen, A. Movsat, and A. A. Linninger, “Pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics and drug metabolism interspecies scaling in pharmacokinetics: A novel whole-body physiologically based modeling framework to discover drug biodistribution mechanisms in vivo,” J. Pharm. Sci.,
vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 1221–1241, 2012.
[12] H. W. Haggard, “The absorption, distribution, and elimination of ethyl
ether: II. Analysis of the mechanism of absorption and elimination of
such a gas or vapor as ethyl ether,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 59, pp. 753–770,
1924.
[13] M. Mertens and J. Vuyk, “Interactions between intravenous anaesthetic
agents,” Bailliere Clin. Anesthes., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 247–261, 1998.
[14] R. D. Miller, L. I. Eriksson, L. A. Fleisher, J. P. Wiener-Kronish, and W.
L. Young, Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Churchill
Livingstone, 2010.
[15] M. D. Brunner, P. Braithwaite, R. Jhaveri, A. McEwan, D. K. Goodman,
L. R. Smith, and P. S. Glass, “MAC reduction of isoflurane by sufentanil,”
Br. J. Anaesth., vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 42–46, Jan. 1994.
[16] W. W. Mapleson, “Effect of age on MAC in humans: A meta-analysis,”
Br. J. Anaesth., vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 179–185, Feb. 1996.
[17] C. E. Rosow, “Anesthetic drug interaction: An overview,” J. Clin. Anesth.,
vol. 9, no. 6 Suppl., pp. 27S–32S, Sep. 1997.
[18] P. S. Glass, T. J. Gan, S. Howell, and B. Ginsberg, “Drug interactions:
Volatile anesthetics and opioids,” J. Clin. Anesth., vol. 9, no. 6 Suppl.,
pp. 18S–22S, Sep. 1997.
[19] R. Searle and P. M. Hopkins, “Pharmacogenomic variability and anaesthesia,” Brit. J. Anaesth., vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–25, Jul. 2009.
[20] V. Sartori, P. M. Schumacher, T. Bouillon, M. Luginbuehl, and M. Morari,
“On-line estimation of propofol pharmacodynamic parameters,” in Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Shanghai, China, 2005, pp. 74–77.
[21] A. Krieger, N. Panoskaltsis, A. Mantalaris, M. C. Georgiadis, and E.
N. Pistikopoulos, “A novel physiologically based compartmental model
for volatile anaesthesia,” in 21st Eur Symp. Comp. Aided Process Eng.,
E. Pistikopoulos, M. Georgiadis, and A. Kokossis, Eds.. vol. 29New
York, NY, USA: Elsevier, 2011, pp. 1495–1499.
[22] A. Krieger, N. Panoskaltsis, A. Mantalaris, M. C. Georgiadis, and E. N.
Pistikopoulos, “Analysis of an individualized physiologically based model
for anesthesia control,” in Proc. 8th IFAC Symp. Biol. Med. Syst., 2012,
pp. 385–390.
[23] E. I. Eger, Anesthetic Uptake and Action. Baltimore, MD, USA:
Williams & Wilkins, 1974.
[24] K. B. Bischoff, “Physiological pharmacokinetics,” Bull. Math. Biol.,
vol. 48, pp. 309–322, 1986.
[25] A. Zwart, N. T. Smith, and J. E. Beneken, “Multiple model approach to
uptake halothane: Use of an analog computer,” Comp. Biomed. Res., vol. 5,
pp. 228–238, 1972.
[26] W. M. Saltzman, Drug Delivery Engineering Principles for Drug Therapy.
Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.
[27] J. D. Enderle, S. M. Blanchard, and J. D. Bronzino, Introduction to
Biomedical Engineering, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Elsevier,
2005.
[28] P. Deurenberg, J. A. Weststrate, and J. C. Seidell, “Body mass index as
a measure of body fatness: Age- and sex- specific prediction formulas,”
Brit. J. Nutr., vol. 65, pp. 105–114, 1991.
[29] H. J. M. Lemmens, D. P. Bernstein, and J. B. Brodsky, “Estimating blood
volume in obese and morbidly obese patients,” Obesity Surg., vol. 16,
no. 6, pp. 773–776, 2006.
[30] S. Heymsfiel, T. Lohman, Z.-M. Wang, and S. Going, Human Body Composition, 2nd ed. Champaign, IL, USA: Human Kinetics, 2005.
[31] S. Nadler, J. Hidalgo, and T. Bloch, “Prediction of blood volume in normal
human adults,” Surgery, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 224–232, 1962.

34

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[32] H. T. Stelfox, S. B. Ahmed, R. A. Ribeiro, E. M. Gettings, E. Pomerantsev,
and U. Schmidt, “Hemodynamic monitoring in obese patients: the impact
of body mass index on cardiac output and stroke volume,” Crit. Care
Med., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1243–1246, Apr. 2006.
[33] P. Pelosi, M. Croci, I. Ravagnan, S. Tredici, A. Pedoto, A. Lissoni, and
L. Gattinoni, “The effects of body mass on lung volumes, respiratory
mechanics, and gas exchange during general anesthesia,” Anesth. Analg.,
vol. 87, pp. 654–660, 1998.
[34] E. I. Eger, J. B. Eisenkraft, and R. B. Weiskopf, The Pharmacology of Inhaled Anesthetics, 1st ed. San Antonio, TX, USA: Dannemiller Memorial Educational Foundation, 2002.
[35] A. L. Gentilini, M. Rossoni-Gerosa, C. W. Frei, R. Wymann, M. Morari,
A. M. Zbinden, and T. W. Schnider, “Modeling and closed-loop control
of hypnosis by means of bispectral index (BIS) with isoflurane,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 874–889, Aug. 2001.
[36] T. Ziehn and A. S. Tomlin, “Environmental modelling & software GUI—
HDMR—A software tool for global sensitivity analysis of complex models,” Environ. Model. Softw., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 775–785, 2009.

[37] G. Li, S.-W. Wang, H. Rabitz, S. Wang, and P. Jaffe, “Global uncertainty
assessments by high dimensional model representations (HDMR),” Chem.
Eng. Sci., vol. 57, pp. 4445–4460, 2002.
[38] Process Systems Enterprise. (2011). “Model Validation Guide, Release
v3.4.0,” London, U.K., [Online]. Available:http://www.psenterprise.com
[39] Y. Bard, Nonlinear Parameter Estimation. London, U.K.: Academic,
1974.
[40] R. S. Parker and F. J. Doyle, “Control-relevant modeling in drug delivery,”
Adv. Drug Del. Rev., vol. 48, no. 2–3, pp. 211–228, Jun. 2001.
[41] C. M. Ionescu, R. De Keyser, B. C. Torrico, T. De Smet, M. M. R. F. Struys,
and J. E. Normey-Rico, “Robust predictive control strategy applied for
propofol dosing using BIS as a controlled variable during,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2161–2170, Sep. 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

