IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

327

A Distributed Scheme to Manage The Dynamic
Coexistence of IEEE 802.15.4-Based
Health-Monitoring WBANs
Mohammad N. Deylami, Student Member, IEEE, and Emil Jovanov, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The overlap of transmission ranges between wireless
networks as a result of mobility is referred to as dynamic coexistence. The interference caused by coexistence may significantly
affect the performance of wireless body area networks (WBANs)
where reliability is particularly critical for health monitoring applications. In this paper, we analytically study the effects of dynamic
coexistence on the operation of IEEE 802.15.4-based health monitoring WBANs. The current IEEE 802.15.4 standard lacks mechanisms for effectively managing the coexistence of mobile WBANs.
Considering the specific characteristics and requirements of health
monitoring WBANs, we propose the dynamic coexistence management (DCM) mechanism to make IEEE 802.15.4-based WBANs
able to detect and mitigate the harmful effects of coexistence. We
assess the effectiveness of this scheme using extensive OPNET simulations. Our results indicate that DCM improves the successful
transmission rates of dynamically coexisting WBANs by 20%–25%
for typical medical monitoring applications.
Index Terms—Coexistence, health monitoring, IEEE 802.15.4,
mobile, wireless body area network (WBAN).

I. INTRODUCTION
WIRELESS body area network (WBAN) is a type of sensor network typically aimed at the acquisition of healthrelated data [1]. Vital signs are collected using sensors that are
placed on or implanted inside the body and transmit their data to
a gateway, which can forward them to medical servers. Examples of the most common health monitoring sensors are activity
sensors (accelerometers), electrocardiographs (ECGs) for monitoring heart activity, and electroencephalographs (EEGs) for
monitoring brain electrical activity [2].
The overlap of ranges between wireless networks is referred
to as coexistence, which can be classified as static coexistence
(for nonmobile network nodes) and dynamic coexistence (for
mobile nodes). WBANs are as mobile as their users; therefore,
they may dynamically coexist with a varying number of other
WBANs during their operation. For instance, dynamic coexistence may happen when a group of people gather in the dining hall at an assisted living home. The interference caused by

A

Manuscript received October 24, 2012; revised May 10, 2013; accepted
August 7, 2013. Date of publication August 15, 2013; date of current version December 31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the University of
Alabama in Huntsville under Grant UAH 236338.
The authors are with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35899 USA (e-mail:
md0010@uah.edu; emil.jovanov@uah.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2278217

the transmissions of coexisting WBANs can significantly affect
their functionality, particularly in medical environments, where
data availability is critical. Thus, the focus of this work is not
increasing the efficiency of sensor networks in general; rather,
it is providing reliability in the transmission of critical health
monitoring data.
In this paper we study the effects of coexistence on the operation of IEEE 802.15.4-based health monitoring WBANs and
propose a distributed mechanism to resolve the harmful effects
of dynamic coexistence. The proposed scheme can be implemented as minimal amendments to the IEEE 802.15.4 standard.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review the
IEEE 802.15.4 standard and how it is incorporated by WBANs.
Section III discusses the coexistence problem in general and
reviews the related works. In Section IV, we study the effects of
coexistence on the operation of IEEE 802.15.4-based WBANs.
Section V presents an analytical model for the performance
metrics of coexisting WBANs. In Section VI, we introduce
a method for managing the dynamic coexistence of WBANs.
Section VII presents the simulation setup and results, and
Section IX concludes the paper.

II. IEEE 802.15.4-BASED WBANS
IEEE 802.15.4 [3] defines the Physical (PHY) and Medium
Access (MAC) layers for low-rate wireless personal area networks (WPANs—a WBAN is a type of WPAN). IEEE 802.15.4
has been used in a wide range of applications including industrial automation, home control, and wireless sensor networking. Compared to standards such as IEEE 802.11 [4] and
802.15.1 [5], IEEE 802.15.4 offers lower complexity and power
consumption that makes it suitable for WBANs with resource
constrained devices. An IEEE 802.15.4-based WPAN may be
configured in the star, mesh, or cluster topologies. In the star
topology, a number of sensors communicate directly with a coordinator, which makes it the most effective choice regarding
network maintenance overhead and energy consumption. The
mesh and cluster topologies are mostly used in environmental
and industrial monitoring applications covering large areas.
IEEE 802.15.4 uses direct sequence spread spectrum (DSSS)
modulation with a default data rate of 250 kbps where each
data symbol (4 bits) is coded into a 32-bit pseudo-noise (PN)
code [3]. Transmissions, clear channel assessments (CCAs), and
backoffs are aligned with units of time called backoff periods
320 μs each. The coordinator divides time into superframes
by transmitting beacon frames. Each superframe includes an

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

328

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

active part during which the nodes can communicate and an
inactive part when the nodes may sleep and conserve energy.
The time interval between two consecutive beacons is called
a beacon interval (BI) and the length of the active part of the
superframe is known as the superframe duration (SD). BI and SD
are adjusted using two parameters called macSuperframeOrder
(SO) and macBeaconOrder (BO).
The active part of the superframe includes 16 time slots divided between a contention access period (CAP) and an optional
contention free period (CFP) during which guaranteed time slots
(GTSs) can be assigned to the devices to transmit without contention. The channel access method in the CAP is carrier sense
multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) and timedivision multiple access (TDMA) is used during the CFP. Since
the CFP eliminates the need for CCAs and backoffs, it is widely
accepted as the default mode of operation for WBANs.
III. COEXISTENCE PROBLEM AND RELATED WORK
As multiple wireless technologies use the 2.4 GHz industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) frequency bands, there may
be multiple sources of interference for a wireless transceiver
at the same time. The coexistence problem can be classified
in heterogeneous and homogeneous categories. Heterogeneous
coexistence refers to the interference between different types
of wireless technologies. Multiple methods for mitigating coexistence effects between IEEE 802.11 and IEEE 802.15.4 are
reviewed in [6]. IEEE 802.15.4 defines sixteen channels in the
2.4 GHz band, but only four of them do not overlap with the
default Wi-Fi channels (channels 1, 6, and 11 in North America).
On the other hand, coexistence of multiple transceivers of
the same type shall be referred to as homogeneous coexistence,
which may be addressed by either centralized or distributed
methods. Ferrari et al. [7] proposed a centralized mechanism
in which a resource allocator server receives requests from the
WPAN coordinators and allocates transmission times to them. In
distributed methods, networks can detect and manage the coexistence situation using collaborative or noncollaborative methods. Assigning nonoverlapping transmission channels based on
graph coloring algorithms [8] and adapting the transmission
power [9] are examples of these two categories, respectively.
One solution that can be implemented as both a collaborative or
a noncollaborative method is organizing the active and inactive
periods of the coexisting WPANs such that the active period of
each network overlaps with the inactive periods of the others.
Based on this idea, Kim et al. [10] proposed a noncollaborative
method where they assume that an IEEE 802.15.4-based WPAN
is joining a group of preexisting networks and it selects its superframe timing based on the information carried in the beacons
of the preexisting WPANs. This mechanism solves the problem
of static (and not dynamic) coexistence since the mobility of
WPANs is not considered and superframes are arranged only
when WPANs are starting operation.
We proposed a distributed and collaborative scheme for
managing the dynamic coexistence of health monitoring
WBANs in medical environments in [11]. Using this method,
when a coordinator detects harmful coexistence, it takes the role
of a coexistence manager, and after exchanging requests and

responses for collaboration, it finds the optimum arrangement
for the superframes of the coexisting WBANs. The drawback
of such a collaborative method is the complexity in maintaining
synchronization after the superframe arrangement and the high
overhead of the exchanged control messages. To the best of our
knowledge, no method has previously been proposed to enable
the WBANs to manage dynamic coexistence independently.
It should also be noted that if the length of the superframe
of one WBAN is shorter than the active period of another, then
the two superframes cannot be arranged without overlapping
of the active periods. Also a coordinator has to suspend its
operation for up to a maximum BI (251.65 s) in order to collect
all possible beacons. In a shared environment like a hospital
where all WBANs operate under the supervision of an authority,
it is reasonable to use the same BIs for all WBANs. Therefore,
a part of our proposition is that in order to achieve the highest
resilience against interference, a unified BI should be used for
all WBANs. We assume BI = 0.98 s (BO = 6) as the default
value.
IV. EFFECTS OF COEXISTENCE ON WBANS
Dynamic coexistence affects the operation of IEEE 802.15.4based WBANs in two major forms: beacon collision and data
collision.
A. Beacon Collision
Since CCA is not used in beacon transmissions, beacons may
easily collide with the transmissions of the coexisting WBANs.
When a beacon is lost, the sensors cannot transmit in the corresponding superframe. Data frames may remain in the buffer for
later superframes or be dropped based on the implementation
and the buffer size. In the worst possible case, if the superframes of two WBANs have the same length and overlap such
that the beacons collide, the operation of both WBANs will be
suspended until they move out of each other’s ranges.
IEEE 802.15.4 supports an orphan device realignment mechanism that is performed after 4 successive beacon losses. However, the beacon is not actually realigned since in response to
a realignment request from a sensor, the coordinator sends a
coordinator realignment frame that only indicates its presence
and not the timing of the beacon. Several studies have exclusively focused on the problem of beacon loss. In this regard, two
proposals (the time-division and the beacon-only-period methods) have been presented by Task Group 15.4b of the IEEE 802
committee [12], yet they remain in the form of abstract proposals with no implementation details. In [13], the authors propose
scanning candidate channels by the coordinator during the inactive periods and switching to clean channels when beacons
are lost. They assume that the “the coordinator is connected
to AC power” which is an unrealistic assumption for wearable
systems.
B. Data Collision
Collision of data frames has different consequences based on
the acknowledged or unacknowledged modes of transmission.
In the unacknowledged mode, collided frames are lost and not

DEYLAMI AND JOVANOV: DISTRIBUTED SCHEME TO MANAGE THE DYNAMIC COEXISTENCE

329

where TBCN is a beacon transmission time (24 symbols). The
probability of beacon collision in this case is
DBCL
.
(4)
BI
In the case of NW coexisting WBANs, the coordinator of a
WBAN may transmit its beacon successfully if it does not collide
with the transmissions of NW − 1 coexisting WBANs where
the no-collision events are independent. The probability of a
successful beacon transmission is
PBCL =

Fig. 1.

Durations of possible beacon collision given two WBANs.

retransmitted. In the acknowledged mode, collided frames are
retransmitted; however, lack of randomness in the timing of
retransmissions, along with the absence of CCAs in CFP, can
result in extreme inefficiency since the retransmitted frames may
also collide. The coordinator can detect data loss in both modes
by checking for missing frame sequence numbers.

PS B T =

N
W −1

(1 − PBCL ) = (1 − PBCL )N W

.

(5)

1

Yet only a subset of the (NW − 1) WBANs may have a successful beacon transmission and the transmission of data frames
afterward. The expected number of these WBANs is
NS B T = (NW − 1) ∗ PS B T .

V. ANALYTICAL MODELING OF COEXISTENCE
In order to provide an accurate and understandable analysis
on the effects of coexistence on the operation of WBANs, we
model the coexistence of homogeneous WBANs, i.e., WBANs
with the same number of sensors and data rates. We consider
the unacknowledged mode of transmission. Each WBAN contains NS sensors, each data frame contains a maximum payload
(114 bytes) and sensor j transmits Rj frames per superframe.
The unit of time is symbols and all durations are defined relative
to a superframe.

−1

(6)

Therefore, we need to change (5) to
PS B T = (1 − PBCL )(N W

−1)∗P S B T

.

(7)

It is important to notice that PS B T shows itself on both sides
of this equation and it is embedded in PBCL (because of NFj )
as well. To validate this analysis, we find numerical solutions to
this equation and compare them with the simulation results in
Section VII.
B. Probability of Successful Data Transmission

A. Probability of Successful Beacon Transmission
If the probability of successful beacon transmission is PS B T ,
the beacon is lost and the frames remain in the buffer with the
probability of (1 − PS B T ). Loss of beacons results in more
frames to be transmitted in active superframes (when beacons
are successfully transmitted); therefore, the expected value of
the number of frames that sensor j needs to transmit during an
active superframe is
NFj =

Rj
.
PS B T

Unsuccessful beacon transmissions caused by collisions reduce data transmissions of sensors in their WBANs. Therefore, the possible duration of data transmission (DD T ) for each
WBAN would be
DD T = BI ∗ (1 − PBCL )N S B T .

(8)

Similar to (3), the duration of time that a data frame may collide
with the data transmissions of a coexisting WBAN would be

(1)

DDCL =

NS 



DCj O + TF R M .

(9)

j =1

Transmission of a frame takes TF R M (266 symbols, which is
the sum of 114 bytes of payload and 19 bytes of header) and
successive transmissions are separated by a long inter-frame
spacing (LIFS) equal to 40 symbols. The duration of time that
a sensor may occupy the channel (DCj O ) is limited by its own
GTS (GT Sj ), that is




DCj O = Min GTSj , NFj ∗ TF R M + NFj − 1 ∗ LIFS .
(2)
Assuming two coexisting WBANs, there are specific periods of
time that a beacon may collide with the transmissions of the
other WBAN. These periods are depicted in Fig. 1 and the sum
of them is the duration of possible beacon collision
DBCL = 2 ∗ TBCN +

NS 

j =1

DCj O + TBCN


(3)

Considering two coexisting WBANs, W1 and W2, transmitted
frames of W1 do not collide with the transmitted frames of W2
during a period of DD T − 2∗ DDCL and during 2∗ DDCL , half
of the frames collide on average. The probability of successful
transmission with just one coexisting WBAN (PS D T 1 ) can be
calculated as




DD T − 2 ∗ DDCL
2 ∗ DDCL
1
∗1+
∗
PS D T 1 =
DD T
DD T
2
=

DD T − DDCL
.
DD T

(10)

To know the probability of successful data transmission or
equivalently the ratio of the successfully transmitted data frames
to all generated data frames, we need to know the number of
transmission trials per superframe. We know that for each successfully received beacon, NFj frames are put into the buffer, yet

330

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

the number of them that actually get the chance for transmission
during an active superframe (NTj ) is limited by the length of the
assigned GTS:


GTSj
j
j
,N
NT = Min
.
(11)
TF R M + LIFS F

TABLE I
DEFINITION OF ACRONYMS AND VARIABLES

A data frame will be successfully transmitted if the beacon is
received successfully, and it does not collide with the transmissions of the coexisting WBANs. The probability of successful
transmission of the data frames for sensor j is
PSj D T =
=

Successfully transmitted frames per super frame
Generated frames per superframe
PS B T ∗ NTj ∗ (PS D T 1 )N S B T
.
Rj

(12)

We may calculate an upper bound for the probability of successful data frame transmission by assuming that all beacons
are received successfully. In this case, the duration of time that
a sensor may occupy the channel is
DCj O = Rj ∗ TF R M + (Rj − 1) ∗ LIFS.

(13)

Similar to (9), the duration of time that a data frame may collide
with the data frames of a coexisting WBAN is
DDCL =

NS 




DCj O + TF R M .

(14)

j =1

Considering two coexisting WBANs, W1 and W2, data frames
of W1 do not collide with the transmissions of W2 with the
probability of
PS D T 1 =

BI − DDCL
.
BI

(15)

Then, the probability of successful data transmission, i.e., the
probability that a transmitted data frame does not collide with
the transmissions of the NW − 1 coexisting WBANs, is
PS D T = (PS D T 1 )N W

−1

.

(16)

The validity of this equation will be assessed in the simulation
results section. Table I lists the acronyms used in this analysis.
VI. DYNAMIC COEXISTENCE MANAGEMENT
We propose the dynamic coexistence management (DCM)
mechanism to enable WBANs to manage the dynamic coexistence situation independently. Although the DCM mechanism
is mainly targeted for health monitoring WBANs, it can be used
in other types of IEEE 802.15.4-based networks as long as they
use the same BIs. DCM uses beacon replacement and channel
switching to resolve the beacon collision and the data collision
respectively.

in DCM if a single beacon is lost, the coordinator will monitor the current working channel during the inactive part of the
superframe. If no frames from coexisting WBANs are detected
during this period, the coordinator will conclude that the beacon loss has been a one-time mishap and it will resume normal
activity. However, if this loss recurs for a second consecutive
superframe or frames from coexisting WBANs are detected, the
coordinator will conclude that the beacon has to be replaced
on the timeline to be received successfully by the sensors. The
sensors are supposed to keep their transceivers on in case of
consecutive beacon losses to be able to receive the replaced
beacons.
When a beacon loss is detected, the coordinator will monitor
the current channel for a BI. At the end of this search, the
coordinator will have complete information about the coexisting
WBANs. If the coordinator can find a gap with the minimum
length of its own active period between the active durations
of the coexisting WBANs, the coordinator will reschedule the
transmission of its next beacon at the beginning of the gap. If a
gap cannot be found, the coordinator will replace the beacon at
the beginning of the largest available gap. Although this gap may
not be sufficient for the whole active period, a successful beacon
transmission will at least reestablish communication with the
sensors in order to resume operation and inform them about
a possible channel switch later on. Since the clocks are not
synchronized between the coordinators and there may be other
collisions shortly after the replacement, a guard time has to be
used between the transmission of the replaced beacon and the
beginning of the gap. We use a value of 10 ms in our simulations.

A. Beacon Replacement
At the end of the CFP, the coordinator can detect a beacon
collision if it receives no data frames during that period. The
beacon loss may be caused by a temporary interference or collision with the transmissions of a coexisting WBAN. Therefore,

B. Channel Switching
Although changing the channel is the most trivial solution in
order to avoid interference, it needs to be carefully investigated.
At the end of a CFP, if the coordinator detects data loss, it has

DEYLAMI AND JOVANOV: DISTRIBUTED SCHEME TO MANAGE THE DYNAMIC COEXISTENCE

Fig. 2.

331

Searching for a candidate channel and replacing the superframe in the DCM mechanism.

the chance to scan a candidate channel for a possible channel
switch. The two possible options are: 1) full BI scan, and 2)
inactive period scan. The benefit of the full BI scan is that
the coordinator can collect the complete information about the
preexisting WBANs in the candidate channel and the availability
of a gap for its own active period. This benefit might come at
the price of missed transmissions for one superframe since the
beacon should not be transmitted during the scan. The advantage
of the inactive period scan is the possibility of finding a gap
without missing a beacon, even though the complete information
about the preexisting WBANs in the candidate channel is not
available. Also, if this scan is not successful, there is a chance
that data loss will not persist in the next superframe and so no
more actions will be needed.
In case of an unsuccessful search for a candidate channel,
other channels will be monitored during the inactive parts of the
next superframes. Altogether, the inactive period scan is more
reasonable. If there is no inactive period (SD = BI), then the
only choice will be to scan the candidate channel for a whole BI.
If the coordinator does not receive any data frames during the
CFP after the channel switch, it will conclude that the sensors
have not received the last beacon and, therefore, they have not
become aware of the channel switch. In this case the coordinator
will switch back to the last working channel.
C. Implementation Issues
In case of a successful search for a candidate channel, the new
channel and the offset to the beginning of the next superframe
will be included in the next beacon. The time offset is defined as
the number of backoff periods until the next beacon, which needs
a 3-byte field added to the standard beacon frame (maximum
BI = 251.65 s, which is equal to 786 432 backoff periods). The
new channel will also need a 1-byte added field. DCM does
not impose any computational overhead on the sensors since
all DCM-related functionality, such as tracking the coexisting
WBANs and scanning the candidate channels, are performed by
the WBAN coordinators. However, DCM may force the sensors
to keep their transceivers on for longer durations, which may
increase their power consumption and will be described in the
results section.
Fig. 2 illustrates the DCM mechanism. At the beginning, three
WBANs (W1, W2, and W3) are coexisting with superframes
that do not overlap. At some point in time, W4 enters the shared
area with the preexisting WBANs and its beacon collides with
the data transmissions of W1. At the end of W4’s CFP, this
WBAN will initiate current channel monitoring. Since it can

detect data frames from W1, it continues the scan for a whole
BI. At the end of this scan, it will have the complete information
about the other three WBANs, and it can find the proper offset
to replace its superframe. On the other hand, W1 will find data
loss at the end of its own CFP, and it will search for a candidate
channel during its inactive period. If the search is successful, it
will inform its sensors about the channel switch using the next
beacon. If a candidate channel is not found, it will not detect
any more data loss due to the superframe replacement by W4
and there will not be a need for more actions.
VII. SIMULATION MODEL AND RESULTS
We simulate the operation of coexisting health monitoring
WBANs using the OPNET simulation environment [14]. Our
implementation includes
1) the IEEE 802.15.4 standard;
2) the interference and collision model;
3) the power consumption model; and
4) the DCM mechanism
A. Simulation Setup
We define four types of health monitoring WBANs (W1–W4)
with typical numbers of sensors and sampling rates according
to [2]. Activity, ECG, and EEG signals are collected using the
operational parameters shown in Table II. All samples are 16 bits
long and data frames are sent with the maximum payload. Each
buffer size is set to 4 KB, which complies with the WBAN
implementation in [1]. Power consumption parameters are set
according to the CC2420 transceiver used in TelosB [15]. Three
simulation scenarios are set up:
1) dynamic coexistence of homogeneous WBANs with fixed
data rates in the unacknowledged mode;
2) dynamic coexistence of nonhomogeneous WBANs with
and without the DCM mechanism; and
3) a real-world situation with a shared environment and coexisting WBANs
In the first scenario, the coexistence of homogeneous health
monitoring WBANs is simulated to verify the analytical model.
We randomly place 100 WBANs of the same type in a 200 m ×
200 m shared area (typical of a large medical facility). Dynamic
coexistence is simulated using the random waypoint mobility
model [16]. Each WBAN selects a random destination, moves
toward it with a random speed between 0.5 and 2 m/s (realistically low speeds for patients), waits for a random period (up
to 60 s), and then selects another destination. The transmission
ranges of the WBANs are set to 30 m (typical of indoor IEEE

332

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

TABLE II
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE SIMULATED WBANS

Fig. 3.
loss.

Comparison between the analytical and simulated results for beacon

802.15.4 ranges [10]) and all WBANs operate in the same channel. The simulation is run for 100 000 s. In the second scenario,
100 WBANs including 25 of each type (W1–W4) are placed
in a 100 m × 100 m area with random movements similar to
the previous scenario. The four nonoverlapping channels discussed in Section III are used. We consider the acknowledged
and unacknowledged modes, each with and without DCM. The
simulation is run for 100 000 s.
In the third scenario, we simulate 16 WBANs that start their
operation with no coexistence in the acknowledged mode. The
simulation continues for 100 s and then the WBANs randomly
enter a simulated room during a course of 200 s. We measure
the performance metrics of the WBANs with and without DCM
and compare the results.
B. Results
Fig. 3 shows the comparison between the simulated and analytical results for the probability of successful beacon transmission obtained from (7). We show the results for two types of
WBANs (W1 and W3). The other two configurations demonstrate the same matching results. Fig. 4 shows the analytical
results for the probability of successful data transmission [see
(12)] for the three sensors of a WBAN of type W1. This figure
also includes the theoretical upper bound for the probability of
successful data transmission [see (16)] for these sensors.

Fig. 4. Probability of successful data transmission for different sensors in a
WBAN of the type W1.

Fig. 5. Successfully received data rates in the four types of WBANs using
different modes.

Figs. 5–8 present the results of the second scenario and the
comparison between the measured parameters in four modes of
operation. Unack and Ack refer to the unacknowledged and acknowledged modes of operation without DCM. Unack+DCM
and Ack+DCM refer to the same modes with DCM support.
The average number of coexisting WBANs for each WBAN
during this simulation was measured as 4.55. Fig. 5 shows the
successfully received data rates at the coordinators. As we expect, without DCM the acknowledged mode performs poorly at
the time of coexistence. The successfully received data rates in
this mode are even lower than those using the unacknowledged
mode. Using DCM, both the acknowledged and unacknowledged modes show almost perfect transmission rates.
Fig. 6 shows the comparison between the power consumptions of the activity sensors in the four types of WBANs

DEYLAMI AND JOVANOV: DISTRIBUTED SCHEME TO MANAGE THE DYNAMIC COEXISTENCE

333

Fig. 6. Power consumption of the activity sensors in the four types of WBANs
using different modes.

Fig. 9. Comparison between the collective data rate of all coexisting WBANs
with and without DCM.

Fig. 7. Dropped frames per second in the four types of WBANs using different
modes.

Fig. 9 shows the collective data rate for the 16 coexisting
WBANs in the third scenario. Starting at 100 s when coexistence
starts, without DCM the received data rates start to decrease
consistently to almost 40% data loss. It should be noted that this
performance degradation is not shared by the WBANs evenly
since some of them face total service shutdown and there are
others that do not lose much data. However, using DCM the set
of the coexisting WBANs converges to a stable condition with no
significant changes in the collective data rate. It is expected that
some frames are lost as the WBANs enter each other’s ranges;
however, since the coordinators rearrange the active periods or
find alternative communication channels, the losses can barely
be observed in the collective data rate.
VIII. CONCLUSION

Fig. 8. Latency of the data frames sent by the activity sensors in the four types
of WBANs using different modes.

using different modes. Higher power consumption is expected
with DCM-enabled modes since the sensors have to keep their
transceivers on for longer periods. However, the major part of
this higher power consumption is due to the fact that when DCM
is used, there are more successful beacon transmissions, which
results in more active superframes and therefore more transmissions. So the higher power consumption in the DCM enabled
modes is justified by the higher rate of successful transmissions.
Fig. 7 shows a very high rate of dropped frames in the acknowledged mode without DCM that is caused by buffer overflows. The unacknowledged mode without DCM has a lower
rate of dropped frames, and with the DCM enabled modes, the
rate of dropped frames is not noticeable. The latencies of the
data frames transmitted by the activity sensors are compared
in Fig. 8. Latency is defined as the period of time from the
creation of a data frame until it is received by the coordinator.
Without DCM, we observe higher latencies since the successfully transmitted frames may reach the destination after waiting
in the buffer for later superframes. The DCM enabled modes
show lower latencies since more frames get the chance to be
transmitted without waiting for later superframes.

Dynamic coexistence of WBANs may result in the loss of critical health monitoring data. The criticality of such information
in addition to the high probability of coexistence in healthcare
environments necessitates the development of mechanisms that
enable the WBANs to detect and mitigate the harmful effects of
coexistence. In this paper, we introduced the DCM mechanism
as an extension to the IEEE 802.15.4 standard which enables the
WBANs to independently manage the coexistence situation in
a distributed manner. We showed that the proposed mechanism
can significantly improve the reliability of the WBANs in the
dynamic coexistence situation. Future works include investigation of realistic patient mobility models and implementation of
DCM on real-world WBANs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank OPNET Technologies, Inc.,
for providing us with OPNET Modeler 16.0.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and E. Jovanov, “Wireless sensor networks for personal health monitoring: Issues and an implementation,” Comput. Commun. (Special Issue Wireless Sensor Netw. Performance, Rel., Security,
Beyond), vol. 29, no. 13–14, pp. 2521–2533, Aug. 2006.

334

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[2] D. Raskovic, A. Milenkovic, P. de Groen,E. Jovanov, “From Telemedicine
to Ubiquitous M-Health: the Evolution of E-Health Systems,” in Biomedical Information Technology (David Feng, ed.), Elsevier, Burlington, MA,
U.S., 2007.
[3] IEEE 802.15 WPANTask Group 4 (TG4) [Online]. Available: http://www.
ieee802.org/15/pub/TG4.html, 2006, accessed Jun. 2013.
[4] IEEE 802.11 Wireless Local Area Networks [Online]. Available: http://
www.ieee802.org/11, 2007, accessed Jun. 2013.
[5] IEEE 802.15 WPAN Task Group 1 (TG1) [Online]. Available: http://
www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG1.html, 2005, accessed Jun. 2013.
[6] D. Yang, Y. Xu, and M. Gidlund, “Wireless coexistence between IEEE
802.11- and IEEE 802.15.4-based networks: A Survey,” Int. J. Distrib.
Sensor Netw., vol. 2011, pp. 1–17, 2011.
[7] P. Ferrari, A. Flammini, D. Marioli, E. Sisinni, and A. Taroni, “Synchronized wireless sensor networks for coexistence,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Emerging Technol. Factory Autom., 2008, pp. 656–663.
[8] K. Chowdhury, N. Nandiraju, P. Chanda, D. Agrawal, and Q. Zeng, “Channel allocation and medium access control for wireless sensor networks,”
Elsevier Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 7, pp. 307–321, 2009.
[9] G. Fang, E. Dutkiewicz, K. Yu, R. Vesilo, and Y. Yu, “Distributed internetwork interference coordination for wireless body area networks,”
in Proc. 2010 IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM 2010),
pp. 1–5.
[10] T. H. Kim, J. Y. Ha, and S. Choi, “Improving spectral and temporal efficiency of collocated IEEE 802.15.4 LR-WPANs,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1596–1609, Dec. 2009.
[11] M. Deylami and E. Jovanov, “A distributed and collaborative scheme for
mitigating coexistence in IEEE 802.15.4 based WBANs,” in Proc. 50th
Annu. Southeast Regional Conf. (ACM-SE ‘12), Tuscaloosa, AL, USA,
2012.
[12] IEEE 802.15 WPA Task Group 4b (TG4b) [Online]. Available:
http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG4b.html, accessed Jun. 2013.
[13] J. Kim, J. Kim, and D. Eom, “Multi-dimensional channel management
scheme to avoid beacon collision in LR-WPAN,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 396–404, May 2008.
[14] OPNET Technologies, Inc. [Online]. Available: www.opnet.com
[15] J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and D. Culler, “Telos: Enabling ultra-low power
wireless research,” presented at the 4th int. Symp. Inf. Process. Sensor
Netw. (IPSN ‘05), Piscataway, NJ, USA, IEEE Press.
[16] C. Bettstetter, G. Resta, and P. Santi, “The node distribution of the random
waypoint mobility model for wireless ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans.
Mobile Comput., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 257–269, Sep. 2003.

Mohammad N. Deylami (S’13) received the B.S.
degree in computer engineering from Tehran University, Tehran, Iran, in 2002, and the M.S. degree in
computer engineering from Amirkabir University of
Technology, Tehran, in 2008. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department, University of Alabama in Huntsville, USA.
He is currently a Research Assistant in the area of
wireless sensor networks. The focus of his research
is on coexistence between health monitoring wireless
body area networks (WBANs). His current research interests include wireless
networking, multimedia, embedded systems, development of wearable medical
devices, and WBANs for telemedicine.

Emil Jovanov (M’98–SM’04) received the Dipl.Ing.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, in 1984, 1989, and 1993,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Alabama in Huntsville. He is recognized
as the originator of the concept of wireless body area
networks for health monitoring and is one of the leaders in the field of wearable health monitoring.
Dr. Jovanov is an Associate Editor of the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE and IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS and is a Member of
the Editorial Board of the Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback. He is
a member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (IEEEEMBS) Technical Committee on Wearable Biomedical Sensors and Systems
and a member of the IEEE Medical Technology Policy Committee. He has
spent over 25 years in the development and implementation of application specific hardware, software, and systems. His current research interests include
ubiquitous and mobile computing, biomedical signal processing, and health
monitoring.

