628

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

The Sensitive and Efficient Detection of Quadriceps
Muscle Thickness Changes in Cross-Sectional Plane
Using Ultrasonography:
A Feasibility Investigation
Jizhou Li, Yongjin Zhou, Member, IEEE, Yi Lu, Guangquan Zhou, Lei Wang, Member, IEEE,
and Yong-Ping Zheng, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—As a direct determinant parameter to quantify muscle activity, the muscle thickness (MT) has been investigated in
many aspects and for various purposes. Ultrasonography (US) is a
promising modality to detect muscle morphological changes during contractions since it is portable, noninvasive, and real time.
However, there are few reports on sensitive and efficient estimation of changes of MT in a cross-sectional plane. In this feasibility investigation, we proposed a coarse-to-fine method based on a
compressive-tracking algorithm for estimation of MT changes during an example task of isometric knee extension using ultrasound
images. The sensitivity and efficiency are evaluated with 1920 US
images from quadriceps muscle (QM) in eight subjects. The detection results were compared with those obtained from both traditional manual measurement and the well known normalized crosscorrelation method, and the effect of the size of tracking window
on detection performance was evaluated as well. It is demonstrated
that the proposed method agrees well with the manual measurement. Meanwhile, it is not only sensitive to relatively small changes
of MT but also computationally efficient.
Index Terms—Compressive tracking, isometric knee extension, muscle thickness (MT), normalized cross correlation (NCC),
quadriceps muscle (QM), sonomyography.

Manuscript received March 20, 2013; revised June 24, 2013 and July 22,
2013; accepted July 23, 2013. Date of publication July 26, 2013; date of current
version March 3, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Next Generation Communication Technology Major Project of National S&T under Grant
2013ZX03005013, in part by the Low Cost Healthcare¯Programs of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, in part by the Guangdong Innovative Research Team Program under Grant 2011S013, in part by International Science and Technology
Cooperation Program of Guangdong Province under Grant 2012B050200004,
and in part by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission under
Grant GHP/047/09. (Corresponding author: Y. Zhou, phone: 086-134-28666265.)
J. Li, Y. Lu, and L. Wang are with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China.
Y. Zhou is with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China, and also with the Interdisciplinary Division of Biomedical Engineering, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong (e-mail: yj.zhou@siat.ac.cn).
G. Zhou and Y.-P. Zheng are with the Interdisciplinary Division of Biomedical
Engineering, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2275002

I. INTRODUCTION
LTRASONOGRAPHY (US) is widely used in the field
of measuring morphology changes of skeletal muscles
due to its advantages, such as being stable, easy to use, low
cost, and able to record instantaneous activities from deeper
muscles without crosstalk from adjacent ones [1]. In recent
years, US has been proved to be able to accurately measure the
changes in muscle thickness (MT) [1]–[6], pennation angle or
fiber orientation [7]–[12], fiber length [6]–[8], [13]–[15], fascicle curvature [16], [17], and cross-sectional area [18]–[20] during contractions. Because these architectural parameters could
change significantly during contraction, they potentially provided a valid method of characterizing activities of various
muscles. Zheng et al. [21] used sonomyography to describe
the real-time architectural parameters’ change detected using
B-mode ultrasound images during the muscle contraction and
proposed to use it for the prosthetic control [21]–[23], assessment of isometric muscle contraction, [2], [10], [20], [24] and
isotonic contraction [25].
Among these morphological parameters, MT has the potential to be the most direct determinant to quantify muscle activity
in a cross-sectional plane. Previous studies have shown that
changes in MT, measured with ultrasound, are a valid index to
provide insight into muscle contraction as compared with electromyography (EMG) [26]. Miyatani et al. [27] used the MT
to estimate the muscle volume of the quadriceps femoris based
on US; Raney et al. [28] used the MT to document the effects
of the spinal manipulation on muscle contraction behavior, and
Ohata et al. [29] employed MT to quantify the muscle strength
of people with severe cerebral palsy. English et al. [30] validated
that ultrasound was a reliable measure of the MT in acute-stroke
patients for some anatomical sites. However, MT was traditionally measured by an experienced operator, and the process is not
only subjective, but also time-consuming. Recently, researchers
have presented several computer-aided methods which could be
used to estimate the MT or related parameters. In longitudinal
direction, we previously proposed an automatic tracking strategy to achieve the continuous and quantitative measurement for
MT of gastrocnemius muscle in ultrasound images [5]. Darby
et al. [31] proposed a method to automatically track movement
of features, in localized tissue portions. And they provided an
automated approach, which has no strong assumptions on the

U

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LI et al.: SENSITIVE AND EFFICIENT DETECTION OF QUADRICEPS MUSCLE THICKNESS CHANGES IN CROSS-SECTIONAL PLANE

fascicle shape, to estimate the skeletal muscle fascicle curvature [16]. Loram et al. [13] used an interpolated control-pointsbased normalized cross-correlation (NCC) method to track
continuous changes in a human muscle contractile length in a
longitudinal direction, where the ultrasound echo of the muscle
would exhibit certain spatial consistency in adjacent regions. In
a cross-sectional plane, Shi et al. [2] demonstrated the feasibility of using the changes of MT extracted from the NCC method
to characterize the muscle fatigue. Two rectangular windows
were selected for the upper and lower boundaries of the biceps brachii in the cross-sectional plane, and a cross-correlation
algorithm was used to measure the distance between their centers as MT at each moment. Koo et al. [32] used an automated
muscle-boundary-tracking algorithm based on the NCC method
to track the pectoralis major muscle boundaries during dynamic
contraction. The detections of the muscle motion and patterns in
a cross-sectional plane have also been employed to investigate
the finger flexion motion and finger positions [33], [34].
However, for a sensitive and efficient detection of MT changes
in the cross-sectional plane, the NCC method has several drawbacks. Apart from an intensive calculation requirement, a more
general problem with NCC is the choice of the tracking window
size [13]. The larger the window size is, the more robust while
less sensitive to fine changes of MT, the tracking would be, and
vice versa. We believe that both sensitivity and efficiency to
fine changes detection of MT are crucial in muscle study based
on ultrasound image sequences, which are commonly acquired
nowadays at frame-rate of 12–30 Hz and the interframe muscle motion is usually relatively small. Therefore, in this study,
an effective coarse-to-fine method, based on the compressivetracking algorithm [35] followed by a fine-tuning step, is proposed to detect thickness changes in quadriceps muscle (QM)
in a cross-sectional plane.
II. METHODS
A. Subjects and Experiment Protocol
Eight healthy subjects (six male and two female, mean ±
SD, age = 33.6 ± 5.2 years; body weight 65.9 ± 11.7 kg;
height = 165 ± 7.0 cm) volunteered to participate in this study.
No participant had a history of neuromuscular disorders, and all
were aware of experimental purposes and procedures. Human
subject ethical approval was obtained from the relevant committee in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong
Kong, and an informed consent was obtained from the subject
prior to the experiment. The testing position of the subject was in
accordance with the User’s Guide of a Norm dynamometer (Humac/Norm Testing and Rehabilitation System, Computer Sports
Medicine, Inc., MA, USA). Each subject was seated with both
the right hip and knee at angles of 90◦ and was required to put
forth his/her maximal effort of isometric knee extension for a
period of 3 s, with verbal encouragement provided. The maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) was defined as the highest
value of the torque recorded during the entire isometric knee
extension. The MVC torque was then calculated by averaging
the two recorded highest torque values from the two tests under
the same conditions. The subject performed several warm-up

629

Fig. 1. Experimental setup for collecting ultrasound images from the subject’s
right QM during isometric knee extension. The ultrasound probe was aligned
perpendicularly to QM belly using a multidegree adjustable bracket.

trials to get familiar with the experiment protocol. After a rest
of 5 min, the subject was instructed to perform ramp increasing
then decreasing contractions, up to 90% of his/her MVC, using isometric knee extension. During each contraction, a torque
production template, serving as a target, and the subject’s realtime torque signal were displayed together on a computer screen
placed in front of him/her. Each test was repeated twice with a
rest of 5 min between two adjacent trials. The torque was measured by the aforementioned dynamometer and the reason for
choosing 90% MVC as the highest value was to avoid muscle
fatigue.
B. Data Acquisition and Data Processing
A real-time B-mode ultrasonic scanner (EUB-8500, Hitachi
Medical Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) with a 10 MHz electronic
linear array probe (L53L, Hitachi Medical Corporation, Tokyo,
Japan) was used to obtain ultrasound images of muscles. The
long axis of the ultrasound probe was arranged perpendicularly
to the long axis of the thigh on its superior aspect, 40% distally from the knee (measured from the anterior superior iliac
spine to the superior patellar border) [36], [37]. The ultrasound
probe was fixed by a custom-designed foam container with fixing straps, and a very generous amount of ultrasound gel was
applied to secure the acoustic coupling between the probe and
skin during muscle contractions, as shown in Fig. 1. The probe
was adjusted to optimize the contrast of muscle fascicles in
ultrasound images [1], and the position was marked to ensure
that the probe was placed at the same site every time. Then,
the B-mode ultrasound images were digitized by a video card
(NI PCI-1411, National Instruments, Austin,TX, USA) at a rate
of 25 frame/s for later analysis. Before the test began, an ultrasound image was collected from the subject on the RF muscle
under the relaxed condition as a reference. A total of 8 (subjects)
× 240 (frames) ultrasound images with 556 × 418 pixels were
acquired, and all the images were cropped to keep the image content only. Ultrasound images and torque signals were simultaneously collected and stored by custom-developed software for
the ultrasonic measurement of motion and elasticity (UMME,
http://www.tups.org) for further analysis. The time delay between the different data collection systems was calibrated using

630

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Fig. 3. Illustration of MT definitions. Three initial tracking windows A, B,
and C are selected to obtain RFT, VIT, and QMT. B and C have been handled
by the Canny edge detector and the maximal connected components search
technology. The triangles point out the locations of the selected window A,
window B, and window C, respectively.

tion. The main steps of compressive tracking are briefed in the
Appendix A.
D. Fine-Tuning Step

Fig. 2. Diagrammatic illustrations of the proposed method. (a) Coarse
position-locating of the tracked window using a compressive-tracking algorithm, and (b) Finetuning to estimate the MT using the center-based method and
edge-based method.

a method similar to that described by our earlier study [38]. A
given B-mode ultrasound image frame corresponded to a given
torque value point.
All signals were processed offline, using programs written in
MATLAB (Version 7.12, MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA)
on a PC equipped with Windows 7, Intel (R) Core i3 3.30 GHz
processors and 2 GB RAM.
C. Coarse Locating
The proposed coarse-to-fine method for the automatic detection of MT changes includes two stages: coarse locating and
fine-tuning, as shown in Fig. 2. The first stage of our method
is to extract coarse location using the compressive-tracking algorithm [35]. Here, the tracking problem is formulated as a
detection task. In the first frame of each ultrasound image sequence, three initial tracking windows are selected manually
along the top and bottom of the RF muscle and femur, respectively. In this selection procedure, each window is placed such
that its horizontal center line lies at the exact boundary of RF
muscle or femur, as shown in Fig. 3. The sizes of these windows
are chosen empirically to include sufficient features for a reliable tracking. At each incoming frame, some positive samples
(near the current target location) and negative samples (far away
from the object center) will be sampled to update the classifier.
To predict the object location in the next frame, some samples
around the current target location are drawn and the one with
the maximal classification score is treated as the expected loca-

The MT at each moment is defined as the vertical distance
among windows location. Specifically speaking, the thickness
of rectus femoris muscle (RFT) is defined as the maximum vertical distance between window A and window B, the thickness
of vastus intermedius muscle (VIT) is defined as the maximum
vertical distance between window B and window C, and the
thickness of QM is defined as the minimum vertical distance
between window A and window C. The locations of these windows will be determined by two different ways, which will be
stated as follows and illustrated in Fig. 3:
1) Edge-based method: The compressive-tracking algorithm
provides a rough location of the tracked window. Then,
for windows B and C, the Canny edge detector and maximal connected components search will be used to extract
the edge. The Canny edge detector transfers the window
image to a binary image, and then maximal connected
components search technology will be used to find the
exact boundary of interests, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
2) Center-based method: There exist multiple boundaries
for window A, after applying the canny edge detector.
Therefore, the location of window A will be calculated as
the center of this corresponding window, as illustrated in
Fig. 3.
E. Methods Evaluation
The manually derived measurement by the investigator using
ImageJ software (ImageJ, National Institutes of Health, USA)
was treated as the golden standard (true MT), and the true thickness was calculated as the average manually measured vertical
distance of two boundaries by two investigators. This manual
measurement was repeated three times by each investigator.
It has a high degree of repeatability (R2 = 0.984, P < 0.001)
and reproducibility (R2 = 0.961, P = 0.003). A quantitative
assessment of the detection accuracy was obtained by evaluating the percentage change rate (PCR) of the muscle defined

LI et al.: SENSITIVE AND EFFICIENT DETECTION OF QUADRICEPS MUSCLE THICKNESS CHANGES IN CROSS-SECTIONAL PLANE

631

B. Computational Time
The size of windows A, B, and C were selected as 100×40,
160 × 40, and 100 ×40, respectively. The interframe computation cost of window B, as an example, was shown in Table I. It
is found in this example that NCC method required significantly
more time than the proposed method. It should be noted that,
the computational cost is dependent on the window size, which
will be investigated in the following section.
C. Effect of the Window Size

Fig. 4. Comparison of PCRs for RFT, VIT, and QMT. (a) PCRs of QMT
by the manual, proposed, and NCC methods, respectively, on the data from
a representative subject. (b) PCRs of RFT bythe manual, proposed, and NCC
methods, respectively. (c) PCRs of VIT by manual, proposed, and NCC methods, respectively. (d) Torque signal during the corresponding isometric knee
extension.

as follows:

To look into the effect of different choices of the tracking
window size, taking window B of subject #1 as an example, the
tracking window was placed such that its horizontal center line
lies at the bottom boundary of RF muscle and the window size
was then varied in terms of both the width and height. Specifically speaking, the width varied from 30 to 300 pixels with a
step of ws = 10 and the height varied from 20 to 200 pixels with
a step of hs = 10. In other words, the tracking of window B for
239 incoming frames of subject #1 was run for a total of 28 times,
and the results is shown in Fig. 6(a), where the color from blue
to red indicates the increasing of mean difference of all frames
between the proposed method and the manual measurement.
The result of the same experiment but using the NCC method
is shown in Fig. 6(b). The computation costs corresponding to
Fig. 6(a) and (b) are illustrated in Fig. 6(c), where the color from
blue to red indicates the increasing of computation cost.
IV. DISCUSSION

T − T0
PCR(%) =
× 100%
T0
where T was the resultant MT at each frame, and T0 was the
reference MT, which was captured under the relaxed condition.
The NCC method, see Appendix B for details, was implemented
to detect the MT change and the same window size was selected.
Bias and jitter are used as metrics to quantify the performance
of the method. Bias is the mean of the difference error of PCR,
which is compared with the manually derived measurement, and
jitter represents the error of the bias, i.e., jitter is measured as
the standard deviation of the displacement error [39].
III. RESULTS
A. Detection of MT Changes
Fig. 4(a)– (c) showed a typical PCR result of QMT and RFT
from a representative subject. The synchronized torque signal at
the same time was shown in Fig. 4(d). In this example, there was
an obvious thickness increase of RF muscle when the muscle
began to contract and when the muscle almost finished relaxing, as labeled by ellipses with dotted lines. The two methods,
both, detected these changes successfully. However, the proposed method demonstrated more sensitivity to fine changes of
MT with more amplitude details during the muscle struggling
to reach its MVC and beginning to relax than the NCC method.
Fig. 5 showed the jitter and bias for difference errors of PCR
from all subjects.

The main objective of this preliminary investigation is to
provide a sensitive and efficient solution for the detection of QM
thickness changes in the cross-sectional plane. The first merit of
the proposed method is the reduced computation cost compared
to NCC method, which has been employed for MT measurement
previously [2], [32]. On the data from eight normal subjects it
is found that for the fine-tuning step, the center-based method
required about 1.5 × 10−5 s and the edge-based method required
less than 6 ms, when the window sizes were 100 (window A)
and 120 × 40 (window B), respectively. Taking the slightly more
time-consuming window B for example, as shown in Table I,
the proposed method, including coarse locating and fine-tuning,
used less than 60 ms, while the NCC method needed nearly
190 ms on the MATLAB platform. It is expected to run even
faster in a C/C++ implementation and be potentially available
for an online and frame-by-frame estimation of MT.
It is also very interesting to find RF and VI thickness change
dramatically, at the beginning of the ramp increasing and end
of ramp decreasing, as labeled by ellipses with dotted lines in
Fig. 4. Meanwhile, in the span between the two ellipses, the
proposed method produced more sensitive thickness estimation
than the NCC method, as shown in Fig. 4, where most of the
time NCC results remained constant. The examination of an
individual muscle, such as RF and VI, can provide a partial
snapshot of the quadriceps activity.
The study aimed at the automatic measurement of MT in
a cross-sectional plane, which is now realized with sensitivity

632

Fig. 5.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Bias and jitter in terms of PCR (to manual method) for RFT and QMT.

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF INTERFRAME COMPUTATIONAL TIME
(MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION)

and efficiency. Meanwhile, we would like to point out that one
example of the new findings made possible the fine details revealed in Fig. 4, where the VIT and RFT change nonlinearly,
while the torque output remain roughly linear during an isometric knee extension, and interestingly, the inverse patterns of
the MT change in VI and RF echo to the EMG findings by
Akima et al. [40]. It should be noted that, for RF, the proposed
implementation made such fine observations possible while the
popular NCC almost flatten the changes out. Yet, data from
more subjects than current are needed to confirm or explain the
extraordinary nonlinear RFT and VIT patterns.
In terms of bias and jitter, as shown in Fig. 5, the proposed
method also outperformed the NCC method. It should also be
noted that the size of the tracking window is an important parameter for both the NCC method and proposed method. As
we know, the NCC method is sensitive to the size of tracking
window [13]. The larger the window size (to be more concise,

Fig. 6. Effects of the window size on the performance of tracking methods.
(a) Mean difference of all frames between tracking results from proposed method
and manual measurement. Color variation from blue to red indicates difference
levels from low to high. (b) Mean difference of all frames between tracking
results from the NCC method and manual measurement. (c) Computation cost
comparison between the proposed and NCC method, where the color variation
from blue to red indicates the computation cost from low to high.

LI et al.: SENSITIVE AND EFFICIENT DETECTION OF QUADRICEPS MUSCLE THICKNESS CHANGES IN CROSS-SECTIONAL PLANE

for windows A, B, and C, which are more longitudinally oriented than vertically oriented, the width of the window size) is,
the more robust while less sensitive the tracking would be, and
vice versa. As shown in Fig. 6, the effect of the window size
variation on the detection performance of the proposed method
and NCC method exhibited different patterns, but both methods
have certain choices of window size where the tracking performance is relatively satisfactory in terms of the measurement
difference as compared to results from the manual method. This
study is currently focused mainly on the feasibility of sensitive
and efficient detection of the MT changes in a cross-sectional
plane under a convenient experiment setup. To promote the proposed method for clinical application in pattern extraction of
changes in MT, it would be necessary to increase the number
of subjects and involve a greater range of tasks to comprehensively evaluate and accordingly improve the proposed method
in future.

633

distributions p(vi |y = 1) and p(vi |y = 0) in the classifier
H(v) are assumed to be Gaussian distributed with four
parameters (μ1i , σi1 , μ0i , σi0 ), where
p(vi |y = 0) ∼ N (μ0i , σi0 ), p(vi |y = 1) ∼ N (μ1i , σi1 )
(2)
and the maximal classifier response is used to find the
tracking location lt .
3) Sample two sets of image patches, Dα = {z|l(z) −
lt  < α} and Dζ ,β = {z|ζ < l(z) − lt  < β} with α <
ζ < β.
4) Extract the Haar-like features with these two sets of samples and the scalar parameters in (2) are incrementally
updated by
 1
μi ←
λμ1i + (1 − λ)μ1
1
σi ← λ(σi1 )2 +(1−λ)(σ 1 )2 +λ(1−λ)(μ1i −μ1 )2
(3)
Output: Tracking location lt and classifier parameters.

V. CONCLUSION
The results presented in this feasibility investigation provide
insight into the algorithmic and computational considerations
required to implement sensitive and efficient detection of MT
changes in a cross-sectional plane. The computation cost, sensitivity, and effect of the size of tracking window were investigated, and the results were compared with those obtained from
both traditional manual measurement and well-known NCC
method. On 1920 US images from QM in eight subjects, it
is demonstrated that the proposed method agrees well with the
manual measurement and can outperform the cross-correlation
method in terms of computation cost and sensitivity to fine
changes of MT.

B. Normalized 2-D Cross Correlation
The NCC algorithm is to determine the location of a desired
pattern represented by a template function t inside a 2-D image
function f . The template is shifted pixel-by-pixel across the
image, forming a correlation plane that provides information
of where the template best matches the image. Let f (x, y) be
the intensity value of the M × N image f at pixel (x, y), x ∈
0, . . . , M − 1, y ∈ 0, . . . , N − 1 and let t(x, y) be the intensity
value of the m × n at pixel (x, y) where m < M, n < N . All
the NCC coefficients are stored in a correlation matrix γu ,v
defined:
γu ,v = 

APPENDIX
A. Compressive Tracking Algorithm
The main steps of the compressive-tracking algorithm [35]
are summarized as follows. The parameters such as α and β are
decided empirically based on numerous tests.
Input: tth image frame.
1) Sample a set of image patches, Dγ = {z|l(z) − lt−1  <
γ} where lt−1 is the tracking location at the (t-1)th frame,
and extract the features with nonadaptive low dimensionality based on compressive sensing theories.
2) For each sample z ∈ Rm , its low-dimensional representation is v = (v1 , . . . , vn )T ∈ Rn with m  n. All elements in v are assumed to be independently distributed.
A naive Bayes classifier H is used to feature each vector,
 n

p(vi |y = 1)p(y = 1)
H(v) = log i=1
n
i=1 p(vi |y = 0)p(y = 0)


n

vi |y = 1
log
=
(1)
vi |y = 0
i=1
where p(y = 1) = p(y = 0), y ∈ {0, 1} is a binary variable which represents the sample label. The conditional

Σx,y (f (x, y) − f u ,v )(t(x − u, y − v) − t)

Σx,y (f (x, y) − f u ,v )2 Σx,y (t(x − u, y − v) − (t))2
(4)
where u ∈ 0, 1, . . . , M − N , v ∈ 0, 1, . . . , m − n, f u ,v denotes
the mean value of f (x, y) within the area of the template t shifted
by (u,v) steps and defined:
f u ,v =

u +N
−1 v +n
−1
1
f (x, y)
N × n x=u y =v

(5)

and t denotes the mean value of the template t defined in a
similar way.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Hodges, L. Pengel, R. Herbert, and S. Gandevia, “Measurement of
muscle contraction with ultrasound imaging,” Muscle Nerve, vol. 27, no. 6,
pp. 682–692, 2003.
[2] J. Shi, Y.-P. Zheng, X. Chen, and Q. Huang, “Assessment of muscle fatigue
using sonomyography: Muscle thickness change detected from ultrasound
images,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 472–479, 2007.
[3] K. Thoirs and C. English, “Ultrasound measures of muscle thickness:
Intra-examiner reliability and influence of body position,” Clin. Physiol.
Funct. Imag., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 440–446, 2009.
[4] P. Han, Y. Chen, L. Ao, G. Xie, H. Li, L. Wang, and Y. Zhou, “Automatic
thickness estimation for skeletal muscle in ultrasonography: Evaluation of
two enhancement methods,” BioMed. Eng. OnLine, vol. 12, no. 6, 2013.
[5] S. Ling, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y.-Q. Zhao, L. Wang, and Y.-P. Zheng, “Automatic tracking of aponeuroses and estimation of muscle thickness in

634

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

ultrasonography: A feasibility study,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
to be published. DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2253787.
A. Randhawa and J. M. Wakeling, “Associations between muscle structure
and contractile performance in seniors,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 28, no. 13,
pp. 705–711, Jun. 17, 2013.
G. Chleboun, A. France, M. Crill, H. Braddock, and J. Howell, “In vivo
measurement of fascicle length and pennation angle of the human biceps
femoris muscle,” Cells Tissues Organs, vol. 169, no. 4, pp. 401–409, 2001.
C. Maganaris, V. Baltzopoulos, and A. Sargeant, “Repeated contractions
alter the geometry of human skeletal muscle,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 93,
no. 6, pp. 2089–2094, 2002.
Y. Zhou, J. Z. Li, G. Zhou, and Y.-P. Zheng, “Dynamic measurement of
pennation angle of gastrocnemius muscles during contractions based on
ultrasound imaging,” BioMed. Eng. OnLine, vol. 11, no. 63, 2012.
Y. Zhou and Y.-P. Zheng, “Estimation of muscle fiber orientation in ultrasound images using revoting Hough transform (RVHT),” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 1474–1481, 2008.
Y. Zhou and Y.-P. Zheng, “Longitudinal enhancement of the hyperechoic
regions in ultrasonography of muscles using a Gabor filter bank approach:
A preparation for semi-automatic muscle fiber orientation estimation,”
Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 665–673, 2011.
M. Rana, G. Hamarneh, and J. M. Wakeling, “Automated tracking of
muscle fascicle orientation in B-mode ultrasound images,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 42, no. 13, pp. 2068–2073, 2009.
I. D. Loram, C. Maganaris, and M. Lakie, “Use of ultrasound to make
noninvasive in vivo measurement of continuous changes in human muscle
contractile length,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 1311–1323, 2006.
L. Mademli and A. Arampatzis, “Behaviour of the human gastrocnemius
muscle architecture during submaximal isometric fatigue,” Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 611–617, 2005.
N. J. Cronin, C. P. Carty, R. S. Barrett, and G. Lichtwark, “Automatic
tracking of medial gastrocnemius fascicle length during human locomotion,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 111, no. 5, pp. 1491–1496, 2011.
J. Darby, B. Li, N. Costen, I. D. Loram, and E. Hodson-Tole, “Estimating skeletal muscle fascicle curvature from B-mode ultrasound image
sequences,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1935–1945, Jul.
2013.
T. Muramatsu, T. Muraoka, Y. Kawakami, A. Shibayama, and
T. Fukunaga, “In vivo determination of fascicle curvature in contracting
human skeletal muscles,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 92, pp. 129–134, 2002.
C. Maganaris, V. Baltzopoulos, and A. Sargeant, “Human calf muscle
responses during repeated isometric plantarflexions,” J. Biomech., vol. 39,
no. 7, pp. 1249–1255, 2006.
J. Guo, Y.-P. Zheng, H. Xie, and X. Chen, “Continuous monitoring of
electromyography (EMG), mechanomyography (MMG), sonomyography
(SMG), and torque output during ramp and step isometric contractions,”
Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 1032–1042, 2010.
X. Chen, Y.-P. Zheng, J.-Y. Guo, Z. Zhu, S.-C. Chan, and Z. Zhang,
“Sonomyographic responses during voluntary isometric ramp contraction
of the human rectus femoris muscle,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 112,
no. 7, pp. 2603–2614, 2012.
Y.-P. Zheng, M. Chan, J. Shi, X. Chen, and Q. Huang, “Sonomyography:
Monitoring morphological changes of forearm muscles in actions with
the feasibility for the control of powered prosthesis,” Med. Eng. Phys.,
vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 405–415, 2006.
J. Guo, Y.-P. Zheng, Q. Huang, X. Chen, J. He, and H. L.-W. Chan, “Performances of one-dimensional sonomyography and surface electromyography in tracking guided patterns of wrist extension,” Ultrasound Med.
Biol., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 894–902, 2009.
X. Chen, Y.-P. Zheng, J.-Y. Guo, and J. Shi, “Sonomyography (SMG)
control for powered prosthetic hand: A study with normal subjects,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1076–1088, 2010.
J. Shi, Y.-P. Zheng, Q. Huang, and X. Chen, “Continuous monitoring of
sonomyography, electromyography, and torque generated by normal upper
arm muscles during isometric contraction: Sonomyography assessment for
arm muscles.,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1191–1198,
Mar. 2008.
H.-B. Xie, Y.-P. Zheng, J.-Y. Guo, X. Chen, and J. Shi, “Estimation of wrist
angle from sonomyography using support vector machine and artificial
neural network models,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 384–391,
2009.
J. McMeeken, I. Beith, D. Newham, P. Milligan, and D. Critchley, “The
relaltionship between EMG and change in thickness of transversus abdominis,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 337–342, 2004.
M. Miyatani, H. Kanehisa, S. Kuno, T. Nishijima, and T. Fukunaga, “Validity of ultrasonograph muscle thickness measurements for estimating

[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]

muscle volume of knee extensors in humans,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 203–208, 2002.
N. H. Raney, D. S. Teyhen, and J. D. Childs, “Observed changes in lateral
abdominal muscle thickness after spinal manipulation: A case series using rehabilitative ultrasound imaging,” J. Orthopaed. Sports Phys. Ther.,
vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 472–479, 2007.
K. Ohata, T. Tsuboyama, N. Ichihashi, and S. Minami, “Measurement of
muscle thickness as quantitative muscle evaluation for adults with severe
cerebral palsy,” Phys. Ther., vol. 86, no. 9, pp. 1231–1239, 2006.
C. English, K. Thoirs, L. Fisher, H. McLennan, and J. Bernhardt, “Ultrasound is a reliable measure of muscle thickness in acute stroke patients,
for some, but not all anatomical sites: A study of the intra-rater reliability
of muscle thickness measures in acute stroke patients,” Ultrasound Med.
Biol., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 368–376, 2012.
J. Darby, E. F. Hodson-Tole, N. Costen, and I. D. Loram, “Automated
regional analysis of B-mode ultrasound images of skeletal muscle movement,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 112, no. 2, pp. 313–327, 2012.
T. Koo, C. Wong, and Y.-P. Zheng, “Reliability of sonomyography for
pectoralis major thickness measurement,” J. Manipulat. Physiol. Therap.,
vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 386–394, 2010.
J. Shi, J.-Y. Guo, S. Hu, and Y.-P. Zheng, “Recognition of finger flexion
motion from ultrasound image: A feasibility study,” Ultrasound Med.
Biol., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1695–1704, 2012.
C. Castellini, G. Passig, and E. Zarka, “Using ultrasound images of the
forearm to predict finger positions,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 788–797, Nov. 2012.
K. Zhang, L. Zhang, and M.-H. Yang, “Real-time compressive tracking,”
in Proc. 12th Eur. Conf. Comp. Vis., 2012, pp. 866–879.
J. Seymour, K. Ward, P. Sidhu, Z. Puthucheary, J. Steier, C. Jolley,
G. Rafferty, M. Polkey, and J. Moxham, “Ultrasound measurement of
rectus femoris cross-sectional area and the relationship with quadriceps
strength in copd,” Thorax, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 418–423, 2009.
P. De Bruin, J. Ueki, A. Watson, and N. Pride, “Size and strength of the
respiratory and quadriceps muscles in patients with chronic asthma,” Eur.
Respirat. J., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 59–64, 1997.
Q. Huang, Y.-P. Zheng, X. Chen, J. Shi, and J. He, “Development of a
frame-synchronized system for continuous acquisition and analysis of sonomyography, surface EMG and corresponding joint angle,” Open Biomed.
Eng. J., vol. 1, pp. 77–84, 2007.
G. F. Pinton, J. J. Dahl, and G. E. Trahey, “Rapid tracking of small displacements with ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq.
Control, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1103–1117, Jun. 2006.
H. Akima and A. Saito, “Inverse activation between the deeper vastus
intermedius and superficial muscles in the quadriceps during dynamic
knee extensions,” Muscle Nerve, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 682–690, 2013.

Jizhou Li was born in China, in 1989. He received the
B.Sc degree in mathematics from Hunan University,
China, in 2011. Since then he has been working toward the M.Sc. degree in mathematics at the College
of Mathematics and Econometrics, Hunan University.
He is currently a visiting student in Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences.
His current research interests include partial differential equation with applications to medical image processing, pattern recognition and machine
learning.

Yongjin Zhou (M’13) was born in China, in 1975.
He received the B.Sc., M.Eng., and Ph.D. degrees
in biomedical engineering from Xi¯an Jiaotong University, Xi¯an, China, in 1996, 1999, and 2003
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China. After a Postdoctoral Fellowship at the Oregon Hearing Research Center, Portland, OR, USA, he joined
Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU), Hong
Kong, in 2005, and was there until 2012. His research interests include biological signal processing, medical ultrasound, medical image analysis, and pattern
recognition.

LI et al.: SENSITIVE AND EFFICIENT DETECTION OF QUADRICEPS MUSCLE THICKNESS CHANGES IN CROSS-SECTIONAL PLANE

635

Yi Lu was born in China, in 1989. She is currently
working toward the M.S. degree in communication
and information system at Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China and studying as a visiting student in Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
Her research interests include signal processing
and pattern recognition.

Lei Wang (M’03) received the B.Eng. degree in
information and control engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in biomedical engineering, both from Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1995 and 2000,
respectively.
He is currently a Full Professor with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China. He has published over 200 scientific papers, authored four book
chapters, and filed 60 patents. His research interest
includes body sensor network.

Guangquan Zhou was born in China, in 1978. He
received the B.Sc. and M.S. degrees in biomedical engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China,
in 2000 and 2003, respectively. He is working toward
the Ph.D. degree from Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.
He was a Software Engineer for six years with the
Alcatel-Lucent Technology R&D Center, Nanjing,
China,. His research interests include human motion
analysis, sonomyography, ultrasound imaging, and
medical image processing.

Yong-Ping Zheng (SM’06) received the B.Sc. and
M.Eng. degees in electronics and information engineering from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, and the Ph.D. degree in
biomedical engineering from Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU), Hong Kong, in 1997.
He is currently the Acting Head with the Interdisciplinary Division of Biomedical Engineering, PolyU.
His research interests include biomedical ultrasound
instrumentation, ultrasound imaging, tissue elasticity
measurement and imaging, and wearable sensors for
healthcare.

