IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

139

EnerCage: A Smart Experimental Arena With
Scalable Architecture for Behavioral Experiments
Uei-Ming Jow, Student Member, IEEE, Peter McMenamin, Student Member, IEEE,
Mehdi Kiani, Student Member, IEEE, Joseph R. Manns,
and Maysam Ghovanloo∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Wireless power, when coupled with miniaturized implantable electronics, has the potential to provide a solution to
several challenges facing neuroscientists during basic and preclinical studies with freely behaving animals. The EnerCage system is
one such solution as it allows for uninterrupted electrophysiology
experiments over extended periods of time and vast experimental
arenas, while eliminating the need for bulky battery payloads or
tethering. It has a scalable array of overlapping planar spiral coils
(PSCs) and three-axis magnetic sensors for focused wireless power
transmission to devices on freely moving subjects. In this paper,
we present the first fully functional EnerCage system, in which
the number of PSC drivers and magnetic sensors was reduced to
one-third of the number used in our previous design via multicoil
coupling. The power transfer efficiency (PTE) has been improved
to 5.6% at a 120 mm coupling distance and a 48.5 mm lateral
misalignment (worst case) between the transmitter (Tx) array and
receiver (Rx) coils. The new EnerCage system is equipped with an
Ethernet backbone, further supporting its modular/scalable architecture, which, in turn, allows experimental arenas with arbitrary
shapes and dimensions. A set of experiments on a freely behaving rat were conducted by continuously delivering 20 mW to the
electronics in the animal headstage for more than one hour in a
powered 3538 cm2 experimental area.
Index Terms—Biotelemetry, behavioral neuroscience, environmental enrichment, planar spiral coils (PSCs), wireless power
transmission.

I. INTRODUCTION
XPERIMENTS in behavioral neuroscience typically employ small animal subjects, such as fish or rodents, to
help improve our understanding of the nervous system and its

E

Manuscript received May 21, 2013; revised June 30, 2013; accepted July 31,
2013. Date of publication August 15, 2013; date of current version December
16, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health,
NIBIB, under Grant 1R21EB009437-01A1 and in part by the National Science Foundation under Award ECCS-824199. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
U.-M. Jow was with the GT-Bionics Lab, School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30308 USA.
P. McMenamin and M. Kiani are with the GT-Bionics Lab, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
30308 USA (e-mail: pmcmena1@gmail.com; m_kiani@gatech.edu).
J. R. Manns is with the Department of Psychology, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA (e-mail: jmanns@emory.edu).
∗ M. Ghovanloo is with the GT-Bionics Lab, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30308 USA
(e-mail: mgh@gatech.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2278180

pathology [1]. In particular, data from basic and preclinical in
vivo electrophysiology experiments have helped develop treatments for disorders ranging from schizophrenia to Parkinson’s,
epilepsy, and depression [2]. These experiments on awake, behaving animals typically use cables to transfer power to and neural data from instruments attached to the animal body, thereby
restricting the recording arena to relatively small sizes and prohibiting the use of enriched environments, such as tunnels or
burrows [3]. Environmental enrichment has received strong support as a means of improving the quality of the data generated
by these experiments [4], and there is a large body of research
indicating that it leads to increased learning and brain plasticity [5]–[11]. In addition, the cables prohibit experiments involving recording from more than one animal at a time in a single
enclosure.
In an attempt to circumvent these problems, several batterypowered neural recording systems have been developed
[13]–[17]. However, these setups are not suitable for longitudinal studies due to the limited lifetime of the batteries and necessary handling of the animal subjects for replacing or recharging
the batteries. The batteries also add considerable weight to the
animal payload, potentially biasing the subjects’ behavior by
creating an impoverished environment.
Several wirelessly powered systems have been developed to
address these limitations and to meet the increasing use of higher
powered applications such as optogenetics [18]. These systems
can be divided into those that operate in the far field within the
ultra-high frequency (UHF) band, and deliver power via antennas, and those that operate in the near field within the HF band,
and deliver power via inductively coupled coils [19]. Current
UHF systems are only suitable for ultra low power applications,
such as neural recording from a small number of sites, because
they tend to provide power transfer efficiencies (PTEs) below
1%. Any attempt to increase the power delivered to the load
(PDL) may result in surpassing the safe specific absorption rate
(SAR) limits for the research staff working near the cage and/or
the animal subject [20]–[24]. The focus of this paper is on inductively powered HF systems, some of which have already
received regulatory approval and become commercially available [25], [26]. The current systems, however, tend to energize
the entire cage and suffer from inhomogeneity of the magnetic
field across the experimental area and heat dissipation. As a
result, they can only support experiments that can be conducted
in a small space, about the size of a rodent home cage.
In order to extend the size of the wirelessly powered area,
the use of coil arrays has been proposed for long-term animal

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

experiments as well as wireless charging of small consumer electronics, such as smartphones and laptops [27]–[32].
Nonetheless, a complete system with architectural details and
functional characterization has not been demonstrated.
We reported on the design and preliminary development of a
smart experimental arena, called the EnerCage system, for longterm electrophysiology experiments in [33]. This HF system was
designed to deliver up to 20 mW at 13.56 MHz in the industrialscientific-medical (ISM) band to devices at coupling distances,
d, up to 120 mm. The EnerCage system is fully compatible
with our inductively powered multichannel wireless implantable
neural recording (WINeR) system and any other data acquisition, stimulation, or drug delivery system that can operate under
these conditions [34]. It offers a few advantages over previous
wirelessly powered electrophysiology setups: 1) it is capable of
conforming to experimental arenas with arbitrary shapes and
dimensions; 2) it creates a focused and yet homogeneous magnetic field distribution across these arbitrary shaped arenas; 3)
it significantly reduces the risk of exposure to excessive electromagnetic field; and 4) low power consumption and thus heat
dissipation (Maximum power: 4 W for one active hex-PSC plus
0.11 W/passive hex-PSC). These features have become possible
by utilizing: 1) a modular and scalable system architecture; 2) a
geometrically optimized array of overlapping hexagonal planar
spiral coils (hex-PSCs); 3) dynamic closed-loop control of the
wirelessly received power; 4) a dual-band bidirectional wireless data link; and 5) wireless non-line-of-sight tracking of the
animal subjects via an array of magnetic sensors, which allow
activation of only one hex-PSC at a time [33]–[37].
In this paper we report, for the first time, on a fully functional
EnerCage system prototype, and discuss its system architecture
and key features in the following section. More details on the
inductive link and the magnetic localization are included in
Sections III and IV, respectively. In vivo measurement results
are presented in Section V, followed by concluding remarks.
II. ENERCAGE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
In the preliminary design of the EnerCage system, each control module communicated with three sensors and drove three
overlapping hex-PSCs with three power amplifiers (PAs). The
control module also included a local microcontroller (MCU)
that communicated with the central PC station via a central
MCU [33]. While providing satisfactory performance, that design was complex and inefficient in terms of cost. Moreover,
the limited number of ports on the central MCU limited the
number of modules that could be added. By taking advantage of
multicoil power transmission and Ethernet, the new EnerCage
system architecture reduces the system cost and complexity by
more than 65%, while providing higher PTE and lifting the
limits on system scalability [38].
A. Stationary Unit
Fig. 1 shows a rendering of the new EnerCage system. A mobile unit (headstage, backpack, or implant), which is embedded
with two receiver (Rx) coils and a magnetic tracer, is carried by a
freely behaving small animal subject. A stationary unit, consist-

Fig. 1. Rendered view of the EnerCage system showing its modular architecture. An array of three-axial magnetic sensors track the animal in real time
to focus the 13.56 MHz magnetic field around the animal body by activating a
printed spiral coil that is in the best position to power the mobile unit on the
animal body. All control modules are connected via Ethernet to a hub and a central PC station. The mobile unit receives wireless power, transmits the acquired
data, and controls stimulation or drug delivery.

ing of rectangular printed circuit board (PCB) modules, forms
a three-layer array of overlapping hex-PSCs with optimized geometries that tile the floor of the experimental arena [35]. The
hex-PSC closest to the animal, which is often in the best position to power the mobile unit, is activated by a class-C PA
that drives a hex-PSC on the third layer from the top (red). If
the closest hex-PSC is on the third layer, it will directly couple
onto the mobile unit by forming a three-coil link. If the closest
hex-PSC is on the first (blue) or second (green) layer, a four-coil
link will be formed with one of the overlapping red PSCs [38],
[39]. This mechanism is described in section III in more detail.
Hence, the three PAs in each control module, vertically mounted
with SMA connectors under the hex-PSC array, can activate the
area covered by nine overlapping hex-PSCs. An array of threeaxis magnetic sensors (AMI360, Aichi Steel, Japan), which has
been evenly distributed under the hex-PSC array (red circles in
Fig. 1), locates the magnetic tracer in the mobile unit based on
the algorithm described in section IV.
Each control module is managed by an MCU (MSP430), as
shown in Fig. 2. However, instead of communicating with another MCU, it has been equipped with an Ethernet port (XPort,
Lantronix, Irvine, CA) with a unique internet protocol (IP) address to communicate with the central PC station via an Ethernet
hub. Using a 48-port Ethernet switch, 432 overlapping hex-PSCs
can be controlled from a central PC, which can cover a small
room. The MCU is also responsible for delivering control signals
from the PC to three HF radio frequency identification (RFID)
readers (TRF7960) and collecting data from magnetic sensors.
Each RFID reader controls a class-C PA, which drives its associated hex-PSC at >68% efficiency. The carrier frequency, fc =
13.56 MHz, is in the ISM band and the hex-PSC geometries
have been optimized accordingly [35]. Based on the magnetic
tracking data, the central PC determines which hex-PSC to activate using the algorithm described in Section IV. It also receives

JOW et al.: ENERCAGE: A SMART EXPERIMENTAL ARENA WITH SCALABLE ARCHITECTURE FOR BEHAVIORAL EXPERIMENTS

Fig. 2.

Block diagram of the sensing, control, and interfacing electronics in the EnerCage system.

Fig. 3.

Schematic diagram of the RFID-based hex-PSC drivers with closed-loop power control via back telemetry from the mobile unit [36]–[39].

information that indicates the amount of power received by the
mobile unit either via the load-shift-keying (LSK) feature of
the RFID link or via a 2.4-GHz RF link directly from the mobile unit MCU, to adjust the transmitted power in a closed-loop
fashion [36]. The closed-loop power control (CLPC) module,
which has its own XPort and IP address, is also connected to
the Ethernet hub and dynamically adjusts the PA supply voltage
(T x VD D ) to maintain the desired received power across the Rx
coils.
B. Mobile Unit
Fig. 3 shows the schematic diagram of the prototype mobile
unit, which is powered through a three/four-coil link to demonstrate the closed-loop-controlled wireless power transfer capability of the EnerCage system. The mobile unit consists of two
Rx coils, L3 and L4 , for load impedance matching, a rectifier,
a 3 V regulator (Vreg ), an LSK switch (M2 ), an LED indicator,
and a system-on-a-chip (SoC) MCU (nRF24LE1, Nordic Semiconductor, Norway), which includes a built-in 10-bit analog-todigital converter (ADC) and a 2.4 GHz transceiver.
The 13.56 MHz carrier is full-wave rectified, divided by two
(0.5 × Vrec ), and digitized with respect to a Vreg = 3 V reference
voltage at 30 Hz. The resulting 10-bit Vrec samples are sent
wirelessly to the PC for monitoring purposes. The MCU also
uses M1 to blink the LED for optical tracking of the animal
subject and proof of mobile unit functionality. When the Rx

141

coils tilt >60◦ relative to the surface of the stationary unit, or
when the animal subject stands on its rear legs (d > 120 mm),
the received power is interrupted even with the maxed-out PA
output. During these occasions, a Cs = 0.47 F super capacitor
in the mobile unit supplies the headstage for up to 30 s.
To close the power control loop, Vrec /2 samples are compared
with a threshold value in the MCU. If Vrec > 4 V, the LSK
periodically shorts the L4 C4 -tank by closing M2 at a rate of
700 Hz. These short pulses (20 μs) indicate that the received
power is more than sufficient, and that the Tx output power
should be reduced by decreasing T x VD D . On the other hand,
if Vrec < 4 V, the lack of LSK pulses results in the T x VD D to
be incrementally increased by the CLPC at an adjustable rate.
This mechanism maintains Vrec at 4 V [36]. The power loop
can also be closed using the Vrec data, received wirelessly at the
PC. In this option, Vrec is subtracted from a designated voltage
in the PC, and the error value controls T x VD D of the CLPC
module.
III. MULTICOIL INDUCTIVE POWER TRANSFER
Hex-PSCs on the stationary unit are divided into driver PSCs,
which are directly driven by the PAs and labeled L1 in Figs. 2
and 3, and primary PSCs, labeled L2 . Three driver hex-PSCs,
shown in red in Fig. 4, are driven by three PAs on each vertical
control module. Each driver PSC is associated with two of the
six primary hex-PSCs that it overlaps, which are shown in green

142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Multicoil links have been extensively studied in the literature
and shown to provide higher PTEs [38]–[41]. The PTE of a
three-coil link can be found from [38]
2
Q3 Q4L Q4L
k34
2 Q Q
1+
1 + k34
3 4L QL
(1)
where k13 is the coupling coefficient between the driver hexPSC and L3 in the mobile unit and k34 is the coupling coefficient
between the two coils in the mobile unit (see Fig. 3), which can
be found from Maxwell’s equation [42], [43]. Qi = ωLi /Ri is
the quality factor of the ith hex-PSC. It should be noted that
for the load hex-PSC, L4 , which is connected in series with
RL , Q4L = ωL4 /(R4 + RL ). Similarly, for the driver hex-PSC,
L1 , which is connected in series to the source, Rs should be
added to R1 .
The PTE in four-coil links can be found from [38], as shown
(2), at the bottom of this page, where k12 is the coupling between
the driver and primary hex-PSCs. The value of k12 depends primarily on the lateral misalignment between hex-PSCs, defined
by the radius of the primary hex-PSCs, ro1 in Fig. 5, as well
as the thickness of the PCB, which defines the distance between the hex-PSCs in different PCB layers. k13 , k14 , and k24
couplings are neglected in comparison with k23 because of the
considerable distance and misalignments between Rx coils and
these hex-PSCs. The worst PTE is expected from the primary
hex-PSCs on the second metal layer (green) from top because
they are affected by the parasitics from both top layer (blue) and
third layer (red). The design of the inductive link should therefore be based on four-coil coupling involving the second metal
layer in order to account for the worst-case conditions [35].

η3−coil =

Fig. 4. Every nine overlapping hex-PSCs in the EnerCage system are controlled by one vertical control module in Fig. 1. Each magnetic sensor output
vector is compared with two different thresholds, Th_H and Th_L, to track the
position of the animal subject and determine the active hex-PSC.

Fig. 5. Multicoil coupling conditions in EnerCage: (A) three-coil power transfer link and (B and C) four-coil power transfer link. Considering the active area
for each
√ hex-PSC (dashed lines), the maximum lateral misalignment of the Rx
is ro 1 / 3.

and blue in Fig. 4. This design reduces the number of drivers and
control modules to one-third of the number used in our earlier
EnerCage system architecture in [33], while maintaining high
PTE by using the multicoil coupling scheme [38].
A. Multicoil Coupling
In the new EnerCage system, the location of the mobile unit
(animal subject) determines whether the three- or four-coil coupling is utilized, as shown in Fig. 5. For example, if the subject
is located above a driver hex-PSC (A), the coupling mechanism
would be three-coil (L1 to L3 –L4 ), but if it is located above a primary hex-PSC (B or C), the associated driver hex-PSC delivers
power through that primary hex-PSC via the four-coil mechanism (L1 –L2 to L3 –L4 ) [38]. Therefore, each control module
is associated with three driver and six primary hex-PSCs.

η4−coil =

[(1 +

2 Q Q ).(1
k12
1 2

2
Q1 Q3
k13
2
2 Q Q
k13 Q1 Q3 + k34
3 4L

.

B. Hex-PSC Optimization
On the Tx side (stationary unit), the hex-PSC array has been
implemented by three overlapping metal layers in a stack of two
double-layer PCBs with 1.7 mm spacing made of FR4 substrate
with 2-oz copper. This means the FR4 dielectric thickness ts =
1.6 mm and the copper thickness t0 = 70 μm. Therefore, the
dielectric material under layers 1 and 3 from the top is FR4,
while the one under layers 2 and 4 is air. Layer 4 is used for
the hex-PSC tuning and matching capacitors, an array of relays
to open circuit the inactive primary hex-PSCs in order not to
couple onto the active hex-PSC, and their interconnects.
On the Rx side (mobile unit), a wire-wound coil is used for
L3 to boost Q3 and a multilayer PCB coil is used for L4 , as
shown in Fig. 2, to limit the weight of the mobile unit. The
maximum allowable diameter for L3 was 40 mm, based on the
size of a headstage designed for a multichannel neural recording
system [17]. Therefore, the inductive link was optimized for the
worst-case coupling at a lateral misalignment√between the Tx
and Rx coils, which occurs at γm ax = ro1 / 3, as shown in
Fig. 5 [35].

2 2 2
Q4L
k23 k34 Q1 Q2 Q2 Q3 Q3 Q4L
k12
2
2 Q Q ].[1 + k 2 Q Q + k 2 Q Q ] · Q
+ k34 Q3 Q4L ) + k23
2 3
L
23 2 3
34 3 4L

(2)

JOW et al.: ENERCAGE: A SMART EXPERIMENTAL ARENA WITH SCALABLE ARCHITECTURE FOR BEHAVIORAL EXPERIMENTS

143

TABLE I
ENERCAGE COIL SPECIFICATIONS OPTIMIZED AT 13.56 MHZ

Fig. 6. EnerCage unit tile (515 × 450 mm2 ) for the stationary unit and the
boundaries of the 3538 cm2 experimental arena constructed by Plexiglas walls
over four identical stationary modules.

triangles in Figs. 1 and 4, houses the digital control circuitry
and three PAs that drive the L1 hex-PSCs, as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 4 shows how the EnerCage modular architecture can be
scaled to support any arbitrarily sized experimental arena. Each
tile is also equipped with twelve three-axis magnetic sensors,
represented by the red dots in Figs. 1 and 6.
To a large extent, the optimal Tx and Rx coil geometries
depend on the average size of the animal subject species. In
the current EnerCage design, the coils were optimized for large
Long-Evans rats (400–600 g) [44], with a maximum coupling
distance of d = 120 mm, fc = 13.56 MHz, and nominal loading
of RL = 500 Ω. Considering these initial design constraints,
the iterative optimization procedure in [35], [38], and [42] was
used to maximize the PTE. The goal was to minimize the coupling variations as the subject moved across the hex-PSC array.
It should be noted that in order to avoid further complexity,
angular misalignments were not considered here. Following optimization, a field solver, HFSS (ANSYS, Pittsburgh, PA), was
used to verify and fine tune the values suggested by the theoretical models [35], [38], [42].
Table I summarizes the geometries of the optimized coils.
The measured PTE was lower than the calculated and simulated
values due to the fact that the model ignores some parasitic
effects, such as those introduced by the interconnects on the 4th
layer and the eddy currents induced in the hex-PSC array [35].
C. Stationary Hex-PSC Array Design
Considering the constraints imposed by the commercial PCB
manufacturing process and the optimal hex-PSC geometries in
Table I, the size of each hex-PSC unit tile was set to 515 ×
450 mm2 as indicated by the solid lines in Fig. 6. Each unit
tile includes 23 complete hex-PSCs (8 in layer 1, 8 in layer 2,
and 7 in layer 3), and 30 incomplete hex-PSCs. Each tile can
support 4 controller modules, which can activate 12 driver hexPSCs. Each control module, vertically mounted at the yellow

IV. NON-LINE-OF-SIGHT MAGNETIC TRACKING
A. Switching Algorithm
The EnerCage system minimizes power usage by turning
on the closest hex-PSC to the animal subject. As the subject
moves from one hex-PSC to the next, the ideal switching point
is halfway between the two hex-PSCs. Since each hex-PSC has
six neighbors, the switching points form hexagons, which are
drawn with dashed lines in Fig. 5. These hexagons indicate the
active area of each hex-PSC, within which the control software,
running on the central PC, should activate that hex-PSC.
Magnetic sensors are evenly distributed under the stationary
unit at the center of each driver hex-PSC and sampled at 500 Hz
by the MCU. Every 17 samples were averaged into one sample
to reduce the sensor noise and interference, mainly from the
RF carrier, and sent to the PC station at 29.4 Hz via Ethernet.
During the initialization phase, when there is no mobile unit,
(containing the magnetic tracer) in the experimental arena, the
data acquisition software measures the magnetic field from every sensor and stores those values, which represent the earth’s
magnetic field (EMF) at the location where the EnerCage has
been installed, to be subtracted from every subsequent measurement by those sensors. As a result, the sensors’ output variations
were mainly caused by the changes in the location and orientation of the magnetic tracer.
Following EMF cancelation, the x–y–z axes from each sensor
are added to generate the magnetic field vector at the location
of that sensor. If the amplitude of the magnetic field vector
surpasses an experimentally determined threshold Th_H, the

144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

tracer is considered to be within the small orange circle in Fig. 4
that encompasses the active area around that sensor. This will
result in activation of the collocated driver hex-PSC. A second,
lower threshold Th_L is represented by the large yellow circles
around each sensor, and if three adjacent sensors have values
greater than Th_L, the tracer is considered to be within the
dashed blue Reuleaux triangle at the center of Fig. 4. The control
software always gives priority to values above Th_H. Therefore,
if no sensor is >Th_H, but three adjacent sensors are >Th_L,
the tracer is located within the green hexagonal area in between
those sensors in Fig. 4, and the control software activates the
underlying primary hex-PSC.
Since the magnitude of the magnetic field vector remains
almost constant when the magnetic tracer maintains its distance
from a sensor, a constant vector magnitude represents a virtual
dome around that sensor. Therefore, the switching locations
around each sensor vary with the height of the magnetic tracer.
In the current EnerCage prototype, Th_H and Th_L thresholds
are determined based on the sensor outputs generated when the
tracer was positioned at a height of 120 mm [37].
Above 120 mm, all circles in Fig. 4 become smaller and the
dashed blue triangle extends into the driver hex-PSC domains.
Thus, the primary hex-PSC domains expand at the expense of
the driver hex-PSC domains. In addition, at the boundary between the blue and green domains, a new region begins to form
that does not belong to either one of the primary hex-PSC domains. When the tracer moves into those regions, the system is
programmed to continue driving the last active hex-PSC.
Below 120 mm, the driver hex-PSC domains expand and the
primary hex-PSC domains shrink. This may cause the system
to occasionally activate the wrong hex-PSC. Since the domain
expansion is less than the diameter of each domain, in the worst
case an adjacent hex-PSC is activated and the mobile unit still
receives some power. Moreover, the PSC activation algorithm
applies a hysteresis window, which alleviates flickering due
to noise and interference at the cost of reduced PSC switching point accuracy [33]. In the future, we plan to use multiple
three-axis sensor data that are proximal to the tracer in an accurate three-dimensional (3-D) magnetic localization algorithm
by solving the inverse problem instead of the current thresholdbased method [45].
B. Graphical User Interface
The EnerCage system is designed to be modular and conform to arbitrarily sized experimental arenas. Since the primary
PSC activation is decided based on the values of three adjacent
magnetic sensors, the graphical user interface (GUI), running
on the PC should be aware of the physical and relative positions
of all sensors to know which sensor output values to process
and which hex-PSC to activate. Each vertical control module,
shown in Fig. 2, has an IP address that it uses for TCP/IP communication with the central PC. To associate the sensors’ data
with their positions in physical space, the user initially enters
the desired number of rows and columns of control modules
and their IP addresses. The GUI draws matrix of three clustered
overlapping red, blue, and green circles on the PC screen for

Fig. 7.

Characterization and bench-top testing setup of the EnerCage system.

Fig. 8. Comparison between PTE of the two-, three-, and four-coil links versus
their coupling distance. The coil geometries of are reported in Table I.

each address, similar to Fig. 4, each representing a hex-PSC and
fills the circle of the active hex-PSC.
The GUI also displays the back telemetry data, the supply
voltage of the mobile unit, the PA supply voltage, and the raw
data from a subset of sensors. The back telemetry data, which
is received by the RFID reader of the active driver hex-PSC, is
packaged along with the magnetic sensor data in each control
module and sent to the central PC. The mobile unit supply
voltage, used as feedback, along with the user’s desired voltage,
used as reference, define the PA supply voltage in a closed loop,
as discussed in section II.B [36].
V. MEASUREMENT RESULTS
Fig. 7 shows characterization and bench-top testing setup
of the EnerCage system, in which the hex-PSC arrays and the
vertical control modules are flipped to show their connections
to the magnetic sensor array and the Ethernet hub. This 1030 ×
900 mm2 EnerCage prototype consists of 4 hex-PSC units, 9
control modules, and 27 magnetic sensor modules (also see
Fig. 1).
A. Power Transfer Efficiency
Fig. 8 shows the calculated, simulated, and measured PTE results of two-, three-, and four-coil links versus coupling distance
for a lateral misalignment of 48.5 mm between Tx and Rx coils
and RL = 500 Ω. The PTE of the two-coil link, which is based

JOW et al.: ENERCAGE: A SMART EXPERIMENTAL ARENA WITH SCALABLE ARCHITECTURE FOR BEHAVIORAL EXPERIMENTS

145

Fig. 9. Removable mobile unit and the permanent steel post mounted on the
rat’s head. The mobile unit was held in place by the magnetic tracer.

on the coupling between L1 and L3 in Table I, is only reported
for comparison with the three- or four-coil links in our design.
The two-coil link has higher PTE at short distances (<50 mm)
while three- and four-coil links provide higher PTE at larger
coil separations (>60 mm). At 120 mm, the three- and four-coil
links achieve measured PTEs of 6.2% and 5.6%, respectively,
while the measured two-coil PTE is only 3.9%. The PTE of the
four-coil link is lower than that of the three-coil link due to the
additional loss in the L1 –L2 link.
B. In Vivo Experiment
Since the hex-PSCs that are on the edges of each rectangular
stationary module need to be either geometrically completed
or driven by the control modules of the neighboring stationary
modules, we limited the experimental arena to the area that
could be entirely powered by nine vertical control modules that
formed a 3 × 3 array. This area includes 81 complete hex-PSCs
that are identified by the solid black-bordered hexagons in Fig. 6,
which indicate the active areas of these 81 hex-PSCs. Another
limitation was imposed by the tracking algorithm that requires at
least two magnetic sensors above and adjacent to each primary
hex-PSC in order to verify that the tracer is located within the
active area of that hex-PSC. Therefore, with 27 sensor modules,
we had several primary hex-PSCs at the edge of the map (the
white hexagons in Fig. 6), which were not activated by the
PC station, even though the control modules had the ability to
power them. Considering these limitations, the boundary of the
experimental arena was established across the black dashed lines
in Fig. 6 using transparent Plexiglas walls. The net active area,
which was both inductively powered and magnetically tracked
was 3538 cm2 (67 hex-PSCs), which to our knowledge is the
largest wirelessly powered arena ever reported.
The assembled prototype mobile unit, which was designed to
be removable from the headstage to prevent damage when the
system was not in use, is shown in Fig. 9. A circular 4-layer PCB
with L4 on the perimeter houses the MCU and other components
including a 48 mm monopole antenna. The PCB is mounted on
a hollow plastic cylinder that holds it 20 mm above the L3
base, which is molded in plastic (Smooth-Cast 300, SmoothOn, Easton, PA). Half of the magnetic tracer in installed under
the PCB in the form of a 8 mm × 1.5 mm permanent magnet
with residual surface flux density of Br m ax = 14 800 Gauss
(K&J, Jamison, PA, USA), and weighing 0.8 g. The weight of
the entire mobile unit was 9.8 g. The headstage consisted of a

Fig. 10. In vivo experimental setup for the EnerCage system in an electrophysiology laboratory. The insets show the animal subject (Long-Evans rat)
carrying the mobile unit.

25 mm stainless steel post (19-gauge cannula), shown on the
right side of Fig. 9, with the other half of the magnetic tracer
molded on top, allowing the mobile unit to be strongly secured
on top of the subject’s head by the force between the two halves
of the magnetic tracer. The total weight of the post was 1.2 g.
Using 3-D printing technology for the plastic parts, thin PCB,
and on-chip integrated components, we can further reduce the
weight of the headstage for adult male rats by half.
A male Long-Evans rat weighing 570 g was used in our in
vivo experiment, after all procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Emory
University and the Georgia Institute of Technology. Aseptic
stereotaxic surgery was performed after the rat was deeply anesthetized with isoflurane (1%–3% in oxygen) and given buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg) as an analgesic. Six stainless steel anchor
screws were drilled into the lateral ridges of the rat’s skull. The
steel post was mounted vertically on the skull, secured by dental
acrylic onto the anchor screws. A second injection of buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg) was administered the following day. The rat
was allowed to recover for two weeks while carrying the post
before testing began. Before the experiment, the mobile unit
was placed on top of the post.
Fig. 10 shows the EnerCage in vivo experimental setup. The
T x VD D for the PAs’ supply voltage was being dynamically
adjusted by the CLPC module in a closed-loop between 5 V
and 18 V to change the PA power consumption between 0.5 W
and 3.5 W depending on the position and orientation of the
mobile unit. The experiment, which was conducted by placing
the rat inside the experimental arena for 1 h and encouraging
it to freely move around using chocolate-flavored pellets (BioServ, Frenchtown, NJ), was meant to indicate whether the current EnerCage prototype placed in a realistic electrophysiology
laboratory environment is capable of continuously delivering
20 mW to the headstage electronics at 4 V (an equivalent of RL
= 500 Ω) without interruption. The results in Fig. 11(a), which
show the changes in the T x VD D (upper black curve) and Vrec
(lower blue curve) on the stationary (Tx) and mobile (Rx) units,

146

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

respectively, over the course of the experiment proved our hypothesis to a satisfactory level.
Fig. 11(b)–(d) zooms in on the 1 h time periods in Fig. 11(a),
during which the EnerCage system showed less than perfect performance. In Fig. 11(b) (t = 5.5–7.5 min), Vrec has decreased
but T x VD D has not been constantly maintained at its maximum value 18 V. This is likely caused by noise in the back
telemetry data, misleading the operation of the CLPC module.
In Fig. 11(c) (t = 31–33.5 min), Vrec has increased above 4 V,
despite T x VD D staying at its minimum level (5 V). This occurs when the mobile unit is located very close to the surface
of the stationary unit resulting in a coupling between the hexPSCs and the Rx coils that was too strong. This problem can
be resolved by allowing the T x VD D to go below 5 V or even
temporarily turn off the PA. In Fig. 11(d) (t = 47–55 min), even
though T x VD D is held at its maximum value of 18 V, Vrec
is slightly below 4 V. This effect, which is the opposite of the
effect in Fig. 11(c), is caused by the mobile unit being too far or
sharply misaligned with respect to the stationary unit for more
than 30 s, resulting in a PTE that was too low. This problem can
be resolved by allowing the T x VD D to go above 18 V.
C. Other Animal Species
Size and weight of the mobile unit in the EnerCage system
strongly depend on the nominal distance between its location
over the course of the experiment to the stationary array of hexPSCs at the bottom of the cage. The shorter the coils’ distance,
the same PTE can be achieved with smaller coils. Shorter distance also allows maintaining the magnetic field strength at the
magnetic sensor array with smaller magnetic tracers. The nominal coils’ distance depends on the animal species and the method
and location of mobile unit attachment to the animal body, e.g.,
headstage, backpack, or implant. Thus, the size and weight of
the mobile unit drops exponentially as it moves closer to the
bottom of the EnerCage, from cats to rats, to mice, and even to
insects. This makes the system usable among a wide range of
animal species. Because the larger the animal, the more weight
it can carry without affecting its behavior. Nevertheless, successful in vivo electrophysiology has been performed on rats
with recording headstages weighing 30–50 g [46]. There are
also methods to improve the coils’ coupling to increase the PTE
and further reduce the mobile unit size, aside from optimizing
the coils’ geometries [35], such as the use of ferrite and metamaterial sheets under the stationary unit, which will be explored
in the future [47].
VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 11. (a) In vivo experimental results showing the mobile unit rectifier
voltage V re c and the transmitter PA supply voltage, T x V D D during 1 h of a
rat freely behaving in a 3538 cm2 , wirelessly powered arena. (b) Period A: noise
has corrupted the back telemetry data leaving a negative impact on the CLPC
operation. (c) Period B: The minimum PA output power of 0.5 W is higher than
what the mobile unit needs. (d) Period C: The mobile unit is held in a position
with very low PTE, and the hex-PSCs cannot provide sufficient power to the
mobile unit due to large distance and/or misalignment.

The modular architecture of the new EnerCage system takes
advantage of multicoil coupling to reduce the number of control
and sensing modules, while improving the PTE and localization accuracy. It demonstrated satisfactory performance in real
time non-line-of-sight tracking, closed-loop wireless powering,
and back telemetry data communication with a wirelessly powered mobile unit in the form of a removable headstage in both
bench-top (dry lab) and in vivo (wet lab) experiments. The in
vivo experiment on a small freely behaving animal subject (rat)

JOW et al.: ENERCAGE: A SMART EXPERIMENTAL ARENA WITH SCALABLE ARCHITECTURE FOR BEHAVIORAL EXPERIMENTS

showed 1-h uninterrupted operation of the current prototype
by delivering 20 mW to the mobile unit in an actual electrophysiology lab environment. The mobile unit can replace
batteries in any electronic or mechanical devices (e.g., infusion
pumps) that are attached to or implanted in the animal body. The
EnerCage system can deliver a designated amount of power
(up to 20 mW) and bidirectional data using focused near-field
inductive coupling at the FCC-approved 13.56 MHz over an
unlimited experimental arena for an unlimited period of time
without posing health risks to the researchers or interfering with
other instruments in the same environment.
Furthermore, we intend to improve the accuracy of the magnetic localization algorithm, add adaptive impedance-matching
to the Tx unit, and adaptive tuning capability to the mobile Rx
unit. We also intend to use the system in a behavioral neuroscience experiment, in which neural data is collected during
wireless powering.

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[19]

The authors would like to thank C.D. Emelue for his help
with the Ethernet communication and other members of the
GT-Bionics Laboratory for their help with the measurements
as well as J. Trimper and R. Stefanescu for their help with the
animal experiments.

[20]
[21]
[22]

REFERENCES
[1] M. Rosenzweig, S. Breedlove, and N. Watson, Biological Psychology: An
Introduction to Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience, 4th ed. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, MA, USA, 2004.
[2] J. P. Donoghue, “Bridging the brain to the world: A perspective on neural
interface systems,” Neuron, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 511–521, Nov. 2008.
[3] Plexon Inc. (2013, Aug. 25). Plexon’s headstages for multi-channel neuronal recording. [Online]. Available: http://www.plexon.com/products/
headstages
[4] M. R. Rosenzweig and E. L. Bennett, “Psychobiology of plasticity: Effects
of training and experience on brain and behavior,” Behav. Brain Res.,
vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 57–65, Jun. 1996.
[5] G. Kempermann, H. Kuhn, and F. Gage, “More hippocampal neurons in
adult mice living in an enriched environment,” Nature, vol. 386, no. 6624,
pp. 493–495, Apr. 1997.
[6] H. Van Praag, G. Kempermann, and F. H. Gage, “Neural consequences of
environmental enrichment,” Nat. Rev. Neuroscience, vol. 1, pp. 191–198,
Dec. 2000.
[7] A. Belayev, I. Saul, Y. Liu, W. Zhao, M. Ginsberg, M. Valdes, R. Busto,
and L. Belayev, “Enriched environments delays the onset of hippocampal
damage after global cerebral ischemia in rats,” Brain Res., vol. 964, no. 1,
pp. 121–127, Feb. 2003.
[8] A. Brauner, D. Kurjiaka, A. Ibragimov, and A. Baldwin, “Impact of cage
size and enrichment (tube and shelf) on heart rate variability in rats,”
Scand. J. Lab. Anim. Sci., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 185–201, Oct. 2010.
[9] A. H. Mohammed, S. W. Zhu, S. Darmopil, J. Hjerling-Leffler, P. Ernfors,
B. Winblad, M. C. Diamond, P. S. Eriksson, and N. Bogdanovic, “Environmental enrichment and the brain,” Prog. Brain Res., vol. 138, pp. 109–33,
Dec. 2002.
[10] L. Petrosinia, P. DeBartoloa, F. Fotia, F. Gelfoc, D. Cutulia, M. G. Leggioa,
and L. Mandolesic, “On whether the environmental enrichment may provide cognitive and brain reserves,” Brain Res. Rev., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 221–
239, Oct. 2009.
[11] A. Sale, N. Berardi, and L. Maffei, “Enrich the environment to empower
the brain,” Trends. Neuroscience, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 233–239, Apr. 2009.
[12] Triangle BioSystems International (2013, Aug. 25). TBSI NeuroWare,
[Online]. Available: http://www.trianglebiosystems.com/neuroware%
C2%A9.html
[13] A. M. Sodagar, G. E. Perlin, Y. Yao, K. Najafi, and K. D. Wise, “An implantable 64-channel wireless microsystem for single-unit neural record-

[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]

147

ing,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 2591–2604, Sep.
2009.
T. A. Szuts, V. Fadeyev, S. Kachiguine, A. Sher, M. V. Grivich,
M. Agrochao, P. Hottowy, W. Dabrowski, E. V. Lubenov, A. G. Siapas,
N. Uchida, A. M. Litke, and M. Meister, “A wireless multi-channel neural
amplifier for freely moving animals,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 263–269, Feb. 2011.
E. Greenwald, M. Mollazadeh, C. Hu, W. Tang, E. Culurciello, and
N. V. Thakor, “A VLSI neural monitoring system with ultra-wideband
telemetry for awake behaving subjects,” Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst.,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 112–119, Apr. 2011.
D. Fan, D. Rich, T. Holtzman, P. Ruther, J. W. Dalley, A. Lopez,
M. A. Rossi, J. W. Barter, D. Salas-Meza, S. Herwik, T. Holzhammer,
J. Morizio, and H. H. Yin, “A wireless multi-channel recording system
for freely behaving mice and rats,” PLoS One, vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 1–9, Jul.
2011.
S. B. Lee, M. Yin, J. R. Manns, and M. Ghovanloo, “A wideband dualantenna receiver for wireless recording from animals behaving in large
arenas,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 17, pp. 1993–2004, Jul.
2013.
C. T. Wentz, J. G. Bernstein, P. Monahan, A. Guerra, A. Rodriguez, and
E. S. Boyden, “A wirelessly powered and controlled device for optical
neural control of freely-behaving animals,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 424–436, Jun. 2011.
P. V. Nikitin, K. V. S. Rao, and S. Lazar, “An overview of near field UHF
RFID,” in Proc. Intl. Conf. RFID, Mar. 2007, pp. 167–174.
D. J. Yeager, J. Holleman, R. Prasad, J. R. Smith, and B. P. Otis, “NeuralWISP: An energy-harvesting wireless neural interface with 1-m range,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 379–387, Dec. 2009.
C. C. Peng, Z. Xiao, and R. Bashirullah, “Toward energy efficient neural
interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 2697–2700,
Nov. 2009.
S. J. Thomas, R. R. Harrison, A. Leonardo, and M. S. Reynolds, “A
battery-free multichannel digital neural/EMG telemetry system for flying
insects,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 424–436,
Oct. 2012.
T. Kim, J. G. McCall, Y. H. Jung, X. Huang, E. R. Siuda, Y. Li, J. Song,
Y. M. Song, H. A. Pao, R.-H. Kim, C. Lu, S. D. Lee, I.-S. Song, G. Shin,
R. Al-Hasani, S. Kim, M. P. Tan, Y. Huang, F. G. Omenetto, J. A. Rogers,
and M. R. Bruchas, “Injectable, cellular-scale optoelectronics with applications for wireless optogenetics,” Science, vol. 340, no. 7, pp. 211–216,
Apr. 2013.
OET Bulletin 65: Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human
Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields, Federal Commun.
Commission, Washington, DC, USA, Aug. 1997.
Mini Mitter (2013, Aug. 25). Minimitter animal monitoring, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://minimitter.respironics.com/animal_products.cfm
Millar Instruments, Inc. (2013, Aug. 25). TRM telemetry system. [Online].
Available: http://millar.com/products/telemetry
PhenoSys GmbH (2013, Aug. 25). Social Activity Monitor. [Online].
Available: http://www.phenosys.com/index.php/en/products/sam
D. McCormick, A. P. Hu, P. Nielsen, S. Malpas, and D. Budgett, “Powering
implantable telemetry devices from localized magnetic fields,” in Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biomed. Cir. Soc. Conf., Aug. 2007, pp. 2331–2335.
D. Russell, D. McCormick, A. Taberner, P. Nielsen, P. Hu, D. Budgett,
M. Lim, and S. Malpas, “Wireless power delivery system for mouse
telemeter,” in Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circ. Sys. Conf., Nov. 2009, pp. 273–
276.
S. Y. R. Hui and W. W. C. Ho, “A new generation of universal contactless battery charging platform for portable consumer electronic equipment,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 620–627, May
2005.
E. Waffenschmidt and T. Staring, “Limitation of inductive power transfer
for consumer applications,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Power Electron. Appl.,
Sep. 2009, pp. 1–10.
Wireless Power Consortium (2013, Aug. 25). Qi low power specification. [Online]. http://www.wirelesspowerconsortium.com/developers/
specification.html
U. Jow, M. Kiani, X. Huo, and M. Ghovanloo, “Towards a smart experimental arena for long-term electrophysiology experiments,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 414–423, Oct. 2012.
S. B. Lee, H. M. Lee, M. Kiani, U. Jow, and M. Ghovanloo, “An inductively powered scalable 32-channel wireless neural recording system-ona-chip for neuroscience applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst.,
vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 360–371, Dec. 2010.

148

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[35] U. Jow and M. Ghovanloo, “Geometrical design of a scalable overlapping
planar spiral coil array to generate a homogeneous magnetic field,” IEEE
Trans. Mag., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2933–2945, Jun. 2013.
[36] M. Kiani and M. Ghovanloo, “An RFID-based closed loop wireless power
transmission system for biomedical applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 260–264, Apr. 2010.
[37] P. McMenamin, U. Jow, M. Kiani, and M. Ghovanloo, “Real time control
of a wireless powering and tracking system for long-term and large-area
electrophysiology experiments,” in Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circ. Sys. Conf.,
Nov. 2012, pp. 240–243.
[38] M. Kiani, U. Jow, and M. Ghovanloo, “Design and optimization of a 3coil inductive link for efficient wireless power transmission,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 579–591, Dec. 2011.
[39] M. Kiani and M. Ghovanloo, “The circuit theory behind coupled-mode
magnetic resonance based power transmission,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
I, Reg. Papers, vol. 59, pp. 2065–2074, Sep. 2012.
[40] A. Kurs, A. Karalis, R. Moffatt, J. D. Joannopoulos, P. Fisher, and
M. Soljacic, “Wireless power transfer via strongly coupled magnetic resonances,” Sci. Exp., vol. 317, pp. 83–86, Jul. 2007.
[41] A. K. RamRakhyani, S. Mirabbasi, and M. Chiao, “Design and optimization of resonance-based efficient wireless power delivery systems for
biomedical implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 48–63, Feb. 2011.
[42] U. Jow and M. Ghovanloo, “Design and optimization of printed spiral coils
for efficient transcutaneous inductive power transmission,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 193–202, Sep. 2007.
[43] C. M. Zierhofer and E. S. Hochmair, “Geometric approach for coupling
enhancement of magnetically coupled coils,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 708–714, Jul. 1996.
[44] Charles River Laboratories International, Inc. (2013, Aug. 25). Research
animal, Long-Evans rat. [Online]. Available: http://www.criver.com/
en-US/ProdServ/ByType/ResModOver/ResMod/Pages/Long-EvansRat.
aspx
[45] C. Chang, X. Huo, and M. Ghovanloo, “Towards a magnetic localization system for 3-D tracking of tongue movements in speech-language
therapy,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med Biol. Soc., Sep. 2009, pp. 563–566.
[46] J. R. Manns and H. Eichenbaum, “A cognitive map for object memory in
the hippocampus,” Learning Memory, vol. 16, pp. 616–624, Jul. 2009.
[47] J. Choi and C. Seo, “High-efficiency wireless energy transmission using
magnetic resonance based on negative refractive index metamaterial,”
Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 106, pp. 33–47, Jun. 2010.

Uei-Ming Jow (S’07) received the B.E. degree in
electrical engineering from Tatung University, Taipei,
Taiwan, in 1999, and the M.S. degree in electronic engineering from the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, in 2001, and the Ph.D.
degree in electronic engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA, in 2013.
From 2001 to 2006, he was with the Industrial
Technology Research Institute in Hsinchu, Taiwan,
as an RF engineer in the Electronics Research and
Service Organization. He was involved in the analysis of electromagnetic compatibility for the high speed digital circuit as well
as the embedded RF circuit packaging technology. From 2007 to 2013, he was
involved in research related to neural engineering, bionic systems, integrated
analog circuit design, and wireless implantable biomedical systems. He was
involved in wireless power transmission systems and antenna design.

Peter McMenamin (S’12) received the B.A. degree in economics from the Johns Hopkins University, MD, USA, in 2005, and the B.S. degree in
electrical and computer engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA, in 2012,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree.
He joined the GT-Bionics Lab in the summer of
2011 as an undergraduate, where he is currently involved in wireless power and data transmission to
implantable devices. He is a member of Eta Kappa
Nu and Gamma Beta Phi.
Mehdi Kiani (S’09) received the B.S. degree from
Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran, in 2005, and the M.S.
degree from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran,
Iran, in 2008. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree from GT-Bionics Lab, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, USA.

Joseph R. Manns received the Ph.D. degree in psychology from the University of California, San Diego,
USA, in 2002.
After completing a Postdoctoral Fellowship at
Boston University in 2007, he joined the Faculty at
Emory University, where he is currently an Assistant
Professor in the Department of Psychology.
Dr. Manns was awarded a postdoctoral Ruth
L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award
(2003–2006) and a Pathway to Independence Award
(K99/R00; 2006–2011) by the National Institutes of
Health.

Maysam Ghovanloo (S’00–M’04–SM’10) was born
in Tehran, Iran, in 1973. He received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of
Tehran, Tehran, in 1994, the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering from the Amirkabir University of
Technology, Tehran, in 1997, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from the University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, in 2003 and 2004,
respectively.
From 2004 to 2007, he was an Assistant Professor
in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NC-State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. He joined the Faculty of
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA, in 2007, where he is currently an
Associate Professor and the Founding Director of the GT-Bionics Lab, School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He has authored or coauthored more
than 100 peer-reviewed publications.
Dr. Ghovanloo is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS
AND SYSTEMS, and a member of the Imagers, MEMS, Medical, and Displays
(IMMD) subcommittee at the International Solid-State Circuits Conference
(ISSCC). He is the 2010 recipient of a CAREER award from the National Science Foundation. He has organized several special sessions and was a member
of Technical Review Committees for major conferences in the areas of circuits,
systems, sensors, and biomedical engineering. He is a member of the Tau Beta
Pi, AAAS, Sigma Xi, and the IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society, IEEE Circuits
and Systems Society, and IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.

