IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1607

Ventricular Fibrillation and Tachycardia
Classification Using a Machine Learning Approach
Qiao Li, Cadathur Rajagopalan, Senior Member, IEEE, and Gari D. Clifford∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Correct detection and classification of ventricular fibrillation (VF) and rapid ventricular tachycardia (VT) is of pivotal importance for an automatic external defibrillator and patient
monitoring. In this paper, a VF/VT classification algorithm using a
machine learning method, a support vector machine, is proposed.
A total of 14 metrics were extracted from a specific window length
of the electrocardiogram (ECG). A genetic algorithm was then
used to select the optimal variable combinations. Three annotated
public domain ECG databases (the American Heart Association
Database, the Creighton University Ventricular Tachyarrhythmia
Database, and the MIT-BIH Malignant Ventricular Arrhythmia
Database) were used as training, test, and validation datasets. Different window sizes, varying from 1 to 10 s were tested. An accuracy (Ac) of 98.1%, sensitivity (Se) of 98.4%, and specificity
(Sp) of 98.0% were obtained on the in-sample training data with
5 s-window size and two selected metrics. On the out-of-sample
validation data, an Ac of 96.3% ± 3.4%, Se of 96.2% ± 2.7%, and
Sp of 96.2% ± 4.6% were obtained by fivefold cross validation.
The results surpass those of current reported methods.
Index Terms—Machine learning, public domain electrocardiogram (ECG) database, support vector machine (SVM), ventricular
fibrillation (VF) detection.

I. INTRODUCTION
ENTRICULAR fibrillation (VF) and rapid ventricular
tachycardia (VT) are dangerous arrhythmic events leading to inevitable death if no defibrillation shock is applied to the
subject within a few minutes [1].
In the last decades, a number of algorithms for VF and VT detection [1]–[10] have been proposed. Methods based on processing of the electrocardiogram (ECG) signal in the time domain
have included the use of threshold crossing criteria [2], autocorrelation function [3], and conversion of the ECG signal into a
binary signal and assessing its complexity [5]. In the frequency
domain, studies have proposed the use of bandstop filtering of
the signal and estimation of the leakage [6], and spectrum analy-

V

Manuscript received May 30, 2013; revised July 16, 2013; accepted July 22,
2013. Date of publication July 26, 2013; date of current version May 15, 2014.
This work was supported by Mindray DS USA. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
Q. Li is with the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine,
Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China, and also with the Department of
Engineering Science, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford,
Oxford, OX1 3PJ, U.K. (e-mail: liqiao@sdu.edu.cn).
C. Rajagopalan is with Mindray DS USA, Mahwah, NJ 07430 USA (e-mail:
C.Rajagopalan@mindray.com).
∗ G. D. Clifford is with the Department of Engineering Science, Institute of
Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PJ, U.K. (e-mail:
gari@robots.ox.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2275000

sis methods [7]. Some novel methods to detect VF include using
wavelet transform [8], neural networks [9], and support vector
machines (SVMs) [10]. A combination of parameters, which reflect the frequency and morphological ECG characteristics, was
found to be an efficient approach for VF detection [11], [12].
Some of the algorithms have been evaluated in [13] and [14].
Amann et al. [15] reviewed ten VF detection algorithms and
compared their performances under equal conditions using
open, published annotated databases. Among the ten algorithms,
the signal comparison algorithm (SCA) achieved the best performance with an accuracy (Ac) of 96.2%, a sensitivity (Se) of
71.2%, and specificity (Sp) of 98.5%. Amann’s results showed
that no algorithm achieved its values for Se or Sp claimed in the
original papers because the original researchers made a preselection of the signals by hand. Therefore, using public domain
databases is essential to evaluate true algorithm performance.
Some studies have shown that the combination of ECG features extracted from different algorithms may enhance the performance of VF detection [1], [9], [16], [17]. Jekova extracted
a set of ten parameters of the ECG signals and employed discriminant analysis to select variables [1]. Four parameters were
selected by this approach and the best performance achieved
had a Se of 94.1% and a Sp of 93.8%. However, almost all
the reported studies used the entire dataset for the development
and performance reporting of their algorithms without splitting
the dataset into a training and test dataset for use during the
development and validation of the algorithms.
In this paper, a VF classification algorithm using a machine
learning method is proposed. The algorithm design included a
development phase and a validation phase. Three annotated public domain ECG databases were used; the Creighton University
Ventricular Tachyarrhythmia Database (CUDB), the MIT-BIH
Malignant Ventricular Arrhythmia Database (VFDB), and the
American Heart Association Database (AHADB).
In the development phase, 14 VF metrics were extracted from
a specific window length (5 s) of ECG. We then used a feature
selection technique, a genetic algorithm (GA), to select the optimal combination of variables. The GA mimics the principles
of natural selection to “breed” possible successful combinations
of parameters, and “kills off” poorly performing combinations
of parameters. Every possible combination of selected features
was trained and tested using an SVM classifier on the study
dataset, which was split further into training and test set. The
combinations of different number of features which result in the
best performance were selected.
In the validation phase, fivefold cross validation was performed on the study dataset with different window lengths (from
1 to 10 s) to evaluate the algorithm.

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE I
DETAILS OF TRAINING AND TEST SET

1-Hz cutoff frequency to suppress residual baseline wander; 2) a
second-order 30 Hz Butterworth low-pass filter to reduce highfrequency noise; and 3) a notch filter to eliminate power line
interference.
C. VF Metrics

TABLE II
NUMBER OF SEGMENTS OF VF AND NON-VF WITH DIFFERENT
WINDOW LENGTHS

II. METHODS
A. Database
All the records including VF and VT signals from CUDB,
VFDB, and AHADB were used in this study. The CUDB
includes 35 records of 8 min single-channel ECG data. The
VFDB includes 22 records of 35 min two-channel ECG data.
The AHADB VT and VF records (No. 8201–8210) include ten
records of 30 min two-channel ECG data. There are a total of
67 records and 99 channels of full length annotated ECG in the
entire dataset (which is called the study dataset in the rest of the
paper).
VF rhythms include ventricular flutter, VF, and VT. As there
is no VT annotation in CUDB, the VT segments in CUDB were
reannotated by an experienced cardiologist. Non-VF rhythms
include normal sinus rhythm, atrial fibrillation, ventricular
bigeminy, first degree heart block, high-grade ventricular ectopic activity, nodal rhythm, paced rhythm, sinus bradycardia, supraventricular tachyarrhythmia, and ventricular escape
rhythm. Note that segments labeled as asystole in which signals
did not exceed 150 μV peak-to-peak and segments labeled as
noise were excluded from the study dataset.
VF and Non-VF rhythms were marked segment-by-segment
according to the length of an analysis window ranging from 1 to
10 s. The window segments are not overlapping. The 67 records
used in the study dataset were split into training and test set
using the odd and even record order in the database, e.g., the
first record was put into the training set, while the second one
went into the test set. Table I shows the details of the training and
test set. The total segments of VF and Non-VF with different
window length are shown in Table II.
B. ECG Signal Preprocessing Filtration
The sampling frequency of the ECG data was 250 Hz. The
applied signal preprocessing included: 1) a high-pass filter with

14 VF metrics were extracted based on a review of recent
published documents as follows:
1) Complexity Measure (Complexity) [5]: A binary signal
calculation is applied to a specific window of the ECG data
(e.g., 5 s). A 0/1 binary string is generated by comparing the
ECG data to a suitably selected threshold. The mean value xm
of the data points in the selected window is calculated and
subtracted from each signal sample. The positive peak value
Vp and the negative peak value Vn of the xi data thus obtained
are taken. The number of xi in the interval [0 < xi < 0.1Vp ] is
denoted Pc and the xi in the interval [0.1Vn < xi < 0] by Nc .
If (Pc + Nc ) < 0.4n, where n is the number of samples in the
selected window, the threshold is selected to be Td = 0; else if
Pc < Nc , then Td = 0.2Vp , otherwise Td = 0.2Vn . The ECG
data are converted into a string (Binary_s): if xi < Td , si = 0,
or else si = 1.
A complexity measure c(n) is then computed using the following procedure: If S and Q represent two strings and SQ is
their concatenation. SQp is the string SQ without its last element. At the beginning, c(n) = 1, S = s1 , Q = s2 , SQp = s1 .
After a number of operations, S = s1 , s2 , . . .,sr and Q = sr +1 .
If Q is a substring of SQp, S does not change and Q becomes Q = sr +1 , sr +2 , . . . , etc. until obtaining Q, which is
not a substring of SQp. S is renewed to be S combined with Q
(S = s1 , s2 , . . . , sr , sr +1 , . . . , sr +i ), Q = sr +i+1 , and c(n) =
c(n) + 1. The aforementioned procedures are repeated until Q
is the last character. The normalized C(n) is computed as
C(n) = c(n)/b(n)

(1)

where b(n) gives the asymptotic behavior of c(n) for a random
string, such that
b(n) ≡ n/ln(n).

(2)

2) VF-Filter Leakage Measure (Leakage) [6]: The VF-filter
technique corresponds to a narrow bandstop filter applied to
the signal with central frequency equivalent to the mean signal
frequency. Its output is the VF-filter leakage. The VF signal
is considered to be of quasi-sinusoidal waveform. The mean
period of a fixed length of data is obtained as

T = 2π

m

i=1


|Vi |

m


−1
|Vi − Vi−1 |

(3)

i=1

where Vi are the signal samples and m is the number of data
points.
The narrow bandstop filter is simulated by combining the
ECG data with a copy of the data shifted by half a period. The

LI et al.: VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION AND TACHYCARDIA CLASSIFICATION USING A MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH

VF-filter leakage is computed as
Leakage =

m


|Vi + Vi−(T /2) |

i=1



m


TABLE III
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF EACH INDIVIDUAL METRIC
(WINDOW SIZE = 5 S)

−1
(|Vi | + |Vi−(T /2) |)

1609

.

i=1

(4)
3) Spectral Analysis [7]: Each data segment is multiplied by
a Hamming window and transformed in the frequency domain
by fast Fourier transform (FFT). Four spectrum parameters, the
first spectral moment normalized (FSMN) and A1, A2, A3, are
obtained from

Af
1
 i i
(5)
FSMN =
Ai
F
where F is the frequency of the component with the greatest
amplitude (called the peak frequency) in the range 0.5–9 Hz;
fi is the ith frequency in the FFT between 0 and 100 Hz; Ai
is the corresponding amplitude; A1 is the sum of amplitudes
between 0.5 Hz and F /2, divided by the sum of amplitudes
between 0.5 Hz and 20 F; A2 is the sum of amplitudes between
0.7 and 1.4 F divided by the sum of amplitudes between 0.5 Hz
and 20 F; A3 is the sum of amplitudes in 0.6 Hz bands around
the second to eighth harmonics (2–8 F), divided by the sum of
amplitudes in the span of 0.5 Hz to 20 F.
4) Time Delay Algorithm (Timedelay) [18]: Based on phase
space reconstruction, the signal s(t) is plotted in a diagram in
the following way: x(t) is plotted on the x-axis, and x(t + τ )
on the y-axis, τ being a proper time constant (τ = 0.5 s for VF
detection).
ECG data are down-sampled to a frequency of 50 Hz. Phase
space plots [x(t), x(t + τ )] are plotted on a 40 × 40 grid, where
the 40 × 40 grid stretches from the minimum to the maximum
of the investigated ECG signal. The area of the plot filled by the
curve is counted and the time delay is defined by
number of visited boxes
.
(6)
number of all boxes
5) Bandpass Filter and Auxiliary Counts [11]: An integer coefficient recursive digital filter with central frequency at
14.6 Hz and bandwidth from 13 to 16.5 Hz (–3dB) is applied on
the ECG data. With a sampling frequency of 250 Hz, the filter
is designed by
Time delay =

14FSi−1 − 7FSi−2 + (Si − Si−2 )/2
(7)
8
where Si is a signal sample with index i and FSi is the filtered
signal sample with index i.
Three auxiliary parameters are calculated from the absolute
values of the digital integer-coefficient filter output (FS), named
Count1, Count2, and Count3. Each parameter represents the
number of signal samples with amplitude values within a certain
amplitude range, calculated for a specific window.
1) Count1—Range: 0.5∗ max(|FS|) to max(|FS|);
2) Count2—Range: mean(|FS|) to max(|FS|);
3) Count3—Range: mean(|FS|) – MD to mean(|FS|) + MD,
where max (|FS|), mean (|FS|), and mean deviation (MD) are
computed for every 1 s time interval.
6) Covariance Calculation (CovarBin) [1]: Measures the
variance of the corresponding binary signal (Binary_s) of ECG.
FSi =

7) Frequency Calculation (FreqBin) [1]: Calculated by
counting the number of binary signal (Binary_s) transitions between “0”and “1” and dividing it to the window length (e.g.,
5 s), thus, obtaining the transitions for 1 s.
8) Area Calculation (AreaBin) [1]: Realized by summing
the values of the binary signal (Binary_s) samples. AreaBin is
equal to the maximum between the sum of the binary signal
sample values and the sum of the inverted binary signal sample
values.
9) Kurtosis (Kurtosis) [19]: Calculated as the fourth standardized moment of the ECG
Kurtosis = E{(x − μx )4 }/σ 4 − 3

(8)

where E{} is the mathematical expectation operator, μ and σ
are, respectively, the mean and standard deviation of the ECG
segment x.
D. Feature Selection
The SVM classification performance of each individual metric is shown in Table III for both training and test sets for a
5 s window length. Se measures the proportion of VF segments
that have been correctly identified as VF. Sp measures the proportion of non-VF segments that have been correctly identified
as non-VF. Ac corresponds to the proportion of segments that
have been correctly classified. Note that AUC is the area under
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and AcB is the
balanced Ac (see Section II-F for detail).
Since it is unlikely that all 14 parameters are useful (and in
fact some may end up lowering the performance), a variable
selection technique is required. Moreover, with a limited number of patterns from which to learn, it is important to keep the
number of free parameters (a function of the number of features)
which we need to learn as low as possible. A GA was therefore
used to select the optimal subset of variables for VF classification [20]. By defining a “chromosome” to be a 14 element binary
vector (each element representing one of the features with a “1”

1610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

indicating a feature is selected), the GA efficiently explores the
space of variable combinations by “mutating” successful randomly chosen chromosomes. A population of 50 chromosomes
was used with a 5% mutation rate, a 5% cloning rate, a 95%
cull rate for crossover, and a 50-generation limit; the search
space of possible variable combinations was rapidly explored.
The fitness function that was minimized was the root mean
squared error (rMSE) of a multivariate logistic regression. A
bootstrapping procedure was performed by running the logistic
regression and evaluating the rMSE on the training set with a
5 s window length. The GA selection was repeated 150 times
and the selected variables were sorted by the frequency of selection. Variables with higher rank (more frequently chosen) were
selected as the features to be used for classification.

TABLE IV
ORDERED RANKING OF SELECTED VARIABLES BY THE GA OVER 150 RUNS

E. Machine Learning Classification and Validation
During algorithm development, we used an SVM classifier
(LIBSVM library) [21], [22] with a Gaussian radial basis function kernel defined by K(xn , xm ) = exp(−γ xn − xm 2 ),
where γ controls the width of the Gaussian kernel and plays
a role in controlling the flexibility of the resulting classifier. xn
and xm are two vectors expressed in the initial feature space.
As the dataset is not balanced, a weight sector w is used on VF
class data when training, where
w=

number of non-VF segments
number of VF segments .

(9)

Every possible combination of selected features was fed into
the SVM model as input to train the model using the training set
with 5 s window length, beginning from the individual features,
then pairs, triplets, and so on. The models were then evaluated
on the test set. The feature combinations of each number of
features with best performance were selected.
In the algorithm validation phase, an SVM was used to evaluate the classification performance of the algorithm. Each selected feature combination was validated using fivefold cross
validation on the study dataset. The fivefold cross validation
sorted the study dataset to fivefold by records rather than by the
ECG segments. Then, fourfold of records were used for training
and the last fold of the records was used for evaluation. This
process was repeated five times as one integral procedure. The
fivefold procedure was repeated randomly 50 times and the average of performance was used for evaluation. This approach
was repeated on different window length (from 1 to 10 s).

Fig. 1. ROC curves of two selected feature combinations (Count2 and Leakage) and some individual features, window size = 5 s, on training set.

III. RESULTS
A. Feature Selection Result
Table IV shows the rank of variables sorted by the times of selection through 150 repeats of GA. There are six variables which
were selected each of the runs and another three variables were
selected in more than 50% of the GA runs. We selected these
nine variables, including Leakage, Count2, CovarBin, FreqBin,
AreaBin, Kurtosis, Complexity, A3, and Count1.
B. Best Performances of Feature Combinations
Table V shows the best performances of feature combinations
and an SVM using the training and test dataset with 5 s window
length. Fig. 1 compares the ROC curve of two selected feature combinations (Count2 and Leakage) with some individual
features.

F. Performance Measurements
We used the Se, Sp, Ac, and AUC to evaluate the performance
of the algorithm. Since the dataset is unbalanced, a weight w is
used to generate balanced result (AcB ) when Ac is calculated
as follows:
AcB =

wTP + TN
.
wTP + wFN + FP + TN

(10)

C. Validation Results
Using the feature combinations acquired from the last step,
fivefold cross validation was repeated randomly 50 times using
an SVM classifier on the study dataset with different window
lengths and the average performance is shown in Table VI.
The best VF classification Ac rate on the evaluation fold by
fivefold cross validation was 96.4% when two metrics, Count2

LI et al.: VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION AND TACHYCARDIA CLASSIFICATION USING A MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH

1611

TABLE V
BEST PERFORMANCES OF FEATURE COMBINATIONS (WINDOW SIZE = 5 S)

TABLE VI
FIVEFOLD VALIDATION RESULTS OF FEATURE COMBINATIONS (WINDOW SIZE = 5 S)

and Leakage, were used with 8 and 10 s window lengths, where
the corresponding Ac on training folds was 97.0%. With a 5 s
window length, the Ac on evaluation was as high as 96.3%. The
Ac rate is lower when shorter windows are selected; 96.1% with
4 s, 95.8% with 3 s, 95.2% with 2 s, and 92.7% with a 1 s window.
Balancing the data does not substantially change the results.
The combination of the two metrics Count2 and Leakage result in the best performance with each window length group,
except 2 and 4 s window groups, where the three metric combinations of Count2, Leakage, and A3 yield the best performance.
The classification Ac rate on the training folds increase when
the numbers of selected metrics increase from 2 to 5. However,
the Ac on the evaluation folds does not increase accordingly.
The Se of VF detection increases with increasing number of
features. However, the Sp decreases accordingly.
IV. DISCUSSION
The method proposed in this paper selected only two features
on a relatively short window length. Thus, it provides real time
operation of VF detection.
A bandpass filter with bandwidth from 13 to 16.5 Hz was
used to trace the non-VF rhythm complexes when Count2 was
being extracted. The filter output for non-VF rhythms shows
obviously peaks of QRS; thus, a comparatively small number of
signal samples locate in the ranges defined for Count2. However,
the output for VF has no clearly defined peaks. It is associated
with a higher number of samples in the range of Count2. The
Leakage algorithm shifted the data by half a period and then

combined them with the original data. The quasi-sinusoidal VF
signal will, therefore, be canceled.
Fixed thresholds were used for VF classification in [6], [11],
and [13]. A series of thresholds of Count1, Count2, and Count3
and complicated logical judgment was also employed in [11].
These thresholds were selected by retrospective analysis on the
entire database without further evaluation. We use a machine
learning algorithm to avoid the fixed threshold selection problem. The results show much more robustness on out-of-sample
data. Cross validation was performed to mitigate the risk of
overtraining.
The Count2 and Leakage metrics appear to provide complimentary information, since the former measures the half bandwidth of the signal centered on the dominant frequency, and the
latter measures the power in the sidebands outside of the central
frequencies.
Compared to the use of a 10 s window, the Ac using a 5 s
window drops only by 0.1% even though there is a 50% shortening of the window size. Reducing the window size to 2 s
can still provide a high performance with Ac of 95.2%, Se of
95.1%, Sp of 95.1%, and AUC of 0.992. A shorter window
means quicker detection of such potentially lethal rhythms and
so possibly faster treatment for the patient. Under zero-noise
conditions, a shorter window should not matter too much, but
because the episode of VF may be obscured partially by noise,
Ac over shorter windows equates to a more accurate alarm under
such conditions.
The standard deviation on the evaluation folds is five to ten
times larger than that on the training folds after 50 repetitions

1612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF THE BEST PERFORMING METHODS CITED IN THE LITERATURE

of fivefold cross validation. This suggests that there are characteristic diversities of VF between patients, and a systemic
validation is necessary for evaluating the performance of the
algorithm.
Table VII shows the performance comparison of some of
the cited methods. Note that the performance of our method
is reported both on the in-sample training dataset and out-ofsample validation dataset; the others report results when using
the entire dataset.
The study is limited by the data in the standard databases.
These are often hand-picked to be of high quality, and so that the
performance in the presence of severe noise could be examined.
This is of course true of all previous studies. Furthermore, a more
exhaustive set of features (beyond the current literature) were
not explored, since it was assumed that the previous authors had
already examined most of the promising approaches. The point
of this paper was to illustrate the performance of previously
published metrics (and combinations of them) in a statistically
valid manner, with out-of-sample testing, which has not been
previously attempted in the literature.

V. CONCLUSION
The method proposed in this paper performs almost equivalently on both the in-sample training and out sample validation dataset. All other methods reported in the literature have
reported in-sample statistics, and therefore, a much lower performance for those techniques should be expected in reality.
Such an issue was seen when we performed univariate tests
on the metrics used by other authors. In our paper, we used
a systematic cross-validation approach to reduce the possibility of overtraining, and we have demonstrated that we are able
to produce a best-in-class VF detector across a diverse set of
databases. In particular, we are able to produce high performances with smaller windows sizes than have previously been
attempted. Moreover, our method is rapid to implement since it
only requires two relatively simple features.

REFERENCES
[1] I. Jekova, “Shock advisory tool: Detection of life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias and shock success prediction by means of a common parameter
set,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 2, pp. 25–33, Jan. 2007.
[2] N. V. Thakor, Y. S. Zhu, and K. Y. Pan, “Ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation detection by a sequential hypothesis testing algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 837–843, Sep. 1990.
[3] S. Chen, N. V. Thakor, and M. M. Mower, “Ventricular fibrillation detection by a regression test on the autocorrelation function,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 25, pp. 241–249, May 1987.
[4] J. Millet-Roig, J. J. Rieta-Ibanez, E. Vilanova, A. Mocholi, and
F. J. Chorro, “Time-frequency analysis of a single ECG to discriminate between ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation,” Comput. Cardiol., vol. 26, pp. 711–714, 1999.
[5] X. S. Zhang, Y. S. Zhu, N. V. Thakor, and Z. Z. Wang, “Detecting ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation by complexity measure,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 548–555, May 1999.
[6] S. Kuo and R. Dillman, “Computer detection of ventricular fibrillation,”
in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 1978, pp. 347–349.
[7] S. Barro, R. Ruiz, D. Cabello, and J. Mira, “Algorithmic sequential decision making in a frequency domain for life threatening ventricular arrhythmias and imitative artifacts: a diagnostic system,” J. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 11, pp. 320–328, Jul. 1989.
[8] J. N. Watson, G. R. Clegg, M. Holzer, F. Sterz, and C. E. Robertson,
“Evaluating arrhythmias in ECG signals using wavelet transforms,” IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 104–109, Sep. 2000.
[9] R. H. Clayton, A. Murray, and R. W. F. Campbell, “Recognition of ventricular fibrillation using neural networks,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 32, pp. 217–220, Mar. 1994.
[10] F. Alonso-Atienza, E. Morgado, L. Fernandez-Martınez, A. GarcıaAlberola, and J. L. Rojo-Alvarez, “Combination of ECG parameters with
support vector machines for the detection of life-threatening arrhythmias,”
Comput. Cardiol., vol. 39, pp. 385–388, 2012.
[11] I. Jekova and V. Krasteva, “Real time detection of ventricular fibrillation
and tachycardia,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 25, pp. 1167–1178, Aug. 2004.
[12] V. Krasteva and I. Jekova, “Assessment of ECG frequency and morphology parameters for automatic classification of life-threatening cardiac
arrhythmias,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 26, pp. 707–723, Jun. 2005.
[13] R. H. Clayton, A. Murray, and R. W. F. Campbell, “Comparison of four
techniques for recognition of ventricular fibrillation from the surface
ECG,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 31, pp. 111–117, Mar. 1993.
[14] I. Jekova, “Comparison of five algorithms for the detection of ventricular
fibrillation from the surface ECG,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 21, pp. 429–439,
Aug. 2000.
[15] A. Amann, R. Tratnig, and K. Unterkofler, “Reliability of old and new
ventricular fibrillation detection algorithms for automated external defibrillators,” Biomed. Eng. OnLine., vol. 4, no. 60, 2005.
[16] J. Moraes, M. Blechner, F. Vilani, and E. Costa, “Ventricular fibrillation
detection using a leakage/complexity measure method,” Comput. Cardiol.,
vol. 29, pp. 213–216, 2002.

LI et al.: VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION AND TACHYCARDIA CLASSIFICATION USING A MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH

[17] I. Jekova and P. Mitev, “Detection of ventricular fibrillation and tachycardia from the surface ECG by a set of parameters acquired from four
methods,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 23, pp. 629–634, Aug. 2002.
[18] A. Amann, R. Tratnig, and K. Unterkofler, “Detecting ventricular fibrillation by time-delay methods,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 174–177, Jan. 2007.
[19] Q. Li, R. G. Mark, and G. D. Clifford, “Robust heart rate estimation from
multiple asynchronous noisy sources using signal quality indices and a
Kalman filter,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, pp. 15–32, Jan. 2008.
[20] D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine
Learning. Reading, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[21] C. C. Chang and C. J. Lin, “LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 2, no. 27, pp. 1–27, Apr.
2011.
[22] C. C. Chang and C. J. Lin, “LIBSVM—A library for support vector machines.” [Online]. Available: http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm/
[23] S. Fokkenrood, P. Leijdekkers, and V. Gay, “Ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation detection algorithm for 24/7 personal wireless heart monitoring,” Pervasive Comput. Quality Life Enhancement, Lecture Notes
Comput. Sci., vol. 4541, pp. 110–120, 2007.

Qiao Li received the B.Eng. degree in computer
application from Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China, in 1991, the M.Med. degree
in physiology from Shandong Medical University,
Jinan, China, in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in
biomedical engineering from Shandong University,
Jinan, China, in 2008.
He became a Research Assistant in 1994, a Lecturer in 1997, and an Associate Professor in 2001 at
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Shandong University. He took up a Visiting Scholar at MIT from
2006 to 2007, working with Dr. Clifford. In 2011, he took a sabbatical to join
Dr. Clifford’s research group at the University of Oxford. His research interest includes multidimensional biomedical signal processing, artifact and noise
analysis, machine learning, and physiological database.
Dr. Li received the Martin Black Prize in 2009 with Dr. Clifford.

Cadathur Rajagopalan (M’85–SM’06) received the
B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Bangalore, Bengaluru, India, the M.S. degree
in engineering (instrumentation) from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India, and the Ph.D.
degree in control systems and biomedical engineering from the University of Lille, Lille, France.
He spent several years working at the Université de
Lille and the Centre Hospitalier d’Arras on problems
related to the analysis of physiological signals from
the neonatal intensive care unit. He was then with the
Department of Cardiology, Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center working on the analysis of signals from isolated myocytes, electrocardiograms, and
high-resolution electrograms. He is currently a Biomedical Engineering Fellow
in the advanced development division of Mindray DS USA (formerly Datascope), a medical device company. He has been involved in the design of several
Food and Drug Administration-approved medical devices including the design
of algorithms for the analysis of physiological signals. Some of these devices
have won awards including the Medical Design Excellence Award. He is also a
Principal Investigator, and part of the clinical and technical due diligence team
of the Technology Research Institute, a global research group within Mindray.
His current research interests include biomedical signal processing, electrocardiogram analysis, user interface design, and new ways to present physiological
data to clinicians. He has several patents, represents Mindray at the Association
for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, and is on the U.S. technical
advisory group of the International Electrotechnical Commission.

1613

Gari D. Clifford (M’02–SM’06) received the B.Sc.
(Hons.) degree in physics from the University of
Exeter, Devon, U.K., in 1992, the M.Sc. degree in
mathematical and theoretical physics from the University of Southampton, Hampshire, U.K., in 1995,
and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering
from the University of Oxford, Oxfordshire, U.K.,
in 2002.
In 2003, he became a Postdoctoral Researcher
at MIT, transitioning to Research Scientist and then
Principal Research Scientist. In 2009, he returned to
the University of Oxford to take a faculty position as a Lecturer in Biomedical
Engineering. He is also the Director of the Centre for Doctoral Training in
Healthcare Innovation, Department of Engineering Science at Oxford’s Institute of Biomedical Engineering, where he runs the Intelligent Patient Monitoring
Group, focusing on low-cost healthcare technologies, biomedical signal processing, and machine learning applied to a range of chronic and acute healthcare
problems. He is also a Fellow of Kellogg College where he directs the Centre
for Affordable Healthcare Technology. He is also a James Martin Fellow at
the George Institute for Global Health where he is the Acting Director of its
Affordable Healthcare Technologies programme. Dr. Clifford is also a Lecturer
in Medicine at Harvard University. He has licensed several patents and has
been involved in the development of several Food and Drug Administrationapproved medical devices and actively collaborates with industry. His research
interests include mHealth, electronic medical records, machine learning, multidimensional biomedical signal processing, artifact and noise analysis, linear and
nonlinear time-series analysis, and modeling of the electrocardiogram and the
cardiovascular system.
Dr. Clifford is on the Editorial Board of IOP’s Physiological Measurement
and Biomedical Engineering OnLine, as well as the International Advisory
Board for the NIH resource PhysioNet. His research group has won several
awards including the Martin Black Prize, the Vodafone Foundation Prize, the
Wireless mHealth prize, the Engineering World Health prize, and three citations
in IOP Phys Measurement’s “Select” for “significant impact on future research.”

