3368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Estimating the Universal Positions of Wireless Body
Electrodes for Measuring Cardiac Electrical Activity
Ivan Tomašić∗ , Sabina Frljak, and Roman Trobec, Member, IEEE

Abstract—A methodology is presented for estimating the wireless body electrode (WE) positions and for calculating the linear
transformations that enable the synthesis of a 12-lead ECG or a
multichannel ECG from three WEs, which in turn simplifies and
improves the acquisition of ECGs. We present, compare, and evaluate three approaches to the synthesis: fully personalized, fully universal, and combined with universal leads and personalized transformations. The evaluation results show that WEs are an acceptable alternative to the standard 12-lead ECG device for patients
with chronic myocardial ischemia, if either the fully personalized
or combined approach is used. The median correlation coefficients
are all higher than 0.94 and 0.92 for the fully personalized and
combined approaches, respectively. The corresponding kappa and
percentual diagnostic agreements between the synthesized and target 12-lead ECGs are 0.88 (95%) and 0.83 (92%), respectively. The
evaluation additionally shows that the personalization of the transformations has more impact on the quality of the synthesized ECGs
than the personalization of the WEs’ positions.
Index Terms—Derived electrocardiograms, differential leads,
ECG synthesis, electrocardiography, wireless electrodes.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE application of a conventional 12-lead ECG device can
be impractical, particularly in emergency situations, since
the accurate standard positions of the precordial electrodes are
difficult to locate quickly, particularly in women and children.
Furthermore, the recording of a 12-lead ECG can be inconvenient for long-term and mobile applications. Systems with
reduced numbers of leads that can synthesize a 12-lead ECG
with an insignificant or a small loss of diagnostic information
have been proposed [1]. The advantage over standard 12-lead
ECG systems is the smaller number of measurement sites (i.e.,
electrodes) and, consequently, fewer wires. Lead systems with
reduced numbers of leads that synthesize 12-lead ECGs are
commonly referred to as derived 12-lead ECG systems.
One of the most promising derived 12-lead ECG systems uses
leads measured with a wearable ECG device called a wireless
body electrode (WE) [2]–[5]. These WEs enable the use of a

T

Manuscript received February 15, 2013; revised May 20, 2013; accepted July
22, 2013. Date of publication August 2, 2013; date of current version November
18, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Slovenian Research Agency
under Grant P2-0095. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ I. Tomašić is with the Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana 1000, Slovenia
(e-mail: ivan.tomasic@ijs.si).
S. Frljak is with the Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, University Medical Center, Ljubljana 1000, Slovenia (e-mail: sabina.frljak@gmail.com).
R. Trobec is with the Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana 1000, Slovenia
(e-mail: roman.trobec@ijs.si).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2276291

minimal number of wires on the body and so increase the wearable comfort. The WEs measure and wirelessly transmit only
the local potential differences, i.e., the bipolar measurements
from two closely placed skin electrodes.
In our previous study [6], we investigated a personalized
approach to the synthesis of a 12-lead ECG from three leads
that can be measured with WEs, which we called differential
leads (DLs). An algorithm was presented that determines the
personalized measurement points (i.e., the electrodes’ positions)
for three DLs, and a personalized transformation matrix used
for the synthesis of the 12-lead ECG. The optimum number of
DLs is three, which was determined experimentally, but can also
be rationalized theoretically [7]–[9]. The ECGs synthesized in
this way were compared to the EASI lead system synthesis [10]
and showed higher quality in terms of the correlation coefficient
(CC) and the root-mean-square distance (RMSD). Even though
the presented, fully personalized approach is expected to yield
the synthesis of the highest quality it has a practical drawback in
that it requires a multichannel ECG (MECG) to be prerecorded
for any person planning to use the WEs.
In this study, we investigate the other two synthesis possibilities: one is to determine the universal measuring positions
and the universal transformation, whereas the other is to keep
the universal positions but employ a personalized transformation matrix. The latter method is expected to yield ECGs of
better quality than the former, but it requires a 12-lead ECG and
the leads from WEs’ universal positions to be recorded simultaneously in order to calculate the personalized transformation
matrix in a process sometimes referred to as calibration [11]. All
three approaches are evaluated by standard evaluation measures,
but we also used evaluation approaches that are particularly applicable for our patient population.
II. METHODS
The DLs measurements used in the following methods were
emulated by the differences between the unipolar leads of a
MECG (see [6] for details).
A. Studied Data
Twenty healthy volunteers (13 male, 7 female, mean age ±
SD = 50.6 ± 9) with no previous medical record related to
heart disease and with a normal 12-lead ECG, and 27 patients
(22 male, 5 female, mean age ± SD = 58 ± 10), scheduled for a
bypass or grafting surgery, were included in our study. The patients had one or multiple significant coronary artery stenoses,
whereas eight of them had an old myocardial infarction. Informed consent was obtained from all the subjects before the

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

TOMAŠIĆ et al.: ESTIMATING THE UNIVERSAL POSITIONS OF WIRELESS BODY ELECTRODES

Fig. 1. Schematic locations of MECG electrodes on the chest (left) and the
back (right). The leads indicated by the red lines are the calculated best leads
for the 12-lead ECG synthesis: {(13,18), (22,25)}, whereas the ones indicated
by green lines: {(21,22), (34,35)} are the calculated best leads for the MECG
synthesis. The lead indicated in blue is in both sets of best leads: {(4,5)}.

study. A single MECG measurement was obtained from each
volunteer and two MECG measurements from each patient who
underwent surgery: the first, one day before the surgery, and
the second, in the period from the fifth to the seventh day after
the surgery. No attempt was made to exclude any measurement;
therefore, a few measurements have arrhythmic events. The
measurements were obtained during our previous studies [12].
The procedure for recording the data is summarized as follows. We have developed a custom MECG device with 35 electrodes, all referenced to the Wilson central terminal potential
(see [13] for details). The locations of the electrodes are shown
schematically in Fig. 1. All the MECG measurements also incorporate all the electrodes for the simultaneous measurement
of a standard 12-lead ECG.
All the data were immediately examined for the quality of the
signals from each individual electrode. In the case of a defective
measurement, the cause of the disturbance was identified and
the problem was immediately solved. Data acquisition was then
restarted, following the same protocol. The measured MECG
analog signals were sampled at 1000 Hz and digitized with a
0.73 μV resolution (14-bit analog-digital converter). The bandwidth of the recording system was 0.05 to 250 Hz. The length
of each measurement was 360 s.
B. Data Preprocessing
The recorded signals were imported and further processed using MatLab (MathWorks, Inc.). First, a series of R-peak times
– fiducial points, were detected for each MECG using a dedicated software function, which is based on the Pan & Tompkins algorithm [14]. The function first applies a differentiator
filter that calculates the differences between neighboring samples [15]. Then, a fixed threshold is applied to the differentiator’s
output. The R-peaks are determined by finding the maximum
signal amplitude for samples that lie above the threshold. The
threshold values were calculated separately for each MECG as
0.3 · mean (derivatives obove 99th percentile).

3369

Next, an isoelectric point in the middle of the PQ segment
was detected for a single beat of each MECG by the procedure described in [16], and confirmed by visual inspection. The
distance between the isoelectric point and its corresponding
(nearest right) fiducial point was used to determine all the other
isoelectric points (the distance is subtracted from the fiducial
points) as it was assumed that the distances between the isoelectric points and the fiducial points are nearly constant for all
the beats in a single MECG. The determined isoelectric points
were visually inspected in the figures, each with all the beats in
a single MECG aligned by their fiducial points, and overlaid.
The visual inspections indicated undistinguishable variations
in the distances between the fiducial points and the isoelectric
points in each MECG, which in turn confirmed the initial assumption of the distance constancy between the fiducial and
isoelectric points. The baseline wandering was removed from
all the measurements by interpolating a cubic spline through the
isoelectric points of each MECG lead and subtracting it from
the source lead. This technique does not significantly distort the
ECG morphology [16].
Subsequently, 10-s intervals were randomly extracted from
each measurement, visually examined for the signal quality and
filtered by a low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 40 Hz,
an attenuation of 60 dB, and a stop frequency of 100 Hz. These
extracted measurements represent realistic signals that can be
measured using WEs and have therefore been used for the evaluation of the synthesis algorithms (evaluation intervals).
From the remaining parts of the measurements, the average
beats were obtained by time-aligning beats in each lead with
their fiducial points, adding the beats together, and dividing by
the number of beats. The average beats were calculated from
the nonfiltered signals, since the high-frequency noise is satisfactorily damped by averaging [16]. The average beats were
then compared, visually and by CC and RMSD [17], with all
the beats in the corresponding leads, for the purpose of identifying and eliminating the eventual ectopic beats and the beats
with the eventual remaining measurement errors. The remaining
beats were used to calculate the final average beats, which were
used in all the subsequent processing, except in the evaluation
of the synthesized ECGs.
For evaluation purposes, the average beats were calculated
for each lead of both the target and the synthesized evaluation
intervals, by using the same procedure described for complete
MECGs. The J-points were determined using the same assumption as for the isoelectric points—the distances between the corresponding fiducial point and the J-points are nearly constant for
all the beats in a single MECG. Hence, a J-point was detected on
one evaluation interval’s average beat for each MECG, using the
procedure described in [16], and verified by visual inspection.
The J-points for the remaining average beats were calculated by
adding the distance to their fiducial points.
C. Calculation of Universal DL Positions
and Universal Transformation
For the universal synthesis, we employed a method of juxtaposing measurements that was previously used in other studies

3370

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

(e.g., [18]): the average beats from each MECG were concatenated for each lead. The obtained all-embracing measurement
was used as the input for our “Best DLs selection algorithm,”
described in [6]. The algorithm basically performs a full search
over all the possible combinations of DL, formed by the differences of the neighboring unipolar MECG leads, for the purpose of synthesizing the 12-lead ECG. The declared best DLs
combination is the one that produces the synthesized 12-lead
ECG with the highest correlation to the target measured 12-lead
ECG. For the juxtaposed average beats, the algorithm yields
the best universal combination of three DLs, and an universal
transformation matrix b = [3 × 12], which is the best universal
transformation in the least-squares sense. Matrix b can be used
to transform the three universal DLs, measured on any person,
to a synthesized 12-lead ECG
Ê = M · b

(1)

where Ê is a synthesized 12-lead ECG, and M is a matrix
⎤
⎡
DL (1)1 DL (2)1 DL (3)1
⎥
⎢
..
..
..
(2)
M =⎣
⎦
.
.
.
DL (1)n

DL (2)n

DL (3)n

with universal DL samples in its columns (n is the total number
of samples).
D. Calculation of Personalized Transformations for Universal
DL Positions
We calculated the personalized transformations for the universal DL positions by fitting a linear model between the average
beats of the target 12-lead ECG and the average beats of the
measured universal DLs for each person. The models’ transformation matrices were again estimated using the least-squares
method. It is clear that the simultaneous measurements from the
universal DLs and from the target 12-lead ECG are needed. We
will refer to this synthesis approach as the combined approach.
E. Calculation of Personalized Transformations for
Personalized DLs
This fully personalized approach was explored in our pervious study [6], where the personalized DLs and transformations were calculated by using measurement intervals, not the
average beats. Nevertheless, to enable a direct comparison between all three approaches, we recalculated the personalized
DLs and transformations by using the same algorithm as in [6],
but utilizing the average beats instead of the measurement intervals. The synthesis was evaluated on the same evaluation intervals and using the same evaluation measures as the other two
approaches.
F. MECG Synthesis
In addition to the 12-lead ECG synthesis, the MECG leads
were also synthesized using the same methods as described in
Sections II-C–E, with the only difference being that the target
ECG used in the calculation of the best DLs and transformations
is the MECG, i.e., its average beats. Equations (1) and (2) are still

valid for the MECG synthesis but Ê now has the meaning of a
synthesized MECG, and b is a [3 × 35] matrix. The MECG leads
are not diagnostically as significant as the 12-lead ECG [19], but
the synthesis of MECG leads has an additional purpose because
it reveals, together with the synthesized 12-lead ECG, how well
the total body-surface potential map can be restored from the
DLs.
G. Evaluation Methods
The accuracy of the 12-lead ECG synthesis was evaluated by
comparing it to the target ECG, on the evaluation segments, with
the following means: a visual comparison, CC, the ST-segment
level at 60 ms after the J-point (ST60), and the ST-segment’s
slope. The visual comparison with the target 12-lead ECG classified the synthesized leads as identical or clearly different. An
expert cardiologist was engaged to visually examine the target and the synthesized 12-lead ECGs. The ST60 and ST-slopes
were taken from the average beats calculated from the 10-s evaluation intervals (target and synthesized). The ST-slopes were
calculated as the mean ST-segment gradients from the J-point
to the point 60 ms after the J-point.
Since the exploited ECG measurements come from patients
with diagnosed myocardial ischemia, the ECGs were also evaluated by employing a well-known diagnostic rule for detecting
myocardial ischemia that is based on the ST-segment elevation
(or depression) and the T wave abnormalities. The rule is described in [20] and was also used in previous studies (e.g., [21]
and [22]).
The diagnostic rules for ischemia are not well established for
leads outside the 12-lead ECG set [19]; therefore, the MECG
synthesis was only evaluated using the CC and ST-segment
features.
III. RESULTS
The best DLs selection algorithm gave the following set of DLs for the universal 12-lead ECG synthesis:
{(13,18), (4,5), (22,25)}, whereas for the MECG synthesis the
best DLs are: {(21,22), (4,5), (34,35)}. The best DL sets are
marked in Fig. 1.
The best DL selection algorithm is based on maximizing the
minimum CC among the synthesized leads (CCm in ) as it represents the worst synthesized lead [6]. Fig. 2 shows histograms
of DL combinations for the CCm in intervals. This illustrates
the importance of finding the best DLs, because the number
of combinations with high CCm in is very small, relative to the
total number of combinations. Interestingly, the algorithm gave
different best DL combinations for the 12-lead ECG and for
the MECG synthesis; however, the best DLs for the MECG
are the fourth best in the sorted list of best DL combinations
for the 12-lead ECG, with the CCm in being only 0.024 smaller
than the CCm in for the best 12-lead ECG’s DL combination.
Therefore, for practical reasons the best combination of DLs for
the MECG synthesis could also be used for the 12-lead ECG
syntheses without any significant loss in the synthesis quality.
However, in this study, we have evaluated the MECG and the

TOMAŠIĆ et al.: ESTIMATING THE UNIVERSAL POSITIONS OF WIRELESS BODY ELECTRODES

3371

B. Evaluation by Correlation Coefficient

Fig. 2. Number of DL combinations for the CCm in intervals, for the universal
12-lead ECG synthesis (upper histogram) and the universal MECG synthesis
(lower histogram). The data for the rightmost bins are shown in the balloons.

12-lead ECGs obtained from their associated best combinations
of DLs.
Fig. 3 shows an example of the target and synthesized 12-lead
ECGs for a patient before a surgery. We selected an ECG interval that contains an extrasystole, which represents an additional
difficulty for the ECG synthesis, because the origin of extrasystolic cardiac activity is located on different position compared
to normal beats [23], so a different transformation would be
required [24]. This is indicated by smaller CCs.
To estimate the significance of the regressions for the 12-lead
ECG and the MECG, employed for calculating the universal DL
positions (see Section II-C), we calculated the p-values for the
F-statistics. The p-values were all insignificantly different than
0, which indicates a very high regression significance [25]. Furthermore, we calculated the normalized 95% confidence interval
lengths for the coefficient estimates b, by dividing the lengths
by the corresponding coefficient estimates. The median values
and interquartile ranges for the normalized confidence interval lengths are 0.019 [0.012, 0.04] for the MECG synthesis and
0.015 [0.01, 0.026] for the 12-lead ECG synthesis, which shows
that the studied data were of a satisfactory size for the universal
synthesis, i.e., that a satisfactory number of measurements was
used.

Fig. 4 shows the CCs between the target and the synthesized
leads for the three syntheses possibilities. Surprisingly, there
are a few leads, indicated with arrows, for which the median
CC is significantly smaller in the fully personalized approach
than in the combined or universal approach, or even in both for
V2. Nevertheless, the median CCs for those seven cases are all
higher than 0.945.
The minimum median CC for the fully personalized approach
is 0.94 for lead 9, for the combined approach it is 0.92, again
for lead 9, whereas for the fully universal approach it is 0.84
for lead 12. Considering only the 12-lead ECG the minimum
medians are, respectively, 0.96, 0.95, and 0.84, all for lead III.
C. Comparison of ST60 and ST-Slope Features
Table II shows the medians and interquartile ranges for the
absolute differences between the ST60 and ST-slope features of
the target and synthesized leads. The maxima and means are
calculated between the leads of each measurement, whereas the
medians and interquartile ranges (in parentheses) are calculated
between the measurements. The data presented are for all the
leads of the 12-lead ECG and MECG.
D. Comparison of Diagnostic Rule Outcomes
Table III shows the comparison of the diagnostic rule outcomes between the target 12-lead ECGs and the synthesized
ECGs. A considerable difference between the performance of
the universal synthesis and the combined synthesis can be observed, especially in terms of the kappa statistic. Despite this,
the percentage agreement for the fully universal synthesis is
almost 80%. The difference between the combined and fully
personalized synthesis is not so pronounced. The kappa confidence intervals are quite wide, which shows that the diagnostic
rule application could benefit from additional measurements in
this case.
IV. DISCUSSION

A. Evaluation by Visual Comparison
Table I shows the evaluation results obtained by visual comparison of the target and synthesized leads. Two independent
observers, first is a medical doctor, cardiologist, and second
with an extensive technical knowledge of ECG devices and
cardiac electrophysiology, have visually inspected all 12-lead
ECGs, target and synthesized. The ECG leads were presented
in the same way as in Fig. 3, but in a higher resolution and on
the paper with 1-mm squares. A few extrasystoles, present in
evaluation intervals, were not analyzed. A lead was tagged by
“clearly different” if the ECG waves or levels differ in morphology (shape, orientation), in duration (for more than 40 ms), or
in amplitude (for more than 0.2 mV in QRS or T, and 0.1 mV in
P or ST-level). The percentage of visually different synthesized
leads for fully universal and combined synthesis is given in
Table I. The fully personalized synthesis did not produce any
lead that was visually clearly different from the target lead.

The visual comparison (see Table I) shows a high percentage of visually different synthesized leads for the universal approach. Furthermore, there is an obvious difference in leads’ visual quality between the three approaches. This is in accordance
with the evaluation by CC, which indicates the superiority of
the fully personalized approach, but also reveals that the combined approach provides a better synthesis than the universal
approach.
The CC medians (see Fig. 4), ST-segment features (see Table II), and the diagnostic rule outcomes (see Table III), all
confirm the superiority of the personalized approach, but additionally reveal that there are much larger differences in the synthesis quality between the combined and universal approaches,
than between the personalized and combined approach. This
indicates that for the quality of the synthesized ECG, the personalization of the transformations is more important than the
personalization of the WEs’ positions.

3372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

Fig. 3. 12-lead ECGs for a patient before surgery. The figure shows the target 12-lead ECG (bottom curve) and the synthesized 12-lead ECGs, moved relative to
each other by 0.2 mV, from bottom in this order: fully personalized synthesis (black), combined synthesis (blue), fully universal synthesis (green). The presented
part of the evaluation interval contains an extrasystole (second beat). On the whole presented interval, the minimum CCs between the three synthesized ECGs, and
the target ECG are 0.77, 0.69, 0.77 in the order as the synthesized ECGs are plotted. The minimum CCs are found in leads I, V4, V4, respectively. The min. CCs
calculated just for the third (normal) beat are 0.99, 0.98, 0.8, in leads aVL, V1, V4. The obtained personalized DLs were {(10, 14), (14, 19), (29, 30)}.
TABLE I
PERCENTAGE OF THE SYNTHESIZED LEADS VISUALLY DIFFERENT FROM THE TARGET LEADS

TABLE II
ST-SEGMENT FEATURES’ DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TARGET
AND SYNTHESIZED LEADS

TABLE III
DIAGNOSTIC RULE OUTCOMES’ AGREEMENTS BETWEEN TARGET AND
SYNTHESIZED ECGS

Table II shows that the ST60 differences might be high enough
to potentially cause an error in ECG interpretation, for all three
synthesis types, but the interpretation depends on the lead in
which the ST60 difference has occurred, the lead’s neighboring
leads, and generally on the applied diagnostic rule, whose outcomes may be calculated automatically, or imposed by an expert.
We have therefore applied a well-known diagnostic rule
for detecting myocardial ischemia. The results presented in
Table III show high diagnostic concordances for the combined
and personalized approaches. For the personalized approach in

fact there are only four (of a total of 74) measurements for
which the diagnostic rule outcomes were different for the target and synthesized 12-lead ECG: one false-negative and three
false-positive cases. Our detailed investigation of the faulty synthesized ECGs revealed that the errors occurred because the
residual noise in the evaluation intervals was overamplified during the synthesis. This problem may be resolved in the future
by restricting the magnitude of the linear transformation coefficients, or by applying a more efficient low-pass filter to the
measured ECG.

TOMAŠIĆ et al.: ESTIMATING THE UNIVERSAL POSITIONS OF WIRELESS BODY ELECTRODES

3373

Fig. 4. CCs between the target and synthesized leads of the 12-lead ECG (I, II, . . ., V6) and the MECG leads (1, 2, . . ., 35). On each box the central mark
is the median; the edges of the box are the 25th and 75th percentiles. The arrows indicate that a particular lead has a median CC for the personalized approach
significantly smaller than in the combined approach. The double arrow for the lead V2 indicates that its median is also significantly smaller than in the universal
approach. For all the other leads the medians are higher in the above graph, or the difference is not significant. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used with a 5%
significance level.

As expected, the universal approach provides the weakest
performance as it does not take into account the individual electrical characteristics and the shape of the volume conductor,
and the individual locations of the heart dipole [24], but it has
the advantage that for its application there is no need for additional measurements or calculations, since the universal DLs
and transformation are calculated only once. The combined and
the fully personalized syntheses, on the other hand, provide
considerably higher performance, but both have the practical
drawback that a new measurement and calculation are needed
for each person that will use the WEs. The combined approach
requires the simultaneous measurement of the universal DLs
and the 12-lead ECG, whereas the fully personalized approach
requires a MECG measurement. Both cases generally require
specialized equipment, but if it is not available, it is possible to
obtain pseudosimultaneous measurements, or MECGs, by using
only a common 12-lead ECG device [26].
The universal approach is applicable in emergency situations,
whereas for patients with ECG changes indicative of chronic
myocardial ischemia, one of the main cardiovascular diseases, it
is justifiable to perform the necessary measurements that enable
personalized or combined approaches. As those patients should
be monitored continuously, the application of WEs could be
beneficial because it reduces the number of wires, and improves
the comfort and applicability of a wearable ECG device.

V. CONCLUSION
The evaluations presented in this study show that the WEs
are an acceptable alternative to the standard 12-lead ECG device for patients with chronic myocardial ischemia, especially
if the presented combined or the fully personalized approach is
applied. The universal synthesis approach may possibly be improved in the future with a segment-specific synthesis (different
transformations for each ECG segment) but such an approach
would also require automatic and reliable real-time segments
extraction from the WE measurements. Future investigations,
with the methodology presented here, and applied to patients
with other diseases, could provide definitive justifications for
the WEs-derived 12-lead ECG system.
The sensitivity of the 12-lead ECG to the detection of myocardial ischemia is not very high [20]. Therefore, a number of researchers have investigated the applicability of additional leads for this purpose [19]. Our investigation of the
MECG leads’ synthesis shows that the CCs for the MECG
are comparable to the CCs obtained for the 12-lead ECG
syntheses, which indicates that a high-quality MECG synthesis is possible just from three DLs. The synthesized MECG
leads may be used in future for detailed ischemia detection, by applying a reliable diagnostic rule when it becomes
available.

3374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 60, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

We have shown that the number of DLs combinations that
produce high-quality synthesized ECGs (see Fig. 2) is relatively
small for both MECG and 12-lead ECG universal syntheses,
but still large enough that another combination of DLs could
be applied, without a significant loss in synthesis quality, if for
some anatomic or ergonomic reasons the best DLs combination
is inconvenient for WE placement. This is an additional advantage of WEs over a standard 12-lead ECG device, and derived
ECG systems that employ fixed measurement points. Furthermore, the freedom to choose between several combinations of
WEs positions also makes it possible to monitor cardiac electrical activity during therapeutic procedures that could disturb or
disable the application of a standard 12-lead ECG device.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the staff of the Clinic of
Cardiovascular Surgery and the Clinic of Neurology of the
Clinical Centre Ljubljana, Slovenia, the Department of Internal
Medicine, General Hospital Slovenj Gradec, Slovenia, where
the MECG measurements were taken in the period from 2002
to 2011. They would also like to thank Dr. I. Malčić, MD,
Professor of Pediatric Cardiology at the School of Medicine,
University of Zagreb, Croatia, and N. Ljubas, MD at the University Hospital Merkur, Zagreb, Croatia, for their help, support,
and valuable advice.
REFERENCES
[1] P. W. Macfarlane, “Derived 12-lead ECG systems,” in Comprehensive
Electrocardiology, P. W. Macfarlane, A. van Oosterom, O. Pahlm, P. Kligfield, M. Janse, and J. Camm, Eds. London, U.K.: Springer-Verlag, 2011,
pp. 396–400.
[2] R. Trobec, M. Depolli, and V. Avbelj, “Wireless network of bipolar body
electrodes,” in Proc. Wireless On-Demand Netw. Syst. Serv., Kranjska,
Gora, Slovenia, 2010, pp. 145–150.
[3] E. S. Valchinov and N. E. Pallikarakis, “Wearable wireless biopotential
electrode for ECG monitoring,” in Proc. Int. Fed. Med. Bio. Eng., 2007,
pp. 373–376.
[4] E. Nemati, M. J. Deen, and T. Mondal, “A wireless wearable ECG sensor
for long-term applications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 36–
43, Jan. 2012.
[5] T. H. Kang, C. R. Merritt, E. Grant, B. Pourdeyhimi, and H. T. Nagle,
“Nonwoven fabric active electrodes for biopotential measurement during
normal daily activity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 188–
95, Jan. 2008.
[6] R. Trobec and I. Tomašić, “Synthesis of the 12-lead electrocardiogram
from differential leads,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 4,
pp. 615–621, 2011.
[7] E. Frank, “Spread of current in volume conductors of finite extent,” Ann.
N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 65, pp. 980–1002, 1957.
[8] H. C. Burger, “Lead vector projections—Part I,” Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.,
vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 1076–1087, 1957.
[9] D. B. Geselowitz, “Dipole theory in electrocardiography,” Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 301–306, 1964.

[10] D. Q. Feild, C. L. Feldman, and B. M. Horáček, “Improved EASI coefficients: Their derivation, values, and performance,” J. Electrocardiol.,
vol. 35, pp. 23–33, 2002.
[11] L. Hadžievski, B. Bojović, V. Vukčević, P. Beličev, S. Pavlović, Z. Vasiljević-Pokrajčić, and M. Ostojić, “A novel mobile transtelephonic system
with synthesized 12-lead ECG,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 8,
no. 4, pp. 428–438, Dec. 2004.
[12] S. Frljak, V. Avbelj, R. Trobec, B. Meglic, T. Ujiie, and B. Gersak, “Beatto-beat QT interval variability before and after cardiac surgery,” Comput.
Biol. Med., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 267–276, May 2003.
[13] V. Avbelj, R. Trobec, B. Gersak, and D. Vokac, “Multichannel ECG measurement system,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Symp. Comput.-Based Med. Syst.,
1997, pp. 81–84.
[14] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[15] B. U. Kohler, C. Hennig, and R. Orglmeister, “The principles of software
QRS detection,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–57,
Jan./Feb. 2002.
[16] F. Jager, “Introduction to feature extraction,” in Advanced Methods
and Tools for ECG Data Analysis, G. D. Clifford, F. Azuaje, and
P. E. McSharry, Eds. Norwood, MA, USA: Artech House, Inc., 2006,
pp. 245–267.
[17] B. M. Horáček, J. W. Warren, D. Q. Field, and C. L. Feldman, “Statistical
and deterministic approaches to designing transformations of electrocardiographic leads,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 22, pp. 41–52, 2002.
[18] H. Atoui, J. Fayn, and P. Rubel, “A novel neural-network model for
deriving standard 12-lead ECGs from serial three-lead ECGs: Application
to self-care,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 883–
900, May 2010.
[19] E. Trägårdh, H. Engblom, and O. Pahlm, “How many ECG leads do we
need?,” Cardiol. Clin., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 317–330, 2006.
[20] Joint European Society of Cardiology/American College of Cardiology
Committee, “Myocardial infarction redefined—A consensus document of
the joint european society of cardiology/american college of cardiology
committee for the redefinition of myocardial infarction,” Eur. Heart J.,
vol. 21, no. 18, pp. 1502–1513, 2000.
[21] B. J. Drew, M. M. Pelter, D. E. Brodnick, A. V. Yadav, D. Dempel, and M.
G. Adams, “Comparison of a new reduced lead set ECG with the standard
ECG for diagnosing cardiac arrhythmias and myocardial ischemia,” J.
Electrocardiol., vol. 35, pp. 13–21, 2002.
[22] S. P. Nelwan, J. A. Kors, S. H. Meij, J. H. van Bemmel, and M. L. Simoons,
“Reconstruction of the 12-lead electrocardiogram from reduced lead sets,”
J. Electrocardiol., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 11–18, 2004.
[23] Y. Hiyoshi, H. Sakurada, N. Izumida, S. Kawano, T. Sawanobori, and
M. Hiraoka, “Moving dipole analysis of normal and abnormal ventricular
activation by magnetocardiography,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 35, no. 2,
pp. 105–113, 2002.
[24] I. Tomašić and R. Trobec, “Electrocardiographic systems with reduced
numbers of leads – synthesis of the 12-lead ECG,” IEEE Rev. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 7, 2014, doi: 10.1109/RBME.2013.2264282.
[25] N. R. Draper and H. Smith, “The general regression situation,” in Applied
Regression Analysis. New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience, 1998,
pp. 135–148.
[26] H. Koch, A. Richter, R. Kursten, and M. Zabel, “Composition of approximated body-surface-potential-maps by utilizing a common 12-lead-ECG
device,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 463–470, Mar.
2005.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

