182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Thermoelectrical Modeling of Bipolar Coagulation
on Posterior Spinal Artery in a Porcine
Spinal Surgery Model
Roland K. Chen∗ , Member, IEEE, Khoi D. Than, Paul Park, and Albert J. Shih

Abstract—The primary objective of our study was to develop a
thermoelectrical model with both solid and liquid phases to calculate tissue temperature during bipolar coagulation of a posterior
spinal artery on the spinal cord. Control of thermal spread caused
by coagulation is a concern in spinal surgery. This model utilizes a
nonisothermal flow to account for the heat transfer due to the movement of cerebrospinal fluid that is induced by electrical field and
temperature gradient. The model is validated by in situ temperature measurements on a porcine spinal cord model. The maximum
error for tissue temperature of this model is 12.6%, and the overall
average error is 4.2%. The lesional region (>50 ◦ C) is identified
to be as wide as 5 mm, and thermal dose cumulative equivalent
minutes at 43 ◦ C (CEM4 3 ) is also calculated with this model. The
incorporation of nonisothermal flow has been shown to be crucial
in order to accurately predict thermal dose in tissue. The developed
model can be further used to establish a guideline for the use of
bipolar coagulation.
Index Terms—Bipolar, coagulation, electrosurgery, finite element modeling (FEM), nonisothermal flow, thermal dose.

I. INTRODUCTION
IPOLAR coagulation is important for the control of bleeding in neurosurgery. This procedure involves the use of
electrical energy to generate heat in spinal cord or brain (solid
phase), or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (liquid phase). The concept of bipolar forceps was first presented by Greenwood in
1940 [1] and remains a standard configuration to this day. The
first commercial bipolar coagulation system was developed by
Malis [2] in the 1960s. This bipolar approach for delivering
electrical current to tissue successfully restrains the electrical
energy and Joule heating in a smaller volume of tissue, comparable to that of the monopolar method [3]. Thermal spread due

B

Manuscript received January 3, 2013; revised June 20, 2013 and August 10,
2013; accepted August 13, 2013. Date of publication August 15, 2013; date of
current version December 16, 2013. This work was supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under Grant CMMI 0825795. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ R. K.-R. Chen is with the Mechanical Engineering Department, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: krchen@umich.edu).
K. D. Than and P. Park are with the Neurosurgery Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: khoi@med.umich.edu;
ppark@med.umich.edu).
A. J. Shih is with the Mechanical Engineering Department and Biomedical
Engineering Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA
(e-mail: shiha@umich.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2278762

to coagulation may introduce thermal injury to the surrounding
neural tissue and lead to undesirable surgical outcomes.
In neurosurgery, bipolar forceps with sharp tips are used in
delicate surgical procedures to coagulate vessels right on the
surface of the spinal cord or cerebral cortex, which have a low
thermal dose threshold for thermal injury [4]. Different coating
materials on the tip, such as silver or gold, have been used to help
dissipate heat and prevent tissue from sticking [5]. Heat pipe has
also been incorporated into bipolar forceps and shown to reduce
thermal damage when compared to conventional forceps [6].
Since the tissue must be heated to seal the vessel, adjacent
tissue is at risk for thermal damage caused by thermal spread
from the sealing site.
A better understanding of thermal spread can help prevent or
reduce thermal injury in neurosurgery. Temperature distribution
in tissue is difficult to quantify. Even with an infrared thermal
camera, only the surface temperature can be measured. Subsurface thermal injury information relies on histological analysis
that cannot determine tissue temperature [6]. Accurate thermoelectrical finite element modeling (FEM) provides insightful
information for temporal and spatial study of thermal spread.
Previous studies on electrosurgical modeling, combining
Joule heating and bio-heat transfer, focused primarily on tissue ablation in different organs [7]–[9] or vessel sealing [10].
However, all of these studies only modeled solid-phase heat
conduction. In the case of vessel coagulation in neurosurgery,
CSF (alone, or mixed with saline for irrigation) on the surface
of the spinal cord plays an important role, not only for current
dissipation but also for heat distribution.
Electrothermally induced fluid flow has been studied intensively to manipulate and separate bio-particles [11]–[13]. When
electrical current is applied to a conductive fluid, the electrical
field will generate electrical force on the fluid causing a fluid
flow [14]. In these studies, gravity force, which is the gravity
times the temperature-dependent fluid density [15], is neglected
because the overall temperature rise is less than 20 ◦ C resulting
in less than a 0.4% decrease in gravity force. However, during
coagulation, the temperature can increase more than 70 ◦ C resulting in a 4% decrease in gravity force due to density change
that may not be negligible.
In this study, we aimed to develop a two-phase (solid–liquid)
thermoelectrical FEM to predict temporal and spatial distributions of tissue temperature during bipolar coagulation of a
posterior spinal artery on the surface of spinal cord. Such a
model can provide insight about not only temperature but also
level of thermal damage on tissue and thus can be used to study

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

CHEN et al.: THERMOELECTRICAL MODELING OF BIPOLAR COAGULATION ON POSTERIOR SPINAL ARTERY

183

Fig. 1. Bipolar forceps used in this study: (a) overview; (b) close-up view of
forceps tips; and (c) forceps tip with temperature measurement setup.

Fig. 2. (a) Spinal cord with dura mater opened and (b) coagulation of the
posterior spinal artery on spinal cord.

different energy delivering methods to minimize thermal damage while maintaining effective coagulation. Stainless steel
bipolar forceps (0.75 mm tip radius) without any special coating were used to perform coagulation, and the experimental
results were used to validate FEM. With this model, the tissue
coagulation region was identified.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
An in situ porcine animal model was used for the experiment.
All procedures were performed in the animal surgery operating
room at the University of Michigan Medical School, and compliant with the protocol approved by the University Committee
on Use and Care of Animals. A stainless steel bipolar forceps
(DePuy Codman & Shurtleff, Warsaw, IN, USA) was used to
perform coagulation [see Fig. 1(a)].
Tissue temperature was measured by microthermistors
(Model 56A1002-C8; Alpha Technics, Irvine, CA, USA). This
type of thermistor was chosen because of its small dimension
(0.46 mm outside diameter) and relative immunity to electromagnetic interference [16]. The thermistor has a measurement
tolerance of ±0.1 ◦ C and 250 ms thermal response time. The
temperature reading was acquired by a data acquisition system (PXI-1033; National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) with
100 Hz sampling rate. Tissue temperature was measured at
three positions: midpoint between forceps tips (thermistor #1),
1.0 mm (thermistor #2), and 2.0 mm (thermistor #3) away from
the midpoint along the centerline, as shown in Fig. 1(a) and
later in Fig. 3(a). An acrylic fixture was created to ensure temperature measurements were recorded at precise locations [see
Fig. 1(c)]. Spacing between the forceps tips was fixed at 2.0 mm

Fig. 3. (a) Configuration of modeled bipolar coagulation on a spinal artery
and (b) detailed geometry of the cross section across forceps tips.

by use of another fixture, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Voltage and
current input to the bipolar forceps were measured by a voltage
probe (Model 10076 A; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) and a current
probe (Model 1147 A; Agilent), respectively. These electrical
data were collected at 4 MHz.
The experiment was carried out immediately after the pig was
euthanized. The dura mater of the porcine spine was opened by
a neurosurgeon to expose a posterior spinal artery on the spinal
cord, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Nine arteries with a diameter of 0.4 to
0.5 mm were chosen for coagulation. The forceps were powered
by an electrosurgical generator (Valleylab Force FX; Covidien,
Boulder, CO) with 25 W. Activation time of the generator was
fixed at 5 s. The electrosurgical generator outputs an alternating
current (ac) with 470 kHz frequency sinusoid waveform.
III. FINITE ELEMENT MODELING
The two-phase (solid–liquid) thermoelectrical FEM consists
of two physics fields: thermal and electrical. The electrical field
was governed by Laplace equation and coupled to the thermal
field by a Joule heat generation term. In the thermal field, the
solid and fluid phases were modeled by heat conduction in solids
and nonisothermal flow, respectively. Four dependent variables
were solved by the model: voltage, temperature, velocity, and
pressure. Formulations for electrical field, heat conduction in

184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

solids, and heat transfer in nonisothermal flow are introduced in
the following sections.

TABLE I
MATERIAL PROPERTIES USED IN THE FEM

A. Electrical Field Formulation
Electrical potential (V ) in the tissue and electrode has been
described in a previous study by solving the Laplace equation
[10]:
∇(σ∇V ) = 0

(1)

where σ is the temperature-dependent electrical conductivity
(S/m). The 470 kHz ac current allows a quasi-static approximation to be used in the model by converting the root-mean-square
(rms) voltage value of the ac current to that of direct current
(dc) [17]. The electrical field, E (V/m) can be obtained by calculating the gradient of electrical potential
E = −∇V

(2)

2

The current density, J (A/m ) is then calculated by
J = σE.

1) Heat Conduction in Solid: In the in situ case, without
considering metabolic heat generation and blood perfusion, the
heat conduction in solids during electrosurgical coagulation [10]
can be expressed as
(4)

where ρ is the tissue density (kg/m3 ), c is the tissue heat capacity
[J/(kg·K)], t is the time (s), k is the tissue thermal conductivity [W/(m·K)], T is the local tissue temperature (K), and qg
is the heat generation (W/m3 ) due to the externally induced
electrosurgical heating of the tissue
2) Nonisothermal Flow: Given that metabolic heat generation and blood perfusion were zero, the heat transfer equation
for a nonisothermal flow can be simplified as [18]
∂T
+ ρcu · ∇T = k∇2 T + qg
(5)
∂t
where u is the velocity field of the fluid (m/s). The velocity for a
Newtonian incompressible fluid is governed by Navier–Stoke’s
equation [19]
ρc

∂u
+ ρu · ∇u = −∇p + μ∇2 u + Fe + Fg
∂t
and the continuity equation
ρ

∂ρ
+ ∇ · (ρu) = 0
∂t

(8)

where ρq is the charge density (ρq = ε∇ · E), and E is the
magnitude of the electrostatic field, and ε is the permittivity [20].
The gravity force is
Fg = ρg

(9)

where g is the gravity, 9.8 m/s2 .
C. Material Properties

B. Thermal Field Formulation

∂T
= k∇2 T + qg
∂t

1
Fe = ρq E − E 2 ∇ε
2

(3)

The Joule heat generation term qg can be calculated by multiplying the electrical field by current density and used to couple
the electrical field to the thermal field.

ρc

density is estimated by [11]

(6)

(7)

where p is the pressure (N/m2 ), μ is the viscosity of CSF
[kg/(m·s)], Fe is the electric force density (N/m3 ), and Fg is
the volume force caused by gravity (N/m3 ). The electrical force

Materials modeled in this two-phase thermoelectrical FEM
include the spinal cord, artery wall, CSF, blood, stainless steel,
and thermistor. Table I lists the density (ρ), specific heat (c),
thermal conductivity (k), electrical conductivity (σ), and viscosity (μ). These values are found in literature, as indicated in
Table I, and are not specifically measured.
The density of CSF is considered temperature-dependent and
is given by Arps [15]. The change of density with temperature
is the nature of fluid that causes heat convection. The specific
heat of tissue has been modified to account for accumulation of
latent heat [21]. In this study, the effective specific heat that is
based on the water loss with temperature is used for both spinal
cord and artery wall.
The thermal conductivities of spinal cord and artery wall
are assumed to be temperature-dependent and can be expressed
as [23]
k = kref + 0.0013(T − Tref )

(10)

where kref is the reference thermal conductivity at Tref (25 ◦ C).
The electrical conductivities of spinal cord and artery wall are
also assumed to be temperature-dependent, increasing at a rate
of 2% ◦ C−1 [17], and can be expressed as:
σ = σref [1 + 0.02(T − Tref )]

(11)

where σref is the reference electrical conductivity at Tref (25 ◦ C).
The reference electrical conductivities for spinal cord and artery
wall can be found in Table I. This increasing rate is only applied
for T < 103 ◦ C. For T ≥ 103 ◦ C, the tissue is considered to be
thermally damaged and will have a low electrical conductivity
of 0.01 S/m [10].

CHEN et al.: THERMOELECTRICAL MODELING OF BIPOLAR COAGULATION ON POSTERIOR SPINAL ARTERY

185

D. Model Configuration, Mesh, Boundary Conditions,
and Computational Solver
The configuration of the model is shown in Fig. 3, with the
tips of bipolar forceps across a posterior spinal artery near the
surface of the spinal cord. The spinal cord is covered by a thin
layer of CSF. The thermistors used to measure temperature are
also included in the model because the size of the thermistor
is of a similar scale to other features and thus, the effect of the
thermistor must be considered. The spinal cord tissue is modeled as a block 20.0 mm long, 15.0 mm wide, and 10.0 mm
thick. The first thermistor is located at the midpoint between the
two tips, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The second and third thermistors are 1.0 and 2.0 mm away from the first thermistor along
the centerline, respectively. Fig. 3(b) shows a close-up view of
the cross-sectional plane across the forceps tips and details the
geometry of the FEM. The spacing of the tips is 2.0 mm. The
thermistor has a diameter of 0.46 mm and a length of 3.0 mm.
The CSF layer has a thickness of 0.15 mm. The artery is assumed to be straight throughout the block of spinal cord. The
artery wall has an outside diameter of 0.5 mm and an inside
diameter of 0.4 mm. The center of the artery is 0.3 mm below
the surface of the spinal cord.
The FEM mesh is generated based on each domain. For the
CSF layer, the maximum element size is 0.05 mm, so that there
are at least three elements across the thickness of the fluid layer.
The maximum element growth rate, which is the maximum
ratio of two adjacent element sizes, is 1.2. The mesh is refined
until the maximum temperature at the midpoint between forceps
tips differed by less than 0.1 ◦ C compared to a finer mesh. The
final mesh consisted of 353 991 tetrahedral elements and a total
of 1 359 631 degrees of freedom. Velocity components were
discretized by second order elements, and all other dependent
variables (pressure, temperature, and voltage) were by linear
elements.
For electrical boundary conditions, the rms value of experimentally measured electrical ac voltage was applied to the end
surface of the active forceps tips, as shown in Fig. 3(a). During
the 5 s coagulation time, the rms voltage remained as a constant
of 61 V. The end surface of the ground forceps tip was set as 0 V.
Electrical continuity was applied to all inner surfaces. All other
outside surfaces were set as electrical insulating, assuming no
electrical current could penetrate these surfaces. For the thermal
boundary conditions of heat transfer in solids and nonisothermal
flow, the heat source [qg in (4) and (5)] of total power generation
from the electrical field was applied to all domains as thermal
input. The top surface of the CSF and all outer surfaces of both
forceps tips and thermistors were subject to free convection ambient temperature and convective heat transfer coefficient set
to 25 W/(m2 ·K). For other surfaces on the sides and bottom,
thermal insulation was applied, assuming that there was no heat
exchange across these surfaces.
For the nonisothermal flow, which was only applied to the
CSF layer, the top surface of the CSF was set as slip wall,
assuming there were no viscous effects at the boundary, and the
bottom and side surfaces (the surface contacting with the spinal
cord) were set to nonslip wall, which means the flow velocity
on the wall is zero (u = 0).

Fig. 4. Comparison of temperature profiles for experimental and FEM results
at three measurement points.

The model was solved by COMSOL Multiphysics 4.2 software (Burlington, MA) with direct PARDISO solver [24]. A
personal computer with six cores (3.2 GHz) and 24 GB randomaccess memory (RAM) was used to perform the computational
work. The computational time for the model with final mesh
was about 48 h.
E. Uncertain Parameters in FEM
Three uncertain parameters in the FEM are: 1) thickness of
the CSF layer, 2) wall thickness of the artery, and 3) depth of
the artery. Thickness of the CSF layer is estimated by matching
the electrical resistance value between the two forceps tips to
the experimental data. Both the voltage and current consumption
were recorded during the experiment, allowing the calculation of
the electrical resistance between two tips, which has an average
value of 1145 Ω. In the FEM, thickness of the CSF was adjusted
to match the electrical resistance between the two tips, which can
be derived by dividing the input voltage with the total amount
of current. The current value was calculated by integrating the
current density over the end surface of the forceps tips.
Sensitivity analyses were performed to evaluate the effect of
the other two uncertain factors, wall thickness and depth of the
artery. Typically, the ratio of wall thickness to artery diameter
ranges from 0.05 to 0.15 [27]. In this analysis, wall thickness
was varied from 0.01 to 0.1 mm, which corresponds to a ratio
of 0.02–0.2. For depth of the artery, a range between 0.26 to
0.5 mm was tested (0.3 mm was used in this model). Given the
radius of the artery is 0.25 mm, the depths of 0.26 and 0.50 mm
correspond to distances from top of the artery to the spinal cord
surface of 0.01 and 0.25 mm, respectively.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Validation of FEM With Experimental Measurements
Fig. 4 shows the comparison of experimentally measured
tissue temperature with FEM predictions during bipolar coagulation. Temperature profiles at the three measurement points,
midpoint, 1.0, and 2.0 away from the forceps tips [see Fig. 3(a)]
are presented. The error bars, indicating the standard deviation
among the nine trials, are only plotted at every integer second.
The overall average error is 4.2%. The maximum error for midpoint, 1.0, and 2.0 mm are 6.9%, 3.5%, and 12.6%, respectively.

186

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 5. Cross-sectional view of temperature distribution. Black lines mark the
boundary of 50 ◦ C.

The sensitivity analysis shows that when wall thickness varied from 0.01 to 0.1 mm (0.05 mm was used in this model,
which is 0.10 ratio of wall thickness to diameter), the resulting
temperature profiles did not differ more than 1 ◦ C at all three
thermistor positions. For depths less than 0.35 mm, the temperature variation among different depths at all three points is
less than 1 ◦ C. When depth is increased to 0.5 mm, the temperature at 2.0 mm at the end of 5 s is 2.6 ◦ C lower than that of
0.3 mm depth. This occurs because the artery wall has a lower
electrical conductivity than that of spinal cord tissue. When the
artery is very close to the spinal cord surface, the artery wall
forms a barrier to electrical current, thus forcing the current to
spread further. Since the spinal artery is visible, a shallow depth
is expected.
B. Spatial and Temporal Temperature Distributions
and Thermal Dose
Fig. 5 shows the spatial and temporal temperature distribution
of the cross-sectional plane. The maximum temperature occurs
in the tissue and CSF right next to the forceps tips, where the
highest current density and strongest effect of Joule heating is
found.
The lesional region can be defined as the area where tissue
temperature exceeds 50 ◦ C [25] and is indicated by the black
line. The lesional region reaches its maximum width at 5 s. At
that moment, the region has a width of 5 mm and a depth of
1.0 mm. At 6 s, the region of tissue with temperature exceeding
50 ◦ C remains 4.8 mm wide and propagates deeper to 1.1 mm.
At 10 s, all tissue temperature falls below 50 ◦ C.
Fig. 6(a) shows the modeled temperature profiles at four
points, marked A, B, C, and D in Fig. 3(b). Point A is at the tip
of the bipolar forceps. Points B and C are 0.5 and 1.0 mm below
point A, respectively. Point D is at the center of the spinal artery.
For point A, the temperature increases rapidly to 90 ◦ C in about
only 0.5 s. The temperature rise then slows down because the
latent heat is being accumulated. When the temperature exceeds
105 ◦ C, the electrical conductivity of spinal tissue decreases to

Fig. 6. (a) Modeled temperature profiles and (b) corresponding thermal doses
(CEM4 3 ) at points of A: tip of the forceps, B: 0.5 mm below point A, C: 1.0 mm
below point A, and D: center of the spinal artery.

0.01 S/m due to water loss [10]. This decrease in electrical
conductivity weakens the effect of Joule heating, so that the
temperature rise remains slow throughout the rest of the power
activation time. The temperature drops quickly immediately after activation stops, but then slows down because the tissue is
releasing the latent heat. Once all latent heat is released (at 7 s),
the temperature descending rate becomes proportional to the
temperature gradient of the surrounding tissue.
The temperature profiles at points B and C follow the trend of
point A during the power activation time, but in a smaller scale.
After activation, the temperature continues increasing for about
1 s due to the heat conducted from point A. The temperature
at point B decays slower than that of point A because point
A contacts with the bipolar forceps, which has higher thermal
conductivity than that of spinal cord and conducts heat away
more efficiently. As a result, the temperature at point B remains
above 50 ◦ C for 8 s (from 0.5 to 8.5 s). The temperature at
the center of the spinal artery (point D) rises slowly and reaches
59 ◦ C at the end of power activation. Considering the coagulation
temperature of 50 ◦ C [28], the temperature at the center of the
artery increases to this level in 2.2 s.
Cumulative equivalent minutes at 43 ◦ C (CEM43 ) is the most
common thermal dose model to evaluate thermal damage in a
variety of tissues [29]. Thermal dose, CEM43 as a function of
both temperature and time can be calculated as
CEM43 =

t=ﬁnal


Δt · R(43−T )

(12)

t=0

where Δt is the time interval, R is a constant equal to 0.233 when
T < 43 ◦ C and 0.428 when T > 43.5 ◦ C, and T is the average
temperature during the time interval Δt [29]. It should be noted
that the CEM43 tends to overestimate the thermal damage in the

CHEN et al.: THERMOELECTRICAL MODELING OF BIPOLAR COAGULATION ON POSTERIOR SPINAL ARTERY

187

Fig. 7. Comparison of temperature profiles between model with both heat
transfer in solids and nonisothermal flow (solid and flow) and model with heat
transfer in solids only (solid).
Fig. 9. Comparison of thermal dose between experimental data, models with
both heat transfer in solids and nonisothermal flow (solid and flow) and model
with heat transfer in solids only (solid).

Fig. 8.

Fluid flow velocity vector at 1 s on the top of the CSF.

higher temperature range (>50 ◦ C) [30]. The thermal dose for
points A, B, C, and D were calculated and shown in Fig. 6(b).
For points A, B, and C, the CEM43 values were much higher
than 1000 at the end of activation (t = 5 s), which is higher
than the threshold value (>240) to cause gross appearance of
thermal damage [4]. For point C, the CEM43 is 0.71 when t =
5 s and reaches 9.33 when t = 10 s, which is in the range (0–20)
for causing functional damage to nerve [4].
C. Effect of Nonisothermal Flow
Fig. 7 shows the comparison between the FEM analyzed heat
transfer in solids (denoted as solid) and with nonisothermal
flow (denoted as solid and flow). The solid model shows higher
temperature at the midpoint. This is because the electrothermally
induced force causes CSF to flow and carry heat away from the
two electrode tips, where the fluid has higher temperature, as
shown in the flow velocity vector field in Fig. 8. The heat being
carried away by the flow contributes to the faster temperature
increase at both 1 and 2 mm for the solid and flow model than
that of the solid model during the first 5 s. The temperature of
solid model at 1 mm maintains at a higher level longer than
that of the solid and flow model, because the solid model has a
higher temperature at the midpoint, where more heat continues
transferring from.
Fig. 9 compares the thermal dose (CEM43 ) of both midpoint
and 1 mm versus time calculated from experimental data, solid
model, and solid and flow model. For the thermal dose at midpoint, the solid model predicts a much higher thermal dose than
those of experimental data and the solid and flow model, even

though the differences in temperature are small. This is because
the accumulation of CEM43 increases exponentially with temperature once the temperature is over 43 ◦ C. Therefore, a small
difference in temperature can result a large discrepancy in thermal dose. For the thermal dose at 1 mm, the solid model also
shows an apparent difference from experimental data and solid
and flow model after 6.8 s because its temperature remains above
43 ◦ C for a longer period. This demonstrates the importance of
including the nonisothermal flow in FEM to accurately predict
the thermal dose.
V. CONCLUSION
This study demonstrated that a thermoelectrical FEM with
the combination of heat conduction in solids and nonisothermal flow could accurately predict spatial and temporal temperature distribution during bipolar coagulation on a porcine spinal
artery. The lesional region and size were identified using FEM.
Because coagulation is usually accomplished in the presence of
CSF or irrigation, the effect of fluid flow needs to be considered
when modeling this procedure. As the fluid would help heat to
spread away, it is suggested that irrigation should be applied
after coagulation is done to cool down the adjacent tissue.
In clinical practice, the presence of CSF is often a factor affecting coagulation. With this developed model, studies can be
performed to calculate coagulation times needed for vessels with
different sizes to achieve effective coagulation, as a reference for
neurosurgeons during training or practice. The relationship between coagulation time and level of thermal damage can also be
established. This could become a guideline for the use of bipolar
coagulation. This model can also be applied to study different
waveforms and control algorithms to deliver electrical energy
to minimize tissue thermal damage without compromising the
coagulation effect.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Greenwood Jr., “Two point coagulation: A new principle and instrument
for applying coagulation current in neurosurgery,” Amer. J. Surg., vol. 50,
no. 2, pp. 267–270, 1940.

188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[2] L. I. Malis, Micro-vascular Surgery: Report of First Conference, R. M.
P. Donaghy and M. G. Yasargil. St. Louis, MO, USA: Mosby, 1967,
pp. 126–130.
[3] B. Chehrazi and W. F. Collins Jr., “A comparison of effects of bipolar
and monopolar electrocoagulation in brain,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 197–203, 1981.
[4] P. S. Yarmolenko, E. J. Moon, C. Landon, A. Manzoor, D. W. Hochman,
B. L. Viglianti, and M. W. Dewhirst, “Thresholds for thermal damage to
normal tissues: An update,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 320–
343, 2011.
[5] T. Mikami, A. Takahashi, K. Hashi, S. Gasa, and K. Houkin, “Performance
of bipolar forceps during coagulation and its dependence on the tip material: A quantitative experimental assay. Technical note,” J. Neurosurg.,
vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 133–138, 2004.
[6] E. W. Elliott-Lewis, J. Jolette, J. Ramos, and E. C. Benzel, “Thermal
damage assessment of novel bipolar forceps in a sheep model of spinal
surgery,” Neurosurgery, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 166–172, 2010.
[7] D. Haemmerich, L. Chachati, A. S. Wright, D. M. Mahvi, F. T. Lee, Jr.,
and J. G. Webster, “Hepatic radiofrequency ablation with internally cooled
probes: Effect of coolant temperature on lesion size,” IEEE Trans Biomed
Eng, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 493–500, Apr. 2003.
[8] G. T. Martin and L. Angelone, “Multiphysics model of the NovaSure
endometrial ablation procedure,” presented at COMSOL Conf., Boston,
MA, USA, 2009.
[9] S. Tungjitkusolmun, E. J. Woo, H. Cao, J. Z. Tsai, V. R. Vorperian, and
J. G. Webster, “Thermal-electrical finite element modelling for radio frequency cardiac ablation: Effects of changes in myocardial properties,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 562–568, Sep. 2000.
[10] R. K. Chen, M. W. Chastagner, R. E. Dodde, and A. J. Shih, “Electrosurgical vessel sealing tissue temperature: Experimental measurement and finite
element modeling,” IEEE Trans Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 453–460,
Nov. 2012.
[11] N. G. Green, A. Ramos, A. Gonzalez, A. Castellanos, and H. Morgan,
“Electrothermally induced fluid flow on microelectrodes,” J. Electrostat.,
vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 71–87, 2001.
[12] A. Ramos, H. Morgan, N. G. Green, and A. Castellanos, “AC electricfield-induced fluid flow in microelectrodes,” J. Colloid Interface Sci.,
vol. 217, no. 2, pp. 420–422, 1999.
[13] N. G. Green, A. Ramos, A. Gonzalez, H. Morgan, and A. Castellanos,
“Fluid flow induced by nonuniform ac electric fields in electrolytes on
microelectrodes. I. Experimental measurements,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 61,
no. 4, pp. 4011–4018, 2000.
[14] A. Ramos, H. Morgan, N. Green, and A. Castellanos, “AC electrokinetics:
A review of forces in microelectrode structures,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.,
vol. 31, no. 18, pp. 2338–2353, 1999.
[15] J. Arps, “The effect of temperature on the density and electrical resistivity
of sodium chloride solutions,” J. Pet. Technol., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 17–20,
1953.
[16] R. Dodde, A. Shih, and A. Advincula, “A novel technique for demonstrating the real-time subsurface tissue thermal profile of two energized surgical
instruments,” J. Minim. Invasive Gynecol., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 599–603,
2009.
[17] E. J. Berjano, “Theoretical modeling for radiofrequency ablation: Stateof-the-art and challenges for the future,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 5,
no. 1, p. 24, 2006.
[18] A. D. Kraus, J. R. Welty, and A. S. Aziz, Introduction to Thermal and
Fluid Engineering. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC/Taylor & Francis, 2012.
[19] A. Gonzalez, A. Ramos, N. G. Green, A. Castellanos, and H. Morgan,
“Fluid flow induced by nonuniform ac electric fields in electrolytes on
microelectrodes. II. A linear double-layer analysis,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 61,
no. 4, pp. 4019–4028, 2000.
[20] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, “The dielectric properties of
biological tissues: I. Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11,
p. 2231, 1999.
[21] D. Yang, M. C. Converse, D. M. Mahvi, and J. G. Webster, “Expanding
the bioheat equation to include tissue internal water evaporation during
heating,” IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1382–1388, Aug.
2007.
[22] F. A. Duck, Physical Properties of Tissue: A Comprehensive Reference.
London, U.K.: Academic Press, 1990.
[23] M. A. Golombeck, O. Dossel, A. Saubert, and V. M. Tonnier, “Magnetic
resonance imaging with implanted neurostimulators: a first numerical approach using finite integration theory,” presented at Int. Symp. Electromagn. Compat., Magdeburg, Germany, 1999.
[24] R. H. Edgerton, “Radial conductivity of arterial walls,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 531–534, 1975.

[25] S. Tungjitkusolmun, S. T. Staelin, D. Haemmerich, J. Z. Tsai, H. Cao,
J. G. Webster, F. T. Lee Jr., D. M. Mahvi, and V. R. Vorperian, “Threedimensional finite-element analyses for radio-frequency hepatic tumor
ablation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 3–9, Jan. 2002.
[26] H. Brydon, R. Hayward, W. Harkness, and R. Bayston, “Physical properties of cerebrospinal fluid of relevance to shunt function. 1: The effect of
protein upon CSF viscosity,” Br. J. Neurosurg, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 639–644,
1995.
[27] M. N. Hart, D. D. Heistad, and M. J. Brody, “Effect of chronic hypertension and sympathetic denervation on wall/lumen ratio of cerebral vessels,”
Hypertension, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 419–423, 1980.
[28] S. A. Sapareto and W. C. Dewey, “Thermal dose determination in cancer
therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 787–800,
1984.
[29] M. Dewhirst, B. Viglianti, M. Lora-Michiels, M. Hanson, and P. Hoopes,
“Basic principles of thermal dosimetry and thermal thresholds for tissue
damage from hyperthermia,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 267–
294, 2003.
[30] J. Pearce, “Comparative analysis of mathematical models of cell death and
thermal damage processes,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 262–
280, 2013.

Roland Kuen-Ren Chen (M’12) was born in Taipei,
Taiwan, in 1984. He received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, in 2005 and 2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
in 2012.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Michigan, where he involved in research in
the fields of bioheat transfer modeling, tissue mimicking materials, tissue joining and cutting, and design
of medical devices.

Khoi D. Than was born in Houston, TX, USA. He
received the B.A. and M.D. degrees from Johns Hopkins University, St California, MD, USA, in 2003 and
2007, respectively.
He is currently a Neurosurgery Resident at the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

Paul Park was born in Los Angeles, CA, USA. He
received the B.A. and M.A. in biology from the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1994, and the
M.D. degree from the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, USA, in 1998.
He is currently an Associate Professor of Neurosurgery at the University of Michigan Health System,
Ann Arbor.

Albert J. Shih was born in Tainan, Taiwan. He
received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, in 1984 and 1986, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA, in 1991.
He is currently a Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Biomedical Engineering at the University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, where he is involved
in research in the fields of design and manufacturing
of medical devices.

