IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

405

A Constrained ICA Approach for Real-Time Cardiac
Artifact Rejection in Magnetoencephalography
Lukas Breuer∗ , Jürgen Dammers, Timothy P. L. Roberts, and N. Jon Shah

Abstract—Recently, magnetoencephalography (MEG)-based
real-time brain computing interfaces (BCI) have been developed to
enable novel and promising methods of neuroscience research and
therapy. Artifact rejection prior to source localization largely enhances the localization accuracy. However, many BCI approaches
neglect real-time artifact removal due to its time consuming processing. With cardiac artifact rejection for real-time analysis
(CARTA), we introduce a novel algorithm capable of real-time cardiac artifact (CA) rejection. The method is based on constrained
independent component analysis (ICA), where a priori information
of the underlying source signal is used to optimize and accelerate
signal decomposition. In CARTA, this is performed by estimating
the subject’s individual density distribution of the cardiac activity,
which leads to a subject-specific signal decomposition algorithm.
We show that the new method is capable of effectively reducing
CAs within one iteration and a time delay of 1 ms. In contrast,
Infomax and Extended Infomax ICA converged not until seven iterations, while FastICA needs at least ten iterations. CARTA was
tested and applied to data from three different but most common
MEG systems (4-D-Neuroimaging, VSM MedTech Inc., and Elekta
Neuromag). Therefore, the new method contributes to reliable signal analysis utilizing BCI approaches.
Index Terms—Cardiac artifact rejection for real-time analysis (CARTA), constrained ICA (cICA), cross trial phase statistics (CTPS), independent component analysis (ICA), magnetoencephalography (MEG), real-time artifact reduction.

I. INTRODUCTION
EAL-TIME analysis of magnetoencephalographic (MEG)
data offers a great potential in providing new insights
into ongoing electrophysiological brain processes during the
execution of the MEG measurements. However, many brain

R

Manuscript received May 2, 2013; revised June 28, 2013 and August 12,
2013; accepted August 20, 2013. Date of publication August 29, 2013; date of
current version January 16, 2014. This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG, IRTG 1328, International Research Training Group).
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ L. Breuer is with the Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-4), 52425 Jülich, Germany (e-mail: L.Breuer@
fz-juelich.de).
J. Dammers is with the Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-4), 52425 Jülich, Germany (e-mail: J.Dammers@
fz-juelich.de).
T. P. L. Roberts is with the Department of Radiology, Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA, and also with the Department of
Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: robertstim@email.chop.edu).
N. J. Shah is with the Forschungszentrum Jülich, Institute of Neuroscience
and Medicine (INM-4), 52425 Jülich, Germany, and also with the Jülich Aachen
Research Alliance (JARA)—Translational Brain Medicine, 52425 Jülich,
Germany (e-mail: N.J.Shah@fz-juelich.de).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2280143

computing interfaces (BCI) approaches neglect the artifact rejection step, because of its time consuming operation. Usually,
the MEG recordings consist of a mixture of brain activity and
field components originating from eye blinks/movements (ocular artifacts), heartbeats cardiac artifacts (CA), muscle activity,
and environmental noise. The biological artifacts have a signal
strength that may be several orders of magnitude larger than the
signal of interest [1]. Hence, the identification and elimination
of such artifact signals prior to analysis of the MEG signals are
essential.
In the MEG community, a variety of artifact removal methods
have been proposed [2]–[9]. In particular, two different methods
are widely used to remove field contributions from cardiac activity: 1) for CA removal, template matching methods [10], [11]
are in general fast and simple to implement. The cardiac activity is rejected by subtracting a reference signal which is usually
estimated by calculating the average activity around the R-peak
at each heartbeat cycle. A common problem in using such a
method is that the MEG signals of brain responses which occur
at the same time are most likely being distorted by this subtraction. 2) Independent component analysis (ICA) is also widely
used for the separation of the mixed data into its underlying
informal components [12], [13]. The ICA-based CA rejection
is performed by removing the corresponding cardiac components from the set of decomposed signals. It has been shown
that artifact rejection utilizing ICA does not harm the signal of
interest (i.e., brain responses) if the decomposition and the selection of the artifact components are properly applied [3]. The
major challenge for all kinds of online artifact removal methods
will be to cope with unaveraged, short data segments during
acquisition.
In the literature, most publications dealing with real-time
MEG data processing are related to BCI [14]–[17]. In general,
a BCI system translates brain activity into commands to be run
on a computer [18]. The two monitoring systems best suited for
BCI approaches are MEG and electroencephalography (EEG).
Both the modalities record brain activity noninvasively. In comparison to EEG, MEG is not a portable device, and therefore, the
method is restricted to some elementary research utilizing BCI.
However, it has been shown that MEG-based BCI approaches
provide more specific information and thus may help to further
improve EEG-based BCI [18]. In the studies [14]–[17], BCI is
applied with short system delays of about 44 ± 17 ms between
MEG data acquisition [17] and receiving a feedback of ongoing
brain activity in sensor space. However, the applied real-time
methods did not include any kind of artifact rejection.
To our knowledge, Rongen et al. the first who demonstrated
real-time MEG source analysis including online CA rejection

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

TABLE I
RECORDING SETUP

[19]. In this paper, data acquisition was performed using the
MAGNES 2500 WH MEG system from 4-D-Neuroimaging,
which is equipped with 148 magnetometer channels. Prior to
the source analysis, Rongen et al. applied ICA-based real-time
CA rejection by using a precalculated fixed rejection matrix for
signal decomposition throughout the experiment [19].
In this paper, we present a novel and fast ICA-based method
optimized for real-time CA rejection. The new algorithm is constructed for application in modern MEG systems and can therefore cope with a few hundred MEG channels. The real-time CA
rejection was performed utilizing the concept of constrained
ICA (cICA). In cICA, the prior knowledge of an underlying expected signal (e.g., the cardiac activity) is used to optimize the
internal cost-function of the ICA [20], [21] resulting in an acceleration of the ICA decomposition toward real-time applicable
analysis.
To demonstrate general real-time applicability, the new algorithm (referred to as cardiac artifact rejection for real-time
analysis, CARTA) was tested using real MEG data recorded
with three different, but commonly used, MEG systems (4-DNeuroimaging, VSM MedTech Inc., and Elekta Neuromag).
Since we had no opportunity to access the MEG data from all
the three systems during acquisition time, the real-time capability of CARTA was tested by simulating the recording process
offline.
II. METHODS AND SIGNALS
A. Real MEG Dataset Examples
The real-time CA rejection approach was tested using MEG
data recorded by three commercial and widely used MEG systems (cf., Table I): 1) a 4-D-Neuroimaging whole-head magnetometer system with 248 channels (MAGNES-3600WH MEG),

2) a VSM MedTech Inc. whole-head axial gradiometer system with 275 channels (CTF MEG), and 3) an Elekta Neuromag whole-head system with 306 channels, consisting of 102
magnetometers and 204 planar gradiometers (Elekta Neuromag TRIUX). While recordings with the 4-D-Neuroimaging
system were performed at the Institute of Neuroscience
and Medicine (INM-4), Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich,
Germany, the recordings with the two other systems were performed at the Lurie Family Foundations’ MEG Imaging Center
of the Department of Radiology, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
The MEG signals from 18 different subjects (age between 8
and 49 years) were recorded using the three different MEG systems (six subjects per MEG system). During the measurements,
the neuromagnetic field changes in response to the binaural
stimulation (single clicks) were recorded. For stimulation, the
sinusoidal tones of different frequencies were presented, where
presentation times, frequencies, and the experimental design
slightly vary between the three MEG systems. A summary of
the most important details is listed in Table I.
The participation in the MEG experiments was in accordance
with the local Institutional Committee of Human Research. All
the participants gave their informed consent after explanation
of the procedure and the purpose of the experiment.
All the data were continuously recorded in order to allow
for simulation of the real-time acquisition process. Since the
sampling rate used during recordings varied between the three
different MEG systems (cf., Table I), all the data were bandpass
filtered to the same frequency band using a phase neutral sixthorder Butterworth filter (see Table I). The frequency range was
chosen from 1–45 Hz, excluding the power line frequencies at 50
and 60 Hz for data recorded in Germany and USA, respectively.
Note that filtering in real time was not part of this paper as it has
already been shown by Rongen et al. [19].
The real-time processing of CA removal was simulated by
storing the filtered MEG data into memory, from which segments of data were read-out whenever the CARTA was ready to
start with the rejection procedure. In the following, these steps
are explained in more detail.
B. Independent Component Analysis
Since CARTA is based on ICA, we will briefly review the basic concept of ICA. If X = (X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X n )T
are the n-dimensional observed signal mixtures, and S =
(S 1 , S 2 , . . . , S n )T the n-dimensional true source signals, then
the classical ICA model can be expressed as the following linear
relationship:
X =A·S

(1)

with A being the unknown mixing matrix of dimension n × n.
The difficulty in solving (1) is that neither the mixing matrix A,
nor the source signals S are known. The challenge therefore is
to find an unmixing matrix W , such that
C = W · X.

(2)

In this way, the ICA transforms an n-sensor data array into
an n-dimensional component space, where each of the time

BREUER et al.: CONSTRAINED ICA APPROACH FOR REAL-TIME CARDIAC ARTIFACT REJECTION IN MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY

varying components in C carries a minimum amount of mutual
information and thus is maximally independent [22].
The signal rejection, i.e., the cleaning process, is performed
by zeroing columns in W −1 which reflect signal contributions
from unwanted (e.g., artifact) sources, resulting in a new mixing
−1
matrix W̃ . The artifact removal or cleaning of the measured
signal is performed by back transformation of C, which results
in a new set of MEG data X 
X  = W̃

−1

· C.

(3)

Multiple realizations of ICA co-exist and are widely used in
the MEG community for different applications [23]–[25]. Here,
we use the constrained ICA concept of Barriga et al. [20] which
is based on Infomax ICA [26].
Since all the MEG systems we used for testing our approach
are equipped with a few hundred MEG channels, this leads to an
overdetermined mathematical problem if we assume a few cardiac sources only. Therefore, we applied principal component
analysis (PCA) [27] to reduce the number of MEG channels
prior to ICA. The dimension reduction is achieved by using k
principle components corresponding to the first k eigenvalues
which explain V % of the data variance. We use 95% of explained variance here for subsequent signal decomposition by
ICA.
With respect to real-time application, it is necessary to find
a tradeoff between the length of the input data and the signal
separation quality. Therefore, in the next section, the handling
of the input data length is explained in more detail.
C. Stationarity Test
Often the ICA-based signal decomposition is performed on
the whole dataset at once. In our experiments, this would translate to 168333, 830400, and 345167 time samples on an average
for 4-D-Neuroimaging, VSM MedTech Inc., and Elekta Neuromag, respectively (Table I). In case of real-time MEG data,
analysis of much smaller data segments are required. When
performing ICA, some requirements and limitations have to be
considered. A basic requirement for data to be decomposed using ICA is stationarity [23], [26], [28]. The stationarity is often
interpreted in the sense that too long data epochs may result in
nonstationary signals due to slight movements of the sources
(i.e., the subject’s head moved). Another possibility is that the
brain may change the strategy to process different tasks during
the measurement. In such cases, the mixing process becomes
nonstationary. On the other hand, there is a minimum amount
of data to be used when extracting the underlying sources. With
regard to short-time data segments, the requirement of stationarity refers to the existence of a representative distribution of the
underlying true source [22]. In other words, to perform reliable
signal separation on short data segments, the amount of data
must be long enough to reflect the temporal time course of the
underlying source by means of its probability density distribution. The question to be addressed for real-time applications is:
“how small can these samples be while at the same time fulfilling the stationarity requirement?” As a rule of thumb, it has
been reported that the number of data samples should be at least

407

a few times the square of the number of ICs to be estimated [29].
However, for real-time applications, we used a much stricter criterion to estimate the optimal sample length. The well-known
Augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) test [30] was used to test for
stationarity in the MEG data before real-time CA reduction was
applied.
In order to test for the minimal size of MEG data segments
prior to ICA decomposition, the ADF test was applied multiple times across different data segments by means of a Jackknife test [31]. The Jackknife test was used to estimate the bias
of the applied ADF test. For this, the recorded data (i.e., the
whole MEG measurement) were segmented into m small data
segments with 50% overlap. On each segment, the ADF test
was applied separately, which resulted in m significance values
pi , i = 1, . . . , m. The bias is then given by
bias = (m − 1) · (p̂ − p̃)

(4)

where p̃ is the significance value of the ADF test performed on
the full MEG dataset and p̂ being the mean over the m estimated
significance values pi , i = 1, . . . , m. If the bias is close to zero
and the maximal pi is lower than the significance level of 1%,
stationarity of the tested MEG signals is assumed.

D. Workflow of Data Cleaning in Real Time
As mentioned previously, performing ICA is computationally
demanding. Thus, with respect to real-time application, here, we
use an algorithm performing two tasks in parallel. One task is
to perform the cleaning process, while the other task is to estimate a new demixing matrix including the identification of CAs
(see Fig. 1). This means that the computationally demanding
parts of the algorithm are all performed in the second task (right
side Fig. 1). The cleaning process (left side Fig. 1) consists of
only transforming MEG signals in ICA-space [cf., (2)], remove
CAs, and back-transform the signal to MEG-space [cf., (3)].
Mathematically, these are two matrix–matrix multiplications,
or rather two matrix–vector multiplications since these multiplications can be applied separately on the data recovered at
each point in time.
To perform CA removal on the actual data segment, i, using
an optimal unmixing matrix, W i , it is important to estimate
W i as quickly as possible. Thus, decomposition is performed
using the minimum amount of data required by using a sliding
window of L seconds.
While calculating the actual unmixing matrix W i , the previous unmixing matrix W (i−1) is used for data decomposition.
After W i is estimated, it is necessary to identify ICs that refer
to the CAs. This is carried out by cross trial phase statistics
(CTPS) [3]. In the cleaning process (left side Fig. 1), the identification of ICs that refer to the CAs does not have to be repeated
since using W i for data decomposition, the indices of the ICs
referring to CAs does not change.
In the next two sections, the calculation of W i including
source identification is elucidated in more detail.

408

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Schematic illustration of the CARTA data processing structure.

E. Constrained ICA for CAs
With respect to real-time analysis, the goal is to optimize ICA
for speed without loss of the signal separation accuracy. We
thus use a cICA approach [20], [21], [32], and incorporate prior
knowledge of the underlying expected signal in the internal cost
function to perform optimal signal decomposition. The prior
knowledge can be incorporated in one of the three ways: 1) in
the initial unmixing matrix, 2) a source specific cost-function,
and 3) by measuring the similarity between a reference signal
and the extracted sources. We here use the first two methods.
The ICA is applied successively on several different data segments. The cardiac activity of these segments must, to some
degree, be the same since the segments overlap. Therefore, the
latest unmixing matrix W (i−1) from the previous ICA calculation at segment (i − 1) serves as an optimal initial matrix for
the signal decomposition at the ith segment (cf., Fig. 1).
The cost function is optimized in line with the approach of
Barriga et al. [20]. CARTA is based on a modified version of
the Infomax principle [26] with the important difference that we
introduce a cost function for optimized signal separation for CA
rejection. Starting from (2), we use the natural-gradient version
of Infomax [28], [33]
ΔW =∈ [I + (1 − 2y)C ∗ ]W
T

with y =

1
∗· .
1 + e−C

(5)
(6)

In (5), I and ∈ denote the identity matrix and the learning rate,
respectively, as used in the standard Infomax algorithm [26]. C ∗
denotes the intermediate component matrix which is identical
to C when the learning procedure is finished. In (6), y represents the sigmoidal function, which is the standard cost function
used in Infomax. In our approach, y is modified and replaced
by an estimated cumulative density function (cdf) of the indi-

vidual electrocardiographic (ECG) signal, which is recorded
in synchrony with the MEG signals. The cdf approximation is
based on a full cardiac cycle; individually for each subject. To
determine an optimal analytical cost function for the extraction
of cardiac activity, the sigmoidal function [cf., (6)] is fitted to
the cdf of the cardiac signal
yC =

1
.
1 + a0 · e − a1 · C ∗

(7)

In (7), a0 changes the y-intersect of the exponential function and a1 the steepness of the exponential function. Both the
parameters are fitted and optimized with respect to the minimum square error. From (7), one can immediately see that if
a0 and a1 are equal to 1, the equation represents the standard
sigmoidal function. Fig. 2 illustrates the work flow of estimating
the unmixing matrix and identifying ICs belonging to CA.
F. Automatic Identification of the Components Related to
Cardiac Activity
Recently, CTPS have been shown to reliably identify components related to strong and weak cardiac activity in a fully
automated fashion [3], [34]. The method is based on a statistically testing phase-locked activity with reference to a given
event (e.g., the R-peak from the QRS complex) in phase space
across multiple trials. In brief, the phase values of the independent components are estimated using the well-known Hilbert
transform [35]. For this, the data are band limited to the frequency range from 10 to 20 Hz covering the strongest energy
from the QRS complex [3]. After filtering, the resulting phases
are normalized and split into time windows (trials) of 1 s around
the R-peak of the ECG signal. Kuiper’s test [36] is used to
estimate the significance of phase-locked activity at each time
point separately, but across trials. In CTPS, we use a normalized

BREUER et al.: CONSTRAINED ICA APPROACH FOR REAL-TIME CARDIAC ARTIFACT REJECTION IN MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY

Fig. 2.

409

Schematic illustration of the real-time simulated CARTA cleaning process.

version of the Kuiper’s statistic, where the significance value
pK ranges between [0,1]. In case of uncorrelated activity, pK
will be close to 0, while for perfectly synchronized activity, the
significance value will be 1.

TABLE II
RESULTS STATIONARITY TEST

G. Quality Measures for CA Removal
In order to evaluate the CA rejection results obtained by
CARTA across different subjects and MEG systems, we use
the rejection performance measure as introduced in [3]. The
rejection performance value Rp is given by


Rp =

r(s − s )
r (s)

with r =

N


1
·
N i=1



1 i 2
(s )
T t t

(8)

by [6] and measures correlation in the frequency domain

 ω2
ω2
ω2



∗ 
∗ 
s̃s̃∗ ·
s̃ s̃∗
fc = 0.5 ·
(s̃ s̃ + s̃s̃ )/
ω1

where r expresses the average root mean square (rms) value
across the N channels of the MEG recordings. The signal si
here is the cross trial averaged signal of the ith sensor. Thus,
r(s) expresses the mean rms value before the artifact rejection
and r(s − s ) represents the mean rms value of the difference
signal between the signal before (s) and after (s ) the ICA
rejection, respectively. With respect to CA rejection, Rp → 0
can be interpreted as a complete failure of the rejection process.
For Rp being close to 1, artifact rejection is maximal. If the
method is applied to stimulus onset averages, we expect Rp
values close to 0 indicating the signal of interest stays unaffected.
Since the rejection performance value Rp as introduced by
Dammers et al. [3] is sensitive to changes in signal amplitude
only, we additionally used a second metric that is sensitive to
changes in the frequency domain. This metric was introduced

ω1

(9)

ω1

where ω1 and ω2 are the bounds of the frequency window (in
our case, 1 and 45 Hz), s̃ and s̃ are the Fourier coefficients of s
and s , and s̃∗ and s̃∗ are the complex conjugations of s̃ and s̃ ,
respectively. fc equals 1, if the frequency content of the signal
after CARTA application is unaffected, while fc → 0 tends to
a complete loss of the frequency content.
III. RESULTS
We tested the CARTA algorithm on data recorded with three
different MEG systems. To achieve optimal signal decomposition for CA removal, CARTA requires a minimum amount of
data. For this, an ADF Jackknife test was performed using a
sliding window with a window width ranging from 9 to 13 s
and 50% overlap (Table II). Our results indicate that the minimal segment size must be 12 s or more in order to fulfill the

410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 3. MEG signals of the Elekta Neuromag system averaged with respect to
the R-peak of ECG before (red) and after the PCA, Infomax, Extended Infomax
FastICA, and CARTA (black) cleaning process, respectively. The reference
signal is superimposed in blue (in arbitrary scaling).

stationarity request. Based on this result, a minimum of 12 s of
recordings of, e.g., resting state activity is necessary before the
actual experiment can start. Since the data accumulate during
recordings, there will be only a short delay at the very beginning
of the experiment (cf., Fig. 1).
The optimal cost function for CARTA is estimated by fitting the cdf of the individual ECG signal according to (7). This
leads to 95% confidence intervals for a0 of [0.5, 1.3], [0.7, 4.7],
and [0.4, 3.5] for 4-D-Neuroimaging, VSM MedTech Inc., and
Elekta Neuromag, respectively. Analogously, the 95% confidence intervals for a1 are [10.5, 28.0], [10.3, 23.4], and [10.1,
21.2].
To compare CARTA with PCA [27], Infomax [26], Extended Infomax [23], and FastICA (using tanh as contrast function) [24], we performed real-time cleaning on a MEG dataset as
explained (cf., Fig. 1), but with using PCA, Infomax, Extended
Infomax, FastICA, and CARTA to estimate the unmixing matrices W i , i = 0, . . . , n (cf., right side Fig. 1). Fig. 3 illustrates
the MEG signals of one data segment (12 s) averaged with
respect to the R-peak of ECG before (red) and after (black)
the PCA, Infomax, Extended Infomax, FastICA, and CARTA

cleaning process, respectively. In case, when PCA was used,
the CAs were not sufficiently suppressed (Rp = 46%), while
when using CARTA with only one iteration in the cICA part, all
CAs were sufficiently removed (Rp = 92%). Infomax ICA performing only one iteration (as in CARTA) yields a Rp value of
72%. To achieve Rp value results in the range of CARTA, seven
iterations are necessary. Using Extended Infomax, we achieved
results comparable to Infomax with Rp values of 71% and 87%
for one and seven iterations, respectively. For FastICA, Rp values of 34% and 87% are obtained for one and ten iterations,
respectively.
Within CARTA, the dimension of the input data is reduced
to the number of components explaining 95% of data variance.
This on average yields 25, 24, and 54 components for 4-DNeuroimaging, VSM MedTech Inc., and Elekta Neuromag, respectively. The computation times for estimating the unmixing
matrices and identify the ICs related to CAs (cf., right side Fig. 1)
using 12 s of data were found to be 2.2, 2.4, and 2.9 s on average (on an Intel Core i5-2410M, 2.3 GHz, 6-GB RAM) for the
4-D-Neuroimaging, VSM MedTech Inc., and Elekta Neuromag
system (Table III).
The CTPS-based source identification revealed one to three
components that can be attributed to cardiac activity in all measurements. The average number of ICs related to CA was found
to be 2.3, 2.3, and 2.1 for the 4-D-Neuroimaging, VSM MedTech
Inc., and Elekta Neuromag system, respectively. The cleaning
process (cf., left side Fig. 1) was measured online for each data
segment and lasts 1 ms for all the three systems.
To detect changes in the time and frequency domain, the
rejection performance Rp and frequency correlation fc were
calculated on all the data segments before and after the cleaning
procedure (Table III). In averages, the mean Rp values with
onset of the R-peak were found to be 94%, 92%, and 92% for
4-D-Neuroimaging, VSM MedTech Inc., and Elekta Neuromag,
respectively. The large Rp values indicate that the amplitude of
CAs is sufficiently suppressed in all the subjects and different
MEG systems after CARTA was applied. For stimulus onset
averages, the mean Rp values were found to be 24%, 19%,
and 26% with respect to the three different MEG systems (cf.,
Table III). In the frequency domain, we found mean fc values
across measurements of the three MEG systems to be 58%,
63%, and 66% for R-peak onset based averages. More importantly, for the stimulus onset based averages, the mean fc values
were found to be 97%, 98%, and 96%. This indicates that the
frequency content of the signal of interest is preserved.
Fig. 4 shows both the signal averages with onset to R-peaks
before and after [see Fig. 4(a)] the application of CARTA. The
difference plot in Fig. 4(b) shows that CAs were sufficiently
removed. This is also indicated by the corresponding rejection performance measures with Rp = 96% and fc = 59% [see
Fig. 4(b)]. To evaluate how much signal of interest (on average)
has been removed, signal averages with respect to stimulus onset were computed [see Fig. 4(c) and (d)]. Fig. 4(c) illustrates
that most of the signal of interest is retained by showing the
signal before (red) and after (black) CARTA application; this
is also reflected by the performance measures, with Rp = 20%
and fc = 98%. Fig. 4(d) illustrates the difference between the
signal of interest before and after CARTA application.

BREUER et al.: CONSTRAINED ICA APPROACH FOR REAL-TIME CARDIAC ARTIFACT REJECTION IN MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY

411

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE RESULTS USING CARTA

Before artifact rejection, the maximum activity was found at:
x = 18, y = −25, z = −7 mm.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 4. MEG signals of the VSM MedTech Inc. system averaged with respect to the R-peak of the ECG signals (top) and stimulus onset (bottom). The
respective reference signal and the stimulus onset are superimposed in blue (arbitrary scaling). The signals before (red) and after (black) CARTA application
are shown on the left side. On the right side, the difference between these signals
is shown.

To evaluate the effect of the CARTA cleaning process with
respect to source localization, we applied magnetic field tomography [37] to six trials from a single subject who showed
strong CAs during auditory stimulation (data were recorded
with the 4-D-Neuroimaging system). The trials were selected
by visual inspection and showed strong cardiac activity within
the time range of the evoked auditory response (N100m). After averaging of the selected trials, source localization was applied at peak latency (N100m, 100 ms after stimulus onset)
before and after artifact rejection. Fig. 5 shows the averaged
MEG signals, a corresponding time-frequency plot using the
Stockwell transformation [38] and the source localization before [see Fig. 5(a)] and after [see Fig. 5(b)] the application
of CARTA. For comparison, the results obtained by template
matching [10] are shown in Fig. 5(c). The source localization is
shown at the maximum activity of the N100m after artifact rejection: x = −7, y = −66, z = 33 mm (individual subject space).

We have introduced a novel approach optimal for CA reduction for real-time MEG data analysis. The method, called
CARTA, is based on a constrained ICA approach [21], where
a priori information of the underlying source signal is used.
In CARTA, this is performed by estimating the individual subject’s density distribution of the cardiac activity. With this, a
subject specific signal decomposition was achieved by incorporating the prior knowledge about the underlying sources leading
to a constrained ICA approach [15], [20], [21]. The subject’s
individual cdf of the cardiac activity served as the internal cost
function within CARTA. As a result, we perform individual and,
therefore, optimal signal decomposition with respect to CAs.
Compared to the standard sigmoidal function, the estimated individual cost functions are much steeper since the lower limit of
the 95% confidence interval of a1 is for all three systems greater
than 10 (note, if a1 equals 1, the sigmoidal function is used).
Second, we incorporated the prior knowledge by using W (i−1)
as the initial unmixing matrix to estimate W i in the ICA calculation of the current data segment. Since the data segments
overlap within a range, the underlying dynamic of the cardiac
sources is expected to be the same which is underlined by the
fact that with the chosen initial unmixing matrix, only one ICA
iteration is needed to achieve optimal signal separation.
We tested the new algorithm in 18 subjects utilizing three different, but common, MEG systems (4-D-Neuroimaging, VSM
MedTech Inc., and Elekta Neuromag). In all the measurements,
we demonstrate that the new method is capable of effectively
reducing CAs when applied to the three different MEG systems. CARTA sufficiently removed cardiac activity within one
iteration (three iterations only for estimating the first unmixing
matrix). In addition, for real-time application, CTPS is implemented in CARTA for the automatic identification of the cardiac
activity [3].
It has been demonstrated in various publications that other
ICA approaches also effectively separate artifacts from the
signal of interest [3], [38]–[41]. However, there are two
major problems when applying “standard ICA” approaches:

412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 5. Selection of six trials with strong cardiac activity at the time of the
auditory response. MEG signal, frequency plot, and source localization of the
auditory N100m signal before (a) and after (b) CARTA filtering, as well as
(c) after template matching. The data were recorded using the 4-DNeuroimaging system and are based on the average of six trials from a subject
with strong CAs within the time range from 80 to120 ms after tone onset. The
source activity is shown for the slice of maximum activity after the application
of CARTA at the time of the N100m peak (green line at 100 ms).

1) the applied ICA method must be selected carefully in particular with respect to the separation strategy, i.e., the internal cost
function. In general, the internal cost function in ICA algorithms
is not optimized to extract a specific source, rather than multiple
types of non-Gaussian sources. 2) Assuming the mixed signals
are adequately separated into its underlying source signals (i.e.,
signal of interest and noninterest), identification of the signal of
interest must be performed quickly and user independently for
real-time analysis.

In the literature, one can find a variety of different ICA and
cICA approaches. Most of them are designed to decompose a
diversity of different non-Gaussian source signals using, for example, the sigmoidal (Infomax) or the tanh function (FastICA)
as the nonlinear contrast function. With regard to the quality
of the signal decomposition, the contrast function used in these
ICA routines can only be considered as a good compromise to
decompose different types of non-Gaussian source signals. The
optimal signal separation is performed when the contrast function used matches best the cdf of the source to be extracted [42].
This strategy has been used and implemented in CARTA, since
the algorithm is designed for CA rejection only. In CARTA, the
contrast function is estimated using the subject’s own cardiac
signal to ensure optimal signal decomposition with respect to
the cardiac activity.
Concerning the computation time, previously reported ICA,
cICA, and other online ICA algorithms are not fast enough
to be considered for real-time analysis. In [17], for example,
the average computation time and learning steps to estimate
independent components related to CAs are reported to last more
than 3.3 s and 274 iterations, respectively. (Note, that in [17]
only four (!) sources have been used). With respect to realtime application, this is quiet slow. In contrast, CARTA quickly
converges with one to three iteration only (≤ 2.9 s) (Note, with
54 sources including dimension reduction from originally 306
sources).
For evaluation of CA removal, we used two different quality
measures: one sensitive for measuring changes in the signal amplitude and another one for changes in the frequency domain.
As a metric for amplitude changes, we used the rejection performance value Rp introduced in [3]. The authors reported a mean
Rp value of 91% for their offline CA rejection method, which
compares very well to our results (mean Rp values around
R-peak: 94%, 92%, and 92%). The analysis in the frequency
domain showed that the signal around the stimulus onset is
marginally changed through the CARTA application (mean fc
values were 97%, 98%, and 96%). In Figs. 3 and 4, we demonstrated that CAs were sufficiently rejected, while the signal of
interest remains. We also showed that with respect to the number of iterations, CARTA performed –seven to ten times faster
compared to the other tested ICA algorithms. When comparing source localization before and after CARTA application, we
found that the source location is strongly affected by the CA
(cf., Fig. 5). Therefore, in order to archive meaningful results,
the CA reduction is mandatory prior to source localization.
The template matching procedures are widely used for artifact
removal in MEG and EEG signal processing. Fig. 5(c) nicely
shows that the template matching procedure effectively removed
the cardiac signal, but at the expense of losing signal of interest.
The loss of signal is also evident in the time-resolved frequency
plot [cf., Fig. 5(b) and (c)].
Since the real-time capability of the algorithm is limited by
the stationarity requirement of ICA, a minimum of 12 s of
recordings (using, for example, resting state activity at the very
beginning of an experiment) is required before the actual experiment starts. Thereafter, estimating a new unmixing matrix and
identification of ICs belonging to CAs is performed parallel to

BREUER et al.: CONSTRAINED ICA APPROACH FOR REAL-TIME CARDIAC ARTIFACT REJECTION IN MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY

data cleaning. Since the cleaning process based on the design
chosen here consists of only two matrix–vector multiplications
for each measured point in time, the cleaning procedure is performed with a time delay of 1 ms. Since Lauer et al. [43] reported
that humans notice delays between movement intention and device’s reaction being longer than 0.2 s, we assume computation
times below 0.2 s can be treated as real time. Thus, our CARTA
algorithm can be added to BCI algorithms [14]–[17] to reduce
the CAs without losing real-time capability.
However, to improve the results, a faster estimation of the
demixing matrix (CARTA needs at least 1.8 s) is desired and
maybe realized by using digital signal processors or field programmable gate arrays. Other online ICA approaches which
update the demixing matrix within a few milliseconds have
been reported [33], [44]. Although these approaches seem to
be very promising, however, these approaches have been tested
on simulated data only using a mixing scenario of only a few
sources (i.e., three to five simulated sources) [33], [44]. In
CARTA, the number of components used ranged from 24–54,
while extra time is needed to apply dimension reduction of the
much larger data matrix defined by the number of MEG sensors used. Nonetheless, a combination of the aforementioned
approaches may help to further develop real-time capable algorithms to reduce other sources of artifacts, in particular, eye
blinks/movements or muscle activity.
V. CONCLUSION
We conclude that our new developed ICA algorithm is fast
and optimized for signal decomposition with respect to CAs.
Combining this algorithm with CTPS, a fast and robust method
to extract the cardiac activity with a very high sensitivity, leads to
an optimal CA reduction method. In summary, we have demonstrated the real-time capability of the new algorithm referred to
as CARTA.

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank F. Boers and A. Muren for
collecting the MEG data from the 4-D-Neuroimaging system
in Jülich, Germany, as well as J. W. Dell, R. L. Golembski,
and P. V. Lam for collecting MEG data on the VSM MedTech
Inc. and Elekta Neuromag system in Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Furthermore, they would also like to thank the reviewers for
giving very useful comments to improve this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Hämäläinen, R. Hari, R. J. Ilmoniemi, J. Knuutila, and
O. V. Lounasmaa, “Magnetoencephalography—Theory, instrumentation,
and applications to noninvasive studies of the working human brain,” Rev.
Mod. Phys., vol. 65,, no. 2, pp. 413–497, Apr. 1993.
[2] G. Barbati, C. Porcaro, F. Zappasodi, P. M. Rossini, and F. Tecchio, “Optimization of an independent component analysis approach for artifact
identification and removal in magnetoencephalographic signals,” J. Int.
Federation Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 115, no. 5, pp. 1220–32, May 2004.
[3] J. Dammers, M. Schiek, F. Boers, C. Silex, M. Zvyagintsev, U. Pietrzyk,
and K. Mathiak, “Integration of amplitude and phase statistics for complete
artifact removal in independent components of neuromagnetic recordings,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng, vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 2353–2362, Oct.
2008.
[4] J. Escudero, S. Member, R. Hornero, D. Abásolo, A. Fernández, and
M. López-coronado, “Artifact removal in magnetoencephalogram compo-

[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]

413

nent analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 1965–1973,
Nov. 2007.
J. W. Kelly, D. P. Siewiorek, A. Smailagic, J. L. Collinger, D. J. Weber,
and W. Wang, “Fully automated reduction of ocular artifacts in highdimensional neural data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3,
pp. 598–606, Mar. 2011.
V. Krishnaveni, S. Jayaraman, L. Anitha, and K. Ramadoss, “Removal of
ocular artifacts from EEG using adaptive thresholding of wavelet coefficients,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 338–46, Dec. 2006.
E. Maris and R. Oostenveld, “Nonparametric statistical testing of EEGand MEG-data,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 164, no. 1, pp. 177–90, Aug.
2007.
C. Porcaro, G. Barbati, F. Zappasodi, P. M. Rossini, and F. Tecchio, “Hand
sensory–motor cortical network assessed by functional source separation,”
Human Brain Mapping, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 70–81, 2008.
C. Porcaro, D. Ostwald, A. Hadjipapas, G. R. Barnes, and A. P. Bagshaw,
“The relationship between the visual evoked potential and the gamma band
investigated by blind and semi-blind methods,” NeuroImage, vol. 56, no. 3,
pp. 1059–1071, 2011.
J. Sijbers, J. Van Audekerke, M. Verhoye, A. Van der Linden, and D. Van
Dyck, “Reduction of ECG and gradient related artifacts in simultaneously
recorded human EEG/MRI data,” Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 18, pp. 881–
886, 2000.
P. J. Allen, G. Polizzi, K. Krakow, D. R. Fish, and L. Lemieux, “Identification of EEG events in the MR scanner: the problem of pulse artifact
and a method for its subtraction,” NeuroImage, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 229–39,
1998.
R. Vigario, V. Jousmäki, M. Hämäläinen, and E. Oja, “Independent component analysis for identification of artifacts in magnetoencephalographic
recordings,” in Proc. Conf. Advances Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 1997,
USA, pp. 229–235.
A. Hyvärinen, “Fast and robust fixed-point algorithms for independent
component analysis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 626–
34, Jan. 1999.
E. Buch, C. Weber, L. G. Cohen, C. Braun, M. a Dimyan, T. Ard,
J. Mellinger, A. Caria, S. Soekadar, A. Fourkas, and N. Birbaumer,
“Think to move: a neuromagnetic brain-computer interface (BCI) system for chronic stroke,” Stroke, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 910–7, 2008.
C. W. Hesse and R. Oostenveld, “On the development of a brain-computer
interface system using high-density magnetoencephalogram signals for
real-time control of a robot arm,” in Proc. Annu. Symp. IEEE/EMBS
Benelux Chapter, 2007, pp. 1–4.
J. Mellinger, G. Schalk, C. Braun, H. Preissl, W. Rosenstiel, N. Birbaumer,
and A. Kübler, “An MEG-based brain-computer interface (BCI),” NeuroImage, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 581–93, Jul. 2007.
G. Sudre, L. Parkkonen, E. Bock, S. Baillet, W. Wang, and D. J. Weber,
“rtMEG: A real-time software interface for magnetoencephalography,”
Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2011, pp. 327953-1–327953-7, Jan.
2011.
F. Tecchio, C. Porcaro, G. Barbati, and F. Zappasodi, “Functional source
separation and hand cortical representation for a brain-computer interface
feature extraction,” J. Physiol., vol. 580, no. Pt.3, pp. 703–21, 2007.
H. Rongen, V. Hadamschek, and M. Schiek, “Real time data acquisition
and online signal processing for magnetoencephalography,” IEEE Trans.
Nucl. Sci., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 704–708, Jun. 2006.
E. S. Barriga, M. Pattichis, D. Ts’o, M. Abramoff, R. Kardon, Y. Kwon,
and P. Soliz, “Independent component analysis using prior information
for signal detection in a functional imaging system of the retina,” Med.
Image Anal., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 35–44, Mar. 2011.
D.-S. Huang and J.-X. Mi, “A new constrained independent component
analysis method,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1532–
1535, Sep. 2007.
A. Hyvärinen, J. Karhunen, and E. Oja, Independent Component Analysis.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2001.
T.-W. Lee, M. Girolami, and T. J. Sejnowski, “Independent component
analysis using an extended Infomax algorithm for mixed sub Gaussian
and super Gaussian sources,” Neural Comput., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 417–41,
Feb. 1999.
A. Hyvärinen and E. Oja, “Independent component analysis: algorithms
and applications,” Neural Netw., vol. 13, no. 4/5, pp. 411–430, 2000.
R. Gharries and A. Cichocki, “Second-order statistics based blind source
separation using a bank of subband filters,” Digit. Signal Process., vol. 13,
no. 2, pp. 252–274, Apr. 2003.
A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski, “An information-maximization approach to
blind separation and blind deconvolution,” Neural Comput., vol. 7, no. 6,
pp. 1129–59, Nov. 1995.

414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

[27] N. Kovacevic and A. R. McIntosh, “Groupwise independent component
decomposition of EEG data and partial least square analysis,” NeuroImage, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 1103–12, Apr. 2007.
[28] G. D. Brown, S. Yamada, and T. J. Sejnowski, “Independent component
analysis at the neural cocktail party,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 54–63, Jan. 2001.
[29] F. Cong, P. H. T. Leppänen, P. Astikainen, J. Hämäläinen, J. K. Hietanen,
and T. Ristaniemi, “Dimension reduction: additional benefit of an optimal filter for independent component analysis to extract event-related
potentials,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 201, no. 1, pp. 269–80, Sep. 2011.
[30] D. A. Dickey and W. A. Fuller, “Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series with a unit root,” J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., vol. 74,
pp. 427–431, 1979.
[31] C. F. J. Wu, “Jackknife, bootstrap and other resampling methods in regression analysis,” Ann. Stat., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1261–1295, 1986.
[32] W. Lu and J. C. Rajapakse, “Approach and applications of constrained
ICA,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 203–12, Jan. 2005.
[33] S. Amari, A. Cichocki, and H. H. Yang, “A new learning algorithm
for blind signal separation,” Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 8,
pp. 757–763, 1996.
[34] J. Dammers and M. Schiek, “Detection of artifacts and brain responses
using instantaneous phase statistics in independent components,” in Magnetoencephalography, E. W. Pang, Ed., 1st ed. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech,
2011, pp. 131–150.
[35] R. N. Bracewell, The Hibert Transform. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1999, pp. 267–
272.
[36] M. A. Stephans, “Use of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Cramer-Von Mises
and related statistics without extensive tables,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Series
B (Methological), vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 115–122, 1970.
[37] A. A. Ioannides, M. J. Liu, L. C. Liu, P. D. Bamidis, E. Hellstrand, and
K. M. Stephan, “Magnetic field tomography of cortical and deep processes: examples of ‘real-time mapping’ of averaged and single trial MEG
signals,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 161–175, Dec. 1995.
[38] R. Stockwell, “Localization of the complex spectrum: the S transform,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 998–1001, Apr. 1996.
[39] J. Escudero, R. Hornero, D. Abásolo, and A. Fernández, “Quantitative
evaluation of artifact removal in real magnetoencephalogram signals with
blind source separation,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2274–86,
Aug. 2011.
[40] D. Mantini, R. Franciotti, G. L. Romani, and V. Pizzella, “Improving MEG
source localizations: an automated method for complete artifact removal
based on independent component analysis,” NeuroImage, vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 160–73, Mar. 2008.
[41] V. V Nikulin, G. Nolte, and G. Curio, “A novel method for reliable and
fast extraction of neuronal EEG/MEG oscillations on the basis of spatiospectral decomposition,” NeuroImage, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1528–35, Apr.
2011.
[42] J. V. Stone, Independent Component Analysis—A Tutorial Introduction.
Cambridge, MA, USA: A Bradford Book, 2004.
[43] R. T. Lauer, P. H. Peckham, K. L. Kilgore, and W. J. Heetderks, “Applications of cortical signals to neuroprosthetic control: A critical review,”
IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 205–208, Jun. 2000.
[44] A. Cichocki and R. Unbehauen, “Robust neural networks with on-line
learning for blind identification and blind separation of sources,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Fundam. Theory Appl., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 894–906,
Nov. 1996.

Lukas Breuer was born in Simmerath, Germany, in
1987. He received the Master’s degree in technomathematics from the University of Applied Sciences,
Aachen, Germany, in 2011. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Forschungszentrum Jülich,
Germany. His Ph.D. research is related to real-time
MEG data analysis.
From 2006 to 2011, he was with the group of polarized light imaging.
Mr. Breuer received a scholarship from the German Research Foundation (DFG, IRTG 1328, International Research Training
Group) for his Ph.D. study.

Jürgen Dammers received the Diploma degree in
biomedical engineering from the Aachen University
of Applied Sciences, Aachen, Germany, in 1994, and
the Ph.D. degree in physics from Open University,
Milton Keynes, U.K., in 2000.
From 2000, he has been with the group of magnetoencephalography (MEG). In 2011, he became
the Head of the MEG group at the Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Forschungszentrum Jülich,
Jülich, Germany. His research interest includes MEG
signal processing with special emphasis on blind
source separation as well as forward and inverse calculations in biomagnetism.

Timothy P. L. Roberts obtained the Ph.D. degree
from Cambridge University, Cambridge, U.K., in
1992.
He has subsequently been on the faculty at University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA and the
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, and is
currently holder of the Oberkircher Family Chair in
Pediatric Radiology and the Vice-Chair for Research
in the Department of Radiology at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA, as well as
Professor of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. His work in 4-D functional imaging using biomagnetic recording as well as advanced MRI techniques (such as diffusion tensor
imaging), specifically in the study of auditory processing and language has
been supported by the National Alliance for Autism Research and is presently
supported by Autism Speaks, the Nancy Lurie Marks Family Foundation, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and NIH. He has published more than 200
scientific papers, mostly in the field of physiologic and functional imaging,
reviews grant proposals for NIH (standing member, DBD) and several equivalent international agencies (U.K., Germany, Austria, Singapore, Israel, Cyprus,
Canada, Holland), and serves on the executive committee of the American Society for Neuroradiology, the American Society for Functional Neuroradiology
(President 2009–2010), and the International Society for the Advancement of
Clinical MEG (President 2009–2011).

N. Jon Shah was born in Lahore, Pakistan, in 1960.
He received the M.S. degree in advanced studies in
science and the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Manchester, Manchester, U.K., in 1984 and 1987,
respectively.
After his Ph.D., he moved to the Toshiba R&D
Center, Japan, as a Postdoctoral Researcher (1987–
1989) and from 1990 to 1992, he was with the University of Cambridge and the Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., as a Research Associate. During 1992–1995, he was a Clinical Scientist
and the Senior MR Physicist at Picker International GmbH and at the Herz- und
Diabeteszentrum NRW in Germany. Since December 1995, he has been with
the Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH in Germany, first as an MR Group Leader,
and in 2008, he was appointed the Director of the Institute of Neuroscience and
Medicine—4 at Forschungszentrum Juelich. From 2011 to 2012, he also held the
position of the Executive Director of the Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine.
Parallel to his work in Jülich, from 2004 to 2008, he was a Professor of Experimental MRI (C3) at the University of Dortmund, Germany, and was appointed a
Professor of Physics of Magnetic Resonance in Neuroscience at RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany, in July 2008, and a Professor of “Magnetic Resonance Physics” at Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, in April
2010. He is the author of more than 200 articles, and more than 40 granted
patents. His research interests include magnetic resonance imaging (techniques
and hardware); ultrahigh-field MRI; hybrid MRI–PET; fMRI; neuroscientific
applications of imaging. Dr. Jon Shah is a member of the Editorial Board of
the journal Brain Structure and Function. He received a scholarship from the
Japanese Association for the Advancement of Medical Equipment in 2001 and
2003.

