IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

353

Wireless Tissue Palpation for Intraoperative
Detection of Lumps in the Soft Tissue
Marco Beccani, Student Member, IEEE, Christian Di Natali, Student Member, IEEE,
Levin J. Sliker, Student Member, IEEE, Jonathan A. Schoen, Mark E. Rentschler, Member, IEEE,
and Pietro Valdastri∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—In an open surgery, identification of precise margins
for curative tissue resection is performed by manual palpation. This
is not the case for minimally invasive and robotic procedures, where
tactile feedback is either distorted or not available. In this paper, we
introduce the concept of intraoperative wireless tissue palpation.
The wireless palpation probe (WPP) is a cylindrical device (15 mm
in diameter, 60 mm in length) that can be deployed through a
trocar incision and directly controlled by the surgeon to create a
volumetric stiffness distribution map of the region of interest. This
map can then be used to guide the tissue resection to minimize
healthy tissue loss. The wireless operation prevents the need for a
dedicated port and reduces the chance of instrument clashing in
the operating field. The WPP is able to measure in real time the
indentation pressure with a sensitivity of 34 Pa, the indentation
depth with an accuracy of 0.68 mm, and the probe position with
a maximum error of 11.3 mm in a tridimensional workspace. The
WPP was assessed on the benchtop in detecting the local stiffness
of two different silicone tissue simulators (elastic modulus ranging
from 45 to 220 kPa), showing a maximum relative error below
5%. Then, in vivo trials were aimed to identify an agar-gel lump
injected into a porcine liver and to assess the device usability within
the frame of a laparoscopic procedure. The stiffness map created
intraoperatively by the WPP was compared with a map generated
ex vivo by a standard uniaxial material tester, showing less than
8% local stiffness error at the site of the lump.
Index Terms—Force feedback, minimally invasive surgery
(MIS), soft tissue identification, surgical robotics, tissue palpation,
tumor localization.

I. INTRODUCTION

M

INIMALLY invasive surgery (MIS) drastically reduces
patient trauma and recovery time when compared to an

Manuscript received May 14, 2013; revised August 1, 2013 and June 22,
2013; accepted August 15, 2013. Date of publication August 21, 2013; date
of current version January 16, 2014. This work was supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant CNS-1239355 and by the National Center for
Advancing Translational Sciences under Grant UL1-TR000445-06. M. Beccani
and C. Di Natali equally contributed to this work. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
M. Beccani and C. Di Natali are with the Science and Technology of
Robotics in Medicine Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235-1592 USA (e-mail: marco.beccani@
vanderbilt.edu; christian.di.natali@vanderbilt.edu).
L. J. Sliker and M. E. Rentschler are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309 USA (e-mail:
levin.sliker@colorado.edu; mark.rentschler@colorado.edu).
J. A. Schoen is with the Department of Surgery at the University of Colorado
Hospital, Aurora, CO 80045 USA (e-mail: jonathan.schoen@ucdenver.edu).
∗ P. Valdastri is with the Science and Technology of Robotics in Medicine
Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37235-1592 USA (e-mail: p.valdastri@vanderbilt.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2279337

open surgery. More than two million MIS procedures are performed annually in the United States alone [1]. Patient benefits,
however, come with a price for surgeons in terms of constrained
maneuverability of laparoscopic instruments and restricted field
of view through the endoscopic camera. The force and tactile
cues are commonly used in an open surgery to identify tumor
margins and vessels buried in the soft tissue. In MIS, any haptic
cue is severely compromised by the use of laparoscopic instruments due to friction against the surgical port (i.e., trocar) and
the fulcrum effect at the insertion point [2]. These shortcomings are amplified in the robotic surgery, where the surgeon is
physically removed from the bedside and haptic feedback is
completely absent in the more than 2000 Intuitive Surgical da
Vinci platforms installed worldwide [3].
Tissue palpation is essential to effectively explore nonvisible tissue and organ features, to identify buried structures (e.g.,
nerves or blood vessels) that must be avoided during the surgical procedure, and to identify precise margins for curative
tumor resections [4]. Achieving negative surgical margins is particularly relevant during partial nephrectomies [5] and hepatic
surgeries [6], in order to minimize accidental damage to healthy
tissue and to prevent organ failure, that would result in the urgent
need for a transplant. Registration with preoperative imaging—a
standard practice for image-guided surgery [7]—is not a viable
option for the soft tissues [4], [8]. Therefore, surgeons currently
rely on an intraoperative ultrasonography (IOUS) for the evaluation of vascular anatomy, identification of known and occult
lesions, and operative planning [9]. Recent studies confirm the
utility of IOUS also in robotic procedures [5], [6], [10], [11],
even if several open issues still remain unaddressed. In particular, IOUS can only provide a vertical slice of tissue density,
while a stiffness distribution map would better serve the need of
tumor margin identification.
Restoring haptic sensations in MIS and robotic MIS has been
an active research topic for more than two decades [12], [13],
with one of the first systems used in a human dating back to
1994 [14]. A relevant number of MIS instruments with force
and/or tactile sensors have been developed to acquire in vivo
data for tissue modeling and simulation [15]–[18], to improve
the outcomes of the surgical procedure—preventing excessive
forces from being applied to the tissues [2], [19]–[22], or to
create stiffness distribution map by palpation [4], [8], [23]–[27].
However, MIS palpation instruments developed to date all
present a rigid shaft and require a dedicated port. This increases
the chance of tool clashing in the operating field and often requires an assistant to operate the palpation probe. A wireless

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

354

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 2. WPP during indentation and the external source of magnetic field with
a slice of the magnetic field map. Vectors r 0 and r f represent the WPP position
r at the beginning and at the end of the indentation. They are represented at the
interface of WPP and tissue, rather than at O w , for a better understanding of
their physical meaning.

Principle of operation for wireless tissue palpation using a WPP.

device for uniaxial indentation of soft tissues was preliminary
reported by the authors in [28]. Magnetic fields were proposed
to indent the tissue and to reposition the probe while scanning
the organ surface. This approach proved to be limited in terms
of both safety and reliable positioning, due to the rapid variation
of the magnetic field strength with distance. Having a wireless
device to be directly manipulated by the surgeon would dramatically improve maneuverability, autonomy, and precision,
as illustrated by the soft-tethered IOUS probes presented in [5]
and [11].
In this paper, we introduce for the first time an intraoperative
wireless palpation probe (WPP)—schematically represented in
Fig. 1—that can be deployed through a trocar incision and directly controlled by the surgeon to create a stiffness distribution
map. Such a map can then be used to localize tumor margins
during the soft tissue surgery, thus improving intraoperative diagnostic and interventional decisions. The wireless operation
prevents the need for a dedicated port and reduces the chance of
instrument clashing in the operating field.
II. MATERIALS
A. Principle of Operation
For indentation depths that are less than 10% of the organ
thickness, it is possible to assume the tissue as linear elastic [4].
A volumetric stiffness map can then be created by estimating
the local tissue stiffness E(r) through the measurement of the
indentation depth δ(r) and the tissue reaction pressure P (r) at
different positions r on the organ surface
E(r) 

P (r)
.
δ(r)

(1)

Referring to Fig. 2, we can define (x, y, z) as the global Cartesian coordinate system, (x , y  , z  ) as the reference frame at the
external source of the static magnetic field, and (xw , yw , zw ) as
the coordinate system at the WPP. The origin O of (x, y, z) is
coincident with the origin O of (x , y  , z  ), while zw is aligned
with the main axis of the device. We can assume the position

vector r to identify the origin of (xw , yw , zw )—noted as Ow —
with respect to the global coordinate system (x, y, z). When
the WPP is manipulated by the surgeon to palpate a tissue, its
motion d is not constrained along zw . Therefore, the following
equation must be used to estimate the indentation depth δ(r):
δ(r) = d · zw 0 = (rf − r0 ) · zw 0

(2)

where r0 and rf are the WPP positions at the beginning and
at the end of the indentation, respectively, while zw 0 is the
unit vector along zw at the beginning of the indentation. In this
approach, the beginning of the indentation is identified as the
instant when the reading of the tissue reaction pressure P (r)
becomes significant. The end of each indentation is identified
as the instant when δ(r) reaches the maximum value.
In this paper, the tissue reaction pressure is acquired by a
barometric pressure sensor embedded in a silicone rubber at the
probing surface of the WPP. This design is inspired by [29] and
further details are provided in Section II-B. A threshold value
Pth , independent from r, is defined by calibration and takes into
account both bias and noise of the pressure sensor. A single
indentation starts as P (r) > Pth .
Real-time localization of the WPP serves two purposes. First,
the position where indentation is taking place must be recorded
in three degrees of freedom (DoF) in order to reconstruct the
stiffness map. In this case, we assume the position r of each indentation to be coincident with WPP position as the indentation
begins (i.e., r0 ). A second goal for WPP tracking is to derive
δ(r) as in (2). In this case, real-time estimation of r and rotations
of the WPP around x and y are required. Therefore, the WPP position and orientation in five DoF must be available in real time.
This is achieved by an on-board localization module, working
in synergy with an external source of the static magnetic field,
as represented in Fig. 1. The on-board module consists of three
orthogonally mounted magnetic field sensors and a triaxial accelerometer (technical details are provided in Section II-B). The
accelerometer—used here as an inclinometer—provides WPP
rotations around x and y. The WPP position vector r is derived

BECCANI et al.: WIRELESS TISSUE PALPATION FOR INTRAOPERATIVE DETECTION OF LUMPS IN THE SOFT TISSUE

355

from the magnetic field sensor readings, as suggested in [30].
In particular, the magnetic field vector Bw is measured at the
WPP and rotated according to
B = RT Rw R Bw

(3)

where Rw is the rotational matrix of the WPP reference frame
with respect to the global Cartesian coordinate system, while
R is the rotational matrix of the reference frame at the external
source of the static magnetic field with respect to the global
Cartesian coordinate system. The matrix Rw is obtained in real
time from the readings acquired by the inclinometer integrated
in the WPP, while R is derived from the data acquired by an
inclinometer mounted on the external source of the static magnetic field. Then, a search within a precalculated bidimensional
magnetic field map is performed to find the WPP position r
that would match with the actual magnetic field vector B. The
magnetic map associates each point r within the workspace—
expressed in cylindrical coordinates (rρ , rz )—to the related
magnetic field intensity B—also expressed in cylindrical coordinates (Bρ , Bz )—with a spatial resolution of 0.2 mm. The
third cylindrical coordinate rθ can be calculated from the values
of Bx and By by applying the following equation:


By
rθ = arctan
.
(4)
Bx
The effective localization workspace is a cylinder with a diameter of 35 cm and a length of 35 cm, centered on the static
magnetic field source. The 5-DoF WPP coordinates derived by
the algorithm are referenced to a Cartesian frame at the center
of the workspace.
B. WPP Development
Both the methods used to measure the indentation pressure
and the solution for WPP localization are designed for wireless
operation and can be implemented within a miniature device.
The WPP prototype, represented in Fig. 3, has a cylindrical
shape (15 mm in diameter, 60 mm in length, 9.5 g total mass)
with a grasping site close to the pressure sensor head. The cylindrical plastic shell—fabricated by rapid prototyping (OBJET 30,
Objet Geometries Ltd, Billerica, MA, USA)—hosts a pressure
sensing head, a localization module with a dedicated signal conditioning stage, a power regulation unit, a rechargeable battery,
and a wireless microcontroller.
The pressure sensing head—based on the design reported
in [29]—consists of a barometric pressure sensor (MPL115A1,
Freescale Semiconductors, Austin, TX, USA) embedded in a
2.2 mm-thick silicone rubber layer (VytaFlex 20, Smooth On,
Easton, PA, USA). The bare barometric pressure sensor has a
sensitivity of 0.5 kPa and a sensing range of 65 kPa for the
atmospheric pressure.
The localization module includes three Hall effect sensors
(CYP15A, ChenYang Technologies GmbH & Co. KG, Finsing,
Germany) and a 16-bit triaxial accelerometer with serial peripheral interface (SPI) (LIS331AL, STMicroelectronics, Geneva,
Switzerland). The Hall effect sensors are mounted on three orthogonal sides of a cubic structure, as represented in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. (a) Schematic view. (b) Picture of the WPP. The signal conditioning
stage, the triaxial accelerometer, the power regulation unit, and the wireless
microcontroller are mounted on separate printed circuit board (PCB) with a
diameter of 9.9 mm. In particular, the signal conditioning stage was separated
into two boards due to PCB area constraints.

Their analog outputs are acquired by a signal conditioning stage.
This stage consists of three instrumentation amplifiers (AD623,
Analog Devices, Norwood, MA, USA) with a unity gain, three
low-pass filters (Fc = 30 Hz), and three 16-bit analog to digital converters (ADS8320, Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, USA)
with SPI interface. The digitalized magnetic field signal has a
sensitivity of 0.6 mT.
The power regulation unit embeds a low-dropout voltage regulator (TPS73xx, Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, USA), an
operational amplifier (ADS8617, Analog Device, Norwood,
MA, USA) used as a voltage divider to provide the proper
power supply to the signal conditioning stage and to monitor
the battery level. A 50 mAh, 3.7 V rechargeable LiPo battery
(Shenzhen Hondark Electronics Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China,
12 mm × 15 mm × 3 mm in size) is used as the on-board power
supply source.
The data from the barometric pressure sensor, the accelerometer, and the magnetic field sensors are acquired by a wireless microcontroller (CC2530, Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX,
USA) through the SPI interface at a clock frequency of 1 Mbit/s.
Each dataset is then bounded into a 28-byte payload together
with a progressive package indicator, a time stamp, the battery level, and two synchronization start and stop bytes. This
payload is transmitted by the wireless microcontroller to an
external transceiver over a 2.4-GHz carrier frequency. The external transceiver consists of a mirror wireless microcontroller
(CC2530, Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, USA) connected to

356

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

the Universal Serial Bus (USB) port of a personal computer
(PC) through a dedicated module (UM232R, FTDI, Glasgow,
U.K.).
While the total time required to acquire a single dataset from
all the sensors is 3.7 ms, the wireless data throughput runs at
44.8 kbit/s, resulting in a refresh time of 5 ms and a sampling
rate of 200 Hz. The overhead allows to handle correctly the
synchronization with the external transceiver.
In addition to the transceiver and the PC, the external platform includes the source of the static magnetic field used for
WPP tracking. The magnetic field is generated by an off-theshelf cylindrical NdFeB permanent magnet mounted on an articulated three-DoF friction clutch arm (Dectron, Roswell, GA,
USA). The selected magnet has N52 axial magnetization, magnetic remanence of 1.48 T, is 50 mm in diameter and 50 mm
in height, and has a mass of 772 g. These features allow for a
localization workspace that extends 15 cm away from each side
of the magnet. A triaxial accelerometer (LIS331AL, STMicroelectronics, Geneva, Switzerland) is mounted on the magnet to
measure its inclination and derive its rotation with respect to
the global reference frame (x, y, z). Accelerometer data are fed
directly to the PC through a secondary USB connection.
As concerns waterproofing of the WPP to operate during the
surgery, a layer of paraffin film (Parafilm, Sigma Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO, USA) was wrapped around the device. An additional
layer of film was secured at the grasping site to enable a safe
grip.

C. Communication Protocol and User Interface
The communication protocol provides robust operation, realtime data acquisition, and low power consumption. A sleep timer
is used to wake up the WPP from a low-power mode every 15 s.
When active, the WPP tries to establish a wireless communication with the external transceiver. If this attempt fails, the
WPP returns in sleep mode to save power. Once the wireless
link is established, the WPP acquires a full dataset of sensor
readings, transmits it to the external transceiver, and waits for
an acknowledgement. If the acknowledgment is received, the
WPP continues to acquire and send data. Otherwise, the WPP
retries to transmit the same package. This attempt is repeated
for two times, then, the firmware forces the device to get a new
dataset and updates the payload. In case of loss of the synchronization, the WPP autoresets itself ready for a new acquisition.
This protocol allows for a fail safe operation and prevents the
need for a hard reset of the device that would not be possible
during surgery.
All the data received by the external transceiver are transmitted to the PC together with the received signal strength indicator
(RSSI). The RSSI quantifies the quality of the wireless link. In
case of a low RSSI, the user is warned to modify the position of
the external transceiver to improve the wireless coupling.
A multithread C++ application running on the PC unbounds
the data and shares them with a parallel application developed
in MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) via TCP-IP communication. Refresh rate for displayed data runs at 30 Hz.

The user interface is conceived to work in two different
modalities: 1) creation of the volumetric stiffness map and 2)
display of WPP position on the volumetric stiffness map. In the
first modality, the surgeon grasps the WPP and creates the map
by palpating the region of interest. In this case, the user interface displays in real time the x, y, z coordinates of the WPP,
a plot of the indentation pressure, and the numeric value of the
indentation depth in case the indentation pressure has exceeded
Pth . Visual indicators are provided to warn the user if the WPP
is outside the localization workspace. Once the region of interest has been palpated with the desired spatial resolution, a
command is provided by the user through the keyboard to create the volumetric stiffness map. Once the map is available, the
user interface switches to the second modality, overlaying the
real-time position of the WPP in a 3-D space centered on the
map. Under the assumption that the region palpated does not
undergo substantial movements, the surgeon can manipulate the
WPP as a cursor to identify the margins of a stiffer region buried
underneath the tissue.

D. WPP Characterization
Before assessing the overall functionality of the proposed device, the single components were tested and characterized on the
benchtop. In particular, the first step was to verify the localization unit algorithm to evaluate the WPP workspace, localization
error, and any influence of surgical tool in the localization unit
performance. Then, a load cell was adopted to calibrate the
pressure sensor response. Finally, the WPP electronic performance was tested on bench to assess the battery lifetime and the
wireless link reliability.
1) Localization: The device was mounted on the end effector of a six DoF industrial robot (RV6SDL, Mitsubishi Corp.,
Tokyo, Japan) which was used as a reference position system
given its encoder feedback. Assuming the (x, y, z) global reference system centered on the external magnet and having z
aligned with the main axis of the magnet, we characterized the
localization on a grid of 3 by 3 points equally spaced by 50 mm
along x- and y-directions at three different z coordinates (i.e.,
80, 110, and 140 mm). For each position, localization data were
acquired from the robot encoders and the WPP algorithm. Onboard localization was repeated for each point with a disposable
laparoscopic grasper (EndoGrasp 5 mm, Covidien, Mansfield,
MA, USA) closing its jaws at the grasping site. Then, the indentation depth error was estimated at each point of the grid by
moving the robot end effector 3 mm along z in open air, thus
emulating palpation. The average absolute errors were equal to
4.7 mm (±4.5 mm) for x, 4.1 mm (±5.8 mm) for y, and 4.5 mm
(±2.2 mm) for z. The laparoscopic grasper increased the localization error to 9.8 mm (±5.1 mm) for x, 11.3 mm (±6.6 mm)
for y, and 10.6 mm (±4.6 mm) for z. However, we observed
that the contribution of the laparoscopic grasper does not vary
substantially within the workspace, thus, it can be assumed as a
constant offset that factors out when reconstructing the stiffness
map. The indentation depth average absolute error resulted in
0.68 mm (±0.44 mm).

BECCANI et al.: WIRELESS TISSUE PALPATION FOR INTRAOPERATIVE DETECTION OF LUMPS IN THE SOFT TISSUE

Fig. 4.

Step response of the WPP pushing against a reference load cell.

357

Fig. 5. Experimental data acquired by standard and wireless indentation for
two different silicone samples. For this trial, relative errors in local stiffness
identification were equal to 4.72% for sample 1 and 3.17% for sample 2.

III. WPP ASSESSMENT
2) Pressure Sensing Head: To calibrate and characterize the pressure sensing head response, a 6-DoF load cell
(NANO17, ATI Industrial Automation, Apex, NC, USA,
resolution 1/160 N) was adopted as the force reference system [26]. The WPP was mounted as in the previous experiment,
while the load cell was fixed on the benchtop. A 1-mm step motion pushing the WPP against the load cell was imposed. Speed
of motion was 65 mm/s. After about 9 s, the same step was
imposed in the opposite direction, releasing the load. From the
experimental results—represented in Fig. 4—we can conclude
that the silicone layer embedding the barometric pressure sensor does not introduce any relevant delay in the sensor response.
An additional set of trials was performed by pushing the WPP
against the load cell at a lower speed (i.e., 3.12 mm/s), until the
saturation of the barometric pressure sensor occurred. This test
was repeated five times. The pressure sensing head showed a
sensitivity of Ps = 34 Pa (i.e., considering the probing area, this
is equivalent to 5 g or 0.049 N), while saturation occurred at
PSAT = 5 kPa (i.e., considering the probing area, this is equivalent to 730 g or 7.16 N). In light of a recent study [27] that reports
tissue damage to the liver for a force exceeding 6 N—exerted by
a probing area of the same size of the WPP—we can conclude
that the pressure sensing range is adequate for this exploratory
investigation. The threshold value Pth was therefore assumed
as Pth = Pbias + 2Ps , where Pbias is the output value for the
sensor when unloaded. This value for Pth allowed us to reliably
identify the start of an indentation.
3) Electronics: As regards power consumption, a single 5ms loop of data acquisition and wireless transmission drains an
average of 33.3 mA with a peak of 41.6 mA. This translates in a
battery lifetime of about 90 min when the WPP is in the active
mode. The average current consumption drops down to 3 mA
when the WPP is in low-power mode.
The data synchronization between the WPP and the external
transceiver was tested in open air to estimate the robustness of
the protocol. The firmware was run for 36 consecutive hours
without failures and was then stopped. The results included a
package loss below 2% and an average RSSI of −13.5 dBm
at a distance of 2 m between the WPP and the external transreceiver. Complete loss of communication occurs as the RSSI
drops below −88 dBm.

Experimental validation of the proposed platform consisted
in two different trials. First, the effectiveness of the probe in
identifying the local stiffness of a tissue simulator was assessed.
Then, in vivo trials were aimed to identify agar-gel lumps injected into a porcine liver and to assess the device usability
within the frame of an MIS procedure.
A. Assessment of Local Stiffness Identification
To estimate the ability of the WPP in detecting different local
stiffnesses, two different synthetic tissue samples were fabricated combining two different ratios of liquid plastic and hardener (PVC Regular Liquid Plastic—Hardener, MF Manufacturing, Fort Worth, TX, USA—Sample 1: 1 to 10 ratio, resulting in
an elastic modulus of 220 kPa; Sample 2: 1 to 2 ratio, resulting
in an elastic module of 45 kPa). The samples were 30 mm thick
with a lateral side of 75 mm. A traditional indenter was obtained
mounting a 6-DoF load cell (MINI 45, ATI Industrial Automation, Apex, NC, USA, resolution 1/16 N) at the end effector
of the robotic manipulator used previously. A cylindrical probe
with the same contact surface as the WPP was mounted on the
distal side of the load cell to indent the sample. Then, the cylindrical probe was replaced with the WPP and the indentation was
repeated acquiring both the indentation pressure and depth from
the wireless device. Five loading–unloading trials reaching an
indentation depth of 2.6 mm were performed for each tissue
sample and each method at a constant speed of 0.75 mm/s.
The local stiffnesses measured with the traditional indenter
were equal to E1 = 2.12 kPa/mm, E2 = 8.52 kPa/mm, while the
results obtained with the WPP were E1W PP = 2.02 kPa/mm,
E2W PP = 8.79 kPa/mm. Experimental plots obtained from a
single loading are represented in Fig. 5. Overall, the WPP was
effective in detecting the local stiffness of different samples with
an average relative error equal to 4.7% for sample 1 and 3% for
sample 2.
B. In Vivo Validation
The feasibility of wireless tissue palpation was then assessed
in vivo on an anesthetized porcine model. The primary measure of interest was to acquire a volumetric stiffness map of a

358

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 7. Laparoscopic view of the WPP operated by the surgeon through a
laparoscopic grasper during in vivo trials.

Fig. 6. Picture of the surgical setup during the in vivo trial. (a) Snapshot of
the laparoscopic camera view and the user interface during the creation of the
volumetric stiffness map. (b) Picture of the surgical field.

segment of the liver where agar-gel was injected to simulate a
hepatic tumor. The map acquired in vivo by wireless palpation
was then compared with a stiffness map obtained post-mortem
within 12 h after the procedure using a standard uniaxial material tester. Secondary measures of interest were the time to scan
a liver segment by wireless palpation, WPP usability, instrument
clashing, and operator workload. Reliability of the wireless link
was also assessed.
The porcine surgery was performed at the University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus under IACUC protocol
87912(04)1D. A 57-kg female standard pig was used for this
study. After intravenous sedation, a laparotomy was performed
to access the liver. Similarly to the methods suggested in [8], 6
cc of Sigma Gelrite Gellan Gum (agar) was prepared in a 30:1
ratio of water to agar by weight, boiled, and injected into the
right lateral segment of the liver, to approximately the midthickness of the organ. The midline incision was then sutured, and
minimally invasive access was gained by one 5-mm (5 Versaport
Plus, Covidien, Norwalk, CT, USA) and three 12-mm trocars (512 Versaport Plus, Covidien, Norwalk, CT, USA). The WPP was
introduced in the abdominal cavity through one of the 12-mm
trocar incisions before the placement of the port. The external
source of the magnetic field and the external transceiver were
placed in the close vicinities of the right side of the animal, as
represented in Fig. 6(b). The surgeon used a standard laparoscopic grasper to operate the WPP under endoscopic guidance
(see Fig. 7). A lateral screen showed in real-time WPP position
in three DoF, indentation pressure, and indentation depth [see
Fig. 6(a)].
Once the right segment of the liver was identified, the surgeon
palpated the organ in different positions, always targeting at
least 3 mm as the indentation depth. To prevent localization

Fig. 8. Local stiffness map acquired in vivo for a 6 cc agar-gel lump injected
into the liver. Since the surface of the liver was almost flat in the palpated region,
a bidimensional projection of the map is shown. The local stiffness values inside
areas A, B, and C were compared with the ex vivo map represented in Fig. 9.

artifacts, the surgeon verified that the liver was not moving
during palpation and that adequate support was provided by
the rib cage and the surrounding organs. Tissue stiffness was
acquired on a total of 30 different points on the liver surface.
This required about 5 min. The local stiffness map, represented
in Fig. 8, was then generated by the algorithm and displayed on
the lateral screen, overlaying the current position of the WPP.
Immediately after euthanization, the liver was harvested from
the animal for ex vivo palpation tests using a standard uniaxial material testing system (MTS) (Insight 2 Electromechanical
Testing System, MTS System Corporation, Eden Prairie, MN,
USA) to create a comparable stiffness map. The liver was placed
in 0.9% phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution immediately
after excision and refrigerated until the ex vivo tests were performed. The liver was warmed to room temperature prior to
testing. The organ was placed on a platform, marked with 28
pins and photographed from the top (see Fig. 9). The liver was
indented with a cylindrical indenter probe (2-mm diameter) beside each pin location—to avoid palpating tissue that had been
pricked by the pin. The test was performed following a standard
tissue compressive property measurement method [31]. The tissue was hydrated throughout the tests by spraying PBS on the

BECCANI et al.: WIRELESS TISSUE PALPATION FOR INTRAOPERATIVE DETECTION OF LUMPS IN THE SOFT TISSUE

Fig. 9. Stiffness map obtained with a standard uniaxial MTS, overlayed on the
right lateral segment of the explanted porcine liver. The local stiffness values
inside areas A, B, and C were compared with the in vivo map represented in
Fig. 8.

surface prior to each indentation. The testing room conditions
were 23.5 ◦ C and 22% relative humidity. A 2-N load cell (PN
LCCA-118-75, MTS System Corporation, Eden Prairie, MN,
USA) with 1-mN resolution was used to measure the load exerted on the tissue by the indenter during each indentation. The
probe was programmed to approach the surface of the tissue
at a low speed (0.1 mm/s) until a force threshold (2 mN) was
reached. At that point, the probe advanced into the tissue at a
rate of 1 mm/s to a depth of 3 mm to simulate the in vivo experiment. The force and indentation depth (10 μm resolution)
data were collected at 100 Hz and analyzed with a customized
program developed in MATLAB. Following testing, the tissue
was resected to verify that the agar did not dilute in the liver.
The force data were divided by the surface area of the cylindrical probe tip to obtain pressure. The local stiffness at each
point was determined by computing the slope of a linear regression of the first 0.75 mm of the pressure–displacement curve.
The force at depths larger than 0.75 mm were found to be too
high due to the rigid platform that the liver was resting on and
the relatively small liver thickness. This was not an issue in vivo
as the liver was pressed against other organs or the rib cage. The
stiffness values were assigned to pin locations and overlaid on
the photograph of the liver to produce the stiffness map shown
in Fig. 9.
The two local stiffness maps were then compared with MATLAB (grid area is equal to 1 mm2 for both the maps). In particular, the maximum measured stiffness resulted in 10.0 kPa/mm
with the MTS machine versus 10.8 kPa/mm with the WPP, corresponding to a 8% relative error. Then, the average pseudo stiffness of the three different areas A (36 mm2 ), B (64 mm2 ), and
C (156 mm2 ) centered on the maximum point were compared.
Area A is a square sided 6 mm, area B is the frame with outer
dimension 10 mm, and inner dimension 6 mm, while the area
C is the frame with outer dimension 16 mm and inner dimension 10 mm. The three areas are shown in both the Figs. 8 and
9. The average stiffness was equal to EA M T S = 9.64 kPa/mm

359

and EA W P P = 8.87 kPa/mm (average relative error 7.96%),
EB M T S = 9.20 kPa/mm and EB W P P = 6.58 kPa/mm (average
relative error 28.5%) and EC M T S = 8.64 kPa/mm and EC W P P =
4.82 kPa/mm (average relative error 44.2%). The tissue stiffness
slightly increased after euthanization and throughout the MTS
testing due to the preservation and dehydration. However, the
stiffness at the injection site remained constant to the in vivo
conditions because the gel properties did not vary after explantation. This can help explain why the relative error increases
with the distance from the maximum point which is nearby the
injection site.
As concerns the qualitative measures of interest, no instrument clashing was reported. However, the length of the WPP
limited the range of motion whenever the target of palpation was
too close to the ribcage. The operator workload was minimal,
since the surgeon was able to use a standard laparoscopic instrument to operate the WPP. Relevant learning occurred just at the
beginning of the procedure, when the surgeon had to understand
how strong to grasp the WPP to prevent slippage. This required
about 20 min. After that, the surgeon was able to operate the
WPP without losing the grip. The wireless link was always reliable, resulting in an average RSSI of −33.4 dBm with losses
between 4.8% and 6.2% of the total packages. Battery operation
was effective for the entire procedure.
It is worth mentioning that the surgeon noted that a tether
tied to the WPP would help in the retrieval at the end of the
procedure. A wired connection may also provide power to the
WPP instead of the battery, thus allowing for a reduction in
size. On the other hand, a tether may limit WPP motion and get
trapped in between instruments.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduces for the first time the concept of wireless
tissue palpation to localize tumor margins intraoperatively by
creating a stiffness distribution map in real time. The proposed
wireless device is manipulated directly by the surgeon through
a standard grasper, thus improving autonomy, precision, and
maneuverability. Wireless operation effectively prevents instrument clashing and removes from the need of a dedicated access
port. Preliminary in vivo results showed the feasibility of acquiring a stiffness map during a minimally invasive procedure. In
the future, this map can be used to guide liver resection without
sacrificing excess normal tissue and preventing postoperative
organ failure.
While the indentation pressure is acquired by a sensor
mounted on-board, the position and the indentation depth measurements rely on an external source of the static magnetic field.
This imposes a constraint on the workspace, since the magnetic
field strength drops exponentially with distance. With the proposed platform, the workspace is a cylinder with a diameter of
35 cm and a length of 35 cm, centered on the source of the static
magnetic field. Considering that the abdominal wall thickness
for severely obese patients (Body Mass Index ≤ 40 kg/m2 ) is
usually below 4 cm [32], the proposed platform is easily applicable to the vast majority of patients undergoing the abdominal
surgery. Nevertheless, if a larger workspace is required, either

360

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

the source of the magnetic field or the on-board magnetic field
sensors can be adapted to meet the desired requirements.
As previously mentioned, motion of the organ during the
creation of the map or poor background support for the tissue
may result in localization artifacts. If this occurs, the surgeon
needs to restart the acquisition of stiffness values. This issue is
common for intraoperative palpation and can be addressed with
appropriate surgical planning.
Next steps will consist of improving localization accuracy, [25] reducing the size of the WPP—to achieve a better
maneuverability—and in demonstrating how the WPP can be
used to assist liver resection in a series of in vivo trials. Blinded
studies will be performed, where the operator is not aware of
the location/number/stiffness of the buried lumps. In these studies, the effectiveness of the WPP approach will be compared
with other forms of intraoperative palpation. Also, additional
bench trials will be performed to quantify the efficacy of tumor
identification with respect to size, depth, and relative stiffness
of embedded lumps, following a protocol similar to [4] and performing CT scans of the region of interest as a benchmark for
localization. The repeatability of the results will be quantified
through statistical analysis. Nonlinear stiffness modeling will be
considered for the detection of deeper tumors. A triaxial force
sensor [33]–[36] may be used in the probing head of the WPP
instead of a uniaxial pressure sensor. This would allow for studying more complex interactions with the tissue and to improve
lump margin detection. Another relevant future step will be the
optimization of the user interface. This will include a study on
the most effective way to convey the acquired information to
the surgeon, along the lines of the results reported in [25].

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]

REFERENCES
[1] J. Fuller, W. Scott, B. Ashar, and J. Corrado. (2003). “Laparoscopic
trocar injuries: A report from a U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) Systematic
Technology Assessment of Medical Products (STAMP) committee,”
[Online]. Available: www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/safety/alertsandnotices/
ucm197339.htm
[2] P. Puangmali, H. Liu, L. Seneviratne, P. Dasgupta, and K. Althoefer,
“Miniature 3-axis distal force sensor for minimally invasive surgical palpation,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 646–656,
Aug. 2012.
[3] Intuitive Surgical website. (2013). [Online]. Available: www.
intuitivesurgical.com
[4] H. Liu, J. Li, X. Song, L. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Rolling indentation probe for tissue abnormality identification during minimally invasive
surgery,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 450–460, Jun. 2011.
[5] B. F. Kaczmarek, S. Sukumar, F. Petros, Q. D. Trinh, N. Mander, R. Che,
M. Menon, and C. Rogers, “Robotic ultrasound probe for tumor identification in robotic partial nephrectomy: Initial series and outcomes,” Int. J.
Urol., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 172–176, 2013.
[6] C. M. Schneider, P. D. Peng, R. H. Taylor, G. W. Dachs, C. J. Hasser,
S. P. DiMaio, and M. A. Choti, “Robot-assisted laparoscopic ultrasonography for hepatic surgery,” Surgery, vol. 151, no. 5, pp. 756–762, 2012.
[7] S. D. Herrell, R. L. Galloway, and L. M. Su, “Image-guided robotic
surgery: Update on research and potential applications in urologic
surgery,” Curr. Opin. Urol., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 47–54, 2012.
[8] G. McCreery, A. Trejos, M. Naish, R. Patel, and R. Malthaner, “Feasibility
of locating tumours in lung via kinaesthetic feedback.,” Int. J. Med. Robot.
Comput. Assist. Surg., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 58–68, 2008.
[9] E. C. Lai, C. N. Tang, J. P. Ha, D. K. Tsui, and M. K. Li, “The evolving
influence of laparoscopy and laparoscopic ultrasonography on patients

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

with hepatocellular carcinoma,” Amer. J. Surg., vol. 196, no. 5, pp. 736–
740, 2008.
R. Yakoubi, R. Autorino, H. Laydner, J. Guillotreau, M. A. White,
S. Hillyer, G. Spana, R. Khanna, W. Isaac, G. P. Haber, R. J. Stein, and
J. H. Kaouk, “Initial laboratory experience with a novel ultrasound probe
for standard and single-port robotic kidney surgery: Increasing console
surgeon autonomy and minimizing instrument clashing,” Int. J. Med.
Robot., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 201–205, 2012.
L. Fratt, “Ultrasound opens new doors in robotic surgery,” Health Imag.,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 12–17, May/Jun. 2012.
P. Dario and M. Bergamasco, “An advanced robot system for automated
diagnostic tasks through palpation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 118–126, Feb. 1988.
R. Howe, W. Peine, D. Kantarinis, and J. Son, “Remote palpation technology,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 318–323, May/Jun.
1995.
T. Ohtsuka, A. Furuse, T. Kohno, J. Nakajima, K. Yagyu, and S. Omata,
“Application of a new tactile sensor to thoracoscopic surgery: Experimental and clinical study,” Ann. Thoracic Surg., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 610–614,
1995.
M. Ottensmeyer and J. Salisbury, “In vivo data acquisition instrument
for solid organ mechanical property measurement,” in Proc. Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assist. Interven., 2001, pp. 975–982.
E. Samur, M. Sedef, C. Basdogan, L. Avtan, and O. Duzgun, “A robotic
indenter for minimally invasive measurement and characterization of soft
tissue response,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 361–373, 2007.
J. Rosen, J. Brown, S. De, M. Sinanan, and B. Hannaford, “Biomechanical
properties of abdominal organs in vivo and postmortem under compression
loads,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 130, no. 021020, pp. 1–17, 2008.
K. Lister, Z. Gao, and J. Desai, “Development of in vivo constitutive
models for liver: Application to surgical simulation,” Ann. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 39, pp. 1060–1073, 2011.
O. Van der Meijden and M. Schijven, “The value of haptic feedback
in conventional and robot-assisted minimal invasive surgery and virtual
reality training: A current review,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 23, pp. 1180–1190,
2009.
G. Tholey and J. P. Desai, “A compact and modular laparoscopic grasper
with tri-directional force measurement capability,” ASME J. Med. Devices,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 031 001–9, 2008.
B. Kübler, U. Seibold, and G. Hirzinger, “Development of actuated and
sensor integrated forceps for minimally invasive robotic surgery,” Int. J.
Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 96–107, 2005.
M. Stark, T. Benhidjeb, S. Gidaro, and E. Morales, “The future of
telesurgery: A universal system with haptic sensation,” J. Turkish-German
Gynecolog. Assoc., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 74–76, 2012.
J. Gwilliam, Z. Pezzementi, E. Jantho, A. Okamura, and S. Hsiao, “Human
versus robotic tactile sensing: Detecting lumps in soft tissue,” in Proc.
IEEE Hapt. Symp., 2010, pp. 21–28.
R. E. Goldman, A. Bajo, and N. Simaan, “Algorithms for autonomous
exploration and estimation in compliant environments,” Robotica, vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 71–87, 2013.
A. Talasaz and R. V. Patel, “Integration of force reflection with tactile
sensing for minimally invasive robotics-assisted tumor localization,” IEEE
Trans. Haptics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 217–228, 2013.
M. T. Perri, A. L. Trejos, M. D. Naish, R. V. Patel, and R. A. Malthaner,
“Initial evaluation of a tactile/kinesthetic force feedback system for minimally invasive tumor localization,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics,
vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 925–931, Dec. 2010.
M. T. Perri, A. L. Trejos, M. D. Naish, R. V. Patel, and R. A. Malthaner,
“New tactile sensing system for minimally invasive surgical tumour localization,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 211–
220, 2010.
M. Beccani, C. Di Natali, M. E. Rentschler, and P. Valdastri, “Wireless
tissue palpation: Proof of concept for a single degree of freedom,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013, pp. 703–709.
Takktile by Y. Tenzer, L. Jentoft, I. Daniher, and R. Howe. (2013). [Online].
Available: www.takktile.com
C. Di Natali, M. Beccani, and P. Valdastri, “Real-time pose detection
for magnetic medical devices,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 7, pp.
3524–3527, 2013.
X. Wang, J. A. Schoen, and M. E. Rentschler, “Quantitative comparison
of soft tissue compressive viscoelastic model accuracy,” J. Mech. Behav.
Biomed. Mater., vol. 20, pp. 126–136, 2013.
S. L. Best, R. Bergs, M. Gedeon, J. Paramo, R. Fernandez, J. A. Cadeddu,
and D. J. Scott, “Maximizing coupling strength of magnetically anchored

BECCANI et al.: WIRELESS TISSUE PALPATION FOR INTRAOPERATIVE DETECTION OF LUMPS IN THE SOFT TISSUE

[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]

surgical instruments: How thick can we go?” Surg. Endosc., vol. 25, no. 1,
pp. 153–159, 2011.
P. Valdastri, K. Harada, A. Menciassi, L. Beccai, C. Stefanini, M. Fujie,
and P. Dario, “Integration of a miniaturised triaxial force sensor in a
minimally invasive surgical tool,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53,
no. 11, pp. 2397–2400, Nov. 2006.
Y. Hu, R. Katragadda, H. Tu, Q. Zheng, Y. Li, and Y. Xu, “Bioinspired
3-D tactile sensor for minimally invasive surgery,” J. Microelectromech.
Syst., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1400–1408, 2010.
J. Peirs, J. Clijnen, D. Reynaerts, H. V. Brussel, P. Herijgers, B. Corteville,
and S. Boone, “A micro optical force sensor for force feedback during
minimally invasive robotic surgery,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 115,
no. 2, pp. 447–455, 2004.
P. Baki, G. Székely, and G. Kósa, “Design and characterization of a novel,
robust, tri-axial force sensor,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 192, no. 1,
pp. 101–110, 2012.

Marco Beccani (S’11) received the Master’s degree
in electronic engineering from the University of Pisa,
Pisa, Italy, in 2010. After spending one year as Research Assistant at the Institute of BioRobotics of
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, since 2011, he is working toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering at Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
He is a member of the Science and Technology
Of Robotics in Medicine Laboratory, and his field of
research is miniaturized real-time embedded system
design for wireless robotic capsular endoscopy and
robotic surgery.

Christian Di Natali (S’10) received the Master’s degree (Hons.) in biomedical engineering from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy in 2010. Since Fall 2011, he
has been working toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering at Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
TN, USA.
In 2011, he joined the Institute of BioRobotics
of Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, as a Research Assistant working on magnetic coupling and teleoperated
magnetic navigation. He is a member of the STORM
lab, and he is actively involved in the design of advanced magnetic coupling for surgery and endoscopy, controlled mechatronic
platforms, and magnetic localization.

Levin J. Sliker (S’13) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from the University
of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA, in 2010 and 2012,
respectively, where he is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering, where
he is a National Science Foundation (NSF) Graduate
Research Fellow.
His research interests include dynamic contact experimentation and modeling, medical robot design,
and mechatronics.
Mr. Sliker is a member of the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers.

361

Jonathan A. Schoen received the B.S. degree in biology from Colgate University, Hamilton, NY, USA,
in 1993, the M.A. degree in biomedical sciences from
Touro College, Dix Hills, NY, USA, in 1994, and the
M.D. degree from the Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, in 1998. His internship, residency
and fellowship were all at the University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO.
He is currently a Board Certified Surgeon specializing in bariatric surgery and advanced minimally invasive surgery, including laparoscopic gastrointestinal surgery and general surgery at the University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora,
CO, USA. His research interests include the mechanisms of weight loss after
gastric bypass, as well as developing a unique integrated and structured exercise
and fitness plan following surgery, to further improve long-term weight loss and
health.
Dr. Schoen is an active member of the American Society for Bariatric Surgeons and the Society of American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons.

Mark E. Rentschler (M’08) received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the University
of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA, the M.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, where
he was a National Defense Science and Engineering
Graduate Fellow, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, NE, USA.
He is currently an Assistant Professor, the CoDirector of Design Center Colorado, and the Director
of the Graduate Design Program in Mechanical Engineering at the University
of Colorado in Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He also holds a secondary appointment in the Department of Surgery at the University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA, and holds an affiliate position in the Department of Bioengineering at the University of Colorado at Denver, Denver,
CO, USA. Previously, he had been a Postdoctoral Researcher in the Division of
Vascular Surgery at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA, and the Senior Engineer and the Director of Operations at Virtual Incision Corporation, Boston, MA, USA. His research interests include medical
mechatronics and surgical robotics design, tissue mechanics characterization,
and tissue–device interaction modeling.
Dr. Rentschler has performed research at the NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA, and is also a member of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers.

Pietro Valdastri (M’05) received the Master’s
(Hons.) degree in electronic engineering from the
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2002, and the Ph.D.
degree in biomedical engineering from the Scuola
Superiore Sant’Anna (SSSA), Pisa, Italy.
After spending three years as an Assistant Professor at the Institute of BioRobotics of SSSA, since
2011 he has been an Assistant Professor at the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN, USA, where he founded
the Science and Technology Of Robotics in Medicine
Lab. He is actively involved in robotic endoscopy and robotic surgery, design of
magnetic mechanisms, and design of capsule robots for medical applications.

