388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Development of an Implantable Flexible Probe
for Simultaneous Near-Infrared Spectroscopy
and Electrocorticography
Toshitaka Yamakawa∗ , Member, IEEE, Takano Inoue, Yeting He, Masami Fujii, Michiyasu Suzuki,
and Masatsugu Niwayama, Member, IEEE

Abstract—A combination of near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)
and electrocorticography (ECoG) provides beneficial information
on cortical activity from different aspects. Integration of such multimodal measurement capability into a single apparatus and the
direct measurement of cortical activity during chronic subdural
implantation may be a powerful means for clinical diagnosis and
neuroscience. However, an optical fiber-based NIRS probe cannot
be miniaturized for implantation into the brain, and the lightscattering effect of ECoG electrodes in NIRS measurements is
unknown. We describe here the development of a flexible probe,
small enough for chronic subdural implantation, for simultaneous NIRS and ECoG. Two light-emitting diodes of different wavelengths and two photodiodes were mounted on a polyimide-based
flexible substrate, and ECoG electrodes were formed with a design
minimizing artifacts in NIRS recording. The fabricated probe measured ECoGs at sufficient spatial resolution and submicromolar
changes in hemoglobin concentrations in in vivo experiments with
acute implantation into a rat. Comparison of measured changes in
hemoglobin concentrations for different source–detector distances
reveals the reliability of the measured values and the practicality
of the simulation model. The proposed intracranial multimodality
probe may provide beneficial evidence for pre- and intrasurgical
assessment of neurosurgery and reveal the interaction of electrophysiology and hemodynamics at high spatial resolution without
artifacts due to scalp blood flow.
Index Terms—Electrocorticography (ECoG), flexible electronics, multimodality probe, near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), subdural implantation.

Manuscript received May 12, 2013; revised July 23, 2013; accepted August
20, 2013. Date of publication August 27, 2013; date of current version January
16, 2014. This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI under Grant
23700493. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ T. Yamakawa is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu
432-8038, Japan, also with the Research Institute of Electronics, Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu 432-8038, Japan, and also with the Fuzzy Logic Systems
Institute, Iizuka 820-0067, Japan (e-mail: toshiyamakawaphd@ieee.org).
T. Inoue, Y. He, and M. Suzuki are with the Department of Neurosurgery,
Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan (e-mail:
tainoue@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp; s004uk@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp; michi@yamaguchiu.ac.jp).
M. Fujii is with the Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University
School of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan, and also with Department of
Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University Hospital, Ube 755-8505, Japan (e-mail:
masfujii@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp).
M. Niwayama is with the Department of Electrical Electronic Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering, Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu 432-8038,
Japan (e-mail: tmniway@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2279888

I. INTRODUCTION
IMULTANEOUS recording of electroencephalogram
(EEG) and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) signals provides insights into both electrophysiological (fast) and hemodynamic (slow) activities. In a noninvasive manner, combined
diagnosis using NIRS and EEG reveals reliable clinical indicators, especially for the evaluation of the epileptogenic focus
in the cerebral cortex [1], [2]. Optical fiber-based NIRS instruments are commonly used in such clinical situations. The probe
head is several millimeters in length, given that the optical fibers
require clad and guard layers to protect the fiber core and must
be bundled to yield high optical intensity. In addition, the optical
fibers are intolerant to flexion because of the limited mechanical
strength of the fiber material. Furthermore, sufficient distance
between the emitter and the detector is necessary for extracranial
measurement because the optical path must reach the targeted
area of the cortex through the scalp, skull, and dura mater. For
the abovementioned reasons, miniaturization of the probe and
improvement of spatial resolution have awaited development.
As an invasive method to measure cortical hemodynamics, cerebral blood flowmetry employing a laser Doppler phenomenon is adopted during craniotomy in neurosurgery. However, cerebral oxygenation and cerebral blood volume (CBV),
which can both be measured in NIRS and are important indicators of hypoxia and hyperemia, cannot be diagnosed by cerebral
blood flow (CBF).
Simultaneous NIRS and electrocorticography (ECoG) have
revealed the interaction between electrical and local metabolic
activity at high spatial and temporal resolution [3], [4]. Such
multimodal assessment enhances the resolution, accuracy, and
reliability of diagnosis, and thus merits the invasive procedure
especially in pre- and intrasurgical diagnoses. Although the
recording of synchronized NIRS and ECoG under chronic implantation may give more useful data, it is not readily achieved
with current methods using fiber-based NIRS instrumentation.
We describe here a thin flexible probe designed for simultaneous recording of NIRS and ECoG. For compatibility with subdural chronic implantation, near-infrared light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) and photodiodes (PDs) for NIRS measurement are
mounted on a nontoxic polyimide-based flexible substrate. Fabrication using flexible printed circuit technology permits a high
integration density of the electrical components and conductive patterns, and thereby permits miniaturization of the probe
head. Although the integration of multimodality into a thin and
tiny probe improves compatibility with subdural implantation,

S

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YAMAKAWA et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PROBE FOR SIMULTANEOUS NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY

389

the highly reflective material (such as the electrodes and wiring
patterns) inserted in the optical path may modulate the mean optical path length. Accordingly, the electrodes for ECoG recording, wiring patterns, and substrate geometry are designed to
minimize the effect on NIRS measurement using estimates derived by a Monte Carlo simulation developed previously [5].
The function of simultaneous NIRS and ECoG measurement
is demonstrated in animal experiments with the acute implantation of the fabricated probe, and the evaluated measurement
capability shows the applicability of the instrument for pre- and
intrasurgical diagnoses.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The probe substrate was fabricated by flexible printed circuit
technology with micrometer-order accuracy. A polyimide thin
film having two copper conductive layers was used as the base
substrate. The copper layers were processed by photolithography to form bonding pads and ECoG electrodes on the top layer
and wiring patterns on the bottom layer and were vertically
connected via plated through holes. The bonding pads and electrodes on the top layer were finished with electroless gold plating. The bottom copper layer was laminated with a polyimide
coverlay coated on the inner side with nonbisphenolic epoxy
adhesive after photolithography. The substrate outline was finalized by UV laser etching after coverlay. The total thickness
of the substrate was approximately 75 μm.
Electronic components were mounted on the top layer of the
substrate. Two infrared LED bare chips having different wavelengths (C735-40P for 735 nm, CN870-40P for 870 nm, 0.4 ×
0.4 × 0.25 mm, Epitex, Kyoto, Japan) were used as luminescence sources. For comparison of NIRS measurement capability
at different source–detector distances, two bare chips of highly
sensitive PDs (PD2501, 1.3 × 3.1 × 0.3 mm, Epitex) with light
sensitivities of 0.50 A/W at 735 nm and 0.53 A/W at 870 nm,
respectively, were mounted at 6 and 8 mm, respectively, from
the LEDs. The top and bottom electrodes of the components
were connected to the bonding pads using 25-μm-diameter gold
bonding wires and conductive silver paste, respectively.
Light absorption blocks were formed with black epoxy on the
direct light pathway between the LEDs and PDs. The mounted
components, conductive patterns excluding the ECoG electrodes, and bonding wires on the top layer were sealed with
water-clear silicone rubber.
After the entire fabrication procedure, all components were
assembled on the probe head of 5.6 × 10 mm with a total
thickness of 0.7 mm. A photograph of the fabricated probe and
a schematic image of the layer structure are shown in Fig. 1.
The LEDs were driven, with an applied power of 1 mW,
complementarily as follows: the 735-nm LED was turned on
for 20 ms, followed by a resting period of 20 ms, the 870-nm
LED was turned on for 20 ms, and both LEDs were turned off
for 440 ms for a static period. The signals obtained by PDs were
processed using a current-to-voltage converter, a multiplexer,
and an amplifier and fed into a personal computer via a digitizer.
Here, the circuit board for the signal processing has confirmed
that the intrinsic noise was less than 5 mV.

Fig. 1. Fabricated NIRS-ECoG probe. (a) Fabricated device. The scales shown
in the lower end indicate 1 mm. PD is the abbreviation for a PD. (b) A schematic
image of the layer structure of the probe head. The materials and the thickness
of the layers are shown in the right edge. Polyimide is abbreviated as PI in the
schematic.

The changes in oxyhemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, and total
hemoglobin concentrations were obtained as in [6]
0.454 ΔOD870 − 0.286 ΔOD735
l
0.438 ΔOD735 − 0.163 ΔOD870
Δ [HHb] =
l
Δ [HbT] = Δ [HbO2 ] + Δ [HHb]

Δ [HbO2 ] =

(1)
(2)
(3)

where ΔOD is the optical density expressed as ln(I0 /I), where I
and I0 are the measured and initial optical intensity, respectively,
at each wavelength, and the coefficients of ΔOD were calculated from the molecular extinction coefficient at each wavelength [7]. l is the mean optical path length obtained by the
Monte Carlo simulation [5]. A homogeneous model was used
for the simulation on the assumption that the probe directly
measures the cortical surface without any reflecting and scattering layers. The Monte Carlo simulation was performed with the
following optical parameters: an absorption coefficient μa of
0.04 mm−1 and a scattering coefficient μs of 42 mm−1 assuming the gray matter of the cortical surface [8], and an anisotropy
factor g of 0.95 under the consideration of forward scattering
in the homogeneous model [9]. As results of the simulation, l
values of 22 and 30 mm were derived for PDs 6 and 8 mm,
respectively, from the LEDs.
As shown in Fig. 1, four gold electrodes for ECoG recording
were installed on the optical path. Such highly reflective materials may modulate the optical path length in the cortex, adding an
error factor to the calculated hemodynamic values. Therefore, a
design with an electrode diameter of 0.5 mm, wiring patterns of
40 μm, and a specific substrate shape was adopted. This caused
<1% increase in the mean optical path length in the Monte
Carlo simulation.

390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 2. Craniotomy and the attached probe. The cranial window was made
so that the electrodes would record the cortical region in the vicinity of the
somatosensory cortex (S1). The wires connected to the scalp are reference
(anterior) and ground (posterior) electrodes for ECoG recording.

To reduce the conductive noise from the electrical paths
for driving the LEDs [three top wiring patterns in the left of
Fig. 1(a)], grounded shield patterns were inserted near the small
signal paths from the electrodes and PDs.
III. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
A. Animal Preparation and Data Acquisition
Animal tests using a male Sprague–Dawley rat (420 g, 10
weeks old) were performed to assess the probe functions using
protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care at Yamaguchi University School of Medicine. Because the prime objective of the experiments was the basic verification of function
in simultaneous NIRS and ECoG recording, only one animal
was used without consideration of intra- and interspecies variation, with the aim of minimizing animal suffering.
The rat was anesthetized with sevoflurane (3% for induction via a facemask, 2% after intubation) and maintained in
a 20% mixture of oxygen and balanced air using a ventilator
(A.D.S.1000; Engler Engineering Co., Hialeah, USA) through
endotracheal intubation. During the procedure, rectal temperature was monitored and kept constant at 37 ± 0.2 ◦ C using
a temperature-controlled heating pad (NS-TC10; Neuroscience
Inc., Tokyo, Japan). The femoral artery was cannulated for continuous monitoring of arterial blood pressure. Systemic blood
pressure was maintained at 100–120 mmHg.
The head was placed in a stereotaxic apparatus (SR-6 N;
Narishige, Tokyo, Japan), a scalp incision was made at the midline, and both the bregma and lambda points were exposed after
dissection of the pericranial tissue. A craniotomy was drilled
over the right hemisphere (1.5–7.5 mm lateral, 3.0 mm anterior, and 9.0 mm posterior to the bregma). The probe head was
placed on the exposed cortex as shown in Fig. 2 so that the elec-

trodes overlapped the primary somatosensory area (S1), which
is located in the frontal cortex in rats [10]. Stainless steel needle electrodes were placed on the anterior and posterior scalp
regions of the cranial window as reference and ground electrodes, respectively. After the surgical procedure, a black cloth
was hung over the stereotaxic apparatus to block ambient light.
The electrodes were connected to a four-channel physiological amplifier (SYNAX1200; NEC-Sanei, Tokyo, Japan) via
through-hole connectors made on the probe tail. The NIRS signal, amplified ECoG signals, and signals of the other monitored
physiological activities (rectal temperature, electrocardiogram,
and blood pressure) were simultaneously collected at a sampling rate of 2 kHz and stored on a PC via a digitizer (Powerlab
8/30; AD Instruments, Colorado Springs, USA). The ECoG
signals were digitally processed with a bandpass filter of 0.5–
50 Hz passband on monitoring software (LabChart 7; AD Instruments). Changes in oxy hemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, and
total hemoglobin concentrations were calculated off-line by the
methods described in Section II.
For the stable measurement of multimodal information, three
tests were performed in the following order: 1) somatosensory
evoked potentials (SEPs); 2) focal brain cooling; and 3) hyperoxia. The rationale of this testing order was that the least
stressful tests were performed first to minimize the influence on
subsequent tests [11].
B. Somatosensory-Evoked Potentials
SEPs can determine the detailed localization of somatosensory activity using multielectrode grids [12]. In this study, SEPs
were measured to confirm the recording function of the electrodes on the probe. A bipolar electrode was affixed to the contralateral forelimb to electrically stimulate the median nerve
and was connected the built-in stimulator of the physiological
amplifier. Electrical stimuli consisted of 3-Hz constant current
pulses with a duration of 200 μs and intensity of 1.4 mA. A
recording session consisted of 100 repeated stimuli, and five
separate sessions were performed with rest intervals of >30 s.
Thus, 500 sweeps were averaged for each electrode.
C. Focal Brain Cooling
Focal brain cooling suppresses abnormal neuronal activity
such as epileptic discharges with minimal influences on neurological functions [13]. This technique has been studied as a
treatment for epilepsy since the 1960 s [14]–[17] and is thought
to be a palliative treatment for severe drug-resistive epilepsy
(e.g. status epileptics), based on the fact that the suppressive
effect on neuronal activity is totally reversible with focal brain
cooling at higher than 5 ◦ C [18], [19]. In addition, focal brain
cooling exerts inhibitive effects on CBF at ≤20 ◦ C [20], [21].
Therefore, in this study, hemodynamic and neuroelectronic activities were measured by the proposed probe under focal brain
cooling.
A focal brain cooling device driven by a Peltier element
equipped with a 4 × 4 mm stainless steel plate at the cooling tip
was attached to a micromanipulator and was gently applied to
cover the exposed cortex through the probe in Fig. 2 (see [22]

YAMAKAWA et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PROBE FOR SIMULTANEOUS NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY

391

Fig. 3. SEPs measured using the electrodes mounted on the proposed probe.
The electrodes were numbered according to the implanted positions as follows:
electrode 1 for median, electrode 2 for posterior, electrode 3 for lateral, and
electrode 4 for anterior.

for the details of the cooling device). The cortical temperature of
the cooling area was measured by a thermocouple built into the
cooling device, and the temperature data were simultaneously
collected by the same digitizer used for the ECoG and physiological activity measurements. The cortical temperature was
reduced from 37 ◦ C to approximately 30 ◦ C by the attachment
of the cooling device. After preparing the device, the NIRS and
ECoG signals were monitored without cooling as a static state
for 5 min. Focal brain cooling at 20 ◦ C was then performed
for 5 min, and the cooling was stopped for >5 min to allow
the cortical surface to return to the normal temperature (30 ◦ C).
This cooling/rewarming cycle was repeated three times.
D. Hyperoxia
Hyperoxia induced by hyperventilation in healthy animals
causes immediate cerebral vasoconstriction with a consequent
rise in cerebral vascular resistance and a fall in CBF [23].
Sevoflurane anesthesia elicits epileptiform EEG patterns followed by hyperoxia [24]. In this experiment, NIRS and ECoG
were measured simultaneously using the fabricated probe with
the purpose of monitoring the electrical and hemodynamic activities of the cortical surface under hyperoxic conditions. To
induce a hyperoxic condition, the fraction of inspired oxygen
(FiO2 ) was increased from 21% to 100% through endotracheal
intubation for 5 min. Induction of this passive hyperoxic condition was repeated for three cycles with a resting period of 5 min
under 21% FiO2 .
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Somatosensory-Evoked Potentials
Fig. 3 shows the averaged SEP signals evoked in the cortex
as measured by the electrodes mounted on the fabricated probe.
The dominant SEP response was observed at 13–15 ms as a negative activity on all electrodes where the stimulus was applied
at t = 0. Amplitude differences among the electrodes were con-

Fig. 4. Transient responses of (a) temperature, (b) and (c) changes in
hemoglobin concentrations with each PD, and (d)–(g) ECoG before and during
focal brain cooling (starting at t = 0). The horizontal scales are normalized.

sistent with the relationships between the electrode location and
the somatosensory region corresponding to the forelimb [10].
Although NIRS measurement was performed simultaneously
throughout the experiment, no significant change was observed.
B. Focal Brain Cooling
Fig. 4 shows a transient response of the measured NIRS and
ECoG signals at the beginning of cooling. The curves in Fig. 4(b)
and (c) show the changes in hemoglobin concentrations detected
by each PD, where the optical intensity averaged at t = −10 to 0
was used as the initial optical intensity at each PD. It should be
noted that PD1 and PD2 are the right and left PDs in Fig. 1(a),
respectively, and that the NIRS plots are smoothed by a moving
average of five data points. Fig. 4(b) and (c) shows changes
in hemoglobin concentrations with PD1 and PD2, respectively.
Significant reductions in both HHb and HbT and a slight increase in HbO2 were observed with both PDs after the start of
cooling at t = 0. The simultaneously measured ECoG signals
are shown in Fig. 4(d)–(g). E1–4 denote electrodes 1–4, respectively. The typical ECoG waves under sevoflurane anesthesia
were observed [25], although it was difficult to discern on the
horizontal scale of Fig. 4.
Throughout all sessions, the changes in hemoglobin concentrations in the last 2 min of cooling were extracted to calculate
the mean value and the fluctuation in changes in hemoglobin
concentrations. The mean and standard deviation of Δ[HbO2 ],

392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 5. Transient responses of NIRS signals before and during hyperventilation. FiO2 is increased at t = 0. The horizontal and vertical scales are
normalized.

Δ[HHb], and Δ[HbT] measured with PD1 are 0.29 ± 0.07,
−0.94 ± 0.08, and −0.65 ± 0.04 μM, respectively. The values
with PD2 are 0.21 ± 0.04, −0.65 ± 0.05, and −0.44 ± 0.03 μM,
respectively.
The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was calculated for each PD
at each wavelength using the raw data of the optical intensity
during the steady state (t = −10 to 0) according to the following
expression:
SNRPD·λ = 20 log10

IAVG
.
ISD

(4)

The suffix of SNR indicates PD1 or PD2 and the wavelength
(735 or 870). IAVG and ISD represent the mean and standard
deviation, respectively, of the optical intensity obtained by each
PD at each wavelength. The calculated SNRs are as follows:
SNRPD1·735 = 42.9, SNRPD1·870 = 52.7, SNRPD2·735 = 46.5,
and SNRPD2·870 = 55.1 dB.
The results indicate a significant reduction in CBV during
cooling, consistent with previous reports [20], [21]. No marked
changes were observed in the ECoG signals before and during
cooling in this experiment, given that focal brain cooling at 20 ◦ C
does not significantly affect normal neuronal activity [13].
C. Hyperoxia
An example of the NIRS response obtained by the proposed
probe is shown in Fig. 5, where hyperoxia induction started at t =
0. The optical intensity averaged at t = −10 to 0 was used as the
initial optical intensity at each PD, and the traces are smoothed
by averaging five data points. As shown in Fig. 5, significant
decreases and increases in Δ[HHb] and Δ[HbO2 ], respectively,
and a gradual decrease in Δ[HbT] were observed. However, the
gradual decrease in Δ[HbO2 ] was observed after the saturation
of the immediate response. ECoGs measured by electrode 1 in
the last 10 s of the normal and the hyperoxic conditions are
shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively. Delta waves within the
amplitude of 400 μV were dominant under the normal condition.
In contrast, sharp polyspikes and burst suppression appeared

Fig. 6. Comparison of ECoGs obtained by electrode 1 between (a) the normal
and (b) hyperoxic conditions. ECoGs at the last 10 s of each condition were
extracted with normalized horizontal and vertical scales. The characteristic
waves appearing in each condition are emphasized in the inset figures [top right
and left of (a) and (b)].

on the slowed delta wave under the hyperoxic condition. This
change in electrophysiological activity presumably led to an
acceleration in oxygen consumption in the cortex, reflected as
a gradual decrease in Δ[HbO2 ] and Δ[HbT]. Similar changes
in hemoglobin concentrations and ECoGs were observed in the
other sessions.
The mean and standard deviation of Δ[HbO2 ], Δ[HHb], and
Δ[HbT] were calculated in the same manner as in the cooling
experiment, and the values measured with PD1 were 0.30 ±
0.06, −0.50 ± 0.05, and −0.20 ± 0.05 μM, respectively. The
values with PD2 were 0.25 ± 0.05, −0.55 ± 0.03, and −0.29 ±
0.07 μM. SNRs in the steady state (t = −10 to 0) were calculated
using (4) as follows: SNRPD1·735 = 45.2, SNRPD1·870 = 54.9,
SNRPD2·735 = 51.5, and SNRPD2·870 = 54.7 dB.
V. DISCUSSION
The advantage and novelty of the proposed probe lies in the
integration of simultaneous NIRS and ECoG capability into a
miniaturized thin flexible probe designed for chronic implantation. The probe’s thickness of 0.7 mm is sufficiently small to
be compatible with subdural implantation in comparison with
the commercially available subdural electrodes used in neurosurgery. To our knowledge, the proposed probe would be the
first chronically implantable NIRS probe. Although multimodal

YAMAKAWA et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PROBE FOR SIMULTANEOUS NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY

recording capability in electrophysiology and optical imagery
for in vivo fluorescence analysis has been previously provided by
an implantable device fabricated using similar technology [26],
the fabricated device developed in this study is aimed at the simultaneous recording of electrophysiology and hemodynamics
indicators that are frequently used in current clinical situations
in neurology. The simple calculation used for hemoglobin concentrations is suitable for online (real-time) analysis with high
sampling frequency. Moreover, the NIRS recording channel is
easily multiplied with time division multiplex acquisition, given
that the measurement time required for one channel can theoretically be minimized to <4 ms. Thus, the proposed method
has the advantages of rapidity and compatibility with clinical
applications.
Similar to that in other neural electric implants [27]–[29],
the exposed surface of the probe consists of nontoxic materials.
In addition, the biocompatibility of the probe can be simply
improved by infrared transparent encapsulation using a medical grade polymer coating such as polydimethylsiloxane or
paraxylene (parylene) for chronic implantation in living tissue,
an operation we did not attempt because our purpose was to
demonstrate the basic functions of the proposed miniaturized
probe. The coating over the electrodes can be removed by lowpower UV laser etching without harming the electrode surface.
The functional localization on the implanted site of the ECoG
electrodes can be estimated according to [10] as follows: electrode 1 for the forelimb of S1 (3.0 mm lateral, 0.5 mm posterior
to the bregma), electrode 2 for the dysgranular region of S1
(4.0 mm lateral, 1.5 mm posterior to the bregma), electrode 3
for the barrel field of S1 (5.0 mm lateral, 0.5 mm posterior to
the bregma), and electrode 4 for the forelimb of S1 (4.0 mm
lateral, 0.5 mm anterior to the bregma). The amplitude of the
obtained SEPs showed consistency with the proximity of the
electrode location to the stimulated region (the forelimb, in this
experiment). The substrate design and the flexibility combined
to obtain appropriate contact between the electrodes and the
cortical surface. No significant change was observed in simultaneous NIRS, given that somatosensory evoked activity with
normal stimulus intensity is not related to hemodynamic acceleration [30], in contrast to stimuli influencing the wider cortical region [31]. The results show that tiny electrophysiological
responses independent of hemodynamics were successfully detected by miniaturized electrodes with high spatial resolution.
Observation of epileptogenic activity that could accelerate local
hemodynamic change as well as ECoG remains to be addressed
in future work.
The received optical intensities were greater than 5 μW at
735 nm and 26 μW at 870 nm in both PDs. These values support the advantage and reliability of the proposed intracranial
measurement method. The estimated intensities also suggest
that the direct light transmission was sufficiently inhibited by
the adopted probe design because the measured signal may be
saturated by direct light when the applied power of each LED
was 1 mW. Although the curvature of the probe is limited to
maintain direct light inhibition, in practice it should not present
a problem for the measurement of the cortical surface except for
trans-sulcal measurement. The calculated SNRs at 870 nm are

393

higher than those at 735 nm because of the differences in the
detected intensity and noise level between the wavelengths [32].
No significant difference in SNRs was observed between PD1
and PD2. In contrast, the observed changes in hemoglobin concentrations showed smaller fluctuation with PD2 than with PD1
throughout the animal tests. This fluctuation appears to be independent of the cardiac and respiratory artifacts, given that the
respiration rate was controlled at 60/min by endotracheal intubation and the monitored heart rate was between 278 and 300
beats/min. This result suggests that superficial obstacles (such as
cerebral fluid) strongly influence optical intensity at a source–
detector distance of 6 mm. Thus, longer distance is suitable
for quantitative evaluation of oxygenation even in direct contact with the cortical surface. However, the observed deviations
in hemoglobin concentrations are sufficiently small with both
PDs for the measurement of larger hemodynamic changes such
as the ictal activity of epilepsy [33], [34], the functional mapping of the motor cortex [35], and the assessment of language
dominance [36]. Therefore, the proposed method may provide
beneficial information on the pre- and intrasurgical diagnoses of
intractable neocortical epilepsy, although further development
is required for interictal analysis (such as in [3]).
In the cooling experiment, the changes in hemoglobin concentrations observed with PD2 were smaller than those with
PD1 (differences in Δ[HbO2 ], Δ[HHb], and Δ[HbT] were
0.08, 0.28, and 0.20 μM, respectively), although no difference
in ΔOD was observed between PD1 and PD2. The effect of
focal brain cooling gradually decreases with depth, and cooling does not affect the hemodynamics in the deeper layer of
the cortex [13]. In the proposed method, in contrast, change in
hemoglobin concentration is calculated according to a homogeneous model excluding depth dependence. Because the values
with PD2 reflect hemodynamic activity in the deep layer more
strongly than those with PD1, the changes in hemoglobin concentrations with PD1 were relatively reliable in this experiment.
However, the changes were qualitatively consistent with both
PD1 and PD2 and showed a slight reduction in HbT, indicating
CBV reduction presumably due to vascular constriction caused
by hypothermia. The slight increase in Δ[HbO2 ] presumably
indicates the suppression of aerobic metabolism caused by hypothermia, although an experiment with more subjects is needed
to confirm this phenomenon, given that ours is the first study of
NIRS during focal brain cooling.
The results under hyperoxic conditions are consistent with
those of a noninvasive NIRS study in rabbits [37]. The differences in Δ[HbO2 ], Δ[HHb], and Δ[HbT] between the two PDs
were 0.04, 0.04, and 0.08 μM, respectively, and were smaller
than those of the cooling experiment. This result is obtained because of the cortical depth independence of the hemodynamic
reaction under the hyperoxic condition. Thus, the homogeneous
model used for calculation is suitable for this experimental protocol.
Although evaluation of the accuracy of biological inference
awaits further experimentation using more subjects and accounting for inter- and intraspecies variation, the simultaneous NIRS
and ECoG capability of the fabricated probe is demonstrated by
the experiments performed in this study.

394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

VI. CONCLUSION
A flexible probe for simultaneous NIRS and ECoG recording compatible with subdural implantation has been introduced.
The device has been designed to minimize the influences of reflective materials in the optical path of the NIRS measurement.
Experimental results in animal tests measuring three different
cortical activities evoked by the electrical, thermal, and respiratory stimuli reveal the measurement capability of the fabricated
probe. The probe is sufficiently miniaturized to be compatible
with subdural chronic implantation into larger animals such as
cats, monkeys, and humans and may enable deeper exploration
of the interaction between electrical and metabolic activity in
the cortex. Further development of the proposed multimodality
probe (such as expansion of the recording channel) may provide
further beneficial information for clinical diagnosis, with invasiveness equivalent to that of the conventional ECoG recording
commonly used in neurosurgery.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Roche-Labarbe, B. Zaaimi, P. Berquin, A. Nehlig, R. Grebe, and
F. Wallois, “NIRS-measured oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin changes associated with EEG spike-and-wave discharges in children,” Epilepsia, vol. 49,
no. 11, pp. 1871–1880, Nov. 2008.
[2] A. Machado, J. M. Lina, J. Tremblay, M. Lassonde, D. K. Nguyen,
F. Lesage, and C. Grova, “Detection of hemodynamic responses to epileptic activity using simultaneous electro-encephalography (EEG)/near infra red spectroscopy (NIRS) acquisitions,” NeuroImage, vol. 56, no. 1,
pp. 114–125, May 2011.
[3] V. Osharina, E. Ponchel, A. Aarabi, R. Grebe, and F. Wallois, “Local
haemodynamic changes preceding interictal spikes: A simultaneous electrocorticography (ECoG) and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) analysis
in rats,” NeuroImage, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 600–607, Apr. 2010.
[4] Y. Sato, M. Oishi, M. Fukuda, and Y. Fujii, “Hemodynamic and electrophysiological connectivity in the language system: Simultaneous nearinfrared spectroscopy and electrocorticography recordings during cortical
stimulation,” Brain Language, vol. 123, no. 1, pp. 64–67, Oct. 2012.
[5] M. Niwayama, H. Suzuki, T. Yamashita, and Y. Yasuda, “Error factors in
oxygenation measurement using continuous wave and spatially resolved
near-infrared spectroscopy,” J. Japanese College Angiol., vol. 52, pp. 211–
215, 2012.
[6] M. Niwayama, L. Lin, J. Shao, N. Kudo, and K. Yamamoto, “Quantitative measurement of muscle hemoglobin oxygenation using near-infrared
spectroscopy with correction for the influence of a subcutaneous fat layer,”
Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 4571–4575, 2000.
[7] S. J. Matcher, C. E. Elwell, C. E. Cooper, M. Cope, and D. T. Delpy,
“Performance comparison of several published tissue near-infrared spectroscopy algorithms,” Anal. Biochem., vol. 227, no. 1, pp. 54–68, May
1995.
[8] P. van der Zee, M. Essenpreis, and D. T. Delpy, “Optical properties of
brain tissue,” in Proc. SPIE 1888, Photon Migration Imag. Random Media
Tissues, 1993, pp. 454–465.
[9] W. F. Cheong, S. A. Prahl, and A. J. Welch, “A review of the optical
properties of biological tissues,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. 26,
no. 12, pp. 2166–2185, Dec. 1990.
[10] G. Paxinos and C. Watson, The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates, 4th
ed. New York, NY, USA: Academic Press, 1998.
[11] Y. Choi, Y. W. Yoon, H. S. Na, S. H. Kim, and J. M. Chung, “Behavioral
signs of ongoing pain and cold allodynia in a rat model of neuropathic
pain,” Pain, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 369–376, Dec. 1994.
[12] C. Quairiaux, P. Mégevand, J. Z. Kiss, and C. M. Michel, “Functional
development of large-scale sensorimotor cortical networks in the brain,”
J. Neurosci., vol. 31, no. 26, pp. 9574–9584, Jun. 2011.
[13] M. Fujii, T. Inoue, S. Nomura, Y. Maruta, Y. He, H. Koizumi,
S. Shirao, Y. Owada, I. Kunitsugu, T. Yamakawa, T. Tokiwa, S. Ishizuka,
T. Yamakawa, and M. Suzuki, “Cooling of the epileptic focus suppresses
seizures with minimal influence on neurologic functions,” Epilepsia,
vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 485–493, Mar. 2012.

[14] A. K. Ommaya and M. Baldwin, “Extravascular local cooling of the brain
in man,” J. Neurosurgery, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 8–20, May 1963.
[15] E. F. Vastola, R. Homan, and A. Rosen, “Inhibition of focal seizures: A
clinical and experimental study,” Arch. Neurol., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 430–
439, Apr. 1969.
[16] X.-F. Yang, D. W. Duffy, R. E. Morley, and S. M. Rothman, “Neocortical
seizure termination by focal cooling: Temperature dependence and automated seizure detection,” Epilepsia, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 240–245, Mar.
2002.
[17] M. Fujii, H. Fujioka, T. Oku, N. Tanaka, H. Imoto, Y. Maruta, S. Nomura,
K. Kajiwara, T. Saito, T. Yamakawa, T. Yamakawa, and M. Suzuki, “Application of focal cerebral cooling for the treatment of intractable epilepsy,”
Neurol. Medico-Chirurgica, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 839–844, Jan. 2010.
[18] S. M. Rothman, M. D. Smyth, X.-F. Yang, and G. P. Peterson, “Focal
cooling for epilepsy: An alternative therapy that might actually work,”
Epilepsy Behav., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 214–221, Sep. 2005.
[19] T. Oku, M. Fujii, N. Tanaka, H. Imoto, J. Uchiyama, F. Oka, I. Kunitsugu,
H. Fujioka, S. Nomura, K. Kajiwara, H. Fujisawa, S. Kato, T. Saito, and
M. Suzuki, “The influence of focal brain cooling on neurophysiopathology: Validation for clinical application,” J. Neurosurgery, vol. 110, no. 6,
pp. 1209–1217, Jun. 2009.
[20] H. Fujisawa, H. Koizumi, H. Ito, K. Yamashita, and T. Maekawa, “Effects
of mild hypothermia on the cortical release of excitatory amino acids and
nitric oxide synthesis following hypoxia,” J. Neurotrauma, vol. 16, no. 11,
pp. 1083–1093, Nov. 1999.
[21] M. Fujii, T. Inoue, Y. He, Y. Maruta, H. Imoto, H. Koizumi, S. Nomura,
M. Suzuki, T. Tokiwa, S. Ishizuka, T. Yamakawa, and T. Yamakawa,
“Alterative treatment of intractable epilepsy with focal brain cooling—A
review of our past studies,” in Proc. 2011 IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man,
Cybern., 2011, pp. 681–685.
[22] H. Fujioka, M. Fujii, H. Koizumi, H. Imoto, S. Nomura, T. Saito,
T. Yamakawa, and M. Suzuki, “An implantable, focal brain cooling device suppresses nociceptive pain in rats,” Neurosci. Res., vol. 66, no. 4,
pp. 402–405, Apr. 2010.
[23] M. E. Raichle and F. Plum, “Hyperventilation and cerebral blood flow,”
Stroke, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 566–575, Sep. 1972.
[24] A. Yli-Hankala, A. Vakkuri, M. Särkelä, L. Lindgren, K. Korttila, and
V. Jäntti, “Epileptiform electroencephalogram during mask induction of
anesthesia with sevoflurane,” Anesthesiology, vol. 91, no. 6, pp. 1596–
1603, Dec. 1999.
[25] I. Constant, R. Seeman, and I. Murat, “Sevoflurane and epileptiform EEG
changes,” Paediatr. Anaesthesia, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 266–274, Apr. 2005.
[26] T. Kobayashi, M. Motoyama, H. Masuda, Y. Ohta, M. Haruta, T. Noda,
K. Sasagawa, T. Tokuda, H. Tamura, Y. Ishikawa, S. Shiosaka, and J. Ohta,
“Novel implantable imaging system for enabling simultaneous multiplanar and multipoint analysis for fluorescence potentiometry in the visual
cortex,” Biosensors Bioelectron., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 321–330, 2012.
[27] D. B. Shire, S. K. Kelly, J. Chen, P. Doyle, M. D. Gingerich, S. F. Cogan,
W. a Drohan, O. Mendoza, L. Theogarajan, J. L. Wyatt, and J. F. Rizzo,
“Development and implantation of a minimally invasive wireless subretinal neurostimulator,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 2502–
2511, Oct. 2009.
[28] J. Ohta, T. Tokuda, K. Sasagawa, and T. Noda, “Implantable CMOS
biomedical devices,” Sensors, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 9073–9093, Nov.
2009.
[29] J. Viventi, D.-H. Kim, L. Vigeland, E. S. Frechette, J. A. Blanco,
Y.-S. Kim, A. E. Avrin, V. R. Tiruvadi, S.-W. Hwang, A. C. Vanleer,
D. F. Wulsin, K. Davis, C. E. Gelber, L. Palmer, J. Van der Spiegel, J. Wu,
J. Xiao, Y. Huang, D. Contreras, J. A. Rogers, and B. Litt, “Flexible, foldable, actively multiplexed, high-density electrode array for mapping brain
activity in vivo,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 1599–1605, Dec.
2011.
[30] A. Vakkuri and V. Jäntti, “Epileptiform EEG during sevoflurane mask
induction: Effect of delaying the onset of hyperventilation,” Acta Anaesthesiol. Scandinavica, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 713–719, 2000.
[31] G. Jasdzewski, G. Strangman, J. Wagner, K. Kwong, R. Poldrack, and
D. Boas, “Differences in the hemodynamic response to event-related motor and visual paradigms as measured by near-infrared spectroscopy,”
NeuroImage, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 479–488, Sep. 2003.
[32] H. Sato, M. Kiguchi, F. Kawaguchi, and A. Maki, “Practicality of wavelength selection to improve signal-to-noise ratio in near-infrared spectroscopy,” NeuroImage, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1554–1562, Apr. 2004.
[33] E. Watanabe, Y. Nagahori, and Y. Mayanagi, “Focus diagnosis of epilepsy
using near-infrared spectroscopy,” Epilepsia, vol. 43, Suppl 9, no. 1,
pp. 50–55, Jan. 2002.

YAMAKAWA et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF AN IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PROBE FOR SIMULTANEOUS NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY

[34] K. Haginoya, M. Munakata, R. Kato, H. Yokoyama, M. Ishizuka, and
K. Iinuma, “Ictal cerebral haemodynamics of childhood epilepsy measured
with near-infrared spectrophotometry,” Brain, vol. 125, no. 9, pp. 1960–
1971, Sep. 2002.
[35] E. Watanabe, Y. Yamashita, A. Maki, Y. Ito, and H. Koizumi, “Noninvasive functional mapping with multi-channel near infra-red spectroscopic topography in humans,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 205, pp. 41–44, 1996.
[36] E. Watanabe, A. Maki, F. Kawaguchi, K. Takashiro, Y. Yamashita,
H. Koizumi, and Y. Mayanagi, “Non-invasive assessment of language
dominance with near-infrared spectroscopic mapping,” Neurosci. Lett.,
vol. 256, no. 1, pp. 49–52, Oct. 1998.
[37] A. Kamei, T. Ozaki, and S. Takashima, “Monitoring of the intracranial
hemodynamics and oxygenation during and after hyperventilation in newborn rabbits with near-infrared spectroscopy,” Pediatr. Res., vol. 35, no. 3,
pp. 334–338, Mar. 1994.

Toshitaka Yamakawa (S’02–M’08) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in engineering from
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan, in 2003,
2005, and 2008, respectively.
Since 2008, he has been an Assistant Professor
in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Shizuoka
University, Hamamatsu, Japan. Since 2013, he has
been an Assistant Professor with the Research Institute of Electronics, Shizuoka University. Since 2009,
he has been a Senior Researcher with the Fuzzy Logic
Systems Institute, Iizuka, Japan. His current research interests include development of implantable multimodal sensor systems and its application to both
clinical and basic neuroscience.
Prof. Yamakawa is a member of the Institute of Electronics, Information
and Communication Engineers (IEICE), the Institute of Electrical Engineers of
Japan (IEEJ), and the Japan Epilepsy Society.

Takano Inoue received the B.S. degree in engineering from Miyazaki University, Miyazaki, Japan, in
2001, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Kyushu
Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu, Japan, in 2003
and 2008, respectively.
Since 2010, he has been a Postdoctoral Fellow
in the Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube, Japan. His current
research interests include development of neuromodulation technologies using wide range of animals,
including rats, cats, and nonhuman primates.
Dr. Inoue is a Member of the Japan Epilepsy Society and the Japan Neuroscience Society.

Yeting He received the M.D. degree in neurosurgery
from China Medical University, Shenyang, China, in
2009. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi
University School of Medicine, Ube, Japan.
His current research interests include assessment
of treatment effect of focal brain cooling—one of the
neuromodulation methods and safer than the surgical
removal of the lesion.

395

Masami Fujii received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees
from Yamaguchi University School of Medicine,
Japan, in 1983 and 1993, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the
Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University
School of Medicine. He is the Chief Surgeon of
Functional Neurosurgery in the Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University Hospital, Ube. His
current research interests include functional neurosurgery using neuromodulation to treat the brain function, specifically the application of novel surgical
techniques such as implantable multimodal sensor and neuromodulation systems.
Prof. Fujii is currently a Councilor of the Japan Neurosurgical Society, the
Japan Society of Clinical Neurophysiology, the Epilepsy Surgery Society of
Japan, the Japan Neuromodulation Society, and the Japanese Association for
Operative Medicine.

Michiyasu Suzuki received the M.D. and Ph.D.
degrees from Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, in
1979 and 1986, respectively.
He is currently a Professor and a Chairman in the Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate
School of Medicine, Yamaguchi University School
of Medicine, Ube, Japan. He is a Member of the Editorial Board of Neurologia Medico-Chirurgica and
Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Disease. His
current research interests include cerebrovascular disease, neurotrauma, repair and regeneration of neuronal injury, blood–brain barrier, brain edema, drug delivery system, inflammation (cytokine), and blood coagulation (thrombin).
Prof. Suzuki is currently acting as a board member of the Japan Neurosurgical Society, the Japan Stroke Society, the Japan Society of Cerebral Blood
Flow and Metabolism, the Japan Society of Neurotaumatology, the Japanese
Congress for Brain Tumor Surgery, the Japanese Society on Cerebral Stroke,
the Conference on Neurosurgical Techniques and Tools, the Japanese Society
for Pediatric Neurosurgery, the Japan Academy of Neurosonology, the Japan
Clinical Health care and Welfare Association, the Japan Association of Neurosurgical Clinics, the Japan Coma Society, the Japanese Headache Society, the
Japan Society of Neurosurgical Emergency, the Japan Brain Dock Society, the
Japan Society for Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery, and as a member of
American Association of Neurological Surgeons, the Congress of Neurological
Surgeons and Society for Neuroscience.

Masatsugu Niwayama (M’11) received the B.S.,
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in engineering from
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan, in 1996, 1998,
and 2001, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering, Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu, Japan, and also associated with the
Research Institute of Electronics, Shizuoka University. His current research interests include biomedical
optics and development of NIRS systems.
Prof. Niwayama is a member of the International Society for Optics and Photoics (SPIE) and the Japanese Society for Medical and Biological Engineering
(JSMBE).

