246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Hybrid Spectral Micro-CT: System Design,
Implementation, and Preliminary Results
James R. Bennett, Alex M. T. Opie, Qiong Xu, Hengyong Yu, Senior Member, IEEE, Michael Walsh,
Anthony Butler, Phillip Butler, Guohua Cao, Aaron Mohs, and Ge Wang∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Spectral CT has proven an important development in
biomedical imaging, and there have been several publications in
the past years demonstrating its merits in pre-clinical and clinical
applications. In 2012, Xu et al. reported that near-term implementation of spectral micro-CT could be enhanced by a hybrid
architecture: a narrow-beam spectral “interior” imaging chain integrated with a traditional wide-beam “global” imaging chain. This
hybrid integration coupled with compressive sensing (CS)-based
interior tomography demonstrated promising results for improved
contrast resolution, and decreased system cost and radiation dose.
The motivation for the current study is implementation and evaluation of the hybrid architecture with a first-of-its-kind hybrid
spectral micro-CT system. Preliminary results confirm improvements in both contrast and spatial resolution. This technology is
shown to merit further investigation and potential application in
future spectral CT scanner design.
Index Terms—CT architecture, CT instrumentation, interior
tomography, micro-CT, spectral-CT.

Manuscript received February 20, 2013; revised April 3, 2013, June 23, 2013,
and July 23, 2013; accepted August 15, 2013. Date of publication August 26,
2013; date of current version January 16, 2014. Asterisk indicates the corresponding author.
J. Bennett and G. Cao are with the Biomedical Imaging Division, VT-WFU
School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA
24061 USA (e-mail: jrbennet@vt.edu; ghcao@vt.edu).
A. M. T. Opie is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Canterbury, Christchurch 8140, New Zealand (e-mail:
alex.opie@pg.canterbury.ac.nz).
Q. Xu is with the Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China (e-mail:
xjtuxqiong@gmail.com).
H. Yu is with the Biomedical Imaging Division, VT-WFU School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA, and
also with the Department of Radiology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC 27157 USA (e-mail: Hengyong-yu@ieee.org).
M. Walsh is with the Department of Radiology, University of Otago,
Christchurch 8011, New Zealand (e-mail: michael.walsh@canterbury.ac.nz).
A. Butler is with the Department of Radiology, University of Otago,
Christchurch 8011, New Zealand, and also with the European Organization
for Nuclear Research, Geneva 23, Switzerland (e-mail: anthony@butler.co.nz).
P. Butler is with the Department of Physics and Astronomy, University
of Canterbury, Christchurch 8140, New Zealand, and also with the European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva 23, Switzerland (e-mail:
phil.butler@canterbury.ac.nz).
A. Mohs is with the VT-WFU School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC 27157
USA (e-mail: amohs@wakehealth.edu).
∗ G. Wang is with the Biomedical Imaging Cluster, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail:
ge-wang@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2279673

I. INTRODUCTION
-RAY beams are comprised of photons and like visible
light they are generally polychromatic. X-ray detectors in
conventional micro-CT and CT scanners are known as energyintegrating, or intensity-integrating, because their output signal
is proportional to the detected photon flux, weighted by the photon energy, integrated across the entire energy spectrum. However, x-ray attenuation varies nonlinearly with photon energy;
spectral information is lost with energy-integrating detectors in
much the same way as color information is lost with black and
white photography. Recently, significant progress has been made
in spectral (i.e., multienergy, energy-resolved, spectroscopic,
etc.) x-ray detectors that are sensitive to the incident photon
energy. Numerous publications have demonstrated promising
pre-clinical and clinical applications for spectral CT [1]–[13].
Clearly, spectral CT is the future of x-ray based biomedical
imaging and will yield improvements for the diagnosis of millions of patients, yet there remain significant hurdles to clinical
and even pre-clinical implementation of this technology.
The most critical limitations with current spectral x-ray detectors are cost, size, radiation dose, and flux. Current spectral detectors are both small and expensive. Radiation dose
is a concern for any x-ray based system, and energy bins for
each spectral channel require higher total exposure relative to a
single-channel energy-integrating (conventional) detector. Furthermore, the maximum detectable x-ray flux is limited by the
detector readout speed (due to pulse pile-up); current technology is too slow for clinical use by an estimated three orders of
magnitude [14]. While there are no physical laws that would
preclude advancement of spectral detectors beyond these limitations, it does appear to be prohibitive in the near future.
In order to overcome these limitations, Xu et al. proposed
to combine a spectral imaging chain with an energy-integrating
imaging chain [15]. The latter provides wide-beam (“global”)
grayscale projections of the sample, while the former provides
narrow-beam (“interior”) spectral projections covering a small
field of view (FOV). Further, Xu et al. proposed a reconstruction
method whereby the grayscale image from the global imaging chain is reconstructed by statistical iterative reconstruction with total variation minimization (SIR-TV), and the interior image for each spectral channel is reconstructed by a
compressive sensing-based statistical interior tomography (CSSIT) method [16], [17]. The spectral images are processed with
principal component analysis (PCA) and the results are color
mapped together with the global reconstruction to produce high
resolution hybrid spectral images.

X

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BENNETT et al.: HYBRID SPECTRAL MICRO-CT: SYSTEM DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION, AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS

There are several merits to this approach. First, the radiation
dose would be lower for hybrid architecture than a full FOV
spectral micro-CT/CT scanner, as only the interior ROI receives
the higher exposure necessary for equivalent spectral contrast
resolution. Second, spectral flux can be increased because the
collimated x-ray beam only passes through the interior sample
region, thus avoiding pulse pile-up that would occur at the sample periphery with a full FOV spectral detector [18]. Third, the
hybrid architecture maintains a traditional energy-integrating
imaging chain, which is important for obtaining “scout” views
to locate and center the interior ROI prior to a full scan. Fourth,
the global energy-integrating chain provides necessary a priori data about the interior ROI for exact interior spectral reconstruction. Fifth, the system cost would be lower because
energy-integrating detectors are vastly more mature and less expensive than spectral detectors. Finally, the most obvious and
important benefit of a hybrid architecture is that it brings spectral
CT closer to widespread use in the near-term.
In this study, we implement a first-of-its-kind hybrid spectral micro-CT prototype system. There are three goals for this
paper: 1) to demonstrate hybrid spectral micro-CT architecture
with a prototype system implementation, phantom scan, and reconstruction; 2) to numerically simulate the hybrid prototype
phantom scan; 3) to evaluate the prototype system by comparing the results to those of a matching simulation. The remainder
of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the
hybrid scanner design and configuration, Section III contains a
brief explanation of the reconstruction technique and describes
the methods and materials used in this study, Section IV presents
the results from the first hybrid spectral micro-CT system and
simulation studies, and Section V discusses related work on
hybrid spectral systems and concludes the manuscript.
II. HYBRID SCANNER DESIGN
Xu et al. [15] reported a hybrid spectral micro-CT system design that incorporated the spectral interior and energyintegrating global imaging chains into a rotating gantry configuration. The benefits of a rotating gantry design, compared to
a rotating sample stage, are obvious for biomedical researchers
as many potential applications require in vivo scans (e.g., small
rodents). However, a rotating gantry configuration requires specialized mechanical components, such as a rotation slip ring,
and many parts must be custom manufactured. Furthermore, it
is more difficult to make alignment/configuration (e.g., sourceto-detector positions, etc.) changes on a rotating gantry design.
Thus, we chose to utilize a rotating sample configuration for the
first prototype of this hybrid architecture. While this rotating
sample architecture may be only useful for micro-CT, it still has
significant biomedical applications and the resulting data should
support further development of a rotating gantry system for in
vivo application.
Our design for the first prototype of a hybrid spectral microCT has endured several evolutions into its final form. The original design required building both the energy-integrating and
spectral imaging chains from scratch, along with a new sample
rotation system. After completing the preliminary system build,

247

TABLE I
HYBRID SPECTRAL MICRO-CT HARDWARE COMPONENT SPECIFICATIONS

it was realized that the spectral imaging chain could be reconfigured to fit within an existing Xradia XCT micro-CT scanner
(Xradia, Pleasanton, CA). There are several advantages to this
approach: the Xradia micro-CT is an existing, well known, and
tested scanner with a very high precision rotating sample stage;
the Xradia grayscale energy-integrating detector has high resolution and a large FOV with existing control hardware/software
integration; and the Xradia micro-CT eliminated the need to
build and test two out of three major components required by
the original hybrid spectral micro-CT design.
The grayscale imaging chain relies on the native Xradia hardware: a Hamamatsu L12606 (Hamamatsu, Japan) microfocus
x-ray source and 6 cm scintillator plus high resolution CCD
camera. The Xradia source and detector positions are controlled
by the proprietary Xradia software and hardware. The spectral
imaging chain consists of a Hamamatsu L10101 microfocus
x-ray source (Hamamatsu, Japan) and a Medipix MXR-Si spectral detector (MARS Bioimaging, Christchurch, New Zealand).
The L10101 source is mounted on a linear translation stage,
while the Medipix detector is mounted in a permanent position
after alignment. The sample rotation stage consists entirely of
the Xradia hardware, which allows for submicron position accuracy in three linear dimensions plus rotation. The hardware
component details are outlined in Table I, a design schematic
is shown in Fig. 1, and an image of the prototype system is in
Fig. 2.
III. METHODOLOGY
Preliminary experiments were performed with a contrast
agent (CA) phantom on the prototype hybrid spectral micro-CT
system. Two common CA types, gadolinium-based Magnevist
(gadopentetate dimeglumine, Berlex Laboratories, Wayne, NJ,
USA) and iodine-based Omnipaque 300 (iohexol, GE Healthcare, Princeton, NJ) were used in various concentrations and

248

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Hybrid spectral micro-CT design schematic.
TABLE II
CONTRAST AGENT PHANTOM CONCENTRATIONS

Fig. 2. Hybrid spectral micro-CT prototype system. Hardware component labels: (A) Medipix MXR-Si detector; (B) Xradia energy-integrating detector; (C)
Hamamatsu L10101 X-ray source for spectral imaging chain; (D) Hamamatsu
L12606 X-ray source for Xradia energy-integrating imaging chain; (E) Xradia
sample rotation stage with contrast agent phantom.

Fig. 3. Contrast agent phantom. (a) Image of the phantom mounted on sample
stage (excerpt from Fig. 2). (b) Axial schematic of the phantom at the reconstructed slice location used for Figs. 4 and 5: blue indicates water, red indicates
Magnevist, and green indicates Omnipaque (Note: shading is not representative
of the contrast agent concentrations). See Table II for details.

immersed in pure water. The CA samples were contained in
polyethylene centrifuge tubes. A schematic of the phantom is
shown in Fig. 3 and the corresponding CA concentrations are
listed in Table II.
The phantom was alternately scanned on the prototype system with the full-width grayscale and narrow spectral imaging
chains to prevent contamination by cross scatter [19]. The interior spectral chain x-ray source was set to 80 kVp and 200 μA
without filtration, and the silicon Medipix detector captured 12
energy bins between 10 to 38 keV at 361 uniformly distributed
angles over 192◦ . The global grayscale chain x-ray source was
set to 80 kVp and 100 μA without filtration, and the energyintegrating detector uniformly captured 1500 projections over
192◦ .
Numerical simulation algorithms were developed based on
Xu et al. [15] and the aforementioned prototype system/CA
phantom design. Global grayscale and interior spectral projections of the phantom were simulated with parameters matching
the prototype system scan, including: source flux and spectrum; source-to-object and source-to-detector distances; projection angles and numbers; detector configuration, pixel size,
conversion efficiency, and energy binning.
Image reconstructions of the spectral interior projections
were performed with CS-SIT, both with and without the global
grayscale image for comparison. The reconstruction algorithm

BENNETT et al.: HYBRID SPECTRAL MICRO-CT: SYSTEM DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION, AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS

249

Fig. 4. Hybrid spectral micro-CT reconstruction results of the simulated (first row) and actual prototype (second row) CA phantom scan: (a/d) is the SIR-TV
reconstruction of the global grayscale projections; (b/e) is the CS-SIT reconstruction of the interior spectral projections without the global grayscale image; (c/f)
is the reconstruction of the interior spectral and global grayscale projection data using CS-SIT. The black circle denotes the interior FOV.

is fully described and derived in [15] and [16], respectively, but
summarized here for convenience.
1) Reconstruct the global image μG with SIR-TV.
2) Reconstruct each energy bin image with CS-SIT, using
μG as the initial image.
3) Apply PCA to the set of reconstructed images to produce
{μs }Ss=1 , where μs is component s of the PCA result set,
and S is the number of PCA components.
4) Create a color image by mapping the first two principal
components and the global reconstruction image into the
HSV color space.
The reconstruction algorithms (SIR-TV for the grayscale, CSSIT for the color interior) operate by minimizing the objective
function
Φ (μ) =

I

yi
i=1

2

([Aμ]i − pi )2 + β T V (μ)

(1)

where μ is the reconstructed image vector, yi is the intensity
measurement on x-ray beam i, A is the system (forward projection) matrix, pi is the estimated projection data, β is a parameter
controlling regularization, and T V (·) calculates total variation.
The objective function (1) is obtained by considering the Poisson
nature of the x-ray data and maximizing an a priori (MAP) objective [16]. The minimization is performed by alternately using

the separable paraboloidal surrogate method [20] for the data fidelity term and using soft-threshold nonlinear filtration [21] for
the regularization. The difference between the two algorithms
is in the choice of initial estimate for μ: in SIR-TV an empty
image is used, while in CS-SIT the reconstructed grayscale image is used. The yi weighting on the data represents the detected
photon number at each detector cell and is proportional to the
square of the SNR since it is Poisson distributed.
The reconstructed images from the spectral imaging chain
are processed with PCA because it is a simple yet effective
method to identify the primary differences in spectra across the
image [1]. PCA operates to find orthogonal basis functions that
best describe the variance of a dataset: the first channel is chosen
such that it describes as much of the multidimensional data as
possible with a single coefficient per pixel; the second channel
is chosen to describe as much of the residual image as possible,
again with a single coefficient per pixel; and the remaining
channels continue in this manner until all the data are accounted
for [22]. A more sophisticated material decomposition algorithm
could be applied, yet is beyond the scope of this paper.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Evaluation of the first-of-its-kind prototype hybrid micro-CT
system was performed by simulating a CA phantom scan and
comparing with the prototype scan results.

250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 5. PCA decomposition of the simulated (first row) and actual prototype (second row) hybrid spectral reconstructions: (a/d), (b/e), and (c/f) are the first,
second, and third principal components, respectively.

A. Reconstruction
Fig. 4 shows three reconstructions of the simulated and actual
prototype system, and demonstrates the improvement obtained
by incorporating a global projection dataset. Figs. 4(a) and (d)
show the global grayscale image reconstructed by SIR-TV for
the simulated and prototype systems, respectively; these images
demonstrate the expected high spatial resolution of a high-end
micro-CT scanner with full FOV. Fig. 4(e) is the Medipix spectral image reconstructed by CS-SIT without a priori global
grayscale data, processed by PCA and color mapped; Fig. 4(b)
is the result from the corresponding simulation data. Figs. 4(c)
and (f) are the spectral images reconstructed from the hybrid
interior spectral and global grayscale data sets; these images
benefit from both the spectral resolution of the interior chain
and the spatial resolution of the global grayscale chain.
The basis set from the PCA of the hybrid reconstruction was
also used to decompose the interior reconstruction, and the same
windows and levels were used to allow fair comparison. We can
see that Figs. 4(b) and (e) lack spatial resolution and Figs. 4(c)
and (f) demonstrate better spectral homogeneity inside the FOV
(delineated by the black circle) than Figs. 4(b) and (e). We also
observe that Figs. 4(c) and (f) show better spectral homogeneity
outside the FOV; however, this degree of improvement may
not be equally impressive in cases of more complex shapes or
contrast in the exterior region.

Fig. 6. Semilog plot of the proportional variance weight of each principal
component for actual and simulated hybrid spectral reconstructions.

The global grayscale reconstruction does not differentiate between the iodine and gadolinium, but all spectral reconstructions
[see Figs. 4(b), (c), (e), and (f)] allow differentiation between
the two CAs. The regions of 0.05M concentration are not readily

BENNETT et al.: HYBRID SPECTRAL MICRO-CT: SYSTEM DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION, AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS

251

TABLE III
SIMULATION AND PROTOTYPE: ATTENUATION, CONTRAST AND NOISE ANALYSIS

identified on the interior image of Fig. 4(b), while the improved
reconstruction in Fig. 4(c) shows the regions more clearly. Neither imaging chain could distinguish the 0.005M concentrations.
Further, the interior spectral reconstructions do not clearly show
spatial details such as the plastic centrifuge tube containing the
CA, nor the slight interior bulge in tube 4 (see Fig. 3), both of
which are apparent in the global and hybrid spectral reconstructions.
B. Quantitative Analysis
Fig. 5 shows the first three components from PCA decomposition of the simulated and prototype hybrid spectral reconstructions. Fig. 6 plots the proportion of data variance represented
by each principal component on a semilog plot. It is clear that
the variance diminishes significantly after the second principal component in both simulated and prototype reconstructions;
this phenomenon is similarly demonstrated by the images in
Figs. 5(a)/(d) and (b)/(e), representing the first two principal
components, clearly contain relevant information, whereas the
third component [see Fig. 5(c)/(f)] does not show any relevant
information. The dominance of the first two components in this
experiment suggests that a carefully chosen dual energy CT system may be capable of producing similar results. However, this
would not be true, in general, for the hybrid configuration with
a harder detector layer (e.g., CdTe or GaAs) because more Kedges could be measured yielding more than two PCA channels
containing significant information.
Another critical element illustrated in Fig. 5 is the differentiation between gadolinium and iodine. The first principal component [see Fig. 5(a)/(d)] does not show any appreciable difference,
yet it is visually obvious that only the gadolinium is enhanced in
the second principal component [see Fig. 5(b)/(e)]. The difference between the first two principal components produces the
colorization of different materials shown in Figs. 4(b)/(e) and
(c)/(f), and thus increases the contrast between elements that
would otherwise be indistinguishable with traditional grayscale
imaging [see Fig. 4(a)]. This phenomenon is due to the K-edge
property of the CA with respect to the photon energy. The signaldifference-to-noise ratio (SDNR) was calculated as described by
He et al. [23] to quantify the contrast improvement between materials. The results in Table III clearly demonstrate the improved
contrast resolution with spectral hybrid reconstruction and PCA.
Fig. 8 plots the reconstructed linear attenuation coefficient
as a function of the 12 spectral energy bins for the simulated
hybrid data, and Fig. 9 plots the same for the actual prototype

Fig. 7. Schematic of the ROIs used for quantitative analysis. Line segment AA is used for spatial resolution measurements; B, C, and D denote the sampled
gadolinium, iodine, and water regions, respectively; the dashed circle represents
the interior field of view.

hybrid data. The attenuations are averages over the ROIs described in Fig. 7. There are two prominent features in the hybrid
prototype plot, the most critical being the expected increase in
attenuation at 33 keV from the K-edge of iodine. Second, there
is a signal drop-off after roughly 35 keV for all three ROIs
which corresponds to the limited efficiency of the silicon detector above this energy, thus the detected counts are too low for
accurate reconstructions. It should be noted that the attenuation
curves do not appear as ideal curves (e.g., NIST) [25] for several
reasons: energy bin width, charge sharing, spectral response of
the silicon detector, source spectrum, and unavoidable noise all
combine to make the measured attenuation plots different from
the ideal ones. For example, a sharp attenuation jump at the
iodine K-edge is observed neither in the real prototype nor the
simulated plots because the relatively wide energy bins are not
exactly defined on either side of the K-edge. Thus, the increased
attenuation at energies above the iodine K-edge is averaged, but
it is still clearly visible in Figs. 8 and 9.
The spatial resolution of each reconstruction method (interior,
hybrid, and grayscale) was calculated for the prototype data via
the edge spread function [24]. First, a line profile was sampled at
1 μm intervals through the segment A-A for each reconstructed
image. The edge spread function was produced by selecting
the line profile regions passing through the CA-polyethylene

252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 8. Simulated attenuation versus energy plot. The plot shows the average
linear attenuation coefficient in the three ROIs described in Fig. 7 as a function
of the 12 spectral energy bins in the simulated hybrid reconstructions.

between the high-resolution grayscale imaging chain and the
spectral resolution of the spectral imaging chain. The described
reconstruction technique utilizes the respective strengths of each
imaging chain to produce images with both high spatial and contrast resolution. This concept was theoretically proven in [15],
and the results from the prototype system implementation in this
paper support its assertions.
There are a few limitations to this study, hence the “preliminary results” designation in its title. The positions of the
x-ray sources, detectors, and sample were not optimized, and
we would have preferred to scan additional CAs, such as barium and gold nanoparticles, with a harder spectral detector layer
than the silicon Medipix MXR used in this study.
Future work will build upon these results, and will include
an evaluation of reducing the number of global grayscale and
interior spectral projections on the contrast and spatial resolution
in order to reduce the x-ray dose. Another study will seek to
optimize the interior spectral energy bin (window) width for
specific CA K-edge(s) to improve contrast resolution. Finally,
we would like to implement a pre-clinical hybrid spectral microCT architecture (i.e., rotating gantry) for in vivo biomedical
applications.
REFERENCES

Fig. 9. Prototype attenuation versus energy plot. The plot shows the average
linear attenuation coefficient in the three ROIs described in Fig. 7 as a function
of the 12 spectral energy bins in the actual prototype hybrid reconstructions.

boundary (border between the CA and the polyethylene centrifuge tubes). The line spread function was produced by taking
the derivative of the edge spread function, and the spatial resolution was calculated as the full width at half maximum (FWHM)
value of the line spread function at the boundary. The FWHM
values are 106, 339, and 124 μm for the grayscale, interior, and
hybrid reconstructions, respectively. These values show spatial
resolution improvement in the hybrid reconstruction relative to
the original interior reconstruction.
V. CONCLUSION
The experimental results from the hybrid spectral micro-CT
prototype demonstrate the feasibility and the merits of this
particular system architecture. There is an obvious synergy

[1] N. Anderson, A. Butler, N. Scott, N. Cook, J. Butzer, N. Schleich, M.
Firsching, R. Grasset, N. de Ruiter, M. Campbell, and P. Butler, “Spectroscopic (multi-energy) CT distinguishes iodine and barium contrast material in MICE,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 20, pp. 2126–2134, 2010.
[2] P. Baturin, Y. Alivov, and S. Molloi, “Spectral CT imaging of vulnerable plaque with two independent biomarkers,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57,
pp. 4117–4138, 2012.
[3] D. P. Cormode, E. Roessl, A. Thran, T. Skajaa, R. E. Gordon, J.-P.
Schlomka, V. Fuster, E. A. Fisher, W. J. M. Mulder, R. Proksa, and Z.
A. Fayad, “Atherosclerotic plaque composition: Analysis with multicolor
CT and targeted gold nanoparticles,” Radiology, vol. 256, pp. 774–782,
Sep. 2010.
[4] S. Feuerlein, E. Roessl, R. Proksa, G. Martens, O. Klass, M. Jeltsch, V.
Rasche, H.-J. Brambs, M. H. K. Hoffmann, and J.-P. Schlomka, “Multienergy photon-counting K-edge imaging: Potential for improved luminal
depiction in vascular imaging,” Radiology, vol. 249, pp. 1010–1016, Dec.
2008.
[5] J. Fornaro, S. Leschka, D. Hibbeln, A. Butler, N. Anderson, G. Pache,
H. Scheffel, S. Wildermuth, H. Alkadhi, and P. Stolzmann, “Dual- and
multi-energy CT: Approach to functional imaging,” Insights Imag., vol. 2,
pp. 149–159, 2011.
[6] D. Pan, R. Proksa, S. D. Caruthers, E. Roessl, M. J. Scott, J.-P. Schlomka,
A. Senpan, P. J. Gaffney, S. A. Wickline, and G. M. Lanza, “Fibrin-specific
spectral CT molecular imaging detects ruptured plaque without calcium
interference,” Circulation, vol. 118, S777, 2008.
[7] E. Roessl and R. Proksa, “K-edge imaging in x-ray computed tomography
using multi-bin photon counting detectors,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52,
pp. 4679–4696, 2007.
[8] J. P. Schlomka, E. Roessl, R. Dorscheid, S. Dill, G. Martens, T. Istel,
C. Bäumer, C. Herrmann, R. Steadman, G. Zeitler, A. Livne, and R.
Proksa, “Experimental feasibility of multi-energy photon-counting Kedge imaging in pre-clinical computed tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 53, pp. 4031–4047, 2008.
[9] P. M. Shikhaliev and S. G. Fritz, “Photon counting spectral CT versus
conventional CT: Comparative evaluation for breast imaging application,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, pp. 1905–1930, 2011.
[10] H. Q. Le and S. Molloi, “Segmentation and quantification of materials
with energy discriminating computed tomography: A phantom study,”
Med. Phys., vol. 38, pp. 228–237, 2011.
[11] J. P. Ronaldson, R. Zainon, N. J. A. Scott, S. P. Gieseg, A. P. Butler, P.
H. Butler, and N. G. Anderson, “Toward quantifying the composition of
soft tissues by spectral CT with medipix3,” Med. Phys., vol. 39, pp. 6847–
6857, 2012.

BENNETT et al.: HYBRID SPECTRAL MICRO-CT: SYSTEM DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION, AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS

[12] T. Woodfield, A. Siegert, B. Schon, and K. Schrobback, “Novel imaging
methods for detecting cartilage tissue quality via MARS-micro computed
tomography,” J. Bone Joint Surg., Brit. Vol., vol. 94, pp. 122–122, 2012.
[13] R. Zainon, J. P. Ronaldson, T. Janmale, N. J. Scott, T. M. Buckenham, A.
P. H. Butler, P. H. Butler, R. M. Doesburg, S. P. Gieseg, J. A. Roake, and N.
G. Anderson, “Spectral CT of carotid atherosclerotic plaque: Comparison
with histology,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 22, pp. 2581–2588, Dec. 2012.
[14] K. Taguchi, S. Srivastava, H. Kudo, and W. C. Barber, “Enabling photon
counting clinical X-ray CT,” in Proc. IEEE Nucl. Sci. Symp. Conf. Rec. ,
2009, pp. 3581–3585.
[15] Q. Xu, H. Yu, J. Bennett, P. He, R. Zainon, R. Doesburg, A. Opie, M. Walsh,
S. Haiou, A. Butler, P. Butler, X. Mou, and G. Wang, “Image reconstruction
for hybrid true-color micro-CT,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 6,
pp. 1711–1719, Jun. 2012.
[16] Q. Xu, X. Mou, G. Wang, J. Sieren, E. A. Hoffman, and H. Yu, “Statistical
interior tomography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1116–
1128, May 2011.
[17] H. Yu and G. Wang, “Compressed sensing based interior tomography,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. 2791–2805, 2009.
[18] T. G. Schmidt and F. Pektas, “Region-of-interest material decomposition
from truncated energy-resolved CT,” Med. Phys., vol. 38, pp. 5657–5666,
2011.
[19] Y. Kyriakou and W. A. Kalender, “Intensity distribution and impact of
scatter for dual-source CT,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 6969–6989,
2007.

253

[20] H. Erdogan and J. A. Fessler, “Monotonic algorithms for transmission tomography,” in Proc. 5th IEEE EMBS Int. Summer School Biomed. Imag.,,
1999, pp. 801–814.
[21] H. Yu and G. Wang, “A soft-threshold filtering approach for reconstruction
from a limited number of projections,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, pp. 3905–
3916, 2010.
[22] A. R. Kalukin, M. Van Geet, and R. Swennen, “Principal components
analysis of multienergy X-ray computed tomography of mineral samples,”
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 1729–1736, Oct. 2000.
[23] P. He, B. Wei, W. Cong, and G. Wang, “Optimization of K-edge imaging
with spectral CT,” Med. Phys., vol. 39, pp. 6572–6579, 2012.
[24] S. M. Bentzen, “Evaluation of the spatial resolution of a CT scanner
by direct analysis of the edge response function,” Med. Phys., vol. 10,
pp. 579–581, 1983.
[25] J. H. Hubbell and S. M. Seltzer, “Tables of X-ray mass attenuation coefficients and mass energy-absorption coefficients 1 keV to 20 MeV for
elements Z = 1 to 92 and 48 additional substances of dosimetric interest,”
Nat. Inst. Standards Technology-PL, Gaithersburg, MD (United States).
Ionizing Radiation Div., 1995.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

