IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

189

Bioluminescence Tomography by an Iterative
Reweighted l2-Norm Optimization
Ping Wu, Yifang Hu, Kun Wang, and Jie Tian∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Bioluminescence tomography is a promising tool in
preclinical research, enabling noninvasive real-time in vivo imaging as well as quantitative analysis in small animal studies. Due to
the difficulty of reconstruction, continuous efforts are still made
to find more practical and efficient approaches. In this paper, we
present an iterative reweighted l2 -norm optimization incorporating anatomical structures in order to enhance the performance of
bioluminescence tomography. The structure priors have been utilized to generate a heterogeneous mouse model by extracting the
internal organs and tissues, which can assist in establishing a more
precise photon diffusion model, as well as reflecting a more specific
position of the reconstruction results inside the mouse. To evaluate the performance of the iterative reweighted approach, several
numerical simulation studies including comparative analyses and
multisource cases have been conducted to reconstruct the same
datasets. The results suggest that the proposed method is able to
ensure the accuracy, robustness, and efficiency of bioluminescence
tomography. Finally, an in vivo experiment was performed to further validate its feasibility in a practical application.
Index Terms—Bioluminescence tomography, hybrid imaging,
optical molecular imaging (OMI), 3-D reconstruction.

I. INTRODUCTION
PTICAL molecular imaging (OMI) has played an increasingly important role in revealing the dynamic interactions
of cellular processes at different system levels [1]–[4]. Bioluminescence imaging is one of the various modalities of OMI,
which has attracted considerable attention because of its high
sensitivity and low cost. It utilizes an ultrasensitive CCD camera to detect light emitted by living cells expressing a luciferase

O

Manuscript received April 23, 2013; revised July 19, 2013; accepted August
13, 2013. Date of publication August 21, 2013; date of current version December 16, 2013. This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research
Program of China (973 Program) under Grant 2011CB707700, in part by the
Knowledge Innovation Project of the Chinese Academy of Sciences under Grant
KGCX2-YW-907, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 81227901, 61231004, 81027002, and 81261120414, in part by the
Chinese Academy of Sciences Visiting Professorship for Senior International
Scientists under Grant 2012T1G0036, and in part by the Beijing Natural Science
Foundation under Grant 4111004. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
P. Wu and K. Wang are with the Key Laboratory of Molecular Imaging and
Functional Imaging, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: ping.wu@ia.ac.cn; kun.wang@ia.ac.cn).
Y. Hu is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044,
China (e-mail: huyifang@fingerpass.net.cn).
∗ J. Tian is with the Key Laboratory of Molecular Imaging and Functional
Imaging, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100190, China (e-mail: tian@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2279190

gene, allowing researchers to monitor the cell growth and to
localize tumors in small animals [5]–[8]. Recently, bioluminescence tomography has become possible. It has upgraded the
2-D bioluminescence imaging to 3-D in vivo detection, providing convenience for researchers in more accurate localization of
internal bioluminescent sources and quantitative analysis of the
bioluminescent density.
This newly developed technology has facilitated preclinical
applications in biomedical in vivo studies, such as tumor detection at an early stage, stem cell imaging, and drug efficacy
evaluation [9]–[12]. Compared with some other imaging modalities, bioluminescence tomography has a higher sensitivity capable of reflecting biological changes at the cellular level. It
costs much less to build a bioluminescence tomography system
than to set up a PET or an MRI system in terms of the instrumentation. Besides, the expenditures on experimental animals
are partly saved because bioluminescence tomography enables
noninvasive imaging; thus, fewer animals are needed for one
trial. Moreover, bioluminescence tomography can realize 3-D
visualization in real time, while animals are usually required to
be sacrificed after the experiment for further observation in the
conventional way.
One of the challenging problems in bioluminescence tomography is that multiple scattering of photons propagating through
heterogeneous biological tissues makes it a highly ill-posed
inverse problem. Besides, the only known information available for the 3-D reconstruction is the photon distribution on the
boundary of the target, which leads to a mathematical process of
solving an underdetermined system of linear equations. Wang
et al. first theoretically proved that the bioluminescent sources
can be uniquely and accurately recovered by incorporating sufficient a priori information to alleviate the ill-posedness [13]. As
reported in the existing literature, multiple types of a priori
information have been adopted in reconstruction algorithms
of bioluminescence tomography ranging from the permissible
source region and spectral information to more involved sparse
constraint [14]–[20]. The basic idea is to reduce the number of
unknown variables or to increase the amount of known boundary
measurements.
The other difficulty is that the numerical computation of reconstruction could be time consuming and inefficient due to
the large scale of datasets. A variety of reconstruction algorithms have been proposed, such as the Guass–Newton method,
conjugate gradient method (CG), interior-point method, etc.
[21]–[24]. Recently, bioluminescent signals were found to have
a similar property of sparse signals, i.e., there were zeros everywhere except on the minimal support of solution space. Consequently, the approaches of sparse signal recovery have become

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 2.

Procedure of building the heterogeneous mouse model.

micro-CT were employed to generate a heterogeneous mouse
model by extracting the internal organs and tissues from the
experimental mouse, which can assist in establishing a more
accurate photon diffusion model for bioluminescence tomography. Third, an optimization function based on this forward
model was built for subsequent optimization. By introducing
a weight function into the optimization function, the original
lp -norm problem was converted to a more simple form of the l2
norm. Afterward, an iterative shrinkage operator was utilized to
avoid the operation of matrix inversion, which can reduce the
computational complexity.
Fig. 1.

Method overview.

increasingly popular in bioluminescence tomography, surpassing the classical optimization techniques in reconstruction efficiency. The essence of sparse signal recovery is to utilize limited
linear observations via the norm optimal strategy. A number of
iterative algorithms which have been studied to recover sparse
signals include the Born iterative method, truncate-Newton,
Levenberg–Marquardt approach, etc. [25]–[27].
Although there are many challenging problems in bioluminescence tomography, consistent efforts are still being made to
develop more advanced reconstruction methods combined with
a priori knowledge for a more practical application. In this paper, we demonstrate an efficient algorithm using an iterative
reweighted l2 -norm optimization, while taking the structural
information as priors to localize the bioluminescent signals.
Furthermore, both the numerical simulation studies and in vivo
mouse studies have been carried out to evaluate the feasibility
and limitations of the proposed method. Finally, their results
have been compared with those of the classical reconstruction
algorithms, and the multisource cases have also been designed
to test the performance of the proposed method.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
There are mainly three steps to implement the proposed algorithm using the iterative reweighted l2 -norm optimization with
structure priors for bioluminescence tomography. The whole
process is depicted by Fig. 1. First, the datasets including microCT volume and bioluminescence images were obtained by the
experimental system. Then, the structure priors provided by

A. Experimental System and Data Acquisition
During imaging, the optical/micro-CT imaging system developed by our group [28], [29] was used to acquire the experimental datasets, which is an integrative platform that combines bioluminescence and fluorescence imaging with an X-Ray
CT scanning. Here, two modalities including bioluminescence
imaging and X-Ray CT were applied to perform the mouse
experiment. For micro-CT scanning, the cone-beam X-ray generator was operated in a continuous mode with the tube voltage
being 55 kVp, where 360◦ projections were scanned. For bioluminescence imaging, an ultrasensitive cooled CCD camera
with a 13 μm × 13 μm pixel size was involved in taking the
multiview optical images. In the in vivo experiment, a hairless
mouse was injected with Fenestra LC and anesthetic. Then, a
home-made luminescent bead with a plastic wrap was implanted
into the mouse liver.
B. Structure Priors of the Heterogeneous Mouse Model
As it is known, bioluminescence tomography is a typical
ill-posed inverse problem with a large number of unknowns
and a relatively limited number of boundary measurements. It
is indispensable in incorporating a priori information into the
inverse problem formulation in order to obtain viable solutions.
Besides employing the sparse constraint in Section II-D, we
also utilized the anatomical structure information acquired by
micro-CT here. The structure priors can aid in generating a
heterogeneous mouse model by a hybrid segmentation approach
briefly illustrated in Fig. 2.
The heterogeneous model describes the anatomical structure
of the experimental mouse in three dimensions, containing the

WU et al.: BIOLUMINESCENCE TOMOGRAPHY BY AN ITERATIVE REWEIGHTED l2 -NORM OPTIMIZATION

major organs and tissues, as well as their corresponding optical absorption coefficient and optical diffusion coefficient. The
overall procedure consists of five steps as follows.
1) For the tissues and organs which show higher contrast
on CT images, such as the skeleton, stomach, and bladder, they were automatically extracted by a thresholding
method.
2) For the parts which have lower contrast on CT but occupy a relatively larger area such as the body outline and
lungs, these were segmented by a region growing method
combined with thresholding.
3) Regarding other major organs such as the heart, liver, and
kidneys, they were extracted by an atlas-based approach. It
firstly built an average-shaped atlas, then roughly localized
the organs, and finally made precise registration.
4) After obtaining the above separate volumes, we needed to
integrate them into one volume data, where the priorities
have been set for different organs and tissues to eliminate
the inevitable overlaps and holes.
5) The corresponding optical properties of different parts
were assigned to depict the interaction of the internal bioluminescent signals with different biological tissues. The
optical properties in this paper were mainly composed of
the absorption coefficient and the scattering coefficient,
which were measured by diffusion optical tomography.
Finally, a heterogeneous anatomical mouse model was completed, offering sufficient a priori knowledge to guide the following process of building a more accurate photon diffusion
model for 3-D reconstruction, as well as reflecting a more specific position of the reconstruction results inside the mouse.
C. Photon Diffusion Model
To describe how the photons transport through biological
tissues, the diffusion equation was adopted to model light propagation [30], which is defined as
−∇ · [D (r) ∇Φ (r)] + μa (r) Φ (r) = S (r)

r∈Ω

(1)

where D is the optical diffusion coefficient, r is the position
vector, Φ is the photon flux density, μa is the absorption coefficient, S is the internal source distribution, and Ω is the region
of the biological tissues. D is calculated by
D=

1
3 [μa + (1 − g) μs ]

(2)

where μs is the scattering coefficient and g is the anisotropy
parameter. The diffusion equation is accompanied by the Robin
boundary condition, which is given by
Φ (r) + 2κ (n) D (r) [v (r) · ∇Φ (r)] = 0 r ∈ ∂Ω

(3)

where κ is the boundary mismatch factor between the biological
tissues and air, n is the refractive index of the biological tissues,
v is the unit outward normal on ∂Ω, and ∂Ω is the boundary of
the biological tissues. κ is calculated by


1 + 1.4399n−2 + 0.7099n−1 + 0.6681 + 0.636n
.
κ (n) =
1 − (1.4399n−2 + 0.7099n−1 + 0.6681 + 0.636n)
(4)

191

The theoretical outgoing photon distribution on the boundary
of the biological tissues is
Γ (r) = −D (r) [v (r) · ∇Φ (r)] =

Φ (r)
2κ(n)

r ∈ ∂Ω .

(5)

After applying the process of discretization by finite element formulation to the photon diffusion model, we established
the linear relationship between the measured outgoing photon
distribution on the surface and the unknown internal photon
distribution via replacing the variables with the matrix-vector
forms
MS = Γ

(6)

where M is the system matrix standing for the optical properties of the heterogeneous mouse model and Γ is the surface
photon distribution acquired by the ultrasensitive CCD camera of the experimental system. Therefore, the ultimate aim of
bioluminescence tomography is to recover the bioluminescent
source distribution S in the above linear equation by an effective
optimization strategy.
D. Iterative Reweighted l2 -Norm Optimization
The approaches of sparse signal recovery have recently become appealing alternatives to reconstruct the internal photon
distribution because the bioluminescent signals have a similar
property of sparse signals. Those algorithms basically depend
on the norm optimal strategy to recover the limited linear observations in a computationally effective way, where the required
number of samples could be less than the quantity needed by the
Nyquist sampling theorem. For this reason, the newly emerged
methods of sparse signal recovery are appropriate for solving the
underdetermined system of linear equations in bioluminescence
tomography.
To find the best basis that stands for the bioluminescent signals, one of the effective algorithms will be introduced in this
section, which is named the iterative reweighted l2 -norm optimization [31], [32]. This approach is then mathematically derived as follows.
1) To Begin With the Original Optimization Function: The
ultimate aim of using the iterative reweighted optimization is to
achieve the unknown internal photon distribution S in Eq. (6),
while the classical solution to Eq. (6) can be generally expressed
in the following form [33]:


1
MS − Γ22 + λ Spp
(7)
arg min
2
s
where λ is the regularization parameter,  · 22 represents the l2
norm,  · pp stands for the lp norm, and p is a real number in the
range from 1 to 2.
2) To Simplify the Optimization Function by Introducing a
Weight Function: The last term in Eq. (7) involves the lp norm,
which is usually more complex than the l2 norm during computation. To convert the lp -norm problem into the l2 -norm form,
the term Spp is substituted with ST W−1 (S)S. As defined in
Eq. (8), W(S) is a weight function, which is a diagonal matrix
with the values |S[k]|2−p in its main diagonal. Here, k is an

192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

integer greater than or equal to zero, and S[k] means the kth
element in S:
⎡
⎤
|S[0]|2−p
⎢
⎥
|S[1]|2−p
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
W(S) = ⎢
⎥ . (8)
..
⎢
⎥
.
⎣
⎦
|S[k]|2−p
Then, Eq. (6) can be rewritten in the l2 -norm form with the
weight function as Eq. (9), which has become easier to optimize
because p does not exist anymore:


1
2
T
−1
(9)
arg min MS − Γ2 + λS W (S)S .
2
S
3) To Accelerate the Computation by Employing an Iterative
Shrinkage Operator: The computation of the optimal values
will be slow if we have to calculate the inversion of W(S) in
Eq. (9), so an iterative shrinkage operator P is employed as
Eq. (10). It can help to avoid the operation of matrix inversion
which usually takes up lots of system memory and time:
−1

2λ
I + W(Sj )
W(Sj ).
(10)
P=
α

Fig. 3.

Procedure of iterative reweighted l2 -norm optimization.

In the above equation, I is a unit matrix, α represents a relaxation constant and it is not less than 1, and j is an integer greater
than or equal to zero.
4) To Find the Optimal Values by Using an Iterative Method:
With the help of the iterative shrinkage operator P, we can
finally solve the optimization function by means of iteration.
The iterative equation is given in Eq. (11), which stands for the
relationship between Sj +1 and Sj . Here, Sj represents the jth
estimate of the internal source distribution, and the initial value
S0 = 0.001 when j = 0. The iterative optimization will stop
when the ratio R = Sj +1 / Sj ≤ 0.1 is satisfied:


1 T
M (Γ − MSj ) + Sj .
Sj +1 = P
(11)
α
The procedure of reconstructing the bioluminescent source
distribution S inside the biological tissues by the proposed
method has been concisely summarized in Fig. 3.

Fig. 4. Segmentation results: (a) skeleton; (b) body outline; (c), (f) 2-D slices
of the X-Ray CT data; (d), (g) 2-D slices of the X-Ray CT data with segmentation
regions marked; (e), (h) organs rendered in 3-D.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

renders the surface of the mouse body. Other organs and tissues
are visualized in both 2-D and 3-D from Fig. 4(c) to (h). Take
the first row of Fig. 4(c)–(e) as an example. Fig. 4(c) is one of
the raw CT slices in 2-D, followed by marking the region of the
lungs on the same slice in a darker color which represents the
current segmentation area shown in Fig. 4(d). After the lungs
were successfully extracted, they were finally displayed in 3-D
as depicted in Fig. 4(e).
Comparing Fig. 4(c) and (f), and Fig. 4(d) and (g), we can
visually assess the segmentation quality. The results suggest that
the hybrid segmentation method enables extraction of some major organs and tissues from the experimental mouse. By integrating all of the separate parts, we ultimately obtained the wholebody anatomical structure of the mouse as shown in Fig. 5.
Therefore, a heterogeneous mouse model for reconstruction was
established, where the corresponding optical properties were

In this section, both numerical simulation studies and in vivo
mouse studies have been designed to analyze the accuracy, robustness, and efficiency of the proposed method. All of the
computational processing was completed on a personal computer with 3.20 GHz Intel Core i5 CPU and 3 GB RAM.
A. Results of the Heterogeneous Mouse Model
To generate the heterogeneous mouse model, the original
dataset acquired by micro-CT was converted into 3-D volume data using the classical Feldkamp–Davis–Kress algorithm.
Then, the volume data were processed by the hybrid segmentation method and the major parts of the experimental mouse were
extracted in sequence. The segmentation results are visualized
in Fig. 4, where Fig. 4(a) shows the 3-D skeleton, while Fig. 4(b)

WU et al.: BIOLUMINESCENCE TOMOGRAPHY BY AN ITERATIVE REWEIGHTED l2 -NORM OPTIMIZATION

193

Fig. 5. Heterogeneous mouse model: (a) front view; (b) side view; (c) rear
view; (d) with photon distribution of the bioluminescent signals on the surface.
TABLE I
OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF MOUSE ORGANS AND TISSUES

Fig. 6. Reconstruction results for the one-source case when λ = 10−3 :
(a) 3-D view; (b)–(e) cross-sectional views, where the circle represents the
location of the simulated bioluminescent source; (f), (g) numerical analysis for
the reconstruction centers and errors in (b)–(e).

assigned to different organs and tissues according to Table I.
Then, the Molecular Optical Simulation Environment (MOSE)
(http://www.mosetm.net/) was applied to simulate the surface
photon distribution emitted by the bioluminescent signals inside the heterogeneous mouse model for numerical simulation
studies, as depicted in Fig. 5(d).
B. Reconstruction Results: One-Source Case
1) Accuracy: The reconstruction results for the one-source
case in the numerical simulation studies are given in Fig. 6.
A simulated bioluminescent source was set by MOSE, whose
center coordinate was (20.00, 12.00, 55.00) and the power
source was 1.6 nW/mm3 . After reconstruction by the iterative
reweighted l2 -norm optimization, the result based on a heterogeneous mouse model in 3-D view is shown in Fig. 6(a) when
λ = 10−3 . Its cross-sectional view is displayed in Fig. 6(e),
where the reconstruction center coordinate was (20.63, 12.35,
55.25), resulting in a reconstruction error of 0.76 mm. As depicted in Fig. 6(d), the reconstruction error sharply increased
to 1.84 mm when the reconstruction was based on a homogeneous mouse model without any anatomical information. This is
mainly because the heterogeneous model considers the specific
optical properties of the organs and tissues leading to a more
accurate description of photon propagation.
To compare the reconstruction accuracy, two other classical
algorithms have been utilized to reconstruct the same datasets
while maintaining the same termination condition. One was the

Newton method (Newton’s) and the other was the CG [34]. The
reconstruction results in cross-sectional views using Newton’s
and CG are given in Fig. 6(b) and (c), respectively. Besides, the
corresponding numerical results are demonstrated in Fig. 6(f)
and (g). The reconstruction error by Newton’s was 2.52 mm,
which was three times larger than that by the proposed method,
while CG guaranteed a relatively smaller error of 1.46 mm.
However, with the help of the anatomical structure shown in
Fig. 6(c), it can be observed that artifacts appeared in the liver
region by CG, which should not exist in precise reconstruction.
2) Robustness: To further evaluate the reconstruction performance, robustness testing was conducted for the proposed iterative reweighted l2 -norm optimization. Usually, the tomographic
imaging quality is sensitive to the selection of the regularization
parameter λ. Hence, λ with different orders of magnitude ranging from 10−1 to 10−20 were tested. The reconstruction results
in cross-sectional views are partly demonstrated in Fig. 7(a)–(h).
Although artifacts occurred when λ = 10−1 , for most cases, the
reconstruction centers were still in good agreement with the
simulated bioluminescent source center.
Furthermore, the corresponding numerical results are displayed in Fig. 7(i). According to the line graph, the reconstruction error undesirably reached its highest peak at 1.53 mm when
λ = 10−1 , while it fell down to the lowest point when λ = 10−3 ,
followed by a slight change with a variation in λ. Particularly,
the reconstruction error started to remain steady at 1.32 mm
since λ = 10−6 . As can be concluded from the above results,
the reconstruction results were satisfying and hardly affected by
the different regularization parameters except when λ > 10−3 .
3) Efficiency: To examine the computational efficiency,
Newton’s and CG have been applied once again to reconstruct

194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 8. Results for in vivo mouse studies: (a) 3-D view of the heterogeneous
mouse model; (b), (e) transverse view and sagittal view of the CT slices, where
the home-made luminescent bead can be observed approximately in the center;
(c), (d) 2-D views of the reconstruction results, whose slice selections are the
same as (b) and (e), respectively.

Fig. 7. Reconstruction results with different regularization parameters:
(a)–(h) cross-sectional views when λ = 10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 , 10−6 ,
10−7 , 10−8 respectively, where the circle represents the location of the simulated bioluminescent source; (g) numerical analysis for the reconstruction errors
when λ = 10−n , where n is an integer ranging from 1 to 20.
TABLE II
RECONSTRUCTION TIME OF NEWTON’S, CG, AND THE PROPOSED METHOD

the same datasets in contrast to the proposed method. The reconstruction time of the three different methods has been compared in Table II, where the computations were based on two
3-D grids. For the grid of 3397 nodes and 18 344 tetrahedral
elements, Newton’s required more than 1 h to implement the
reconstruction, while CG considerably enhanced the efficiency
up to 132.43 s. Although CG can ensure good results within
several minutes, it would become hardly tolerable to wait as
the dataset size increases. Consequently, the proposed iterative
reweighted optimization tended to be helpful and necessary. It
took less than 10 s to complete the reconstruction process.
Similarly, for another grid of 4529 nodes and 21 286 tetrahedral elements listed in Table II, the proposed method was
still much more efficient than the other two classical algorithms
despite increasing grid size. The main reason leading to the substantial difference among the three methods is that the proposed
method has employed an iterative shrinkage operator, which
avoids the time-consuming computation of the matrix inversion.
Besides, CG is more time saving than Newton’s on account of
not having to calculate the Hessian matrix, while Newton’s has
to calculate the matrix of second-order partial derivatives and
its inversion.
4) Practical Application: To validate the feasibility of the
proposed approach in a practical application, an in vivo mouse
experiment has been conducted and its reconstruction results are

demonstrated in Fig. 8. In this experiment, a hairless mouse with
a luminescent bead implanted in the liver region was utilized.
The bead was filled with luminescent liquid which emitted a
red luminescent light. After imaging, the micro-CT volume and
bioluminescent images were acquired by the optical/micro-CT
system. In order to build the heterogeneous mouse model, the
micro-CT volume was segmented into several parts, which consisted of the skeleton, body outline, lungs, heart, liver, and stomach as displayed in Fig. 8(a). The corresponding optical properties were assigned to different organs and tissues according
to Table I. Then, the 2-D bioluminescent images were mapped
onto the 3-D micro-CT volume, so we could obtain the photon
distribution of the bioluminescent signals on the mouse surface,
which was indispensable for reconstruction.
As shown in Fig. 8(b) and (e), the location of the internal luminescent bead could be determined by the CT scan because the
bead was wrapped in a plastic material. It examined the reconstruction accuracy of the bioluminescence tomography results
in Fig. 8(c) and (d). For reconstruction, the grid contained 4529
nodes and 21 286 tetrahedral elements, while the regularization
parameter λ was selected as 10−3 due to the experience in previous robustness testing. As a result, the reconstruction time was
10.74 s and the reconstruction error was 1.16 mm. Although the
proposed method for the in vivo studies did not perform as well
as that for the simulation studies, the reconstruction accuracy
and efficiency were still acceptable.
C. Reconstruction Results: Multisource Cases
It has recently caught the attention of researchers to focus on
multisource cases due to the actual demands for reconstructing
more than one region of interest inside an experimental mouse,
which therefore requires a reconstruction method capable of
recovering more than one internal bioluminescent source. However, the method performs stably in a single source case, but it
sometimes does not work in multisource cases because of the
low optical image resolution as well as the low grid density
employed to generate the photon diffusion model using finite
element formulation. In this section, double/triple/quadruple
source cases were designed to test how the proposed method
behaved under different circumstances.

WU et al.: BIOLUMINESCENCE TOMOGRAPHY BY AN ITERATIVE REWEIGHTED l2 -NORM OPTIMIZATION

195

construction errors did not show a big difference from those of
the double-source cases, but Sources D3 and D4 partly overlapped as shown in Fig. 10(d). It is necessary to note that:
(i) the regularization parameter λ was selected as 10−3 during
the reconstruction in all of the aforementioned cases (ii) the results were no longer satisfactory when the distance between the
two sources was less than 5 mm.
IV. CONCLUSION

Fig. 9. Results for the double source case: (a) the heterogeneous mouse model
with photon distribution on the surface, where the distance between two internal
bioluminescent sources was 10 mm; (b) cross-sectional views of the reconstruction results when the distance was 10 mm; (c) surface photon distribution,
where the distance between two internal bioluminescent sources was 5 mm;
(d) cross-sectional view of the reconstruction results when the distance was
5 mm; (e) numerical analysis for the results in (b), (d).

Fig. 10. Results for triple and quadruple source cases: (a) surface photon
distribution for the triple source case, where the shortest distance between two
internal bioluminescent sources was 5 mm; (b) cross-sectional view of the
reconstruction results for the triple source case; (c) surface photon distribution
for the quadruple source case, where the shortest distance between the two
internal bioluminescent sources was 5 mm; (d) cross-sectional views of the
reconstruction results for the quadruple source case; (e) numerical analysis for
the reconstruction results in (b), (d).

In the double-source cases, two experiments were carried
out, where the distances between the two internal bioluminescent sources were 10 and 5 mm, respectively. As demonstrated
in Fig. 9,the reconstruction errors were 1.08 and 0.65 mm when
the two sources were 10 mm apart from each other, which was
slightly better than that of the two being 5 mm apart. In the
triple and quadruple source cases, the shortest distance between
any two sources was 5 mm. As presented in Fig. 10, the re-

In this paper, we proposed an efficient algorithm using iterative reweighted l2 -norm optimization while taking structural
information as priors to localize the internal bioluminescent
signals. The structure priors have been applied to establish a
heterogeneous mouse model by extracting the major organs and
tissues of the mouse, thus generating a more precise photon diffusion model for the following reconstruction. To analyze the
performance of the proposed method, both numerical simulation
studies and in vivo mouse studies have been conducted.
The experimental results indicated that the iterative
reweighted l2 -norm optimization is capable of guaranteeing
accurate reconstruction for bioluminescence tomography. It
maintains reliable reconstruction results with the changes in
the regularization parameter λ, where the results are always
satisfactory when λ ≤ 10−3 . Regarding the same datasets, the
proposed iterative reweighted approach computes faster than
the two classical algorithms especially for the common highdimensional problems in image processing. Besides, the reconstruction results of the in vivo experiment validated its feasibility
in a practical application. The comparative analyses in one of
the numerical simulation studies showed that the reconstruction based on the heterogeneous mouse model was about twice
as precise as the one based on the homogeneous model. Last
but not least, multisource cases have also been considered and
the proposed method could provide acceptable results when the
distance between two sources was not less than 5 mm.
Future work will concentrate on the study of the proposed
method for more practical applications, e.g., to conduct in vivo
experiments based on mice afflicted with tumors to determine
if it is able to reconstruct the much weaker tumor signal. It
is believed that bioluminescence tomography will provide more
potential for earlier detection and characterization of the disease
and evaluation of the treatment with rapid development of the
3-D reconstruction algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Ntziachristos, “Going deeper than microscopy: The optical imaging
frontier in biology,” Nat. Methods, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 603–614, 2010.
[2] F. G. Blankenberg and H. W. Strauss, “Recent advances in the molecular
imaging of programmed cell death—Part II: Non-probe-based MRI, ultrasound, and optical clinical imaging techniques,” J. Nucl. Med., vol. 54,
no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2013.
[3] S. Keereweer, J. D. F. Kerrebijn, P. B. A. A. van Driel, B. W. Xie,
E. L. Kaijzel, T. J. A. Snoeks, I. Que, M. Hutteman, J. R. van der Vorst,
J. S. D. Mieog, A. L. Vahrmeijer, C. J. H. van de Velde, R. J. B. de Jong,
and C. W. G. M. Lowik, “Optical image-guided surgery—Where do we
stand?” Mol. Imaging Biol., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 199–207, 2011.
[4] T. F. Massoud and S. S. Gambhir, “Molecular imaging in living subjects:
Seeing fundamental biological processes in a new light,” Gene Develop.,
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 545–580, 2003.

196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

[5] C. H. Qin, S. P. Zhu, and J. Tian, “New optical molecular imaging systems,” Current Pharm. Biotechnol., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 620–627, 2010.
[6] O. Leppanen, M. Ekstrand, and J. H. Braesen, “Bioluminescence imaging
of energy depletion in vascular pathology: Patent ductus arteriosus and
atherosclerosis,” J. Biophoton., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 336–344, 2012.
[7] A. Rehemtulla, L. D. Stegman, S. J. Cardozo, S. Gupta, D. E. Hall,
C. H. Contag, and B. D. Ross, “Rapid and quantitative assessment of
cancer treatment response using in vivo bioluminescence imaging,” Neoplasia, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 491–495, 2000.
[8] Z. Paroo, R. A. Bollinger, D. A. Braasch, E. Richer, D. R. Corey,
P. P. Antich, and R. P. Mason, “Validating bioluminescence imaging as
a high-throughput, quantitative modality for assessing tumor burden,”
Mol. Imaging, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 117–124, 2004.
[9] J. T. Au, L. Gonzalez, C. H. Chen, I. Serganova, and Y. Fong, “Bioluminescence imaging serves as a dynamic marker for guiding and assessing
thermal treatment of cancer in a preclinical model,” Ann. Surg. Oncol.,
vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 3116–3122, 2012.
[10] X. W. Bai, Y. S. Yan, M. Coleman, G. Wu, B. Rabinovich,
M. Seidensticker, and E. Alt, “Tracking long-term survival of intramyocardially delivered human adipose tissue-derived stem cells using bioluminescence imaging,” Mol. Imaging Biol., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 633–645,
2011.
[11] J. E. Talmadge, “Bioluminescence in drug development for cancer Shedding light on therapeutic efficacy,” Cancer Biol. Ther., vol. 11, no. 9,
pp. 846–848, 2011.
[12] R. Weissleder and V. Ntziachristos, “Shedding light onto live molecular
targets,” Nat. Med., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 123–128, 2003.
[13] G. Wang, Y. Li, and M. Jiang, “Uniqueness theorems in bioluminescence
tomography,” Med. Phys., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 2289–2299, 2004.
[14] C. H. Qin, S. P. Zhu, J. C. Feng, J. H. Zhong, X. B. Ma, P. Wu, and J. Tian,
“Comparison of permissible source region and multispectral data using
efficient bioluminescence tomography method,” J. Biophoton., vol. 4,
no. 11–12, pp. 824–839, 2011.
[15] H. Zhao, T. C. Doyle, O. Coquoz, F. Kalish, B. W. Rice, and C. H. Contag,
“Emission spectra of bioluminescent reporters and interaction with mammalian tissue determine the sensitivity of detection in vivo,” J. Biomed.
Opt., vol. 10, no. 4, p. 041210, 2005.
[16] W. Guo, K. B. Jia, D. Han, Q. Zhang, X. Y. Liu, J. C. Feng, C. H. Qin,
X. B. Ma, and J. Tian, “Efficient sparse reconstruction algorithm for bioluminescence tomography based on duality and variable splitting,” Appl.
Opt., vol. 51, no. 23, pp. 5676–5685, 2012.
[17] A. Sangtae, J. C. Abhijit, D. Felix, A. B. Charles, and M. L. Richard,
“Fast iterative image reconstruction methods for fully 3D multispectral
bioluminescence tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53, no. 14, pp. 3921–
3942, 2008.
[18] Y. J. Lv, X. Q. Zhang, A. Douraghy, D. Stout, J. Tian, T. F. Chan, and
A. F. Chatziioannou, “Source reconstruction for spectrally-resolved bioluminescence tomography with sparse a priori information,” Opt. Exp.,
vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 8062–8080, 2009.
[19] A. Cong, W. Cong, Y. Lu, P. Santago, A. Chatziioannou, and G. Wang,
“Differential evolution approach for regularized bioluminescence tomography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2229–2238, Sep.
2010.
[20] J. Liu, D. Chen, X. Li, X. Ma, H. Chen, W. Fan, F. Wang, X. Qu, J. Liang,
F. Cao, and J. Tian, “In vivo quantitative reconstruction studies of bioluminescence tomography: Effects of peak-wavelength shift and model
deviation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2579–2582,
Oct. 2010.

[21] R. Noumeir, G. E. Mailloux, H. Mallouche, and R. Lemieux, “Comparison between Ml-Em and modified newton algorithms for SPECT imagereconstruction,” in Proc. Physiological Imaging, Spectroscopy, and EarlyDetection Diagnostic Methods, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 1993, vol. 1887,
pp. 226–233.
[22] T. Tarvainen, M. Vauhkonen, and S. R. Arridge, “Gauss–Newton reconstruction method for optical tomography using the finite element solution
of the radiative transfer equation,” J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf.,
vol. 109, no. 17–18, pp. 2767–2778, 2008.
[23] W. W. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. Q. Yao, J. H. Chang, H. L. Graber, and
R. L. Barbour, “Iterative total least-squares image reconstruction algorithm for optical tomography by the conjugate gradient method,” J. Opt.
Soc. Amer. A, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 799–807, 1997.
[24] C. Byrne, “Block-iterative interior point optimization methods for image
reconstruction from limited data,” Inverse Probl., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1405–
1419, 2000.
[25] J. C. Ye, K. J. Webb, R. P. Millane, and T. J. Downa, “Modified distorted
Born iterative method with an approximate Frechet derivative for optical
diffusion tomography,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1814–1826,
1999.
[26] R. Roy and E. M. Sevick-Muraca, “Truncated Newton’s optimization
scheme for absorption and fluorescence optical tomography: Part II reconstruction from synthetic measurements,” Opt. Exp., vol. 4, no. 10,
pp. 372–382, 1999.
[27] K. D. Paulsen and H. B. Jiang, “Enhanced frequency-domain optical image reconstruction in tissues through total-variation minimization,” Appl.
Opt., vol. 35, no. 19, pp. 3447–3458, 1996.
[28] S. P. Zhu, J. Tian, G. R. Yan, C. H. Qin, and J. C. Feng, “Cone beam
micro-CT system for small animal imaging and performance evaluation,”
Int. J. Biomed. Imaging, vol. 2009, no. 2009, p. 960573, 2009.
[29] G. R. Yan, J. Tian, S. P. Zhu, Y. K. Dai, and C. H. Qin, “Fast cone-beam
CT image reconstruction using GPU hardware,” J. X-Ray Sci. Technol.,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 225–234, 2008.
[30] W. X. Cong and G. Wang, “Boundary integral method for bioluminescence
tomography,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 11, no. 2, p. 020503, 2006.
[31] C. J. Miosso, R. von Borries, M. Argaez, L. Velazquez, C. Quintero, and
C. M. Potes, “Compressive sensing reconstruction with prior information
by iteratively reweighted least-squares,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 2424–2431, Jun. 2009.
[32] I. F. Gorodnitsky and B. D. Rao, “Sparse signal reconstruction from limited data using FOCUSS: A reweighted norm minimization algorithm,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 600–616, 1977.
[33] O. Scherzer, H. W. Engl, and K. Kunisch, “Optimal a posteriori parameter choice for Tikhonov regularization for solving nonlinear ill-posed
problems,” SIAM J. Numer. Anal., vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 1796–1838, 1993.
[34] J. F. Bonnans, J. C. Gilbert, C. Lemaréchal, and C. A. Sagastizábal, Numerical Optimization. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2006, pp. 51–76.

Authors’photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

