368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Monte Carlo Bias Field Correction in Endorectal
Diffusion Imaging
Dorothy Lui∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Amen Modhafar, Jeffrey Glaister, Student Member, IEEE,
Alexander Wong, Member, IEEE, and Masoom A. Haider

Abstract—Prostate cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer
death in the male population. The detection of prostate cancer using
imaging has been challenging until recently. Multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been shown to allow accurate
localization of the cancers and can help direct biopsies to cancer
foci, which is required to plan the treatment. The interpretation
of MRI, however, requires a high level of expertise and review of
large multiparametric datasets. An endorectal receiver coil is often
used to improve signal-to-noise ratio and aid in detection of smaller
cancer foci. Moreover, computed high b-value diffusion-weighted
imaging show improved delineation of tumors but is subject to
strong bias fields near the coil. Here, a nonparametric approach
to bias field correction for endorectal diffusion imaging via Monte
Carlo sampling is introduced. It will be shown that the delineation
between the prostate gland and the background and intensity inhomogeneity may be improved using the proposed approach. High
b-value generated results also show improved visualization of tumor regions. The results suggest that Monte Carlo bias correction
may have potential as a preprocessing tool for endorectal diffusion images for the prostate cancer detection and localization or
segmentation.
Index Terms—Bias correction, endorectal diffusion imaging,
prostate cancer (PCa).

I. INTRODUCTION
ROSTATE cancer (PCa) is the most common type of cancer in North America. In 2012, an estimated 26 500 men
were diagnosed with PCa in Canada [1] and in the United States,
approximately 241 740 new cases emerged [2]. Of those cases,
4000 Canadians [3] and 28 170 Americans [2] who were diagnosed were predicted to result in patient death. PCa is the third
leading cause of death for men in Canada [1], and thus, early
detection becomes important to survival by obtaining treatment

P

Manuscript received May 21, 2013; revised July 10, 2013 and August 13,
2013; accepted August 20, 2013. Date of publication August 23, 2013; date of
current version January 16, 2014. The work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada and the Ontario
Ministry of Research and Innovation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. Lui is with the Vision and Image Processing Lab in the Department of
Systems Design Engineering, 200 University Ave. West, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada (e-mail: dlui@uwaterloo.ca).
A. Modhafar and M. A. Haider are with the Department of Medical Imaging,
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada (e-mail:
aamhjx@gmail.com; masoom.haider@sunnybrook.ca).
J. Glaister and A. Wong are with the Vision and Image Processing Lab
in the Department of Systems Design Engineering, 200 University Ave.
West, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada (e-mail:
jeffrey.glaister@uwaterloo.ca; a28wong@uwaterloo.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2279635

during the early stages before it metastasizes to surrounding
tissues [4]. In late stages, PCa has a poor prognosis [5]. As
a means of diagnosis, doctors use a variety of methods. One
method has been developed through the evaluation of high levels of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in the blood, which can
indicate high risks of PCa. Regardless of its wide use, controversy surrounds PSA as some doctors have recognized this test
as unreliable due to the many factors that can cause a rise in PSA
levels. These factors and the disagreement on the threshold PSA
level has increased the number of false positives that have led
to overdetection and overtreatment [5], [6].
Currently, there is no reliable and widely accepted method
of diagnostic imaging used to detect PCa. Instead, a systematic
transrectal biopsy approach covering the whole prostate gland
is used. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recognized as
a strong candidate for diagnostic purposes of PCa using T2weighted images [7], [8]. These images have improved soft tissue contrast in comparison to other modalities. However, it has
been reported that tumors occurring on the central gland cannot
be distinguished from other low-signal-intensity deformations
that result from noncancerous situations [9], [10]. Furthermore,
the use of MRI requires highly qualified subspecialty radiologists to interpret MRI data due to the subtle delineation between
cancerous and healthy tissue.
A promising method currently under investigation for PCa
diagnosis is diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI), which is sensitive
to diffusion processes in biological tissues due to random thermal flow of water molecules [9]–[11]. Prostate cancerous tissue
has high-cellular density which results in restricted diffusion of
water. As such, diffusion-weighted imaging can capture various
molecular properties in different parametric settings, which results in high contrast between healthy and cancerous tissue [9],
[11], [12]. In particular, it was found that DWI imaging at high
b-values (e.g., b-values greater than 1,000 s/mm2 ) were found
to provide improved delineation between tumors and benign
tissues [13]–[16] making it a very promising tool for PCa detection and localization. One challenge to the use of high b-value
DWI imaging is a significant decrease in signal-to-noise (SNR).
To enhance the SNR near the prostate gland, endorectal coils
(ERCs) are used by placing a coil in the rectum to increase
proximity to the prostate gland area for increased SNR. This
can produce magnetic distortion or motion artifacts that can affect the accuracy [10], [17]. Although ERCs provide a higher
SNR near the coil, it introduces a bias field where the prostate’s
peripheral zone (PZ) has extremely high intensities that quickly
diminish with distance [18]. This inhomogeneity makes this
region difficult to interpret and diagnose [19]. Approaches to

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LUI et al.: MONTE CARLO BIAS FIELD CORRECTION IN ENDORECTAL DIFFUSION IMAGING

correct for this have been applied including the use of parametric maps of the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in the
case of diffusion-weighted source images acquired at different
b-values or signal correction based on division of the images
by a calibration scan image. These methods of signal correction
can produce additional artifacts. An approach for signal correction that would allow for direct assessment of high b-value DWI
imaging would be helpful in obtaining better diagnosis of PCa.
Although ERC provides improved SNR, this imaging technique can lead to patient discomfort. More recently, 3T MRI
using pelvic phased-array coils (PAC) has been explored as
an alternative. Although more expensive and not necessarily
available, the stronger magnetic field of 3T MRI scanners enables higher SNR [20], [21]. A number of studies have been
conducted to compare the image quality and localization capabilities of 1.5T MRI with ERC versus PAC using 3T MRI. It
was found that there was no significant visualization difference
between the two [22], [23] with one study showing that the ERC
exhibited improved SNR [23]. Other studies have compared the
use both coils with 3T MRI. Kim et al. found no significant
improvement using an ERC in staging accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity [21]. Heijmink et al. on the other hand found significant improvement in the image quality, localization and staging
performance of ERCs compared to PAC [20]. As a result of
the various studies, it is clear that 3T MRI and ERCs at either
1.5T or 3T serve as two useful alternatives for prostate imaging.
Currently, DWI imaging of the prostate using a 3T scanner has
been explored however only one study was found to compare
the use of ERC and PAC in these circumstances. Mazaheri et al.
compared the results from a combined ERC-PAC with the use
of a 3T DWI PAC [24]. It was found that the PAC caused lower
SNR and as a result significantly decreased ADC values at high
b-values compared to the ADC values obtained by ERC-PAC.
Further investigation is needed to determine whether an ERC is
necessary for higher field strengths. In cases where a 3T DWI
scanner is not available or cost effective, ERCs can improve
SNR and improve tumor localization if intensity inhomogeneity is corrected.
To overcome this intensity bias, various methods have been
developed. While some techniques aim to adjust for the bias
field prior to imaging, under the assumption that it is a result of
the MRI acquisition process, they do not account for bias fields
that result from the patient’s anatomy [25]. Other methods utilize prior information of the acquisition process, thus adjusting
the patient- and MRI-dependant inhomogeneities [26]. These
postprocessing methods implement any of the following: filtering, surface fitting, and segmentation. The simplest type of
filtering that is used to remove bias fields are various forms
of homomorphic filters which assume that bias fields result in
low-frequency bandwidths and can be removed using a low-pass
filter on the log transform of the image [25]. Although simple
and fast to implement, in some cases it can distort tissue intensity values and add artifacts to corrected images [25], [27],
[28]. Surface fitting methods fit a parametric surface to a set of
image features that contain information on the intensity inhomogeneity. A polynomial or spline-based surface is derived to
estimate the bias field of the input image and bases the surface

369

on the intensities within the image. The drawback to this technique is that the surface corrects for the major tissue, and then,
extrapolates for surrounding areas assuming the corrections are
applicable to other tissue types in the image [26], [28]. Many of
these methods also require user-defined reference points or timeconsuming optimization processes [29]. In many cases, removing the bias field is a preprocessing step toward completing the
segmentation of interest regions. In segmentation approaches,
inhomogeneity removal and segmentation are combined simultaneously. This, however, introduces a circular problem where
the accuracies of both segmentation and bias field depend on
each other [30]. Other methods use maximum-likelihood (ML)
or maximum a posteriori probability to estimate the intensity
probability distribution [26], [31]. This makes the assumption
that the inhomogeneity in the image follows a predictable distribution, which is often not the case [30]. Some techniques
use fuzzy C-means (FCM) segmentation where image voxels
are assumed to belong to more than one class, which introduce complex and time-consuming iterative approaches [26].
Finally, another approach involves estimating the bias field via
a complete space search of all possible bias-free distributions
has also been explored for intensity inhomogeneity correction
in MRI [32]. The space of all bias-free distributions can be an
exhaustive search as well as performance dependent upon what
distribution is selected.
In many MRI scanners, a common feature is a built-in surface
coil intensity correction (SCIC) algorithm that postprocesses the
images [33]–[35] or calibrates the acquisition to correct for the
intensity variations [19]. A precalibration correction approach
such as the one proposed by Liney et al., uses a series of proton
density (PD) weighted images to determine the bias profile so
that a correction matrix can be generated and applied to correct upon acquisition [19]. This correction process, however,
increases the acquisition time due to the extra PD weighted images that need to be acquired and is, therefore, more susceptible
to motion that can affect the correction. SCIC employs low-pass
filtered, shrunken and thresholded versions of the signal to form
an estimate of the bias field. The uncorrected image is then
divided by the estimated bias field.
In this paper, a new algorithm is introduced that corrects bias
fields caused by ERCs in prostate DWI. The method develops a
bias field estimate through nonparametric modeling based on the
Monte Carlo sampling approach. The estimate is formulated to
remove the intensity inhomogeneity from the acquired image.
The resulting image can then improve ease of segmentation
and diagnosis in subsequent steps. For the remaining portion of
this paper, the method will be referred to as Monte Carlo bias
correction (MCBC).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the proposed approach’s methodology is described in Section II. The
experimental results are then presented in Sections III and V.
Finally, conclusions are drawn and future work is discussed in
Section VI.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this section, the problem formulation and the methodology
of how the nonparametric bias field is estimated is discussed.

370

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

This is followed by an explanation of how the bias field estimation is applied to construct the corrected image.

Thus, the bias field b may be estimated as


b̂ = exp
log(b)p(log(b)| log(v))d(log(b)) .

(7)

A. Problem Formulation
The intensity inhomogeneity model can be modeled as a multiplicative relationship. Let S be a set of voxels on a discrete lattice L defining the endorectal prostate MRI image, and let s ∈ S
be a voxel in L. Let V = {V (s)|s ∈ S}, U = {U (s)|s ∈ S},
and B = {B(s)|s ∈ S} be random fields on S representing
the acquired image, the bias-free image, and the bias field. Let
v = {v(s)|s ∈ S}, u = {u(s)|s ∈ S}, and b = {b(s)|s ∈ S} be
realizations of V , U , and B, respectively. The intensity inhomogeneity model for MRI can be modeled as a multiplicative
relationship [26], [30], where v(s) is
v(s) = u(s) · b(s).

(1)

Often times the bias field model accounts for the presence of
noise as an additive component to the multiplicative relationship. In this paper, however, noise was assumed to be negligible
to focus on isolating the bias field for easier clinical diagnosis.
Based on the model defined in (1), the inverse problem of estimating the bias field b can be formulated in the logarithmic
space given the acquired image v as the Bayesian least-squares
estimation problem as follows:
log(b̂) = arg min E((log(b) − log(b̂))2 | log(v))
log(b)



= arg min


(log(b) − log(b̂))2 p(log(b)|log(v))d(log(b)) .

log(b)

(2)
Taking the derivative of (2) gives us

∂
(log(b) − log(b̂))2 p(log(b)|log(v))d(log(b))
∂d(log(b̂))

= −2(log(b) − log(b̂))p(log(b)| log(v))d(log(b)). (3)


Setting the derivative to zero
log(b)p(log(b)| log(v))d(log(b))

=



log(b̂)p(log(b)|log(v))d(log(b)).

(4)

Simplifying the right-hand side of (4)
log(b̂)p(log(b)| log(v))d(log(b))

= log(b̂)

Equation (7) implies that the bias field estimate requires the
posterior distribution, p(log(b)| log(v)), which can be complicated and difficult to obtain analytically. Therefore, a nonparametric approach is instead applied to estimate p(log(b)| log(v))
via importance-weighted Monte Carlo sampling [36].
B. Nonparametric Posterior Estimation
The importance-weighted Monte Carlo sampling approach
[36] was employed to estimate p(log(b)| log(v)). This approach
establishes Ω, a set of samples and associated importance
weights from a search space of voxels, ηs , within a surrounding
region of a voxel of interest, s0 . Then, a uniform instrumental distribution, Q(sk |s0 ), is used to randomly select a subset
of voxels, sk , in the search space, ηs . Using this uniform distribution, voxels in the search space are selected with equal
probability.
Once a voxel is selected, an acceptance probability, α(sk |s0 ),
is calculated by comparing the neighbors of the selected voxel,
sk , and the voxel of interest, s0 . The acceptance probability is
used to determine if sk is a realization of p(log(b)| log(v)) and
is calculated using the error statistics formulation as shown in
(8). In this equation, hk [j] and h0 [j] are the jth sites in the
neighborhoods around sk and s0 .
 1
−(log (h k [j ]/h 0 [j ])) 2
]
j 2π σ exp[
(2σ 2 )

α(sk |s0 ) =
.
(8)
j (exp(λ))
The λ found in (8) is a normalization term that allows α(sk |s0 )
to equal 1 if sk ’s neighbors are identical to those of s0 . The acceptance probability is calculated as the product of probabilities
at each jth location since neighboring voxels are assumed to
be independent. The term σ controls the shape of the exponential in (8) and is based on the variance of the uncorrected
image in the log domain. α(sk |s0 ) returns the probability that
the voxel sk is accepted into the set Ω and used to estimate
the posterior distribution p(log(b)| log(v)). α(sk |s0 ) is also the
associated importance weight for the accepted voxel. To determine whether a voxel, sk , is accepted, a random value, u, is
drawn from a uniform distribution, U (1, 0). If u ≤ α(sk |s0 ),
then sk is accepted into the set Ω or if otherwise, sk is discarded. This process of selection and acceptance is repeated
until a desired number of samples, N , have been selected from
the search space. The posterior distribution is then calculated as
a weighted histogram
p̂(log(b)| log(v))

p(log(b)| log(v))d(log(b))
=

= log(b̂).
Therefore, (5) becomes

log(b̂) = log(b)p(log(b)| log(v))d(log(b)).

(5)

(6)

N
k =0

α(sk |s0 )δ(log(b) − log(v)(sk ))
Z

(9)

where δ() is the
Dirac delta function and Z is a normalization
term such that log(b) p̂(log(b)| log(v)) = 1.
Equation (7) can then be calculated with the estimated posterior distribution to find an estimate of the bias field.

LUI et al.: MONTE CARLO BIAS FIELD CORRECTION IN ENDORECTAL DIFFUSION IMAGING

C. Bias Field Image Correction
Once the bias field estimate b̂ is found, the inverse relationship
in (1) is used to construct the bias field-free image. Completing a
simple division of the acquired image by the bias field estimate,
the resulting image is a successful estimate of the image with
the bias field removed.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Patients
Approval for this study was obtained from the ethics review board of Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto,
Canada. Informed consent was waived. Seven patient cases
were used in this study with acquisitions at b = 800 s/mm2
and b = 0 s/mm2 , totaling to 14 cases. The patients ranged in
age from 53 to 78 years, with a median age of 70 years. All
patients underwent MRI as part of clinical indications related to
detection or staging of PCa.
B. Diffusion MRI Protocol
For this study, examinations using diffusion-weighted imaging were performed using a GE Medical Systems Signa
HDxt 1.5T machine at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre,
Toronto, Canada. Imaging parameters for the diffusion MRI
imaging acquisitions were: two b-values (b = 800 s/mm2 and
b = 0 s/mm2 ), TR ranged from 3400 to 4000 ms, with a median
of 4000 ms and TE ranged from 73.8 to 100.608 ms with a
median of 73.9 ms. Slice thickness was 3.0 mm for all selected
slices. The display field of view was 14 cm × 14 cm. A Hologic
endorectal receiver coil was used in all patients.
IV. QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
The bias fields and the corresponding corrected endorectal DWI images were generated using MATLAB and the
ProCanVAS (Prostate Cancer Visual Analysis System) platform
developed at the University of Waterloo Vision and Image Pro-

371

cessing lab. All images were reviewed by a single radiologist
with 16 years of experience interpreting body MRI and 11 years
of experience interpreting prostate MRI. The uncorrected (UC)
and corrected images were reviewed. It is important to note that
the proposed approach is intended for volumetric data, however, for the purpose of this paper, single slices were used for
demonstration.
For this paper, 14 single slice datasets (two b-value datasets
for each patient) are corrected. Two forms of quantitative analysis were used in this paper to quantitatively measure the bias
field removal of MCBC compared against the following methods: 1) bias-corrected fuzzy C-means (BCFCM) [37], 2) spatial
gradient distribution method (SGD) [38], 3) a level-set method
(LS) [39], 4) low entropy minimization with a bicubic spline
model (LEMS) [40] method, and 5) SCIC [33]. The implementations of LS, SGD, and LEMS used for this study were provided by the original authors of the respective methods, while
the implementation of BCFCM used was provided by a third
party [41]. SCIC is used as a baseline for comparison and consistent with [33]. For LEMS, a fourth-order polynomial was
used to initialize the bias field and a consistent threshold level
across all images was used.
A DWI phantom objected with a synthetic bias field and a
commercial physical phantom imaged using endorectal DWI
were considered using the correlation coefficient and the coefficient of variation, respectively, to compare the bias correction
approaches. Real endorectal DWI images were also evaluated
based on the Fisher criterion, probability of error when classifying the prostate versus background, high b-value computations,
timing analysis, and visual assessment.
A. Experiment 1: Synthetic Phantom
In this experiment, a known intensity bias field was added to
a nonendorectal DWI image to create a synthetic phantom. The
bias field was simulated using a Gaussian distribution to imitate
the radial nature of the intensity deterioration away from the
rectum, where the coil is located. Within the rectum, a circle
with zero intensity was added to replicate the lack of signal
at the ERC center. A nonendorectal DWI image was used as
reference for the synthetic phantom tests due to their lack of
bias field effects. The original nonendorectal DWI image and
the synthetic phantom are shown in Fig. 1.
This synthetic phantom was then corrected using the various approaches and evaluated using the correlation coefficient.
The correlation coefficient, r, describes how dependent two
images are with one another. An r = ±1 indicates a linear relationship between the two images (they are scalar multiples
of one another) while an r = 0 indicates that there is no predictability between the two images. The correlation coefficient
was calculated for the prostate gland for each corrected image
with the original nonendorectal DWI image using the following
equation:
 
(Am n − Ā)(Bm n − B̄)
r =    m n
	  
	
2
2
m
n (Am n − Ā)
m
n (Bm n − B̄)
(10)

372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

the ERC and weakens with distance. In this area, the CV value
would be high. By removing the intensity variation (the bias
field), the CV would be reduced. The images with the lowest
CV value are determined to have the least variation in the areas
of interest concluding the best bias field removal.
C. Experiment 3: Real Endorectal DWI
1) Fisher Criterion: Fisher criterion (FC) analysis was performed on real endorectal DWI bias corrected images to study
the separability between the prostate gland and the surrounding
background, which is important for segmentation purposes. It
was calculated using the following formula:
Fig. 1. Original nonendorectal DWI (left) used to create the synthetic phantom
(right).

Fig. 2.

Region considered for homogeneity using coefficient of variation.

where m and n describe the dimensions of the images A and B
and Ā and B̄ indicate the image means.
B. Experiment 2: Physical Phantom
An ultrasound prostate training phantom from Computerized
Imaging Reference Systems Inc. (CIRCS Model 053) was imaged using DWI. The bias corrected images were then used to
calculate the coefficient of variation (CV) to quantitatively assess each approach’s bias field removal in the region specificed
in Fig. 2. A lower CV measure indicates the region of interest
has lower variation and since the imaged phantom is homogeneous, this measurement is useful in evaluating the correction’s
ability to remove the intensity bias. It was calculated using the
following equation:
Ĉv =

σ
x̄

(11)

where Ĉv is the CV value, σ is the standard deviation, and x̄ is
the mean.
The CVs were calculated for a known homogeneous region
in the lower half of the prostate phantom closest to the ERC.
CV relates a scalar value to the level of intensity variation in a
given area. In an area affected by a bias field, there is increased
intensity variation where the strongest intensity appears nearest

J=

|x¯b − x¯p |2
σb2 + σp2

(12)

where J is the FC value, x̄b and x̄p are the class means for the
surrounding background and the prostate gland, respectively,
and σb2 and σp2 are the class variances for the surrounding background and the prostate gland, respectively. The greater the FC
value, the greater the delineation between the prostate and the
background. This value was also calculated based on the uncorrected image to provide a comparative benchmark.
2) Probability of Error: In measuring the separability of the
prostate in real endorectal DWI from the background, the probability of error was also calculated. Due to the variability of
the bias field impacted images, a two-class Bayesian classifier
was learned using each individual case, where the two classes
include the prostate and the background. The individual classes
(prostate and background) were modeled as normal distributions
and learned using ML estimation. The probability of error was
calculated as follows:

P () = min[P (ρ|u), P (β|u)]p(u)du
(13)
where ρ and β are the prostate and background classes, respectively. A high probability of error indicates that there is a large
overlap between the two class distributions and as a result the
ML threshold estimate leads to incorrect classifications between
the two classes. A lower probability of error indicates that there
is better separation between the two classes and fewer voxels
are misclassified.
D. Experiment 4: High b-Value DWI
In this experiment, the improvements of the bias correction
on the identification of tumor candidates for computer-aided
clinical decision support for PCa using computed high b-value
DWI is considered. High b-value DWI, even with the use of
an ERC has relatively low SNR. To overcome this problem,
a newly described technique called computed DWI was introduced where DWI images at high b-values are computed using
DWI acquisitions at lower b-values. This technique was found
to be useful for improved cancer delineation while maintaining
image quality [14]. In this experiment, computed high b-value
DWI images at b = 1500 s/mm2 generated by the tested methods for a patient case with known PCa and a patient case without
PCa are compared to determine which method provides the best

LUI et al.: MONTE CARLO BIAS FIELD CORRECTION IN ENDORECTAL DIFFUSION IMAGING

373

TABLE I
CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS FOR EACH CORRECTION APPROACH
COMPARED TO THE ORIGINAL NONENDORECTAL DWI IMAGE

TABLE II
COEFFICIENT OF VARIATION FOR EACH CORRECTION
APPROACH FOR THE PHYSICAL PHANTOM

tumor visualization following bias correction. The high b-value
DWI image is computed using the following formula:

TABLE III
FC RESULTS: MCBC RESULTS IN THE STRONG SEPARATION OF THE PROSTATE
AND THE BACKGROUND WITH THE HIGHEST FC VALUES

Sb = S0 exp(−b · ADC)

(14)

where Sb is the computed DWI with b-value of b, and ADC refers
to the apparent diffusion coefficient. The resulting high b-value
DWI images are useful in indicating tumor regions where high
cellular density results in low diffusion and high intensity.
The computed high b-value DWI were then evaluated using
FC and probability of error as described in Section IV-C to
determine the separability of the tumor from the prostate.
V. RESULTS
In this paper, the potential for bias field removal by MCBC in
endorectal DWI images is explored for use as a preprocessing
tool for improved PCa detection and localization using phantoms, CV, FC, probability of error, high b-value computation
and timing analysis, as well as visual assessment.
A. Experiment 1: Synthetic Phantom
The correlation coefficients for the bias corrected synthetic
phantom are shown in Table I with the visual results shown
in Fig. 5. MCBC exhibits the strongest correlation with the
original nonendorectal DWI image within the prostate gland.
BCFCM, LS, SGD, and SCIC provide some improvement upon
the correlation of the uncorrected image by reducing the intensity variation to improve prostate gland visualization. However,
these correction approaches still exhibit strong intensity variation in the PZ that leads to lower correlation. LEMS has a high
correlation coefficient with the original image as a result of flattening the prostate to remove the intensity bias but at the cost of
background artifacts.
B. Experiment 2: Physical Phantom
In the next experiment, the bias corrected DWI images of
a physical phantom were evaluated for CV and the results are
shown in Table II and Fig. 6. LEMS showed the lowest CV
indicating the least intensity variation within the masked region
with MCBC with the next lowest CV. Due to the known homogeneity of the phantom in this area, the CV is a useful indicator
that the bias correction by these two approaches is more successful compared to the other methods. Looking more closely
at the visual results, it is evident that LEMS’ correction is ho-

mogeneous in this region, however, nearest the ERC, MCBC
reduces the variation more effectively without the presence of
background artifacts.
C. Experiment 3: Real Endorectal DWI
Real endorectal DWI images were corrected using the various
approaches and compared using FC as well as probability of
error to determine the resulting separability of the prostate from
the background.
1) Fisher Criterion: The results of the FC analysis are shown
in Table III. Considering the FC values of all the methods,
MCBC proves to be the most robust at increasing the class
separation of the uncorrected image. Improved class separation improves visualization and eases the process of diagnosis.
This method improved upon the FC of the uncorrected image
drastically. MCBC’s higher FC values show that this approach
was able to improve upon the uncorrected image’s separation
between the prostate and background. BCFCM, LS, and SGD
showed similar results where there was some improvement with
respects to separation but less significant as MCBC. SCIC on
the other hand, in most cases, failed to improve the FC of the
uncorrected image and instead diminished it. Visual results support these conclusions as the approach is dependent upon a
fixed threshold value. The threshold value is used to develop a
mask where correction is applied and does not support the accurate estimation of ERC caused bias fields. As a result, SCIC

374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

TABLE IV
PROBABILITY OF ERROR RESULTS: MCBC DEMONSTRATES THE LOWEST
AVERAGE PROBABILITY OF ERROR FOR ALL CASES INDICATING IT HAS
THE LOWEST CHANCE OF MISCLASSIFYING A VOXEL INCORRECTLY
AS COMPARED TO THE UNCORRECTED IMAGE

overcompensates for intensity bias in the background. Consequently, the separability of the prostate and the background is
impacted and the FC value is diminished. LEMS showed a wide
range of FC values, where in some cases it demonstrated improved separation over the uncorrected image, while in others it
made the separation worse. This is due to the user-thresholded
mask that is applied to the image in order to narrow the range
of the bias field. A consistent threshold was used for all cases
in order to give fair comparison against the other approaches.
A fourth-order polynomial was also used to initialize the bias
field. As a result, if the mask is not a reasonable fit to the bias
field, LEMS can instead introduce artifacts that decrease the
separation of the prostate and the background.
2) Probability of Error: Supporting the FC results, the probability of error (see Table IV) showed that MCBC had the lowest average probabilities of error compared to the other approaches. This demonstrates that MCBC’s ML estimation to
classify the two classes allows the best separation between the
classes with fewest voxels misclassified. Improved separation of
the prostate from the background helps to improve visualization
of the prostate for diagnosis. BCFCM, LS, and SGD showed
similar probabilities of error to one another, which were also
similar to the uncorrected images. This indicates that the separation between the classes was not improved based on the learned
ML estimates. LEMS and SCIC had the highest probability of
error demonstrating there were many misclassified voxels due
to the poor separation of the prostate and background.

The failure to remove this intensity bias near the coil leads to
uncertainty whether this region is a tumor candidate or a result
of intensity variation. In contrast, LEMS is more successful in
delineating the lower region of the tumor, however, the introduction of artifacts near the top of the prostate gland also leads
to uncertainty. The artifacts show up as bright regions which
could demonstrate the potential for a cancerous region which
can be misleading and potentially harmful to diagnosis. MCBC
displays the best tumor delineation with the best bias removal
displaying the tumor region with high intensity as expected.
In Fig. 4, an example of noncancerous tissue is shown where
no bright regions are to be expected. The bias field and poor
bias correction, however, show as bright regions in the PZ
which make this assumption challenging. BCFCM, LS, and
SCIC are unable to remove the inhomogeneity, while SGD is
able to remove some of the bias. LEMS removes all of the inhomogeneity successfully, however, distorts the upper prostate
gland by creating the appearance that it is larger than it really
is. Due to its strong dependence upon threshold masking for
correction, the computed high b-value is not useful due to this
inaccurate representation. MCBC shows the best bias correction
without distorting the prostate gland, thereby allowing for better
visualization.
To quantify the separation of the tumor found in Fig. 3 from
the prostate gland, the FC and probability of error were calculated. The results are shown in Table V. MCBC had the best
separation indicated by the high FC value and the lowest probability of error in classifying the tumor from the prostate. Due
to its removal of the bias field, MCBC maintains a strong delineation of the tumor from the prostate that is useful in tumor
localization and visualization.
E. Timing Analysis
The performance of each approach was considered and compared using MATLAB and C++. Tests were completed on a
3.10-GHz AMD Athlon(tm) II X3 445 processor with 4.00 GB
of RAM. The MCBC implementation was not optimized for
timing performance and author provided implementations were
used for the compared approaches. The results are shown below
in Table VI. BCFCM showed the fastest computation times with
performance of 0.094 s, while LEMS had the slowest average
computation time of 119.245 s. MCBC shows a middle range
performance with an average computation time of 6.359 s. SCIC
is not included in the timing analysis since the correction is built
into the scanners in which case the time to compare against is
0 s.

D. Experiment 4: High b-Value DWI

F. Visual Assessment

High b-value computations were calculated for two cases
(shown in Figs. 3 and 4). Fig. 3 shows an example where the
high intensity region identifies an area with low diffusion, potentially indicating the presence of a tumor. Due to the bias field
created by the ERC (indicated by the blue pointer), it is difficult
to delineate the tumor region (indicated with the red arrow).
BCFCM, LS, SGD, and SCIC are unable to completely remove
the bias impacting the PZ and this is evident by the bright PZ.

Figs. 7–9 show example slices from three out of the fourteen
cases that have been corrected with the discussed methods. In
comparison to the other images, the results produced by MCBC
visually validate the previous FC and probability of error analyses. In these images, the strong bias field near the ERC has
been muted to allow for improved prostate and background delineation aiding in visual analysis. The bias field is still visible
in the BCFCM, LS, SGD, and SCIC corrected images around

LUI et al.: MONTE CARLO BIAS FIELD CORRECTION IN ENDORECTAL DIFFUSION IMAGING

375

Fig. 3. High b-value b = 1500 s/mm2 with tumor: The bright intensity of the tumor (red arrow) is most visible in MCBC due to the lack of inhomogeneity (blue
arrow) that is apparent in the other approaches.

Fig. 4. High b-value b = 1500 s/mm2 without tumor: The prostate gland appears most even in MCBC, while the other approaches exhibit bright intensity regions
that are characteristic of tumor regions that are in fact nonexistant.
TABLE V
FC AND PROBABILITY OF ERROR RESULTS FOR HIGH B-VALUE: MCBC SHOWS
THE HIGHEST FC AND LOWEST PROBABILITY OF ERROR SUPPORTING THE
REMOVAL OF THE BIAS FIELD FOR STRONG DELINEATION OF THE TUMOR

the ERC and shows a weak separation between the prostate and
the background. SCIC uses a fixed threshold mask to develop a

bias estimate. As such, this mask can lead to poor bias estimation and correction leading to remnants of the intensity bias and
weak separability of the prostate from the background.
Similarly, LEMS shows some variation in the PZ region but
less than BCFCM, LS, SGD, and SCIC, however, the presence
of additional artifacts can increase the size of the prostate. This
is dependent upon the mask that is initialized using a threshold
approach to focus the algorithm upon the prostate. Using a consistent threshold across all images for fair comparison against
the other approaches, it is evident that in situations where the
mask is a reasonable fit, the results are more favorable. For example, in Figs. 7 and 8, a suitable mask was applied and LEMS
is able to compensate for the bias field appropriately (although
introducing artifacts in the background). In Fig. 9, a poor mask is

376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 5. Bias corrected synthetic DWI phantoms are shown. MCBC displays the best suppression of the intensity bias while the other approaches still display
signs of intensity inhomogeneity.

Fig. 6.

Bias corrected DWI phantoms are shown.

LUI et al.: MONTE CARLO BIAS FIELD CORRECTION IN ENDORECTAL DIFFUSION IMAGING

377

Fig. 7. Case 1 b = 800 s/mm2 : MCBC and LEMS effectively remove the strong bias field found near the ERC that the other methods are unable to. LEMS,
however, exhibits background artifacts and there is still a visible variation that carries from the PZ upwards through the PG in BCFCM, SGD, LS, and SCIC.

Fig. 8. Case 4 b = 0 s/mm2 : MCBC removes the bias field in the PZ and brightens the PG for better delineation from the background. The bias field can still be
seen in BCFCM, LS, SGD, and SCIC. LEMS shows additional background artifacts.

378

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Case 13 b = 800 s/mm2 : MCBC effectively reduces the bias field across the PZ and PG, resulting in a more consistent intensity across the entire prostate.

TABLE VI
COMPUTATION TIMES: BCFCM HAS THE SHORTEST AVERAGE COMPUTATION
TIME WITH 0.094 S, WHILE LEMS HAS THE LONGEST AVERAGE
COMPUTATION TIME WITH 119.245 S

images for use as diagnostic tools and acting as a preprocessing
tool for segmentation.
VI. CONCLUSION

found due to the stronger bias field and as a result the correction
is applied on areas not including the prostate, increasing the illumination in the background, thereby reducing the prostate and
background separability. Moreover, LEMS appears to remove
detail and flatten the prostate gland, making the prostate gland
difficult to characterize.
MCBC on the other hand is not subject to a mask and is
able to improve separability and illumination variation in the
presence of strong and weak bias fields accordingly. With these
preliminary results, MCBC shows strong promise in being a
useful tool for bias field removal to improve endorectal DWI

In this paper, a Monte Carlo bias field correction method for
endorectal DWI was introduced. This approach uses a Monte
Carlo sampling method to develop a nonparametric estimate
of the bias field to be removed for improved image diagnostic
capabilities. The analysis in this study shows that following correction, there may be strong delineation between the prostate
and the background in bias field-affected images as well as reduced intensity variation in bias-heavy areas. Computation of
high b-values can also be useful for visualization of cancerous regions and for diagnosis. These improvements show the
promise of this method in advancing the diagnostic power of
endorectal DWI for detecting PCa.
The resulting bias field estimate from the MCBC approach
found in this study appears to result in a better estimate than
the other methods. Applying a synthetic bias field to a nonendorectal DWI image, MCBC showed high correlation with the
nonendorectal DWI image. Then, the resulting corrected MCBC
for a physical phantom showed the second least variation within
the selected region. In both cases, BCFCM, LS, SGD, and SCIC
showed minimal improvement upon the inhomogeneity and correlation, failing to remove the strong bias in the PZ nearest the
coil. LEMS showed improved bias correction over these other
approaches, however, was dependent upon the threshold mask
generated and was subject to background artifacts. Moreover,
LEMS reduces the detail in the prostate gland and flattens the region making it difficult to distinguish prostate from background.

LUI et al.: MONTE CARLO BIAS FIELD CORRECTION IN ENDORECTAL DIFFUSION IMAGING

Moreover, MCBC effectively subdue the intensity inhomogeneity to improve the separability of the prostate from the background with the highest Fisher criterion and lowest probability
of error.
High b-value computations of a known tumor case and a
no-tumor case were also considered. The purpose of this experiment was to assess bias correction on the improvement of
visualization to provide a means of computer-aided clinical decision support for PCa. MCBC’s computations showed visually
and quantitatively easier visualization of tumors and separation
from the prostate while some of the other approaches displayed
incorrect indicators of tumor candidates. LEMS even introduced
bright background artifacts that made the prostate difficult to delineate and would typically indicate tumor candidates.
Given these promising preliminary results, it is suggested
that the application of MCBC to endorectal MRI images may
be thoroughly investigated as a preprocessing technique for automatic tumor candidate detection and localization as well as
segmentation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
D. Lui, A. Modhafar, and A. Wong were involved in designing the study and performing statistical analysis. D. Lui, A.
Modhafar, A. Wong, M. A. Haider, and J. Glaister were involved
in the writing and editing. M. A. Haider was involved in collecting and reviewing the data. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
REFERENCES
[1] Canadian Cancer Society, Statistics Canada, “Canadian cancer statistics
2012,” 2012.
[2] American Cancer Society, “Cancer facts and figures,” 2012.
[3] Canadian Cancer Society, “Prostate cancer statistics at a glance,” 2012.
[4] Prostate Cancer Canada Network, “Early detection guidelines,” 2012.
[5] P. R. Carroll, “Early detection of prostate cancer,” Commun. Oncol., vol. 7,
pp. 25–27, 2010.
[6] I. M. Thompson, D. K. Pauler, P. J. Goodman, C. M. Tangen, M. S. Lucia,
H. L. Parnes, L. M. Minasian, L. G. Ford, S. M. Lippman, E. D. Crawford,
J. J. Crowley, and C. A. C. Jr, “Prevalence of prostate cancer among men
with a prostate-specific antigen level ≤ 4.0 ng per mililiter,” N. Engl. J.
Med., vol. 350, pp. 2239–2246, 2004.
[7] V. S. Khoo, A. R. Padhani, S. F. Tanner, D. J. Finnigan, M. O. Leach,
and D. P. Dearnaley, “Comparison of MRI with ct for the radiotherapy
planning of prostate cancer: A feasibility study,” Brit. J. Radiol., vol. 72,
pp. 590–597, 1999.
[8] M. Debois, R. Oyen, F. Maes, G. Verswijvel, G. Gatti, H. Bosmans,
M. Feron, E. Bellon, G. Kutcher, H. V. Poppel, and L. Vanuytsel, “The
contribution of magnetic resonance imaging to the three-dimensional treatment planning of localized prostate cancer,” T. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol.
Phys., vol. 45, pp. 857–865, 1999.
[9] N. Desouza, S. Reinsberg, E. Scurr, J. Brewster, and G. Payne, “Magnetic
resonance imaging in prostate cancer: The value of apparent diffusion
coefficients for identifying malignant nodules,” Brit. J. Radiol., vol. 80,
pp. 90–95, 2007.
[10] K. Hosseinzadeh and S. D. Schwarz, “Endorectal diffusion-weighted
imaging in prostate cancer to differentiate malignant and benign peripheral
zone tissue,” J. Magnet. Reson. Imag., vol. 20, pp. 654–661, 2004.
[11] M. Haider, T. van der Kwast, J. Tanguay, A. J. Evans, A.-T. Hashmi1,
G. Lockwood, and J. Trachtenberg, “Combined t2-weighted and diffusionweighted mri for localization of prostate cancer,” C. Amer. J. Roentgenol.,
vol. 189, pp. 323–328, 2007.
[12] D. Koh and A. Padhani, “Diffusion weighted mri a new functional clinical
technique for tumour imaging,” D. Brit. J. Radiol., vol. 79, pp. 633–635,
2006.

379

[13] J. Glaister, A. Cameron, A. Wong, and M. Haider, “Quantitative investigative analysis of tumour separability in the prostate gland using ultra-high
b-value computed diffusion imaging,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 420–423.
[14] A. B. Rosenkrantz, N. Hindman, H. Chandarana, F. ming Deng, J. S. Babb,
S. Taneja, and C. Geppert, “Computed diffusion-weighted imaging of the
prostate at 3t: Impact on image quality and tumor detection,” in Proc. Int.
Soc. Mag. Reson. Med. (ISMRM), 21st Annu. Meeting Exhibit., 2013, p.
94.
[15] C. K. Kim, B. K. Park, and B. Kim, “High-b-value diffusion-weighted
imaging at 3 T to detect prostate cancer: Comparisons between b values of
1,000 and 2,000 s/mm2,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 194, no. 1, pp. W33–
W37, 2010.
[16] T. Metens, D. Miranda, J. Absil, and C. Matos, “What is the optimal b
value in diffusion-weighted mr imaging to depict prostate cancer at 3T?”
Eur. Radiol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 703–709, Mar. 2012.
[17] D. Beyersdorff, K. Taymoorian, T. Knösel, D. Schnorr, R. Felix, B. Hamm,
and H. Bruhn, “MRI of prostate cancer at 1.5 and 3.0 T: Comparison
of image quality in tumor detection and staging,” Amer. J. Roentgenol.,
vol. 185, pp. 1214–1220, 2005.
[18] A. Fan, W. M. Wells, J. W. Fisher, S. H. Mujdat Cetin, R. Mulkern, C.
Tempany, and A. S. Willsky, “A unified variational approach to denoising
and bias correction in mr,” in Information Processing in Medical Imaging
(Lecture Notes Computer Science, vol. 2732). Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2003, pp. 148–159.
[19] G. P. Liney, L. W. Turnbull, and A. J. Knowles, “A simple method for the
correction of endorectal surface coil inhomogeneity in prostate imaging,”
J. Magn. Reson. Imaging, vol. 8, pp. 994–997, 1998.
[20] S. W. Heijmink, J. J. Fütterer, T. Hambrock, S. Takahashi, T. W. Scheenen,
H. J. Huisman, C. A. Hulsbergen-Van de Kaa, B. C. Knipscheer,
L. A. Kiemeney, J. A. Witjes et al., “Prostate cancer: Body-array versus
endorectal coil mr imaging at 3 T? Comparison of image quality, localization, and staging performance1,” Radiology, vol. 244, no. 1, pp. 184–195,
2007.
[21] B. S. Kim, T.-H. Kim, T. G. Kwon, and E. S. Yoo, “Comparison of pelvic
phased-array versus endorectal coil magnetic resonance imaging at 3 tesla
for local staging of prostate cancer,” Yonsei Med. J., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 550–
556, 2012.
[22] J. Sosna, I. Pedrosa, W. C. Dewolf, H. Mahallati, R. E. Lenkinski, and
N. M. Rofsky, “Mr imaging of the prostate at 3 tesla: Comparison of an
external phased-array coil to imaging with an endorectal coil at 1.5 tesla,”
Acad. Radiol., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 857–862, 2004.
[23] D. Beyersdorff, K. Taymoorian, T. Knösel, D. Schnorr, R. Felix, B. Hamm,
and H. Bruhn, “Mri of prostate cancer at 1.5 and 3.0 T: Comparison
of image quality in tumor detection and staging,” Amer. J. Roentgenol.,
vol. 185, no. 5, pp. 1214–1220, 2005.
[24] Y. Mazaheri, H. A. Vargas, G. Nyman, A. Shukla-Dave, O. Akin, and
H. Hricak, “Diffusion-weighted MRI of the prostate at 3.0 T: Comparison of endorectal coil (ERC) MRI and phased-array coil (PAC)
MRI?The impact of SNR on ADC measurement,” Eur. J. Radiol., vol. 82,
2013.
[25] B. H. Brinkmann, A. Manduca, and R. A. Robb, “Optimized homomorphic unsharp masking for mr grayscale inhomogeneity correction,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 161–171, Apr. 1998.
[26] U. Vovk, F. Pernus, and B. Likar, “A review of methods for correction of
intensity inhomogeneity in MRI,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 405–421, Mar. 2007.
[27] B. M. Dawant, A. P. Zijdenbos, and R. A. Margolin, “Correction of intensity variations in mr images for computer-aided tissue classification,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 770–781, Dec. 1993.
[28] R. P. Velthuizen, J. J. Heine, A. B. Cantor, H. Lin, L. M. Fletcher, and
L. P. Clarke, “Review and evaluation of MRI nonuniformity corrections
for brain tumor response measurements,” Med. Phys., vol. 25, pp. 1655–
1666, 1998.
[29] S.-H. Lai and M. Fang, “A new variational shape-from-orientation approach to correcting intensity inhomogeneities in magnetic resonance images,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 3, pp. 409–424, 1999.
[30] Z. Hou, “A review of mr image intensity inhomogeneity correction,” Int.
J. Biomed. Imag., vol. 2006, pp. 1–11, 2006.
[31] B. Belaroussia, J. Millesb, S. Carmec, Y. M. Zhua, and H. Benoit-Cattina,
“Intensity non-uniformity correction in MRI: Existing methods and their
validation,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 10, pp. 234–246, 2006.
[32] J. G. Sled, A. P. Zijdenbos, and A. C. Evans, “A nonparametric method
for automatic correction of intensity nonuniformity in MRI data,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 87–97, Feb. 1998.

380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

[33] G. B. Avinash and G. E. Company, “Method for correcting inhomogeneity
of spatial intensity in an acquired mr image,” U.S. Patent US59 437 433
A, Aug. 24, 1999.
[34] L. Axel, J. Costantini, and J. Listerud, “Intensity correction in surface-coil
mr imaging,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 148, no. 2, pp. 418–420, 1987.
[35] N. D. Gelber, R. L. Ragland, and J. R. Knorr, “Surface coil mr imaging:
Utility of image intensity correction filter,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 162,
no. 3, pp. 695–697, 1994.
[36] M.-H. Chen, “Importance-weighted marginal Bayesian posterior density
estimation,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., vol. 89, pp. 818–824, 1994.
[37] M. N. Ahmed, S. M. Yamany, N. Mohamed, A. A. Farag, and T. Moriarty,
“A modified fuzzy c-means algorithm for bias field estimation and segmentation of mri data,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 193–199,
Mar. 2002.
[38] Y. Zheng, M. Grossman, S. Awate, and J. Gee, “Automatic correction
of intensity nonuniformity from sparseness of gradient distribution in
medical images,” Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv., vol. 12,
pp. 852–859, 2009.
[39] C. Li, R. Huang, Z. Ding, J. C. Gatenby, D. N. Metaxas, and J. C. Gore,
“A level set method for image segmentation in the presence of intensity
inhomogeneities with application to MRI,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 2007–2016, Jul. 2011.
[40] O. Salvado, C. Hillenbrand, S. Zhang, and D. L. Wilson, “Method to
correct intensity inhomogeneity in mr images for atherosclerosis characterization,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 539–552, May
2006.
[41] D.-J. Kroon. (2009). Bias field corrected fuzzy c-means, [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/25712bias-field-c orrected-fuzzy-c-means

Dorothy Lui (S’13) received the B.A.Sc. degree in
mechatronics engineering in 2012 from the University of Waterloo, ON, Canada, where she is currently
working towards the M.A.Sc. degree in systems design engineering.
She has researched biomaterial fabrication and
worked in telecommunications and biomedical device development. Her current research interests include computer vision and medical image processing
with a focus on denoising, reconstruction and segmentation in prostate multiparametric MRI.

Amen Modhafar received the Graduate degree in
systems design engineering from the University of
Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2012.
He is a Research Engineer/Physicist at Sunnybrook Health Science Center, Toronto, ON. He has
varied experience in the field of biomedical imaging
working on visualization, quantification and research
in DWI, T1 and T2 MR imaging for prostate cancer
detection. His research interests include development
of flexible user interfaces geared to perform applied
mathematics tools.

Jeffrey Glaister (S’12) received the B.A.Sc. degree
in systems design engineering in 2011 from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, where
he is currently working toward the M.A.Sc. degree in
systems design engineering.
He is a member of the Vision and Image Processing Research group. His current research topic
is segmentation of skin lesions from dermatological
photographs. His research interests include biomedical image processing, remote sensing, and pattern
recognition.

Alexander Wong (M’05) received the Ph.D. degree
in systems design engineering in 2010 from the University of Waterloo, ON, Canada.
He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Research Fellow
at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Systems Design Engineering, University of
Waterloo. His research interests include the field of
image processing and computer vision, with a focus
on biomedical imagery acquired from different sensing technologies.

Masoom A. Haider received the M.D. degree in 1986
from the University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.
In 1994, he completed his residency in radiology
at the University of Toronto, ON, Canada where he is
currently Professor of Radiology in the Department of
Medical Imaging. He is also the Chief of the Medical
Imaging Department at Sunnybrook Health Sciences
Centre, Toronto, ON. His research interests include
abdominal and pelvic MRI with special emphasis in
prostate cancer, therapeutic response assessment and
function imaging of cancer.

