362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Metrics for Describing Soft-Tissue Artefact and Its
Effect on Pose, Size, and Shape of Marker Clusters
E. Grimpampi, V. Camomilla∗ , A. Cereatti, P. de Leva, and A. Cappozzo

Abstract—In human movement analysis based on stereophotogrammetry, bone pose is reconstructed by observing a cluster
of skin markers. Each marker undergoes a displacement relative
to the underlying bone that is regarded as an artefact (soft-tissue
artefact, STA) since it affects accuracy in bone pose estimation. This
paper proposes a set of metrics for the statistical description of the
STA and its effects on cluster pose, size, and shape, with the intent
of contributing to a clearer knowledge of its characteristics, and
consequently of setting the bases for the development of more accurate bone pose estimators than presently available. Skin marker
clusters behave as deformable bodies in motion relative to the underlying bone. Their motion can be described, based on Procrustes
analysis, as the composition of four independent transformations:
translation and rotation (rigid motion, RM), and change in size and
shape (nonrigid motion, NRM). Statistical parameters describing
the time histories of both the individual marker STA and the cluster transformations listed earlier were defined. For demonstration
purposes, data collected ex vivo were used. The lower limbs of
three cadavers were made to undergo movements with prevailing
flexion–extension components. Femur pose was accurately measured using pin markers and the movement of twelve thigh skin
markers observed relative to it. The STAs of all possible clusters of
four skin markers were analysed. RM and NRM exhibited similar
magnitudes and therefore impact on bone pose estimation. Thus
bone pose estimators should not account for NRM only, as is normally the case, but also for RM.
Index Terms—Bone pose, human movement analysis, marker
cluster, Procrustes analysis, soft-tissue artefact (STA).

NOMENCLATURE
Reference frame fixed to the analyzed bone.
Bone pose estimator.
Reference frame representing the pose of a deformable
marker cluster.
G
Global reference frame.
NRM Nonrigid motion.
RM
Rigid motion.
ROM Range of motion.
STA Soft-tissue artefact.
B
BPE
C

Manuscript received April 11, 2013; revised July 11, 2013; accepted August
13, 2013. Date of publication August 23, 2013; date of current version January
16, 2014. This work was supported by the University of Rome “Foro Italico”
under Grant 2012. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
E. Grimpampi, P. de Leva, and A. Cappozzo are with the Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome “Foro Italico,” 00135
Rome, Italy (e-mail: e.grimpampi@uniroma4.it; paolo.deleva@uniroma4.it;
aurelio.cappozzo@uniroma4.it).
∗ V. Camomilla is with the Department of Movement, Human and Health
Sciences, University of Rome “Foro Italico,” 00135 Rome, Italy (e-mail:
valentina.camomilla@uniroma4.it).
A. Cereatti is with the POLCOMING Department, Information Engineering
Unit, University of Sassari, 07100 Sassari, Italy (e-mail: acereatti@uniss.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2279636

I. INTRODUCTION
HE estimate of the instantaneous pose of a bone (position
and orientation) relative to a global frame (G), during
the execution of a physical exercise, by means of noninvasive
experimental techniques, is a central and yet inadequately solved
problem in human movement analysis [1].
The assumption of rigidity of the bone and consequent use of
a bone-embedded frame (B) to numerically describe its pose is
commonly accepted in the present context. The instantaneous
positions relative to G of at least three nonaligned markers
(marker cluster), placed on the surface of the body segment
under analysis, are measured by means of a stereophotogrammetric system. These positions are provided as input to a bone
pose estimator (BPE) the output of which is the instantaneous
pose in G of a frame (C) associated, by means of a predefined
rule, with the cluster.
Due to the unavoidable deformation of the soft tissues, the
markers move with respect to B. This movement is regarded as
an artefact (soft-tissue artefact, STA) because, if not compensated for, it prevents frame C from being rigidly associated with
frame B and, therefore, from accurately representing the bone
pose. The STA is regarded as the most important source of the
error affecting in vivo skeletal movement reconstruction based
on stereophotogrammetry [2].
Based on a mathematical approach known as Procrustes analysis [3], if a marker is included in a cluster, its displacement
(i.e., the STA) can be explained as the result of a sequence of
geometrical transformations applied to the cluster. Namely, the
displacement of each marker may be imagined to be the sum of
four components (see Fig. 1), caused by
1) a translation of the cluster;
2) a rotation of the cluster about the origin of C;
3) a change in cluster size (a homothetic transformation of
the cluster with respect to its centroid, herein also called
cluster scaling);
4) a change in cluster shape (cluster deformation).
By definition, these transformations are independent of each
other. Namely, a change in one of them entails no change in
the others. Note that the term deformation is sometimes used
to indicate any nonrigid motion of a set of points. In this study,
deformation is more strictly defined as any marker motion that
does not entails translation, rotation or scaling. For instance,
the displacement of only one marker cannot be considered a
pure cluster deformation, as it necessarily produces a cluster
translation, and often also rotation and scaling.
The composition of translation and rotation can be described
as a rigid motion (RM) and that of scaling and deformation
as a nonrigid motion (NRM). BPEs have been proposed in the

T

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GRIMPAMPI et al.: METRICS FOR DESCRIBING SOFT-TISSUE ARTEFACT AND ITS EFFECT ON POSE, SIZE, AND SHAPE OF MARKER CLUSTERS

363

II. METHODS
A. STA at Single Marker Level
The STA of a given skin marker at time i is, by definition,
its local displacement from a reference position fixed in B.
Typically, the reference position is either a position of the marker
at a given time (e.g., the position recorded at the beginning of
an experiment, or while the subject assumes a standard static
posture), or its mean position.
B. STA at Cluster Level

Fig. 1. (a) STA in a cluster of 4 markers represented as displacements di
(i = 1, . . ., 4) relative to a reference position. The displacement of each marker
is the sum of the three components shown in (b)–(d). For instance, d1 =
d1 .1 + d1 .2 + d1 .3 . White and black dots represent markers before and after
displacement, respectively. Although, for the sake of simplicity, the figure shows
2-D transformations, typically translation, rotation, scaling, and deformation
occur in 3-D, and the four markers may not lie on the same plane.

literature that exploit Procrustes analysis to fully compensate
for cluster NRM [4]–[13]. Methods to partially compensate for
RM have been also suggested, but they have limited clinical
application because they either require additional calibration
procedures [14], [15] or they exhibit insufficient effectiveness
[16].
Several published studies provide information concerning
the STA of individual skin markers, mostly with reference to
the human thigh and shank [16]–[20], and their effects on the
estimate of knee joint kinematics [21]–[25]. Few investigations are available regarding the STA components illustrated
earlier.
Taylor et al. [13], based on experiments on sheep, suggested
that cluster RM, which they called “unison movement of the
marker set,” plays a critical role as a source of error, but they
did not quantify it. Andersen et al. [26] decomposed thigh STAs
assessing position, orientation, and NRM of a deformable cluster
model [27]. However, they focused on evaluating how these
components varied with time and did not provide quantitative
information about them.
As a premise to the design of advanced optimal BPEs, this
study intended to propose a new set of metrics for the statistical
description of the time histories of both the STA affecting individual markers, and its effects on cluster position, orientation,
size, and shape. A secondary purpose was to provide a quantitative description of both the STA and the associated cluster
transformations, in the paradigmatic case of skin marker clusters
located on the human thigh.

As shown in Fig. 1, the displacements (STAs) of the markers forming a cluster can be described as the effect of a rigid
displacement (change in pose), a scaling (change in size), and a
deformation (change in shape) of the cluster. Below, the cluster
pose, size, and shape, will be defined, then the corresponding
statistical measures of variability illustrated.
1) Cluster Pose: The pose of C relative to B at time i was
defined as that of an optimally superimposed cluster template
with time-invariant shape and size, represented by a position
B
vector cB
i and an orientation matrix Ri . The template was defined as a set of points representing the mean shape of the cluster
throughout the experiment, computed as described by Dryden
and Mardia [3]. A local reference frame T was attached to the
template. Its origin coincided with the centroid of the template,
its orientation was arbitrarily defined (the final results of this
study are independent of this definition). For each time i, the
cluster template was superimposed to the actual cluster by optimally translating and rotating it. The goal of the optimization
was minimizing the root mean square distance between the corresponding points of the two objects. This technique is known as
partial Procrustes superimposition [3]–[11]. The mean shape,
sometimes also called optimal common shape [12], [13], is used
because it provides the closest overall fit when superimposed to
the n sampled cluster configurations.
Note that the template centroid (which is also the origin of
T ) is superimposed onto the cluster centroid. Hence, cB
i points
to the cluster centroid. Namely, if the cluster is composed of m
markers, and pB
ij is the local position at time i of the jth marker,
then
1  B
p .
m j =1 ij
m

cB
i =

(1)

2) Cluster Size: The size si of a cluster at time i is defined
as the root mean square distance of its m markers from their
centroid.
3) Cluster Shape: The shape of an object is the geometrical
information about it that is invariant to translations, rotations,
and size changes. This implies that two objects have the same
shape if one can be transformed to the other by a composition
of these transformations. Moreover, to compare the shape of
multiple objects, all of them need to be rotated, translated, and
resized to an arbitrary common pose and size.
In this study, the common pose and size were chosen to be
the pose of B and the mean cluster size s̄, respectively. Consequently, the shape of the cluster at time i was defined as the

364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

position q B
ij of its markers (j = 1, . . ., m) resulting after translating, rotating, and uniformly scaling the cluster as follows:
qB
ij =

 B

s̄
T
pij − cB
.
(RB
i )
i
si

(2)

C. STA Metrics
The STA affecting a single marker can be statistically deB
B
scribed using the peak-to-peak values (ΔpB
x , Δpy , Δpz ) of
the time histories of the corresponding coordinates in B. These
parameters will be referred to as the ranges of motion (ROM)
of the marker with respect to the axes of B.
To quantify the amplitude of the marker STA, irrespective of
the definition of the local frame B, a fourth axis w is defined as
the axis fixed in B along which the largest ROM is observed. By
definition, this axis intersects the two points lying on the marker
three-dimensional (3-D) trajectory that are farthest away from
each other. Their distance ΔpB
w , referred to as the diameter of
the marker trajectory, is the ROM of the marker along w.
During a given motor task, due to STAs, a marker cluster
behaves as a deformable body in motion relative to the bone.
Namely, it undergoes a variation in its position (cB
i ), orientation
B
(RB
i ), size (si ), and shape (q ij ). The maximum variation in
time domain of the latter variables can be statistically measured
through four scalar quantities that will be referred to as position
range (ΔcB ), orientation range (ΔϑB ), size range (Δs), and
shape range (Δq). For i = 1, . . ., n – 1, and u = (i+1), . . ., n:


B
(3)
ΔcB = max cB
u − ci
i,u




B 
ΔϑB = max ϑB RB
i , Ru

(4)

i,u

Δs = max su − si  = max si − min si
i,u

i


 

1 m  B
(q − qB )2
Δq = max
uj
ij
i,u
4 j =1

i

(5)

(6)



B
where ϑB RB
i , Ru is the orientation vector representing the
B
rotation of the cluster from RB
i to Ru . For instance, Δq is
the maximum change in shape observed for a given deformable
cluster, namely, the difference in shape between the two sampled
cluster configurations that are most different from each other.
ΔcB and ΔϑB describe the translation and rotation of the
cluster (first and second STA components), Δs describes cluster
size variation (third STA component), and Δq describes cluster
deformation (fourth STA component). The position range can be
also called the diameter of the trajectory of the cluster centroid.
Note that Δs and Δq are independent of the reference frame in
which the motion of the cluster is observed.
The cumulative effects of NRM (size and shape changes)
were also evaluated using a further parameter referred to as
NRM range (Δr)

 
1 m B
B
B
(r − rB
(7)
Δr = max 
ij ) · (ru j − rij )
i,u
4 j =1 u j

Fig. 2. Pin markers, skin markers, and anatomical landmarks. RASI, LASI,
RPSI, LPSI = right and left anterior and posterior superior iliac spines; LE,
ME = lateral and medial femoral epicondyles. The femoral anatomical reference
frame is also indicated.
TABLE I
THIGH LENGTH AND MASS FOR SPECIMENS S1, S2, AND S3

where

 B
 si B
B T
rB
pij − cB
= q ij .
ij = (Ri )
i
s̄

(8)

D. Experimental Data Collection and Analysis
Data were obtained from three intact adult cadavers (S1, S2,
S3; age 70–85 years).
All specimens had no history of injuries to their lower extremities. Steel pins were inserted into the right iliac crest, proximal
third of the right femoral diaphysis, and anteromedial aspect
of the right tibia (see Fig. 2). Each pin was equipped with a
four-marker cluster (minimum distance between two markers:
70 mm). Cruciform incisions were carried out through the skin
and soft tissue before inserting the steel pins into the bones to
reduce forces exchanged between skin and pins [28]. Additionally, twelve skin markers were placed along three longitudinal
lines on the anteromedial, anterior and anterolateral aspects of
the right thigh (see Fig. 2) [29].
The length and mass of the specimens’ thigh is provided in
Table I. Thigh mass was estimated using a geometrical model
of the thigh built using anthropometric data provided by [29].
The specimens were placed in a supine position, with their
lower limbs initially extended (reference posture). An operator
made their right hip and knee flex to the largest possible range
of motion and then extend back to the reference posture at
a relatively low speed. Three trials for each specimen were
performed.
A nine-camera stereophotogrammetric system (Vicon MX,
120 frames/s) was used for the reconstruction of the instantaneous 3-D position of skin and pin markers in G. Local frames
for pelvis (Lp ), femur (Lf ), and tibia (Lt ) where determined as
explained in the following section, using the corresponding pin

GRIMPAMPI et al.: METRICS FOR DESCRIBING SOFT-TISSUE ARTEFACT AND ITS EFFECT ON POSE, SIZE, AND SHAPE OF MARKER CLUSTERS

markers. The position of the following anatomical landmarks
relative to the corresponding local frame was determined by
means of an ad hoc anatomical calibration experiment, using
a pointer equipped with a cluster of four markers [30]: right
and left anterior superior spines, right and left posterior superior spines, medial and lateral femoral epicondyles and malleoli,
head of the fibula, and tibial tuberosity. Moreover, the position
of the hip joint centre in Lf was estimated using a functional
approach, based on the motion of Lf relative to Lp [28].
1) Pose of Pelvis, Femur, and Tibia: Given the reconstructed
position in G of the pin marker clusters attached to pelvis,
femur and tibia, the instantaneous pose in G of the relevant
local reference frames (Lp , Lf , or Lt ) were estimated using
partial Procrustes superimposition to reduce the propagation of
stereophotogrammetric errors to the estimated cluster pose [31].
The instantaneous poses with respect to G of the anatomical
frames of the pelvis (Bp ), femur (Bf ), and tibia (Bt ) were
determined consistently with the geometrical rules proposed by
Cappozzo et al. [30], based on the known fixed positions in
Lp , Lf , and Lt of the anatomical landmarks listed earlier (including the hip joint centre). These poses were used to estimate
the instantaneous hip and knee joint angles as defined by the
Cardan convention [32].
2) Cluster Selection: Cappozzo et al. [6] showed that the
size and shape of a marker cluster, together with the number
of markers used to build it, affect the accuracy of a BPE. They
also recommended to use clusters formed by four skin markers
with two-dimensional (2-D) isotropy index greater than 0.5 (the
2-D isotropy index is a variable ranging from 0 to 1, assuming
value 0 when the four markers are collinear, and 1 when they
form a square). According to these recommendations, the twelve
skin markers attached to the thigh of each specimen were used
to construct 495 four-marker clusters, out of which 334, 421,
and 370 clusters with 2-D isotropy index greater than 0.5 were
selected for S1, S2, and S3, respectively.
3) Statistical Analysis: Let x, y, z be the axes of Bf (see
Fig. 2) and w an axis fixed in Bf determined, for each marker,
as explained earlier. For each specimen, the ROM of each marker
along x, y, z, w, and the ranges describing the motion of each
cluster (ΔcB , ΔϑB , Δs, Δq, and Δr) were averaged over the
three trials. A test for normality of the latter parameters over
all marker clusters indicated that none of them was normally
distributed. Therefore, the dispersion of each parameter over all
marker clusters was described using a five-number summary
technique (minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile,
and maximum).
Spearman’s correlation coefficients were used to assess
the following relationships: between position and orientation
ranges, between NRM and position ranges, and between NRM
and orientation ranges.
III. RESULTS
The mean hip flexion–extension, adduction–abduction, and
internal–external orientation ranges were 61.3◦ ± 10.8◦ , 7.5◦ ±
3.1◦ , and 17.3◦ ± 5.7◦ , respectively. The mean knee flexion–
extension range was 113.8◦ ± 17.7◦ .

365

Fig. 3. STA affecting the 12 skin markers. The box plots show, for each
specimen (S1, S2, S3), the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, the
maximum, and outliers of the ROM of the 12 markers along axes x, y, z (see
Fig. 2), and w, averaged over the three trials. w is an axis fixed in the femoral
anatomical reference frame such that the ROM along it is the diameter of the
marker trajectory with respect to the same frame.

Fig. 4. STA at cluster level. Box plots showing, for each specimen (S1, S2, S3),
the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, maximum, and outliers of:
(a) position range, (b) orientation range, (c) size range, and (d) shape range of
the selected marker clusters with respect to the femur, averaged over the three
trials.

Statistical data describing the STAs observed for each specimen are shown in Fig. 3 (at single marker level) and Fig. 4 (at
cluster level).
It is apparent from Fig. 4 that each of the parameters used to
describe the STA components (position, orientation, size, and
shape ranges) exhibited a large variability, both across specimens and across clusters. For instance, the median values for
the three specimens ranged from 10.5 to 17.2 mm for position
range, from 6.9◦ to 13.6◦ for orientation range, from 2.1 to
3.2 mm for size range, and from 5.2 to 6.6 mm for shape range.

366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

TABLE II
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN STA RANGES

The minimum and maximum values observed across clusters
and specimens were 5.4 and 21.0 mm for position range, 4.0◦
and 28.2◦ for orientation range, 0.3 and 10.3 mm size range, 1.8
and 13.3 mm for shape range, 1.8 and 13.9 mm for NRM range.
The minimum values for position and orientation ranges varied, among specimens, between 5 and 13 mm and between 5◦
and 8◦ , respectively.
Table II shows the correlations found between the STA ranges.
Position and orientation ranges were poorly or not correlated.
The NRM range was either not correlated or poorly correlated
with position range, while its correlation with orientation range
was low for S1, negligible for S2, and moderate for S3.
IV. DISCUSSION
A new set of metrics has been presented, aimed at describing
the time histories of both the STA affecting individual markers
and its effect on marker cluster position, orientation, size, and
shape.
A number of limitations need to be considered in association
with the experimental data used to demonstrate the proposed
methodology. First, the small number of specimens prevents a
generalisation of the experimental results. A second limitation
is a consequence of the ex vivo procedure adopted. Due to the
absence of active muscular tone, voluntary contraction, and significant inertial effects, the observed STAs were caused only by
soft tissue deformation induced by joint motion. However, despite this limitation the STAs observed in this study exhibited an
amplitude comparable to that observed in previous in vivo studies involving tasks with a similar range of motion and marker
locations [18], [23], [29], [33], [34], suggesting that the STA
component associated with joint motion prevails under these
conditions. Furthermore, these limitations do not jeopardise the
conceptual framework of the study.
The STAs and their effects on cluster pose, size, and shape
were specimen-specific and cluster-specific (see Figs. 3 and 4).
As expected, the largest STAs were observed, both at marker
level (see Fig. 3) and cluster level (see Fig. 4), in the specimen
who exhibited the largest thigh mass and smallest thigh length
(S3).
The NRM of a skin marker cluster is independent of the
adopted reference frame. Hence, it is easily measurable in vivo
by means of a Procrustes analysis of cluster motion relative to
G.
Since the NRM range resulted not to be markedly correlated
with the position and orientation ranges, it cannot be used as
a reliable indicator of the accuracy in the estimated bone pose.
Therefore, NRM range minimization should not be used, or used
with caution, as a criterion for optimal marker placement or

optimal marker cluster selection. Since position and orientation
ranges were not or poorly correlated, clusters with small translation may show a large rotation, and vice versa. The definition and
location of the clusters least affected by STA differed between
specimens. Hence, it was impossible to provide guidelines for
the selection of the best cluster. Based on [11], we believe that
a number of markers m > 4 is not likely to markedly reduce the
STA effect. However, further study is needed on this topic.
The present results concerning cluster RM were in accordance
with those observed elsewhere during gait and during an openchain knee flexion with similar ranges of joint motion [23],
[34]. Specifically, the median position and orientation ranges
reported in this study were in the same order of magnitude
as the corresponding mean values presented in [34] (13 mm
and 18◦ ). They were also comparable to similar parameters
obtained elsewhere for step up tasks presenting a similar range
of joint motion: 7.5 mm and 12◦ in [17], and 5.5–10 mm and
2◦ –10◦ in [18]. The orientation ranges were in the same order
of magnitude as the maximum root mean square error (24◦ )
found by [23] for knee flexion–extension angles, due to thigh
and shank STAs.
Although a few studies did assess the cluster NRM component [13], [26], no description could be found in the literature
in terms of its decomposition into cluster size and shape variation. Taylor et al. [13] used partial Procrustes superimposition
to superimpose the sampled configurations of a cluster to its
mean shape, then defined and displayed NRM as the instantaneous deviations of individual markers from the mean shape.
Andersen et al. [26] performed a geometric analysis of the first
four principal components of STAs acquired in vivo during level
walking, cutting, and hopping and considered the NRM component (which they called deformation). However, only the time
history of this component was provided.
This study is meant to be a premise to the development
of more advanced BPEs. Commonly used BPEs exploit partial Procrustes superimposition to fully compensate for NRM
[4]–[13], but are ineffective with RM.
V. CONCLUSION
In summary, during the execution of a given motor task, the
marker cluster undergoes simultaneously to a translation and a
rotation with respect to the bone (RM), and a size and shape
variation (NRM).
Although the experimental results provided herein are not
generalisable to in vivo motion analysis, they suggest that compensating for NRM is not sufficient to obtain an accurate estimate of bone pose. Future work is needed to develop a model
for accurately predicting RM, defined using a priori information
about STA [29], [34]–[36]. Such a model can then be incorporated into a BPE, allowing it to effectively compensate for all
the components of cluster motion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Dr. M. Donati for his support in
performing the experiments.

GRIMPAMPI et al.: METRICS FOR DESCRIBING SOFT-TISSUE ARTEFACT AND ITS EFFECT ON POSE, SIZE, AND SHAPE OF MARKER CLUSTERS

REFERENCES
[1] A. Cappozzo, U. Della Croce, A. Leardini, and L. Chiari, “Human movement analysis using stereophotogrammetry. Part 1: Theoretical background,” Gait Posture, vol. 21, pp. 186–196, 2005.
[2] A. Leardini, L. Chiari, U. Della Croce, and A. Cappozzo, “Human movement analysis using stereophotogrammetry: Part 3. Soft tissue artifact
assessment and compensation,” Gait Posture, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 212–225,
2005.
[3] I. L. Dryden and K. V. Mardia, Statistical Shape Analysis. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2002.
[4] F. E. Veldpaus, H. J. Woltring, and L. J. Dortmans, “A least-square algorithm for the equiform transformation from spatial marker co-ordinates,”
J. Biomech., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 45–54, 1988.
[5] K. S. Arun, T. S. Huang, and S. D. Blostein, “Least-square fitting of two
3 d point sets,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 698–700, Sep. 1987.
[6] A. Cappozzo, A. Cappello, U. Della Croce, and F. Pensalfini, “Surfacemarker cluster design criteria for 3-D bone movement reconstruction,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 1165–1174, Dec. 1997.
[7] J. H. Challis, “A procedure for determining rigid body transformation
parameters,” J. Biomech., vol. 28, pp. 733–737, 1995.
[8] L. Chèze, B. J. Fregly, and J. Dimnet, “A solidification procedure to
facilitate kinematic analyses based on video system data,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 879–884, 1995.
[9] I. Söderkvist and P. Wedin, “Determining the movement of the skeleton
using well-configured markers,” J. Biomech., vol. 26, pp. 1473–1477,
1993.
[10] A. Cappello, P. F. La Palombara, and A. Leardini, “Optimization and
smoothing techniques in movement analysis,” Int. J. Biomed. Comput.,
vol. 41, pp. 137–151, 1996.
[11] A. Cereatti, U. Della Croce, and A. Cappozzo, “Reconstruction of skeletal movement using skin markers: comparative assessment of bone pose
estimators,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 23, pp. 3–7, 2006.
[12] M. O. Heller, S. Kratzenstein, R. M. Ehrig, G. Wassilew, G. N. Duda, and
W. R. Taylor, “The weighted optimal common shape technique improves
identification of the hip joint center of rotation in vivo,” J. Orthop. Res.,
vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1470–1475, 2011.
[13] W. R. Taylor, R. M. Ehrig, G. N. Duda, H. Schell, P. Seebeck, and
M. O. Heller, “On the influence of soft tissue coverage in the determination of bone kinematics using skin markers,” J. Orthop. Res., vol. 23,
no. 4, pp. 726–734, 2005.
[14] L. Lucchetti, A. Cappozzo, A. Cappello, and U. Della Croce, “Skin movement artifact assessment and compensation in the estimation of knee joint
kinematics,” J. Biomech., vol. 31, pp. 977–984, 1998.
[15] A. Cappello, A. Cappozzo, P. F. La Palambora, L. Lucchetti, and
A. Leardini, “Multiple anatomical landmark calibration for optimal bone
pose estimation,” Hum. Mov. Sci., vol. 16, pp. 259–274, 1997.
[16] E. J. Alexander and T. P. Andriacchi, “Correcting for deformation in skinbased marker systems,” J. Biomech., vol. 34, pp. 355–361, 2001.
[17] E. H. Garling, B. L. Kapteina, B. Mertens, W. Barendregt, H. E. J. Veeger,
R. G. H. H. Nelissen, and E. R. Valstar, “Soft-tissue artefact assessment
during step-up using fluoroscopy and skin-mounted markers,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 40, pp. 18–24, 2007.
[18] R. Stagni, S. Fantozzi, A. Cappello, and A. Leardini, “Quantification of
soft tissue artefact in motion analysis by combining 3D fluoroscopy and
stereophotogrammetry: A study on two subjects,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 20,
pp. 320–329, 2005.
[19] T.-Y. Tsai, T.-W. Lu, M.-Y. Kuo, and H.-C. Hsu, “Quantification of threedimensional movement of skin markers relative to the underlying bones
during functional activities,” Biomed. Eng. Appl. Basis Commun., vol. 21,
pp. 223–232, 2009.
[20] A. Peters, B. Galna, M. Sangeux, M. Morris, and R. Baker, “Effect of skin
movement artifact on knee kinematics during gait and cutting motions
measured in vivo,” Gait Posture, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2010.

367

[21] T. Ryu, “Application of soft tissue artifact compensation using displacement dependency between anatomical landmarks and skin markers,” Anat.
Res. Int., vol. 2012, pp. 1–10, 2012.
[22] D. L. Benoit, D. K. Ramsey, M. Lamontagne, X. Lanyi, P. Wretenberg,
and P. Renstroem, “Effect of skin movement artifact on knee kinematics
during gait and cutting motions measured in vivo,” Gait Posture, vol. 24,
pp. 152–164, 2006.
[23] M. Akbarshahi, A. G. Schache, J. W. Fernandez, R. Baker, S. Banks, and
M. G. Pandy, “Non-invasive assessment of soft-tissue artifact and its effect
on knee joint kinematics during functional activity,” J. Biomech., vol. 43,
pp. 1292–1301, 2010.
[24] T. Y. Tsai, T. W. Lu, M. Y. Kuo, and C. C. Lin, “Effects of soft tissue
artifacts on the calculated kinematics and kinetics of the knee during
stair-ascent,” J. Biomech., vol. 44, pp. 1182–1188, 2011.
[25] A. Cereatti, V. Camomilla, G. Vannozzi, and A. Cappozzo, “Propagation
of the hip joint centre location error to the estimate of femur vs pelvis orientation using a constrained or an unconstrained approach,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1228–1234, 2007.
[26] M. S. Andersen, M. Damsgaard, J. Rasmussen, D. K. Ramsey, and
D. L. Benoit, “A linear soft tissue artefact model for human movement
analysis: proof of concept using in vivo data,” Gait Posture, vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 606–611, 2012.
[27] M. S. Andersen, M. Damsgaard, and J. Rasmussen, “Kinematic analysis
of over-determinate biomechanical systems,” Comput. Methods Biomech.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 12, pp. 371–384, 2009.
[28] A. Cereatti, M. Donati, V. Camomilla, F. Margheritini, and A. Cappozzo,
“Hip joint centre location: An ex vivo study,” J. Biomech., vol. 42, pp. 818–
823, 2009.
[29] V. Camomilla, A. Cereatti, L. Cheze, and A. Cappozzo, “A hip joint
kinematics driven model for the generation of realistic thigh soft tissue
artefacts,” J. Biomech., vol. 46, pp. 625–630, 2013.
[30] A. Cappozzo, F. Catani, U. Della Croce, and A. Leardini, “Position and
orientation in space of bones during movement: anatomical frame definition and determination,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 10, pp. 171–178, 1995.
[31] L. Chiari, U. Della Croce, A. Leardini, and A. Cappozzo, “Human movement analysis using stereophotogrammetry. Part 2: Instrumental errors,”
Gait Posture, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 197–211, 2005.
[32] G. Wu, S. Siegler, P. Allard, C. Kirtley, A. Leardini, D. Rosenbaum,
M. Whittle, D. D. D’Lima, L. Cristofolini, H. Witte, O. Schmid, and
I. Stokes, “ISB recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate system
of various joints for the reporting of human joint motion—Part I: Ankle, hip, and spine. International Society of Biomechanics,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 35, pp. 543–548, 2002.
[33] A. Cappozzo, F. Catani, A. Leardini, M. G. Benedetti, and U. Della Croce,
“Position and orientation in space of bones during movement: experimental artefacts,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 90–100, 1996.
[34] B. Gao and N. Zheng, “Investigation of soft tissue movement during level
walking: Translations and rotations of skin markers,” J. Biomech., vol. 41,
no. 15, pp. 3189–3195, 2008.
[35] V. Camomilla, M. Donati, R. Stagni, and A. Cappozzo, “Non-invasive
assessment of superficial soft tissue local displacements during movement:
a feasibility study,” J. Biomech., vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 931–937, 2009.
[36] V. Richard, V. Camomilla, L. Cheze, A. Cappozzo, and R. Dumas, “Feasibility of incorporating a soft tissue artefact model in multi-body optimisation,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 194–196, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

