362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Metrics for Describing Soft-Tissue Artefact and Its
Effect on Pose, Size, and Shape of Marker Clusters
E. Grimpampi, V. Camomilla∗ , A. Cereatti, P. de Leva, and A. Cappozzo

Abstract—In human movement analysis based on stereophotogrammetry, bone pose is reconstructed by observing a cluster
of skin markers. Each marker undergoes a displacement relative
to the underlying bone that is regarded as an artefact (soft-tissue
artefact, STA) since it affects accuracy in bone pose estimation. This
paper proposes a set of metrics for the statistical description of the
STA and its effects on cluster pose, size, and shape, with the intent
of contributing to a clearer knowledge of its characteristics, and
consequently of setting the bases for the development of more accurate bone pose estimators than presently available. Skin marker
clusters behave as deformable bodies in motion relative to the underlying bone. Their motion can be described, based on Procrustes
analysis, as the composition of four independent transformations:
translation and rotation (rigid motion, RM), and change in size and
shape (nonrigid motion, NRM). Statistical parameters describing
the time histories of both the individual marker STA and the cluster transformations listed earlier were defined. For demonstration
purposes, data collected ex vivo were used. The lower limbs of
three cadavers were made to undergo movements with prevailing
flexion–extension components. Femur pose was accurately measured using pin markers and the movement of twelve thigh skin
markers observed relative to it. The STAs of all possible clusters of
four skin markers were analysed. RM and NRM exhibited similar
magnitudes and therefore impact on bone pose estimation. Thus
bone pose estimators should not account for NRM only, as is normally the case, but also for RM.
Index Terms—Bone pose, human movement analysis, marker
cluster, Procrustes analysis, soft-tissue artefact (STA).

NOMENCLATURE
Reference frame fixed to the analyzed bone.
Bone pose estimator.
Reference frame representing the pose of a deformable
marker cluster.
G
Global reference frame.
NRM Nonrigid motion.
RM
Rigid motion.
ROM Range of motion.
STA Soft-tissue artefact.
B
BPE
C

Manuscript received April 11, 2013; revised July 11, 2013; accepted August
13, 2013. Date of publication August 23, 2013; date of current version January
16, 2014. This work was supported by the University of Rome “Foro Italico”
under Grant 2012. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
E. Grimpampi, P. de Leva, and A. Cappozzo are with the Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome “Foro Italico,” 00135
Rome, Italy (e-mail: e.grimpampi@uniroma4.it; paolo.deleva@uniroma4.it;
aurelio.cappozzo@uniroma4.it).
∗ V. Camomilla is with the Department of Movement, Human and Health
Sciences, University of Rome “Foro Italico,” 00135 Rome, Italy (e-mail:
valentina.camomilla@uniroma4.it).
A. Cereatti is with the POLCOMING Department, Information Engineering
Unit, University of Sassari, 07100 Sassari, Italy (e-mail: acereatti@uniss.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2279636

I. INTRODUCTION
HE estimate of the instantaneous pose of a bone (position
and orientation) relative to a global frame (G), during
the execution of a physical exercise, by means of noninvasive
experimental techniques, is a central and yet inadequately solved
problem in human movement analysis [1].
The assumption of rigidity of the bone and consequent use of
a bone-embedded frame (B) to numerically describe its pose is
commonly accepted in the present context. The instantaneous
positions relative to G of at least three nonaligned markers
(marker cluster), placed on the surface of the body segment
under analysis, are measured by means of a stereophotogrammetric system. These positions are provided as input to a bone
pose estimator (BPE) the output of which is the instantaneous
pose in G of a frame (C) associated, by means of a predefined
rule, with the cluster.
Due to the unavoidable deformation of the soft tissues, the
markers move with respect to B. This movement is regarded as
an artefact (soft-tissue artefact, STA) because, if not compensated for, it prevents frame C from being rigidly associated with
frame B and, therefore, from accurately representing the bone
pose. The STA is regarded as the most important source of the
error affecting in vivo skeletal movement reconstruction based
on stereophotogrammetry [2].
Based on a mathematical approach known as Procrustes analysis [3], if a marker is included in a cluster, its displacement
(i.e., the STA) can be explained as the result of a sequence of
geometrical transformations applied to the cluster. Namely, the
displacement of each marker may be imagined to be the sum of
four components (see Fig. 1), caused by
1) a translation of the cluster;
2) a rotation of the cluster about the origin of C;
3) a change in cluster size (a homothetic transformation of
the cluster with respect to its centroid, herein also called
cluster scaling);
4) a change in cluster shape (cluster deformation).
By definition, these transformations are independent of each
other. Namely, a change in one of them entails no change in
the others. Note that the term deformation is sometimes used
to indicate any nonrigid motion of a set of points. In this study,
deformation is more strictly defined as any marker motion that
does not entails translation, rotation or scaling. For instance,
the displacement of only one marker cannot be considered a
pure cluster deformation, as it necessarily produces a cluster
translation, and often also rotation and scaling.
The composition of translation and rotation can be described
as a rigid motion (RM) and that of scaling and deformation
as a nonrigid motion (NRM). BPEs have been proposed in the

T

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GRIMPAMPI et al.: METRICS FOR DESCRIBING SOFT-TISSUE ARTEFACT AND ITS EFFECT ON POSE, SIZE, AND SHAPE OF MARKER CLUSTERS

363

II. METHODS
A. STA at Single Marker Level
The STA of a given skin marker at time i is, by definition,
its local displacement from a reference position fixed in B.
Typically, the reference position is either a position of the marker
at a given time (e.g., the position recorded at the beginning of
an experiment, or while the subject assumes a standard static
posture), or its mean position.
B. STA at Cluster Level

Fig. 1. (a) STA in a cluster of 4 markers represented as displacements di
(i = 1, . . ., 4) relative to a reference position. The displacement of each marker
is the sum of the three components shown in (b)–(d). For instance, d1 =
d1 .1 + d1 .2 + d1 .3 . White and black dots represent markers before and after
displacement, respectively. Although, for the sake of simplicity, the figure shows
2-D transformations, typically translation, rotation, scaling, and deformation
occur in 3-D, and the four markers may not lie on the same plane.

literature that exploit Procrustes analysis to fully compensate
for cluster NRM [4]–[13]. Methods to partially compensate for
RM have been also suggested, but they have limited clinical
application because they either require additional calibration
procedures [14], [15] or they exhibit insufficient effectiveness
[16].
Several published studies provide information concerning
the STA of individual skin markers, mostly with reference to
the human thigh and shank [16]–[20], and their effects on the
estimate of knee joint kinematics [21]–[25]. Few investigations are available regarding the STA components illustrated
earlier.
Taylor et al. [13], based on experiments on sheep, suggested
that cluster RM, which they called “unison movement of the
marker set,” plays a critical role as a source of error, but they
did not quantify it. Andersen et al. [26] decomposed thigh STAs
assessing position, orientation, and NRM of a deformable cluster
model [27]. However, they focused on evaluating how these
components varied with time and did not provide quantitative
information about them.
As a premise to the design of advanced optimal BPEs, this
study intended to propose a new set of metrics for the statistical
description of the time histories of both the STA affecting individual markers, and its effects on cluster position, orientation,
size, and shape. A secondary purpose was to provide a quantitative description of both the STA and the associated cluster
transformations, in the paradigmatic case of skin marker clusters
located on the human thigh.

As shown in Fig. 1, the displacements (STAs) of the markers forming a cluster can be described as the effect of a rigid
displacement (change in pose), a scaling (change in size), and a
deformation (change in shape) of the cluster. Below, the cluster
pose, size, and shape, will be defined, then the corresponding
statistical measures of variability illustrated.
1) Cluster Pose: The pose of C relative to B at time i was
defined as that of an optimally superimposed cluster template
with time-invariant shape and size, represented by a position
B
vector cB
i and an orientation matrix Ri . The template was defined as a set of points representing the mean shape of the cluster
throughout the experiment, computed as described by Dryden
and Mardia [3]. A local reference frame T was attached to the
template. Its origin coincided with the centroid of the template,
its orientation was arbitrarily defined (the final results of this
study are independent of this definition). For each time i, the
cluster template was superimposed to the actual cluster by optimally translating and rotating it. The goal of the optimization
was minimizing the root mean square distance between the corresponding points of the two objects. This technique is known as
partial Procrustes superimposition [3]–[11]. The mean shape,
sometimes also called optimal common shape [12], [13], is used
because it provides the closest overall fit when superimposed to
the n sampled cluster configurations.
Note that the template centroid (which is also the origin of
T ) is superimposed onto the cluster centroid. Hence, cB
i points
to the cluster centroid. Namely, if the cluster is composed of m
markers, and pB
ij is the local position at time i of the jth marker,
then
1  B
p .
m j =1 ij
m

cB
i =

(1)

2) Cluster Size: The size si of a cluster at time i is defined
as the root mean square distance of its m markers from their
centroid.
3) Cluster Shape: The shape of an object is the geometrical
information about it that is invariant to translations, rotations,
and size changes. This implies that two objects have the same
shape if one can be transformed to the other by a composition
of these transformations. Moreover, to compare the shape of
multiple objects, all of them need to be rotated, translated, and
resized to an arbitrary common pose and size.
In this study, the common pose and size were chosen to be
the pose of B and the mean cluster size s̄, respectively. Consequently, the shape of the cluster at time i was defined as the

