IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

611

Dual Electroretinogram/Nitric Oxide Carbon Fiber
Microelectrode for Direct Measurement of Nitric
Oxide in the In Vivo Retina
Micah J. Guthrie and Jennifer J. Kang-Mieler∗

Abstract—Nitric oxide (NO) plays an important physiological
role in normal and pathological retinas. Intraretinal NO concentrations have not been directly measured due to lack of NO electrodes capable of determining their location in the retina. The
microelectrodes described here allow recording of the intraretinal
electroretinogram (ERG) and NO concentration from the same
location, with ERGs used to determine retinal depth. Doublebarreled electrodes were constructed with one barrel serving as
a reference/voltage recording barrel and the other containing a
Nafion-coated carbon fiber used to detect NO amperometrically.
Nafion coating imparted a high selectivity for NO versus ascorbic
acid (2000:1). In vivo rodent experiments demonstrated that the
electrodes could record intraretinal ERGs and NO current with
minimal retinal thickness deformation (9%), allowing for retinal
NO depth profile measurements. Comparison of NO depth profiles
under control conditions and under nitric oxide synthase (NOS)
inhibition by 5 mM L-NG-Nitroarginine methyl ester (L-NAME)
verified that the recorded current was attributable to NO. NO concentrations from control profiles (n = 4) were 2.37 ± 0.34 μM at
the choroid and 1.12 ± 0.14 μM at the retinal surface. NO concentrations from L-NAME profiles (n = 4) were significantly lower at
0.83 ± 0.15 μM at the choroid (p = 0.006) and 0.27 ± 0.04 μM
at the retinal surface (p = 0.001). Localized regions of increased
NO (100–400 nM) were seen in the inner retina under control conditions but not after L-NAME. The dual ERG-NO electrode may be
a valuable tool in evaluating the role of NO in normal and diseased
retinas.
Index Terms—Amperometry, electroretinography, in vivo, nitric
oxide, retina.

I. INTRODUCTION
ITRIC OXIDE (NO) has been shown to play a role in
both normal physiological and pathological retinal processes. Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) is found in numerous retinal cell types such as photoreceptors and the nerve fibers in the
outer and inner plexiform layers [1], amacrine, and ganglion
cells [2], [3], and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) [4]. NO is
believed to play an important role in light and dark adaptation in

N

Manuscript received May 30, 2013; revised August 16, 2013; accepted
September 8, 2013. Date of publication September 11, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
M. J. Guthrie is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616 USA (e-mail: mguthri4@hawk.iit.edu).
∗ J. J. Kang-Mieler is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Illinois
Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616 USA (e-mail: jkangmie@iit.edu)
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2281541

the retina [5], [6]. NO has also been shown to be involved in diabetic retinopathy [7], retinal ischemia [8], and retinal immune
responses to infection [9].
Despite NO playing such a key role in retinal processes, there
have been no direct in vivo measurements of intraretinal NO
concentrations. Concentration measurements have been made
in the vitreous [6], near the retinal surface [10], and near ganglion cells at the retinal surface [11]. NO-induced fluorescence
has been observed in retinal slices but it was not possible to quantitatively correlate the fluorescence with concentration [11]. A
general review of techniques to measure NO in biological samples is given by Taha [12]. There are a variety of methods, but
electrochemical detection of NO is the most direct way of measuring concentration. The difficulty in directly measuring NO
concentration within the retina results from two problems: thinness of the tissue (which is between 200–250 μm for most mammals) and difficulty in determining the position of the recording
electrode tip relative to retinal depth. Most commercial NO
electrodes are too large (on the order of hundreds of micrometers) to successfully penetrate the retina and those that are small
enough are only single-barrel electrodes that only measure NO.
A comprehensive reviews of electrodes used for NO detection
are given in Bedioui and Villeneuver [13]. Single-barreled NO
microelectrodes used in previous in vivo studies relied on visual indications and sharp increases in NO concentrations when
inserting into superficial layers of easily accessible tissue such
as cortex and large blood vessels [14], [15]. However, it is difficult to visualize the electrode tip inside the eye (especially
in small animals) and the NO concentration profile inside the
retina is unknown. Additionally, the retina is made of distinct
layers which may have different NO concentrations. In order to
solve these problems and distinguish between retinal layers, it
is necessary to add a voltage-sensing barrel to the NO electrode
to record the electroretinogram (ERG). The ERG is the voltage
response of the retina to a light stimulus. The intraretinal ERG
signal is different in the various retinal layers/depth, allowing
for the determination of tip position.
Double-barreled microelectrodes have been used to record
in vivo retinal oxygen tension and ERGs [16]. The oxygen
measurements were made amperometrically from a gold-coated
sensing surface held at –0.7 V. These electrodes could theoretically be used to measure NO if set to around + 0.9 V, the voltage
at which NO is most readily oxidized [17]. However, other interfering molecules such as ascorbic acid, nitrite, and dopamine
are also readily oxidized at the same voltage. Ascorbic acid
concentrations are high in the retina with levels approaching

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 1. Schematic of electrode design and operation. One barrel contains the
carbon fiber used as the active electrode for NO measurements and the other
contains a Ag/AgCl wire used to record ERGs and act as a counter/reference
electrode for NO measurements. Tip is made watertight by epoxy. An image of
the beveled and recessed tip is seen in the inset. NO current measurements are
made via a potentiostat holding +0.9 V between the active and counter/reference
electrodes. ERGs are recorded by connecting the Ag/AgCl to an amplifier
referenced to a subdermal electrode placed on the animal’s head.

one hundred time that of blood plasma [18]. To reduce the effects of interfering molecules, a variety of substances can be
coated onto NO electrodes. One of the most common coatings
is Nafion, which can repel anionic molecules like ascorbic acid
and nitrite [17].
In this study, dual NO-ERG microelectrodes suitable for in
vivo retinal measurements were developed in which the carbon fiber NO-sensing barrel coated to repel interferents without
compromising the ability to record ERGs from the ERG barrel.
The response characteristics of the electrodes were investigated
to determine their sensitivity, selectivity, and stability. The electrodes were tested in an in vivo rodent model to verify their
utility in retinal studies.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Fabrication of Dual ERG/NO Electrodes
A schematic of the electrode is shown in Fig. 1. The electrodes were constructed from double-barreled borosilicate capillary glass (0.5 mm ID/1.0 mm OD, Friedrich and Dimmock,
Millville, NJ, USA) with one barrel containing a small glass
filament. The filament-containing barrel served as the voltagesensing barrel for ERG measurement as well as reference for
the NO-sensing barrel. The other barrel without filament served
as the NO-sensing barrel. A length of approximately 12 to 1
inch was broken off the NO barrel so that the ERG barrel was
longer in length. A carbon fiber (OD 5 μm, HexTow IM9, Hexcel Corp., Stamford, CT, USA) was inserted into the NO barrel by attaching the fiber to a small plastic tube (OD 0.016 in,
PTFE Sub-Lite Tubing, Braintree Scientific) with superglue and
pulling the tubing through the barrel. Excess fiber sticking out
to the ends of the barrel was trimmed. The glass was then pulled
on a micropipette puller (P-97, Sutter Instruments) to produce
a fine tip approximately 10 μm in width across both barrels.
During pulling, the fiber was held in place by a piece of clay
over the end of the barrel. A poor seal between the glass and
the fiber results if the fiber is not anchored. Excess carbon fiber
protruding from the tip after pulling was trimmed from the tip
so that approximately 1 mm of fiber was left protruding from
the end of the glass. The NO barrel was then back-filled with
diluted epoxy (Loctite Quickset, Henkel Corp., Bridgewater,

NJ, USA) to form a waterproof seal between the glass and the
carbon fiber at the tip. The hardener and resin of the epoxy
were diluted in a 1:1 ratio, with the hardener being diluted in
acetone and the resin in ethanol. The diluted hardener and resin
were then mixed together in equal parts and back-filled into the
barrel through a filling needle (34 g MicroFil, World Precision
Instruments, Sarasota, FL, USA). The electrode was then heat
cured on a heating plate sequentially at 50 ◦ C for 5 min, 75 ◦ C
for 5 min, 100 ◦ C for 10 min, and 150 ◦ C at 10 min. The slow
increase in temperature allowed the epoxy to cure without boiling and expelling itself out the barrel. Once cured, a small plug
of low melting-point alloy (LMA; Roto117F, RotoMetals, San
Leandro, CA, USA) was inserted into the barrel. The plug was
initially formed by sucking melted LMA into polyethylene tubing with an inner diameter less than the inner diameter of the
borosilicate glass. The polyethlene tubing is then cut away by
scalpel to expose the LMA plug. After the plug was inserted
into the barrel, a Nichrome wire was used to heat the LMA
and melt it over the carbon fiber. A copper wire was inserted
into the LMA during the heating, allowing for the carbon fiber
to be electrically connected to the copper wire and recording
equipment.
To produce a sharp tip suitable for tissue penetration, the
electrode was beveled. The first step was to etch the carbon
fiber all the way back to the glass tip. This was accomplished
by electroetching the carbon fiber by placing the tip in a drop of
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and passing a voltage of 3 VAC
between the tip and a gold wire in contact with the saline. Once
the carbon fiber was flush with the glass tip, the electrode was
beveled on a micropipette beveler (BV-10, Sutter Instruments,
Novato, CA, USA) at an angle of approximately 20◦ so that
the sharp point of the tip was on the carbon fiber barrel. After
beveling, a recess of 1–2 μm was created by electroetching the
carbon fiber for less than a minute at 2 VAC. This recess provided
protection to the Nafion coating from mechanical damage during
tissue penetration. The recess can be seen in the image of the
electrode tip in Fig. 1.
The Nafion membrane was coated onto the carbon fiber in the
recess using a custom mixture of Nafion and acetone. Nafion
117 (5% solution, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was first
preconcentrated to 10% solution by boiling half of the solution
volume away. Acetone was then added until the original solution volume was replenished. Replacing some of the water and
alcohol in the original solution with acetone greatly decreases
the surface tension of the solution, allowing it to more uniformly
coat into the small gaps between the carbon fiber and the glass.
The tip of the electrode was dipped into this solution for 1–2 s
three times, with the tip being heated to 100 ◦ C for 30 s by
placing it next to a soldering iron. The heat curing allowed the
solvents to evaporate out of the Nafion solution before the next
coating was added.
In order to keep Nafion from entering the voltage barrel and
plugging it up, the barrel was pressurized to approximately 45
psi during the coating procedures. The voltage barrel was connected to pressure by sealing the end of the barrel to a Teflon
tube connected to an air tank using heat shrink tubing (1/16
ID, 2:1 shrink ratio, NTE Inc., Bloomfield, NJ, USA). After

GUTHRIE AND KANG-MIELER: DUAL ELECTRORETINOGRAM/NITRIC OXIDE CARBON FIBER MICROELECTRODE

coating, the tubing was cut and the barrel filled with 1X PBS. A
chlorided silver wire was inserted into the barrel and glued into
place. The electrode tip was immersed in PBS until use.
B. Measurement Setup and Calibration
NO measurements were made in amperometric mode using
a potentiostat (DY2011, Digi-Ivy, TX, USA) in a two-electrode
configuration held at +0.9 V between the NO electrode and the
voltage barrel, serving as reference for NO recording. NO is
oxidized at the carbon fiber surface, resulting in the generation
of a small redox current that is measured by the potentiostat [17].
The oxidized NO is then rapidly converted into nitrite in aqueous
media.
A schematic of the equipment connections can be seen in
Fig. 1. A 1 Hz low-pass filter was used to reduce noise. Before
each calibration, the electrode was placed in the test media and
the baseline electrode current was allowed to stabilize. Ascorbic
acid (AA) and dopamine (DA) calibration measurements were
made in stirred PBS (pH 7.4) heated to 37 ◦ C. L-ascorbic acid
(powder, Sigma Aldrich) was added to test medium to achieve a
final concentrations of 200 and 400 μM. Dopamine hydrochloride (powder, Sigma Aldrich) was added to the test medium to
achieve a final concentration of 2 and 4 μM. A linear curve was
fit to the current responses to calculate the sensitivity to both
interferents.
The
decomposition
of
S-Nitroso-N-Acetyl-D,LPenicillamine (SNAP) with a copper (II) catalyst was
used to calibrate the electrode for nitric oxide. Stock SNAP solution was made by adding SNAP powder (Cayman Chemical,
MI, USA) to distilled water and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA), which acts as a transition metal chelator and allows
for negligible decomposition of SNAP while stored. Electrodes
were immersed into an air-equilibrated 0.1 M solution of copper
(II) chloride heated to 37 ◦ C and aliquots of the stock SNAP
solution were added. For every mole of SNAP that undergoes
Cu2 + catalyzed decomposition under aerobic conditions, an
average of 0.54 moles of NO is liberated [19]. The remaining
SNAP is either not decomposed or the NO is immediately
oxidized before it can reach the electrode. Three different
aliquots of SNAP were added to achieve concentrations of 1, 2,
and 3 μM NO. A linear fit was used on the current responses
to determine the sensitivity to NO. The selectivity ratio of the
electrode for NO:AA was calculated as the sensitivity to NO
divided by the sensitivity to AA. Electrodes with a selectivity
of less than 100 were rejected for use in experiments as the
current response to AA would have been on the same order or
larger than the response to NO.
For further verification of the NO calibration, a second
calibration method utilizing diethylammonium (Z)-1-(N,Ndiethylamino)diazen-1-ium-1,2-diolate (DEA/NO) was performed on several electrodes. DEA/NO spontaneously releases
NO when dissolved in neutral of acidic aqueous solutions [20].
SNAP and DEA/NO calibrations were compared at both 30 and
37 ◦ C. Stock solutions of DEA/NO (Cayman Chemicals, Ann
Arbor, MI) were made in 0.01 M NaOH and aliquots of the stock
solution were added to air-equilibrated PBS. At 30 ◦ C in air-

613

equilibrated PBS, 1 and 5 μM of DEA/NO release maximum
levels of 0.8 and 2.3 μM NO, respectively [20]. At 37 ◦ C in
air-equilibrated PBS, 2 and 5.6 μM DEA/NO release maximum
levels of 0.99 and 2.19 μM NO, respectively [21].
C. In Vivo Experiments
All animal procedures were in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
at the Illinois Institute of Technology, and with the principles
embodied in the statement on the use of animals in ophthalmic
and vision research adopted by the Association for Research
in Vision and Ophthalmology. Male Long-Evans and SpragueDawley rats (350–450 g) were initially anesthetized by 3%
isoflurane in an air mixture that contained 30% oxygen, initially through a mask and then a tracheal tube after tracheotomy.
The femoral vein was cannulated and bolus injections of urethane (20% weight/volume, 0.25 mL) were administered every
20 min until the loading dose (800 mg/kg) was achieved. After
the loading dose was reached, a bolus injection of the muscle
paralyzing agent pancuronium bromide (0.8 mg/kg) was administered and the animal placed on artificial respiration. Urethane
(75 mg/kg/h) and pancuronium bromide (0.4 mg/kg/h) were
administered continuously via syringe pump throughout the experiment to maintain deep anesthesia. The animals’ heart rate
and oxygen saturation was monitored by a pulse oximeter and
the body temperature was maintained at 37 ◦ C using a heating
pad.
The eyecup was prepared by first excising the eyelids to prevent interference. The conjunctiva was then removed with small
scissors to expose the sclera and eye muscles. The eye muscles
are cut to prevent them from exerting any traction on the eye.
Care was taken to prevent from severing the vortex veins during
eye muscle removal to prevent choroidal effusion. A long-chain
cyanoacrylate glue (Gluture, Abbott Laboratories, Abott Park,
IL, USA) used for wound closure in veterinary procedures was
then applied from below the equatorial region of the eye up to
the corneal border around the circumference of the eye. Once
hardened, the glue supported the eye wall and maintained its
normal contours. An incision was made at the corneal border
with a scalpel blade and microscissors were then used to remove
the cornea. The lens was then carefully extracted from the eye
with toothed forceps. The majority of the vitreous was usually
removed along with lens but the vitreal cortex usually remained
behind. The collagen in the vitreal cortex rapidly degenerates
and produces a film that can break or clog the electrode barrels.
Fine forceps are used to pull the cortex away at the vitreal base,
and the eyecup was then filled with Ames’ media (pH 7.4) to
maintain the health of the retina.
D. Electroretinography and NO Depth Profiles
The intraretinal ERG was recorded from the voltage barrel
of the electrode and referenced to a silver subdermal electrode
on the animal’s head. The ERGs were elicited with full-field
Ganzfeld stimulation with a flash intensity of 307 scotopic
cd∗s/m2 and flash duration of ∼2 ms. The ERGs were amplified (1000×), filtered (low pass, 3 kHz), digitized (10 kHz),

614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

and stored on a computer. Animals were dark-adapted for 1 hour
before the recording of ERGs. To create a depth profile of retinal
NO concentration, the retina was first penetrated while recording intraretinal ERGs to determine the location of the various
retinal layers. The electrode was advanced slowly toward the
retina with a motorized micropositioner (MX1641R, Siskiyou,
Grants Pass, OR, USA). A sharp transient in the voltage trace on
the oscilloscope and a reverse in polarity of the ERG indicated
that the electrode has penetrated the retinal surface [16], [22].
The micropositioner was zeroed at the surface and advanced in
steps of 30 μm, with ERGs being recorded at each step. The
electrode was advanced until the RPE is reached, which was
indicated by a voltage drop and/or pulsation of the voltage trace
on the oscilloscope. The track length from the retinal surface
to the choroid was then used to calculate percent retinal depth,
with the retinal surface being 0% and the choroid being 100%.
Once the RPE was reached, the NO electrode was polarized to
+0.9 V and the current allowed to stabilize. The electrode was
then withdrawn at a rate of 1.5 μm/s while recording the current
and stopped when the electrode was 200 μm away from the
retinal surface. The sensitivity of the electrode was used to convert the current recording into NO concentration, and the NO
concentration was then plotted with the corresponding percent
retinal depth to create a NO depth profile of the retina.
For the purposes of testing the in vivo functionality of the
electrodes, L-NG-Nitroarginine methyl ester (L-NAME), the
nonspecific NOS inhibitor, was injected directly into the eyecups to inhibit NO production [23]. The volume of Ames media
added to the eyecup was 0.1 mL. Into this, 20 μL of 25 mM
L-NAME solution was injected to achieve a final vitreal concentration of 5 mM. For each experiment, control profiles were first
recorded. Then, a solution of L-NAME (Cayman Chemical) was
injected into the eyecup to achieve a final vitreal concentration
of 5 mM. L-NAME depth profiles were then recorded 30 min
after injection, to allow sufficient time for drug to diffuse into
the retina [23], [24]. The control and L-NAME depth profiles
were compared to assess the contribution of NO to the in vivo
current recorded by the electrode.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fig. 2. Response to SNAP addition in CuCl2 and DEA/NO addition in PBS.
(a) Response to aliquots of SNAP solution into CuCl2 at 37 ◦ C. Arrows indicate
addition of SNAP. 1.6, 3.4 μM SNAP = 0.86, 1.84 μM NO, respectively.
NO response rapidly declines as NO is converted to nitrite and nitrate. Sharp
transients are artifact from addition of SNAP aliquots to solution. (b) Response
of same electrode to various aliquots of DEA/NO to air-equilibrated PBS at
37 ◦ C. Arrows indicate addition of DEA/NO. 2, 5.6 μM DEA/NO = 0.99,
2.19 μM NO, respectively. (c). Linear calibration curve for the SNAP response
from (a). (d). Linear calibration curve for the DEA/NO response in (b.) Note
that an electrode with a higher than average sensitivity for NO was used in the
recordings in order to more clearly detect any potential differences between the
two calibration techniques.

A. Electrode Characteristics
The electrode characteristics were determined by calibrating
the electrodes with SNAP, DEA/NO, AA, and DA. An electrode response to SNAP addition in air-equilibrated CuCl2 at
37 ◦ C is shown in Fig. 2(a). The SNAP is quickly converted
to NO under these conditions. The current response stays relatively constant for approximately 5 s before quickly decreasing
as NO is oxidized to nitrite and nitrate. The current value at the
initial plateau was used to construct a linear calibration curve.
The response of the same electrode in Fig. 2(a) to DEA/NO in
air-equilibrated PBS at 37 ◦ C is shown in Fig. 2(b). The decomposition of DEA/NO was much slower, with the peak NO
current being reached around 3–4 min. The calibration curves
for the responses in Fig. 2(a) and (b) are seen in Fig. 2(c) and
(d), respectively. There was no significant difference between
the NO sensitivities calculated from the two calibration methods

at either 30 or 37 ◦ C. Both methods permit NO calibrations under aerobic conditions. The advantage of the SNAP calibration is
that the instantaneous decomposition in CuCl2 allows for rapid
calibration, whereas the slow decomposition of DEA/NO takes
considerably longer. The disadvantage of SNAP calibration in
CuCl2 is that it can be variable [25]. S-nitrosothiol decomposition depends on both Cu2 + concentration and on the concentration of any contaminating thiols [21]. SNAP release can also
be nonlinear at small (nanomolar) and higher (>10 μM) concentrations [25]. NO release from DEA/NO is much slower, but
the release kinetics are far less variable [21]. It is also easier to
determine the peak current level with DEA/NO due to the longer
duration of the peak NO current. The NO sensitivities for the
experiments reported below were calculated from calibrations
with SNAP.

GUTHRIE AND KANG-MIELER: DUAL ELECTRORETINOGRAM/NITRIC OXIDE CARBON FIBER MICROELECTRODE

615

TABLE I
SENSITIVITY AND SELECTIVITY VALUES FOR UNCOATED AND
COATED ELECTRODES

The sensitivity and selectivity values for uncoated and coated
electrodes are shown in Table I. Selectivity is expressed as sensitivity for NO divided by sensitivity for an interferent whereas
the sensitivity to NO was only slightly reduced for the coated
electrodes, the average sensitivity to AA was 680 times lower
for the coated electrodes. The average selectivity for NO over
AA was over a thousand times greater for the coated electrodes.
There have been no reported measurements of extracellular AA
in intact retinas. The concentration of AA in human vitreous
has been reported to be as low as 2 μM [26]. Microdialysis
measurements of AA in rabbit vitreous showed a normal AA
concentration of approximately 100 μM [27]. At this concentration, AA would contribute less than a tenth of picoampere to
the redox current measured by the coated electrode.
The Nafion coating did not greatly improve the selectivity for
NO versus DA with selectivity of the coated electrodes being
approximately six times higher than uncoated electrodes. The
extracellular concentration of dopamine in the retina is reported
to peak around 500 nM [28]. This would result in a current
contribution from dopamine of approximately a tenth of a picoampere.
The minimum current resolution of the potentiostat was 0.076
pA. With careful shielding and filtering, the noise level in the
current recordings was less than this minimum resolution. Given
the average NO sensitivity of 0.9 pA/μM and conservatively assuming that the noise level was 0.076 pA, the average detection
limit of the electrode (SNR of 3) would be 0.25 μM NO.
Electrode characteristics were better preserved over time if
electrodes were coated with Nafion solution containing acetone
compared to Nafion only. The electrodes coated with acetone
in the solution and those without acetone did not have a statistically different response to addition of 200 μM AA into
the test solution one day after coating. By the third day after
coating, however, the responses obtained in the without-acetone
group was statistically higher (p = 0.009) by a factor of ten. It
is hypothesized that this occurs because the decreased surface
tension of the acetone-containing solution allows the solution to
better penetrate into small gaps of the recess and crevices of the
carbon fiber. It was observed during coating that normal Nafion
solution built up quickly at the opening of the recess and would
hinder solution from reaching the end of the recess. After coating, storage solution would gradually move to the back of the
recess past this partial blockage over a few days and reach the
poorly coated portions of carbon fiber. The acetone-containing
solutions did not have this problem and allowed for uniform
coating over the entire recess length.

Fig. 3. Representative intraretinal ERG depth profile. Arrow indicates time
of flash presentation. The vitreal ERG is shown at the top. Intraretinal ERG
components are reversed in polarity compared to ERGs obtained from the vitreal
space. The retinal surface is considered at 0% depth and the RPE at 100% depth.
The b-wave amplitude grows approaching the bipolar cell layer (∼50% depth).
The a-wave does not appear until deeper into the retina near the photoreceptors.

B. Electroretinography
The pressurization of the voltage barrel during coating prevented any Nafion blockage in the barrel and allowed for the
recording of clean intraretinal ERGs. A typical retinal darkadapted ERG depth profile from the in vivo rodent experiment
is shown in Fig. 3. ERGs recorded in the vitreal space above
the retina showed a negative a-wave and positive b-wave. The
a-wave primarily reflects the response of the photoreceptors and
the b-wave reflects the activity of bipolar cells and other inner
retinal cells [29], [30]. After penetrating the retina, the ERG reversed polarity so that the b-wave was negative and the a-wave
positive, consistent with other in vivo intraretinal studies [30].
The intraretinal ERG is a localized response, so the ERG component amplitudes change at different layers as the electrode
gets closer to or further away from the source of each ERG
component. The b-wave amplitude increased as it reached the
depth where the bipolar cells are located (30–50% depth) and
decreased as it moved away. The a-wave did not appear until
near the photoreceptors layer (∼60% depth). As the electrode
reached the choroid (100% depth), the ERG components were
severely reduced.

616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 4. Representative control NO current profiles from multiple rats. The
current values on both sides indicate the current value at the endpoints. The
NO concentration at the endpoints is shown in parentheses. The profiles exhibit
similar trends. NO current is high near 100% depth and gradually decreases to
a constant level around the retinal surface, with localized regions of increased
NO current near the ganglion/amacrine cell layers (0–30% depth, indicated by
arrows). Image at bottom shows location of different retinal cell types to scale
with % retinal depth of current recordings. Definition of abbreviations: GC =
ganglion cells, AM = amacrine cells, BI = bipolar cells, HC = horizontal cells,
PR = photoreceptors, RPE = retinal pigment epithelium.

Standard intraretinal electrodes are single-barrel with a tip
size of 1–3 μm. The tip size of the electrodes used in this
study is relatively large at ∼10 μm. To test that the electrode
penetration did not cause significant deformation of the retina,
ERGs were recorded during withdrawal after penetrations and
the track length between the two compared. The average withdrawal length was 300.4 ± 69.9 μm compared to the average
penetration length of 276.1 ± 65.7 μm (n = 7). The elongation of the retina during withdrawal likely occurs due to retinal tissue sticking to the electrode, but this minimal 8.8% pull
would not cause any significant distortion in the NO profiles
recorded during withdrawal and is similar to the pull produced
by double-barreled oxygen electrodes [16]. The larger tip size
can occasionally result in difficulty penetrating the retina. Penetration can be aided by gently vibrating the electrode tip when
it is at the retinal surface with a soft tap of a rubber mallet on
the experimental platform. It was observed that electrodes with
a tip size larger than 15 μm penetrated very poorly and their use
should be avoided in intraretinal studies.
C. Retinal NO Profiles
After the intraretinal ERG recordings indicated that the electrode tip had reached the choroid, the electrode was withdrawn
while recording the NO current. Fig. 4 shows representative

Fig. 5. Comparison of control and L-NAME NO concentration profiles. Subplots (a) and (b) are from two rats and each subplot shows control and L-NAME
profiles recorded from the same retina. The control profile shows a higher level
in the outer retina and a localized increase near the ganglion/amacrine cell
layer. In contrast, the L-NAME profile is flatter throughout the retina with no
localized regions of increased NO in the inner retina. At 100% retinal depth
after L-NAME administration, there is a decrease in NO concentration to 35%
control value for the response in Fig. 5(a) and to 28% control value in Fig. 5(b).
At 0% depth, there is a decrease in NO concentration to 27% control value for
the response in Fig. 5(a) and 20% control value in Fig. 5(b).

control NO profiles recorded from multiple rats. The profiles
show the same general trend. The NO current is high near the
choroid (100% depth) and gradually decreases to a constant
level on the vitreal side of the retinal surface (0% depth). There
are localized regions of increased current seen near the ganglion/amacrine cell layers (arrows). The NO concentration is
calculated by subtracting the average baseline current value in
PBS for a particular electrode from the in vivo profiles. The
remaining current is then converted to concentration using the
calibration data. The NO concentrations at the endpoints of the
profiles in Fig. 4 are shown in parentheses below the current
values.
To verify that the current was generated in response to NO,
the broad-spectrum NOS inhibitor L-NAME was injected into
the eyecup to suppress NO synthesis. Fig. 5 shows two sets
of control and L-NAME concentration profiles from different
rats. There is a clear difference between treatment and nontreatment groups, whereas the control profiles have a distinct gradient and localized regions of increased NO in the inner retina,
the L-NAME profiles are greatly reduced with no localized NO

GUTHRIE AND KANG-MIELER: DUAL ELECTRORETINOGRAM/NITRIC OXIDE CARBON FIBER MICROELECTRODE

increases in the ganglion/amacrine cell layers. These differences
suggest that the distinct features seen in the control profile, such
as the localized increases in the inner retina and the high levels
near the choroid, can be directly attributed to NO. The clear difference between control and L-NAME profiles combined with
the high selectivity of the electrodes for NO versus AA, one of
the main interferents in the retina, supports the direct conversion
of the current into NO concentration.
When expressed in terms of NO concentration, the control NO
profiles (n = 4) had an average of 2.37 ± 0.34 μM NO at 100%
retinal depth, which gradually decreased to an average of 1.12 ±
0.14 μM at 0% depth. NO profiles after L-NAME administration
(n = 4) had an average of 0.83 ± 0.15 μM at 100% retinal
depth gradually decreasing to an average of 0.27 ± 0.04 μM
at 0% depth. Control and L-NAME NO measurements were
statistically different at both 100% depth (t-test, p = 0.006)
and 0% depth (p = 0.001). There were localized regions of
increased NO in the inner retina of the control profiles on the
order of 100 to 400 nM. No localized increases of NO were seen
in the inner retina after L-NAME treatment.
The high NO levels near the choroid and photoreceptors and
the localized regions of increased NO in the inner retina correspond with what is known about NO sources in the rat retina.
Vielma et al. [31] used fluorophore diaminofluorescein-2 (DAF2) to stain for NO in rat retina slices and observed significant
amounts of NO in the RPE and photoreceptor inner segments
and the amacrine and ganglion cells in the inner retina, with
no significant NO production in the middle of the rat retina
near the bipolar cells. NO producing amacrine cells of various
types were observed in the inner retina of the rat in Vielma
et al. [31], spanning approximately the inner third of the retina.
The amacrine cells also stained strongly for NO relative to their
surroundings, indicating that they would likely be detected as
unique features in a retinal NO concentration profile. The strong
NO staining and similar spatial range make the NO producing
amacrine strong candidates for the source of the localized regions of increased NO seen in this study.
The current profiles in Fig. 5 show that the outer retina appears
to be less affected than the inner retina by L-NAME administration. The overall data show that after L-NAME the average
NO concentration at 100% depth was reduced to 34.5 ± 3.0%
control level and the average NO concentration at 0% depth
was reduced to 24.2 ± 2.6% control level, a significant difference of 10% (p = 0.042). The high relative level of NO in
the outer retina after L-NAME is likely a result of the outer
retina’s proximity to the choroid. The choroid is highly vascularized and oxygen diffusing from the choroid supplies the
high oxygen demand of the photoreceptors in the outer retina.
Choroidal blood vessels also release nitric oxide, which being
a noncharged gaseous molecule would diffuse easily into the
retina. L-NAME was delivered locally in the vitreous cavity
and would diffuse freely into the retina. However, L-NAME
would encounter diffusional barriers (e.g., retinal pigment epithelium, Bruch’s membrane) as it tried to pass from the retina
to the choroid and would not reach the choroid with as high
concentration, causing the NO level in the outer retina to be less
sensitive to L-NAME. Previous studies performed in our lab

617

indicate that 2.5 mM L-NAME caused a significant decrease
in retinal blood flow [24], and this could also contribute to the
greater inner retinal changes seen after L-NAME in this study.
No study has previously measured intraretinal NO concentration directly, but other studies have measured NO concentration
with microelectrodes in the vitreous near the retinal surface and
from ganglion cells at the retinal surface. Buerk et al. [32] found
that NO concentrations in the vitreous near the cat optic nerve
head were between 0.8 and 1.2 μM under control conditions,
and between 0.3 and 0.7 μM after L-NAME inhibition. This is
similar to the level of NO seen in this study at the rat retinal
surface. Hoshi et al. [6] measured NO in the rat vitreous with
a commercial carbon fiber electrode and found the vitreal NO
concentration to be 0.85 μM for light-adapted eyes and 0.55 μM
for dark-adapted eyes. These vitreal values are smaller than the
retinal surface values reported in this study. However, the vitreal
values were obtained from an electrode located in the middle
of the vitreous, not immediately adjacent to the retinal surface.
Eldred et al. [11] found that the NO concentrations near turtle
retinal ganglion cells were between 100–200 nM and that the
concentration decreased rapidly within a few micrometers away
from the cell. A similar trend is observed in the localized regions
of 100–400 nM NO in the inner retina in this study. It is possible
that the localized region of increased NO seen in the inner retina
in this study may originate from both neuronal and/or vascular
sources. This will be further explored in future studies by use of
selective neuronal and endothelial NOS inhibitors. Regardless
of their origin, the electrodes were able to detect these NO features in the retinal profiles. The DAF-2 staining in rats and direct
measurements from near-retinal sources in other vertebrates all
support the values for intraretinal NO concentration seen in this
study.
The eyecup procedure results in a drastic decrease in pressure
in the vitreal space compared to the intact eye. Abnormally low
intraocular pressure causes decreased blood flow in both the
retina and choroid as the autoregulation mechanisms attempt
to balance the perfusion pressure [33], [34]. As the intraocular
pressure decreases below 5 mm Hg, autoregulation is not fully
effective at restoring the blood flow in the retina [33]. It is likely
then that the retinal vessels in the eyecup would have increased
blood flow compared to intact eye vessels. The increased flow
would cause increased shear stress on the vessel wall, and increased shear stress is a trigger of NO release from vascular endothelium [35]. It is, therefore, possible that the eyecup causes
an increased release of NO from the retinal vessels. However,
the NO values measured in this study are comparable to other
ocular NO measurements and it is unlikely that the changes between control and treatments (NOS inhibition, ischemia, etc.)
profiles recorded from eyecups would be qualitatively different
from those taken from an intact eye.
D. Electrode Durability and Storability
Electrodes were calibrated before and after each experiment
to ensure that in vivo usage had not caused deterioration of the
electrode performance. The average preexperiment selectivity
for the three electrodes used in the in vivo measurements was

618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

948.9 ± 478.5. The average selectivity obtained from postexperiment calibration was 438.8 ± 239.3. The selectivity decreased
to an average of 45 ± 0.14% the preexperiment value, a large
decrease but still selective enough to prevent large currents due
to AA. Mechanical damage from the penetration can damage
the coating even though the recess helps protect the carbon fiber
surface. Deeper recesses allow for better protection but also
reduce the sensitivity due to increased distance that molecules
must diffuse [36]. Another source of degradation is high currents. Any high current generated by excessive environmental
noise or by accidental shorting of the leads can cause the carbon
fiber surface to etch away, taking the coating with it. Great care
must be taken during usage and storage to prevent this from
happening. The tips must also not be allowed to dry out during
storage as the evaporation of the saline causes the formation
of large salt crystals that can disrupt the Nafion coating. Additionally, the saline filled reference barrel can also dry out. If
properly stored, the electrodes can be maintained for 1–2 weeks
after filling.
IV. CONCLUSION
Electrodes were coated without compromising the ability to
record clean ERGs, allowing for the determination of tip location
inside the retina. The electrodes were able to record full depth
NO concentration profiles that were in agreement with expected
sources of NO production in the rat retina. The results suggest
that NO from the RPE/choroid makes a major contribution to the
NO level seen in the outer retina. The ability of the electrodes
to measure NO gradients in the retina and detect difference
between treatment groups make them useful for studying the role
of NO in both normal retinal physiology and disease models.

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[22]

The author would like to thank to Dr. Robert Linsenmeier for
advice on electrode construction, Dr. W. Mieler for advice on the
eyecup surgery, and C. Osswald for assistance with experiments.

[23]
[24]

REFERENCES
[1] R. Yamamoto, D. S. Bredt, S. H. Synder, and R. A. Stone, “The localization of nitric oxide synthase in the rat eye and related cranial ganglia,”
Neuroscience, vol. 54, pp. 189–200, May 1993.
[2] T. M. Dawson, D. S. Bredt, M. Fotuhi, P. M. Hwang, and S. H. Snyder,
“Nitric oxide synthase and neuronal NADPH diaphorase are identical in
brain and peripheral tissues,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 88, pp. 7797–
7801, Sep. 1991.
[3] J. Koistinaho, R. A. Swanson, J. D. Vente, and S. M. Sagar, “NADPHdiaphorase (nitric oxide synthase)-reactive amacrine cells of rabbit retina:
Putative target cells and stimulation by light,” Neuroscience, vol. 57,
pp. 587–597, Dec. 1993.
[4] D. S. Bredt, P. M. Hwang, and S. H. Snyder, “Localization of nitric oxide synthase indicating a neural role for nitric oxide,” Nature, vol. 347,
pp. 769–770, Oct. 1990.
[5] A. Vielma, L. Delgado, C. Elgueta, R. Osorio, A. G. Palacios, and
O. Schmachtenberg, “Nitric oxide amplifies the rat electroretinogram,”
Exp. Eye Res., vol. 91, pp. 700–709, Aug. 2010.
[6] H. Hoshi, M. Sato, M. Oguri, and T. Ohtsuka, “In vivo nitric oxide concentration in the vitreous of the rat eye,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 347, pp. 187–190,
Aug. 2003.
[7] Q. Li, A. Verma, P. Han, T. Nakagawa, R. J. Johnson, M. B. Grant,
M. Campbell-Thompson, Y. P. R. Jarajapu, B. Lei, and W. W. Hauswirth,

[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]
[31]

“Diabetic eNOS-knockout mice develop accelerated retinopathy,” Invest.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 51, pp. 5250–5246, Oct. 2010.
S. Veriac, G. Tissie, and C. Bonne, “Oxygen free radicals adversely affect
the regulation of vascular tone by nitric oxide in the rabbit retina under
high intraocular pressure,” Exp. Eye Res., vol. 56, pp. 85–88, Jan. 1993.
O. Goreau, D. Hicks, and Y. Courtois, “Human retinal pigment epithelial
cells produce nitric oxide in response to cytokines,” Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun., vol. 198, pp. 120–126, Jan. 1994.
G. Donati, C. J. Pournaras, J. L. Munoz, S. Poitry, C. L. Poitry-Yamate,
and M. Tsacopoulos, “Nitric oxide controls arterial tone in the retina of the
miniature pig,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci., vol. 36, pp. 2228–2237,
Oct. 1995.
W. D. Eldred and T. A. Blute, “Imaging of nitric oxide in the retina,” Vis.
Res., vol. 45, pp. 3469–3486, Dec. 2005.
Z. H. Taha, “Nitric oxide measurements in biological samples,” Talanta,
vol. 61, pp. 3–10, Sep. 2003.
F. Bedioui and N. Villeneuve, “Electrochemical nitric oxide sensors for
biological samples- principle, selected examples, and applications,” Electroanalysis, vol. 15, pp. 5–18, Jan. 2003.
J. K. Park, P. H. Tran, J. K. Chao, R. Ghodadra, R. Rangarajan, and
N. V. Thakor, “In vivo nitric oxide sensor using non-conducting polymer
modified carbon fiber,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 13, pp. 1187–1195,
Nov. 1998.
A. G. Tsai, C. Acero, P. R. Nance, P. Cabrales, J. A. Frangos, D. G. Buerk,
and M. Intaglietta, “Elevated plasma viscosity in extreme hemodilution
increases perivascular nitric oxide concentration and microvascular perfusion,” Am. J. Physiol.-Heart C., vol. 188, pp. 1730–1739, Apr. 2005.
R. A. Linsenmeier, “Effects of light and darkness on oxygen distribution
and consumption in the cat retina,” J. Gen. Physiol., vol. 88, pp. 521–542,
Oct. 1986.
X. Zhang and M. Broderick, “Amperometric detection of nitric oxide,”
Mod. Asp. Immunobiol., vol. 1, pp. 160–165, 2000.
R. C. Rose and A. M. Bode, “Ocular ascorbate transport and metabolism,”
Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A. Comp. Physiol., vol. 100, pp. 273–285, 1991.
ISO-NOP200 Manual, World Precision Instruments, Inc., Sarasota, FL,
USA, 2002.
S. Griveau, C. Dumézy, P. Goldner, and F. Bedioui, “Electrochemical
analysis of the kinetics of nitric oxide release from two diazeniumdiolates
in buffered aqueous solution,” Electrochem. Comm., vol. 9, pp. 2551–
2556, Aug. 2007.
K. Schmidt, W. Desch, P. Klatt, W. R. Kukovetz, and B. Mayer, “Release
of nitric oxide donors with known half-life: A mathematical model for
calculating nitric oxide concentrations in aerobic solutions,” Arch. Pharmacol., vol. 355, pp. 457–462, Apr. 1997.
J. J. Kang Derwent and R. A. Linsenmeier, “Intraretinal analysis of the awave of the electroretinogram (ERG) in dark-adapted intact cat retina,”
Vis. Neurosci., vol. 18, pp. 353–363, May 2001.
M. Sato and T. Ohtsuka, “Opposite effects of nitric oxide on rod and cone
photoreceptors of rat retina in situ,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 473, pp. 62–66,
Mar. 2010.
S. R. Tummala, S. Benac, H. Tran, A. Vankawala, A. Zayas-Santiago,
A. Appel, and J. J. Kang Derwent, “Effects of inhibition of neuronal nitric
oxide synthase on basal retinal blood flow regulation,” Exp. Eye Res.,
vol. 89, pp. 801–809, Nov. 2009.
X. Zhang, L. Cardosa, M. Broderick, H. Fein, and I. R. Davies, “Novel
calibration method for nitric oxide microsensors by stoichiometrical generation of nitric oxide from SNAP,” Electroanalysis, vol. 12, pp. 425–428,
May 2000.
R. C. Rose and A. M. Bode, “Biology of free radical scavengers: An
evaluation of ascorbate,” FASEB J., vol. 7, pp. 1135–1142, Sep. 1993.
X. M. Zhang, K. Ohishi, and T. Hiramitsu, “Microdialysis measurement
of ascorbic acid in rabbit vitreous after photodynamic reaction,” Exp. Eye
Res., vol. 37, pp. 303–309, Sep. 2001.
P. Witkovsky, C. Nicholson, M. E. Rice, K. Bohmaker, and E. Meller,
“Extracellular dopamine concentration in the retina of the clawed frog,
Xenopus laevis,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 90, pp. 5667–5671, Jun.
1993.
J. G. Robson and L. J. Frishman, “Dissecting the dark-adapted electroretinogram,” Doc. Ophthalmol., vol. 95, pp. 187–215, May 1998.
J. J. Kang Derwent and R. A. Linsenmeier, “Effects of hypoxemia on
the a- and b-waves of the electroretinogram in the cat retina,” Invest.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 41, pp. 3634–3642, Oct. 2000.
A. H. Vielma, M. A. Retamal, and O. Schmachtenberg, “Nitric oxide signaling in the retina: What have we learned in two decades?” Brain Res.,
vol. 1430, pp. 112–125, Jan. 2012.

GUTHRIE AND KANG-MIELER: DUAL ELECTRORETINOGRAM/NITRIC OXIDE CARBON FIBER MICROELECTRODE

[32] D. G. Buerk, C. E. Riva, and S. D. Cranstoun, “Nitric oxide has a vasodilatory role in cat optic nerve head during flicker stimuli,” Microvasc. Res.,
vol. 52, pp. 13–26, Jul. 1996.
[33] J. W. Kiel and A. P. Shepherd, “Autoregulation of choroidal blood flow in
the rabbit,” Invest. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 33, pp. 2399–2410, Jul. 1992.
[34] S. H. Sinclair and C. E. Riva, “Autoregulation of the retinal circulation
in response to decrease of intraocular pressure below normal,” Invest.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 23, pp. 124–127, Jul. 1982.
[35] S. Moncada, R. M. Palmer, and E. A. Higgs, “Nitric oxide: Physiology,
pathophysiology, and pharmacology,” Pharmacol. Rev., vol. 43, pp. 109–
142, 1991.

619

[36] G. Schneiderman and T. K. Goldstick, “Oxygen electrode design criteria and performance characteristics: Recessed cathode,” Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 45, pp. 145–154, Jul. 1978.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

