484

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Modeling Cell–Cell Interactions in Regulating
Multiple Myeloma Initiating Cell Fate
Tao Peng, Huiming Peng, Dong Soon Choi, Jing Su, Chung-Che (Jeff) Chang, and Xiaobo Zhou

Abstract—Cancer initiating cells have been documented in multiple myeloma and believed to be a key factor that initiates and
drives tumor growth, differentiation, metastasis, and recurrence of
the diseases. Although myeloma initiating cells (MICs) are likely to
share many properties of normal stem cells, the underlying mechanisms regulating the fate of MICs are largely unknown. Studies
designed to explore such communication are urgently needed to enhance our ability to predict the fate decisions of MICs (self-renewal,
differentiation, and proliferation). In this study, we developed a
novel system to understand the intercellular communication between MICs and their niche by seamlessly integrating experimental data and mathematical model. We first designed dynamic cell
culture experiments and collected three types of cells (side population cells, progenitor cells, and mature myeloma cells) under various cultural conditions with flow cytometry. Then we developed a
lineage model with ordinary differential equations by considering
secreted factors, self-renewal, differentiation, and other biological
functions of those cells, to model the cell–cell interactions among
the three cell types. Particle swarm optimization was employed to
estimate the model parameters by fitting the experimental data to
the lineage model. The theoretical results show that the correlation coefficient analysis can reflect the feedback loops among the
three cell types, the intercellular feedback signaling can regulate
cell population dynamics, and the culture strategies can decide cell
growth. This study provides a basic framework of studying cell–cell
interactions in regulating MICs fate.
Index Terms—Cancer initiating cell, lineage model, mathematical modeling, multiple myeloma (MM), parameter estimation.

I. INTRODUCTION

M

ULTIPLE MYELOMA (MM) is the second most common hematologic malignancy, with about 15,000 new

Manuscript received March 22, 2013; revised August 14, 2013; accepted
September 5, 2013. Date of publication September 16, 2013; date of current
version March 3, 2014. The work of X. Zhou was supported in part by NIH
1U01CA166886, NIH 1R01LM010185, NIH 1U01HL111560, TSI-VAMC, and
CCCWFU. T. Peng, H. Peng, and D. S. Choi contributed equally to this work.
(Corresponding author: X. Zhou.)
T. Peng was with the Department of Radiology, The Methodist Hospital
Research Institute and Weil Cornell Medical College, Houston, TX 77030 USA.
He is now with the Department of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine,
CA 92697 USA (e-mail: taop@uci.edu).
H. Peng, J. Su, and X. Zhou are with the Department of Radiology, Wake
Forest University Health Science, Winston-Salem, NC 27157 USA (e-mail:
hpeng@wakehealth.edu; jsu@wakehealth.edu; xizhou@wakehealth.edu).
D. S. Choi is with the Methodist Cancer Center, The Methodist Hospital,
Houston, TX 77030 USA (e-mail: dchoi@tmhs.org).
C.-C. (Jeff) Chang is with the Department of Pathology, Florida Hospital,
Orlando, FL 32803 USA (e-mail: jeffchang@pol.net).
This paper has supplementary material available: at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
provided by the authors.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2281774

cases per year in USA, and remains incurable with a median survival of 3–5 years even with recently developed novel therapeutic agents and high dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell
transplantation [1]. Failure of myeloma cells to undergo apoptosis plays an important role in the accumulation of myeloma
cells within the bone marrow. Several anti-apoptotic proteins
and anti-apoptotic signaling cascades have been identified that
contribute to the survival of the myeloma [1], [2]. Actually,
adhesion of MM cells to bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs)
upregulates cytokine secretion from both BMSCs and tumor
cells, and then triggers cytokine-mediated tumor cell growth,
survival, drug resistance, and migration.
It has become clear that many cancers, including MM, arise
from a small population of cancer stem cells that retain key stem
cell properties, including self-renewal, to drive tumorigenesis.
The presence of myeloma stem cells or myeloma initiating cells
(MICs) is relatively well documented in the pioneer works by
Matsui et al. [3], [4], compared to most types of cancers. Previous studies have suggested that CD138+ mature myeloma
cells cannot give rise to clonogenic MM growth in vitro but a
small amount of CD138–B cells can [3]. These cells present
in myeloma patient blood samples or myeloma cell lines possessing the characteristics shared by stem cells, i.e. they can be
identified by Hoechst side population (SP) and positive Aldefluor assay [4]. Studies have shown that well-known chemotherapeutics (dexamethasone, lenalidomide, bortezomib, and 4hydroxycyclophosphamide) inhibit CD138+ mature myeloma
cells but had little effect on MICs in vitro [4]. The earlier experimental findings agree with the clinical observation that many
agents are active in killing MM cells, but majority of the patients
relapse, likely due to regrowth of residual MICs. SP is a phenotype on flow cytometry, originally characterized in murine
hematopoietic stem cells, but is now described to be a feature
of many different stem cell populations [5]. In this study, we
propose to use SP as the marker to select MICs.
Although MIC may hold many properties of normal stem
cells, the underlying mechanism of MIC development is largely
unknown, and even the identification and purification of MIC
from tumor is a challenge. Hence novel methods and biomarkers
used to label and isolate MIC will be of great importance for
further MIC studies and, subsequently, cancer therapy. Furthermore, the proliferation and differentiation of MIC will significantly affect the tumor growth, evolution, and heterogeneity as
well. Therefore, understanding and quantitatively modeling the
patterns of MIC commitment at cellular level and the mechanisms of modulating MIC fate at molecular level will enhance
our ability to predict the tumor development, treatment outcomes, and novel therapy strategies.

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PENG et al.: MODELING CELL–CELL INTERACTIONS IN REGULATING MULTIPLE MYELOMA INITIATING CELL FATE

Studies have suggested that the MICs may play an important
role in supporting MIC lineage and that targeting MIC lineage
is an attractive therapeutic approach for curing MM. However,
the study of MIC linage is currently hampered by the lack of in
vitro and in vivo models suitable for evaluating this interaction.
We will use the model established in this study to start answering some fundamental questions about this interaction such as
apoptosis (survival), proliferation, and differentiation of various stages of MM cells, i.e., MICs, progenitor cells (PCs), and
mature myeloma cells (MCs), as well as secreted inhibitory and
stimulatory factors. In our developed model, we incorporate different stages of MM cell development and consider self-renewal
and differentiation for MM cells. In addition, the model also includes the feedbacks between different types of cells during MM
cell development, which is regulated by stimulation/inhibition
factors, such as various cytokines secreted by diverse types of
cells. The purpose of this study is to take advantage of our
expertise in cell biology and computational modeling to develop coherent experimental protocols and construct mathematical models for understanding the mechanism underlying MIC
evolution from subcellular level to cellular level.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we present the cell culture procedure and the experimental data.
Based on these data, a mathematical model to simulate the cell–
cell interactions as well as the MM cell growth are constructed
in Section III, and then some theoretical results predicted from
the model are shown in Section IV. Finally, we present some
discussions and conclude the paper in Section V.
II. CELL CULTURE AND EXPERIMENTAL DATA
A. Hoechst Side Population Analysis and Cell Culture
Hoechst staining was performed according to the protocol
outlined by the Goodell’s lab at the Baylor College of Medicine.
Briefly, human MM Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)
8226 cells were harvested by centrifuge and washed in PBS, and
then re-suspended at 1 × 106 cells/mL in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10 mM HEPES
(Invitrogen) and 2% FBS with Hoechst 33342 dye at a final
concentration of 10 g/mL. After incubation at 99 ◦ F for 60 min,
the cells were centrifuged and re-suspended in cold Hanks’
balanced salt solution (HBSS) buffers with 2 g/mL propidium
iodide (PI) to exclude dead cells. Sample was then put on ice
before sorting. Hoechst dye was then excited with UV laser at
350 nm and signal measured with Hoechst blue and Hoechst
red filters. SP cells were sorted out by cell sorter and used for
further experiments. The collected SP cells were then cultured
as explained later.
As summarized in Fig. 1(a), the SP cells were sorted and
cultured in RPMI 1640 (10% FBS) for four days and then 80%
of cells were resorted for the SP cells. The remaining 20% of the
cells were then separated into two groups, i.e., “nonsorted & old
medium (NSOM)” (1/2 of the old medium and 1/2 of fresh RPMI
1640 plus 10% FBS) and “nonsorted & new medium (NSNM)”
(fresh RPMI 1640 plus 10% FBS), for further SP analysis at Day
9 and Day 14. The resorted SP cells were also divided similarly
as earlier into two groups, i.e., “sorted & old medium (SOM)”

485

Fig. 1. Cell culture procedures and experimental data. (a) The flow cytometry
data consisting of the percentages of three cell types over the total cells under
various cultural conditions. (b) Two examples of the flow cytometry data. The
first example shown in the second row is the data under the condition of SNM
at Day 9, and the second example shown in the third row is the data under the
condition of SOM at Day 9 (the first row is for control condition).

and “sorted & new medium (SNM)”, for further SP analysis
at Day 9 and Day 14. Before the SP analysis, the total cells
were stained with CD138-PE as a marker for cell differentiation
from SP cells to PCs (CD138– non-SP cells) or MCs (CD138+
non-SP cells).
The results indicated that when sorted SP cells were cultured
for four days, most of progenies were committed to PCs or
MCs with only 2.17% SP cells remaining. Additionally, SP cells
continued to decline at Day 9 to only 0.83% under the condition
of NSNM, while most cells died at Day 9 under the condition of
NSOM [data thus not shown in Fig. 1(a)]. Similarly, the resorted
SP cells shown significant declining of SP cells with old medium
compared to replacing new medium at Day 4. These findings
suggest that the differentiated cells may secret inhibitory factors
to inhibit the development of MM cells. In addition, Fig. 1(b)
shows two examples of the flow cytometry data under conditions
of SNM at Day 9 and SOM at Day 9.
III. MATHEMATICAL MODEL CONSTRUCTION
A. Lineage Model of MIC, PPC, CPC, and MC
The hematopoietic hierarchy can be divided into a number of
discrete compartments [see Fig. 2(a)] from MICs to fully differentiated MCs. Each compartment can be viewed as representing
a cell population at a distinct state of maturation, with unidirectional transition between compartments. Our previous study [6]
showed that MIC may undergo self-renewal and differentiation.
A cell population can be constructed based on each compartment of the lineage model, in which the number of cells depends

486

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Note that the range of i is from 2 to 12 in (2) and from
13 to 18 in (3). This lineage model is a deterministic model,
which describes the growth of MM cancer cells at different
stages. It is worth noting that, although this type of lineage
model of stem cell development has been well established in
literature such as [8]–[10], none of them has paid attention
to the MIC development, which is the focus of our work. For
example, [8] focused on neural stem cell, [9] hematopoietic stem
cell, and [10] mesenchymal stem cell. Next we will focus on
the determination of the major parameters in the lineage model,
which include self-renewal probabilities and proliferation rates,
by linking them to the secreted factor system.
B. Secreted Factor System
Fig. 2. Schematic depiction of MICs development model incorporating functional assays and positive and negative feedbacks. (a) The model consists of 18
compartments. SP and non-SP are both composed of CD138– and CD138+.
MIC is in the zone of CD138– of SP, PPC is in the zones of CD138– and
CD138+ of SP, CPC is in the zones of CD138– and CD138+ of SP and
CD138– of non-SP, and MC is in the zones of CD138+ of non-SP. (b) All
cells are divided into four types of cells. Each type of cells self-renew. MIC,
PPC, and CPC differentiate to PPC, CPC and MC, respectively. MC undergoes
the apoptosis. MCs secret SSF1 and SSF2 stimulating the self-renewal and the
differentiation respectively, and MCs secret ISF1 inhibiting the differentiation,
and CPCs secret ISF2 inhibiting the self-renewal. Note that there is no other
meaning of the usage of two green arrows for each self-renew except for the
convenience of presentation.

on the number of cells entering from the earlier compartment,
the cell proliferation rate, and the probability of self-renewal.
As it is described in Fig. 2(b), the MICs can self-renew or differentiate to primitive PCs (PPCs) and committed PCs (CPCs),
and the CPCs also can self-renew or differentiate to MCs, and
MCs can proliferate by themselves. In addition, apoptosis will
be considered in the stage of MC [7]. We consider several compartments during the MIC development as modeled in [8]–[10].
The major purpose is to elucidate the dynamic changes of the
numbers of these four cell types during MIC development.
As we can see from Fig. 2(a), X1 represents the number
of MICs, X1 to X10 represent the number of PPCs in each
compartment for the process of progenitor development, X1 to
X12 represent the number of CPCs in each compartment for the
process of progenitor development, and X13 to X18 represent the
number of MCs in each compartment, respectively. We denote
fi as the probability of self-renewal of MM cells in the ith
compartment. μi represents the proliferation rate of MM cells
in the ith compartment; dM C represents the apoptosis rate of
MCs. We ignore the apoptosis terms for MICs, PPCs, and CPCs
[see (1)–(2)], because the apoptosis rates are rather small in
those stages. Therefore, by referring to [8]–[10], an ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) system of the lineage model for
MIC development can be constructed as follows:
dX1
= (2f1 − 1)μ1 X1
(1)
dt
dXi
= 2(1 − fi−1 )μi−1 Xi−1 + (2fi − 1)μi Xi
(2)
dt
dXi
= 2(1 − fi−1 )μi−1 Xi−1 + (2fi − 1)μi Xi − dM C Xi .
dt
(3)

In order to completely build the mathematical model for the
considered MICs development system, we design a secreted
factor system to describe how the different cell compartments
interact with each other, how the factors are secreted from cells
at different stages, and how the major system parameters in the
lineage model are determined by the secreted factors. Fig. 2(b)
gives us an intuitive diagram for this system, where SSF1 and
SSF2 represent secreted stimulatory factors that are able to stimulate the survival of MM cells and ISF1 and ISF2 represent
secreted inhibitory factors that are able to inhibit the survival
of MM cells. Briefly, SSF1 produced by MCs stimulates the
self-renewal of MM cells, SSF2 produced by MCs stimulates
the proliferation of MM cells, ISF1 produced by MCs inhibits
the proliferation of MM cells, and ISF2 produced by PPCs inhibits the self-renewal of MM cells. The secreted factors used
here represent the general relationship of different known or unknown molecules instead of some specific molecules. The major
reason of the usage of the general representation is because the
secreted factors remain largely theoretical and most of them are
still needed to be identified by research in the future though
some potential candidates have been identified in the literatures.
For example, TGF-β is a well-established inhibitor of stem and
progenitor expansion in vitro and in vivo [7], IL-8 suppresses
myeloid colony formation in vitro [11], a few molecules with
stimulatory effects on self-renewal and proliferation have been
reported as being expressed by hematopoietic cells [9].
Then, by referring to [9], we model the secreted factor system as ODEs (4)–(7) with Hill-type functions to describe the
feedback loops shown in Fig. 2(b)
(nMC/D1 )d 1
d[SSF1]
= sr1 ·
dt
1 + (nMC/D1 )d 1

(4)

d[SSF2]
(nMC/D1 )d 1
= sr2 ·
dt
1 + (nMC/D1 )d 1

(5)

d[ISF1]
(nMC/D1 )d 1
= sr3 ·
dt
1 + (nMC/D1 )d 1

(6)

d[ISF2]
(ISF1/Ls )K s + (nCPC/D2 )d 2
= sr4 ·
. (7)
dt
1 + (ISF1/Ls )K s + (nCPC/D2 )d 2
Note that Hill-type functions are used herein to substitute for
the linear functions proposed in [9], for Hill-type function is
more reasonable to describe a certain growth from a biological

PENG et al.: MODELING CELL–CELL INTERACTIONS IN REGULATING MULTIPLE MYELOMA INITIATING CELL FATE

487

TABLE I
MODEL PARAMETERS AND COEFFICIENTS OF VARIATION

point of view. In this system, nMC denotes the number of MCs
given by the sum of X13 to X18 ; nCPC denotes the number
of CPCs given by the sum of X1 to X12 ; the parameters are
described in Table I. Finally, we complete the lineage model
by linking together with the secreted factor system and using
algebra equations incorporating with Hill-type functions as well
as Gaussian-type functions to describe the self-renewal probabilities and proliferation rates as (8)–(10)
2
2
fi = fm ax · e−(i−1) /(2D S R ) ·

1 + (SSF1)k 1
1 + (ISF2)k 4 + (SSF1)k 1
(8)

2
2
μi = μm ax · e−(i−n m a x ) /(2D G R ) ·

·

t
τDk t

kt

+ tk t

1 + (SSF2)k 2
1 + (ISF1)k 3 + (SSF2)k 2

μi = μ+ ·

tk t
τDk t

+ tk t

·

1 + (SSF2)k 2
.
1 + (ISF1)k 3 + (SSF2)k 2

(9)
(10)

Note that the range of i is from 1 to 18 in (8) and from 1 to 12
in (9) and from 13 to 18 in (10). It is important to note that we
build the earlier algebra equations by referring to [9] meanwhile
transforming the Eq. (16)] in [9] into two equations (9) and (10)
herein to distinguish between the two cases of CPC and MC. In
the earlier equations, τD denotes the time for 50% of the cells to
enter cycle and kt denotes the Hill coefficient defining the rate
at which cells are induced to cycle and here we set τD = 2 days
and kt = 4 as previously described [9], and the other parameters
are described in Table I.
C. Parameter Estimation
The resulting model as described through (1)–(10) contains
21 unknown parameters shown in Table I. Dynamic data from
experiment shown in Fig. 1(a) was used as a training set to es-

timate those parameters through a reverse engineering strategy.
The objective function, which is based on the errors between
theoretical and experimental data, is defined as follows:
J(Θ) =

Ji
I −1 


2


(i)
(i) 
ωi V (th) (Θ; tj ) − V (exp) (tj ) .

(11)

i=0 j =1

In the earlier objective function, · denotes the L2 norm operator; Θ = (θ1 , θ2 , . . ., θ21 ) denotes the vector of parameters in
the lineage model; Ω is the available parameter space; I represents the number of experimental stages that is set as I = 4; Ji
represents the number of time points of observation for ith stage
(i)
of experiment; tj represents the jth time points of observation
in the ith stage; and ωi represents the corresponding coefficients
of the weights in the four different stages, and here we set all
of them as 1 equally based on the experimental conditions and
model assumptions. There is one time point for the first two
stages of experiments, two time points for the last two stages
of experiments, and the corresponding parameters are set as J0
(0)
(1)
(i)
(i)
= 1, t1 = 4, J1 = 1, t1 = 9, Ji = 2, t1 = 9, and t2 = 14,
(th)
and V (exp) ,
for i = 2, 3. In addition, the two variables, V
represent the theoretical and experimental vectors of the observations composed of three types of cells, i.e., V = (pSP, pPC,
pMC), where pSP, pPC, and pMC denote the percentages of SP
cells, PCs, and MCs over the total cells (TCs).
Finally, a total of 18 system outputs (experimental data) are
therefore used to fit 21 model parameters listed in Table I by
minimizing the earlier objective function, namely
Θ∗ = arg min J(Θ).

(12)

Θ∈Ω

Because of the highly nonlinear and multi-modal nature of
the objective function (J), the multi-scale algorithm based on
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [12], [13] was used to solve
this nonlinear programming problem. The whole algorithm included the following three steps. The first step is to determine
the rough searching range. Because the model was built using

488

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Fig. 3. Fitting results of parameter estimation and parameter sensitivity analysis. (a–c) The fitting results between theoretical data and experimental data.
The brown (left) bar is the theoretical data and the green (right) bar is the experimental data. (d–i) The results of model sensitivity for total 18 system outputs
on total 21 kinetic parameters listed in Table I.

biological knowledge, the involved parameters had the corresponding biological meanings. Accordingly, we could get the
rough searching range. The second step is to globally search
the optimal solution on the scale of 10Θ 1 (Θ1 is the optimized
vector). Because of the limitation of PSO, we search the optimal
solutions 20 times independently and choose the best one. The
third step is to locally search the optimal solution on the scale of
Θ2 (Θ2 is the optimized vector). PSO was employed to search
the optimal solution.
The final results of parameter estimations are shown in Table I,
and the corresponding fitting results are shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c).
Most of the fitting errors are rather small except for those under
the condition of SNM at Day 14 shown in Fig. 3(a). There may
be several reasons causing this problem. First, we only considered four secreted factors in our model, SSF1, SSF2, ISF1, and
ISF2. However, in the intercellular environment there are many
factors that are involved in the self-renewal, differentiation, and
proliferation of different MM cells. Second, the signaling pathways related to the secreted factors were not considered. In
other words, the lineage model is still a simplified model. We
hope that the combination of the lineage model and signaling
pathway model will provide more detailed simulation of cell
development in the future research.
D. Parameter Identifiability and Sensitivity Analysis
Coefficient of variation (CV) based on bootstrapping approach [14] was used to study whether and how many parameters are identifiable. CV is a normalized measure of dispersion
of a probability distribution of a variable, which is defined as
the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. Briefly, we first

resampled the experimental data for 100 times using bootstrapping approach. Then, based on the resampled data, we obtained
100 sets of estimated parameters using the proposed optimization algorithm. Finally, based on the estimated parameters sets,
we calculated the CVs for all parameters and defined the number
1 as the threshold to determine the identifiability for parameters.
The results are shown in Table I, in which the CVs marked with
red color illustrate the corresponding parameters are nonidentifiable and thus about 76% of the parameters are identifiable in
our model.
Parameter sensitivity analysis is a tool to quantitatively determine the effect of specific parameters on the output. To understand the relationship between system responses and variations
in individual model parameters, local parameter sensitivity analysis was performed (see [15] for detail). Briefly, we increased or
decreased the estimated value of each parameter by 1% and then
checked the response of the system outputs in order to determine the corresponding parameter sensitivity. In Fig. 3(d)–(i),
the results show the percentage changes of system outputs are
less than 6% for most all parameters as increased or decreased
by 1%, which demonstrates the stability of our model. It is also
worth noting that three most sensitive parameters may control
the antagonistic relationship between mature and primitive cell
compartments, including the 1st parameter fm ax , the 2nd parameter nm ax , and the 19th parameter D1 , as it has been shown
that the regulation of stem cell self-renewal and proliferation
plays an important role in preventing cancer cells [16].
E. Model Cross-Validation
Here we use cross-validation to evaluate how accurately our
model will perform. In the cross-validation technique, we first
partitioned the observations into two complementary subsets,
and then used one subset to train the model and the other to
test and validate the model. In our study we used leave-one-out
cross-validation. That means we used one single observation
from original sample as the validation data and the remaining
observations as the training data. This process was repeated until
each observation in the dataset was used once as the validation
data. The results are shown in Fig. 4.
Briefly, we first got the estimated parameters of the lineage
model based on the whole dataset, and the estimated parameters
of the lineage model based on the dataset in which one single
observation is deleted. Then we calculated the relative errors
(REs) for all parameters by comparing these two sets of estimated parameters. The results are presented in Fig. 4(a) where
we can see that the RE is rather large for the 8th parameter μ+
and the 20th parameter D2 .
Fig. 4(b)–(d) shows the comparison results between the experimental data and the predicted outputs from the estimated
model trained by the leave-one-out dataset. About 94% of results are consistent with the experimental data. For example,
when we leave out the single data of “the percentage of PCs
at Day 9 under the condition of SNM” from the whole dataset,
the predicted data from the model trained by the leave-one-out
dataset does not show a good agreement with the experimental
data, as shown in Fig. 4(c). This happens may be due to the

PENG et al.: MODELING CELL–CELL INTERACTIONS IN REGULATING MULTIPLE MYELOMA INITIATING CELL FATE

Fig. 4. Results of leave-one-out cross-validation. (a) The REs between the
estimated parameters trained by the leave-one-out datasets and the estimated
parameters trained by the whole dataset. (b–d) The comparisons between the
experimental data and the theoretical data predicted from the developed model
trained by the leave-one-out datasets.

489

Fig. 6. Theoretical results from model under various treatment conditions. (a)
The results of total cell number dynamics. (b) The results of the percentage
dynamics of SP cells over total cells. “Increase self-renewal rate”: increasing
fm a x by 50%; “Partial differentiation block”: decreasing μ m a x by 50%; “Unresponsive to the promoters”: setting SSF1 = SSF2 = 0.

negative correlations with the outputs of the percentages of SP
under all cultural conditions. Third, the outputs of the percentages of MCs under all cultural conditions have strong correlations with all parameters. Finally, the correlation is significantly
negative between the 19th parameters D1 and the 14th output
(the percentage of PCs under the condition of SNM at Day 9),
which indicates that the secreted factors produced by MCs have
significant effects on regulating the MICs development through
the corresponding feedback loops depicted in Fig. 2(b).

Fig. 5. Theoretical results from function analysis of parameters in the model.
The heat map shows the results of Pearson correlation coefficients (PCCs)
between total 21 model parameters and total 18 system outputs.

following reasons. First, the size of the whole dataset is not
big enough, hence when we leave one out of the dataset, some
important information such as nonlinear property could be lost.
Second, we did not consider signaling pathways in the different
types of cells in the lineage model, which could make the model
inaccurate in cell population prediction. Generally speaking, our
model can be used to do the prediction in practice because only
one out of 18 cases did not show good performance.
IV. THEORETICAL RESULTS
A. Correlation Coefficient Analysis Reflects Feedback Loops
To systematically explore the regulation function of the model
parameters in an unbiased manner, the Pearson correlation coefficients (PCCs) were employed to investigate the relationships
between 21 model parameters and 18 system outputs. The detailed method for the calculation of PPCs in the simulation is
provided in the supplementary.
The results are presented using a heat map shown in Fig. 5.
First, the results show the strong correlations between the 2nd
parameter nm a and most of the model outputs, which means that
the parameter nm ax plays an important role in regulating MICs
development. Second, the 4th parameter DGR shows strong

B. Intercellular Feedback Signaling Regulates
Cell Population Dynamics
Here, we simulated the dynamics of the number of total cells
and the percentage of SP in response to different theoretical
treatments shown in Fig. 6. In the simulation, the culture in each
condition was intermittently renewed (i.e., all secreted factors
are reset back to zeros) every two days after Day 4.
First, we considered the treatment of increasing the selfrenewal rate (increasing fm ax by 50%). The simulation results
in Fig. 6 show that the number of total cells expands faster and
the percentage of SP reaches the steady stage in the same short
time period compared to the control condition, which means that
increasing self-renewal rate can only influence the number of
total cells but not the percentage of SP. Second, we considered
the treatment of partially blocking the differentiation (decreasing μm ax by 50%). The results show that the increase of the
total cell number slows down and the percentage of SP is rather
high compared to the control condition. Third, we considered
the treatment of “unresponsive to the promoters” in which the
promotion factors do not affect the self-renewal and differentiation (setting SSF1 = SSF2 = 0 in the model). The results
show the increase of the total cell number is totally inhibited,
i.e., blocking the stimulatory factors can result in inhibiting the
growth of cell population, indicating that stimulatory factors
play important roles in regulating the MM cell development.
From the discussion earlier, we can conclude that stimulatory
factors may play a major role in regulating the self-renewal and
differentiation of MM cells.

490

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Fig. 7. Theoretical results from model under various culture strategies. Three
culture strategies were simulated based on the established linage model by
renewing the medium at different frequency of culture manipulations, i.e., “1
Day”, “2 Days”, and “3 Days”. (a) The percentage dynamic of SP cells over
total cells, the percentage dynamic of MCs over total cells, and the dynamic
of the total cell population. (b and c) The concentration dynamics of ISF1 and
ISF2.

C. Culture Strategies Decide Cell Growth
We also in silico studied the cell culture strategies based on
the established linage model by renewing the medium at three
different frequencies of culture manipulations, i.e., “1 Day”, “2
Days”, and “3 Days”. Three culture strategies were performed
in the simulation as follows. “1 Day”: resetting all secreted
factors back to zeros every 1 day after Day 4 culture; “2 Days”:
resetting all secreted factors back to zeros every 2 days after
Day 4 culture; “3 Days”: resetting all secreted factors back to
zeros every 3 days after Day 4 culture.
Fig. 7(a) shows the results of the percentage dynamic of SP
cells over total cells, the percentage dynamic of MCs over total
cells, and the dynamic of the total cell population, along with
three different cultural strategies described earlier. With the culture strategy of “1 Day”, the total cell number will reach the
steady stage early at the 4th day compared to other two culture strategies. Specially, with the culture strategy of “3 Days”,
the total cell number expands exponentially. Fig. 7(b) and (c)
shows the results of the concentration dynamics of ISF1 and
ISF2, respectively, along with three different cultural strategies.
Fig. 7(b) shows that the faster the culture frequency, the faster
the maximal concentration of ISF1 increases. In addition, the
concentration of ISF2 is always rather small through 30 days
culture with the culture strategies of both “1 Day” and “2 Days”
except that it increases significantly after 25 days culture with
the culture strategy of “3 Days”, as shown in Fig. 7(c). From the
earlier discussion, we conclude that increasing the frequency of
culture manipulation can result in inhibiting the growth of cell
population. Thus, manipulating the culture strategy may make
great contributions to the growth of MM cells.

The goal of this study is to take advantage of our expertise
in cell biology and computational modeling to develop coherent experimental protocols and mathematical models for understanding the cell–cell interactions between MICs, PCs, and
MCs regulating MICs evolution. We experimentally measured
the dynamic population numbers of different types of cells under
various cultural conditions. These data were then employed to
construct a mathematical model consisting of the MIC lineage
model and the corresponding secreted factor system. Finally the
model was used to predict some theoretical results. The theoretical results showed that stimulatory factors play important
roles in regulating the MM cell development and blocking the
stimulatory factors can result in inhibiting the growth of cell
population, and the increasing frequencies of culture manipulation can also result in inhibiting the growth of cell population.
This study provides a basic framework of studying cell–cell
interactions in regulating MIC fate. The obtained results from
dynamic system may be potentially useful for understanding
mechanism of cancer stem cells development, as well as the selection of drug treatments in the chemical therapy by targeting
the stem cells.
The main limitation of our wok is that we did not consider
the signaling pathways involved in the lineage model, though
recent studies have suggested that many pathways may be involved in regulating the cellular behavior of cancer stem cells,
e.g., Wnt [17], Notch [18], Hedgehog [19], and so on. Second,
although some secreted factors have been identified in literature, we did not specify them in our model and just simply classify them into four classes, i.e., SSF1, SSF2, ISF1, and ISF2.
Third, we only used the percentages of SP cells, PCs, MCs over
TCs based on many theoretical assumptions, and the dynamic
changes of these cell numbers were not employed in training our
model. In addition, more discussions about the parameters in the
model are needed, such as the number of compartments belonging to the stages of MIC, PC, and MC. In order to discover new
drugs for treating MM, we need more detailed models and more
experimental data. In the following work, the significant pathways will be considered in the model, and more experimental
data will be measured, such as reverse phase protein array data
that measure the phosphorylation levels of the proteins involved
in the signaling pathways.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Younes, X. Leleu, E. Hatjiharissi, A. S. Moreau, T. Hideshima, P.
Richardson, K. C. Anderson, and I. M. Ghobrial, “Targeting the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway in multiple myeloma,” Clin. Cancer
Res., vol. 13, no. 13, pp. 3771–3775, Jul. 1, 2007.
[2] T. Hideshima, C. Mitsiades, G. Tonon, P. G. Richardson, and K. C. Anderson, “Understanding multiple myeloma pathogenesis in the bone marrow to identify new therapeutic targets,” Nat. Rev. Cancer, vol. 7, no. 8,
pp. 585–598, Aug., 2007.
[3] W. Matsui, C. A. Huff, Q. Wang, M. T. Malehorn, J. Barber, Y. Tanhehco,
B. D. Smith, C. I. Civin, and R. J. Jones, “Characterization of clonogenic
multiple myeloma cells,” Blood, vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 2332–2336, Mar. 15,
2004.
[4] W. Matsui, Q. Wang, J. P. Barber, S. Brennan, B. D. Smith, I. Borrello, I.
McNiece, L. Lin, R. F. Ambinder, C. Peacock, D. N. Watkins, C. A. Huff,
and R. J. Jones, “Clonogenic multiple myeloma progenitors, stem cell
properties, and drug resistance,” Cancer Res., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 190–197,
Jan. 1, 2008.

PENG et al.: MODELING CELL–CELL INTERACTIONS IN REGULATING MULTIPLE MYELOMA INITIATING CELL FATE

[5] M. A. Goodell, K. Brose, G. Paradis, A. S. Conner, and R. C. Mulligan,
“Isolation and functional properties of murine hematopoietic stem cells
that are replicating in vivo,” J. Exp. Med., vol. 183, no. 4, pp. 1797–1806,
Apr. 1, 1996.
[6] Y. Feng, J. Wen, P. Mike, D. S. Choi, C. Eshoa, Z. Z. Shi, Y. Zu, and C.
C. Chang, “Bone marrow stromal cells from myeloma patients support
the growth of myeloma stem cells,” Stem. Cells Dev., vol. 19, no. 9,
pp. 1289–1296, Sep. 2010.
[7] S. Yamazaki, A. Iwama, S. Takayanagi, K. Eto, H. Ema, and H. Nakauchi,
“TGF-beta as a candidate bone marrow niche signal to induce hematopoietic stem cell hibernation,” Blood, vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 1250–1256, Feb. 5,
2009.
[8] R. Ganguly and I. K. Puri, “Mathematical model for the cancer stem cell
hypothesis,” Cell Prolif., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 3–14, Feb. 2006.
[9] D. C. Kirouac, G. J. Madlambayan, M. Yu, E. A. Sykes, C. Ito, and
P. W. Zandstra, “Cell–cell interaction networks regulate blood stem and
progenitor cell fate,” Mol. Syst. Biol., vol. 5, p. 293, 2009.
[10] P. Pivonka, J. Zimak, D. W. Smith, B. S. Gardiner, C. R. Dunstan, N. A.
Sims, T. J. Martin, and G. R. Mundy, “Model structure and control of bone
remodeling: A theoretical study,” Bone, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 249–263, Aug.
2008.
[11] H. E. Broxmeyer and C. H. Kim, “Regulation of hematopoiesis in a sea of
chemokine family members with a plethora of redundant activities,” Exp.
Hematol., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 1113–1123, Jul. 1999.
[12] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Neural Netw., 1995, vol. 4, pp. 1942–1948.
[13] M. Meissner, M. Schmuker, and G. Schneider, “Optimized particle swarm
optimization (OPSO) and its application to artificial neural network training,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 7, p. 125, 2006.
[14] A. Kremling, S. Fischer, K. Gadkar, F. J. Doyle, T. Sauter, E. Bullinger,
F. Allgower, and E. D. Gilles, “A benchmark for methods in reverse engineering and model discrimination: Problem formulation and solutions,”
Genome. Res., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1773–85, Sep. 2004.
[15] H. Peng, J. Wen, L. Zhang, H. Li, C. C. Chang, Y. Zu, and X. Zhou,
“A systematic modeling study on the pathogenic role of p38 MAPK
activation in myelodysplastic syndromes,” Mol. Biosyst., vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 1366–1374, Apr. 2012.
[16] K. W. Orford and D. T. Scadden, “Deconstructing stem cell self-renewal:
Genetic insights into cell-cycle regulation,” Nat. Rev. Genet., vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 115–128, Feb. 2008.
[17] T. Reya and H. Clevers, “Wnt signalling in stem cells and cancer,” Nature,
vol. 434, no. 7035, pp. 843–850, Apr. 14, 2005.
[18] K. Brennan and A. M. Brown, “Is there a role for Notch signalling in
human breast cancer?” Breast Cancer Res., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 69–75, 2003.
[19] S. Liu, G. Dontu, I. D. Mantle, S. Patel, N. S. Ahn, K. W. Jackson, P. Suri,
and M. S. Wicha, “Hedgehog signaling and Bmi-1 regulate self-renewal of
normal and malignant human mammary stem cells,” Cancer Res., vol. 66,
no. 12, pp. 6063–6071, Jun. 15, 2006.
Tao Peng received the B.S. degree in computational
mathematics from Wuhan University, Hubei, China,
in 2007. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree at the University of California, Irvine, USA.
His current research interests include systems biology, computational biology, and machine learning.

Huiming Peng received the B.S. degree from
China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China,
in 2002, the M.S. degree from Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree from
China University of Geosciences, in 2011, all in
mathematics.
Since 2005, he has been a faculty member with the
School of Mathematics and Physics, China University of Geosciences. From 2008 to 2010, he was an
exchange Ph.D. student with supervisor Dr. Xiaobo
Zhou at the Department of Radiology, The Methodist
Hospital Research Institute and Weil Cornell Medical College, Houston, TX. He
is currently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the Department of Radiology,
Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. His current
research interests include systems biology and statistical signal processing.

491

Dong Soon Choi received the B.A. degree from the
University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA, in 1996, and
the M.S. degree in biological science and the Ph.D.
degree in molecular science and technology from
Ajou University, Suwon, Korea, in 2002 and 2007,
respectively.
From 2007 to 2011, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the UT MD Anderson Cancer Center
and the Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX,
USA. Since 2011, he has been a Research Associate
at the Houston Methodist Cancer Center, The Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston. His research interests include the biology of
cancer stem cells and their interactive nature with cancer microenvironment,
currently focusing on epigenetic modification by anticancer drugs and the related drug-resistance mechanism in cancer stem cells and cancer associated
stromal cells.
Jing Su received the Ph.D. degree from Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, USA, and Emory University, Atlanta, GA,
USA.
He is currently an Instructor in the Department
of Radiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA. His current research interests include systems biology, biomedical informatics,
and biomaterials.

Chung-Che (Jeff) Chang received the M.D. degree
from National Yang-Ming Medical College, Taipei,
Tiawan, and the Ph.D. degree from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
From 1999 to 2003, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Department of Pathology, Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA. From 2003 to
2004, he was an Associate Professor with the Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX. From 2004 to 2011, he was a Professor with the Department of Pathology, The Methodist
Hospital, Houston, TX. Since 2011, he has been a Professor with the Department
of Pathology, Florida Hospital, Orlando, USA. His current research interests include clinical and translational, focusing on identifying markers and signaling
pathways that are important for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of hematological malignancies.
Xiaobo Zhou received the B.S. degree from Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, China, in 1988, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from Peking University, Beijing,
China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively, both in mathematics.
From 1988 to 1992, he was a Lecturer
with the Training Center, 18th Building Company,
Chongqing, China. From 1992 to 1998, he was a Research Assistant and Teaching Assistant with the Department of Mathematics, Peking University. From
1999 to 2000, he was a Senior Technical Manager
with the 3G Wireless Communication Department, Huawei Technologies Co.,
Ltd., Beijing. From 1998 to 2004, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow
with Tsinghua University, Beijing; the University of Missouri-Columbia; Texas
A&M University, College Station; and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
From 2005 to 2007, he was a faculty member with Brigham and Women’s
Hospital and Harvard University, Boston, MA. From 2007 to 2012, he was the
Chief of Bioinformatics, Director of Center for Translational Biosystems, Professor of Radiology, The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX. Since 2013, he has
been the Chief of Bioinformatics, the Director of Center for Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology, a Full Professor of Diagnostic Radiology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. He and his colleagues
pioneered the high-content cellular imaging informatics and the multiscale systems biology.
Dr. Zhou was recently awarded three NIH R01 grants, two NIH U01 grants,
and one DOD grant as a PI. In addition, he and his colleagues have successfully
got other 6 NIH R01 grants. He also organized and substantially contributed to
the NIH U54 Center for Systems Modeling of Cancer Development funded in
2010.

