IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

235

Cardiac Electrophysiological Activation Pattern
Estimation From Images Using a Patient-Specific
Database of Synthetic Image Sequences
Adityo Prakosa, Maxime Sermesant∗ , Pascal Allain, Nicolas Villain, C. Aldo Rinaldi, Kawal Rhode,
Reza Razavi, Hervé Delingette, and Nicholas Ayache

Abstract—While abnormal patterns of cardiac electrophysiological activation are at the origin of important cardiovascular diseases (e.g., arrhythmia, asynchrony), the only clinically available
method to observe detailed left ventricular endocardial surface activation pattern is through invasive catheter mapping. However,
this electrophysiological activation controls the onset of the mechanical contraction; therefore, important information about the
electrophysiology could be deduced from the detailed observation
of the resulting motion patterns. In this paper, we present the study
of this inverse cardiac electrokinematic relationship. The objective
is to predict the activation pattern knowing the cardiac motion
from the analysis of cardiac image sequences. To achieve this, we
propose to create a rich patient-specific database of synthetic time
series of the cardiac images using simulations of a personalized
cardiac electromechanical model, in order to study this complex
relationship between electrical activity and kinematic patterns in
the context of this specific patient. We use this database to train
a machine-learning algorithm which estimates the depolarization
times of each cardiac segment from global and regional kinematic
descriptors based on displacements or strains and their derivatives.
Finally, we use this learning to estimate the patient’s electrical activation times using the acquired clinical images. Experiments on
the inverse electrokinematic learning are demonstrated on synthetic sequences and are evaluated on clinical data with promising
results. The error calculated between our prediction and the invasive intracardiac mapping ground truth is relatively small (around
10 ms for ischemic patients and 20 ms for nonischemic patient).
This approach suggests the possibility of noninvasive electrophysiological pattern estimation using cardiac motion imaging.
Index Terms—Cardiac electrophysiology, computer model, inverse problem, machine learning, non-invasive mapping, synthetic
images.

Manuscript received December 21, 2012; revised August 30, 2013; accepted
September 3, 2013. Date of publication September 16, 2013; date of current version January 16, 2014. This work was supported under the MedYMA advanced
Grant 291080 funded by the European Research Council. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
A. Prakosa, H. Delingette, and N. Ayache are with Inria, Asclepios
team, 06902 Sophia Antipolis, France (e-mail: Adityo.Prakosa@inria.fr;
Herve.Delingette@inria.fr; nicholas.ayache@inria.fr).
∗ M. Sermesant is with Inria, Asclepios team, 06902 Sophia Antipolis, France
(e-mail: maxime.sermesant@inria.fr).
P. Allain and N. Villain are with the Medisys Research Laboratory, Philips
Healthcare France, 92156 Suresnes, France (e-mail: pascal.allain@philips.com;
nicolas.villain@philips.com).
C. A. Rinaldi is with the Department of Cardiology, St. Thomas’ Hospital,
London, SE1 7EH, U.K. (e-mail: aldo.rinaldi@gstt.nhs.uk).
K. Rhode and R. Razavi are with the King’s College London, Division of
Imaging Sciences, St. Thomas’ Hospital, London, SE1 7EH, U.K. (e-mail:
kawal.rhode@kcl.ac.uk; reza.razavi@kcl.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2281619

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE electrophysiological activation controls the onset of
the mechanical contraction, important information about
the electrophysiology could be gathered from the detailed observation of the resulting motion patterns. Abnormal patterns of this
activation are at the origin of important cardiovascular diseases
(e.g., arrhythmia, asynchrony). However, only catheter-based
intracardiac electrical mappings are available to obtain such
information, and these invasive procedures are not classically
used for diagnosis but rather for planning and guiding a therapy.
Electrocardiographic imaging (ECGI) [1] (a.k.a. body surface
potential mapping) is a noninvasive technique for imaging activation times of the myocardium but still remains to be validated
thoroughly and is not widely available in the clinical centers.
First application of ECGI in human subject was done in [2] to
image the activation pattern of the normal heart, heart with right
bundle branch block, heart with pacing, and also atrial flutter.
In a recent study [3], the invasive catheter-based electrophysiology study findings were compared with the noninvasive ECGI
method to image a large diversity of human ventricular tachycardia activation patterns. Recent validation studies were done in
rabbit [4], canine [5], and swine [6] for another technique which
also uses the body potential mapping, namely the 3-D cardiac
electrical imaging, to noninvasively reconstruct the 3-D ventricular activation sequence. Another method which also used
the body surface potential maps and an ultrafast computerized
tomography scanning was developed in the 3-D electrocardiographic imaging technique [7] and was compared with the 3-D
intracardiac mapping in rabbits. In [8], the feasibility of the noninvasive imaging of cardiac electrophysiology in patients with
the Wolf–Parkinson–White syndrome was investigated. The result was compared with the standard invasive electroanatomical
mapping. Therefore, there is a strong need to quantitatively
assess a patient electrophysiological condition from noninvasive imaging modalities. The proposed method could help in
constraining the notoriously ill-posed inverse problem of electrocardiography.
Despite advances in both the medical image analysis and
the intracardiac electrophysiological mapping technology, the
understanding of the relationship between the cardiac electrophysiology and the cardiac motion visible in images is only
partial. Since noninvasive cardiac imaging is readily available,
unlike noninvasive detailed electrophysiology maps, it is important to investigate how the cardiac electrophysiology function
can be estimated from the analysis of the cardiac motion. This

S

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

is specifically relevant, for example, in the evaluation of the cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) where the placement and
tuning of pacemaker leads play a crucial role in the outcome
of the therapy. In this context, cardiologists need to interpret
time series of cardiac images in order to detect and characterize
kinematic patterns (motion asynchrony, delayed contraction)
and then infer possible electrical conduction disorders. However, currently 30% of the patients with CRT show no benefit
from this therapy [9], which may be caused by the suboptimal
implementation of the therapy. Providing activation maps from a
time series of cardiac images would be of great interest to better
select patients and to optimize the lead placements and delays
during and after the therapy. For instance, in a recent study, Sohal
et al. [10] use time–volume curves of left ventricular segments
to identify two classes of contraction patterns, which seem to
be correlated with the CRT response in patients with left bundle
branch block (LBBB). More fundamentally, understanding the
relationship between the cardiac motion and electrophysiology
is essential to improve the diagnosis and therapy of patients
suffering from heart failure.
While there is an important literature on the estimation of
the cardiac kinematics from cardiac sequences (see for instance [11]–[14] and references therein), there exist no such
tools to estimate the electrical wave propagation from such image sequences. However, the relationship between the cardiac
motion and electrical activation has been investigated in several
studies [15]–[19].
Electromechanical wave imaging modality has been recently
introduced to image the electromechanical wave (EW) which
was shown to correlate with the myocardium electrical wave
propagation [18], [20]. In [21], it was shown that the EW was
able to be reproduced by an E/M model. This imaging modality uses high ultrasound frequency to map the small, transient
deformation of the EW. However, this method is limited to this
specific modality, which has only been demonstrated in 2-D
(whereas the propagation pattern is 3-D) and is not often available clinically.
In this paper, we propose to study the inverse electrokinematic
relationship through the creation of a patient-specific database
of synthetic time series of cardiac images based on our previous
study in [15]. Because it is difficult to obtain a large number
of cases where both the electrophysiological mapping and time
series of 3-D images are available, we use an E/M model of
the heart to produce synthetic but visually realistic image sequences for which the electrical stimulation is known using our
method [22]. On this database, invariant kinematic descriptors
were extracted from each synthetic sequence and then fed to a
machine-learning algorithm which estimates the electrical pattern from kinematic descriptors during the cardiac cycle. The
creation of this database allows us to develop this machinelearning-based study. Recently, many medical image analysis
studies are motivated by machine learning, for example in [23],
where a virtual population is created to train an active shape
models. As the electrokinematic relationship is very complex,
we prefer here to generate a patient-specific database, so that
the learning is done on cases relatively close to the patient condition. The hypothesis of this study is that the clinician already
has some knowledge on the pathology when asking for the MR

images, e.g., LBBB from a standard ECG using QRS shape and
width. Therefore, the aim is not to help for diagnosis but for
therapy planning. We believe that solving the general case without any information on the diagnosis of the patient would lead
to a huge number of possibilities and make the inverse problem
even more difficult.
Previous works [18], [19] have mainly focused in detecting
E/M wave directly from the displacement and strain patterns
estimated from image sequences during the contraction and
relaxation of the myocardium. Since the relationship between
those mechanical waves and electrical waves is very complex,
our approach is to learn it through an E/M model of the heart
at a larger spatial and temporal scale. In [19], the cardiac motion descriptors are combined in order to obtain the electrical
activation time, but the weights are assigned manually for the
descriptors. Another study by McVeigh et al. [24] considers only
the circumferential strain estimated from tagged MR images as
the mechanical activation measure. Another approach has been
developed using a mathematical-based computational technique
to image the active stress from the displacement using an inverse
model [17]. This method was able to reconstruct traveling plane
wave of active stress from a mechanical deformation. The active stress was initially used to generate this deformation using
a forward model. However, this method would still need to be
evaluated in the clinical application. Compared to [16], instead
of estimating displacements and strains directly from the E/M
model, we propose a more realistic estimation by first simulating
3-D images and then using an image-based motion tracking algorithm. Furthermore, rather than learning the activation forces
over time, we have chosen to learn the depolarization times of
all American Heart Association (AHA) segments. Finally, our
learning approach is optimized in order to detect which kinematic descriptor is most correlated with the electrophysiology
waves.
The overall approach is described in Fig. 1 and mainly consists in three stages. First, right, and left ventricles (LVs) are
segmented from an input cardiac image sequence and the cardiac motion is tracked. An electromechanical model of the heart
is mechanically calibrated from this data. In a second stage,
a training set, a.k.a patient-specific database, is created from
this E/M model by changing the electrophysiological parameters related to different pathological conditions. For each set
of electrophysiology parameters, a different cardiac motion is
simulated and a realistic synthetic image sequence is created.
In the third stage, motion descriptors are estimated from each
sequence. A learning method is then trained to relate those
descriptors with the endocardial depolarization times. Finally,
the depolarization times of the original sequence are estimated
from the knowledge of its motion descriptors. Evaluation of the
inverse electrokinematic-learning process on three patients is
discussed in Section V.
II. IMAGE PROCESSING AND PARAMETER CALIBRATION
A. Image Segmentation and Registration
First, we need to apply two image processing steps to the
patient clinical image sequence. These steps are the segmentation of the end diastolic (ED) myocardium and the estimation of

PRAKOSA et al.: CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVATION PATTERN ESTIMATION FROM IMAGES

237

Fig. 1. Estimation of electrophysiological activation pattern from images. A
cardiac mesh is created from image segmentation. Different electromechanical
conditions are simulated close to the patient condition to generate the database of
electrophysiological patterns and synthetic cardiac sequences. The relationship
between the motion descriptors and the activation patterns is learned from this
database. The result is used to predict the patient electrophysiological activation
pattern.

the myocardium motion. The purpose of the segmentation is to
personalize the cardiac mesh geometry required for the cardiac
E/M simulation. Furthermore, the estimation of patient cardiac
motion allows us to also estimate the patient’s endocardial LV
volume curve. Using this information, the E/M simulation can
be calibrated with respect to this volume curve so that the simulated ejection fraction as well as the ejection and filling rates
are similar to the measured ones [25].
The 3-D epicardium and endocardium of the left and the right
ventricles of the ED clinical image were delineated using an interactive tool available within the CardioViz3D software [26].
These delineations were then used to create the myocardium
segmentation. Using the CGAL software [27], a computational
tetrahedral mesh was created from the binary mask of the compact myocardium segmentation (cf., Fig. 2). We label the different tetrahedra of the mesh in order to set different electrical conduction parameters for each labeled region (see Section III-A).
The labels include the scar, the Purkinje network (the tetrahedra
next to the endocardial surface), the scarred Purkinje network
(the intersection of the scar and the Purkinje network), and the
cardiac muscle (the remaining tetrahedra). To create bull-eyes
plot, we also label the LV according to the 17 AHA segments.
Applying a nonlinear registration to pairs of medical images
is a common method to estimate the motion of the tissue in
the image. Here, we use the symmetric log-domain diffeomorphic demons (LogDemons) [28] nonrigid registration method
to align the template image Ti (x) to a reference image R(x),

Fig. 2. Cardiac geometry and electrical stimulation. A personalized cardiac
mesh is created from the myocardium delineation of the clinical image. The
region on the surface of the LV and RV endocardium is set to have higher
electrical conduction velocity to simulate the Purkinje network. Different RV
initial electrical activation position is set to simulate the extremities of the
Bundle of His. These positions are approximately set based on the septal LV
AHA Zones.

which is the ED image of the clinical sequence, by estimating
a dense nonlinear transformation φi (x), where x ∈ R3 is the
space coordinate. Ti (x) is the image at each time frame i in the
cardiac sequence. This transformation φi (x) is associated with
the displacement vector field ui (x) and is parameterized by the
stationary velocity field vi (x) which ensures the invertibility of
the deformation since we are working in the log-domain. By
having this estimated displacement field, we are also able to
estimate the patient’s endocardial LV volume curve in time. We
deformed the ED tetrahedral mesh using the estimated displacement field ui (x) and then computed the endocardial LV volume
of the deformed mesh in time.

238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

B. Electromechanical Model Calibration
We used the Eikonal model to simulate the electrophysiological activation patterns. This model has the advantage to be
fast to compute and involves few parameters. More detailed
models [29], [30] could also have been used; however, such additional level of complexity is not necessary since we are only
interested in providing main patterns ofconduction driven by
few parameters. The Eikonal equation v ∇Tdt D∇Td = 1 was
solved using multifront fast marching method [31] to calculate
the depolarization time Td at each point of the mesh. v is the
local conduction velocity and D = (1 − r)f ⊗ f + r.I is the
anisotropic conductivity tensor where f is the fiber orientation,
r is the conductivity anisotropy ratio, and I is the identity matrix.
We base our approach on the Bestel–Clément–Sorine (BCS)
E/M model [32] composed of a passive nonlinear elastic part
and an active part that describes the binding and unbinding
process of the actin and myosin filaments in the sarcomere by
a differential equation that controls the active stress τc and the
sarcomere stiffness kc
 ˙
kc = −(| u | +α | e˙c |)kc + n0 k0 | u |+
(1)
τ˙c = −(| u | +α | e˙c |)τc + e˙c kc + n0 σ0 | u |+
where α is a constant related to the cross-bridge release due to a
high contraction rate, k0 and σ0 are, respectively, the maximum
stiffness and contraction. n0 is a reduction factor that allows us
to take into account the Starling effect by which the maximum
contraction depends on the fiber strain ec . The control variable u
is derived from the electrical activation model and is a function
of the free calcium concentration only. It is modeled using electrophysiological inputs such as depolarization times (Td ) and
action potential durations (APD). The four-element Windkessel
model is used to model the arterial pressure [25].
The BCS E/M model was implemented in the SOFA simulation platform [33] and to assess the mechanical parameters of
the model, we used the algorithm derived from the Unscented
Transform [34], and described in [25] and [35]. The algorithm
finds a set of parameters that enable the simulation to match observations on the endocardial LV volume (the minimum volume,
the minimum, and maximum of the flow) in one iteration through
the analysis of the covariance matrix between the simulated observations and the variation of each parameter independently.
The assessed calibrated parameters of the BCS E/M model are
σ0 , K, μ, APD, and Rp. K is the Bulk modulus of the passive
part and μ is the viscosity parameter of the active part. APD is
the cell excitation duration. Rp is the peripheral resistance, one
of the Windkessel parameters.
III. PATIENT-SPECIFIC DATABASE OF SYNTHETIC
IMAGE SEQUENCES
A database of visually realistic synthetic cardiac sequences
is created using the method proposed in [22]. This database is
required to train the machine-learning algorithm. This synthetic
sequence generation method consists in the combination of the
simulated motion and the real motion estimated from the patient
image sequence. The database is built using different scenarios
which are performed to simulate a variety of conditions close to

TABLE I
PATIENT-SPECIFIC DATABASE OF 144 SIMULATED CASES

TABLE II
PATIENT-SPECIFIC DATABASE OF 180 SIMULATED CASES

clinical condition of this patient. Since these datasets are taken
from patients with an LBBB, the scenarios consist of different
variations of electrophysiological and mechanical parameters
that simulate this specific pathology.
A. Simulated Electromechanical Conditions
An electrophysiological activation pattern which corresponds
to each scenario is generated using the Eikonal model in the
personalized cardiac mesh geometry. The scenarios are created
based on a variation of the parameters of the Eikonal model
around the standard values. The varying parameters are the conduction velocity value of the Purkinje network vp , the value in
the cardiac muscle vm , and also the initial electrical activation
position which simulates the extremities of the Bundle of His.
For datasets containing a scar region, a variation of the conduction velocity value for this region vs and also a value of the
scarred Purkinje network vsp are also included in the scenarios
(cf., Table I and Fig. 2).
For datasets that do not contain a scar region, we set a low
conduction velocity in the anterior lateral region (zone 6, 12,
and 16 of the AHA segments) or in the inferior lateral region
(zone 5, 11, and 16 of the AHA segments) in order to mimic the
occurrence of a functional block in those regions (cf., Table II).
The overall conduction velocities are also set lower compared
to Table I.
B. Generation of Synthetic Image Sequences
Visually realistic synthetic time series of MR images were
created using the previously simulated deformation which was
combined to the real clinical sequence estimated displacement
using the method proposed in [22]. This method applied nonrigid registration algorithm to extract the motion of the real
clinical MRI sequence. This extracted motion was then combined with the E/M simulated motion in the log domain and
then used to warp the original images in order to create the synthetic cardiac sequence. With this method, a database of realistic
images of the patient was generated for which the underlying

PRAKOSA et al.: CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVATION PATTERN ESTIMATION FROM IMAGES

239

cardiac motion and electrophysiological parameters are known.
This database served as the training set in our machine-learningbased study. For each different initial electrical activation position (RV Init 1, 2, 3, and 4) (cf., Fig. 2, Tables I and II), a mechanical calibration is performed as described in Section II-B.
Therefore, the variation of the mechanical parameters was included as well in the database.
With the method described previously, a large database of
synthetic 3-D MR images was created. We then tracked the
cardiac motion from those synthetic images by using the symmetric LogDemons registration algorithm [28]. More precisely,
we registered all the images of the synthetic sequence to its
reference ED image as we did to the real clinical sequence.
IV. INVERSE ELECTROKINEMATIC LEARNING
A. Cardiac Motion Descriptors
As an input to a machine-learning algorithm, we needed to
first extract kinematic descriptors which describe in a compact
and discriminative way the cardiac motion for each time point
in the cardiac cycle. We wanted these descriptors to be regional,
as we aim for an activation pattern rather than local activation
times, and also intrinsic (frame invariant) as the orientation of
the heart in the images varies.
To this end, we first characterized the motion of each AHA
segment by fitting in the least-squares sense an affine transformation f (p) = Ap + B to the LogDemons estimated displacement field. The strain tensor E was then computed from the
affine matrix A as E = (AT A − I)/2.
We then extracted kinematic descriptors at each time of the
cardiac cycle that are invariant to any change of reference frame
(or rigid transformation). For the strain matrix E, the three
Euclidean invariants are computed as
x1 = trace(E), x2 = trace(E 2 ), x3 = det(E).
For the displacement vector, we only extracted its norm as invariant
x4 = u = Ab + B − b
where u is the displacement norm of the zone centroid with
b the initial position of the centroid. We also used the strain in
the direction of displacement as the invariant
x5 = (uT Eu)/(2u2 ).
Compared to our previous study [15], we added here more descriptors which are usually found in clinical records. We added
the QRS duration x6 = tQRS which is the time needed for the
whole myocardium to be activated. We also added the LV volume curve x7 = V and the regional LV volume curve x8 = Vreg
computed for each AHA segment. More precisely, we divided
the LV endocardial surface according to the AHA segment surfaces and then computed the volume of the region created by
each displaced segment surface and the barycenter of the LV
(cf., Fig. 3).
Furthermore, in order to learn the influence of the dynamics
of some descriptors, we added the derivative of the trace of the
strain tensor, of the displacement, and of the global and regional

Fig. 3. Regional LV volume. The V re g is the volume of the region created by
the LV AHA segment surface and the LV barycenter.

volume curves
x9 = d trace(E)/dt, x10 = du/dt
x11 = dV /dt, x12 = dVreg /dt.
These descriptors, except for the volume curve x7 , its derivative
x11 and the QRS duration x6 , are evaluated regionally for the 17
AHA zones during the n time instances. The value n depends
on the temporal resolution of the original clinical sequence, n =
number of frames − 1. The volume curve x7 and its derivative
x11 are vectors with length of n and the QRS duration x6 is a
single scalar value.
The difficulty in using a simulated database for machine learning is that there are limitations in both the electromechanical
model used to simulate the motion and the image processing
methods used to extract the descriptors. Therefore, there can be
discrepancies between the descriptors used in the learning phase
compared to the descriptors extracted from the real images.
In order to cope with this, and also because we are more
interested in the relative dynamics of these descriptors which
are related to the activation pattern than in their absolute values,
we normalized each descriptor. This normalization was done
regionally for the descriptors taken from the 17 AHA regions.
With this normalization, each descriptor has a range of values
from 0 to 1, as we use the relationship x = (x − xm in )/(xm ax −
xm in ), where xm ax and xm in are the maximum and the minimum
values of x, respectively.
These 12 descriptors (cf., Table III) were used to create a
kinematic descriptor vector x = (xi )i∈[1,12] ∈ Rd for each simulation with
d = 9(Descriptors1,2,3,4,5,8,9,10,12 ) × n(Times) × 17(Zones)
+ 2(Descriptors7,11 ) × n(Times)
+ 1(Descriptors6 )
= 155n + 1.

240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

with K = XX T , k = Xx, λ > 0 is the regularization parameter, X = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xN )T is a N × d matrix and Y =
(y1 , y2 , . . . , yN )T is a N × r matrix. In this form, other type
of Kernel function can be used to substitute the linear Kernel
function K = K(xi , xj ) = xTi xj .
We modeled the nonlinear relationship using KRR with a bias
term or LS-SVM for regression

TABLE III
LIST OF THE DESCRIPTORS

y = f (x) = Ak(xi , x) + b

(3)

with matrix A is computed as A = Y T (λI + K)−1 and
k(xi , x) is a kernel vector. We chose the radial basis funcD
−z k
as the Kernel function where
tion K(x
 k i , xj )k = k =1 e 2
zk = (xi − xj  /(σk αk )) , i, j = {1, . . . , N }, and D is the
number of descriptors. In this kernel function, σk is the standard deviation of each descriptor and αk is a dimensionless
coefficient which weights the importance of each
descriptor
2 in
N  k
2

the learning process, where σk = (1/N ) i=1 xi − μ and

k
μ = (1/N ) N
i=1 xi .

For a cardiac image sequence with 30 images, the dimension d
of the complete vectorial kinematic descriptor is
d = 155 × (30 − 1) + 1 = 4496.

B. Machine-Learning Method
In the inverse electrokinematic-learning process, the nonlinear relationship between the kinematic descriptors and the
electrical propagation was estimated based on a training set extracted from the synthetic database. To represent the cardiac
electrophysiology, we considered the activation time when the
electrical potential starts to depolarize at a point of the myocardium. The activation time was averaged for all points of the
LV endocardial surface in each AHA segment. Therefore, the
vector characterizing electrophysiology for each simulation is
y = (yi ) ∈ Rr=17 (AHA Zones) = log(Activation Times).
We modeled the nonlinear relationship using least-square support vector machine (LS-SVM) for regression [36] which is
similar to the kernel ridge regression (KRR).
LS-SVM extends the KRR method by adding a bias term.
KRR itself is the nonlinear extension of ridge regression (RR)
which searches a linear function y = wT x that models the dependencies between the descriptor vectors x = xi ∈ Rd and the
response vectors y = yi ∈ Rr (all vectors are column vectors)
from a set of N examples (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xN , yN ). The
use of nonlinear kernels allows us to capture the complex relationship between activation times and motion in a way that will
decrease the influence of some descriptors when far from the
ones used in the training phase.
RR can be extended to KRR by rewriting the solution
y = wT x
= Y T (λI + K)−1 k

(2)

C. Parameter Optimization
The chosen λ and α parameters are optimized by using
leave-one-out estimates which train the model with all members of the training set but one and test the performance on
the singleton. The process is repeated for all the singletons
in the training set. We use Allen’s predicted residual sum of
squares (PRESS) criterion
for 2the optimization of the λ and
α parameters PRESS = N
i e(i) [36] where e(i) = yi − ŷ(i)
is the residual for the ith example with the ith example excluded from the training process and ŷ(i) is the predicted response for the ith example based on the training process. Fortunately, we have e(i) = ei /(1 − hii ) where ei = yi − ŷi is the
residual for the ith example in the training process which includes all examples and ŷi is fitted response based on this
training. hii is the ith element of the leading diagonal of the
hat matrix H = X(λI + X T X)−1 X T = XX T (λI + XX T =
K(λI + K)−1 . Therefore, in the end, we can have the PRESS
for the chosen parameters λ and α in one iteration without having to do N iterations for the leave-one-out cross validation. We
use the Powell’s BOBYQA [37], [38] method to optimize these
parameters to have the smallest PRESS.
V. RESULTS
A. Activation Pattern Validation on Synthetic Data
First, we evaluated the learning process on the generated
synthetic data and estimated the minimum size of the training
set to have a small regression error for the remaining entries
of the database. Fig. 4 shows a good generalization with a root
mean square (RMS) error of less than 8 ms of residual by using
at least 13, 18, and 44 training datasets for the Databases I,
II, and III, respectively. The Databases I, II, and III are the
patient-specific databases for patients I, II, and III, respectively,
described in Section V-B. These numbers are less than 25% of
the size of datasets of each database.

PRAKOSA et al.: CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVATION PATTERN ESTIMATION FROM IMAGES

241

TABLE IV
RANK OF THE OPTIMIZED LS-SVM PARAMETERS

Fig. 4. RMS residual versus size of training data. Less than 8-ms RMS residual
is obtained by using more than 13, 18, and 44 training cases for the Databases
I, II, and III, respectively. The Databases I, II, and III are the patient-specific
databases for patients I, II, and III, respectively, described in Section V-B. This
means that a good generalization is obtained by using less than 25% of the
whole dataset.

B. Activation Pattern Evaluation on Clinical Data
We applied our proposed approach on three clinical cases
from patients with different pathologies and etiologies or causes
of diseases. However, in all three of them there was a modified
activation pattern due to scars or functional blocks, as well as
poor ejection fraction, which are the characteristics of the patient
groups we are aiming at.
The first patient was a 60-year-old woman with heart failure and NYHA class III symptoms. She had subendocardial
posterolateral scar in the LV. Her left ventricular ejection fraction was 25% on maximal tolerated heart failure medication.
The surface ECG demonstrated significant conduction disease
with LBBB QRS duration of 154 ms (normal QRS is less than
120 ms). Echocardiography, including tissue doppler, confirmed
significant mechanical dyssynchrony in keeping with the ECG
findings.
The second patient was a 72 years old male patient with
ischemic heart disease. He had a myocardial infarction in the
inferolateral wall. His left ventricular ejection fraction was 35%
with the QRS duration of 99 ms.
The third patient was a 77-year-old woman with a much more
developed dilated cardiomyopathy. She was in NYHA class III
heart failure with a LV ejection fraction of 18%, LBBB and
a QRS duration of 200 ms. There was no late gadolinium enhancement images acquired but functional conduction block was
observed in the electrophysiological mapping. We proposed to
add different virtual functional blocks in the simulated database
in order to be able to correctly estimate the activation patterns in
nonischemic cases, which often also present conduction blocks.
For all the cases, dynamic cardiac MRI (Philips 1.5T Achieva,
Phillips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) consisted of multiple slice cine steady state free precession scans performed
in short-axis orientation to assess the ventricular function

(TR/TE = 2.9/1.5 ms, resolution 2.2 × 2.2 × 10 mm3 , around
30 heart phases, breath-hold). The images were then resampled
in a resolution of 1.6 mm3 and centered on the heart region
with a region of interest of around 1003 voxels. A noncontact
mapping study was performed using the Ensite 3000 multielectrode array catheter system (St Jude, Sylmar, CA, USA). The
array records intracavity far-field potentials that are sampled
at 1.2 kHz and digitally filtered at 0.1–300 Hz. The resulting
signals allow the reconstruction of over 3000 virtual unipolar
electrograms superimposed on a model of the LV created using
a locator signal on a roving endocardial catheter. The XMR fusion provided the location of the Ensite mapping with respect
to the MR-derived information.
For each patient, a database of synthetic sequences which
contains the scenarios described in Section III-A was built. For
the first patient, the total generated synthetic 3-D MR images
are 144 (scenarios) × 29 (number of frame − 1) = 4176.
We did a first evaluation of this learning process on the clinical
3-D MR sequence of the patients. Using the relationship or the
optimized parameters previously found, we are able to predict
the LV endocardial electrical activation time of the patient. We
apply the same processing to this sequence as we did for the
synthetic sequence.
After optimizing the PRESS criterion on the whole synthetic database of each patient, the obtained LS-SVM parameters are shown in Table IV. We listed the descriptors with
their (αm ax − αi )/(αm ax − αm in ) value which describes the
increasing importance of the descriptor i (cf., Table IV). αm ax
and αm in are, respectively, the maximum and minimum α value

242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 5. Depolarization time estimation from clinical 3-D MR sequences. First
evaluation of the learning process in the prediction of the LV endocardial surface
depolarization time on three patients (right) is compared to the ground truth value
(left). Similar patterns in the same range are observed on the three of them.

of the descriptors for a patient database. Therefore, the value
range is from 0 for the least important descriptor to 1 for the
most important one. Table IV shows that the kinematic descriptors x1 = trace(E) and x5 = (uT Eu)/(2u2 ) are consistently
the most important ones to learn the electrokinematic relationship from the three databases since they have smaller optimized
αi values compared to the other descriptors.
After performing LogDemons nonrigid registration and extracting the vector x of kinematic descriptors from the estimated
displacement field, the electrophysiology vector y was estimated
from the LS-SVM. Since we have the ground truth LV endocardial electrical activation time of the patient acquired using noncontact mapping study, we are able to compare our prediction
with this measurement. Similar estimated depolarization times
were obtained for this patient (cf., Fig. 5) with the root mean
square error (RMSE) = 11.20 ms for the patient I, 13.51 ms for
the patient II, and 22.42 ms for the patient III.
We computed the mean and variance of the electrophysiological database created previously with the patient’s LV endocardial electrical activation time ground truth value. Then, we were
able to compare our prediction with these values (cf., Fig. 6).
We can observe similar RMS errors for the activation time for
different parameter sets, which is mostly due to the influence
of the Purkinje network. The high electrical conductivity of the
Purkinje network produces similar endocardial activation patterns. However, the activation pattern for the whole myocardium
is significantly different for each parameter set, which makes the
resulting motion pattern different.

Fig. 6. Distance (RMSE) of each simulated electrophysiology with respect
to the patient’s ground truth. For each patient’s database of simulated electrophysiological patterns, the difference of each pattern with the patient’s electrophysiological pattern ground truth is calculated. These differences are shown in
a curve which describes the variation of the simulated electrophysiology. The
mean and standard deviation of each curve for each patient are shown in the
legend. The prediction errors in Fig. 5 are shown as horizontal lines with the
values shown in the legend.

VI. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we created patient-specific database of synthetic
sequences in order to learn the cardiac inverse electrokinematic
relationship. In the end, we used the learned relationship to
estimate patient’s LV endocardium electrical activation time.
For each dataset, the prediction error (cf., Fig. 5) is in the order
of 15 ms which represents typically between 21% and 24%
of the total LV endocardium surface activation and between
7% and 14% of the QRS duration. This is reasonable given
the spatial and temporal accuracy of the invasive intracardiac
mapping systems and even more compared to the accuracy of
noninvasive ECGI systems.
A current limitation of the method is the spatial resolution of
the predicted map. The spatial resolution of the estimated activation pattern could be increased to more than 17 regions as the
electromechanical model spatial resolution is much finer. However, given the resolution of the images and the uncertainty on
the invasive EP data (due to acquisition and registration errors),
predicting depolarization times at a greater spatial resolution
would be difficult to validate with the current data. However,
the modeling and the learning phases can handle higher resolution data; therefore, the method would be unchanged. We are
working on acquiring higher resolution contact maps to allow
us to have a better validation for a finer model.
The prediction error is also smaller compared to the
average error in the database (cf., Fig. 6). Patient I:
11.20 ms < 13.74 ms, Patient II: 13.51 ms < 16.28 ms, Patient
III: 22.42 ms < 26.99 ms. This shows the proper behavior of

PRAKOSA et al.: CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVATION PATTERN ESTIMATION FROM IMAGES

the LS-SVM method since it basically consists in interpolating
the depolarization times of the entries in the learning set that
are closest to the input kinematics descriptors. Ideally, a measure of confidence in the prediction should be provided, but the
LS-SVM regression method does not provide any covariance on
the activation times. Covariance can only be estimated on the
activation parameters if covariance on the motion descriptors is
available which is not the case here.
With this learning process, the prediction error combines several types of possible errors: noise in the noncontact mapping
acquisition, errors in the learning process, errors in modeling
the cardiac electromechanics, and discretization errors. Due to
the noncontact nature of the mapping, it is often difficult to have
an accurate match between the electrophysiology maps and the
endocardial surface reconstructed from MR imaging. For example for Patient II, there is an uncertainty in the ground truth
data since the latest activated area is not in the region where the
scar is. Applying 30 ◦ of clockwise rotation to the ground truth
data would make the scarred region last activated and reduce
the prediction error from 13.51 to 8.73 ms. The learning error
mostly depends on the size of the electrophysiology scenarios
as they should be vast enough to include the actual pathology of
the patient. In this paper, we have restricted ourselves to LBBB
cases with five parameter categories (onset position, conduction
velocity. . .) leading to between 144 and 180 simulated cases.
Adding more hypothesis of electrophysiology parameters in the
training set would help capturing more complex electrophysiology and kinematics patterns. However, this would also lead
to a much increased number of simulations, and therefore, a
tradeoff must be found between the range of pathologies and
the computational requirements.
Then, prediction errors also depend on the accuracy of the
electrophysiology model. For instance, applying an automated
personalization method [39] of an electrophysiology model on
the three patients’ datasets described previously leads to errors
of 10.19, 9.19, and 16.51 ms, respectively. These errors after
personalization capture the combined effect of acquisition, discretization, and model errors. Given that the prediction errors
are, respectively, 11.20, 13.51, and 22.42 ms, it appears that
the errors due to the learning process are relatively small. To
decrease further those errors may require to use a more complex electrophysiological model or a finer mesh. However, it
is probable that improving the acquisition protocol leading to
higher spatial resolution would be most beneficial. In practice,
obtaining ground truth electrophysiology data is currently difficult due to the invasive nature of the endocardial mapping
systems. Using less invasive electrophysiology data from body
surface potential mapping would allow to broaden the number
of test cases.
In addition, to decrease the prediction errors, it is important
that the electromechanical model produces realistic simulations
of the cardiac motion. This not only implies that the cardiac
physiology is well described by the chosen E/M model, but it
also means that this model is sufficiently well personalized. In
our approach, the chosen E/M has been shown to produce realistic simulations of the cardiac motion and also shown good predictive behavior for the electrophysiology and mechanics [40].

243

Furthermore, in this paper, we have performed four different
mechanical calibrations for each onset position, in order to have
similar volume curves between the simulation and the patient
data. To improve the prediction, one would probably need to
perform a calibration and even a personalization of the mechanical parameters for each electrophysiology scenario. Indeed, the
calibration stage only tries to match the endocardial volume
curves whereas the personalization stage tries to match more
regional or local kinematic indices (regional volume curves, estimated displacement, etc.). The weighting of the descriptors
was learned on the simulated database; therefore, it is important
that the link between electromechanics and deformation is well
captured by the model. Any improvement of the model can be
readily used in this method by rerunning the learning phase.
The learning phase will be also influenced by the observability of the deformation features in the motion extracted from the
simulated images. Any improvement in cardiac motion tracking
from images would help in better learning the link between the
simulations and the resulting features. More sophisticated methods for cardiac motion analysis, e.g., atlas-based ones, could be
used as input to the learning process; however, they still need
a large-scale validation; therefore, we focused here on motion
descriptors already available in a clinical setting.
One limitation of this paper is that the created database is
patient-specific. Therefore, numerous simulations need to be
performed in order to predict another patient’s depolarization
time. Currently, predictions from one training set built from
one patient does not generalize to another patient because of the
difference in their kinematic descriptors. The use of an atlas may
overcome this limitation but meaningful strategies to transport
the kinematic descriptors between patients have to be found.
VII. CONCLUSION
As the generated synthetic cardiac MR sequences have electrokinematic “ground truth” information, we have performed
an inverse electrokinematic learning on this patient-specific
database. Invariant kinematic descriptors were extracted from
the displacement field obtained from the sequence registration.
The nonlinear inverse relationship between the electrical activation times and the kinematic descriptors was modeled using
LS-SVM. Evaluation of the learning process for the database
of synthetic sequence shows good generalization and a first
evaluation on three clinical MR sequences shows encouraging
results.
We presented here results on patients with an LBBB in order to reduce the span of possible onset locations and have a
relatively slower propagation (large QRS). However, we tested
the method on both ischemic and nonischemic patients. The
results are better for the ischemic patients, as the scar locations are known, while for the nonischemic patients we need to
find where the potential functional block is. Extension of this
method to more complex activation patterns should be possible,
but the evaluation of the observability of such patterns from the
available time resolution of the images has to be explored.
This approach opens the possibility of using noninvasive cardiac motion imaging as a way to estimate electrophysiological

244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

patterns. This could provide additional information to the cardiologist during the optimization of the CRT, for example, allowing the placement of the pacemaker leads in the cardiac region
which is lately activated. An extension of this paper would be the
application of this method to different imaging modalities. This
can be done since the synthetic sequence generation method
is generic and was already demonstrated for different imaging
modalities [22].

[13]

[14]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank S. Marchesseau and J. Relan
from the Asclepios team, P. Cathier and P. Etyngier from the
Medysis Research Laboratory, and E. Saloux from the Caen
University Hospital for the fruitful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. N. Ghanem, P. Jia, C. Ramanathan, K. Ryu, A. Markowitz, and Y. Rudy,
“Noninvasive electrocardiographic imaging (ECGI): Comparison to intraoperative mapping in patients,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 2, pp. 339–354, Apr.
2005.
[2] C. Ramanathan, R. N. Ghanem, P. Jia, K. Ryu, and Y. Rudy, “Noninvasive
electrocardiographic imaging for cardiac electrophysiology and arrhythmia.,” Nature Med., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 422–428, 2004.
[3] Y. Wang, P. Cuculich, J. Zhang, K. Desouza, R. Vijayakumar, J. Chen,
M. Faddis, B. Lindsay, T. Smith, and Y. Rudy, “Noninvasive electroanatomic mapping of human ventricular arrhythmias with electrocardiographic imaging,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 3, no. 98, p. 98ra84, 2011.
[4] C. Han, S. M. Pogwizd, C. R. Killingsworth, and B. He, “Noninvasive
imaging of three-dimensional cardiac activation sequence during pacing
and ventricular tachycardia,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 1266–1272,
2011.
[5] C. Han, S. M. Pogwizd, C. R. Killingsworth, and B. He, “Noninvasive
reconstruction of the three-dimensional ventricular activation sequence
during pacing and ventricular tachycardia in the canine heart,” Amer. J.
Physiol. Heart Circulat. Physiol., vol. 302, no. 1, pp. H244–H252, 2012.
[6] C. Liu, N. Skadsberg, S. Ahlberg, C. Swingen, P. Iaizzo, and B. He,
“Estimation of global ventricular activation sequences by noninvasive
three-dimensional electrical imaging: Validation studies in a swine model
during pacing,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 535–540,
2008.
[7] X. Zhang, I. Ramachandra, Z. Liu, B. Muneer, S. M. Pogwizd, and B. He,
“Noninvasive three-dimensional electrocardiographic imaging of ventricular activation sequence,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circulat. Physiol.,
vol. 289, no. 6, pp. H2724–H2732, Dec. 2005.
[8] T. Berger, G. Fischer, B. Pfeifer, R. Modre, F. Hanser, T. Trieb,
F. Roithinger, M. Stuehlinger, O. Pachinger, B. Tilg, and F. Hintringer,
“Single-beat noninvasive imaging of cardiac electrophysiology of ventricular pre-excitation.,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 2045–
2052, 2006.
[9] R. H. Helm, M. Byrne, P. A. Helm, S. K. Daya, N. F. Osman, R. Tunin,
H. R. Halperin, R. D. Berger, D. A. Kass, and A. C. Lardo, “Threedimensional mapping of optimal left ventricular pacing site for cardiac
resynchronization,” Circulation, vol. 115, pp. 953–961, Feb. 2007.
[10] M. Sohal, A. Shetty, S. Duckett, Z. Chen, E. Sammut, S. Amraoui, G. CarrWhite, R. Razavi, and C. A. Rinaldi, “Non-invasive assessment of left
ventricular contraction patterns using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
to identify responders to cardiac resynchronization therapy,” J. Amer.
College Cardiol.: Cardiovasc. Imag., vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 864–873, 2013.
[11] K. McLeod, A. Prakosa, T. Mansi, M. Sermesant, and X. Pennec, “An incompressible log-domain demons algorithm for tracking heart tissue,”
in Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart: Imaging and Modelling Challenges (Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series), O. Camara, E. Konukoglu, M. Pop, K. Rhode, M. Sermesant, and
A. Young, Eds. Toronto, ON, Canada: Springer-Verlag, Sep. 2012, no.
7085, pp. 55–67.
[12] C. Tobon-Gomez, M. D. Craene, A. Dahl, S. Kapetanakis, G. Carr-White,
A. Lutz, V. Rasche, P. Etyngier, S. Kozerke, T. Schaeffter, C. Riccobene,

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]

Y. Martelli, O. Camara, A. F. Frangi, and K. S. Rhode, “A multimodal
database for the 1st cardiac motion analysis challenge,” in Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart: Imaging and Modelling
Challenges, vol. 7085, (Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series),
O. Camara, E. Konukoglu, M. Pop, K. Rhode, M. Sermesant, and
A. Young, Eds.
Toronto, ON, Canada: Springer-Verlag, 2012, pp.
33–44.
T. Mansi, X. Pennec, M. Sermesant, H. Delingette, and N. Ayache,
“iLogDemons: A demons-based registration algorithm for tracking incompressible elastic biological tissues,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 92,
pp. 92–111, 2011.
A. Elen, H. F. Choi, D. Loeckx, H. Gao, P. Claus, P. Suetens, F. Maes, and
J. D’hooge, “Three-dimensional cardiac strain estimation using spatiotemporal elastic registration of ultrasound images: A feasibility study,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1580–1591, Nov. 2008.
A. Prakosa, M. Sermesant, H. Delingette, E. Saloux, P. Allain, P. Cathier,
P. Etyngier, N. Villain, and N. Ayache, “Synthetic echocardiographic
image sequences for cardiac inverse electro-kinematic learning,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, vol. 6891,
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series), G. Fichtinger, A. Martel,
and T. Peters, Eds. Toronto, ON, Canada: Springer-Verlag, Sep. 2011,
pp. 500–507.
A. Prakosa, M. Sermesant, H. Delingette, E. Saloux, P. Allain, P. Cathier,
P. Etyngier, N. Villain, and N. Ayache, “Non-invasive activation times
estimation using 3D echocardiography,” in Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart, vol. 6364, (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science Series), O. Camara, M. Pop, K. Rhode, M. Sermesant, N. Smith,
and A. Young, Eds. Beijing, China: Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 212–221.
N. Otani, S. Luther, R. Singh, and R. Gilmour, “Transmural ultrasoundbased visualization of patterns of action potential wave propagation in
cardiac tissue,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, pp. 3112–3123, 2010.
J. Provost, W. Lee, K. Fujikura, and E. Konofagou, “Electromechanical
wave imaging of normal and ischemic hearts in vivo,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imag., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 625–635, Mar. 2010.
G. Sanchez-Ortiz, M. Sermesant, R. Chandrashekara, K. Rhode,
R. Razavi, D. Hill, and D. Rueckert, “Detecting the onset of myocardial contraction for establishing inverse electro-mechanical coupling in
XMR guided RF ablation,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Arlington,
TX, USA, 2004, pp. 1055–1058.
E. E. Konofagou and J. Provost, “Electromechanical wave imaging for
noninvasive mapping of the 3D electrical activation sequence in canines
and humans in vivo,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 856–864, 2012,
special Issue on Cardiovascular Solid Mechanics.
J. Provost, V. Gurev, N. Trayanova, and E. E. Konofagou, “Mapping of
cardiac electrical activation with electromechanical wave imaging: An in
silico in vivo reciprocity study,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 752–759,
2011.
A. Prakosa, M. Sermesant, H. Delingette, S. Marchesseau, E. Saloux,
P. Allain, N. Villain, and N. Ayache, “Generation of synthetic but visually
realistic time series of cardiac images combining a biophysical model and
clinical images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 99–109, Jan.
2013.
C. Tobon-Gomez, C. Butakoff, S. Aguade, F. Sukno, G. Moragas, and
A. Frangi, “Automatic construction of 3D-ASM intensity models by simulating image acquisition: Application to myocardial gated SPECT studies,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1655–1667, Nov. 2008.
E. R. McVeigh, F. W. Prinzen, B. T. Wyman, J. E. Tsitlik, H. R. Halperin,
and W. C. Hunter, “Imaging asynchronous mechanical activation of the
paced heart with tagged MRI,” Magnet. Reson. Med., vol. 39, pp. 507–513,
Apr. 1998.
S. Marchesseau, H. Delingette, M. Sermesant, and N. Ayache, “Fast
parameter calibration of a cardiac electromechanical model from medical
images based on the unscented transform,” in Biomechanics and Modeling
in Mechanobiology. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2012.
N. Toussaint, T. Mansi, H. Delingette, N. Ayache, and M. Sermesant, “An
integrated platform for dynamic cardiac simulation and image processing:
Application to personalised tetralogy of fallot simulation,” presented at
the Eurograph. Workshop Vis. Comput. Biomed., Delft, The Netherlands,
2008.
L. Rineau, S. Tayeb, and M. Yvinec, “3D mesh generation,” in CGAL
User and Reference Manual, 3rd ed. CGAL Editorial Board, 2009.
T. Vercauteren, X. Pennec, A. Perchant, and N. Ayache, “Symmetric logdomain diffeomorphic registration: A demons-based approach,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted InterventionMICCAI, vol.
5241, (Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series), D. Metaxas, L. Axel,

PRAKOSA et al.: CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVATION PATTERN ESTIMATION FROM IMAGES

[29]
[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]

G. Fichtinger, and G. Székely, Eds. New York, NY, USA: SpringerVerlag, Sep. 2008, pp. 754–761.
K. Ten Tusscher, D. Noble, P. Noble, and A. Panfilov, “A model for human
ventricular tissue,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 286, pp. H1573–H1589, 2004.
C. C. Mitchell and D. G. Schaeffer, “A two current model for the dynamics
of cardiac membrane,” Bull. Math. Biol., vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 767–793, 2003.
M. Sermesant, E. Konukoglu, H. Delingette, Y. Coudiere,
P. Chinchaptanam, K. Rhode, R. Razavi, and N. Ayache, “An
anisotropic multi-front fast marching method for real-time simulation of
cardiac electrophysiology,” in Functional Imaging and Modeling of the
Heart, vol. 4466, (Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series), Jun. 7–9,
2007, pp. 160–169.
D. Chapelle, P. Le Tallec, P. Moireau, and M. Sorine, “An energypreserving muscle tissue model: Formulation and compatible discretizations,” Int. J. Multiscale Computat. Eng., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 189–211,
2012.
F. Faure, C. Duriez, H. Delingette, J. Allard, B. Gilles, S. Marchesseau,
H. Talbot, H. Courtecuisse, G. Bousquet, I. Peterlik, and S. Cotin, “Sofa:
A multi-model framework for interactive physical simulation,” in Soft
Tissue Biomechanical Modeling for Computer Assisted Surgery, vol. 11,
(Studies in Mechanobiology, Tissue Engineering and Biomaterials Series),
Y. Payan, Ed. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2012, pp. 283–
321.
S. Julier and J. Uhlmann, “A new extension of the Kalman filter to nonlinear systems,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Aerosp./Defense Sensing, Simulat.
Controls, 1997, vol. 3, pp. 182–193.
S. Marchesseau, H. Delingette, M. Sermesant, K. Rhode, S. Duckett,
C. Rinaldi, R. Razavi, and N. Ayache, “Cardiac mechanical parameter calibration based on the unscented transform,” in Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention, vol. 7511, (Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series), N. Ayache, H. Delingette, P. Golland, and K. Mori,
Eds. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, Oct. 2012, pp. 41–48.

245

[36] G. C. Cawley, “Leave-one-out cross-validation based model selection criteria for weighted LS-SVMs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2006, pp. 1661–1668.
[37] M. J. D. Powell, “The BOBYQA algorithm for bound constrained optimization without derivatives,” Dept. Appl. Math. Theoretical Phys., Cambridge, U.K. Tech. Rep. NA2009/06, Aug. 2009.
[38] S. G. Johnson. (2012). The NLopt nonlinear-optimization package. [Online]. Available: http://ab-initio.mit.edu/nlopt
[39] J. Relan, M. Pop, H. Delingette, G. Wright, N. Ayache, and M. Sermesant,
“Personalisation of a cardiac electrophysiology model using optical mapping and MRI for prediction of changes with pacing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3339–3349, Dec. 2011.
[40] M. Sermesant, R. Chabiniok, P. Chinchapatnam, T. Mansi, F. Billet,
P. Moireau, J. Peyrat, K. Wong, J. Relan, K. Rhode, M. Ginks, P. Lambiase,
H. Delingette, M. Sorine, C. Rinaldi, D. Chapelle, R. Razavi, and
N. Ayache, “Patient-specific electromechanical models of the heart for
the prediction of pacing acute effects in CRT: A preliminary clinical validation,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 201–215, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

