IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

279

Real-Time, Simultaneous Myoelectric Control Using
Force and Position-Based Training Paradigms
Ali Ameri, Student Member, IEEE, Erik J. Scheme, Member, IEEE, Ernest Nlandu Kamavuako, Member, IEEE,
Kevin B. Englehart∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, and Philip A. Parker, Life Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, the simultaneous real-time control of
multiple degrees of freedom (DOF) for myoelectric systems is investigated. The goal of this study, in which ten able-bodied subjects
participated, was to directly compare three control paradigms
of constrained (force targeted), unconstrained (position targeted)
and resisted unconstrained (position targeted) limb contractions.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) were trained for simultaneous myoelectric control of the three degrees of freedom (DOFs)
(wrist flexion–extension, abduction–adduction, and pronation–
supination) using mirrored bilateral contractions. In the resisted
unconstrained experiment, some resistance to movement was provided using flexible wrist braces in order to increase the required level of muscle activation. The force, in constrained experiments, and position, in unconstrained and resisted unconstrained experiments, were measured. The three protocols were
compared off-line using estimation accuracies (R2 ) and online
using a real-time computer-based target acquisition test. The constrained control paradigm outperformed the unconstrained method
in the abduction–adduction DOF (Rc2o n stra in e d = 90.8 ± 0.6,
Ru2 n c o n stra in e d = 85.6 ± 1.6) and pronation–supination DOF
(Rc2o n stra in e d = 88.5 ± 0.9, Ru2 n c o n stra in e d = 82.3 ± 1.6), but no
significant difference was found in the flexion–extension DOF. The
constrained control method outperformed unconstrained control
in two real-time testing metrics including completion time and path
efficiency. The constrained method results, however, were not significantly different than those of the resisted unconstrained method
(with braces) in both off-line and real-time tests. This suggests
that the quality of control using constrained and unconstrained
contraction-based myoelectric schemes is not appreciably different when using comparable levels of muscle activation.
Index Terms—Constrained contractions, electromyogram, myoelectric control, powered prostheses, unconstrained contractions.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

CONSIDERABLE amount of work has been performed
using the surface electromyogram (EMG) to control my-

Manuscript received May 28, 2013; revised August 14, 2013; accepted
September 7, 2013. Date of publication September 16, 2013; date of current
version January 16, 2014. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) under NSERC Discovery
Grant 217354-10 and Grant A4445-2004. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Ameri, E. J. Scheme, and P. A. Parker are with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of
New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB E3B 5A3, Canada (e-mail: ali.ameri@unb.ca;
escheme@unb.ca; pap@unb.ca).
∗ K. B. Englehart is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of New Brunswick,
Fredericton, NB E3B 5A3, Canada (e-mail: kengleha@unb.ca).
E. N. Kamavuako is with the Department of Health Science and Technology, Center for Sensory-Motor Interaction, Aalborg University, Aalborg 9220,
Denmark (e-mail: enk@hst.aau.dk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2281595

oelectric prostheses [1], robot manipulators [2] and computerbased avatars [3] or virtual limbs [4]. With this approach, the
user must perform contractions using selected muscle groups
that form the basis of control input. In the case of an intact limb,
the limb may be constrained (unable to move, with control imparted by varying force), or unconstrained (movement allowed,
with control imparted by varying position and possibly force).
The intent of the user can be estimated from the surface EMG,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. Once the user intent has been estimated,
this must be translated into some functional manifestation by
using an appropriate control scheme. For myoelectric prostheses, the control scheme typically employs velocity control, in
which the intensity of effort is proportional to the velocity of a
device. Robot manipulators can afford greater complexity, and
consequently often use feedback control to implement a position control scheme, mapping the intensity of the EMG to a
desired position or joint angle. Computer-based training and
rehabilitation tools have employed both velocity and position
control [5], [6].
There have been several strategies employed to estimate user
intent. The simplest, termed conventional control, typically involves estimating the EMG amplitude [7] or rate of change [8]
from one or two muscles to determine the direction and speed
of a device. This cannot be extended to the control of more than
one DOF without some means of “mode switching” (usually a
contraction burst or hardware toggle), resulting in an awkward
means of multi-DOF manipulation [9].
To address this issue, the classification of EMG using pattern recognition techniques has been investigated for more than
30 years (e.g., [10]–[14]). Pattern recognition systems are based
on the assumption that EMG features from a given electrode location are repeatable for a given state of muscle group activation,
and are different from one state of activation to another [15].
Such systems can potentially control more DOFs than conventional approaches because they do not need a one-to-one
mapping between the DOF and control site [14].
Most pattern recognition-based approaches described in the
literature do not inherently provide proportional control. Although recent work has proposed methods for its inclusion
(e.g., [16], [17]), it has the effect of compromising classification accuracy. Furthermore, pattern recognition-based approaches do not typically accommodate combined motions, and
thus the selection of DOFs is sequential. Recent preliminary
work [18], [19] has investigated the use of pattern recognition
for control of combined (simultaneous) DOFs. Despite these
modifications however, a classification-based approach combining both aspects of simultaneous and proportional control of

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

280

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Hierarchical levels of myoelectric control; control scheme typically use position or velocity control.

multiple DOFs has yet to be developed. Using current pattern
recognition-based control methods, a user is required to perform movements sequentially in order to complete a given task,
which imposes significant motor planning challenges, and prevents fluid life-like motions.
This has motivated the mapping of EMG to a continuous representation of user intent (such as force or position) so that the
simultaneous activation of multiple DOF can be estimated. In the
case of robotic teleoperation (e.g., [20]), the user’s limb is intact,
so that the EMG and the force/position target can be acquired
from the controlling limb. In the case of upper limb prostheses,
the amputee is unable to produce movement or force with the
absent limb. A strategy (applicable to unilateral amputees) to
accommodate this is to have the amputees generate mirrored
bilateral contractions with the intact (contralateral) limb producing the movement/force target. The consistency in EMG
between the upper limbs is motivated by the observation that
a significant correlation exists between the left and right upper
limb motions during mirrored bilateral maximal and submaximal contractions [21]. As well, a high correlation between the
movement-related cortical potentials (MRCP) recorded from the
left and right motor areas during mirrored bilateral maximal and
submaximal contractions has been reported [21]. This high correlation indicates the interneuronal connectivity between both
motor areas linked by common inputs [21].
In force targeted experiments (with constrained limb contractions), Jiang et al. [22] proposed a semi-unsupervised
method using nonnegative matrix factorization to estimate from
EMG the wrist force in the three DOF of flexion–extension,
abduction–addcution, and ponation–supination. This method
did not require force data for training, and therefore was applicable to bilateral amputees. The performance however, was
poor in pronation–supination. Nielsen et al. [23] employed mirrored training to estimate the force in two wrist DOF (flexion–
extension and abduction–adduction). Castellini et al. [24] estimated grasp force with unilateral amputee subjects using mirrored training. Kamavuako et al. [25] tested mirrored training
on intramuscular EMG to estimate grasp force.
In position-targeted experiments (with unconstrained limb
contractions), Artemiadis and Kyriakopoulos [20] estimated position in four DOF of the shoulder and elbow joints for a robotic
application. Using mirrored training, Sebelius et al. [26] estimated finger joint angles with unilateral amputees. Muceli
et al. [27] estimated joint angles for wrist DOF as well as hand
close-open using mirrored training [28]. Jiang et al. [29] employed mirrored training to estimate joint angles in wrist DOF
with healthy and amputee subjects.
Previous works ([22], [23], [28]) have investigated constrained and unconstrained contractions using prerecorded data,

and consequently the interaction of the user with the control
system is absent. A simple correlation (R2 ) between the actual
and estimated force/position of off-line data were used to assess
estimation accuracy. The novelty of the present work is that
it compares, to our best knowledge, for the first time control
strategies based on constrained and unconstrained contractions
in a real-time target acquisition paradigm with user feedback,
which offers much greater insight regarding the usability of the
two approaches in user intent estimation.
Although the focus of this paper is prosthetic control, the process of intent estimation is relevant to other applications (such
as robotic control and human computer interfaces). Therefore,
for generality and to enable quantitative comparisons, the user
intent was mapped to the position of a cursor on a computer
screen. The position modality was selected instead of velocity control (as is often used in prosthetics) because it allows a
more direct evaluation of control quality. In this case, acquisition of targets with different amplitudes evaluates the output
magnitude, while targets with combinations of DOF assess the
efficacy of simultaneous control. This metaphor is often used
in commercial myoelectric training software [6]. It should be
noted, however, that while often slower, the velocity control is
easier for a user as the cursor movements are smoother. Also,
maintaining the cursor on a target requires the user to stop moving (the no motion command) in velocity control, whereas in a
position modality, a user has to continuously contract in order
to keep the cursor on a target. This paper is an extension of a
pilot study presented in [30].
II. METHODS
Ten able-bodied subjects (ages: 24–39, all right handed)
participated in this study. The experimental protocol was
approved by the University of New Brunswick’s research
ethics board. Three DOFs including wrist flexion-extension,
abduction-adduction, and forearm pronation-supination were
investigated. Eight bipolar wireless surface electrodes (Delsys
Inc.) were attached to each arm, equally spaced around the
circumference of the forearm. The electrodes were placed at approximately one-third of the forearm length, measured from the
olecranon of ulna. The EMG data were sampled at 1 kHz using
a 16-bit A/D converter (NI PCIe-6363). The protocol involved
both constrained and unconstrained experiments conducted in
separate sessions with random order. Each session consisted of
a training protocol and the completion of a real-time tracking
test, separated by 5 min of rest. Fourteen contractions were
used in the experiments, as listed in Table I. Pilot work showed
that performing consistent organized contractions with combinations of all three DOFs was difficult for subjects (especially in

AMERI et al.: REAL-TIME, SIMULTANEOUS MYOELECTRIC CONTROL USING FORCE AND POSITION-BASED TRAINING PARADIGMS

281

TABLE I
PRACTICAL CONTRACTIONS OF WRIST AND FOREARM INCLUDED
IN THE PROTOCOL

Fig. 2. (a) Constrained experiment apparatus, (b) the force/torque transducer
was positioned between the left handle and steel frame such that its three axes
were aligned to wrist flexion–extension, abduction–adduction, and pronation–
supination. The torque exerted on the force/torque transducer was measured.

unconstrained experiments). Therefore, these contractions were
not included in the protocol. Signal acquisition and analysis was
conducted using MATLAB (Mathworks, Inc.) on a 3.30 GHz Intel Optiplex 990 workstation. The display adapter was an AMD
Radeon HD 6670.
A. Training Protocol
1) Constrained Experiment: Subjects sat in a chair, with
arms secured to armrests. The hands were fixed in a neutral
position with palms facing inward using two vertical handles
attached to a steel frame mounted in front of the chair (see
Fig. 2). A commercially available three-axis force/torque transducer (Gamma FT-130–10, ATI Industries) was mounted between the left handle and the steel frame, so that the x-axis corresponded to flexion–extension, y-axis to abduction–adduction,
and z-axis to pronation–supination. The torque exerted on the
force/torque transducer was recorded at 1 kHz using a 12-bit
A/D converter (NI PCI-6024E). The force/torque transducer
resolution was approximately 0.001 N.m, so the measurement
error was assumed to be negligible in the range of wrist force.
To provide subjects with real-time force feedback, the force
transducer output was displayed on a computer screen using a cursor with orientation. The flexion–extension DOF
was mapped to the horizontal position of the cursor, while
abduction–adduction was mapped to the vertical displacement. The orientation angle of the cursor was determined by
pronation–supination. The system was calibrated before each
trial, so that no motion resulted in a cursor located at the center of the screen with vertical orientation. The EMG from both
arms and the force of the left (nondominant) upper limb were
recorded concurrently.
The protocol involved 14 trials associated with the 14 practical contractions listed in Table I. The subjects were asked to per-

form mirrored bilateral constrained contractions. In each trial,
a picture of the requested contraction was displayed. To standardize the maximum applied force among the subjects, a fixed
target representing a medium force level (of constant magnitude
for all subjects and directions) corresponding to the requested
contraction was highlighted on the screen. Each movement was
6 s in duration and included approximately 1 s of initial no
motion, 1 s of movement towards the target, 2 s of holding the
contraction, 1 s of returning to no motion, followed by holding no motion for the remaining time. Each trial involved four
repetitions of a movement.
2) Unconstrained Experiment: Two experimental methods
were conducted in random order for the unconstrained experiment. The first experiment was performed without wrist braces.
In the second setup, the subjects were fitted with a pair of flexible
wrist braces [see Fig. 3(a)] used to provide nominal resistance
during wrist movements (resisted unconstrained protocol). Adjustable straps were tightened to provide a desired resistance for
the experiment. The reduction in range of motion caused by the
wrist braces was negligible.
The inclusion of the resisted unconstrained protocol was motivated by the observation that EMG levels were low during pilot
unconstrained experiments. Previously, Muceli and Farina [28]
acknowledged this issue and attempted to accommodate it by
using wrist orientation to employ gravity as an opposing force.
The use of wrist braces in this experiment was intended to provide roughly uniform resistance in all DOFs. The wrist braces
were chosen such that EMG levels observed during pilot work
were similar to those elicited during the constrained protocol.
The subjects sat in a chair with armrests supporting both
arms. In a neutral state (no motion), the subjects rested their
forearms with palms facing inward. Six reflective ball shaped
markers with a diameter of 15 mm were attached to the left

282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 3. (a) Wrist brace used in the resisted unconstrained experiment and
(b) marker locations in the unconstrained experiment.
TABLE II
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR EACH PROTOCOL IS SHOWN

(nondominant) upper limb at the medial and lateral epicondyles
of the humerus, the styloid processes of the radius and ulna, the
radial head of the second metacarpal bone and the ulnar head of
the fifth metacarpal bone, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The positions
of the markers were captured by a Vicon 512 system using 8
infrared video cameras recording at 60 Hz. The motion capture
system resolution was approximately 2 mm, so the measurement error is assumed to be negligible in the range of wrist
movements. The motion capture system was synchronized with
the EMG collection system using a digital trigger through a PC
serial port. The EMG from both arms and position of the left
(nondominant) limb was recorded simultaneously.
The protocol involved 14 trials corresponding to the 14 contractions listed in Table I. The subjects were asked to focus
on performing mirrored bilateral unconstrained contractions. In
each trial, a picture of the requested contraction was shown on
the screen. Other than the modality, the protocol was as similar
to the constrained experiment as possible. Subjects were asked
to use a comfortable full range of motion in each DOF. Table II
summarizes the experimental setup for each protocol.
B. Data Processing
Data processing was conducted off-line. The EMG data were
bandpass filtered using an third order Butterworth filter between
10 and 400 Hz, after which the time-domain (TD) features (comprising mean absolute value, zero crossings, slope signs changes,

and waveform length) were extracted using a 200-ms window
length with an increment of 50 ms. The EMG TD features have
been shown to be effective in representing surface EMG for pattern recognition [10] and outperform the mean absolute value
alone [23] in force estimation.
Wrist joint angles for each DOF were calculated from the
marker traces as explained in [27]. The measured force and position were lowpass filtered using a third order Butterworth filter
with cutoff frequency of 1 Hz [31]. Subsequently, the average
value of the force/position over the window was calculated. To
map the EMG to the corresponding force/position, a separate
multilayer perceptron ANN was used for each DOF, as this was
shown in pilot work to outperform a single ANN. For each
limb, a separate set of ANNs were trained with that limb EMG
TD features as the inputs and the left limb force (constrained
experiment) or joint angle (unconstrained experiments) as the
target. The case in which the EMG and force/position were acquired from the same limb (ipsilateral) is expected to be the best
case scenario for force/position mapping as it is not degraded
by imperfections in the bilateral mirroring process. It should
be noted that for applications such as prosthesis control, however, force/position would have to be acquired from the opposite
(contralateral) limb.
A four-fold cross-validation procedure was used to evaluate
the performance, where three out of four movement repetitions
in each trial were used as the training set and the remaining
repetition was used as the test set (training: 75%, testing: 25%).
All data containing both static and dynamic segments were included. The ANN structure, which was determined empirically,
included one hidden layer of five neurons, with the hidden and
output layers having sigmoid and linear activation functions,
respectively. Levenberg–Marquardt backpropagation was used
as the training method. The estimated output was lowpass filtered (cutoff = 1 Hz) to match the target frequency content.
The performance of each DOF was assessed using the coefficient of determination (R2 ) as employed in previous studies [22], [23], [28]
2
N  
fi (t)−fi (t)
t=0
Ri2 = 1 − 
(1)

2
N
f
(t)
−
f
(t)
i
i
t=0
where fi (t) is the force/angle of the ith DOF, f
i (t) is the corresponding estimate from the ANN, fi (t) is the temporal average
of fi (t), Ni is the number of data samples, and Ri2 is the coefficient of determination of the ith DOF.
C. Target Acquisition Test
A target acquisition test for each experiment (constrained,
unconstrained, and resisted unconstrained) was conducted to
evaluate the performance in a real-time usability test (see Fig. 4).
This test was performed on the right (dominant) upper limb, using the ANNs trained with the right arm EMG as input and
contralateral (left) force/position as target in the training protocol. During the test, the normalized estimated force/position
in the three DOFs from the right arm EMG was mapped to the

AMERI et al.: REAL-TIME, SIMULTANEOUS MYOELECTRIC CONTROL USING FORCE AND POSITION-BASED TRAINING PARADIGMS

283

TABLE III
TARGET ACQUISITION TEST PERFORMANCE METRICS

Fig. 4. Trace of the cursor (filled) movement towards a target (black, not
filled) is shown during a target acquisition test. The target in this example case
corresponds to simultaneous wrist extension and supination.

position and orientation of a control cursor as described earlier.
The estimated angles for each direction (two directions for each
DOF) were normalized by the subject’s maximum joint angles
in that direction in training. Similarly, the estimated forces in
each direction were normalized using the maximum target magnitude in training to correspond to the percent deviation from
rest. Consequently, a normalized estimated force/position of
unity magnitude in a given direction resulted in full range cursor displacement (with unity magnitude) in the corresponding
direction. The estimations and screen update were performed
every 100 ms, limited by numerical processing and graphics
rendering delays, respectively.
During the test, a fixed target was displayed on the screen,
and the subjects were required to reach the target as quickly as
possible. A picture of the required contraction(s) was also presented. A target was successfully acquired when the user kept
the location and orientation of the cursor within a specified tolerance for a full second (dwell time). The tolerance region was
defined as a three-dimensional (3-D) Euclidean distance from
the target of less than 15% of full range (determined empirically
to yield a reasonable difficulty usable for all subjects). The 3-D
distance between the cursor and target was stated in percentage of full range as the cursor displacements were normalized.
Consequently, the accuracy of each direction was assessed in
comparison to its full range (using relative error as opposed to
absolute error), which was also the case in off-line estimation
accuracies (this is important because for example, in unconstrained experiments the ranges of flexion and abduction are
substantially different). As feedback, the cursor color changed
if the cursor was within the target tolerance.
If the task was not completed within 10 s, the target timed
out and was considered unsuccessful. Each trial included 14
consecutive targets corresponding to the contractions of Table I
with randomized order. A 2 s rest time was provided between the
two successive targets as the subjects were prompted to return
to the neutral position. The test included four trials, with target
magnitudes of 90%, 70%, 50%, and 30% of full range.
A target acquisition test was also conducted using the force
transducer to control the cursor directly. The output was lowpass filtered with the same filter used in other protocols. This

test was included to provide a baseline for the force estimation
protocol. Since the position data recorded by the motion capture
system (Vicon 512) were not accessible in real-time, a similar
unconstrained test was unfeasible.
A set of performance metrics (completion rate, completion
time, path efficiency, and overshoot) used in [32]–[34] was employed as described in Table III. These measures capture various
aspects of the control quality.
D. Statistics
The overall off-line contralateral estimation accuracies (R2 )
were compared between the three protocols (constrained, unconstrained, resisted unconstrained) using a one-way repeatedmeasures analysis of variance (ANOVA) test followed by a
Tukey–Kramer post hoc test. For each DOF, the contralateral
R2 values were compared between the three protocols using the
same procedure. Also, the same tests were used to compare the
target acquisition test results in each metric between the three
protocols. The significance level was set to 0.05.
III. RESULTS
The estimated outputs for a representative subject in the
constrained, resisted unconstrained, and unconstrained experiments (using EMG from the right limb) are plotted in Fig. 5(a)–
(c), respectively. The mean of all DOFs contralateral R2 values
were 89.7% ± 0.5%, 89.5% ± 0.4%, and 85.5% ± 0.9%, for the
constrained, resisted unconstrained, and unconstrained experiments, respectively (the corresponding values for the ipsilateral
case were 91.2% ± 0.4%, 90.7% ± 0.6%, and 87.3% ± 0.7%).
No significant difference was observed for the overall contralateral R2 between the constrained and resisted unconstrained
protocols (p > 0.1), while the constrained overall R2 was statistically higher (p = 0.001) than that of the unconstrained protocol. The estimation accuracy (R2 ) results in each DOF from
all subjects using mean ± standard error are listed in Table IV.
The statistical analysis results for the R2 values of each DOF
are listed in Table V. Based on the results, no significant difference was found between the R2 of the constrained and resisted
unconstrained experiments in any DOF. The R2 value of the
constrained method was found to be significantly better than

284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 5. (a) Constrained experiment; the estimated and measured forces are plotted for a representative subject in the contralateral case. In this example the
R 2 were 95.0% for flexion–extension, 93.0% for abduction, and 83.3% for pronation–supination. Medium force levels were used in the constrained experiment,
(b) Resisted unconstrained experiment; the estimated and measured angles are plotted for a representative subject in the contralateral case. In this example the R 2
were 87.0% for flexion–extension, 87.6% for abduction, and 90.4% for pronation–supination. A comfortable full range of joint angles was used in this experiment.
(c) Unconstrained experiment; the estimated and measured angles in each DOF are plotted for a representative subject in the contralateral case. In this example
the R 2 were 84.9% for flexion–extension, 86.3% for abduction, and 87.5% for pronation–supination. A comfortable full range of joint angles was used in this
experiment.
TABLE IV
ESTIMATION ACCURACIES R 2 (%) RESULTS OF EACH DOF FOR THE
CONTRALATERAL CASE ARE LISTED USING MEAN ± STANDARD ERROR

TABLE VI
TARGET ACQUISITION TEST RESULTS ARE SHOWN USING
MEAN ± STANDARD ERROR

TABLE V
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS RESULTS OF THE OFF-LINE CONTRALATERAL R 2
VALUES OF EACH DOF

that of the unconstrained method for the abduction–adduction
and pronation–supination DOF, but no significant difference was
found in the flexion–extension DOF. Fig. 6(a) and (b) depicts
a 3-D representation (with cursor orientation shown in the Z-

direction for visualization purposes) of path traces in the target
acquisition test for a representative subject in the constrained
and unconstrained experiments (only the first eight acquired
targets are shown for clarity).
The target acquisition test results from all subjects are shown
in Table VI using mean ± standard error for constrained, unconstrained, and resisted unconstrained protocols as well as the test
where the cursor was controlled directly by the force transducer.
The statistical analysis results for each performance metric are
listed in Table VII. The results show that the constrained and
resisted unconstrained protocols results were not different for
any real-time metric. As well, the results of the constrained

AMERI et al.: REAL-TIME, SIMULTANEOUS MYOELECTRIC CONTROL USING FORCE AND POSITION-BASED TRAINING PARADIGMS

285

IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 6. 3-D representation of path traces for a representative subject in the
target acquisition test; the first eight acquired targets are shown for clarity:
(a) constrained experiment and (b) unconstrained experiment.
TABLE VII
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS RESULTS OF THE TARGET ACQUISITION TEST METRICS

experiment in completion rate and overshoot were not different
from those of the unconstrained protocol. However, the constrained experiment completion time and path efficiency outperformed those of the unconstrained experiment.

The constrained and unconstrained experiments estimation
accuracies (R2 ) were comparable to those reported in previous
studies [27], [29], [36]. Also, as expected, the performance of
the ipsilateral case was higher than the contralateral case, which
is consistent with the previous work [23].
The wrist braces in the resisted unconstrained protocol were
used to increase the level of muscle activity during contractions.
The wrist braces were selected such that the observed EMG levels were similar to those of the constrained experiment in the
pilot work that made it possible to make a more fair comparison
between the constrained and unconstrained protocols. The overall R2 in the unconstrained experiment was significantly lower
than that of constrained experiment, while that of the resisted
unconstrained protocol was not. This may be due to the low level
of effort with no external resistance that may reduce the usable
information content of the EMG signals at the surface. Using
wrist braces in the resisted unconstrained experiment increased
the EMG level, so that the estimation accuracies improved to a
level similar to those of the constrained protocol.
The unconstrained protocol performance was inferior to that
of the constrained experiment in the completion time and path
efficiency. Again, this may be attributed to the fact that the
EMG was not sufficiently large in the unconstrained experiment
and caused estimation accuracy degradation. However, the resisted unconstrained experiment results were similar to those
of the constrained experiment in both off-line and real-time
test metrics. As such, it can be concluded that constrained and
unconstrained contraction-based myoelectric control schemes
perform similarly when compared in similar loading conditions
(EMG level).
The majority of users felt that the constrained protocol provided better control than the unconstrained protocol, since they
had a wider range of force available for cursor control that
enabled improved selection of desired intensity. However, most
users were indifferent between the control quality of constrained
and resisted unconstrained experiments.
A main difference between the constrained and unconstrained
protocols is the surface EMG recording method. Muscle displacement during contractions changes the relative location of
the electrodes in the bipole. Larger displacements occur in unconstrained contractions due to change of muscles’ lengths.
The effect of muscle displacement is mixed with that of varying
force/position, but hypothetically it can be learned by ANNs.
The target acquisition test results were found to obey Fitts’
law (the R2 of linear regression between completion time
and index of difficulty was higher than 90% for each protocol). Future work will undertake a fully developed Fitts’ law
test.
Although three wrist DOFs were investigated in this paper,
there is currently no commercially available prosthesis with
wrist abduction–adduction. Therefore, inclusion of a more practical DOF such as hand open–close might be preferred. This
however, was not feasible due to hardware (force transducer)
limitations. The authors also believe that simultaneous control
of wrist and hand function can employ a hierarchical control

286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

scheme (in development) which will utilize the methods described here as a component.
It is not obvious whether constrained or unconstrained experiment is best suited for the case of an amputee user of a myoelectric control system. Using unconstrained-based mirrored
bilateral contractions of an intact limb to represent an impaired
limb as in [27]–[29] may not be appropriate because much of
the EMG modulation with position is due to the change in the
muscle geometry through the excursion of joint angle. The action of a muscle changing length across a joint may not exist in
the context of an amputee. In fact, in some surgical outcomes,
the remaining muscle or tendon is sutured to the bone or other
muscle. In this scenario, an amputee’s case may more closely resemble constrained contractions that occur in normally limbed
individuals. In amputees with muscles that are not tied down,
the muscle shortens, but not against a load; instead it can sometimes retreat with significant movement. Although this bears
some similarity to the changing length in an intact limb, it does
so without the resistance of a terminal point. Ultimately, amputated limb articulations likely differ from both constrained and
unconstrained contractions of an intact limb and vary greatly
from one amputee to another. Generalizable conclusions will
therefore require an extensive investigation and access to many
amputees. Nonetheless, it is an essential next step, and is the
focus of our ongoing clinical research.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a direct comparison between constrained- and
unconstrained-based myoelectric control paradigms in ablebodied subjects was made. Three experiments of constrained,
unconstrained, and resisted unconstrained were investigated.
Off-line R2 and real-time target acquisition test results showed
that the constrained-based control method outperformed the unconstrained protocol without resistance. However, when nominal resistance was added to the unconstrained protocol, no
significant difference from that of the constrained protocol was
found (both off-line and online metrics resulted in p > 0.1).
These results suggest that the constrained and unconstrainedbased control schemes exhibit similar control performance when
using similar EMG levels. These results were obtained in a controlled environment and it remains to investigate the impact of
the practicalities of daily living in both strategies.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Cipriani, C. Antfolk, M. Controzzi, G. Lundborg, B. Rosen,
M. C. Carrozza, and F. Sebelius, “Online myoelectric control of a dexterous hand prosthesis by transradial amputees,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 260–270, Jun. 2011.
[2] P. Shenoy, K. J. Miller, B. Crawford, and R. P. N. Rao, “Online electromyographic control of a robotic prosthesis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1128–1135, Mar. 2008.
[3] R. Davoodi and G. E. Loeb, “Real-Time animation software for customized training to use motor prosthetic systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 134–142, Mar. 2012.
[4] J. M. Lambrecht, C. L. Pulliam, and R. F. Kirsch, “Virtual reality environment for simulating tasks with a myoelectric prosthesis: An assessment
and training tool,” J. Prosthet. Orthot., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 89–94, Apr.
2011.

[5] M. R. Dawson, F. Fahimi, and J. P. Carey, “The development of a myoelectric training tool for above-elbow amputees,” Open Biomed. Eng. J.,
vol. 6, pp. 5–15, Feb. 2012.
[6] M. R. Dawson, F. Fahimi, and J. P. Carey, “Myoelectric training systems,”
Expert Rev. Med. Devices, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 581–589, Sep. 2011.
[7] D. S. Dorcas and R. N. Scott, “A three-state myoelectric controller,” Med.
Biol. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 367–372, 1966.
[8] D. Childress, “A myoelectric three state controller using rate sensitivity,”
presented at the Int. Conf. Math. Biology Ecology, Chicago, IL, USA,
1969.
[9] T. W. Williams, “Practical methods for controlling powered upperextremity prostheses,” Assist Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 3–18, 1990.
[10] B. Hudgins, P. A. Parker, and R. N. Scott, “A new strategy for multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 82–94, Jan. 1993.
[11] K. B. Englehart, B. Hudgins, P. A. Parker, and M. Stevenson, “Classification of the myoelectric signal using time-frequency based representations,”
Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 21, no. 6–7, pp. 431–438, Jul.–Sep. 1999.
[12] Y. Huang, K. B. Englehart, B. Hudgins, and A. D. C. Chan, “Gaussian
mixture model based classification scheme for myoelectric control of
powered upper limb prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52,
no. 11, pp. 1801–1811, Nov. 2005.
[13] M. F. Lucas, A. Gaufriau, S. Pascual, C. Doncarli, and D. Farina, “Multichannel surface EMG classification using support vector machines and
signal-based wavelet optimization,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 169–174, Apr. 2008.
[14] L. Hargrove, E. Scheme, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “Multiple binary
classifications via linear discriminant analysis for improved controllability
of a powered prosthesis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 49–57, Feb. 2010.
[15] D. Graupe, J. Salahi, and K. H. Kohn, “Multifunctional prosthesis and
orthosis control via microcomputer identification of temporal pattern differences in single-site myoelectric signals,” J. Biomed. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 17–
22, Jan. 1982.
[16] A. Fougner, O. Stavdahl, P. J. Kyberd, Y. G. Losier, and P. A. Parker,
“Control of upper limb prostheses: Terminology and proportional myoelectric control—A review,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 663–677, Sep. 2012.
[17] E. Scheme and K. Englehart, “Training strategies for mitigating the effect of proportional control on classification in pattern recognition-based
myoelectric control,” J. Prosthet. Orthot., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 76–83, Apr.
2013.
[18] A. J. Young, L. H. Smith, E. J. Rouse, and L. J. Hargrove, “A new hierarchical approach for simultaneous control of multi-joint powered prostheses,” in Proc. BioRob. IEEE RAS EMBS Int. Conf., 2012, pp. 514–520.
[19] E. Kamavuako, J. Rosenvang, R. Horup, W. Jensen, D. Farina, and
K. Englehart, “Surface versus untargeted intramuscular EMG based classification of simultaneous and unconstrainedally changing movements,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., (Mar. 7, 2013). [Online].
[20] P. K. Artemiadis and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “An EMG-based robot control
scheme robust to time-varying EMG signal features,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 582–588, May. 2010.
[21] S. Oda, “Motor control for bilateral muscular contractions in humans,”
Jpn. J. Physiol, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 487–498, Dec. 1997.
[22] N. Jiang, K. B. Englehart, and P. A. Parker, “Extracting simultaneous and
proportional neural control information for multiple-DOF prostheses from
the surface electromyographic signal,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56,
no. 4, pp. 1070–1080, Apr. 2009.
[23] J. L. Nielsen, S. Holmgaard, N. Jiang, K. B. Englehart, D. Farina, and
P. A. Parker, “Simultaneous and proportional force estimation for multifunction myoelectric prostheses using mirrored bilateral training,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 681–688, Mar. 2011.
[24] C. Castellini, E. Gruppioni, A. Davalli, and G. Sandini, “Fine detection
of grasp force and posture by amputees via surface electromyography,” J.
Physiol. Paris, vol. 103, pp. 255–262, Sep.-Dec 2009.
[25] E. N. Kamavuako, D. Farina, K. Yoshida, and W. Jensen, “Estimation of
grasping force from features of intramuscular EMG signals with mirrored
bilateral training,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 648–656, Mar.
2012.
[26] F. Sebelius, L. Eriksson, C. Balkenius, and T. Laurell, “Myoelectric control
of a computer animated hand: A new concept based on the combined use
of a tree-structured artificial neural network and a data glove,” J. Med.
Eng. Tech., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 2–10, Jan.–Feb. 2006.
[27] S. Muceli, N. Jiang, and D. Farina, “Multichannel surface EMG based
estimation of bilateral hand kinematics,” during movements at multiple

AMERI et al.: REAL-TIME, SIMULTANEOUS MYOELECTRIC CONTROL USING FORCE AND POSITION-BASED TRAINING PARADIGMS

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]
[36]

degrees of freedom,” in Proc. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
vol. 2010, pp. 6066–6069.
S. Muceli and D. Farina, “Simultaneous and proportional estimation of
hand kinematics from EMG during mirrored movements at multiple degrees of freedom,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 371–378, May 2012.
N. Jiang, J. L. Vest-Nielsen, S. Muceli, and D. Farina, “EMG-based simultaneous and proportional estimation of wrist/hand unconstraineds in
uni-lateral trans-radial amputees,” J. Neuro Eng. Rehabil., vol. 9, p. Epub,
Jun. 2012.
A. Ameri, K. B. Englehart, and P. A. Parker, “A comparison between force
and position control strategies in myoelectric prostheses,” in Proc. Conf.
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 2012, pp. 1342–1345.
E. N. Kamavuako, J. C. Rosenvang, M. F. Bøg, A. Smidstrup,
E. Erkocevic, M. J. Niemeier, W Jensen, and D. Farina, “Influence of
the feature space on the estimation of hand grasping force from intramuscular EMG,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–5, Jan.
2013.
A. Simon, L. Hargrove, B. Lock, and T. Kuiken, “Target achievement control test: Evaluating real-time myoelectric pattern-recognition control of
multifunctional upper-limb prostheses,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop., vol. 48,
no. 6, pp. 619–628, 2011.
M. Williams and R. Kirsch, “Evaluation of head orientation and neck
muscle EMG signals as command inputs to a human-computer interface
for individuals with high tetraplegia,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 485–496, Oct. 2008.
E. Scheme and K. Englehart, “Validation of a selective ensemble-based
classification scheme for myoelectric control using a three dimensional
Fitts’ law test,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 616–623, Jul. 2013.
P. Fitts, “The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement,” J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 47, no. 6,
pp. 381–391, Jun. 1954.
J. L. Nielsen, S. Holmgaard, N. Jiang, K. Englehart, D. Farina, and
P. Parker, “Enhanced EMG signal processing for simultaneous and proportional myoelectric control,” in Proc. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., Sep. 2009, pp. 4335–4338.

Ali Ameri (S’10) received the B.Sc. degree from
Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, and
the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from
Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran, in 2004
and 2007, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New
Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada.
His current research interests include statistical signal processing, myoelectric control of powered prostheses, machine learning, and speech
processing.

Erik J. Scheme (S’09–M’13) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of New Brunswick (UNB),
Fredericton, NB, Canada, in 2003, 2005, and 2013,
respectively.
He is currently the Research Engineer at the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, UNB and an Adjunct Professor with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering. His current research interests
include biological signal processing, pattern recognition, human–computer interfaces, and the clinical and
commercial deployment of research.
Dr. Scheme is a Registered Professional Engineer and a member of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Societies.

287

Ernest Nlandu Kamavuako (M’11) received the
Master and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark, in
2006 and 2010.
Since 2010, he has been an Assistant Professor in
the Department of Health Science and Technology,
Aalborg University, Denmark. From 2007 to 2008,
he was a Research Scholar in the Biomedical Department, IUPUI, Indianapolis, USA. From 2012 to
2013, he was a Visiting Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of New
Brunswick, Canada. His current research interests include the use of invasive
recordings in the control of upper limb prostheses, muscle recovery functions
following electrical stimulation, signal processing and the application of nearinfrared spectroscopy for brain–computer interface and speech processing.

Kevin B. Englehart (S’90–M’99–SM’03) received
the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
New Brunswick (UNB), Fredericton, NB, Canada,
in 1989, 1992, and 1998, respectively.
He is the Director of the Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, UNB. His current research interests include neuromuscular modeling and biological signal
processing using adaptive systems, pattern recognition, and time–frequency analysis.
Dr. Englehart is a Registered Professional Engineer and a Member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
the International Society of Electrophsiology and Kinensiology, and the Canadian Medical and Biological Engineering Society.

Philip A. Parker (S’70–M’73–SM’86–LM’09) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of New
Brunswick (UNB), Fredericton, NB, Canada, in 1964
and 1975, respectively, and the M.Sc. degree from
the University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, U.K., in
1966.
In 1966, he joined the National Research Council of Canada as a Communications Officer. He is
currently a Policy Board Member of the Institute of
Biomedical Engineering, UNB, which he joined in
1967 as a Research Associate. In 1976, he was appointed to the Department
of Electrical Engineering, UNB, where he is currently a Professor Emeritus.
His current research interests include the area of biological signal processing with applications to powered limb prosthesis control, evoked response detection/estimation, conduction velocity distribution estimation, and diagnostic
tools.

