576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Integration of Network Topological and Connectivity
Properties for Neuroimaging Classification
Biao Jie, Daoqiang Zhang∗ , Wei Gao, Qian Wang, Chong-Yaw Wee, and Dinggang Shen∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Rapid advances in neuroimaging techniques have
provided an efficient and noninvasive way for exploring the structural and functional connectivity of the human brain. Quantitative measurement of abnormality of brain connectivity in patients
with neurodegenerative diseases, such as mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD), have also been widely
reported, especially at a group level. Recently, machine learning
techniques have been applied to the study of AD and MCI, i.e.,
to identify the individuals with AD/MCI from the healthy controls (HCs). However, most existing methods focus on using only a
single property of a connectivity network, although multiple network properties, such as local connectivity and global topological
properties, can potentially be used. In this paper, by employing
multikernel based approach, we propose a novel connectivity based
framework to integrate multiple properties of connectivity network
for improving the classification performance. Specifically, two different types of kernels (i.e., vector-based kernel and graph kernel)
are used to quantify two different yet complementary properties
of the network, i.e., local connectivity and global topological properties. Then, multikernel learning (MKL) technique is adopted to
fuse these heterogeneous kernels for neuroimaging classification.
We test the performance of our proposed method on two different data sets. First, we test it on the functional connectivity networks of 12 MCI and 25 HC subjects. The results show that our
method achieves significant performance improvement over those
using only one type of network property. Specifically, our method
achieves a classification accuracy of 91.9%, which is 10.8% better
than those by single network-property-based methods. Then, we
test our method for gender classification on a large set of functional

Manuscript received May 7, 2013; revised July 21, 2013; accepted September 12, 2013. Date of publication October 2, 2013; date of current version
January 16, 2014. This work was supported in part by Jiangsu Natural Science
Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholar (No. BK20130034), in part by
the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education
under Grant 20123218110009, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities under Grant NE201315 and Grant NZ2013306, in part
by the NIH under Grant EB006733, Grant EB008374, Grant EB009634, and
Grant AG041721, and in part by University Natural Science Foundation of
Anhui under Grant KJ2013Z095. This work was also supported in part by the
National Research Foundation under Grant 2012-005741 funded by the Korean
Government. Asterisks indicate corresponding authors.
B. Jie is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China, and also
with the School of Mathematics and Computer Science, Anhui Normal University, Wuhui, 241000, China (e-mail: jbiao@nuaa.edu.cn).
∗ D. Zhang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China
(e-mail: dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn).
W. Gao, Q. Wang, and C.-Y. Wee are with the Department of Radiology and
BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
(e-mail: wgao@email.unc.edu; qianwang@cs.unc.edu; cywee@med.unc.edu).
∗ D. Shen is with the Department of Radiology and BRIC, the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA, and also with
the Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul
136-701, Korea (e-mail: dgshen@med.unc.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2284195

connectivity networks with 133 infants scanned at birth, 1 year, and
2 years, also demonstrating very promising results.
Index Terms—Connectivity network, connectivity property,
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), multikernel learning (MKL),
topological property.

I. INTRODUCTION
LZHEIMER’S disease (AD) is the most common type of
dementia, accounting for 60%–80% of age-related dementia cases. It is predicted that the number of affected people will
double in the next 20 years, and 1 in 85 people will be affected by
2050 [1]. Since the AD-specific brain changes begin years before the patient becomes symptomatic, early clinical diagnosis
becomes a challenging task. Accordingly, there have been a lot
of studies focusing on possible identification of such changes at
the early stage, i.e., mild cognitive impairment (MCI), by leveraging neuroimaging data [2], [3]. Recently, machine learning
and pattern classification approaches have been widely used to
identify AD and MCI at an individual level [4]–[8], rather than
at a group level, i.e., only the comparison between different
clinical groups. Most of these works focused on using regionsof-interest (ROIs) or voxel-wise features extracted from single
imaging modality or multiple imaging modalities, e.g., magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) or/and fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET).
In the literature, it has been shown that many neurological
and psychiatric disorders can be categorized as dysconnectivity/hyperconnectivity syndromes, which are commonly associated with the disrupted synchronization or the abnormal integration of different brain regions [9], [10]. Rapid advances in
neuroimaging techniques have provided an efficient and noninvasive way for studying the structural and functional connectivity of human brain [11]. Functional connectivity, which is
referred to as the functional association pattern among brain
regions, provides a view to understand the relationship between
the activities in certain brain regions and the specific mental
functions, and thus could provide an insight into the pathophysiological mechanism in neurodegenerative diseases, such
as MCI and AD.
Several groups have investigated the connectivity of brain
networks in neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., MCI and AD)
by using group analysis, where abnormal connectivities are
found in a series of brain networks, including default-mode network (DMN) [12] and other resting-state networks (RSNs) [13].
These findings indicate that AD/MCI is associated with a largescale highly connected functional network, rather than a single isolated region [14]. For instance, “small-world” properties

A

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JIE et al.: INTEGRATION OF NETWORK TOPOLOGICAL AND CONNECTIVITY PROPERTIES FOR NEUROIMAGING CLASSIFICATION

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE CURRENT STUDY

577

and stare at a fixation cross in the middle of the screen, which
lasted for 5 min.
B. Method

(characterized by high local clustering and short path length)
have been reported to be disrupted in functional brain network
of AD and MCI patients [15].
On the other hand, connectivity network based methods have
also been applied to accurately identify individuals with AD and
MCI from the healthy controls (HCs) [8], [16]–[22]. For example, some researchers used local measures (e.g., local clustering
coefficients and the weights between nodes) of connectivity
network to identify AD/MCI patients [8], [16], [23]. However,
to the best of our knowledge, most of the existing approaches
use only a single type of network property for AD and MCI
classification, although multiple network properties, including
local connectivity and global topological properties, can potentially be used. Intuitively, effective integration of these multiple network properties may further improve the classification
performance.
Accordingly, in this paper, we present a new connectivity
network based classification framework to accurately identify
individuals with MCI from the HCs. The key to our approach
involves the use of kernel-based method to quantify and integrate multiple properties of connectivity network. Specifically,
for each brain connectivity network, we first construct two different types of kernels: a vector-based kernel corresponding to
the conventional local network property (e.g., local clustering
coefficients) and a graph kernel corresponding to the global
topological property of the network, and then we effectively integrate them for classification. Our method provides a new perspective to apply different yet complementary properties of the
connectivity network for improving brain disease classification.
II. MATERIALS AND METHOD
A. Data Acquisition
Subjects used in the current study were recruited by the DukeUNC Brain Imaging and Analysis Center (BIAC), Durham,
North Carolina, USA. There are totally 37 participants, including 12 MCI patients and 25 HCs. Demographic information
of the participants is shown in Table I. Informed consent was
obtained from all participants, and the experimental protocols
were approved by the institutional ethics board. All recruited
subjects were diagnosed by expert consensus panels. A 3.0-T
GE Signa EXCITE scanner was used to acquire resting-state
functional MRI (fMRI) volumes. The fMRI volumes of each
participant were acquired with the following parameters: TR/TE
= 2000/32 ms, flip angle = 77◦ , acquisition matrix = 64 × 64,
FOV = 256 × 256 mm2 , voxel resolution = 4 × 4 × 4 mm3 ,
34 slices, 150 volumes, and voxel thickness = 4 mm. During
scanning, all subjects were instructed to keep their eyes open

It has been reported that the connectivity patterns/properties
of the brains with AD/MCI differ from those of the normal
brains [13], [24]. Thus, these properties may serve as potential
biomarkers for disease diagnosis. In this paper, we propose a
new method for integrating multiple properties of a connectivity
network to improve the disease diagnosis performance. Fig. 1
illustrates the framework of our proposed method. Specifically,
for each subject, a functional connectivity network is first constructed from the respective fMRI data. In order to remove weak
or potentially insignificant connections and also to reflect multiple levels of topological properties of the original functional
connectivity network, multiple pre-defined values are used to
separately threshold the functional connectivity network. Then,
two different types of kernels, i.e., a vector-based kernel and a
graph kernel, are respectively computed to quantify two different yet complementary network properties, i.e., local clustering
and global topological properties. Finally, the multikernel support vector machine (SVM) is adopted to fuse these two heterogeneous kernels for distinguishing the individuals with MCI
from the HCs. Different from the previous multimodality-based
integrating methods [6], [7], which combine the same type of
kernels from multiple data sources, in this study, we combine
different types of kernels from different properties of the same
connectivity network. The core of our proposed method is summarized below and will be discussed comprehensively in the
subsequent sections:
1) Extraction of multilevel topological properties of connectivity network using multiple thresholds;
2) Measurement of topological similarity using graph kernel;
3) Feature selection using the least absolution shrinkage and
selection operator (LASSO) method;
4) Integration of different yet complementary network properties using a multikernel SVM.
1) Image Processing and Network Construction: The preprocessing step of the fMRI images, which includes slice timing
correction and head-motion correction, was performed using the
Statistical Parametric Mapping software package (SPM8, available at http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk.spm). Specifically, the first
10 acquired fMRI images of each subject were discarded to
ensure magnetization equilibrium. The remaining 140 images
were first corrected for the acquisition time delay among different slices before they were realigned to the first volume of
the remaining images for head motion correction. Since the regions of ventricles and white matter (WM) contain a relatively
high proportion of noise caused by the cardiac and respiratory
cycles [25], we utilized only the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signals extracted from gray matter (GM) tissue to
construct the functional connectivity network. Accordingly, we
first segmented the T1-weighted MR image of each subject into
GM, WM, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). GM tissue of each
subject was then used to mask the corresponding fMRI images
to eliminate the possible effects from CSF and WM.

578

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Proposed classification framework.

The first scan of the remaining fMRI scans was co-registered
to the T1-weighted MR image of the same subject. The estimated
transformation was then applied to all other fMRI scans of the
same subject. The aligned fMRI scans were further parcellated
into 90 ROIs by warping the Automated Anatomical Labeling
(AAL) [26] template to the subject space using a deformable
registration method [27]. Finally, for each subject, the mean
time series of each ROI was computed by averaging the fMRI
time series over all voxels in that particular ROI.
In the current study, the mean time series of each ROI was
band-pass filtered within in frequency interval [0.025 ≤ f ≤
0.100 Hz], since the fMRI dynamics of neuronal activities are
most salient within this frequency interval. It has been reported
in [28] that the frequency band of (0.027–0.073 Hz) demonstrated significantly higher test-retest reliability than other frequency bands. Also, it provides a reasonable tradeoff between
avoiding the physiological noise associated with higher frequency oscillations [29] and the measurement error associated
with estimation of very low frequency correlations from the
limited time series [30].
Finally, by using pairwise Pearson correlation coefficient, a
functional connectivity network was constructed with the nodes
of network corresponding to the ROIs and the weights of edges

corresponding to the Pearson correlation coefficients between
a pair of ROIs. Fisher’s r-to-z transformation was applied on
the elements of the functional connectivity network (matrix) to
improve the normality of the correlation coefficients. Moreover,
we removed all negative correlations from the obtained connectivity networks to extract the meaningful network measures.
2) Kernel-Based Method: Kernel-based method offers a
very general framework for performing pattern analysis (e.g.,
classification and clustering) on different types of data. The main
idea of kernel-based method is to implicitly perform a mapping
from the input space to a high dimensional feature space, where
the input data are more likely to be linearly separable than in
the original lower dimensional space. Informally, a kernel is
defined as a function of two subjects that quantifies their similarity. Specifically, given two subjects x andx , the kernel can
be defined as
k(x, x ) = Φ(x), Φ(x )

(1)

where Φ is a mapping function that maps data from the input
space to the feature space. Once given a kernel function, many
kernel-based learning algorithms, such as SVM, can be used to
perform pattern analysis.

JIE et al.: INTEGRATION OF NETWORK TOPOLOGICAL AND CONNECTIVITY PROPERTIES FOR NEUROIMAGING CLASSIFICATION

The definition/selection of the kernel depends on specific
data type and the domain knowledge concerning the patterns
(i.e., training subjects). There are several kernel functions which
have been successfully used in the literature, such as the linear
kernel and Gaussian radial basis function (RBF) kernel. In the
following, we will introduce the topology-based graph kernel,
which will be used in our proposed method.
a) Topology-Based Graph Kernel: Kernel can also be defined on complex data types, e.g., graph in the connectivity
network. The respective kernel is called graph kernel, which
maps the graph data from the original graph space to the feature
space and further measures the similarity between two graphs
by comparing their topological structures [31]. Thus, graph kernel bridges the gap between graph-structured data and many
kernel-based learning algorithms, with successful applications
in computer vision [32] and bioinformatics [33].
Many methods have been proposed to construct the graph
kernel. In this study, the graph kernel proposed in [31], called
Weisfeiler–Lehman subtree kernel, is used to measure the topological similarity between paired connectivity networks. It has
been shown that this type of graph kernel can effectively capture the topological information from graphs and achieve better
performance than the state-of-the-art graph kernels [31].
Before giving the definition of graph kernel, some basic terms
are first introduced. Here, a graph is composed of a finite set of
nodes and edges. The graph which has a label associated with
each node is called the labeled graph. A subtree is a restricted
form of a graph, where one node is called the root and each
node has a path to the root (i.e., any two nodes are connected
by exactly one simple path with no recurring nodes). Subtree
pattern extends the notion of subtree by allowing repetitions of
nodes. However, these same nodes are treated as distinct nodes.
Shervashidze et al. proposed a subtree-pattern-based method
to construct the graph kernel [31]. The core concept of their
graph kernel comes from the Weisfeiler–Lehman test of isomorphism. For a pair of graphs G and G , the basic process of
the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Lehman test is as follows: if these
two graphs are unlabeled, i.e., vertices of the graph have not
been assigned with labels, every vertex in each graph is first labeled with the number of edges that are connected to that vertex.
Then, at each subsequent step (or iteration), the label of each
node is simultaneously updated based on its previous label and
the labels of its neighbors. For example, for each node, we augment its label by the sorted set of node labels of its neighboring
nodes, and compress these augmented labels into a new shorter
label. This process is iterated until the node label sets ofG andG
differ, or the number of iteration reaches a predefined maximum
value h.
Given two graphs G and G , let Li = {li1 , li2 , . . . ,
li|l i | }(i = 0, 1, . . . , h) be the set of letters that occur as node
labels in G or G at the end of the ith iteration of the Weisfeiler–
Lehman test of isomorphism. Here, L0 denotes the set of the
initial labels of graph G or G . Assume all Li are pairwise disjointed. Without loss of generality, assume every Li is ordered,
and then the Weisfeiler–Lehman subtree kernel on two graphs
G and G with h iterations is defined as [31]:
k(G, G ) = Φ(G), Φ(G )

(2)

579

where
Φ(G) = (ρ0 (G, l01 ), . . . , ρ0 (G, l0|L 0 | ), . . . ,
ρh (G, lh1 ), . . . , ρh (G, lh|L h | ))
and
Φ(G ) = (ρ0 (G , l01 ), . . . , ρ0 (G , l0|L 0 | ), . . . ,
ρh (G , lh1 ), . . . , ρh (G , lh|L h | ))
with ρi (G, lij ) and ρi (G , lij ) are the numbers of occurrences
of the letter lij in G and G , respectively. It has been proven that
this kernel is positive definite [31]. It is worth noting that each
compressed label denotes a subtree pattern. According to this
definition, the graph kernel embeds the local and global graph
topological information into kernel.
b) Multikernel Support Vector Machine: Recent studies
on multikernel learning (MKL) have shown that the integration
of multiple kernels not only increases the classification accuracy
but also enhances the interpretability of the results [34]. Several
recent studies in neuroimaging have also shown that multikernel combination provides a powerful tool for systematically
aggregating different imaging modalities into a single learned
model [6]–[8]. Generally, kernel integration is achieved through
a linear combination of multiple kernels

βm km (x, x )
(3)
k (x, x ) =
m



where km (x, x ) is a basic kernel built for subjects
 x and x , and
βm is a nonnegative weighting parameter with m βm = 1.
In the current study, we adopt our previously developed multikernel SVM method [7], [8], [35] to combine multiple kernels.
Different from the existing MKL methods [34] that jointly optimize the weighting parameters βm together with other SVM
parameters, in our multikernel SVM, the optimal weighting parameters βm are determined via grid search on the training
data. Once the optimal weighting parameters βm are obtained,
the multikernel SVM can be naturally embedded into the conventional single-kernel SVM framework to classify the MCI
patients from HCs. On the other hand, since the vector-based
kernel and the graph kernel are two different types of kernels,
a normalization step must be performed individually as in (4),
before combining them using the multikernel SVM.

(4)
k̃ (x, x ) = k (x, x ) / k (x, x) k (x , x ).

3) Multiple Properties of Connectivity Network: In functional connectivity networks, the connectivity describes
frequency-dependent correlation between spatially distinct
brain regions. Some weak and potentially insignificant connections for identifying patients from controls could obscure the
network topology, when considered together with strong and
important connections. Thus, it may be important to discard
these connections by using a thresholding approach. Moreover,
the thresholded networks are often simpler to characterize and
thus have more easily defined models for statistical comparison [36]. However, the thresholds are often arbitrarily determined [13], [15], [37], and the optimal threshold can only be
determined after exploring the network properties over a broad

580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

(e.g., the connection between nodes B and D) have been removed, as shown in Fig. 2(b) or (c). Moreover, the topological
structures with different thresholds are obviously different for
each healthy subject (or MCI subject).
As a local network property, local clustering reflects the
prevalence of clustered connectivity around individual network
nodes (or brain regions). Numerous studies have shown that
the local clustering of functional connectivity network has been
disrupted in the AD and MCI patients at a group comparison level [13], [38]. In this study, the local weighted clustering
coefficients are extracted from each thresholded connectivity
network as [11], [39]

m m m 1/3
τ τ )
2 i,j (τpi
m
 ij j p
(6)
cp =
m
m
dp dp − 1

Fig. 2. Examples of multiple-thresholded connectivity networks. (a) Original
functional connectivity networks, (b) thresholded connectivity networks with
T = 0.3, and (c) thresholded connectivity networks with T = 0.5. Here, A, B,
C, D, and E represent five different nodes/ROIs; value on each edge denotes the
connection weight between a pair of ROIs. The connectivity between nodes A
and D on a patient with MCI (right) has been changed, compared to a HC (left).

range of plausible thresholds. On the other hand, the network
with different thresholds may represent different level of topological properties, and these properties may be complementary to each other in improving the classification performance.
Therefore, in the current study, a multiple-threshold method
is adopted to reflect the multiple levels of network properties.
Specifically, given a threshold Tm (m = 1, . . . , M ), the connectivity network (matrix) G = [τij ]n ×n is thresholded as

0,
if τij < Tm
m
(5)
τij =
τij , otherwise
where τij denotes the connection weight between the ith and jth
network-nodes/ROIs. Fig. 2 gives an example of our multiplethreshold method. Here, the original connectivity networks in
Fig. 2(a) are fully connected, with no differences between MCI
and HC in the topological structures. However, when these networks are thresholded with the value T = 0.3 and T = 0.5
respectively, significant differences can be observed between
MCI and HC, where the weak connections (e.g., the connection between nodes B and E) and the nonsignificant connections

where dm
p is the number of neighboring nodes around the node
p. The coefficients of n nodes xm = [cm
p ]p=1,...,n compose a
feature vector representing the local clustering property of the
thresholded connectivity network Gm . We then concatenate the
feature vectors of all the thresholed connectivity networks to
form a single large vector x = [(x1 )T · · · (xm )T · · · (xM )T ]T .
Features extracted from all thresholded connectivity networks
potentially include many irrelevant and redundant features for
classification. Therefore, LASSO-based feature selection (see
next section) is performed in our method to filter out those
features. Finally, vector-based kernel is computed, based on the
selected features, to measure the similarity of two connectivity
networks using local clustering property.
Another important network property is the topological structure of the whole connectivity network, which characterizes the
entire network. It has been widely reported that the topological
properties of the whole brain network have been changed for
AD and MCI [15], [40]. Since the connectivity network is a form
of graph, where the ROIs and the connectivities between ROIs
correspond, respectively, to the nodes and edges, it is natural
to apply graph kernel to our data. In this study, the Weisfeiler–
Lehman subtree kernel [31] discussed in the previous subsection
will be constructed on each thresholded connectivity network
across different subjects to measure the similarity of topological structures, as shown in Fig. 1. It is noteworthy that graph
kernel only preserves the local and global structural information
of connectivity networks, while it does not consider the weight
information (i.e., connectivity strength) of edges, which can be
captured by vector-based kernel through extraction of features
based on the local clustering property of connectivity networks.
4) LASSO-Based Feature Selection: Feature selection,
which can be considered as the biomarker identification for
AD and MCI, attempts to remove as many irrelevant and/or
redundant features as possible and at the same time to select
a feature subset for effective classification. Different from the
other feature selection methods, LASSO [41] can achieve feature selection by minimizing a penalized objective function,
which trends to assign zero weight to most irrelevant and redundant features. It has been shown that LASSO is particularly
effective for the cases where there are many irrelevant features
while only a few training samples [42].

JIE et al.: INTEGRATION OF NETWORK TOPOLOGICAL AND CONNECTIVITY PROPERTIES FOR NEUROIMAGING CLASSIFICATION

TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS

The loss function of LASSO is defined as
1
(yi − wT xi − b)2 + λw1
2 i

581

N

min
w ,b

(7)

where xi represents a feature vector extracted from all thresholded connectivity networks on the i-th subject, yi is the corresponding class label, w denotes the regression coefficients for
the feature vector, b is the intercept, and N is the number of
training subjects. The L1 -norm regularizer w1 typically leads
to a sparse solution in the feature space, i.e., the regression coefficients for most irrelevant or redundant features are shrunk
to zero. The features with nonzero coefficients will be selected
and used for constructing the vector-based kernel. λ > 0 is a
regularization parameter, which balances between the complexity of the model and the goodness-of-fit. The optimal λ value is
determined using cross-validation on the training data.
5) Implementation Details: To evaluate the performance of
different methods, a leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation strategy is adopted to enhance the generalization power of the classifier and to avoid the over-fitting on small sample dataset. Specifically, for all subjects, one is left out for testing, and the remaining are used for training. This entire process is repeated for
each subject. The classifier training of standard SVM is implemented using LIBSVM library [43] with default parameter
values (i.e., C = 1). In our experiment, five thresholded connectivity networks are obtained using five different values, i.e.,
T = [0.2 0.3 0.38 0.4 0.45] with 0.38 as the average value of
connectivity strength between all nodes/ROIs across all training
subjects. The corresponding connection densities (i.e., the fraction of present connections to the possible connections) of these
thresholds are located in the interval of [40% 75%]. It is reported in [44] that the connection density interval of [25% 75%]
provides significantly better classification performance. A total
of 450 (5∗90) features (i.e., local clustering coefficients) are
extracted from all thresholded connectivity networks for each
subject. Moreover, we adopt the method used in [7] to normalize
each extracted feature. At the feature selection step, the SLEP
package [45] is used to solve the LASSO regression, with the
regularization parameter λ(λ ∈ [0 1]) learned from the training
subjects by using another LOO cross-validation. In addition, the
linear kernel is adopted in our experiment as the vector-based
kernel. Also, the optimal weighting parameter βm for each kernel is learned similarly based on the training subjects via another
LOO cross-validation through a grid search using the range from
0 to 1 at a step size of 0.1.
III. RESULTS
A. Classification Performance
The classification performance is evaluated based on classification accuracy and the area under receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), respectively. Besides, to avoid the
inflated performance estimates on imbalanced datasets, we also
compute the balanced accuracy of classification, which can be
defined as average accuracy obtained on either class (i.e., the
arithmetic mean of sensitivity and specificity). In our experi-

Fig. 3. ROC curves of different methods on MCI classification. Left: using
single graph kernel and mixed kernel of all graph kernels; right: using single
linear kernel, mixed kernel of all graph kernels, and combination of both linear
kernel and graph kernels.

ments, we compare our proposed method based on multinetwork properties with those using only single network property.
Specifically, in the linear-kernel-based method (denoted as LK),
we first perform LASSO for feature selection on the obtained
450 (5∗90) features (i.e., local clustering coefficients extracted
from five thresholded connectivity networks) and then compute
the linear kernel based on those selected features. On the other
hand, for the graph kernel based methods, five graph kernels are
constructed on the five thresholded connectivity networks, denoted as GK1, GK2, GK3, GK4, and GK5, respectively. These
five graph kernels, which correspond to five different levels of
topological properties of connectivity network, are combined
and denoted as GK-C. All experiments are performed using
LOO cross-validation. The classification performances for different methods are summarized in Table II. Fig. 3 plots the ROC
curves for these methods.
As can be seen from Table II and Fig. 3, our proposed method
achieves the best performance (w.r.t. both classification accuracy and AUC), by combining both the vector-based kernel and
the graph kernels from multinetwork properties of connectivity
network. Specifically, our method yields a classification accuracy of 91.9% and a balanced accuracy of 89.7%, which are at
least 10.8% and 10.2% improvements, respectively, over other
compared methods. Also, our method achieves an AUC of 0.87,
indicating excellent diagnostic power. These results indicate that
different properties of connectivity network (i.e., local clustering
features and global topological properties) contain complementary information and thus can be integrated for further improving
the classification performance. Table III gives the combination
weights of six kernels at each LOO cross-validation. On the

582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

TABLE III
COMBINATION OF WEIGHTS FOR SIX KERNELS IN EACH LOO
CROSS-VALIDATION

TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF TWO DIFFERENT METHODS, IN THE CASE
OF USING THE t-TEST-BASED FEATURE SELECTION, INSTEAD OF USING
LASSO-BASED FEATURE SELECTION

Fig. 4.

Performance w.r.t. the selection of λ value.

statistical t-test, to evaluate the classification performance of
our proposed framework. Specifically, those features with their
p-values lower than a given threshold are selected for subsequent kernel construction and classification. The classification
results are summarized in Table IV, where our proposed method
also achieves much better performance.
B. Effect of Regularization Parameter λ

other hand, both Table II and Fig. 3 show that: 1) GK-C significantly outperforms other single-graph-kernel based methods
(i.e., GK1, GK2, GK3, GK4, and GK5), which implies that
the topological information conveyed by multiple thresholded
networks is complementary to each other and thus can lead to
performance improvement if integrated together; 2) LK outperforms other single-graph-kernel based methods, and in most
cases the weight value of β0 in Table III is larger than other
weights, indicating that the local network property (i.e., local
clustering) is more important than the topological property of
the whole connectivity network for classification.
Furthermore, we performed an additional experiment by comparing our MKL-based method with a baseline scheme, i.e., assigning a uniform weight to all kernels, including vector-kernel
and graph-kernels. This method achieves a classification accuracy of 86.5%, which is inferior to our proposed MKL-based
method as shown in Table II. This result implies that different types of kernels contribute differently and thus should be
integrated adaptively for achieving better classification performance.
Finally, instead of using LASSO-based feature selection
method, we also employed other feature selection method, i.e.,

Regularization parameter λ of LASSO balances between the
complexity of the model and the goodness-of-fit. Larger λ value
means fewer features are preserved for classification and vice
versa. Specially, classification performance of the vector-kernelbased method often deteriorates when too large or too small λ
values are used. However, our proposed method takes into account multiple network properties by combining vector-based
kernel and graph kernel, and thus improves the final classification performance. In this experiment, we investigate the
influences of λ value on the classification accuracy of our
proposed method. The classification accuracies with different
λ values are plotted in Fig. 4. Here, the λ values used are
[0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5]. It is worth noting that, when λ = 0,
no feature selection step is performed, i.e., all features extracted
from the thresholded connectivity networks are used for the
linear kernel construction and classification.
As can be seen from Fig. 4, our proposed method consistently
performs better than LK method for all λ values. Specifically,
our method yields relatively high classification accuracies (i.e.,
more than 80%) for all λ values, showing its robustness to the
regularization parameter. Particularly, with no feature selection
step (i.e., λ = 0), our method achieves a classification accuracy
of 83.8%, which is still higher than the LK method. This again
validates the advantage of our multinetwork properties based
method (i.e., using both the local clustering features and global
topological properties) over the conventional single-networkproperty based methods (i.e., using only the local clustering
features).

JIE et al.: INTEGRATION OF NETWORK TOPOLOGICAL AND CONNECTIVITY PROPERTIES FOR NEUROIMAGING CLASSIFICATION

583

TABLE V
TOP 12 ROIS THAT ARE SELECTED BASED ON THE LOCAL
CLUSTERING PROPERTY

Fig. 5.

Top 12 selected ROIs based on LASSO feature selection.

defined as follows:
dm (p) =

C. Most Discriminant Brain Regions
Besides reporting the classification performance measured
with classification accuracy and AUC, another important issue
is to investigate which features (i.e., brain regions or ROIs) are
selected for brain disease classification and interpretation. To
this end, for each (local clustering) feature, we count its selection
frequency by LASSO method in all LOO cross-validations, and
then select those features with top selection frequency as the
most important features. For each selected important feature,
t-test is performed on all subjects to evaluate its discriminative
power for identifying patients from normal controls. Table V
lists the top 12 brain regions that are selected based on the
local clustering property. These regions include temporal pole,
orbitofrontal cortex, heschl gyrus, hippocampus, middle, and
posterior cingulate gyri. These identified regions are consistent
with previous findings.
As can be seen from Table V, most features have relatively
small p-values, showing good discriminative power between patients and controls. Table V also shows that the selected features
are from multiple thresholded connectivity networks, validating
our assumption that different thresholded connectivity networks
contain complementary information which is useful for improving classification performance. Finally, for visual inspection, in
Fig. 5, we show those selected ROIs listed in Table V.
On the other hand, to further evaluate the discriminative
power of different ROIs, we also characterize the top brain
regions (i.e., ROIs) based on their global topological property.
Let R = {R1 , R2 , . . . , Rn } be the set of ROIs. For each ROI
Rp , a sub-network can be built according to the connectivity between Rp and the remaining ROIs Rq (q = 1, 2, . . . , n, q 
= p)
on the m-th thresholded connectivity network, and the graph
p
(Gim , Gjm ) between the samples Gi and Gj on the
kernel km
corresponding sub-network is computed using the method introduced in the previous section. Then, the group difference of
ROI Rp on the m-th thresholded connectivity network can be

1
n1 n2



 i

p
Gm , Gjm
km

(8)

i∈L + ,j ∈L −

where L+ is the index set of patients, and L− is the index set of
normal controls, with number of subjects of n1 and n2 , respectively. According to the definition in Eq. (8), the group difference
dm (p) represents the discriminative power of ROI Rp between
patients and normal controls on the m-th thresholded connectivity network. Then, for each thresholded connectivity network,
we rank the ROIs according to their group differences and select
also the top 12 ROIs with the highest group difference. Table VI
gives the top selected ROIs based on the global topological property, which include orbitofrontal cortex, rectus gyrus, posterior
cingulate gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus, amygdale, and temporal pole. These finding are consistent to previous AD/MCI
studies. For instance, it has been reported that the functional
connectivity between posterior cingulate cortex and other regions is significantly reduced in MCI patients [46]–[48]. Also,
it is worth noting that most of ROIs selected based on the global
topological property are identical to those selected based on the
local clustering.
D. Results on Infant Gender Classification
To further investigate the efficacy of our proposed method,
we evaluate it on a larger dataset for gender classification of 133
infants with ages ranged from 0 to 2. The participants include
51 neonates (26 males, 25 females), 50 one-year-old (26 males,
24 females) infants, and 32 two-year-old (17 males, 15 females)
infants.
1) Data Acquisition, Postprocessing, and Connectivity Network Construction: The detailed descriptions of data acquisition and postprocessing can be found in [49]. In short, all images
were acquired using a 3 T head-only MR scanner. A 3D magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequence
was used for providing anatomical images to co-register among
subjects, and the time series images were acquired by using
a T2-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence. The preprocessing step of the fMRI images included the exclusion of
voxels outside of the brain, time shifting, motion correction,
spatial smoothing (6-mm full width at half maximum Gaussian
kernel), linear trend removal, and low pass filtering (<0.08 Hz).
For within-group registration, longitudinal T1 MR images from
one subject scanned at 3 weeks, 1 year, and 2 years were

584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

TABLE VI
TOP SELECTED ROIS BASED ON THE GLOBAL TOPOLOGICAL PROPERTY

selected as templates for the corresponding age groups, and
then an intensity-based HAMMER nonlinear registration [27]
was performed to warp each individual subject onto its agematched template space. Registration between each age group
template (from the longitudinal data set) and the MNI space was
then done using 4D HAMMER registration. The rationale for
using a longitudinal dataset as templates was to achieve higher
registration accuracy through the use of 4D HAMMER registration, which takes into account the longitudinal correlation information. Subsequently, the transformation fields from the 4D
HAMMER registration were employed to warp the automatic
labeling template (AAL) template (90 ROIs) covering the cerebral cortex, defined in [26] based on adult sulcal pattern, to each
individual age group template space, achieving an age-specific
ROI map. The corresponding connectivity networks (i.e., correlation matrices) were derived based on this age-specific map
for all three age groups. The mean time course of each ROI was
separately extracted from each individual subject and used to
construct a connectivity network using the Pearson correlation
coefficients between a pair of ROIs. Fisher’s r-to-z transformed
was used to improve the normality of the correlation coefficients.
2) Experimental Results: In this experiment, we adopt the
same setting as the experiments on MCI dataset, except using
different sets of thresholds T = [0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4]. Note
that, for each age group, the average value of connectivity
strength between all ROIs across all training subjects is located in the interval of [0.25 0.35], with the corresponding con-

nection densities of these thresholds located in the interval of
[25% 75%]. Table VII gives the classification performances, and
Fig. 6 plots the ROC curves of different methods. As we can see
from Table VII and Fig. 6, our proposed method consistently
achieves better classification performance compared with other
methods for all age groups. The classification performance for
the neonate group is relatively poor due to the possible incomplete connectivity network and/or larger imaging noise [49]. Table VIII lists the top 12 selected brain regions, which includes
amygdala, parietal gyrus, temporal pole, superior frontal region, and lingual gyrus, in line with previous studies [50]–[55].
Moreover, some ROIs, i.e., amygdala, posterior cingulate gyrus,
and inferior temporal gyrus, have been selected for all age
groups.

IV. DISCUSSION
This paper presents a new connectivity-network-based classification framework that integrates multiple network properties
(i.e., the local clustering and global topology) through MKL
method for automatic brain disease classification. We evaluated
our proposed method on two applications, i.e., identifying MCI
subjects from normal controls, and classifying the infant gender.
The experimental results show that our proposed method can
significantly improve the classification performance over stateof-the-art methods on the connectivity-network-based classification.

JIE et al.: INTEGRATION OF NETWORK TOPOLOGICAL AND CONNECTIVITY PROPERTIES FOR NEUROIMAGING CLASSIFICATION

585

TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON INFANT GENDER CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 6. ROC curves of different methods on infant gender classification. Left:
using single graph kernel and mixed kernel of all graph kernels; right: using
single linear kernel, mixed kernel of all graph kernels and the combination of
both linear kernel and graph kernels. (a) age 0, (b) age 1, and (c) age 2.

Integration of multiple modalities of data (e.g., MRI, PET
imaging biomarkers, and nonimaging biological biomarkers)
has been recently studied for AD/MCI classification. On the
other hand, multiple types of properties can also be extracted
from a single modality of data for improving the classification
performance. For example, for a single connectivity network,
both local clustering property and the global topological property, which are complementary to each other, can be extracted
and integrated to improve the disease classification accuracy,
even without using information from other modalities. This has

been validated in our study of identifying MCI patients from
normal controls.
Many studies have suggested that the diseased brains (such
as with AD/MCI) differ from the normal brains in connectivity
patterns, reflected in various network properties such as local
clustering [37], [38] and the topological properties of whole
network [13], [15], [40]. In our method, two different types of
kernels were used to quantify these two different network properties. Specifically, a vector-based kernel was calculated on the
feature vectors (i.e., with local weighted clustering coefficients)
to measure the similarity of local clustering of the connectivity
networks. Here, feature selection (i.e., with LASSO) is first used
to remove the irrelevant features for classification. The selected
brain regions during feature selection were found to be consistent with the conventional group comparison studies, which include temporal pole [56], orbitofrontal cortex [57], [58], heschl
gyrus [37], hippocampus [38], [47], [59], and posterior cingulate gyrus [46], [47], [60], etc.
On the other hand, graph kernel was used to capture and
characterize the topological property of the whole connectivity
networks [31]. Here, graph-kernel-based group analysis was
performed to rank the discrimination power of each ROI, and
the result shows that the most discriminative ROIs were in line
with previous studies, which include orbitofrontal cortex [57],
[58], rectus gyrus [16], posterior cingulate gyrus [46]–[48],
[60], parahippocampal gyrus [61], [62], amygdala [60], and
temporal pole [56], etc. Finally, it is worth noting that most
of the selected ROIs based on these two properties (i.e., local
clustering and global topology) are consistent due to the same
underlying pathology in AD/MCI.
In AD/MCI studies, threshold-based method has been used
for exploring topological properties of functional connectivity
network [13], [15], [37], [44]. However, there is no golden standard to select a single threshold, and thus network properties are
often explored over a range of plausible threshold. For example,
Zanin et al. in [44] proposed to determine the best threshold
by exploring the classification performance on the whole range
of applicable threshold. Supekar et al. [13] adopted thresholds
ranged from 0.01 to 0.99 with an increment of 0.01 to explore the
“small-world” properties of functional connectivity networks in
AD. In our method, multiple thresholds were adopted to reflect
multiple levels of topological properties of network. Compared
with the single threshold based methods, our method has the following advantages: 1) avoiding testing over a range of thresholds
to find the optimal one; 2) taking advantage of the complemen-

586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

TABLE VIII
TOP 12 SELECTED ROIS FOR INFANT GENDER CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 7.

Performance w.r.t. the number of selecting thresholds.

tary topological properties of different thresholded networks.
Moreover, it is worth noting that, by using the multiple-kernel
learning technique, our method can automatically determine the
optimal network property or combination of network properties
of multiple thresholded networks for classification.
To investigate the effect of the number of thresholds on final
classification performance, we performed an additional experiment on MCI dataset with six different groups of thresholds,
i.e., T 1 = [0.38], T 2 = [0.38 0.4], T 3 = [0.3 0.38 0.4], T 4 =
[0.3, 0.38 0.4 0.45], T 5 = [0.2 0.3 0.38 0.4 0.45], and T 6 =
[0.2 0.3 0.38 0.4 0.45 0.6]. The classification accuracies using
different numbers of thresholds are plotted in Fig. 7. As can be
seen in Fig. 7, our proposed method consistently outperforms
other comparison methods for all groups of thresholds. On the
other hand, our method achieves the best performance when
using five thresholds, and the use of more than five thresholds
does not further improve its classification performance. This
may be because the use of more thresholds leads to more features and thus more challenging to select the discriminative
features for the LK method; this may cause the LK method
(i.e., vector-kernel based) to perform poorly and finally affect
the performance of our proposed method which combines both
vector-kernel and graph-kernels.

whole connectivity network for classification, while intuitively
selecting the disease-related sub-networks from the whole network may further improve the classification performance. Full
investigation on this issue will be our future work. Second, the
network construction is a very important step and different network construction methods may exhibit different properties. Our
current study does not analyze the impact of these differences
on classification performance. Third, there are many imaging
modalities that have been used for AD or MCI classification,
and simultaneous integration of different imaging modalities
and different network properties of each modality may further
improve the classification performance, which will be explored
in the future. Finally, our current study is limited by the small
number of MCI subjects, which may reduce its generalization
ability on MCI classification. Thus, in the future work, we plan
to apply the proposed method on larger MCI dataset.
V. CONCLUSION
In summary, we have presented a new connectivity network
based classification framework to fuse multiple properties of
connectivity networks for classification. In the proposed framework, multiple thresholds were first applied on functional connectivity network to reflect multiple levels of network properties.
Then, two different types of kernels (i.e., vector-based kernel and
graph kernel) were used to quantify two different yet complementary network properties, and an MKL technique was further
adopted to fuse these heterogeneous kernels. Experimental results show that our proposed method not only can significantly
improve the performance of classification, but also can potentially detect the ROIs that are sensitive to disease pathology. In
the future work, we will investigate how to select the diseaserelated sub-networks from whole network for further improving
the classification performance and also for better interpretation
of the pathology of disease.
REFERENCES

A. Limitations
The current study is limited by the following factors. First,
in our study, we use only the topological information of the

[1] R. Brookmeyer, E. Johnson, K. Ziegler-Graham, and H. M. Arrighi, “Forecasting the global burden of Alzheimer’s disease,” Alzheimer’s Dementia,
vol. 3, pp. 186–191, Jul. 2007.

JIE et al.: INTEGRATION OF NETWORK TOPOLOGICAL AND CONNECTIVITY PROPERTIES FOR NEUROIMAGING CLASSIFICATION

[2] D. Pachauri, C. Hinrichs, M. K. Chung, S. C. Johnson, and V. Singh,
“Topology-based kernels with application to inference problems in
Alzheimer’s disease,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1760–
1770, Oct. 2011.
[3] P. M. Thompson and L. G. Apostolova, “Computational anatomical methods as applied to ageing and dementia,” Brit. J. Radiol., vol. 80, pp. S78–
S91, 2007.
[4] J. P. Ye, T. Wu, J. Li, and K. W. Chen, “Machine learning approaches
for the neuroimaging study of Alzheimer’s disease,” Computer, vol. 44,
pp. 99–101, Apr. 2011.
[5] J. Escudero, E. Ifeachor, J. P. Zajicek, C. Green, J. Shearer, and S. Pearson,
“Machine learning-based method for personalized and cost-effective detection of Alzheimer’s disease,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no.
1, pp. 164–168, Jan. 2013.
[6] C. Hinrichs, V. Singh, G. F. Xu, S. C. Johnson, and A. D. Neuroimaging,
“Predictive markers for AD in a multi-modality framework: An analysis of
MCI progression in the ADNI population,” Neuroimage, vol. 55, pp. 574–
589, Mar. 15, 2011.
[7] D. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, H. Yuan, and D. Shen, “Multimodal classification of Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment,” Neuroimage, vol. 55, pp. 856–867, Apr. 1, 2011.
[8] C. Y. Wee, P. T. Yap, D. Q. Zhang, K. Denny, J. N. Browndyke,
G. G. Potter, K. A. Welsh-Bohmer, L. H. Wang, and D. G. Shen, “Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity
networks,” Neuroimage, vol. 59, pp. 2045–2056, Feb. 1, 2012.
[9] T. Xie and Y. He, “Mapping the Alzheimer’s brain with connectomics,”
Frontiers Psychiatry/Frontiers Res. Found., vol. 2, pp. 1–14, 2011.
[10] K. Abuhassan, D. Coyle, and L. P. Maguire, “Investigating the neural
correlates of pathological cortical networks in Alzheimer’s disease using
heterogeneous neuronal models,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no.
3, pp. 890–896, Mar. 2012.
[11] M. Rubinov and O. Sporns, “Complex network measures of brain connectivity: Uses and interpretations,” Neuroimage, vol. 52, pp. 1059–1069,
Sep. 2010.
[12] J. R. Petrella, F. C. Sheldon, S. E. Prince, V. D. Calhoun, and
P. M. Doraiswamy, “Default mode network connectivity in stable vs. progressive mild cognitive impairment,” Neurology, vol. 76, pp. 511–517,
Feb. 8, 2011.
[13] K. Supekar, V. Menon, D. Rubin, M. Musen, and M. D. Greicius, “Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer’s
disease,” Plos Comput. Biol., vol. 4, pp. e1000100:1–11, Jun. 2008.
[14] Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Bai, H. Yan, R. Dai, C. Zhong, H. Wang, W. Wei,
T. Xue, Y. Feng, Y. You, and J. Tian, “Investigation of the effective connectivity of resting state networks in Alzheimer’s disease: A functional
MRI study combining independent components analysis and multivariate
Granger causality analysis,” NMR Biomed., vol. 25, pp. 1311–1320, Dec.
2012.
[15] E. J. Sanz-Arigita, M. M. Schoonheim, J. S. Damoiseaux,
S. A. Rombouts, E. Maris, F. Barkhof, P. Scheltens, and C. J. Stam,
“Loss of ‘small-world’ networks in Alzheimer’s disease: Graph analysis
of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity,” PLoS ONE, vol. 5,
pp. e13788:1–14, 2010.
[16] C. Y. Wee, P. T. Yap, K. Denny, J. N. Browndyke, G. G. Potter,
K. A. Welsh-Bohmer, L. H. Wang, and D. G. Shen, “Resting-state multispectrum functional connectivity networks for identification of MCI patients,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. e37828:1–11, 2012.
[17] Y. Li, Y. Wang, G. Wu, F. Shi, L. Zhou, W. Lin, and D. Shen, “Discriminant analysis of longitudinal cortical thickness changes in Alzheimer’s
disease using dynamic and network features,” Neurobiol. Aging, vol. 33,
pp. 427 e15–427 e30, Feb. 2012.
[18] G. Chen, B. D. Ward, C. M. Xie, W. J. Li, G. Y. Chen, J. S. Goveas,
P. G. Antuono, and S. J. Li, “A clustering-based method to detect functional connectivity differences,” Neuroimage, Springer,
Berlin/Heidelberg, vol. 61, pp. 56–61, May 15, 2012.
[19] B. Jie, D. Q. Zhang, C. Y. Wee, and D. G. Shen, “Structural feature
selection for connectivity network-based MCI diagnosis,” in Multimodal
Brain Image Analysis of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, P.-T. Yap
et al., Eds. 2012, vol. 7509, pp. 175–184.
[20] B. Jie, D. Q. Zhang, C. Y. Wee, and D. G. Shen, “Topological graph
kernel on multiple thresholded functional connectivity networks for MCI
classification,” Human Brain Mapping, Sep. 2013, DOI: 10.1002/hbm.
22353.
[21] C. Y. Wee, P. T. Yap, D. Zhang, L. Wang, and D. Shen, “Constrained
sparse functional connectivity networks for MCI classification,” Med.
Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv., vol. 15, pp. 212–219, 2012.

587

[22] J. M. Shao, N. Myers, Q. L. Yang, J. Feng, C. Plant, C. Bohm, H. Forstl,
A. Kurz, C. Zimmer, C. Meng, V. Riedl, A. Wohlschlager, and C. Sorg,
“Prediction of Alzheimer’s disease using individual structural connectivity
networks,” Neurobiol. Aging, vol. 33, pp. 2756–2765, Dec. 2012.
[23] G. Chen, B. D. Ward, C. Xie, W. Li, Z. Wu, J. L. Jones, M. Franczak,
P. Antuono, and S. J. Li, “Classification of Alzheimer disease, mild
cognitive impairment, and normal cognitive status with large-scale network analysis based on resting-state functional MR imaging,” Radiology,
vol. 259, pp. 213–221, Apr. 2011.
[24] J. Wang, X. Zuo, Z. Dai, M. Xia, Z. Zhao, X. Zhao, J. Jia, Y. Han, and
Y. He, “Disrupted functional brain connectome in individuals at risk for
Alzheimer’s disease,” Biological Psychiatry, vol. 73, pp. 472–481, Mar.
2013.
[25] K. R. A. Van Dijk, T. Hedden, A. Venkataraman, K. C. Evans, S. W. Lazar,
and R. L. Buckner, “Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human
connectomics: Theory, properties, and optimization,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 103, pp. 297–321, Jan. 2010.
[26] N. Tzourio-Mazoyer, B. Landeau, D. Papathanassiou, F. Crivello, O. Etard,
N. Delcroix, B. Mazoyer, and M. Joliot, “Automated anatomical labeling
of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the
MNI MRI single-subject brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 15, pp. 273–289, Jan.
2002.
[27] D. Shen and C. Davatzikos, “HAMMER: Hierarchical attribute matching
mechanism for elastic registration,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21, no.
11, pp. 1421–1439, Nov. 2002.
[28] X. N. Zuo, A. Di Martino, C. Kelly, Z. E. Shehzad, D. G. Gee, D. F. Klein,
F. X. Castellanos, B. B. Biswal, and M. P. Milham, “The oscillating brain:
Complex and reliable,” Neuroimage, vol. 49, pp. 1432–1445, Jan. 15,
2010.
[29] D. Cordes, V. M. Haughton, K. Arfanakis, J. D. Carew, P. A. Turski,
C. H. Moritz, M. A. Quigley, and M. E. Meyerand, “Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in ‘resting-state’
data,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 22, pp. 1326–1333, Aug. 2001.
[30] S. Achard, D. S. Bassett, A. Meyer-Lindenberg, and E. Bullmore, “Fractal
connectivity of long-memory networks,” Phys. Rev.. E, Statistical, Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., vol. 77, pp. 036104:1–12, Mar. 2008.
[31] N. Shervashidze, P. Schweitzer, E. J. van Leeuwen, K. Mehlhorn, and
K. M. Borgwardt, “Weisfeiler–Lehman graph kernels,” J. Mach. Learning
Res., vol. 12, pp. 2539–2561, Sep. 2011.
[32] G. Camps-Valls, N. Shervashidze, and K. M. Borgwardt, “Spatio-spectral
remote sensing image classification with graph kernels,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 741–745, Oct. 2010.
[33] Y. Zhang, H. Lin, Z. Yang, and Y. Li, “Neighborhood hash graph kernel
for protein-protein interaction extraction,” J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 44,
pp. 1086–1092, Dec. 2011.
[34] G. R. G. Lanckriet, N. Cristianini, P. Bartlett, L. El Ghaoui, and
M. I. Jordan, “Learning the kernel matrix with semidefinite programming,” J. Mach. Learning Res., vol. 5, pp. 27–72, Jan. 2004.
[35] D. Zhang and D. Shen, “Multi-modal multi-task learning for joint prediction of multiple regression and classification variables in Alzheimer’s
disease,” Neuroimage, vol. 59, pp. 895–907, Jan. 16, 2012.
[36] E. Bullmore and O. Sporns, “Complex brain networks: Graph theoretical
analysis of structural and functional systems,” Nature Rev. Neuroscience,
vol. 10, pp. 186–198, Mar. 2009.
[37] Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Yan, L. Bai, R. Dai, W. Wei, C. Zhong, T. Xue,
H. Wang, Y. Feng, Y. You, X. Zhang, and J. Tian, “Altered topological
patterns of brain networks in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s
disease: A resting-state fMRI study,” Psychiatry Res., Jun. 11, 2012.
[38] F. Bai, Z. Zhang, D. R. Watson, H. Yu, Y. Shi, Y. Yuan, Y. Zang, C. Zhu,
and Y. Qian, “Abnormal functional connectivity of hippocampus during
episodic memory retrieval processing network in amnestic mild cognitive
impairment,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 65, pp. 951–958, Jun. 1, 2009.
[39] J. P. Onnela, J. Saramaki, J. Kertesz, and K. Kaski, “Intensity and coherence of motifs in weighted complex networks,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 71,
pp. 065103: 1–4, Jun. 2005.
[40] C. J. Stam, B. F. Jones, G. Nolte, M. Breakspear, and P. Scheltens, “Smallworld networks and functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 17, pp. 92–99, Jan. 2007.
[41] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the Lasso,” J. Royal
Statistical Soc. Series B Methodol.,, vol. 58, pp. 267–288, 1996.
[42] A. Y. Ng, “Feature selection, L1 vs L2 regularization, and rotational in
variance,” Proc. Int’l Conf. Mach. Learning, 2004.
[43] C. C. Chang and C. J. Lin, “LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines,” (2011). [Online]. Available: http://www.CSTe.ntu.edu.
tw/∼cjlin/libsvm

588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

[44] M. Zanin, P. Sousa, D. Papo, R. Bajo, J. Garcia-Prieto, F. del Pozo,
E. Menasalvas, and S. Boccaletti, “Optimizing functional network representation of multivariate time series,” Sci. Rep., vol. 2, pp. 630:1–6,
2012.
[45] J. Liu, S. Ji, and J. Ye, SLEP: Sparse Learning with Efficient Projections.
Phoenix, AZ: Arizona State Univ., 2009.
[46] S. D. Han, K. Arfanakis, D. A. Fleischman, S. E. Leurgans,
E. R. Tuminello, E. C. Edmonds, and D. A. Bennett, “Functional connectivity variations in mild cognitive impairment: Associations with cognitive
function,” J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc., vol. 18, pp. 39–48, Jan. 2012.
[47] Y. X. Zhou, J. H. Dougherty, K. F. Hubner, B. Bai, R. L. Cannon, and
R. K. Hutson, “Abnormal connectivity in the posterior cingulate and hippocampus in early Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment,”
Alzheimers Dementia, vol. 4, pp. 265–270, Jul. 2008.
[48] K. Wang, M. Liang, L. Wang, L. Tian, X. Zhang, K. Li, and T. Jiang,
“Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer’s disease: A restingstate fMRI study,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 28, pp. 967–978, Oct.
2007.
[49] W. Gao, J. H. Gilmore, K. S. Giovanello, J. K. Smith, D. Shen, H. Zhu,
and W. Lin, “Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology
during the first two years of life,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, pp. e25278:1–13,
2011.
[50] H. J. Kim, N. Kim, S. Kim, S. Hong, K. Park, S. Lim, J. M. Park, B. Na,
Y. Chae, J. Lee, S. Yeo, I. H. Choe, S. Y. Cho, and G. Cho, “Sex differences
in amygdala subregions: Evidence from subregional shape analysis,” Neuroimage, vol. 60, pp. 2054–2061, May 1, 2012.
[51] L. A. Kilpatrick, D. H. Zald, J. V. Pardo, and L. F. Cahill, “Sex-related differences in amygdala functional connectivity during resting conditions,”
Neuroimage, vol. 30, pp. 452–461, Apr. 1, 2006.
[52] J. M. Duarte-Carvajalino, N. Jahanshad, C. Lenglet, K. L. McMahon,
G. I. de Zubicaray, N. G. Martin, M. J. Wright, P. M. Thompson, and
G. Sapiro, “Hierarchical topological network analysis of anatomical human brain connectivity and differences related to sex and kinship,” Neuroimage, vol. 59, pp. 3784–3804, Feb. 15, 2012.
[53] E. R. Sowell, B. S. Peterson, E. Kan, R. P. Woods, J. Yoshii, R. Bansal,
D. R. Xu, H. T. Zhu, P. M. Thompson, and A. W. Toga, “Sex differences
in cortical thickness mapped in 176 healthy individuals between 7 and
87 years of age,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 17, pp. 1550–1560, Jul. 2007.
[54] A. K. Mutlu, M. Schneider, M. Debbane, D. Badoud, S. Eliez, and
M. Schaer, “Sex differences in thickness, and folding developments
throughout the cortex,” Neuroimage, May 28, 2013.
[55] J. M. Goldstein, L. J. Seidman, N. J. Horton, N. Makris, D. N. Kennedy,
V. S. Caviness, Jr., S. V. Faraone, and M. T. Tsuang, “Normal sexual dimorphism of the adult human brain assessed by in vivo magnetic resonance
imaging,” Cereb Cortex, vol. 11, pp. 490–497, Jun. 2001.
[56] F. Nobili, D. Salmaso, S. Morbelli, N. Girtler, A. Piccardo, A. Brugnolo,
B. Dessi, S. A. Larsson, G. Rodriguez, and M. Pagani, “Principal component analysis of FDG PET in amnestic MCI,” Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Molecular
Imag., vol. 35, pp. 2191–202, Dec. 2008.
[57] C. L. Grady, A. R. McIntosh, S. Beig, M. L. Keightley, H. Burian, and
S. E. Black, “Evidence from functional neuroimaging of a compensatory
prefrontal network in Alzheimer’s disease,” J. Neurosci. Official J. Soc.
Neurosci., vol. 23, pp. 986–993, Feb. 1, 2003.
[58] Y. Han, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, B. Min, J. Lu, K. Li, Y. He, and J. Jia,
“Frequency-dependent changes in the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: A resting-state fMRI study,”
Neuroimage, vol. 55, pp. 287–295, Mar. 1, 2011.
[59] Y. Feng, L. Bai, Y. Ren, S. Chen, H. Wang, W. Zhang, and J. Tian, “FMRI
connectivity analysis of acupuncture effects on the whole brain network
in mild cognitive impairment patients,” Magn. Resonance Imag., vol. 30,
pp. 672–682, Jun. 2012.
[60] C. Davatzikos, P. Bhatt, L. M. Shaw, K. N. Batmanghelich, and
J. Q. Trojanowski, “Prediction of MCI to AD conversion, via MRI,
CSF biomarkers, and pattern classification,” Neurobiol. Aging, vol. 32,
pp. 2322e19–2322e27, Dec. 2011.
[61] M. M. Machulda, M. L. Senjem, G. E. Smith, R. J. Ivnik, B. F. Boeve,
D. S. Knopman, R. C. Petersen, and C. R. Jack, “Functional MRI changes
in amnestic vs. nonamnestic MCI during a recognition memory task,”
Neurology, vol. 70, pp. A445–A445, Mar. 11, 2008.
[62] K. A. Celone, V. D. Calhoun, B. C. Dickerson, A. Atri, E. F. Chua,
S. L. Miller, K. DePeau, D. M. Rentz, D. J. Selkoe, D. Blacker,
M. S. Albert, and R. A. Sperling, “Alterations in memory networks in mild
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: An independent component analysis,” J. Neurosci. Official J. Soc. Neurosci., vol. 26, pp. 10222–
10231, Oct. 4, 2006.

Biao Jie received the B.S. degree in computer science from Fuyang Normal College, Fuyang, China,
in 2001, and the M.S. degree in computer science
from the Yunnan Normal University, Yunnan, China,
in 2006. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Computer Science, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing,
China.
His current research interests include machine
learning and medical image analysis.

Daoqiang Zhang received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in
1999 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently a Professor in the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. His current
research interests include machine learning, pattern
recognition, and biomedical image analysis. In these
areas, he has authored or coauthored more than 100
technical papers in the refereed international journals
and conference proceedings.
Dr. Zhang was nominated for the National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation
Award of China in 2006, won the best paper award at the 9th Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence (PRICAI’06), and was the winner
of the best paper award honorable mention of Pattern Recognition Journal 2007.
He is currently an Editorial Board Member for the Computational Intelligence
and Neuroscience Journal and a Program Committee Member for several international conferences. He is a member of the Machine Learning Society of
the Chinese Association of Artificial Intelligence (CAAI) and the Artificial Intelligence and Pattern Recognition Society of the China Computer Federation
(CCF).

Wei Gao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from
Tianjin University, Tianjin,China, in 2004 and 2006,
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill in 2010.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the
Department of Radiology and Biomedical Research
Imaging Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. His current research interests include
MRI studies of early brain development and normal/abnormal adult brain functioning with a focus
on connectivity-based network-level analysis.

Qian Wang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in
2006 and 2009, respectively. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Computer Science, the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill.
He is with the Image Display, Enhancement, and
Analysis Research Laboratory, Department of Radiology and BRIC, the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill. His current research interests include
medical image registration, segmentation, machine
learning, and fMRI analysis.

JIE et al.: INTEGRATION OF NETWORK TOPOLOGICAL AND CONNECTIVITY PROPERTIES FOR NEUROIMAGING CLASSIFICATION

Chong-Yaw Wee received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Malaya,
Malaysia, in 2007.
Since 2010, he has been a Postdoctoral Research
Associate at the Biomedical Research Imaging Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
His current research interests include machine learning, neurodegenerative and neurodevelopment disorders, and multimodal multivariate neuroimaging
classification.

589

Dinggang Shen (M’00–SM’07) received the Ph.D.
degree in electronic communication from Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China, in 1995.
He is a Professor of Radiology, Biomedical Research Imaging Center (BRIC), Computer Science,
and Biomedical Engineering in the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH). He is currently directing the Center for Image Informatics, the
Image Display, Enhancement, and Analysis (IDEA)
Lab, Department of Radiology, and also the Medical
Image Analysis Core in the BRIC. He was a tenuretrack Assistant Professor in the University of Pennsylvanian (UPenn) and a
Faculty Member in the Johns Hopkins University. His current research interests
include medical image analysis, computer vision, and pattern recognition. He
has authored or coauthored more than 450 papers in the international journals
and conference proceedings. He is as an Editorial Board Member for four international journals.
Dr. Shen is with the Board of Directors, the Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) Society.

