840

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

The Technologically Integrated Oncosimulator:
Combining Multiscale Cancer Modeling
With Information Technology in the
In Silico Oncology Context
Georgios Stamatakos, Member, IEEE, Dimitra Dionysiou, Aran Lunzer, Robert Belleman,
Eleni Kolokotroni, Eleni Georgiadi, Marius Erdt, Juliusz Pukacki, Stefan Rüeping, Stavroula Giatili,
Alberto d’ Onofrio, Stelios Sfakianakis, Kostas Marias, Member, IEEE, Christine Desmedt,
Manolis Tsiknakis, Member, IEEE, and Norbert Graf, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper outlines the major components and function of the technologically integrated oncosimulator developed primarily within the Advancing Clinico Genomic Trials on Cancer
(ACGT) project. The Oncosimulator is defined as an information
technology system simulating in vivo tumor response to therapeutic
Manuscript received February 5, 2013; revised July 12, 2013; accepted
September 12, 2013. Date of publication October 2, 2013; date of current version
May 1, 2014. This work was supported in part by the European Commission
under the Project “ACGT: Advancing Clinicogenomic Trials on Cancer” (FP62005-IST-026996), Project Contra Cancrum: Clinically Oriented Translational
Cancer Multilevel Modeling” (FP7-ICT-2007-2-223979), Project “TUMOR:
Transatlantic TUmor Model Repositories (FP7-ICT-2009.5.4-247754, Project
“p-medicine: Personalized Medicine (FP7-ICT-2009.5.3-270089,” and Project
“CHIC: Computational Horizons in Cancer (CHIC): Developing Meta- and
Hyper-Multiscale Models and Repositories for In Silico Oncology” (FP7-ICT2011–9–600841).
G. S. Stamatakos (corresponding author) is with Institute of Communication and Computer Systems, National Technical University of Athens, In Silico
Oncology Group, 9 Iroon Polytechniou, GR 157 80, Zografos, Greece (e-mail:
gestam@central.ntua.gr).
D. Dionysiou, E. Kolokotroni, E. Georgiadi, and S. Giatili are with the
In Silico Oncology Group, Institute of Communication and Computer Systems, National Technical University of Athens, GR 157 80, Zografos, Greece
(e-mail: dimdio@esd.ece.ntua.gr; ekolok@mail.ntua.gr; egeorg@central.
ntua.gr; giatili@otenet.gr).
A. Lunzer was with Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0814, Japan. He is
now with Alan Kay’s Viewpoints Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA 900951596 USA (e-mail: aranlunzer@gmail.com).
R. Belleman is with the University of Amsterdam, 1012 WX Amsterdam,
The Netherlands (e-mail; R.G.Belleman@uva.nl).
M. Erdt is with the Fraunhofer Institute, 64283 Darmstadt, Germany (e-mail:
marius.erdt@igd.fraunhofer.de).
J. Pukacki is with the Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center
(PSNC), 60-449 Poznan, Poland (e-mail: pukacki@man.poznan.pl).
S. Rueping is with the Fraunhofer IAIS, Schloss Birlinghoven, 53754 St.
Augustin, Germany (e-mail: Stefan.rueping@iais.fraunhofer.de).
A. d’Onofrio is with the Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, 20141 Milano, Italy
(e-mail: alberto.donofrio@ieo.it).
S. Sfakianakis and K. Marias are with the Foundation for Research and
Technology Hellas, Heraklion 700 13, Greece (e-mail: ssfak@ics.forth.gr;
kmarias@ics.forth.gr).
C. Desmedt is with the Institut Jules Bordet, – Centre des Tumeurs1000 Bruxelles, Belgium (e-mail: christine.desmedt@bordet.be).
M. Tsiknakis is with the Department of Informatics Engineering, TEI Crete
and the Computational Medicine Laboratory, Institute of Computer Science,
FORTH, Heraklion 700 13, Greece (e-mail: tsiknaki@staff.teicrete.gr).
N. Graf is with the University Hospital of the Saarland, Pediatric
Haematology and Oncology, D-66421 Homburg, Germany (e-mail: Norbert.
Graf@uniklinikum-saarland.de).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2284276

modalities within the clinical trial context. Chemotherapy in the
neoadjuvant setting, according to two real clinical trials concerning nephroblastoma and breast cancer, has been considered. The
spatiotemporal simulation module embedded in the Oncosimulator is based on the multiscale, predominantly top-down, discrete
entity—discrete event cancer simulation technique developed by
the In Silico Oncology Group, National Technical University of
Athens. The technology modules include multiscale data handling,
image processing, invocation of code execution via a spreadsheetinspired environment portal, execution of the code on the grid,
and the visualization of the predictions. A refining scenario for
the eventual coupling of the oncosimulator with immunological
models is also presented. Parameter values have been adapted to
multiscale clinical trial data in a consistent way, thus supporting the
predictive potential of the oncosimulator. Indicative results demonstrating various aspects of the clinical adaptation and validation
process are presented. Completion of these processes is expected to
pave the way for the clinical translation of the system.
Index Terms—Advancing Clinico Genomic Trials on Cancer
(ACGT) project, breast cancer, in silico medicine, in silico oncology, multiscale cancer modeling, nephroblastoma, oncosimulator,
Virtual Physiological Human (VPH).

I. INTRODUCTION
N silico medicine, an emergent scientific and technological
domain based on clinically driven and oriented multiscale
biomodeling, appears to be the latest trend regarding the translation of mathematical and computational biological science
to clinical practice through massive exploitation of information
technology. The term multiscale refers to several scales or levels
of the manifestation of life such as the molecular, the cellular,
the tissue, the organ, and the body system scales addressed concurrently. The idea is to view disease as a hypercomplex and
multiscale natural phenomenon amenable to modeling and simulation [1]–[10]. In silico (i.e., on the computer) experimentation
for each individual patient using their own multiscale biomedical data is expected to significantly improve the effectiveness
of treatment in the future, since reliable computer predictions
could suggest the optimal treatment scheme(s) and schedules(s)
for each separate case.
It is noted that generic treatment schemes and schedules
are based on the average response of a population of patients.
Despite the fact that those patients share certain characteristics

I

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

STAMATAKOS et al.: TECHNOLOGICALLY INTEGRATED ONCOSIMULATOR

of the disease, other critical disease characteristics may differ
tremendously across the population. This may lead to remarkably differing actual responses to the same treatment among
patients.Therefore, a thorough exploitation of all the critical
disease characteristics of a given patient and their dynamic interdependences at several spatiotemporal scales is expected to
lead to an optimal treatment tailored to the patient’s biological
constitution. Such an approach may dictate the prescription of
more effective drugs and dosages for any given patient and the
minimization of side effects. This may obviously have considerable clinical, societal, and financial implications.
In order to address this vision, a number of combined multiscale modeling and information technology approaches have appeared over the last few years [1]. In the area of in silico oncology
the technologically integrated oncosimulator (IOS) developed
primarily within the framework of the European Commission
(EC) funded integrated project ACGT (Advancing ClinicoGenomic Trials on Cancer, FP6–2005-IST-026996) appears to be
the first worldwide effort of its kind. [11].
The ACGT project proposed the design and implementation
of a dedicated cancer information technology (IT) environment
able to seamlessly integrate clinico-genomic data and support
the development of complex models. Within this context, simulating disease evolution and/or disease outcome was a milestone
for the technological advancement of predictive medicine-based
decision support. The major expected outcome is twofold: first,
we hope to alleviate the patient from unnecessary treatment.
Excess treatment may be administered in cases where lack of
knowledge regarding critical aspects of the molecular constitution and the multiscale dynamics of the tumor prevents the
prediction of an eventually good and fast response to a given
therapeutic scheme from being formulated. In silico oncology
is expected to substantially alleviate the potentially serious side
effects of excess treatment in such cases. Second, we hope to
eventually optimize treatment via in silico simulation of candidate therapeutic schemes.
The IOS embedded within the ACGT architecture is a software system simulating in vivo tumor response to therapeutic
modalities within the clinical trial context. The four dimensional (4-D) (spatiotemporal) simulation module that has been
embedded in the oncosimulator is primarily based on the multiscale, predominantly top-down, discrete entity—discrete event
cancer simulation technique developed by the In Silico Oncology Group (ISOG) of the Institute of Communication and
Computer Systems, National Technical University of Athens
(www.in-silico-oncology.iccs.ntua.gr) [2]–[10]. The top-down
method starts from the macroscopic imaging data and proceeds
toward lower biocomplexity levels. When there is a need for an
upward movement in the biocomplexity scales, a summary of
the available information pertaining to the previous lower level
is used.
Within the ACGT project, we have addressed two preoperative chemotherapy scenarios using real clinical trial data:
nephroblastoma and breast cancer. The technology modules include multiscale data handling, image processing, invocation of
code execution via a spreadsheet-inspired environment portal
(RecipeSheet), execution of the computer code on the grid, and

841

visualization of the predictions of the simulations. Adaptation
of parameter values to multiscale clinical trial data has been
achieved in a consistent way as described in Section IX. The latter endorses the predictive potential of the oncosimulator. Both
clinical adaptation and validation procedures are in progress. In
addition to already published predictive results [8], [10] demonstrating various aspects of the clinical adaptation and validation
procedures, new illustrative simulation examples are presented
in this paper. Clinical adaptation and validation, when completed, are expected to pave the way for the clinical translation of the system. A scenario for the eventual coupling of the
oncosimulator with immunological models so as to refine the
original simulation tumor dynamics models is also presented.
A. Nephroblastoma Case
Nephroblastoma is the most common malignant renal tumor
in children. Treatments are based on prospective multicenter
trials and studies conducted by the International Society of
Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) in Europe and the Children’s Oncology Group, North America (COG) in North America [12].
Information from these nephroblastoma studies on both sides
of the Atlantic have allowed the identification of prognostic
indicators independent of whether patients are treated by immediate surgery (COG) or surgery after preoperative chemotherapy
(SIOP).
The identification of histological subtypes of Wilms’ tumor
in addition to stage classification and response to treatment is
of prognostic value. In this way, the SIOP trials and studies
largely focus on the issue of preoperative therapy [13], [14].
Response to treatment can be measured individually by tumor
volume reduction and percentage of therapy-induced necrosis
or remaining vital blastema at the time of surgery in the histological specimen. In nephroblastoma, the blastemal subtype
after preoperative chemotherapy is recognized as an unfavorable entity. This gives an early individual prognostic parameter
and is used for further stratification and more individualization
of the postoperative treatment [12], [13].
The nephroblastoma case is ideal for the development and
validation of in silico models since the highly successful treatment rate in SIOP provides an excellent, reliable reference for
both developing and validating such models. The main goal in
this context is to quantitatively predict the response to preoperative chemotherapy in every case. The model aims at avoiding
unnecessary treatment in nonresponding tumors and applying
chemotherapy only to those patients that would benefit most.
At the same time, the provision of a clinical decision support
tool for the less experienced clinicians treating this disease is of
particular importance.
B. Breast Cancer Case
The breast cancer branch of the oncosimulator addresses
breast cancer treatment with epirubicin, an anthracycline drug
used for chemotherapy. Although anthracycline drugs are
among the most effective chemotherapies in breast cancer, their
efficacy is restricted to a subset of the breast cancer patient
population, and a small proportion of women suffer severe side

842

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

effects, including congestive heart failure. By identifying those
women who are most likely to benefit from treatment, it might
be possible to reduce the unnecessary exposure of some women
to such a risk and to take an important step toward the individualization of breast cancer treatment. The traditional approach to tackle this problem has been the identification of
novel predictive biomarkers. Topoisomerase IIA (TOP2 A) is
arguably the most promising marker for predicting the efficacy
of anthracycline-based chemotherapy for breast cancer patients.
However, several groups have reported conflicting results with
regard to its predictive value. The primary aim of the TOP
trial [15] was to prospectively evaluate the predictive value of
TOP2 A and the secondary aim to identify biomarkers of response/resistance to anthracyclines.
This trial has demonstrated a significant correlation of
TOP2 A amplification—but not protein overexpression—
with the response to anthracyclines [15]. Additionally, an
anthracycline-based score (A-Score) using gene expression data
has been proposed. By including the A-Score into the IOS,
a multiscale model has been developed to simulate treatment
outcome based on the characteristics of individual patients for
optimizing breast cancer treatment.
II. BRIEF OUTLINE OF THE MULTISCALE MODEL OF CANCER
DYNAMICS AND RESPONSE TO TREATMENT UNITS
In this section, a brief description of the basics of the IOS multiscale models is provided. The models start from the macroscopic high biocomplexity level (imaging data) and proceeds
toward lower biocomplexity levels. The macroscopic anatomic
region of interest is either manually or semi-automatically annotated by the clinicians on MRI imaging sets acquired at time
of diagnosis (see Section III.) A virtual cubic mesh is used for
the discretization of the area of interest (tumor) of which the elementary cube is termed geometrical cell [2]–[9]. A hypermatrix,
i.e., a mathematical matrix of [matrices of (matrices. . .of (matrices or vectors or scalars))] corresponding to the anatomic region
of interest is subsequently defined [9]. The latter describes explicitly or implicitly the local biological, physical, and chemical
dynamics of the region [2]–[10]. The following (sets of) parameters are used to identify a cluster of biological cells belonging
to a given equivalence class within a geometrical cell of the
mesh at a given time point.
1) The spatial coordinates of the discrete points of the discretization mesh with spatial indices i, j, k, respectively.
It is noted that each discrete spatial point lies at the center
of a geometrical cell of the discretization mesh.
2) The temporal coordinate of the discrete time point with
temporal index l.
3) The mitotic potential category (i.e., stem or progenitor
or terminally differentiated) of the biological cells with
mitotic potential category index m.
4) The cell phase (within or out of the cell cycle) of the
biological cells with cell phase index n. The following
phases are considered: {G1, S, G2, M, G0, A, N, D},
where G1 denotes the G1 cell cycle phase, S denotes the
DNA synthesis phase, G2 denotes the G2 cell cycle phase,

M denotes mitosis, G0 denotes the quiescent (dormant)
G0 phase, A denotes the apoptotic phase, N denotes the
necrotic phase and D denotes the remnants of dead cells.
For the biological cells belonging to a given mitotic potential
category AND residing in a given cell phase AND being accommodated within the geometrical cell whose center lies at a
given spatial point AND being considered at a given time point;
in other words for the biological cells clustered in the same
equivalence class denoted by the index combination ijklmn, the
following state parameters are provided:
1) local oxygen and nutrient provision level;
2) number of biological cells;
3) average time spent by the biological cells in the given
phase;
4) number of biological cells hit by treatment;
5) number of biological cells not hit by treatment.
The initial constitution of the tumor has to be estimated based
on the available medical data through the application of pertinent algorithms [8]. This state corresponds to the instant just
before the start of the treatment course to be simulated. The
entire simulation can be viewed as the periodic and sequential
application of a number of algorithms (operators) on the hypermatrix of the anatomic region of interest which takes place in
the following order. 1) time updating, i.e., increasing time by
a time unit (e.g., 1 h); 2) estimation of the local oxygen and
nutrient provision level; 3) estimation of the effect of treatment
referring mainly to cell hit by the treatment, cell killing, and
cell survival. Available molecular and/or histological information is integrated primarily at this point. 4) Application of cell
cycling, possibly perturbed by treatment. Transition between
mitotic potential cell categories such as transition of the offspring of a terminally divided progenitor cell into the terminally
differentiated cell category is also tackled by this algorithm set.
5) Handling of differential tumor expansion/ shrinkage or more
generally spatial geometry and tumor mechanical dynamics. 6)
Updating the local oxygen and nutrient provision level at each
time step. It is worth noting that stochastic perturbations about
the mean values of several model parameters are considered (hybridization with the Monte Carlo technique). A generic tumor
cell cytokinetic model is depicted in Fig. 1. For further details
see [8] and [10].

III. IMAGE PROCESSING OF THE MEDICAL DATA
For patients with nephroblastoma, imaging studies (MRI T 1,
T 1 with contrast enhancement, T 2 and T 2 flair) are available
at the time of diagnosis and after 4 weeks of preoperative
chemotherapy. The imaging studies at the time of diagnosis
are used for the prediction of tumor shrinkage during and after
4 weeks of vincristine and actinomycin-D chemotherapy.
One of the main inputs into the IOS is the volumetric data
of nephroblastoma. This data consists of isotropic voxel dimensions in order to facilitate the computation of tumor dynamics
simulation. Since MRI slices are usually reconstructed containing highly nonisotropic voxels, interpolation of the binary
segmentation volumes is performed [16].

STAMATAKOS et al.: TECHNOLOGICALLY INTEGRATED ONCOSIMULATOR

843

Fig. 1. Generic cytokinetic model used. LIMP: Limited Mitotic Potential cells.
DIFF: terminally differentiated cells. G1: Gap 1 phase. S: DNA synthesis phase.
G2: Gap 2 phase. M: Mitosis. G0: dormant phase. N: necrosis. A: apoptosis. Hit:
cells lethally hit by chemotherapy. CKR: Cell Kill Rate. The arrow indicating
chemotherapy-induced death is a sliding arrow, with position dependent on drug
pharmacodynamics.

Segmentation of the tumor is important in order to provide
information on the shape and location of the tumor. This process
is also important for model validation since it allows quantitative comparison of the simulation predictions with the actual
development of the tumor in vivo. Within the ACGT project, a
novel semiautomatic snake-based method for cancer segmentation was developed, where a spatially adaptive behavior of
the snake is accomplished with minimal user interaction. The
method achieved has improved results over traditional snakes,
due to local snake bending. This spatially adaptive active contour technique introduced a local snake bending to improve traditional snake’s performance for segmenting tumors. The key
point is the use of adaptable parameters, instead of constant
ones, in order to adjust the bending of the curve locally according to image characteristics such as gradient magnitude and corner strength. The result is a more flexible/accurate delineation of
tumor regions reported in more than 150 real MRI cases. Validation has been performed using the clinical expert’s annotations
as ground truth [17]. Fig. 2, shows an example where this improved method better delineates the tumor without getting stuck
in local maxima.
IV. SUBJUNCTIVE INTERFACE SYSTEM FOR THE EXPLORATION
OF THE ONCOSIMULATOR
In this section, the front-end facilities that were created to
support the IOS developers in its technical validation are briefly
described. Validation, in the sense used here, means confirming
that the simulator delivers credible results when applied to tumors of differing sizes and shapes, and that adjustment to each
of its parameters, singly or in combination, has the expected
impact on the results.
The validation is therefore a form of exploration within the
space of possible simulation results, with the following characteristics. 1) The exploration must be overseen by a human user.
For each simulation, the developers must confirm not just that
the final predicted outcome (percentage growth or shrinkage of
the tumor) is reasonable, but that the simulation followed a le-

Fig. 2. Renal tumor segmentation on MR abdominal images: (a) clinician’s
annotation, (b) result using traditional snakes due to tumor inhomogeneity, and
(c) result using spatially adaptive active contours.

gitimate and credible course to that outcome. 2) The parameter
space is very large. The versions of the simulator being validated
have between 35 and 40 independently variable parameters. An
interface offering simultaneous access to all these parameters
would be unwieldy, so the users must be able to choose which
parameters to vary. They must also be assisted in keeping track
of which parameter–value combinations have been explored so
far. 3) Validation calls heavily on comparison. The developers
must initially confirm that for each step in the value of a single
parameter, the results change by a reasonable increment in the
predicted direction. They must also check the effects of changing
settings on multiple parameters. 4) Some result visualizations
require interaction. The results from the oncosimulator include
representations of the tumor shape in three dimensions; these
can be rendered in 2-D for on-screen display, but in order to understand the entire solid shape a user typically needs to interact
with the view, for example by rotating it or taking slices.
Data presentations and visualizations for the validation are
obtained through RESTful web services. These provide both
alphanumeric (“raw”) representations of IOS results as well as
graphical, such as graph plots, 2-D views (isocontours, scatterplots, cutting planes), 3-D views (isosurfaces, volume rendering), and animated views that show the evolution of a tumor
over time. Multimodal visualizations are also supported that simultaneously represent IOS results with medical images (e.g.,
CT, MRI) and manual annotations of pre/post-therapy tumor regions. Given the importance of comparison between alternative
cases, as noted above, linked views are supported to provide a
consistent view on multiple cases at the same time.
The validation interface is based on the RecipeSheet [18],
an end-user programming environment that explicitly includes

844

Fig. 3.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Main OncoRecipeSheet (ORS) showing the menus for selecting simulation and visualization parameters.

subjunctive interface facilities [19], [20] to help users request,
compare, and interact with multiple alternative results simultaneously. On the “OncoRecipeSheet” (ORS) created for this
project, a user can specify up to 12 independent scenarios at
a time, each scenario defining a combination of simulation–
parameter values. If a simulation has already been run for
a specified parameter combination, visualizations of its results are retrieved from an online server and displayed on the
sheet; if the simulation has not yet been run, the ORS includes a simple tool for submitting it immediately as a grid
job.
Fig. 3 presents the main ORS interface with a single scenario
showing the results. The patient identifier and the version of
simulator code are chosen using the sheet cells at top left. The
large pop-up menu (shown expanded on the right) offers the
38 parameters that can be varied in the chosen code version;
here, the user has requested a control to vary the “cell cycle”
parameter, which the menu shows would otherwise default to
23 h. The displayed result is from a simulation run with default
values for all other parameters. On the far right is an expanded
version of a second menu that offers parameters for tailoring
the result display. Here, the user has asked to control three of
those parameters, so they too appear as cells on the sheet. Fig. 4
shows three examples of how a sheet can be set up with multiple
scenarios, defined by choosing alternative values for simulation
or visualization parameters, and how the scenarios’ results are
displayed to assist comparison.
By the end of the ACGT project some 7000 simulations had
been run using the ORS; early results of this work were published in [21] and [22], [23]. In general, the simulator was shown
to be robust and predictable across a broad range of parameter
settings, but the ability to make comparisons did help to discover
various unexpected behaviors that the simulator developers were
then able to resolve.

V. EXECUTING THE ONCOSIMULATOR ON THE GRID VIA
THE ONCORECIPESHEET (ORS) AND VIA
THE WORKFLOW ENVIRONMENT
The oncosimulator application can take an advantage of the
Grid environment designed within the ACGT project [24]. The
most important components of the grid [25] infrastructure that
take part in the grid execution of the IOS are the following: grid
resource management service (GRMS), responsible for resource
management, and data management system (DMS), a grid storage system (see Fig. 5). GRMS is an open source metascheduling system which allows developers to build and deploy resource
management systems for large scale distributed computing infrastructures. GRMS is based on dynamic resource selection,
mapping and an advanced scheduling methodology, and deals
with dynamic grid environment and resource management challenges, e.g., load-balancing among clusters, remote job control,
or file staging support.
Therefore, the main goal of the GRMS is to manage the whole
process of remote job submission to various batch queuing systems, clusters, or resources. It has been designed as an independent core component for resource management processes,
which can take advantage of various low-level core services
and existing technologies. The main features of GRMS are job
submission, job control (suspending, resuming, canceling), the
ability to choose “the best” resource for the job execution using
multicriteria matching algorithms, support for job checkpointing and migration, support for file staging, storing information
about the job execution, user notifications support, workflow
jobs support, etc.
The data management system (DMS) is composed of several
specialized components and allows building a distributed system of services capable of delivering mechanisms for seamless
management of large amounts of data. It is based on the pattern

STAMATAKOS et al.: TECHNOLOGICALLY INTEGRATED ONCOSIMULATOR

845

Fig. 4. Three multiscenario setups of the OncoRecipeSheet. At top left, the user has requested to view the equivalent simulation results for five patients; at top
right, the results for a single patient using nine alternative values for probability of cells entering the G0 state. The sheet at bottom has results from six stages of a
single simulation, showing a slice plane through the tumor at one of the stages. Next to it are three examples of how the tumor view would appear when overlay
mode is enabled: the outer contours of the slices from all six time points are shown together, to aid comparison.

Fig. 5. Components of the grid environment: DMS: data management system,
GRMS: grid resource management system, GAS: Grid authorization service,
GridFTP—grid fie tyransfer service, GRAM: globus resource allocation manager, MDS4: monitoring and discovery system ver. 4.

of autonomic agents using the accessible network infrastructure for mutual communication. From the external applications
point of view DMS is a virtual file system keeping the data
organized in a tree-like structure. The main units of this structure are metadirectories, that enable the creation of hierarchies
which encompass other data objects and metafiles. Metafiles
represent a logical view of data regardless of their physical
storage location. The DMS consists of three logical layers: the
data broker, which serves as the access interface to the DMS

system and implements the brokering of storage resources, the
metadata repository that keeps the information about the data
managed by the system, and the data container, which is responsible for the physical storage of data. In addition, DMS contains
modules which extend its functionality to fulfill the enterprise
requirements. These include the fully functional web-based administrator interface and a proxy to external scientific databases.
The proxy provides a simple object access protocol, interface
to the external databases, such as those provided by sequence
retrieval system.
The scenario for running the oncosimulator in the grid environment is mostly based on the aforementioned services. The
first step is devoted to the preparation of input data for the computation. The clinician needs to prepare, e.g., MRI sets of slices
of a nephroblastoma tumor corresponding to the tumor before
chemotherapeutic treatment with vincristine and dactinomycin.
Using specialized tools they also need to delineate the tumor
boundaries on the provided slices as well as to prepare the rest
of the multiscale input data. The user uploads all required files
from their machine to the DMS using a web client. The files are
then managed by DMS and can be accessed by the user or the
other services acting on behalf of the user.
To execute the IOS in the grid, an appropriate job description
XML (Extensible Markup Language) document is produced. It
defines the job as a set of tasks with dependences among them.
Each task is described as resource requirements and description

846

Fig. 6.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Oncosimulator service.

of the executable: environment variables, parameters of the execution, input and output files (or directories), executable file
etc.
Users are supported in the production of the Job Description XML document through the use of the OncoRecipeSheet
(ORS) [18]–[23], [26], which is responsible for creating a proper
XML document based on the forms that are presented to the
user, showing parameters of the application in a convenient way
for the user. Subsequently ORS submits the description to the
GRMS and monitors job execution. Based on the provided information GRMS finds available resources on the grid, transfers
the input data from DMS to the grid node, and starts the computation. On successful completion of the job it moves the output
data to DMS thus making it available for ORS for downloading.
Using the ORS interface users can browse the results, compare the values, and submit new simulations if necessary. An
overview of the scenario and the infrastructure components that
are taking part in it is depicted in Fig. 5.
An alternative way of integrating the IOS into the ACGT
architectural framework is a service implementation. In this approach, grid execution of the application is wrapped with the
web service implementation such that the IOS can be used within
the workflow environment of ACGT. The workflow infrastructure is a set of services and tools that allows the users to create
scientific experiments by joining different service invocations
into a single flow of actions. There are many services that are
incorporated into the environment, some of them are focused on
accessing different databases while others are able to process
the data using statistical packages (e.g., R).
The workflow environment lies on the top of the grid infrastructure of ACGT. The oncosimulator service has been designed
and developed in order to take advantage of the workflow environment of ACGT and to provide a means to integrate it with
the rest of ACGT software (see Fig. 6).
VI. EXECUTING THE ONCOSIMULATOR
THROUGH WORKFLOWS
The ACGT Workflow Editor [27], [28] is the end user application for designing and executing high-level scientific workflows
(see Fig. 7). In this web-based application, the user is encouraged to graphically combine the data retrieval and discover services and the knowledge extraction and data analysis tools. The

Fig. 7.

Example of workflow created in the ACGT workflow environment.

definition of the syntactic representation of the data and most
importantly the annotation of the services with semantic metadata descriptions gives great flexibility in the workflow editor
for supporting user friendliness and intelligence. If properly
annotated, incompatible services cannot be directly connected
because the data types of their inputs and outputs do not conform
to each other, either in the syntactic or the semantic level, while
service recommendation and intelligent workflow composition
can also be supported.
Furthermore, the ACGT Workflow Editor features the following functionality: 1) provides a graphical environment for
the end users to build their scientific experiments by combining
the ACGT tools and facilitate their execution on the Grid; 2)
supports access to all the ACGT tools and services, including
the gridified version of the R package; 3) supports separate storage area per user, gives access to grid file system, and supports
publication of a workflow to the ACGT community, execution
monitoring and logging of a workflow; 4) supports user provided metadata (tagging) for custom search and retrieval of
workflows; and 5) supports the storage and management of the
provenance information gathered during the execution of the
user workflows.
The oncosimulator when wrapped as another Grid Service, as
described in Section V, can be integrated into more complex scientific workflows. This integration is achieved in a transparent
way. The user creates their own workflow by creating a distinct
functional entity which accepts its own parameter set and delivers its output. This seamless integration is further enhanced by
the ability to include multiple instances of the onsosimulator in
the same workflow but with different input parameters. Under
the hood, all the different executions of the oncosimulator can
be performed in parallel enabled by the scheduling and the run
time support of the grid infrastructure. In this way, scientific
experimentation and discovery becomes less time consuming,
more efficient, and more productive.
VII. CLINICAL ADAPTATION AND VALIDATION ASPECTS
In order to adapt and validate the oncosimulator, clinical
data including preoperative and postoperative imaging studies
is being used and compared with the in silico predictions. The

STAMATAKOS et al.: TECHNOLOGICALLY INTEGRATED ONCOSIMULATOR

Fig. 8.

Workflow of the Oncosimulator for nephroblastoma.

learning loop included in the biomedical usage workflow of
the oncosimulator and shown in Fig. 8 for the special case of
nephroblastoma is utilized to finely tune the models.
Up to now 16 cases of nephroblastoma and 20 cases of breast
cancer have been collected and their multiscale data are under
exploitation. Initial clinical adaptation results using this data
have already been published [8], [10], whereas a number of new
relevant articles are currently in the publication process. Additional results demonstrating aspects of the clinical adaptation
and validation process are presented in Section IX (A and B.)
VIII. COUPLING THE ONCOSIMULATOR WITH
IMMUNOLOGICAL MODELS IN THE FUTURE:
A PLAUSIBLE SCENARIO
Tumor cells (TCs) are characterized by a vast number of genetic and epigenetic events leading to the appearance of specific
antigens triggering reactions by the immune system (IS) [29].
Thus, the competition between TCs and the IS is complex and
also involves many spatial phenomena [30]. Currently a number
of immunotherapies are being developed, although the results
of their clinical trials are often puzzling. Theoretical immunology [31] suggests that the latter mirror the dynamic complexity
of this interplay. This demands an approach that is based on detailed multiscale models that are amenable to clinical validation.
Thus, the Oncosimulator might be an ideal frame for the
patient-specific simulation of immunotherapies. Moreover, the
integration of an “Immune System Module” (ISM) might also
allow the oncosimulator to perform finer predictions of the
postchemotherapeutic time course of immunogenic tumors. In
such tumors, the role of the IS in the elimination of the residual
disease could be highly important.
An ISM has been designed at the information flow level by
adopting a hybrid, i.e., partly stochastic and partly deterministic modeling approaches. A stochastic detailed model (the
Oncosimulator) describing the dynamics of tumor growth and
treatment response is coupled to a stochastic mean-field model
for the description of the IS effectors. In this case, this approach
has some advantageous features. There is no need to modify
the core component of the oncosimulator, whereas only simple

847

changes in accessory components accounting for the exchange
of information between the main component and the ISM are
required.
Due to the polymorphic interplay of TCs-IS, ISM does not
implement a single specific model, but it is rather a tool for the
definition and validation of models. Users may choose a specific
model from a database of models, or they may choose from some
more general families of models. Here, “parameters” are userdefined functions, whose “adherence” to the chosen family is
checked by the system.
The implementation of ISM adopts the following design challenges: 1) the user is in charge: support of human guided exploration; 2) the “plug-and-play” principle: no essential changes in
the Oncosimulator are required; 3) a large model space: ISM
must support the implementation of large families of models;
4) model comparison is key: validation requires that the user
is able to compare results between multiple possible models;
5) supporting “multi-mathematics”: models of TCs-IS interplay
are symbolically challenging and heterogeneous.
IX. RESULTS
In the following two sections, we demonstrate how the oncosimulator can be adapted to various scenarios. This is achieved
through the processing of multiscale data and the adjustment of
simulation codes.
The paradigms of breast cancer treated with epirubicin and
nephroblastoma (Wilms tumor) treated according to the SIOP
2001/GPOH clinical trial protocol are addressed. For both the
clinical adaptation and the clinical validation of each one of the
models the same kind of data—although not the same data itself
—and the same simulation code are to be used. Therefore, the
following examples also convey important aspects of the clinical
validation process. The presented proof of concept adaptation
studies focus on one breast cancer and two nephroblastoma clinical cases. Simulation results involving the full set of clinical
cases provided within ACGT project and related clinical adaptation/validation methods will be the subject of dedicated journal
papers under preparation.
A. Breast Cancer
In this section, a clinical adaptation paradigm of the breast
cancer branch of the oncosimulator is provided. A plausible
value range of the apparent cell kill rate (CKR) of epirubicin
is suggested following the exploitation of the actual clinical
data originating from one real clinical breast cancer case and
the simulation itself. CKR can be thought of as summarizing
important genetic determinants influencing the tumor response
to epirubicin monotherapy.
The available patient specific data utilized by the model are
the following (see Fig. 9): 1) the maximum dimension of the
tumor before and after completion of treatment as measured
by ultrasound; 2) the dates of the corresponding examinations;
3) the detailed chemotherapeutic scheme including the dates
and the dose of each epirubicin administration session; 4) the
histological grade of the tumor determining the degree of differentiation; and 5) the available proliferation markers and more

848

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TABLE I
MODEL (CODE) INPUT PARAMETERS RELATED TO BREST CANCER FREE
TUMOR GROWTH AND THEIR VALUES FOLLOWING CLINICAL ADAPTATION

Fig. 9. Treatment schedule and tumor measurement time points for the set of
multiscale data considered.

specifically the Ki67 index serving as a quantitative measure of
the tumor growth fraction.
A macroscopically spatially homogeneous tumor of spherical shape has been assumed, with a diameter equal to the given
maximum size. This approximation is dictated by 1) the provision of only a single tumor dimension at each measurement time
point and 2) the nonavailability of MRI or CT data that could
enable both the 3-D reconstruction of the tumor shape and the
consideration of internal regions of variable metabolic activity
(proliferating, quiescent, necrotic).
A two-step adaptation process is followed. The first step refers
to the adaptation of the model parameters regulating tumor-free
growth kinetics. In general a large number of virtual tumor implementations (virtual instances) corresponding to certain given
or known parameter values exist. Narrowing this large window
of possible solutions, ideally to one solution for a specific clinical case, is a critical first step in the adaptation procedure. In the
present paradigm, the following assumptions/constrains were
imposed, based on the literature and patient specific kinetics
data.
1) Cell cycle duration: Breast cancer cell cycle duration estimated based on cell line studies or in vivo methods (such
as percent labeled mitosis curves) may vary from approximately 20 to 96 h [32]–[34]. A mean value of 60 h is
considered here [32]–[34].
2) Growth fraction: ±10% of patient Ki67 index (=40%).
3) Volume doubling time (Td ): Studies aiming at determining breast cancer growth rate based on volumetric methods have revealed a great interindividual variability with
volume doubling times ranging from a few weeks to
years [35], [36]. In the present analysis, we assume a
lower limit of Td > 30 days.
4) Fraction of stem cells: Based on [37], breast tumor stem
cells are a minority population with a frequency of 5% at
best. Here, we assume that the frequency of cancer stem
cells among living tumor cell population does not exceed
the above value (< 5%).
The free growth adaptation outcome is presented in Table I.
In the second step, CKR is adapted to the observed tumor
size reduction yielding the apparent CKR of the specific virtual
tumor implementation. Since no data on the tumor growth rate
of the patient are available, the procedure is repeated for other
virtual tumor implementations with growth rates that cover the
value range reported in the literature. This is achieved by varying a model parameter that primarily influences growth rate

Fig. 10. Predicted volume doubling time as a function of the fraction of stem
cells that perform symmetric division.

Fig. 11. Predicted relative population of various tumor cell categories as a
function of the fraction of stem cells that perform symmetric division.

while ensuring consistency with the aforementioned imposed
constraints. The chosen parameter is the fraction of stem cells
that perform symmetric divisions (Psym ). According to Figs. 10
and 11 even though the variation of Psym for the range of values
considered has a negligible effect on the tumor cell composition, it does nevertheless induce a dramatic change in the volume

STAMATAKOS et al.: TECHNOLOGICALLY INTEGRATED ONCOSIMULATOR

849

Fig. 13. Simulated Wilms tumor preoperative chemotherapy treatment protocol of the SIOP/GPOH clinical trial.

Fig. 12. Predicted cell kill rate as a function of the fraction of tumor stem cells
that perform symmetric division.

doubling time. In the present paradigm, Td varies from 43 days
up to 2562 days (∼ 7 years). In Fig. 12, we observe that virtual
tumor implementations with shorter Td (higher Psym ) require
a higher CKR in order to achieve the same tumor shrinkage.
Based on those results, the apparent CKR for the clinical case
considered lies approximately in the range 0.17–0.41.
Concluding, the realism of the model behavior has been
demonstrated in previous publications [8]. More specifically
tumor shrinkage after each chemotherapeutic session and the
consequent tumor repopulation has been successfully demonstrated in accordance to clinical experience. In the present analysis, the model has been applied for the in vivo estimation of the
apparent CKR, a measure of drug toxicity on tumor cells, taking into consideration the repopulation of tumor cells after each
therapeutic session. The validity of our results is ensured by 1)
the compliance of the virtual tumors kinetic characteristics with
the ones reported in the literature and 2) the negligible deviation between the simulation results and the patient volumetric
data (less than 0.2%) for all virtual tumor implementations with
different Psym (data not shown).
B. Nephroblastoma
Several nephroblastoma tumor cases of which sets of multiscale data were collected in the context of SIOP 2001/GPOH
trial have been modeled with IOS so far. As an indicative example, the in silico response of two nephroblastoma cases (cases
I and II) of stromal type to preoperative combined chemotherapy with actinomycin-D and vincristine in the context of SIOP
2001/GPOH trial is presented in this section.
Anonymized imaging and clinical data have been provided.
The initial and final virtual tumors have been spatiotemporally
initialized based on the MRI tomograms of their real clinical
counterparts collected at two time instants before the start of
chemotherapy (2 days for case I and 6 days for case II) and
after the completion (4 days for case I and 0 days for case II).
The chemotherapeutic scheme administered is according to the
SIOP 2001/GPOH clinical trial protocol for unilateral stages I–
III nephroblastoma tumors (see Fig. 13). In [38]–[54] the authors

Fig. 14. Time evolution of tumor volume for the four virtual scenarios of
Table II: (a). T1 (Case I-Scenario A), (b). T2 (Case I-Scenario B), (c). T3 (Case
II-Scenario A), and (d). T4 (Case II-Scenario B).

provide pertinent literature that has been utilized throughout the
following analysis.
Two adaptation scenarios are considered. The following assumptions have been made based on both literature and imaging
clinical information.
1) Doubling time in the range of 11–40 days [49]–[53].
2) Growth fraction 1.5–20% for stromal type nephroblastomas [54].
3) The imaging data-specified volume reduction of case I is
65% and of case II is 32%.
According to the first adaptation scenario (A), both nephroblastoma tumors are considered to have common growth kinetics
as they are of the same histological type (stromal). The CKR of
the chemotherapeutic drugs is adapted in order to simulate the
volume reduction induced by chemotherapy.
According to the second adaptation scenario (B), the effect of
the chemotherapeutic drugs is considered common in both cases
and the growth rate of the tumors is adapted within the range
defined by the reported literature. This is achieved by perturbing
the values of important growth kinetic parameters according to
model sensitivity analyses [10].
The aforementioned assumptions, in conjunction with accumulated basic science and clinical experience based plausible
values, lead to the selection of the entries for the run-time parameters of the tumor model (see Table II) for cases I, II, and under
scenarios A and B. The time course of the four virtual tumors is
presented in Fig. 14.The resultant virtual tumor characteristics
and volume reduction are given in Table III. All four virtual scenarios are in good agreement with the clinical data in terms of

850

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TABLE II
DEFINITION OF THE TUMOR MODEL PARAMETERS. REFERENCE VALUES AND
CORRESPONDING LITERATURE REFERENCES. VALUES ASSIGNED TO THE
MODEL PARAMETERS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF FOUR VIRTUAL TUMORS.

technological reliability as well as its potential to be translated
into the clinic following completion of the ongoing lengthy and
demanding clinical validation process.
Clinical adaptation and validation of the multiscale modeling component of the system continues among other environments within the framework of the currently running
EC funded projects p-medicine (FP7-ICT-2009–6–270089) and
CHIC (FP7-ICT-2011–9–600841.) A number of clinical adaptation scenarios addressed in this paper have demonstrated the
basics of several aspects of the clinical adaptation and validation process. Following the completion of the latter, the IOS
is expected to be translated into clinical practice and serve as
a platform for optimizing both patient individualized treatment
and the design of new clinical trials.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the highly constructive feedback provided by the following ACGT external reviewers appointed by the European Commission (EC): Prof. D. Ingram,
University College London, Prof. O. Björk, Karolinska University, Stockholm, Dr L.Toldo, and Dr E.Tsiporkova. They would
also like to thank the EC appointed ACGT project officer Dr
R. Bergström for strong encouragement and Prof. N. Uzunoglu
from National Technical University of Athens for his support.
Last but not least they acknowledge the valuable, detailed feedback provided by the anonymous reviewers of the manuscript.
REFERENCES

TABLE III
TUMOR CHARACTERISTICS AND VOLUME REDUCTION PERCENTAGES FOR THE
FOUR VIRTUAL TUMOR SCENARIOS DEFINED BY THE PARAMETER VALUES
GIVEN IN TABLE II

volume reduction (see Table III). In addition, a good agreement
is also accomplished in terms of the tumor growth characteristics presented in Table III when compared with values reported
in the literature.
X. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A synoptic delineation of the IOS, primarily developed within
the framework of the EC funded ACGT project but also extended within the framework of other EC funded projects, has
been presented. Both the modeling principles and the technological components of the system have been briefly, yet comprehensively addressed. Successful demonstrations of the system
during the implementation of the ACGT project have ensured its

[1] Multiscale Cancer Modeling, T. S. Deisboeck and G. Stamatakos Eds.,
Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2011.
[2] G. S. Stamatakos, D. D. Dionysiou, E. I. Zacharaki, N. A. Mouravliansky,
K. S. Nikita, and N. K. Uzunoglu, “In silico radiation oncology: Combining novel simulation algorithms with current visualization techniques,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 90, no. 11, pp. 1764–1777, Nov. 2002.
[3] D. D. Dionysiou, G. S. Stamatakos, N. K. Uzunoglu, K. S. Nikita, and
A. Marioli, “A four dimensional in vivo model of tumour response to
radiotherapy: Parametric validation considering radiosensitivity, genetic
profile and fractionation,” J. Theor. Biol., vol. 230, pp. 1–20, 2004.
[4] G. S. Stamatakos, V. P. Antipas, and N. K. Uzunoglu, “A spatiotemporal, patient individualized simulation model of solid tumor response to
chemotherapy in vivo: The paradigm of glioblastoma multiforme treated
by temozolomide,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1467–
1477, Aug. 2006.
[5] G. S. Stamatakos, D. D. Dionysiou, N. M. Graf, N. A. Sofra, C. Desmedt,
A. Hoppe, N. Uzunoglu, and M. Tsiknakis, “The oncosimulator: A multilevel, clinically oriented simulation system of tumor growth and organism
response to therapeutic schemes. Towards the clinical evaluation of in
silico oncology,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Society, Lyon, France, 2007, pp. 6628–6631.
[6] D. D. Dionysiou, G. S. Stamatakos, D. Gintides, N. Uzunoglu, and
K. Kyriaki, “Critical parameters determining standard radiotherapy treatment outcome for glioblastoma multiforme: A computer simulation,” The
Open Biomed. Eng. J., vol. 2, pp. 43–51, 2008.
[7] E. A. Kolokotroni, D. D. Dionysiou, N. K. Uzunoglu, and
G. S. Stamatakos, “Studying the growth kinetics of untreated clinical tumors by using an advanced discrete simulation model,” Math.
Comput. Modelling, vol. 54, pp. 1989–2006, 2011.
[8] G. S. Stamatakos, E. A. Kolokotroni, D. D. Dionysiou, E. C. Georgiadi,
and C. Desmedt, “An advanced discrete state – discrete event multiscale
simulation model of the response of a solid tumor to chemotherapy: Mimicking a clinical study,” J. Theor. Biol., vol. 266, pp. 124–139, 2010.
[9] G. Stamatakos, “Cancer Multiscale Modeling,” in In Silico Oncology
Part I: Clinically Oriented Cancer Multilevel Modeling Based on Discrete
Event Simulation, T. Deisboeck and G. Stamatakos, Eds. Boca Raton,
Florida, USA: CRC Press, 2010, pp. 407–436.

STAMATAKOS et al.: TECHNOLOGICALLY INTEGRATED ONCOSIMULATOR

[10] G. S. Stamatakos, E. C. Georgiadi, N. Graf, E. A. Kolokotroni, and
D. D. Dionysiou, “Exploiting clinical trial data drastically narrows the
window of possible solutions to the problem of clinical adaptation of a
multiscale cancer model,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 3, p. e17594, 2011.
[11] (2013, 30 Jan.). [Online]. Available: http://cordis.europa.eu/result/
brief/rcn/6061_en.html
[12] J. De Kraker, N. Graf, H. van Tinteren, F. Pein, B. Sandstedt, J. Godzinski,
and M. F. Tournade, SIOP, “Reduction of postoperative chemotherapy
in children with stage I intermediate-risk and anaplastic Wilms’ tumour
(SIOP 93–01 trial): A randomised controlled trial,” Lancet, vol. 364,
pp. 1229–1235, 2004.
[13] N. Graf, M. F. Tournade, and J. de Kraker, “The role of preoperative
chemotherapy in the management of Wilms’ Tumor — The siop studies,”
Urol. Clin. North Amer., vol. 27, pp. 443–454, 2000.
[14] M. F. Tournade, C. Com-Nougué, P. A. Voûte, J. Lemerle, J. de Kraker,
J. F. Delemarre, M. Burgers, J. L Habrand, C. G. Moorman, and D. Bürger,
“Results of the sixth international society of pediatric oncology wilms’
tumor trial and study: A risk-adapted therapeutic approach in wilms’
tumor,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 11, pp. 1014–1023, 1993.
[15] Ch. Desmedt, A. Di Leo, E. de Azambuja, D. Larsimont, B. HaibeKains, J. Selleslags, S. Delaloge, C. Duhem, J.-P. Kains, B. Carly,
M. Maerevoet, A. Vindevoghel, G. Rouas, F. Lallemand, V. Durbecq,
F. Cardoso, R. Salgado, R. Rovere, G. Bontempi, S. Michiels, M. Buyse,
J.-M. Nogaret, Y. Qi, F. Symmans, L. Pusztai, V. D’Hondt, M. PiccartGebhart, and C. Sotiriou, “Multifactorial approach to predicting resistance to anthracyclines,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1578–1586,
2011.
[16] R. Whitaker, “Reducing aliasing artifacts in iso-surfaces of binary volumes,” in Proc. IEEE Volume Vis. Graphics Symp., Oct. 2000, pp. 23–32.
[17] C. Farmaki, K. Marias, V. Sakkalis, and N. Graf, “Spatially adaptive
active contours: A semi-automatic tumor segmentation technique,” Inter.
J Comput.-Assisted Radiol. Surg., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 369–84, 2010.
[18] A. Lunzer and K. Hornbæk, “RecipeSheet: Creating, combining and controlling information processors,” in Proc. 19th Annu. ACM Symp. User
Interface Softw. Technol., Montreux, Switzerland, Oct. 2006, pp. 145–153.
[19] A. Lunzer, “Choice and comparison where the user wants them: Subjunctive interfaces for computer-supported exploration,” in Proc. IFIP TC 13
Int. Conf. Human–Comput. Interaction, 1999, pp. 474–482.
[20] A. Lunzer and K. Hornbæk, “Subjunctive interfaces: Extending applications to support parallel setup, viewing and control of alternative scenarios,” ACM Trans. Comput.–Human Interaction, vol. 14, no. 4, Jan. 2008.
[21] N. Graf, A. Hoppe, E. Georgiadi, R. Belleman, C. Desmedt, D. Dionysiou,
M. Erdt, J. Jacques, E. Kolokotroni, A. Lunzer, M. Tsiknakis, and
G. Stamatakos, “In silico oncology for clinical decision making in the
context of nephroblastoma,” Klinische Pädiatrie, vol. 221, pp. 141–149,
2009.
[22] A. Lunzer, R. Belleman, P. Melis, J. Pukacki, P. Spychała, and
G. Stamatakos, “Validating the ACGT Oncosimulator with a gridsupported visualisation environment,” in Proc. 4th Int. Adv. Res. Workshop on In Silico Oncology Cancer Investigation, Athens, Greece, 2010,
pp. 93–96, [Online]. Available: http://www.4th-iarwisoci.iccs.ntua.gr/
[23] A. Lunzer, R. Belleman, P. Melis, and G. Stamatakos, “Preparing, exploring and comparing cancer simulation results within a large parameter
space,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Inf. Vis. in Biomed. Inf., London, U.K.,
2010, pp. 258–264.
[24] M. Tsiknakis, M. Brochhausen, J. Nabrzyski, J. Pucacki, S. Sfakianakis,
G. Potamias, C. Desmedt, and D. Kafetzopoulos, “A semantic grid infrastructure enabling integrated access and analysis of multilevel biomedical
data in support of postgenomic clinical trials on cancer,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 205–217, Mar. 2008.
[25] I. Foster, “The grid: Computing without bounds,” Sci. Amer., vol. 288,
no. 4, pp. 60–67, 2003.
[26] R. G. Belleman, M. Scarpa, and B. Stolk, “Interactive simulation and
visualization for cancer treatment planning with grid-based technology,”
ERCIM News, vol. 69, pp. 22–23, 2007.
[27] S. Ruping, S. Sfakianakis, and M. Tsiknakis, “Extending work flow management for knowledge discovery in clinico-genomic data,” in Proc.
Healthgrid 2007: From Genes to Personalized Health Care: Grid Solutions Life Sci., 2007, pp. 183–193.
[28] D. Wegener, T. Sengstag, S. Sfakianakis, S. Ruping, and A. Assi, “GridR:
An r-based grid-enabled tool for data analysis in acgt clinico-genomics
trials,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf. e-Sci. Grid Comput., 2007, pp. 228–
235.
[29] T. J. Kindt, B. A. Osborne, and R. A. Goldsby, Kuby Immunology. San
Francisco, CA: Freeman, 2006.

851

[30] A. Matzavinos, M. Chaplain, and V. A. Kuznetsov, “Mathematical modelling of the spatio-temporal response of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes to a
solid tumour,” Math. Med.Biol., vol. 21, pp. 1–34, 2004.
[31] A. d’Onofrio, “A general framework for modeling tumor-immune system
competition and immunotherapy: Analysis and medical inferences,” Phys.
D, vol. 208, pp. 220–235, 2005.
[32] S. Cos, J. Recio, and E. J. Sanchez-Barcelo, “Modulation of the lenght of
cell cycle time of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells by melatonin,” Life
Sci., vol. 58, pp. 811–816, 1996.
[33] S. Descamps, X. Lebourhis, M. Delehedde, B. Boilly, and
H. Hondermarck, “Nerve growth factor is mitogenic for cancerous but
not normal human breast epithelial cells,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 273, no. 27,
pp. 16659–16662, 1998.
[34] J. S. Meyer, R. McDivitt, K. Stone, M. Prey, and W. Bauer, “Practical
breast carcinoma cell kinetics: Review and update,” Breast Cancer Res.
Treat., vol. 4, pp. 79–88, 1984.
[35] D. Von Fournier, E. Weber, W. Hoeffken, M. Bauer, F. Kubli, and V. Barth,
“Growth rate of 147 mammary carcinomas,” Cancer, vol. 45, no. 8,
pp. 2198–2207, Apr. 15, 1980.
[36] P. Peer, J. van Dijck, J. Hendriks, R. Holland, and A. Verbeek, “Agedependent growth rate of primary breast cancer,” Cancer, vol. 71, no. 11,
pp. 3547–51, Jun. 1, 1993.
[37] J. Stingl and C. Caldas, “Molecular heterogeneity of breast carcinomas
and the cancer stem cell hypothesis,” Nat. Rev. Cancer, vol. 7, no. 10,
pp. 791–9, Oct. 2007.
[38] W. Duechting, W. Ulmer, R. Lehrig, T. Ginsberg, and E. Dedeleit, “Computer simulation and modeling of tumor spheroids growth and their relevance to optimization of fractionated radiotherapy,” Strahlenther Onkol,
vol. 168, no. 6, pp. 354–360, 1992.
[39] B. Titz and R. Jeraj, “An imaging-based tumour growth and treatment
response model: investigating the effect of tumour oxygenation on radiation therapy response,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53, pp. 4471–4488,
2008.
[40] E. Groninger, T. Meeuwsen-de Boer, P. Koopmans, D. Uges, W. Sluiter,
A. Veerman, W. Kamps, and S. de Graaf, “Pharmacokinetics of vincristine
monotherapy in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia,” Pediatric Res.,
vol. 52, pp. 113–118, 2002.
[41] W. Dahl, R. Oftebro, E. Pettersen, and T. Brustad, “Inhibitory and cytotoxic
effects of Oncovin (Vincristine Sulfate) on cells of human line NHIK
3025,” Cancer Res, vol. 36, pp. 3101–3105, 1976.
[42] K. Sawada, K. Noda, H. Nakajima, N. Shimbara, Y. Furuichi, and
M. Sugimoto, “Differential cytotoxicity of anticancer agents in pre- and
post-immortal lymphoblastoid cell lines,” Biol. Pharm. Bull., vol. 28,
pp. 1202–1207, 2005.
[43] G. Veal, M. Cole, J. Errington, A. Parry, J. Hale, A. D. Pearson, K.
Howe, J. C. Chisholm, C. Beane, B. Brennan, F. Waters, A. Glaser, S.
Hemsworth, H. Mc Dowell, Y. Wright, K. Pritchard-Jones, R. Pinkerton,
G. Jenner, J. Nicholson, A. M. Elsworth, A. V. Boddy; Kingdom Children’s
Cancer Study Group Pharmacology Working Group, “Pharmacokinetics
of Dactinomycin in a pediatric patient population: a United Kingdom
Children’s Cancer Study group study,” Clin. Cancer Res., vol. 11, no. 16,
pp. 5893–5899, 2005.
[44] E. Revazova and A. Petrova, “Cell cycle and proliferative pool of human tumor strains transplanted into athymic mice,” Biull Eksp Biol Med,
vol. 92, pp. 335–337, 1981. (in Russian).
[45] K. Maseide and E. Rofstad, “Mathematical modeling of chronical hypoxia
in tumors considering potential doubling time and hypoxic cell lifetime,”
Radiother. Oncol., vol. 54, pp. 171–177, 2000.
[46] L. Wein, J. Cohen, and J. Wu, “Dynamic optimization of a linear-quadratic
model with incomplete repair and volume-dependent sensitivity and repopulation,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 1073–
1083, 2000.
[47] B. Ribba, T. Colin, and S. Schnell, “A multiscale mathematical model of
cancer, and its use in analyzing irradiation therapies,” Theor. Biol. Med.
Model, vol. 3, p. 7 (Feb. 10, 2006). [Online].
[48] W. Dewey, C. Ling, and R. Meyn, “Radiation-induced apoptosis: Relevance to radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 33, no. 4,
pp. 781–796, 1995.
[49] T. Tan and D. Amor, “Tumour surveillance in Beckwith–Wiedermann
syndrome and hemihyperplasia: A critical review of the evidence and suggested guidelines for local practice,” J. Paedeatrics Child Health, vol. 42,
pp. 486–490, 2006.
[50] S. Shackney, G. McCormack, and G. Cuchural, “Growth rate patterns of
solid tumours and their relation to responsiveness to therapy,” Ann. Intern.
Med., vol. 89, pp. 107–121, 1978.

852

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

[51] A. Craft, “Growth rate of Wilms’ tumour,” Lancet, vol. 354, no. 9184,
p. 1127, 1999.
[52] A. Zoubek, I. Slavc, G. Mann, G. Trittenwein, and H. Gadner, “Natural
course of a Wilms’ tumour,” Lancet, vol. 354, p. 344, 1999.
[53] A. Carré, C. Frantz, R. Weksberg, L. Nicholson, L. Ciarlo et al., “Wilms
tumor in an 11-year old with hemihyperplasia,” Amer. J. Med. Genetics,
vol. 139 A, pp. 165–166, 2005.
[54] D. Berrebi, J. Leclerc, G. Schleiermacher, I. Zaccaria, L. Boccon-Gibod,
M. Fabre, F. Jaubert, A. El Ghoneimi, C. Jeanpierre, and M. Peuchmaur,
“High cyclin-E staining index in blastemal, stromal or epithelial cells is
correlated with tumor aggressiveness in patients with nephroblastoma,”
PLoS ONE, vol. 3, no. 5, e2216, 2008.

Georgios S. Stamatakos (M’08) received the
Diploma degree in electrical engineering from the
National Technical University of Athens (NTUA),
Athens, Greece, the M.Sc. degree in bioengineering
from the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, U.K., and the Ph.D. degree in physics (biophysics) from NTUA.
He is a Research Professor of Analysis and Simulation of Biological Systems at the Institute of Communication and Computer Systems, NTUA where he
has founded and leads the In Silico Oncology Group.
The focus of his research group is on in silico oncology and multiscale cancer
modeling. He has proposed the notion and the system of oncosimulator. He has
led the development of the oncosimulator of the European Commission (EC)
and Japan co-funded ACGT integrated project as well as of the oncosimulators
of several other EC funded and international projects mostly centred around the
initiative of the Virtual Physiological Human (VPH). He is the coordinator of the
EC funded EU-US large scale integrating research project entitled “CHIC: Computational Horizons in Cancer: Developing Meta- and Hyper-Multiscale Models
and Repositories for In Silico Oncology” FP7-ICT-2011-9, Grant Agreement
no: 600841. He has also proposed the term and the notion of in silico oncology
denoting a new clinical trial driven scientific and technological discipline. He
has coinitiated and coorganized a number of international research workshops,
including the series of International Advanced Research Workshops on In Silico
Oncology and Cancer Investigation and the First Transatlantic (EU-US) Workshop on Multiscale Cancer Modeling (ICT 2008, Brussels 2008). The latter was
cofunded by EC and NCI.
Dr. Stamatakos has been a co-editor, contributor, and reviewer of the transatlantic multiauthor textbook entitled Multiscale Cancer Modeling published by
CRC Press (2010/2011). He is a member of CViT, the VPH Institute, and the
Technical Chamber of Greece.

Dimitra Dionysiou received the Diploma degree in
electrical and computer engineering (ece) from the
National Technical University of Athens (NTUA),
Athens, Greece, a PhD on the M.Sc. in bioinformatics from the Faculty of Biology, University of Athens,
Athens, and the Ph. D. degree in ece (in silico oncology) from NTUA.
She is currently a Senior Researcher at the In Silico Oncology Group, Institute of Communication and
Computer Systems, NTUA. She has worked for the
development of several clinically oriented multiscale
oncosimulators within the framework of the EC-funded projects ACGT, ContraCancrum, TUMOR, and p-medicine. She has published more than 60 papers
in international peer-reviewed journals, books, and conference proceedings, and
has been a coorganizer of the series of International Advanced Research Workshops on In Silico Oncology (in 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012). Her research
interests include in silico oncology, multiscale cancer modeling, bioinformatics, systems biology, biological process modeling, and biomedical engineering.

Aran Lunzer received the M.A. degree in engineering from the University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
U.K., in 1986, and the Ph.D. degree in computing
science from the University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
U.K., in 1995.
He is a British Researcher in human–computer
interaction, working in Alan Kay’s Viewpoints Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA, USA. The work
reported here was completed while he was an Associate Professor in the Meme Media Laboratory,
Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan, led by Prof.
Y. Tanaka. It demonstrates his "subjunctive interfaces" approach to helping users
explore alternative results in parameter-controlled applications. In addition to
12 years at Hokkaido University, his Postdoctoral experience includes spells at
UBS’s Ubilab, Zurich and at the University of Copenhagen.

Robert Belleman received the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, in 2003.
He is currently a Lecturer and Researcher with
the Informatics Institute, the University of Amsterdam. He teaches bachelor courses on computer graphics, web systems, databases, data processing, concurrency and parallel programming, and master courses
on Scientific Visualization and Virtual Reality. He
is currently the programme Director for the Bachelor Computer Science ("Informatica") at the University of Amsterdam. His research interests include design and implementation
of interactive graphical environments for the visual exploration of data and
information.

Eleni Kolokotroni, received the Diploma degree in
physics and the M.Sc. degree in medical physics –
radiophysics from the National University of Athens,
Athens, Greece, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical
engineering from a interdepartmental-interuniversity
program between the University of Patras and the National Technical University of Athens.
She is working as a Researcher with the In Silico Oncology Group, Institute of Communication and
Computer Systems, National Technical University of
Athens. Her research interests include computational
electromagnetics, bioinformatics, computational biology, systems biology, multiscale cancer modeling, and in silico oncology. She has participated in numerous
European research and development projects. She is a member of the Union of
Medical Physicists in Greece.

Eleni Georgiadi received the Diploma degree in
physics from the School of Sciences, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece (specialization in Nuclear and Particle physics). the M.Sc. degree in medical physics from the University of Surrey, Surrey,
U.K., and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering (in silico oncology) from the National Technical
University of Athens (NTUA), Athens, Greece, in
cooperation with the faculty of Medicine of the University of Patras.
She is currently an Assistant Researcher in the In
Silico Oncology Group, Institute of Communication and Computer Systems
(ICCS), NTUA. She has published more than 20 papers in international peerreviewed journals and conference proceedings. Her researcher interests include
silico oncology, cancer modeling, and simulation of biological processes.

STAMATAKOS et al.: TECHNOLOGICALLY INTEGRATED ONCOSIMULATOR

Marius Erdt received the Diploma degree in computer science from the University Koblenz-Landau,
Landau, Germany, and the Dr.-Ing. degree in computer science from Technische Universitδt Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany.
He is the Deputy Director of the Fraunhofer IDM,
NTU research centre, Singapore, and the Head of
Medical Computing. His research interests include
computer graphics, image processing, computeraided diagnosis, and computer- assisted intervention.

Juliusz Pukacki received the M.Sc. degree in computer science from Poznan University of Technology (Parallel and Distributed Computing), Poznan,
Poland.
He is a Leader of Data Management and Integration team of Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center (PSNC), Poznan, Poland. Since 1998, he
has been with PSNC. At first, he was working on
solutions for resource management in the Grid environment. He was involved in a number of Grid
related projects. Some of the most important ones
were the following: GridLab (leader of resource management workpackage),
ACGT (Advancing Clinico Genomic Trial on Cancer)—responsible for leading
of architecture development, and providing grid infrastructure for the project.
Other projects include: Inteligrid, HPC-Europa, QosCosGrid. He is currently
leading the PSNC activity in the Virtual Physiological Human area project “pmedicine” providing storage infrastructure. He has also started activities in the
area of semantic data integration including the national project Synat (building
integrated knowledge management system for data of cultural heritage area) and
the European Commission funded one entitled MARKOS (semantic repository
of open source project data).

Stefan Rüping received the Ph.D. degree in machine
learning and has an experience in both research and
business projects in the area of data mining.
He leads the Integrated Data Mining Group, Fraunhofer IAIS, Germany, and is responsible for the activities in the areas of data science and big data analytics
with a particular focus on the area of healthcare.

Stavroula Giatili received the Diploma degree in
electrical and computer engineering from the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA),
Athens, Greece, in 2006, the Graduation degree from
the Military Nursing Academy, Athens, Greece, in
2001. In 1994, she succeeded in the mathematics
competition organized by the Hellenic Mathematic
Society. She is Currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree from the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, NTUA.
Since 2007, she has been a member of In Silico
Oncology Group, Institute of Communication and Computer Systems, NTUA.
She is involved in various European research projects. Her major research interests include in silico oncology, multilevel biomodeling, and systems biology.

853

Alberto d’Onofrio has studied electrical engineering and control theory at the Faculty of Engineering, Pisa University, Pisa, Italy. He received an interdisciplinary Ph.D. degree in medical computer sciences from “La Sapienza” University, Rome, Italy.
He has been a Principal Investigator in systems
biomedicine at the Department for Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy
since 2008. He has participated and is participating
in various past and ongoing research projects such
as p-medicine, ACGT, and PRINs. He is also interested in sociophysics, eHealth, and epistemology. So far he has authored 92
peer-refereed papers in international journals and has edited 4 books for several
international publishing houses. His research interests include mathematical biology and biophysics, with focus on mathematical oncology, systems biology,
and mathematical and statistical epidemiology.
Dr. d’Onofrio is an Associate Editor of the ISI-indexed Journal Journal of
Optimization: Theory and Applications.

Stelios Sfakianakis received the B.Sc. degree in informatics from the Department of Informatics, National University of Athens in 1995, and the M.Sc. degree in advanced information systems from the same
Department in 1998.
He has been with the Computational Medicine
Laboratory, FORTH-ICS since 2000. His research
interests include the semantic integration and composition of services in the state of the art computational
environments such as the Grid and the Semantic Web
and the employment of statistical and computational
approaches based on machine learning and data mining techniques for the analysis of high-throughput experiments, such as gene expression profiling and
genomic sequencing. In the past, he has worked on the design and implementation of a service-oriented architecture for the realization of the Integrated
Electronic Patient Health Record by the means of CORBA and Web Services
middleware technologies. On the technical side his experience spans the application design and development using the Unified Modeling Language (UML),
the development of distributed systems using CORBA, Web/REST Services,
and Grid Services, and the design of OWL/RDF-S ontologies and their employment in the semantics-based description of services.

Kostas Marias (M’03) received the M.Sc. degree
from the Imperial college of Science, Technology
and Medicine in physical science and engineering in
medicine, the Electrical Engineering Diploma degree
from the National Technical University of Athens,
Athens, Greece, and the Ph.D. degree in the field of
medical image analysis, University College London,
London, U.K.
He holds a Principal Researcher position in the
Institute of Computer Science at the Foundation for
Research and Technology, Hellas (FORTH), Greece,
leading the Computational Medicine Laboratory, FORTH-ICS, He was a Research Assistant at the Medical Vision Lab, University of Oxford. He recently
coordinated two EC projects on cancer modeling (ContraCancrum and TUMOR), and is actively involved in the Virtual Physiological Human (VPH)
EC initiative. He has published more than 100 papers in international journals
and conference proceedings in the fields of cancer medical image analysis and
modelling.

854

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Christine Desmedt received the Bio-engineering
degree in cells and genes biotechnology from the
Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in
2000, In 2004, the Master’s degree in bio-medical
sciences at the Free University of Brussels, Brussels,
Belgium, and the Ph.D. degree from the Breast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Jules Bordet
Institute, headed by C. Sotiriou, where she started a
Ph.D. entitled “Multimarker approach for improving
breast cancer treatment tailoring” in 2008.
Since 2000, she has been with the Jules Bordet
Institute, an autonomous comprehensive cancer center devoted entirely to the
fight against cancer. For two years, she was a Clinical Monitor for the Breast
European Adjuvant Studies Group (Br.E.A.S.T), cocoordinating the monitoring activities of external groups for the conduct of breast cancer trials. Since
then, besides conducting research projects, she is also assisting the head of the
lab in the scientific and administrative management of the lab. Her projects
involve identification and validation of prognostic and predictive markers in
breast cancer, as well as a better characterization of breast cancer development
and metastasis. She received grants from the MEDIC Foundation, the “Fonds
National de la Recherche Scientifique”, the Fondation Lambeau-Marteau, and
the Fonds Heuson. She is also actively involved in several EU-projects.
Dr. Desmedt has received awards from the AACR and ASCO.

Manolis Tsiknakis (M’12) received the B.Eng. degree in electric and electronic engineering, in 1983,
the M.Sc. degree in microprocessor engineering, in
1985, and the Ph.D. degree in systems engineering
from the University of Bradford, Bradford, U.K., in
1989.
He was a teaching Research Assistant until 1991
with the University of Bradford. From February 1992
to January 2012, he was with the Institute of Computer Science (ICS), Foundation for Research and
Technology–Hellas (FORTH), Greece, as a Principal
Researcher and Head of the Center of eHealth Technologies. Since February
2012, he has been an Associate Professor of Biomedical Informatics at the
Department of Informatics Engineering, TEI Crete, Chania, Greece, and a Visiting Researcher at FORTH/ICS (Computational Medicine Laboratory). He has
published extensively more than 200 papers in refereed scientific journals and
conferences on issues related to the application of innovative Information and
Communication Technologies in the domain of clinical and translational research, care, and wellness management. His current research interests include
biomedical informatics and engineering, service oriented SW architectures and
their application in biomedicine, affective computing, approaches for semantic
health data integration, and smart eHealth and mHealth service platforms.

Norbert Graf (M’13) received the MD degree from
the University of Saarland, Germany, in 1981.
He is Professor for Pediatrics since 1999 and became Medical Director of the Department for Pediatric Oncology and Hematology in 2003. He is the
Chairman of the SIOP 2001/GPOH Trial on Nephroblastoma and the Dean for study affairs at the Faculty of Medicine, Saarland University. He studied
human medicine at Faculty of Medicine, Saarland
University. After his approbation as a Physician and
specialized training in pediatrics and pediatric oncology/hematology he habilitated in pediatrics at the Faculty of Medicine, Saarland
University. He is an internationally acknowledged pioneer in the field of personalized medicine. He is participating in various ongoing VPH research projects
such as p-medicine, CHIC, EURECA, and MyHealthAvatar. His research interests include pediatric oncology, especially nephroblastoma and brain tumors,
clinical trials, ethical issues in medicine, eHealth, eLearning and medical education.
Dr. Graf is member of various national and international research, scientific,
and ethical societies.

