IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

463

Induced Current Pharmacological Split Stimulation
System for Neuronal Networks
Atsushi Saito∗ , Member, IEEE, Yuzo Takayama, Member, IEEE, Hiroyuki Moriguchi, Kiyoshi Kotani,
and Yasuhiko Jimbo, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Magnetic stimulation noninvasively modulates neuronal activity through a magnetically induced current. However,
despite the usefulness and popularity of this method, the effects
of neuronal activity in the nonstimulated regions on the stimulus
responses are unknown. Here, we report that the induced currentevoked responses were affected by neuronal activities in the nonstimulated regions. Our experiment used a Mu-metal-based localized induced current stimulation (LICS) system combined with the
microfabricated cell culture chamber system and a microelectrode
array (MEA). The cell culture chamber system has radiating microtunnels connecting one central and eight outer chambers, which
were fabricated using soft lithography and a replica modeling technique with SU-8 photoresist and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS).
Rat cortical neurons were separately cultured in the chambers and
formed functional synaptic connections through the microtunnels.
By applying a biphasic alternating pulsed magnetic field to the
Mu-metal located in the central chamber, induced currents were
mainly generated near the cultured neurons and modified the neuronal activities, which were recorded through MEA. Furthermore,
we confirmed that the evoked responses were modified by localized
pharmacological stimulation (LPS) in the outer chambers. These
results suggest that our system would be promising tool for analyzing the effect of magnetic stimulation on interacting neuronal
activity.
Index Terms—Induced current, magnetic stimulation, microelectrode array (MEA), neuronal network, pharmacological stimulation, spontaneous activity.

I. INTRODUCTION
AGNETIC stimulation has been used for various medical investigations for a long time. Particularly, repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is an innovative clinical technique for studying the central nervous system (CNS) dis-

M

Manuscript received January 6, 2013; revised April 18, 2013 and July 15,
2013; accepted August 27, 2013. Date of publication October 3, 2013; date
of current version January 16, 2014. This study was supported by the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), MEXT, Japan. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ A. Saito is with the Environmental Research Laboratory, Central Research
Institute of Electric Power Industry (CRIEPI), 1646 Abiko, Abiko, Chiba, Japan
(e-mail: saito@criepi.denken.or.jp).
Y. Takayama is with the Research Center for Stem Cell Engineering, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
H. Moriguchi is with the Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, and also with the Quantitative Biology Center
(QBiC), 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.
K. Kotani and Y. Jimbo are with the Department of Human and Engineered
Environmental Studies, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan (e-mail: jimbo@
k.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2281079

orders such as depression [1]–[3], Parkinson’s disease [4], [5],
and stroke [6], [7]. Although there have been various reports on
the effects of rTMS, the mechanism of its neuronal modulation
in the human brain is not well understood [8]–[10]. Extensive
research is thus required to determine the effectiveness and risks
of rTMS treatment. In light of this background, we supposed
that the complexity of the structure and function of the brain
has caused ambiguity among the reported rTMS effects. In addition, when using a time-varying alternating magnetic field,
the induced currents spread to various areas of the target organs, and this has led to the development of precise stimulation
methods [11], [12]. Until now, however, there has been a lack of
precise analysis methods. Recently, in vitro monolayer and selforganized neuronal networks cultured on a microelectrode array
(MEA) have started to be used to evaluate simplified brain functions modulated by various electrical stimulations [13]–[16].
In addition, these cultured neuronal networks on MEA have
been used to investigate the effect of rTMS on calcium transitions [17], electrical activity [18], and gene expression [19].
However, rTMS modulates only part of the neuronal activity
in the human brain; this means the neuronal activity in a nonstimulated region might affect the stimulus-evoked responses
via axonal interaction with the stimulated region. In fact, there
are various procedures for treating the identical neurological
disorder by rTMS. These procedures characterized the stimulus parameters such as region, frequency, and waveforms [20].
Nevertheless, modulation of stimulus-evoked responses by the
spontaneous activity in the nonstimulated region has not been
investigated using cultured neurons. A precise assessment of
spontaneous activity-dependent modulation of the evoked responses is required for the evaluation of rTMS effects in vitro.
Microfluidictechniques are powerful tools for patterning neuronal network structures. Previous studies demonstrated that
microtunnels fabricated by using photolithography permitted
the isolation of axons and cell bodies [21]–[23]. Furthermore, by using the microfluidic device with and attached MEA
and microfluidic-based selective pharmacological stimulation,
it was confirmed that two different neuronal networks that
were separately cultured could be functionally through axons [24]–[27]. These studies suggest that microfluidic techniques for assessing in vitro rTMS effects are a useful strategy
for achieving localized stimulation and studying the effects of
spontaneous activity on the evoked activity.
For this purpose, we fabricated clustered cell culture chambers (clustered chambers) that consist of one central chamber
connected to eight outer chambers through microtunnels. The
clustered chambers are fabricated by using photolithography

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 1. Fabrication of clustered chambers with attached MEA. (a) Fabrication of the master template and PDMS device. Briefly, the master template was
constructed in a two-layer SU-8 photolithographic process on glass by using SU-8 3005 and 3050. The thin PDMS layer and two circular PDMS compartments
were set on this mold. After baking and induration of the PDMS (60 ◦ C, 1 h), the device was stripped from the SU-8 mold. (b) Method of aligning clustered
chambers on the MEA. The cylindrical PDMS compartment that was set on the clustered chambers so as to permit the modulation of the volume difference between
the central and outer chambers. For LPS, the height of medium in the central chamber was set higher than the outer chambers. (c) Phase-contrast images of the
clustered chambers and MEA. The central chamber has eight microtunnels that connect it to all outer chambers. In addition, each chamber has a spacer to prevent
the cell migration into the microtunnels. Using this device, we performed the split stimulation using the localized induced current and drugs in the same neuronal
networks

and replica molding techniques and are attached to a MEA substrate for noninvasive monitoring of the electrical activity of
the neuronal networks grown in the chambers. After plating the
cortical cells in each chamber, the extending axons in each mictrotunnel formed the functionally-connected clustered neuronal
networks in the device. We then analyzed the interactions between the localized induced current stimulation (LICS)-evoked
electrical activity in the central chamber and the localized pharmacological stimulation (LPS)-induced localized modulation of
neuronal activity in the outer chambers.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Cell Culture
Cortical tissues were prepared from 18- to 19-day-old Wistar rat embryos (Charles River Laboratories Japan). All animal
experiments were approved by the animal experiments ethnics
committee at the University of Tokyo and performed according to the University of Tokyo guidelines for the care and use
of laboratory animals. Cell isolation was performed following the previous study [28]. Briefly, the isolated cortical tissues were dissociated enzymatically and physically using 0.5%
Trypsin solution (Sigma-Aldrich). Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle
Medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen) containing 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) (Invitrogen), 5% horse serum (HS) (Invitrogen),
and 1% Penicillin–Streptomycin (Pe-St) (Invitrogen) was used

for culture medium. The isolated neuronal and glial cells were
seeded on the multiclustered chambers that were set on the MEA
with a density of 5 × 104 cells/mm2 . The plated neurons and
glial cells were incubated under 37 ◦ C, 5% CO2 and water vapor conditions. The medium was exchanged twice a week to
maintain the culture conditions.
B. Fabrication of Clustered Chambers
To restructure the multiunit neuronal network in the culture, we fabricated clustered chambers by using the SU-8 photoresist (3005 and 3050, Microchem) and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (Silpot184, Dow Corning Toray). The fabrication
process is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The master mold was fabricated in a two-layer photolithographic process. The first layer
(height: 4 μm, width: 100 μm) was prepared for the microtunnels
(length: 1 mm) and spacers (length: 500 μm) at the bottom of
the chambers. Thin photoresist layers (SU-8 3005, Microchem)
were created on the glass plates by spin-coating (3500 r/min,
30 s) and prebaking (95 ◦ C,5 min). The SU-8 microstructures
were developed after the lithographic exposure (4 min) (MA-10,
Mikasa), development (3 min) (SU-8 Developer, Microchem),
and postbaking (95 ◦ C, 5 min). The second layer for the cylindrical chambers (height: 70 μm, diameter: 2 mm) was made on
top of first layer. Cylindrical SU-8 molds were made by spincoating (1200 r/min, 30 s) the photoresist layer (SU-8 3050,
Microchem), prebaking (95 ◦ C, 5 min), lithographic exposure

SAITO et al.: INDUCED CURRENT PHARMACOLOGICAL SPLIT STIMULATION SYSTEM FOR NEURONAL NETWORKS

465

(4 min), and postbaking (95 ◦ C, 45 min). After fabrication of
the SU-8 molds, PDMS was spin-coated (500 r/min, 10 s) onto
them and cured (70 ◦ C, 1 h) for thermal stabilization on the hot
plate, and the clustered chambers were carefully extracted from
the master mold. Finally, we attached the chambers to the MEA
substrate, positioned all electrodes in the interior of the central
chamber.
Using these chambers, we tried to form multiunit neuronal
networks in the central and outer chambers connected via the
microtunnels, which were designed to pass only axons.
C. Extracellular Recording
To evaluate the effects of induced current and pharmacological stimulation in the matured neuronal networks, we monitored
the network-wide extracellular spontaneous activity by using a
MEA-based recording system that has been developed previously [29]. Fig. 1(b) and (d) shows the positions of the electrodes
of the MEA after their alignment in the chambers. The square array of 64 electrodes in the central chamber permitted multipoint
and wide-area recording of stimulus-evoked cultured neuronal
network activities during various external stimuli. The extracellular signals from these electrodes were amplified 10 000 times
with the pre- and postamplifiers (NF Co.), the band passed using a 100–2000 Hz filter (NF Co.), A/D converted at a 25 kHz
sampling rate using LabVIEW software (National Instruments)
and stored on a hard disk. The recorded data were visualized
by spike raster plot analysis using PV-WAVE software (Visual
Numerics) [28]. We evaluated the network activity by detecting
and analyzing synchronized bursting activity. The synchronized
bursting activity in this experiment was defined as a sequential
occurrence of spikes (typically over ten spikes) simultaneously
detected in over 20 electrodes.
D. LICS System
To apply magnetically induced current stimulation to the local region in the cultured neuronal networks, we applied the
horizontal alternating current magnetic fields to the soft magnetic material on top of the central chamber [see Fig. 2(a)]. The
LICS system was built from an alternating current magnetic
field generator and Mu-metal (Nilaco), which has high magnetic permeability [see Fig. 2(b)]. To generate low-frequency
(0.5 Hz, biphasic pulse) magnetic fields, we used a high-speed
bipolar power supply (BWS40–7.5, Takasago), function generator (SG-4111, Iwasaki), and air core coils (Jantzen). The diskshaped Mu-metal (Mu-disk) had a 2 mm diameter and 0.125 mm
thickness. Before the magnetic field exposure, the Mu-disk was
put in the middle of the pair of air core coils (internal diameter: 24 mm, outside diameter: 48 mm, about 100 turns). In this
way, the magnetic fields were focused on the Mu-disk, and the
induced currents were applied locally to the cultured neuronal
network in the central chamber. We used the MEA to evaluate the
spatiotemporal patterns of responses evoked during the LICS.
Electromagnetic field analysis software (Maxwell 2D, Ansoft)
was used to evaluate the magnetic flux distribution and induced
current density (ICD). Table I lists the physical constants, such

Fig. 2. Method of localized magnetic stimulation of cultured neuronal networks in the central chamber. (a) Schematic diagram of localized electrical
stimulation by an induced current that was generated in the Mu-metal. The
Mu-disk was set in the central chamber, and magnetic fields were applied from
horizontal direction. In the central chamber, the cylindrical PDMS compartment and inner medium tank stabilized the Mu-metal during the magnetic field
exposure. (b) System for recording LICS and the MEA-based extracellular voltage from cultured neuronal networks. The stimulation waveform was a 0.5 Hz
biphasic alternating pulse magnetic field.
TABLE I
PHYSICAL CONSTANT USED IN NUMERICAL ANALYSIS

as permittivity (ε), permeability (μ), and conductivity (σ), of
the materials used in the system.
E. LPS Method
Our goal here was to use the LICS to observe and modulate the neuronal network activity in the outer chambers to
change the network activity in the central chamber. To do so,
we attempted to apply the LPS to the outer chambers by using the volume difference-mediated clustered chambers. During
LPS, bicuculline methiodide (BMI) (10 μM, Sigma-Aldrich),

466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

which is a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) recipient antagonist, and tetrodotoxin (TTX) (1 μM, Sigma-Aldrich), which
is a sodium ion channel blocker, were used for modulation of
neuronal network activities in outer chambers. Moreover, it is
known that cell migration near the microtunnels blocks the flow
of the medium [21], [22]. Accordingly, pharmacological saturation in the central chamber was inhibited by establishing margin
regions for cell migration in the spacer and by controlling the
volume difference between the central and outer chambers.
F. Immunohistochemistry
For the immunochemical analysis, cultured neurons and glial
cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room
temperature. After washing in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
(1 min ×3), the fixed cells were permeabilized with 0.25%
TritonX-100 in PBS for 10 min and blocked with 4% bovine
serum albumin (BSA). Primary antibodies used in this study
were mouse anti-beta-3 tubulin (anti-B3 T) (1:400, Chemicon International) and rabbit antiglial fibrillary acidic protein
(anti-GFAP) (1:1000, Chemicon International). These antibodies were applied overnight at 4 ◦ C. Neuronal and glial cells
were washed in PBS (5 min × 3) and incubated for 2 h at room
temperature with Alexa Fluor 488-mouse IgG (1: 500, Molecular Probes) and Alexa Fluor 546-rabbit IgG (1:500, Molecular
Probes), which are secondary antibodies for anti-beta-3 tubulin and anti-GFAP, respectively. Immunochemical images were
obtained with a cooled charge coupled device (CCD) camera
(C8800-21 C, Hamamatsu Photonics) combined with a phasecontrast microscope (IX-71, Olympus). The obtained images
were analyzed with HiPic software (Hamamatsu Photonics).
III. RESULTS
A. Neuronal Network Patterning Using Clustered Chambers
To test the culture conditions of the clustered neuronal networks, we plated cortical cells on each chamber and observed
the time-dependent axonal outgrowth in each microchannel.
Fig. 3(a) shows a typical result for a cultured monolayer neuronal network in a chamber. Plated cells adhered only to each
the chamber spot, and these spots contained approximately the
same densities of B3 T and GFAP-positive cells. During the
development of the neuronal networks, migration-related cell
intruded into the spacers, but not the microtunnels. On the other
hand, axons intruded into both the microtunnels and spacers
[see Fig. 3(b)]. The percentage of axon-containing microtunnels increased during the culture period. In particular, all of
the microtunnels were filled with bidirectional axons within
8–10 days of culture [see Fig. 3(c)]. Therefore, these morphological changes showed that our device could connect multiple
neuronal networks with only axons.
B. Axonal Connection-Dependent Developmental Modulation
of Spontaneous Activity
In order to reveal the functional connections of the clustered
neuronal networks, the MEA was used to evaluate the axonintrusion related modulation of spontaneous activities in the

Fig. 3. Neuronal and glial cells in the central chamber and axonal outgrowth
in a microtunnel. (a) Neuronal and glial cells in the clustered chambers. Double immunofluorescent image of B3 T and GFAP labeling was also shown.
B3 T-positive cells and GFAP-positive cells indicated neurons and astrocytes,
respectively. (b) Intruded axons in a microtunnel. The picture shows that the
cell bodies were trapped by the chamber and spacer, and the axons were guided
into the microtunnel. (c) Percentage of axon-contained microtunnels during development of clustered neuronal networks. After 8–10 days in culture, almost
all microtunnels were filled with axons (N = 6, ±SD).

central chamber during development. Here, a part of neuronal
networks in the outer chambers was mechanically removed under stereoscopic microscope observation to facilitate a comparison of the changes in spontaneous activity in the presence or
absence of axonal intrusions. Fig. 4(a) shows a schematic diagram of the preparation methods for two types of neuronal network in the chambers. We named the networks under the normal
conditions “connection” network and networks without axonal
intrusion from the outer chambers “nonconnection” network.
The waveforms of the spontaneous activities shown in Fig. 4(b)

SAITO et al.: INDUCED CURRENT PHARMACOLOGICAL SPLIT STIMULATION SYSTEM FOR NEURONAL NETWORKS

467

Fig. 4. Modulation of time-dependent changes in spontaneous activity of clustered neuronal network. (a) Schematic overview of plating method and preparation
of two types of neuronal network (nonconnection and connection). The cells in the outer chambers for the nonconnected networks were mechanically removed
after plating of cells. (b) Spike waveforms of spontaneous activities detected from the same electrodes during the developmental stage under each culture condition.
The representative waveforms show that spike frequencies of the connected networks were higher than those of the nonconnected network during 7–28 days.
A comparison of the number of (c) spikes and (d) synchronized bursting activities shows that these spontaneous activities were increased concurrently during
7–28 days in the connection neuronal networks (N = 4, ±SD).

indicate that of the spike frequencies accompanying the axonal
intrusion from the outer chambers in the connection networks
increased during the culture period of 14–35 days. There were
obvious differences in the spontaneous activities during development between the nonconnection and connection networks.
In particular, the number of spikes and synchronized bursting
activities on the connection networks were higher than in the
nonconnection ones during the culture period of 14–28 days
[see Fig. 4(c) and (d)]. Such modulations of spontaneous activity were not observed at 35 days of culture.
C. Effects of LPS on Spontaneous Activity
To modulate the neuronal network activities in the central
chamber, we tried the volume difference-based LPS. A cylindrical PDMS compartment was set up around the central chamber,
and the height of the medium between the central and outer
chambers produced the volume difference-based water pressure
for the prevention of drug inflow [see Fig. 5(a)]. Medium inflow
from the outer chambers into the central chamber was monitored
by using the localized fluorescein (Uranine, Wako) and colored
water before the pharmacological experiments [see Fig. 5(b)].
No inflow of fluorescein was observed, whereas the evaporation
of colored water in the central and outer chambers evaporated
after several hours [see Fig. 5(c)]. Therefore, the pharmacological experiment was performed within an hour, and the recording

started within 10 min after each pharmacological trial. The neuronal network activities in the outer chambers were modulated
by BMI or TTX stimulation, and the extracellular electrical activities in the central chamber were evaluated by using the same
samples for each condition. Fig. 5(d) shows typical modulations
of the pattern of spontaneous activities in the central chamber
after BMI and TTX stimulation. The results of the pharmacological experiments using the same neuronal network indicated
that the spontaneous activity in the central chamber was rapidly
modulated under each LPS condition. In particular, the firing
rates of the spontaneous activities decreased compared with
the nonstimulated condition. On the other hand, these modulations were not observed in the nonconnected networks [see
Fig. 5(e)]. Fig. 5(f) and (g) shows the number of spikes and synchronized bursting activities after pharmacological stimulation.
Compared with the nonstimulation (Control) condition, BMI
stimulation decreased the number of spikes by 80.1%, and TTX
stimulation decreased it by 97.1%. Furthermore, TTX stimulation decreased the synchronized bursting activities by 96.2%,
whereas BMI stimulation increased it by 21.4%. However, the
obvious increase or decrease of spikes and synchronized bursting activities were not shown in the nonconnected networks.
These results confirm that the neuronal networks in the central
and outer chambers were connected functionally through the
microtunnels, and that LPS was able to modulate the neuronal
network activities in various ways. Note that we named the

468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 5. Observation of functional connections between neuronal networks of the central and outer chambers by LPS. (a) Schematic overview and picture image
of the method of limited modulation of neuronal network activities by water pressure-based LPS in the outer chambers. (b) Observation of medium inflow from
the outer chambers into the central chamber using fluorescein (Uranine). (c) Evaporation of medium during four hours. Representative waveforms and spike raster
plots of pharmacologically modulated neuronal network activities in the central chamber under (d) connection networks and (e) nonconnection networks. These
figures show that the spike frequencies and firing patterns were modulated characteristically in the same electrodes under each LPS condition in the connection
networks. A comparison of the number of (f) spikes and (g) synchronized bursting activities between before and after LPS for each pharmacological condition (N
= 4, ±SD).

non-LPS stimulation, BMI stimulation, and TTX stimulation
the natural condition, synchronized condition, and depressed
condition, respectively.
D. Numerically-Estimated Magnetic Flux and Induced
Current Densities in the Culture Environment
We constructed a simple analytical model of the experimental
setup and used it to estimate the distribution of magnetic flux

density (MFD) and ICD in the medium during the exposure
to 0.5 Hz alternating current magnetic fields. The results in
Fig. 6(a) show the MFD was focused on the Mu-disk. In addition,
Fig. 6(b) and (c) indicates that the ICDs focus on only the central
chamber. According to the results of numerical analysis, ICD in
the medium and Mu-disk is about 5–15 mA/m2 (induced electric
field: 2.52–7.56 mV/m) and 10–50 A/m2 (induced electric field:
5.04–25.2 V/m), respectively. Here, the theoretical threshold of
the electric field is 1 mV/m [30]–[33]. These results indicate

SAITO et al.: INDUCED CURRENT PHARMACOLOGICAL SPLIT STIMULATION SYSTEM FOR NEURONAL NETWORKS

Fig. 6. Two-dimensional analysis for visualization of the distribution of the
magnetic field and induced current in the culture environment. The figures show
(a) the MFD in the culture environment, the ICD focused on (b) the Mu-disk and
the ICD in the medium in the culture dish (c) with or (d) without the Mu-disk
[dashed square in (a)].

that our LICS system could produce localized stimulus effects
of neuronal network activities during the alternating magnetic
field exposure. It was worth noting that ICD in the medium
reduced under 1 mA/m2 when the Mu-disk was removed [see
Fig. 6(d)]. Therefore, the MFD-induced current without Mudisk did not satisfy the theoretical threshold.
E. Network Activity-Dependent Effects of LICS
on the Evoked Responses
The modulations of the evoked activities in the central chamber by LICS related to different types of LPS were evaluated
using the experimental method shown in Fig. 2. The stimulus
artifacts from the electrodes during the stimulation periods had
two different waveforms [see Fig. 7(a)]. Fig. 7(b) shows the
typical evoked responses after magnetic field exposure to neuronal networks with and without the Mu-disk. Evoked responses
were not observed in the network without the Mu-disk, so that

469

Fig. 7. Observation of evoked responses during LICS. (a) Stimulus artifacts
that were recorded from one electrode with Mu-disk. The 0.5 Hz alternating
and bipolar pulse stimulation made two types of stimulus artifact. (b) Different
neuronal responses by LICS before and after insert of Mu-disk. The modulations
of neuronal activity were not observed during magnetic field exposure without
Mu-disk. In contrast, combined with Mu-disk, the magnetic field exposure
inhibited the neuronal network activities.

the magnetic fields did not produce any neuronal modulation.
On the other hand, the network with the Mu-disk rapidly modulated its neuronal activities upon exposure to the magnetic field.
In particular, the neuronal network activities were suppressed
during exposure to the magnetic field. These results mean that
our in vitro soft magnetic material-based LICS system permits
induction of the silent period (SP)-like response observed in
human rTMS trials.
F. Network Activity-Dependent Prolonged Modulation
after Induced Current Stimulation
Finally, we examined how the evoked responses and its duration of the LICS-evoked neuronal activities were affected by
the spontaneous activity in the non-stimulated networks under
each LPS condition. Fig. 8(a) shows the LICS-evoked activities under different LPS conditions. The LICS induced silent
and high potentiation periods under the natural and depressed
conditions. In particular, the high potentiation period occurred
after SP. Therefore, we consider the evoked responses, which
resemble the rebounded activity (RA) observed after the SP in

470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 8. LPS-dependent modulation of LICS-evoked neuronal network activities. (a) Representative multisite waveforms of LICS-evoked neuronal network
activities recorded under each LPS condition. The different LPS conditions caused varied responses in the same neuronal networks. (b) The spike raster plots and
(c) the time-dependent changes of LICS-evoked activities in each LPS condition. In particular, the spontaneous activities of the natural and depressed conditions
were increased after LICS. These results mean that the spontaneous activities modulated the prolonged effects of the stimulus-evoked activities.

the rTMS trials, were generated. However, these evoked activities were not observed under the synchronized condition. In
addition, the generation timings of the silent and high potentiation periods under the natural condition were different from
those under the depressed condition. Compared with the LICSevoked activities under the natural condition, those under the
depressed condition induced a variability in the generation timings of the silent period and high potentiation at each electrode.
These results mean that our LICS system was able to modulate the neuronal network activities, but the evoked activities of
the neuronal network in the central chamber during the LICS
were affected by the neuronal network activities in the outer
chambers.
Fig. 8(b) shows the prolonged effects visualized by spike
raster plots. The results from the natural and depressed conditions show highly modulated neuronal network activities after
the LICS. Here, the duration of the potentiation in the networks
of the natural condition was longer than that of the depressed
condition. In addition, the reproducible observed evoked responses that were less than a 60 s in duration. Therefore, we
detected the signals just before and after stimulation using a
120 s time window in order to include the time course of prolonged effect. Fig. 8(c) shows the time-dependent changes in
the number of spikes and synchronized bursting activities after
LICS. The duration of the potentiation in the networks under the
natural and depressed conditions became more prominent during the minute after drug application, but this effect disappeared
after 3–5 min. The modulations of spontaneous activities after
the LICS did not last for the entire period of the synchronized
condition. These results suggest that neuronal network activities in the outer chambers modulated the prolonged effects of
the LICS on the spontaneous activities of the central chamber’s
network.

IV. DISCUSSION
Our evaluation of the cell culture chamber platform revealed
the showed the morphological and functional connections between one neuronal network cultured in a central chamber and
a number of distant neuronal networks cultured in the outer
chambers. The spontaneous activity in the central chamber was
modulated by a bidirectional axonal connection during the longterm culture. Previous studies reported that spontaneous activity is important for the development of neuronal networks and
their activities [34]–[36]. Moreover, the spontaneous activity
recorded in the cell culture chambers demonstrated that the
neuronal activity during development was modulated by the axonal inputs. Here, the localized application of BMI in the outer
chambers through volume difference-based LPS induced potentiation of synchronized bursting activity in the central chamber.
Previous reports that showed the random spikes were transformed into high-frequency synchronized bursting activities by
BMI [39]. Hence, the BMI-induced modulation of neuronal activity was also induced by the localized application of BMI. By
contrast, application of TTX in the outer chambers induced a
rapid inhibition of the neuronal network activity in the central
chamber, but the spontaneous activity did not disappear. These
results indicate that modulation of the neuronal activity is related
to modulation of the axonal inputs from the outer chambers.
Next, we estimated the magnetic field and the induced current densities in the LICS area of the culture platform by using
numerical analysis. The analytical results demonstrated that the
magnetic field and induced current were focused on the Mu-disk
at the top of the central chamber, and the ICD in the medium tank
of the central chamber was 5–15 mA/m2 . According to theoretical studies, the thresholds of the induced electric field that modulate the neuronal network activity are considered to be around

SAITO et al.: INDUCED CURRENT PHARMACOLOGICAL SPLIT STIMULATION SYSTEM FOR NEURONAL NETWORKS

1 mV/m [30]–[32]. Here, the estimated magnetically-induced
minimum electric fields were about the 2.52–7.56 mV/m. Thus,
our LICS system satisfied the required condition for the theoretical threshold of the induced electric field. However, an
experiment on a hippocampal slice culture reported that the
threshold of the induced electric field for modulation of spontaneous electrical activities was 140–180 mV/m [33] and another
previous study estimated the minimum intensity of the induced
current during TMS to be about 20–30 A/m2 [40]. In our LICS
system, the induced current in the surface of the Mu-disk was
over 50 A/m2 . Moreover, stimulus effects were only observed
in the Mu-disk cultures. Therefore, we expect that the Mu-disk
generated a sufficient current to stimulate the neuronal networks
through magnetic-current conversion. In addition, the currents
induced by applying the external alternating magnetic fields
to the Mu-disk produced SP and RA immediately after SP in
the whole LICS area. The same phenomenon occurred in lowfrequency rTMS (frequency of f < 1 Hz) studies of the human
brain [40]. These results imply that we can monitor the rTMSlike stimulus responses even in cultured neuronal networks, and
modulate the network activities with the induced current provided by the Mu-disk.
Finally, we tried to determine whether the LPS-induced modulation of the spontaneous activity of the neuronal networks
in the outer chambers affected the LICS-evoked activities in
the central chamber. Although application of BMI did not produce LICS-evoked stimulus responses, the application of TTX
resulted in a recovery and variable generation timing of the
LICS-evoked stimulus responses. This indicates that the synaptic function in the nonstimulate region inverted the properties of
the stimulus responses. Generally, there are two different rTMS
approaches related to the region of the human brain undergoing stimulation [20]. The “interaction” model in which rTMS
interact with the intrinsic ability of the brain to restore or compensate for a damaged function is clearest and has been shown
to have a scientific basis in a therapeutic trial on motor strokes.
In this model, the stimulation frequency and stimulation region
are influential factors in inverting the stimulus responses. On
the other hand, our method that modulated the number of spikes
and synchronized bursting activities by LPS in the stimulus
frequency stabilized condition also inverted the stimulus responses. This suggests that the synchronized bursting activities
were an inhibiting factor of the stimulus responses. In addition,
the LPS-induced natural and depressed conditions showed the
prolonged effects after LICS; however, BMI-induced condition
did not have such a prolonged effect. These results mean that the
LICS-evoked prolonged effects on neuronal network functions
are affected by the activities in the stimulated and nonstimulated
regions. Here, a previous report supports our result that in vitro
magnetic stimulation effects were altered by the application of
BMI [18]. However, although we did not inhibit GABA-A receptors in the stimulated region, the stimulus responses were
similar to the previous results [18]. Therefore, our results indicate that the functions of inhibitory neurons are involved in
LICS-evoked neuronal activity and these stimulus responses and
prolonged effects were altered by the functional connections of
neuronal networks of the stimulated and nonstimulated region.
In conclusion, to clarify the mechanisms of rTMS effects and

471

risks, it will be necessary to focus on the functional relationship
between the stimulated and nonstimulated regions.
V. CONCLUSION
We developed a novel neuronal assay device for studying interactions between induced current evoked stimulus responses
under various spontaneous activity patterns. We evaluated the
effect of the pharmacologically modulated neuronal network
activities on the induced current evoked neuronal network modulations. Using our induced current and pharmacological bidirectional split stimulation device, we observed that the various
pharmacological-evoked neuronal network activities affected
the induced current-evoked neuronal network activity in the
nonpharmacologically stimulated region.
REFERENCES
[1] M. S. George, E. M. Wassermann, W. A. Williams, A. Callahan,
T. A. Ketter, P. Basser, M. Hallett, and R. M. Post, “Daily repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) improves mood in depression,”
Neuroreport, vol. 6, no. 14, pp. 1853–1856, 1995.
[2] A. Pascual-Leone, B. Rubio, F. Pallardo, and M. D. Catala, “Rapid-rate
transcranial magnetic stimulation of leftdorsolateral prefrontal cortex in
drug-resistant depression,” Lancet, vol. 348, no. 9022, pp. 233–237, 1996.
[3] E. Klein, I. Kreinin, A. Chistyakov, D. Koren, L. Mecz, S. Marmur,
D. Ben-Shachar, and M. Feinsod, “Therapeutic efficacy of right prefrontal
slow repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in major depression: a
double-blind controlled study,” Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, vol. 56, no. 4,
pp. 315–320, 1999.
[4] J. P. Lefaucher, “Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS):
Insights into the treatment of Parkinson’s disease,” Neurophysiol. Clin.,
vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 125–133, 2006.
[5] R. C. Helmich, H. R. Siebner, M. Bakker, A. Münchau, and B. R. Bloem,
“Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation to improve mood and motor
function in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurol. Sci., vol. 248, no. 1–2, pp. 84–
96, 2006.
[6] E. M. Khedr, M. A. Ahmed, N. Fathy, and J. C. Rothwell, “Therapeutic
trial of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation after acute ischemic
stroke,” Neurology., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 466–468, 2005.
[7] P. Talelli, R. J. Greenwood, and J. C. Rothwell, “Exploring theta burst
stimulation as an intervention to improve motor recovery in chronic
stroke,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 118, no. 2, pp. 333–342, 2007.
[8] S. Kuwabara, C. Cappelen-Smith, C. S. Lin, I. Mogyoros, and D. Burke,
“Effects of voluntary activity on the excitability of motor axons in the
peroneal nerve,” Muscle Nerve., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 176–184, 2002.
[9] K. Stefan, E. Kunesch, R. Benecke, L. G. Cohen, and J. Classen, “Mechanisms of enhancement of human motor cortex excitability induced by
interventional paired associative stimulation,” J. Physiol., vol. 543, no. 2,
pp. 699–708, 2002.
[10] Y. Z. Huang, R. S. Chen, J. C. Rothwell, and H. Y. Wen, “The after-effect
of human theta burst stimulation is NMDA receptor dependent,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 118, no. 5, pp. 1028–1032, 2007.
[11] S. Ueno, T. Tashiro, and K. Harada, “Localized stimulation of neural tissue
in the brain by means of a paired configuration of time-varying magnetic
fields,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 5862–5864, 1990.
[12] D. E. Bohning, S. Denslow, P. A. Bohning, J. A. Walker, and
M. S. George, “A TMS coil positioning/holding system for MR imageguided TMS interleaved with fMRI,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 114, no. 11,
pp. 2210–2219, 2003.
[13] Y. Jimbo, T. Tateno, and H. P. Robinson, “Simultaneous induction of
pathway-specific potentiation and depression in networks of cortical neurons,” Biophys. J., vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 670–678, 1999.
[14] G. Shahaf and S. Marom, “Learning in networks of cortical neurons,” J.
Neurosci., vol. 21, no. 22, pp. 8782–8788, 2001.
[15] D. A. Wagenaar, R. Madhavan, J. Pine, and S. M. Potter, “Controlling
bursting in cortical cultures with closed-loop multi-electrode stimulation,”
J. Neurosci., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 680–688, 2005.
[16] H. A. Johnson, A. Goel, and D. V. Buonomano, “Neural dynamics of
in vitro cortical networks reflects experienced temporal patterns,” Nat.
Neurosci., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 917–919, 2010.

472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

[17] A. Rotem and E. Moses, “Magnetic stimulation of one-dimensional neuronal cultures,” Biophys. J., vol. 94, no. 12, pp. 5065–5078, 2008.
[18] J. F. Meyer, B. Wolf, and G. W. Gross, “Magnetic stimulation and depression of mammalian networks in primary neuronal cell cultures,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1512–1523, May 2009.
[19] M. Stock, B. Kirchner, D. Waibler, D. E. Cowley, M. W. Pfaffl, and
R. Kuehn, “Effect of magnetic stimulation on the gene expression profile
of in vitro cultured neural cells,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 526, no. 2, pp. 122–
127, 2012.
[20] M. C. Ridding and J. C. Rothwell, “Is there a future for therapeutic use
of transcranial magnetic stimulation?” Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 8, no. 7,
pp. 559–567, 2007.
[21] A. M. Taylor, M. Blurton-Jones, S. W. Rhee, D. H. Cribbs, C. W. Cotman,
and N. L. Jeon, “A microfluidic culture platform for CNS axonal injury,
regeneration and transport,” Nat. Methods, vol. 2, no. 8, pp. 599–605,
2005.
[22] M. A. Sutton, A. M. Taylor, H. T. Ito, A. Pham, and E. M. Schuman,
“Postsynaptic decoding of neural activity: eEF12 as a biochemical sensor coupling miniature synaptic transmission to local protein synthesis,”
Neuron, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 648–661, 2007.
[23] J. Park, H. Koito, J. Li, and A. Han, “Multi-compartment neuron-glia
co-culture platform for localized CNS axon–glia interaction study,” Lab
Chip, vol. 12, no. 18, pp. 3296–3304, 2012.
[24] E. Calverol-Tinture, M. Ghirardi, F. Fiumara, X. Rosell, and J. Cabestany,
“Multielectrode arrays with elatomeric microstructured overlays for extracellular recordings from patterned neurons,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. L1–L7, 2005.
[25] S. K. Ravula, M. A. McClain, M. S. Wang, S. J. D. Glass, and
A. B. Frazier, “A multielectrode microcompartment culture platform for
studying signal transduction in the nervous system,” Lab Chip, vol. 6,
no. 12, pp. 1530–1536, 2006.
[26] Y. Takayama, H. Moriguchi, K. Kotani, T. Suzuki, K. Mabuchi, and
Y. Jimbo, “Network-wide integration of stem cell-derived neurons and
mouse cortical neurons using microfabricated co-culture devices,” Biosystems, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2012.
[27] T. T. Kanagasabapathi, M. Franco, R. A. Barone, S. Martinoia,
W. J. Wadman, and M. M. Decre, “Selective pharmacological manipulation of cortical-thalamic co-cultures in a dual-compartment device,” J.
Neurosci. Methods, vol. 214, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2013.
[28] Y. Takayama, H. Moriguchi, K. Kotani, and Y. Jimbo, “Spontaneous calcium transients in cultured cortical networks during development,” IEEE
Trans Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 2949–2956, Dec. 2009.
[29] Y. Jimbo and A. Kawana, “Electrical stimulation and recording from
cultured neurons using a planar electrode array,” Bioelectrochem. Bioenergetics, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 193–204, 1992.
[30] R. K. Adair, R. D. Astumian, and J. C. Weaver, “Detection of weak electric
fields by sharks, rays, and skates,” Chaos, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 576–587, 1998.
[31] B. Veyret, “Rapporteur report: Interaction mechanisms,” Radiat. Prot.
Dosimetry, vol. 106, no. 4, pp. 317–319, 2003.
[32] World Health Organization (WHO), “Extremely low frequency fields,” Environmental Health Criteria Monograph, No. 238, Geneva: WHO, 2007.
[33] J. T. Francis, B. J. Gluckman, and S. J. Schiff, “Sensitivity of neurons to
weak electric fields,” J. Neurosci., vol. 23, no. 19, pp. 7255–7261, 2003.
[34] H. A. Cameron, B. S. McEwen, and J. Bischofberger, “Regulation of adult
neurogenesis by excitatory input and NMDA receptor activation in the
dentate gyrus,” J. Neurosci., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 4687–4692, 1995.
[35] I. Rajan and H. T. Cline, “Glutamate receptor activity is required for
normal development of tectal cell dendrites in vivo,” J. Neurosci., vol. 18,
no. 19, pp. 7836–7846, 1998.
[36] M. G. Hanson and L. T. Landmesser, “Normal patterns of spontaneous
activity are required for correct motor axon guidance and the expression
of specific guidance molecules,” Neuron, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 687–701,
2004.
[37] S. M. Potter and T. B. DeMarse, “A new approach to neural cell culture
for long-term studies,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 110, no. 1–2, pp. 17–24,
2001.
[38] E. M. Ullian, S. K. Sapperstein, K. S. Christopherson, and B. A. Barres,
“Control of synapse number by glia,” Science, vol. 26, no. 5504, pp. 657–
661, 2001.
[39] F. J. Amold, F. Hofmann, C. P. Bengtson, M. Wittmann, P. Vanhoutte,
and H. Bading, “Microelectrode array recording of cultured hippocampal
networks reveal a simple model for transcription and protein synthesisdependent plasticity,” J. Physiol., vol. 564, no. 1, pp. 3–19, 2004.
[40] M. Sekino and S. Ueno, “Comparison of current distributions in electroconvulsive therapy and transcranial magnetic stimulation,” J. Appl. Phys.,
vol. 91, no. 10, pp. 8730–8732, 2002.

[41] A. D. Pinto and R. Chen, “Suppression of the motor cortex by magnetic
stimulation of the cerebellum,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 140, no. 4, pp. 505–
510, 2001.
Atsushi Saito (S’11–M’11) was born in Tokyo,
Japan, in 1984. He received the B.E. degree from
the Department of Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan
University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2007, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from the Graduate School of Frontier
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in
2009 and 2012, respectively.
Since 2012, he has been a Postdoctoral Fellow
of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS). Since 2013, he has been a Researcher at Environmental Science Research Laboratory, Central
Research Institute of Electric Power Industry. His current research interests
include assessment of the effects of the environmental electromagnetic fields
and magnetic stimulation on the neuronal development and neuronal network
activity.
Yuzo Takayama (S’09–M’09) was born in Tokyo,
Japan, in 1983. He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from the Graduate School of Engineering, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, in 2005 and 2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Graduate
School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
in 2010.
From 2010 to 2013, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow
of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS). He is currently a Research Fellow at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology, Ibaraki, Japan. His current research interests include experimental
analysis of the developmental processes of neuronal network, the development
of the precise control method of neuronal differentiation and three-dimensional
(3-D) construction of cultured cells and tissues.
Hiroyuki Moriguchi received the B.E., M.E., and
Ph.D. degrees in arts and sciences from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2001, 2003, and 2006,
respectively.
In 2006, he joined in the Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Since 2010, he has been a Lecturer in the Graduate
School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo.
Since 2012, he has been a Researcher at Quantitative
Biology Center (QBiC), RIKEN. His current research
interests include rhythmic activities emerges in micropatterned small neuronal networks composed of a single to several numbers
of neurons and their role in information processing.
Kiyoshi Kotani received the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D.
degrees in Engineering from the University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan, 2003.
From 2003 to 2007, he was an Assistant Professor at the Graduate School of Information Science
and Technology, The University of Tokyo. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Graduate School
of Frontier Sciences, the University of Tokyo. His current research interests include biomedical signal processing, nonlinear dynamics, and human interface.

Yasuhiko Jimbo (M’04) received the B.E., M.E., and
Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1983, 1985, and
1988, respectively.
He joined the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
(NTT) Basic Research Laboratories in 1988. From
1992 to 1993, he was a Visiting Researcher at Centre
National de la Recherché Scientifique (CNRS), Marseilles, France. Since 2006, he has been a Professor
at the Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Dr. Jimbo is a member of the Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan
(IEEJ) and the Japan Society of Medical Electronics and Biological Engineering (JSMBE).

