872

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

On the Seamless, Harmonized Use
of ISO/IEEE11073 and OpenEHR
Jesús D. Trigo, Christian D. Kohl, Aitor Eguzkiza, Miguel Martı́nez-Espronceda, Member, IEEE, Álvaro Alesanco,
Luis Serrano, Senior Member, IEEE, José Garcı́a, Member, IEEE, and Petra Knaup

Abstract—Standardized exchange of clinical information is a
key factor in the provision of high quality health care systems.
In this context, the openEHR specification facilitates the management of health data in electronic health records (EHRs), while the
ISO/IEEE11073 (also referred to as X73PHD) family of standards
provides a reference framework for medical device interoperability. Hospitals and health care providers using openEHR require
flawless integration of data coming from external sources, such as
X73PHD. Hence, a harmonization process is crucial for achieving
a seamless, coherent use of those specifications in real scenarios.
Such harmonization is the aim of this paper. Thus, the classes
and attributes of a representative number of X73PHD specializations for medical devices—weight, temperature, blood pressure,
pulse and heart rate, oximetry, and electrocardiograph—along
with the X73PHD core document—ISO/IEEE11073–20601—have
been analyzed and mapped to openEHR archetypes. The proposed
methodology reuses the existing archetypes when possible and suggests new ones—or appropriate modifications—otherwise. As a
result, this paper analyzes the inconsistencies found and the implications thereof in the coordinated use of these two standards. The
procedure has also shown how existing standards are able to influence the archetype development process, enhancing the existing
archetype corpus.
Index Terms—Archetypes, harmonization, ISO/IEEE 11073,
openEHR, standards.

I. INTRODUCTION

C

ONTROLLED medical vocabularies are a requirement
of paramount importance in order to build medical

Manuscript received March 7, 2013; revised July 8, 2013; accepted September 30, 2013. Date of publication October 10, 2013; date of current version
May 1, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Ministerio de Economı́a
y Competitividad under Project TIN-2011-23792, in part by the European Regional Development Fund, and in part by the European Social Fund. The work
of J. D. Trigo was supported by a Postdoctoral research visit grant awarded by
Diputación General de Aragón, Ref. 284–309 and by a Postdoctoral research
grant awarded by Public University of Navarre, Res. 667/2013.
J. D. Trigo is with the Communications Technologies Group, Aragón Institute
of Engineering Research, University of Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain, with
the Signal Theory and Communications Group, Public University of Navarra,
31009 Pamplona, Spain, and also with the Institute of Medical Biometry
and Informatics, University Hospital Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
(e-mail: jtrigo@unizar.es).
C. D. Kohl and P. Knaup are with the Institute of Medical Biometry and
Informatics, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany (e-mail:
Christian.Kohl@med.uni-heidelberg.de; petra.knaup@med.uni-heidelberg.de).
A. Eguzkiza, M. Martı́nez-Espronceda, and L. Serrano are with
the Signal Theory and Communications Group, Public University of
Navarra, 31009 Pamplona, Spain (e-mail: aitor.eguzkiza@unavarra.es; miguel.
martinezdeespronceda@unavarra.es; lserrano@unavarra.es).
Á. Alesanco and J. Garcı́a are with the Communications Technologies Group,
Aragón Institute of Engineering Research, University of Zaragoza, 50018
Zaragoza, Spain (e-mail: alesanco@unizar.es; jogarmo@unizar.es).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2285441

informatics applications. The goals for the development of standard, reusable, multipurpose-controlled medical vocabularies
were set out by Cimino [1]. Although a plethora of new terminologies, vocabularies, and standards have emerged throughout
these years, none of them has reached international consensus
yet. Creating and maintaining clinical terminologies is indeed
a complex issue. In [2], Rector enumerated ten crucial reasons
which make developing comprehensive reusable terminologies
hard. As this is a complicated task, standards have been usually
created ad hoc to a rather specific purpose. This implies the
coexistence of different, often overlapping standardized ontological systems.
In this ever-changing context, a number of standards, norms,
protocols, and specifications have emerged, including standards for the medical device (MD) interoperability—such as
ISO/IEEE11073 (also referred to as X73PHD) [3]—or specifications for the interoperable exchange of the Electronic Health
Record (EHR)—such as openEHR [4], CEN/ISO 13606 [5], or
HL7 [6]. The X73PHD standard connects MDs—e.g., weighing
scale, blood pressure monitor, or pulse oximeter—to Concentrator Devices (CDs)—e.g., cell phones, personal computers,
personal health appliances, or set top boxes. Subsequently, this
information can be sent to a hospital server (HS), in which
a different standard for EHR may apply. Therefore, practical
use of medical informatics needs mapping across systems. This
is a complex, time-consuming, and sometimes unachievable
task [7]. Overlapping, incompleteness, redundancies, vagueness, and ambiguities between origin and target specifications
are, therefore, the challenges that researchers face when trying
to accomplish cross-specification harmonization.
In order to partially solve this issue, a number of proposals have emerged, aimed at encouraging the coordinated use
of X73PHD and EHR-related standards. The integration of
X73PHD and HL7 has been thoroughly analyzed by Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise [8] or the Continua Health Alliance [9]. These entities have proposed different system architectures and specifications for effectively transferring medical
information from CDs to HSs [10], such as the Personal Healthcare Monitoring Report (PHMR) [11], a document constraining
HL7 Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) to describe documents mostly containing analyzed and raw information of data
generated by personal healthcare monitoring devices.
Some of the characteristics of openEHR—such as its open
nature, its broader approach to the modeling of the medical
ecosystem, or the solid commitment of a number of governments around the world to include openEHR-based EHRs in
their national health system—make this specification a valuable

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TRIGO et al.: ON THE SEAMLESS, HARMONIZED USE OF ISO/IEEE11073 AND OPENEHR

Fig. 1.

873

X73PHD- and openEHR-compliant system architecture.

candidate to establish as a de-facto standard. There has also
been effort to investigate on the possibility of committing serialized openEHR compositions directly from the point of care
to openEHR servers [12], [13]. Indeed, integrating data from
external sources is a key aspect in openEHR systems [14]—
including data originally compliant with other standards, such
as DICOM [15]. Moreover, some open-source projects facilitating direct committal have been launched [16]–[18]. This type
of procedure reduces the number of specifications required to
integrate monitoring data into openEHR architectures. Fostering this emerging ecosystem, off-the-shelf X73PHD-compliant
MDs can already be bought, whereas there is a steadily growing
number of governments, healthcare providers, and academics
interested in openEHR-compliant solutions [19]. This suggests
that the concurrent use of these two specifications in real scenarios is foreseeable (see Fig. 1). However, there is no previous effort aimed at analyzing the seamless, coordinated use of
X73PHD monitoring data and their committal from the point
of care directly to openEHR-compliant servers. Hence, there
is a need to investigate on the harmonized use of these two
specifications.

A. Objectives, Contributions, and Structure
Therefore, the main objective of this paper is to analyze the
combined use of X73PHD and openEHR. To do so, a telecardiology scenario has been chosen as a proof-of-concept for this
analysis. This scenario has been chosen since vital signs monitoring entails the use of various X73PHD-compliant devices
and, therefore, it is very representative in an X73PHD–openEHR
harmonization analysis. As a result, this paper analyzes the potential inconsistencies and provides recommendations for the
foreseeable coordinated use of these two standards. Furthermore, this manuscript presents a theoretical approach, thereby
facilitating a reproducible methodology to seamlessly harmonize other external standards with openEHR. Finally, the investigation also explores how existing standards may influence the
archetype development process.
The structure of the paper is as follows: a brief overview
of the two standards involved is presented in Section II,
while the research methodology is presented in Section III.
Sections IV and V present the main outcomes of the study.
Section IV introduces the results of the harmonization process,
mainly in the form of tables. In Section V, the issues identified
during the process are thoroughly discussed, along with the limitations of the methodology. Finally, conclusions are drawn in
Section VI.

Fig. 2.

X73PHD DIM [3].

II. OVERVIEW OF X73PHD AND OPENEHR
A. X73PHD
The X73PHD standard family describes the landscape of
transport-independent applications and information profiles so
that medical information can be exchanged between personal
MDs (called “Agents” in the X73 context) and CDs, usually
called “Managers” (e.g., cell phones, personal computers, personal health appliances, or set top boxes). The X73PHD standard defines a reference model based on a well-defined objectoriented paradigm that guarantees extensibility and reusability.
The domain information model (DIM) characterizes information from an Agent as a set of objects with one or more attributes, which describe measurement data that are communicated to a Manager as well as elements that control behavior
and report on the status of the Agent. The DIM covers the
definition of the medical device system (MDS) object, scanner objects (for data reporting), different metrics (Numeric,
Real Time-Sample Array (RT-SA) and Enumeration objects)
and Persistent Metric (PM) objects, used for data storage. The
core document of X73PHD is the optimized exchange protocol document (ISO/IEEE 11073–20601:2010) [3], along with
the published amendment. The DIM is defined in document
ISO/IEEE 11073–20601:2010 as shown in Fig. 2. In addition,
every MD considered in the X73 family is defined by a specialization document, named ISO/IEEE 11073–104zz, where the
code number “zz” identifies the device.
B. OpenEHR
openEHR is an open specification in health informatics that
describes the management and storage, retrieval and exchange
of health data in EHRs [20]. The openEHR Foundation coordinates the development of openEHR by publishing and maintaining a set of specifications. The current baseline (version 1.0.2) is
available in [21]. The basics of the openEHR approach rely on
a multilevel modeling (see Fig. 3). The lower levels are that of
the reference model, a stable object model from which software
and data can be built (unshaded boxes in Fig. 3). Concepts in
the openEHR reference model are invariant, and include things
like Composition, Section, Observation, and various data types
such as Quantity and Coded text. On top of and parallel to that,
the archetype model consists of domain-level definitions in the
form of archetypes and templates (light grey shaded boxes in

874

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 3. OpenEHR multilevel modeling approach [20]: Reference model (unshaded), archetype model (light gray shaded), and service model (dark gray
shaded), EHR = Electronic Health Record, OM = Object Model, ADL =
Archetype Definition Language.

Fig. 3). An archetype is a computable expression of a domain
content model in the form of structured constraint statements,
based on some reference model. Archetypes follow a tree structure that culminates in leaf nodes representing constraints on
primitive types such as integers, strings, and date/times. A template is used at runtime to create default data structures and
to validate data input, ensuring that all data in the EHR conform to the constraints defined in the archetypes referenced by
the template. Concepts defined at this level include things such
as “blood pressure measurement,” “SOAP (Subjective, Objective, Assessment, and Plan) headings,” or “HbA1 c Result.” The
upper levels correspond to the service model, which provides
definitions of basic services in the health information environment, centered on the EHR (dark grey-shaded boxes in Fig. 3),
such as terminology, demographic her, or archetype services.
III. HARMONIZATION METHODOLOGY
A. General Approach and Examples
The research methodology of the proposed harmonization
process can be modeled as a flowchart (see Fig. 4). The first
step is to look for an openEHR archetype equivalent to the concept that is being harmonized. For example, the X73PHD blood
pressure monitor specialization (ISO/IEEE 11073–10407:2010)
represents the same concept as the openEHR blood pressure
archetype and, therefore, the blood pressure archetype will be
selected. If there is no equivalent concept (i.e., archetype) or
the existing one does not fulfill the requirements, then, a new
archetype has to be created (a few examples of this case are presented later in Section V, e.g., finding #15). Thereafter, equivalent data items that fulfill the requirements must be connected.
For example, the diastolic pressure measurement corresponds to
the diastolic archetype leaf. If there is no connectable data item,
then the purpose of the attribute in the origin has to be checked.
For example, there are a number of X73PHD attributes intended
for internal use that report information required to identify and
order the rest of the data properly at the MD (e.g., handles, internal codes, etc.). Therefore, they are not mapped to any particular
openEHR data. If the original attribute is not connectable and it
is not intended for internal use—i.e., it is a piece of knowledge
which would be useful in openEHR—then a new leaf has to be
suggested. For example, battery-related attributes are present in
X73PHD, but they are not modeled in openEHR (see Section
V, finding #3). Finally, if there is an equivalent archetype and

a corresponding leaf, data types are checked. If there is no loss
of data, then the concept is accurately mapped. For example,
the body weigh in X73PHD is coded with the X73PHD FLOAT
data type (for noninteger values) defined as a 32-bit value with
24-bit mantissa and 8-bit exponent. In openEHR, the SimpleNu-Observed-Value reporting the weight should be mapped to
the archetype leaf Weight within the body weight archetype
and, more specifically, to the sub-leaf value. This value is expressed with the openEHR data type quantity, which, in turn,
is defined as a double, which represents 64-bit real numbers,
in any interoperable representation including double-precision
IEEE floating point. Therefore, it can be stated that X73PHD
weigh scale data will suffer no conversion loss when mapped
to openEHR. Otherwise, a newly suggested, proper data type is
required. At the end of the process, a finding is reported if any
suggestion had to be made (see Section V).
By using the proposed methodology, both semantic and
syntactic levels of interoperability are addressed. A—wellfounded—validation of the equivalent archetype and leaf for
a specific attribute will provide fully semantic interoperability.
Furthermore, the validation of the appropriate data type will
provide syntactic interoperability.
Adopters of the methodology willing to connect an X73PHDcompliant MD to an openEHR HS should first check if a mapping of the device is available. If no mapping is available,
adopters should follow the proposed flowchart (see Fig. 4) to
create a new one. Once the bindings between concepts have
been created, a proxy tool able to transcode X73PHD data to
openEHR archetypes is required for deploying the framework.
Thereafter, appropriate openEHR committal can be executed
directly from the CD to the HS.
B. Specific Approach and Documents Analyzed in the
Particular Use Case of a Telecardiology Scenario
The proposed methodology has been applied to the particular use case of a telecardiology scenario. A new openEHR
template has been created to gather and commit a number of
cardiovascular-related vital signs—weight, temperature, blood
pressure, pulse and heart rate, oximetry, and electrocardiograph (ECG). Thereafter, the X73PHD objects and attributes
are mapped to the openEHR archetypes by following the proposed flowchart, i.e., reusing existing archetypes when possible
and suggesting modifications to them or creating new archetypes
otherwise (see Section IV). It is worth noting, however, that the
generation of a template is not an essential requirement for a
X73PHD-openEHR mapping. It has been created to simulate a
telecardiology scenario, in which the template could be used to
commit the information to the openEHR server.
A number of documents from both X73PHD and openEHR
specifications have been analyzed. From the point of view
of X73PHD, the optimized exchange protocol (ISO/IEEE
11073–20601:2010) [3] and the amendment have been used
as the basis for this analysis. In addition, the analyzed
specializations included those representing the MDs usually present in a telecardiology solution, i.e., the weighing
scale (ISO/IEEE 11073–10415:2010) [22], the thermometer

TRIGO et al.: ON THE SEAMLESS, HARMONIZED USE OF ISO/IEEE11073 AND OPENEHR

Fig. 4.

875

Proposed methodology flowchart.

(ISO/IEEE 11073–10408:2010) [23], the blood pressure monitor (ISO/IEEE 11073–10407:2010) [24], the pulse oximeter (ISO/IEEE 11073–10404:2010) [25], and the basic ECG
(ISO/IEEE 11073–10406:2011) [26]. All mandatory and recommended classes and attributes—along with selected optional
and conditional—were analyzed in the framework of this paper.
From the point of view of openEHR, the current baseline
of specifications—release 1.0.2—has been used in this paper [21]. In addition, the archetypes available in the openEHR
archetype repository have been used in this analysis. The Clinical Knowledge Manager (CKM)—which is available from the
openEHR website—has been used to search the archetype repository [27]. Following the openEHR philosophy, archetypes have
been reused, whenever possible. Among those available, some of
them—body weight, body temperature, blood pressure, and indirect oximetry—have been already published by the openEHR
CKM, whereas some others are still pending of publication
with different status: either being drafted—Pulse, Waveform,
Vital Signs, Device, Device Details, and Alert—or undergoing
a team review process—ECG recording and Heart Rate. Finally,
some other required archetypes as well as the template used in
this paper were not available in the CKM, and they were created
and proposed within the framework of this project.
As a result of this process, existing issues in the harmonized
committal of X73PHD-compliant measurements to openEHRcompliant hospital information systems will be addressed and
thoroughly discussed (see Section V). Although a telecardiology
scenario has been selected in this paper, this methodology can be
applied to other medical scenarios. Moreover, this methodology
can be also applied to harmonize other standards with openEHR.

Ocean’s Archetype Editor [29]. The results of the research conducted for the specific telecardiology scenario are presented in
the rightmost column of the tables disseminated in this paper.
For all tables, unshaded columns have been extracted from the
X73PHD family of standards, whereas shaded columns—i.e.,
rightmost column of each table—contain the results presented
herein.
The attributes of the MDS class, which are common for all devices, are analyzed in Table I. The metric classes of the different
specializations are analyzed in the subsequent tables—weighing
scale (see Table II), thermometer (see Table III), blood pressure
monitor (see Table IV), pulse oximeter (see Table V), and basic
ECG (see Table VI).
The notation used in the tables is explained as follows.
X73PHD mandatory attributes are shown without qualifier,
while recommended, optional and conditional attributes are represented by (R), (C), and (O), respectively. The star symbol (∗)
means that the X73PHD attribute is needed to convey the information in the proper order from the Agent to the Manager,
but it is no longer required to commit the information to the
openEHR server. The plus sign (+) indicates that this is an attribute/archetype suggested in this paper. Finally, the pound sign
(#) relates the mapping to openEHR with a specific finding in
Section V. In addition, for the sake of clarity, simpler, human
readable paths are shown within the mapping to openEHR column, instead of the common Archetype Definition Language
paths.

IV. HARMONIZATION OF X73PHD AND OPENEHR

The main findings and inconsistencies that can be identified
in the tables mentioned in the previous section, the proposed
amendments and their implications are discussed in this Section:
Finding #1 (system-model manufacturer): In order to
map the OCTET-STRING X73PHD MDS::System-Model.
Manufacturer attribute, two options are possible: 1) the Device/
Manufacturer archetype leaf—type text—and 2), the Device
Details/Manufacturer Model Name—an HL7-compliant representation for Continua PHMR reports. Choosing the latter would entail the use of a nonopen specification inside
openEHR. Avoiding dependencies to extern nonopen standards
in openEHR is a desirable feature, and, therefore, the former
approach is the option suggested in the framework of this paper.

A new template was developed during the harmonization process for the proposed telecardiology scenario (see Fig. 5). The
Template Designer tool developed by Ocean was used for this
purpose [28]. Fourteen archetypes were integrated in the template. Six archetypes—body weight, body temperature, blood
pressure, indirect oximetry, alert, and device—were reused as
they were in the CKM, four archetypes—vital signs, pulse,
heart rate, and device details—were modified, and four new
archetypes—RR rate, sample array, ECG waveform, and ECG
recording—were created. In addition, one archetype leaf was
modified and 24 new archetype leaves were created. The proposed modifications of archetypes were performed with the

V. DISCUSSION
A. Discussion Regarding Identified Findings, Proposed
Amendments, and the Implications Thereof

876

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 5. Overview of the template developed for a telecardiology scenario.
To illustrate the template, the modified archetype “Pulse” is fully uncollapsed.
Some of the newly created archetype leaves can be seen: Pulsatile Occurrence,
Maximal Inrush, Filter, Power Status, Battery Level, Remaining Battery Time,
and Ticks Resolution.

Finding #2 (battery-related attributes): The battery-related
attributes—Power-Status, Battery-Level, and RemainingBattery-Time—are recommended attributes in X73PHD. There
is no possibility to include battery-related information in the Device or Device Details archetypes. These data, however, could
be useful in some scenarios, such as ECG recordings (having the source of power identified—battery or mains—could
prevent misinterpretation of ECG data due to interference),
or the follow-up of the battery status of implantable cardiac
devices. An existing, general-purpose archetype leaf—such as
Device Details/Additional Information—could be used to map
this attribute. However, this would be suboptimal and could lead
to eventual misunderstandings. Therefore, three new archetype
leaves are suggested in this paper (one of type Text and two of
type Quantity). These new leaves would be included within the
Device Details archetype (see Table I).
Finding #3 (date and time): In X73PHD, a point in time
is usually reported by means of the Absolute-Time-Stamp attribute in the Metric class (see Tables II–VI). This is the typical situation in a telecardiology scenario, where the store-andforward paradigm is common. It should be noted, however, that
the Absolute-Time-Stamp is a conditional attribute in 1107320601, which states that Agents should associate a time stamp
if they report previously stored data. The Absolute-Time-Stamp
could not otherwise be present, although in such an event the
Manager would be able to generate the Date and Time tags
given that the sending and receipt of data take place concurrently. The Absolute-Time-Stamp is a structure of eight INTU8 fields (namely, century, year, month, day, hour, minute,
second, and sec-fractions—up to a resolution of 1/100 of a
second). In openEHR, times that are a by-product of the investigation process—such as time of measurement or time of data
committal—are concretely modeled. The openEHR specifications use the ISO8601:2004 standard as the definitional basis
for assumed date/time types. This implies that any date/time
object in openEHR is an ISO8601-compatible date/time string
including year, month, day, hour, minute, second, and time zone.
The only difference between X73PHD and openEHR is that secfractions are not present in openEHR, whereas time zone is not
provided by X73PHD. In general, this is not a critical issue. As
regards to time zone, it can be created by the Manager before data
committal. The sec-fractions attribute provides information that
is usually not necessary, particularly in a telecardiology followup scenario. Nevertheless, it can be used to round up or down
the seconds to the closest actual value.
Finding #4 (MAP formula): The formula used to calculate the
mean arterial pressure (MAP) might be included in openEHR
(see Table IV). However, the X73PHD blood pressure specialization does not specify how the MAP has been calculated.
Having this information could help in the interpretation of the
data. Hence, a new attribute to report the MAP formula within
the blood pressure specialization is suggested. In addition, a
workaround could be to identify the model and manufacturer of
the device (using the parameters analyzed in finding #1) and to
arrange a database of models/formulae at service’s disposal.
Finding #5 (SpO2 modality): An oximeter provides a noninvasive estimate of functional oxygen of arterial hemoglobin

TRIGO et al.: ON THE SEAMLESS, HARMONIZED USE OF ISO/IEEE11073 AND OPENEHR

TABLE I
MDS CLASS ATTRIBUTES OF THE OPTIMIZED EXCHANGE PROTOCOL (ISO/IEEE 11073–20601:2010) AND THEIR MAPPING TO OPENEHR

TABLE II
WEIGHING SCALE (ISO/IEEE 11073–10415:2010) AND THEIR MAPPING TO OPENEHR

TABLE III
THERMOMETER (ISO/IEEE 11073–10408:2010) AND THEIR MAPPING TO OPENEHR

TABLE IV
BLOOD PRESSURE MONITOR (ISO/IEEE 11073–10407:2010) AND THEIR MAPPING TO OPENEHR

877

878

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TABLE V
PULSE OXIMETER (ISO/IEEE 11073–10404:2010) AND THEIR MAPPING TO OPENEHR

(SpO2) from a light signal interacting with tissue, by using the
time-dependent changes in tissue optical properties that occur
with pulsatile blood flow. In X73PHD, the pulse oximeter specialization can be set according to two different standard configurations (Dev-Configuration-Id = 0 × 190 and 0 × 191), plus
extended configurations. The 0 × 191 configuration is intended

for taking single, fully processed readings for transmission to
a Manager (MDC_MODALITY_SPOT), while the 0 × 190
configuration represents continuous monitoring. Additionally,
both types could be filtered to enhance and adapt the measured
data to slow or fast response (MDC_MODALITY_SLOW or
MDC_MODALITY_FAST), as shown in Table V. This kind of

TRIGO et al.: ON THE SEAMLESS, HARMONIZED USE OF ISO/IEEE11073 AND OPENEHR

879

TABLE VI
BASIC ECG (ISO/IEEE 11073–10406:2011) AND THEIR MAPPING TO OPENEHR

processing could be interesting for the openEHR server but cannot be directly mapped to any openEHR archetype leaf within
the indirect oximetry archetype. Some existing archetype leaves
could be used, such as Device/Device Details/Additional Information, but this solution would be suboptimal. Therefore, a new
archetype leaf is suggested under the protocol subgroup. Additionally, the inclusion of another optional archetype leaf to
describe the formula used is also suggested. Manufacturers of
X73PHD-compliant pulse oximeters could make public the formula they use or, similarly as suggested in Finding #4, a new
attribute for this processing could also be added.

Finding #6 (alerts): According to the X73PHD pulse oximeter specialization, alerts can be defined and set to report whether
the measurement has reached or crossed beyond the threshold
boundaries. The alert generated by the X73PHD pulse oximeter
device can be committed to the openEHR server by using the
Alert archetype (see the first group of rows in Table V). Such
alerts, however, could also be generated once the data reach
the server. Nevertheless, by using the first approach, patients
receive punctual, first-hand information about the status of their
measurements and can be informed that the hospital has been
actually informed about the alert. This has the additional benefit

880

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

of increasing patient confidence in the system, thereby reducing
reluctance to adopt it.
Finding #7 (pulsatile quality): Off-the-shelf pulse oximeters
use different ways to report the quality of the pulsatile wave.
In fact, there is no standardized method to convey such type of
information. The X73PHD pulse oximeter model provides an
open, manufacturer-based scheme for describing these characteristics by means of a numeric class called Pulsatile Quality (see
the third group of rows in Table V). X73PHD-compliant manufacturers should describe the implementation in the Implementation Conformance Statements (ICS) tables. Two quality measurements are predefined: a dimensionless attribute expressing
a form of pulse amplitude (MDC_PULS_OXIM_PERF_REL),
and a percentage attribute, related to the quality of O2 saturation
(MDC_SAT_O2_QUAL). Any other quality parameter can be
used as long as it is defined in the ICS. Within the openEHR
pulse rate archetype, however, only three leaves related to the
quality of the wave are defined: Regularity (“the observed regularity of the pulse”), Volume (“the size or amplitude of the
wave”), and Character (“the shape of the pulse on palpation”).
Hence, the pulsatile quality attributes that arrive to the Manager,
may not be mapped to any openEHR archetype leaf and, subsequently, could not be transferred to the openEHR server. The
suggested approach is as follows: first, use the X73PHD ICS
tables to determine the incoming X73PHD data. Second, when
possible, map the X73PHD data to the existing quality leaves—
Regularity, Volume, and Character—promoting thereby the
reuse of already defined archetype leaves. Third, create new
archetype leaves on demand, according to the ICS tables.
Finding #8 (pulsatile occurrence): In X73PHD, the optional
enumeration class Pulsatile Occurrence reports a precisely timestamped occurrence of a pulse (see the fourth group of rows
in Table V). This can be used to derive another physiological measurement or for purposes of displaying, for instance, a
flashing heart icon. Two possible values are predefined: one to
report that a pulsatile occurrence has occurred (MDC_TRIG_
BEAT), and the other to report that the maximal inrush of
the pulsatile wave has occurred (MDC_TRIG_BEAT_MAX_
INRUSH). The precise definition of “maximal inrush” in terms
of slope or amplitude is vendor-dependent and should be defined
in the appropriate ICS section. No existing openEHR archetype
leaf within the Pulse Rate archetype can be used to handle this
information. In a store-and-forward scenario, such as the proposed in this paper, this information may not be required by the
openEHR server. Nevertheless, as it can be used in conjunction
with other reported physiological events to derive other physiological measurements, two new archetype leaves—representing
the MDC_TRIG_BEAT and the MDC_TRIG_BEAT_MAX_
INRUSH values—are proposed for enabling the committal of
this information to the server. These archetypes leaves should
be created in accordance to the X73PHD ICS tables. In order
to handle the inherent nature of these measurements, the Array
data type is suggested.
Finding #9 (pulsatile characteristic): X73PHD-compliant
pulse oximeters may convey additional information about the
pulsatile wave (see fifth group of rows in Table V). Managers
supporting this object shall be able to interpret the following

characteristics: Quality of the detected pulse is nominal, in
that there are no recognized abnormalities in the detected pulse
(pulse-qual-nominal), perfusion or quality of the detected pulse
is marginal (pulse-qual-marginal), perfusion or quality of the
detected pulse is minimal (pulse-qual-minimal), and perfusion
or quality of the detected pulse is unacceptable (pulse-qualunacceptable). A BITS-16 data type is used to map this information. Within the openEHR pulse archetype, the archetype
leaf Clinical Description (text type), defined as a “narrative
description of the pulse,” can be used to convey such information. The X73PHD bits must be therefore translated into a
Text string for an adequate and accurate mapping. Nevertheless,
this information reports data corresponding to a single pulsatile
occurrence, therefore, a specialization of the archetype leaf is
necessary to properly handle the information. In this paper, a
cluster archetype leaf composed of an array of Clinical Descriptions is suggested to handle the descriptions of the different
pulsatile occurrences.
Finding #10 (device/sensor annunciation): X73PHD pulse
oximeters may optionally report on several aspects of the pulse
oximeter equipment, including sensor displacement, faulty sensor detection, signal irregularities and loss-of-signal tracking,
and low-perfusion determination (see sixth group of rows in
Table V). As opposed to the Pulsatile Characteristic object—
which informs about a specific pulsatile occurrence—this object
refers to the general signal condition. This X73PHD information
is intended to correct the position of the sensor at the point of
care. Therefore, one can envision that they are not to be sent to
the openEHR server. Indeed, no direct mapping is currently possible for the sensor incidences reported by X73PHD-compliant
pulse oximeters. However, if badly recorded measurements are
sent to the Manager and, eventually, committed to the openEHR
server; proper information about the general quality of the signal
would be helpful. A feasible solution in openEHR is to map this
information to the archetype leaf Confounding Factors, defined
as “narrative description about any incidental factors that may be
contributing to the pulse observations.” Appropriate translation
from bits to Text strings must be performed before data committal. The possible reports—sensor displacement, faulty sensor detection, signal irregularities, and loss-of-signal tracking—might
be stored in the template as predefined input for the Confounding Factors leaf. Other alternatives include the creation of new,
ad hoc archetype leaves or discarding the compromised data.
The latter option implies proper detection of compromised data,
which may not be a straightforward process. Nonetheless, the
optimal solution would be correcting the placing of the sensors
before recording.
Finding #11 (heart rate averaging time): The Basic ECG HR
object may report the period of time during which the HR is
averaged. This is a recommended (although depending on the
configuration, mandatory) attribute in X73PHD. The lack of this
attribute is not critical, but its presence helps in the evaluation
of the measurement. As there is no openEHR leaf for that, a
newly created archetype leaf (Duration type) is suggested (see
Table VI).
Finding #12 (ticks resolution): The R–R interval in X73PHD
can be measured in milliseconds or in “ticks” (an internal

TRIGO et al.: ON THE SEAMLESS, HARMONIZED USE OF ISO/IEEE11073 AND OPENEHR

oscillator count, see Tables I and VI). The RR rate in openEHR
rate can only be measured in beats per minute. Although a
relatively accurate mapping is feasible, a new, complementary
archetype leaf is suggested herein to allow openEHR storing
the RR interval using ticks unit. A FLOAT (32 bits) type (or
higher) would be required. This modification would simplify
implementations and/or facilitate higher accuracy by avoiding
round off errors.
Finding #13 (RR rate): The R–R interval in X73PHD can
be continuously monitored. In openEHR, the RR rate archetype
leaf is a Quantity variable, which averages the RR rate of the
ECG recording. To handle the specific nature of the measurements and storing store all R–R intervals of the ECG, a different
organization—Array data type—can be used in the archetype
leaf (see Table VI).
Finding #14 (RR archetype): The basic ECG specialization
offers the possibility of recording RR intervals without registering the ECG itself. This can also be done in openEHR,
but it would imply the use of the ECG archetype without any
ECG recording or analysis thereof. Another possibility would
be the use of the HR archetype, after performing the appropriate
transformation and informing that it refers to instantaneous HR.
Alternatively, an ad hoc, newly created RR interval archetype
can be designed as well.
Finding #15 (IANA MIME types): The openEHR archetype
for the ECG is particularly oriented to ECG interpretation and
metadata (for example, it includes data such as duration, slope,
or area of the different ECG waves), rather than the ECG waveforms themselves. However, there is an archetype leaf for the
ECG waveforms, termed “ECG recording.” This leaf is defined
as the “Multimedia representation of the ECG,” and it is a Multimedia class, which is intended for audiovisual and biosignal types. As defined in the openEHR DV_MULTIMEDIA
class defines, ECG recordings can only be stored within the
ECG archetype in compliance with the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension
(MIME) types [30]. According to that, a wide variety of MIME
types can be used to store ECG recordings, such as Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine (DICOM), Medical Waveform Format Encoding Rules, Scalable Vector Graphics + extensible Markup Language, the United Nations/Electronic Data
Interchange For Administration, Commerce and Transport—
which, in turn, makes the use of the Standard Communications Protocol for computer assisted electrocardiography possible [31]—Resource Description Framework+XML, or even an
OCTET-STREAM format. Moreover, MIME is extensible by
definition and application developers can create and use their
own MIME type. By allowing all IANA-compliant MIME media
types, openEHR allows all these possibilities. However, this is a
suboptimal approach and hinders seamless integration and interoperability, as it forces servers to be compliant with all possible
IANA-compliant formats. Therefore, some other approaches
are discussed as follows. One option is to use the Waveform
archetype, defined as “a waveform of an equidistant series of
time spaced measurements.” Data would be stored within the
leaf Digits Series, which is a Text type leaf defined as the “Individual data points of a waveform defined by the CDA-Continua

881

Alliance PHMR documentation.” This approach would solve the
problems posed by the use of IANA MIME media types. Nevertheless, it makes use of CDA-compliant specifications. As
discussed above in finding #1, avoiding dependencies to extern
nonopen standards in openEHR is a desirable feature. Therefore, the use of the existing Waveform archetype (as it is) is not
recommended in this paper. An enhanced alternative would be
to use a newly created cluster archetype to convey waveforms
(see third group of rows in Table VI). Hereinafter, this new
archetype is referred to as “Sample Array,” and it would contain
a number of leaves. One of those would be an Array<Octet>,
used for the data series, while the remaining data, required to
recover all the information, would be stored in new archetypes
leaves. This process is further developed below. Another newly
created archetype, termed “ECG waveform” is also proposed.
Every ECG lead would imply one Sample Array archetype,
thereby filling the slots of the ECG waveforms archetype. Creating a new waveform archetype however implies the creation
of a viewer able to interpret the new data structure. If DICOM
were used, this problem would be already solved. However,
the introduction of this archetype effectively enhances interoperability, as opposed to current solution, which allows a wide
number of possible IANA-compliant formats, and therefore, a
wide number of potentially required viewers.
The attributes of the RT-SA object of the basic ECG specialization are mapped to this archetype, creating new leaves when
necessary (see third group of rows of Table VI). However, this
procedure aims to be general, thus other similar objects can be
archetyped with it (such as the pletysmogram). The RT-SA.Type
attribute may be used to identify the type of waveform (ECG
lead, pletysmogram, etc.). Therefore, a new Text archetype leaf
is suggested, named Waveform Name. The RT-SA.Unit-Code
attribute indicates that the measurements are in millivolts. As
this papers aims to propose a general Sample Array archetype,
a new leaf is suggested containing the Units of the measurement (type text but in compliance with the Unified Code for
Units of Measure unit syntax). For the ECG, millivolts shall
be used. The X73PHD RT-SA.Sample-Period attribute is expressed in 1/8 of millisecond. In the existing openEHR waveform archetype there is a Sample Period leaf (Duration type).
The Units subleaf would be seconds (the coarsest one) and
the Value subleaf would be the result of performing the appropriate arithmetic transformation (see Table VI). Nevertheless,
division of integers is not a closed operation, and the quotient
is a rational number. This could lead to wrong rounded numbers. The implications of this issue are discussed below (finding #16). The RT-SA.Simple-Sa-Observed-Value is mapped to
the newly created Array<Octet> leaf. The RT-SA.Scale-andRange-Specification describes a mapping between scaled values
and absolute values and defines the expected range of absolute
values and scaled values. The existing openEHR archetype has
a Quantity leaf called Scaling Factor. For ECG waveforms, this
might be enough, as they are relative measures of the electrical
activity, and therefore, the waveform is centered in 0 V. However, other waveforms may be not centered on zero, hence the
need of a more complete description (see finding #17). The RTSA.Sa-Specification.array.size (“number of samples per metric

882

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

update period”) is mapped to the newly created leaf Array Size
(also defined in samples per second). In openEHR, this refers to
the whole ECG, while in X73PHD only to the Array. Thus, they
must be summed before insertion (see Table VI). The two subattributes of RT-SA.Sa-Specification.sample-type are also mirrored into newly created archetype leaves (see Table VI). Finally,
the RT-SA.Sa-Specification.Flags defines additional waveform
properties and this attribute is also mirrored in the Sample Array
archetype using Cluster and Boolean types (see Table VI). The
use of the new Sample Array archetype can also be extended to
other waveforms, such as the pletysmogram.
Finding #16 (sample period): The X73PHD attribute for Sample Period is expressed in 1/8 of millisecond, while in openEHR
it is a Text string expressed in seconds. Therefore, a division
must be performed and, eventually, this could lead to a wrong
rounded approximation. The most common ECG sample periods, however, will not suffer this issue, since the remainder of
the division—being 100, 200, 300, 500, 1000, 256, 512, 1024,
etc. the number of samples per second—equals zero. Nevertheless, this could theoretically happen. An alternative (or complementary) approach would be to define an archetype leaf called
Samples per Second, which could be an integer. Either this or
the Sample Period leaf shall be mandatory.
Finding #17 (scale and range): The Scaling Factor defined in
openEHR does not cover all the possibilities when describing a
waveform. Therefore, four new leaves are suggested to optimally
define the scale and range parameters of any waveform (see
Table VI). For the sake of simplicity, these new leaves follow
the scheme provided by X73PHD RT-SA objects, although other
approaches are possible.
Finding #18 (device status): The device status enumeration
object is an optional object in X73PHD that informs the user
of device-related events, such as lead wire loss or lead signal
loss (see fourth group of rows in Table VI). The idea behind this
object is to warn users and suggest them to check the wires and
sensors before recording. Therefore, the committal of this information to the openEHR server is usually not required. However,
if sensors cannot be relocated before recording, and the signal
is acquired and sent with low quality in, for example, one ECG
lead, it would be useful for the openEHR server to know which
data have been compromised. No direct mapping to existing
openEHR archetype leaves is currently feasible. This information can be however mapped to the archetype leaf Confounding
Factors, as they include comments on and record other incidental
factors that may be contributing to ECG recording. Appropriate bits-to-table conversion is required at the Manager. Other
options include the creation of new archetype leaves or the discarding of compromised data before committal. In any case,
the optimal solution lies in a proper replacing of the sensors
whenever the Manager informs about that situation.
Finding #19 (context data trigger): The Context Data Trigger
enumeration object informs about the reason for transmitted
data, such as a user pressing a button, a periodic scheduled
event, an automatic event due to a data analysis mechanism
in the Agent (e.g., in case of detection of a cardiac event),
or an external event (see fifth groups of rows in Table VI).
No openEHR archetype leaves of the ECG or HR archetypes

cover such type of information. In the context of the scenario
analyzed in this paper, events are usually scheduled beforehand
by the physician and, therefore, this information may not be
needed. However, this could be helpful in some other scenarios.
Therefore, for the sake of scalability, contextual information
could be added alongside the observation data for conveying the
reason that triggered the transmission.
Finding #20 (processed data): The PM-store class provides
long-term storage capabilities for metric data. X73PHD MDs
can store a large number of sessions and, subsequently, send
them to the Manager. This method is intended for store-andforward scenarios, such as, e.g., a telecardiology follow-up system. This persistent method needs additional parameters that
are used by the Manager to identify the method of transmission.
However, once the data are decoded, the only inconsistencies
that may appear related to openEHR are those that have been
noted in the sections above. It is worth discussing, however,
the PM-Store.Store-Sample-Algorithm attribute. This attribute
describes how the sample values stored in the PM-segment
have been processed (averaged, recursive, min-pick, max-pick,
median, trended, no-downsampling, or manufacturer specific).
openEHR allows the committal of 24-h averaged blood pressure measurements. Therefore, blood pressure samples averaged every 24-h and reported by a PM-Store with the StoreSample-Algorithm attribute set to 1 (average) can be accurately
mapped to the blood pressure archetype subbrunch that reports
24-hs averaged blood pressure measurements. Nevertheless, the
X73PHD data could have been processed with a method other
than averaging. Moreover, some other X73PHD MDs can implement this feature. However, openEHR observation archetypes
do not provide any method to indicate whether the measurements have been processed, and how they have been processed.
A new archetype leaf is therefore suggested to convey that information to the openEHR server. This finding is not related to
any table, as PM-stores are able to store any type of X73PHD
medical data coming from any specialization.
B. Limitations of the Methodology
The procedure described in this paper is mostly heuristic;
this being understood as a set of methodological rules not necessarily formalized that suggests how to elaborate educated
guesses based on common sense and previous knowledge. Human beings—at least those with some previous knowledge on
the field—are able to straightforwardly understand that two definitions refer to the very same concept. Creating an automatic,
computer-aided tool able to provide a univocal, seamless mapping between X73PHD classes and attributes, and openEHR
archetypes and leaves would be a desired goal, although an
intricate, convoluted task [7]. Thus, human processing assures
high levels of concept equivalency, although it may hinder the
scalability of the methodology.
VI. CONCLUSION
The seamless, harmonized use of X73PHD and openEHR
has been investigated and discussed. Regarding the particular telecardiology scenario, five common MDs—and thus, the

TRIGO et al.: ON THE SEAMLESS, HARMONIZED USE OF ISO/IEEE11073 AND OPENEHR

related X73PHD specializations and archetypes—have been
considered: the weighing scale (ISO/IEEE 11073–10415:2010),
the thermometer (ISO/IEEE 11073–10408:2010), the blood
pressure monitor (ISO/IEEE 11073–10407:2010), the pulse
oximeter (ISO/IEEE 11073–10404:2010), and the basic ECG
(ISO/IEEE 11073–10406:2011). This paper has provided
a functional harmonization between the two specifications,
proposing a new template for a telecardiology scenario, reusing
existing archetypes when possible (6 out of 14), and modifying
them (4 out of 14) or suggesting new ones (4 out of 13) when
there was an identified lack of appropriate parameters or data
types. As a result, 20 findings—thoroughly discussed in Section
V—have been addressed.
Furthermore, an overall conclusion can be drawn from the
detailed analysis, which is summarized in the following general
principles. The mapping and the suggestions supplied in this
paper foster the coordinated use of these standards and provide
recommendations for future implementations of X73PHD- and
openEHR-compliant systems. Moreover, an analogous methodology can be applied to harmonize other scenarios or other
standards with openEHR, thereby enhancing the integration
of external data—in compliance with other standards—into
openEHR systems. Finally, as the findings proposed herein may
ultimately lead to modifications of existing archetypes, or even
the creation of new ones, this paper also provides evidence on
how existing standards—such as X73PHD—are able to influence the archetype development process, enhancing the existing
archetype corpus.
REFERENCES
[1] J. J. Cimino, “Desiderata for controlled medical vocabularies in the
twenty-first century,” Methods Inf. Med., vol. 37, pp. 394–403, Nov. 1998.
[2] A. L. Rector, “Clinical terminology: Why is it so hard?” Methods Inf.
Med., vol. 38, pp. 239–52, Dec. 1999.
[3] Health Informatics. Personal Health device Communication (X73PHD).
Part 20601: Application Profile. Optimized Exchange Protocol, ISO/IEEE
11073–20601:2010
[4] openEHR. (2013 Oct.). open Electronic Health Record. [Online]. Available: http:///www.openehr.org
[5] Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR) Communication. Standard Parts 1–
5, ISO/EN13606 CEN/TC251, 2004 1st ed.
[6] HL7. (2013 Oct.). Health Level Seven. Devices Special Interest Group. [Online]. Available: http://www.hl7.org/Special/committees/
healthcaredevices/index.cfm
[7] H. Saitwal, D. Qing, S. Jones, E. V. Bernstam, C. G. Chute, and
T. R. Johnson, “Cross-terminology mapping challenges: A demonstration
using medication terminological systems,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 45,
pp. 613–25, Aug. 2012.
[8] Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise. (2013 Oct.). [Online]. Available:
http://www.ihe.net
[9] Continua Health Alliance. (2013 Oct.). [Online]. Available: http://www.
continuaalliance.org/
[10] Continua Health Alliance. (2010, May 12). Continua Design Guidelines.
[Online]. Available: http://www.continuaalliance.org/products/designguidelines.html
[11] HL7. (2013, Oct.). Personal Healthcare Monitoring (PHM) Reports.
[Online]. Available: http://www.hl7.org/special/Committees/projman/
searchableProjectIndex.cfm?action=edit&ProjectNumber=209
[12] C. D. Kohl, S. Garde, and P. Knaup, “Facilitating secondary use of medical data by using openEHR archetypes,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform.,
vol. 160, pp. 1117–1121, 2010.
[13] E. Sundvall, M. Nystrom, D. Karlsson, M. Eneling, R. Chen, and
H. Orman, “Applying representational state transfer (REST) architecture
to archetype-based electronic health record systems,” BMC Med. Inform.
Decis. Mak., vol. 13, p. 57, May 9, 2013.

883

[14] Ocean Informatics. (2013 Oct.). OpenEHR: Integrating with data source
systems (White paper). [Online]. Available: http://www.mz.gov.si/
fileadmin/mz.gov.si/pageuploads/eZdravje/Novice/gradiva_predstavitve_
dogodkov/Open_EHR/9_integration-non_EHR.pdf
[15] Y. Wang, Z. Yao, and L. Liu, “Integration of DICOM and openEHR standards,” in Proc. SPIE, Med. Imag.: Adv. PACS-Based Imag. Informatics
Therapeutic Appl., 2011, pp. 79670 T–79670 T.
[16] openEHR.NET. (2013 Oct.). A C# implementation of openEHR. [Online].
Available: http://openehr.codeplex.com/
[17] GastrOS. (2013 Oct.). An endoscopic reporting application based on
open standards: OpenEHR and MST. [Online]. Available: http://gastros.
codeplex.com/
[18] LiU-IMT EEE. (2013 Oct.). A REST based educational EHR environment based on openEHR. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
LiU-IMT/EEE
[19] OpenEHR Foundation. (2013 Oct.). Who is using openEHR? [Online].
Available: http://www.openehr.org/who_is_using_openehr
[20] OpenEHR Foundation. (2013 Oct.). OpenEHR Architecture Overview.
[Online]. Available: http://www.openehr.org/releases/1.0.2/architecture/
overview.pdf
[21] OpenEHR Foundation. (2013 Oct.). OpenEHR Specifications. [Online].
Available: http://www.openehr.org/programs/specification/releases/1.0.2
[22] Health Informatics. Personal Health Devices Communication (X73PHD).
Device Specialization—Weighing Scale, ISO/IEEE 11073–10415, 2010.
[23] Health Informatics. Personal Health Devices Communication (X73PHD).
Device Specialization—Thermometer, ISO/IEEE 11073–10408, 2010.
[24] Health Informatics. Personal Health Devices Communication (X73PHD).
Device Specialization—Blood Pressure Monitor, ISO/IEEE 11073–
10407, 2010.
[25] Health Informatics. Personal Health Devices Communication (X73PHD).
Device Specialization—Pulse Oximeter, ISO/IEEE 11073–10404, 2010.
[26] Health Informatics. Personal Health Device Communication (X73PHD).
Part 10406: Device Specialization—Basic Electrocardiograph (ECG) (1to 3-lead ECG), ISO/IEEE 11073–10406, 2011.
[27] OpenEHR Foundation. (2013 Oct.). Clinical Knowledge Manager (CKM).
[Online]. Available: http://www.openehr.org/knowledge/
[28] Ocean Informatics. (2013 Oct.). Template Designer. [Online]. Available:
http: / / wiki.oceaninformatics.com / confluence / display / TTL / Template+
Designer
[29] Ocean Informatics. Archetype Editor. (2013 Oct.). [Online]. Available:
http://wiki.oceaninformatics.com/confluence/display/TTL/Archetype+
Editor
[30] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA). (2013 Oct.). Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) types. [Online]. Available:
http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/index.html
[31] I. Johansen. (2013, Oct.). “Database—Collection of different ECG and
implementation of SCP format in different EHCR systems,” Proc.
2nd OpenECG Workshop. [Online]. Available: http://www.openecg.net/
WS2_proceedings/Session03/S3.2_PA.pdf

Jesús D. Trigo was born in Zaragoza, Spain, in 1981.
He received the M.S. degree in telecommunication
engineering and the Ph.D. degree (Hons.) from the
University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, in 2005 and
2011, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher in the
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Public University of Navarre, Pamplona, Spain.
He has undergone research stages at the Biomedical Informatics Laboratory of the Foundation for
Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete,
Greece, and at the Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics of the University of Heidelberg, Germany. His current research interests include eHealth
applications and architectures, biomedical informatics or medical device interoperability, and standardization among others.

884

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Christian D. Kohl was born in Heilbronn, Germany,
in 1980. He received the Diploma in Medical Informatics (comparable to a Master’s degree) and a
Ph.D. (Dr. sc. hum.) degree from the University of
Heidelberg, Germany, in 2012. He is currently with
the Medical Informatics group at the Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics at Heidelberg University.
He is also head of the IT Department of the Coordination Centre for Clinical Trials (KKS) at the
Heidelberg University Hospital. His main research
interest and projects include health data management, IT-structures for clinical
trials, and digital archiving of paper-based patient records.

Aitor Eguzkiza was born in Pamplona (Navarra),
in 1984. He received the B.Sc. degree in audiovisual
telecommunication and the M. Sc. degree in biomedical engineering from the Public University of Navarra
(UPNA). He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree studying new e-Health strategies based on
standards defining the interoperability between clinical information management systems (openEHR,
X73, HL7, ISO/CEN 13606, and DICOM).
In September 2007, he started to work in the Department of Electrical and Electronics of the UPNA
involved in several projects related to e-Health, Telemedicine and Management
of Medical Image Health Services.
Mr. Eguzkiza received the Northern Society of Ophthalmology of Spain
awards (REDIAP Project, 2008) and Ophthalmology Vision Awards Spain
(OVAS) (financial supported by Novartis-Spanish Society of Retina and Vitreous) by a project focused on AMD’s remote monitoring.

Miguel Martı́nez-Espronceda (S’08–M’12) was
born in Mendavia, Spain, in 1981. He received the
M.S. degree in telecommunication engineering and
the Ph.D. degree (Hons.) from the Public University
of Pamplona (UPNA), Pamplona, Spain, in 2005 and
2012, respectively.
Since then, he has developed his research within
the Biomedical Engineering Group, Department of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering (UPNA). He
was a visiting student in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Applied Sciences
Technikum Wien, Austria, and, at the Department of Communication Systems
and Computing, Brunel University, Uxbridge, U.K. He started up the spin-off
Life Quality Technology Accessibility and Innovation Co., in 2011. His research interests include wearable and wireless personal health solutions based
on standards and medical devices interoperability.
Dr. Martı́nez-Espronceda is member of IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, and collaborator in national and international standardization
organizations (AENOR/CTN139-SC4, CEN/TC251-WGIV, and PHD-WG).

Álvaro Alesanco was born in Ezcaray, Spain, in
1977. He received the Master’s degree in telecommunications engineering and the Ph.D. degree (Hons.)
from the University of Zaragoza (UZ), Zaragoza,
Spain, in 2001 and 2007, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor of communication networks in the Telematics Engineering
area, UZ, where he is also a member of the Communications Technologies Group, Aragón Institute of
Engineering Research. His research interests include
electrocardiogram and echocardiography video coding and transmission in wireless e-health environments, eHealth telemonitoring
architectures, and other related topics.

Luis Serrano (S’92– M’97– SM’06) was born in Andosilla, Spain, in 1966. He received the M.Sc. degree
in physics from the University of Zaragoza, Spain, in
1989, and Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
the Public University of Navarra, Spain, in 1995.
From 1990 to 1993, he was a Researcher Assistant
with Physics Faculty at the University of Zaragoza
where he worked in the field of analogue electronic
design. In 1994, he moved to the Public University
of Navarra as a Lecturer at the Electrical and Electronic Engineering Faculty and worked as analogue
electronic designer. Since 1997, he has been working in Bio inspired VLSI
electronic systems for biomedical analogue signal processing, medical instrumentation, Wireless Communications, eHealth services and Medical Devices
Standardization in the Biomedical Engineering Research Group of the Public
University of Navarra.

José Garcı́a (M’07) was born in Zaragoza, Spain,
in 1971. He received the M.S. degree in physics
and the Ph.D. degree (Hons.) from the University
of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, in 1994 and 1998,
respectively.
He is an Associate Professor and accredited as a
Full Professor since July 2012 at the Engineering and
Architecture School, University of Zaragoza, and a
member of the Aragón Institute of Engineering Research (I3 A). He was the Head of the Department of
Electronics Engineering and Communications from
2009 to 2013. He is also the founder and responsible of the Telemedicine and
e-Health research group in the I3 A, coordinating and/or participating in over
40 research projects. He has undergone several research stages in USA, Sweden, and Austria, and published more than 40 papers in international journals
and more than 150 in national and international conference proceedings. His
research interests include telemedicine, coding and transmission, network management, and other related topics.

Petra Knaup was born in Recklinghausen, Germany,
in 1967. She received the Master’s degree in medical
informatics, in 1991, and the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, in
1994.
She is currently the Head of Medical Informatics
at the Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics,
University of Heidelberg. She is the Head of Working Group Information Management in Medicine of
the German Society for Biomedical Engineering and
the Vice Head of Working Group “Ambient-Assisted
Living and assistive health technologies” of the German Society of Medical
Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology. Her major research interests include
health data management, patient-centered health care and IT-infrastructures for
biomedical and clinical research.
She is a member of the Editorial Board of Methods of Information in Medicine
and Journal of Clinical Bioinformatics.

