630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Advanced Statistical Matrices for Texture
Characterization: Application to Cell Classification
Guillaume Thibault∗ , Jesús Angulo, and Fernand Meyer

Abstract—This paper presents new structural statistical matrices which are gray level size zone matrix (SZM) texture descriptor
variants. The SZM is based on the cooccurrences of size/intensity of
each flat zone (connected pixels with the same gray level). The first
improvement increases the information processed by merging multiple gray-level quantizations and reduces the required parameter
numbers. New improved descriptors were especially designed for
supervised cell texture classification. They are illustrated thanks
to two different databases built from quantitative cell biology.
The second alternative characterizes the DNA organization during the mitosis, according to zone intensities radial distribution.
The third variant is a matrix structure generalization for the fibrous texture analysis, by changing the intensity/size pair into the
length/orientation pair of each region.
Index Terms—Gray-level size zone matrix (SZM), quantitative
cytology, structural statistical matrices, texture characterization
and classification.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARALLEL cells growing in multiwell plates’ current technologies (or in other supports as cell on chip) and fluorescent labeling of targeted proteins (antibodies immunofluorescence, GFP-tagged proteins) are coupled together for automated microscopy image capture and subsequent cell image
analysis. All this is essential for new cellular biology mechanism
discovery (i.e., using siRNA), new pharmaceuticals (i.e., potential active molecules mass screening) or for new diagnostic/
prognostic tests development, and also toxicology tests (i.e., different concentration compounds assessments). The more cells
are acquired, the more accurate analysis is performed. Currently,
most of these processes are manual, time consuming, and involving results variability according to experts (interobserver
variability).
Cell classification is a pattern recognition classical task [1],
[2], but the key point for such a cell classification system is
to achieve a high robust throughput system which will be able

P

Manuscript received November 6, 2012; revised April 7, 2013 and August
20, 2013; accepted September 29, 2013. Date of publication October 4, 2013;
date of current version February 14, 2014. This work was supported in part
by RAMIS Project (2007–2010) funded by the General Directorate for Competitiveness, Industry, and Services of the French Ministry for the Economy,
Industry and Employment. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ G. Thibault is with the Center for Mathematical Morphology, MinesParisTech, Fontainebleau 77300, France (e-mail: guillaume@thibault.biz).
J. Angulo and F. Meyer are with the Centre de Morphologie Mathématique,
Ecole des Mines de Paris, Fontainebleau 77305, France (e-mail: jesus.angulo@
ensmp.fr; fernand.meyer@ensmp.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2284600

to automatically analyze thousands of cell images without any
manual interaction [3]. Texture characterization and classification are traditionally one of the useful techniques to describe
cell features.
Methods presented in this paper were designed to efficiently
characterize various significant cells and nuclei aspects. They
allow us to describe either the different mitosis phases which
are relevant to facilitate the oncology molecule active effect
analysis, as the various cells pattern, and are fundamental to
search antibodies in the patient serum, or to reveal autoimmune
diseases. More precisely, this paper aims to present several new
alternative bivariate statistical texture representations, as extended and completed preliminary works’ versions presented
in [4] and [5]. The first descriptor, discussed in Section IV, is a
gray-level size zone matrix (SZM) multiscale extension, which
merges various gray-level quantizations and avoids selecting an
“optimal” quantization. As we empirically prove in the paper,
this new descriptor improves texture homogeneity characterization. SZM and the new multiscale extension are particularly
efficient to characterize homogeneity. Then, two other versions
are introduced to characterize other texture types. The second
alternative suggested in Section V takes into account zone intensities radial distribution for the DNA characterization. The
third variant, studied in Section VI, is a matrix structure generalization allowing fibrous textures analysis by changing the
intensity/size pair into length/orientation pair. It is particularly
used in order to characterize microtubule network. These new
and improved descriptor interests are illustrated all along this
paper for texture classification problems arising from quantitative cell biology. Indeed, the present paper includes a more
rigorous presentation of our descriptors than [4], as well as a
more systematic study of their performances for the cell classification, including comparative evaluation with other statistical
matrix-based texture descriptors. Results obtained using the different databases are presented in Section VII. This paper is also
completed with material background. On one hand, Section II
summarizes supervised classification algorithms used in our experiments. On the other hand, Section III provides a state of the
art on previous statistical matrices particularly relevant for cell
classification.
Two datasets were used to illustrate our texture descriptors
performance. The first cell dataset was provided by the ICPR
2012 HEp-2 Cells Classification contest [6]. Cell images were
acquired by indirect immunofluorescence, using a fluorescence
microscope (40-fold magnification), coupled with a 50 W mercury vapor lamp and with a digital camera CCD (SLIM system
by Das srl), with 6.45 μm square pixel. It contains 1457 cells
divided into six classes.

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

THIBAULT et al.: ADVANCED STATISTICAL MATRICES FOR TEXTURE CHARACTERIZATION: APPLICATION TO CELL CLASSIFICATION

631

II. CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 1. Examples of typical cells for each category of ICPR’12 cell classification contest: (a) centromeres, (b) coarse speckle, (c) cytoplasmic, (d) fine
speckle, (e) homogeneous, and (f) nucleolar.

1) Centromere (388): several discrete speckles distributed
throughout the interphase nuclei and characteristically
found in the mitosis condensed nuclear chromatin as a
bar of closely associated speckles.
2) Coarse (239) or fine (225) speckled: granular nuclear staining of the interphase cell nuclei.
3) Cytoplasmic (128): fine fluorescent fibers running the
length of the cell.
4) Homogeneous (345): diffuse both nuclei interphase and
mitotic cells chromatin staining.
5) Nucleolar (257): large coarse speckled staining within the
nucleus, less than six in number per cell.
The second cell dataset is part of the RAMIS project.1 It is
composed of thousands 2-D z-stacks images, acquired by an
AxioImagerZ1 epifluorescent confocal microscope with 63×
objective N.A. 1.4 and 12 bits Hamamastu CCD camera, driven
by Visilog software. The cell image preprocessing involves the
following steps: 1) a z-stacks projection for extended-depth-offocus 2-D images; 2) an image normalization for an uneven illumination correction [7]; 3) a microtubule network enhancement
(see Section VI); and 4) an individual cell segmentation, including a nuclei/cytoplasm separation. A selection of 300 individual
cells composes this dataset, where each cell was completely
annotated by experts (approximately 50 features per cell), including typical annotations on DNA homogeneity, DNA quantization, microtubule network organization, etc.

1 http://www.adcis.net/fr/Applications/Projets-De-Recherche-Et-Développe
ment/RAMIS-Sélection-De-Molécules-Innovantes-Inhibant-La-Division-Cell
ulaire.html

The classification aims to attribute classes (sometimes just
one) to each studied object. In this paper, we take benefit of
biologists knowledge who specified the classes, which are important clues in mitosis phase cell classification and cell patterns. We can therefore take advantage of supervised methods
to design the classifiers. Such a classifier is usually built using a
learning method, and generalization is achieved thanks to crossvalidation. With this objective, datasets are separated into two
groups: a training sample and a validation sample. The classifier
must have comparable performance levels through training and
validation. But prior to the classification phase, it is necessary
to construct a characteristics vector describing the data. The
vector must be relevant to allow an accurate classification and
prediction. The major risk in providing the classifier too many
characteristics is overfitting. The greater the characteristic vector dimension, the greater the model flexibility and the better
the classification, but the poorer the model’s performance for
a dataset not used during the training. Then each model must
systematically be validated and the best classification with the
validation sample identified. In this paper, the validation is done
following the K-fold cross validation [8]–[10] or if necessary
with the leave-one-out protocol [8], [11] (a k-fold validation
with k being equal to the working set size) because of the working set small size.
In this paper, we consider three of the most popular and
efficient classification methods, which are formalized through
different machine learning paradigms.
1) The logistic regression [12]–[14] is a linear model particularly well adapted to classification problems with two
e f ( x )
x = (x1 , . . . , xn )
classes: P = P (Y /x) = 1+e
f ( x ) with 

being the input data characteristic vector, f (x) = i αi xi
and P (Y /x) the conditional probability P of the variable
x to belong to the class Y . To estimate the model coefficients αi , the maximum likelihood method is often
used, which maximizes the probability of obtaining values observed on the learning sample. It consists in finding
parameters optimizing the likelihood function. Logistic
regression is preferred to discriminate analysis [15] because of its variables’ fewer restrictions and its results’
easier interpretation.
2) The random forest [16] is a nonlinear classification technique based on the use of classification and regression
trees [17]. It is one of the most recent developments in the
randomized decision trees aggregation research. It synthesizes approaches developed in [18] and [19].
3) The neural network [20] (NN) is a nonlinear technique
where training consists in minimizing the average squared
error associated cost using a gradient descent (backpropagation on multilayer perceptrons).
We have access to cell sets labeled by experts, but with imbalanced datasets, specially when there are more than two classes
per problem. In order to simplify the characteristic space boundary decision determination, we use a one-class classifier technique: the treated class against all the others merged in a single
one. Therefore, one classifier per class is built, and results are

632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

significantly improved. However, in this case, the imbalanced
dataset problem is amplified. Thus, we implement an oversizing protocol (or oversampling) [21]: we multiply the minority
class in order to obtain two balanced classes. Please note that
other techniques are available to deal with imbalance data. It is
possible to implement undersampling [22]: random or directed
instance suppression in the majority class until the sets are balanced. However, it is not recommended for a small dataset.
Other techniques based on asymmetric entropy measure [23] or
the use of an autoassociator NN [24] could also be used as well.
In order to validate our results, we systematically compute
each model confidence interval (CI) and probability. The CI
contains 95% of results provided by a model, because some significant result variance could occur due to the data repartition
in learning and training sets. The model probability is the probability of obtaining a similar result if predictions are randomly
chosen. It is computed by a random class mix of each data
in the learning set. These probabilities will be systematically
lower than 0.0001, due to the proposed algorithms relevance
and efficiency.
III. PREVIOUS WORKS ON STATISTICAL MATRICES
Statistical matrices were extensively used for texture characterization. The most famous one is the gray-level cooccurrence
matrix (COM), coupled with Haralick’s features [25]. The COM
represents the texture by second-order statistics: distribution of
cooccurring values at a given offset. The more the offsets used,
the more information quantity extracted. This is the main drawback of this approach, but this method is still a reference in cell
texture classification issues [26]–[28].
Another classical technique is the gray-level run length matrix (RLM) [29], extensively developed for texture classification [30], [31]. The RLM extracts statistical higher order features: the matrix element p(i, j|θ) gives the intensity i and length
j total run numbers (i.e., collinear pixels with same intensity in
the same direction θ). This method is particularly efficient for
periodic textures and completes the COM information. Typical
features extracted in RLM are moments of order −2 to 2.
Others statistical matrices were proposed in the state of the
art, such as the gray-level difference histogram [32] and the
gray-level sum histogram [33]; however, these methods extract
less information and deserve less interest for real applications
in quantitative cytology.
IV. MULTIPLE GRAY-LEVEL SZM
E→T
Let f :
be a gray-level image, where E ⊂ Z2
x → f (x)
is the pixel space support, and the image intensities are discrete values which range in a closed set T = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tN },
Δt = ti+1 − ti , e.g., for an 8 bits image, we have t1 = 1,
N = 256, and Δt = 1. Let us also assume that the image f
is segmented into its J flat zones Rj [f ] (i.e., connected regions
of constant value): E = ∪Jj=1 Rj [f ], ∩Jj=1 Rj [f ] = ∅. The size
(surface area) of each region is s(j) = |Rj [f ]| (| · | is the cardinal). Hence, we consider that with each zone Rj [f ] is associated
a constant gray-level intensity.


Fig. 2. SZM filling example for a 4 × 4 image texture dimensions with four
gray levels and using 8-connexity.

A. Reminder on Gray-Level SZM
Our starting point is the gray-level SZM original notion, based
on each flat zone (connected pixels with the same gray level)
size/intensity cooccurrences. It was recently introduced in [4]
and [34] as an alternative to the jointed gray-level run length
distribution.
The texture image f SZM, denoted GS f , provides a statistical representation by the estimation of a bivariate conditional
probability density function of the image distribution values.
It is calculated following the pioneering RLM principle: the
GS N
f (sn , gm ) matrix value is equal to the size sn and gray level
gm total zone numbers, after reduction of f to N gray levels.
The resulting matrix has a fixed row numbers equal to N (so matrix height), and a dynamic column number (so matrix width),
determined as the largest zone size as well as the quantization
size.
The image gray-level (resp. sizes) numbers can be reduced
by a function (generally linear, but also log, square root, etc.,
according to the problem under investigation) in order to improve the result efficiency and stability. Whether two zones
of gray level (resp. size) gm and gn = gm + 1 (resp. sn and
sm = sn + 1) are indeed really different?
Thanks to this design, the more homogeneous the texture
(large flat zones with closed gray levels), the wider and flatter the matrix. Upon this statistical and matrix representation,
we can calculate all GS f second-order moments as compact
texture features [30] and two more features which are specific
weighted variances [34]. Fig. 2 shows an example of such a
matrix calculation.
This matrix does not require several direction computation,
contrary to RLM and COM, however, it requires a flat zone
labeling which is time consuming. The connectivity type used
for labeling modifies the matrix, but our experiments do not
show classification’s performance impact. The RLM and COM
are appropriated for periodic textures, whereas the SZM is typically adapted to describe nonperiodic heterogeneous textures.
In addition, due to the intrinsic segmentation, texture description in SZM is more regional than the COM point-wise-based
representation. However, it was empirically shown [4] (see
Tables 5 and 7, and proved in the past for other databases)
that the gray-level quantization degree still has an important
impact on the texture classification performance. For a general
application, it is usually required to test several gray level and
width quantizations in order to find the optimal one with respect
to a training dataset.

THIBAULT et al.: ADVANCED STATISTICAL MATRICES FOR TEXTURE CHARACTERIZATION: APPLICATION TO CELL CLASSIFICATION

633

B. Multiple Gray-Level Quantization of SZM
Instead of optimizing the gray-level numbers N , we propose
to construct a multiple scheme with various matrices and then to
combine them into a single matrix. The multiple gray-level SZM
(MSZM) principle, for an 8 bits image, consists in calculating
eight SZM for eight different gray-level quantizations: Nk =
2k , k = 1, 2, . . . , 8, and merge the resulting matrices with a
weighted average (which avoids to multiply the matrices number
and thus characteristics, and then provides simpler classifiers):
 f (sn , gm ) =
GS

8


k
wk GS N
f (sn , gm )

k =1
k
where GS N
f is calculated from T quantized in Nk gray levels.
Weights
 distribution in MSZM is given by a Gaussian function
(so k wk = 1) centered between N4 = 16 and N5 = 32 gray
levels; this distribution penalizes gray-level numbers’ extreme
values because low levels contain limited structural information and high levels are sensitive to noise. By the way, the
weights could be automatically learnt or adapted a priori for
a specific application. For example, wk can be equal to GS N k
classification rate; for each Nk gray-level quantization, GS N k
performances are evaluated among the whole dataset and then
used as weights. Results are then strongly improved, but it is
k
more time consuming. For Nk values, GS N
f matrices have different dimensions. Even if we consider that the region size is
quantized with the same intervals (same number of columns),
the number of rows is equal to Nk . To solve this drawback,
we propose to replicate each of the Nk rows in order to finally
obtain 256 rows.
The different gray-level quantization can also be interpreted
as a segmentation into λ-flat zones [35], where the value of
λ is associated with the corresponding Δt = 256/Nk . From a
 f requires to
computational viewpoint, the multiple SZM GS
fill eight individual SZM, but it is generally more efficient for
texture classification (see application in Section VII).

V. GRAY-LEVEL DZM
Texture in natural objects is often nonstationary in space;
for instance, the texture can radially vary with respect to the
object center or border. For instance, we have to characterize
the cell nuclei DNA organization (i.e., chromatin texture), see
Fig. 7. More precisely, the “DNA quantity” is represented by
the pixel intensity; the higher the pixel gray level, the higher
the DNA quantity (this is one of the reasons why we previously
corrected the uneven illumination). Observing the examples, the
DNA distribution is not stationary and, for some classes, it is
usually further to the nuclei border [according to the skeleton,
see Fig. 7(d)].
By design, the COM, RLM, and SZM are not able to characterize such a distribution, due to the pixel texture spacial
localization absence. Then, in order to characterize such radial
textures, we propose a descriptor named gray-level DZM, dek
noted GDf . The new statistical GDN
f (dn , gm ) matrix element
yields the number of intensity zones gm at a dn distance further
to the E c space support border. This distance is the shortest

Fig. 3. Four gray level texture example, where each flat zone is valued with
4-connectivity and distance to the border E c (top left), with the resulting DZM
(top right) and SZM (bottom).

Euclidean distance between the flat zone and the shape border
(see example of Fig. 3).
In practice, to accelerate the computation time, the distance
function is computed for the whole texture support space
D(x, E) = inf{d(x, y), y ∈ E c }
where d(x, y) is typically obtained using a discrete metric approximation to the Euclidean distance (Chamfer or Montanary).
Then, for each region Rj [f ], the corresponding distance value
is obtained as its smallest value in the distance map
dj = inf{D(z, E), z ∈ Rj [f ]}.
Remarks:
1) Generalize this matrix to construct a multiple gray-level
f is obvious:
DZM, GD
f (dn , gm ) =
GD

8


k
wk GDN
f (dn , gm ).

k =1

2) The distance is the shortest Euclidean distance between
the shape flat zone and the border, but we can use a variant
using the distance from the flat zone barycenter (more
representative for a global approach) to the border, in order
to handle long or large flat zones which touch the border.
3) Flat zone sizes are not taken into account and we can suppose that, in many applications, large zones are more significant than small ones. Hence, we can create a weighted
matrix in which GDf (dn , gm ) yields the zone sizes sum
of intensity gm at a distance of dn from the border.
VI. ORIENTATION LENGTH ZONE MATRIX
The SZM and DZM are statistical descriptors assuming that
the texture is composed of a randomized homogeneous zone’s
nonperiodic tiling, each one described by its intensity value and
its size/distance-to-border. This principle, which is appropriate
to describe intensity-dependent homogeneous versus heterogeneous textures [34], is not compatible with other structured textures kinds, in particular, with fibrous textures. Let us consider
the given microtubule network example in Fig. 4(a), which is
another studied case in Section VII. Similar texture images can

634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

the texture f is not bounded in the image, the main axis can be
replaced by the texture full zone orientation average.
VII. APPLICATION TO CELL CLASSIFICATION
A. Cells Pattern
Fig. 4. Original microtubule network (left); an enhanced network image (with
LRT) giving at each pixel x, the image processed value with a kernel orientated
at angle θi which produces the maximal intensity (middle); an orientation
map gives at each x, the corresponding maximal response θi represented by a
different color label (right).

be found in other natural objects such as wood, carbon, wool,
all fibrous materials, etc. On the one hand, we observe that the
fiber intensity is not an important feature. Fibers can mainly be
described by their length, width variation, orientation, and tortuosity [36]. We assume here that our fibrous textures are thin
fiber randomized network of limited width variation and low
tortuosity. On the other hand, the fibrous texture segmentation
by flat zones is without interest for construction of descriptors
which characterize fiber network morphological properties.
Hence, we offer to use the local radon transform (LRT), as
discussed in [37], to segment individual fibers. The LRT uses an
orientated Gaussian derivative kernel, rotated at different angles
and adapted via a maximization procedure to the various texture directions (see Fig. 4). Other filtering oriented techniques
could have been used, but the LRT intrinsically provides a fast
(implementation using fast Fourier transform) and robust (regularization by the smallest Gaussian) result. Now, the connected
flat zone computation (two neighboring points belonging to the
same zone if they have the same dominant orientation value)
produces a network segmentation in J linear segments which
roughly represents each fiber Fj [f ], but which does not cover
the whole support space, i.e., ∪Jj=1 Fj [f ] 
= E; in addition, in
the fiber crossing points, one orientation is arbitrary favored
over the others. We solved this last drawback by considering
separately the connected components of each orientation and
by reconnecting them with a small morphological closing; for
each orientation, concerning fibers are isolated and connected
with a unitary oriented structuring element. To improve the descriptor robustness, the regions associated with very small fibers
can be rejected. Once the individual fiber segmentation is available, each fiber can be described by its length lj (computed as
its geodesic diameter) and by its orientation θj (main axis orientation, computed by PCA [38]). Using these two parameters,
we propose to characterize a fibrous texture f by a new statistical matrix named the orientation length zone matrix (OLZM),
OLf (θn , lm ), which yields the “fiber’s” number of orientation
θn and length lm . The OLZM row number depends on the orientation space discretization degree (which is selected in the LRT
computation) and the columns number is equal to the longest
texture fiber.
To deal with the rotation invariance problem, we propose the
following alternative solutions. If the texture f is a segmented
object, for instance, a cell such as the ones in our case study, each
zone orientation is given with respect to the coordinates system
associated with the object’s main axis (computed by PCA). If

In order to assert our advanced statistical matrices texture
description performances, we compare their results with the
ones obtained with the powerful morphological pattern spectrum
(PS), providing a texture morphological multiscale representation. PS is based upon the granulometry notion. A granulometry
(resp. antigranulometry) is an image object’s size distribution
study [39], [40]. Formally, for the discrete case, a granulometry
(resp. antigranulometry) is an opening family Γ = (γB n )n ≥0
(resp. closings Φ = (ϕB n )n ≥0 ) that depends on an integer positive parameter n (which expresses a size factor). We remind
that the f image opening using the structuring element B of
size n is obtained by concatenation: an erosion with Bn followed by a dilation with the same structuring element [39], i.e.,
γB n (f ) = δB n (εB n (f )). The closing is obtained by reversing
the operators order, i.e., ϕB n (f ) = εB n (δB n (f )). The f image
granulometric analysis with respect to Γ consists in evaluating each opening of size n 
with a measurement, typically the
opened image integral, i.e., x∈E γB n (f )(x)dx. The granulometric curve, or PS(f, n) [40] of f with respect to Γ and Φ, is
defined by the following normalized mapping:
⎧
γB n (f )(x)dx
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
x∈E
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪

⎪
⎪
⎪
γB n + 1 (f )(x)dx,
⎪ −
⎪
⎪
⎪
x∈E
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ for n ≥ 0
1
PS(f, n) = 

⎪
x∈E f (x)dx ⎪
ϕB |n | (f )(x)dx
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
x∈E
⎪
⎪
⎪

⎪
⎪
⎪
ϕB |n |−1 (f )(x)dx,
−
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
x∈E
⎪
⎪
⎩
for n ≤ −1.
The PS value for each size n corresponds to structures measurement of size n and is a probability density function (i.e., a
histogram); a peak or mode in PS at a given scale n indicates
the presence of many image structures of this scale (or size).
Granulometric size distributions can be used as descriptors for
the texture classification. We use both granulometry and antigranulometry to characterize bright and dark structures, that is,
cell speckles in this application.
Tables I–III present results on the ICPR 2012 HEp-2 cells
classification contest dataset, for both characterization technique families previously described and for three classifiers.
For SZM, the gray-level image number is reduced to 64 (empirically estimated). For the PS, structuring element sizes are from
n = 1 to n = 13 with a two size step, in order to detect small to
big speckles, where the structuring element B is a discrete disk
unit.
Considered separately, every technique is efficient (predictions upper than 90%, except for the “centromere” class) for

THIBAULT et al.: ADVANCED STATISTICAL MATRICES FOR TEXTURE CHARACTERIZATION: APPLICATION TO CELL CLASSIFICATION

635

TABLE I
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS (IN PERCENTAGE) WITH LOGISTIC REGRESSION

TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS (IN PERCENTAGE) WITH RANDOM FOREST
Fig. 5. Examples of homogeneous texture (left) versus heterogeneous texture
(right) nuclei, and results of homogeneity classification (in percentage) using
second-order moments of GLZSM.

TABLE III
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS (IN PERCENTAGE) WITH NEURAL NETWORK

Fig. 6. Probabilities histograms and the AUR, given by each model: (a) RLM,
(b) SZM, and (c) MSZM. In dark gray the nuclei with heterogeneous texture
and the probability 1 (resp. 0) is on the right (resp. left). The closer to 1 (resp.
0) the probability, the more heterogeneous (resp. homogeneous) the texture.

logistic regression and quite perfect results for random forest
and neural network. However, some rare mistakes remain. A
systematic study revealed us that they are different following the
characterization techniques and classifiers. Therefore, we considered a final weighted average probability, where the weights
correspond to the empirical predictions given in the tables. This
classifier combination improves our results, leading to a perfect
100% prediction for all classes.
B. Cell Division Assays
The development of the present statistical texture descriptors
was motivated by an application in cell-based assays for phenotypic screening, which consists in the use of multiparametric
and high-resolution imaging techniques to characterize and select innovative compounds and/or protein targets involved in cell
division. More precisely, the aim is to build a cell-phase classifier by the DNA structure analysis (using a nuclear chromatin
marker) and the microtubule network organization (using a cytoskeleton marker). We disposed of the RAMIS dataset made
with 317 cells which were extensively annotated by experts.
Annotation includes the mitosis phase, with approximately 50
other labels providing relevant information for phase classification. For this experimental result part, logistic regression is
considered as a classifier, with one-class classifiers for each
class, and validation by leave one out (k-fold validation with k
being equal to the number of instances).
Among all available labels, we here focus on the following:
1) DNA Texture Homogeneity: It contains two classes Homogeneous and Heterogeneous. Fig. 5 shows that MSZM

provides comparable result than the best original SZM. This
property can be observed in Fig. 7 too for the radial distribution.
CI sizes are equal and model probabilities are lower than 0.001.
We can observe in Fig. 6, the receiver operator characteristic curves (ROC, the true positive rate /sensitivity is plotted
in function of the false positive rate/100-specificity for different
cutoff points of a parameter) and the area under ROC (AUR: the
closer to 1, the better), in order to estimate the results sensitivity/specificity. The best SZM specific gray-level number obtains
the best area under curve, and the MSZM has a comparable result, even better than RLM one. Moreover, the probabilities
distribution is better for SZM and MSZM than RLM. MSZM
has the best repartition close to the extremities (so really few
ambiguous cases), but SZM has the strong errors lowest number (misclassified nuclei with strong probability). These results
demonstrate the power and usefulness of such a multiple graylevel version. Moreover, we have empirically observed that the
MSZM has generally better or comparable results than the SZM.
This can be observed in both Tables II and III.
2) DNA Masses Texture: It is the DNA “distribution” and
contains four classes (Beads, Slightly Condensed, Condensed
and Highly Condensed). Fig. 7 shows that the MDZM provides
a better radial distribution description than the MSZM. However,
there is an exception for class “Beads”, which is composed of
textures without radial repartition (so random or homogeneous
texture). Thus, the MSZM is well adapted and provides better
results.
3) Microtubules Network Organization: It contains three
classes (Well Organized, Reorganized, and Other). Fig. 8 shows

636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank C. Etievant, D. Reberioux, V. Tillement
and M. Wright from Pierre Fabre pharmaceutical company for
providing the annotated cell images, and R. Danno from ADCIS
company for the annotation software.
REFERENCES

Fig. 7. Nuclei examples with different textures (associated here to the chromatin condensation): (a) beads, (b) slightly, (c) condensed, and (d) highly;
classification results (in percentage) and best results CI.

Fig. 8. Examples of microtubule network normal/enhanced with different
organization: (a) Well Organized—WO. (b) Reorganized—RO. (c) Other. The
results of classification (in percentage) and the confidence intervals—CI.

the OLZM really satisfying results, and this is the first method
proposed to figure out this problem. However, these results are
slightly lower than other results presented in this paper, due to
the organization similarity among texture classes.

VIII. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
In this paper, the problem of cell characterization and classification was addressed. More precisely, we focused on specific
and relevant parts of cell characterization particularly difficult
during mitosis. To figure out these problems, we designed new
advanced statistical matrices based on the gray-level SZM. First,
a multiple gray-level version which uses more information about
the texture thanks to a complete gray level decomposition. It
provides at least comparable results to the best original SZM
on both applications; it uses one less parameter, but requires
more computations. In addition, two new versions, which use
radial distribution and length/orientation of flat zones, are used
in order to characterize specific DNA and microtubules aspects.
These matrices showed their power and efficiency for quantitative cell analysis, and can be applied to other specific problems
of texture characterization.

[1] A. E. Carpenter, T. R. Jones, M. R. Lamprecht, C. Clarke, I. H. Kang,
O. Friman, D. A. Guertin, J. H. Chang, R. A. Lindquist, J. Moffat, P.
Golland, and D. M. Sabatini. (2006). Cellprofiler: Image analysis software
for identifying and quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biol. [Online].
7, p. R100. Available: http://www.cellprofiler.org/index.shtml
[2] P. Perner, H. Perner, and B. Müller, “Texture classification based on random sets and its application to hep-2 cells,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image
Process., 2002, vol. 2, pp. 406–411.
[3] B. Newmann and T. Walker, “Phenotypic profiling of the human genome
by time-lapse microscopy reveals cell division genes,” Nature, vol. 464,
no. 7289, pp. 721–727, 2012.
[4] G. Thibault, B. Fertil, C. Navarro, S. Pereira, P. Cau, N. Levy, J. Sequeira, and J.-L. Mari. (2013). Shape and texture indexes: Application
to cell nuclei classification, Int. J. Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell. [Online]. 27(1). Available: http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/
S0218001413570024
[5] G. Thibault, J. Angulo, and F. Meyer, “Advanced statistical matrices for
texture characterization: Application to dna chromatin and microtubule
network classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., Sep.
2011, pp. 53–56.
[6] P. Foggia, G. Percannella, P. Soda, and M. Vento, “Benchmarking hep-2
cells classification methods,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 10,
pp. 1878–1889, Jun. 2013.
[7] J. Angulo, D. Reberioux, G. Thibault, C. Etievant, and F. Meyer, “Selfnormalization of cell images in multifocus quantitative fluorescence,” in
Proc. Int. Congr. Stereol., Beijing, China, Oct. 2011, p. 4.
[8] T. G. Dietterich, “Approximate statistical tests for comparing supervised
classification learning algorithms,” Neural Comput., vol. 10, pp. 1895–
1923, Dec. 1998.
[9] R. Kohavi, “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 1995,
pp. 1137–1145.
[10] M. Stone, “Cross-validatory choice and assessment of statistical predictions,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 111–147, 1974.
[11] H. Martens and P. Dardenne, “Validation and verification of regressionin
small data sets,” Chemometrics Intell. Lab. Syst., vol. 44, no. 1–2, pp. 99–
121, 1998.
[12] J. Berkson, “Application of the logistic function to bio-assay,” J. Amer.
Statist. Assoc., vol. 39, pp. 357–365, 1944.
[13] D. Hosmer and S. Lemeshow, Applied Logistic Regression. Toronto,
BC, Canada: Wiley, 1989.
[14] McFadden, Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behaviour,
P. Zarembka Ed. Waltham, MA, USA, 1974
[15] R. A. Fisher, “The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems,”
Ann. Eugen., vol. 7, pp. 179–188, 1936.
[16] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
2001.
[17] L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone, Classification
and Regression Trees. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1984.
[18] L. Breiman, “Bagging predictors,” Mach. Learn., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 123–
140, 1996.
[19] Y. Amit and D. Geman, “Shape quantization and recognition with randomized trees,” Neural Comput., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1545–1588, 1997.
[20] W. S. McCulloch and W. Pitts, “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent
in nervous activity,” Bull. Math. Biophys., vol. 5, pp. 115–133, 1943.
[21] I. A. Liu, J. Ghosh, and C. Martin, “Generative oversampling for mining
imbalanced datasets,” Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2007, pp. 66–72.
[22] X.-Y. Liu, J. Wu, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Exploratory under-sampling for classimbalance learning,” IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining. Washington, DC, USA,
Dec. 2006, pp. 965–969
[23] S. Marcellin, D.-A. Zighed, and G. Ritschard, “An asymmetric entropy
measure for decision trees,” in Proc. Inf. Process. Manage. Uncertainty
in Knowledge-Based Syst., 2006, pp. 1292–1299.
[24] N. Japkowicz. (2000). “Learning from imbalanced data sets: A comparison
of various strategies,” in AAAI Workshop on Learning from Imbalanced

THIBAULT et al.: ADVANCED STATISTICAL MATRICES FOR TEXTURE CHARACTERIZATION: APPLICATION TO CELL CLASSIFICATION

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]

[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]

Data Sets. Palo Alto, CA, USA, pp. 10–15. [Online]. Available: http://
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.34.1396
R. M. Haralick, K. Shanmugam, and I. Dinstein, “Textural features for
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man Cybern., vol. SMC-3, no. 6,
pp. 610–621, Nov. 1973.
O. S. Al-Kadi, “Texture measures combination for improved meningioma
classification of histopathological images,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 43,
pp. 2043–2053, May 2010.
Q. Ji, J. Engel, and E. Craine, “Texture analysis for classification of cervix
lesions,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1144–1149, Nov.
2000.
J. Wang, X. Zhou, P. L. Bradley, S.-F. Chang, N. Perrimon, and S. T. Wong,
“Cellular phenotype recognition for high-content RNAI genome-wide
screening,” J. Biomol. Screen., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 29–39, Jan. 2008.
M. Galloway, “Texture analysis using grey level run lengths,” Comput.
Graph. Image Process., vol. 4, pp. 172–179, Jul. 1975.
A. Chu, C. Sehgal, and J. Greenleaf, “Use of gray value distribution of
run lengths for texture analysis,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 415–419, 1990.
B. Dasarathy and E. Holder, “Image characterizations based on joint gray
level run length distributions,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 12, no. 8,
pp. 497–502, 1991.
L. S. Davis, M. Clearman, and J. Aggarwal, “A comparative texture classification study based on generalized cooccurrence matrices,” presented
at the IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Miami, FL, USA, Dec. 1979.
H. Schulerud, J. M. Carstensen, and H. Danielsen. (1995). “Multiresolution texture analysis of four classes of mice liver cells using different
cell cluster representations,” in Proc. 9th Scand. Conf. Image Anal., Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 121–129. [Online]. Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.
edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.44.3125
G. Thibault, B. Fertil, C. Navarro, S. Pereira, P. Cau, N. Levy, J. Sequeira,
and J.-L. Mari, “Texture indexes and gray level size zone matrix. application to cell nuclei classification,” presented at the Pattern Recognition and
Information Processing, Minsk, Belarus, May 2009, pp. 140–145.
F. Meyer, “The levelings,” in Mathematical Morphology and its Applications to Image and Signal Processing, R. Heijmans, Ed. Norwell, MA,
USA: Kluwer, 1998, pp. 199–206.
L. Decker, D. Jeulin, and I. Tovena, “3D morphological analysis of the
connectivity of a porous medium,” Acta Stereol., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 107–
112, 1998.
M. Krause, R. Alles, B. Burgeth, and J. Weickert, “Retinal vessel detection
via second derivative of local radon transform,” Dept. of Math., Saarland
Univ., Saarbrücken, Germany, Tech. Rep. 212, Jun. 2008
H. Hotelling, “Analysis of a complex of statistical variables with principal
components,” J. Educat. Psychol., 1933
J. Serra, Image Analysis and Mathematical Morphology. vol. 1, London,
U.K.: Academic, 1982.
P. Maragos, “Pattern spectrum and multiscale shape representation,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 701–716, Jul. 1989.

Guillaume Thibault received the M.S. degree in
computer science, with a thesis on image analysis
in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in image processing
and pattern recognition from the University of AixMarseille II, France, in 2009.
He was formerly a Research Engineer in the Center of Mathematical Morphology (CMM), MINESParisTech and is currently a Research Engineer in
the Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
OR, USA.His research interests include image processing (segmentation, 2.5-D confocal images projection), pattern recognition (shape and texture features extraction, computer
aided diagnosis), with applications to biomedicine/biotechnology image analysis: cellular biology (classification on phases of mitosis) and ophthalmology
(main structures segmentation and pathologies detection).

637

Jesús Angulo was born in Cuenca, Spain, in 1975.
He received the M.S. degree in telecommunications
engineering from Polytechnical University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, in 1999, with a thesis on image
and video processing. He received the Ph.D. degree
in mathematical morphology and image processing
from the Ecole des Mines de Paris, Paris, France, in
2003, under the guidance of Prof. Jean Serra.
He is currently a Permanent Researcher (Chargé
de Recherche) in the Center of Mathematical Morphology (Department of Mathematics and Systems),
MINES ParisTech, Paris, France. His research interests include multivariate image processing (color, hyper/multispectral, temporal series, polarimetric, tensor
imaging) and mathematical morphology (filtering, segmentation, shape and texture analysis, stochastic and geometry approaches, PDE approaches), and their
application to the development of theoretically-sound and high-performance
algorithms and software in the fields of biomedicine/biotechnology, remote
Sensing and Industrial Vision.

Fernand Meyer received the Engineer degree from
the Ecole des Mines de Paris, Paris, France in 1975.
He received the Ph.D. degree in 1979 where his research area was “Early and automatic detection of
cervical cancer on cytological smears.”
He is currently a Director at the Centre de Morphologie Mathematique (CMM), Ecole des Mines de
Paris, Paris, France since 1975. He participated actively in the development of mathematical morphology: particle reconstruction, top-hat transform, the
morphological segmentation paradigm based on the
watershed transform and markers, the theory of digital skeleton, the introduction
of hierarchical queues for high speed watershed computations, morphological
interpolations, the theory of levelings, multiscale segmentation.

