1058

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Quality of the Wireless Electrocardiogram Signal
During Physical Exercise in Different Age Groups
Tiina Takalokastari, Esko Alasaarela, Matti Kinnunen, and Timo Jämsä

Abstract—Electrocardiographic (ECG) recordings are usually
obtained at rest. In many cases, real-time ECG monitoring in the
home environment during daily life would be useful, but that requires a wireless device. The purpose of this paper is to evaluate
the quality of the wireless ECG signals during physical activities.
The test data were collected both in a normal exercise environment and in a radio frequency (RF)-shielded and noiseless environment. 30 test persons performed running, biking, or Nordic
walking exercises in normal indoor conditions, while electrical activity of the heart and acceleration of the body were measured
by a VitalSens VS100 device (InteleSens). The acceleration data
were also acquired with a DogIMU movement sensor (Domuset).
Six more persons were measured in an RF-shielded environment,
while they followed a specific list of exercises to verify the tests of
the first group. The list consisted of exercise movements, thought to
introduce disturbance in the ECG signals. The collected data were
classified into three quality classes, good (3%), moderate (66%),
and poor (31%), based on the recognition of the QRS-complex and
R-R intervals as well as the amount of disturbance. The accelerometer data were compared to the amount of noise in the ECG data.
A clear correlation was found between increased noise and level of
activity. Increasing age also appeared to decrease the ECG signal
quality. Careful consideration of the quality of the data versus positive and negative features of wirelessness shows great potential for
the wireless ECG in future home healthcare and fitness industries.
Index Terms—Activity monitoring, biomedical measurements,
disturbances, electrocardiography, noise, wireless sensing.

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTROCARDIOGRAM (ECG) recordings are usually
conducted at rest. Outside hospitals only Holter and event
recorders [1] or wired exercise ECG recorders [2] are commonly
available for measuring ECG during physical exercise. In many
cases, real-time ECG monitoring would be useful, but it requires
higher quality wireless devices.

E

Manuscript received April 17, 2013; revised June 28, 2013; accepted September 12, 2013. Date of publication October 10, 2013; date of current version May
1, 2014. The work was supported by the European Regional Development Fund,
Domuset Ltd., Siperia Systems Ltd., Ouman Ltd., ZEF Solutions Ltd., and Pudasjärvi City. This project was made as a part of Simsala project (Integrated
multisensor safety and health solutions for senior citizens) in the Optoelectronics
and Measurement Techniques Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
T. Takalokastari was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Oulu, 90570 Oulu, Finland (e-mail: tiina.takalokastari@gmail.com).
E. Alasaarela and M. Kinnunen are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Oulu, 90570 Oulu, Finland (e-mail: esko.alasaarela@
oulu.fi; matti.kinnunen@ee.oulu.fi).
T. Jämsä is with the Department of Medical Technology, University of Oulu,
90570 Oulu, Finland (e-mail: timo.jamsa@oulu.fi).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2282934

The variety of commercial ECG devices has increased, as
healthcare has developed from traditional methods toward ubiquitous technology [3]. Holter and event recorders with roundthe-clock ECG monitoring capacity now have lighter wireless
competitors with a real-time telemonitoring capability and an
operation time of several days, which is useful for certain types
of chronic heart disease monitoring. Wireless solutions are a key
to health monitoring and analysis not only with the elderly, but
also among the younger and physically active age groups. [4],
[5]
However, wireless ECG solutions are still at an early development stage, and many problems have to be solved, before
they are ready to break into the ECG device market in a big
way. Among the main problems are sensing of biosignals while
the object moves and sweats, and simultaneously induces motion artifacts, and transmission of huge amounts of data with
a reliable wireless method, particularly with a great number of
patients in the same space [6], [7]. In long-term Holter-type
monitoring this may render the diagnosis of arrhythmia patients
more difficult [8]. In addition, battery lifetime is still a severe
problem and requires new solutions [9]. In order to solve the
aforementioned problems, more attention has been paid in recent
years to developing wireless ECG measurement systems with
flexible sensors, measurements through clothing, and wearable
design [10]–[12]. This will support the convenient use of the
ECG devices also during various exercises.
Wireless ECG is not only ECG recording without cables.
It also allows measuring ECG during different activities, be
they physical, physiological, or mental [13]–[15]. Patients can
perform normal day-to-day activities during monitoring and,
if something unexpected happens, the system quickly initiates
necessary actions. Patients may even forget to turn OFF monitoring, which can be useful for mental studies. During physical
training or daily household activities, ECG monitoring can occur concurrently with movement and position monitoring. [11]
Decisions can be confirmed by combining and processing several sensor signals, which is not possible with wired biosignal
monitoring.
Since acceleration affects the ECG signals [16], various approaches have been studied to reduce motion artifacts in them.
Ottenbacher et al. developed motion artifact detection algorithms using dry electrodes [17]. Each electrode was equipped
with a three-axis acceleration sensor. Kozaki et al. [18], Sardini
et al. [19] Healey et al. [20], and Kishimoto et al. [21] used the
3-D acceleration data for movement detection and activity level
classification. Motion artifacts can also be time-variable and
affect the ECG signal differently at different times. Sweeney
et al. [22] showed that the quality of the ECG signal can be

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TAKALOKASTARI et al.: QUALITY OF THE WIRELESS ECG SIGNAL DURING PHYSICAL EXERCISE IN DIFFERENT AGE GROUPS

1059

assessed better, when corrected with differential acceleration
sensors. Liu [23] has suggested using an optical sensor to measure skin strain, which can then be used as input for adaptive
filtering. These papers report promising results and the topic is
worth studying in more detail.
A. Aims of the Study
We aimed to study the quality of the ECG signal when measured during common physical activities and body movements
and present reasons for poor signal quality. We also wanted to
clarify whether the quality of the wireless ECG data is suitable
to be used in the healthcare market for the elderly or in the
life-style market of the younger population.

Fig. 1. VitalSens ECG device on the right and positioning of electrodes on
the left. The device is fixed on the five buttons of the upper electrode.

II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. ECG Monitoring Tests
The study was divided into two parts: 1) ECG, movement
and video data collected during four common activities: walking, running, Nordic walking, and biking, 2) ECG, movement
and video data collected in a shielded echoless (EMC-shielded)
room, where all radio wave disturbances and reflections were
eliminated. In the latter set of tests, the physical activities were
planned after the first set had been completed.
The first set of tests was conducted at the Sports Clinic of
the Oulu Deaconess Institute (ODL) (n = 30) and the second
in the EMC laboratory of the University of Oulu (n = 6). The
subjects’ (n = 36) average age was 38.7 (from 16 to 70) years,
average height 169 (from 157 to 190) cm, and average weight
73 (from 57 to 94) kg. In the first set of tests, the 30 subjects
participated in a regular fitness stress test by running, biking, or
Nordic walking a total of 690 min (11.5 h), including a few minutes warm-up, walking at a slow pace. Walking, running, and
Nordic walking were done on a treadmill. Biking was done with
an ergometer. In the fitness stress test, the load was increased
step-by-step and continued either until the heart rate exceeded
85–90% of the evaluated maximum or the person experienced
excessive discomfort. In the EMC laboratory, the test subjects
also performed separate predefined activities, planned in accordance with the findings of the Sports Clinic tests. The test data
were collected for 152 min (2.5 h).
B. Measurement Methods and Devices
All the tests were video recorded with time markers for a
visual analysis of the effects of body movements on the ECG
signal. Also shadowing moments can be found in the videos.
Three-lead ECG and 3-D acceleration signals were measured
from the chest using a VitalSens VS100 wireless ECG monitor
by InteleSens [24], which communicates with a laptop computer via a Bluetooth connection. Fig. 1 shows the VitalSens device and positioning of the InteleSens Dual-Monitor electrodes.
VitalSens has a sampling rate of 360 samples/s and a quantization range of 12 bits, and it comes with a Class 2 Bluetooth radio.
The measurement data were received by the internal Bluetooth
radio of a Lenovo G550 laptop computer. The same manufac-

Fig. 2. DogIMU device on the right and positioning on the waist on the left.
Directions of the x-, y-, and z-axes can also be seen.

turer’s Canberra v1.0 software was used to receive and follow
the data stream during the tests.
Three-axis acceleration data were collected from the chest using the same VitalSens device. Its acceleration sensor produces
measurements at the rate of 40 samples/s with a quantization
range of 16 bits per axis and a maximum scale of ±6 G each (G
is acceleration due to gravity).
Acceleration was also measured by a DogIMU device, which
is a prototype developed by Domuset Ltd., a company participating in a parallel project. Its dimensions are 103 mm × 62 mm ×
13 mm, and it weighs 100 g. It was fixed on the waist of all test
persons, except the bikers (see Fig. 2).
DogIMU is a 10-degree-of-freedom inertial movementmeasuring device, which includes an Analog Devices ADXL345
three-axis MEMS-based acceleration sensor with a sensitivity
in excess of 100 μG and a range of ±16 G. It can take 330 samples/s, but this study only used a rate of 50 samples/s. It contains
a basic Class 2 Bluetooth radio with an error correction transmission protocol. These data were received by an external Bluetooth
radio connected via USB to the Lenovo G550 computer.
In addition, a Polar S810i heart rate monitor was worn in all
the fitness tests to follow the subjects’ stress level [25], [26] and
to keep the test load at an appropriate level. The data were used
to support the analysis of the VitalSense’s data.
ECG data were processed to analyze the properties of QRS
complexes using InteleSens Canberra v1.0, MATLAB R2008b,
and Microsoft Excel. Canberra proved easy-to-use and effective in the visual analysis of signal form and amount of noise.
Recognition of the QRS complex requires finding the Q, R, and
S waves of the ECG signal. Of these, R waves are the easiest
to recognize due to their peak form. A good quality ECG signal
also allows P, T , and U waves to be recognized.
With MATLAB, two functions were particularly useful: R
peak identification and QRS complex recognition. Real-time

1060

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TABLE I
COLLECTED ECG DATA CLASSIFIED INTO QUALITY CLASSES

TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION OF ECG SIGNAL QUALITY ACCORDING TO AGE GROUP
Fig. 3. Examples of (a) good, (b) moderate, and (c) poor ECG signals. x-axis:
25 mm/s.

QRS complex finding is a well-known method, and a wide
variety of software tools are available for the purpose [27].
In R–R interval determination, a moving window method was
applied [28]. In this method, peak detection relies on comparing
the signal to a threshold value (set automatically by the program
and dependent on the signal) and analyzing valleys around found
peaks [29].
Assessing the quality of the ECG signals could be based
on basic signal quality properties (amplitude, spikes, constant
signal portions) and on the ratio of QRS-amplitude to noiseamplitude [30].
III. RESULTS
A. Classification of ECG Data
The collected ECG data were divided into three quality
classes: 1) good, 2) moderate, and 3) poor (see Fig. 3). This
classification was done on the basis of recognition of QRScomplexes and R-R intervals and the amount of existing noise
and disturbances. A good signal contains almost no noise and
has an easily recognized QRS-complex. In addition, its P and
T waves are also visible [see (Fig. 3(a)]. A moderate signal has
a recognizable QRS-complex, but some noise or disturbances
exist between different complexes [see Fig. 3(b)]. A poor signal
is mainly unrecognizable as ECG, although some R peaks can
be seen as shown in Fig. 3(c).
As seen in Table I, only 3% of the collected ECG data were
good. However, the sum of good and moderate ECG data was
77% in walking, 63% in running, 83% in Nordic walking, and
75% in biking, amounting to an average of 69%.
ECG data were further divided into smaller groups based on
the age of the person. Table II shows that the best overall signal
quality (3% good, 71% moderate) was obtained in the group of
people under the age of 30. The signal quality tends to decrease
with increasing age, resulting in a clear change in the amount
of moderate and poor data.

However, the amount of good and moderate data is still as
high as 60% for persons older than 50.
Highest signal quality was obtained from the under 30-year
old when cycling (98% good or moderate quality) and the lowest
when they were jogging (67% good or moderate quality). For
the age group 30–50 years, the signal quality was highest when
Nordic walking and lowest when jogging (87% and 61% for
moderate and good signals, respectively). For people older than
50 years, the signal quality was best when cycling and lowest
when jogging (66% and 54% for moderate and good signals,
respectively).
B. Acceleration Data
Three-axis acceleration was measured from the chest with
VitalSens in all the tests and from the waist with DogIMU in 14
tests (walking: n = 14, running: n = 12, Nordic walking: n =
2). An example of DogIMU data of a whole test can be seen
in Fig. 4. A gradual increase in stress level manifests itself as
gradually increasing accelerations. The acceleration data were
used to identify disturbances in the ECG signal.
In addition, a comparison was conducted between the different accelerometers in different activities, because the location of
the device has an effect on measurements of body movement [5].
Thus, DogIMU on the waist measures different movements than
VitalSens on the chest. Table III shows that the orientation of
the sensor affects the average values recorded by the sensor.
In all the cases, the direction of acceleration is different in the
DogIMU and VitalSens sensors along the x- and z-axis.
Based on the findings shown in Table III, running is the type of
physical exercise that produces the highest acceleration values.

TAKALOKASTARI et al.: QUALITY OF THE WIRELESS ECG SIGNAL DURING PHYSICAL EXERCISE IN DIFFERENT AGE GROUPS

1061

Fig. 6. Effects of jumping on the ECG signal. Directions in the acceleration
curves: x = red, y = blue, z = green. x-axis: 25 mm/s.
Fig. 4. Acceleration graphics of a 20 min. Nordic walking stress test with
increasing exercise intensity of one of the test persons. Directions: x = red, y =
green, z = blue. Scale of x-axis is seconds and y-axis g.
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF ACCELERATION DATA IN DIFFERENT ACTIVITIES

Fig. 7. Effects of rubbing hands together on the ECG signal. (measured in the
EMC room) x-axis: 25 mm/s

Fig. 8. Effect on the ECG signal of turning one’s back towards the receiver.
(measured in the EMC room) x-axis: 25 mm/s.

Fig. 9. Effects of taking off a shirt on the ECG signal. (measured in the EMC
room). x-axis: 25 mm/s.
Fig. 5. Example of how acceleration affects the ECG signal. Directions in the
acceleration curves: x = red, y = blue, z = green. x-axis: 25 mm/s.

C. Effects of Movement in the ECG Signal
Visual studies of the ECG data show that growing accelerations, vertical movements in particular, produce disturbances
in the ECG signal. Fig. 5 shows how even small changes in
acceleration introduce extra noise in the ECG signal.
Effects of growing acceleration on the ECG signal become
highly visible in controlled movement tests. Fig. 6 shows how
a jump affects the ECG signal: one R wave disappears, while
some noise becomes visible.

Also movements without a remarkable acceleration signal
can have a marked influence on the ECG signal. Fig. 7 shows
an example of the effect of rubbing one’s hands together, while
Fig. 8 shows how the connection is broken, when the test person
turns his back toward the computer, thereby shadowing the radio
path. Fig. 9 shows how the ECG signal is destroyed, when the
test person takes off his shirt.
IV. DISCUSSION
We demonstrated that 69% of the ECG data recorded during
various exercise activities were of moderate or good quality. It

1062

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

turned out that age affects the data quality, and the test group
consisting of young people (<30 years) showed the best overall
signal quality (3% good, 71% moderate). On the other hand,
60% of the data obtained from people older than 50 years were
of good or moderate quality. This shows that wireless ECG
monitoring is applicable to people at different ages and to a
range of situations, including physical exercise or health status
monitoring outside of hospitals. However, use of the wireless
ECG in more critical medical applications is challenging due
to the requirement of higher quality data and reliability of the
wireless connection.
Radio propagation depends on the environment, including the
material of walls, ceilings, and floors [31]. Reflections help to
maintain a radio connection even when the direct radio path
is shadowed. Therefore, it was important to conduct measurements in an EMC room, where all reflections are attenuated and
external radio noise is blocked. In such conditions, we found
that the connection between the ECG device and receiver could
be blocked simply by the test person turning his back toward
the receiving computer (see Fig. 8).
Special attention needs to be paid to improving the signal
quality. Sweeney et al. [22] showed that the application of
differential accelerometers for motion detection instead of a
single accelerometer reduced the amount of motion artifactcontaminated data from 65.7% to 34.4%. They thus demonstrated the importance of simultaneously measuring movement
by different ECG electrodes. Mühlsteff et al. [11] demonstrated
a clear correlation between the acceleration of body movements
and the noise in the ECG data. Our observations are consistent with their results. Furthermore, improvements in the signal
quality (and classification results) can be achieved by using
adaptive filters [32]. However, Mühlsteff et al. [11] have also
shown that the difference in the ECG analysis and classification
using a peak detector, filter bank, or wavelet only amounts to
2%. Hence, we suggest that more attention should be paid on the
attachment of the ECG electrodes, especially among the elderly
people.
We identified regularly repeating QRS complexes and separated the essential parts (Q, R, S, T, and P waves) of each ECG
signal. To achieve a reliable classification between moderate and
poor signals, we used three different types of function. Sometimes, it is possible to find the R peaks even in a very noisy
signal, but such signals are not useful as ECG data, although
heart rate monitors utilize methods of this kind. Video recordings proved very helpful in checking events, when the ECG or
acceleration data indicated that something unusual occurred. To
improve the measurement method, video recordings could be
integrated into and synchronized with the ECG and acceleration
measurements. In the future, video recordings could also be replaced with displacement or other sensors and integrated into
the measurement setup.
Only a small proportion of seniors have fitness equipment
at home. They simply go out to a fitness center for physical
training or they go out for walking, jogging, or Nordic walking.
Therefore, it is important that they carry an ECG signal receiver
not only during the actual exercises, but also during followup periods at home. A smartphone would be an optimal access

point for signal transmission and, because it would be very close
to the ECG device, there would be no problem with the radio
connection. [13] Still, the problem of good long-term attachment
of sensors is an important research issue.
Monitoring of elderly persons with various cardiac syndromes
is one of the most promising applications for the wireless ECG.
Although ECG monitoring is already an important tool, the potential application range is extensive. Worldwide, the number of
elderly people is growing fast. From 2000 to 2050, the world’s
60+ population is expected to double from 11% to 22%, and the
number of people aged 60 years and over will increase from 0.6
to 2 billion [33]. With reasonable and adequate health monitoring tools and services, it should be possible to live longer in one’s
own home, which serves to significantly reduce the healthcare
expenditure of governments [34], [35]. Recently Worringham
et al. [13] developed a system where they used a smart phone
to transfer the ECG signals and GPS data to a server, enabling
the ECG trace, heart rate, walking speed, elapsed distance, and
patient location to be viewed in real time.
As smartphone health applications are invading the health
market, new solutions are being developed for measuring and
monitoring health-related parameters. A good example is using
the smartphone camera to detect vital signs. A finger on the
camera lens gives information of the heart rate, respiration rate,
and blood oxygen saturation [36], [37]. New technical innovations not only offer solutions to health problems, but also help
people make preventive life-style changes. Measuring ECG and
other biosignals during normal daily activities is an important,
growing segment of the personal healthcare market.
The whole health industry is moving from an institutional to a
personal mode [14], [38]. When the majority of users are at home
or at work, instead of lying in bed at the hospital or a care home,
wearability and seamlessness of devices becomes increasingly
important. Biosignals must be measured continuously, in any
conditions and places, and the data must be available for a realtime feedback. This leads toward wireless systems. [35] Special
attention must be paid on the usability of the ECG devices, health
monitoring systems, and user interfaces intended for elderly
people [39]–[41].
During the measurements, a number of differences between
the different exercise techniques were noted and considered.
Results proved most reliable when obtained from subjects, who
were comfortable with the speed of the exercise and their technique. The difference between comfortable and uncomfortable
running speed could be as extreme as going from good to poor
quality data.
It was noted that both subject-dependent and exterior factors
had an effect on the signal quality. Small things like arm or
chest movements, talking, singing, dressing, or turning away
from the receiver were found to have an influence on the ECG
signal during exercises, as seen in Figs. 6–9. According to the
tests performed in the EMC laboratory, many of these factors
had at least some significance in terms of disturbing the ECG
and accelerometer signals.
Important sources of error in the wireless ECG measurements
were large upper body movements that produce bursts of electricity from the muscles, long distances, and blockages between

TAKALOKASTARI et al.: QUALITY OF THE WIRELESS ECG SIGNAL DURING PHYSICAL EXERCISE IN DIFFERENT AGE GROUPS

the sender and the receiver as well as movements with a notable
effect on the acceleration signals, such as strong toe raises. Such
ECG devices as VitalSens that include an acceleration sensor allow the development of algorithms for motion error correction,
similar to those used in the blood oxygen saturation devices [42].
In a future vision, a multisensory measurement system warns
the data processing unit, if some period of an ECG signal is not
of good quality and should be excluded from analysis.
V. CONCLUSION
Considering data quality plus the positive and negative features of wirelessness, such as freedom of movements and data
transmission problems, wireless ECG monitoring is a good candidate for monitoring health-related issues in future healthcare
and fitness applications, including home healthcare and wellness services. We show that 69% of data are at least of moderate
quality for people aged 16 to 70 doing different activities. However, using wireless devices in more critical medical applications
is challenging due to the tighter requirements of the data quality and reliability of the wireless connection. In order to make
outdoors measurements, a portable access point for sensor data
may be necessary.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Sports Clinic of the
Oulu Deaconess Institute and, especially, H. Kaikkonen and R.
Korpelainen, who arranged the tests with their fitness customers
and gave us all the facilities and time needed for the practical
part of data collection.
REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Fogoros. (2013), “Holter monitors and event recorders—
Ambulatory monitoring in evaluating heart rhythm problems,” in
About.com Guide, [Online] Available: http://heartdisease.about.com/cs/
arrhythmias/a/holter.htm
[2] R. M. Fogoros. (2013), “The cardiac stress test—Exercise testing for the
heart,” in About.com Guide, [Online] Available: http://heartdisease.about.
com/cs/cardiactests/a/stress.htm,
[3] W. F. Ganong, Review of Medical Physiology, 22nd ed. New York, NY,
USA: McGraw-Hill, 2005, pp. 547–576.
[4] W. Y. Chung, “Ubiquitous healthcare system based on a wireless sensor network,” in Proc. Acta Universitatis Ouluensis, C Technica, Oulu,
Finland, 2009, vol. 344, p. 128.
[5] M. Ermes, J. Pärkkä, J. Mäntyjärvi, and I. Korhonen, “Detection of daily
activities and sports with wearable sensors in controlled and uncontrolled
conditions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 20–26,
Jan. 2008.
[6] H. Sugano, S. Hara, T. Tsujioka, S. Nakajima, K. Takeuchi, and
H. Nakamura, “Continuous ECG data gathering by a wireless vital
sensor—Evaluation of its sensing and transmission capabilities,” in Proc.
IEEE 11th Int. Symp. Spread Spectrum Techn. Appl., Taichung, Taiwan,
2010, pp. 98–102.
[7] H. Sugano, T. Tsujioka, T. Inoue, S. Nakajima, S. Hara, H. Nakamura,
and K. Takeuchi, “Clinical tests and evaluations of a wireless ECG sensor
for realization of ubiquitous health care systems,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010,
pp. 2030–2033.
[8] N. Dagres, H. Kottkamp, C. Piorkowski, S. Weis, A. Arya, P. Sommer,
K. Bode, J. Gerds-Li, D. Kremastinos, and G. Hindricks, “Influence of the
duration of Holter monitoring on the detection of arrhythmia recurrences
after catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation Implications for patient followup,” Int. J. Cardiol., vol. 139, no. 3, pp. 305–306, 2010.

1063

[9] R. Bouhenguel, I. Mahgoub, and M. Ilyas, “An energy efficient model
for monitoring and detecting atrial fibrillation in wearable computing,”
presented at the 7th Int. Conf. Body Area Netw., Oslo, Norway, 2012.
[10] T. Vuorela, V. P. Seppä, J. Vanhala, and J. Hyttinen, “Design and implementation of a portable long-term physiological signal recorder,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 718–725, May
2010.
[11] J. Mühlsteff, O. Such, R. Schmidt, M. Perkuhn, H. Reiter, J. Lauter,
J. Thijs, G. Münsch, and M. Harris, “Wearable approach for continuous
ECG – and activity patient-monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc. Conf., 2004, vol. 3, pp. 2184–2187.
[12] H. J. Baek, G. S. Chung, K. K. Kim, and K. S. Park, “A smart health
monitoring chair for nonintrusive measurement of biological signals,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 150–158, Jan. 2012.
[13] C. Worringham, A. Rojek, and I. Stewart, “Development and feasibility
of a smartphone, ECG and GPS based system for remotely monitoring
exercise in cardiac rehabilitation,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 2, e14669,
2011.
[14] A. Szczepanski, K. Saeed, A. Riener, and A. Ferscha, “Wearable computers: A study on ECG signal changes during everyday activities,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Biometrics Kansei Eng., 2011, pp. 169–174.
[15] S. Korsakas, J. Lauznis, A. Vainoras, Z. Markovitch, L. Gargasas,
I. Markovitcha, Z. Navickas, and R. Ruseckas, “The mobile ECG and
motion activity monitoring system for home care patients,” Comput. Cardiol., vol. 33, pp. 833–836, 2006.
[16] P. K. Khanna, K. V. Balasubramanian, S. K. Dham, K. Rai, and
R. S. Hoon, “Effect of positive acceleration (+gz) on electrocardiogram
of subjects with vasoregulatory abnormality,” Br. Heart J., vol. 39, no. 3,
pp. 317–322, 1977.
[17] J. Ottenbacher, M. Kirst, L. Jatoba, M. Huflejt, U. Grossmann, and
W. Stork, “Reliable motion artifact detection for ECG monitoring systems with dry electrodes,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2008, pp. 1695–1698.
[18] T. Kozaki, S. Nakajima, T. Tsujioka, T. Inoue, H. Nakamura, K. Takeuchi,
and S. Hara, “Estimation of human movements from body acceleration
monitoring for ubiquitous health care,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. Technol., 2010, vol. 1, pp. 430–435.
[19] E. Sardini and M. Serpelloni, “Instrumented wearable belt for wireless
health monitoring,” Procedia Eng., vol. 5, pp. 580–583, 2010.
[20] J. Healey and B. Logan, “Wearable wellness monitoring using ECG and
accelerometer data,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Symp. Wearable Comput.,
2005, pp. 220–221.
[21] Y. Kishimoto, Y. Kutsuna, and K. Oguri, “Detecting motion artifact ECG
noise during sleeping by means of a tri-axis accelerometer,” in Proc. IEEE
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol., 2007, pp. 2669–2672.
[22] K. Sweeney, S. McLoone, and T. Ward, “A simple bio-signals quality
measure for in-home monitoring,” in Proc. 7th IASTED Int. Conf. Biomed.
Eng., BioMED 1, 2010, pp. 96–102.
[23] Y. Liu, “Reduction of skin stretch induced motion artifacts in electrocardiogram monitoring using adaptive filtering,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept.
Mechanical Eng., University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, 2007.
[24] VitalSens Wireless Platform, by InteleSens. Available: http://www.
intelesens.com/pdf/vitalsensoem.pdf
[25] www.polar.com/support_files/en/C225742500419A8A42256A67003236
25/179291 Manual S810 GBR A.pdf
[26] M. Kingsley, M. J. Lewis, and R. E. Marson, “Comparison of Polar S810
and an ambulatory ECG system for RR interval measurement during
progressive exercise,” Int. J. Sports Med., vol. 26, pp. 39–44, 2005.
[27] J. Pan and W. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[28] V. Afonso, W. Tompkins, T. Nguyen, and S. Luo, “ECG beat detection
using filter banks,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 192–202,
Feb. 1999.
[29] N. Yoder. (2013), PeakFinder – Quickly finds local maxima (peaks)
or minima (valleys) in a noisy signal, [Online] Available: http://www.
mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/25500-peakfinder
[30] D. Hayn, B. Jammerbund, and G. Schreier, “ECG quality assessment for
patient empowerment in mHealth applications,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol.
Conf., 2011, pp. 353–356.
[31] W. K. Tam and V. N. Tran, “Propagation modeling for indoor wireless
communication,” Electron. Commun. Eng. J., vol. 7, pp. 221–228, Oct.
1995.
[32] A. Gautam, Y.-D. Lee, and W.-Y. Chung, “Noise cancellation of electrocardiogram signal measured by wearable USN node,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Multisensor Fusion Integr. Intell. Syst., 2008, pp. 154–157.

1064

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

[33] World Health Day – Ageing and health, WHO, 2012. Available:
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2012/WHO_DCO_WHD_2012.1_eng.pdf
[34] D.-H. Shih, H. Chiang, B. Lin, and S. Lin, “An embedded mobile ECG
reasoning system for elderly patients,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 854–865, May 2010.
[35] G. Benelli, G. L. Daino, A. Pozzebon, R. Sesto, and R. Zambon, “Health
monitoring and wellness for all, a multichannel approach through innovative interfaces and systems,” presented at the 7th Int. Conf. Body Area
Netw., Oslo, Norway, 2012.
[36] C. G. Scully, “Physiological parameter monitoring from optical recordings
with a mobile phone,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 303–
306, Feb. 2012.
[37] M. Rose, “Smartphones move from social media to social medicine,”
Photonics Spectra, vol. 47, pp. 68–73, Jan. 2013.
[38] E. Alasaarela, R. Neman, S. DeMello, N. S. Oliver, and M. Miyazaki,
“Wireless for managing healthcare—The Wirhe framework,” Proc. Int. J.
Healthcare Del. Reform Initiatives, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 52–73, 2009.
[39] J. Merilahti, J. Pärkkä, K. Antila, P. Paavilainen, E. Mattila, E. Malm,
A. Saarinen, and I. Korhonen, “Compliance and technical feasibility of
long-term health monitoring with wearable and ambient technologies,” J.
Telemed. Telecare, vol. 15, pp. 302–309, 2009.
[40] H. Ehmen, M. Haesner, I. Steinke, M. Dorn, M. Gövercin, and
E. Steinhagen-Thiessen, “Comparison of four different mobile devices
for measuring heart rate and ECG with respect to aspects of usability and
acceptance by older people,” Appl. Ergonomics, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 582–
587, 2012.
[41] A. Lorenz and R. Oppermann, “Mobile health monitoring for the elderly:
Designing for diversity,” Pervasive Mobile Comput., vol. 5, pp. 478–495,
2009.
[42] A. Jubran, “Pulse oximetry – Review,” Critical Care, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 11–
17, 1999.

Tiina Takalokastari received the M.Sc. degree in
health technology from the University of Oulu, Faculty of Medicine, Oulu, Finland in 2012.

Esko Alasaarela received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of
Oulu, Oulu, Finland, in 1975 and 1983, respectively.
He is currently a Professor of Health and Wellness
Measuring in the University of Oulu. He also works
regularly as a Visiting Professor in Dongseo University, Busan, Korea. In addition, he is a founding partner in ZEF Solutions Ltd. (www.zefsolutions.com)
and Domuset Ltd. (www.domuset.com), innovative
Internet service companies in Finland. Formerly, he
has also served as the Research Director in the University of Jyvaskyla, the Managing Director of Moistic Ltd., High Technology
Center Ltd. His research interests include biomedical engineering including
wireless technologies.
Dr. Alasaarela is a member of the Finnish Association of Biomedical Engineering and Physics (from 1990).

Matti Kinnunen received the M.Sc. (Tech) and D.Sc.
(Tech.) degrees in electrical engineering from the
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, in 2002 and 2006,
respectively.
He is currently a Senior Research Fellow at the
University of Oulu. His research interests include sensors and measurement techniques as well as optical
noninvasive measurement techniques for biomedical
applications.
Dr. Kinnunen is a board member of Finnish Optical Society.

Timo Jämsä received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Faculty of Technology, and
Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, in 1981 and 1998,
respectively.
He has been a Professor in Medical Technology at
the University of Oulu, since 2001. He has published
more than 90 refereed journal papers. His research interests include biomechanics, medical imaging, physical activity monitoring, eHealth, and technologies
for ambient assisted living.
Dr. Jämsä was the President of the Finnish Society for Medical Physics and
Medical Engineering in 2004–2007. He has served in the General Council of
European Alliance of Medical and Biological Engineering and Science since
2006. He is a member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. He is also a member of the European Society for Biomechanics. He received
the Clinical Biomechanics Award 2004, awarded by the European Society of
Biomechanics.

