IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

1453

Prediction of Periventricular Leukomalacia
Occurrence in Neonates After Heart Surgery
Ali Jalali, Erin M. Buckley, Jennifer M. Lynch, Peter J. Schwab, Daniel J. Licht, and C. Nataraj

Abstract—This paper is concerned with predicting the occurrence of periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) using vital and blood
gas data which are collected over a period of 12 h after the neonatal cardiac surgery. A data mining approach has been employed
to generate a set of rules for classification of subjects as healthy or
PVL affected. In view of the fact that blood gas and vital data have
different sampling rates, in this study we have divided the data
into two categories: 1) high resolution (vital), and 2) low resolution
(blood gas), and designed a separate classifier based on each data
category. The developed algorithm is composed of several stages;
first, a feature pool has been extracted from each data category
and the extracted features have been ranked based on the data reliability and their mutual information content with the output. An
optimal feature subset with the highest discriminative capability
has been formed using simultaneous maximization of the class separability measure and mutual information of a set. Two separate
decision trees (DTs) have been developed for the classification purpose and more importantly to discover hidden relationships that
exist among the data to help us better understand PVL pathophysiology. The DT result shows that high amplitude 20 min variations
and low sample entropy in the vital data and the defined out of
range index as well as maximum rate of change in blood gas data
are important factors for PVL prediction. Low sample entropy
represents lack of variability in hemodynamic measurement, and
constant blood pressure with small fluctuations is an important indicator of PVL occurrence. Finally, using the different time frames
of data collection, we show that the first 6 h of data contain sufficient information for PVL occurrence prediction.
Index Terms—Classification, data mining, decision tree (DT),
feature extraction, feature ranking, mutual information, periventricular leukomalacia (PVL).

I. INTRODUCTION
EWBORNS with congenital heart disease (CHD) are at
high risk for different types of brain injury [1]–[3]. According to [4], patients with CHD have increased rates of neurodevelopmental impairments. A study by Miller et al. [5]

N

Manuscript received April 17, 2013; revised August 6, 2013; accepted
September 30, 2013. Date of publication October 9, 2013; date of current
version June 30, 2014.
A. Jalali and C. Nataraj are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Villanova University, Villanova, PA 19085 USA (e-mail: ali.jalali@villanova.
edu; nataraj@villanova.edu).
E. M. Buckley is with the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, Charlestown, MA 02129 USA (e-mail: ebuckle2@gmail.com).
J. M. Lynch is with the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
USA (e-mail: jlynch1286@gmail.com).
P. J. Schwab and D. J. Licht are with the Neurovascular Imaging Lab, Division of Child Neurology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA
19140 USA (e-mail: SchwabP@email.chop.edu; licht@email.chop.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2285011

showed that preterm newborns with CHD have widespread brain
abnormalities before they undergo cardiac surgery.
Periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) is a particular type of
brain injury that affects mostly premature infants. The condition
occurs when immature cells in the white matter are exposed
to low oxygen levels and low blood flow. The injury occurs
most frequently in an arterial watershed zone that exists at the
border of the lateral ventricles of the brain. The injury results
in scarring, or gliosis, in the white matter and disruption of
neuronal networks [6]. When severe, affected individuals exhibit
motor control problems (cerebral palsy) or other developmental
delays or epilepsy later in life [7], [8].
In order to identify and quantify PVL after neonatal heart
surgery, PVL was defined as punctate periventricular white matter lesions associated with T1 hyperintensity, with or without
restriction of water diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging [9].
Furthermore, PVL lesions were manually segmented using ITKSNAP Q8. User-guided 3-D active contour segmentation of
anatomic structures significantly improved efficiency and reliability [10]. PVL volumes were expressed in cubic millimeters.
Research has shown a high incidence of PVL both before
and after cardiac surgery in full-term neonates with CHD
[11]–[13]. Current observations suggest that hypoplastic left
heart syndrome (HLHS) and transposition of great arteries
(TGA) are two CHDs which have high correlation with occurrence of the PVL. Licht et al. [14] showed that, before surgery,
term infants with HLHS and transposition of the great arteries
have brains that are smaller and structurally less mature than
expected for full-term infants. They suggested that brain immaturity may increase the occurrence probability of PVL in the
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative periods.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in clinical research
to aim to understand the progression and pathology of PVL, to
develop protocols for the prevention of PVL development and
to examine the trends in outcomes of individuals with PVL [15],
[16].
Results of a study by Petit et al. [17] showed that preoperative
brain injury in neonates with transposition of the great arteries is
associated with hypoxemia and longer time to surgery. The study
of the relationship between preoperative cerebral blood flow
and preoperative neurologic conditions has been carried out by
Licht et al. [18]. Their findings indicated that the low cerebral
blood flow values were associated with PVL. Deficiency in
oxygen concentrations in the blood and low carbon dioxide
concentrations (PCO2 ) have also been suggested as important
factors indicating PVL occurrence [19].
Despite advancement in research in the field of PVL, there
are no treatments currently prescribed for PVL; furthermore,

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1454

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

clinical prediction of PVL occurrence almost always has low
accuracy [20]. This is due to fact that the origin of PVL and
its physiology still remain to be clearly understood. Consequently, all treatments administered are in response to secondary
pathologies, such as seizures, that develop as a consequence of
the PVL [21]–[23].
A computer-based decision making tool, also referred to as
an intelligent patient monitoring (IPM) tool or as computeraided diagnostics or clinical decision making systems, will help
the care-givers aggregate different types of physiological data
and discover the hidden knowledge or patterns in the data to
quickly make the correct decision [24]–[28]. Most of the currently used IPM tools employ data-driven techniques with data
collected from an experiment. These techniques analyze the collected data using statistical or computational intelligence (CI)
algorithms to arrive at a conclusion on the state of health of the
patient. The IPM is comprised of a knowledge base data mining
approach as well as patient-specific information to provide support for decision making in patient care. A systematic review by
Garg et al. [29], [30] of a hundred studies concluded that IPM
improved practitioner performance in 64% of the studies and
improved patient outcomes in 13% of the studies.
CI techniques are potentially powerful tools for classification
and prediction and are attracting increasingly more attention in
the field of clinical decision making [19], [24], [31]–[38]. The
CI techniques include data-mining algorithms and techniques
like decision tree (DT) [37], [39], neural networks [19], support
vector machine [35], [36], [40], adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference
system [34], [41], etc. Among the many different CI techniques,
we have chosen DT for the task of PVL prediction in this study.
The main advantages of DT-based approach that makes it a
perfect fit for this study are the ability to discover hidden patterns
in the data and generation of easily interpretable classification
rules.
DT algorithms give reliable and effective results that provide high-classification accuracy with a simple representation
of gathered knowledge, and are especially appropriate to support
decision-making processes in medicine.
In this study, we investigate how DT can help the clinicians
to predict the PVL occurrence after the neonatal heart surgery.
By constructing a DT and extracting classification rules, the
clinicians will be able to identify predictive factors for the occurrence of the PVL. As a result the goal in this paper is to
classify patients with PVL from patients showing no sign of
PVL after heart surgery. These rules will enable better management of the patient targeting the reduction of events, as well as,
reduction of the cost of therapy, due to the expected restriction
of interventions in necessary cases only.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data Collection
Vital sign data from 44 neonates were collected according to
a prespecified protocol at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). Subjects of this study were limited to two heart
diagnoses; HLHS and TGA, accounting for the fact that these
two diseases are considered to have the highest likelihood of

TABLE I
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE COLLECTED DATA

TABLE II
COLLECTED VITAL AND BLOOD GAS DATA AT CHOP WITH THEIR RELIABILITY

PVL occurrence as their postoperative effect. Demographic data
collected includes sex, type of disease (HLHS or TGA), cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) duration in minutes, aorta crossclamp time in minutes, and deep hypothermic circulatory arrest
(DHCA) duration in minutes. Clinical and demographic characteristics of the study cohort are shown in Table I.
For each patient, vital sign data as well as blood gas measurements were collected for a 12-h period immediately after
surgery. The sampling time for the vital data varies both interand intrapatient from 4 to 17 s. The blood gas data were also
collected at irregular sampling intervals, and varying from 20
to 90 min. Table II lists the collected hemodynamic variables
as well as their respective measurement reliability. Reliability
number is qualitatively derived from expert opinions and knowledge of the test. Data that were captured directly from the patient
(i.e., vital sign data) was highly reliable, while data that were
calculated such as HCO3 was considered to be less reliable.
B. Algorithm Design
Next, we discuss the steps involved with the designed algorithm for the task of data classification and rule extraction. In
Fig. 1, we provided a schematic overview of the proposed algorithm. As shown, the algorithm consists of three main steps:
feature extraction, feature ranking, and classifier design. First,
the patient data were collected at the hospital and were used
to form the pool of features. A modified version of the mutual
information method that takes into account the reliability of the
collected data was then used for ranking the extracted features
in the feature pool. After forming the ordered feature set, the optimal feature subset that encapsulates the most critical features
was selected by maximizing the class separability measure. The

JALALI et al.: PREDICTION OF PERIVENTRICULAR LEUKOMALACIA OCCURRENCE IN NEONATES AFTER HEART SURGERY

1455

defined as follows:
mn (x) = E{(x − μ)n }

Fig. 1.

Schematic of the proposed algorithm.
TABLE III
EXTRACTED FEATURES FROM VITAL AND BLOOD GAS DATA

(1)

where, n is the order, μ is the mean value of the data, and E
is the expected value. Skewness is an indicator of probability
density function asymmetry and kurtosis is an indicator of the
invariability of a signal. Admission value is the first value of
the recorded blood gas data. Our preliminary results [42] which
were carried out using blood gas data collected every four hours
showed the importance of admission recordings in PVL occurrence prediction.
It is known that hemodynamic variables fluctuate at different
time scales consisting of seconds, minutes, hours, and possibly, days. These variations are presumably caused by different
regulatory mechanisms. It is believed that these mechanisms
are both affected by, and affect the PVL occurrence. In order
to try to uncover regulatory mechanisms that are most actively
involved with the occurrence of PVL, we use the continuous
wavelet transform (CWT). We calculate the energy of the CWT
coefficients of vital data at 1-min, 20-min, and 2-h time scales.
These time scales are selected in the way that represent the
physiological phenomena that are occurring in different time
scales. Since the sampling rate for data collection varies both
in interpatient and intrapatient, we first up-sample the data to
the sampling rate of 1 s using linear interpolation, calculate the
CWT coefficients at the desired time scales and then calculate
the energy of the signal at each scale.
The CWT of signal x(t) is defined as follows:


 ∞
t−b
1
x(t)ψ ∗
dt
(2)
Xω (a, b) = 
a
|a| −∞
where, a is the time scale, b is the transitional value, and ψ ∗ is
the complex conjugate of the mother wavelet function ψ. In this
study, the Morlet function is used as a mother wavelet function;
it should be noted that the Morlet function is often used in the
literature in case of nonstationary signals [43]. The energy of
the CWT at scale a is calculated as follows:

optimal feature subset was reduced in size compared to the original feature set; however, by maximizing the class separability
measure, this subset can be expected to result in a higher accuracy in the final prediction. The selected features were then fed
to the DT.
C. Feature Extraction
Since the resolution of the collected data is different for blood
gas data and the vital data, we divide them into two categories of
high resolution (vital data) and low resolution (blood gas data).
Consequently two different feature pools will be developed for
each category of the data. Table III shows the extracted features
from different categories of the data.
The minimum and maximum values of the data are important
features for both vital and blood gas data, because they could potentially reveal mechanisms that are triggered in the body when
a hemodynamic variable passes a certain threshold. Skewness
and kurtosis are third- and forth-order statistical moments of a
random variable. Statistical moments of a random variable x are

E(a) =

N


|Xω (a, i)|2 .

(3)

i=1

The Morlet function is defined as follows:
Ψk (t) = Ck π −0.25 e−0.5t (eik t − e−0.5k )
2

2

(4)

where, k allows a tradeoff between time and frequency resolutions. Sample entropy (SampEn) is a measure of signal complexity and is the negative natural logarithm of the conditional
probability of having a signal window with length N , having
repeated itself within a tolerance r for m points, will also repeat itself for m + 1 points, without allowing self-matches [44].
SampEn is used in the literature to evaluate the cyclic behavior
of heart rate variability and blood pressure variability [45], [46].
The collected blood gas data have very low resolution and
are discontinuous. To overcome this limitation, and after confirmation by clinicians, we assumed that there are no sharp,
unexpected variations in the data between samples. Hence, it
is reasonable to linearly interpolate the blood gas data. The

1456

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

TABLE IV
NORMAL RANGE OF BLOOD GAS DATA

function. The mutual information is then defined as
 
p(xi , wk )
p(xi , wk ) log
I(xi ; wk ) =
p(xi )p(wk )

(6)

i∈X k ∈{±1}

where, wk represents the classes and p(xi , wk ) is the joint probability distribution of xi and wk . To take into account the reliability of the collected data and to bolster the effect of the
data with high reliability, we modified the mutual information
technique by inserting coefficient of reliability into (6). The
modified mutual information of feature xi and class wk is hence
calculated as follows:
Im (xi ; wk ) = cR I(xi ; wk )

(7)

where, cR is a measure of the reliability of the collected data. The
ordered feature set is not the best feature set, because we have
not considered the mutual information between the features. To
solve this problem, we use the concept of mutual information
of a set, which is defined as follows:

1 
1
Im (xi ; wk ) −
I(xi ; xj )
I(S; wk ) =
2
|S|
|S − 1|
x i ∈S

x i ,x j ∈S

(8)
where, |S| is size of the set S, I(S; wk ) is mutual information
of set S and class wk , and I(xi ; xj ) is mutual information of
features, xi and xj . By finding the set Sopt that maximizes (8),
the algorithm is able to form the best ordered feature set. In
this paper, we use the algorithm proposed by Kappaganthu and
Nataraj [48] to find the Sopt .
Fig. 2. Plot of features extracted from a sample blood gas measurement. The
blue area is the ORI index of the PaCO2 for a sample patient.

weighted mean of blood gas data takes into the account the duration of time that the patient stays at a specific measurement.
This feature is clinically more significant than the mean value of
the data, because, from a clinical point of view the time duration
of a blood gas reading is as important as its amplitude.
Time weighted mean is calculated as follows:
m
ti xi
(5)
Mw (x) = i=1
m
i=1 ti
where, m is the number of measurements and x is the measured
variable.
In addition, we define out of range index (ORI) as a new
feature in this paper. ORI is a measure of both amplitude difference of a measurement within its normal range and the time that
the measurement spent out of normal range. The normal range
limits of the collected blood gas data are presented in Table IV
[47]. Fig. 2 shows the defined feature for a data sample.
D. Feature Ranking
In this paper, we apply the concept of mutual information to
rank the features. Mutual information of two random variables
is defined as a measure of their mutual dependence. Let xi be the
ith feature and p(xi ) be its corresponding probability density

E. Class Separability Measure
Now that the optimal feature vector have been formed, the
next step is to find a subset of the feature matrix that has the
maximum discriminative capacity. The subset with the highest
discriminative capacity is the subset that will result in the highest
classification accuracy. The class separability is a measure that
has been defined as a measure of divergence between classes
using the feature subset xs
 ∞
p(xs |w1 )
dxs
d=
(p(xs |w1 ) − p(xs |w2 ))ln
(9)
p(xs |w2 )
−∞
where p(xs |wi ) is the conditional probability of xs with respect
to wi . An optimal feature subset is the feature subset that maximizes the class separability and has a reduced dimensionality.
In this part, the algorithm to extract the optimal feature set
using the class separability measure is explained. We intend to
extract an optimal subset Sopt from the ordered feature set S
obtained in the previous stages. The criterion for optimization
is to achieve the maximum class separability measure using as
few features as possible. We simply start with an empty feature
set S∅ and at each step we add a feature to the set and measure
the class separability between the two classes that we have. The
process will stop when the class separability index reaches its
maximum. The algorithm for this is as follows:
1) Set S0 = ∅.
2) Initialize i = 1 and Si = S(1).
3) Start loop.

JALALI et al.: PREDICTION OF PERIVENTRICULAR LEUKOMALACIA OCCURRENCE IN NEONATES AFTER HEART SURGERY

4) Measure class separability between the two classes (di )
using (9).
5) If Si = S Stop Loop and proceed to step 12, else continue.
6) i = i + 1.
7) Si = Si ∩ Si+1 .
8) Measure class separability for the Si .
9) If di > di−1 .
10) Return i and Stop the loop.
11) Else continue.
12) End loop.
13) Obtain Sopt as Si .

1457

TABLE V
OPTIMAL SUBSETS OF THE FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM VITAL AND BLOOD
GAS DATA WHICH ARE USED FOR DESIGNING THE CLASSIFIERS

F. Classifier Design
In this part of the algorithm, a machine-learning type classifier
is designed to classify PVL patients from healthy subjects. DT
has been selected as the classifier. The DT algorithm uses a recursive partitioning technique to construct a tree-based structure
for generating a set of ”if-then-else” rules in order to predict the
desired event. Unlike almost all other techniques in data mining
that construct a gray box model for classification, DT produces
a very easy to interpret model. This characteristic is very useful in clinical settings because clinicians are not only interested
in the final prediction, but are also interested in finding injury
pathways for possible interventions to prevent the injury. The
DT induction consists of two phases: construction and pruning.
The Gini index has been used as splitting criterion for tree construction and Fisher’s exact test has been used for pruning the
tree [49]. Moreover, the output data type has been chosen as
categorical instead of as a numerical variable since it resulted in
a more robust classification. The p-value threshold for pruning
has been set to 0.05.
III. RESULTS
Features that are mentioned in Table III have been extracted
from the data and two separate feature pool, one for vital data
and one for blood gas data, have been formed. The features have
been ranked using the modified mutual information algorithm,
the optimal feature set with maximized mutual information of
set have been found and dimension of the feature pools have
been reduced using the class separability measure. Table V lists
the optimal feature subsets for both vital and blood gas data.
Table V shows that the subset of 12 features out of 36 features
extracted from the vital data will result in highest classification
accuracy. For vital data, this table demonstrates that the energy
of the wavelet coefficients, SampEn, and kurtosis are the most
important features for PVL occurrence prediction. This table
also shows that compared to other vital data, RAP contains
the least amount of information for PVL occurrence prediction.
Regarding the blood gas data, the table shows that the subset
of 19 features out of 80 features extracted from the blood gas
data will result in the highest classification accuracy. This table
highlights the rule of the blood partial pressures of O2 and
CO2 in occurrence of PVL after the neonatal cardiac surgery.
Moreover, it can be seen from Table V that the defined blood
gas features, ORI, and maximum rate of change in the upper
and lower ranges are significant PVL predictors.

Fig. 3. DT shows that high amplitude 20 min variations and low SampEn in
the data are important factor for prediction of PVL.

After deriving the optimal feature sets for both vital and blood
gas data, a DT classifier has been generated for each category
of the data. A DT that has been formed based on the vital data
to predict the occurrence of the PVL is represented in Fig. 3.
Investigating the DT shows that generally high amplitude 20 min
variations and low SampEn in the data are important factors
for the prediction of PVL. Low SampEn represents lack of
variability in hemodynamic measurement, and constant blood
pressure with small fluctuations is an important indicator of
PVL occurrence.
In addition, a DT based on the features derived from blood
gas data has been generated and is shown in Fig. 4. Results show
that among all blood gas measurements, CO2 concentration in

1458

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

TABLE VI
PREDICTION ACCURACY FOR DIFFERENT LENGTH OF DATA

Fig. 4. DT constructed based on optimal features set derived from blood gas
data. Results show that among all blood gas measurements, CO2 concentration
in blood, and ionized Potassium, Calcium and Sodium are the most valuable
parameters for predicting PVL.

prediction of the PVL. To the best of our knowledge, there has
been no study carried out so far to find the optimum length of
time needed for data collection after the neonatal heart surgery
to be able to achieve positive PVL prediction. This could help
to target time of intervention to prevent PVL, reducing injury,
and reducing healthcare cost. To this end, we trained and tested
the DT with first 2, 4, 6, and 8 h of the data and we compared
the prediction results with the complete data. Table VI shows
that 6 h of the data contains sufficient information for reliable
PVL prediction. Another way to interpret this result is that after
6 h the opportunity to prevent PVL will decrease significantly.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Fig. 5.

ROC curve (plot of true positive rate versus false positive rate).

blood, and ionized Potassium, Calcium, Sodium, and Bicarbonate HCO3 are the most valuable parameters for predicting PVL.
This result further validates our previous suggestion presented
in [42] which highlighted the role of blood CO2 concentration as
an important factor in the PVL prediction. This result also shows
the importance of the rate of change in blood gas data as well as
the defined ORI as indicators of hemodynamic instability which
could lead to PVL.
The classification accuracy of the designed classifier is shown
using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. The
higher area under the curve shows the higher classification accuracy. The plot shows high accuracy in classification although,
the relatively small size of the data set makes it impossible to
have a smooth curve.
In the final step, by using all of the extracted features from
both vital data and blood gas data, we would like to predict the
length of a data collection that would be sufficient for timely

In the clinical context, the area under the physiological measurement curve has been considered a more valuable predictor
of the state of patients than extreme values. The results of this
study show that this is a valid argument also in the case of PVL
prediction.
The results of formulating a DT from vital data put emphasis
on stationarity of both HR and blood pressures as strong predictors of PVL. Moreover, the maximum and minimum values
of the rate of change of PaCO2 are the most important parameters from the blood gas data. One of the main objectives of
this study is to increase PVL prediction accuracy in order to
help clinicians to plan possible treatments in a timely manner to
avoid occurrence of the PVL. Our results show that 6 h of the
data contains sufficient information for reliable PVL prediction.
This in fact is a very important result due to the fact that it shows
a possible time frame for physiological interventions. It should
be noted however that these results are preliminary and we are
in the process of collecting additional patient data to further
validate them.
While the findings of this study seem to be very interesting
and important, it still needs explanation from a physiological
point of view. Hence, the next step of the current study is to
investigate the physiological reasons behind these findings. For
example, questions that need investigating include: how does
decreased uncertainty in MAP result in the PVL occurrence,
what is the relationship between PVL and HR, and how does
the CO2 affect the PVL occurrence. Furthermore, additional data
are needed to prove the robustness of the developed algorithm
to measurement noise and application to special cases.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Wernovsky, A. J. Shillingford, and J. W. Gaynor, “Central nervous
system outcomes in children with complex congenital heart disease,”
Curr. Opin. Cardiol., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 94–99, 2005.

JALALI et al.: PREDICTION OF PERIVENTRICULAR LEUKOMALACIA OCCURRENCE IN NEONATES AFTER HEART SURGERY

[2] J. A. Ballweg, G. Wernovsky, and J. W. Gaynor, “Neurodevelopmental outcomes following congenital heart surgery,” Pediatr. Cardiology,
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 126–133, 2007.
[3] S. Blackburn, “Central nervous system vulnerabilities in preterm infants,
Part II,” J. Perinat. Neonatal Nurs., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 108–110, 2009.
[4] A. N. Massaro, M. El-Dib, P. Glass, and H. Aly, “Factors associated with
adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes in infants with congenital heart
disease,” Brain Development, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 437–446, 2008.
[5] S. P. Miller, P. S. McQuillen, S. Hamrick, D. Xu, D. V. Glidden,
N. Charlton, T. Karl, A. Azakie, D. M. Ferriero, A. J. Barkovich, and
D. B. Vigneron, “Abnormal brain development in newborns with congenital heart disease,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 357, no. 19, pp. 1928–1938,
2007.
[6] K. K. Galli, R. A. Zimmerman, G. P. Jarvik, G. Wernovsky,
M. K. Kuypers, R. R. Clancy, L. M. Montenegro, W. T. Mahle,
M. F. Newman, A. M. Saunders, S. C. Nicolson, T. L. Spray, and
J. W. Gaynor, “Periventricular leukomalacia is common after neonatal
cardiac surgery,” J. Thoracic Cardiovasc. Surg., vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 692–
704, 2004.
[7] J. J. Volpe, Neurology of the Newborn, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Saunders, 2001.
[8] J. J. Volpe, “Cerebral white matter injury of the premature infant-more
common than you think,” Pediatrics, vol. 112, pp. 176–180, 2003.
[9] P. S. McQuillen, S. E. G. Hamrick, M. J. Perez, A. J. Barkovich,
D. V. Glidden, T. R. Karl, D. Teitel, and S. P. Miller, “Balloon atrial septostomy is associated with preoperative stroke in neonates with transposition of the great arteries,” Circulation, vol. 113, no. 2, pp. 280–285,
2006.
[10] P. A. Yushkevich, J. Piven, H. C. Hazlett, R. G. Smith, S. Ho, J. C. Gee,
and G. Gerig, “User-guided 3d active contour segmentation of anatomical
structures: Significantly improved efficiency and reliability,” Neuroimage,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1116–1128, 2006.
[11] J. W. Gaynor, “Periventricular leukomalacia following neonatal and infant
cardiac surgery,” Semin. Thoracic Cardiovasc. Surg.: Pediatr. Cardiac
Surg. Annu., vol. 7, pp. 133–140, 2004.
[12] P. S. McQuillen, D. A. Goff, and D. J. Licht, “Effects of congenital heart
disease on brain development,” Progr. Pediatr. Cardiol., vol. 29, no. 2,
pp. 79–85, 2010.
[13] P. S. McQuillen and S. P. Miller, “Congenital heart disease and brain
development,” Ann. New York Acad. Sci., vol. 1184, pp. 68–86, 2010.
[14] D. J. Licht, D. M. Shera, R. R. Clancy, G. Wernovsky, L. M. Montenegro,
S. C. Nicolson, R. A. Zimmerman, T. L. Spray, J. W. Gaynor, and
A. Vossough, “Brain maturation is delayed in infants with complex congenital heart defects,” J. Thoracic Cardiovasc. Surg., vol. 137, no. 3,
pp. 529–37, 2009.
[15] H. C. Glass, S. Fujimoto, C. Ceppi-Cozzio, A. I. Bartha, D. B. Vigneron,
A. J. Barkovich, D. V. Glidden, D. M. Ferriero, and S. P. Miller, “Whitematter injury is associated with impaired gaze in premature infants,” Pediatr. Neurol., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 10–15, 2008.
[16] I. C. van Haastert, L. S. de Vries, M. J. C. Eijsermans, M. J. Jongmans,
P. J. M. Helders, and J. W. Gorter, “Gross motor functional abilities in
preterm-born children with cerebral palsy due to periventricular leukomalacia,” Developmental Med. Child Neurol., vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 684–689,
2008.
[17] C. J. Petit, J. J. Rome, G. Wernovsky, S. E. Mason, D. M. Shera,
S. C. Nicolson, L. M. Montenegro, S. Tabbutt, R. A. Zimmerman, and
D. J. Licht, “Preoperative brain injury in transposition of the great arteries is associated with oxygenation and time to surgery, not balloon atrial
septostomy,” Circulation, vol. 119, no. 5, pp. 709–716, 2009.
[18] D. J. Licht, J. Wang, D. W. Silvestre, S. C. Nicolson, L. M. Montenegro,
G. Wernovsky, S. Tabbutt, S. M. Durning, D. M. Shera, J. W. Gaynor,
T. L. Spray, R. R. Clancy, R. A. Zimmerman, and J. A. Detre, “Preoperative cerebral blood flow is diminished in neonates with severe congenital
heart defects,” J. Thoracic Cardiovasc. Surg., vol. 128, no. 6, pp. 841–849,
2004.
[19] B. Samanta, G. L. Bird, M. Kuijpers, R. A. Zimmerman, G. P. Jarvik,
G. Wernovsky, R. R. Clancy, D. J. Licht, J. W. Gaynor, and C. Nataraj,
“Prediction of periventricular leukomalacia. Part I: Selection of hemodynamic features using logistic regression and decision tree algorithms,”
Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 201–215, 2009.
[20] J. W. Newburger, L. A. Sleeper, D. C. Bellinger, C. S. Goldberg,
S. Tabbutt, M. Lu, K. A. Mussatto, I. A. Williams, K. E. Gustafson,
S. Mital, N. Pike, E. Sood, W. T. Mahle, D. S. Cooper, C. DunbarMasterson, C. D. Krawczeski, A. Lewis, S. C. Menon, V. L. Pemberton,
C. Ravishankar, T. W. Atz, R. G. Ohye, J. W. Gaynor, and P. H. N. I.,

[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

1459

“Early developmental outcome in children with hypoplastic left heart syndrome and related anomalies: The single ventricle reconstruction trial,”
Circulation, vol. 125, no. 17, pp. 2081–2091, 2012.
A. Gururaj, L. Sztriha, A. Bener, A. Dawodu, and V. Eapen, “Epilepsy in
children with cerebral palsy,” Seizure: J. Brit. Epilepsy Assoc., vol. 12,
pp. 110–114, 2003.
E. Hatzidaki, E. Giahnakis, S. Maraka, E. Korakaki, A. Manoura,
E. Saitakis, I. Papamastoraki, K.-M. Margari, and C. Giannakopoulou,
“Risk factors for periventricular leukomalacia,” Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 110–115, 2009.
E. L. Albers, D. P. Bichell, and B. McLaughlin, “New approaches to neuroprotection in infant heart surgery,” Pediatr. Res., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 1–9,
2010.
K. C. Tan, Q. Yu, C. M. Heng, and T. H. Lee, “Evolutionary computing
for knowledge discovery in medical diagnosis,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 27,
no. 2, pp. 129–154, 2003.
R. B. Haynes, N. L. Wilczynski, and C. C. D. S. S. C. S. R. Team, “Effects
of computerized clinical decision support systems on practitioner performance and patient outcomes: Methods of a decision-maker-researcher
partnership systematic review,” Implement. Sci., vol. 5, pp. 12–20, 2010.
J. Eberhardt, A. Bilchik, and A. Stojadinovic, “Clinical decision support
systems: Potential with pitfalls,” World J. Surg. Oncol., vol. 105, no. 5,
pp. 502–510, 2012.
A. Pandor, S. Harnan, S. Goodacre, A. Pickering, P. Fitzgerald, and
A. Rees, “Diagnostic accuracy of clinical characteristics for identifying
CT abnormality after minor brain injury: a systematic review and metaanalysis,” J. Neurotrauma, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 707–718, 2012.
S. J. J. Kumar and M. Madheswaran, “An improved medical decision
support system to identify the diabetic retinopathy using fundus images,”
J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 3573–3581, 2012.
A. X. Garg, N. K. J. Adhikari, H. McDonald, M. P. Rosas-Arellano,
P. J. Devereaux, J. Beyene, J. Sam, and R. B. Haynes, “Effects of computerized clinical decision support systems on practitioner performance and
patient outcomes: A systematic review,” J. Amer. Med. Assoc., vol. 293,
no. 10, pp. 1223–1238, 2005.
A. Tenev, S. Markovska-Simoska, L. Kocarev, J. Pop-Jordanov, A. Müller,
and G. Candrian, “Machine learning approach for classification of ADHD
adults,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 13, pp. 23–28, 2013.
V. Podgorelec, P. Kokol, and M. M. Stiglic, “Searching for new patterns
in cardiovascular data,” in Proc. 15th IEEE Symp. Comput.-Based Med.
Syst., 2002, pp. 111–116.
A. C. Stasis, E. N. Loukis, S. A. Pavlopoulos, and D. Koutsouris, “A
decision tree-based method, using auscultation findings, for the differential
diagnosis of aortic stenosis from mitral regurgitation,” in Proc. Comput.
Cardiol., 2003, pp. 769–772.
A. Ghaffari and A. Jalali, “Predicting acute hypotensive episodes based
on HR baroreflex model estimation,” Cardiovasc. Eng., vol. 9, no. 4,
pp. 161–164, 2009.
A. Jalali and C. Nataraj, “A cycle-averaged model of hypoplastic left heart
syndrome (HLHS),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 190–194.
J. S. Sartakhti, M. H. Zangooei, and K. Mozafari, “Hepatitis disease diagnosis using a novel hybrid method based on support vector machine
and simulated annealing (SVM-SA),” Comput. Methods Progr. Biomed.,
vol. 108, pp. 570–579, 2011.
N. Xin, X.-F. Gu, H. Wu, Y.-Z. Hu, and Z.-L. Yang, “Discrimination
of raw and processed Dipsacus asperoides by near infrared spectroscopy
combined with least squares-support vector machine and random forests,”
Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecul. Biomolecul. Spectrosc., vol. 89,
pp. 18–24, 2012.
A. Jalali, D. J. Licht, and C. Nataraj, “Application of decision tree in the
prediction of periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) occurrence in neonates
after heart surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
pp. 5931–5934.
A. Kalinli, F. Sarikoc, H. Akgun, and F. Ozturk, “Performance comparison
of machine learning methods for prognosis of hormone receptor status in
breast cancer tissue samples,” Comput. Methods Progr. Biomed., vol. 110,
pp. 298–307, 2013.
A. Singh and J. V. Guttag, “A comparison of non-symmetric entropybased classification trees and support vector machine for cardiovascular
risk stratification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 79–82.
R. Ribeiro, R. Marinho, and J. Sanches, “Classification and staging of
chronic liver disease from multimodal data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1336–1344, May 2013.

1460

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

[41] A. Jalali, A. Ghaffari, P. Ghorbanian, and C. Nataraj, “Identification of
sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves function in cardiovascular regulation using ANFIS approximation,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 52, no. 1,
pp. 27–32, 2011.
[42] B. Samanta, G. L. Bird, M. Kuijpers, R. A. Zimmerman, G. P. Jarvik,
G. Wernovsky, R. R. Clancy, D. J. Licht, J. W. Gaynor, and C. Nataraj,
“Prediction of periventricular leukomalacia. Part II: Selection of hemodynamic features using computational intelligence,” Artif. Intell. Med.,
vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 217–231, 2009.
[43] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelet Transform. Philadelphia, PA,
USA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1992.
[44] J. S. Richman and J. R. Moorman, “Physiological time-series analysis
using approximate entropy and sample entropy,” Amer. J. Physiol.: Heart
Circulat. Physiol., vol. 278, no. 6, pp. H2039–H2049, Jun. 2000.
[45] J. R. Moorman, J. B. Delos, A. A. Flower, H. Cao, B. P. Kovatchev,
J. S. Richman, and D. E. Lake, “Cardiovascular oscillations at the bedside: early diagnosis of neonatal sepsis using heart rate characteristics
monitoring,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1821–1832, 2011.
[46] D. E. Lake, J. S. Richman, M. P. Griffin, and J. R. Moorman, “Sample
entropy analysis of neonatal heart rate variability,” Amer. J. Physiol.—
Regulat., Integrat. Comparat. Physiol., vol. 283, no. 3, pp. R789–R797,
2002.
[47] T. Le, V. Bhushan, and J. Hofmann, First Aid for the USML Step 1 2012.
New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2012.
[48] K. Kappaganthu and C. Nataraj, “Feature selection for fault detection
in rolling element bearings using mutual information,” J. Vib. Acoust.,
vol. 133, pp. 061001-1–061001-11, 2011.
[49] W. Liu, S. Chawla, D. Cieslak, and N. C. A, “A robust decision tree
algorithms for imbalanced data sets,” in Proc. 10th SIAM Int. Conf. Data
Mining, 2010, pp. 766–777.

Ali Jalali received the M.Sc. degree in mechanical
engineering from the K. N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. He is currently toward the Ph.D.
degree in the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Villanova University, Villanova, PA, USA.
His research interests include data analysis and
biomedical diagnostics using machine-learning techniques with applications in ICU outcome prediction,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation research, arrhythmia
detection, and cardiovascular engineering.

Erin M. Buckley received the Ph.D. degree
in physics from the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, in 2011.
She is currently a Research Fellow at the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Charlestown, MA, USA. Her research focuses on
the development and applications of diffuse optical spectroscopies applied to critically ill neonatal
populations.

Jennifer M. Lynch received the M.Sc. degree
in physics from the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, in 2011, where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in physics in
the subfield of biomedical optics.
Her research interests include employing diffuse
optical spectroscopies to monitor cerebral hemodynamics in pediatric populations.

Peter J. Schwab received the B.A. degree in philosophy from the University of Pennsylvania in 2011.
He has been a Technician in Dr. Daniel Licht’s
Neurovascular Imaging Lab at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia since 2011. His research interests
include neurovascular imaging, brain–computer interfacing, neuroplasticity, and philosophy of mind.

D. Daniel J. Licht received the M.D. degree from the
New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA and
did his residency at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
He is the director of the Neurovascular Imaging
Lab at The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and he
is in charge of implementing and adapting novel instrumentation to answer important clinical questions.
His research program is informed by his clinical responsibilities, which includes neurology consult liaison to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit and a founding
member of the CHOP Pediatric Stroke Program. To accomplish research goals
he has employed all-optical devices for probing cerebral oxygenation (frequency
domain NIRS) and cerebral blood flow (diffuse correlation spectroscopy) in infants and children with critical illness.

C. Nataraj received the B.S. degree in mechanical
engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology,
and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in engineering science
from Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
After getting the Ph.D. degree in 1987, he worked
for a year as a Research Engineer and a partner with
Trumpler Associates, Inc. He is currently the Chairman of the Mechanical Engineering Department at
Villanova University, Villanova, PA, USA. He holds
the Mr. and Mrs. Robert F. Mortiz, Sr. Endowed Chair
Professorship in Engineered Systems at Villanova
University. He was also the founding Director of the Center for Nonlinear Dynamics and Control (CENDAC) in the College Of Engineering. He has worked
on various research problems in nonlinear dynamic systems with applications
to mobile robotics, unmanned vehicles, rotor dynamics, vibration, control, and
electromagnetic bearings. His current interest includes biomedical diagnostics
and mathematical modeling of biological systems. His research has been funded
by Office of Naval Research, National Science Foundation, National Institute
of Health and many companies.

