1026

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Accelerometry-Based Home Monitoring
for Detection of Nocturnal Hypermotor
Seizures Based on Novelty Detection
Kris Cuppens, Member, IEEE, Peter Karsmakers, Anouk Van de Vel, Bert Bonroy, Milica Milosevic, Stijn Luca,
Tom Croonenborghs, Berten Ceulemans, Lieven Lagae, Sabine Van Huffel, Fellow, IEEE,
and Bart Vanrumste, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Nocturnal home monitoring of epileptic children is
often not feasible due to the cumbersome manner of seizure monitoring with the standard method of video/EEG-monitoring. We
propose a method for hypermotor seizure detection based on accelerometers attached to the extremities. From the acceleration
signals, multiple temporal, frequency, and wavelet-based features
are extracted. After determining the features with the highest discriminative power, we classify movement events in epileptic and
nonepileptic movements. This classification is only based on a nonparametric estimate of the probability density function of normal
movements. Such approach allows us to build patient-specific models to classify movement data without the need for seizure data that
are rarely available. If, in the test phase, the probability of a data
point (event) is lower than a threshold, this event is considered
to be an epileptic seizure; otherwise, it is considered as a normal
nocturnal movement event. The mean performance over seven patients gives a sensitivity of 95.24% and a positive predictive value
of 60.04%. However, there is a noticeable interpatient difference.
Index Terms—Accelerometers, home monitoring, hypermotor
seizures, novelty detection.

Manuscript received November 12, 2012; revised May 28, 2013 and August
21, 2013; accepted September 30, 2013. Date of publication October 9, 2013;
date of current version May 1, 2014. This work was supported by Research
Council KUL: GOA-MANET, IWT: TBM070713-Accelero, Belgian Federal
Science Policy Office IUAP P6/04 (DYSCO, Dynamical systems, control and
optimization, 2007-2011); EU: Neuromath (COSTBM0601). The work of K.
Cuppens was supported by a Ph.D. grant of the Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology (IWT).
K. Cuppens, P. Karsmakers, and B. Vanrumste are with Mobilab of Thomas
More Kempen, 2440 Geel, Belgium and also with Department of Electrical
Engineering (ESAT) STADIUS and iMinds Future Health Department, KU
Leuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium (e-mail: kris.cuppens@thomasmore.be; peter.karsmakers@khk.be; bart.vanrumste@esat.kuleuven.be).
A. Van de Vel and B. Ceulemans are with the University Hospital
of Antwerp, Wilrijkstraat 10 2650 Edegem, Antwerp, Belgium (e-mail:
Anouk.Van.de.Vel@uza.be; Berten.Ceulemans@uza.be).
B. Bonroy is with the Mobilab of Thomas More Kempen, 2400 Geel, Belgium
(e-mail: bert.bonroy@thomasmore.be).
M. Milosevic and S. Van Huffel are with Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT) STADIUS and iMinds Future Health Department, KU
Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium (e-mail: Milica.Milosevic@esat.kuleuven.be;
sabine.vanhuffel@esat.kuleuven.be).
S. Luca is with the Thomas More Kempen, 2400 Geel, Belgium (e-mail:
stijn.luca@khk.be).
T. Croonenborghs is with the Department of Computer Science (CW) DTAI,
KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium and also with the Mobilab of Thomas More
Kempen, 2400 Geel, Belgium (e-mail: tom.croonenborghs@kuleuven.be).
L. Lagae is with the University Hospital Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
(e-mail: Lieven.Lagae@uz.kuleuven.ac.be).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2285015

I. INTRODUCTION
ENERALLY, long-term home monitoring of epileptic
children is not feasible, due to the inconvenient manner
of seizure detection based on the gold standard of video/EEGmonitoring. However, long-term home monitoring would be
beneficial because in this way, the neurologist would be provided with an objective measure of the number of seizures the
patient has during a night. This permits a better observation of
the patient, which can increase the quality of life. Another advantage of a home monitoring system is that the parents can be
alarmed when a large seizure occurs that requires care or if the
child needs to be comforted, as it is alone during the night.
In our setup, accelerometers are attached to the wrists and
ankles to register leg and arm movements. The goal is to tune
the algorithm only based on information of the normal nocturnal
movement of the patient and still get a high sensitivity and
positive predictive value (PPV). This approach is applicable
since a large number of normal activities and very few epileptic
events are observed.
Some commercially available detection systems are already
available on the market. EmFit-bed sensors (Emfit Ltd.) are
already used for the detection of clonic and tonic-clonic seizures.
In the literature, studies can be found that use the sensor for sleep
monitoring [1], [2] and as a sensor for cardiac measurements [3],
but to our knowledge there are no papers about the performance
of seizure detection with the EmFit system.
SmartWatch by Smart Monitor Corporation and EpiLert from
Biolert are wrist watches used to detect generalized tonic-clonic
seizures. In a study of Lockman et al. [4], the SmartWatch was
successfully tested on a group of 40 patients (6 with tonicclonic seizures). Seven of eight tonic-clonic seizures, and 204
nonseizures events were detected, with only one false detection
during sleep.
Nijsen et al. [5] already investigated the detection of seizures
by means of accelerometers, used on myoclonic seizures. They
tested various methods, resulting in a maximal sensitivity of
80%, but all with a low PPV. The best PPV reached was 16%.
Jallon [6] also investigated epileptic seizure detection based on
accelerometers. His algorithm is based on a Bayesian approach
using hidden Markov models, resulting in a sensitivity of 88%
and 89% in two patients. The corresponding PPV was 75%
and 55%, respectively. Conradsen et al. [7] used a multimodal
approach for seizure detection, mainly on tonic seizures. They

G

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CUPPENS et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED HOME MONITORING FOR DETECTION OF NOCTURNAL HYPERMOTOR SEIZURES

obtained a sensitivity between 91% and 100% with a specificity
of 100%.
The advantage over video detection, which is proposed in
Cuppens et al. [8] and Karayiannis et al. [9], is that accelerometers can measure body movement more easily under blankets
and can better separate the movements of the individual limbs,
but the sensors have to be attached to the body.
Our approach in this study is based on novelty detection. We
model normal movement, and try to detect abnormal (novel,
not yet or rarely seen) events, i.e., epileptic events. Novelty
detection is typically used in settings where the abnormalities
occur relatively seldom, and when insufficient data are available
to model the abnormal activity. This can also be seen as oneclass classification, in contrast to the traditional two class (or
multiclass) classifiers, where data of all the classes are used for
generating the classification model.
For modeling the normal movement, we estimate the probability density function (PDF) using nonparametric Parzen windows [10]. A nonparametric estimator was chosen since such
approach does not make any assumption on the form of the data
distribution and therefore is more flexible. Parzen density estimation is commonly used in the context of classification and
novelty detection [11]. Rathi et al. [12] and Rangayyan and
Wu [13] modeled the distributions of two classes based on the
Parzen window approach and classified instances based on the
highest probability. Tarassenko et al. [14], [15] and Yeung and
Chow [16] used the one-class classification which is the novelty
or outlier detection. A PDF for normal behavior is estimated
and new instances with a probability, computed using this PDF,
below a certain threshold level are considered abnormal.
The proposed approach must be contrasted to binary classification methods which use information from both classes
(seizures and normal movements) to estimate a model. Requiring information of both classes for estimation implies a costly
annotation process. Seizure segments must be isolated from the
normal movements by experts using video/EEG. Our one-class
method does not require knowledge about the seizure class.
Furthermore, since the seizure class is populated with much
less examples than the normal class, it can typically be assumed
that the very small portion of seizure examples has a negligible
effect on the estimation of the PDF. In a practical system, when
some patient-group specific tuning parameters are fixed, this
means that a patient-specific model can be obtained with much
less human interaction compared to two-class models.
The main contributions in this paper are 1) that we focus
on a different patient group (children up until 18 years old)
compared to the methods found in the literature and a different
type of seizures (hypermotor), and 2) an easy-to-apply patientspecific training is proposed that does not require any seizures
in the training phase. In Van de Vel et. al [17], the proposed
system is investigated from a clinical point of view, whereas in
this paper, the technical aspects are elaborated.
II. METHOD
A. Acquisition System
The acceleration data were recorded synchronously with
video, EEG-, ECG-, electro-oculogram (EOG)-, and elec-

1027

Fig. 1. Acquisition setup, where the placement of the accelerometers is indicated by the circles.
TABLE I
DATASET OVERVIEW

tromyogram (EMG)-data. The synchronization of the signals
was done by BrainRT software from OSG (www.osg.be), and
a Schwarzer interface box which converted the analog input
from the sensors to a digital signal for the connection with the
recording computer.
To acquire the data, we developed a hardware system that consists of four three-dimensional (3-D) accelerometers, attached
to the extremities with comfortable wrist and ankle bands. The
setup is shown in Fig. 1. The accelerometers range between −3g
and +3g, and the data were sampled at 250 Hz.
B. Patients
The group we studied consisted of seven patients with hypermotor seizures, all between the age of 5 and 16 years. Table I
gives an overview of the patients and the number of seizures
and normal movements they had during the monitoring. The
segmentation in movement events is explained in Section II-C1.
The recordings took place during the night, starting typically at
20h00 in the evening and finishing at 8h00 in the morning the
next day.
The seizures we focus on, the hypermotor seizures, are
marked by a strong and uncontrolled movement of the arms
and legs that can last from a couple of seconds to some minutes.
Due to the heavy movement, the patient can injure himself during the seizure. The labeling was performed by an EEG expert
based on the video/EEG-data. When it was not clear whether an
event was epileptic or not, a group of two EEG experts and two
neurologists agreed about the type in a consensus.
C. Epileptic Seizure Detection
In three steps, the raw data are processed to a classification
result. In the first step, which is a preprocessing step, movement
events are detected. In the second step, features are extracted

1028

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 2. Schematic overview of an algorithm. The determination of the optimal
features is only done during the development phase of the algorithm. In the
operational phase, only the flow in the left part of the scheme is followed.

from the events. The third and final step consists of the seizure
detection algorithm. A model is built based on the normal movements and tested afterward to measure its performance. An
overview of the approach is given in Fig. 2.
In the development phase of the algorithm, the features with
the highest discriminative power are selected. Only the optimal
features that are found during the development phase are further
used in the operational algorithm. During the operational phase,
this step does not have to be executed anymore.
1) Preprocessing: Thanks to the preprocessing step, the
events that do not contain movement information are discarded,
which results in a reduction of the data to process. Furthermore,
it divides the data into separate movement events. This preprocessing is already described in our previous work [18] and is
shortly described later.
The preprocessing step first filters the raw data with a lowpass filter with a cut-off frequency of 47 Hz. In order to avoid
phase distortion, the data are processed in a forward and reverse
directions to get a zero-phase filtering. The cut-off frequency is
chosen to avoid aliasing when downsampling to 100 Hz and to
eliminate the noise from the net frequency (50 Hz). We can easily downsample the data because the frequency content above
40 Hz is negligible. The influence of the static earth gravitation
is then eliminated by a high-pass zero-phase filter with a cut-off
frequency of 0.2 Hz. After filtering, the norm (the 3-D vector
amplitude) of each accelerometer is calculated, which gives one
signal per sensor (hence four signals). To detect the body movement, the standard deviation of each signal is calculated from
a sliding window of 2 s. If the standard deviation crosses the
threshold for the arms or legs, the event within the window is
considered as movement. These thresholds are determined by
a simulation where a simulator lies in bed during 5 min, after

which he makes small finger and toe movements which are the
smallest motions to be detected by the algorithm. This resulted in
a threshold of 10 mg for the arms and a threshold of 5 mg for the
legs. This difference can be explained by the fact that toe movements have a lower influence on the accelerometer signal than
the finger movements. Eventually, movement events lying less
than 30 s apart are clustered, because the duration of the epileptic activity we want to monitor is typically long (tens of seconds)
and sometimes, during one hypermotor seizure, the patient stops
moving (order of seconds). Note that after this clustering step,
the movement events have a variable duration. In the remainder
of this paper, these events with variable length are used.
Typically, 80% to 90% of the data are discarded as they contain no movement. Considering all the reduction steps (including
the dimension reduction and downsampling) only 1.5% to 3.0%
of the raw data are preserved.
2) Feature Extraction and Selection: From the events we got
from the preprocessing, we derive several features in the time,
frequency, and wavelet domain. After this step, we evaluated
the Lasso technique [19] for each patient individually to find
the features with the highest discriminative power. The results
are then combined to determine the best features over all the
patients.
Table II shows an overview of the features that are selected
from the events, which are features that are found in the literature. These are commonly used features as described in [20]
and [21], but also features specifically used for the detection
of seizures using accelerometers such as the ones derived from
the signal of the posture (orientation) as described in Nijsen
et al. [22]. The wavelets were based on a model to describe arm
movements in patients with myoclonic seizures [23]. Furthermore, Conradsen et al. [7] also made use of wavelet features
for the detection of seizures based on accelerometers. The features in [20] are derived from accelerometer signals, in multiple
cases, including human movement. Temko et al. [21] derived
features from EEG-signals for epileptic seizure detection.
A high correlation is expected between the amplitude-based
features and the seizures due to the often violent manifestation
of this type of seizure. In the frequency and wavelet space, we
would expect a relative higher contribution of energy in the
higher frequency bands from the seizures compared to normal
movements. This is because we presume that the uncontrolled
shock-like movements contain information in a wider frequency
spectrum compared to a smoother normal movement.
Features that are derived from the individual channels are not
likely to be descriptive over time or patient, as if the patient
rotates a limb, the same discriminating feature can be found in
another channel. Indeed, the channel which is discriminative can
change depending on the orientation of the patient. Therefore,
we chose to only take into account features that contained more
general information including information of all the channels of
one limb or from all the accelerometers combined. Therefore,
to get more general features, for the kurtosis, RMS, skewness,
orientation, and frequency features, only the mean and the minimal and maximal values over the calculated values over the
12 channels were considered. The other features are used as
illustrated in Table II.

CUPPENS et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED HOME MONITORING FOR DETECTION OF NOCTURNAL HYPERMOTOR SEIZURES

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF FEATURES IN THE TIME, FREQUENCY, AND WAVELET DOMAIN

1029

1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)

the max of resultant over both arms (1),
the mean std over all channels (2),
the mean of the means over all channels (3),
the max of resultant over both legs (4),
the length of the event, n, and
the mean over all limbs of the norm of the ranges of the
channels (5).
In a more formal way, these features can be expressed using
the following equations:
max = max (x1−3 (t) , x4−6 (t))
arm s
t

12 
n

1 
 1
(xi (t) − x̄i )2
mean =
std
12 i=1 n − 1 t=1
1 1
xi (t)
12 i=1 n t=1
12

mean =
m eans

(2)

n

max = max (x7−9 (t) , x10−12 (t))
legs

(1)

t

1
Rangei
4 i=1

(3)
(4)

4

mean =
ranges

(5)

where xa−b (t) represents the channels with index a until b as a
function of time. n is the number of samples (thus the length)
of a certain movement event. Range is defined by the following
equation:

 3

(6)
Range =  (max(xslw k ) − min(xslw k ))2
k =1

For the feature selection, we used an embedded approach.
We use the Lasso technique [19] for determining the optimal
feature set in a multivariate way. Using this approach, we first
determined the best patient-specific features by using a ten-fold
cross-validation. From every patient, we obtained the feature set
according to the lowest mean-squared error (MSE) in the tenfold cross-validation of the regression models compared to the
input data. The different regression models are constructed by
varying the regularization parameter λ. Note that the weighting
of the seizure data is 20 times higher compared to the normal
data to compensate for the imbalance in the data. From the
different sets of patient-specific features a selection of features
is retained to be part of the final patient-independent feature
set. This selection is based on a voting scheme, those features
that appear in at least three patients are included. There was no
person-specific weighting used to select the features, regardless
of whether one patient has more seizures than the other.
The feature subset using this approach is listed below:

where xslw denotes the block-like signal that contains the information of the orientation of the accelerometers. This signal is
the result of a median filtering with a window length of 1 s. The
features that do not hold information on the orientation are calculated based on the dynamic acceleration where the orientation
information is subtracted from the raw signals.
3) Model Estimation and Hyperparameter Tuning: With the
features selected in the previous paragraph, we modeled the
normal activity (example is given in Fig. 3). Movement events
are classified in the test phase. When they are outliers of the
normal activity distribution, they are classified as seizures.
To model the normal activity, we estimated its PDF with the
Parzen window method [10], by placing a kernel function in
every training data point and adding them. In this study, a radially symmetrical Gaussian kernel function is chosen which is
smooth and can be completely specified by a bandwidth (variance) parameter only.
This bandwidth is a hyperparameter (β) that should be determined. It has an influence on the smoothness of the estimated
distribution as a larger bandwidth results in a smoother density estimation. Another hyperparameter that needs to be determined is the threshold on the PDF (τ ) at which we separate
normal from epileptic movement. We determine this threshold
based on a fixed probability of 95%. This means that the 5%
movements with the lowest probability to be normal are classified as epileptic.

1030

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 3. PDFs of patient 2 and patient 5. The red dots are the seizures in the test
phase. The normal activity is in blue. The gray dots represent the normal activity
that is used for constructing the classification model in the training phase. The
normal activity and epileptic seizures are well separable in patient 2 (a) and not
separable in patient 5. (b) The decision line in black corresponds to the 95%
probability contour.

To determine the bandwidth β, we used the approach that
is shown in Fig. 4. Different values of β are evaluated on the
performance using a cost function. More specific, the evaluated
values are 2n where n ∈ {−2, −1, . . . , 4}.
For determining the threshold τ , we calculate the probability
of each point from our training set based on the PDF. From
these probabilities, a histogram and its cumulative distribution
function (CDF) is calculated. Using this CDF, we can determine
the threshold (probability value) that is associated with the 95%
border.
To make the approach as general as possible, we want the
hyperparameters to be group specific (i.e., for all patients with
hypermotor seizures) and not patient specific. In this way, they
do not have to be adjusted per patient. Therefore, to determine
β, we made use of a leave-one-out approach on a patient basis.
Since we have seven patients, we use six of them to estimate
β (training phase), and the remaining patient in patient-specific
test phase to estimate the PDF and classify movement events.
In this experiment, we used two-third of the normal movements of all nights as training, and 33 complementary normal
movements and 2 seizures for testing the performance of the
chosen bandwidth β. These numbers for the test set were chosen because we wanted to have the same number of examples
in each patient, and for some patients we only had two seizures
and not much more than 100 normal movements (so 33 for onethird of the data). This training and testing is done in a ten-fold
randomization, so for each value of β and for each patient, ten
PDFs are built and tested. We calculated the performance of the
model as the average of ten costs using
cost(β) = −[2 × sensitivity(β) + PPV(β)].

(7)

Here, the weight of the sensitivity is higher than the weight
of the PPV, as missing a seizure is worse than generating a false
positive for this type of seizure.

Fig. 4. Schematic overview of tuning β and the patient-specific testing. Note
that two-thirds of the normal movements are used to model the PDF. Information
of six patients is used to determine the optimal bandwidth in the seventh patient.

Although the number of data points in every patient is small to
train an support vector machine (SVM) classifier, we also did an
attempt to train an SVM model on the three patients with at least
four seizures and validated it in a three-fold cross-validation in
ten randomizations. This classification with an SVM is considered as the state-of-the-art approach and compared with the
outlier detection.

CUPPENS et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED HOME MONITORING FOR DETECTION OF NOCTURNAL HYPERMOTOR SEIZURES

1031

TABLE III
RESULTS OF VALIDATION

D. Validation
As already mentioned, a leave-one-out approach is used to
validate the models, meaning that the model hyperparameter β
is estimated using information of six patients and then kept fixed
for the remaining patient. For this seventh patient, a performance
score was computed using the same setup. For ten randomizations, a PDF of normal nocturnal movement based on two-thirds
of the normal movements of all nights of this patient is estimated
(with fixed β). Next, the sensitivity and PPV are computed on a
set of 33 normal and 2 epileptic movements. Finally, the mean
of the sensitivity and PPV over all the randomizations are used
as a validation measure.

Fig. 5. Performance of PDF approach when using different threshold values
(between 0.25 and 0.999). The full black dots indicate the 95% threshold. We
clearly see that an improvement is possible compared to the 95% threshold.

with a sensitivity of 30.00% and a PPV of 35.93%. The standard
deviation over the randomizations of the SVM approach is high
(the mean std on the sensitivity is 19.33% and on the PPV, the
mean std is 30.39%). This indicates that the generated SVM
models are not robust over the different randomizations.
IV. DISCUSSION

III. RESULTS
The optimal parameter value for β is determined on a group
of six patients excluding the patient for whom the performance
measures are calculated. The cost over these six patients is
averaged out, and the bandwidth related to the lowest cost is
used for estimating the PDF. For all patients, a bandwidth of 8
gave the best result except for patient 3. But when testing with
another threshold, the optimal bandwidth can change as both
values are related.
The result of the validation is given in Table III. For all patients
the mean and standard deviation of the sensitivity, the PPV and
the specificity, computed using 10 randomizations, are given. In
all patients except in patient 5, the sensitivity is 100.00% and
the PPV is more than 50%.
Fig. 3 shows the PDFs of patient 2(A) and patient 5(B), together with the epileptic activity from one randomization in red.
The black decision line gives the 95% threshold that separates
normal and epileptic movements. This decision line and the PDF
are calculated on only two features (in contrast to the six features
we use in our approach) for visualization purposes. Features 1
and 2 are used in this figure, which represent the maximal resultant over both arms and the mean standard deviation of all
channels, respectively. From this figure, it is clearly visible that
the normal and epileptic activity is well separable for patient 2
but not for patient 5 as the normal and epileptic activity overlap
in this patient.
When comparing the results of the outlier detection to the
state-of-the-art SVM approach, we can say in general that for
patients 2 and 6, the sensitivity is comparable (95.00%) and the
PPV is higher (83.33%). Only the results for patient 5 are worse,

The advantages of the PDF classification are the possibility
of training the model without positive training examples (no
labeling needed) and the flexibility to adjust the model with
an increasing number of data. In this way, when we install
the system in a real home situation, a better model of normal
movement can be learned over time, when more and more data
become available. This is also further discussed in the next
paragraph.
In Section III, we evaluated the method on the different patients, using the same number of seizures (2) and normal movements (33) in the test set. This makes a comparison between
patients fairer. It also allows us to calculate the average sensitivity and PPV over all patients. However, for some patients, the
balance between normal and epileptic movements is different
when we would consider all the patient’s data, which has an
influence on the performance. We observed that the PPV value
decreases when a relatively larger number of normal movements
occur with respect to the number of seizures. The influence of
the balance on the PPV value is also explained in the next
paragraph.
In the PDF approach, we use a rather conservative threshold in
a way that in all patients but one, all the seizures are detected. We
prefer to use a conservative threshold to be sure no seizures are
missed. However, a more optimal result of the PDF classification
can be achieved when choosing the threshold in a better way,
for example when making use of prior knowledge of the relative
number of seizures that occur. We see in Fig. 5, which shows
the performance for different values of the threshold, that for
patients 2 and 6, a sensitivity and PPV value of more than 90%
can be achieved when choosing the best threshold value.

1032

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

When we look at the manifestation of the seizures in patient 5,
we see that they are short in duration and subtle in intensity, and
are clearly different from the seizures in the other patients. After
a more thorough inspection, we can conclude that 20 of the 26
seizures included arm movements, 10 contained leg movements.
In five seizures, the patient sits up in bed, in seven seizures the
patient turns over, and two seizures look like normal nocturnal
movements. The seizures are typically shorter than 10 s, and
clearly less violent compared to the seizures of the other patients.
This makes it hard for the algorithm to detect them correctly,
which explains the lower performance for patient 5. This is also
visible in the optimal number of features determined by Lasso
on this patient. At the minimal MSE, the number of features
for patient 5 is 10, compared to an average of 7.7 over all the
patients. At the largest λ value for Lasso, where the MSE is
within 1 standard deviation of the minimum, the number of
components is still 6 in patient 5, compared to an average of 2.7
over all the patients. When we use ten features from the optimal
feature set for patient 5 determined by Lasso in the outlier
detection approach, the performance increases to a sensitivity
of 70.00% and a PPV of 49.00%.
Observing the differences between the means of the normal
and epileptic normalized data for all patients and for all features,
we can see that this difference for patient 5 is maximal 1.87,
whereas for the other patients this is at least 3.49 (and 5.39
on average). And although a combination of features with a
weak discriminative power potentially has a high discriminative
power, this is an indication that the univariate discriminative
power of six features that are used is low for patient 5. To be
able to increase the performance, probably other features are
required that are not yet included in our overall feature set.
Novelty detection works well in situations where the occurrence of abnormal events is very low. In this case, the distribution
of normal events can be constructed from all the data available.
If the occurrence of abnormalities is low enough, these will not
influence the distribution too much. Another advantage of this
approach is that in the learning phase, the events should not be
labeled, as all the events are used for estimating the PDF. In our
case, this would mean that, given a group-specific determined
β and τ , we can immediately install the detector in the room of
the child. Movement data can continuously be collected for updating the PDF. These does not require any other human action.
Initially a subset of normal movement from other patients can be
used, which is gradually replaced by patient specific movements
as more data are collected from that patient.
A possible extension of the method could be integrating an
adaptation of the PDF over time. We can make the algorithm robust against a change of normal movements of the patients over
time (a change in behavior). This could be done by discarding
the older movement events that were used for building the PDF
and replacing them by new movements that are observed.
The obtained value for the PPV depends on both the threshold and the balance between both classes. This can easily be
explained using the following reasoning: consider the case that
both classes are separable, so there is no overlap between classes,
and that the threshold is set in a way that all seizures are detected, with a certain number of false positives. Let B be the

balance, the positive examples (seizures) divided by the total
number of movements (seizures + normal movements). Let n
be the total number of data points and T the threshold, which in
our case would be 95%. We can state that:
PPV =

B.n
B
TP
=
=
.
TP + FP
(1 − T ).n
1−T

(8)

As we assume that all seizures are detected, we can say that
TP = B.n. To get a high PPV, 1 − T should be a good estimation
of B. Note that B <= (1 − T ); otherwise seizures are missed,
and we get false negatives, and the ideal case we assumed would
not hold anymore. Thus, the threshold could be optimized in
function of the balance.
We now have tested the algorithm on one type of seizure, but
the detection based on accelerometers can be extended to other
types of seizures that contain motor components, at least if the
seizures do not occur too often throughout the night. Indeed,
if the patients suffer from too many seizures, the PDF will be
influenced too much, and seizures will not be regarded as an
abnormal event anymore. So in this case, many seizures will
be missed, unless the threshold is set lower, which leads to
more false positives. Furthermore, for seizures with no motor
component, this detection system will not work. Hence, this
system is restricted to detection of convulsions (seizures with a
motor component) only.
To improve the performance for example for the seizures that
are visually not distinguishable from normal movements such
as some seizures in patient 5, extra modalities can be integrated.
For example, the tensioning of the arm muscles can be measured
using EMG. But also sensors such as ECG, audio, video, or skin
conductivity, can increase the performance. However, there is a
tradeoff between the number of applied sensors and the patient’s
comfort, unless contactless sensors are used.
The results we have are initial results on a group of seven
patients. To make more reliable conclusions we will have to test
the system and algorithm on a larger group. Furthermore, the
system should also be tested in a real home situation. For now,
it is only tested in a hospital setting. However, when we test it at
home, we will lose the EEG information, and a labeling based
on the gold standard is not possible for validation.
V. CONCLUSION
We proposed a method to detect nocturnal hypermotor
seizures in pediatric patients. First, we segment the raw data
in movement events and extract the features with the highest
discriminative power. Afterward, we estimated a nonparametric
patient-specific PDF based on normal movement to distinguish
epileptic activity from normal activity. This resulted in an average sensitivity of 95.24% and a PPV of 60.04% for seven
patients.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Rauhala, J. Virkkala, and S. L. Himanen, “Periodic limb movement
screening as an additional feature of emfit sensor in sleep-disordered
breathing studies,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 178, no. 1, pp. 157–161,
2009.

CUPPENS et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED HOME MONITORING FOR DETECTION OF NOCTURNAL HYPERMOTOR SEIZURES

[2] J. M. Kortelainen, M. O. Mendez, A. M. Bianchi, M. Matteucci, and
S. Cerutti, “Sleep staging based on signals acquired through bed sensor,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 776–785, May
2010.
[3] J. Kortelainen and J. Virkkala, “FFT averaging of multichannel BCG
signals from bed mattress sensor to improve estimation of heart beat
interval,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2007, vol. 1, pp. 6685–
6688.
[4] J. Lockman, R. S. Fisher, and D. M. Olson, “Detection of seizure-like
movements using a wrist accelerometer,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 638–641, 2011.
[5] T. M. E. Nijsen, R. M. Aarts, P. J. M. Cluitmans, and P. A. M. Griep,
“Time-frequency analysis of accelerometry data for detection of myoclonic seizures,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 5,
pp. 1197–1203, Sep. 2010.
[6] P. Jallon, “A Bayesian approach for epileptic seizures detection with 3-D
accelerometers sensors,” in Proc. 32nd IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc.,2010, pp. 6325–6328.
[7] I. Conradsen, S. Beniczky, P. Wolf, J. Henriksen, T. Sams, and
H. B. D. Sorensen, “Seizure onset detection based on a uni- or multimodal intelligent seizure acquisition (uisa/misa) system,” in Proc. 32nd
IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 3269–3672.
[8] K. Cuppens, L. Lagae, B. Ceulemans, S. Van Huffel, and B. Vanrumste,
“Automatic video detection of body movement during sleep based on
optical flow in pediatric patients with epilepsy,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 923–931, 2010.
[9] N. B. Karayiannis, G. Z. Tao, J. D. Frost, M. S. Wise, R. A. Hrachovy,
and E. M. Mizrahi, “Automated detection of videotaped neonatal seizures
based on motion segmentation methods,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 117,
no. 7, pp. 1585–1594, 2006.
[10] C. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Singapore:
Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[11] M. Markou and S. Singh, “Novelty detection: A review—Part 1: Statistical
approaches,” Signal Process., vol. 83, no. 12, pp. 2481–2497, 2003.
[12] Y. Rathi, J. Malcolm, S. Bouix, R. McCarley, L. Seidman, J. Goldstein,
C.-F. Westin, and M. Shenton, “Disease classification: A probabilistic
approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag.: Nano Macro, Apr.
2010, pp. 1345–1348.

1033

[13] R. M. Rangayyan and Y. Wu, “Modeling and classification of knee-joint
vibroarthrographic signals using probability density functions estimated
with Parzen windows,” in Proc. 30th IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Aug. 2008, pp. 2099–2102.
[14] L. Tarassenko, P. Hayton, N. Cerneaz, and M. Brady, “Novelty detection
for the identification of masses in mammograms,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
Artif. Neural Netw., Jun. 1995, pp. 442–447.
[15] L. Tarassenko, A. Hann, and D. Young, “Integrated monitoring and analysis for early warning of patient deterioration,” Brit. J. Anaesth., vol. 97,
no. 1, pp. 64–68, 2006.
[16] D.-Y. Yeung and C. Chow, “Parzen-window network intrusion detectors,”
in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2002, vol. 4, pp. 385–388.
[17] A. Van de Vel, K. Cuppens, B. Bonroy, M. Milosevic, S. Van Huffel,
B. Vanrumste, L. Lagae, and B. Ceulemans, “Long term home monitoring
of hypermotor seizures by patient-worn accelerometers,” Epilepsy Behav.,
vol. 26, pp. 118–125, 2013.
[18] K. Cuppens, L. Lagae, B. Ceulemans, S. Van Huffel, and B. Vanrumste,
“Detection of nocturnal frontal lobe seizures in pediatric patients by means
of accelerometers: A first study,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2009, vol. 1–20, pp. 6608–6611.
[19] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” J. Roy.
Statist. Soc., B, vol. 58, pp. 267–288, 1996.
[20] W. Dargie, “Analysis of time and frequency domain features of accelerometer measurements,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw.,
2009, pp. 1–6.
[21] A. Temko, E. Thomas, W. Marnane, G. Lightbody, and G. Boylan, “EEGbased neonatal seizure detection with support vector machines,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 122, no. 3, pp. 464–473, 2011.
[22] T. M. Nijsen, R. M. Aarts, J. B. Arends, and P. J. Cluitmans, “Automated
detection of tonic seizures using 3-D accelerometry,” in Proc. 4th Eur.
Conf. Int. Fed. Med. Biol. Eng., 2009, vol. 22, pp. 188–191.
[23] T. Nijsen, R. Aarts, J. Arends, and P. Cluitmans, “Model for arm movements during myoclonic seizures,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2007, pp. 1582–1585.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

