IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

907

A Computational Tool for Preoperative Breast
Augmentation Planning in Aesthetic Plastic Surgery
Joachim Georgii, Maximilian Eder, Kai Bürger, Sebastian Klotz, Florian Ferstl, Laszlo Kovacs,
and Rüdiger Westermann

Abstract—Breast augmentation was the most commonly performed cosmetic surgery procedure in 2011 in the United States. Although aesthetically pleasing surgical results can only be achieved
if the correct breast implant is selected from a large variety of different prosthesis sizes and shapes available on the market, surgeons
still rely on visual assessment and other subjective approaches for
operative planning because of lacking objective evaluation tools. In
this paper, we present the development of a software prototype for
augmentation mammaplasty simulation solely based on 3-D surface scans, from which patient-specific finite-element models are
generated in a semiautomatic process. The finite-element model is
used to preoperatively simulate the expected breast shapes using
physical soft-tissue mechanics. Our approach uses a novel mechanism based on so-called displacement templates, which, for a specific implant shape and position, describe the respective internal
body forces. Due to a highly efficient numerical solver we can provide immediate visual feedback of the simulation results, and thus,
the software prototype can be integrated smoothly into the medical
workflow. The clinical value of the developed 3-D computational
tool for aesthetic breast augmentation surgery planning is demonstrated in patient-specific use cases.
Index Terms—Breast augmentation, finite-element simulation,
implant simulation, surgical planning.

I. INTRODUCTION
REAST augmentation was the most commonly performed
cosmetic surgery procedure in 2011 with 307 180 women
in the United States undergoing augmentation mammaplasty
with inserted implants under or in front of the pectoral muscle,
a 45% increase from 2000 [1], [2]. Although correct breast implant selection defines the aesthetically pleasing surgical result
and a large variety of different prosthesis sizes and shapes are
available on the market, surgeons still rely on visual assessment

B

Manuscript received February 25, 2013; revised July 29, 2013; accepted
September 30, 2013. Date of publication October 10, 2013; date of current
version May 1, 2014. This work was supported by the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology (BMWi), Germany.
J. Georgii is with Fraunhofer MEVIS, Institute for Medical Image Computing, 28359 Bremen, Germany (e-mail: Joachim.Georgii@mevis.fraunhofer.de).
M. Eder and L. Kovacs are with the Computer Aided Plastic Surgery Research Group, Department of Plastic Surgery and Hand Surgery, Klinkum rechts
der Isar, Technische Universität München, 80333 Munich, Germany (e-mail:
m.eder@caps.me.tum.de; l.kovacs@lrz.tum.de).
K. Bürger, F. Ferstl, S. Klotz, and R. Westermann are with the Computer Graphics and Visualization Group, Technische Universität München,
80333 Munich, Germany (e-mail: buerger@tum.de; florian.ferstl@tum.de;
klotz@in.tum.de; westermann@tum.de).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2285308

and other subjective approaches for operative planning because
of lacking objective evaluation tools [3], [4]. Classical methods for breast augmentation planning and implant selection as
ordinary 2-D digital photography [5], anthropomorphic evaluations [6], water displacement [7], plaster casting [8], radiological
assessments [9]–[11], volume measurement devices [12], [13],
and the commonly performed method of placing varying implant
sizes in the patients’ bras to select the proper prosthesis [14] are
subjective, observer dependent, unreliable, cumbersome, time
consuming, cost intensive, and mostly of limited help for the
surgeon [4], [15]–[18].
Plastic surgeons could benefit from objective tools to measure and predict the aspired postoperative three-dimensional
(3-D) changes of the breasts after augmentation mammaplasty
[19]–[21]. Three-dimensional quantification of the breast region using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed
tomography (CT) provides accurate breast volume calculation
and enables precise anatomical 3-D reconstruction for numerical soft-tissue deformation simulation [16]–[19], [22]. However,
MRI/CT are expensive, time consuming, and the costs are not
reimbursed by health insurance companies because of a lack of
clinical prognosis for these examinations in aesthetic surgeries
and in the case of CT, the patient is furthermore exposed to radiation. Furthermore, soft-tissue deformations or compressions
are caused by the supine or prone patient positioning during acquisition which do not allow objective 3-D evaluation of the real
breast contour [10], [11], [19]. In addition, patients’ acceptance
for tomography imaging is limited because of serious noise exposure, potential claustrophobia, and the necessity not to move
during assessment hinder a routine 3-D patient data acquisition
in plastic and aesthetic surgery using MRI/CT [19].
Because of the limitations of the aforementioned named classical methods in breast augmentation planning, different 3-D
surface imaging systems (laser scan, stereophotogrammetry,
fringe light projection, etc.) were developed and several studies
demonstrated the clinical value of 3-D surface imaging as a noninvasive, reliable, precise, accurate, and objective method to preand postoperatively evaluate 3-D breast morphology in augmentation mammaplasty [4], [19], [23]–[26]. Further studies presented 3-D morphing systems to virtually deform and model the
patients’ 3-D surface breast shape [27]–[29]. The commercially
available 3-D imaging systems and software solutions like Precision Light, Inc. (Los Gatos, California, USA), 3dMD (Atlanta,
Georgia, USA), Axis Three (Boston, Massachusetts, USA), and
Canfield Scientific, Inc. (Fairfield, New Jersey, USA) do not take
the biomechanical soft-tissue behavior into account, suffer from
a lack of sufficient clinical validation and are therefore currently

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

908

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

limited for breast augmentation simulation [29]. Computational
modeling of soft-tissue mechanics solely based on 3-D surface
scans showed promising results, but a specific description of the
used 3-D breast model and the applied numerical algorithms to
simulate breast implant and soft-tissue interactions for augmentation mammaplasty are still required [30]–[32]. Recent work
presents implant simulation using Finite-element (FE) models
based on CT images, which, however, limits the application due
to the required radiation exposure and computation time [33].
Currently, 3-D surface imaging is also limited for a reliable generation of a closed 3-D breast model because no rear boundary
of the thoracic wall is technically ascertainable [16]–[18].
A. Contribution
This study presents the development of a software prototype
for augmentation mammaplasty simulation solely based on 3-D
surface scans. It is based on patient-specific FE models, which
are generated in a semiautomatic process from the surface scans
using a standardized workflow. The FE model is used to preoperatively simulate the expected breast shapes using physical
soft-tissue mechanics. A highly efficient numerical solver allows reducing waiting times significantly, providing immediate
visual feedback of the simulation results. Due to the intuitive
semiautomatic model generation process as well as the high
performance of the simulation method, the software prototype
can be integrated smoothly into the medical workflow regardless
which kind of 3-D imaging device (laser scan, stereophotogrammetry, fringe light projection, etc.) is applied. The clinical value
of the developed 3-D computational tool for aesthetic breast augmentation surgery planning is demonstrated in patient-specific
use cases.
The proposed prototype comes along with a number of technological challenges that have to be addressed in order to allow
for an accurate, yet interactive breast augmentation simulation.
The first challenge is the semiautomatic construction of a closed
FE model from a patient-specific open surface scan. We provide
a solution that only requires the specification of few anatomical landmarks and computes a closed breast volume from these
landmarks automatically. The second challenge is the efficient
simulation of the implant insertion and the deformation that is
caused by the insertion into the breast. Our approach uses a
novel mechanism based on so-called displacement templates,
which, for a specific implant shape and position, describe the
internal body forces this implant would cause. The corresponding positional changes are then fed into an FE solver to compute
the resulting deformation. By means of this approach, the use
of a geometric implant model, and in particular the complicated
simulation of the two-way coupling between the implant and
the enclosing breast can be avoided. The third challenge is to
give the user full interactive control over implant placement and
shape. We address this requirement in two ways: First, we propose an intuitive mechanism to place a selected implant in the
breast volume and provide few intuitive parameters to control
the implant’s shape. Second, we consider performance issues
throughout the entire pipeline and tightly couple simulation and
visualization to enable immediate visual feedback. Therefore,

Fig. 1.

Overview of the proposed system for breast augmentation simulation.

the optimal placement and shape of a selected implant type can
be intuitively determined.
II. METHOD OVERVIEW
In this section, we give an overview of the preoperative 3-D
planning tool developed. It is based on patient-specific 3-D surface scans, which are acquired by a 3-D laser scanner system.
These surface meshes can then be loaded in our software prototype, where we developed and implemented a pipeline to semiautomatically process the data to obtain a patient-specific FE
model. This pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 1.
The first step is to set well-defined anatomical landmarks on
the 3-D surface scan. These landmarks are required to define
and measure the breast contour and to quantify differences between pre- and postoperative scans. The next major step is to
reconstruct the back wall (rear demarcation of the chest wall)
for the breast models. The chest wall is needed to generate a
closed surface mesh from which a volumetric simulation model
can be computed. Furthermore, the back wall is used to place selected implants anatomically correct in the simulation process.
The region of each breast is defined in an interactive session,
and the surface scan is cut at the region boundaries into three
parts—the left and right breast, and the body part. The left and
right breasts are cut out of the surface scan and the emerging
holes are closed by taking into account the curvature of the surrounding parts. This process generates the body mesh, and it is
discussed in Section IV-C in detail. To only spend the degrees of
freedom in the anatomical region of interest, i.e., the breast and
the surrounding of the implant, the original 3-D scan and the
body mesh are additionally cut by predefined planes (left, right,
top, and bottom), and the resulting meshes are connected to
construct a closed surface mesh. This mesh defines the volume
in which the tissue is simulated using an FE method. Fig. 4 depicts all major steps which are performed to generate the closed
surface mesh.
The closed surface mesh is finally triangulated to generate a
tetrahedral volumetric FE model. To accelerate the simulation
procedure, we use a hierarchical representation of the FE model.

GEORGII et al.: COMPUTATIONAL TOOL FOR PREOPERATIVE BREAST AUGMENTATION PLANNING IN AESTHETIC PLASTIC SURGERY

909

Therefore, we use a triangulation algorithm, which can be parameterized to generate ever coarser simulation models. The
simulation uses a geometric multigrid solver to solve the static
elasticity problem very efficiently [34], [35]. It can accurately
handle large strain deformations and allows fast updates due to
its implicit nature. The details of the computational simulation
machinery are described in Section V.

III. 3-D DATA ACQUISITION
Three-dimensional breast surface scans of female patients undergoing breast augmentation with silicone implants were obtained before and six months after surgery using a 3-D surface
laser scanner (Vivid 910, Konica-Minolta Co., Osaka, Japan)
according to a standardized and previously reported 3-D acquisition protocol [16]–[18], [21]. The scanner was placed 1.5 m
from the subject and the region between the jugulum and the
navel was assessed with the scanner in 10◦ upward position in
approximately 1.5 s. Three single scans were obtained from a
standing position on predefined markers on the ground with the
subject facing +30, 0, and −30◦ relative to the lens [36]. The
patients hold their breath during acquisition with arms down the
side crossed behind at the height of the pelvis and the patients
back supported by a wall to guarantee reproducible data [23],
[24].
All shots were carried out under standardized lighting conditions with room light of an intensity ranging between 350 and
400 lux. The scanner is based on the principal of laser triangulation and the object is detected by a plane of laser light coming
from the source aperture of the scanner and is swept across the
detected region by a mirror, rotated by a galvanometer. Each
laser light stripe is reflected from the subject surface and acquired by a charge-coupled device camera. The surface contour
measurements of the subject are obtained through triangulation
from each reflected scan line and converted into a 3-D polygon
mesh (around 150.000 points). Using the middle lens with focal
length distance f = 14 mm, the scanner captures 198 to 823 mm
in X-direction, 148 to 618 mm in Y, and 70 to 800 mm in Z with
an acquisition accuracy up to 0.10 mm to the reference plane.
The captured three single scans were converted into one single
virtual 3-D model using appropriate software (Raindrop Geomagic Studio 11, Raindrop Geomagic, Inc., Research Triangle
Park, NC, USA) that detects corresponding parts in overlapping
regions.

IV. GENERATION OF A PATIENT-SPECIFIC 3-D BREAST
MODEL FROM SURFACE SCANS
The 3-D laser scanner provides high-resolution surface
meshes, from which volumetric FE models are constructed in
a semiautomatic process. This process is controlled via a planning tool that allows selecting the specific breast region to be
augmented and simulating the insertion of different kinds of
implants into this region. The tool also provides easy-to-use
measurement functionality to analyze the differences between
the real surgical outcome and the simulated postoperative result.

Fig. 2. Anatomical landmarks and distances used by the planning tool. Landmarks: Pcl = clavicle left, Pcr = clavicle right, Pj = sternal notch, Pnr = nipple
right, Pnl = nipple left, PSMFr = lowest point of the submammary fold right,
PSMFl = lowest point of the submammary fold left, PSMFmr = medial border
of the submammary fold right, PSMFml = medial border of the submammary
fold left, PSMFlr = lateral border of the submammary fold right, PSMFll =
lateral border of the submammary fold left, Px xiphoid.

A. Anatomical Landmarks
Anatomical landmarks can be positioned interactively on the
patient’s surface scan, and they are used throughout the whole
data processing pipeline. Landmark placement is performed by
rendering the surface scan and determining the triangle—given
by a unique id—below the mouse cursor. From the cursor position in screen space the exact landmark position in 3-D can
then be computed and used to render a small sphere at this position. Fig. 2 shows the set of predefined landmarks which must
be placed by the user to enable an automatic realization of the
following task:
1) Measurement: Distances between landmarks are used to
quantify differences or asymmetries on the surface scan
and to evaluate the surgical outcome [23]–[26]. (The clinically most relevant distances on both sides between specific landmarks are the following: Pc to Pn, Pj to Pn,
Pn to PSMF, Pn to PSMFm, Pn to PSMFl, Pnl to Pnr,
see Fig. 2.) The planning tool supports measurements on
the breast surface (on-surface distances) as well as Euclidean distances. To compute on-surface distances between two landmarks, approximate geodesic distances are
used. Therefore, the plane passing through the two landmarks and being orthogonal to the coronal plane is intersected with the surface, and the length of the intersection
curves is used as on-surface distance. The intersection
curve is computed by tracing out this curve as described
in the next section for generating a smooth curve passing
through a set of landmarks.
2) Registration: Different scans generated by the 3-D laser
scanner are not in the same coordinate system. In order
to compare different scans of the same patient, i.e., the
post- and preoperative scans, surface meshes are first registered by means of the landmarks which are close to the
bones and do not undergo soft-tissue deformations during
surgery (Pcl, Pcr, Pj, and Px, see Fig. 2). The registration
is performed rigidly using principal component analysis.

910

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 3. Rigid registration of two surface scans is performed automatically after
the anatomical landmarks have been set. Left: Distances between a nonregistered
pair of pre- and postoperative surface scan are color coded (from green equals
zero to red equals 20 mm). Right: Distances between the automatically registered
pair of surface scans.

Fig. 3 shows a postoperative scan before registration and
after automatic registration to the preoperative scan of the
same patient.
3) Breast Volume: From a set of predefined landmarks, the
breast region is determined automatically according to the
breast volume measurement protocol proposed in [17],
[18], and [23]. In this process, landmarks are used as
control points in the construction of a smooth curve which
segments the breast surface in the initial surface scan (see
next section for details).
In addition to the set of predefined landmarks which have to be
specified to enable breast volume computation and construction
of a volumetric breast model, the user can define additional
landmarks and let distances between any pair of landmarks be
computed automatically by the system.

B. Breast Volume
The planning tool automatically determines a first approximation of the breast region, i.e., the surface region which the
surgeon considers as breast, from the predefined anatomical
landmarks. This region is important for volume comparison between pre- and postoperative scans and for the construction of
a volumetric breast model.
The breast region is defined via a curve on the initial surface
scan—the so-called cut curve—which separates the breast. The
curve is generated from a set of control points, i.e., the landmarks
PSMFmr, PSMFr, PSMFlr as well as additional control points
on the surface, which are automatically computed. Since the
landmark Pcr is outside the breast region, we automatically determine a control point at a predefined ratio along the on-surface
curve from Pcr to Pnr. An additional control point is inserted in
the middle of the on-surface curve from this new control point to
PSMFlr, since it is useful to adjust the automatically generated
curve in the region of the armpit. An illustration of the separating
curve as well as the control points used to construct this curve is
given in Fig. 4(a). The automatically computed curve can then
be adjusted interactively by moving any of the control points
on the mesh or arbitrarily inserting additional control points on

the curve segments, thereby automatically performing the steps
described in the following to compute the projected curve.
To compute the cut curve enclosing the breast, a closed sequence of 3-D cubic Hermite splines is computed from the
positions of the control points. At spline transitions, C 2 continuity is assured. Even though the 3-D spline curve is enforced
to pass through the specified control points on the surface, in
general, it will not stay on the surface in between these points.
Thus, in a second step the spline curve has to be projected onto
the surface mesh to obtain the cut curve.
Projecting the spline curve onto the surface mesh is performed
as follows: Starting with an arbitrary control point and the triangle containing it, a new point on the spline curve is computed
using a predefined parameter increment. The line segment from
the start point to the new point is then projected into the triangle
plane using the triangle normal vector as the projection direction. If the projected line segment crosses one of the triangle
edges, it is clipped at this edge and projected into the plane of
the triangle adjacent across this edge. This process is repeated
until the line’s end point falls into the interior of a triangle, in
which case a new sample point on the curve is taken and the
process is repeated using the line from the current to this new
point. All line-edge intersections and projected end points are
stored in the order they are computed, giving the cut curve as a
closed line strip which can be rendered on top of the surface.
C. Breast Model Construction
To obtain a volumetric breast model, a number of automatic
steps are performed as illustrated in Fig. 4(b)–(e). The basic
idea is to use the cut curves to separate the breast surfaces from
the initial surface scan, and then to compute smooth surfaces
covering the resulting holes. These surfaces are then used to
construct a closed rear wall which can be stitched to the initial
surface scan.
The cut curves are first constructed for the left and right
breast as described [see Fig. 4(a)], and they are then used to
cut the mesh into three disjoint parts—the left breast (LB),
the right breast (RB), and the base (BS). Since the cut curve
is projected onto the triangular surface mesh, generating these
parts is straight forward: For each line segment of a cut curve, we
locally cut the mesh by splitting the triangles the curve is passing
through. Thus, the split triangle is replaced by two to three new
triangles, which are assigned to the base and breast, respectively.
If the curve is going exactly along a triangle edge, the two
adjacent triangles are assigned unchanged. To decide which of
the triangles belongs to the breast and which to the base mesh,
we exploit the fact that the cut line is generated in a consistent
ordering (defined by the anatomical landmarks). Therefore, we
compute the signed distance of the triangle vertices opposite to
the new edge to the plane defined by the line segment and the
respective triangle normal. Depending on the sign, the triangles
can then be assigned consistently. Fig. 4(b) shows the resulting
base mesh.
Now, a challenging step is to automatically fill the holes
in the base mesh which occur when taking out LB and RB
from BS. Filling these holes is important because the filled base

GEORGII et al.: COMPUTATIONAL TOOL FOR PREOPERATIVE BREAST AUGMENTATION PLANNING IN AESTHETIC PLASTIC SURGERY

911

Fig. 4. Workflow for generating the volumetric breast model used in the FE simulation. (a) The breast region is segmented by a curve on the surface scan. The
curve is generated by a set of control points, i.e., landmarks PSMFmr 
1, PSMFr 
2, PSMFlr 
3, as well as two additional points on the surface (
4, 
5) that are
computed automatically. (b) Mesh is cut along the curve, and the breasts are removed. (c) Resulting holes in the surface mesh are automatically filled, resulting in
the rear wall. (d) Both the initial mesh and the rear wall are cut along planes (Top, Bottom. Left, Right) to reduce the simulation volume to the required region.
The rear wall is shifted toward the back. (e) Meshes are connected at their boundary to define a closed surface representation.

Fig. 5. Illustration of the approach to fill the holes in the base mesh after cutting out the breast. (a) Least-squares plane is fitted to the cut curve vertices, and these
vertices are projected on the plane to generate a Delaunay triangulation using regularly distributed interior vertices (blue). (b) Obtained triangle mesh is smoothly
adapted to the base mesh by averaging horizontal and vertical cubic Hermite splines. (c) Generated triangular fill-in mesh.

serves as the rear wall in the following construction of a closed
mesh representation. For each hole, we generate one additional
mesh—the left and right fill-in (LF, RF)—as follows. First, we
project the boundaries of the holes (i.e., the cut curve) onto the
regression plane of the curve points, which is computed via a
least-squares method. We then compute a 2-D Delaunay triangulation of the n-polygon defining the projected curve. However,
in addition to the curve points we add additional points on a
regular 2-D lattice in the interior of the curve, and we let the
Delaunay triangulation consider these points as well. This is
illustrated in Fig. 5 (a).
The reason for using additional points is that the fill-ins should
not be planar but should smoothly extend the curved shape of
the surrounding base surface. This is achieved by displacing
the interior points according to a set of smoothly varying spline
curves which are spanned over the interior part. In particular, for
each of the rows and columns of the used lattice a 1-D cubic Hermite spline is computed. The start and end points of each spline
are the points on the cut curve where the respective rows and
columns intersect this curve [(see orange vertices in Fig. 5(a)].
The tangents of the base mesh at these points define the second
pair of constraints for each spline [see Fig. 5 (b)]. Once the Hermite points and tangents are determined, the Hermite splines
along the rows and columns can be evaluated at the parameter
values corresponding to the positions of the lattice points. Each
lattice point is set to the average between the positions of the
spline curves along the rows and columns. A smooth fill-in that
has been generated by the proposed method is shown in Fig. 5
(c). To further improve the smoothness of the reconstructed fillins, we apply a smoothing of the row and column tangents in

advance, using a Gaussian filter of sufficient size. Finally, we
apply 10–20 iteration steps of a Laplace Beltrami filter on the
3-D triangular mesh to smooth it sufficiently.
As shown in Fig. 4(c), the fill-ins are finally stitched together
with the base BS in order to smoothly fill the holes. By using the initial surface scan including the breasts and the base
with the fill-ins, we can now generate a volumetric model in
a straight forward way. Therefore, we first clip both meshes at
four appropriately selected planes to restrict the volume model
to the relevant parts. The filled base is then shifted toward the
back of the patient to account for the thickness of the skin and
the muscle, such that the resulting back wall approximately has
the niveau of the chest wall as shown in Fig. 4(d). Finally, the
clipped and shifted BS and the clipped initial surface are connected along the boundaries via additional triangles so that a
closed mesh is obtained. This mesh is shown in Fig. 4(e).
The resulting closed mesh is then input to a 3-D triangulation
method which generates a volumetric tetrahedral mesh. We use
the tetgen package [37] to construct a tetrahedralization, and we
specify additional points in the interior of the mesh to guarantee
a good aspect ratio of the elements. In particular, a Cartesian
grid is overlaid with the surface mesh, and all grid points in the
interior of the mesh are used as additional points. A beneficial
side effect of this approach is that the resolution of the Cartesian
grid can be varied in order to generate a hierarchy of tetrahedral
grids at ever coarser resolution. We use the quality parameters
of tetgen, and by doing so the surface mesh is also remeshed
appropriately at the coarser levels. The hierarchy generated in
this way is required by the geometric multigrid solver which we
use to simulate the implant insertion efficiently (see Section V).

912

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

V. SIMULATION
The simulation approach, we use for estimating the breast
deformations due to the insertion of an implant is based on
the corotational formulation of elasticity. The approach works
on an FE discretization of the breast using tetrahedral elements. Breast deformations are described as a mapping from
the breast’s reference configuration Ω to its deformed configuration {x + u(x) | x ∈ Ω} using a displacement function
u : R3 → R3 . The displacement function specifies for every
grid vertex the movement of this vertex due to internal and
external forces.
The dynamic behavior of an elastic object is governed by the
Lagrangian equation of motion
M ü + C u̇ + Ku = f

Fig. 6. Discrete implant simulation. Left: Vertices in front (blue)/back (green)
of the implant surface are detected. Back vertices are fixed. Middle: To the front
vertices, displacements are applied according to the projection (thickness) of
the implant in normal direction of the implant surface. Right: Simulation result
with discretized implant. Implant elements are denoted in blue (initial state) or
red (deformed state).

(1)
A. Implant Simulation

where M , C, and K denote the mass, damping and stiffness
matrices, respectively. u is a vector built from the displacement
vectors of all vertices and analogously, f is constructed from
the vertex force vectors, i.e., external forces and body forces
such as gravity. The stiffness matrix K is buil by assembling the
element stiffness matrices Ke , which are determined from the
formulation of the strain tensor and the material law. To keep
the matrices Ke linear with respect to u, we apply the Cauchy
strain formulation together with the generalized Hooke’s law,
yielding the formula Ke = Ω e BeT DBe dx with Be being the
element strain matrices. More details can be found in previous
work on FE methods [38], [39].
The Cauchy strain just gives a linear approximation of the
full Green strain tensor and, thus, only yields a reasonably approximation for small deformations. To overcome this limitation, we use the corotated Cauchy strain formulation [40] in
our approach, which, in principle, rotates the elements from
the deformed to the reference configuration before the linear
strain approximation is computed. The element rotations are
computed via the energy minimization approach by Georgii and
Westermann [34].
To solve for the material displacements, we use the implicit
geometric multigrid solver proposed in [35], [41]. In a preprocess, the FE discretizations are constructed at multiple resolutions as described in the previous section to obtain the grid
hierarchy required by the solver. Due to the corotational formulation of strain, the equation systems at every level of the
multigrid hierarchy have to be rebuilt in every simulation step
before a typical multigrid V-cycle can be performed. In our
current system, typical element numbers are in the range of 15–
60 K, depending on the initial resolution of the surface scan.
On a standard desktop computer, simulations on such meshes
can be computed at times between 25 and 90 ms per multigrid
V(2,1)-cycle, enabling immediate visual feedback once an implant is inserted, repositioned, or scaled in volume. Note that
convergence of the solver is achieved after 3–5 V-cycles. We apply the deformation field computed at the FE grid to the original
surface scan by means of inter-/extrapolation thereby yielding
visually pleasing results.

To simulate the effect of an implant on the breast volume,
in the current approach, we assume the implant is a rigid body
which is defined implicitly by a function describing its shape.
Later in this text, we will discuss the different shape functions
provided by our tool.
To simulate the effects of these implants in an interactive environment, we do not cut the tetrahedral mesh of the breast to
insert the implant as a separate object, since this involves time
consuming recalculations of the FE model and solver data structures. Instead, we blow up a thin region of the breast without
modifying the tetrahedral mesh. We can illustrate the simulation approach by using an implant with a projection (thickness)
equal to zero, which is inserted into the tetrahedral grid by
finding the corresponding vertices of the tetrahedral mesh, and
the tetrahedral grid is then deformed according to the implants
effective projection at the respective mesh vertices. This procedure requires that we determine for each point of the implant
surface its corresponding projection, i.e., the thickness of the
implant.
The shape functions serve as displacement functions which
describe the positional change of the breast tissue when an
implant is inserted. In particular, given the shape function and the
implant position, those vertices of the tetrahedral breast model
that are covered by the implant can be determined procedurally,
and they can then be displaced according to the displacement
function so that they come to lie outside the implant. Such
a displacement, which is only carried out for a thin shell of
vertices, is illustrated in 2-D in Fig. 6. In the simulation process,
the positions of the displaced vertices covered are considered as
boundary constraints in the simulation, and the displacement of
all other vertices is simulated accordingly.
To enable an accurate deformation simulation via displacement functions, we first adapt the FE discretizations used in the
elasticity simulation. In a preprocess, we determine the region
in the interior of the breast which may be covered by an implant due to different positions and volumes. In these regions,
additional vertices are inserted and the triangulation is refined
using these vertices [see Fig. 6 (Left)]. The refinement is necessary to allow for an accurate, discrete representation of the

GEORGII et al.: COMPUTATIONAL TOOL FOR PREOPERATIVE BREAST AUGMENTATION PLANNING IN AESTHETIC PLASTIC SURGERY

selected implant shape via the displaced vertices. This refinement is generated on the finest level of the multigrid hierarchy,
and this hierarchy is generated by locally doubling the spacing
of the interior, regularly distributed, vertices used in the meshing
process.
In an interactive session, the user first selects a particular
implant shape and volume, and positions this implant in the
breast. Here, we use the slightly displaced fill-ins RF and LF
(red curve in Fig. 6) as surface models of the pectoralis muscle
on top of which the implant is positioned. By using a specific
point in the center of the implant’s back wall—the so-called
implant anchor point—positioning the implant means that this
point is shifted along the fill-in and the implant is warped to
the fill-in accordingly. Warping is implemented by adjusting the
implicit implant functions described later to the local normals
of the fill-in.
We first determine all tetrahedral elements intersecting the
fill-in mesh using a kd-tree. For these so-called fill-in elements
we denote all vertices in front of (anterior to) the fill-in mesh
as front vertices; the vertices in back of (posterior to) the mesh
are denoted as back vertices. We then use a Mercator projection
to project the front/back vertices on the fill-in mesh yielding
projected coordinates x and y  . Given the fact that we describe
the implant functions as a projection (thickness) value z over
a 2-D coordinate (x, y) as described in Section V-C, we can
use the projected coordinates (x , y  ) to compute the implant
thickness z  (x , y  ) at that location. In case the implant thickness
is greater than zero, the vertex is in the interior of the implant
and is considered for further processing. In case the thickness is
zero or undefined, the vertex is outside of the implant and thus
ignored. An interior front vertex is denoted as implant vertex. In
this case, we assume to displace the vertex in direction of the fillins normal accordingly to the implants thickness z  . In case of
an interior back vertex, we set this vertex as fixed. Additionally,
for all fill-in elements, we determine the set of elements that
are incident to exclusively interior front/back vertices. For these
so-called implant elements, we adjust the elastic modulus to a
very soft material, and we set the density to the density of the
implant (see Fig. 6).
To finally compute the deformation of the breast, we partition the set of vertices into two subsets S1 and S2 —the interior
front/back vertices and the breast vertices—and we handle the
respective vertices differently in the simulation. For the interior
front/back vertices, we use Dirichlet boundary conditions. This
means that the displacements ui of these vertices are given as
constraints, and the respective forces to achieve these displacements are simulated. The forces acting on the breast vertices,
on the other hand, are given (i.e., gravitation) and the respective
displacements have to be simulated. We can thus split the linearized displacement and force vectors into u1 , f1 and u2 , f2 ,
where u1 and f2 are known and f1 and u2 have to be computed.
The system of equations to be solved in every simulation step
can then be partitioned as


K11
K21

K12
K22



u1
u2




=

f1
f2


.

913

To embed this partitioning into the geometric multigrid solver
we use the approach of elimination of the boundary conditions
as proposed in [42].

B. Gravity Correction
By inserting the implant, the breast does not only increase in
volume, but it also increases in mass due to the implant’s mass
which has not been considered so far. The initial surface scan
was taken in standing position of the patient and, thus, it shows
the breast shape under gravity. In the simulation so far, however,
the effect of gravity on the implant was not considered, but it
was inserted into the breast under gravity.
Since we simulate the implants by blowing up specific elements of the breast, we have to account for the mass increases
and gravity effect of these elements. The general idea would
be to determine the gravity free state of the breast, simulate
the insertion of the implant, and then simulate the effect of the
gravity on the whole breast including the implant. Since the
forces to switch to the gravity free state and back to the gravity
state cancel for all but the implant elements, it is sufficient to
only consider the implant elements. However, for performance
reasons one will avoid to change the reference state (rest state)
of the simulation, since this would require the stiffness matrices
to be recomputed. Therefore, our goal is to include the effect
of gravity of the inserted implant, which can be accounted for
by determining the volume increase achieved by the implant. In
order to do so, we cannot use Dirichlet boundary conditions for
the implant, but we have to convert them into equivalent force
constraints. Thus, we take the result of the implant simulation
and convert it into pure force constraints, e.g., at the implant
vertices the external forces
f1 = K11 u1 + K12 u2
are set, where u1 and u2 refer to the displacement which have
been computed in the previous simulation step. Then, we run the
simulation again without these Dirichlet boundary conditions
but with the external forces at the implant vertices (and of course
keeping the fixed vertices), and we add adjusted gravity forces
for all implant elements that have been blown up. Taking into
account that the initial FE model is created in standing position
of the patient, we only have to take into account the gravity
effect of the additional volume. We therefore use the deformed
tetrahedral elements to compute the gravity contribution in the
deformed state, and we subtract from it the gravity contribution
of the initial rest state of the element. In that way, we get a gravity
correction for each vertex of each implant element, which are
assembled into a global gravity correction vector. Note, that
the material parameters at these elements have already been
updated. In this way, we simulate the effect of gravity of the
introduced volume using the density of the implant introduced.
Note that this additional simulation step can be performed very
efficiently since we can use the displacement field of the initial
simulation step as initial condition for the displacement field.
Fig. 7 gives an example of this gravity correction approach.

914

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 8. Profile of the round implants (from Bottom). Due to the adaption of
p(x, y), the profile can be varied slightly (Right).

Fig. 7. Augmentation mammaplasty simulation without (Left) and with
(Right) gravity correction for the inserted implant (275 cm3 anatomic).

C. Predefined Implant Shapes
Fig. 9.

We distinguish between two kinds of implants in our
simulation—round implants and anatomic implants. Round implants are defined by their diameter and projection, whereas
anatomic implants are defined by width, height, and projection.
Using these parameters, we derive analytical formulas to describe the implants surface in rest position—in the following
we call this the implant surface.
To integrate implant simulation in our planning system, we
define implicit functions which approximatively describe the
shape of the implants available in the market, and which are
controlled by the aforementioned parameters—width, height,
and projection. This modeling approach has the advantage that
implants can be defined relatively simple by adapting parameters
(we will introduce some more parameters that control the shape
in this section). However, the alternative method to describe the
implant shape by triangular meshes is more flexible in general,
but additionally comes at higher computational costs at run time
when the implants have to be simulated. This is due to the fact
that the projection of the implant is not analytically given for
an arbitrary surface point, but has to be determined by means
of ray casting through the implant mesh. Since the focus of this
paper is to give immediate visual feedback, we focus on the first
approximative approach.
1) Round Implants: Round implants can be approximated
by 3-D ellipsoids, which are bisected along their xy plane.
To define the implicit function, we choose as parameters the
diameter w and the projection p of the implant, where the latter
one is associated with the local positive z-axis. The surface of
the implant is then defined as

Coronal, axial, and lateral view of an anatomic implant.

transition at the implants boundary as illustrated in Fig. 8


x2 + y 2
p (x, y) = p · 1 − 2
.
w2

(4)

2) Anatomic Implants: The shape of anatomic implants are
adapted to the shape of the female breast. We achieve this shape
adaption in our implicit function by deforming a 3-D ellipsoid.
Since we have now an asymmetric shape, we need as parameters
the width w, the height h as well as the projection p to describe
the basic shape. To deform the ellipsoid, we perform two steps.
First, we adapt the width of the implant in dependence of the
local y coordinate, such that we achieve a diminution to the top.
Second, we adapt the projection in dependence of the local x
coordinate to change the profile of the implant accordingly.
For the first step, we choose the function


−2 hy + a
(5)
w (y) = w ·
(a + 1) · b
where parameters a and b are used to control the shape of the
diminution. In our examples, we choose two different sets of
parameters, one for implants with large heights [a = 3, b =
0.78, see Fig. 9 (left)] and one for implants with small height
(a = 10, b = 0.91).
For the second step, we define the projection as the
p (x, y) = p ψ(x) χ(y)

(6)

Therefore, the projection (or thickness) of the implant can be
determined using the coordinates x and y
 p 
 
z (x, y) =   w2 − 4x2 − 4y 2 .
(3)
w

where ψ (x) adapts the projection with respect to the local xaxis, and χ (y) adapts the projection with respect to the height
as illustrated in Fig. 9 (right)
 x 2
(7)
ψ (x) = 1 − 2
w

y 2
χ (y) = 0.3 1 − 2
+ 0.44.
(8)
h
By inserting (5) and (6) into the ellipsoid equation

By spatially varying the projection parameter p such that it
reaches zero at the boundary of the implant we obtain a smoother

y2
z2
x2
2 +
2 + p2 (x, y) = 1 ∧ z > 0
(w(y)/2)
(h/2)

y2
z2
x2
2 +
2 + p2 = 1 ∧ z > 0.
(w/2)
(w/2)

(2)

(9)

GEORGII et al.: COMPUTATIONAL TOOL FOR PREOPERATIVE BREAST AUGMENTATION PLANNING IN AESTHETIC PLASTIC SURGERY

915

TABLE I
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

All of the example are based on non-nested grid hierarchies with three levels, and
five multigrid V-cycles, each including an update of the element rotations, have been
performed. Note that our prototype gives visual feedback (and allows for adaption
of the implant parameters) after each multigrid V-cycle, yielding a five times higher
update rate.

we obtain the implicit function describing the surface of the
anatomic implants. For the simulation, we again need the projection of implant in dependence of the coordinates x and y,
which we obtain by dissolving for z
	

2
 y 2
x
−4
.
(10)
z (x, y) = p(x, y) 1 − 4
w(y)
h

Fig. 10. Graphical user interface of the implant simulation. Immediate visual
feedback of the expected outcome is given by the simulation.

VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Performance
We have tested our software prototype on a standard desktop
PC equipped with an Intel Core 2 Quad Q9450 2.66-GHz processor and 8 GB of RAM. In Table I, we provide information
on some of the models used and the respective performance
achieved. The second column shows the number of tetrahedral
elements that are used in the FE simulation. The next column
shows the time required to setup the boundary conditions for
the simulation, including the time required to find the implant
vertices and elements using the precomputed kd-tree. Then, we
show the time it takes to simulate the deformation induced by
the implant using a maximum number of five V(2,1)-cycles of
the geometric multigrid solver yielding convergence in all of our
examples. Note that in each multigrid V-cycle, we perform an
update of all element rotations as well as a reassembling of the
system of equations to account for the geometric nonlinearities
of the corotational formulation. The iterative solver allows us
to give visual updates after each single multigrid V-cycle. Note
that interactions are also possible before the solver is fully converged, in which case the boundary conditions are seamlessly
updated to the new implant parameters. Therefore, we achieve
an higher update rate of the system. The last column contains
the overall update rate one achieves if moving the implant or
changing size and volume of the implant.

Fig. 11. Breast volume as well as the volumes of the four quadrants are
automatically measured by the proposed software prototype. These information
can be directly used to support generation of reports of the cases.

are realized by moving the surface where the implant is positioned at. If the results are visually pleasant, the prototype can
suggest an implant from a given database which matches best
the parameters interactively set.
On the other hand, the software prototype supports setting the
implant parameters automatically by selecting a vendor-specific
implant and thus to inspect the visual outcome of this specific
implant. A potential workflow could then be to go through a list
of available or preferred implants and inspect the results, where
the surgeon can still change the position of the implant.

B. Interaction

C. Assessment

As can be seen from Table I, our approach allows for the interactive change of implant position and parameters. This means
that the surgeon can interactively adjust the implant extensions,
i.e., width, height, and projection (and thereby volume), and
can immediately observe the visual outcome of the simulation.
As a consequence, the surgeon does not need to inspect the
shape of the implants, but can focus on the shape of the patients breast after simulation. Moreover, the implant can be intuitively repositioned in the breast by using buttons such as move
left/right/up/down/front/back, and again the simulation results
are immediately available (see Fig. 10). Movements in depth

The developed software prototype contains a large range of
automatic assessment tools. Since the landmarks are set for every dataset in the workflow, the tool automatically measures
distances (Euclidean and on-surface) between these landmarks.
Moreover, since the movement of the landmarks due to the simulation is computed too, one can also obtain these measurements
for the simulated, postoperative breasts and thus can directly
compare the measurements.
Besides distance measurements, we also integrated volume
measurements of the whole breast as well as the four breast quadrants, which are automatically determined from the on-surface

916

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 12. Retrospective surgical planning for two patients undergoing bilateral subglandular breast augmentation with round implants for patient A (a)–(c) and
anatomic implants for patient B (d)–(f). From left to right, the frontal (above) and side views (below) of the preoperative (a + d) and postoperative (b + e) 3-D
surface scans as well as the simulated results (c + f) are shown for the both patients.

Fig. 13. Comparison of simulated and postoperatively assessed breast shapes
for patient A (Left) and B (Right). The measured root-mean-square distances
were 3.3 and 2.1 mm, respectively.

lines between Pnr and PSMFlr, PSMFmr, Pcr, and PSMFR as is
shown in Fig. 11.
Additionally, we have integrated tools for comparative assessments, e.g., preoperative to postoperative comparisons which
include, beside distance and volume measurements the direct
visualization of surface distances. This can be used both for
simulated as well as measured postoperative scans. Please note
that for measured postoperative scans, the anatomical landmarks
have to be set manually, while they are automatically computed
for simulated postoperative results.
All this information can be used to support the surgeon in generation of reports for the cases, which also include screenshots
of common views of the breast.
D. Clinical Application for Breast Augmentation Planning
In order to evaluate the clinical reliability and applicability
of the presented simulation approach for round and anatomic
implants, retrospective simulations for two patients using the
known implant shape and volume were performed and the simulation result were compared with the real postoperative 3-D
surface scan acquired six months after surgery (see Figs. 12
and 13). The preoperative surface scans of the two patients

(n = 4 breasts) undergoing bilateral subglandular augmentation
mammaplasty with round and anatomic implants, respectively,
were converted into volumetric FE breast models by one observer according to the previously described procedure. This
task has been performed by a surgeon and took less than 5 min
per patient. The most clinical relevant bilateral distance measurements between specific landmarks (sternal notch to nipple distance: Pj-Pnl and Pj-Pnr; nipple to submammary fold
distance: Pnl-PSMFl and Pnr-PSMFr) and breast volume calculations were compared between the simulated and the actual
postoperative 3-D scan. Furthermore, the real postoperative 3-D
models (reference object) were superimposed over the simulated
3-D scan (test object) and the breast contour deviation [23], [43]
between the two 3-D models were quantified by calculating the
node to surface root mean square integration of the Haussdorff
distance in millimeters.
The first patient (A) is a 20-year old female (BMI = 20.8)
undergoing bilateral subglandular breast augmentation with
identical round implants (diameter: 11.5 cm; projection: 3.3 cm;
volume: 250 cm3 ) showed a postoperative sternal notch to nipple distance of 23.1 cm on the right and 23.0 cm on the left,
a nipple to submammary fold distance of 8.6 cm on the right
and 8.7 cm on the left and a breast volume of 574 cm3 on the
right and 579 cm3 on the left. The breast augmentation simulation with the aforementioned implant parameters result in a
virtual sternal notch to nipple distance of 23.4 cm on the right
and 23.3 cm on the left, a nipple to submammary fold distance
of 8.8 cm on the right and 8.9 cm on the left and a breast volume
of 580 cm3 on the right and 586 cm3 on the left. In addition,
the breast contour deviation analysis between the simulated and
the real 3-D model showed a root-mean-square value of 3.3 mm
[see Fig. 13(Left)].
The second 32-year old female patient (B) presented for bilateral subglandular augmentation mammaplasty with identical anatomic implants (width: 12.0 cm; height: 11.3 cm; projection: 4.2 cm; volume: 280 cm3 ). The patient had a postoperative

GEORGII et al.: COMPUTATIONAL TOOL FOR PREOPERATIVE BREAST AUGMENTATION PLANNING IN AESTHETIC PLASTIC SURGERY

sternal notch to nipple distance of 23.3 cm on both sides, a nipple to submammary fold distance of 9.0 cm on the right and
8.8 cm on the left and showing a right breast volume of 620 cm3
and 616 cm3 on the left. The retrospective breast enhancement
simulation applying the aforementioned implant parameters revealed a virtual sternal notch to nipple distance of 23.5 cm on
the right and 23.6 cm on the left, a right nipple to submammary
fold distance of 9.2 cm and of 9.0 cm on the left and a right
breast volume of 624 cm3 and 621 cm3 on the left. The breast
contour deviation analysis showed a root-mean-square value
of 2.1 mm [Fig. 13(Right)]. Both simulation results presented
no substantial postoperative asymmetries and clinically relevant
differences to the actual 3-D scan after surgery.
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In recent years, 3-D computer-assisted technologies have
gained acceptance in the field of aesthetic breast surgery to
optimize surgical planning and outcome analysis based on 3-D
surface imaging techniques [23]–[26]. Nevertheless, a considerable demand for clinical reliable, objective computer-assisted
devices which allows preoperative prediction of the aspired surgical result taking the biomechanical soft-tissue behavior into
account still remains [30]–[33].
The 3-D surface imaging device used in our study was a 3-D
surface laser scanner, a class 1 (for US) and class 2 (for Europe)
according to DIN VDE 0837 and IEC Publication 60825-1 with
a spectral range of 690 nm and therefore also with no damage
to the eye within exposure times up to 0.25 s. However, we recommend all patients to close their eyes during the examination
since the average acquisition will take approximately 1 s. Nevertheless, the proposed software prototype can be used with other
imaging devices such as stereophotogrammetry or fringe light
projection as well. However, in our preliminary studies no 3-D
surface imaging system, respectively, no underlying technology
proved to have a clear advantage over the other [44], [45].
Recently, commercially available 3-D devices also enable the
surgeon to model the preoperative 3-D surface image by choosing varying implant sizes and implant contours [45], [46]. But
these solutions apply a nonphysical morphing approach, and
the studies suffer from a lack of sufficient clinical validation as
the results are either compared to postoperative scans six weeks
after surgery [46] or breast surface morphing starts from the
3-D surface image solely without taking the thoracic wall as the
correct anatomical rear boundary into account [46], [47]. As we
have demonstrated in a previous study, changes in breast contour and volume after augmentation mammaplasty caused by
postoperative soft-tissue swelling are completed not earlier than
after three months [23]. As actual techniques in aesthetic breast
enhancement planning are cumbersome and inaccurate, the presented approach has clear advantages compared to conventional
and current available methods.
This study presented a 3-D computational tool for aesthetic
breast augmentation surgery planning and provides surgeons to
prospectively predict breast shape changes and to objectively
compare the simulation results of different surgical procedures
and varying implants with the real surgical outcome. The 3-D

917

breast augmentation surgery simulation tool is based on physical
soft-tissue properties and implant dimensions, and the prosthesis chest wall position is taken into consideration. Simulations
are planned on individual, noninvasive 3-D patient data, taking a
nondeformed breast surface as a starting point overcoming 2-D
photo reconstructions and invasive tomography imaging [32],
[33]. In addition, not only the postoperative volume change can
be predicted with the presented method, also the breast contour
changes after surgery will be visualized. The developed surgical
planning tool may also serve as a consultation platform to improve the patient–physician consultation and the intraoperative
process.
Although our study is the first to present a patient-specific FEbased simulation approach for aesthetic breast augmentation
based on 3-D surface scans solely, the presented approach is
still clinically limited to some degree. Especially the placement
of the implant on a surface derived from the fill-in requires
further clinical validation. The curvature filled rear breast wall
[see Fig. 4(c)] is shifted toward the back to create the surface
where the implant is placed (see Fig. 6). This approach includes
several unknown variables. First, is the resulting implant surface
curvature and position in accordance with the real anatomical
structures? Second, what is the influence of the breast muscles
(major and minor pectoral muscle) to the simulation result as in
some augmentation procedures the implant will be placed either
under or in front of the muscles? Furthermore, the proposed
simulation process does not consider age-dependent alterations
of skin elasticity and the underlying soft tissue. However, future
work might focus on customized patient-specific planning tools
using the soft-tissue material parameters of the patient by simply
applying a pinch test and correlate it with the best matching FE
material model. Additionally, simulation results are dependent
on the size of the preoperative breast, the degree of ptosis, and the
interaction between the overlying soft tissue and the implants.
Especially, the implant surface (smooth or textured) and contour
(anatomic or round) might play a role when simulating the
resulting breast deformations.
Therefore, future studies are designed to analyze the anatomical agreement between the virtual rear demarcation and the
real thoracic wall as well as the breast muscles. The planned
study aims to create a 3-D breast model for breast augmentation
simulation with a rear demarcation of the thoracic wall based
solely on 3-D surface imaging of 25 young, healthy, and nonoperated test persons and to anatomically verify this 3-D breast
model by comparing it with the real anatomical structures using
the corresponding MR images of the same subjects. Our previous studies already showed a valuable agreement between the
proposed filling of the rear breast wall for breast volume calculations with the 3-D reconstructed anatomical thoracic wall
based on MRI [17], [18]. The planned MRI study will provide
anatomical data of a representative study group that might allow
optimizing the parameters used to determine the implant surface
as well as deliver a mean breast muscle geometry, which can be
integrated into the software for future simulations of subpectoral
and subglandular implant positioning.
The first clinical applications for subglandular implant positioning using the presented software prototype are promising

918

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

(see Figs. 12 and 13), but furthermore detailed validations are
needed before a wider clinical application can take place. The
surgeons performing the first simulations positively emphasize
the clarity and simplicity of the software design and the proposed
workflow which enhance the user friendliness (see Fig. 10).
Furthermore, the surgeons highlighted the usefulness to interact
with the 3-D breast model in real time and to see the applied
deformations immediately which allows him to compare different types of implants directly during the same evaluation
without time consuming interactions. In addition, the surgeons
are very pleased by the implemented assessment tools which
enable the user to quantify and visualize the performed breast
shape changes and to summarize these evaluations in a written
report which may contribute to a standardized quality assurance
in aesthetic and reconstructive breast surgery in the near future.
Finally, to achieve successful and aesthetically pleasing surgical results, breast surgery planning based on a patient-specific
3-D surface scan breast model with a reliable quantitative surgical outcome prediction and postoperative 3-D breast contour
assessment may add a considerable value to aesthetic breast
surgery. We believe that a 3-D patient-specific physics-based
breast augmentation planning tool may play an important role
in plastic, reconstructive, and aesthetic breast surgery, but will
never completely replace the surgeons’ clinical experience.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. Haase, Director of the Zentralinstitut für Medizintechnik (IMETUM), Technische Universität München, Germany for his cooperation and infrastructural
support. In addition, they would also like to thank Prof. Dr.
H.-G. Machens, Director of the Department of Plastic Surgery
and Hand Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Germany for his continuous support of our
projects which has enabled this study.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Rohrich, “The increasing popularity of cosmetic surgery procedures:
A look at statistics in plastic surgery,” Plast. Reconstr. Surg., vol. 106,
pp. 1363–1365, 2000.
[2] American Society of Plastic Surgeons, National Cosmetic Procedures,
[Online]. Available: http://www.plasticsurgery.org/Documents/newsresources / statistics / 2011-statistics / 2011-cosmetic-procedures-trendsstatistics.pdf. Accessed Aug. 31, 2012.
[3] M. Ferreira, “Evaluation of results in aesthetic plastic surgery: Preliminary
observations on mammaplasty,” Plast. Reconstr. Surg., vol. 106, pp. 1630–
1635, 2000.
[4] O. M. Tepper, J. G. Unger, K. H. Small, D. B. Feldman, N. Kumar,
M. Choi, and N. S. Karp, “Mammometrics: The standardization of aesthetic and reconstructive breast surgery,” Plast. Reconstr. Surg., vol. 125,
pp. 393–400, 2010.
[5] J. Chavoin, A. Teysseyre, and J. Grolleau, ““Morphobreast”: Patient’s
data bank management for objective selection of implant’s volume in
hypotrophic breasts,” Ann. Chir. Plast. Esthet., vol. 50, pp. 487–493,
2005.
[6] M. Westreich, “Anthropomorphic breast measurement: Protocol and results in 50 women with aesthetically perfect breasts and clinical application,” Plast. Reconstr. Surg., vol. 100, pp. 468–479, 1997.
[7] F. Bouman, “Volumetric measurement of the human breast and breast
tissue before and during mammaplasty,” Brit. J. Plast. Surg., vol. 23,
pp. 263–264, 1970.
[8] B. Campaigne, V. Katch, P. Freedson, S. Sady, and F. Katch, “Measurement of breast volume in females: Description of a reliable method,” Ann.
Hum. Biol., vol. 6, pp. 363–367, 1979.

[9] C. Kalbhen, J. McGill, P. Fendley, K. Corrigan, and J. Angelats, “Mammographic determination of breast volume: Comparing different methods,”
Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 173, pp. 1643–1649, 1999.
[10] R. Rudolph and N. Forcier, “Calculation of silicone breast implant volumes using breast magnetic resonance imaging,” Aesthet. Surg. J., vol. 29,
pp. 310–313, 2009.
[11] A. Pozzobon, M. Sabino Neto, D. Veiga, L. Abla, J. Pereira, T. Biasi,
L. Ferreira, L. Yamashita, F. Kawano, E. Nakano, and D. Shigueoka,
“Magnetic resonance images and linear measurements in the surgical
treatment of breast asymmetry,” Aesthet. Plast. Surg., vol. 33, pp. 196–
203, 2009.
[12] T. Kirianoff, “Volume measurements of unequal breasts,” Plast. Reconstr.
Surg., vol. 54, p. 616, 1974.
[13] A. Grossman and L. Roudner, “A simple means for accurate breast volume
determination,” Plast. Reconst. Surg., vol. 66, pp. 851–852, 1980.
[14] G. Brody, “Breast implant size selection and patient satisfaction,” Plast.
Reconstr. Surg., vol. 68, pp. 611–613, 1981.
[15] N. Bulstrode, E. Bellamy, and S. Shrotria, “Breast volume assessment:
Comparing five different techniques,” Breast, vol. 10, pp. 117–123, 2001.
[16] L. Kovacs, M. Eder, R. Hollweck, A. Zimmermann, M. Settles,
A. Schneider, M. Endlich, A. Mueller, K. Schwenzer-Zimmerer,
N. Papadopulos, and E. Biemer, “Comparison between breast volume
measurement using 3D surface imaging and classical techniques,” Breast,
vol. 16, pp. 137–145, 2007.
[17] L. Kovacs, M. Eder, R. Hollweck, A. Zimmermann, M. Settles,
A. Schneider, K. Udosic, K. Schwenzer-Zimmerer, N. A Papadopulos,
and E. Biemer, “New aspects of breast volume measurement using 3dimensional surface imaging,” Ann. Plast. Surg., vol. 57, pp. 602–610,
2006.
[18] M. Eder, A. Schneider, H. Feussner, A. Zimmermann, C. Höhnke,
N. Papadopulos, and L. Kovacs, “Breast volume assessment based on
3D surface geometry: Verification of the method using MR imaging,”
Biomed. Tech., vol. 53, pp. 112–121, 2008.
[19] M. Eder and L. Kovacs, “Commentary on the article of Herold et al.:
The use of mamma MRI volumetry to evaluate the rates of fat survival
after autologous lipotransfer,” Handchir. Mikrochir. Plast. Chir., vol. 42,
pp. 135–136, 2010.
[20] M. Eder, N. Papadopulos, and L. Kovacs, “Re: Virtual 3-dimensional modeling as a valuable adjunct to aesthetic and reconstructive breast surgery,”
Amer. J. Surg., vol. 194, pp. 563–565, 2007.
[21] L. Kovacs, M. Eder, N. Papadopulos, and E. Biemer, “Validating 3dimensional imaging of the breast,” Ann. Plast. Surg., vol. 55, pp. 695–
696, 2005.
[22] A. del Palomar, B. Calvo, J. Herrero, J. López, and M. Doblaré, “A finite
element model to accurately predict real deformations of the breast,” Med.
Eng. Phys., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 1089–1097, 2008.
[23] M. Eder, F. v Waldenfels, M. Sichtermann, T. Schuster, N. Papadopulos,
H. Machens, E. Biemer, and L. Kovacs, “Three-dimensional evaluation of
breast contour and volume changes following subpectoral augmentation
mammaplasty over 6 months,” J. Plast. Reconstr. Aesthet. Surg., vol. 64,
pp. 1152–1160, 2011.
[24] L. Kovacs, M. Eder, A. Zimmermann, D. Müller, T. Schuster,
N. Papadopulos, E. Biemer, M. Klöppel, and H. Machens, “Threedimensional evaluation of breast augmentation and the influence of
anatomic and round implants on operative breast shape changes,” Aesthetic Plast. Surg., vol. 36, pp. 879–887, 2012.
[25] O. Tepper, K. Small, J. Unger, D. Feldman, N. Kumar, M. Choi, and
N. Karp, “3d analysis of breast augmentation defines operative changes
and their relationship to implant dimensions,” Ann. Plast. Surg., vol. 62,
pp. 570–575, 2009.
[26] D. Esme, A. Bucksch, and W. Beekman, “Three-dimensional laser imaging
as a valuable tool for specifying changes in breast shape after augmentation
mammaplasty,” Aesthet. Plast. Surg., vol. 33, pp. 191–195, 2009.
[27] D. Chen, D. Chittajallu, G. Passalis, and I. Kakadiaris, “Computational
tools for quantitative breast morphometry based on 3d scans,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 1703–1718, 2010.
[28] H. Seo, F. Cordier, and K. Hong, “A breast modeler based on analysis of
breast scans,” Comp. Anim. Virtual Worlds, vol. 18, pp. 141–151, 2007.
[29] L. Kovacs, M. Eder, A. Müller, M. Endlich, N. Papadopulos, and
E. Biemer, “Three-dimensional computer-assisted intuitive breast surgery
planning,” J. Biomech., vol. 39, no. Suppl. 1, 2006.
[30] E. Gladilin, B. Gabrielova, P. Montemurro, and P. Hedén, “Customized
planning of augmentation mammaplasty with silicon implants using
three-dimensional optical body scans and biomechanical modeling of
soft tissue outcome,” Aesthet. Plast. Surg., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 494–501,
2011.

GEORGII et al.: COMPUTATIONAL TOOL FOR PREOPERATIVE BREAST AUGMENTATION PLANNING IN AESTHETIC PLASTIC SURGERY

[31] L. Roose, W. de Maerteleire, W. Mollemans, F. Maes, and P. Suetens, “Simulation of soft-tissue deformations for breast augmentation planning,”
Lecture Notes Comput. Sci.: Biomed. Simulat., vol. 4072, pp. 197–205,
2006.
[32] P. de Heras Ciechomski, M. Constantinescu, J. Garcia, R. Olariu,
I. Dindoyal, S. Le Huu, and M. Reyes, “Development and implementation
of a web-enabled 3d consultation tool for breast augmentation surgery
based on 3d-image reconstruction of 2d pictures,” J. Med. Internet. Res.,
vol. 14, no. 1, p. e21, 2012.
[33] A. Lapuebla-Ferri, A. del Palomar, J. Herrero, and A. Jiminez-Mocholi,
“A patient-specific FE-based methodology to simulate prosthesis insertion
during an augmentation mammoplasty,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 33, no. 9,
pp. 1094–1102, 2011.
[34] J. Georgii and R. Westermann, “Corotated finite elements made fast and
stable,” in Proc. 5th Workshop Virtual Reality Interact. Phys. Simulat.,
2008, pp. 11–19.
[35] J. Georgii and R. Westermann, “A streaming approach for sparse matrix
products and its application in Galerkin multigrid methods,” Electron.
Trans. Numer. Anal., vol. 37, pp. 263–275, 2010.
[36] L. Kovacs, A. Yassouridis, A. Zimmermann, G. Brockmann, A. Wöhnl,
M. Blaschke, M. Eder, K. Schwenzer-Zimmerer, R. Rosenberg,
N. Papadopulos, and E. Biemer, “Optimization of 3-dimensional imaging
of the breast region with 3-dimensional laser scanners,” Ann. Plast. Surg.,
vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 229–236, 2006.
[37] H. Si, “TetGen, a quality tetrahedral mesh generator and three-dimensional
Delaunay triangulator, v1.3 user’s manual,” Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics, Berlin, Germany, Tech. Rep. 9, 2004.
[38] M. Bro-Nielsen and S. Cotin, “Real-time volumetric deformable models
for surgery simulation using finite elements and condensation,” in Proc.
Eurograph., 1996, pp. 57–66.
[39] K.-J. Bathe, Finite Element Procedures. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA:
Prentice-Hall, 2002.

919

[40] C. Rankin and F. Brogan, “An element-independent co-rotational procedure for the treatment of large rotations,” ASME J. Pressure Vessel
Technol., vol. 108, pp. 165–174, 1986.
[41] J. Georgii and R. Westermann, “A multigrid framework for real-time
simulation of deformable bodies,” Comput. Graph., vol. 30, pp. 408–415,
2006.
[42] J. Georgii, D. Lagler, C. Dick, and R. Westermann, “Interactive deformations with multigrid skeletal constraints,” in Proc. 7th Workshop Virtual
Reality Interact. Phys. Simulat., 2010, pp. 39–47.
[43] M. Eder, F. Waldenfels, A. Swobodnik, M. Klöppel, A. Pape, T. Schuster,
S. Raith, E. Kitzler, N. Papadopulos, H. Machens, and L. Kovacs, “Objective breast symmetry evaluation using 3-d surface imaging,” Breast,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 152–158, 2012.
[44] M. Eder, G. Brockmann, A. Zimmermann, M. Papadopoulos,
K. Schwenzer-Zimmerer, H. Zeilhofer, R. Sader, N. Papadopulos, and
L. Kovacs, “Evaluation of precision and accuracy assessment of different
3-d surface imaging systems for biomedical purposes,” J. Digit Imag.,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 163–172, 2013.
[45] P. Patete, M. Eder, S. Raith, A. Volf, L. Kovacs, and G. Baroni, “Comparative assessment of 3d surface scanning systems in breast plastic and
reconstructive surgery,” Surg. Innov., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 509–515, 2013.
[46] B. Mailey, A. Freel, R. Wong, D. Pointer, and K. Khoobehi, “Clinical
accuracy and reproducibility of portrait 3d surgical simulation platform in
breast augmentation,” Aesthet. Surg. J., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 84–92, 2013.
[47] C. Creasman, D. Mordaunt, T. Liolios, C. Chiu, A. Gabriel, and
G. Maxwell, “Four-dimensional breast imaging, part ii: Clinical implementation and validation of a computer imaging system for breast augmentation planning,” Aesthet. Surg. J., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 925–938, 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

