508

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

SemInf: A Burst-Based Semantic Influence Model
for Biomedical Topic Influence
Dan He and Douglas S. Parker

Abstract—In this study, we model how biomedical topics influence one another, given they are organized in a topic hierarchy,
medical subject headings, in which the edges capture a parent–
child/subsumption relationship among topics. This information
enables studying influence of topics from a semantic perspective,
which might be very important in analyzing topic evolution and is
missing from the current literature. We first define a burst-based
action for topics, which models upward momentum in popularity
(or “elevated occurrences” of the topics), and use it to define two
types of influence: accumulation influence and propagation influence. We then propose a model of influence between topics, and
develop an efficient algorithm (TIPS) to identify influential topics. Experiments show that our model is successful at identifying
influential topics and the algorithm is very efficient.
Index Terms—Bursts, MeSH (medical subject headings), social
influence, topic hierarchies.

I. INTRODUCTION
N recent years, the problem of mining influence in networks,
especially social networks, has attracted significant attention. One of the key questions is how ideas, information, or
influence spread (cascade) through the network. Lots of research [1]–[4] has been aimed at evaluating the influence of
people—identifying the most influential people (viral marketing) or selecting an initial set of people who ultimately influence the largest number of people in the network (influence
maximization).
Recently, two works appeared in which this notion of influence was generalized into topic-level influence in a heterogeneous network: in [5] and [6], heterogeneous link information and the textual content associated with nodes are combined to mine influence. The topic-level influence, however, is
a “real” form of influence between users without direct interaction between topics, creating interesting differences from social
networks.
Inspired by this study, we took the next step to consider topic
influence as a direct interaction between topics. This type of

I

Manuscript received February 27, 2013; revised September 5, 2013; accepted
September 12, 2013. Date of publication October 17, 2013; date of current version March 3, 2014.
D. He is with the IBM T.J. Watson Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
USA (e-mail: dhe@us.ibm.com).
D. S. Parker is with the Department of Computer Science, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1596 USA (e-mail:
stott@cs.ucla.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2285875

influence is important in that it can be used to measure impact
of topics directly.
Interesting measures of influence can be based on relationships among research topics. Natural relationships include cooccurrence and citation, for example, as in the scientific literature,
one topic can be said to “influence” another by citation: the two
cooccur in the same literature and the first topic occurs earlier
than the second, defining a precedence relationship. Therefore,
we measure the influence between a pair of topics from two
aspects: 1) temporal differences between their occurrences; one
topic needs to occur earlier to influence another topic, and 2) the
pointwise mutual information based on their cooccurrences. (In
the scientific literature, it is unlikely that one topic will influence
another, yet the two topics never cooccur.)
What’s more, in this paper, we consider the semantic relationship of subsumption between topics, quantified by a topic
hierarchy. Hierarchies provide a natural semantic relationship
among topics, such as the “is a” relationship among node types.
Therefore, the two nodes have a “parent–child” relationship, and
their semantic relatedness can be measured by their closeness
in the hierarchy. It is well known that research attention often
shifts to related topics; for example, social network analysis
may influence other areas of data mining such as graph mining,
but it is less likely to influence research in optical networks.
Therefore, the larger their semantic distance, the less semantically related two topics are, and the less influence there is
between them. We believe that these semantic relationships can
be important in improving the validity of an influence model in
practical applications.
To our knowledge, there is no recent work about mining direct
interactions, or influences between topics. The topic hierarchy
is also unique in our model, and we believe that it is important
since it provides a semantic perspective on topic influence. This
might be very important in analyzing topic evolution and is
missing from the current literature.
SemInf is a novel model designed for the unique properties
of this problem. We consider the influence of topics on each
other through certain actions or events: we first define a “burst”based action as a period of “elevated occurrence” of a topic (or
“burst” in its frequency), following the topic-dynamics model of
bursts in [7]. There are a number of works on modeling bursts
such as [7]–[10]. We adopted the momentum-oriented topicdynamics model in [7] because it is suited to burst detection in a
hierarchy in which occurrences of the topics can be tracked, and
this model of bursts permits extension to represent the complete
process of birth, growth, and death of topics. More details are
given later. Next, we model influence between topics according
to the temporal difference between their bursts, the pointwise

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HE AND PARKER: SEMINF: A BURST-BASED SEMANTIC INFLUENCE MODEL FOR BIOMEDICAL TOPIC INFLUENCE

mutual information (based on co-occurrence), and their semantic distance. The temporal property of the burst-based actions
permits propagation of influence. We can calculate the influence
of a topic to all other topics as its impact.
One more advantage of our model is that it can be potentially
used as an alternative model of impact in the scientific literature. It is well established that impact factors reflect the average
number of citations to articles published in science and social
scientific journals. Traditional models for quantifying impact
of scientific journals are generally based on citations and algorithms such as page rank have been applied on citation networks
to rank journals [11]. As shown in our experiments, although
our model defines the impact of topics without using citation
information, it does report ranks of scientific journals that are
consistent with the page rank model using citation information.
It appears that the temporal relationships between topic occurrences and their cooccurrences can approximate citation relationships. Thus, our model can be useful for estimating impact
of scientific topics when the citation network is not available, or
when it is too expensive to construct and analyze.
To summarize our contributions in this paper:
1) SemInf is unique as a model of direct interaction between
topics. It weights influence by pointwise mutual information based on cooccurrences of topics, so that increases
in cooccurrence over random expectation are reflected by
increased influence.
2) SemInf represents topic influence in terms of bursts, with a
burst-based action that is multitimestamp, spanning whole
time periods of “elevated occurrence” of a topic. It weights
influence according to the temporal difference between
their bursts.
3) SemInf considers semantic relatedness of topics, so that
more semantically related topics have higher influence on
each other.
4) SemInf can be potentially used as an alternative model for
measuring impact of topics (as is common in the scientific
literature), and can be used when citation information is
not available.
5) SemInf works even when the semantic information is unknown, although such information does boost the performance of the model.
6) Although we focused on biomedical topics in this paper,
we show SemInf can be generalized to other domains such
as computer science research.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we review related work for mining influence in social
networks. In Section III, we define our model of topic influence in a topic hierarchy. We propose an algorithm to efficiently
compute the impact of every node in the hierarchy. We report
the experimental results and comparisons in Section IV, and
conclude in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
In studies of the spread of influence in social networks, two
types of propagation models are well accepted. In the general
threshold model, each node is either active or inactive at any

509

given timestamp, and each node becomes monotonically more
likely to be active as more of its neighbors become active. In
the independent cascade model, each activated node is given a
one-time chance to activate each of its neighboring nodes with
a certain probability.
Domingos and Richardson [1] studied the viral marketing
problem by viewing the market as a social network, and modeling it as a Markov random field. Kempe et al. [2] studied
the influence maximization problem and provided a greedy algorithm as well as the first provable approximation guarantees
for efficient algorithms. More recently, other problems related
to influence maximization have been explored. Leskovec et al.
studied the outbreak detection problem in [3], modeling it as
a problem of selecting nodes in a network so as to detect
the spread of a virus or information as quickly as possible.
Rodriguez et al. studied the problem of identifying an optimal
diffusion network from temporal data in [4], developing an approximation algorithm that can be scaled to large networks to
trace paths of diffusion and influence through networks, and to
infer the network that best explains the influence propagation.
Chen et al. [12] developed methods to improve the efficiency of
the greedy algorithm for influence maximization in [2], and proposed degree discount heuristics that improve influence spread.
All the above study assumes predefined influence probabilities between people. Goyal et al. [13], on the contrary, studied
the problem of learning influence probabilities from historical
action data and tried to predict when people will become activated from the learned probabilities. Saito et al. [14] applied the
electromagnetic algorithm to solve the same problem, focusing
on the independent cascade model of propagation.
In this paper, we want to study the problem of learning topic
influence in a hierarchy, a special type of network, using historical topic frequency data similar to that of Goyal et al. [13].
To our knowledge, there is no recent work on mining direct
topic interactions, or influence in topic hierarchies. The most
relevant work appears to be that of [5] and [6]. Tang et al. [6]
introduced a topic-based social influence problem, in which
nodes are coauthors rather than friends. Each researcher in the
network is associated with a distribution of topics, reflecting
research topics in their publications. A model is then proposed
to study the problem, characterizing for each specific topic how
the researchers affect one another, and determining which are
most influential on each topic. Liu et al. [5] adopted a similar
but more general idea to mine topic-level influence for users
in a heterogeneous network. A generative model which utilizes
both content and link information in heterogeneous networks is
proposed. These two works, however, study influence between
users rather than topics, and neither considers semantic information between topics.
We are interested in how elevated occurrence of a topic influences the popularity of other topics. Therefore, we need to
identify when popularity gains strong upward momentum, i.e.,
there is a “burst” in popularity. We then define the actions that
are associated with the topics in the hierarchy as the complete
process of occurrence of a burst, from the growth of the burst
to its death. Lots of work has been done in identifying bursts
of a topic over certain time series. Kleinberg [9] and Leskovec

510

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

et al. [10] used an automaton to model bursts, in which each
state represents the arrival rate of occurrences of a topic. Shasha
and Zhu [8] defined bursts based on hierarchies of fixed-length
time windows. In [7], bursts are modeled with a “topic dynamics” model, where bursts are intervals of positive change
in momentum. They applied trend analysis indicators such as
exponential moving average (EMA) and moving average convergence/divergence (MACD) histogram of technical analysis
(well-developed momentum computation methods used in evaluating stock histories) to identify burst periods. While the topic
dynamics model is suitable for identifying bursts for individual
topics, Kleinberg’s model is more appropriate for identifying
bursts among a set of topics.

Fig. 1.
action.

Visualized comparison of the traditional action and our burst-based

III. MODELS
A. Burst-Based Action
To model topic influence, we need to define actions for the
topics, which can model elevated occurrences of the topics.
The actions are based on the bursts defined in [7], based on
technical analysis indicators such as EMA, MACD, and MACD
histogram. A burst is defined as a time interval in which the
MACD Histogram value is greater than 0. The strength of the
burst at a specific timestamp is the MACD Histogram value of
that timestamp. We then define the burst-based action as the
whole process of the occurrence, growth, and death of the burst.
And from now on, “year” will be the only time unit we use. We
also say a topic is activated when a burst of the topic occurs.
The readers can refer to [7] for the details of the topic dynamic
model.
B. SemInf Model
As the occurrences of the burst-based actions are temporal,
we can model burst-based influence in a manner like the models
for the traditional social influence. Goyal et al. [13] proposed
several probability models for the influence of one node to another node based on temporal data. However, in our problem
setting, these models cannot be applied directly. This is because
in the traditional social influence problem, each action is assumed to occur at a specific timestamp and each node has only
binary status: “active” and “inactive”. Therefore, these actions
can be considered as single-timestamp actions. In our problem
setting, the burst-based action occurs at a specific timestamp and
lasts for a certain amount of time (and then vanishes). During
the time period the bursts occur, they have continuous values, or
strengths. The actions in our problem are thus multitimestamp,
over intervals defined by the burst periods. A visual comparison
of the traditional social network action and our burst-based action is shown in Fig. 1. As one can see, the traditional actions are
all discrete points along the time axis. Our burst-based actions
correspond to multitimestamp burst regions.
To handle burst-based actions in our problem, we need to
design a new probability model. We follow the independent
cascade model to define the influence probability between any
pair of nodes, considering the following three aspects:

1) The influence is multitimestamp; namely, we consider not
only the occurrence time of the action, but also every
timestamp in the whole period of the action. Similar to
traditional social influence, for each pair of timestamps,
the more distant they are, the smaller the influence between
them.
2) In the scientific literature, if one topic is influenced by
another, the two usually cooccur (in scientific publications). The more they cooccur, the greater the influence
between them. We can measure the influence that results
from cooccurrences with pointwise mutual information.
3) Among research topics, semantically related topics are
more likely to influence each other, as research attention
shifts frequently to related topics rather than to unrelated
topics. As the topic hierarchy explicitly defines the semantic distance of the topics, we weight the influence by
semantic distance.
Based on the above intuition, we propose the SemInf model,
which defines semantic influence from a node pj to a node ci as


m ∈B c i
n ∈B p j ,n < m In ,m
× Hp j ,c i
P Ip j ,c i =
(1)
|Bc i | × |Bp j |
SIp j ,c i =

1
P Ip j ,c i
sd(pj , ci )β

(2)

where SIp j ,c i is the semantic influence from pj to ci , P Ip j ,c i
denotes the propagation influence from pj to ci and sd(pj , ci ) is
the semantic distance between pj and ci in the hierarchy. β is a
decay factor adjusting the weights of semantic distance. As we
will show later in our experiments, β = 1 is a reasonable choice.
Bc i and Bp j denote the set of consecutive burst years for ci and
pj , respectively, Scmi and Spmj denote the number of occurrences
at year m for ci and pj , and In ,m denotes the traditional social
influence between two actions occurring at timestamp n and m,
where n is necessarily smaller than m. Hp j ,c i is the pointwise
mutual information quantifying the probability p(ci |pj ) over the
burst period of ci , defined as follows:
Hp j ,c i =


m ∈B c i

PMIm (ci , pj )


e  PMIm (e , pj )

(3)

HE AND PARKER: SEMINF: A BURST-BASED SEMANTIC INFLUENCE MODEL FOR BIOMEDICAL TOPIC INFLUENCE

511

Therefore, semantic influence is accumulated for each year m
in the burst period of ci , and this can be influenced by all years
n < m in the burst period of pj , weighted by the cooccurrence
proportion of the two topics. Just as in models for the traditional
social influence, the start year of pj must precede the start year
of ci for the influence to be meaningful.
C. Alternative Baseline Models
For comparison, we consider two alternative baseline models:
1) Single-timestamp model: Instead of doing accumulation
for all timestamps within the burst period, we only consider the occurrence time of the actions. We apply the traditional influence model in social networks solely based
on these occurrence times.
2) No-hierarchy model: We ignore the hierarchy structure
and compute influence between every pair of nodes simply
based on their occurrence time and cooccurrences ratio.
D. Influence Graph
Fig. 2. Year differences between burst occurrences of pairs of topics versus
their semantic distance.

PMIm (e, pj ) = log

cm (e, pj )
.
cm (e) × cm (pj )

(4)

Here, cm (e, pj ) is the number of articles in which e and pj
cooccur at year m, and cm (e) is the number of articles in which
e occurs at year m.
Popular models for traditional social influence between two
actions include an exponential model and a power-law model
exponential model:
power-law model:

P (δ) ∝ e−δ /α
P (δ) ∝

1
.
δα

Here, P (δ) is the traditional influence probability between the
two actions, δ is the difference between the occurrence times
of the two actions, α is a decay parameter. In our experiments,
we used the power-law model and we tested different values for
α. The results do not vary much. Therefore, we simply set α to
be 1.
In order to justify that the semantic distance is indeed an important factor in influence propagation, for every edge in the
graph, we summarize the year difference between the burst occurrences of the pair of nodes of the edge against their semantic
distance. We show the results in Fig. 2. As we can see, although
there are certain fluctuations, in general, the mean difference
between the action occurrence times increases as their semantic distance increases. Similarly, the variance of the difference
increases as semantic distance increases. Therefore, for small
semantic distance, namely for pairs of topics that are semantically similar, once one topic is “activated,” the other topic is
“activated” more rapidly compared with pairs of topics with
large semantic distance. The figure indicates that a topic is more
likely to influence a semantically related topic than unrelated
topics.

Given the definition of semantic influence, we can build an influence graph G = (V, E), where V is the set of topic bursts, and
E is the set of edges between bursts whose influence probability
is not 0. In reality, as the number of bursts is very large, the number of edges can be in the billions. Thus, we set up a threshold
to keep only the edges with greater influence probability. More
details will be given in the experiments. For influence from ai
to bj , we must have ts(ai ) < ts(bj ), where ts(ai ), ts(bj ) are
the start years of the burst for node ai , bj , respectively.
Given the graph, we can compute the influence probability
of a node a on a node b. Consider a simple case where a and b
are siblings and their parent is c. a can influence b through their
coparent c. Let Ancestor(ai ) and Ancestor(bj ) be the set of
ancestors of ai and bj , respectively, and P athk (ai , bj ) be the
set of nodes on the path from ai to bj . If there is no path from a
to b, the influence probability between a and b is 0. For a more
general case, we define the influence probability of the ith burst
of a to the jth burst of b as:

SIe
(5)
IPk (ai , bj ) =
e∈Path k (a i ,b j )

IP (ai , bj ) = 1 −


(1 − IPk (ai , bj ))

(6)

k

where IP (ai , bj ) is the influence probability between ai and
bj , IPk (ai , bj ) is the influence probability between ai and bj
following the kth path between ai and bj , e is an edge in the kth
path between ai and bj , SIe is the semantic influence between
the pair of end nodes
 of the edge e, defined in (2). We define
IP (ai , bj ) as 1 − k (1 − IPk [ai , bj ]) since there can be multiple paths between ai and bj , and bj can be activated multiple
times. Thus, the probability is 1 minus the probability that none
of the attempts activate bj .
E. Impact of Topics
In essence, we want to study the viral marketing problem
for topics in a hierarchy; in other words, we want to identify

512

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

the most influential topics. Unlike the influence maximization
problem defined in [2], which aims to identify a set of k people
that activate the most people in a social network, we study a
simpler version of the problem. We define the impact IP (ai ) of
a node ai as the sum of the influence probabilities from ai to all
other nodes bj ’s in the influence graph G = (V, E)
IP (ai ) =



IP (ai , bj ).

TABLE I
RUN TIME (SECONDS) OF TIPS AND BF (BREADTH-FIRST SEARCH) ON
RANDOMLY GENERATED DAGS WITH DIFFERENT (VERTEX
NUMBER, EDGE NUMBER) PAIRS

(7)

b j ∈V ,b j = a i

Our goal is to identify topics that have the highest impact.
With the definition of impact for a node in the influence graph,
we can compute the impact for each node, and rank nodes accordingly. A naive algorithm applies breadth-first search from
each node to compute its impact. The complexity of the naive
algorithm is O(|V |3 ), where |V | is total number of bursts for
all nodes in the hierarchy—or equivalently the number of nodes
in the influence graph. In our experimental problem setting discussed below, |V | is around 160 000. Thus, the computational
load can be very high. The naive algorithm is not efficient in the
following two respects:
1) If there are multiple paths from one node to another, and
the paths share some edges, the naive algorithm may explore nodes on these edges multiple times.
2) If paths from two different nodes share edges, the naive
algorithm explores nodes on these edges multiple times.
Next, we apply a more efficient search algorithm called twolists depth-first search (TIPS) that we developed in [15]. In our
algorithm, we start from all the source nodes in the influence
graph that only have out-going edges and no incoming edges.
We do depth-first search from each source node and compute the
influence probability along the way. However, to avoid exploring
the same node multiple times, we maintain two lists for each
node a searched, a To list and a From list. The To list stores all
the nodes which have paths to the node a. The From list stores
all the nodes to which a has paths.
During the depth-first search, whenever a node x is reached
and x has not been explored before, we update the To list for
x and the From lists for all nodes that have paths to x. However, when x has been already explored (meaning the depth-first
search has found a new path to x), we avoid exploring x any
further.
For all nodes on any new path to a, we can update their From
list as well as the influence probability from them to a since
we maintain two lists for a. Meanwhile, we update the To list
of a by adding all nodes on the new path to a. Since the new
path to a will affect a’s influence probability as well as the
influence probability of all the nodes in a’s From list, we update
the influence probability from a to all the nodes in a’s From
list. Once we have finished searching the whole graph in this
way, the impact of a node a will be the sum of the influence
probabilities from a to each of the nodes in its From list.
Although theoretically the complexity of the algorithm TIPS
is still O(|V |3 ), in reality TIPS is much more efficient: when
we are trying to explore a node that has been explored earlier,
TIPS only needs to update the To and From lists, and the nodes
that need to be updated can be obtained directly from the two

lists. By contrast, breadth-first search needs to explore nodes on
common edges repeatedly, which requires searching neighbors
of the nodes, and this search turns out to be time consuming.
On the other hand, TIPS consumes more memory to save the
two lists. Therefore, TIPS trades time efficiency for memory
efficiency.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Performance on Random DAGs
To first illustrate the efficiency of the algorithm TIPS, we
generated random directed acyclic graph (DAG) with different vertex numbers and edge numbers. Due to the difficulty of
generating random DAGs, we generated only relatively small
DAGs, which are sufficient to show that TIPS is much more
efficient than a breadth-first search from all vertices. The results
are shown in Table I. We rounded run times to integer seconds.
We can see that for most parameter settings, TIPS is much faster
than the breadth-first search.
B. Simulation With a Randomly-Generated Hierarchy
Since we do not have ground truth to validate the most influential terms directly, we conduct the validation on simulated
random graphs. In our simulation, we randomly generate a hierarchy with 5000 topics and 15 000 edges. Then, we randomly
generate occurrences of burst-based action for all these topics.
TIPS is run on the simulated influence graph. To validate the
most influential topics in the random graph, we start from every
topic and propagate the influence through the influence graph to
activate topics according to the influence probability associated
with the edges. We then rank the topics according to the number
of topics that are activated by the propagation and use this rank
as our ground-truth.
1) Choose Decay Factor β: We first evaluate what should
be a good value of the decay factor β in Formula 2. We compare the top-100 most influential topics reported by TIPS and
the top-100 topics in the rank ordering of which activated the
most other topics, and compute accuracy. Accuracy is defined
as the percentage of the reported top-100 topics that also appear
among the top-100 topics that activated the most other topics.
The results are shown in Table II. As we can see, β = 1 gives
the greatest accuracy. As β increases, the weight of semantic
distance decreases exponentially, leading to a dramatic drop in
accuracy. The accuracy is not high, because the impact of the

HE AND PARKER: SEMINF: A BURST-BASED SEMANTIC INFLUENCE MODEL FOR BIOMEDICAL TOPIC INFLUENCE

TABLE II
ACCURACY OF TIPS FOR DIFFERENT DECAY FACTORS β

513

However, considering both multiple timestamps and the hierarchical structure still leads to much better performance.
The results also indicate that SemInf is a general model. It
achieves better performance when the topic hierarchy is available. However, when the topic hierarchy is not available, SemInf
can be still applied without the component of the semantic information, as all the components are independent.
C. Validation on the Mesh Hierarchy

Fig. 3. Accuracy of the three models, SemInf (“MultiTimeStamp + Hierarchy”), baseline models “SingleTimeStamp” and “No-Hierarchy,” for top-100,
top-500, top-1000 topics, respectively.

top topics are close to each other. Therefore, these topics usually activate the same number of topics and we lack a way to
distinguish between them. However, as we will see later, the
ranks of the top-100 most influential topics reported by TIPS
are generally very high.
2) Comparison With Baseline Models: We next compare the
accuracy of our model with the following two baseline models:
1) Single-timestamp model: In the influence graph, we only
use the occurrence time of the bursts to compute the influence probability. We do not accumulate probabilities at
every timestamp in the burst period.
2) No-hierarchy model: In the influence graph, the influence
probability of each edge is computed solely based on the
burst period of the two nodes. Semantic distance is not
considered.
We fix β as 1 and check top-100, top-500, and top-1000 topics. The accuracy of the three models is shown in Fig. 3. As we
can see, as the sample size increases, the accuracy of all models
increases. Our model is superior to the other two baseline models for all sample sizes. The accuracy of the single-timestamp
model is not poor compared with the no-hierarchy model. This is
because we normalize influence through the burst period. Thus,
the influence probability from considering single timestamps
will not be too different from considering multiple timestamps.

We next applied TIPS on the medical subject headings
(MeSH) hierarchy, a very widely used hierarchy of topics in
biomedical research: each article in PubMed/MEDLINE is annotated with descriptive MeSH terms. (Here “topic” and “term”
are interchangeable.) We crawled these articles for the years
1950 through 2008—a list of 19 million articles of size 70 GB.
For each term in the MeSH hierarchy, we counted its frequency
of occurrence in each year, and accumulated these frequencies
through the hierarchy (so that the frequency of a node is the sum
of the frequencies of all descents of the node as well as of itself).
We show the number of terms at each level of the hierarchy.
To find all burst-based actions, we used the parameters (4,
8, and 5) for the MACD histogram, as suggested in [7]. Notice,
we consider yearly frequencies in the experiments but the model
can be generalized to any time-unit-based frequency. We first
constructed the influence graph for all MeSH topic occurrences.
Since the data set is very large, the number of all possible
nodes and edges in the graph is astronomical. However, we
observed that most of the edges have low influence probability
as the coocurrences ratio (defined as the ratio of the number of
coocurrences of the two topics and the product of the numbers of
ocurrences of the two topics) of the pair of topics is low. Indeed,
as one topic usually cooccurred with only a small number of
other topics, most often the coocurrence ratio between a random
pair of topics was 0. Thus, we first checked the cooccurrence
ratio of the topics and removed all edges with ratio less than
0.01 for the pair of topics. Also, for all nodes that were isolated
from the remaining graph after all such edges were removed,
we removed the node as well. After this filtering step, the total
number of nodes in the graph was 104 257 and the total number
of edges was 227 054. As the ratio of the numbers of edges
and vertices was around 2, indicating that the chance of seeing
multiple paths between two vertices was relatively low, TIPS
finished in just 19 s. We ranked the MeSH terms by their impact,
and the top-10 most influential terms and their burst periods that
resulted are shown in Table III.
These results also provided some interesting results about
“impact” of journals. In order to validate that our model reported
meaningful ranks for these biomedical topics, we also tried to
rank all biomedical journals according to the topics they contain.
In other words, we used a simple sum of the influence of all
topics contained in each journal as a measure of impact of the
journal. With this measure of impact, the top-10 most influential
biomedical journals were determined to be those in Table IV.
For comparison, the table also shows the ranks of these journals
obtained with a weighted page rank model based on citation
data [11]. Since we only found the top-10 journals reported by

514

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

TABLE III
TOP-10 HIGHEST IMPACT MESH TERMS, WITH CORRESPONDING
BURST PERIODS

TABLE IV
TOP-10 HIGHEST IMPACT BIOMEDICAL JOURNALS, REPORTED BY SemInf AND
BY A WEIGHTED PAGE RANK MODEL [11]

used in social network influence mining can be naturally adapted
here, with three modifications to reflect the dynamics and semantic structure of topics. We also developed an efficient algorithm to produce an impact ranking of journals, where we
defined impact as the sum of influence probabilities of all its
topics. We validated our model in the biomedical domain: our
experimental analysis showed that SemInf yields meaningful results, and that our algorithm for finding high impact topics is
efficient. An interesting potential application of our model is that
it could be used to quantify impact when citation information is
not available. We also showed that SemInf can be generalized to
other domains such as computer science research.
As shown in our simulated experiments, availability of a topic
hierarchy permits SemInf to achieve better performance. However, when the topic hierarchy is not available, SemInf can be still
applied without the component of the semantic information—
all the components are independent. Therefore, SemInf is a very
general model.
REFERENCES

V. CONCLUSION

[1] P. Domingos and M. Richardson, “Mining the network value of customers,” in Proc. 7th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2001, pp. 57–66.
[2] D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and É. Tardos, “Maximizing the spread of influence through a social network,” in Proc. 9th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2003, pp. 137–146.
[3] J. Leskovec, A. Krause, C. Guestrin, C. Faloutsos, J. VanBriesen, and
N. Glance, “Cost-effective outbreak detection in networks,” in Proc. 13th
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2007, pp. 420–429.
[4] M. Gomez Rodriguez, J. Leskovec, and A. Krause, “Inferring networks of
diffusion and influence,” in Proc. 16th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2010, pp. 1019–1028.
[5] L. Liu, J. Tang, J. Han, M. Jiang, and S. Yang, “Mining topic-level influence in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. 19th ACM Int. Conf. Inf.
Knowl. Manage., 2010, pp. 199–208.
[6] J. Tang, J. Sun, C. Wang, and Z. Yang, “Social influence analysis in largescale networks,” in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2009, pp. 807–816.
[7] D. He and D. S. Parker, “Topic dynamics: An alternative model of bursts in
streams of topics,” in Proc. 16th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2010, pp. 443–452.
[8] Y. Zhu and D. Shasha, “Efficient elastic burst detection in data streams,”
in Proc. 9th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Washington, DC, USA, Aug. 24–27, 2003, pp. 336–345.
[9] J. M. Kleinberg, “Bursty and hierarchical structure in streams,” in Proc.
8th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada, Jul. 23–26, 2002, pp. 91–101.
[10] J. Leskovec, L. Backstrom, and J. Kleinberg, “Meme-tracking and the
dynamics of the news cycle,” in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2009, pp. 497–506.
[11] J. Bollen, M. Rodriquez, and H. Van de Sompel, “Journal status,” Scientometrics, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 669–687, 2006.
[12] W. Chen, Y. Wang, and S. Yang, “Efficient influence maximization in
social networks,” in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2009, pp. 199–208.
[13] A. Goyal, F. Bonchi, and L. Lakshmanan, “Learning influence probabilities in social networks,” in Proc. 3rd ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data
Mining, ACM, 2010, pp. 241–250.
[14] K. Saito, R. Nakano, and M. Kimura, “Prediction of information diffusion probabilities for independent cascade model,” in Knowledge-Based
Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems. New York, NY, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 67–75.
[15] D. He, “Modeling semantic influence for biomedicai research topics using
mesh hierarchy,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Bioinformat. Biomed., 2012,
pp. 1–6.

In this study, we have proposed SemInf, a burst-based model
of topic influence. We have shown that models similar to those

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

the page rank model, if the journal is not in the top-10 list, its
page rank is marked as “NA.” As we can see in Table IV, five
of our top-10 journals are also top-10 journals by the page rank
model.
It is especially interesting that J Biological Chemistry is
ranked first by both models; this is startling, since its official impact factor based on citations is significantly lower than those of
journals like Nature and Science that are renowned for their high
citation-based impact factors. This indicates the influence propagation in our model which is consistent with the propagation
used in page rank models based on citation. Also one thing to
notice is that our ranking covers a total of 19 833 journals, while
the page rank model considers only 5 709 journals. Therefore,
because our ranking is not dependent on citation information,
some journals emerge as highly-ranked that are omitted from
the other ranking. What’s more, because we removed the weak
influences, our ranking places greater emphasis to topics having strong influence. Citations can reward diversity of topics,
and this can increase the impact ranking of journals such as
Nature, which publishes papers in many fields. Finally, an astonishing result was that our model was able to report fairly
consistent topic and journal rankings without using any citation
data. (Of course, using citation data can improve the measure
of influence between two topics that are linked by citations.)
Therefore, SemInf potentially can be used to model impact in
the scientific literature when citation data is not available. We
would like to further explore this in our future work.

