1186

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Using a Dynamic Tracking Filter to Extract
Distortion-Product Otoacoustic Emissions
Evoked With Swept-Tone Signals
Jun Deng, Shixiong Chen, Member, IEEE, Xiaoping Zeng, and Guanglin Li, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs)
are sound energy generated by healthy inner ears when stimulated
by two tones. Since DPOAEs are physiologically related with the
functional status of the inner ear, they have been widely used as a
clinical tool in hearing screening and diagnoses. Currently, almost
all DPOAEs recording systems use pure tones as the stimuli and
can test only one frequency at a time, resulting in low efficiency and
insufficient resolution. In this study, conventional pure tones were
replaced by swept tones with time-varying frequencies to overcome
the limitation of current DPOAEs measurements. A tracking filter with dynamic center frequencies was proposed to extract the
swept-tone DPOAEs from recorded signals with stimulus artifacts
and background noises. The results of this study showed that the
dynamic tracking filter had great performance in effectively extracting the swept-tone DPOAEs under different noise conditions
for both the simulation and experimental data. The spectrogram of
the extracted swept-tone DPOAEs could provide useful information to examine the functional status of the inner ear and to identify
the detailed frequency regions of the hearing loss. These preliminary findings suggested that the swept-tone DPOAEs might be
useful for developing a more efficient and accurate tool for hearing
loss screening in the clinic.
Index Terms—Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions
(DPOAEs), dynamic tracking filter, hearing loss, swept tones.

I. INTRODUCTION
EARING loss has become one of the most common
chronic diseases all over the world. Early diagnosis and
treatment are clinically important and useful in reducing serious
influences on the language development of newborns and life
quality of adults. Currently, the easiest way for early detection
of hearing loss is to measure otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) that
are low-level acoustic signals generated by the activities of outer

H

Manuscript received April 27, 2013; revised August 16, 2013; accepted
September 30, 2013. Date of publication October 11, 2013; date of current
version June 30, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Key
Basic Research Program of China (#2013CB329505), the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants (#61135004, #61302037), the Shenzhen
Governmental Basic Research Grant (#JC201005270295A), and the Guangdong Innovation Research Team Fund for Low-cost Healthcare Technologies.
The first two authors have equal contributions to the work.
J. Deng and X. Zeng are with the Department of Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China (e-mail: dengjun@cqu.edu.cn;
zxp@cqu.edu.cn).
S. Chen and G. Li are with the Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China (e-mail: sx.chen@siat.ac.cn; gl.li@siat.ac.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2285558

hair cells (OHCs) within the cochlea [1]–[3]. The OAE energy
can propagate to the external auditory canal, where it can be
recorded by a sensitive microphone [1]–[4]. When the OHCs
are damaged (by acoustic noises or ototoxic drugs), OAEs will
decrease or even disappear [5]. Therefore, the measurement of
OAEs provides an objective way to monitor the physiological
activities and healthiness of the OHCs. Since the OHCs at different locations of the cochlea would generate OAEs with different frequencies, the analysis of frequency components in OAEs
recordings can obtain the information about the healthiness of
OHCs at different locations. The auditory brainstem response
(ABR) is another hearing test frequently used in newborn hearing screening and auditory threshold estimation [6]–[8]. However, studies showed that only when ABR and OAE measurements are combined together, much more comprehensive information about the functional status of the auditory system could
be provided and the false-positive rate could be greatly reduced
than either alone [9]–[11]. Therefore, the OAE measurement is
usually followed by an ABR test during hearing loss screenings
of newborns in routine clinical practices [12], [13].
Distortion-product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs), evoked
by two pure tones with closely spaced frequencies (f1 , f2 , f1 <
f2 ), are one type of OAEs frequently used in the clinic. Due to
the nonlinear amplification mechanism of the cochlea, DPOAEs
occurred at multiple frequencies mf1 + mf2 (where m and
n are the integers) other than the stimulus frequencies. For
humans, the cubic difference tone (CDT, 2f1 –f2 ) shows the
largest amplitude and therefore is most frequently measured in
clinical practices [14], [15]. Compared with OAEs evoked by
other types of stimuli, DPOAEs are easier to measure since
it only requires a simple fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the
acoustic response at the ear canal. The amplitude and phase,
as well as the input/output functions, of DPOAEs, are highly
related with the nonlinearities of the OHCs and healthiness of
the cochlea [16]–[21]. Therefore, the measurement of DPOAEs
has been defined as a standard routine in clinical OAE tests
[22]–[24].
Generally, pure tones with fixed frequencies are used in clinical practices to evoke DPOAEs. By using a pure tone, only one
frequency point or one cochlea location can be measured at a
time. To be practical in the clinic, only some sparse frequency
points (such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 kHz) are usually measured in cases of time constraints. With low-resolution OAEs,
it is difficult to accurately pinpoint the locations of the hearing loss and may be easy to miss impaired OHCs. In addition,
measuring DPOAEs at sufficient number of cochlea locations

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DENG et al.: USING A DYNAMIC TRACKING FILTER TO EXTRACT DISTORTION-PRODUCT OTOACOUSTIC EMISSIONS EVOKED

would be rather time consuming. The long-time DPOAE testing
on subjects, especially on children, may cause additional interferences in OAE recordings due to the fatigue of the subjects
with deep concentration and possible variances of the recording
system. Therefore, the current measuring methods of DPOAEs
are limited to obtain reliable and accurate results. To overcome
the limitations of current DPOAE methods, using frequencyvarying tones to induce the DPOAEs has been proposed and
investigated [16]–[22], in which multiple frequencies could be
measured at a time. Among all frequency-varying tones, swept
tones originally proposed by Muller and Paulo [25] are most
immune against system distortion and easiest to customize the
spectral contents. These features of the swept tones are usually preferred by OAE measurements. To measure swept-tone
DPOAEs, the pure-tone stimuli are replaced by two swept tones
and the frequencies of corresponding DPOAE components also
change with time. The use of swept tones is beneficial for measuring high-resolution DPOAEs within a rather short time to
overcome the limitations of current methods.
For conventional pure-tone stimuli, the amplitude and phase
of DPOAEs can be easily extracted by a simple FFT of the
acoustic signal recorded at the ear canal. However, such analysis
method cannot be adopted for the extraction of the swept-tone
DPOAEs because the frequencies of all components change
over time. Specifically, both the stimuli (f1 , f2 ) and the CDT
(2f1 –f2 ) become swept tones whose frequency ranges are
largely overlapped over the entire testing time. As a result, a simple FFT or a conventional band-pass filter is incapable of separating the components from each other. Talmadge et al. [26] and
Dhar [27], [28] et al. proposed a least-squares-fit (LSF) filter to
analyze DPOAEs evoked by continuously sweeping primaries.
While their studies are an interesting work in measuring highresolution DPOAEs, the LSF filter requires long-time recordings
for an accurate estimation and the results are easily affected by
extra noises introduced by the prolonged test. Wit et al. [29] and
Tognola et al. [30] proposed a time–frequency analysis technique to extract DPOAEs based on continuous wavelet transform (CWT). However, the most pivotal coefficient of CWT
was chosen according to an empirical relationship between the
frequency and phase gradient, which may not be the most optimized choice. Choi et al. [31] used a digital heterodyne analysis method to extract stimulus frequency OAEs with sweeping
frequencies. Their method is based on the searching of the energy peak after the filtering and therefore susceptible to various
noises. Therefore, a novel data processing algorithm is necessary for the analyses of swept-tone DPOAEs.
In this study, a narrow band-pass filter with time-varying
center frequencies, namely, the dynamic tracking filter was proposed to extract the swept-tone DPOAEs from OAE recordings
with various interferences and background noises. Both simulation and experimental data of the swept-tone DPOAEs were
employed to examine the validity and performance of the dynamic tracking filter. The results were also compared with the
traditional method using pure tones to evaluate the accuracy of
the swept-tone DPOAEs.

1187

Fig. 1. DPOAEs evoked by two different types of stimulus signals: pure
tones and swept tones. The f1 and f2 indicate the paired stimulus signals,
and (2f1 –f2 ) represents the CDT signal (the largest DPOAE component).
(a) Pure-tone DPOAEs. (b) Swept-tone DPOAEs.

II. METHODS
A. Dynamic Tracking Filter
1) Signal Processing Algorithm: For DPOAEs evoked by
pure tones, the signals recorded at the ear canal mainly contained three prominent components of fixed frequencies: the
stimulus artifacts (f1 , f2 ) and the CDT (2f1 –f2 ) [see Fig. 1(a)].
When the pure-tone stimuli were changed to swept tones, the
signal composition was similar, except that the frequencies
of all the three components became continuous functions of
time, shown as f1 (t), f2 (t), and 2f1 (t) − f2 (t) in Fig. 1(b) (the
three swept-tone components were also mentioned as f1 , f2 and
2f1 –f2 for convenience in the following context). The objective
of the swept-tone DPOAE measurement was to extract CDT
component with time-varying frequencies from other interferences (f1 , f2 ) and possible background noises.
In this study, a dynamic tracking filter, which was actually a
combination of one narrow band-pass filter and several bandstop filters with time-varying center frequencies, was proposed
to achieve the objective of the swept-tone DPOAE measurement.
The filter was implemented by the placements of zeros and poles
in the z-plane. To extract the CDT component, a pole which had
the same frequency (2f1 –f2 ) and a radius of r was placed so
that the CDT signals could be preserved. Meanwhile, two zeros
were placed at the frequencies of f1 and f2 , respectively, so that
the unwanted stimulus-related components (f1 and f2 ) could
be greatly attenuated in the filter output. The radiuses of the
zeros were set to 1 for maximal attenuation of the stimulusrelated interferences. The corresponding transfer function of
the dynamic tracking filter was
H(z) =

G(z − ej ω 1 )(z − ej ω 2 )
z − rej ω 3

(1)

where the discrete angular frequencies ω1 = 2πf1 /fs ,
ω2 = 2πf2 /fs , and ω3 = 2π(2f1 − f2 )/fs (fs : sampling frequency), the radius r was determined by the bandwidth Δf , and
the sampling rate fs by Smith [32]:
r ≈1−

(Δf )π
fs

(2)

where the closer r approaches 1, the smaller the bandwidth Δf
is. The gain factor G was introduced to ensure unity gain at the

1188

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

ω3 frequency and therefore could be calculated as follows:


(1 − r)ej ω 3 
.
G =  j 2ω
(3)
e 3 − (ej ω 1 + ej ω 2 )ej ω 3 + ej (ω 1 +ω 2 ) 
Since the transfer function in (1) was in a complex form, the
input should be expressed as an analytical signal, which could
be obtained by taking the input and then adding in quadrature
its Hilbert transform. The analytical signal(s) of the simulation
data x was
s = x + j x̂
(4)
√
where j = −1, and x̂ was the Hilbert transform of x. Then
the samples of s were fed to the dynamic tracking filter, and
the real part of the filtered signal was taken as the filter output
of x. The dynamic tracking filter in (1) could be cascaded in
series to improve the filtering performance, and the number of
the cascaded filters was defined as the order of the tracking filter.
2) Performance Evaluation by Simulation Data: In this
study, simulation data were prepared for the purpose of testing the performance of the dynamic tracking filter. Since the
target signal could be known in advance in the simulation data,
the performance of the tracking filter could be evaluated by
comparing the filter output with the actual target signal under
various conditions.
To evaluate the performance of the dynamic tracking filter, the
frequency of f1 was increased linearly from 500 Hz to 10 kHz
within 1 s and the f2 frequency was kept 1.2 times of that of f1
to simulate the standard DPOAE recording conditions. Since it
takes time for the CDT signals to be generated and travel back
from the cochlea to the ear canal, the simulated CDT component
has certain delay (in the order of several milliseconds) that is
longer for lower frequency. Such CDT delay was incorporated
in the simulation [as shown in Fig. 1(b)] using experimental
data of relevant publications [20], [32]. To simulate the periodical spectral features of OAE amplitudes [33], the simulated
CDT amplitude was sinusoidally fluctuated when the frequency
increased [see Fig. 4(a) and (b)]. To test the filter performance
under different noise conditions, Gaussian noises were added to
the simulation data with various levels corresponding to signalto-noise ratios (SNRs) of –30–0 dB at a 10-dB step. The SNR
was calculated by the averaged CDT amplitude over the noise
magnitude.
Then the dynamic tracking filter was applied to the temporal
waveform of the simulation data, and the amplitude spectra of
the filter output, or the extracted CDT component, were calculated under different noises conditions. The two zeros of the
dynamic tracking filter were placed at f1 and f2 , separately,
and the pole was set at the 2f1 –f2 frequency. The frequencies
of the zeros and poles could dynamically follow their tracking
targets. The root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the amplitude
difference between the filter output and the original CDT signal
(see Fig. 4) was calculated from 1 to 7 kHz as an overall measure
of the filter performance. The optimal filter parameters corresponding to the minimum RMSE value were explored based on
the RMSEs under different signal conditions. The order of the
dynamic tracking filter was increased from 1 to 10 at a step of 1
and, for each order, the bandwidth of the filter was varied from

Fig. 2. Signal presentation and data acquisition system of the DPOAE experiment. (a) Schematic diagram of the system. (b) One subject during the
experiment.

25 to 200 Hz at a step of 25 Hz to systemically explore the
optimal filter parameters for extracting the CDT component.
B. Subjects
Six volunteers from Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT) with ages from 22 to 31 (mean age = 26.2, four
males and two females) participated in the experiment of this
study. Prior to the experiment, each of the subjects attended a
standard audiogram test, in which pure tones of fixed frequencies were played and the lowest sound level the subject could
hear (or hearing threshold) was recorded for a series of standard
frequencies (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 kHz). The audiogram test
showed that four of the six subjects had normal hearing with audiogram thresholds less than 20-dB hearing level at all standard
frequencies and another two (one male and one female) had
hearing loss at 6 kHz and above. The experimental procedures
were in accordance with the Institutional Review Board (IRB)
of SIAT (SIAT- IRB-130124-H0015). All subjects gave the written informed consent and provided permission for publication
of data with a scientific and educational purpose.
C. Equipment
The system diagram of DPOAE recordings was shown
in Fig. 2(a). A low-noise USB sound card (model number
EMU-0204, Creative Technology Ltd.) was chosen for stimulus
generation and data acquisition. The EMU-0204 sound card is
full duplex with an SNR as high as 113 dB at both input and
output channels. Two high-fidelity earphones (model number
ER-2, Etymotic Research) were connected with the sound card
for the stimulus presentation of the swept tones. The earphones
were coupled to an eartip via two silicon tubes separately. During the experiment, the subject was told to lie in a comfort bed
inside a quiet room and was instructed to be as quiet as possible
to reduce noises caused by the body movements [see Fig. 2(b)].
The eartip was inserted into the ear canal of the subject and the
swept-tone stimuli were played by the earphones. The acoustic
response was recorded by a sensitive microphone (model number ER-10B, Etymotic Research) seated at the same eartip as the
earphones. The recorded responses were digitized by the sound
card at a rate of 48 000 samples/s and stored in the computer for
offline analyses.

DENG et al.: USING A DYNAMIC TRACKING FILTER TO EXTRACT DISTORTION-PRODUCT OTOACOUSTIC EMISSIONS EVOKED

1189

swept tone played by the other earphone in the second interval.
Finally, both swept tones were played simultaneously in the third
interval. The duration of each interval was 1 s. Assuming the
time waveforms of the recorded responses of the three intervals
were p1 , p2 , and p3 , respectively, the swept-tone DPOAEs could
obtained by the residue:
p = p3 − p 1 − p 2 .

Fig. 3. Three-interval paradigm for recording the swept-tone DPOAEs. The
f1 (t) and f2 (t) are two swept-tone stimulus signals.

D. Procedures
In this study, each subject took part in two successive sessions
of DPOAE measurements: the traditional pure-tone measurement with fixed frequencies and the swept-tone measurement
with time-varying frequencies. The design of the pure-tone measurement was for the purpose of testing whether the swept-tone
DPOAEs measured in this study were consistent with the results
from traditional methods. Prior to the tests, the subjects were
instructed to be as quiet as possible and sleeping was allowed.
The whole experiment took about 1 h to complete and there was
a 5-min break between the two sessions.
1) Pure-Tone Measurement: In this session, DPOAEs were
measured at discrete frequencies in a point-by-point fashion,
which was the same as traditional methods in the clinic [see
Fig. 1(a)]. Sixty individual frequencies from 2.5 to 6.5 kHz with
a step of 64 Hz were chosen for f1 and the ratio of f2 /f1 was
kept constant at 1.2 to evoke largest amplitude of DPOAEs [34].
The amplitude of f1 was 60-dB SPL and it was 55-dB SPL for
f2 . The two pure tones (f1 and f2 ) were played by two separated
earphones and both the durations were 1 s. An on-/off- ramp with
a duration of 0.03 s was applied to the beginning and ending
of both pure-tone waveforms to reduce switching noises caused
by the earphones. For each frequency, the stimulus presentation
was repeated ten times and the average of the 10 responses was
used to improve the SNR of the results.
2) Swept-Tone Measurement: In this session, the evoking
stimuli were replaced by two swept tones whose instantaneous
frequencies changed dynamically with time [see Fig. 1(b)]. The
frequency of the first swept tone f1 was increased linearly from
500 Hz to 10 kHz with a time of 1 s, and the frequency of
the second swept tone f2 was kept 1.2 times of that of f1 .
The level of the first swept tone L1 was increased from 40- to
60-dB SPL at a 5-dB step, while the level of the second swept
tone L2 was kept 5 dB lower than L1 . Both swept tones were
constructed in the frequency domain [25] and their amplitude
spectra were calibrated according to the forward pressure to
reduce the impacts of standing wave in the ear canal [35]. The
swept tones were played separated by the same earphones and
the same on-/off- ramp was applied to the waveforms.
The swept tones were played in a three-interval paradigm
to evoke the swept-tone DPOAEs [36], as shown in Fig. 3. In
the three-paradigm, the first swept tone was played alone by
one earphone during the first interval, followed by the second

(5)

The residue p contained the swept-tone DPOAEs (i.e., the
CDT component), as well as other interfering noises. The advantage of using a three-interval paradigm was that the stimulus
artifacts, which were as large as 60-dB SPL, could be cancelled
during the subtraction in (5). The CDT component of interest
was present only when both swept tones were played simultaneously during the third interval, and therefore preserved in the
residue after the subtraction.
For each stimulus level, the three-interval stimuli (see Fig. 3)
were repeatedly presented 20 times and the residue of each
response was calculated in real time according to (5). Then the
raw data of the 20 residues were averaged and stored for offline
analysis.
E. Data Analysis
For each frequency of the pure-tone measurements, a hamming window was applied to the averaged temporal response and
an FFT was performed on the windowed waveform. A correction factor of 2 was applied to the FFT complex to compensate
the amplitude reduction by the hamming window. The magnitude at the frequency of 2f1 –f2 was obtained as the DPOAE
amplitude, and the averaged of a frequency band of 75 Hz lower
than the DPOAE frequency was calculated as the noise level.
For the swept-tone measurements, the dynamic tracking filter
was performed on the time waveform of the averaged residue
[see (5)] to separate the CDT component from other interfering
noises. The key steps were to set the parameters of the filter
including the center frequencies, order and bandwidth. The settings of the center frequencies of the zeros [at f1 and f2 ] and
poles [at 2f1 –f2 ] were slight different compared with the simulation since the signal components of the experimental data had
certain delays relative to those in Fig. 1(b). The signal delays
were composed of two parts: the latency of the acoustic recording system and the group delay of the OAEs in humans. The
system latency could be calculated by the phase gradient of the
response during interval 1 or 2, and the OAE group delay could
be initially estimated by the published data [20], [32]. Then the
actual center frequency of each component (f1 , f2 , and 2f1 –f2 ),
was determined by searching the local energy maximum around
its estimated frequency in the spectrogram obtained by the shorttime Fourier transform (STFT) of the unprocessed residue. The
order and bandwidth of the dynamic tracking filter were set
according to the conditions under which the filter had optimal
performance in the simulation. Then the time waveform of the
analytical signal of the residue passed through the dynamic
tracking filter and an FFT was performed on the real part of
the filter output to obtain the spectra information of the CDT
signal. To obtain the noise level, the pole frequency of the filter

1190

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 5. Typical time waveforms of the swept-tone DPOAEs from one subject
with normal hearing. (a) Before applying the dynamic tracking filter. (b) After
applying the dynamic tracking filter. The stimulus level was 55-dB SPL.

Fig. 4. Performance of the dynamic tracking filter evaluated by the simulation
data. (a) and (b) Comparison between the original CDT signal and the filter
output under two different SNRs. (c) Filter performance as a function of order (bandwidth = 75 Hz). (d) Filter performance as a function of bandwidth
(order = 5).

was adjusted to 200 Hz below the instantaneous frequency of
2f1 –f2 while the zeros remained unchanged. The spectral level
of the output of the adjusted filter, which contained no OAEs,
was used as the noise floor of the swept-tone DPOAEs.
III. RESULTS
A. Performance of the Dynamic Tracking Filter
1) Simulation Data: In this study, the simulation data were
prepared to simulate the experimental swept-tone DPOAEs.
Since the target CDT signal could be precisely known in advance, the comparison of the filter output with the target signal would provide ideal means to evaluate the performance of
the dynamic tracking filter. In the simulation, the CDT signal
(2f1 –f2 ) was mixed with the swept-tone stimuli (f1 and f2 ) and
other background noises [as shown in Fig. 1(b)]. Then the dynamic tracking filter was used to extract the CDT signal and the
filter output was compared with the target CDT signal under different noise conditions [see Fig. 4(a) and (b)]. It can be observed
that the filter output (or the extracted CDT signal) and the target
signal matched well across frequencies when the SNR was 0 dB,
with the maximal difference less than 0.5 dB from 1 to 7 kHz.
The goodness of the match showed some declination when the
SNR fell to –20 dB, but the filter output could still follow the
dynamic variation of the target. Since the SNR is usually above
0 dB in common DPOAE measurements [26], [37], [38], these
observations showed that the dynamic filter was suitable for extracting the CDT signal evoked by swept tones and the performance was rather satisfied under conventional signal conditions.
In the simulation, two filter parameters, the order and bandwidth, were systemically varied to observe the effects on
the performance of the dynamic tracking filter. The RMSEs,

calculated by the root-mean squares of the amplitude difference
(in dB) between the filter output and the target CDT signal [see
Fig. 4(a) and (b)] from 1 to 7 kHz, as functions of the order and
bandwidth under different SNRs were illustrated in Fig. 4(c)
and (d). For SNRs above –10 dB, the RMSE values were almost
unchanged when the filter order was increased from 1 to 10
and the maximal RMSE was less than 1.0 dB, even if using a
one-order filter [see Fig. 4(c)]. However, the filters with a higher
order could achieve better performance when the SNR fell below –20 dB. Similar effects were observed for the bandwidth in
Fig. 4(d), i.e., the filter performance was only slightly affected
by the bandwidth when the SNR was larger than –10 dB and a
narrower bandwidth could reduce the RMSE dramatically when
the SNR was decreased from –20 dB. Therefore, the order and
bandwidth had rather small effects on the filter performance
when the SNR of the CDT signal was high, whereas higher order and narrower bandwidth were preferred for CDT signals of
low SNRs.
2) Experimental Data: Fig. 5 illustrated typical time waveforms of the swept-tone DPOAEs before and after apply the
dynamic tracking filter. The time waveform in Fig. 5(a) was
the residue obtained by the subtraction of the responses of the
three intervals (5) and averaged across multiple presentations.
It could be observed that the time waveform in Fig. 5(a) was
rather noisy and no information (such as the envelope) about the
swept-tone DPOAEs could be clearly visualized. A local observation about the waveform showed that a complex mixture of
several different components might obscure the features of the
swept-tone DPOAEs. In contrast, the time waveform of the output from the dynamic tracking filter [see Fig. 5(b)] became much
cleaner and showed clear envelope variations of the swept-tone
DPOAEs. The waveform was similar to the swept-tone stimulus which became denser (corresponding to higher frequency)
as time lapsed and amplitude fluctuations were similar to the
findings of relevant studies [28], [39].
To visualize the dynamic spectral features of the swept-tone
DPOAEs, the typical spectrograms under two stimulus levels
(55- and 60-dB SPL) before and after passing through the dynamic tracking filter were shown in Fig. 6. The color maps

DENG et al.: USING A DYNAMIC TRACKING FILTER TO EXTRACT DISTORTION-PRODUCT OTOACOUSTIC EMISSIONS EVOKED

Fig. 7.

1191

Comparison of DPOAEs evoked by pure tones and swept tones.

Fig. 6. Typical spectrograms of the swept-tone DPOAEs before and after
applying the dynamic tracking filter from one subject with normal hearing. The
spectrograms in (c) and (d) were obtained by the STFT of the time waveforms
in Fig. 5(a) and (b), respectively.

represented the energy distribution as a function of time and
frequency. The spectrogram in Fig. 6(a) showed that the swepttone DPOAEs had similar energy distributions to the simulation
data [see Fig. 1(b)], with the three lines corresponding to f2 , f1 ,
and 2f1 –f2 (CDT), respectively. By comparison with Fig. 6(a)
and (b) showed that the dynamic tracking filter could extract
the CDT component with high fidelity, and greatly attenuate the
irrelevant components and environmental noises. The spectrogram in Fig. 6(b) would be beneficial for further analyses of
the CDT features (such as the amplitude spectra and phase gradients) and possible detection of hearing abnormalities. When
the stimulus level was increased to 60-dB SPL, each component
demonstrated consistent increase in Fig. 6(c) and a new DPOAE
component corresponding to (f1 + f2 ) started to appear, shown
by the uppermost line. The filter output in Fig. 6(d) confirmed
the overall great performance of the dynamic tracking filter in
separating the CDT component at high stimulus levels. Similar
results were obtained in the other three subjects with normal
hearing.
B. Comparison of Swept-Tone DPOAEs With Traditional
Method
In this study, DPOAEs were also measured with the traditional
method, in which pure tones of discrete frequencies were used. It
would be explored that whether the largest DPOAE component
(the CDT) measured by swept tones were identical to those
evoked by pure tones. Fig. 7 showed the comparison of the
CDT amplitude curves measured by swept tones and pure tones
in one subject with normal hearing. The comparison was made
at frequencies measured by the pure-tone method. It could be
observed that the CDT amplitudes of the two methods were

Fig. 8. Comparison of typical swept-tone DPOAE spectrograms between subjects with normal hearing and hearing loss (stimulus level L 1 = 60-dB SPL).
(a) Subject with normal hearing. (b) Subject with high-frequency hearing loss.

highly consistent across frequencies. The fluctuation pattern of
the two amplitude curves was rather similar and the difference
could be very small, especially at frequencies where the CDT
amplitude was large. The maximal deviation of the two curves
was 2.06 dB and the difference averaged across frequencies was
0.54 dB. At frequencies where the CDT fell below 0-dB SPL, the
difference seemed to slightly increase since the CDTs were more
affected by random noises. The observations on the comparison
between the two methods were similar in other subjects.
C. Swept-Tone DPOAEs in Subjects With Hearing Loss
To evaluate possible significance of the proposed method in
the screening of hearing impairments, the swept-tone DPOAEs
were also measured in two subjects with hearing loss, with the
spectrogram (after filtering) of one subject with high-frequency
hearing loss shown in Fig. 8(b). For comparison, the spectrogram from the subject with normal hearing was also presented in Fig. 8(a). It could be observed from the comparison that the swept-tone method could successfully distinguish
the two subjects: while the spectrogram of the normal-hearing
subject showed large amplitude of CDT across frequencies
[see Fig. 8(a)], the CDT was much smaller for the subject with
hearing loss [see Fig. 8(b)]. In addition, the frequency range
of the CDT abnormalities could be clearly identified in the
spectrogram, with no apparent CDT observed above 4.5 kHz
(where the corresponding f2 frequency was 6.75 kHz). Given

1192

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

that CDT was mainly generated at the f2 place at high stimulus levels [40], [41], the observation was consistent with the
results of the audiogram test in which the subject demonstrated
high-frequency hearing loss above 6 kHz. Similar results were
observed for the other subject with hearing loss.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Dynamic Tracking Filter
1) Settings of Center Frequencies: The most important finding of this study is that the proposed dynamic tracking filter
could effectively and successfully extract the CDT signals, the
largest component of the swept-tone DPOAEs, from DPOAE
recordings that were contaminated by swept-tone stimulus artifacts and other noises. The simulation results, as shown in Fig. 4,
indicated that the CDT components extracted by the tracking
filter matched the original signals well across a wide range of
frequencies and the stimulus artifacts were greatly eliminated,
even if they were over 50 dB larger than the CDT component.
The experimental results also showed that the dynamic tracking
filter could extract the CDT components accurately in subjects
with normal hearing (see Fig. 6) and those with hearing loss
(see Fig. 8). The great performance of the dynamic tracking
filter in the simulation data was achieved by the target-guided
placement of the dynamic poles and zeros in the settings of
the center frequencies. Specifically, a pole with unity gain was
placed around the CDT frequency so that the CDT component
could pass through the dynamic tracking filter without any significant changes. In contrast, dynamic zeros were placed at the
frequencies of f1 and f2 , so that stimulus artifacts with frequencies around f1 or f2 could be greatly attenuated. Compared with
the simulation data, the settings of the poles and zeros (or center
frequencies) were slightly different for the experimental data,
since the components [see Fig. 1(b)] in the recorded signals were
slightly delayed by the amount of the system latency plus the
OAE delay. The system latency could be calculated by the phase
change of the swept tone stimulus after passing through the
DPOAE recording system [42], [43], while the estimate of OAE
delay could be obtained by the average results of human data in
relevant studies [22], [32]. Then the estimated center frequencies could be determined with the calculated system latency and
the estimated OAE delay. Finally, the center frequencies were
adjusted by searching the local maximum of the energy distribution within a certain range around the estimated frequencies
in the spectrograms. In this way, the center frequencies of the
dynamic tracking filter can track any prominent DPOAE components without the need to know their exact delays. If there is
no apparent OAE energy within a certain range of frequencies,
a curve fitting would be employed to set the center frequencies
using the results of neighboring frequencies.
2) Optimal Order and Bandwidth: Besides the settings of
the center frequencies, Fig. 4 showed that the order and bandwidth, as well as the SNR, played an important role in the performance of the dynamic tracking filter. When the SNR of the
CDT was above 0 dB, the filter output matched the target CDT
signal well across frequencies [see Fig. 4(a)] and the overall
performance was rather satisfied, with the RMSE less than 1 dB

across all orders and bandwidths [see Fig. 4(c) and (d)]. These
observations confirm the robust performance of the dynamic
tracking filter in low-noise conditions. However, the filter parameters should be carefully selected when the SNR fell below
0 dB. The order of the filter should be high enough to achieve
minimal RMSE, but not too high to avoid computation overload
or instability of the filter. In the simulation, we found that the
improvement of the performance was rather limited when the
order was increased beyond five. As a result, the optimal order
was set at five in the data analyses of the experimental data.
Regarding the bandwidth, it should be wide enough to pass all
energy of CDT signals, but not too wide to include excessive
noises. The choice of the bandwidth should also take account
of the complicated generation mechanisms of DPOAEs. The
DPOAE energy recorded in the ear canal is considered to be
a mix of two different components: the distortion component
(generated near the f2 place where the traveling waves of the
two stimuli overlap) and reflection component (formed by partial energy of the distortion component traveling apically and
reflected at the 2f1 –f2 place) [40], [41]. Given that the delays of
the two components are slightly different, the swept-tone CDT
signal of this study is actually composed of two closely spaced
components (so close that they cannot be visually identified in
the spectrograms of Fig. 6). Since the objective of this study is to
extract the mixed CDT, the bandwidth of the dynamic tracking
filter should be wide enough to include both components. With
the center frequency set at the local maximum (which could
be either of the two components) and the difference of the delays distributed in a few milliseconds [26], [40], a bandwidth
of 75 Hz was empirically chosen as the optimal parameter to
preserve both components and to include least noises.
3) Comparison With Other Filters: Compared with other
filters, the dynamic tracking filter is more suitable to extract
DPOAEs evoked by swept tones in this study. In cochlear implants, band-pass filters were usually used to separate different features in the speech signals to stimulate different electrodes [44], [45]. However, the band-pass filters are incapable
of separating the swept-tone DPOAEs (2f1 –f2 ) from the stimulus artifacts (f1 and f2 ) since these signal components are
all swept tones and their frequency ranges are largely overlapped over the 1-s recording time (see Fig. 6). Due to the
same reason, the spectral analyses that were frequently used
in pure-tone DPOAE measurements [46]–[48] fail to recover
the CDT components from the interferences of other signals.
Moleti et al. [49], as well as other investigators [21], [22], used
a time–frequency filtering technology that is based on the CWT
to overcome the limitations of the time–domain filtering methods. However, the technology is implemented according to an
empirically optimizing algorism and therefore the results are
largely dependent on the empirical choice of wavelet coefficients. Long et al. used an LSF method to extract the heartbeat
signal from the spontaneous emissions [18] and to measure
DPOAEs with continuously sweeping primaries [50]. The LSF
method is a rather interesting way capable of separating the
two different components of the CDT signals. Compared with
the digital heterodyne analysis that acts like a moving bandpass filter [31], the dynamic tracking filter introduced additional

DENG et al.: USING A DYNAMIC TRACKING FILTER TO EXTRACT DISTORTION-PRODUCT OTOACOUSTIC EMISSIONS EVOKED

zeros to attenuate unwanted stimulus artifacts and it is, therefore,
more immune to various interferences and background noises.
B. Advantages of Using Swept Tones
1) Efficiency Improvement: In clinical tests, only several
standard pure-tone frequencies are measured due to time constraints. The testing time could increase dramatically to 30 min
or even longer to measure DPOAEs at more frequencies to gain
sufficient resolution in most hearing studies [18], [47], [51].
The prolonged test would often be more susceptibly decayed
due to the fatigue of the subjects with deep concentration and
possible variances of the recording system [38], [52], [53]. In
the pure-tone test of this study, it took about 15 to 20 min to
measure sixty 2f1 –f2 frequencies from 2 to 5.5 kHz with a
resolution of about 60 Hz. Unlike the pure-tone method, the
swept-tone stimulus had time-varying instantaneous frequency
and could measure a large number of frequencies within one
single test. Therefore, it took a much shorter time (only 1 or
2 min) for the swept-tone method to measure a wider range of
DPOAEs. With the swept-tone duration set to 1 s in the experiment, the frequency resolution could get as high as 1 Hz in
the spectrum of the swept-tone DPOAEs (see Fig. 7). Therefore, the swept-tone DPOAEs method could greatly improve
the efficiency and frequency resolution of OAE measurements.
The high-resolution results could be helpful in monitoring slight
DPOAE changes at any frequencies caused by acoustic noises
or ototoxic drugs [54], [55].
2) Comparison With Traditional Method: Although the
swept-tone method showed dramatically improved efficiency,
it is also of great importance to evaluate whether the DPOAEs
evoked by swept tones are equivalent to those measured by pure
tones (traditional method). Only when DPOAEs evoked by the
two types of stimuli are proved to be identical, any change in
the DPOAEs could be related with the functional alteration of
the inner ear, instead of the change of the stimulus type. In this
study, the comparison between the swept-tone and pure-tone
methods showed that DPOAEs evoked by different types of
stimuli were nearly equivalent across a wide range of frequencies (see Fig. 7), indicating that the DPOAEs measured by the
proposed swept-tone method were rather accurate and reliable.
It was also found that the consistency between the two methods
was better when the CDT had larger amplitude and was, therefore, less affected by background noises. Similar observations of
OAEs were also reported by other studies using different types
of stimuli. Long et al. [26] found that the DPOAEs measured by
fixed-frequencies tones and continuously sweeping primaries
paradigms were highly consistent. Kalluri and Shera [56] used
both pure tones and swept tones to measure another kind of
OAEs, the stimulus frequency otoacoutsic emissions, and found
that the two methods yielded nearly equivalent results. These
findings suggest that different types of OAEs are not influenced
by whether the stimuli are presented frequency-by-frequency or
in a frequency-sweeping manner. Since the swept-tone DPOAEs
are as accurate as the traditional method and the frequency resolution could be much higher (see Fig. 7), they could be a more
useful tool for detailed hearing loss detection in the clinic.

1193

3) Value in Hearing Loss Screening: Another promising
finding of this study is that the swept-tone method might be
capable of providing more detailed information about the hearing loss. For subjects with normal hearing, the spectrogram
showed large amplitude of swept-tone DPOAEs across frequencies, whereas there were no apparent DPOAEs within the frequency range where the subject had noticeable hearing loss (see
Fig. 8). Compared with conventional audiograms, the spectrogram of the swept tone DPOAEs has much higher resolution
and therefore the detailed information of the hearing loss could
be identified more precisely. However, it is still too overhasty to
jump to a conclusion about the clinical value of the swept-tone
DPOAEs in hearing loss screening. As mentioned previously,
the swept-tone DPOAEs measured in the ear canal are constituted of two components (the distortion component and reflection component) from two different cochlear places. One place
is near the f2 place where the traveling waves of the two stimuli overlap, and the other place is the 2f1 –f2 place where the
second component is amplified and reflected [41]. Since both
places have contribution to the overall DPOAEs recorded in the
ear canal, there is uncertainty in attributing the abnormality of
the swept-tone DPOAE to the damage of one specific cochlear
place, i.e., the reduction of the swept-tone DPOAEs could be
caused by the damage of the f2 place, or the 2f1 –f2 place or
both. Studies [57], [58] found that the distortion component
may be dominant at high stimulus levels, which may be a possible explanation of the frequency consistency of the DPOAE
abnormality and hearing loss in Fig. 8. In future research, attempts would be made to improve the dynamic tracking filter
so that it can separate the two components by making use of
their different delays. Moreover, it would be more useful when
the swept-tone DPOAE measurement is combined with the ABR
test during hearing loss screenings, since the results of DPOAEs
only provide information about the healthiness of the OHCs, not
the entire auditory system [10]. Another limitation of this study
is that only two abnormal subjects with high-frequency hearing
loss were recruited in the experiments. In future studies, more
subjects with various hearing loss will be employed to examine
the effectiveness of the swept-tone method before it becomes a
feasible approach of hearing loss screening in the clinic.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, pure tones used in conventional DPOAE measurements were replaced by swept tones so that multiple frequencies could be measured at a time. A dynamic tracking filter
that was able to track the instantaneous frequency of the desired signals was proposed to extract the swept-tone DPOAEs
from the recordings which would be contaminated by interferences and background noises. Both simulation and experimental
results showed that the dynamic tracking filter had great performance in extracting swept-tone DPOAE signals and attenuating unwanted interferences. The extracted swept-tone DPOAEs
were consistent with the results of the traditional pure-tone
method and they could provide more detailed information about
the hearing loss.

1194

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Dr. Zhengde Du at Nanshan Affiliated
Hospital of Guangdong Medical College for his assistance on
the pure-tone DPOAE experiment and Dr. Lan Wang at Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology for her help in signal
processing and experimental settings.
REFERENCES
[1] D. T. Kemp, “Stimulated acoustic emissions from within the human auditory system,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 64, pp. 1386–1391, 1978.
[2] D. Mountain and A. Hubbard, “Rapid force production in the cochlea,”
Hear. Res., vol. 42, pp. 195–202, 1989.
[3] G. Zweig and C. A. Shera, “The origin of periodicity in the spectrum of
evoked otoacoustic emissions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 98, pp. 2018–
2047, Oct. 1995.
[4] S. S. Goodman, R. H. Withnell, and C. A. Shera, “The origin of SFOAE
microstructure in the guinea pig,” Hear. Res., vol. 183, pp. 7–17, Sep.
2003.
[5] D. Kemp, “Otoacoustic emissions, travelling waves and cochlear mechanisms,” Hear. Res., vol. 22, pp. 95–104, 1986.
[6] L. J. Hood, Clinical Applications of the Auditory Brainstem Response.
San Diego, CA, USA: Singular Publishing Group, 1998.
[7] J. A. Mason and K. R. Herrmann, “Universal infant hearing screening
by automated auditory brainstem response measurement,” Pediatrics,
vol. 101, pp. 221–228, 1998.
[8] D. W. McCandless, “Auditory brainstem response,” in Kernicterus.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2011, pp. 175–187.
[9] K. J. Doyle, B. Burggraaff, S. Fujikawa, and J. Kim, “Newborn hearing
screening by otoacoustic emissions and automated auditory brainstem
response,” Int. J. Pediatr. Otorhinolaryngol., vol. 41, pp. 111–119, Aug.
20, 1997.
[10] J. W. Hall, S. D. Smith, and G. R. Popelka, “Newborn hearing screening
with combined otoacoustic emissions and auditory brainstem responses,”
J. Am. Acad. Audiol., vol. 15, pp. 414–425, 2004.
[11] C. R. Kennedy, L. Kimm, D. C. Dees, P. I. Evans, M. Hunter, S. Lenton,
and R. D. Thornton, “Otoacoustic emissions and auditory brainstem responses in the newborn,” Arch. Dis. Child., vol. 66, pp. 1124–1129,
1991.
[12] K. Kaga, M. Nakamura, M. Shinogami, T. Tsuzuku, K. Yamada, and
M. Shindo, “Auditory nerve disease of both ears revealed by auditory
brainstem responses, electrocochleography and otoacoustic emissions,”
Scand. Audiol., vol. 25, pp. 233–238, 1996.
[13] H. C. Lin, M. T. Shu, K. S. Lee, G. M. Ho, T. Y. Fu, S. Bruna, and G. Lin,
“Comparison of hearing screening programs between one step with transient evoked otoacoustic emissions (TEOAE) and two steps with TEOAE
and automated auditory brainstem response,” Laryngoscope, vol. 115,
pp. 1957–1962, 2005.
[14] T. A. Johnson, S. T. Neely, C. A. Garner, and M. P. Gorga, “Influence
of primary-level and primary-frequency ratios on human distortion product otoacoustic emissions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 119, pp. 418–428,
2006.
[15] R. Probst, B. L. Lonsbury-Martin, and G. K. Martin, “A review of otoacoustic emissions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 89, pp. 2027–2067, 1991.
[16] L. Bian, “Cochlear compression: Effects of low-frequency biasing on
quadratic distortion product otoacoustic emission,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
vol. 116, pp. 3559–3571, Dec. 2004.
[17] L. Bian, M. E. Chertoff, and E. Miller, “Deriving a cochlear transducer
function from low-frequency modulation of distortion product otoacoustic
emissions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 112, pp. 198–210, Jul. 2002.
[18] M. Subramaniam, R. J. Salvi, V. P. Spongr, D. Henderson, and
N. L. Powers, “Changes in distortion product otoacoustic emissions and
outer hair cells following interrupted noise exposures,” Hear. Res., vol. 74,
pp. 204–216, 1994.
[19] F. F. Telischi, M. P. Widick, B. L. Lonsbury-Martin, and M. J. McCoy,
“Monitoring cochlear function intraoperatively using distortion product
otoacoustic emissions,” Am. J. Otol., vol. 16, pp. 597–608, Sep. 1995.
[20] S. Chen and L. Bian, “Cochlear gain control estimated from distortion
product otoacoustic emissions evoked by amplitude modulated tones,” in
Proc. AIP Conf. Proc., 2011, vol. 1403, pp. 601–607.
[21] L. Bian and S. Chen, “Behaviors of cubic distortion product otoacoustic
emissions evoked by amplitude modulated tones,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
vol. 129, pp. 828–839, 2011.

[22] D. T. Kemp, “Otoacoustic emissions, their origin in cochlear function, and
use,” Br. Med. Bull., vol. 63, pp. 223–241, 2002.
[23] P. Bray and D. T. Kemp, “An advanced cochlear echo technique suitable
for infant screening,” Br. J. Audiol., vol. 21, pp. 191–204, Aug. 1987.
[24] B. Davis, W. Qiu, and R. P. Hamernik, “The use of distortion product
otoacoustic emissions in the estimation of hearing and sensory cell loss in
noise-damaged cochleas,” Hear. Res., vol. 187, pp. 12–24, 2004.
[25] S. M. Müller and M. Paulo, “Transfer-function measurement with
sweeps,” J. Audio. Eng. Soc., vol. 49, pp. 443–471, 2001.
[26] G. R. Long, C. L. Talmadge, and J. Lee, “Measuring distortion product
otoacoustic emissions using continuously sweeping primaries,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., vol. 124, pp. 1613–1626, 2008.
[27] S. Dhar and L. A. Shaffer, “Effects of a suppressor tone on distortion
product otoacoustic emissions fine structure: Why a universal suppressor
level is not a practical solution to obtaining single-generator DP-grams,”
Ear Hear., vol. 25, pp. 573–585, 2004.
[28] S. Dhar, C. L. Talmadge, G. R. Long, and A. Tubis, “Multiple internal
reflections in the cochlea and their effect on DPOAE fine structure,” J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 112, pp. 2882–2897, Dec. 2002.
[29] H. P. Wit, P. van Dijk, and P. Avan, “Wavelet analysis of real ear and synthesized click evoked otoacoustic emissions,” Hear. Res., vol. 73, pp. 141–
147, 1994.
[30] G. Tognola, F. Grandori, and P. Ravazzani, “Time-frequency distributions
of click-evoked otoacoustic emissions,” Hear. Res., vol. 106, pp. 112–122,
1997.
[31] Y. S. Choi, S. Y. Lee, K. Parham, S. T. Neely, and D. O. Kim, “Stimulusfrequency otoacoustic emission: Measurements in humans and simulations
with an active cochlear model,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 123, pp. 2651–
2669, May 2008.
[32] J. O. Smith, Introduction to Digital Filters: With Audio Applications.
Stanford, CA, USA: W3K Publishing, 2007.
[33] D. T. Kemp and R. A. Chum, “Observations on the generator mechanism of stimulus frequency acoustic emissions—Two tone suppression,”
in Psychophysical, Physiological and Behavioural Studies in Hearing,
G. van den Brink and F. A. Bilsen, Eds. Delft, The Netherland: Delft
Univ. Press, 1980.
[34] L. Bian and S. Chen, “Comparing the optimal signal conditions for recording cubic and quadratic distortion product otoacoustic emissions,” J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 124, pp. 3739–3750, Dec. 2008.
[35] R. A. Scheperle, S. T. Neely, J. G. Kopun, and M. P. Gorga, “Influence of
in situ, sound-level calibration on distortion-product otoacoustic emission
variability,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 124, pp. 288–300, Jul. 2008.
[36] D. H. Keefe, “Double-evoked otoacoustic emissions. I. measurement theory and nonlinear coherence,” in J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 1998, vol. 103,
pp. 3489–3498.
[37] W. Wagner, G. Heppelmann, R. Vonthein, and H. P. Zenner, “Test-retest repeatability of distortion product otoacoustic emissions,” Ear Hear., vol. 29,
pp. 378–391, Jun. 2008.
[38] H. Keppler, I. Dhooge, L. Maes, W. D’Haenens, A. Bockstael, B. Philips,
F. Swinnen, and B. Vinck, “Transient-evoked and distortion product otoacoustic emissions: A short-term test-retest reliability study,” Int. J. Audiol.,
vol. 49, pp. 99–109, Feb. 2010.
[39] C. L. Talmadge, G. R. Long, A. Tubis, and S. Dhar, “Experimental confirmation of the two-source interference model for the fine structure of
distortion product otoacoustic emissions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 105,
pp. 275–292, Jan. 1999.
[40] R. Kalluri and C. A. Shera, “Distortion-product source unmixing: A test of
the two-mechanism model for DPOAE generation,” vol. 109, pp. 622–637,
2001.
[41] C. A. Shera and J. J. Guinan, “Evoked otoacoustic emissions arise by
two fundamentally different mechanisms: A taxonomy for mammalian
OAEs,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 105, pp. 782–798, Feb. 1999.
[42] Z. Xiangwei, L. Yuanling, Y. Shaowei, and Z. Zhaowen, “A novel definition and measurement method of group delay and its application,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 229–233, Jan. 2009.
[43] V. S. Stojanovic and A. D. Micic, “Group delay sensitivity of recursive
digital filter transfer functions with multiple poles,” in Proc IEEE Int.
Symp. Circuits Syst., 1992, vol. 5, pp. 2433–2436.
[44] P. Loizou, “Speech processing in vocoder-centric cochlear implants,” in
Adv. Otorhinolaryngol., 2006, vol. 64, pp. 109–143.
[45] Q.-J. Fu and G. Nogaki, “Noise susceptibility of cochlear implant users:
The role of spectral resolution and smearing,” J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol.,
vol. 6, pp. 19–27, 2005.
[46] K. S. Schairer, D. Fitzpatrick, and D. H. Keefe, “Input-output functions for
stimulus-frequency otoacoustic emissions in normal-hearing adult ears,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 114, pp. 944–966, Aug. 2003.

DENG et al.: USING A DYNAMIC TRACKING FILTER TO EXTRACT DISTORTION-PRODUCT OTOACOUSTIC EMISSIONS EVOKED

[47] S. W. Meenderink and M. van der Heijden, “Distortion product otoacoustic
emissions evoked by tone complexes,” J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol., vol. 12,
pp. 29–44, Feb. 2011.
[48] R. D. Knight and D. T. Kemp, “Wave and place fixed DPOAE maps of the
human ear,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 109, pp. 1513–1525, 2001.
[49] A. Moleti, F. Longo, and R. Sisto, “Time-frequency domain filtering of
evoked otoacoustic emissions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 132, pp. 2455–
2467, 2012.
[50] G. R. Long and C. L. Talmadge, “Spontaneous otoacoustic emission frequency is modulated by heartbeat,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 102, pp. 2831–
2848, 1997.
[51] L. A. Shaffer, R. H. Withnell, S. Dhar, D. J. Lilly, S. S. Goodman, and
K. M. Harmon, “Sources and mechanisms of DPOAE generation: Implications for the prediction of auditory sensitivity,” Ear Hear., vol. 24,
pp. 367–379, Oct. 2003.
[52] D. J. Franklin, M. J. McCoy, G. K. Martin, and B. L. Lonsbury-Martin,
“Test/retest reliability of distortion-product and transiently evoked otoacoustic emissions,” Ear Hear., vol. 13, pp. 417–429, Dec. 1992.
[53] F. Zhao and D. Stephens, “Test-retest variability of distortion-product
otoacoustic emissions in human ears with normal hearing,” Scand. Audiol.,
vol. 28, pp. 171–178, 1999.
[54] A. Rao and G. R. Long, “Effects of aspirin on distortion product fine
structure: Interpreted by the two-source model for distortion product otoacoustic emissions generation,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 129, pp. 792–800,
Feb. 2011.
[55] K. M. Reavis, D. S. Phillips, S. A. Fausti, J. S. Gordon, W. J. Helt,
D. Wilmington, G. W. Bratt, and D. Konrad-Martin, “Factors affecting
sensitivity of distortion-product otoacoustic emissions to ototoxic hearing
loss,” Ear Hear., vol. 29, pp. 875–893, Dec. 2008.
[56] R. Kalluri and C. A. Shera, “Measuring stimulus-frequency otoacoustic
emissions using swept tones,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 134, pp. 356–368,
2013.
[57] S. Dhar, G. R. Long, C. L. Talmadge, and A. Tubis, “The effect of
stimulus-frequency ratio on distortion product otoacoustic emission components,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 117, pp. 3766–3776, Jun. 2005.
[58] C. Abdala, S. Dhar, and R. Kalluri, “Level dependence of distortion product otoacoustic emission phase is attributed to component mixing,” J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 129, pp. 3123–3133, 2011.

Jun Deng was born in Yunyang, Chongqing, China,
in 1989. He received the B.S. degree in electrical information engineering from Chongqing University,
Chongqing, China, in 2011. He is currently working
toward the M.S. degree in the Department of Communication Engineering, Chongqing University.
His major research interests include biomedical
signal processing, wireless sensor network, and distributed compressive sensing.

Shixiong Chen (M’12) received the Bachelor’s and
Master’s degrees in biomedical engineering from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2005 and
2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in speech
and hearing science from Arizona State University,
AZ, USA, in 2012.
In 2012, he joined the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shenzhen, China, where he is currently an Assistant
Professor in the Research Centre for Neural Engineering at the Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering. His current research interests include mechanics of hearing, otoacoutsic
emissions, inner-ear nonlinearity, hearing loss detection, and rehabilitation of
hearing disorders.

1195

Xiaoping Zeng received the B.E., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China, in 1982, 1987, and
1996, respectively.
He is currently a Full Professor and Ph.D.
Supervisor at the College of Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China and serves as
the Dean of the college since 2003. He is an expert with State Department Special Allowance. His
current research interests include the next generation
mobile communication, future aeronautical communication, and biomedical signal processing.
Dr. Zeng is the recipient of the National Teaching Master Award and the
National High-Level Talents Support Program, the Initiative Scientist of the
Municipal Academic Committee on Technology, the Chief Scientist of the Municipal Major Science and Technology Project, the Director of China Institute
of Communications, the Deputy Director of Chongqing Institute of Electronics,
and the Leader of the National Key Project on “Aerocraft TTC and Remote
Sensing Information Transmission Technology” supported by “State 211 and
985 Project.”

Guanglin Li (M’01–SM’06) received the Bachelor’s
and Master’s degrees in electrical engineering from
Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 1983 and 1988,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
in 1997.
He joined the Department of Automatic Control
Engineering, Shandong University, where he became
an Associate Professor in 1998. From 1999 to 2002,
he was a Research Fellow, and later a Postdoctoral
Research Associate, in the Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA. From 2002 to 2006, he
was a Senior Research Scientist at BioTechPlex Corporation. From 2006 to
2009, he was a Senior Research Scientist in the Neural Engineering Center for
Artificial Limbs at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, and also a Research
Assistant Professor in the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
at Northwestern University. Since 2009, he has been with Shenzhen Institutes of
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China, where
he is currently a Professor in the Research Centre for Neural Engineering at
the Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering. His current research interests include neural engineering, neurorehabilitation, neural-machine interfaces,
biomedical signal processing, and computational biomedical engineering.

