IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

2313

Tumor Localization Using Magnetic
Nanoparticle-Induced Acoustic Signals
A. Tsalach, I. Steinberg, and I. Gannot∗

Abstract—Cancer is a major public health problem worldwide,
especially in developed countries. Early detection of cancer can
greatly increase both survival rates and quality of life for patients.
A magnetoacoustic-based method had been previously proposed
for early tumor detection, in a minimal invasive procedure, using
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). This paper presents a supporting
localization algorithm that can provide the clinician with essential tumor location data and could enable a sequential biopsy. It
provides localization algorithm development, as well as its validation in both computerized simulations and in vitro experiments.
Three-dimensional (3-D) tumor localization is demonstrated with
an error of 2.14 mm and an overlapping volume of 84% of the
actual tumor. The obtained results are promising and prove the
feasibility of tumor localization using a time difference of arrival
algorithm along with a magnetoacoustic detection scheme.
Index Terms—Cancer detection,
(MNPs), magnetoacoustics.

magnetic

nanoparticles

I. INTRODUCTION
ANCER is a major public health problem worldwide, especially in developed countries in which life expectancy
is longer. In the United States alone, it is considered as the second leading cause of death, accounting for one in every four
deaths [1]. Early detection of cancer can greatly increase both
survival rates and quality of life for patients. Statistics show that
the mean five-year survival rate for all cancer types increased
from 49% in the period 1975–1977 to 67% in 2001–2007 [2],
mostly due to the developments in diagnostic and treatment techniques. Yet, current detection methods (e.g., magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), computerized tomography scans, mammography, PSA test, etc.) are not ideal for wide scope cancer screening
due to their either high costs or low accuracy and use of ionizing radiation. Therefore, intense research efforts are directed for
developing new detection methods that will overcome the main
drawbacks of the existing ones and could become wide scope
screening tests.
One particular domain that gains a growing momentum in
the last few years is the use of superparamagnetic nanoparticles

C

Manuscript received June 2, 2013; revised September 10, 2013; accepted
October 6, 2013. Date of publication October 21, 2013; date of current version
July 15, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Tsalach and I. Steinberg are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: tsalachadi@gmail.com;
idanstei@gmail.com).
∗ I. Gannot is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: gannot@eng.tau.ac.il).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2286638

(MNPs) conjugated with designated antibodies for the detection
of cancer. These nanoparticles have physical characteristics that
make them exceptionally attractive and significantly valuable
in cancer detection procedures. First, their nanometric size that
allows them to diffuse through the capillary bed and aggregate
at tumor tissues. They are often coated with antigens, allowing
them to bind specifically to tumor sites, thereby providing a
controllable means of ‘tagging’ or addressing cancerous tissue.
Second, the magnetic properties the MNPs possess enable remote control of their behavior by the use of magnetic field. This
can be exploited for both heat delivery and specific harmonic
vibrations. At present, some of these particles are already in clinical use as contrast agents in MRI [3]. Yet, MRI is expensive and
requires special equipment and housing, thus making it unfit for
wide scope screening tests. Other studies use an external harmonic magnetic field, causing heat production from the MNPs
aggregation at the tumor sites, tagging them thermally [4]. To
date, however, there have been no reports of successful clinical
use of this technology. The challenge lies in the ability to detect
the clinically acceptable amount of heat generated deep within
the tissue on the skin surface. Heat diffusion, body metabolism
and temperature regulation diminishes the signal considerably
and render the measurement inaccurate.
Since ultrasound is known to have low attenuation and scattering in biological tissues comparing to heat and light, an especially promising direction seems to be the combination of
antibody conjugated MNPs along with ultrasonic detection. Several attempts have been made in this direction, including magneto motive detection [5] and asymmetric MNPs distribution
imaging using ultrasound [6]. Recently, we proposed a novel
magnetoacoustic-based detection procedure [7]. In this method,
following nanoparticles injection and their aggregation at the
tumor site, a harmonic magnetic field of tens of kilohertz is applied to vibrate the MNPs–tumor complex and generate acoustic
wave detectable on the skin surface by an acoustic sensor. It was
demonstrated that using such a method, one can detect a tumor
a few cm deep under tissue surface. However, the demonstrated
procedure only supplies data regarding tumor presence, with no
spatial information.
This paper aims to develop a supporting localization algorithm that will provide the clinician with essential tumor location data and could enable a sequential biopsy. Our objective is
to measure the acoustic signals generated by the MNP conjugated tumor in an optimal multisensor array, and estimate the
three-dimensional (3-D) location of the tumor in real time, as
illustrated in Fig. 1.
Throughout this paper, the time difference of arrival (TDOA)
based cancer localization algorithm was implemented on the
breast tissue geometry. This geometry was selected only as a

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

Fig. 1. Magnetoacoustic detection final step in which the tumor–MNPs complex was formed, and a sensor array containing five sensors is utilized to obtain
the generated acoustic signal and localize the tumor.

primary geometry for the proof of concept. However, the presented method is much more extensive and can be further implemented on different geometries and utilized for other types
of cancer as well.
II. METHODS
In order to solve the tumor localization problem, we use its
similarity to well-known localization problems such as radar,
sonar, and GPS problems. The MNP–tumor complex acts as an
acoustic emitter and the sensor array as a passive sonar system. This is the problem of positioning a stationary radiating
emitter by passive measurements of acoustic waves at various
sites. Hence, the use of hyperbolic positioning algorithm, often
called time difference of arrival (TDOA) algorithm, is straightforward [8], [9]. The algorithm relies on the fact that a pulse
emitted from a point source arrives at slightly different times at
two spatially separated receivers due to unequal source-detector
distances. The difference between the arrival times can be calculated and used for source location estimation. For given locations
of two receivers, the acoustic wave velocity in the medium, and
a single TODA measurement, a whole set of emitter locations,
located on a two-sheeted hyperboloid, is possible. For a sensor
array of more than two sensors, each pair of sensors yields a single TDOA measurement and a corresponding hyperboloid that
represents the possible source locations. The algorithm exploit
this fact by grouping all sensors into pairs, estimating the TDOA
for each pair, and finding the point where all associated hyperboloids most nearly intersect. The intersection point represents
the source’s location.
In order to solve the localization problem in 3-D, at least
four sensors are required to generate three nonlinear equations
with three unknown values (x, y, z). Five sensors (or more) will
provide excessive data that will assist in improving localization
accuracy, especially in a noisy environment.
We describe the localization algorithm principals followed
by simulation and experiments carried to validate its feasibility
and assess its performance.
A. Tumor Localization Algorithm
The problem of breast tumor localization withholds several
inherent modifications comparing to the classic source localiza-

tion problems (GPS problems) and therefore requires several
assumptions and suitable algorithm adjustments.
Generally, the localization problem can be divided into two
consecutive subprocesses: time delay estimation proceeded by
location estimation, given the calculated delays.
Time delay estimation is usually performed using generalized
cross correlation (GCC), which is the maximum likelihood estimator [10]. However, the GCC algorithm performs well only
under the ideal single path propagation scenario when signalto-noise ratio (SNR) is high [10], [11] and is only justifiable
when the received echo is a time-shifted and scaled version of
the transmitted waveform plus white noise. For breast tissue,
the acoustic impedance mismatch between the breast tissue and
its surrounding creates a reverberant environment with multiple
echoes from the tissue boundaries. Thus, the obtained signal
might differ from the transmitted one, and widening can be observed. Therefore, another algorithm is suggested for time delay estimation based on threshold crossing. The time of arrival
(TOA) of the signal to each sensor is defined by threshold crossing and calculates the difference between those times. This TOA
is given by the first time the signals amplitude rise above the
noise level and found by crossing a certain threshold, which is
predetermined adaptively to fit the measurement noise statistics
(expectation and standard deviation). This algorithm is especially valuable in reverberant environment since it refers only to
the first arrival of the signal to the sensors. Reverberations due
to reflections from the tissue boundaries, which occur later, are
filtered out.
As for the location estimation, the hyperbolic positioning
algorithm yields a set of nonlinear equations with three unknowns, which are the source location coordinates. Usually,
those equations cannot be solved analytically, and their solution
must be approximated numerically. To do that we use Gauss–
Newton algorithm, which is an iterative gradient scheme with a
fast convergence rate [8], [12], [13], described by the following
equation:
θ̂

(k )

(k )

= θ̂

(k −1)



(k −1)
+ (H T H)H T ϕ̂ − h(θ̂
)

(1)

where θ̂ is the location estimation vector (xs , ys , zs ) at the
kth iteration, ϕ̂ is the time delays vector estimation, h(θ)
are the model equations, and H is the Jacobean matrix defined by Hnm = ∂hn (θ)/∂θm . This algorithm is initiated by
(0)
and used iteratively until convergence:
an initial guess θ̂
(k )
(k −1)
| < ε. However, convergence is not guaranteed,
|θ̂ − θ̂
not even in the local sense, as there is a dependency on the
initial guess. Yet, since for tumor localization the initial guesses
are confined within the tissue boundaries, there is no concern
of nonconvergence, and we can avoid using a more sophisticated algorithm, with higher computational complexity, such as
Levenberg–Marquardt.
It is also important to mention that comparing to the classic GPS problem in which the purpose is to localize a small
distant object; the problem of tumor localization withholds several inherent modifications. First, the problem dimensions are
such that L ≈ λ (i.e., near field) compared to L >> λ for the

TSALACH et al.: TUMOR LOCALIZATION USING MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLE-INDUCED ACOUSTIC SIGNALS

2315

GPS problem. Furthermore, the object we wish to localize (the
tumor), is not a point object but has a non negligible volume
compared to the problem dimensions.
Second, the common GPS problem assumes the source to
be isotropic. However, the acoustic source generated by the
magnetoacoustic procedure has dipole source characteristics, as
at any given moment one of the solenoids “pulls” the MNP–
tumor complex in its direction. A dipole source does not radiate
sound equally in all directions, but mostly along the source
axis. The directivity pattern dictates regions where sound is
radiated very well (along the horizontal axes of the source), and
regions where sound cancels (up along the vertical axes) [14].
Yet, these radiation characteristics are for the far field of the
radiated pressure. As tissue geometry is confined to the near
field, we neglected this unequal radiation.
Fig. 2. Experimental setup for speed of sound measurement experiment.
(a) Total system sketch. (b) An actual photo of the system.

B. Speed of Sound Measurement
The first in vitro experiment aimed to measure the speed
of sound in tissue mimicking Agarose gel. This was done in
order to characterize the tissue phantoms acoustic properties.
The experiment protocol included measurements of an acoustic
signal using two sensors, separated by a predefined distance.
The difference between the signal’s arrival times to the two
sensors allowed deducing the wave propagation velocity.
A 75 cm long agar gel (6.4 g Agarose gel–BactoTM Agar,
300 mL water) cylinder (diameter of 2 cm) was prepared inside a
plastic tube. To ensure stability during the measurement, it was
fixed to a rigid metal bar and to the measurement table. Two
holes 70 cm apart were drilled in the plastic tube’s upper side.
Two omnidirectional acoustic sensors (Aquarian Audio H2a
Hydrophones) were placed in those holes deep into the agar to
ensure good coupling between the sensors and the phantom. A
third sensor (Brüel&Kjær Hydrophone Type 8103) was placed
on one end of the tube and acted as an acoustic transmitter. It
was driven by a function generator (555 Pulse Generator, Berkeley Nucleonics) to emit narrow square pulses (time on: 10 μs)
with 14 V amplitude at 0.5 Hz frequency. Such repetition rate
ensures good separation between pulses even in the presence of
pulse broadening due to modal dispersion. Signals were sampled
at 100 kHz rate using a data acquisition card (NI USB-6210)
controlled by a LabView program. Thousand pulses were
recorded to enable sufficient pulse averaging and rejection of
anomalous measurements. Time delay estimation and velocity
calculation were then performed in MATLAB environment. The
experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2.
Time delay was estimated using threshold crossing. The
threshold was determined by
Threshold = ±(μnoise + n · σnoise )

(2)

where μnoise is the noise’s mean, σnoise is its standard deviation,
and n is a constant, which was set according to the SNR. The
selected values were n = 3.
Propagation velocity for each pulse was calculated by
v=

0.7
TimeDelay

(3)

as the wave propagated 70 cm from sensor 1 to sensor 2. Finally,
1000 velocities were obtained and averaged to estimate the true
propagation velocity.
C. Computerized Simulation
COMSOL Multiphysics, a commercial finite element analysis
solver and simulation software, was used to model the acoustic
wave propagation and produce the expected signals obtained by
the sensor array. These simulated signals were later used in a
MATLAB environment to assess the tumor location.
A time dependent pressure acoustics simulation was used to
simulate the impulse response of the tissue to an acoustic dipole
source. This simulation solves the wave (4)
1 ∂2
p(r, t) − ∇2 p(r, t) = −∇ · q(r, t)
c2s ∂t2

(4)

where p [Pa] is the spatiotemporal pressure distribution, cs [m/s]
denotes the speed of sound, and q refers to a dipole source distribution in space [N/m3 ]. The solution is the pressure variation
with time, or the surface acceleration (pressure gradient on the
surface divided by the medium’s density), which is the physical
parameter measured by our sensors. The tumor was modeled as
a sphere (3 mm radius) with a dipole source in an arbitrary point
inside the breast tissue. This procedure was repeated 100 times
for different, random locations in the breast tissue.
The breast tissue was assumed to be a homogenous fat
tissue with hemispherical geometry, 10 cm in diameter. The
acoustics characteristics of the simulated tissue were taken
as ρ = 950 kg/m3 , cs = 1490 m/s. Boundary conditions were
set to be constant atmospheric pressure in the breast surroundings, and acoustic impedance of muscle beneath it (ρ =
1065 kg/m3 , c = 1575 m/s). These values are in accordance to
literature for frequencies lower than 100 kHz [15].
The sensor array contained five sensors equally distributed
on the spherical surface (uniform angular array) as illustrated
in Fig. 3. This configuration was shown to be the optimal in

2316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

Fig. 3. Simulation’s configuration including the five sensors (tagged) equally
distributed around the breast tissue, and the simulated acoustic source (tumor)
inside.

order to get minimum variance of the error in the localization
estimation [16].
The numeric mesh grid was constructed by 120 795 free tetrahedral elements. Denser areas with smaller element size were
built specifically near the sensors for better spatial resolution
(455 elements in a 9 mm3 cube surrounding each sensor). A
mesh validation convergence test was performed to assess the
sensitivity to the number of elements. The working mesh was
chosen when the calculated time delays received from two successively refined meshes differed by less than 3%. The solution
obtained using these properties had a sufficient resolution with
reasonable runtime of the program.
The acceleration signals (pressure gradients) were recorded at
the sensor locations over 70 ms with a 0.1 μs time step. Since the
time delay magnitudes are of order of microseconds, this temporal resolution was adequate. Under these conditions, given the
speed of sound within the tissue, the maximal spatial resolution
is 0.15 mm. The mesh sensitivity to the time step was also tested.
The selected mesh was the one in which refining caused a negligible difference in time delay calculation that did not exceed
3%. The recorded signals were used in a MATLAB program,
which implements the hyperbolic positioning equations.
The signal’s time of arrival to each sensor was defined as the
time of the first threshold crossing. The localization sensitivity
to the selected threshold was tested, and as threshold modifications caused only minor changes in the delay calculations (few
percentages), we set it on a constant, randomly selected value,
for all simulations.
For an array of N sensors, a set of N (N − 1)/2 time delays
were computed, corresponding to each pair of sensors. Finally,
using the calculated delays vector and applying Gauss–Newton
algorithm, the simulation yielded the estimated tumor location.
It was then compared with the actual known tumor location that
we set at COMSOL to get the localization error. The analysis
included both calculation of the Euclidean distance between the
actual and estimated tumor centers and assessment of the overlapping volume between the two volumetric tumors calculated
by


d3
4d
+
%Overlap = 100 · 1 −
3 R 9R3


(5)

Fig. 4. Sensors’ supporting system including an elevated phantom tray surrounded by five sensors unequally distributed around it. (a) General view.
(b and c) Side views.

where R is the sources radii (3 mm) and d is the Euclidean
distance discussed earlier.
We applied this procedure on 100 tumor locations, to assess
the performance of the algorithm.
D. Experimental Setup
In order to validate the TDOA based localization algorithm
in in vitro experiments, a designated experimental setup was
built. This setup can be divided into 2 main parts: the magnetic
excitation system and the acoustic sensing system. The excitation system consisted of two twin magnetic solenoids, a driving
circuit (modulator) and a dc power supply unit. The solenoids
consisted of 2 layers of 46 radial windings with inner diameter
of 3 mm. The windings were made of 72 mm thick (AWG 21)
isolated copper wire. They were facing each other and fixed
to the measurement table using a set of posts (diameter: 1 cm,
length: 20 cm), holders, mounts, and screws all made of Delrin
(polyoxymethylene). These parts were especially manufactured
and used instead of the standard steel parts in order to minimize distortions in the magnetic field due to metallic objects.
The driving circuit was designed to supply the solenoids with a
square current wave with inverse phase, at various frequencies
and amplitudes. It was powered by a dc current PSU (Motech
DS 10014). Current peak to peak amplitude and frequency were
manually controlled and set for each experiment separately.
The sensing system consisted of five acoustic sensors (hydrophones) arranged in a designated supporting system, a fivechannel hydrophone amplifier and a data acquisition system.
The setup support consisted of a modular stationary structure
that is fixed to the measurement table and intended to hold the
sensor array in a stable, user-defined geometry. As can be seen
in Fig. 4, the sensor array complex is elevated approximately
25 cm above the measurement table, and surrounds a tray, on
which the tissue phantom will be placed.
The setup supports geometry could not meet the uniform angular array distribution requirement. This is due to the integration of the excitation system, which consisted of large solenoids,
and the sensing system.
This integration requires the distance between two adjacent
sensors to be large enough to enable the solenoids approach to
the tissue phantom tray. Therefore, the sensors distribution was
chosen to be as close as possible to the uniform angular array,

TSALACH et al.: TUMOR LOCALIZATION USING MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLE-INDUCED ACOUSTIC SIGNALS

2317

Fig. 5. Sensors’ unequal distribution in the XY plane. (a) Top view. The gap
between sensors 1 and 2 and sensors 3 and 4 is larger, to leave sufficient space for
the solenoids. (b) Design sketch, detailing the accurate geometry (dimensions
are in mm).

Fig. 7. (a) 2-D experimental setup including the cylindrical tissue phantom, the acoustic source, and the sensor array held by the supporting system.
(b) Overview of the tissue phantom surrounded by four sensors and the acoustic
source in a randomly selected point. (c) The target board that was used to define
the source location.

Fig. 6. Whole experimental setup including both the magnetoacoustic excitation system and the sensing system.

yet leaving sufficient space for the solenoids. The final design
of the sensor array geometry is given in Fig. 5.
In order to reduce any distortions to the magnetic field, all the
measurement setup components (beside the base) were made
of a non metallic material (black Delrin) due to their proximity
to the solenoids. Five acoustic sensors (Aquarian Audio H2a
Hydrophones) were placed in the designated positions in the
support system, and connected to a five-channel H2a hydrophone amplifier designed specifically for these sensors. All
sensors were sampled simultaneously after amplification at
100 kHz rate using a data acquisition card (NI USB-6210).
The two systems integration is detailed schematically in
Fig. 6.
E. 2-D Localization
The first algorithm validation experiment was designed for
two-dimensional (2-D) validation, using four sensors. The experimental setup, illustrated in Fig. 7(a), included an acoustic
source, a cylindrical tissue phantom and the sensing system described earlier. The excitation system (source) was similar to
the one detailed earlier in the “speed of sound” experiment.
A 5 cm radius, 3 cm high cylinder of agar (prepared as described earlier) was placed on the supporting system’s tissue
phantom tray. Though the axial dimension is in same order as
the lateral dimension, we neglected the phantom height and
considered it as a 2-D phantom that enables source localization

in XY plane only. As our sensors were immersed sensors we
needed a thick phantom to ensure good coupling between both
the source and the sensor array to the phantom.
Sensors were distributed in one dimension—XY plane, surrounding the phantom. Their positions are shown in Fig. 7(b).
A 5 cm radius target board [see Fig. 7(c)] was used to define
the source location. The acoustic source was modeled using
a fifth omnidirectional hydrophone (Brüel&Kjær Hydrophone
Type 8103) as a transmitter.
The procedure was repeated ten times for ten different source
locations. For each location, six measurements of six sensor
pairs were taken and a set of six corresponding time delays
were estimated using threshold crossing.
Source locations were determined and both the error in each
coordinate and the Euclidean distance from the simulated source
were evaluated. The overlapping area (as this is a 2-D case) was
estimated using the following equation for two circles intersection:
√
R2 cos−1 (d/2) − (d/2) 4R2 − d2
(6)
%overlap = 100
πR2
where R is the sources radii (5 mm) and d is the Euclidean
distance between as discussed earlier.
F. 3-D Localization
Second algorithm validation experiment was conducted in
three dimensions, using five sensors. This time a 5 cm radius
hemisphere served as a tissue phantom, mimicking the geometry
of the breast. It was again imposed on the tissue phantom tray
of the supporting system, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
As for the sensors spatial distribution, four out of five were
placed in the XY plane, similar to the last experiment, and the
additional sensor was placed above them, enabling the 3-D

2318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

Fig. 8. 3-D localization experimental setup. (Left) Sketch of the whole system.The hemisphere represents the tissue phantom, placed on the tissue phantom
tray of the supporting system, and surrounded by the five sensors utilized in the
localization process. The sixth sensor acts as a transmitter and controlled by a
pulse generator. (Center) Real setup including the same parts described above.
(Right) Zoom in on the system region of interest.

localization. This configuration was as close as possible to the
uniform angular array configuration.
The acoustic source was modeled the same way, using a sixth
hydrophone as a transmitter. Its XY location was determined
using the aforementioned target board, and the Z-coordinate
using a rubber. Selected tumor locations were bound to be close
to the phantom surface due to the use of an additional hydrophone to mimic the tumor acoustic source. This restriction
was purely technical as previous work had already demonstrated
small (5 mm) tumor detection using magnetoacoustic in deep
tissue [7].
The procedure was repeated three times for three different
source locations. For each location ten measurements of ten
sensor pairs were taken and a set of ten corresponding time delays were estimated using threshold crossing. Source locations
were determined, and both the error in each coordinate and the
Euclidean distance from the simulated source were calculated.
The overlapping volume between the real and estimated sources
was calculated as well.
G. Magnetoacoustic Experiment
The last experiment aimed to validate the localization algorithm in a full magnetoacoustic procedure and localize a tumor
phantom immersed within a tissue phantom. The tumor phantom, consisted of MNPs in agar, was vibrated by an external
alternating magnetic field generated by two solenoids. The resulting acoustic signal was recorded by a five sensor array. The
experimental setup is presented in Fig. 9. The main challenge
in this experiment, comparing to the others, was to extract the
acoustic signal from the obtained measurements corrupted by
the presence of high electromagnetic noise. Thus, the sampling
system was slightly changed. A four channels A/D was used
(NI PCI-6115) and enabled a higher sampling rate of 2.2 MHz
per channel. This was especially important as the SNR was
expected to be much lower.
A tumor phantom was prepared from a mixture of Agarose gel
(300 mL DI water, 6.4 g BactoTM Agar) and 300 μL of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles solution (Ocean Nano
Tech SHP10-10). It was allowed to consolidate into a sphere
with 5 mm radius. The concentration of MNPs at the tumor
was 6 mg/mL and the total amount of MNPs was 3 mg, which
are somewhat lower than those who were already in use in the

Fig. 9. Experimental setup used in the magnetoacoustic experiment. On the
right is a sketch of the system, presenting the sensor array along with the two
solenoids and the tissue phantom. On the left is an actual picture of the system
containing the tumor phantom within the hemisphere tissue phantom.

clinic with similar types of MNPs [17], [18]. It was placed in a
predefined location inside a hemispherical tissue phantom. This
phantom was prepared in two steps. First, a 2 cm layer of agar
was formed and put in a hemisphere pattern. Then, the tumor
phantom was placed, and another layer of agar was used to fill
the dedicated pattern. Finally, a uniform tissue phantom was assembled with a tumor phantom buried in a predefined location.
Another identical tissue phantom was composed of Agarose gel
without a tumor phantom. This phantom served as a reference
to perform a differential measurement as will be detailed later.
As demonstrated in Fig. 9, the phantom containing the tumor
was the first to be placed on the tissue phantom tray. The following measurement protocol was carried: using an oscilloscope,
the driver circuit was tuned to 22 kHz. It was then connected
to both the power supply and the solenoids. To evaluate the
environment noise, a 1-s-long measurement was taken with the
power supply off. Then, the power supply was turned on and set
to peak to peak amplitude of 8 A. Another 1-s-long measurement
was taken.
Since for this setup the solenoids are placed in a proximity to
the measuring sensors, a very high electromagnetic noise was
prone to interfere with the measurement. This noise is of deterministic nature, and can be subtracted from the measurement to
produce clean acoustic signal. In order to evaluate this interference, the tissue phantom was replaced with the control phantom
(no tumor). All other system characteristics were maintained
the same and a third, 1-s-long measurement was taken. As there
were no MNPs involved in this measurement, no acoustic signal
was present.
Therefore, it contained only the electromagnetic noise and
could be used as a reference to eliminate this noise from the
“real” measurement. This procedure was repeated for each three
sensors combination in the array. The forth channel was used
for the trigger recording.
The obtained measurements were then processed in
MATLAB environment. Each measurement was averaged over
the recorded second to get an averaged five-period segment. To
avoid edge effects the first and last cycles were removed. This
averaging reduced the accompanied white noise and eliminated
random effects on the signal. To extract the acoustic signal,
the averaged electromagnetic noise was then reduced from the

TSALACH et al.: TUMOR LOCALIZATION USING MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLE-INDUCED ACOUSTIC SIGNALS

TABLE I
LOCALIZATION RESULTS OF THE DIFFERENT SIMULATIONS AND EXPERIMENTS
CARRIED OUT

2319

TABLE II
MEAN LOCALIZATION ERROR BY COORDINATE

obtained averaged signal. Ultimately, we were left with the
acoustic signal only, and could implement the localization algorithm. Time delays were calculated using threshold crossing
and a vector of ten time delays was obtained and used in the
Gauss–Newton algorithm to get the final location estimation of
the algorithm. Euclidean distance and overlapping volume were
calculated to represent the localization error.
III. RESULTS
The localization algorithm was validated in computerized
simulation and in both two and three dimensions localization experiments. As the speed of sound within the tissue is
a crucial parameter in the localization algorithm, first phase
of in vitro experiments concentrated on calculating this parameter for our Agarose-based tissue phantom. The calculated
mean velocity, after removal of 10% outlier measurements, was
1493 ± 83.7 m/s. This velocity agreed well with results obtained in the literature [19]–[22] and, therefore, was used in the
algorithm for all consecutive experiments. The measurements
standard deviation was approximately 5%. It is important to
mention that due to the fact that the expected time delays are
of order of few microseconds, a variation of ±100 m/s in the
speed of sound causes a change of only 0.1 mm in the location.
Thus, the obtained results are definitely sufficient.
The obtained localization results are detailed in Table I.
Our system yielded 3-D position localization with a mean
error of 2.03 ± 1.44 mm in computerized simulations and
4.1 ± 0.8 mm in in vitro experiments. Corresponding overlapping volumes between the actual and estimated tumors were
58 ± 26% and 42 ± 10%, respectively. Obviously, in comparison to the computerized simulation, in vitro experiments
yielded less accurate localization, since in simulations, inaccuracy was associated mainly with numerical errors and algorithm
assumptions, while in the in vitro experiments many other noise
sources were present (inaccuracies in the source and sensors
locations, environment acoustic noise, external vibrations, etc.).
The exhibited results indicate that tumor localization can indeed be achieved with good spatial resolution and significant
overlapping volume and might enable consecutive biopsy.
Regarding the in vitro experiments, in 2-D, localization was
achieved with a mean error of 3.33 ± 0.99 mm, while in 3-D,
the localization was less accurate and, as mentioned, yielded an
error of 4.1 ± 0.8 mm. This was rather expected as there was

Fig. 10. Averaged signal obtained by one sensor. The black line is the normalized current signal which was supplied to the solenoids. The blue and red
lines represent the averaged signals obtained with and without a tumor (MNPs),
respectively.

another coordinate to estimate with only one additional sensor,
enabling the 3-D localization. Larger number of sensors might
have yielded better spatial resolution as will be discussed later.
Further examination of the localization errors in each coordinate, illustrated in Table II, reveals that the errors obtained in
the source Z-coordinate estimation were systematically higher.
We attribute these errors to the fact that four of five sensors of
the array were located in the XY plane, and only one additional
sensor was placed above them.
Another issue is the imbalance of errors in the X and Y coordinates in the in vitro experiment. This can be attributed to
either the unequal location of the sensors that can be resolved
by unequal factoring of both axis or to inconvergence of the
statistical error due to the limited number of measurements.
However, one should note that errors are small and on the order
of 1 mm, which is clinically acceptable.
The last phase of experiments included a proof of concept in a
full magnetoacoustic procedure. Due to the proximity between
the solenoids and the measuring sensors, SNR was very low, as
the acoustic signal was accompanied with a very high degree
of electromagnetic noise. The weak acoustic signal was added
on top of the strong electromagnetic interference caused by the
solenoids modulated currents. Fig. 10 demonstrates an averaged
signal that was obtained by one of the sensors (light gray line),
along with the solenoids averaged current trigger (bold black
line).

2320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

Fig. 11. Extracted acoustic signal (blue line) gathered by the reduction of
the electromagnetic noise from the actual signal. The red line represents the
current trigger and highlights the connection between the excitation to the
MNPs response.

It further shows the measurement obtained with the control
phantom without tumor or MNPs (red line). This measurement
represents only the electromagnetic noise and as there are no
vibrating MNPs as a response to the alternating magnetic field
applied, there is no “actual” acoustic signal within it. Clearly, the
measurements with and without MNPs are very similar, emphasizing the low ratio between the actual acoustic signal amplitude
to the accompanying electromagnetic noise amplitude. Yet, it is
also evident that the averaging done over a long measurement
period significantly reduced random noises, since the signal is
smooth and periodic. A reduction of the electromagnetic noise
from the measurement taken with the MNPs extracts the acoustic signal, as shown in Fig. 11. The low SNR of the acoustic
signal compared to the EM interference is clearly apparent. To
improve the SNR, various signal processing methods can be
applied that will be discussed.
The obtained acoustic signals were utilized to get final location estimation with an error of 2.14 mm and an overlapping
volume of 84%. This localization is illustrated in Fig. 12(a).
Table III details the explicit localization results by source position coordinate. A significant overlap between the actual source
and the estimated one is apparent. Yet, in order appreciate the
accuracy of the location estimation, it is worthy to observe it
from 3 different planes—XY plane, XZ plane, and YZ plane,
as illustrated in Fig. 12(b)–(d). This display exposes us to the
localization error in each coordinate.
The obtained results seem quite promising and demonstrate
the feasibility of tumor localization using a time difference of arrival algorithm along with a magnetoacoustic detection scheme.
Again the error in measurements in the Y -coordinate is sufficiently larger than in the X-coordinate as discussed previously.
IV. DISCUSSION
A new complementary localization algorithm for the magnetoacoustic cancer detection procedure was presented and evaluated. In general, our study suggests that the combination of
magnetoacoustic detection along with a TDOA-based localization algorithm can produce an efficient tumor diagnostic system.
Successful tumor localization with good spatial resolution was
demonstrated. Our system, which is simple, rapid, inexpensive,

and avoids the use of ionizing radiation, exhibits obvious inherent benefits comparing to other imaging techniques used for
breast cancer screening, such as mammography or MRI, and
its performance might be sufficient for routine screening tests.
Moreover, its performance can be further improved as will be
discussed later. It is also worth reminding that the simulated tumor had only a 3 mm radius in simulations and 5 mm radius in
experiments, cases that represent a very early stage in cancer development. Furthermore, the localization errors achieved were
smaller than the tumor radius, and with a significant overlap
volume, thus allowing biopsy.
First noteworthy aspect of our in vitro experiments is the
breast tissue modeling, and particularly its speed of sound, as it
has significant effect on the localization algorithm. Evaluations
of this speed in breast tissues at 7.5 MHzand 8 MHz yielded
velocities of 1470 m/s [23] and 1500 m/s [24], respectively. As
for Agarose phantoms, several studies that have been carried out
in order to evaluate its acoustic properties obtained a wide range
of velocities from 1400 to 1600 m/s [19]–[22]. In these studies,
the characterization of speed has been conducted at frequencies
of at least several megahertzs. We assume that the variance
in the obtained velocities is associated with the Agarose type,
concentration, and preparation method. Our calculated mean
velocity was 1493 ± 83.7 m/s, which is consistent with those
achieved by others. Thus, we showed that our phantoms mimic
soft tissue’s acoustic properties well.
We also made two more assumptions that are worth mentioning. First, the symmetric hemisphere assumption is evidently
not very realistic. The human breast has a more elliptic shape
and might be better modeled using half of a three dimensional
ellipsoid. A 3-D anatomical breast model can be deduced from
a 3-D MRI in order to improve our breast model and convert
it into a configuration that is more similar to the actual breast
shape [25]. Still, this is a very common assumption and represents the breast’s shape well enough.
Second, the homogeneous fat tissue assumption that we made
is quite crude, since the human breast is composed of several different structures [26]. With this assumption, the reflection and refraction due to transition between different acoustic
impedances in the heterogeneous media are neglected, and can
cause some accuracy loss [27]. Yet, conventional ultrasound
systems typically assume the speed of sound in soft tissues to be
constant with an average value close to that of water [28], as the
mechanical properties changes between one tissue to another
are only in few percents and therefore negligible. In addition,
anatomically, a breast tumor is most likely to be inside the ducts
(milk passage) and lobules (milk producing glands at the end
of the lobes) [29]. The tumor model should have been modified
accordingly. Further study can take these matters under consideration and construct a more detailed model, which includes the
skin layer, the ducts and the lobules.
Another interesting result is the systematically higher estimation error obtained in the Z-coordinate, as presented before in
Table II. We believe that a different sensor array configuration
might have helped in minimizing the error in that coordinate.
Yet, it was shown in the literature that the optimal configuration
(in the sense of minimal variance of error) for location estimation

TSALACH et al.: TUMOR LOCALIZATION USING MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLE-INDUCED ACOUSTIC SIGNALS

2321

Fig. 12. Magnetoacoustic experiment localization results. (a) 3-D tissue phantom (a hemisphere confined by black lines) surrounded by the five sensors utilized
for the localization (crosses). The acoustic source and its location estimation are marked by the full and hollow circles, respectively. (b–d) The localization results
exhibited in three different planes—XY, XZ, and YZ. This display emphasizes the localization quality.
TABLE III
LOCALIZATION’S EXPLICIT RESULTS

is the uniform angular array [16].Thus, a change in the array geometry might reduce the accuracy of estimation in the other two
coordinates (X and Y ) and yield a higher overall error. Furthermore, since our system’s characteristics differ from those
of similar GPS problems in the sense of the source and the
boundary conditions, the above mentioned optimization might
not be relevant to our case. Further studies should investigate
the performances of different sensor distributions.
As for the tumor modeling, it was modeled as an acoustic
dipole source. We assumed that since the tissue is confined to
the near field of the source, the source’s directivity pattern could
be neglected. In fact, the numerical simulation did yield similar
waveforms at the different sensors. However, the dipole directivity might suggest another reason to the reduced resolution in
the estimation of the source Z-coordinate. Therefore, another

way to improve the localization result and enhance its resolution
might include alterations in the solenoids configuration. In each
configuration, the MNP–tumor complex would be vibrated in
another direction, generating a dipole source with another directivity pattern. Detection of the different dipole configurations
might assist in improving the localization and eliminating the
directivity dependency, if it exists.
Several techniques can be used in order to enhance the localization resolution. The main guiding idea is to increase the
number of measurements in our system, thereby creating an excessive data, which is useful in the localization algorithm. One
approach might be using the same five sensors in several configurations, yielding several location estimations. Averaging the
estimations achieved by each sensor configuration should produce better tumor localization. It can be even further developed
into a scanning system, in which the sensors move in known
shifts and for each shift they measure the acoustic signal and location estimation is gathered. Another approach can include an
addition of a sixth sensor to the array. The enlarged array would
create a TDOA excessiveness even in a one sole configuration
and might enable better localization as well.
Regarding the time delay calculation, it is well-known that
the standard cross-correlation estimator is the optimal unbiased maximum likelihood estimator [30]. Nevertheless, we used

2322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

threshold crossing that was shown to produce better results. In
order to achieve a more robust calculation and eliminate the
threshold selection dependency, one should consider using cross
correlation for the delay estimation. This might require revision
of the basic assumptions that were used here. As mentioned,
we consider our system as a passive one, in which the MNP–
tumor complex acts as an acoustic emitter and the sensor array
as a passive sonar system. However, it might useful to consider
it as an active radar system, in which the magnetic excitation
procedure determines the characteristics of the signal obtained
by the sensor array. Using this assumption, one rather selects a
different excitation method in order to achieve better temporal
resolution in time delay estimation, and therefore better spatial
resolution in source localization. In our in vitro experiments, the
magnetic excitation system is continuous and periodical, as at
any given moment one of the solenoids “pulls” the MNP–tumor
complex in its direction, creating a continuous vibration of the
complex toward one solenoid or the other. If we consider the
tumor to be a perfect sphere and neglecting power loss due to
friction, this give raise to a periodical dipole source [31], whose
temporal autocorrelation function is periodical as well. This
configuration is suited for cases in which long measurement periods can be obtained and averaged to achieve high SNR. As we
wish to give location estimation in real time, we would like to
minimize the excitation time and might need to select another
excitation protocol. One option is to transmit a “white” signal,
whose frequency changes randomly within a fixed bandwidth
and has the quality of being independent and identically distributed. This ensures that the signals received by the different
sensors will have a unimodal cross correlation with a peak only
near the real TDOA. This technique might yield better temporal
resolution in the delay calculation. We can further use a more
sophisticated excitation technique such as pulse compression.
This is a signal processing technique mainly used in radar, sonar
and echography to increase both the localization resolution as
well as the SNR, by modulating the transmitted pulse [32]. The
main idea is to transmit a coded series (such as Barker codes
or Golay codes) whose autocorrelation is unimodal as well.
Again we get higher resolution in delay calculation. Yet another
advantage of these modulated pulses is their use for multiple
objects localization, which can be used for another interesting
common physiological condition of multiple tumors localization or a metastatic tumor. To do that, one should also further
investigate multisource TDOA estimation techniques [33], [34].
In addition to the tumor location data and whether it had
spread, another very important parameter in cancer staging is
the tumor size. As for now, the magnetoacoustic procedure is
not able to produce this data; however, additional analysis of
the obtained signals might enable deducing it. Based on the fact
that a bigger tumor is prone to cause an excessive aggregation of
MNPs, a more significant response to the applied magnetic field
is likely to appear. Therefore, the received signal strength is practically proportional to the tumor size. An analysis of the signal
amplitudes along with a proper prescaling of the system might
yield the desired size information. Future study should further
investigate other signal characteristics, such as the received signal strength, in order to provide tumor size information.

Finally, the localization concept was proved and validated.
Yet, since our system was tested solely in computerized simulation and in vitro experiments, the actual accuracy of a real
system cannot be truly estimated. To achieve that, and enable
its conversion into a useful diagnostics system for humans, one
should expand the testing to in vivo experiments and clinical
trials. Moreover, improvements have been proposed and should
be further investigated as well. The inherent advantages of being
simple, rapid, inexpensive, and without the use of ionizing radiation make this minimal invasive method very promising and
appealing. It enables the detection of tumor presence, as well as
the triangulation of its location. In the future it can be developed
into a compact diagnostic system and even into an “image and
treat” method. Localization, accompanied with treatment and
feedback for treatment efficacy, all at the same session.

REFERENCES
[1] Society, American Cancer, Cancer Facts & Figures 2012, Atlanta, GA,
2012.
[2] R. Siegel, D. Naishadham, and A. Jemal, “Cancer statistics,” J. Clin., vol.
62, no. 1, pp. 10–29, 2012.
[3] Q. G. de Lussanet, W. H. Backes, A. W. Griffioen, J. M. A. van
Engelshoven, and R. G. H. Beets-Tan, Gadopentetate Dimeglumine Versus Ultrasmall Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide for Dynamic ContrastEnhanced MR Imaging of Tumor Angiogenesis in Human Colon Carcinoma in Mice1, vol. 229. Maastricht, the Netherlands: Radiological
Society of North America, 2003, pp. 429–438.
[4] A. Levy, A. Dayan, M. Ben-David, and I. Gannot, “A new thermographybased approach to early detection of cancer utilizing magnetic nanoparticles theory simulation and in vitro validation,” Nanomed. Nanotechnol.,
Biol. Med., vol. 6, pp. 786–796, 2010.
[5] J. Oh, M. D. Feldman, J. Kim, C. Condit, S. Emelianov, and T. E. Milner,
“Detection of magnetic nanoparticles in tissue using magneto-motive ultrasound,” Nanotechnology, vol. 17, pp. 4183–4190, 2006.
[6] S. J. Norton and T. Vo-Dinh, “Imaging the distribution of magnetic
nanoparticles with ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 26, no. 5,
pp. 660–665, May 2007.
[7] I. Steinberg, M. Ben-David, and I. Gannot. “A new method for tumor
detection using induced acoustic waves from tagged magnetic nanoparticles,” Nanomed. Nanotechnol., Biol. Med., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 569–579,
2012.
[8] D. J. Torrieri, “Statistical theory of passive location systems,” IEEE
Trans. Aerospace Electron. Syst., vol. AES-20, no. 2, pp. 183–198, Mar.
1984.
[9] Y. Chan and K. Ho, “A simple and efficient estimator for hyperbolic
location,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1905–1915,
Aug. 1994.
[10] C. Knapp and G. Carter, “The generalized correlation method for estimation of time delay,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 320–327, Aug. 1976.
[11] G. C. Carter, “Coherence and time delay estimation,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 75,
no. 2, pp. 236–255, Feb. 1987.
[12] W. H. Foy, “Position-location solutions by Taylor-series estimation,”
IEEE Trans. Aerospace Electron. Syst., vol. AES-12, no. 2, pp. 187–194,
Mar. 1976.
[13] J. Smith and J. Abel, “Closed-form least-squares source location estimation from range-difference measurements,” IEEE Trans. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Process., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 1661–1669, Dec.
1987.
[14] D. A. Russell, J. P. Titlow, and Y. J. Bemmen, “Acoustic monopoles,
dipoles, and quadrupoles: An experiment revisited,” Amer. J. Phys.,
vol. 67, pp. 660–664, 1999.
[15] F. A. Duck, Physical Properties of Tissue: A Comprehensive Reference
Book. University of Wisconsin—Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA:
Academic, 1990.
[16] B. Yang and J. Scheuing, “Cramer-Rao bound and optimum sensor array
for source localization from time differences of arrival,” vol. 4, pp. iv/961–
iv/964, 2005.

TSALACH et al.: TUMOR LOCALIZATION USING MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLE-INDUCED ACOUSTIC SIGNALS

[17] M. G. Harisinghani, J. Barentsz, P. F. Hahn, W. M. Deserno, S. Tabatabaei,
C. H. Van de Kaa, J. de la Rosette, and R. Weissleder, “Noninvasive
detection of clinically occult lymph-node metastases in prostate cancer,”
New Engl. J. Med., vol. 348, pp. 2491–2499, 2003.
[18] L. Yang, X.-H. Peng, Y. A. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Cao, C. Ni, P. Karna,
X. Zhang, W. C. Wood, and X. Gao, “Receptor-targeted nanoparticles for
in vivo imaging of breast cancer,” Clinical Cancer Res., vol. 15, pp. 4722–
4732, 2009.
[19] M. O. Culjat, D. Goldenberg, P. Tewari, and R. S. Singh, “A review of
tissue substitutes for ultrasound imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 36,
pp. 861–873, 2010.
[20] M. Brewin, L. Pike, D. Rowland, and M. Birch, “The acoustic properties,
centered on 20 MHZ, of an IEC agar-based tissue-mimicking material and
its temperature, frequency and age dependence,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 34, pp. 1292–1306, 2008.
[21] K. Zell, J. Sperl, M. Vogel, R. Niessner, and C. Haisch, “Acoustical
properties of selected tissue phantom materials for ultrasound imaging,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. N475–N484, 2007.
[22] M. E. Anderson and G. E. Trahey, “The direct estimation of sound speed
using pulse–echo ultrasound,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 104, pp. 3099–
3106, 1998.
[23] J. F. Greenleaf and R. C. Bahn, “Clinical imaging with transmissive ultrasonic computerized tomography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME28, no. 2, pp. 177–185, Feb. 1981.
[24] P. Edmonds, C. Mortensen, J. Hill, S. Holland, J. Jensen, P. Schattner,
A. Valdes, R. Lee, and F. Marzoni, “Ultrasound tissue characterization of
breast biopsy specimens,” Ultrasonic Imag., vol. 13, pp. 162–185, 1991.
[25] E. Zastrow, S. K. Davis, M. Lazebnik, F. Kelcz, B. D. Van Veen, and
S. C. Hagness, “Development of anatomically realistic numerical breast
phantoms with accurate dielectric properties for modeling microwave interactions with the human breast,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55,
no. 12, pp. 2792–2800, Dec. 2008.

2323

[26] D. Ramsay, J. Kent, R. Hartmann, and P. Hartmann, “Anatomy of the
lactating human breast redefined with ultrasound imaging,” J. Anatomy,
vol. 206, pp. 525–534, 2005.
[27] M. Fluckiger and B. J. Nelson, “Ultrasound emitter localization in heterogeneous media,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annual Int. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
(EMBS), Conf., Aug. 2007, pp. 2867–2870.
[28] P. N. T. Wells, “Ultrasonic imaging of the human body,” Rep. Progress
Phys., vol. 62, pp. 671–722, 1999.
[29] Breast Cancer Facts & Figures, American Cancer Society, Inc., Atlanta,
GA, USA, 2011–2012.
[30] S. M. Kay, Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation
Theory. vol. 1, University of Rhode Island: Prentice Hall, 1993.
[31] A. D. Pierce and P. Smith, “Acoustics: An introduction to its physical
principles and applications,” Phys. Today, vol. 34, pp. 56–57, 1981.
[32] J. R. Klauder, “The design of radar signals having both high range resolution and high velocity resolution,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 39, pp. 809–820,
1960.
[33] C. Blandin, E. Vincent, and A. Ozerov, “Multi-source TDOA estimation
using SNR-based angular spectra,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process. (ICASSP), Conf., May 2011, pp. 2616–2619.
[34] X. Sheng and Y. H. Hu, “Maximum likelihood multiple-source localization using acoustic energy measurements with wireless sensor networks,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 44–53, Jan. 2005.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

