694

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Time-Varying Modeling of Cerebral Hemodynamics
Vasilis Z. Marmarelis∗ , Fellow, IEEE, Dae C. Shin, Member, IEEE, Melissa Orme, and Rong Zhang

Abstract—The scientific and clinical importance of cerebral
hemodynamics has generated considerable interest in their quantitative understanding via computational modeling. In particular,
two aspects of cerebral hemodynamics, cerebral flow autoregulation (CFA) and CO2 vasomotor reactivity (CVR), have attracted
much attention because they are implicated in many important
clinical conditions and pathologies (orthostatic intolerance, syncope, hypertension, stroke, vascular dementia, mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s disease, and other neurodegenerative diseases with cerebrovascular components). Both CFA and CVR are
dynamic physiological processes by which cerebral blood flow is
regulated in response to fluctuations in cerebral perfusion pressure and blood CO2 tension. Several modeling studies to date
have analyzed beat-to-beat hemodynamic data in order to advance
our quantitative understanding of CFA–CVR dynamics. A confounding factor in these studies is the fact that the dynamics of
the CFA–CVR processes appear to vary with time (i.e., changes
in cerebrovascular characteristics) due to neural, endocrine, and
metabolic effects. This paper seeks to address this issue by tracking
the changes in linear time-invariant models obtained from short
successive segments of data from ten healthy human subjects. The
results suggest that systemic variations exist but have stationary
statistics and, therefore, the use of time-invariant modeling yields
“time-averaged models” of physiological and clinical utility.
Index Terms—Cerebral flow autoregulation (CFA), cerebral
hemodynamics, CO2 vasomotor reactivity (CVR), time-varying
modeling.

I. INTRODUCTION
ULTIPLE physiological factors affect cerebral blood
flow during normal variations in the cerebral perfusion
pressure and blood CO2 tension that constitute the physiological
regulatory processes of cerebral flow autoregulation (CFA) and
CO2 vasomotor reactivity (CVR), respectively. These regulatory processes maintain variations in cerebral blood flow within

M

Manuscript received September 26, 2012; revised December 22, 2012 and
February 8, 2013; accepted February 9, 2013. Date of publication October 28,
2013; date of current version February 14, 2014. This work was supported in
part by the Biomedical Simulations Resource at the University of Southern California under National Institutes of Health Grant P41-EB001978 and by National
Institutes of Health NIA R01AG033106–01 grant to the University of Texas,
Southwestern Medical Center. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ V. Z. Marmarelis is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and
the Biomedical Simulations Resource, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90089 USA (e-mail: vzm@usc.edu).
D. C. Shin is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Biomedical Simulations Resource, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90089, USA (e-mail: shind@usc.edu).
M. E. Orme is with Sonovation Inc., Los Angeles, CA 90274 USA (e-mail:
orme.melissa@gmail.com).
R. Zhang is with the Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75231 USA (e-mail: rongzhang@texashealth.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2287120

physiologically acceptable bounds in the presence of spontaneous or induced variations in the cerebral perfusion pressure
and blood CO2 tension. Because of its vital importance for survival and the proper functioning of the brain, CFA has received
considerable attention for many years starting with the pioneering work of Lassen [1] and Fog [2]. In most studies to date, the
dynamic relationship between the arterial blood pressure and
the cerebral blood flow velocity is analyzed and modeled as
a time-invariant either linear or a nonlinear input–output system using time-series measurements [3]–[20]. These models
include implicitly the effects of the myogenic mechanism [21],
[22], flow-mediated endothelial mechanisms [23], and perivascular innervation [24]–[26] without yet being able to draw a
direct correspondence between physiological mechanisms and
specific model characteristics. Such input–output models often
incorporate end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2 ) measurements to account
for the known effects of blood CO2 tension on this physiological process, especially in the low-frequency range from 0.02
to 0.08 Hz [8], [10], [12], [27]–[31]. Previous studies have
shown that the characteristics of CFA and CVR are altered
by orthostatic stress, hypertension, hypoxia, hypercapnia, head
injury, stroke, early Alzheimer’s disease, and pharmaceutical interventions that affect the autonomic nervous system or vascular
tone [11], [12], [28], [32]–[38]. Some of the recent findings were
made possible by Volterra-type nonlinear modeling with two inputs (arterial blood pressure and ETCO2 ) [10]–[12]. Among the
variants of Volterra-type modeling methods, the most promising
for cerebral hemodynamics appears to be the one based on the
use of principal dynamic modes (PDMs), which has been developed in recent years and applied successfully to various physiological domains [39]. The PDM-based modeling approach represents the evolution of the general Volterra modeling approach
toward improving model compactness and physiological interpretability. It has been shown to have significant advantages
over other Volterra-like model representations [8], [39]. This is
the methodological approach that will be followed in this paper
(see the Appendix).
Although these previous time-invariant modeling studies
have yielded promising results, there have been indications that
the dynamic characteristics of the CFA and CVR processes
may vary over time due to neural, endocrine, or metabolic factors [40]. The time-varying nature of CFA and CVR has not
been examined so far with regard to the estimation of databased models of cerebral hemodynamics. There has been an
implicit assumption that these possible variations are random
with stationary statistics and, therefore, time-invariant modeling yields time-averaged models of cerebral hemodynamics.
This paper examines the validity of this implicit assumption
by performing analysis of the time-varying characteristics of
segment-wise time-invariant models (over a sliding time window) of the dynamic CFA–CVR processes in healthy human

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MARMARELIS et al.: TIME-VARYING MODELING OF CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS

695

subjects. The obtained time-invariant models for each position
of the sliding time window reveal the time-varying dynamic
characteristics of the CFA–CVR processes. The length of the
sliding time window is kept short (60 s) with a sliding step of
5 s in order to track possible time-varying changes with sufficient temporal resolution. For this reason, the segment-wise
time-invariant modeling is limited to the linear case so that the
number of free model parameters remain low (six in this case)
relative to the available data in order to avoid over-fitting. In
this regard, the use of the PDM-based modeling methodology
offers a significant advantage by allowing model compaction.
In addition to examining the key assumption of time-invariant
modeling, the presented time-varying analysis offers additional
insight into the functional characteristics of the dynamic CFA–
CVR processes that is expected to advance our understanding
of fundamental aspects of cerebral hemodynamics.
II. METHODS
A. Experimental Methods
This study involved ten healthy subjects who voluntarily participated in this study and signed the informed consent form
that has been approved by the Institutional Review Boards of
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and Texas
Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas, where the data were collected (Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine). The
arterial blood pressure was measured continuously and noninvasively with finger photoplethysmography (Finapres, Ohmeda,
Colorado) and the cerebral blood flow velocity was measured in
the middle cerebral artery using a 2-MHz transcranial Doppler
probe (Multiflow, DWL, Germany) placed over the temporal
window and fixed at a constant angle with a custom-made holder.
The heart rate was monitored by the electrocardiogram and the
ETCO2 tension was obtained via a nasal cannula using a mass
spectrometer (Marquette Electronics). All the experiments were
performed in the morning in a quiet, environmentally controlled
laboratory. After 20 min of supine rest, 6 min of recordings were
made under resting conditions in the supine position. These
clinical measurements are reliable, noninvasive, safe, and comfortable for the subjects. The experimental procedure and the
demographics of the healthy subjects have been described in
detail in previous publications of our group [19].
B. Data Preprocessing
Beat-to-beat time-series data of mean arterial blood pressure (MABP), ETCO2 , and mean cerebral blood flow velocity (MCBFV) were obtained from continuous recordings over
6 min in each of ten healthy subjects (in the supine position) by
averaging the recorded signals over each R–R interval (heartbeat) and resampling the beat-to beat values every 0.5 s using
cubic-spline interpolation. Occasional outliers due to measurement artifacts were removed by applying a threshold on the
maximum change between successive beat-to-beat values that
is deemed physiologically possible for these variables, and by
clipping the resampled data at +/−2 standard deviations. The
resulting time-series data were detrended via high-pass filtering

Fig. 1. Top panel: the preprocessed beat-to-beat time-series data of MCBFV,
MABP, and ETCO2 for a typical subject over 6 min. Bottom panel: the respective
spectra of the time-series data plotted up to 0.5 Hz.

to remove the constant offset (average) and the very low frequencies below 0.008 Hz. Fig. 1 shows illustrative time-series
data over 6 min and the respective spectra for a typical subject.
C. Modeling Methods
In this paper, we employ the novel concept of PDMs to obtain
reliable linear models from short data records (60 s) of the causal
relationship between two input signals, MABP and ETCO2 ,
and the output signal of MCBFV. The preprocessed time-series
data over 6 min from each of ten healthy subjects were used
to estimate the PDM-based model. The utility of the PDMs is
found in the fact that they make the models more compact and
facilitate the physiological interpretation of the obtained model
[8]. We briefly outline below the proposed PDM-based variant of
Volterra modeling that is utilized in this paper in a linear context.
For the many details of Volterra-type modeling and PDM-based
modeling of nonlinear systems, the reader is referred to the
monograph [39]. To assist the reader, the basics of this modeling
approach are summarized in the Appendix. Although the PDMbased modeling approach is generally applicable to dynamic
nonlinear systems, it is utilized in this paper for linear (first
order) modeling using 60-s data segments to allow tracking of
the time-varying system characteristics with sufficient temporal
resolution without risking overfitting by keeping the number of
free parameters in the model low (namely six). This valuable

696

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

compaction of the PDM-based model is achieved by utilizing
the “global” PDMs of this system, as described below.
In the Volterra modeling approach, the output is expressed in
terms of the input(s) by means of a functional expansion that
represents the hierarchical nonlinear interactions among values
of the input epochs as they affect the output (i.e., a second-order
Volterra functional represents the quantitative pattern by which
two values of input epoch(s) interact in order to influence the
output). The nth-order kernel is convolved with n values in the
input epoch(s) to form the nth-order Volterra functional. The
first-order kernel quantifies the linear dynamics of the system
and the respective first-order functional represents the linear
component of the Volterra model prediction. The latter (firstorder model) is used in this paper.
In the case of systems/models with two input signals, x(t) and
p(t), the general second-order Volterra expression of the output
signal, y(t), is given by [39]
 ∞
 ∞
kp (τ )p(t − τ )dτ +
kx (τ )x(t − τ )dτ
y(t) = k0 +


0
∞

+

0

kpp (τ1 , τ2 )p(t − τ1 )p(t − τ2 )dτ1 dτ2

0



∞

+

kxx (τ1 , τ2 )x(t − τ1 )x(t − τ2 )dτ1 dτ2

0


+

∞

kpx (τ1 , τ2 )p(t − τ1 )x(t − τ2 )dτ1 dτ2 + ε(t)

0

(1)
where y(t) denotes the MCBFV output data and p(t) and x(t)
denote the MABP and ETCO2 input data, respectively. As indicated previously, this study employs only the two first-order
terms in (1)—i.e., a linear model approximation.
In general, to compact the model representation of (1) and
facilitate the estimation task, we use kernel expansions on
Laguerre (or other suitable) basis of functions [39], [41]. The
model compactness can be further improved by expanding the
kernels on the system-specific basis of PDMs [39], [42]. When
data from multiple subjects are analyzed, then a set of PDMs is
generally obtained for each subject. For maximum model compactness, we employ the “global” PDMs of the system that are
obtained (for each input) by “fusing” the subject PDMs via a
process using singular value decomposition (SVD) [8].
In this study, the subject PDMs are derived from initial expansions of the system kernels on the Laguerre basis using five
Laguerre functions for the MABP input and three Laguerre
functions for the ETCO2 input (both with Laguerre parameter alpha = 0.7, determined through a search procedure) and
subsequent SVD of a rectangular matrix (one for each input)
composed of the first-order kernels and the significant eigenvectors of the second-order self-kernels weighted by the respective
Eigenvalues [8]. The “global” PDMs are subsequently derived
by fusing all subject PDMs (for each input separately) via SVD
of a rectangular matrix composed of all subject PDMs weighted
by their respective singular values [8]. The term “global” implies
that all subject PDMs are fused to derive the most significant
PDMs valid for all subjects. In a recent study of this system [8],
it was found that three global PDMs were adequate for the

kernels of each input. In the nonlinear modeling case, the significant cross-terms are also determined and included in the
PDM-based model [8]. However, in this paper, we use linear
models and, therefore, we do not need to include cross-terms.
The advocated PDM-based modeling methodology can yield
linear or nonlinear models of the CFA–CVR system that have
predictive capability. The nonlinear models typically provide
more accurate predictions of the output, provided that sufficient
data exist to estimate the kernels of these nonlinear models
(which have more free parameters than the linear models) with
sufficient accuracy. Since this paper explores the possible timevarying characteristics of the CFA–CVR system and we are
forced to use short data records (60 s), we limit ourselves to
linear time-invariant models from each 60-s data-segment that
is sliding in steps of 5 s in order to track the time-varying characteristics of the system. The global PDM-based linear timeinvariant model (for each sliding data-segment) has only six
free parameters—the coefficients of the six PDM outputs that
compose the model-predicted output. The temporal changes of
these six coefficients for successive sliding data-segments reflect
the time-varying dynamic characteristics of the CFA–CVR system. The general linear time-varying model of the CFA–CVR
system can be expressed as


y(t) = h(t, τ )p(t − τ )dτ + g(t, τ )x(t − τ )dτ .
(2)
The time-varying kernels, h(t, τ ) and g(t, τ ), describe the
time-varying dynamics of the system with respect to the MABP
and ETCO2 inputs, respectively. The estimated linear timeinvariant model for each ith sliding data-segment is


yi (t) = hi (τ )p(t − τ )dτ + gi (τ )x(t − τ )dτ . (3)
We wish to examine the changes of the first-order kernels
(impulse response functions), hi (τ ) and gi (τ ), over the various
segments i. To estimate the linear model of (3) for each datasegment, we use the three pairs of global PDMs shown in Figs. 2
and 3 for the MABP and ETCO2 inputs, respectively, that were
derived from our analysis of the CFA–CVR system [8]. The
possible physiological interpretation of the form of these global
PDMs is discussed in the last section. The time-invariant 1storder kernels, hi and gi , are obtained at each data-segment by
estimating the expansion coefficients {ci,m ,j } via linear regression of the input–output equation

ci,m ,j ui,m ,j (t)
(4)
yi (t) =
m ,j

where ui,m ,j (t) denotes the convolution of the jth PDM with
the mth input (p(t) for m = 1 and x(t) for m = 2) for the
ith data-segment. Having obtained the regression coefficients
{ci,m ,j }, we can construct the sequence of the kernel estimates
for the two inputs via the respective PDMs as

ci,1,j MABP.PDMj (τ )
(5)
hi (τ ) =
j

gi (τ ) =


j

ci,2,j

ETCO2 .PDMj (τ )

(6)

MARMARELIS et al.: TIME-VARYING MODELING OF CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS

Fig. 2. Three global PDMs for the MABP input of the CFA-CVR system.
Top: time-domain representations. Bottom: frequency-domain representations.

where MABP.PDMj and ETCO2 .PDMj denote the jth PDMs
for the MABP and ETCO2 inputs, respectively. The results of
PDM-based time-varying linear modeling of the CFA–CVR system (with MABP and ETCO2 inputs) are presented below.
III. RESULTS
Using the outlined procedure and the three pairs of global
PDMs shown in Figs. 2 and 3 for the two inputs (MABP and
ETCO2 respectively), we obtain the sequence of first-order kernel estimates for all the ten subjects. An illustrative example
of a sequence of first-order kernel estimates for the MABP input in a typical subject is shown in Fig. 4 (sliding step of 5 s),
along with their frequency-domain counterparts (magnitude of
the transfer functions or gain functions). Each kernel estimate
in the sequence is the impulse response function for the respective 60-s segment of data which has an overlap of 55 s with the
previous data-segment. Thus, the changes in this time-varying
kernel are gradual and localized within a 60-s time window.
The respective gain functions [magnitudes of their fast Fourier
transforms (FFTs)] depict some resonant characteristics (e.g.,
around 0.15 and 0.04 Hz), which are intermittent as they appear
and disappear within a few seconds, but always reemerge at the
same frequency band. For the ETCO2 input, the sequence of
estimated kernels in the same subject is shown in Fig. 5. It is
evident that the first-order kernel estimates (and the corresponding gain functions) undergo changes over time, although with
no apparent pattern. These gain functions exhibit intermittent

697

Fig. 3. Three global PDMs for the ETCO2 input of the CFA-CVR system.
Top: time-domain representations. Bottom: frequency-domain representations.

low-pass (integrative) characteristics with a cutoff (half-max)
frequency of about 0.04 Hz.
In order to assess the predictive performance of the obtained
sequences of segment-wise linear models, we computed the
normalized mean-square error (NMSE) of the linear model prediction for each 60-s segment and for the linear time-invariant
model prediction over the entire data record for each subject.
The mean and standard deviation values of the NMSE sequences
for the 60-s segment models are shown in Table I along with the
NMSE values for the linear time-invariant model over the entire
data record. It is evident that the NMSE values are generally
lower for the time-varying models, as expected, since the latter
have collectively more free parameters (50 times more for each
dataset, since the six model parameters are allowed to vary in
each 60-s segment).
We wish to examine the temporal structure of the variations
of the obtained first-order kernels in order to assess the timevarying dynamic characteristics of the CFA–CVR system. Instead of the kernels themselves, it is easier to examine the time
variations in the sequence of PDM output coefficients for each
input. The FFT magnitude of these sequences may reveal possible periodicities in the temporal variation of these coefficients.
The results for the dominant first PDM of each input for all
the ten subjects are shown in Fig. 6 for the MABP input and
in Fig. 7 for the ETCO2 input. In each case, the sequence of
coefficient estimates is shown over 6 min of data for a 5-s

698

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 4. Estimated sequence of 50 first-order kernel estimates (top) and their
frequency-domain counterparts or Gain Functions (bottom) for the MABP input
in a typical subject. Each kernel estimate is obtained from a 60-s data-segment
with a sliding step of 5 s and represents the impulse response function for the
respective 60-s segment of data which has an overlap of 55 s with the previous
data-segment. The respective gain functions (magnitudes of their FFTs) depict
some resonant characteristics (e.g., around 0.15 and 0.04 Hz), which appear
intermittent.

sliding step. Since each data-segment is 60 s, there are 50 segments in each sequence (the first 50 s of the data record are used
for the transient response). We observe no specific temporal
structure in these sequences and considerable intersubject variability. Nonetheless, the FFTs indicate some periodicities of the
coefficient sequences in very low frequencies below 0.01 Hz
(periods longer than 100 s), with occasional periodicities of
ETCO2 dynamics extending to slightly higher frequencies (up
to 0.03 Hz). These results reveal the presence of some cyclical
variations in the linear dynamics of these processes over the
time scale indicated by the respective first-order kernels and
gain functions in each case (see Figs. 4 and 5). In order to illustrate the extent of temporal variation in the coefficients of the six
PDM outputs (three for each input), we present in Figs. 8 and
9 population-wide results in the form of the mean and standard
deviation bounds of the FFT magnitudes over all ten subjects for
the PDMs of the MABP input and ETCO2 input, respectively. It
is evident from these population-wide results that some cyclical
variations exist in the linear dynamics of this system in the very
low frequencies below 0.01 Hz.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we seek to gain quantitative understanding of
the time-varying characteristics of cerebral hemodynamics and,
in particular, the temporal variations of linear dynamics of the
CFA and CVR processes. This understanding is pursued by

Fig. 5. Estimated sequence of 50 first-order kernel estimates (top) and their
frequency-domain counterparts or gain functions (bottom) for the ETCO2 input
in a typical subject. Each kernel estimate is obtained from a 60-s data-segment
with a sliding step of 5 s (see also caption of Fig. 4). These Gain Functions
exhibit intermittent low-pass characteristics.
TABLE I
NMSE OF PDM MODEL PREDICTION

tracking the time-varying dynamics of the CFA–CVR processes
with a sequence of estimated linear time-invariant input–output
dynamic models based on PDMs using short sliding data windows of 60 s with sliding step of 5 s—resulting in a sequence
of 50 linear time-invariant models for the 60-s data-segments of
each data record. The models have two inputs: MABP, ETCO2 ,
and one output: MCBFV. Three “global” PDMs were employed
for each input that were found in a recent study [8] to compose
an adequate “functional coordinate system” for representing the
dynamics of the CFA–CVR process for all subjects. The existence of such a common reference set of global PDMs facilitates

MARMARELIS et al.: TIME-VARYING MODELING OF CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS

Fig. 6. Estimated sequences of the first PDM output coefficients for the MABP
input in the time domain (top ten panels) and in the frequency domain (bottom
ten panels) for the ten subjects. No specific temporal pattern is evident in the
variations of these coefficients. However, most subjects exhibit considerable
Fourier components of these variations in frequencies <0.01 Hz, which correspond to periods of 100 s or more, revealing the presence of cyclical variations
over the indicated time scales.

the study of time variations in the dynamics of the CFA–CVR
system. The results were evaluated by examining the sequence
of 50 coefficients of the PDM outputs in each case that define

699

Fig. 7. Estimated sequences of the first PDM output coefficients for the
ETCO2 input in the time domain (top ten panels) and in the frequency domain (bottom ten panels) for the ten subjects.

the linear time-invariant models for each 60-s data-segment—
see (5) and (6). Fourier analysis of these sequences revealed
some intrinsic periodicities in the very low frequencies below

700

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

0.01 Hz. Occasionally, some cyclical variation power extends
up to 0.03 Hz for the ETCO2 input. Although there is considerable intersubject variability in the time-varying characteristics
of the CFA–CVR system, some conclusions can be drawn that
are summarized below.
A. Dynamic CFA–CVR Processes are Time-Varying
With Cyclical Characteristics
The results of the time-varying analysis of the dynamics of the
CFA-CVR system indicate significant time-variations of system
characteristics in the form of the sequences of the kernel expansion coefficients on a suitable PDM basis. Fourier analysis of
these sequences revealed some intrinsic periodicities in the frequency range below 0.01 Hz (see Figs 8 and 9 for populationwide results). Weaker periodicities appear occasionally up to
0.03 Hz for the ETCO2 -to-MCBFV relation. The dynamics
associated with the ETCO2 input seem to have stronger time
variations. Considerable intersubject variability is observed in
terms of the relative size of the estimated model coefficients
(defining the system dynamics). Indications of nonstationarities
in the CFA process also have been reported previously using
different methodology [11], [40], [43]–[57].

Fig. 8. Mean (black line) and mean +1 standard deviation bound (gray line)
of the FFT magnitudes of the PDM coefficient sequences over all ten subjects
for the first PDM (top), second PDM (middle), and third PDM (bottom) of the
MABP input.

Fig. 9. Mean (black line) and mean +1 standard deviation bound (gray line)
of the FFT magnitudes of the PDM coefficient sequences over all ten subjects
for the first PDM (top), second PDM (middle) and third PDM (bottom) of the
ETCO2 input.

B. Possible Physiological Interpretation
of the Modeling Results and Future Tests
Although the specific physiological mechanisms underlying
the observed features of the global PDMs must be examined in
future studies, it appears that the first MABP-PDM is mostly
related to passive cerebrovascular flow characteristics (akin to
the Windkessel model of cerebral hemodynamics that exhibits
high-pass characteristics), while the other PDMs may be influenced by active mechanisms of CFA which sense and react to
changes in the blood pressure. The time-varying characteristics
of all PDM components are comparable, although they appear
stronger and more broadband for the ETCO2 -to-MCBFV relation. Only the coefficient sequences of the first MABP-PDM and
of the first ETCO2 -PDM have consistently positive values, while
the coefficient sequences of all other PDMs fluctuate around
zero. The origin of these nonstationary system characteristics
must be examined in future studies. However, their very low frequency (<0.01 Hz) suggests the possibility of rhythmic changes
of the neuroendocrine mechanisms for regulation of perivascular smooth muscle tone leading to cyclic changes of the CFA–
CVR process. These hypotheses can be explored in the future
by blocking or stimulating specific physiological mechanisms
and examining the effects on the time-varying characteristics of
the CFA–CVR system. We note that this modeling approach can
elucidate the discrepancy between pressure autoregulation and
cerebrovascular reactivity, first described in [58].
C. Linear Time-Invariant Model Describes the
“Time-Averaged” Dynamics of the CFA–CVR System
The obtained results indicate that the temporal variations of
the CFA–CVR dynamics may be significant and exhibit some

MARMARELIS et al.: TIME-VARYING MODELING OF CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS

701

periodicities at very low frequency (<0.01 Hz). A linear timeinvariant model obtained over the entire data record (6 min in
this application) is a “time-averaged” representation of the linear
time-varying dynamics of the CFA–CVR system, as expected
(see Fig. 10). Whether this “time-averaged” model remains practically unbiased by the intrinsic nonstationarities of the system
(and retain physiological and clinical utility) will depend on the
specific form of the nonstationarities in each case. If the criterion of predictive capability is used for the validation of these
models, then the results of this paper suggest that a linear timeinvariant model of the CFA–CVR system over data records of
several minutes has a predictive capability that is comparable
to the time-average of the predictive capabilities of segmentwise linear time-varying models (over data segments of 60 s)
and, therefore, it is not seriously biased and retains potential
physiological and clinical utility.

APPENDIX
BASICS OF VOLTERRA MODELING AND PDM ANALYSIS
The proposed modeling methodology is based on the general nonparametric Volterra approach that is applicable to all
finite-memory dynamic nonlinear systems and covers almost all
physiological systems (with the exception of chaotic systems or
nondissipating oscillators). In the Volterra approach, the output
y(t) of a single-input nonlinear system is expressed as a functional expansion involving multiple convolution integrals of the
input x(t) with kernel functions {kn } of various orders as [39]


∞

y(t) = k0 +

+

0
∞

k1 (τ )x(t − τ )dτ

k2 (τ1 , τ2 )x(t − τ1 )x(t − τ2 )dτ + · · · . (A1)

0

This functional expansion represents the hierarchical nonlinear interactions among different parts of the input epochs as
they affect the output (e.g., a second-order Volterra functional
represents the pattern in which all pairs of values of the input
past epoch interact in order to influence the output. The specific
pattern of such nonlinear interactions for a given system is codified by the respective Volterra “kernel.” The first-order kernel
quantifies the linear dynamics of the system and the respective
first-order functional (single convolution) represents the linear
component of the Volterra model. The modeling task consists of
estimating these kernels from input–output data. The Volterra
representation is extended easily to nonlinear systems with two
or more inputs (and outputs) [39]. For instance, the secondorder Volterra model of the two-input CFA–CVR system is
given by (1). Practical problems arise from the high dimensionality of high-order kernels which makes their estimation difficult
and their physiological interpretation daunting. For this reason,
most applications to date have been limited to second order. To
mitigate this practical limitation, we have utilized kernel expansions on the Laguerre basis that simplify the kernel estimation
and yield significant computational benefits [41]. For instance,

Fig. 10. Coefficients of the 3+3 PDM outputs of the linear time-invariant
models (red dots) estimated from the entire data record for the MABP input (top
three panels) and ETCO2 input (bottom three panels), along with the averages
(blue dots) and +/– 1 standard deviation bars for the respective sequence of 50
coefficient estimates for the time-varying models (blue bars). The red dots are
within the range of the respective blue bars, reflecting the fact that the linear
time-invariant model is a “temporal-average” of the sequence of segment-wise
linear time-varying models.

702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

the Laguerre expansion of the rth order kernel
kp,...p (τ1 , . . . , τr) =

L


···

j 1 =1

L


ar (j1 , . . . , jr)bj 1 (τ1) · · · bj r (τr)

j r =1

(A2)
where {bj (τ )} denotes the basis of L Laguerre functions, yields
the following nonlinear input–output relation which involves
linearly the Laguerre expansion coefficients {ar }
y(t) = c0 +

Q 
L

r =1 j 1 =1



j r −1

···

ar (j1 , . . . , jr )vj 1 (t) · · ·vj r (t)

j r =1

(A3)
where the signals vj (t) are the convolutions of the Laguerre
basis function bj with the respective input and Q is the nonlinear order of the model. The fact that the Laguerre expansion coefficients enter linearly in the nonlinear Volterra model
of (A3) allows their estimation via least-squares regression (a
simple and robust numerical procedure). Having estimated the
Laguerre expansion coefficients, we can construct the Volterra
kernel estimates using (A2) and compute the model prediction
for any given input using (A1). Although the Laguerre expansion
technique brings considerable model estimation efficiencies, it
does not remove the “curse of dimensionality” associated with
the multidimensional structure of high-order kernels. In order
to overcome this practical limitation, we have introduced the
concept of PDMs, which aims at identifying the minimum set
of “basis” functions (distinct and characteristic for each system)
that are capable of representing adequately the system dynamics (i.e., provide satisfactory expansions of the kernels). The
computation of the PDMs from self-kernel estimates, for each
input separately, employs SVD of a rectangular matrix composed of the first-order kernel estimate (as a column vector) and
the second order self-kernel estimate weighted by the standard
deviation of the respective input. The singular vectors corresponding to the top singular values are selected as the PDMs of
the system.
The resulting PDMs form a filter-bank that receives the respective input signal and generates (via convolution) signals
that are subsequently transformed by properly defined “Associated Nonlinear Functions” (ANFs) which represent the nonlinear characteristics of the system for the respective PDMs. The
ANFs are typically represented by polynomials and their coefficients are estimated via regression on the output signal [10],
[11]. The degree of the ANF polynomial is constrained by the
length of the available data to prevent overfitting problems (i.e.,
cubic degree is the maximum in this application). In this application, the restrictive data requirements imposed by the 60-s
data-segments have dictated the use of linear PDM-based models. This simplifies the model for each data-segment to the one
shown in (3).
REFERENCES
[1] N. A. Lassen, “Cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption in man,”
Physiol. Rev., vol. 39, pp. 183–238, 1959.
[2] M. Fog, “Autoregulation of cerebral blood flow and its abolition by local
hypoxia and-or trauma,” Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Invest., vol. 102, pp. 62–74,
1968.

[3] R. Aaslid, K. F. Lindegaard, W. Sorteberg, and H. Nornes, “Cerebral
autoregulation dynamics in humans,” Stroke, vol. 20, pp. 45–52, 1989.
[4] M. Czosnyka, S. Piechnik, H. Richards, P. Kirkpatrick, P. Smielewski, and
J. Pickard, “Contribution of mathematical modeling to the interpretation
of bedside tests of cerebrovascular autoregulation,” J. Neurol., Neurosurg.
Psychiatry, vol. 63, pp. 721–731, 1997.
[5] M. Czosnyka, K. Brady, M. Reinhard, P. Smielewski, and L. Steiner,
“Monitoring of cerebrovascular autoregulation: Facts, myths, and missing
links,” Neurocrit. Care, vol. 10, pp. 373–386, 2009.
[6] C. A. Giller and M. Mueller, “Linearity and nonlinearity in cerebral hemodynamics,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 25, pp. 633–646, 2003.
[7] K. Hu, C. K. Peng, M. Czosnyka, P. Zhao, and V. Novak, “Nonlinear
assessment of cerebral autoregulation from spontaneous blood pressure
and cerebral blood flow fluctuations,” Cardiovasc. Eng., vol. 8, pp. 60–71,
2008.
[8] V. Z. Marmarelis, D. C. Shin, and R. Zhang, “Analysis of cerebral flow
autoregulation using principal dynamic modes: Linear and nonlinear modeling,” Open Biomed. Eng. J., vol. 6, pp. 42–55, 2012.
[9] G. D. Mitsis, R. Zhang, B. D. Levine, and V. Z. Marmarelis, “Modeling of
nonlinear physiological systems with fast and slow dynamics II: Application to cerebral autoregulation,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 30, pp. 555–565,
2002.
[10] G. D. Mitsis, M. J. Poulin, P. A. Robbins, and V. Z. Marmarelis, “Nonlinear modeling of the dynamic effects of arterial pressure and CO2 variations
on cerebral blood flow in healthy humans,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 1932–1943, Nov. 2004.
[11] G. D. Mitsis, R. Zhang, B. D. Levine, and V. Z. Marmarelis, “Cerebral
hemodynamics during orthostatic stress assessed by nonlinear modeling,”
J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 101, pp. 354–366, 2006.
[12] G. D. Mitsis, R. Zhang, B. D. Levine, E. Tzanalaridou, D. G. Katritsis, and
V. Z. Marmarelis, “Nonlinear analysis of autonomic control of cerebral
hemodynamics,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 54–62,
Nov./Dec. 2009.
[13] R. B. Panerai, S. L. Dawson, and J. F. Potter, “Linear and nonlinear analysis of human dynamic cerebral autoregulation,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 277,
pp. H1089–H1099, 1999.
[14] R. B. Panerai, D. M. Simpson, S. T. Deverson, P. Mahony, P. Hayes, and
D. H. Evans, “Multivariate dynamic analysis of cerebral blood flow regulation in humans,” IEEE Trans Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 419–423,
Mar. 2000.
[15] R. B. Panerai, M. Moody, P. J. Eames, and J. F. Potter, “Cerebral blood
flow velocity during mental activation: Interpretation with different models
of the passive pressure–velocity relationship,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 99,
pp. 2352–2362, 2005.
[16] A. H. van Beek, J. A. Claassen, M. G. Rikkert, and R. W. Jansen, “Cerebral
autoregulation: Overview of current concepts and methodology with special focus on the elderly,” J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab., vol. 28, pp. 1071–
1085, 2008.
[17] R. Zhang, J. H. Zuckerman, C. A. Giller, and B. D. Levine, “Transfer
function analysis of dynamic cerebral autoregulation in humans,” Amer.
J. Physiol., vol. 274, pp. 233–241, 1998.
[18] R. Zhang, J. H. Zuckerman, K. Iwasaki, T. E. Wilson, C. G. Crandall,
and B. D. Levine, “Autonomic neural control of dynamic cerebral
autoregulation in humans,” Circulation, vol. 106, pp. 1814–1820,
2002.
[19] R. Zhang, S. Witkowski, Q. Fu, J. A. Claassen, and B. D. Levine, “Cerebral
hemodynamics after short- and long-term reduction in blood pressure in
mild and moderate hypertension,” Hypertension, vol. 49, pp. 1149–1155,
2007.
[20] R. Zhang, K. Behbehani, and B. D. Levine, “Dynamic pressure-flow relationship of the cerebral circulation during acute increase in arterial pressure,” J. Physiol., vol. 587, no. 11, pp. 2567–2577, 2009.
[21] L. Symon, K. Held, and N. W. Dorsch, “A study of regional autoregulation
in the cerebral circulation to increased perfusion pressure in normocapnia
and hypercapnia,” Stroke, vol. 4, pp. 139–147, 1973.
[22] D. R. Harder, “Pressure-induced myogenic activation of cat cerebral arteries is dependent on intact endothelium,” Circ. Res., vol. 60, pp. 102–107,
1987.
[23] R. Busse, G. Trogisch, and E. Bassenge, “The role of endothelium in the
control of vascular tone,” Basic Res. Cardiol., vol. 80, pp. 475–490, 1985.
[24] C. Iadecola, “Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and
in Alzheimer’s disease,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 5, pp. 347–360,
2004.
[25] J. McCulloch and L. Edvinsson, “Cerebrovascular smooth muscle reactivity: A critical appraisal of in vitro and in situ techniques,” J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab., vol. 4, pp. 129–139, 1984.

MARMARELIS et al.: TIME-VARYING MODELING OF CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS

[26] J. Seylaz, H. Hara, E. Pinard, S. Mraovitch, E. T. MacKenzie, and
L. Edvinsson, “Effect of stimulation of the sphenopalatine ganglion on
cortical blood flow in the rat,” J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab., vol. 8,
pp. 875–878, 1988.
[27] R. F. Furchgott, P. D. Cherry, J. V. Zawadzki, and D. Jothianandan, “Endothelial cells as mediators of vasodilation of arteries,” J. Cardiovasc.
Pharmacal., vol. 6, pp. S336–S343, 1984.
[28] C. A. Giller, G. Bowman, H. Dyer, L. Mootz, and W. Krippner, “Cerebral
arterial diameters during changes in blood pressure and carbon dioxide
during craniotomy,” Neurosurgery, vol. 32, pp. 737–741, 1993.
[29] A. M. Harper and H. I. Glass, “Effect of alterations in the arterial carbon
dioxide tension on the blood flow through the cerebral cortex at normal and
low arterial blood pressures,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 28,
pp. 449–452, 1965.
[30] R. V. Immink, B. J. van den Born, G. A. van Montfrans, R. P. Koopmans,
J. M. Karemaker, and J. J. van Lieshout, “Impaired cerebral autoregulation
in patients with malignant hypertension,” Circul., vol. 110, pp. 2241–2245,
2004.
[31] H. A. Kontos, E. P. Wei, A. J. Raper, and J. L. Patterson Jr., “Local mechanism of CO2 action of cat pial arterioles,” Stroke, vol. 8, pp. 226–229,
1977.
[32] J. A. Claasen, R. Diaz-Arrastia, K. Martin-Cook, B. D. Levine, and
R. Zhang, “Altered cerebral hemodynamics in early Alzheimer disease: A
pilot study using transcranial Doppler,” J. Alzheimers Dis., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 621–629, 2009.
[33] M. Czosnyka, P. Smielewski, P. Kirkpatrick, R. J. Laing, D. Menon, and
J. D. Pickard, “Continuous assessment of the cerebral vasomotor reactivity
in head injury,” Neurosurgery, vol. 41, pp. 11–17, 1997.
[34] H. A. Kontos, E. P. Wei, R. M. Navari, J. E. Levasseur, W. I. Rosenblum,
and J. L. Patterson, “Responses of cerebral arteries and arterioles to acute
hypotension and hypertension,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 234, pp. H371–
H383, 1978.
[35] H. A. Kontos, E. P. Wei, A. J. Raper, W. I. Rosenblum, R. M. Navari, and
J. L. Patterson Jr., “Role of tissue hypoxia in local regulation of cerebral
microcirculation,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 234, pp. H582–H591, 1978.
[36] R. B. Panerai, “Cerebral autoregulation: From models to clinical applications,” Cardiovasc Eng., vol. 8, pp. 42–59, 2008.
[37] M. Reinhard, M. Roth, B. Guschlbauer, A. Harloff, J. Timmer,
M. Czosnyka, and A. Hetzel, “Dynamic cerebral autoregulation in acute
ischemic stroke assessed from spontaneous blood pressure fluctuations,”
Stroke, vol. 36, pp. 1684–1689, 2005.
[38] R. Zhang, J. H. Zuckerman, and B. D. Levine, “Deterioration of cerebral autoregulation during orthostatic stress: Insights from the frequency
domain,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 85, pp. 1113–1122, 1998.
[39] V. Z. Marmarelis, Nonlinear Dynamic Modeling of Physiological Systems.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2004.
[40] R. B. Panerai, P. J. Eames, and J. F. Potter, “Variability of time-domain
indices of dynamic cerebral autoregulation,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 24,
pp. 367–381, 2003.
[41] V. Z. Marmarelis, “Identification of nonlinear biological systems using
Laguerre expansions of kernels,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 21, pp. 573–
589, 1993.
[42] V. Z. Marmarelis, “Modeling methodology for nonlinear physiological
systems,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 25, pp. 239–251, 1997.
[43] J. Bellapart and J. F. Fraser, “Transcranial Doppler assessment of cerebral
autoregulation,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 35, pp. 883–893, 2009.
[44] M. Czoskyka, H. K. Richards, Z. Czosnyka, S. Piechnik, and J. D. Pickard,
“Vascular components of cerebrospinal fluid compensation,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 90, pp. 752–759, 1999.
[45] R. B. Panerai, B. J. Carey, and J. F. Potter, “Short-term variability of cerebral blood flow velocity responses to arterial blood pressure transients,”
Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 29, pp. 31–38, 2003.
[46] V. Novak, A. C. Ying, L. Lepicovsky, A. L. Goldberger, L. A. Lipsitz,
and C. Peng, “Multimodal pressure-flow method to assess dynamics of
cerebral autoregulation in stroke and hypertension,” BioMed. Eng. OnLine,
vol. 3, p. 39, 2004.
[47] M. Latka, M. Turalska, M. Glaubic-Latka, W. Kolodziej, D. Latka, and
B. J. West, “Phase dynamics in cerebral autoregulation,” Amer. J. Physiol.
Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 289, pp. H2272–H2279, 2005.
[48] X. Hu, V. Nenov, T. C. Glenn, L. A. Steiner, M. Czosnyka, M. Bergsneider,
and N. Martin, “Nonlinear analysis of cerebral hemodynamic and intracranial pressure signals for characterization of autoregulation,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 195–209, Feb. 2006.
[49] Z. Chen, K. Hu, H. E. Stanley, V. Novak, and P. C. Ivanov, “Crosscorrelation of instantaneous phase increments in pressure-flow fluctuations: Applications to cerebral autoregulation,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat. Nonlin.
Soft Matter Phys., vol. 73, pp. 156–164, 2006.

703

[50] A. B. Rowley, S. J. Payne, I. Tachtsidis, M. J. Ebden, J. P. Whiteley,
D. J. Gavaghan, L. Tarassenko, M. Smith, C. E. Elwell, and D. T. Delpy,
“Synchronization between arterial blood pressure and cerebral oxyhaemoglobin concentration investigated by wavelet cross-correlation,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, pp. 161–173, 2008.
[51] K. Hu, C. K. Peng, N. E. Huang, Z. Wu, L. A. Lipsitz, J. Cavallerano, and
V. Novak, “Altered phase interactions between spontaneous blood pressure
and flow fluctuations in type 2 diabetes mellitus: Nonlinear assessment of
cerebral autoregulation,” Physica A, vol. 387, pp. 2279–2292, 2008.
[52] R. B. Panerai, E. L. Sammons, S. M. Smith, W. E. Rathbone, S. Bentley,
J. F. Potter, and N. J. Samani, “Continuous estimates of dynamic cerebral
autoregulation: Influence of non-invasive arterial blood pressure measurements,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, pp. 497–513, 2008.
[53] A. J. Ocon, J. Kulesa, D. Clarke, I. Taneja, M. S. Mdeow, and
J. M. Stewart, “Increased phase synchronization and decreased cerebral
autoregulation during fainting in the young,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol., vol. 297, pp. H2084–H2095, 2009.
[54] R. B. Panerai, N. E. Dineen, F. G. Brodie, and T. G. Robinson, “Spontaneous fluctuations in cerebral blood flow regulation: Contribution of
PaCO2 ,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 109, pp. 1860–1868, 2010.
[55] T. Peng, A. B. Rowley, P. N. Ainslie, M. J. Poulin, and S. J. Payne,
“Wavelet phase synchronization analysis of cerebral blood flow autoregulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 960–968, Apr.
2010.
[56] N. E. Dineen, F. G. Brodie, T. G. Robinson, and R. B. Panerai, “Continuous estimates of dynamic cerebral autoregulation during transient
hypocapnia and hypercapnia,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 108, pp. 604–613,
2010.
[57] J. Liu, M. D. Simpson, J. Yan, and R. Allen, “Tracking time-varying
cerebral autoregulation in response to changes in respiratory PaCO2 ,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 31, pp. 1291–1307, 2010.
[58] E. M. Enevoldsen and F. T. Jensen, “Autoregulation and CO2 responses
of cerebral blood flow in patients with acute severe head injury,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 48, pp. 689–703, 1978.
Vasilis Marmarelis (F’92) was born in Greece. He
received the Ph.D. degree in engineering science from
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
USA, in 1976.
He is currently a Professor of biomedical engineering with the University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, and the Codirector of the Biomedical Simulations Resource, a research center funded
by the NIH since 1985. He served as the Department
Chairman from 1990 to 1996. His research interests
include dynamic nonlinear modeling of biomedical
systems; neural information processing; modeling of physiological autoregulation; model-based diagnostic physiomarkers; and multimodal ultrasound tomography for diagnostic imaging. He has authored two monographs (1978,
2004) and has published more than 200 peer-reviewed papers and book chapters. He is a Fellow of the AIMBE.

Dae C. Shin (S’81–M’95) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from the Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1982 and 1984,
respectively, and both the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 1988 and
1994, respectively.
He was on the technical staff at the Electrical
and Telecommunication Research Institute, Daejon,
Korea (1984–1985). After one year of Postdoctoral
work at the University of Southern California (1994–
1995), he became a Chief Engineer of MultiSpec Corp., Waupun, WI, USA
(1995–2002), a high-tech company specializing on advanced telemetry systems.
Changing his focus to biomedical signal processing, he worked as a Research
Scientist at the Alfred Mann Institute of the University of Southern California
(2002–2008), where he is currently a Senior Research Associate at the Department of Biomedical Engineering. His primary research interests include statistical signal processing, linear and nonlinear dynamic modeling of biomedical
systems, with special focus on multiinput/multioutput and closed-loop modeling
with applications to neural information processing and physiological autoregulation. He retains a research interest in 3-D ultrasound tomography, adaptive
signal processing, and radar/sonar signal processing. He has published many
papers in peer-reviewed journals and conference proceedings.

704

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Melissa E. Orme was born in Los Angeles, CA,
USA. She received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in aerospace engineering from the University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, in 1984,
1985, and 1989, respectively.
After four years as a Postdoctoral Fellow and Research Assistant Professor at the University of Southern California, she joined the faculty of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering at the University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA, in 1993, where she rose
to the rank of Full Professor in 2002. Her research
interests include: modeling of mechanical systems and capillary fluid dynamics
with applications to advanced materials synthesis and rapid prototyping; analysis of cerebral hemodynamics for improved clinical diagnosis; and nonionizing
diagnostic imaging for improved detection of breast cancer, osteoporosis, and
traumatic brain injury. She has served as the President of Rapid Analysis and
Development from 1993 to 1996, a start-up dedicated to rapid prototyping.
She is currently the President of Sonovation Inc., Los Angeles, CA, a start-up
company dedicated to developing advanced diagnostic imaging technologies
using 3-D ultrasound tomography and the Board Chair of MastoScopia S.A.,
Voula, Greece, a European start-up pioneering the first diagnostic transmissionultrasound tomography system for breast cancer screening. She has published
many journal papers and has been granted numerous patents.
Dr. Orme is the recipient of the American Association of University Women
Award, and the Zonta International Amelia Earhart Award.

Rong Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in aerospace
physiology from The Fourth Military Medical University, Xian, China, in 1993.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the
Department of Internal Medicine and the Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics at University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA, and the Director of Cerebrovascular
Laboratory, Institute for Exercise and Environmental
Medicine Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, Dallas, TX. His research interests include cerebral blood
flow regulation, brain aging and Alzheimer disease, and application of biomedical signal modeling to understand human physiology. He has published more
than 100 peer-reviewed research papers and review articles. His work has been
funded by the American Heart Association and the NIH.

