346

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Attenuation of Systolic Blood Pressure and Pulse
Transit Time Hysteresis During Exercise and
Recovery in Cardiovascular Patients
Qing Liu, Bryan P. Yan, Cheuk-Man Yu, Yuan-Ting Zhang, and Carmen C. Y. Poon∗

Abstract—Pulse transit time (PTT) is a cardiovascular parameter of emerging interest due to its potential to estimate blood
pressure (BP) continuously and without a cuff. Both linear and
nonlinear equations have been used in the estimation of BP based
on PTT. This study, however, demonstrates that there is a hysteresis phenomenon between BP and PTT during and after dynamic
exercise. A total of 46 subjects including 16 healthy subjects, 13 subjects with one or more cardiovascular risk factors, and 17 patients
with cardiovascular disease underwent graded exercise stress test.
PTT was measured from electrocardiogram and photoplethysmogram of the left index finger of the subject, i.e., a pathway that
includes predominately aorta, brachial, and radial arteries. The
results of this study showed that, for the same systolic BP (SBP),
PTT measured during exercise was significantly larger than PTT
measured during recovery for all subject groups. This hysteresis
was further quantified as both normalized area bounded by the
SBP–PTT relationship (AreaN) and SBP difference at PTT during
peak exercise plus 20 ms (ΔSBP20). Significant attenuation of both
AreaN (p < 0.05) and ΔSBP20 (p < 0.01) is observed in cardiovascular patients compared with healthy subjects, independent of
resting BP. Since the SBP–PTT relationship are determined by the
mechanical properties of arterial wall, which is predominately mediated by the sympathetic nervous system through altered vascular smooth muscle (VSM) tone during exercise, results of this study
are consistent with the previous findings of autonomic nervous dysfunction in cardiovascular patients. We further conclude that VSM
tone has a nonnegligible influence on the BP–PTT relationship and
thus should be considered in the PTT-based BP estimation.
Index Terms—Cuffless blood pressure (BP), mobile health, pulse
transit time (PTT), vascular smooth muscle (VSM) tone, wearable
device.
Manuscript received March 28, 2013; accepted October 10, 2013. Date of
publication October 23, 2013; date of current version January 16, 2014. This
work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission (ITS/159/11) and in part by FP7 HeartCycle Project (FP7-216695), the
National Basic Research Program 973 (no. 2010CB732606), and Guangdong
Innovation Research Team Fund for LCHT in China. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Q. Liu is with the Joint Research Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
Hong Kong (e-mail: qingliu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
Y.-T. Zhang is with the Joint Research Centre for Biomedical Engineering,
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kongalso, and also with the Key Laboratory for Health Informatics, SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518060, China (e-mail:
ytzhang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
B. P. Yan and C.-M. Yu are with the Division of Cardiology, Department
of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: bryan.yan@cuhk.edu.hk;
cmyu@cuhk.edu.hk).
∗ C. C. Y. Poon is with the Department of Surgery and the Department of
Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong
Kong (e-mail: cpoon@surgery.cuhk.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2286998

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIOVASCULAR diseases (CVDs) are the leading
causes of deaths worldwide, bringing a great burden on
individual, national and global economics [1]. The development
of a variety of CVDs is associated with autonomic dysfunction.
Specifically, declined vagal activity is a powerful indicator of
overall mortality [2], while sympathetic overactivity is strongly
related to diseases such as hypertension, obesity, and heart failure [3]–[5].
Pulse transit time (PTT) is a cardiovascular parameter of
emerging interest due to its potential to estimate blood pressure
(BP) continuously and without a cuff. Previous studies have
shown that the PTT-based BP estimation has acceptable accuracy compared with gold-standard BP measurement methods in
some situations [6], [7]. Nevertheless, a complex and nonlinear
BP–PTT relationship has also been reported under some conditions [8], e.g., after the administration of vasoactive drugs [9]
and during short-term physical exercise [10].
The BP–PTT relationship is dependent on the mechanical
behavior of the arterial wall. Current PTT-based BP estimation methods are derived from the Moens–Korteweg equation
under the assumption that artery is a passive, thin wall and
purely elastic tube. The derived relationship between PTT and
BP is approximately linear. Nevertheless, arterial wall in reality exhibits a specifically layered structure and comprises
elastin, collagen, and smooth muscles. The three components
function together to determine the overall mechanical behavior
of artery. While elastin and collagen fibers response passively to
the distending pressure, smooth muscle cells, which account for
about 50% of wall compositions, can actively alter the mechanical property of the arterial wall by exerting an circumferential
stress [11]. It has been reported that vasoactive drug induced
vascular smooth muscle (VSM) contraction and dilation would
change the elasticity of arteries [12]–[14]. Therefore, the VSM
tone, which actually represents the activation level of VSM cells,
is an essentially important factor that may influence the BP–PTT
relationship.
The VSM cell layer lies between autonomic nerve terminals
and the endothelial cells; the VSM tone is accordingly under
control of ANS and endothelial function. In fact, most blood
vessels in human body do not have parasympathetic innervation, and thus are only influenced by the sympathetic nervous
system [15]. There is a tonic balance between the release of
vasodilating factors from the endothelium and vasoconstricting
factors from sympathetic nerve terminals to maintain an appropriate VSM tone at rest [16]. Nevertheless, during exercise,

C

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LIU et al.: ATTENUATION OF SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE AND PULSE TRANSIT TIME HYSTERESIS

347

alternations in ANS and endothelial function will occur, in order
to adjust vascular impedance and reinforce blood flow redistribution [17]. Therefore, the influences of vasoactive drugs and
physical exercise on BP–PTT relationship are both attributed to
the VSM tone alternations under the circumstances.
In this study, we presented hysteresis phenomenon between
systolic BP (SBP) and PTT in human subjects who underwent
an exercise protocol. Furthermore, we quantitatively evaluated
the SBP–PTT hysteresis to examine whether the hysteresis is
greater in healthy subjects than in cardiovascular patients as
sympathetic overactivation have been previously reported in
these patients.
Fig. 1.

Typical recording of SBP and PTT during the experiment.

II. METHODOLOGY
A. Study Population

C. Signal Processing

Sixty-four subjects were divided into three groups: 1) healthy
subjects without known CVDs or risk factors (RFs) associated
with CVDs, 2) subjects with one or more known RFs of CVDs,
such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and
3) patients with CVDs. The experiment was approved by the
Joint Chinese University of Hong Kong—New Territories East
Cluster Clinical Research Ethics Committee. All subjects were
evaluated at the Division of Cardiology, Prince of Wales Hospital in Hong Kong. Inform consent was obtained from each
subject before experiment.

Beat-to-beat SBP and PTT was extracted from Finapres BP,
ECG, and PPG. SBP was defined as the maximal point of BP.
PTT was measured as the time interval between the peaks of
ECG R wave and the first derivative of PPG in the same cardiac
cycle. SBP and PTT were then averaged every 60 beats for the
hysteresis examination. Fig. 1 shows a typical recording of SBP
and PTT time series during the experiment. Both the raw data
and 60-beat averaged were presented.

B. Study Protocol
The bicycle exercise stress tests were performed on the subjects in supine position. The experiment was conducted at least
1 h after meal in a standard patient room with temperature kept
at 25 ◦ C. Upon arrival, the subject was asked to lie on a bed with
his/her feet putting on a bicycle ergometer for 10 min to reach
baseline. Cuff BP was measured by a registered nurse using
auscultatory device at baseline. Continuous Finapres BP, electrocardiogram (ECG), cardiac output (CO), and photoplethysmogram (PPG) began to acquire until the end of the experiment.
ECG and CO were measured by an impedance cardiographic device (Physio Flow PF-05, Macheren, France). PPG was obtained
from the left index finger of the subject by using an in-house
made acquisition device.
After the 10-min rest, the bed was titled toward the left-hand
side of the subject by 20◦ –30◦ and the subject was asked to
start riding the bicycle at 25 W. The riding load was increased
by 25 W every 2 min until it reached the tolerant limit of the
subject. The load was then kept at the tolerant limit until the
subject reached his/her target heart rate (HR) [85% × (220Age)]. For those subjects who cannot reach the target HR even
at their exhausting condition, they are encouraged to keep riding
to ensure their HR is as close to the target HR as possible.
The subject stopped riding 1 min after reaching his/her maximal HR, then he/she was asked to lie still on the bed for recovery.
The recovery phase lasted until CO dropped back to the baseline
or at most for 15 min.

D. Hysteresis Examination
The SBP–PTT hysteresis was characterized by higher SBP at
a given PTT while BP is increasing during exercise and lower
SBP at the same PTT while BP is decreasing during recovery. A
qualified hysteresis should exhibit two clear boundaries during
exercise and recovery, respectively. A representative example of
qualified SBP–PTT hysteresis is shown in Fig. 2(a). Hysteresis
was absent in 18 subjects where the SBP–PTT relationship was
chaotic and the correlation was low due to subjects unable to
keep on riding the bicycle as instructed. These 18 patients were
excluded from further analysis. Finally, SBP–PTT data of 46
subjects were selected for the next hysteresis quantification.
The evaluation approach was modified from the method proposed by another study for computation of QT–RR hysteresis [18]. Briefly, the method calculates the area between the two
SBP–PTT regression curves during and after exercise, respectively. The quantification method is demonstrated in Fig. 2(b).
For each subject, we first defined two segments: seg-Exe and
seg-Rec on the SBP–PTT curve to represent the time period
during and after exercise. As the relationship between SBP and
PTT was not perfectly linear, the segments were determined
manually according to the following criteria:
1) both seg-Exe and seg-Rec should comprise data points
that increase or decrease as monotonically as possible;
2) data point in maximal exercise (either with highest SBP
or shortest PTT) should be contained in the segments; and
3) SBP and PTT data in either segment should exhibit a
moderate to high correlation.
Both segments were then modeled by linear regression analysis. The hysteresis area noted as Area0 was computed as the

348

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 2. (a) Representative example of qualified SBP–PTT hysteresis. (b) Demonstration of the quantification method of SBP–PTT hysteresis. Area0 is defined
as the area between the exercise and recovery curves which were regressed from seg-Exe and seg-Rec, respectively. AreaN is the normalized area obtained from
dividing Area0 by SBP range and PTT range. ΔSBP20 is the difference in SBP between exercise and recovery at PTT during peak exercise plus 20 ms.

Fig. 3. Processing method of the SBP–PTT hysteresis in subject 27. (a) Resampling the exercise/recovery curve to ten data points. (b) Normalizing the hysteresis
to [0,1]. (c) Shifting the start point of exercise to (0, 0).

area between the two modeled curves over a range of PTT. As
shown in Fig. 2(b), the range was from the smaller PTT of the
minimal PTTs of the two segments; to the smaller PTT of the
maximal PTTs of the two segments. The area was normalized
by dividing SBP range and PTT range of the hysteresis to reach
a normalized area—AreaN.
Furthermore, since ANS alternations happens rapidly in late
exercise and early recovery [18], the hysteresis was also quantified as the difference in SBP between exercise and recovery
at a predetermined PTT, which is PTT during peak exercise
plus 20 ms, toward better interpretation of the hysteresis. The
parameter was defined as ΔSBP20.
In addition, in order to calculate the group averaged hysteresis, the exercise/recovery curve was linearly resampled to ten
data points from the start to the end of exercise/recovery for
each subject, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Hysteresis was then averaged for each of the three groups. Toward better comparison of
the hysteresis among groups, normalization was performed on
each group by first normalizing the range of both PTT and BP
to [0, 1] and then shifting the PTT–SBP curves to reinforce the

start point of exercise at (0, 0), as shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c),
respectively.
E. Statistics
All data are presented as mean ± SD. Unpaired student’s
t-test was employed to test the significance of differences in the
hysteresis parameters between any two groups.
III. RESULTS
Table I summarizes the physical and hemodynamic characteristics of the selected subjects. There were 16 subjects in the
healthy group (11 males, aged 59 ± 8 year), 13 subjects in the
RF group (8 males, aged 56 ± 12 year), and 17 subjects in CVD
group (15 males, aged 59 ± 10 year). The three groups have
similar level of SBP and DBP at baseline. In addition, no significant difference was found among the groups in all the other
characteristics.
Table II gives the clinical diagnosis of subjects in RF group
and CVD group. There were four, eight, and two patients in RF

LIU et al.: ATTENUATION OF SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE AND PULSE TRANSIT TIME HYSTERESIS

TABLE I
PHYSICAL AND HEMODYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECTS

TABLE II
DIAGNOSIS OF SUBJECTS IN RF GROUP AND CVD GROUP

group and two, six, and four patients in CVD group have diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia, respectively.
Furthermore, in CVD group, ten patients have coronary artery
disease, seven patients have heart failure, one patient has peripheral arterial disease, and two patients have cerebrovascular
disease.
The group averaged hysteresis is shown in Fig. 4, with (a), (b),
and (c) present absolute averaged hysteresis in healthy group,
RF group, and CVD group, respectively.
Fig. 5 gives the normalized hysteresis in (a) healthy group,
(b) RF group, and (c) CVD group, respectively. The results
demonstrate decreased hysteresis in RF group and CVD group
compared with healthy group.
Fig. 6 compares the two hysteresis quantifications: AreaN
and ΔSBP20 among the three groups. AreaN was 0.32 ± 0.12
arbitrary unit (a.u.), 0.24 ± 0.14 a.u., and 0.22 ± 0.12 a.u.;
ΔSBP20 was 26.58 ± 11.97 mmHg, 19.05 ± 15.40 mmHg,
and 14.85 ± 10.12 mmHg for healthy, RF, and CVD groups,
respectively. As revealed by the figure, both AreaN and ΔSBP20
demonstrate significant decrease in CVD group compared with
healthy group (p < 0.05 for AreaN; p < 0.01 for ΔSBP20),
indicating attenuated SBP–PTT hysteresis during exercise and
recovery in cardiovascular patients.

349

IV. DISCUSSION
In this experiment, subjects were asked to perform cycling
exercise in a supine position while PPG was measured from
their left index finger. The path which the pressure pulse travels through should be predominately aorta, brachial, and radial
arteries. As leg cycling exercise was adopted in the protocol,
vasodilation occurred mainly in the active limbs, to permit redistribution of blood flow to the contracting skeletal muscles.
In contrast, since the left upper limb was kept still during the
experiment, blood flow induced endothelial function changes
in the PTT paths were assumed to be minimal; thus, the effects of endothelial function were regarded as negligible in this
study. Therefore, although VSM tone is the result of interplay
of ANS control and endothelial function, alternations of VSM
tone during exercise and recovery in this study should be mainly
attributed to the ANS control. It is hypothesized that if PTT was
measured over the arteries of the exercising limbs, i.e., legs, the
SBP–PTT hysteresis would be reversed with lower SBP during
exercise and higher SBP during recovery at the same PTT, as
vasodilation induced by the endothelial function plays a predominant role in these arteries during exercise.
The hysteresis effect in BP and pulse wave velocity (PWV),
which is the reciprocal of PTT, has been previously reported
by in vivo dog experiment [19]. The study observed a shifted
BP–PWV relationship in dogs when the neurohumoral regulatory factors were intact. However, the hysteresis phenomenon
disappeared and BP–PWV relationship became “zigwag” when
the nervous regulatory factor and part of the humoral regulatory factors were eliminated. It was, therefore, concluded that
vasoconstriction and dilation were the main elements that cause
hysteresis and further influence the relationship between BP and
PWV. Specifically, for the same PWV, BP was higher during BP
rises and lower during BP falls. In our study, SBP–PTT hysteresis is characterized by higher SBP at a given PTT while BP
is increasing during exercise and lower SBP at the same PTT
while BP is decreasing after exercise. Therefore, the direction of
hysteresis characterized in our study is consistent with previous
study. It is worth noting that the hysteresis effect between PTT
and mean BP (MBP) as well as PTT and diastolic BP (DBP)
were also observed in this study. By using the same quantification method, it can be obtained that the MBP–PTT and DBP–
PTT hysteresis were also attenuated in cardiovascular patients,
as shown in Fig. 7.
Late exercise is associated with sympathoexcitation and minimal parasympathetic effects; while early recovery is characterized by rapid parasympathetic reactivation with persistent,
but declining sympathoexcitation [18]. Since sympathetic and
parasympathetic activities will lead to VSM contraction and
dilation, respectively, it can be deduced intuitively that VSM
tone is higher thus artery is stiffer during exercise than recovery. However, the hysteresis results in this study showed that,
at a given SBP, PTT was longer (i.e., shorter PWV) during exercise than recovery. The paradox may be explained by taking
into consideration of vessel radius decrease in consequence of
vasoconstriction. It is evident that the increase in stiffness provided by smooth muscle activation is insufficient to offset the

350

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 4. Averaged hysteresis in (a) healthy group, (b) RF group, and (c) CVD group. Solid circle (a), triangle (b), and square (c) represent exercise, and open
circle (a), triangle (b), and square (c) indicate recovery; mean and standard deviation are both presented.

Fig. 5. Normalized hysteresis in (a) healthy group, (b) RF group, and (c) CVD group. Solid circle (a), triangle (b), and square (c) represent exercise, and open
circle (a), triangle (b), and square (c) indicate recovery.

Fig. 6. Comparison of AreaN and ΔSBP20 among healthy group, RF group,
and CVD group. ∗ : p < 0.05; ∗∗ : p < 0.01. (a.u.: arbitrary unit).

decrease in stiffness that results from contraction to a smaller
radius [14]. Therefore, although VSM tone is enhanced during
exercise, PWV compared as a function of pressure will decrease
due to the reduced vessel radius.
Furthermore, the results of this study showed that the SBP–
PTT hysteresis during exercise and recovery was significantly
attenuated in patients with CVDs. CVD development is a complicated process involving heighted sympathetic nervous system

activity and suppressed parasympathetic nervous system activity
that impair the ability of the ANS to regulate the cardiovascular
system [16]. Many studies have indicated augmented sympathetic nervous system activity and excessive vasoconstriction
in heart failure patients [20], [21]. On the other hand, there is
a close linkage between CVDs and heart failure. For example,
most of the heart failure patients were found to have history
of CVDs such as coronary heart disease and arterial hypertension [22]. Based on the aforementioned knowledge, the findings
in this study could be attributed to the augmented sympathetic
function and elevated basal VSM tone in such patients such that
the SBP–PTT curve in recovery is closer to the curve during
exercise when sympathoexcitation and vasoconstriction occurs.
In addition, previous study has indicated a gradual increase in
sympathetic activity in heart failure patients with normal BP,
with either hypertension or obesity, and with both obesity and
hypertension [23]; thus, the sympathetic tone seems to be gradually augmented during the pathological process of CVD. In
this study, the hysteresis in subjects with one or more cardiovascular risk factors (RF group) was found to be reduced than that
in healthy subjects (healthy group), while it was larger than that
in CVD patients (CVD group). However, the differences were
found to be not significant. The observation may be attributed

LIU et al.: ATTENUATION OF SYSTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURE AND PULSE TRANSIT TIME HYSTERESIS

Fig. 7. Comparison of the hysteresis quantifications of the MBP–PTT and
the DBP–PTT hysteresis among healthy group, RF group, and CVD group.
∗ : p < 0.05; ∗∗ : p < 0.01.

to the insufficient subject pool. On the other hand, the sympathetic nervous function may be partly preserved in subjects of
RF group, leading to the insignificant results.
In particular, Finpares was used for BP measurement in the
study because it is currently one of the most widely acceptable
methods that can measure BP noninvasively and continuously
during dynamic exercise. Its specifically designed ‘‘Physiocal”
algorithm is able to compensate and minimize the influences of
vasoconstriction and vasodilation during exercise. More importantly, in this study, the SBP–PTT hysteresis was quantified by
using the normalized hysteresis area (areaN) and SBP difference at the same PTT (ΔSBP20), it was accordingly the SBP
changes, rather than the absolute SBP value, would affect the
results. While its accuracy and precision was found to be sufficient when used to track BP changes [24], Finapres should
be acceptable for measuring BP to obtain reliable results in the
study.
Nevertheless, PTT measured in this study is not the actual
transit time of pressure pulse, but includes a pre-ejection period
(PEP), which is a considerable time delay comprised of both
the electromechanical delay and the isovolumic contraction period of left ventricle [9]. Although impedance cardiogram has
been used to track PEP changes in this experiment, the signalto-noise ratio was found to be much lower than ECG, PPG,
and BP during cycling exercise. As a result, if PEP was to be
taken into account, the number of usable data segments in this
study has to be substantially reduced. On the other hand, PEP
is determined by the cardiac muscle contractility which is also
controlled by the sympathetic nervous system. Resulted from
heightened sympathetic tone, PEP will be shorten during ex-

351

ercise [25]. Therefore, if the PEP effect is removed, the actual
SBP–PTT hysteresis should be enlarged, as an extra portion will
be added to the hysteresis to account for the PEP shortening during exercise. In particular, previous study has demonstrated that
the decrease in PEP during exercise was less in patients with
cirrhosis than controls, due to the impaired sympathetic nervous
function in the patients [25]. Based on these previous studies,
it is concluded that the decrease in PEP during exercise is also
less in cardiovascular patients than healthy subjects, as CVD development is usually related with sympathetic nervous system
dysfunction. Consequently, the added portion accounting for
the PEP effect should be larger, and the hysteresis phenomenon
should be more significantly enhanced in healthy subjects than
in CVD patients. From this perspective, though difficult to be
measured during exercise, PEP will not affect the conclusion of
this study.
PTT is well known for its potential for cuffless BP estimation.
However, its own clinical information has also been recognized
for a long time. PTT is a potential screen tool for sleep related
breathing disorders [26], [27]. It also offers a simple and noninvasive method to evaluate ANS effect on the cardiovascular
system [28], [29]. Its reciprocal, PWV, is of great prognostic
value as index of arterial stiffness and reported to predict a composite of cardiovascular outcomes above and beyond 24-h mean
BP and other traditional CVD RFs, indicating that PTT contains information about the cardiovascular system in addition to
BP. In this study, we demonstrate that although the baseline BP
was similar in the three subject groups, hysteresis was significantly reduced in patients diagnosed with CVD. Although the
recovery of HR immediately after exercise has been promoted
as an index of parasympathetic function with important clinical
implications [30], [31], convenient assessment of sympathetic
activity which has a predominant role in cardiovascular control under a variety of situations, remains challenging [55]. The
results of this study provide us a chance to examine solely sympathetic function by using indices quantifying the SBP–PTT
hysteresis.
This study revealed that VSM tone is a vitally important
determinant of the BP–PTT relationship and therefore if PTT
is to be used for BP estimation, the active VSM tone must be
considered, especially scenarios when ANS varies due to drug
effects, sleep, and exercise.
Limitations: Data of 18 in 64 subjects are excluded in the
analysis. In these subjects, SBP–PTT plots display chaotic relationship or overlapped loops mainly due to some subjects not
able to continue cycling as instructed.
In conclusion, this study presents a hysteresis effect between
SBP and PTT during exercise and recovery. Quantitative analysis was applied on the SBP–PTT hysteresis in 46 subjects.
The results showed that, in spite of similar level of resting
BP, the SBP–PTT hysteresis was significantly attenuated in patients with CVD, suggesting an elevated sympathetic tone in
these patients. We further concluded that VSM tone has a nonnegligible influence on the BP–PTT relationship, thus should
be taken into account when using PTT as a surrogate for BP
estimation.

352

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. L. Wang and Ms. Y. B.
Liu for helping with the collection of the data and Prof. G. Yip
for giving advice on the design of the protocol of this study in
the initial phase.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Mendis, P. Puska, and B. Norrving Eds., Global Atlas on Cardiovascular
Disease Prevention and Control. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization, 2011.
[2] C. R. Cole, E. H. Blackstone, F. J. Pashkow, C. E. Snader, and M. S. Lauer,
“Heart-rate recovery immediately after exercise as a predictor of mortality,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 341, no. 18, pp. 1351–1357, 1999.
[3] J. N. Cohn, T. B. Levine, M. T. Olivari, V. Garberg, D. Lura, G. S. Francis,
A. B. Simon, and T. Rector, “Plasma norepinephrine as a guide to prognosis in patients with chronic congestive heart failure,” N. Engl. J. Med.,
vol. 311, no. 13, pp. 819–823, 1984.
[4] C. R. Benedict, B. Shelton, D. E. Johnstone, G. Francis, B. Greenberg,
M. Konstam, J. L. Probstfield, and S. Yusuf, “Prognostic significance
of plasma norepinephrine in patients with asymptomatic left ventricular
dysfunction,” Circulation, vol. 94, no. 4, pp. 690–697, 1996.
[5] S. C. Malpas, “Sympathetic nervous system overactivity and its role in
the development of cardiovascular disease,” Physiol. Rev., vol. 90, no. 2,
pp. 513–557, 2010.
[6] C. C. Y. Poon and Y. T. Zhang, “Cuff-less and noninvasive measurements
of arterial blood pressure by pulse transit time,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Annu.
Int. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Shanghai, China, 2005, pp. 5877–5880.
[7] M. Y. M. Wong, C. C. Y. Poon, and Y. T. Zhang, “An evaluation of the
cuffless blood pressure estimation based on pulse transit time technique:
A half year study on normotensive subjects,” Cardiovasc. Eng., vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 32–38, 2009.
[8] G. Q. Zhang, M. W. Gao, D. Xu, N. B. Olivier, and R. Mukkamala, “Pulse
arrival time is not an adequate surrogate for pulse transit time as a marker
of blood pressure,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 111, no. 6, pp. 1681–1686, 2011.
[9] R. A. Payne, C. N. Symeonides, D. J. Webb, and S. R. J. Maxwell, “Pulse
transit time measured from the ECG: An unreliable marker of beat-to-beat
blood pressure,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 136–141, 2006.
[10] J. Proenca, J. Muehlsteff, X. Aubert, and P. Carvalho, “Is pulse transit time
a good indicator of blood pressure changes during short physical exercise
in a young population?,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010, pp. 598–601.
[11] W. W. Nichols and M. F. O’Rourke, McDonald’s Blood Flow in Arteries:
Theoretic, Experimental, and Clinical Principles, 5th ed. London, U.K.:
E. Arnold, 2005.
[12] M. A. Zulliger, N. T. M. R. Kwak, T. Tsapikouni, and N. Stergiopulos,
“Effects of longitudinal stretch on VSM tone and distensibility of muscular
conduit arteries,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 283, no. 6,
pp. H2599–H2605, 2002.
[13] S. Kinlay, M. A. Creager, M. Fukumoto, H. Hikita, J. C. Fang,
A. P. Selwyn, and P. Ganz, “Endothelium-derived nitric oxide regulates
arterial elasticity in human arteries in vivo,” Hypertension, vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 1049–1053, 2001.
[14] P. B. Dobrin and A. A. Rovick, “Influence of vascular smooth muscle
on contractile mechanics and elasticity of arteries,” Amer. J. Physiol.,
vol. 217, no. 6, pp. 1644–1651, 1969.
[15] R. Klabunde, Cardiovascular Physiology Concepts. Baltimore, MD,
USA: Williams & Wilkins, 2011.

[16] K. F. Harris and K. A. Matthews, “Interactions between autonomic nervous system activity and endothelial function: A model for the development of cardiovascular disease,” Psychosom. Med., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 153–
164, 2004.
[17] M. H. Laughlin and D. H. Korzick, “Vascular smooth muscle: Integrator
of vasoactive signals during exercise hyperemia,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 81–91, Jan. 2001.
[18] D. J. Pelchovitz, J. Ng, A. B. Chicos, D. W. Bergner, and J. J. Goldberger,
“QT-RR hysteresis is caused by differential autonomic states during exercise and recovery,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 302, no. 12,
pp. H2567–H2573, 2012.
[19] W. Lu, H. Li, S. Tao, D. Zhang, Z. Jiang, L. Cui, J. Tu, and D. Gou,
“Research on the main elements influencing blood pressure measurement
by pulse wave velocity,” Front. Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 189–199,
1992.
[20] F. E. I. Cabrera, D. Bia, Y. Zócalo, and R. L. Armentano, “Smooth muscledependent changes in aortic wall dynamics during intra-aortic counterpulsation in an animal model of acute heart failure,” Int. J. Artif. Organs.,
vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 354–361, 2009.
[21] G. S. Francis and J. N. Cohn, “The autonomic nervous system in congestive heart failure,” Annu. Rev. Med., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 235–247, 1986.
[22] G. Hasenfuss, “Animal models of human cardiovascular disease, heart
failure and hypertrophy,” Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 60–76,
1998.
[23] G. Grassi, G. Seravalle, F. Quarti-Trevano, R. Dell’Oro, G. Bolla, and
G. Mancia, “Effects of hypertension and obesity on the sympathetic activation of heart failure patients,” Hypertension, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 873–877,
2003.
[24] B. P. M. Imholz, W. Wieling, G. A. van Montfrans, and K. H. Wesseling,
“Fifteen years experience with finger arterial pressure monitoring: Assessment of the technology,” Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 605–616,
Jun. 1998.
[25] M. Bernardi, A. Rubboli, F. Trevisani, C. Cancellieri, A. Ligabue,
M. Baraldini, and G. Gasbarrini, “Reduced cardiovascular responsiveness to exercise-induced sympathoadrenergic stimulation in patients with
cirrhosis,” J. Hepatol., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 207–216, 1991.
[26] J. L. Pépin, N. Delavie, I. Pin, C. Deschaux, J. Argod, M. Bost, and
P. Levy, “Pulse transit time improves detection of sleep respiratory events
and microarousals in children,” Chest, vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 722–730, 2005.
[27] S. E. Brietzke, E. S. Katz, and D. W. Roberson, “Pulse transit time as
a screening test for pediatric sleep-related breathing disorders,” Arch.
Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg., vol. 133, no. 10, pp. 980–984, 2007.
[28] T. Weiss, A. Del Bo, N. Reichek, and K. Engelman, “Pulse transit time
in the analysis of autonomic nervous system effects on the cardiovascular
system,” Psychophysiology, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 202–207, 1980.
[29] J. Y. A. Foo and C. S. Lim, “Pulse transit time as an indirect marker
for variations in cardiovascular related reactivity,” Technol. Health Care,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 97–108, 2006.
[30] J. J. Goldberger, F. K. Le, M. Lahiri, P. J. Kannankeril, J. Ng, and
A. H. Kadish, “Assessment of parasympathetic reactivation after exercise,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 290, no. 6, pp. H2446–
H2452, 2006.
[31] A. B. Chicos, P. J. Kannankeril, A. H. Kadish, and J. J. Goldberger,
“Parasympathetic effects on cardiac electrophysiology during exercise and
recovery in patients with left ventricular dysfunction,” Amer. J. Physiol.
Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 297, no. 2, pp. H743–H749, 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

