IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

1043

sEMG-Based Joint Force Control for an Upper-Limb
Power-Assist Exoskeleton Robot
Zhijun Li, Senior Member, IEEE, Baocheng Wang, Fuchun Sun, Chenguang Yang, Member, IEEE,
Qing Xie, and Weidong Zhang

Abstract—This paper investigates two surface electromyogram
(sEMG)-based control strategies developed for a power-assist exoskeleton arm. Different from most of the existing position control
approaches, this paper develops force control methods to make the
exoskeleton robot behave like humans in order to provide better
assistance. The exoskeleton robot is directly attached to a user’s
body and activated by the sEMG signals of the user’s muscles,
which reflect the user’s motion intention. In the first proposed control method, the forces of agonist and antagonist muscles pair are
estimated, and their difference is used to produce the torque of the
corresponding joints. In the second method, linear discriminant
analysis-based classifiers are introduced as the indicator of the motion type of the joints. Then, the classifier’s outputs together with
the estimated force of corresponding active muscle determine the
torque control signals. Different from the conventional approaches,
one classifier is assigned to each joint, which decreases the training time and largely simplifies the recognition process. Finally, the
extensive experiments are conducted to illustrate the effectiveness
of the proposed approaches.
Index Terms—Exoskeleton, force estimation, linear discriminant
analysis (LDA), surface electromyogram (sEMG).

I. INTRODUCTION
XOSKELETON robots are very popular in the literature [1]–[6]. In the recent decades, biological signals are
attracting more and more attention in controlling robots. The

E

Manuscript received August 11, 2012; revised August 16, 2013, March 9,
2013, and December 16, 2012; accepted October 14, 2013. Date of publication November 5, 2013; date of current version May 1, 2014. This work was
supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
61174045 and Grant 61025016, in part by the International Science and Technology Cooperation Program of China under Grant 2011DFA10950, and in part
by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
2011ZZ0104, in part by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University under Grant NCET-12-0195, and in part by the Marie Curie International
Incoming Fellowship Grant FP7-PEOPLE-2010-IIF-275078.
Z. Li is with The Key Lab of Autonomous System and Network Control,
College of Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: zjli@ieee.org).
B. Wang and W. Zhang are with Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China (e-mail: cheng_870701@163.com;
wdzhang@sjtu.edu.cn).
F. Sun is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn).
C. Yang is with the School of Computing and Mathematics University of
Plymouth, Plymouth PL4 8AA, U.K. (e-mail: cyang@ieee.org).
Q. Xie is with the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Ruijin Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China (e-mail: ruijin_xq@
yahoo.com.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2286455

typical signals include electroencephalographic (EEG) and surface electromyogram (sEMG). The sEMG is a biological signal
which is commonly applied in rehabilitation. It can be introduced as the driving or feedback signal into the exercise of elders
or those recovering from stroke to improve exercise performance
and muscle collaboration [7]. In controlling exoskeleton robots,
which are attached to a user’s body, it is important to automatically assist the user’s motion according to the user’s motion
intention [8]. The amount of activity level of sEMG reflects the
amount of the generating force of the muscles adjacent to the
measuring point. In [9], the rehabilitation devices or assistive
robots could incorporate the information extracted from sEMG
and recognize the signal patterns. In [10]–[12], targeted muscle reinnervation was proposed for amputees. It involves transferring the residual amputated nerves to nonfunctional muscles
acting as biological amplifiers of motor commands in amputees.
The research community has focused on the use of signalprocessing techniques to achieve accurate decoding of the
sEMG. Using offline approaches, the accuracy of sEMG pattern recognition can be more than 90% through employing various classifiers, such as linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [13],
time-delayed artificial neural networks [14], and support vector machines (SVMs) [15]. The aforementioned works show a
promising future in estimating the motion intention using complicated but powerful classifiers; however, the ease of utilizing
such strategy has been left open, because in most cases, the
output of the classifier is categorical and discrete. For example, in [16], Shenoy et al. implemented the SVM to recognize
eight motion patterns of human forearm to control a manipulator online. The sEMG signal is only used to indicate the motion
direction of corresponding joints, while the velocity and torque
of the joints are predefined. In order to realize smooth and continuous control, a lot of works have been conducted to estimate
joints’ force from the sEMG signal, [6], [17]–[20]. In the previous works, since force sensors are indispensable, the control
approaches with only sEMG signals are not fully investigated.
In this paper, we propose control strategies based on upperlimb sEMG signals to provide power-assist for the user. The
strategies aim to make sEMG easier to apply in controlling
exoskeleton devices without both force sensors and manifold
parameters of the robot–user system. The first method is called
independent force control. The forces of agonist and antagonist
muscles pair are estimated, and their difference is used for the
torque of the corresponding joints. In the second method, LDAbased classifiers are introduced as the indicator of the motion
type of the joints. The classifiers utilize the estimated force of
the corresponding active muscle to produce the control signals.

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1044

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Different from conventional approaches, one classifier is assigned to each joint, which decreases the training time and
largely simplifies the recognition process. Finally, the experiments are conducted to verify the efficacy of the proposed
approaches.
II. METHODS
In this paper, power-assist control strategies are developed
for an exoskeleton arm. Since the interaction between human
and robot is in real time, a human is involved in the control loop
naturally. In order to reflect the muscle force, we transfer the
percentage of maximum torque range of human joints to those
of the robot’s corresponding joints. The estimated force in this
paper is a percentage value, presenting the relevant magnitude
of the real force. It has no physical meaning. This value would
be mapped into the current range of the robot joints for amplification. In the first method, the forces of agonist and antagonist
muscles pair dominating the relevant joints are estimated, and
the force difference between the pair would be used for controlling the corresponding joints of the robot, while in the second
method, LDA-based classifiers are introduced as the indicator
of the joint motion type and combined with the estimated force
of corresponding active muscle to produce the control signal.
The second method is different from the conventional approach,
which assigns one classifier for each joint and decomposes the
motion of the joints to be independent. By this way, the forearm motion can be treated as a combination of different joint
motions, which can decrease the training time and simplify the
recognition of motion.
A. Independent Force Control
The common method on estimating muscle forces from the
sEMG signals is to approximate the active state for a Hilltype muscle model [21], [22]. In this approach, the following
models are necessary in modeling a joint: 1) anatomical model,
2) EMG-to-activation model, 3) Hill-type muscle model, and 4)
model calibration. It is noted that, in addition to the complexity
of establishing the anatomical model, a motion capture system
needs to determine the parameters (e.g., tendon length) of the
joint kinematics.
However, in this paper, we aim to develop sEMG-based control, which is easily implemented on the exoskeleton and suitable
for different users without long training and calibration time.
One of the potential applications is rehabilitation. We only design task movements specialized for certain joint of the patients,
i.e., the elbow and wrist joint.
The approach diagram is described in Fig. 1. The sEMG signals are collected from the agonist/antagonist muscles pair and
fed into the motion recognizer. The force from sEMG signals
can be estimated, while the noise in sEMG signals can be filtered by the Kalman filter. The difference of the filtered forces
between the agonist and antagonist muscles is treated as the
reference input in the PI controller. In the control process, the
user adjusts his joint motion and force by his visual feedback.
In order to obtain the estimated force from the sEMG signals,
a high-pass filter is used to remove approximately 99% of the

Fig. 1.

Control flow of independent force control.

Fig. 2.

Control flow of classifier-based control.

sEMG signal power, which is mainly due to the fatigue and tissue
filtering properties and the differential amplification process
[23]. The nonlinearity between the sEMG signal and force is
also considered. Moreover, the Kalman filter is utilized to reduce
the estimation noise. The detail of implementation is discussed
in the following section. The reference force (ri (t), see Fig. 2)
produced by the estimation of force can be described as
ri (t) = mi + (sgn(ΔFi ) · Li − mi ) · |ΔFi |/100 · p
|ri (t)| < Li i = {0 (elbow), 1 (wrist)}

(1)

where mi is the holding force when the input force is zero; ΔFi
is the force difference between the agonist/antagonist muscles
pair, p is the proportional coefficient, and Li is the limit of the
input force. In proportional control, the user can obtain much
larger force compared with his/her own. The maximum sEMG
magnitude is the only parameter that needs to be determined before control online, so the training time can be reduced, avoiding
fatigue and increasing the ease of use.
B. Classifier-based Control
Assume that the motion coupling between the elbow and wrist
is weak. The potential motion state of each joint is yi ∈ Y 4 , Y =
{0 (Rest), 1 (Flexion), 2 (Extension), −1 (Nondetermined)}. If
all the motion combinations of both elbow and wrist joints (i.e.,
rest, flexion, and extension) are required to be classified by
only one classifier, there would be nine classes, which is the
square of the single joint’s motion classes. The combination
number would increase exponentially according to the number
of joints. For cooperative motion of many joints, it would be
time consuming to train so many classes, and the performance
of the classifier may be degenerated without enough calculation
time in each class. Therefore, we assign a classifier to each

LI et al.: sEMG-BASED JOINT FORCE CONTROL FOR AN UPPER-LIMB POWER-ASSIST EXOSKELETON ROBOT

1045

TABLE I
THE REFERENCE FORCE’S SOURCE

joint. As a result, the number of classes would be three for each
classifier. For example, the input feature vector of the classifier
corresponding to the elbow motion type is vi , and it is extracted
only from the sEMG signals of muscles controlling the elbow,
while the output is yi . The total class number can be reduced to
the sum of the number of each joint’s motion classes.
As for the classifier selection, it is well known that LDA in
classifying sEMG is with better performance than some other
classifiers (e.g., SVM) [24], [25], and there exist few parameters
necessary to be selected. Therefore, we combine it into our control scheme because of its simplicity. The classifier developed in
this study is based on uncorrelated linear discriminant analysis
(ULDA) [26]. As a dimensionality reduction method, ULDA
can reduce class-pair specific decision boundaries to a simple
one-dimensional (1-D) threshold. In [25], through 1-versus-1
technology and majority votes, it can be used in the multiclass
classification problem. The class associated with a feature vector
v for a given binary classifier can be described as follows:

CA B

⎧
⎨ CA ,
= CB ,
⎩
CV M ,

(DA V < DB V ) ∩ (DA V < τA )
(DB V < DA V ) ∩ (DB V < τB )
else

(2)

where CA B is the class output of the binary classifier; CA , CB ,
and CV M denote membership to class A, B, or neither; DA V
and DB V are the normalized distance between the sample v and
class A and B, and τA and τB are adjustable thresholds. These
thresholds can be adjusted based on the confidence of the result.
The smaller the threshold, the more confident the result.
As we mentioned, the output of the classifier is categorical and
discrete. In order to achieve a smooth and continuous control,
estimated force has to be mixed into it. Therefore, we introduce
a decision maker shown in Fig. 2. It selects the reference force
source based on the rules illustrated in Table I. The estimated
force from the selected force’s source would be used to replace
ΔFi in (1). We assume that the user holds his/her posture in
a period time TM . In other words, the user cannot change his
posture very quickly. This scheme is used for filtering out the
impulse noise, and ensured by the following condition:
c(t − 1) = · · · = c(t − TM /TS )
c(t) = c(t − 1)

(3)

where c(t) is the class label of time t (see Fig. 2), c(t − 1) is
the last label, and TS is the sampling time. In the sample time
TM , the control input cannot be changed until next sample time
even if the recognition results vary.

Fig. 3.

Flow of force estimation.

III. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
A. Data Collection
In the data collection, we select a pair of agonist and antagonist muscles for the elbow and wrist joint, respectively. A
group of four-channel sEMG signals was collected from four
locations on the upper limb (i.e., biceps-short head, triceps-long
head, flexor carpi radialis, and extensor carpi radialis), using
bipolar electrodes. For the elbow joint, we define the biceps as
the agonist muscle and the triceps as the antagonist muscle. For
the wrist, flexor carpi radialis is defined as the agonist muscle
and extensor carpi radialis as the antagonist muscle. The raw signals were digitally sampled at 1024 Hz, bandpass filtered from
10 to 500 Hz using a digital, four-order Butterworth filter, and
a notch filter was used to remove the unwanted line-frequency
(50 Hz) [27]. In the training stage, the user performed six joint
postures (i.e., classes). The motions are isometric and consist
of elbow rest, elbow flexion, elbow extension, wrist rest, wrist
flexion, and wrist extension. Each contraction was held for 8 s,
with 3–5 s rest between adjacent contractions. The suite of six
states was repeated five times totally. A twofold cross-validation
was employed to evaluate the performance of the classifier. The
information of maximum force has been included in the data
collected in the above training process, so the training of two
methods can proceed simultaneously.
B. Data Analysis
After the data acquisition, the force signal can be estimated
from the filtered sEMG signals. The whole procedure of the
estimation is illustrated in Fig. 3. First, the sEMG signal is
high-pass (cut-off frequency Fcut ) filtered to remove most of
the power energy in the low-frequency range. Then, the signals
would be rectified, and in this paper, we simply obtain its absolute value. Then, the low-pass filter is utilized to obtain the
signal envelope. It is now known that the relationship between
the force produced by the muscle and the amplitude of the EMG
signal is relatively nonlinear. It can be described by [28]:
EMGN = 100

e(−EM G L ξ ) − 1
e(−100ξ ) − 1

(4)

1046

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

where EMGL denotes EMG linearly normalized to 100% of
maximum, EMGN denotes EMG nonlinearly normalized to
100% of maximum, and ξ is a constant of the defined exponential curvature. Then, the Kalman filter is implemented to
remove the noise and make the force estimation smooth. In
order to utilize the Kalman filter, we use the following model:
f (t) = f (t − 1) + Q
EMGN (t) = f (t) + R

(5)

TABLE II
MATHEMATICAL DEFINITION OF FEATURES, GIVEN si AS THE ith SIGNAL,
AND N THE NUMBER OF SAMPLES IN A SEGMENT

TABLE III
PARAMETERS CONFIGURATION

wheref (t) is the desired estimated force, Q is the process noise
covariance, R is the measurement noise covariance, the parameters Q and R are used for smoothing the estimated force, which
are selected according to [20]. Then, we have
fˆ− (t) = fˆ(t − 1)
P − (t) = P (t − 1) + Q
−

−

(6)
−1

K(t) = P (t)(P (t) + R)

fˆ(t) = fˆ− (t) + K(t)(EMGN (t) − fˆ− (t))
P (t) = (1 − K(t))P −1 (t)

(7)

where fˆ− (t) is the estimated prior value, fˆ(t) is the estimated
a posteriori force value, P − (t) is the a priori estimate error
covariance, P (t − 1) is the a posteriori estimate error covariance, K(t) is the Kalman filter gain. Equations (6) and (7) are
called as the predication step and the update step, respectively.
According to linearity assumption, the estimated state is simply equal to the previous one, and the observation is utilized to
update the estimation.
For the classification of the second method, the classifier acts
upon a sliding window, producing a class decision. Therefore,
the original data need to be segmented. A segment is a sequence
of data limited in a time slot, which is used to estimate signal
features. Real-time constraints enforce a delay time of less than
300 ms between the onset of muscle contraction made by a user
and corresponding motion in device [29]. In order to achieve
the real-time control, a 100 samples window is selected, which
produces a nearly 10-Hz control command flow. After the segmentation, the following step is the feature extraction, which
reveals the underlying information between different patterns.
Careful effort must be paid on the feature selection, because
it has a strong effect on the performance of the classifier. In
the previous study, Tkach et al. [30] conducted a study of many
time-domain features. They concluded that mean absolute value
(MAV), waveform length (WL), and autoregression coefficient
are the most insensitive features to three disturbances, including
sEMG electrode location shift, variation in muscle contraction
effort, and muscle fatigue. Meanwhile, Farina and Merletti [31]
have also pointed out that a segment length shorter than 125 ms
is to be avoided for the extraction of AR feature, because they
would lead to high variance and bias. Finally, we selected MAV
and WL, which produce 4-D feature vectors for the two classifiers, respectively. The mathematical definition of these features
is described in Table II. The parameters mentioned previously
are shown in Table III.

Fig. 4. Estimation of force. The green curve below indicates the error calculated as the absolute value of the difference between the force and sEMG curves.
The RMS of error is 6.9%.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION AND RESULTS
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at
Ruijin Hospital. Five subjects, aged 21–30, have been involved
in the study and provided informed consent. One of the demonstration videos is provided in the link (http://v.youku.com/
v_show/id_XMzc0MDQwOTA0.html). The evaluation experiment of force estimation was conducted first on biceps brachii.
The sEMG signal and the actual force were acquired in the
meantime. The resulting actual force and sEMG-based estimated force are then shown in Fig. 4. In the comparison, both
signals have been normalized with their respective maximum
value. The correlation coefficient between the two signals is
0.8608 (p < 0.0001).
Then, the principal components analysis technique was applied to reduce the 4-D original feature vector to a 2-D one,
which is easy to plot in a plane [32]. The processed feature vectors of sEMG signals collected in elbow and wrist are shown in
Fig. 5, which shows the distribution of 50 feature vectors. From
the figure, we can see that the feature set we selected is proper
enough for the discrimination between patterns. By twofold
cross-validation, the recognition rates about the two joints’ motion are 90% and 95%, respectively. In addition, the time-domain

LI et al.: sEMG-BASED JOINT FORCE CONTROL FOR AN UPPER-LIMB POWER-ASSIST EXOSKELETON ROBOT

1047

TABLE IV
PARAMETERS OF THE TUNED PI CONTROLLER

TABLE V
PREDEFINED TRAJECTORIES FOR THE EVALUATION EXPERIMENT

(a)

(b)

Fig. 5. Feature distribution after dimension reduction. The red, green, and
blue colors denote that y i = 0, 1, 2, respectively. (a) Features depicting elbow
motion. (b) Features depicting wrist motion.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Fig. 6. Configuration of the online control experiment. (a) Hardware configuration. (b) Software interface.

Fig. 7.

PI force controller.

feature has little request for a long data segmentation, and it can
be well suitable for the real-time control problem.
The experimental environment is shown in Fig. 6, which consists of an exoskeleton and one of the subjects. The robot has
corresponding joints to each joint of the user’s arm. The upper
and lower arms of the robot are both adjustable according to the
length of the user’s arm. The right part of Fig. 6 is the software
interface designed by us, and we can switch between the two
methods in the experiment during control. The sEMG signals
can be monitored, and once abnormal signals are observed, the
operator can stop the system.
The structure of the PI controller is shown in Fig. 7, and
the PI parameters need to be selected properly beforehand. The
feedback force signals are actually motor current, as the robot
is not equipped with the force sensors and that the fact that the
value force is proportional to the motor current. The selected
parameters of the force controller are listed in Table IV.
In order to have a comprehensive evaluation of our strategy,
four kinds of motion types of the elbow and wrist were predefined, described in Table V. The results of the two methods
are shown in Figs. 8 and 9, respectively. From the difference

Fig. 8. Records using the independent force control method. The red line
denotes the percentage force estimated from the agonist muscle, the green
line denotes the force estimated from the antagonist muscle, and the blue line
denotes the degree of robot’s joint. The right axes express the position of the
relevant joints in degrees. (a) Elbow with trajectory 1. (b) Wrist with trajectory
1. (c) Elbow with trajectory 2. (d) Wrist with trajectory 2. (e) Elbow with
trajectory 3. (f) Wrist with trajectory 3. (g) Elbow with trajectory 4. (h) Wrist
with trajectory 4.

of the forces from the agonist/antagonist muscles pair, we can
distinguish which kind of motion the user is performing. When
the force of the agonist muscle is much larger than that from
the antagonist muscle, the motion is flexion, and its extension

1048

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

(a)

(b)

Fig. 10.

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Fig. 9. Records using the classifier-based method. The red line denotes the
percentage force estimated from the agonist muscle, the green line denotes the
force estimated from the antagonist muscle, the blue line denotes the degree
of robot’s joint. The black circle denotes the results of the recognition. The
right axes express the position of the relevant joints in degrees. (a) Elbow
with trajectory 1. (b) Wrist with trajectory 1. (c) Elbow with trajectory 2.
(d) Wrist with trajectory 2. (e) Elbow with trajectory 3. (f) Wrist with trajectory 3.
(g) Elbow with trajectory 4. (h) Wrist with trajectory 4.

when the force of the agonist muscle is smaller than that from
the antagonist muscle. If the forces estimated from the muscles
pair are almost the same and have much small value, the user is
resting the relevant joint.
In the first two rows of both Figs. 8 and 9, the intention of
the first two trajectories is tracked well. Although the force of
the agonist muscle is larger than that of the antagonist muscle
in some situations of Fig. 8, the position of the controlled robot
joint remains constant. It is due to the inertia, friction, and
gravity of the robot’s joint that make it insensitive to the small
force difference fluctuation. This insensitivity in fact increased
the robustness of the method. In Fig. 9(c), the motion states of
the elbow are almost recognized as flexion, which should be rest.
It indicates that the classifier has a poor online performance. It
is due to the transient signals of online experiments, compared
with the isometric contraction signals collected for training. That
situation also occurs in Fig. 9(b) and (e). However, the output
remains consistent with the real intention of the user, especially

Results of nonpower-assist control.
TABLE VI
EXERTED FORCE IN THE PROPOSED METHODS

in the flexion and extension movement of both the elbow and
wrist. In the contraction of the two joints, the second method
performs a little better than the first one as especially indicated
in the comparison with Figs. 8(f) and 9(f), thanks to the smooth
and timely indicator of the movement intention.
In order to make a comparison, we let the robot follow the
subject’s elbow motion without force assistance. The estimated
forces from sEMG of the biceps brachii were obtained. The
relationship of the estimated force and position is shown in
Fig. 10. It can be distinguished that the force that the user
exerts is pretty large and the biceps muscle keeps contracting
during the experiment. The comparison of the RMS value of
the estimated force is shown in Table VI. Compared with the
nonpower-assist situation, the force that the user has to exert
nearly falls by half. In the first method, the exserted force in
triceps-short head increased in comparison to the nonpowerassist method, because the elbow extension motion is recognized
on the condition that the force of triceps-short head exceeds the
one of biceps-short head. However, the second method does
not need that requirement, thanks to the classifier and the more
time-consuming training period. As a result, it decreases both
the forces of the two muscles. The methods we proposed indeed
assist the movement of the user, reducing the force that the user
has to exert.
In general, Fig. 8 reveals that the independent force control
depends only on the force difference of the agonist/antagonist
muscles pair. It is sensitive to the force difference, especially
in the wrist joint because of the smaller gravitational torque
compared with the elbow joint. Fig. 9 shows that the classifierbased method can produce smoother control, though it consumes
more training time. The two methods are complementary to
provide good performance.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper has developed two control strategies based on
the upper-limb sEMG signals to provide power-assist to users.
The developed sEMG-based control is easier to be applied to the

LI et al.: sEMG-BASED JOINT FORCE CONTROL FOR AN UPPER-LIMB POWER-ASSIST EXOSKELETON ROBOT

exoskeleton robot. Both methods depend on the force estimation
from the corresponding agonist/antagonist muscles pair. A major innovative contribution is that the developed control strategies no longer require the expensive and supernumerary sensors
including the force and position sensors, as well as precise modeling of the exoskeleton system. The first method is based only
on the force estimation, and the force difference between the agonist and antagonist muscles is used to produce the joint torque.
The second method combines force estimation with a motion
classifier, and the training process endows the recognition stage
with more flexibility and robustness.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Kawamoto and Y. Sankai, “Comfortable power assist control method
for walking aid by HAL-3,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man Cybern.,
Oct. 2002, pp. 6–9.
[2] A. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, and A. Chu, “On the mechanical design of the
Berkeley lower extremity Eexoskeleton (BLEEX),” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Aug. 2–6, 2005, pp. 3465–3472.
[3] W. Ye, Z. Li, and C.-Y. Su, “Development and human-like control of
an upper limb rehabilitation exoskeleton using sEMG Bio-feedback,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Mechatron. Autom., 2012, pp. 2077–2082.
[4] Y. Wu, Y. Yu, D. Xu, Z. Wu, and F. Che, “Kinematics analysis and simulation of a robot with wearable and power-assisted lower extremities,”
Mech. Sci. Technol., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 235–240, 2007.
[5] E. Rocon, M. Manto, J. Pons, S. Camut, and J. Belda, “Mechanical suppression of essential tremor,” Cerebellum, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 73–78, 2007.
[6] E. Rocon and J. L. Pons, Robotic Rehabilitation Exoskeleton: Tremor
Suppression. London, U.K.: Springer-Verlag, 2011.
[7] G. Y. F. Ng, A. Q. Zhang, and C. K. Li, “Biofeedback exercise improved
the EMG activity ratio of the medial and lateral vasti muscles in subjects
with patellofemoral pain syndrome,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 128–133, Feb. 2008.
[8] G. Li, A. E. Schultz, and T. A. Kuiken, “Quantifying pattern recognitionłbased myoelectric control of multifunctional transradial prostheses,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 185–192, Apr.
2010.
[9] M. A. Oskoei and H. Hu, “Myoelectric control systems—A survey,”
Biomed. Signal Process. Contr., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 275–294, Oct. 2007.
[10] P. Zhou, M. M. Lowery, K. B. Englehart, H. Huang, G. Li, L. Hargrove,
J. P. A. Dewald, and T. A. Kuiken, “Decoding a new neural-machine interface for control of artificial limbs,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 98, pp. 2974–
2982, 2007.
[11] H. Huang, P, Zhou, G. Li, and T. A. Kuiken, “An analysis of EMG electrode configuration for targeted muscle reinnervation based neural machine interface,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. 37–45, Feb. 2008.
[12] T. A. Kuiken, G. Li, B. A. Lock, R. D. Lipschutz, L. A. Miller,
K. A. Stubblefield, and K. B. Englehart, “Targeted muscle reinnervation
for real-time myoelectric control of multifunction artificial arms,” J. Amer.
Med. Assoc., vol. 301, no. 6, pp. 619–628, 2009.
[13] K. Englehart and B. Hudgins, “A robust, real-time control scheme for
multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
no. 7, pp. 848–854, Jul. 2003.
[14] A. T. C. Au and R. F. Kirsch, “EMG-based prediction of shoulder and
elbow kinematics in able-bodied and spinal cord injured individuals,”
IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 471–480, Dec. 2000.
[15] M. A. Oskoei and H. Hu, “Support vector machine-based classification
scheme for myoelectric control applied to upper limb,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1956–1965, Aug. 2008.
[16] P. Shenoy, K. J. Miller, B. Crawford, and R. P. N. Rao, “Online electromyographic control of a robotic prosthesis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1128–1135, Mar. 2008.
[17] K. Kiguchi and Y. Hayashi, “An EMG-based control for an upper-limb
power-assist exoskeleton robot,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. B: Cybern., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1064–1071, Aug. 2012.
[18] P. K. Artemiadis and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “An EMG-based robot control
scheme robust to time-varying EMG signal features,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 582–588, 2010.

1049

[19] P. K. Artemiadis and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “Estimating arm motion and
force using EMG signals: On the control of exoskeletons,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Nice, France, Sep. 2008, pp. 279–
284.
[20] J. Kuan, T. Huang, and H. Huang, “Human intention estimation method
for a new compliant rehabilitation and assistive robot,” presented at the
SICE Annual Conf., Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 18–21, 2010
[21] A. L. Hof and J. Van Den Berg, “EMG to force processing I: An electrical
analog of the Hill muscle model,” J. Biomech., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 747–
758, 1981.
[22] D. G. Lloyd and T. F. Besier, “An EMG-driven musculoskeletal model
to estimate muscle forces and knee joint moments in vivo,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 765–776, 2003.
[23] J. R. Potvin and S. H. M Brown, “Less is more: High pass filtering, to
remove up to 99% of the surface EMG signal power, improves EMGbased biceps brachii muscle force estimates,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 389–399, 2004.
[24] T. Lorrain, N. Jiang, and D. Farina, “Influence of the training set on the
accuracy of surface EMG classification in dynamic contractions for the
control of multifunction prostheses,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 8, no. 25,
pp. 1–8, 2011.
[25] E. J. Scheme, K. B. Englehart, and B. S. Hudgins, “Selective classification for improved robustness of myoelectric control under nonideal conditions,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1698–1705, Jun.
2011.
[26] J. Ye, T. Li, T. Xiong, and R. Janardan, “Using uncorrelated discriminant
analysis for tissue classification with gene expression data,” IEEE Trans.
Comput. Biol. Bioinformat., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 181–190, Oct.–Dec. 2004.
[27] G. Li, Y. Li, L. Yu, and Y. Geng, “Conditioning and sampling issues
of EMG signals in motion recognition of multifunctional myoelectric
prostheses,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1779–1787, Jun. 2011.
[28] J. R. Potvin, R. W. Norman, and S. M. McGill, “Mechanically corrected
EMG for the continuous estimation of erector spine muscle loading during repetitive lifting,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occupat. Physiol., vol. 74,
pp. 119–132, 1996.
[29] B. Hudgins, P. Parker, and R. Scott, “A new strategy for multifunction
myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 82–
94, Jan. 1993.
[30] D. Tkach, H. Huang, and T. A. Kuiken, “Study of stability of time-domain
features for electromyographic pattern recognition,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 7, no. 21, pp. 1–13, 2010.
[31] D. Farina and R. Merletti, “Comparison of algorithms for estimation of
EMG variables during voluntary isometric contractions,” J. Electromyogr.
Kinesiol., vol. 10, pp. 337–349, 2000.
[32] L. J. Hargrove, G. Li, K. B. Englehart, and B. S. Hudgins, “Principal
components analysis preprocessing for improved classification accuracies
in pattern-recognition-based myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1407–1414, May 2009.

Zhijun Li (M’07–SM’09) received the Dr. Eng. degree in mechatronics from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2002.
From 2003 to 2005, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Intelligent systems, University of ElectroCommunications, Tokyo, Japan. From 2005 to 2006,
he was a Research Fellow at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, and Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. From 2007 to 2011, he was an
Associate Professor at the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Currently, he is a Professor in the College of Automation Science and
Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. His
current research interests include rehabilitation robotics, mobile manipulation,
biomedical mechatronics, etc.
Dr. Li is serving as an Editor-at-large of Journal of Intelligent & Robotic
System.

1050

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Baocheng Wang received the B.S. degree in automation from the Qingdao University of Science and
Technology, Shandong, China, in 2010. He received
the Master’s degree in automation from Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China, in 2013.
His research interests include the application of
machine learning techniques to the understanding of
EEG signals and control of biorobot.

Qing Xie received the Bachelor of Medicine degree
in 1987 and the Master’s degree in medical rehabilitation in 1999 from Hebei Medical University, Hebei,
China.
From 1987 to 2002, she was a Doctor in the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Renming Hospital,
Wuhan University, Hebei. Since 2002, she has been
a Chief Doctor in the Department of Rehabilitation
Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, and also the Director of the
Rehabilitation Medicine and Physical Therapy Department, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. She has been devoted
to the neurological rehabilitation and orthopedic rehabilitation for 25 years.
Dr. Xie is the Editor of Chinese Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Chinese Journal of Rehabilitation.

Fuchun Sun received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1998.
He is currently a Professor at the Department of
Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. His research interests include intelligent control, neural networks, fuzzy systems, variable structure control, nonlinear systems, and robotics.

Chenguang Yang (M’10) received the B. Eng. degree in measurement and control from Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi¯an, China, in 2005, and
the Ph.D. degree in control engineering from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2010.
From October 2009 to December 2010, he was a
Research Associate with Imperial College London,
London, U.K., working on human–robot interaction.
Since December 2010, he has been a Lecturer of
robotics with the School of Computing and Mathematics, Plymouth University, Plymouth, U.K., where
he is currently on secondment as a Marie Curie International Incoming Fellow from August 2011, supported by the European Commission. His current
research interests include robotics, control, and human–robot interaction.

Weidong Zhang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
in 1990, 1993, and 1996, respectively.
He worked in National Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology as a Postdoctoral Fellow
before joining Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 1998 as an Associate Professor. Since
1999, he has been a Professor at the Department of
Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He is
serving as the Deputy Dean of the Department of
Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research interests include robust control, distributed control, and their applications
in industry.
Dr. Zhang has authored or coauthored more than 200 journals and conference
papers.

