IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

55

New Adaptive Clutter Rejection Based on Spectral
Analysis for Ultrasound Color Doppler Imaging:
Phantom and In Vivo Abdominal Study
Geunyong Park, Student Member, IEEE, Sunmi Yeo, Student Member, IEEE, Jae Jin Lee, Student Member, IEEE,
Changhan Yoon, Student Member, IEEE, Hyun-woo Koh, Hyungjoon Lim, Youngtae Kim, Hwan Shim,
and Yangmo Yoo∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Effective rejection of time-varying clutter originating
from slowly moving vessels and surrounding tissues is important
for depicting hemodynamics in ultrasound color Doppler imaging (CDI). In this paper, a new adaptive clutter rejection method
based on spectral analysis (ACR-SA) is presented for suppressing
nonstationary clutter. In ACR-SA, tissue and flow characteristics
are analyzed by singular value decomposition and tissue acceleration of backscattered Doppler signals to determine an appropriate
clutter filter from a set of clutter filters. To evaluate the ACR-SA
method, 20 frames of complex baseband data were acquired by a
commercial ultrasound system equipped with a research package
(Accuvix V10, Samsung Medison, Seoul, Korea) using a 3.5-MHz
convex array probe by introducing tissue movements to the flow
phantom (Gammex 1425 A LE, Gammex, Middleton, WI, USA).
In addition, 20 frames of in vivo abdominal data from five volunteers were captured. From the phantom experiment, the ACR-SA
method provided 2.43 dB (p < 0.001) and 1.09 dB (p < 0.001) improvements in flow signal-to-clutter ratio (SCR) compared to static
(STA) and down-mixing (ACR-DM) methods. Similarly, it showed
smaller values in fractional residual clutter area (FRCA) compared to the STA and ACR-DM methods (i.e., 2.3% versus 5.4%
and 3.7%, respectively, p < 0.001). The consistent improvements
in SCR from the proposed ACR-SA method were obtained with
the in vivo abdominal data (i.e., 4.97 dB and 3.39 dB over STA and
ACR-DM, respectively). The ACR-SA method showed less than 1%
FRCA values for all in vivo abdominal data. These results indicate
that the proposed ACR-SA method can improve image quality in
CDI by providing enhanced rejection of nonstationary clutter.

Manuscript received May 19, 2013; revised June 23, 2013; accepted July
22, 2013. Date of publication November 6, 2013; date of current version December 16, 2013. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science, ICT
& Future Planning, Korea, under the Convergence Information Technology
Research Center support Program NIPA-2013-H0401-13-1007 supervised by
the National IT Industry Promotion Agency. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
G. Park, S. Yeo, J. J. Lee, and C. Yoon are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea (e-mail: gypark@
sogang.ac.kr; yeosunmi@sogang.ac.kr; jge0707@sogang.ac.kr; yoonch@
sogang.ac.kr).
H.-W. Koh, H. Lim, Y. Kim, and H. Shim are with the Digital Media &
Communication R&D Center, Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd, Suwon 442-600,
Korea (e-mail: hw.koh@samsung.com; hyungjoon48.lim@samsung.com; yt65.
kim@samsung.com; hwan.shim@samsung.com).
*Y. Yoo is with the Department of Electronic Engineering and also with Interdisciplinary Program of Integrated Biotechnology, Sogang University, Seoul
121-742, Korea (e-mail: ymyoo@sogang.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2276088

Index Terms—Adaptive clutter rejection, nonstationary clutter,
spectral analysis, ultrasound color Doppler imaging (CDI).

I. INTRODUCTION
FFECTIVE rejection of clutter originating from slowly
moving vessel walls and nonstationary tissue movements
is important for depicting hemodynamic in medical ultrasound
color Doppler imaging (CDI) since it leads to a bias in flow
estimation [1]–[3]. Various clutter filters, such as finite impulse
response (FIR), infinite impulse response (IIR), and autoregression, have been proposed for clutter rejection [4]–[6]. However,
since clutter has time varying characteristics, it is challenging
to successfully remove it with a single clutter filter that has a
fixed cutoff frequency [7], [8].
For effectively eliminating nonstationary clutter, various
adaptive clutter rejection (ACR) methods have been proposed
[9]–[17]. In down-mixing (ACR-DM), to overcome limitations
in utilizing a single clutter filter with assumption that clutter is
centered around zero frequency, the mean clutter frequency is
estimated and used for shift the clutter to be centered around zero
frequency [9]. While ACR-DM can suppress the narrow-band
clutter well, it has difficulty in removing the clutter when several tissue velocities exist in the backscattered Doppler signals
because of acceleration/deceleration of tissues [10].
In eigen-based clutter rejection, an optimum clutter filter
is designed with the orthogonal basis functions by performing eigendecomposition (ED) or singular value decomposition
(SVD) of the Hankel matrix of backscattered Doppler signals (Hankel-SVD) [11]–[15]. The ED-based clutter rejection
method, in which the eigenvectors of the clutter signal are selected as the orthogonal basis functions for regression filtering,
can theoretically provide maximum clutter rejection for a given
filter order due to its best mean-square approximation of the
clutter signals [11]–[13]. However, it has difficulty in determining an optimum filter order although eigenvalues can be used as
a threshold to decide the clutter space [13]. In the Hankel-SVD
clutter rejection method, a Hankel data matrix is formed from
the backscattered Doppler signals and SVD is performed to the
Hankel data matrix [14]. It has shown the considerable improvement in clutter rejection compared to the ACR-DM method [15].
On the other hand, in the ED and Hankel-SVD clutter rejection methods, the improper selection of the filter order or the

E

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE

56

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

dimension parameter can lead to an unwanted bias on flow estimation since it can remove flow signal components.
In adaptive clutter filtering, unlike the ED and Hankel-SVD
methods, an optimum clutter filter is dynamically selected at
each location from a set of predesigned filters that are designed
for rejecting specific clutter frequencies [8], [16], [17]. To determine an optimum clutter filter, the bandwidth of the clutter
components was assumed to be related with the clutter mean
frequency [8]. The method showed the improvement in clutter
rejection in phantom and preliminary in vivo studies, but its
performance was degraded when the accelerated tissue motions
are introduced. To overcome this limitation, instantaneous clutter frequencies (called as tissue acceleration factor, TAF) and
clutter power are utilized [16], [17]. This ACR method with
the filter bank (ACR-FB) method outperformed the ACR-DM
method in terms of flow signal-to-clutter ratio (SCR) and it did
not introduce a bias on flow estimation. However, the ACR-FB
method suffered from excessive suppression of flow signals
when the estimations of tissue acceleration have biased from
relatively high amplitude flow components, resulting in less
sensitive to slow flow. To accurately analyze clutter characteristics, the SVD of backscattered Doppler signal was tested [18].
While this approach can provide the better understanding of
clutter characteristics, it also suffered from the biased estimates
from flow components.
In this paper, a new adaptive clutter rejection method based
on spectral analysis (ACR-SA) is presented. In the proposed
ACR-SA method, the SVD of backscattered Doppler signals
is performed, and then, singular vectors and values are used
for determining flow and tissue regions. In the tissue region,
while the TAF is used for suppressing nonstationary clutter, the
cutoff frequency of a clutter filter is determined from tissue
and flow estimates in the flow region. The performance of the
proposed ACR-SA method was evaluated with flow phantom
and in vivo abdominal data from five volunteers. For quantitative
comparison, fractional residual clutter area (FRCA) and flow
SCR were measured for the static (STA), ACR-DM, ACR-FB,
and ACR-SA methods.
II. METHODS
A. ACR-SA
Fig. 1 shows a block diagram of the ACR-SA method where
the additional processing blocks needed for adapting to varying clutter characteristics are shaded. In the proposed ACR-SA
method, TAF is used in the tissue region since it can effectively
suppress nonstationary clutter from tissue acceleration and deceleration [16], [17]. On the other hand, the TAF estimate can
be biased in the flow region when the flow strength is considerable. To avoid this problem, spectral analysis based on SVD
of the backscattered Doppler signal, which is better for understanding spectral characteristics than the traditional fast Fourier
transform method [19], is utilized to generate flow mask and
determine the cutoff frequencies in the flow region. For this, in
ACR-SA, as shown in Fig. 1, SVD of the m × m correlation

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the (ACR-SA) method. The additional processing
blocks for adapting to varying clutter characteristics are shaded. I and Q are
in-phase and quadrature data. TAF and SVD represent tissue acceleration factor
and singular value decomposition, respectively.

matrix estimate from the backscattered Doppler signal (i.e., R)
is performed as follows [20]:

R = X H X = U ΣV T

(1)

where U is the m × m unitary matrix, Σ is the m × m diagnonal
matrix, V T is the m × m unitary matrix, respectively, and X
is the E × m Toeplitz matrix that generates the autocorrelation
matrix, R, which is given by
⎡

x(m + 1)

⎢ x(m + 2)
⎢
⎢
⎢
..
⎢
.
⎢
⎢
⎢ x(E − m)
⎢
⎢
..
X=⎢
.
⎢
⎢
⎢ x(E)
⎢
⎢
⎢ x∗ (1)
⎢
⎢
..
⎢
.
⎣
x∗ (E − m)

···

x(2)

···

x(3)

..

..

.

.

···

···

..

..

.

.

···

···

∗

x (2)

···

..

..

.

···

.

···

x(1)

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
x(m + 1) ⎥
⎥
⎥
..
⎥
.
⎥
⎥
x(E − m) ⎥
⎥
⎥
∗
x (m + 1) ⎥
⎥
⎥
..
⎥
.
⎦
x(2)
..
.

(2)

x∗ (E)

where x represents the received ensemble data.
The orthonormal singular vectors (V ) can be represented as
V1 ,√
V2 , . .√
. , VM and
√ the corresponding singular values are given
by λ1 , λ2 , . . . λk . Thus, these singular values and vectors

PARK et al.: NEW ADAPTIVE CLUTTER REJECTION BASED ON SPECTRAL ANALYSIS FOR ULTRASOUND COLOR DOPPLER IMAGING

57

Fig. 2. Singular value power spectrum of the backscattered Doppler signal. V
represents the frequency estimate from the singular vector.

can be rewritten by
⎡√
λ1
0
⎢ 0 √λ
2
⎢
⎢
⎢ ..
⎢ .
⎢
⎢
Σ=⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

···

0

⎤

⎡

V1T

⎤

⎢ T ⎥
⎢ V2 ⎥
0⎥
⎥
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢ . ⎥
.. ⎥
..
.
⎥
⎢
.
.⎥
⎢ . ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎢
√
⎥
VkT ⎥
⎥ , V T =⎢
λk
⎥.
⎢
⎥
⎥
⎢
T
⎥
⎢Vk +1 ⎥
0
⎥
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢ . ⎥
..
⎥
⎥
⎢
.
.
⎦
⎣ . ⎦
0
0 ···
0
VMT
(3)
As the order increases,
the
amplitude
of
the
sigular
values
√
√
√
√
become smaller (i.e., λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λk , where λi is
the power of the ith-order singular vector).
The total energy of the SVD of the correlation matrix estimate
from the backscattered Doppler signal is the sum of singular
values. Thus, the singular value spectrum of the backscattered
Doppler signal can be drawn in Fig. 2. As shown in Fig. 2, the
clutter, flow, and noise components estimated from the ith-order
singular vector are represented as C(Vi ), F(Vi ), and N(Vi ), respectively. Since clutter has strong power compared to other
components (i.e., flow and noise), it can be decomposed with
lower orders (i.e., V1 ∼ Vm ). On the other hand, flow components are represented with higher orders (i.e., Vm +1 ∼ Vk ).
Unlike clutter and flow components, noise is spread over various orders. The frequency and power of the ith-order singular
vector can be obtained by
···

fPRF
tan−1 [RV i V i (1)]
2π
pSVD (i) = Σ(i, i)
fSVD (i) =

(4.1)
(4.2)

where fPRF is the pulse repitition freqeuency and RV i V i (1) is
the lag-one autocorrelation of the ith-order singular vector (i.e.,
Vi ).
In the previously developed ACR-FB method, since a clutter
filter is solely selected by the TAF value, it suffered from unwanted rejection of flow signals when the estimation of a TAF
is biased due to high-amplitude flow components. To resolve
this limitation, in the proposed ACR-SA method, two different criteria for determining the cutoff frequency of a clutter are
separately utilized in the tissue and flow regions. In ACR-SA,
the flow mask for each singular vector (i.e., Vm +1 ∼ Vk ) is first

Fig. 3. Flow chart for selecting an optimum clutter filter in the proposed
ACR-SA method.

generated based on its power and velocity estimates given by
(4). For example, with the ith-order singular vector, fSVD (i)
and PSVD (i) are computed for every pixel, and predetermined
power and velocity thresholding values are applied to determine
the flow region. Based on the result, a 2-D flow mask from the
ith-order singular vector (i.e., FMi (x,y)), in which the flow and
tissue pixels are set to “1” and “0,” respectively, can be obtained. After acquiring the flow masks for each singular vector
(i.e., Vm +1 ∼ Vk ), the final 2-D flow mask is generated by
FM (x, y) = FMm +1 (x, y) ||FMm +2 (x, y) || . . . ||FMk (x, y)
(5)
where x and y are the indices for lateral and axial directions,
and || presents the logical OR operation. As described in (5),
the final flow mask is determined if one of the singular vectors
is considered as a flow pixel.
Fig. 3 shows the flowchart to determine the cutoff frequency
of a clutter filter applied in the tissue and flow regions based
on the generated flow mask. In the tissue region, the cutoff
frequency of a clutter is only determined by the TAF value,
similar to the ACR-FB method. For this, the instantaneous clutter freuqencies are calculated from the complex baseband data
by [16], [17]
1
tan−1
fi,clutter (e) =
2π

	
I(e + 1)Q(e) − I(e)Q(e + 1)
×
(6)
I(e)I(e + 1) + Q(e)Q(e + 1) e=0,1,2,...E −2
where E is the ensemble size, and I and Q represent in-phase
and quadrature components in complex baseband data, respectively. From (6), a TAF value for the cutoff frequency of a clutter

58

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

filter is determined by



fc,tissue = TAF = max

	

∂
fi,clutter (e) .
∂e

(7)

TABLE I
SYSTEM PARAMETERS USED FOR ACQUIRING PHANTOM AND In Vivo
ABDOMINAL DATA

On the other hand, to preserve the slow flow in the flow
region, the minimum flow velocity (MFV) is obtained from the
flow frequency estimates from singular vectors as
MFV = min [fSVD (i)] , where m + 1 ≤ i ≤ k.

(8)

In addition, the clutter velocity (CV) is computed using the
most prominent singular vector corresponding to the clutter
component (i.e., V1 ), obtained by
CV = fSVD (1).

(9)

A cutoff frequency of the clutter for the flow region is then
given by
fc,ﬂow = (1 − α) · MFV + α · CV

(10)

where α is the clutter-flow ratio, which determines the cutoff
frequency between the clutter and minimum flow velocities,
ranging from 0.0 to 1.0.
As described in Fig. 3, after computing the cutoff frequency
of a clutter filter for every pixel in CDI, the optimum clutter
filter is determined by
ACR -SA (order, fc ) <

CSL
Pclutter

(11)

where fc is the cutoff frequency for the tissue and flow pixel,
CSL is the clutter suppression level, and Pclutter is the clutter
power, respectively. In (11), the optimum order of a clutter filter
is dynamically selected to achieve the best clutter rejection ratio.
Since the different clutter levels are introduced depending on the
cardiac cycle (i.e., systolic and diastolic phases), by utilizing
clutter power (i.e., Pclutter ) for each pixel in a CDI frame to
determine the optimum clutter filter, effective clutter rejection
can be achieved over the entire cardiac cycle.
B. Experimental Setup
To evaluate the ACR-SA method for CDI, phantom and
in vivo abdominal data were acquired from a commerical ultrasound machine equipped with a research package (Accuvix
V10, Samsung Medison Inc., Seoul, Korea) using a 3.5-MHz
convex array probe (C5-2, Samsung Medison Inc., Seoul,
Korea). The acquired 20 frames of complex baseband data from
a flow phantom (Gammex 1425A LE, Gammex, Middleton,
WI, USA) were transferred to an external PC and processed
off-line using MATLAB (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA,
USA). Nonstationary tissue movements were introduced by tapping over the flow phantom surface. Similarily, 20 frames of
complex baseband data from an abdomen region of five volunteers were captured. Four clutter rejection methods, i.e., STA,
ACR-DM, ACR-FB, and ACR-SA, were evaluated with the acquired phantom and in vivo abdominal data for an ensemble size
(E) of 10. The system parameters used for acquiring phantom
and in vivo abdominal data are summarized in Table I. Fig. 4
shows the frequency responses of six clutter filters with different cutoff frequencies (e.g., PR and PI-IIR) in the filter bank

Fig. 4. Frequency response of six clutter filters utilized in the ACR-FB and
ACR-SA methods.

applied in this study. These filters were utilized in the previous
studies as well [16], [17].
C. Evaluation Metrics
For quantiative comparison, FRCA and flow SCR were measured for phantom and in vivo abdominal data. The FRCA was
measured by [17]
FRCA =

Nc
Nt

(12)

where Nc and Nt are the number of pixels containing residual clutter and the total number of pixels, respectively, in a
prescan-converted color Doppler image. The FRCA is useful
for quantifying an amount of biased estimates from residual
clutters.
The performance of clutter rejection is also quantified by
measuring SCR as follows [13], [17]:
SCR =

Pf
Pc

(13)

where Pf and Pc represent the output power of the flow and
clutter components, respectively, computed by averaging the
signal power in their respective mask regions.

PARK et al.: NEW ADAPTIVE CLUTTER REJECTION BASED ON SPECTRAL ANALYSIS FOR ULTRASOUND COLOR DOPPLER IMAGING

59

Fig. 5. Prescan converted color Doppler images with frequency estimates and its residual clutter area from the phantom experiment before applying frequency
and power thresholing obtained by (a) STA, (b) ACR-DM, (c) ACR-FB, and (d) proposed ACR-SA methods, respectively.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Phantom Study
Fig. 5 shows the prescan converted color Doppler images
from the flow phantom by the STA, ACR-DM, ACR-FB, and
proposed ACR-SA methods before applying frequency and
power thresholding, respectively, along with the images of residual clutter. For STA and ACR-DM, the projection-initialized
IIR filter with the cutoff frequency of 0.152 PRF (PI-IIR1) was
applied to remove the clutter. For the ACR-FB and ACR-SA
methods, an appropriate filter from six clutter filters with different cutoff frequencies (e.g., PR and PI-IIR) was dynamically
selected based on the characteristics of clutter and flow components, as shown in Fig. 6. In the proposed ACR-SA method,
SVD with the order of four was performed. The first singular
vector (i.e., V1 ) was assumed to be clutter, and the rest of sin-

gular vectors (i.e., V2 , V3 , and V4 ) were presumed as flow. It is
reasonable to assume that the clutter signal only exists in low orders since most of clutter components are concentrated in lower
frequencies. Also, this assumption is valid even if nonstationary
tissue movements are presented [12].
The α and CSL values in (9) and (10), respectively, were set to
0.2 and −40 dB, respectively. The same CSL value was applied
for the ACR-FB method. As indicated in the color map, if the
clutter is not properly rejected even after the clutter filtering, it
is shown as a green color not only in the tissue region but also in
the flow region. Under visual assessments, it is clearly noted that
the ACR-FB and ACR-SA methods outperformed the STA and
ACR-DM method in removing nonstationary clutter, i.e., less
greenish colors at the upper side of the images indicated as “A”
in Fig. 5(a)–(d), since they utilized the clutter filters with higher
cutoff frequencies (i.e., PI-IIR3 and PI-IIR4) as shown in Fig. 6.

60

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 6. Selected clutter filters for (a) ACR-FB and (b) ACR-SA methods in
the phantom experiments.
TABLE II
FRCA (MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION) OBTAINED BY APPLYING THE STA,
ACR-DM, ACR-FB, AND ACR-SA FOR PHANTOM AND In Vivo ABDOMINAL
DATA

ACR-DM suppressed more clutter than the STA method, but a
significant amount of clutter was still remained. It must be noted
that, in the flow region indicated as “B” in Fig. 6, while clutter
filters with higher cutoff frequencies (i.e., PI-IIR2, PI-IIR3, and
PI-IIR4) were utilized in ACR-FB, they were only applied in
vessel walls in the proposed ACR-SA method.
For quantitative comparison, the mean and standard deviation
FRCA values on 20 frames were computed and summarized in
Table II. As listed in Table II, ACR-DM can remove more clutter than the STA method (i.e., 3.7% versus 5.4%, respectively).
From the ACR-FB and ACR-SA methods, higher clutter rejection was achieved. Compared to STA, the improvements were
from 2.3% and 2.1% to 5.4% for the ACR-FB and ACR-SA
methods, respectively. To compute the SCR values, the power
Doppler images were first generated as shown in Fig. 7, and then,
the flow and tissue regions were determined as indicated as “B”
and “A,” respectively. The tissue region (i.e., “A” in Fig. 7) was
chosen since a significant amount of tissue movements were
introduced. The computed SCR values for four methods are
summarized in Table III. As listed in Table III, the ACR-FB
method oversuppressed the flow signal because the cutoff frequency of a clutter filter was only determined by using the TAF
value; thus, higher cutoff frequencies were used due to the induced tissue motion on flow regions. This can be more easily

Fig. 7. Prescan converted power Doppler images by (a) the static clutter filter
(STA), (b) down-mixing (ACR-DM), (c) adaptive clutter filter (ACR-FB), and
(d) proposed adaptive clutter rejection based on spectral analysis (ACR-SA)
methods.

TABLE III
SCR (MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION) IN DB OBTAINED BY APPLYING THE
STA, ACR-DM, ACR-FB, AND ACR-SA FOR PHANTOM
AND In Vivo ABDOMINAL DATA

recognized with the power Doppler images in Fig. 7. On the
other hand, the ACR-SA method improved SCR over the STA
and ACR-DM methods by 2.43 dB (p < 0.001) and 1.09 dB
(p < 0.001), respectively, since it can preserve slow flow

PARK et al.: NEW ADAPTIVE CLUTTER REJECTION BASED ON SPECTRAL ANALYSIS FOR ULTRASOUND COLOR DOPPLER IMAGING

61

Fig. 8. Prescan converted color Doppler images with frequency estimates and its residual clutter area from the abdominal in vivo experiment before applying
frequency and power thresholding obtained by (a) STA, (b) ACR-DM, (c) ACR-FB, and (d) ACR-SA methods, respectively.

components by adequately selecting the cutoff frequencies in
the flow region.
The limitation in the presented phantom experiments is that
the nonstationary clutter was introduced by manually tapping
over the flow phantom surface; thus, the motion cannot be quantified. If a mechanical device oscillating with the specific frequencies is utilized to induce the motion, the effectiveness of
the proposed method can be more clearly ascertained. However,
since, in practice, the tissue movements are typically unknown,
the presented phantom experiments would be sufficient to evaluate the performance of the proposed method compared to other
methods.
B. In Vivo Abdominal Study
For in vivo study, the complex baseband data were acquired
from the liver of five volunteers since it typically presents strong
nonstationary tissue motions from heart movements and respiration. As a result, it is challenging for an effective clutter rejection
and the subsequent flow estimation. Fig. 8 shows the prescan
converted color Doppler images (left panel) with flow estimates

by using the STA, ACR-DM, ACR-FB, and ACR-SA methods,
respectively. Also, to clearly visualize the residual clutter area,
the images before applying the power and velocity thresholding
were obtained along with the images of residual clutter (right
panel). The parameters used in ACR-FB and ACR-SA were
identical to those used in the phantom experiments. Depending
on the analyzed clutter and flow characteristics, the selected
clutter filters for the ACR-FB and ACR-SA methods varied and
they are displayed in Fig. 9. As can be seen in Fig. 8(a) and (b),
STA exhibited difficulty in removing nonstationary clutter [“C”
and “D” in Fig. 8(a)], while ACR-DM provided higher clutter
rejection but it still introduces some residual clutter in the deep
portion of imaging area [“D” in Fig. 8(b)], close to the heart.
On the other hand, both the ACR-FB and ACR-SA methods effectively removed most of clutter as shown in Fig. 8(c)
and (d). However, the ACR-FB method produced a bias in flow
estimation in “E” in Fig. 8(c), compared to the other methods, since the cutoff frequency in the ACR-FB method was
only determined by the TAF value. The clutter filters with
higher cutoff frequencies were applied due to the bias from high
amplitude flow components in the flow region indicated as “F”

62

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014

Fig. 9. Selected clutter filters for (a) ACR-FB and (b) ACR-SA methods in
the in vivo experiments.
TABLE IV
P -VALUES BETWEEN ACR-SA AND OTHER METHODS (I.E., STA, ACR-DM,
AND ACR-FB)

and “G” in Fig. 9(a). Thus, the lower part of flow components
in the backscattered Doppler signal was filtered out and the
higher frequency components remained, resulting in higher velocity estimates compared to the other method. This can be
clearly shown with the power Doppler images that are shown in
Fig. 10. As shown in Fig. 10(c), the considerable amount of the
Doppler signal was removed in “E” from the ACR-FB method,
while the proposed the ACR-SA method, in which clutter filters
with lower cutoff frequencies are utilized as show in Fig. 9(b),
preserved the flow signal.
For quantitatively analyzing the residual clutter, the FRCA
values were also measured from five cases and summarized in
Table II. As listed in Table II, the ACR-FB and ACR-SA produced the similar FRCA values, and they can provide higher
clutter rejection compared to the STA and ACR-DM methods.
The ACR-FB and ACR-SA methods showed less than 1% FRCA
values for all the cases. Similar to the phantom study, the SCR
values were measured and summarized in Table III. The p-values
(ACR-SA versus STA, ACR-DM, and ACR-FB) are also summarized in Table IV. In this evaluation, the ACR-SA method
provided higher SCR values for all cases as listed in Table III.
The average improvements by ACR-SA were, respectively, 4.97
and 3.39 dB over the STA and ACR-DM methods. Compared
to the STA method, it could achieve statistically significant improvement in SCR (p < 0.05) except “Case 5.” For “Case 5,”
the tissue motions caused by heart pulsation and respiration

Fig. 10. Prescan converted power Doppler images by (a) STA, (b) ACR-DM,
(c) ACR-FB, and (d) ACR-SA methods.

were not severely introduced; thus, there was no statistically
significant difference between the methods (p > 0.05).
The ACR-FB method achieved the similar clutter suppression with the proposed ACR-SA method, but it excessively
suppressed the flow signal when the considerable tissue motion
close to flow areas was introduced, as demonstrated in Figs. 8(c)
and 10(c). The average improvements from the ACR-FB
method over the STA and ACR-DM methods were 3.11 and
1.54 dB, respectively. The ACR-SA method enhanced SCR
by 1.85 dB compared to the ACR-FB method, but only two
cases (i.e., “Case 1” and “Case 2”) were statistically significant
(p < 0.05) since the clutter characteristics vary from a case to a
case and a frame to a frame. However, from these preliminary
results, it can be ascertained that the proposed ACR-SA method
can provide enhanced clutter rejection (i.e., lower FRCA) while
providing improved sensitivity (i.e., higher SCR) in CDI when
a considerable amount of nonstationary tissue movements is
introduced.

PARK et al.: NEW ADAPTIVE CLUTTER REJECTION BASED ON SPECTRAL ANALYSIS FOR ULTRASOUND COLOR DOPPLER IMAGING

From the phantom and in vivo study, it was demonstrated
that the proposed ACR-SA could improve image quality in CDI
by providing enhanced rejection of nonstationary clutter and
preserving the slow flow components. Previously, the ACR-FB
method was implemented on the programmable ultrasound system, in which two MAP-CA processors (Equator Technologies
Inc., Campbell, CA, USA) were utilized, and it was found that
the ACR-FB method can be operated in real time for most
imaging depths (i.e., >40 mm) [21]. However, in the proposed
ACR-SA method, the additional processing block (i.e., SVD) is
required for analyzing tissue and flow characteristics, compared
to the ACR-FB method. The computation time for an SVD of an
m × m matrix R in (1) is 4m3 and 8m3 for Σ and V T , respectively [22]. This computational complexity can be absorbed in
modern ultrasound imaging systems where high-performance
digital signal processors or graphic processing units are utilized [23].
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a new ACR-SA for suppressing nonstationary clutter. From the phantom and in vivo abdominal experiments, the proposed ACR-SA method outperformed
in removing nonstationary clutter while providing higher sensitivity in flow estimates compared to the other methods, i.e.,
STA, ACR-DM, and ACR-FB. These results indicate that the
proposed ACR-SA method can improve image quality in ultrasound CDI when strong tissue motions are introduced.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Torp, “Clutter rejection filters in color flow imaging: A theoretical
approach,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 44,
no. 2, pp. 417–424, Mar. 1997.
[2] J. A. Jensen, Estimation of Blood Velocities Using Ultrasound. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999, pp. 195–226.
[3] J. Bailey, R. O. Bude, and T. Tuthill, “US artifacts: Effects on out-of-plane
US images reconstructed from three-dimensional data sets,” Radiology,
vol. 21, pp. 592–597, 2001.
[4] E. S. Chornoboy, “Initialization for improved IIR filter performance,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 543–550, Mar. 1992.
[5] A. P. Kadi and T. Loupas, “On the performance of regression and step initialized IIR clutter filters for color Doppler systems in diagnostic medical
ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 42,
no. 5, pp. 927–937, Sep. 1995.
[6] S. Bjaerum, H. Torp, and K. Kristoffersen, “Clutter filter design for ultrasound color Doppler imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 204–216, Jun. 2002.

63

[7] A. Herment, G. Demoment, and P. Dumee, “Improved estimation of low
velocities in color Doppler imaging by adapting the mean frequency estimator to the clutter rejection filter,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 43,
no. 9, pp. 919–927, Sep. 1996.
[8] Y. Yoo, R. Managuli, and Y. Kim, “Adaptive clutter filtering for ultrasound
color flow imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 29, pp. 1311–1320, 2003.
[9] L. Thomas and A. Hall, “An improvement wall filter for flow imaging of
low velocity flow,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 1994, pp. 1701–1704.
[10] P. J. Brands, A. P. G. Hoeks, and R. S. Reneman, “The effect of echo suppression on the mean velocity estimation range of the RF cross-correlation
model estimator,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 49, pp. 945–959, 1995.
[11] L. A. F. Ledoux, P. J. Breands, and A. P. G. Hoeks, “Reduction of the clutter component in Doppler ultrasound signals based in singular value decomposition: A simulation study,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 19, pp. 1–
18, 1997.
[12] S. Bjaerum, H. Torp, and K. Kristoffersen, “Clutter filters adapted to
tissue motion in ultrasound color flow imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason.,
Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 693–704, Jun. 2002.
[13] D. E. Kruse and K. W. Ferrara, “A new high resolution color flow system using an eigendecomposition-based adaptive filter for clutter rejection,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 49, no. 10,
pp. 1739–1754, Oct. 2002.
[14] A. C. Yu and R. S. Cobbold, “Single-ensemble-based eigen-processing
methods for color flow imaging–Part I. The Hankel-SVD filter,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 559–572,
Mar. 2008.
[15] A. C. Yu and L. Lovstakken, “Eigen-based clutter filter design for ultrasound color flow imaging: A review,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr.
Freq. Control, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1096–1111, May 2010.
[16] Y. Yoo and Y. Kim, “Adaptive clutter rejection for 3D color Doppler imaging: Preliminary clinical study,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 34, pp. 1221–
1231, 2008.
[17] Y. Yoo and Y. Kim, “New adaptive clutter rejection for ultrasound color
Doppler imaging: In vivo study,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 36, pp. 480–
487, 2010.
[18] Y. Yoo and Y. Kim, “New adaptive clutter rejection based on spectral
analysis in ultrasound color-flow imaging,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 2, 2004, pp. 1337–1340.
[19] F. Forsberg, “On the usefulness of singular value decomposition-ARMA
models in Doppler ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 418–428, Sep. 1991.
[20] H. Anton and R. C. Busby, Contemporary Linear Algebra. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2003, ch. 8.
[21] Y. Yoo, “Three-dimensional ultrasound imaging for blood flow and tissue,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 2007.
[22] G. H. Golub and C. Reinsch, “Singular value decomposition and least
squares solutions,” Numer. Math., vol. 14, pp. 403–420, 1970.
[23] M. V. Romer, “Computing the singular value decomposition in parallel
on graphic processing units using a one-sided Jacobi method,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Amer., vol. 133, p. 3614, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

