IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

725

Noncontact Accurate Measurement of
Cardiopulmonary Activity Using a Compact
Quadrature Doppler Radar Sensor
Wei Hu∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Zhangyan Zhao, Yunfeng Wang, Haiying Zhang,
and Fujiang Lin, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The designed sensor enables accurate reconstruction
of chest-wall movement caused by cardiopulmonary activities, and
the algorithm enables estimation of respiration, heartbeat rate,
and some indicators of heart rate variability (HRV). In particular, quadrature receiver and arctangent demodulation with calibration are introduced for high linearity representation of chest
displacement; 24-bit ADCs with oversampling are adopted for
radar baseband acquisition to achieve a high signal resolution;
continuous-wavelet filter and ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD) based algorithm are applied for cardio/pulmonary
signal recovery and separation so that accurate beat-to-beat interval can be acquired in time domain for HRV analysis. In addition,
the wireless sensor is realized and integrated on a printed circuit board compactly. The developed sensor system is successfully
tested on both simulated target and human subjects. In simulated
target experiments, the baseband signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is
73.27 dB, high enough for heartbeat detection. The demodulated
signal has 0.35% mean squared error, indicating high demodulation linearity. In human subject experiments, the relative error
of extracted beat-to-beat intervals ranges from 2.53% to 4.83%
compared with electrocardiography (ECG) R-R peak intervals.
The sensor provides an accurate analysis for heart rate with the
accuracy of 100% for p = 2% and higher than 97% for p = 1%.
Index Terms—Arctangent demodulation, cardiopulmonary,
Doppler radar, heart rate variability (HRV), noncontact.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE ability of remotely sensing vital signs such as heartbeat
and respiration is particularly useful in situations where
contact electrodes are impractical or inconvenient. Compared
with traditional ways such as electrocardiography (ECG) or
photoplethysmography (PPG), noncontact detection technology

T

Manuscript received August 29, 2013; revised October 19, 2013; accepted
October 23, 2013. Date of publication November 4, 2013; date of current version February 14, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ W. Hu is with the Department of Electronic Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail: huwei@
mail.ustc.edu.cn).
Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, and H. Zhang are with the Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Department, Institute of Microelectronics of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: zhaozhangyan@ime.ac.cn; wangyunfeng@
ime.ac.cn; zhanghaiying@ime.ac.cn).
F. Lin is with the Department of Electronic Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail:
linfj@ustc.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2288319

has advantages for using in sleep apnea monitoring, sudden infant death syndrom (SIDS) monitoring, fatigue monitoring, inhospital monitoring, and home healthcare. Previous efforts with
related theoretical explains have demonstrated that microwave
Doppler radar has potential to provide a practical tool for noncontact detecting cardiopulmonary activity [1]–[4].
Doppler radar sensor provides a remote sensing operating
mode that is demanded in many occasions [2], [3]. For healthcare applications, the radar sensor systems are designed to work
without interfering the user’s daily routine; freeing the users
from the inconveniences of being attached to electrode makes
it very user-friendly. Compared with other noncontact sensing technology such as ultrasound or infrared, the microwave
Doppler radar aims to provide three main advantages: being able
to penetrate clothing, bedding, or other nonmetallic obstacles;
not sensitive to environment factors such as light and temperature; and having the potential to be integrated using low-cost
silicon CMOS technology.
As one family of sensor systems, continuous-wave (CW)
Doppler radar is widely used in research lately. CW radar is
simply in structure and can be considered as a phase detector. Quadrature CW radar with I/Q channel demodulation has
been proposed to alleviate the null point problem occurring in
direct-conversion single-channel receiver by Droitcour et al. [4];
compact sensor system with integrated CW radar transceiver is
described in [5] and [6]. Li and Lin [7] have proposed a method
to eliminate the false alarm caused by random body movement
using CW radar sensors; to achieve robust performance, various
advanced digital signal processing methods are studied for cardiopulmonary information extraction [8]–[10]. Recently, much
interest has been paid to the topics on how to achieve high detection accuracy so that cardiopulmonary activities including
not only heart and respiration rate but also heart rate variability
(HRV) and respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) indicators can
be extracted. Results presented by Massagram et al. [11] have
shown that using a quadrature Doppler radar system with a linear demodulation method provides fairly accurate analysis for
HRV and RSA. In special application, highly directive antenna
or antenna array approach is induced to increase selectivity and
decrease sensitivity to clutter [12].
However, in real applications, antennas with small size but
relatively low gain such as printed circuit board (PCB) antennas is preferred, and in this case, heartbeat signal power at
baseband is relatively small, easy to be affected by noise, clutter, intermodulation interference, and respiration harmonics. In

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

726

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Doppler radar front-end block diagram.

addition, some of the potential problems exist when developing
the technology into real applications. Main challenges can be
summarized as follows for accurate cardiopulmonary sensing in
particular:
1) Reconstruction of chest wall movement with high linearity
and accuracy. It is the source information for physiology
activities analysis;
2) Recovery and separation of the heartbeat and respiration
signal and removal of the interference signal caused by
body motion and background while the signal processing
algorithm being robust for measuring abnormal physiological activities;
3) Extraction of cardiopulmonary information useful in
healthcare or other applications from a human subject,
such as variation of the HR, although the heartbeat waveform from radar is not as sharp as ECG or PPG.
The intent of this paper is to study these problems and introduce specialized hardware and signal processing techniques to
ameliorate their disruptive effects.
II. QUADRATURE DOPPLER RADAR SENSOR SYSTEM
Doppler radar sensing technology is based on the fact that a
portion of the transmitted microwave signal backscattered off
the subject is phase-modulated by the torso movement due to the
Doppler effect. It is the subject’s body surface reflections that
dominate the radar measurements of cardiopulmonary activities
[13]. Then, the information can be extracted by processing the
radar echo signal.
A. Doppler Radar Front End
In CW Doppler radar with homodyne receiver, the same oscillator is used to provide both the receiver’s local oscillator and
the transmitted signal. A quadrature receiver configuration was
adopted for Doppler radar front-end in this paper. I/Q channel
demodulation with calibration method was proposed to alleviate
the null point problem and acquire an accurate phase demodulation result with high linearity. Fig. 1 shows the block diagram
of radar front end with signal flow.
The target, at a distance of d0 from the antenna, has a periodic displacement x(t), which is mainly caused by respiration
and heart activity. The transmitted signal T (t) travels a total
distance of 2d(t) = 2(x(t)+d0 ) and becomes the received signal R(t). The receiver captures and down-converts the signal

by comparing the phase of the reflected wave with the LO(t).
In quadrature receiver configuration, two orthonormal components at the baseband are obtained, namely, BI (t) and BQ (t).
The baseband signal is proportional to the cosine or sine of a
constant phase shift θ, which is determined by hardware and
d0 , summed with a time-varying phase shift proportional to the
time-varying chest motion x(t), and with the residual phase
noise Δψ(t). The two receiver output channels will be


4πx(t)
+ Δψ(t)
BI (t) = AB cos θ +
λ


4πx(t)
BQ (t) = AB sin θ +
+ Δψ(t) .
(1)
λ
When only one-channel signal is chosen for demodulation,
the sensitivity will vary with the target’s distance because θ
changes. For example, if θ is an integer multiple of π, the I
signal will be in null point where the demodulation sensitivity is
low, and the Q signal will be at an optimum phase demodulation
point. Quadrature receiver together with arctangent demodulation can solve the null point problem. The digital signal processing begins with two-channel combination; the baseband outputs
of I/Q channels together provide the demodulated phase, which
is proportional to the target movement x(t). For x(t), in theory,
the maximum chest-wall displacement due to heartbeat is about
0.5 mm [14], and the displacement caused by respiration ranges
from 4 to 12 mm [15]. When there is a case that the maximal
heartbeat motion be detected, the chest wall motion will cause
56◦ –167◦ phase shift for Doppler radar operating in 5.8 GHz.
Then, the cardiopulmonary information can be identified by
processing the demodulated signal.
This is the basis for cardiopulmonary sensing. However, additional challenges are introduced when the subject is not at rest
or the antenna is not facing the location of and in the direction
of maximum chest motion. In addition, the maximal heartbeat
motion occurs over a very small area on the body surface, and
the area in motion varies with individual physiology, shape, and
orientation with respect to the antenna. So the proportion of
the contribution of heartbeat signal in x(t) changes largely with
range, direction, target position etc. The radar sensor system
should have a high baseband signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in order to ensure that the heartbeat signal won’t be submerged by
noise.
In this paper, a compact Doppler radar sensor with quadrature
receiver is designed and fabricated on a PCB. Beside two 7 dBi
patch antennas, the radar sensor used the following commercially available components: one LNA (Hittite HMC717), one
MMIC I/Q mixer (Hittite HMC620), one power splitter (MiniCircuits SCN-2–65+), and one oscillator (Hittite HMC358). It
operated at 5.8 GHz with 7.5 dBm power level at the transmitter
antenna. The receiver has a relatively low gain, about 5 dB, and
the output of radar front end are two-channel IF signals.
B. Analog Signal Processing
The analog signal processing (ASP) block that follows the
radar front end consists of several filters, amplifiers, and ADCs.
In real applications, respiration signal is much larger than

HU et al.: NONCONTACT ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF CARDIOPULMONARY ACTIVITY

heartbeat, and the dc offset at baseband may be variable and
greater than the respiration signal. So both large dynamic range
and high resolution are required at the same time in order to acquire useful information. The signal at baseband tends to have
a high dc level and a low ac level. ASP should have a low
gain to prevent overload, and thus, it would be interesting to
explore the use of high-resolution ADC so that the baseband
signal can be digitized with enough resolution. This will help
to eliminate the need for dc blocking circuit or high-pass filters,
which require use of large capacitors and may cause amplitude
or phase imbalance. The high-resolution ADC would also enable the subtraction of dc offsets and I/Q imbalance calibration
in digital domain so that the information near dc is preserved;
the arctangent combining technique would not result in the errors seen when using high-pass filters, thus resulting in more
accurate phase demodulation.
In this paper, each channel is filtered, amplified, and digitally
acquired independently. The ASP block has a total 20 dB gain to
improve radar range. Only low-pass filter is used to each channel for antialiasing. After filters and amplifiers, two channels of
24-bit ADCs are adopted. In addition, the ADCs are configured at sampling rate of 12.8 kHz and then the signals are
down-sampled to 50 Hz; the oversampling technique is applied
for 256 times in order to get 4-bit ENOB improvement. The
components used include amplifiers (Analog Devices AD8221,
AD8628) and 24-bit ADC (Texas Instrument ADS1251).
C. Quadrature Signal Demodulation
Demodulation sensitivity variation with the target’s distance
can be solved by using a quadrature receiver and arctangent
demodulation since it overcomes target position limitation and
small angle limitation [4]. However, challenges inherent in the
homodyne quadrature architecture—phase imbalance, amplitude imbalance, and dc offset—impede the arctangent technique
to directly demodulate the phase.
For quadrature channel imbalance, the amplitude error AE is
defined as the ratio of the amplitude of the Q RF signal to that of
the I RF signal. The phase error φE is defined as the difference
between the phases of the two LO signals minus π/2. DC offsets
in the quadrature channels act as a linear transform on I and Q
components, refer to VI and VQ . With these nonidealities, the
baseband signals become
BI (t) = VI + AR cos(θ(t))
BQ (t) = VQ + AR AE sin(θ(t) + φE ).

(2)

If the channel imbalance factors are known, the Gram–
Schmidt procedure can be used to correct imbalance errors [2].
DC offset of each channel is caused by imperfections in circuit
components and reflections from stationary objects, as well as
the dc information associated with target’s position required for
accurate demodulation [16]. Since the dc information should be
preserved, high-pass filter or dc blocking cannot be used. And
it should be noted that once the distance between target and
radar or environment changed, the dc offset will also change,
thus requiring calibration again. As for imbalance errors, they
are mainly caused by radar hardware, and since the baseband

727

Fig. 2. Complex plot of I channel, Q channel, and their arctangent demodulation before and after calibration.

signals are nonstationary and random, special method is also
required to estimate the imbalance errors. In this paper, these
factors are calibrated in two steps:
The first step is hardware calibration. I/Q imbalance errors
and dc offset caused by imperfections in circuit components
are calculated from special measurement and are removed. It
is executed only once. When the baseband I and Q outputs
are plotted on I/Q-plane, their imperfect factors can be clearly
seen. Assuming that there is only one source of moving target
and the target’s motion is much bigger than half wavelength,
that is, 2.58 cm at 5.8 GHz (a half-wavelength change in range
can cause 2π phase change), the complex plot of I and Q channel forms an ellipse. The center offset of the ellipse indicates
the two channels’ dc offsets, and the rotation and length difference between the two axes indicates the amplitude error AE
and phase error φE . For real radar system, take the impact of
baseband signal amplitude into consideration, AR is inversely
proportional to d2 (t) based on radar equation. So the complex
plot of I/Q will form spiral-like curves. The curves have different radii that indicate the signal amplitude AR but same center
point. I/Q plot of an example signal with these nonideal factors
are shown in Fig. 2(a); the simulation used the example signal
with 20 cm displacement, so there were 20/2.58 ≈ 7.75 cycles;
their arctangent demodulated output is shown in Fig. 2(b). The
center offset of the ellipse is easy to find; then in order to calculate AE , pick up one ellipse curve, seen as a Lissajous Figure,
as shown in Fig. 2(a), and find the width A and height B; thus,
AE equals B/A. C is the distance between two joints that is
decided by the centerline parallel to I-axis and the ellipse, the
φE can be calculated as arcsine (C/A). Although the curve is
not actually closed, the VI , VQ , AE and φE are calculated with
error less than 0.8% in simulation. After this procedure, we
could bring back the center offset to the origin by substrate the

728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

VI and VQ from BI and BQ and then use the Gram–Schmidt
technique [17] to estimate the amplitude and phase errors. The
orthonormal basis vectors BI ,orth , BQ ,orth will be

 


1
0
BI ,orth
BI − VI
=
. (3)
1
− tan(φE ) A E cos(φ
BQ ,orth
BQ − VQ
E )
The I/Q plot of calculated baseband signal and its arctangent demodulated output are shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d); the
demodulated signal shows a good linearity. In real calibration,
for collecting the data, the target (human subject or a metal
plane instead) in front of radar antenna should move within a
reasonable range and create a long enough displacement such
as 20 cm.
The second step is dynamic dc offset compensation. Center estimate algorithm is applied to compensation the dc offset
caused by the often uncontrolled changes of environment in
which the measurements are performed. Although the dc offset
maybe small for most of time, the compensation will help to
enhance the demodulation linearity and make the radar system
suitable for moving target. For 5.8 GHz radar system, 4–12 mm
displacement caused by respiration will produce 56◦ –167◦ phase
shift. So the arc length caused by one cycle of respiration is
enough for center estimating. Thus, we choose to use ten seconds of baseband data for processing. In the center estimate
algorithm, we approximate scattered points by a circle with radius R, calculate the minimum variance of R, which indicates
the circle center points. The objective function we use is variance of R. Given n points (xi , yi ), 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the objective
function is
 n
2
n
1 
1 2
R − 2
Ri
(4)
F =
n i=1 i
n
i=1
where Ri is the distance from the point (xi , yi ) to the center
(a, b). Find the minimum of F iteratively; when the acceptable
accuracy is obtained, the center point (a, b) is calculated from the
minimum of F . After that the center is brought back to the origin
and then quadrature signals forming the arc centered at origin in
complex plot are combined by using arctangent demodulation.
The target displacement can be recovered by simply unwrapping
the demodulated phase signal



BQ ,orth − b
λ
× unwrap arctan
. (5)
x(t) =
4π
BI ,orth − a
D. Cardiopulmonary Information Extraction
The digital signal processing method we used for cardiopulmonary sensing is based on wavelet filter and ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD). The flowchart of the algorithm is shown in Fig. 3.
Utilizing arctangent demodulation, I/Q channels can be converted to the net spatial displacement of the object detected. The
signal we acquired is the target’s chest movement combined with
other unwanted clutter. To find the useful information such as
heartbeat and respiration, we started from signal decomposing
and denoising. Classic filters allow extracting the heartbeat rate
by looking at the frequency components of the signal. However,
they do not allow the extraction of the HRV. As the heartbeat

Fig. 3.

Digital signal processing method for cardiopulmonary sensing.

signal is nonstationary and has relatively sharp peaks, wavelet
transform (WT) is an ideal choice for its analysis. Wavelets
provide excellent time resolution for rapid events such as heartbeats and good frequency resolution for slower events such as
respiration.
The continuous WT (CWT) is employed in this paper that can
be viewed as processing the demodulated signal using a bank
of filters applied successively. Daubechies wavelet was chosen
as the mother wavelet because of its accuracy after thorough
experimentation results. The application of the wavelet filter
decomposes the demodulated signal into a series of components,
and for each decomposition levels, the coefficients can be either
set to zero or reduced in magnitude, such that a particular feature
of the signal is affected upon reconstruction. The high-frequency
(HF) components are used for heartbeat signal recovery and
the low-frequency (LF) components for respiration recovery. A
moving average filter is then applied to each signal, thus the
heartbeat and respiration signal are reconstructed.
However, wavelets alone cannot always find every heartbeat
with clearly seen peaks, so peak detecting method cannot provide a fairly accurate analysis for HR. Recently, the empirical
mode decomposition (EMD) [18] has been used to process nonstationary signals and is applied in many related fields. The
EEMD algorithm is proposed as a noise-assisted data analysis
method for solving the EMD-mode mixing and other problems [19]. The EEMD algorithm provides an exact reconstruction of the original signal and a better spectral separation of the
modes. Therefore, in this paper, EEMD is applied for further
analysis of the heartbeat signal after wavelet filter. If x[n] is
the targeted data, we can describe the EEMD method by the
following algorithm:
1) Add a white noise series to x[n].
2) Fully decompose the data with added white noise into a
small number of intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) using
EMD.

HU et al.: NONCONTACT ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF CARDIOPULMONARY ACTIVITY

3) Repeat steps 1) and 2) with several realizations of Gaussian white noise added to the original signal.
4) Obtain the means of corresponding IMFs of the decompositions as the final result.
Then, we choose to use certain IMFs, combining them to
form a more accurate heartbeat signal.
After cardiopulmonary signal extraction, we use zerocrossing detectors to acquire the beat-to-beat intervals of heartbeat and respiration signals. Time-domain analysis can be done
after this step.
HRV is a useful indicator to quantitatively measure physiological changes during treatment. HRV assessment stands out
as one of the most promising methods for the future of general health evaluation [11]. ECG is traditionally considered the
standard way to measure the beat-to-beat intervals that are the
source information for HRV analysis. In this paper, HRV analysis of heartbeat signal extracted from Doppler radar is done and
the results are compared to the HRV indices calculated from
ECG. The beat-to-beat intervals and their Bland and Altman
analysis are observed in the experiment, and two time-domain
HRV indices, the standard deviation of normal-to-normal intervals (SDNN), the root-mean-square successive difference of
intervals (RMSSD) are calculated. The interval between beats is
denoted as δ(n) for n ∈{1, . . ., N }, where N is the total number
of intervals and δ is the average beat-to-beat interval and then
the SDNN and RMSSD are determined as
	


N

1 

2
SDNN = 
δ(n) − δ
(6)
N n =1
	




RMSSD = 

N
1 
[δ(n) − δ(n − 1)]2 .
N − 1 n =2

(7)

The power spectra of HRV are calculated as described by
Wong et al. [20]. From spectral analysis, two frequency bands
were considered: LF band and HF band. The two band spectral power, LFP and HFP, are calculated by using the frequency
ranges of 0.045–0.15 and 0.15–0.40 Hz, respectively. The LF
and HF oscillatory components are presented in absolute (milliseconds square, ms2 ) units.
Finally, the heartbeat and respiration rate can be calculated
by convert the beat-to-beat intervals to instantaneous rate, and
the heart rate is obtained by averaging the instantaneous rate
over 15 s so that the output result is smoothed.
E. Doppler Radar Sensor System Design and
Experiment Device
The schematic of the radar sensor system and the measurement setup are shown in Fig. 4.
The size of the radar module with patch antenna facing outward is 3.3 cm × 7 cm. The ASP circuit, 24-bit ADC, Blue
Tooth module (CSR HC05) and the dc–dc converter circuit are
integrated in a single PCB board with the size of 6 cm × 7 cm.
The two PCBs as the radar sensor has compact size that is suitable for handheld applications. The Bluetooth module was used
to transmit the two-channel baseband signals to computer wire-

Fig. 4.

729

Schematic of radar sensor system and the experiment setup.
TABLE I
POWER CONSUMPTION FOR EACH BUILDING BLOCK

lessly so that the radar sensor is more convenience to use for
experiment. The software to collect and process the data was
written in MATLAB.
For the signal processing validation part, a simulated target
with a metal plate (mimics human skin) facing the radar system
is proposed for representing the cardiopulmonary activity. The
simulated target can be programmed by a computer to move
with a certain model such as the waveform shown in the right
side of Fig. 4.
For power supply circuit, components used include dc–dc
converter 12–6 V (Texas Instrument TPS5430) and LDO 6–5
and 6–3 V (Analog Devices ADP3339). The total current of
the compact sensor system is 126 mA with the supply voltage
12 V. The power consumption for each building block is listed
in Table I. As it can be seen, the power was mainly consumed
by the 5.8 GHz radar front end.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Numerical experiments are performed to demonstrate the advantages of signal processing techniques used in the paper for
noncontact cardiopulmonary sensing. Demodulation linearity is
first measured by using the simulated target. Then, human cardiopulmonary sensing results were compared with the reference
signals: ECG and respiration signals from piezoelectric sensors
on upper torso.
A. SNR and Demodulation Linearity
Before we apply our signal processing method to real cardiopulmonary signal analysis, we first analyze the performance
of the designed quadrature radar sensor system and I/Q demodulation linearity by using the simulated target. The simulated
target is first programmed to move with a period of 1 Hz and
amplitude of 4 mm. When it was 50 cm away from the radar
sensor, the power spectrum for one channel is shown in Fig. 5(a).

730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 5. (a) Baseband signal spectra with or without a 1 Hz period, 4 mm
amplitude target at 50 cm distance. The noise floor obtained by averaging the
noise power over frequencies higher than 10 Hz measured without target motion
is − 78 dBmV and the SNR is 73.27 dB. (b) Relationship between distance and
the radar baseband SNR.

Fig. 6. Relationship between displacement of target and baseband SNR measured at the distance of 1 m using 1 Hz sine wave.

The noise floor obtained by averaging the noise power over frequencies higher than 10 Hz is − 78 dBmV. The SNR of the signal
that is defined as the useful signal power at 1 Hz (22.99 dB, as
the solid line shows) over average noise power measured without target (− 50.28 dB, as the dotted line shows) is 73.27 dB.
Using the same method, the baseband SNR varies with distance
can be obtained. As it is shown in Fig. 5(b), the SNR is unstable
at the distance less than 20 cm for antenna near-field effect. The
SNR is above 20 dB with the distance less than 6 m, and above
50 dB with the distance within 2 m.
Another experiment also configured the simulated target in
1 Hz sine wave, but at a distance of 1 m and with different
amplitudes varying from 5.4 mm to 5.4 μm (with a down step
of 3 dB). Using the same method, the baseband SNRs were
calculated. Fig. 6 shows the relationship between displacement
and the SNR. As it can be seen, for radar front end operating
at the distance of 1 m, the minimum detectable displacement is
about 0.01 mm with the SNR above zero.
For further analysis, the simulated target is programmed using
the heartbeat and respiration waveform model derived from real
people. The heartbeat movement is set with 1.25 Hz period and
0.8 mm amplitude, and respiration movement is set with 0.25 Hz
period and 6 mm amplitude. The simulated target at the distance

Fig. 7. Radar baseband signal and demodulation: (a) simulated target movement. (b) I and Q channel signal after dc offset compensation and I/Q imbalance errors calibration. (c) Complex plot of original and calibrated I/Q channel
signal. (d) Arctangent demodulated result.

of 50 cm combines the two movements to mimics a real subject
chest motion, and the waveform of it is shown in Fig. 7(a). Fig.
7(b)–(d) show the processing result for movement signal gathered by the radar sensor. As described earlier, the dc offset and
I/Q imbalance errors from hardware imperfect are calibrated
before the system put into use; then during the experiment, dc
offset caused by stationary objects reflection is calibrated using
the dynamic dc offset compensation method. The I and Q channel signals after two steps calibration are shown in Fig. 7(b). The
calculated estimation center is at (9.57, − 1.8) (mV) with radius
21.42 mV. One can find that the calibrated curve fits well with
the fitted circle of it, and this proves that the phase and amplitude
error is rather small after calibration and the center of the data
is moved to the origin accurately. Complex plot of 10 s original
and calibrated I/Q channel signal is shown in Fig. 7(c). At last,
we got the arctangent demodulated and unwrapped x(t) using
(5) as the demodulation signal, which is shown in Fig. 7(d). The
maximum amplitude of demodulation signal is about 6 mm that
corresponds with the target displacement. We can intuitively
tell from the result that the signal measured by radar sensor is
exactly consistent to the simulated target movement signal. The
arctangent demodulation with calibration provides high linearity
signal reconstruction. Compared to simulated target movement
signal in Fig. 7(a), the demodulated signal gives a mean squared
error (MSE) of 0.35%.
B. Human Cardiopulmonary Sensing Results
Ten healthy volunteers (25.9 ± 2.1 years, 170.7 ± 6.7 cm,
63.6 ± 9.7 kg, 5 males, and 5 females) were included in this
study. The volunteers were free of known cardiac, respiratory,
or any other diseases. The study was approved by the local
institutional ethical committee, and all the volunteers gave their
written informed consent.
In human cardiopulmonary sensing experiment, 4 min data
were recorded from each subject 0.5 m away from the radar
sensor, seating still and breathing normally. While gathering

HU et al.: NONCONTACT ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF CARDIOPULMONARY ACTIVITY

731

Fig. 8. Data recorded from an actual human subject. (a) In-phase baseband
signal. (b) Quadrature baseband signal. (c) Phase signal after applying the same
demodulation algorithm as earlier.

these data, one-channel ECG and one-channel respiration signal measured from upper torso using piezoelectric sensor are
also recorded synchronously from the subject. They are used as
reference signal to examine the accuracy of the extracted cardiopulmonary information. The two-channel reference signals
are recorded using a NI USB-6215 DAQ with a sampling rate
of 2000 Hz.
The example of the original reflected signal in radar baseband,
zoomed in 100 s time internal, is shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b). After demodulation, the phase signal shown in Fig. 8(c) contains
both heartbeat and respiration motion together with unwanted
clutter. From the demodulated signal, it is easy to read the respiration rate as its peaks and valleys are quite obvious, but the
heartbeat signal cannot be clearly observed from it. The signal
quality is highly varying and unreliable due to the uncontrolled
environment of body shaking in which the measurements are
performed. The real person’s heartbeat movement that can be
detected by radar is even smaller than 0.5 mm.
The demodulated phase signal is processed using wavelet
filters; moving average filters were then applied to both the
high-pass-filtered signals, which contain the heartbeat information and the low-frequency signal for respiration analysis. After
that we extracted the heartbeat and respiration waveform. The
examples of 30 s extracted heartbeat signal and ECG reference
signal are compared in Fig. 9(a), and 150 s extracted respiration signal and respiration reference signal are compared in
Fig. 9(b). The results show that the heartbeats superimposed on
the respiration can be decomposed with clearly seen peaks and
corresponds with the ECG signal using this technique, whereas
the respiration decomposed results also show a high consistency
with the reference signal.
The respiration rate can be simply calculated after zerocrossing detector with low relative error since it has big amplitude and long duration. The following will focus on HRV
analysis and heartbeat rate detection.
According to the signal processing method previously mentioned, the heartbeat signal was then processed using EEMD

Fig. 9. Extracted signal compared with reference signal. (a) Extracted heartbeat signal and ECG reference signal. (b) Extracted respiration signal and respiration reference signal.

Fig. 10. Estimated beat-to-beat intervals of filtered radar heartbeat signal and
the peak-to-peak intervals calculated from the ECG reference signal.

algorithm to improve its measurement accuracy. From one of
the subject, the beat-to-beat interval estimated after this processing is shown in Fig. 10, and it is compared with the peak-to-peak
intervals calculated from the ECG reference signal. The results
show that the estimated intervals consistent well with that of reference for all the 4 min data. The HRV analysis or time-domain
cardiopulmonary information extraction is possible in human
experiment.
The summary of the HRV analysis results from ten subjects is
listed in Table II. We define the relative error as the root-meansquare error (RMSE) over the mean value of intervals derived
from reference signal. The method of Bland and Altman [21]
is used to assess the agreement between the two signals. For
the Bland and Altman analyses, the Bias is the mean difference
between the two, SD is standard deviation of the difference,

732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

TABLE II
CORRELATION COEFFICIENT AND BLAND AND ALTMAN ANALYSIS OF BEAT-TO-BEAT INTERVALS AND THE RESULTS OF HRV INDICES
FROM DOPPLER RADAR AND ECG

TABLE III
AVERAGE HEART RATE MEASUREMENT RESULT

Fig. 11.

Heart rate estimation using 15 s data.

and the 95% limits of agreement is defined as follows: lower
limits of agreement (LL) = Bias – 1.96 SD, and upper limits
of agreement (UL) = Bias + 1.96 SD. If the differences within
Bias ± 1.96 SD are not clinically important, the two methods may be used interchangeably. In this experiment, to assess
the feasibility of HRV measurement via radar sensor, four HRV
indices were calculated from the beat-to-beat intervals and compared with ECG results.
The average values of beat-to-beat interval extracted from
radar sensor were similar to the average intervals extracted from
ECG. The relative error ranges from 2.53% to 4.83%. Most of
bias magnitudes and 95% limits of agreement were small. The
results obtained from the Bland and Altman analysis are in
agreement with those obtained from relative errors and suggest
that the radar heartbeat signal could be suitable to get beat-tobeat intervals as a surrogate of ECG R-R peak time intervals.
For HRV indices shown in Table II, all SDNNs of radar sensor
and ECG differed within − 1.5 to 15.5 ms2 , RMSSDs differed
within − 0.1 to 4.7 ms2 . However, the HF and LF results of some
subjects are not quite accurate compared with ECG results. One
out of ten subjects has LFs that differed more than ±35 ms2 ,
and five subjects have HFs not within ±42 ms2 .
The example of average heart rate measurement result is
shown in Fig. 11. The solid curve shows the radar-detected
heartbeat rate in beats per minute (bpm); the dotted line shows
the ECG reference heartbeat rate in bpm. Finally, the calculated
heart rate of the ten subjects is listed in Table III. Values are
expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Define the heart rate

accuracy as the percentage of time the detected rate is within ±
2% (presented as p = 2%) of the reference rate according to [22];
the results show that the accuracy is 100% for all subjects. And
when p = 1%, the accuracy is higher than 97%.
IV. DISCUSSION
The Doppler radar sensor system can provide noncontact cardiopulmonary monitoring, which is more easy for data collection and is certainly convenience for both the subject and the
examiner. Since signal obtained in Doppler radar sensor is equivalent to the chest-wall displacement signal, it is natural to ask
whether the cardiopulmonary information obtained from it can
be used as a surrogate of that obtained from traditional methods.
The developed Doppler radar sensor system has a compact
size and is portable and user friendly. It has a truly noncontact
operation capability and can penetrate clothing, whereas the
radiation power poses no threat to human safety. The sensor
system uses common seen electronic components so that it can
be considered as a low-cost solution for monitoring vital signs
in many applications such as home healthcare.
For Doppler radar sensor, experiment using simulated target
showed that the baseband has a high SNR to cope with the
change in the heartbeat amplitude. The 24-bit ADC was proved

HU et al.: NONCONTACT ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF CARDIOPULMONARY ACTIVITY

to have enough resolution that enabled the digitalization of baseband signal with both large dc offset and tiny heartbeat signal.
The demodulation linearity was high and tiny movement from
target can be reconstructed. In addition, based on this method,
the demodulated signal gives an absolute motion displacement
of the target. The amplitude and demodulation sensitivity will
not change with distance, so the acquired information has the
potential not only for heartbeat and respiration analysis, but also
useful when the amplitude of chest wall motion is of interest
in some studies. It should be noted that the nature chest wall
motion of a subject is hard to collect using traditional method.
The objective of these experiments using simulated target
was to demonstrate that the target’s chest wall movement can be
detected with reasonable accuracy for further analysis. The noise
from sensor hardware can be ignored. So, if there is clutter in the
reflected signal when the target is human subject, it was mainly
caused by body movement, body shaking or other background
moving target.
For digital signal processing, the wavelet filter and EEMD
method proved to be powerful in Doppler radar signal processing. The weak biosignals can be detected in time domain
using this method, which cannot be acquired using fast Fourier
transform (FFT) based methods. It has positive meanings when
considering that many physiological changes are measured in
time domain, such as instantaneous alteration in heart rate are
often measured during treatment. And thus, this method has
promising to be used in real applications such as general health
monitoring or early diagnosis of some diseases.
From the experiment, the Bland and Altman analysis suggests
that radar results correlated well with ECG R-R peak intervals.
The heart rates show that the sensor can provide an accurate
analysis for HR in all subjects. It suggests that the proposed
method can serve as an alternative to traditional rate monitor
and get used in hospital wards or other long time monitoring
applications to provide a more convenient measurement.
The result that some estimated HRV indices not consistent
well with reference results, especially for HF and LF values, is
probably related to the following aspects:
1) Different from ECG method, the beat-to-beat intervals
of radar signals are calculated from zero crossing of
the filtered waveform, thus resulting in some errors. The
Doppler radar heart signal does not exhibit a peak as sharp
as the ECG signal since it is a measurement of mechanical
motion of the chest wall, so the detection accuracy of ECG
or PPG methods cannot be reached by Doppler signal. The
results should be interpreted in such context.
2) The radar signal from human subjects may have nonlinear distortion by itself. The chest wall movement due to
respiration will certainly affect how the heart’s motion is
and cause the translation, rotation, and deformation of the
heart, thus resulting in a peak location shift at the skin
surface. But there are rarely known studies of skin surface
chest motion due to heart beat at different points in the respiration cycle, since most of detection method measured
heartbeat and respiration signals respectively.
3) The amplitude of respiration is more than 100 times larger
than the heartbeat in real applications, and the large ampli-

733

tude signal cannot be seriously filtered out in the following
procedure. In addition, Morgan and Zierdt [10] have found
that the respiration movement at the skin surface typically
has many significant harmonics, which affect the reliable
detection of the much smaller heartbeat signal. Respiration harmonics change the relationship of the peak location
and affect the HRV indices, especially HF and LF values.
This problem may be special for Doppler signal for its
simultaneous acquisition of breathing and heart rate.
4) Signal caused by body shaking has the same frequency
band as cardiopulmonary signal, which will affect the detection accuracy. The results from Massagram et al. [11]
have shown that the HR and HRV assessments from
Doppler radar were more accurate when the subjects were
in a supine position than in a seated position for the same
subjects. This reveals that the extracted heartbeat signal
may be influenced by tiny body movement or shaking,
which contributes to clutter within the interesting band.
The improvement of measurement accuracy requires better
processing algorithms. For instance, the paper will focus on
finding an optimal wavelet since the waveform extraction accuracy could be influenced by the choice of wavelet filters.
For EEMD algorithm, in future works, studies will be carried
out to determine a proper ensemble size and the added noise
amplitude.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, a method for noncontact cardiopulmonary sensing based on Doppler radar technique was proposed. The sensor
system was realized and integrated on a PCB. An algorithm
for the determination of the respiration and heartbeat features
was developed. The method was validated by experiments using
both simulated target and human subject.
Advantages of this method include the following: it is a truly
noncontact detection method, requiring no user initiative intervention, and the sensor system is compact; the quadrature
receiver used in radar front end ensured good recovery of chest
displacement without the null point problem; the demodulation algorithm with calibration method was proposed to provide
accurate and high linearity demodulation output. The wavelet
filters and EEMD method were adopted to extract heartbeat and
respiration waveforms with high accuracy. The human experiment results have shown that the sensor can provide an accurate
analysis for HR and fairly accurate interbeat times. The Doppler
radar sensor as a noncontact cardiopulmonary sensing method
has the potential to be used in sleep monitoring, infant monitoring, home healthcare [2], [11], or medical treatment application [23].
As this paper was mainly concerned with introducing accurate
measurement techniques, practical issues such as dynamic motion compensation were not discussed. Large body motion of the
subject overwhelms the small respiration and heartbeat signals,
making estimation of vital signs very difficult. We were not able
to obtain reliable results using the proposed method under these
conditions. Improvements in signal processing method may help
to inhibit noise and clutter or separate the stable segment from

734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

short interference signal, as well as getting the measurement results in real time. When considering the proper solution to cope
with the nonlinear superposition of cardiopulmonary signals,
the sensor configuration method can be studied. These are the
possibilities for future work.
REFERENCES
[1] K. M. Chen, D. Misra, H. Wang, H. R. Chuang, and E. Postow, “An
X-band microwave life-detection system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. BME-33, no. 7, pp. 697–702, Jul. 1986.
[2] C. Li and J. Lin, “Recent advances in Doppler radar sensors for pervasive healthcare monitoring,” in Proc. 22nd Asia-Pacific Microw. Conf.,
Yokohama, Japan, Dec. 2010, pp. 283–290.
[3] K. M. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, and A. Norman, “Microwave lifedetection systems for searching human subjects under earthquake rubble
and behind barrier,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 106–
114, Jan. 2000.
[4] A. D. Droitcour, O. Boric-Lubecke, V. M. Lubecke, J. Lin, and
G. T. A. Kovacs, “Range correlation and I/Q performance benefits in
single-chip silicon Doppler radars for noncontact cardiopulmonary monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 838–848,
Mar. 2004.
[5] J. H. Choi and D. K. Kim, “A remote compact sensor for the real-time
monitoring of human heartbeat and respiration rate,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 181–188, Jun. 2009.
[6] X. Yu, C. Li, and J. Lin, “System level integration of handheld wireless
non-contact vital sign detectors,” in Proc. IEEE Radio Wireless Symp.,
Jan. 2009, pp. 514–517.
[7] C. Li and J. Lin, “Random body movement cancellation in Doppler radar
vital sign detection,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 56, no. 12,
pp. 3143–3152, Dec. 2008.
[8] S. Bakhtiari, S. Liao, T. W. Elmer, N. Gopalsami, and A. C. Raptis, “A
real-time heart rate analysis for a remote millimeter wave I-Q sensor,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1839–1845, Jun. 2011.
[9] C. Li, J. Ling, J. Li, and J. Lin, “Accurate Doppler radar non-contact vital
sign detection using the RELAX algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 687–695, Mar. 2010.
[10] D. R. Morgan and M. G. Zierdt, “Novel signal processing techniques for
Doppler radar cardiopulmonary sensing,” Signal Process., vol. 89, no. 1,
pp. 45–66, Jan. 2009.
[11] W. Massagram, V. Lubecke, A. Host-Madsen, and O. Boric-Lubecke,
“Assessment of heart rate variability and respiratory sinus arrhythmia
via Doppler radar,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 57, no. 10,
pp. 2542–2549, Oct. 2009.
[12] C. Gu, Z. Salmani, H. Zhang, and C. Li, “Antenna array technology for
radar respiration measurement in motion-adaptive lung cancer radiotherapy,” in Proc. BioWireleSS, Santa Clara, CA, Jan. 2012, pp. 15–18.
[13] O. Aardal, Y. Paichard, S. Brovoll, T. Berger, T. S. Lande, and S. Hamran,
“Physical working principles of medical radar,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1142–1149, Apr. 2013.
[14] G. Ramachandran and M. Singh, “Three-dimensional reconstruction of
cardiac displacement patterns on the chest wall during the P, QRS, and
T-segments of the ECG by laser speckle interferometry,” Med. Biological
Eng. Comput., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 525–530, 1989.
[15] A. E. Aubert, L. Welkenhuysen, J. Montald, L. de Wolf, H. Geivers,
J. Minten, H. Kesteloot, and H. Geest, “Laser method for recording displacement of the heart and chest wall,” J. Biomed. Eng., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 134–140, 1984.
[16] B. Park, O. Boric-Lubecke, and V. M. Lubecke, “Arctangent demodulation
with DC offset compensation in quadrature Doppler radar receiver systems,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1073–1079,
May 2007.
[17] F. E. Churchill, G. W. Ogar, and B. J. Thompson, “The correction of I and
Q errors in a coherent processor,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.,
vol. AES-17, no. 1, pp. 131–137, Jan. 1981.
[18] N. Huang, Z. Shen, S. Long, M. C. Wu, H. Shih, Q. Zheng, N. Yen,
C. Tung, and H. Liu, “The empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert
spectrum for nonlinear and nonstationary time series analysis,” Proc. Roy.
Soc. London, vol. 454, no. 1971, pp. 903–995, Mar. 1998.
[19] Z. Wu and N. E. Huang, “Ensemble empirical mode decomposition: A
noise-assisted data analysis method,” Advances Adaptive Data Anal.,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–41, 2009.

[20] J. S. Wong, W. A. Lu, K. T. Wu, M. Liu, G. Y. Chen, and C. D. Kuo, “A
comparative study of pulse rate variability and heart rate variability in
healthy subjects,” J. Clin. Monit. Comput., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 107–114,
2012.
[21] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 1,
no. 8476, pp. 307–310, 1986.
[22] C. Li, Y. Xiao, and J. Lin, “Experiment and spectral analysis of a lowpower Ka-band heartbeat detector measuring from four sides of a human
body,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 4464–4471,
Dec. 2006.
[23] C. Gu, R. Li, H. Zhang, A. Y. C. Fung, C. Torres, S. B. Jiang, and
C. Li, “Accurate respiration measurement using DC-coupled continuouswave Radar sensor for motion-adaptive cancer radiotherapy,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3117–3123, Nov. 2012.

Wei Hu (S’12) received the B.S. degree in electronic
information science and technology from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China, in 2009, where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in circuits and systems.
She is currently a Visiting Student with the
Department of Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit,
Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. Her current research interests include biomedical applications of microwave
and millimeter-wave technologies, wireless biomedical sensor, and radio-frequency-integrated circuits.

Zhangyan Zhao received the B.S. degree in electronic information science and technology and the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China, in 2005 and 2010, respectively.
He is currently a Research Assistant at the Institute
of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China. His current research interests include
biomedical sensors and systems, data acquisition and
instruments, and radio frequency measurement.

Yunfeng Wang received the B.S. in microelectronics
from the Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2004,
and the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics and solid
state electronics from the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in
2009.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the
Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. His current research interests include analog and RF circuit design for low-power wireless communications, biomedical circuits and systems, and wearable healthcare and its enabling ultra-low-power design and
technology.

HU et al.: NONCONTACT ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF CARDIOPULMONARY ACTIVITY

Haiying Zhang was born in China, in 1964. She
received the B.S. degree in semiconductor physics
and technology from the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 1986, the M.S. degree in
microelectronics from Jilin University, Changchun,
China, in 1989, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from Saint-Petersburg
State Electro-Technical University, Saint Petersburg,
Russia, in 1993.
From 1994 to 1997, she was an Engineer with
Croena Semiconductor Ltd., Moscow, Russia, where
she was involved with clean-room fabrication and technology process setup.
From 1997 to 1999, she was with the Department of Microwave Circuits
and Compound Semiconductor Devices, Institute of Micro-electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IMECAS), Beijing, China. In 1999, she became a
Professor and Deputy Director with the Department of Microwave Circuits and
Compound Semiconductor Devices, IMECAS. In 2010, she established the RF
Integrated Circuit Department, IMECAS. Since 2000, she has been involved
with research of RF circuit design technology and device technology for years.
Her current research interests include 3G/4G wireless transmitter circuit design
technology, embedded multimode, multifrequency wireless transceiver IP design methodologies, medical electronics integration technology, ultra-wideband
wireless personal area network standard, and Internet of things related technologies.

735

Fujiang Lin (M’93–SM’99) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees from the University of Science and
Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China, in 1982
and 1984, respectively, and the Dr.-Ing. degree from
the University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany, in 1993,
all in electrical engineering.
After finishing his Ph.D. program in Germany in
1993, he was a Research Scientist in National University of Singapore. In 1995, he was transferred to
the Institute of Microelectronics (IME), Singapore,
as a Member of Technical Staff, where he pioneered
practical RF modeling for MMIC/RFIC development. In 1999, he joined HP
EEsof, as the Technical Director, where he established the Singapore Microelectronics Modeling Center, providing accurate state-of-the-art device and package
characterization and modeling solution service worldwide. From 2001 to 2002,
he started up and headed Transilica Singapore Pte. Ltd., a research and development design center of Transilica Inc., a Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 a/b wireless
system-on-chip (SoC) company. The company was acquired by Microtune Inc.
After the close down of Transilica Singapore in 2002, he joined Chartered Semiconductor Manufacturing Ltd. (now GlobalFoundries, second largest foundry),
as the Director, where he led the SPICE modeling team in support of company
business. In 2003, he rejoined IME as a Senior Member of Technical Staff,
where he focused on upstream research and development initiatives and leadership toward next waves. His current research interests include the development
of CMOS as a cost-effective technology platform for 60-GHz band millimeterwave SoC, as well as millimeter wave therapy for healthcare applications. As
an Adjunct Associate Professor with the National University of Singapore,
Singapore, and Adjunct Professor with USTC, Hefei, China, he is actively involved in educating and training post-graduate students. In 2010, he returned
back USTC as full professor under the Chinese “1000 Talents Program,” where
he is currently the head of the Department Electronic Science and Technology.
He is the Executive Director of the MESIC (Micro-/Nano-Electronic System
Integration R&D Center,” which is jointly established by USTC and IME.CAS
http://english.ime.cas.cn/). He has authored or coauthored over 120 scientific
papers. He holds seven patents. His current research interests include modeling cum IC validation of next-generation technology devices such as GaN and
FinFET.
Dr. Lin has been involved in the IEEE activities in different functions since
1995, including chair of the IEEE Singapore MTT/AP Chapter, Committee
Member of Singapore Section, Reviewer Board Member for a few of transactions or journals, and Technical Program Committee (TPC) member of numerous conferences such as RFIC and ESSCIRC. He is the Initiator and Coorganizer of international workshops and short courses at APMC99, SPIE00,
ISAP06, and IMS07. In 1995, he and his team initiated and organized the IEEE
International Symposium on Radio-Frequency Integration Technology (RFIT),
Singapore and now become MTT-S fully sponsored flagship conference in Asia.
Dr. Lin was the recipient of the 1998 Innovator Award presented by EDN Asia
Magazine.

