2304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, AUGUST 2014

Combining Motor Imagery With Selective Sensation
Toward a Hybrid-Modality BCI
Lin Yao, Jianjun Meng, Dingguo Zhang, Xinjun Sheng, Member, IEEE, and Xiangyang Zhu∗

Abstract—A hybrid modality brain-computer interface (BCI) is
proposed in this paper, which combines motor imagery with selective sensation to enhance the discrimination between left and right
mental tasks, e.g., the classification between left/ right stimulation
sensation and right/ left motor imagery. In this paradigm, wearable
vibrotactile rings are used to stimulate both the skin on both wrists.
Subjects are required to perform the mental tasks according to the
randomly presented cues (i.e., left hand motor imagery, right hand
motor imagery, left stimulation sensation or right stimulation sensation). Two-way ANOVA statistical analysis showed a significant
group effect (F (2,20) = 7.17, p = 0.0045), and the Benferronicorrected multiple comparison test (with α = 0.05) showed that
the hybrid modality group is 11.13% higher on average than the
motor imagery group, and 10.45% higher than the selective sensation group. The hybrid modality experiment exhibits potentially
wider spread usage within ten subjects crossed 70% accuracy,
followed by four subjects in motor imagery and five subjects in
selective sensation. Six subjects showed statistically significant improvement (p < 0.0045 Benferroni-corrected) in hybrid modality
in comparison with both motor imagery and selective sensation.
Furthermore, among subjects having difficulties in both motor imagery and selective sensation, the hybrid modality improves their
performance to 90% accuracy. The proposed hybrid modality BCI
has demonstrated clear benefits for those poorly performing BCI
users. Not only does the requirement of motor and sensory anticipation in this hybrid modality provide basic function of BCI for
communication and control, it also has the potential for enhancing
the rehabilitation during motor recovery.
Index Terms—BCI, hybrid modality, motor imagery (MI), selective sensation (SS).

I. INTRODUCTION
BRAIN-computer interface (BCI) provides a nonmuscular channel for humans to communicate and control with
the external world, and it paves the way to retrieve motion

A

Manuscript received April 16, 2013; revised September 30, 2013; accepted
October 16, 2013. Date of publication November 6, 2013; date of current
version July 15, 2014. This work was supported by the National Basic Research
Program (973 Program) of China under Grant 2011CB013305, the Science and
Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality under Grants 11JC1406000
and 13430721600, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grants 51075265 and 51375296. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
L. Yao, J. Meng, D. Zhang, and X. Sheng are with State Key Laboratory of
Mechanical System and Vibration, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China (e-mail: ylin0liny@gmail.com; mengjianjunxs008@gmail.com;
dgzhang@sjtu.edu.cn; xjsheng@sjtu.edu.cn).
∗ X. Zhu is with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and
Vibration, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China (e-mail: mexyzhu@
sjtu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2287245

functions for those suffering from locked-in syndromes or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [1]. There is growing research interest
in improving classification accuracy [2]–[5], enabling mass usage of BCI systems [6]–[8], and solving the “BCI-illiteracy”
problem in which BCI control does not work for a portion of
users [9]–[11]. BCI diversity and software algorithms may provide a way to solve these problems. Various BCI modalities
have been proposed in the literature, such as motor imagery
(MI) [12], steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) [13],
P300 evoked potentials [14], sensory motor rhythm [15], steadystate somatosensory evoked potentials (SSSEPs) [16], and selective sensation (SS) [17]. While there are pros and cons in
different BCI modalities [18]–[20], a hybrid BCI may lead
to a novel way to achieve better performance [21]. Allison
et al. [10] reported that a hybrid approach adopting MI and
SSVEP yielded the highest classification accuracy (81.0%),
compared with SSVEP (76.9%) or MI (74.8%) alone. In addition, a hybrid task-based approach that combined MI and the
P300 potential into a single hybrid feature was proposed for
target selection [22], with 94% accuracy. This hybrid paradigm
was also successfully employed to control a brain-actuated simulated and real wheelchair [23]. In Pfurtscheller’s work, MI was
combined with SSVEP for orthosis control, which presented
promising results with a much lower rate of false positives per
minutes during resting periods in comparison with SSVEP BCI
alone [24].
MI and SS are both based on the dynamics of brain oscillations described as event-related (de)synchronization (ERD,
ERS) [25], which have a strong correlation not only with active
or imagined movement [26]–[28], but also with sensory stimulation processing [29], [30]. For instance, motor imagery of
hand movements accompanies contralateral ERD and ipsilateral ERS [31], while selective attention modulates somatosensory oscillations in alpha, beta bands [32], which results in significantly increased beta ERD/ERS due to attentional effects.
Motor imagery and SS are two distinctive cognitive processes,
which may have different dynamics represented in EEG signals. The former is for activating efferent neural pathways with
mentally simulated motor output [25], and the latter is for selectively collecting and processing stimulation signals from afferent input [30], [32]. The hybridizing of motor and sensation
intentions of the subjects and the corresponding brain oscillatory
dynamics could enable a hybrid BCI, which combines imagined
hand movement and stimulation sensation. The integration of
these two neurophysiological signals is expected to enhance the
spatial-temporal pattern discriminations corresponding to different mental tasks or strategies for improved BCI performance.
In this paper, vibrotactile stimulation is applied to subject’s
left and right wrists, and each subject is required to perform

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YAO et al.: COMBINING MOTOR IMAGERY WITH SELECTIVE SENSATION TOWARD A HYBRID-MODALITY BCI

2305

Fig. 2. Trial procedure of the experiment. Subjects performed the mental task
according to the cue randomly presented in the screen, with upper left arrow
corresponding to left motor imagery (L-MI), upper right arrow corresponding to
right motor imagery (R-MI), lower left arrow corresponding to left stimulation
sensation (L-SS), and lower right arrow corresponding to right stimulation
sensation (R-SS).

C. EEG Recording
Fig. 1. Experimental setup: stimulation devices are attached to both wrists on
the subject.

one of the four randomized mental tasks, i.e.,: right hand motor
imagery, left hand motor imagery, right stimulation sensation,
or left stimulation sensation. The focus of this paper is to present
a hybrid BCI modality which combines motor imagery and SS
as a feasible BCI methodology.

II. METHOD
A. Subjects
Eleven healthy subjects participated in these experiments
(eight male/-three female, all right handed, average age of
25 years). Six subjects had previously participated a MI BCI
experiment and a SS BCI experiment separately. The study was
approved by the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. All participants signed informed consent forms
before participation.

B. Stimulation Device
In this experiment, stimulation was applied to the wrist. The
stimulation device produced a 23 Hz sine wave for the left wrist,
and 27 Hz sine wave for the right wrist (both modulated with a
175 Hz sine carrier wave). Two types of mechanical receptors,
Pacinian corpuscles and Meissner corpuscles were stimulated,
which are sensitive to frequencies above 100 and 20–50 Hz,
respectively [33].
Left and right wrists were simultaneously stimulated as shown
in Fig. 1. The linear resonant actuators (10 mm, C10-100, Precision Microdrives, Ltd., typical normalized amplitude 1.4 G)
were used for vibrotactile stimulation. The amplitude of vibration was individually adjusted within the range of 0.5 times
to maximum amplitude of 11.3 μm at the resonant frequency.
The subjects could feel the intense vibration with flutter sense,
and it was modulated to a certain extent that the subject could
concentrate on performing the predefined experimental tasks.

EEG signals were recorded using a SynAmps2 system (Neuroscan, USA). A 64 channel quick-cap was used to collect 62
channel EEG signals, and the electrodes were placed according
to the extended 10/20 system. The reference electrode was located on the vertex, and the ground electrode was located on the
forehead. An analog bandwidth filter of 0.5–70 Hz and a notch
filter of 50 Hz were applied to the raw signals. Signals were
digitally sampled at 250 Hz.
D. Experimental Paradigm
In the MI task, subjects were instructed to mentally simulate
kinaesthetic movements of their own left or right hands depending on the cues without any actually moving. In the sensation
task, subjects were required to SS on the indicated side of their
hands as if stimulation on the attended side was stronger than
the unattended side.
During the EEG signal recording, each subject sat in a comfortable armchair in an electrically shielded room. With forearms and hands resting in the armrest, the subject sat still while
limiting eye blinks and avoiding facial or arm movements. The
subject’s task was to perform MI and SS according to a given
cue. A total of 400 trials were performed by the subjects in ten
runs, and subjects rested between the two runs. There were 40
trials in each run, and R-MI, L-MI, R-SS, L-SS (defined below)
were randomly arranged with ten trials each. At the beginning of
each trial, a “+” sign appeared in the center of the screen. At the
first second, a vibration burst with the same intensity stimulated
both hands to alert the user for the subsequent task, with the
vibration pulse lasting 200 ms. Then, at the third second, a red
cue pointing either up left (L-MI), up right (R-MI), lower left
(L-SS) or lower right (R-SS) was presented visually on the computer monitor, which was superimposed on the “+” and lasted
for 1.5 s. Subjects were instructed to perform the mental task
after the cue arrow appeared. The mental task continued until
the eighth second when the “+” disappeared. At the 4.5th second, vibrations were applied to both hands until the end of the
mental task. Next there was a relaxation time period lasting for
1.5 s, during which the subjects relaxed and could blink his or
her eyes. Finally, a random time period of 0 to 2 s was inserted
after the relaxation period to further avoid subject’s adaptation.
The single-trial procedure is shown in Fig. 2.

2306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, AUGUST 2014

TABLE 1
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR EACH PAIR OF MENTAL TASKS FOR EACH SUBJECT

E. Algorithms
The decoding algorithm for each two of the four mental tasks
is based on the common spatial pattern (CSP). The CSP is a primary method used in MI-based BCI literature. Mathematically,
it is realized by simultaneous diagonalization of the covariance
matrices for the two classes [34], [35]. The raw EEG signal
is represented as Xk with dimensions ch × len, where ch is
the number of recording electrodes, and len is the number of
sample points, and k is the trial index. The normalized spatial
covariance of the EEG can be obtained from
Ck =

Xk XkT
trace(Xk XkT )

(1)

where XkT denotes the transpose of the matrix Xk , and
trace(Xk XkT ) is the sum of the diagonal elements of the matrix
Xk XkT . Let


Cl =
Ck
Cr =
Ck
(2)
k ∈S l

k ∈S r

where Sl and Sr are the two index sets of the separate classes.
The projection matrix W is obtained from the augmented generalized decomposition problem, (Cl + Cr )W = λCr W . The
rows of W are spatial filters; the columns of W −1 are spatial patterns. For the kth trial, the filtered signal Zk = W Xk
is uncorrelated. In this paper, the log variance of the first three
rows and last three rows of Zk (corresponding to three largest
eigenvalues and three smallest eigenvalues), are chosen as feature vectors, and linear discriminative analysis is selected as the
classifier.
III. RESULTS
A. Hybrid Modality BCI
A hybrid modality BCI is defined in this paper as BCI decoding each subject’s mental state from right MI to left stimulation
sensation, hybridizing MI with SS (shown from Table I that
R-MI versus L-SS yielded the highest mean accuracy across
subjects).

The time interval was chosen from the fourth second to the
seventh second from the beginning of the trial (the first to fourth
second after the stimulus cue) for offline analysis of MI modality, SS modality, and proposed hybrid modality. The frequency
band was chosen to cover the alpha and beta bands from 8 to
26 Hz, using a fourth-order Butterworth filter. The processing
procedure was the same for all three modalities. A 10 × 10 fold
cross validation was adopted to evaluate the classification accuracy of each modality as follows: first trials were randomly
permutated (100 trials for class one and 100 trials for class
two), then equally divided into ten partitions. Each partition was
used as an unknown test set which was classified by the classifier trained with the remaining nine partitions, and achieved
a classification accuracy for each partition. This process was
repeated ten times, and generated 100 classification accuracy
indexes. Table I outlines pairwise classification results of the
four experimental tasks. A randomized complete block designs
(RCBD) [36] was adopted to analyze the group effect of the three
BCI modalities mentioned above (subjects as block factors, for
within each subject the conditions were as homogeneous as possible so the treatments could be compared under relatively homogeneous conditions). Two-way ANOVA showed a significant
group effect (F(2,20) = 7.17, p = 0.0045). Based on Benferronicorrected multiple comparison test (with α = 0.05), the hybrid
modality group was 11.13% higher on average than the MI
group with 95% confidence interval of [2.52% 19.73%], and
was 10.45% higher than the SS group with 95% confidence interval of [1.84% 19.06%]. There was not a significant difference
between the MI group and the SS group. One-way ANOVA with
repeated measure and Benferroni-corrected p-value of 0.05/11
= 0.0045 were utilized to evaluate different BCI treatments for
each subject (Mauchly¯s tests for the sphericity were done for
repeated measures factors and in cases when sphericity was violated, significance tests were Greenhouse-Geisser corrected).
Subjects s1, s2, s4, s5, s6, s7, s8, s9, s10, s11 showed significant
differences among the three treatments in Fig. 3. The hybrid
modality treatment was significantly better than both MI and SS
among subjects s1, s2, s4, s5, s8, s11. Some subjects, having
difficulties in both MI and SS performed well in hybrid modality reaching 90% accuracy level (e.g., s1, s8). Subjects s3 and

YAO et al.: COMBINING MOTOR IMAGERY WITH SELECTIVE SENSATION TOWARD A HYBRID-MODALITY BCI

Fig. 3. Comparison of discrimination accuracy of motor imagery, selective
sensation, and hybrid modality. Blue bars indicate the discrimination accuracy
of left and right hand motor imagery (motor imagery). Yellow bars indicate the
discrimination accuracy of left and right stimulation selective sensation (selective sensation). Red bars indicate the discrimination accuracy of left sensation
and right motor imagery (hybrid modality). The green dash-dotted line indicates
70% accuracy.

s9 demonstrated stable performance in all three modalities with
above 95% accuracy. Subjects s6 and s10 showed better performance in SS and MI, respectively, and they gained reliable
control in this hybrid modality with approximate 80% accuracy.
Subject s7 showed better performance in hybrid modality. In
general, the hybrid modality enabled wider user ranges and improved classification accuracy, generally enhanced performance
for poorly performing BCI users.
10 × 10 fold cross validation was an efficient method to estimate the general classification accuracy of different BCI modalities, while the nonstationarity effect of the data might be obscured since training samples are drawn from the full time course
of the experiment in cross validation [37]. Here we attempted
to give another view considering the nonstationarity property of
the data by performing a cross validation with a ten-fold chronological split. The 100 trials of each mental task were temporally
sorted, and divided into ten partitions, each of which contained
temporal information similar to actual BCI usage. As shown in
Fig. 4, the classification results, which included with temporal
information of the trials, were similar to that of Fig. 3, but with
a relatively larger variance as a result of the chronological split
in the cross validation maintaining the nonstationarity property
of the data. There was also a significant group effect (F(2,20) =
6.7, p = 0.0059), and the hybrid modality group was 11.09%
higher on average than the MI group with 95% confidence interval of [2.05% 20.14%], and was 10.86% higher than the SS
group with 95% confidence interval of [1.82% 19.91%].
B. Enhanced Discrimination in Spatial-Spectral-Temporal
Space
Time-frequency decomposition of each trial along each
EEG channel was undertaken to construct the spatial-spectraltemporal structure according to predefined mental tasks. It was
calculated every 200 ms with hanning tapper, convoluted with
modified sinusoid basis in which the number of cycles linearly
changed with frequency to achieve proper time and frequency

2307

Fig. 4. Comparison of discrimination accuracy of motor imagery, selective
sensation, and hybrid modality (temporal information incorporated). Blue bars
indicate the discrimination accuracy of left and right hand motor imagery (motor
imagery). Yellow bars indicate the discrimination accuracy of left and right stimulation selective sensation (selective sensation). Red bars indicate the discrimination accuracy of left sensation and right motor imagery (hybrid modality).
The green dash-dotted line indicates 70% accuracy.

resolution [38]. The R2 index [39] was used to locate the discriminative information distribution among the spatial-spectraltemporal space between two corresponding mental tasks. The
R2 value distribution indicated which (frequency domain),
where (spatial domain), and when (temporal domain) the EEG
signal exhibited discriminative information, which was used to
separate the two corresponding mental tasks. Subjects, who had
difficulty in both MI and SS, demonstrated plain discriminative information among the spatial-spectral space as shown in
Figs. 5 and 6 (note that R2 was averaged along the temporal
dimension corresponding to the fourth–seventh seconds from
the beginning of the trial). While in this hybrid modality phase,
discriminative information emerged out in the spatial-spectral
space, and the discriminative information was localized in the
sensorimotor area, which was responsible for motor output and
processing of afferent input. Meanwhile, the R2 value across the
time and frequency domain at critical channels (such as C4 or
C3) further showed how subjects gained control in this hybrid
modality. Fig. 7 illustrates the discriminative information of a
good BCI subject.
C. Toward Four-Class Discrimination
A one to one CSP algorithm was initially employed for fourclass separation (L-MI, R-MI, L-SS, R-SS each with 100 trials).
The baseline corresponded to [−2 0] s before the appearance of
the cues (i.e., the time interval of the first–third seconds from
the beginning of the trial), while the taskline corresponded to
[1 4] s after the appearance of the cues (i.e., the time interval of
the fourth–seventh seconds from the beginning of the trial). The
frequency band of [8 26] Hz was adopted to filter the EEG signals. Similarly, a 10 × 10 fold cross validation was conducted
to evaluate the classification accuracy of the four-class recognition problem. Fig. 8 shows that taskline discrimination accuracy was significantly different from baseline discrimination
(F(2,20) = 182.97, P < 0.0001). Four subjects reached 60%

2308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, AUGUST 2014

Fig. 5. R 2 value distribution in spatial-spectral-temporal space from subject
s8. (1) R 2 value distribution across frequency and spatial domains in motor
imagery task (R 2 was averaged along the temporal dimension corresponding
to the fourth–seventh seconds from the beginning of the trial), the color bar
indicates the R 2 values. (2) R 2 value distribution across frequency and spatial
domains in selective sensation task. (3) R 2 value distribution across frequency
and spatial domains in the hybrid modality task. (5) Topoplot at 12 Hz of R 2
value in the hybrid modality. (4)–(6) R 2 value distribution across time and
frequency domains of channels C3 and C4 [corresponding to channel 26 and 30
in (1)] in the hybrid modality. The vertical white dashed line indicates the cue,
and two vertical magenta dash-dotted lines correspond to the time interval used
for classification, also equal to the fourth–seventh seconds from the beginning
of the trial.

accuracy compared with 25% random probability level in the
four-class problem, while subject s9 obtained a classification
accuracy of 72.5%.
IV. DISCUSSION
This study proposed a hybrid modality BCI combined cortical output activity (MI) with cortical activity related to afferent
input (SS). It demonstrated significantly improved classification
accuracy and better performance among a majority of subjects.
Allison et al. [10] combined imagined movement and visual attention to form a hybrid BCI, and showed that a hybrid approach
adopting MI and SSVEP yielded the highest classification accuracy (81.0%), followed by SSVEP (76.9%) and MI (74.8%).
Some subjects with difficulty in MI BCI or SSVEP BCI attained
effective communication in the hybrid task. In this paper, the
hybrid condition also produced the highest average classification accuracy (83.1%), in comparison with the sole approach
with MI (71.9%) or SS (72.6%). Some subjects, e.g., subject s1
and s8, turned out to be suitable BCI users achieving 90% classification accuracy in the hybrid condition. The hybrid modality
seems to be a good choice for subjects with difficulty in gaining control through conventional MI BCI. The hybrid approach
also presented a promising application in target selection [22],
in which P300 and ERD features were hybridized. If the target
is of interest, the user is instructed to pay attention to a flashing
button and to maintain the idle state of MI in order to locate the
target. In contrast, the user is instructed to perform MI without
focusing on the flashing button. Upon this hybrid strategy, a
93.99% accuracy was attained to allow efficient target selection

Fig. 6. R 2 value distribution in spatial-spectral-temporal space from subject
s1. (1) R 2 value distribution across frequency and spatial domains in motor
imagery task (R 2 was averaged along the temporal dimension corresponding
to the fourth–seventh seconds from the beginning of the trial), the color bar
indicates the R 2 values. (2) R 2 value distribution across frequency and spatial
domains in selective sensation task. (3) R 2 value distribution across frequency
and spatial domains in the hybrid modality task. (5) Topoplot at 12 Hz of R 2
value in the hybrid modality. (4)–(6) R 2 value distribution across time and
frequency domains of channels C3 and C4 [corresponding to channel 26 and 30
in (1)] in the hybrid modality. The vertical white dashed line indicates the cue,
and two vertical magenta dash-dotted lines correspond to the time interval used
for classification, also equal to the fourth–seventh seconds from the beginning
of the trial.

in the 2-D cursor control. In this experiment, only the ERD feature was used in the hybrid task, as the ERD feature not only
reflects the motor intention but also reflects the sensation intention. The proposed strategy in the hybrid task was different from
both of them, that is, increasing the left and right separation by
instructing to perform different mental task (right MI and left
stimulation sensation). In general, from the definition of the
concept of hybrid BCI [21], at least one BCI should be involved
in the hybrid task design. Like the hybrid car with two different
types of engines for achieving energy efficiency, the hybrid BCI
is a promising solution to improve overall user performance.
One of the challenging issues confronting BCI research is understanding and solving the “BCI Illiteracy” problem, in which
BCI control does not work for some users (roughly 15%–30%).
A neurophysiological predictor of BCI performance has been
previously proposed [9], that is, the BCI feedback performance
could be predicted upon two-minute recording of a “relax
with eyes open” condition. This furthered our understanding
of the “BCI Illiteracy” problem, and offered a novel way to
discover poorly performing users. While training a subject to
modulate rhythmic activity [40], machine learning to extract
subject-specific patterns [6] and coadaptation of the subject and
machine [8] have all been shown to reduce the number of poorly
performing BCI users, the hybrid experiment design in this
study has also shown the potential for reducing the number of
the poorly performing BCI users. In the proposed experiment,
the majority of the subjects crossed the 70% accuracy threshold
in the hybrid approach, which might be provided as a supplementary intervention to tackle the “BCI-illiteracy” problem.

YAO et al.: COMBINING MOTOR IMAGERY WITH SELECTIVE SENSATION TOWARD A HYBRID-MODALITY BCI

Fig. 7. R 2 value distribution in spatial-spectral-temporal space from subject
s9. (1) R 2 value distribution across frequency and spatial domains in motor
imagery task (R 2 was averaged along the temporal dimension corresponding
to the fourth–seventh seconds from the beginning of the trial), the color bar
indicates the R 2 values. (2) R 2 value distribution across frequency and spatial
domains in selective sensation task. (3) R 2 value distribution across frequency
and spatial domains in the hybrid modality task. (5) Topoplot at 12 Hz of R 2
value in the hybrid modality. (4)–(6) R 2 value distribution across time and
frequency domains of channels C3 and C4 [corresponding to channel 26 and 30
in (1)] in the hybrid modality. The vertical white dashed line indicates the cue,
and two vertical magenta dash-dotted lines correspond to the time interval used
for classification, also equal to the fourth–seventh seconds from the beginning
of the trial.

Fig. 8. Comparison of baseline and taskline discrimination in the four-class
problem. The green dash-dotted line indicates 25% accuracy.

In all four mental task periods, the vibrotactile stimulation
was applied to the subject’s wrists, and the only difference was
the mental tasks. The stimulation was primarily used to induce
rhythmic changes with respect to the cortical process of the
afferent input, a necessary component for constructing the SS
BCI. Traditionally, MI BCI does not rely on sensory information
but instead on spontaneous rhythms which can be modulated
by the subject’s mental activities. MI with stimulation in this
experiment also showed discriminant information similar to MI
without stimulation in the literature, and our previous work had
also confirmed these findings [17], [41].
The proposed experimental paradigm required outside vibrotactile stimulation to induce cortical activity. Our experiment
relied on the afferent neural pathway to perceive stimulation

2309

Fig. 9. Discrimination accuracy for each subject. The green bar indicates
discrimination accuracy between left motor imagery and right stimulation sensation, and the red bar indicates discrimination accuracy between right motor
imagery and left stimulation sensation.

instead of efferent neural pathways. This is similar to P300
based BCI, which requires intact afferent pathways to transmit
the transient flickering stimuli to evoke P300 potentials and does
not depend on efferent neural pathway for gazing direction of the
eyes. It is also different from SSVEP-based BCI, which requires
both efferent and afferent neural pathways. The proposed experimental paradigm is expected to work well for stroke patients
with damaged motor movement but intact stimulation sensation
ability. Additionally, this could be beneficial for rehabilitation,
and for communication and control in aiding in daily activity
tasks. Motor and sensory related cortical activity in this hybrid
modality would enhance the sensory motor loop for functional
recovery after disease onset, which is our intended application
for future clinical trials.
It is interesting that the discrimination between right MI and
left stimulation sensation is 4.3% higher on average than the
one between left MI and right stimulation sensation as shown
in Fig. 9, when choosing one motor task and one sensation
task. According to one study, gating effects are lower in the
dominant left hemisphere for right-handed subjects [42], and
thus dominant hand control should reduce gating effects. As the
attenuation effects were more evident in the right hemisphere,
it is likely that left hand stimulation would be better captured.
This phenomena and the motor-sensory interaction mechanism
should be explored further [43].
The four-class separation results have the potential to form
a multiclass BCI system [44], [45], though there is still room
for improvement from advanced classification algorithms and
improved experimental design. Our preliminary results of the
four class discrimination using a one to one CSP algorithm have
shown that it was significantly (p < 0.001) different from random guessing (25% accuracy), and can achieve up to 72.5%
classification accuracy. For discrimination between unilateral
motor and sensation, only four subjects crossed the 70% accuracy line. From the physiological point of view, motor and sensation processes were distinctive: one corresponding to efferent
neural pathways, the other to afferent neural pathways. Since
the EEG signals have poor spatial resolution and the primary
motor cortex is close to the somatosensory cortex, separation

2310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, AUGUST 2014

of the two cognitive tasks might be difficult. This is also similar to the discrimination between left foot MI and right foot
MI [46], in which the corresponding cortexes are very close to
each other, causing difficulty in separating the two motor tasks.
In the proposed research, only the ERD/ERS phenomena with
basic CSP algorithm was used to deal with the classification
problem between each of the two cognitive tasks. Steady-state
somatosensory evoked potential (SSSEP) induced by periodic
vibrotactile stimulation might increase the separation between
unilateral side motor and sensation cognitive tasks. MI has been
shown to decrease the SSSEP amplitude [47], while sensation
has been shown to increase the SSSEP amplitude [48]. The
hybridizing of the ERD/ERS and SSSEP features, might significantly increase the separation between these unilateral cognitive tasks. Introducing SSSEP was our initial goal of increasing
the classification accuracy, but it is not yet found the SSSEP
corresponding to the stimulation frequency. Some facts such as
stimulation parameters and stimulation body side might explain
our lack of SSSEP in this experiment. Our stimulating device
produced a maximum amplitude of 11.3 μm at the resonant frequency, while an amplitude of 500 μm has been produced with
a braille stimulator [49], showing a clear SSSEP. Also our vibration stimulation was applied at each subject’s wrists compared
to other studies, where the vibration stimulation was applied
to the fingers or palms [16], [50], [51]. The discrimination of
unilateral cognitive tasks would be critical points for further improvement of the classification accuracy of the four-class BCI,
and this problem is worth of future investigation.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented and validated a nonvisual hybrid modality BCI with improved classification accuracy and
enhanced upper alpha EEG component discrimination localized near the sensorimotor cortex. This hybrid modality has
potential for helping to solve the “BCI Illiteracy” problem. Experimental results demonstrated up to 72.5% accuracy in the
four-class problem compared with 25% random chance. This
hybrid modality BCI could also form a multiclass BCI system.
The proposed hybrid BCI could be especially useful for individuals who have lost volitional gaze control for setting up a P300
or SSVEP based BCI. A motor and sensory combined hybrid
BCI system might also be valuable for those deficient sensorymotor interaction, as the hybrid modality system would enhance
the interaction of the sensory motor system. Future work should
focus on extended clinical trials.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank all volunteers for their participation in the study.
We thank Prof. H. Liu and Prof. P. B. Shull for the helpful
suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, T. Vaughan
et al., “Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767–791, 2002.

[2] H. Higashi and T. Tanaka, “Simultaneous design of FIR filter banks and
spatial patterns for eeg signal classification,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1100–1110, Apr. 2013.
[3] H. Suk and S. Lee, “A novel Bayesian framework for discriminative feature
extraction in brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 286–299, Feb. 2013.
[4] J. Meng, G. Huang, D. Zhang, and X. Zhu, “Optimizing spatial spectral
patterns jointly with channel configuration for brain-computer interface,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 104, pp. 115–126, 2012.
[5] S. Makeig, C. Kothe, T. Mullen, N. Bigdely-Shamlo, Z. Zhang, and
K. Kreutz-Delgado, “Evolving signal processing for brain–computer interfaces,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 100, no. 13, pp. 1567–1584, May 2012.
[6] B. Blankertz, G. Dornhege, M. Krauledat, K.-R. Müller, and G. Curio,
“The non-invasive Berlin brain-computer interface: Fast acquisition of
effective performance in untrained subjects,” NeuroImage, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 539–550, 2007.
[7] B. Blankertz, F. Losch, M. Krauledat, G. Dornhege, G. Curio, and
K.-R. Muller, “The Berlin brain–computer interface: Accurate performance from first-session in BCI-naive subjects,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 2452–2462, Oct. 2008.
[8] C. Vidaurre, C. Sannelli, K.-R. Müller, and B. Blankertz, “Co-adaptive
calibration to improve BCI efficiency,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, p.
025009, 2011.
[9] B. Blankertz, C. Sannelli, S. Halder, E. M. Hammer, A. Kübler,
K.-R. Müller, G. Curio, and T. Dickhaus, “Neurophysiological predictor
of SMR-based BCI performance,” NeuroImage, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1303–
1309, 2010.
[10] B. Allison, C. Brunner, V. Kaiser, G. Müller-Putz, C. Neuper, and
G. Pfurtscheller, “Toward a hybrid brain–computer interface based on
imagined movement and visual attention,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 7, no. 2,
p. 026007, 2010.
[11] C. Brunner, B. Z. Allison, D. J. Krusienski, V. Kaiser, G. R. Müller-Putz,
G. Pfurtscheller, and C. Neuper, “Improved signal processing approaches
in an offline simulation of a hybrid brain–computer interface,” J. Neurosci.
Methods, vol. 188, no. 1, pp. 165–173, 2010.
[12] G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, D. Flotzinger, and M. Pregenzer, “EEG-based
discrimination between imagination of right and left hand movement,”
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 642–651,
1997.
[13] M. Cheng, X. Gao, S. Gao, and D. Xu, “Design and implementation of a
brain-computer interface with high transfer rates,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1181–1186, Oct. 2002.
[14] E. Donchin, K. M. Spencer, and R. Wijesinghe, “The mental prosthesis:
Assessing the speed of a P300-based brain-computer interface,” IEEE
Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 174–179, Jun. 2000.
[15] J. R. Wolpaw and D. J. McFarland, “Control of a two-dimensional movement signal by a noninvasive brain-computer interface in humans,” Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 101, no. 51, pp. 17 849–17 854, 2004.
[16] G. Muller-Putz, R. Scherer, C. Neuper, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Steadystate somatosensory evoked potentials: Suitable brain signals for braincomputer interfaces?,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 30–37, Mar. 2006.
[17] L. Yao, J. Meng, D. Zhang, X. Sheng, and X. Zhu, “Selective sensation
based brain-computer interface via mechanical vibrotactile stimulation,”
PloS one, vol. 8, no. 6, p. e64784, 2013.
[18] C. Guger, G. Edlinger, W. Harkam, I. Niedermayer, and G. Pfurtscheller,
“How many people are able to operate an EEG-based brain-computer
interface (BCI)?,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 145–147, Jun. 2003.
[19] C. Guger, S. Daban, E. Sellers, C. Holzner, G. Krausz, R. Carabalona,
F. Gramatica, and G. Edlinger, “How many people are able to control a
P300-based brain–computer interface (BCI)?,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 462,
no. 1, pp. 94–98, 2009.
[20] B. Allison, T. Luth, D. Valbuena, A. Teymourian, I. Volosyak, and
A. Graser, “BCI demographics: How many (and what kinds of) people can use an SSVEP BCI?,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 107–116, Apr. 2010.
[21] G. Pfurtscheller, B. Z. Allison, C. Brunner, G. Bauernfeind, T. SolisEscalante, R. Scherer, T. O. Zander, G. Mueller-Putz, C. Neuper, and N.
Birbaumer, “Hybrid BCI,” Front. Neurosci., vol. 4, p. 42, 2010.
[22] J. Long, Y. Li, T. Yu, and Z. Gu, “Target selection with hybrid feature for
BCI-based 2-D cursor control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 1,
pp. 132–140, Jan. 2012.
[23] J. Long, Y. Li, H. Wang, T. Yu, J. Pan, and F. Li, “A hybrid brain computer interface to control the direction and speed of a simulated or real

YAO et al.: COMBINING MOTOR IMAGERY WITH SELECTIVE SENSATION TOWARD A HYBRID-MODALITY BCI

[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]

[43]
[44]
[45]

wheelchair,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 20, no. 5,
pp. 720–729, Sep. 2012.
G. Pfurtscheller, T. Solis-Escalante, R. Ortner, P. Linortner, and
G. R. Muller-Putz, “Self-paced operation of an SSVEP-Based orthosis
with and without an imagery-based brain switch: a feasibility study towards a hybrid BCI,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18,
no. 4, pp. 409–414, Aug. 2010.
G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper et al., “Motor imagery activates primary sensorimotor area in humans,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 239, no. 2/3, pp. 65–68,
1997.
F. Cassim, W. Szurhaj, H. Sediri, D. Devos, J. Bourriez, I. Poirot,
P. Derambure, L. Defebvre, and J. Guieu, “Brief and sustained movements:
Differences in event-related (de) synchronization (ERD/ERS) patterns,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 111, no. 11, pp. 2032–2039, 2000.
G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, C. Brunner, F. L. da Silva et al., “Beta rebound
after different types of motor imagery in man,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 378,
no. 3, pp. 156–159, 2005.
M. T. Jurkiewicz, W. C. Gaetz, A. C. Bostan, D. Cheyne et al., “Postmovement beta rebound is generated in motor cortex: Evidence from
neuromagnetic recordings.,” Neuroimage, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1281–1289,
2006.
G. Pfurtscheller, M. Woertz, G. Müller, S. Wriessnegger, K. Pfurtscheller
et al., “Contrasting behavior of beta event-related synchronization and
somatosensory evoked potential after median nerve stimulation during
finger manipulation in man,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 323, no. 2, pp. 113–116,
2002.
E. Houdayer, E. Labyt, F. Cassim, J. Bourriez, and P. Derambure, “Relationship between event-related beta synchronization and afferent inputs:
Analysis of finger movement and peripheral nerve stimulations,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 117, no. 3, pp. 628–636, 2006.
G. Pfurtscheller and F. Lopes da Silva, “Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and desynchronization: Basic principles,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 110, no. 11, pp. 1842–1857, 1999.
C. Dockstader, D. Cheyne, and R. Tannock, “Cortical dynamics of selective attention to somatosensory events,” Neuroimage, vol. 49, pp. 1777–
1785, 2010.
C. Breitwieser, V. Kaiser, C. Neuper, and G. Müller-Putz, “Stability and
distribution of steady-state somatosensory evoked potentials elicited by
vibro-tactile stimulation,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 347–
357, 2012.
K. Fukunaga, Introduction to Statistical Pattern Recognition, 2nd ed.
New York, NY, USA: Academic, vol. 1, p. 2, 1990.
H. Ramoser, J. Muller-Gerking, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Optimal spatial
filtering of single trial EEG during imagined hand movement,” IEEE
Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 441–446, Dec. 2000.
L. Murray, Randomized Complete Block Designs, Encyclopedia of Biostatistics, New York, USA: Wiley Online Library, 2005.
S. Lemm, B. Blankertz, T. Dickhaus, and K.-R. Müller, “Introduction to
machine learning for brain imaging,” Neuroimage, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 387–
399, 2011.
R. Oostenveld, P. Fries, E. Maris, and J.-M. Schoffelen, “FieldTrip: Open
source software for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data,” Computat. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2011, Index no.
156869, 2011.
T. H. Wonnacott and R. J. Wonnacott, Introductory Statistics.
vol. 19690, New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1990.
A. J. Doud, J. P. Lucas, M. T. Pisansky, and B. He, “Continuous threedimensional control of a virtual helicopter using a motor imagery based
brain-computer interface,” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 10, p. e26322, 2011.
L. Yao, X. Sheng, J. Meng, D. Zhang, and X. Zhu, “Mechanical vibrotactile
stimulation effect in motor imagery based brain-computer interface,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2013, pp. 2772–2775.
F. Tecchio, F. Zappasodi, J. Melgari, C. Porcaro, E. Cassetta, and
P. Rossini, “Sensory-motor interaction in primary hand cortical areas:
A magnetoencephalography assessment,” Neuroscience, vol. 141, no. 1,
pp. 533–542, 2006.
S. N. Baker, “Oscillatory interactions between sensorimotor cortex and
the periphery,” Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 649–655, 2007.
P. Bobrov, A. Frolov, C. Cantor, I. Fedulova, M. Bakhnyan, and
A. Zhavoronkov, “Brain-computer interface based on generation of visual images,” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 6, p. e20674, 2011.
G. Townsend, B. Graimann, and G. Pfurtscheller, “A comparison of common spatial patterns with complex band power features in a four-class
BCI experiment,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 642–651,
Apr. 2006.

2311

[46] P. Boord, A. Craig, Y. Tran, and H. Nguyen, “Discrimination of left and
right leg motor imagery for brain–computer interfaces,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 343–350, 2010.
[47] J. I. Voisin, C. Mercier, P. L. Jackson, C. L. Richards, and F. Malouin, “Is
somatosensory excitability more affected by the perspective or modality
content of motor imagery?,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 493, no. 1, pp. 33–37,
2011.
[48] C. Giabbiconi, C. Dancer, R. Zopf, T. Gruber, and M. Müller, “Selective
spatial attention to left or right hand flutter sensation modulates the steadystate somatosensory evoked potential,” Cognit. Brain Res., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 58–66, 2004.
[49] M. Severens, J. Farquhar, P. Desain, J. Duysens, and C. Gielen, “Transient and steady-state responses to mechanical stimulation of different
fingers reveal interactions based on lateral inhibition,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 121, no. 12, pp. 2090–2096, 2010.
[50] S. Tobimatsu, Y. M. Zhang, and M. Kato, “Steady-state vibration somatosensory evoked potentials: Physiological characteristics and tuning
function,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 110, no. 11, pp. 1953–1958, 1999.
[51] E. Colon, V. Legrain, and A. Mouraux, “Steady-state evoked potentials to
study the processing of tactile and nociceptive somatosensory input in the
human brain,” Neurophysiologie Clinique/Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 42,
pp. 315–323, 2012.

Lin Yao received the Bachelor’s degree from the
School of Manufacturing Science and Engineering
at Sichuan University, Sichuan, China, in 2009. He
is currently working toward the Master’s and Ph.D.
degrees in the School of Mechanical Engineering at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include mainly Braincomputer Interface (BCI) technology, motor and sensory intention decoding; Exogenous stimulation for
making BCI more applicable; EEG signal processing,
feature extraction and classification.

Jianjun Meng received the Bachelor’s degree from
the School of Mechanical Engineering at Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2005 and
received the Master and Ph.D. degrees in the School
of Mechanical Engineering from the same university,
in 2013.
Now he is a Postdoctoral Associate in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of
Minnesota, USA. His research interest is focused
on enhancement of Brain-computer Interface (BCI)
technology, the decoding of motor imagination,
methods related to neuromodulations to improve the performance of BCI,
novel algorithms for advanced EEG signal processing, feature extraction and
classification.

Dingguo Zhang received the Bachelor’s degree in
electrical engineering from Jilin University, Jilin,
China, in 2000, the Master’s degree in control engineering from Harbin Institute of Technology, Heilongjiang, China, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree
from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
in 2007.
From 2006 to 2007, he was a Research Fellow at
Nanyang Technological University. In 2008, he was
a Postdoctoral Fellow at LIRMM of CNRS, France.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the Institute of Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. His research
interests include human-machine interface, rehabilitation technique, biological
cybernetics, and biomechatronics.
Dr. Zhang is a member of IEEE, RAS, EMBS, and IFESS. He is the winner
of Delsys Prize 2011, USA.

2312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, AUGUST 2014

Xinjun Sheng (A’11–M’12) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China, in 2001, 2003, and 2014, respectively.
He joined the School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2003. In 2012,
he was a Visiting Scientist in Concordia University,
Canada. He is currently a Lecturer in the School
of Mechanical Engineering at Shanghai Jiao Tong
University. His current research interests include
robotics, and biomechatronics.
Dr. Sheng is a member of RAS, EMBS, and IES.

Xiangyang Zhu received the B.S. degree from the
Department of Automatic Control Engineering, Nanjing Institute of Technology, Nanjing, China, in 1985,
the Master’s degree in instrumentation engineering
from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1989,
and the Ph.D. degree in automatic control engineering from the same university in 1992.
He joined the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Southeast University in 1995, after 2 years
work as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Since
June 2002, he has been a Professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, with a
joint appointment in the Robotics Institute and the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical Systems and Vibrations. His current research interests include robotic
manipulation planning, manufacturing automation, and biomechatronics.
Dr. Zhu was awarded the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young
Scholars in 2005, and appointed as a “Cheung Kong” Chair Professor in 2007.

