254

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

A New Head Phantom With Realistic Shape and
Spatially Varying Skull Resistivity Distribution
Jian-Bo Li, Chi Tang, Meng Dai, Geng Liu, Xue-Tao Shi, Bin Yang, Can-Hua Xu, Feng Fu, Fu-Sheng You,
Meng-Xing Tang, and Xiu-Zhen Dong∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Brain electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is an
emerging method for monitoring brain injuries. To effectively evaluate brain EIT systems and reconstruction algorithms, we have developed a novel head phantom that features realistic anatomy and
spatially varying skull resistivity. The head phantom was created
with three layers, representing scalp, skull, and brain tissues. The
fabrication process entailed 3-D printing of the anatomical geometry for mold creation followed by casting to ensure high geometrical
precision and accuracy of the resistivity distribution. We evaluated
the accuracy and stability of the phantom. Results showed that the
head phantom achieved high geometric accuracy, accurate skull
resistivity values, and good stability over time and in the frequency
domain. Experimental impedance reconstructions performed using the head phantom and computer simulations were found to be
consistent for the same perturbation object. In conclusion, this new
phantom could provide a more accurate test platform for brain EIT
research.
Index Terms—Electrical impedance tomography (EIT), heterogeneous resistivity distribution, phantom, realistic shape, rapid
prototyping (RP).

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTRICAL impedance tomography (EIT) is a safe, noninvasive, real-time, low-cost, and functional imaging technology. Its principle is that the alternating current is injected
into the body and the voltage is measured on the object surface,

E

Manuscript received July 3, 2013; revised September 30, 2013; accepted
October 23, 2013. Date of publication November 1, 2013; date of current version January 16, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grants 50937005, 81000648, 61071033,
51207161, and 31100710, in part by National Key Technology Research and
Development Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China
under Grant 2011BAI08B00 and 2012BAI20B02, and in part by the Twelfth
Five-year Major Program of PLA under Grant AWS11C010–8. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
J.-B. Li is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi’an 710032, China and also with the 406th Hospital of
the Chinese People’s Liberation Army, Dalian 116041, China (e-mail: ljbilg@
163.com).
C. Tang, M. Dai, X.-T. Shi, B. Yang, C.-H. Xu, F. Fu, and F.-S. You are with
the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi’an 710032, China (e-mail: tangchi@fmmu.edu.cn; daimeng@fmmu.edu.cn;
shixuetao@fmmu.edu.cn; binyang@fmmu.edu.cn; canhuaxu@fmmu.edu.cn;
fufeng@fmmu.edu.cn; fushengyou@fmmu.edu.cn).
G. Liu is with the Tianjin Stomatological Hospital, Nankai University, Tianjin
300041, China (e-mail: jiandanzhishang@126.com).
M.-X Tang is with the Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College
London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: mengxing.tang@imperial.ac.uk).
∗ X.-Z. Dong is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi’an 710032, China (e-mail: dongyang@fmmu.
edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2288133

based on which impedance distribution or change can be reconstructed [1]. Brain EIT is an emerging application of EIT with
great potential in monitoring brain injuries, such as intracranial hemorrhage, ischemia, and cerebral edema [2]–[4]. Phantom study plays an important role in exploring the application
of brain EIT to the aforementioned diseases. A head phantom
is usually required to perform some experiments in brain EIT.
First, a head phantom is able to test the performance of the hardware and software before a brain EIT system can be applied in
vivo. Second, due to the electrical and geometrical parameters
and properties which are similar to real tissues, head phantoms
can simulate human normal and pathological conditions to carry
out various experimental studies which would be difficult to do
in vivo.
An ideal physical phantom for EIT is supposed to accurately
reflect the electrical and geometrical characteristics of the internal organs of the object as well as to realistically simulate the
current distribution inside the object. In fact, the skull resistivity
is so high that only a small amount of the current applied on
the scalp can penetrate the skull. Also, the current distribution
in the head is nonuniform because the skull is characterized
by an irregular shape and spatially varying resistivity [5]. Accordingly, these important characteristics of the skull should be
incorporated into head phantoms.
Existing head phantoms fail to fully meet these requirements. At present, the main categories of head phantoms fall
into digital models, human cadavers, artificial physical models,
etc. [6]–[9].These different models possess their respective advantages as well as disadvantages. The digital phantoms were
effective tools for studying brain EIT on computers but would
not be helpful in testing the EIT hardware performance or system stability over time. Although human cadavers could provide
models with realistic anatomy, the resistivity of the devitalized
tissue varied greatly from that of the living tissue. Resistivity
changes of the object directly lead to changes in current distribution within the object. Moreover, artificial physical phantoms
were established in many forms. For example, cylindrical phantoms were relatively simple and easy to achieve [10]. However,
their shapes were so different from the human head that they
are not ideal for studying brain EIT. Although resistor network
phantoms possess high repeatability and stability over time [11],
they could not simulate the continuous behavior of biological
tissues and would require complex connections to build accurate 3-D models. Spherical or hemispherical phantoms filled
with salt solution, paraffin, or gel could well mimic the resistivity properties of tissues [8], [9], [12]. However, they lack true
geometrical information of the skull. In addition, Tidswell et al.

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LI et al.: NEW HEAD PHANTOM WITH REALISTIC SHAPE AND SPATIALLY VARYING SKULL RESISTIVITY DISTRIBUTION

employed a real human skull in the EIT study and used skillfully
the skin of a marrow or giant zucchini to provide impedance
simulation of the human skin [13], [14], but the skull resistivity
was different from data of living skull. Collier et al. manufactured a head phantom with realistic geometrical shape [15], yet
they ignored the important fact that the resistivity distribution
varies spatially in a real skull. In short, in almost all volume
conductor models, the skull was considered to have a uniform
resistivity distribution, which greatly affected the accuracy of
EIT measurements.
The aim of this study was to fabricate a reproducible head
phantom with more anatomical details and more accurate
impedance distribution than those of the previous ones, which
could make the current distribution in the phantom closer to the
in vivo situation. The phantom was a 3-D physical model with
three layers, including scalp, skull, and brain. In this study, we
first carefully selected a material simulating the skull and investigated its electrical properties. Next, we used rapid prototyping
(RP) technology (3-D printing) and the impression technique
usually applied in prosthodontics to build the head phantom.
These techniques could fabricate a skull shell with a highly
precise geometrical shape, thereby avoiding errors caused by
cylindrical, spherical, or semispherical phantoms. Finally, the
test results showed that the head phantom achieved some satisfactory performances in terms of geometrical shape, electrical impedance distribution, stability over time, as well as in a
wide frequency range. This developed multilayer head phantom
would facilitate the assessment of the data-acquisition hardware,
verification of the current injection mode, and evaluation of the
reconstruction algorithms in brain EIT research.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Material and Its Electrical Property
The human skull has a relatively high resistivity which greatly
shields the injected current. The material simulating the skull is
generally assumed to have the following characteristics: 1) high
similarity to the skull in terms of resistivity within an environment akin to the human body (including temperature and
humidity), 2) a stable resistivity in a wide frequency range,
3) steady resistivity over time, 4) easy shaping, and 5) high
rigidity that ensure no deformation. Thus, far several materials
are suitable for simulating the skull for brain EIT: conductive
silicone rubber, carbon-doped resin, and plaster, all of which
are able to meet the requirements in terms of stability and reproducibility [16]–[19]. However, it is technically difficult to
integrate parts of rubber or resin into one. Also, as conductive powder is mixed with rubber or resin during processing,
it is possible to cause nonuniform resistivity distribution and
difficulty in regulating electrical properties. Furthermore, conductive rubber is prone to deformation under a given pressure.
Contrarily, plaster is a material without foregoing defects. Plaster resistivity has been reported to correlate with the ratio of
the distilled water to plaster powder [4], [9]. According to the
previous literature, the resistivity of the dental grade plaster remained approximately constant in a wide frequency range (1 Hz
to 1 MHz), which was similar to the electrical characteristic of

255

TABLE I
WEIGHT RATIOS OF DISTILLED WATER TO PLASTER POWDER

a skull [10], [20]. Therefore, we chose dental grade plaster (calcium sulfate, Dental Stone III, Shanghai Medical Instruments
Ltd., China). However, some issues remained to be addressed.
In previous studies, for example, the temperature and humidity were not strictly controlled according to the human body.
The range of the ratio of the distilled water to plaster powder
was also relatively narrow. In addition, no specified formula
was provided to determine plaster resistivity and the ratio of the
distilled water to plaster powder. Thus, it was of necessity to
conduct related research to solve these problems.
In this study, the distilled water was mixed with plaster powder according to the ratios shown in Table I first. After thorough
stirring, the plaster was quickly filled into a cylindrical silicon
mold. Bubbles were removed with a vibrator and then the plaster
was taken out after coagulation. The diameter and the height of
the plaster cylinder were 29 and 70 mm, respectively. For each
ratio, six plaster cylinders were produced simultaneously.
Plaster cylinders were soaked in a saturated solution of calcium sulfate for two weeks to stabilize the resistivity. Before
resistivity measurement, the saturated solution was placed in an
infant incubator, the temperature and humidity of which were
set to 36.5 ± 1 ◦ C and 98 ± 1% RH. In this study, we employed
a four-electrode assembly reminiscent of the reported ones to
measure the impedance [5], [21]. Measurements were carried
out by SI 1260 and SI 1294 impedance analyzers (Schlumberger Technologies Ltd., Farnborough, Hampshire, England)
with a current magnitude of 1.25 mA in the frequency range
from 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The system is calibrated by conductivity
standard solution (12.88 mS/cm, Mettler-Toledo AG, Analytical, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland) before measurement. Each
plaster cylinder was measured thrice.
The resistivity can be calculated by
RS
(1)
L
where R is the real part of impedance of the plaster cylinder, S
is the cross-sectional area of the plaster cylinder, and L is the
height of the plaster cylinder.
The measured data were fitted using Origin 8.0 (OriginLab,
Northampton, MA, USA) [see Fig. 1(a)]. The regression equation can be expressed as
ρ=

y = 7.0575 × 107 e(−x/0.0204) + 38.4366

(2)

where x is the ratio of distilled water to plaster powder and y
is the resistivity of the plaster. R2 , the correlation coefficient, is
0.9931.
The maximal resistivity of a living human skull as measured
by Tang et al. is 265.46 Ω·m and the minimal resistivity is

256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 2.

Schematic diagram of fabrication of the skull phantom.

Fig. 3. Three-dimensional reconstruction of skull: (a) complete skull and
(b) separate skull.

stabilized over time [see Fig. 1(b)]. The stabilization time of
different plasters varies only from 8 to 12 days. Consequently,
we chose a time period of two weeks to stabilize the resistivity
of the plaster samples.
B. Geometrical Shape
Fig. 1. Electrical property of plaster: (a) the relationship between the resistivity
and the ratio of distilled water to plaster powder (f = 50 kHz) and (b) the
resistivity change of the plaster soaked in the calcium sulfate saturated solution
over time for the weight ratio of 0.33 (the results of groups with other weight
ratio presented the same tendency).

57.82 Ω·m [20]. Thus, the minimal and maximal ratios of distilled water to plaster powder calculated by (2) were 0.258 and
0.308, respectively, which were included by the tested ratio
range.
According to the literature, the resistivities of the human scalp
and brain are 2.00 and 3.30 Ω·m [22], [23], respectively, which
are far less than the resistivity of the skull. The resistivities
of the scalp and brain are of the same order of magnitude.
Therefore, we reasonably simplified the design and set their
resistivities to both 4.00 Ω·m. The resistivity of the saturated
solution of calcium sulfate was reported to be 4.00 Ω·m [21],
which qualified this solution to simulate the scalp and the brain.
Another advantage of this solution is the prevention of plaster
dissolution to ensure the stability of the phantom. Preliminary
experiments showed that the resistivity of a plaster cylinder
soaked in the calcium sulfate saturated solution was gradually

Laser RP technology (3-D printing) has many advantages in
the manufacturing industry. However, the materials processed
by this method are mostly resin or metal [24], [25], which do
not easily simulate electrical properties of skull characterized
by spatially varying resistivity distribution. Consequently, we
first constructed a high-precision resin model through laser RP
(3-D printing), and then we fabricated a plaster phantom with
realistic geometrical shape using a resin model and an alginate
impression material.
The fabrication process of this skull phantom is shown in
Fig. 2.
An adult male patient’s head without brain disease was
scanned by spiral CT (Light Speed VCT, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA). The scan parameters included 0.625-mm slice
thickness, 578 slices, 120-kV tube voltage, and 240-mA tube
current. The acquired image data were saved as a standard
file format: digital imaging and communications in medicine
(DICOM).
After importing the DICOM files into the Mimics 10.0 software (Materialise, Leuven, Belgium), we identified and extracted the skull area, followed by reconstruction of the 3-D
skull model. Next, we optimized the 3-D model in Magics V10
(Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) [see Fig. 3(a)] and divided it

LI et al.: NEW HEAD PHANTOM WITH REALISTIC SHAPE AND SPATIALLY VARYING SKULL RESISTIVITY DISTRIBUTION

257

TABLE II
RESISTIVITIES OF LIVE HUMAN SKULL PARTS

along the sutures into eight parts: one frontal bone, two sphenoid wing bones, two temporal bones, two parietal bones, and
one occipital bone [see Fig. 3(b)].
The reconstructed 3-D model was meshed into triangle
grids and exported in stereo lithography (STL) format files
which could be processed by RP. After that, the poly-Nsalicylidenevinylbenzylamine resin as raw material was sintered
layer by layer via a selective laser sintering (SLS) RP machine
(model AFS360, Beijing Longyuan Automated Fabrication System Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) so that separate resin skull phantom parts were obtained. Finally, the surfaces of the resin phantoms were polished to eliminate burrs and edge bumps.

Fig. 4.

Schematic diagram of resin tank fabrication.

C. Spatially Varying Skull Resistivity Distribution
To build a skull phantom with realistic resistivity distribution,
we set the resistivities of separate skull parts and sutures (see
Table II) in accordance with the skull anatomy and the results
on living human skulls reported by Tang et al. [20]. The ratio of
the distilled water to plaster powder for separate skull parts and
sutures were calculated using (2).

Fig. 5. Three-dimensional structures of skull and tank reconstructed by Mimics: (a) side view and (b) bottom view. The thickness of the tank is 5 mm. There
is a 5-mm gap filled with saturated calcium sulfate between the skull phantom
and the tank to simulate the scalp.

D. Fabrication of Impression and Phantom
Impressions of separate resin phantom parts were constructed
with alginate. After shaping of the impression, the resin phantoms were removed and the fabricated plaster was immediately
poured into the impression placed on the vibrator. Plaster with
different ratios corresponded to separate skull parts. After solidification, the plaster skull phantom was taken out of the impression. Each phantom part was trimmed and polished carefully
before they were joined together by plaster with resistivity corresponding to sutures, thereby forming a complete skull phantom with realistic geometrical shape and spatially varying skull
resistivity distribution.

The outer surface of the 3-D skull reconstruction was extracted and expanded 5 mm outward to form the scalp layer,
followed by another 5-mm outward extension with identical
shape as the 3-D reconstruction of the tank (see Fig. 5). After
optimization, STL format files were imported into the SLS RP
machine to produce the resin tank.
To study the impedance changes in different cross sections
of the head, two layers of electrodes were set on the inner
surface of the resin tank. The 16 electrodes on first layer were
equally spaced across the eyebrows, temporal bone, and inion.
The second layer was 20 mm below the first one with identical
electrode distribution (see Fig. 6).

E. Resin Tank and Bracket
In clinical monitoring, the electrodes of brain EIT system are
attached to the patient’s scalp and typically located on the same
plane. To simulate the actual monitoring environment, we built
a resin tank which was skull-like in shape and slightly larger
than the phantom. Electrodes were set in the inner surface of the
resin tank.
The fabrication process of the resin tank was similar to that
of the resin skull phantom (see Fig. 4).

F. Geometrical and Electrical Characteristics,
and Stability Performance
With the advantage of high precision, RP technology has
been widely used in surgery and other medical fields [26]–[29].
Likewise, alginate is a high-precision impression material commonly applied in prosthodontics [30]–[33]. Therefore, the plaster skull phantom made with alginate impression via RP technology is expected to possess high precision. Nonetheless, a

258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 8. Driving and measuring pattern of brain EIT in one measurement in
computer simulation and physical experiment (driving electrodes: EP 1–9).
Fig. 6.

Electrode arrangement in the tank with 16 electrodes on either plane.

Fig. 7. Key points of parietal bone phantom part. The thicknesses of A, B, C,
and D are denoted by t1, t2, t3, and t4, respectively. The distance between the
midpoint of sagittal suture and superior temporal line is denoted by L.

morphometric analysis is still necessary to validate the feasibility of the construction method and the geometrical precision of
the actual phantom. However, the irregular shape of the skull
made the quantification of morphometric precision relatively
difficult. Thus, some key points on the skull phantom must be
determined for quantitative analysis. Measurements and analysis methods of all skull phantom parts were similar, and we
herein take the phantom part of left parietal bone as an example (see Fig. 7). The intersection of the sagittal and coronal
sutures was assumed to be A, where the thickness was t1; the
intersection of the lambdoid and sagittal sutures was B, where
the thickness was t2; the intersection of the lambdoid and parietotemporal sutures was C, where the thickness was t3; the
intersection of the sphenoid wing and the parietotemporal suture was D, where the thickness was t4; and the linear distance
from the midpoint of the sagittal suture to the superior temporal
line was L. In the case where the parietal bone phantom is placed
horizontally, the height of the highest point in the phantom was
h1, the height of midpoint of parietotemporal suture was h2,
and the height of midpoint of sagittal suture was h3. To reduce
the measurement error, all key points on the phantom (plaster
or resin) were marked simultaneously, and the average of three
consecutive measurements was considered as the final result for
each key point. Agreement between the plaster and the resin
phantom was evaluated.
While casting each plaster part of the skull phantom, six
plaster cylinders (70 mm in length and 29 mm in diameter) with
the same ratio were made to facilitate the measurement of the
resistivity corresponding to that plaster part. The measurement
temperature and humidity were, respectively, set to 36.5 ± 1 ◦ C
and 98 ± 1% RH. Measurements were carried out using SI
1260 impedance analyzer with SI 1294 interface. The current
magnitude was 1.25 mA and the frequency range was from 1 Hz

Fig. 9.

Finite element method model of the human head.

to 1 MHz. One-sample t test was used to evaluate the difference
between the measured resistivity of each plaster part and that of
the corresponding human skull part [20], where P < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant.
To test the phantom stability, transimpedances were measured
over time and the results were compared with the simulation
values. In the phantom measurement, Ag/AgCl electrodes were
connected to SI 1294 via shielded wire. The skull phantom was
soaked in saturated calcium sulfate solution for two weeks prior
to measurement to stabilize the resistivity of the phantom. The
amplitude of the driving current was 1.25 mA and the frequency
range was from 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The measurement was performed thrice daily for one week. To elucidate the measurement
process, we defined that when the driving current was injected
via electrode pair (EP) 1–9, the measured voltage from EP 2–3
was denoted as No. 2, the measured voltage on EP 3–4 was
denoted as No. 3, and so on (see Fig. 8).
In computer simulations, the transimpedances were obtained
from the 2-D skull model with a real boundary and resistivity
distribution with identical parameter configuration (see Fig. 9).
G. EIT Experiments Based on the Head Phantom
To evaluate the reliability of the head phantom in a practical
application, an EIT imaging experiment with resistivity perturbation was carried out and the results were compared with those
of computer simulations.
In this study, an optimized adaptive damped least-square
(DLS) method was applied in computer simulations [3]. The
DLS method was used to mesh the skull region according to
the real boundary and to set different resistivities depending on

LI et al.: NEW HEAD PHANTOM WITH REALISTIC SHAPE AND SPATIALLY VARYING SKULL RESISTIVITY DISTRIBUTION

259

TABLE III
MORPHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENTS OF PLASTER AND RESIN PHANTOM PART
(LEFT PARIETAL BONE)

Fig. 10. Skull phantom parts: (a) parietal bone phantom parts, (b) separate
skull phantom parts, and (c) complete plaster skull phantom.

TABLE IV
RESISTIVITY COMPARISON BETWEEN PLASTER PHANTOM AND HUMAN SKULL

Fig. 11. Established platforms for physical experiment: (a) resin tank,
(b) plaster skull phantom, (c) platform without skull phantom, and (d) platform with skull phantom.

different skull regions (see Fig. 9). For our brain EIT system,
an opposite driving/adjacent measuring pattern was employed
for the 16-electrode measurement with 1.25-mA driving current at 50 kHz. The main performances of the brain EIT system
included 90-dB signal-to-noise ratio, 75-dB common mode rejection ratio, 0.01% measurement precision, 0.1% deviation of
reciprocity, operating frequency range from 1 Hz to 190 kHz,
and a data-acquisition rate higher than 1 f/s [34]. The perturbation object was an agar cylinder with a resistivity of 1.43 Ω·m
(diameter 20 mm, height 50 mm). A comparison was made
between reconstructions of computer simulations and physical
experiments with the perturbation at four positions.
III. RESULTS
A. Skull Phantom and Experimental Platform
Separate plaster parts were successfully reproduced from
resin parts by the impression technique and were joined to form
a complete skull phantom (see Fig. 10).
A bracket made of plexiglass was designed for accurate positioning during the experiment, which was light and did not
induce any electromagnetic interference. In addition, a vernier
with a precision of 0.02 mm was mounted on the bracket. The
vernier was capable of moving up and down and rotating freely
(see Fig. 11).

Take the left parietal bone phantom part as an example. Morphological measurement results of the key points are shown
in Table III. By comparing the results of the plaster and resin
phantom parts with respect to the corresponding key points, the
absolute values of differences (Mp −Mr ) were found to be less
than 0.60 mm and the average SDR was 0.75%.
According to the measurement results, the SDRs of the
plaster phantom parts of frontal bone, left-sphenoid wing, rightsphenoid wing, left-temporal bone, right-temporal bone, rightparietal bone, and occipital bone were 0.37%, 0.40%, 0.29%,
0.73%, 0.62%, 0.50%, and 0.43%, respectively. The average
SDR of the complete plaster skull phantom was 0.51%.
C. Resistivity Distribution
The resistivity measurement results of each separate plaster
skull phantom part are shown in Table IV. All data were presented as mean ± SD (n = 6). Statistical analysis showed no
statistical significance in terms of resistivity differences between
the plaster phantom parts and those of real human skull (P >
0.05).

B. Geometrical Approximation

D. Stability of the Head Phantom

For a key point on the phantom parts, shape distortion rate
(SDR) is defined as

Based on the experimental platform including the head phantom, a comparison was made from 1 Hz to 1 MHz between
the simulated data and the measurement results regarding the
real parts of transimpedance (see Fig. 12). The current injection
pattern of EP 1–9 was adopted. As shown in Fig. 12, in the measurement frequency range, the real part of the transimpedance
of the head phantom presented an almost flat tendency, which

E=

|Mp − Mr |
× 100%
Mr

(3)

where Mp and Mr are the measurement results of a plaster and
resin phantom part, respectively.

260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Fig. 13. Comparison of the transimpedance magnitude between simulated
data and measurement results over one week (f = 50 kHz, driving electrodes:
EP 1–9).

Fig. 12. Comparison of the real part of the transimpedance between simulated
data and measurement results (driving electrodes: EP 1–9). Sim: simulated data;
Meas: measurement results.

Fig. 14.

Scene of an EIT imaging experiment based on the head phantom.

agreed well with the simulated data. However, the results had
a slight deviation from the simulated values around 1 MHz.
Presented in Fig. 13 is the comparison of transimpedance magnitude between the simulated data and the measurement results
at 50 kHz over one week. All data are expressed as mean ± SD.
Compared with the simulated data, the measurement results had
a slight variation over a long period of time. The results of the
No. 7 and No. 9 were 51.33 ± 2.02 and 52.03 ± 2.47 (V/A),
respectively, which exhibited a larger deviation than the others.
E. Application in EIT Experiment
The brain EIT system could stably work and acquire data
after connection of the head phantom. With this platform, we
could conveniently carry out various experiments and effectively validate the hardware system and imaging algorithms.
Besides, selection of a different imaging plane was achieved via
an alternative interface (see Fig. 14).
For the same perturbation at different positions, images of
resistivity change were reconstructed in both computer simulation and physical phantom experiment (see Fig. 15). The
reconstruction value of the perturbation was expressed by an arbitrary unit (AU), which was a relative unit to show the ratio of
measured voltage to a predetermined reference voltage. The re-

Fig. 15. Comparison of image reconstructions between computer simulation
and physical experiment. (a) Coordinates of object. (b) Computation simulation.
(c) Experiment with head phantom.

sults demonstrated that, for a perturbation at the same position,
the AU of computer simulation was close to that of physical
experiment.

LI et al.: NEW HEAD PHANTOM WITH REALISTIC SHAPE AND SPATIALLY VARYING SKULL RESISTIVITY DISTRIBUTION

Fig. 16. SEM photographs of plasters with different weight ratio of distilled
water to plaster powder. (a)–(f) correspond to the weight ratio of 0.24, 0.27,
0.30, 0.33, 0.36, and 0.39, respectively. The pores in the plaster were indicated
by yellow dot circles. (a)–(f) are in the same scale.

IV. DISCUSSION
A. Accomplishments
This study mainly focused on building a new head phantom with realistic geometrical shape and spatially varying skull
resistivity distribution to simulate the actual conditions as accurately as possible, and provide a platform with reliable performance for brain EIT study. Presently, although RP technology
(3-D printing) is a powerful tool for building objects with complicated structures, it is not an ideal method to directly fabricate
a head phantom with spatially varying skull resistivity distribution. Therefore, with plaster we employed the impression technique together with RP technology (3-D printing) to achieve
geometry as well as electrical characteristics approximate to
those of real human skull.
According to the experimental results of plaster, the smaller
water content was, the larger resistivity would be. This could be
related to the microstructure of hydrated plaster. It is seen from
the SEM figures (see Fig. 16), with small proportion of water,
the structures of the plaster crystals are incomplete, presenting
tiny fibrous or sheet-like aggregates. In the opposite case, the
structures of the plaster crystals are integrated with aggregates
that exhibit short column shape and dense structure. The porosity of the plaster increases with the water content. In fact, dry
gypsum crystal is nonconductive. After hydration, gypsum crystals will become aggregates with many pores. The pores will be
filled with saline when the gypsum is immersed in the solution.

261

Thus, the main conductive materials are likely to be the liquid
and ions inside the pores. Moreover, the skull parts and sutures
were made by the same plaster, which was conducive to the
formation and growth of crystal structure network between the
homogeneous interfaces; therefore, the skull parts can integrate
tightly.
Issues on shape distortion of head phantoms have not been
reported previously. Our measurement results indicated that the
fabricated plaster skull phantom had little geometrical difference from the resin phantom with high precision (see Table III).
This finding suggested that our new skull phantom not only
approximated to the human skull in shape but also had relatively high precision compared with the traditional cylindrical
or spherical phantoms. Thus, our phantom may be more suitable
in the studies of brain EIT.
A comparison between the resistivity of the plaster skull phantom and that of the living human skull reported by the previous
literature [20] revealed that the difference was not statistically
significant, suggesting that the resistivity of plaster skull phantom resembles that of the living human skull.
This study also showed stability of the real part of transimpedance on each measuring EP in the frequency range from
1 Hz to 1 MHz, which was in good agreement with the simulated data. This finding indicated the good electrical stability of
the fabricated phantom in a relatively wide frequency range (see
Fig. 12). However, the measurement results presented relatively
large deviations from simulated data around the frequency of
1 MHz, which could possibly be caused by stray capacitance or
inductance in high-frequency range.
The magnitude of transimpedance on each measuring EP was
stable for one week, which demonstrated a good stability of our
phantom over time. The one-week time span could meet the time
requirement of continuous measurements in many EIT experiments. However, measurement results of certain EPs had small
deviations from the simulated data. For the head phantom with
spatially varying skull resistivity distribution, these deviations
might be attributed to the different positions of measuring EP
given a particular current injection EP. As shown in Fig. 13, the
deviations of No. 7 and No. 9 were probably caused by different
positions of measuring EPs on the occipital bone region where
the thickness varied. This finding also suggested that the spatially varying skull resistivity distribution of the head phantom
should not be ignored.
Given the fact that crystallization and dissolution will reach
a dynamic equilibrium in saturated calcium sulfate solution, the
use of this solution to simulate the brain and the scalp was important to maintain the resistivity stability of the head phantom,
which were conducive to the accuracy and consistency of the
measurements.
With regard to EIT imaging in this study, the construction
values obtained from the head phantom had slight deviations
from those of the computer simulation, which might derive
from system noise or the error between prior information and
real resistivity. The imaging results suggested that through this
head phantom, not only physical experiments could be carried
out but also the hardware performance and imaging algorithms
of brain EIT could be assessed.

262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2014

Although attention should be paid to some details including a more skillful impression technique and more accurate
electrode positioning, this head phantom performed quite well.
First, the head phantom possessed complex anatomical structure
that included the major tissues in the head: scalp, skull, and
brain. Second, the head phantom achieved spatially varying
skull resistivity distribution, which was a key factor that affected current distribution. Finally, the head phantom showed
stable performance over time and in a wide frequency range.
B. Comparison With Prior Work
In earlier studies of brain EIT, various head phantoms with
advantages and disadvantages were developed for different applications [6]–[8], [10], [11], [15]. Nonetheless, a head phantom
similar to the human head both in anatomy and in resistivity distribution was unavailable, which restricted the further researches
of brain EIT.
Bagshaw et al. and Tidswell et al. presented head phantoms
with realistic shape and homogeneous resistivity distribution
to study epilepsy [4], [13]. Sperandio et al. produced a fourshell diffusion head phantom for EIT [12]. There is a major
difference between their studies and this study. This is attributed
to a different focus by our group, which are positioning accuracy
and resolution of the brain EIT system for monitoring brain
diseases. The key performance of the brain EIT system requires
a precise head phantom for validation. The different focus may
lead to the different phantom types, construction methods, and
phantom accuracy among many research groups. In addition,
the lack of resistivity data of the living human skull was also
an unfavorable factor that restricted phantom accuracy in other
studies.
Furthermore, a skull phantom with spatially varying skull
resistivity distribution is difficult to accomplish by the traditional casting method. Therefore, we utilized RP (3-D printing)
technology to manufacture each separate resin phantom part,
and then cast the parts with impression technique to complete
a head phantom with realistic geometry and spatially varying
skull resistivity distribution. The new head phantom is expected
to be useful for future brain EIT researches.

tigation. In addition, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and skin are
usually ignored because their resistivities are much lower than
that of the skull [14], [22], [23]. Although this practice is common in many head phantoms, some errors might occur. The
material simulating CSF and skin are supposed to not only represent the resistivity of real tissues but also contact stably with
other materials simulating scalp and skull. We will include the
CSF and skin in our future study if the suitable materials or
methods are available.
V. CONCLUSION
A precise head phantom is highly important to validate the
hardware and imaging algorithms of the brain EIT system. In this
study, based on CT images of human head, RP technology (3-D
printing) and impression technique were utilized to fabricate a
new head phantom with a realistic geometry and spatially varying skull resistivity distribution. This head phantom includes
scalp, skull, and brain layers. The main innovation of the head
phantom is the varying skull resistivity which is close to the
data of the live human skull. Experiment results show that the
proposed method of head phantom construction is feasible. The
new head phantom achieves spatially varying skull resistivity
distribution, smaller geometrical distortion, and good stability
over time as well as in a wide frequency range, which endows
the new head phantom with a high practical value. This study
is an attempt to adopt advanced techniques from other fields for
brain EIT modeling. Future studies will focus on how to achieve
3-D accuracy in the heterogeneous resistivity distribution of the
head phantom.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Y. Dong of School
of Stomatology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an,
China, for his help with the 3-D printing and Dr. F. Tao of the
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, China, for his help with revision of the
manuscript.
REFERENCES

C. Remaining Challenges
With the development of current technologies, there is still
room for improving the new head phantom. Although this phantom accurately simulates the human head in a 2-D plane across
16 electrodes, it is just an approximation of the human head in
a 3-D domain, which is due to the very complicated structure
and morphology of the human skull. Actually, the thickness
and resistivity of the human skull at different positions are spatially dependent. Therefore, some error could be introduced if
this phantom is applied to 3-D EIT imaging. In future studies,
a head phantom with improved approximation degree in 3-D
is required to serve more experiments. Furthermore, similar to
many previous studies [9], [12], [35]–[38], this study did not
consider the effect of facial bones on EIT measurements but we
do acknowledge that the effects of the facial bones and other
off-plane structures on EIT measurements needs further inves-

[1] R. H. Bayford, “Bioimpedance tomography (electrical impedance tomography),” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 8, pp. 63–91, 2006.
[2] M. Dai, B. Li, S. Hu, C. Xu, B. Yang, J. Li et al. (Jan. 2013), “In vivo
imaging of twist drill drainage for subdural hematoma: A clinical feasibility study on electrical impedance tomography for measuring intracranial bleeding in humans,” PLoS One, [Online]. 8(1), pp. e55020. Available: http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.
pone.0055020
[3] C. Xu, M. Dai, F. You, X. Shi, F. Fu, X. Dong, and R. Liu, “An optimized
strategy for real-time hemorrhage monitoring with electrical impedance
tomography,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 32, pp. 585–598, 2011.
[4] A. P. Bagshaw, A. D. Liston, R. H. Bayford, A. Tizzard, A. P. Gibson,
A. T. Tidswell, M. K. Sparkes, H. Dehghani, C. D. Binnie, and
D. S. Holder, “Electrical impedance tomography of human brain function using reconstruction algorithms based on the finite element method,”
Neuroimage, vol. 20, pp. 752–764, 2003.
[5] S. K. Law, “Thickness and resistivity variations over the upper surface of
the human skull,” Brain Topography, vol. 6, pp. 99–109, 1993.
[6] J. R. Rice, R. H. Milbrandt, E. L. Madsen, G. R. Frank, E. J. Boote, and
J. C. Blechinger, “Anthropomorphic 1 H MRS head phantom,” Med.
Phys., vol. 25, pp. 1145–1156, 1998.

LI et al.: NEW HEAD PHANTOM WITH REALISTIC SHAPE AND SPATIALLY VARYING SKULL RESISTIVITY DISTRIBUTION

[7] D. L. Collins, A. P. Zijdenbos, V. Kollokian, J. G. Sled, N. J. Kabani,
A.C. Evans, and C. J. Holmes, “Design and construction of a realistic
digital brain phantom,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 463–
468, Jun. 1998.
[8] K. Shmueli, D. L. Thomas, and R. J. Ordidge, “Design, construction and
evaluation of an anthropomorphic head phantom with realistic susceptibility artifacts,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 26, pp. 202–207, 2007.
[9] A. D. Liston, R. H. Bayford, and D. S. Holder, “The effect of layers in
imaging brain function using electrical impedance tomograghy,” Physiol.
Meas., vol. 25, pp. 143–158, 2004.
[10] C. Wang, R. Liu, F. Fu, F. You, X. Shi, and X. Dong, “Image reconstruction
for magnetic induction tomography and preliminary simulations on a
simple head model,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2007,
pp. 4406–4409.
[11] H. Gagnon, M. Cousineau, A. Adler, and A. E. Hartinger, “A resistive
mesh phantom for assessing the performance of EIT systems,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2257–2266, Sep. 2010.
[12] M. Sperandio, M. Guermandi, and R. Guerrieri, “A four-shell diffusion
phantom of the head for electrical impedance tomography,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 383–389, Feb. 2012.
[13] A. T. Tidswell, A. Gibson, R. H. Bayford, and D. S. Holder, “Validation
of a 3D reconstruction algorithm for EIT of human brain function in a
realistic head-shaped tank,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 22, pp. 177–185, 2001.
[14] A. T. Tidswell, A. P. Bagshaw, D. S. Holder, R. J. Yerworth, L. Eadie,
L. Morgan, R.H. Bayford, and S. Murray, “A comparison of headnet
electrode arrays for electrical impedance tomography of the human head,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 24, pp. 527–544, 2003.
[15] T. J. Collier, D. B. Kynor, J. Bieszczad, W. E. Audette, E. J. Kobylarz,
and S. G. Diamond, “Creation of a human head phantom for testing of
electroencephalography equipment and techniques,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2628–2634, Sep. 2012.
[16] A. H. Kaya, A. Dagcinar, I. Cebeci, A. Senel, and F. Celik, “A training
model head of plaster of Paris for stereotactic localization,” Surg. Neurol.,
vol. 68, no. 546, pp. 544–546, 2007.
[17] M. Wolf, M. Keel, V. Dietz, K. von Siebenthal, J. Teller, O. Baenziger, and
H. U. Bucher, “The influence of a clear layer on near infrared spectrophotometry: Comparison of measurements in a liquid neonatal head phantom
to infants in vivo,” Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., vol. 530, pp. 75–84, 2003.
[18] A. K. Carton, P. Bakic, C. Ullberg, H. Derand, and A. D. Maidment,
“Development of a physical 3D anthropomorphic breast phantom,” Med.
Phys., vol. 38, pp. 891–896, 2011.
[19] A. S. Kashif, T. F. Lotz, M. D. McGarry, A. J. Pattison, and J. G. Chase
(Jun. 2013), “Silicone breast phantoms for elastographic imaging evaluation,” Med. Phys., [Online]. 40(6), pp. 063503.1–063503.11. Available:
http://scitation.aip.org / content / aapm/journal / medphys/40/6/10.1118/1.
4805096
[20] C. Tang, F. You, G. Cheng, D. Gao, F. Fu, X. Dong, and G. Yang, “Correlation between structure and resistivity variations of the live human skull,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2286–2292, Sep. 2008.
[21] T. F. Oostendorp, J. Delbeke, and D. F. Stegeman, “The conductivity of
the human skull: Results of in vivo and in vitro measurements,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 1487–1492, Nov. 2000.
[22] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: I. Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2231–
2249, 1996.
[23] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.

263

[24] P. A. Webb, “A review of rapid prototyping (RP) techniques in the medical
and biomedical sector,” J. Med. Eng. Technol., vol. 24, pp. 149–153, 2000.
[25] N. Schilling, T. Hoffmann, F. Sonntag, S. Schmieder and U. Klotzbach,
“Laser based rapid prototyping for imprint technology and micro fluidics,”
Biomed. Tech. (Berl.), vol. 57 (Suppl. 1), pp. 595–597, 2012.
[26] K. Torres, G. Staskiewicz, M. Sniezynski, A. Drop, and R. Maciejewski,
“Application of rapid prototyping techniques for modelling of anatomical
structures in medical training and education,” Folia Morphol, vol. 70,
pp. 1–4, 2011.
[27] A. Makitie, K. S. Paloheimo, R. Bjorkstrand, M. Salmi, R. Kontio, J. Salo,
Y. Yan, M. Paloheimo, and J. Tuomi, “[Medical applications of rapid
prototyping–three-dimensional bodies for planning and implementation
of treatment and for tissue replacement],” Duodecim, vol. 126, pp. 143–
151, 2010.
[28] J. Winder and R. Bibb, “Medical rapid prototyping technologies: State
of the art and current limitations for application in oral and maxillofacial
surgery,” J. Oral Maxillofac Surg., vol. 63, pp. 1006–1015, 2005.
[29] J. Faber, P. M. Berto, and M. Quaresma, “Rapid prototyping as a tool for
diagnosis and treatment planning for maxillary canine impaction,” Amer.
J. Orthod. Dentofacial Orthop., vol. 129, pp. 583–589, 2006.
[30] A. Eriksson, G. Ockert-Eriksson, O. Eriksson, and L. A. Linden, “Alginate
impressions for fixed prosthodontics. A 20 year follow up study,” Swed.
Dent. J., vol. 28, pp. 53–59, 2004.
[31] V. V. Nandini, K. V. Venkatesh, and K. C. Nair, “Alginate impressions: A
practical perspective,” J. Conserv. Dent., vol. 11, pp. 37–41, 2008.
[32] O. P. Shaba, I. C. Adegbulugbe, and O. H. Oderinu, “Dimensional stability
of alginate impression material over a four hours time frame,” Nig. Q. J.
Hosp. Med., vol. 17, pp. 1–4, 2007.
[33] F. Ghani, J. A. Hobkirk, and M. Wilson, “Evaluation of a new antisepticcontaining alginate impression material,” Br. Dent. J., vol. 169, pp. 83–86,
1990.
[34] S. Xuetao, Y. Fusheng, F. Feng, L. Ruigang, and D. Xiuzhen, “High
precision multifrequency electrical impedance tomography system and
preliminary imaging results on saline tank,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Proc.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2005, vol. 2, pp. 1492–1495.
[35] M. R. Schneider, “A multistage process for computing virtual dipolar sources of EEG discharges from surface information,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. BBM-19, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan. 1972.
[36] H. R. Gamba, R. Bayford, and D. Holder, “Measurement of electrical
current density distribution in a simple head phantom with magnetic resonance imaging,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 44, pp. 281–291, 1999.
[37] P. J. Vauhkonen, M. Vauhkonen, T. Savolainen, and J. P. Kaipio, “Threedimensional electrical impedance tomography based on the complete electrode model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 1150–1160,
1999.
[38] A. Ni, X. Dong, G. Yang, F. Fu, and C. Tang, “Image reconstruction
incorporated with the skull inhomogeneity for electrical impedance tomography,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 32, pp. 409–415, 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

