IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

775

Galvanic Coupling Transmission in Intrabody
Communication: A Finite Element Approach
M. Amparo Callejón∗ , Javier Reina-Tosina, Member, IEEE, David Naranjo-Hernández, Member, IEEE,
and Laura M. Roa, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Galvanic coupling in intrabody communication (IBC)
is a technique that couples low-power and low-frequency voltages
and currents into the human body, which acts as a transmission
medium, and thus constitutes a promising approach in the design of personal health devices. Despite important advances being
made during recent years, the investigation of relevant galvanic
IBC parameters, including the influence of human tissues and
different electrode configurations, still requires further research
efforts. The objective of this work is to disclose knowledge into
IBC galvanic coupling transmission mechanisms by using a realistic 3-D finite element model of the human arm. Unlike other
computational models for IBC, we have modeled the differential
configuration of the galvanic coupling as a four-port network in
order to analyze the electric field distribution and current density through different tissues. This has allowed us to provide an
insight into signal transmission paths through the human body,
showing them to be considerably dependent on variables such as
frequency and inter-electrode distance. In addition, other important variables, for example bioimpedance and pathloss, have also
been analyzed. Finally, experimental measurements were also carried out for the sake of validation, demonstrating the reliability
of the model to emulate in general forms some of the behaviors
observed in practice.
Index Terms—Bioimpedance, channel length, cole-cole model,
electric current density, electric field, finite element (fem) model,
galvanic coupling, human body tissue, inter-electrode separation,
intrabody communication, pathloss.

I. INTRODUCTION

I

NTRABODY communication (IBC) is a technique that uses
the human body as a transmission medium for electrical sig-

Manuscript received July 28, 2013; revised October 2, 2013; accepted October
29, 2013. Date of publication November 7, 2013; date of current version
February 14, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Consejerı́a de
Economı́a, Innovación y Ciencia, Government of Andalucı́a, under Grants P08TIC-04069 and P10-TIC-6214, in part by the Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, under Grant PI11/00111, and in part by
CIBER-BBN under Grant NANOPHOR. CIBER-BBN is an initiative funded by
the VI National R&D&i Plan 2008-2011, Iniciativa Ingenio 2010, Consolider
Program. CIBER Actions are funded by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III with
assistance from the European Regional Development Fund. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ M. A. Callejón is with the Biomedical Engineering Group, University
of Seville and the CIBER de Bioingenierı́a, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina
(CIBER-BBN), Seville 41092, Spain (e-mail: amparocallejon@gmail.com).
J. Reina-Tosina is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, University of Seville and CIBER-BBN, Seville 41092, Spain (e-mail:
jreina@us.es).
D. Naranjo-Hernández and L. M. Roa are with CIBER-BBN and the Biomedical Engineering Group, University of Seville, Seville 41092, Spain (e-mail:
davidazuaga@gmail.com; lroa@us.es).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2289946

nals [1], thus offering a natural channel to connect personal
health devices within body area networks [2]. Three main IBC
coupling techniques have been proposed in the literature: galvanic coupling [3], [4], capacitive coupling [5], [6], and wave
propagation methods [7], [8]. The first two are based on lowfrequency, low-level currents, and voltages coupled into the
human body. Specifically, the galvanic coupling uses four electrodes attached to the skin in differential mode, while the capacitive coupling uses a floating ground electrode that electrostatically couples the signal toward the external ground. In the wave
propagation technique, usually related to higher frequencies, an
electromagnetic wave propagates through the human body, generating nonnegligible radiated power into the surroundings. The
advantages related to IBC, including the use of low-power signals at low-frequency ranges have drawn the attention of diverse
research groups, in such a way that great progress has been made
at both IBC electronic design and modeling levels [9]–[12].
For instance, lumped and distributed-parameter circuital models have been presented in the literature [13], [14], permitting
useful expressions of the IBC pathloss to be obtained. However,
they are only valid in a limited frequency range and cannot emulate the complex anatomical and geometrical characteristics of
the human body. Consequently, more realistic geometrical properties have been addressed through the proposal of 2-D and 3-D
models based on numerical methods such as finite-differencetime-domain [15], [16] and finite-element methods (FEM) [17].
These approaches allow a more comprehensive study of the
electric field and current distribution through the human body,
yet require more data to ensure greater accuracy, increasing
simulation time, and computational cost. More recently, theoretical models of the electromagnetic propagation have also
been proposed with the aim of offering a unified explanation of
a signal transmission phenomena through the human body [18].
However, the analytical solution of Maxwell’s equations in the
human body is challenging and their solution in closed form is
usually constrained to simple geometries.
In this way, although important advances have been achieved
over the past few years, there is still much work to be done before we can completely understand the electrical transmission
mechanisms through the human body. This is evidenced both by
the fact that a good agreement between models and experimental results has not always been obtained, and that divergent data
have been reported by different authors, which usually makes a
comparison unfeasible. A comprehensive study into IBC measurements was presented in [19], where a set of experiments
was conducted for both the galvanic and capacitive coupling
by scanning different key IBC parameters. For instance, the galvanic coupling results were shown to be especially dependent on

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

parameters such as subject, channel length, and inter-electrode
distance. However, relatively little is known about the underlying causes which produce this dependence, and therefore further
research efforts are still required.
Consequently, in order to gain an insight into IBC electrical
transmission mechanisms through the human tissue, this study
proposes a 3-D FEM multilayered cylindrical model of a human arm. Similar models have previously been reported in the
IBC literature [20]–[23]: in [20], a cylindrical FEM human arm
model was presented to study the influence on the galvanic coupling attenuation of variables such as electrode size and human
joints, among others. However, only three frequencies were simulated and one electrode was considered as ground, which does
not formally correspond with a pure differential coupling. In
addition, isolation of the arm with respect to the external air was
established and the electric field was neither computed in the
air nor inside tissues. In [21], a theoretical galvanic coupling
model based on a quasi-static approximation was analytically
solved as a function of frequency, but pathloss expressions were
only obtained for a single channel length of 6 cm. In [22], a
FEM-based model of a capacitive IBC system was proposed in
order to analyze the current distribution over the human arm
at three different frequencies. The ratio between the capacitive
and resistive components of the current density was computed,
and the influence of parameters such as humidity of the skin
and electrode size was studied, showing that the highest current
density was confined in the muscle. Nevertheless, only onesignal electrode was considered, and therefore an analysis of
IBC pathloss regarding parameters such as channel length was
not presented. A more recent study [23] proposed a galvanic
coupling FEM model of the whole human body and presented
the distribution of electric potential studying the signal transmission from different parts of the body. Although some of these
works have already shown the dependence of the IBC galvanic
coupling on parameters such as frequency, dielectric properties
of tissue, and channel length, they have not provided simulations
of the current density and electric field through different tissues
as a function of frequency and for different key IBC parameters
such as channel length and inter-electrode distance. In addition, both the underlying electrical transmission mechanisms
by which such dependence exists, as well as its relation with
the actual signal transmission paths through the human body,
remain unknown. Therefore, further analysis on the causes and
effects of galvanic IBC main parameters and tissues still need
to be addressed.
For this reason, with the end of gaining a greater appreciation
of IBC galvanic coupling transmission mechanisms, we have
addressed practical issues regarding the application of computational FEM simulation methods to galvanic-type IBC models.
It must be noticed that the consideration of galvanic coupling
as a differential-like excitation raises some practical questions
regarding the electrode-grounding settings for the FEM solver,
which have not usually been covered in depth in the IBC literature. Unlike other previous computational models, we have
taken into account the presence of both pairs of transmitter and
receiver electrodes by means of a four-port network. Therefore,
a differential electric potential has been defined at each side,

Fig. 1. Geometry of the proposed model. (a) Transverse section of the arm
inside an external air layer. (b) Transverse section of the arm composed of five
concentric layers of tissue: skin, fat, muscle, and cortical and cancellous bone.
(c) Longitudinal view of the arm with electrodes, depicting parameters such as
channel length (cl ), inter-electrode distance (tl ), arm length (a l ), etc.

and an external ground has been established in an external air
layer surrounding the human arm. In this way, we have been
able to simulate the electric field and current density in different tissues as a function of frequency and for different channel
lengths and inter-electrode distances, which to the best of the
authors’ knowledge, have so far not been reported for galvanic
coupling. This has allowed us to obtain the actual signal transmission paths established through human tissues for different
IBC parameters, thus permitting us in part to explain the results
observed in practice, as well as to provide practical hints for IBC
design. For the sake of validation, simulated results have been
compared with measured data also obtained in this study by
using an experimental setup previously proposed by the authors
in [19].
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the
characteristics of the proposed FEM model, such as the geometry, the model parameters, and the details of the numerical
implementation. In Section III, the experimental measurement
setup for galvanic coupling is shown. Section IV presents simulated results such as bioimpedance, electric field distribution,
current density, and pathloss. Finally, Section V presents the
final conclusions of this paper.
II. FEM MODEL PROPOSED
A. Geometry and Model Parameters
The geometry considered in this study consists of a multilayered cylinder modeling a human arm formed by five different
concentric layers, each of which emulates a different tissue: skin,
fat, muscle, and cortical and cancellous bone (Fig. 1). The main
parameters of this model are listed in Table I. A pair of 2 cm ×
2 cm squared copper electrodes were placed on the skin at a
determined inter-electrode distance tl . The tissue thicknesses
considered in this model are within the range of true anatomical
proportions and are similar to those proposed in [20]. The complex frequency behavior of dielectric properties of tissue, i.e.,
electrical conductivity σ and permittivity ε, was modeled by
means of four-parameter Cole–Cole models using data in [24].
Finally, an outer layer has also been considered in order to

CALLEJÓN et al.: GALVANIC COUPLING TRANSMISSION IN INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: A FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH

TABLE I
GALVANIC COUPLING FEM MODEL PARAMETERS

777

C. Model Computation

emulate an unbounded and grounded air domain surrounding
the human arm.
B. Model Equations
The model proposed in this paper has been implemented
in COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3a software by using the electric
currents interface within the ac/dc module, which solves a current conservation problem for electric potential. In this paper,
the time-harmonic charge-continuity equation, together with the
electric form of Gauss’ law, were used:

The arm geometry was meshed using an extra-fine free tetrahedral element, the most accurate default meshing option provided by COMSOL Multiphysics for general physics. In addition, for the sake of greater accuracy, this mesh was refined
near the electrodes and boundary layers, leading to a number of elements between 400 000 and 500 000. Regarding the
external air layer, the infinite elements implementation allows
an unbounded domain to be modeled in the ac/dc module of
COMSOL Multiphysics software [25]. In this case, a swept
meshing was used, which is the recommended procedure to improve the element quality and avoid slow convergence and illconditioned problems. In addition, different radii and lengths of
this air layer, specifically er = 10, 25, and 50 cm and el = 120,
300, and 600 cm, were first simulated in order to guarantee that
the value chosen did not affect the convergence of results. Once
it was shown that they all yielded consistent results, the shortest
were chosen (er = 10 cm, el = 120 cm) to minimize the number
of mesh elements. On the other hand, it must be noticed that as
the frequency increases, the wavelength begins to show a similar magnitude order to the geometrical dimensions of the model
and in addition other unpredictable phenomena such as the body
antenna effect become nonnegligible [26], [27]. For this reason,
a frequency domain solver in the range 1 kHz–100 MHz was
used.

∇ · J = ∇ · (σE + Je ) = −jωρ

(1)

D. Simulations

∇·D = ρ

(2)

The first parameter to be simulated was the bioimpedance Z0
seen between the terminal electrodes when these were separated
by an inter-electrode distance of 6 cm. In order to do this,
the transmitted voltage V0 was divided by the total injected
current I0 . It must be noticed that the frequency response of such
impedance can provide useful conclusions regarding optimum
values of input and output impedances for the IBC transceiver
design. However, only few bioimpedance data exist in the IBC
literature. For this reason, and with the end of obtaining a general
expression, the real and imaginary parts of the impedance were
plotted in a Cole diagram and a least-mean-square algorithm
was applied to obtain a curve-fitting, from which the parameters
of a three-dispersion Cole–Cole model were derived [28]:

D = ε0 E + P = ε 0 ε r E

(3)

which yields the following equation in the frequency domain:
−∇ · ((σ + jωε0 )∇V − (Je + jωP)) = 0

(4)

where J is the current density [A/m2 ], σ the electrical conductivity [S/m], E the electric field intensity [V/m], Je the source
current density [A/m2 ], ω the angular frequency [rad/s], and ρ
the electric charge density [C/m3 ]. In addition, D represents the
electric displacement [C/m2 ], and its constitutive relation in (3)
involves the electric polarization vector P [C/m2 ] as well as the
relative permittivity εr [F/m] and the permittivity of vacuum ε0 .
Finally, V is the scalar electric potential [V].
It should be noticed that this formulation is only valid when
the wavelength is much larger than the dimensions of the geometry proposed in such a way that both inductive and wave
propagation effects can be considered negligible. For this reason, no frequency exceeding 100 MHz has been used in this
study [5]. Regarding signal excitation, fixed voltage boundary
conditions were established for each electrode (either signal or
ground). Therefore, the voltage signal launched into the human
arm V0 was differentially established through a fixed-voltage
Dirichlet boundary condition for both transmitter electrodes
(V = V0 1 = 1[V]) and (V = V0 2 = −1[V]), in such a way that
V0 = V0 1 − V0 2 . Electric insulation for the external air layer
(n · J = 0) was considered and an infinite elements approach
was used in order to define an external unbounded air domain.

Z(ω) = R∞ +

3

i=1

ΔRi
.
1 + (jωτi )α i

(5)

Subsequently, the electric field distribution on a crosssectional plane corresponding to the TX of the electrodes was
simulated. In addition, in order to gain an understanding of
the electric field penetration toward the tissue, an average electric field value for each tissue volume was calculated. In much
the same way, the current distribution through the arm was
also obtained for different frequencies (100 kHz, 1 MHz, and
100 MHz), inter-electrode distances (tl = 6 and tl = 12 cm),
and channel lengths (cl = 5, cl = 10, and cl = 15 cm). Moreover, the total percentage of the current crossing each of the
different tissues was also calculated by first integrating the normal current flux over a tissue surface area and then dividing it by

778

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 2.

Galvanic coupling experimental setup.

the total injected current I0 . In order to analyze the influence of
inter-electrode distance on the percentage of the current passing through each tissue, three different distances of 3, 6, and
12 cm were studied. These specific inter-electrode distances
were selected due to their correspondence with different electrode arrangements: very close (3 cm), almost opposite each
other (12 cm), and in an intermediate position (6 cm). This is of
particular interest as they represent three different cases where
the position of electrodes is expected to considerably influence
the current distribution through the human arm.
On the other hand, the galvanic coupling pathloss was obtained by calculating the ratio between the received and the
transmitted voltage in dB, Vl and V0 , respectively, according
to (6). The influence of parameters such as channel length and
inter-electrode distance on pathloss was studied for a frequency
of 40 kHz, which was shown to present a maximum of gain
in [19]. For the sake of validation, the behavior of simulated
results was compared with experimental results obtained using
a measurement procedure previously reported in [19].
Pathloss(dB) = 20 log10

Vl
Vl − Vl 2
= 20 log10 1
V0
V0 1 − V0 2

Fig. 3.

Magnitude and phase of simulated bioimpedance Z 0 over frequency.

(6)

III. GALVANIC COUPLING EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In order to validate the simulated results, experimental measurements were carried out using an experimental setup previously reported by the authors in [19]. The galvanic coupling
setup, shown in Fig. 2, was formed by a signal generator at the
transmitter side (TX), a digital oscilloscope at the receiver side
(RX), and four electrodes attached to the skin in a differential
configuration. In addition, a pair of baluns was used in order to
isolate the internal grounds of the measurement equipment, thus
avoiding cabled paths. Four square copper electrodes with an
area of 2 cm × 2 cm were placed on the arm of a male volunteer
subject with a 65-cm arm length and an average arm diameter of
9.5 cm. A constant transmitted peak-to-peak voltage of 5 V was
established between the two transmitter electrodes. More details
about the experimental setup can be found in [19]. In addition,
with the aim of analyzing parameters such as channel length
and inter-electrode distance, a fixed frequency of 40 kHz, which
was shown to present a lower attenuation value, was chosen. In
this way, different channel lengths cl from 5 cm to 20 cm and
different inter-electrode distances tl of 3, 5, 7, 9, and 12 cm
were tested. Finally, the experiments were repeated over five

Fig. 4. Simulated Cole–Cole diagram of Z 0 bioimpedance (marked line)
and three-dispersion Cole–Cole curve-fitted model (solid line). The subfigure
presents a detailed zoom of the two-dispersion zone at high frequencies.

consecutive days under the same conditions and the average
measurements were taken.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Bioimpedance
The simulated results obtained for bioimpedance Z0 are represented in Fig. 3. It can be seen that as the frequency increases,
the magnitude decreases and the phase has an inflexion point at
approximately 20 kHz. Even when bioimpedance results have
not usually been reported in the IBC literature [20]–[23], these
results agree well with those simulated in [29] as well as with experimental measurements carried out in [30]. In addition, the results adequately fit a three-dispersion Cole model (5), as shown
in Fig. 4, whose derived parameters are listed in Table II. An
interesting result is that a dominant dispersion was found up to
1 MHz, although two more dispersions are needed in order to

CALLEJÓN et al.: GALVANIC COUPLING TRANSMISSION IN INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: A FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH

779

TABLE II
THREE-DISPERSION COLE-COLE BIOIMPEDANCE MODEL

Fig. 5. Logarithm of simulated electric field pattern E [V/m] (0 dB indicates 1 V/m) at the transmitter cross-sectional plane at four different frequencies: 1 kHz,
100 kHz, 1 MHz, and 100 MHz. Results have been normalized for a transmitted voltage of 1 [V].

up to 1 MHz, but as the frequency increases, penetration toward
inner tissues also increases, and the majority of the electric field
is no longer confined to the skin, but instead to the fat. Furthermore, the electric field considerably increases in the muscle and
bone. The component of the electric field in the surrounding air
near the human arm was calculated by considering an external
air volume of a radius equal to two times that of the arm, as
shown in Fig. 1. It proved to have an average value of around
0.1 V/m, however it does increase slightly with frequency. Nevertheless, in the frequency range under study, it is always lower
than that found in the skin and fat, confirming that radiation is
negligible over this frequency range.
C. Current Density

Fig. 6. Simulated average of electric field magnitude E [V/m] in different
tissue volumes composing the human arm as a function of frequency. The
values correspond to a transmitted voltage of 1 [V].

fully emulate the impedance response at higher frequencies. It
should be noticed that Z0 at low frequencies is in the range of
tens of kilo-ohms while it tends to the tens of ohms at higher
frequencies.
B. Electric Field
The simulated electric field pattern at the transmitter electrodes is shown in Fig. 5 for four different frequencies (1 kHz,
100 kHz, 1 MHz, and 100 MHz) in a logarithmic scale. The
results were normalized, in such a way that they represent the
electric field pattern for a transmitted voltage of Vo = 1 [V]. For
other transmitted voltages, results could easily be generalized
by scaling with the corresponding factor. From the results, it can
be seen that at 1 kHz, the electric field is mainly confined to the
outer layers of the arm (mainly the skin) and the surrounding air,
while it is almost negligible in the muscle and bone. However, as
the frequency increases, penetration toward inner tissues begins
to become more noticeable. Subsequently, the average electric
field was calculated for the tissue volumes shown in Fig. 1. The
simulated results (Fig. 6) confirm the aforementioned trend: the
electric field is mainly confined to the skin at low frequencies

The current density simulated through the different tissues
composing the human arm is shown in Fig. 7 for different parameters such as frequency, inter-electrode distance (tl ), and
channel length (cl ). For the sake of representation, the results
were first normalized by the injected current I0 expressed in
units of mA, and the logarithm was subsequently calculated.
Therefore, the results represent the logarithmic distribution of
the current density for an injected current of 1 mA. In addition, the results were simulated for different transverse planes
corresponding to the TX and RX sides, the latter being located
at three different channel lengths of 5, 10, and 15 cm. It can
be noticed that the distribution of the electric current varies
considerably depending on the frequency and channel length.
For example, at the TX, the majority of the current is confined
to the muscle at low frequencies (100 kHz) while as the frequency increases (100 MHz), the current also begins to increase
through skin. Regarding the effect of channel length, the current
density is considerably attenuated on its way through the arm.
In fact, it can be noticed that for a channel length of 15 cm
(RX cl = 15 cm), only a small amount of the electric current
arrives at the receiver electrodes, and therefore a greater attenuation is expected. Nevertheless, a better performance seems to
be found for longer inter-electrode distances (12 cm), since a
greater current density is observed in this case for all frequencies. However, it must be noticed that the total current crossing
a tissue is not only determined by the current density, but also
by the tissue area. Therefore, it is expected that more current

780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 7. Logarithm of magnitude of simulated current density distribution J [A/m2 ] for an injected current Io of 1 mA at both the transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX)
cross-sectional planes. Three different frequencies of 100 kHz, 1 MHz, and 100 MHz, three different channel lengths of 5, 10, and 15 cm, and two inter-electrode
distances of 6 and 12 cm were analyzed.

ent inter-electrode distances correspond respectively to different
geometrical arrangements of electrodes on the arm: as the electrodes are positioned further away from each other, the current
lines distribute more widely through the cross-sectional plane
of the arm. However, in the case of small inter-electrode distances, such as 3 cm, the electrodes are very close together, and
the electric current finds a shorter pathway through the skin. On
the other hand, only a small percentage of the current reaches
the bone, which also depends on the inter-electrode distance.
In fact, a greater percentage (about 5%) crosses the cancellous
bone at a separation of 12 cm, which is even higher than that
through the fat at the same distance. However, at a separation
of 6 cm, this behavior is inverted and a greater percentage of
current passes through the fat instead of the cancellous bone.

Fig. 8. Simulated percentage of injected current crossing each tissue for different inter-electrode distances: 3, 6, and 12 cm.

passes through those tissues which have a greater area, such as
the muscle. The percentage of the total current crossing each
tissue for different inter-electrode distances is shown in Fig. 8.
Due to its larger area, the major part of the current is confined
to the muscle for all frequencies and inter-electrode distances.
Nevertheless, this percentage diminishes at frequencies above
1 MHz, at the same time as the percentage of current through the
skin increases to 40%, in the case of an inter-electrode separation of 3 cm. In general, as the electrodes are positioned closer to
each other, a greater percentage of the current crosses the skin at
higher frequencies. This can also be down to the fact that differ-

D. Pathloss
In order to analyze the influence of parameters such as channel length and inter-electrode distance on pathloss, different
simulations using (6) were performed at 40 kHz. For the sake of
comparison, simulated results together with experimental measurements are presented.
1) Influence of Channel Length: Simulated pathloss results
for several channel lengths at a frequency of 40 kHz and with an
inter-electrode distance of 9 cm were obtained. In order to show
its dependence on this parameter, simulated results of specific
pathloss in dB/cm for channel lengths between 5 and 20 cm have
been represented in Fig. 9. It can be seen that attenuation increases with the channel length, as much as 4 dB/cm for a length
of 5 cm, thus matching the experimental measurements obtained
by the authors in [19], as well as other outcomes also reported

CALLEJÓN et al.: GALVANIC COUPLING TRANSMISSION IN INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: A FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH

Fig. 9. Specific pathloss versus channel length for a frequency of 40 kHz
and an inter-electrode distance of 9 cm. Comparison between simulated and
experimental results.

in the literature [4], [20]. This result is also corroborated by
the simulated results in Fig. 7, where the received current diminishes as the channel length increases. On the other hand, an
approximate specific pathloss of about −2 dB/cm was observed
for channel lengths longer than 5 cm. The error, calculated as the
difference between simulated and experimental results, is also
represented in Fig. 9. It can be seen that this error is not constant
but actually depends on the channel length, with a maximum
value near 1.5 dB/cm. Nevertheless, the magnitude of this error
is within the range found in previous studies for the standard deviation of experimental results over different days [19], [21]. In
addition, this variation between modeled and measured results
could be due to the fact that as channel length increases, the
far-field component becomes more noticeable, as was reported
in [18], and therefore, other unpredictable phenomena such as
radiation effects and interferences with the surrounding environment may have an impact on pathloss measurements [27].
Moreover, without loss of generality, the electronic measurement devices were not considered in this model, due to their
being out of the scope; however, they do produce an effect on
pathloss.
2) Influence of Interelectrode Distance: Pathloss simulations for several inter-electrode distances at a frequency of
40 kHz and a channel length of 10 cm were obtained. In Fig. 10,
results have been represented in terms of specific pathloss as a
function of inter-electrode distance. The results evidence that
there exists a dependence between them, and more specifically, that attenuation decreases considerably as this distance
increases, for example about 1 dB/cm for a distance of 6 cm.
In general, the experimental measurements agree well with the
simulated results. It must be noticed that the order of the maximum error found was 1 dB/cm for a distance of 2 cm, which is
within the range obtained for variability of experimental measurements between different days. On the other hand, the dependency found between pathloss and inter-electrode distance
can be explained through the results shown in Fig. 7, where a
higher current density is observed for a greater inter-electrode

781

Fig. 10. Specific pathloss (dB/cm) versus inter-electrode distance (cm) for
a frequency of 40 kHz and a channel length of 10 cm. Comparison between
simulated and experimental results.

distance of 12 cm. In this case, the majority of the current
distributes widely through the muscle, in such a way that more
current density is achieved at the RX. In this sense, the simulated
results also confirm the experimental results obtained by the authors in [19], which suggests that better performance can be
achieved by increasing the separation between electrodes of the
same pair. On the other hand, this phenomenon could also be the
cause of the data divergence observed between results reported
by different authors. It must be noticed that inter-electrode distance also depends on the arm diameter of the subject, i.e., the
same inter-electrode distance for subjects with different arm diameters leads to different electrode configurations on the arm,
and therefore, to a different current distribution. On the other
hand, according to the results, it is also expected that both anthropometrical characteristics and body mass composition of
the user under test considerably affect the measurements, as has
also been previously highlighted in the literature [19].
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, a 3-D FEM model of a human arm in the IBC
galvanic coupling has been proposed as a first approach toward
an understanding of some key IBC signal transmission mechanisms. With this objective, frequency-dependent dielectric properties of tissue were emulated by means of Cole–Cole models.
A conservation problem for the electric potential was solved in
COMSOL Multyphysics following a four-port network configuration. This model has allowed us to obtain simulated results
such as bioimpedance, electric field, current density distribution,
and pathloss. It must be noticed that the simulated results present
a similar trend to those obtained in practice, thus confirming the
usefulness of the model proposed in this study to explain some
IBC galvanic coupling transmission mechanisms. The influence
of key IBC parameters, including frequency, channel length,
and inter-electrode distance has also been analyzed. In addition,
detailed simulations of the average electric field and percentage
of the current through different tissues have been derived. Consequently, this model has proved useful to gain an insight into

782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

bioimpedance and transmission paths through the human body
from a bioelectrical viewpoint. Therefore, the main conclusions
derived from this study are as follows:
1) The bioimpedance Z0 has a dominant dispersion up to
1 MHz. However, two other dispersions are needed in
order to emulate its complex frequency behavior at higher
frequencies. The Cole–Cole parameters provided for Z0
in this study showed a value in the range of kilo-ohms at
low frequencies and in the range of tens of ohms at higher
frequencies.
2) The electric field is mainly confined to the outer layers of
the arm in the range from 1 kHz to 100 MHz, evidencing
that the far-field component, associated to radiation, could
be neglected, as was also concluded in [21] and [29]. In
this paper, it has been also found that the electric field
is mainly confined in the skin up to 1 MHz, and that it
only decreases about 5 dB up to 100 MHz. Therefore, a
high value of electric field is present in the skin at this
range, suggesting that this is an adequate range for IBC
galvanic transmission when electrodes are attached to the
skin. At the same time, the electric field in inner tissues
such as fat, muscle, and bone considerably increases at
frequencies higher than 1 MHz, showing an increment in
the magnitude of about 30 dB, due to the fact that the
injected current Io also increases as the bioimpedance Z0
decreases.
3) The majority of the electric current in the galvanic coupling travels through the muscle, possibly due to its higher
conductivity and larger area. In addition, the percentage
of the current passing through the muscle is greater for
larger inter-electrode distances. In fact, as the distance decreases, a great part of the current no longer flows through
the muscle but instead starts to pass through the skin and
fat (as much as 40% through the skin for an inter-electrode
distance of 3 cm). Finally, even when the percentage of
current flowing through the bone also increases with frequency, it always remains below 7% in our study.
4) Pathloss has shown to be dependent on the channel length,
showing larger attenuation values as this parameter increases. In [20], a decrease of pathloss between 6 and 9 dB
for increments of 5 cm in channel length were reported.
In [23], it was concluded that the signal transmission distance has relatively less influence between 10 and 100 kHz.
In this paper, both our simulated and experimental results
confirm that pathloss considerably decreases as the channel length increases, as far as 20 dB for an increment of
5 cm. Therefore, an optimum channel length would be the
shortest one, but this is in turn a practical limitation. For
this reason, it can be concluded that galvanic coupling in
human limbs is more adequate when short distances are
required.
5) Pathloss has proved to be highly dependent on the interelectrode distance, obtaining lower attenuation results (up
to 20 dB) for larger distances. This is due to the fact
that a higher electrical current is received in such cases.
This could be explained by the fact that when the interelectrode distance is greater, the current distributes more

widely through the transverse section of the arm. From
a design viewpoint, an optimum inter-electrode distance
would be the largest possible for each subject, which is
achieved when the electrodes are located on the arm symmetrically opposite to each other. It must be noticed that
this separation varies from person to person, in such a
way that a personalized optimum value could possibly be
found for each subject depending on their arm radius.
In view of the results, the inter-electrode distance seems to
represent a significant design parameter in the IBC galvanic
coupling. In fact, this could be used to explain the reason why
experimental results for different subjects diverge. In this sense,
from a geometrical viewpoint, it must be noticed that different
arm diameters and inter-electrode distances intrinsically lead
to different electrode arrangements, which considerably affects
current distribution through the arm. As future research, the
study of the effect of inter-subject variations (e.g., different anthropometric characteristics and bioelectric properties), which
could lead to significant advances toward personalization of
IBC devices, will be considered. In addition, the methods proposed in this study can be extended to other parts of the body
by resizing the shapes and dimensions as well as taking into
account other tissue distributions. However, not all parts of the
body exhibit the same ground coupling paths and there are also
bioelectric sources that may influence the electrical pathways
through human tissues (e.g., in the heart or the brain). Finally,
modeling different electrode geometries and types would also
be interesting in order to discriminate the optimum electrodes
for IBC performance.
REFERENCES
[1] T. G. Zimmerman, “Personal Area Networks: Near-field intrabody communication,” IBM Syst. J., vol. 35, no. 3.4, pp. 609–617, 1996.
[2] M. Seyedi, B. Kibret, D. T. H. Lai, and M. Faulkner, “A survey on intrabody communications for body area network applications,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2067–2079, Aug. 2013.
[3] M. S. Wegmueller, M. Oberle, N. Felber, N. Kuster, and W. Fichtner,
“Signal transmission by galvanic coupling through the human body,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 963–969, Apr. 2010.
[4] X. M. Chen, P. U. Mak, S. H. Pun, Y. M. Gao, M. I. Vai, and M. Du,
“Signal transmission through human muscle for implantable medical devices using galvanic intra-body communication technique,” in Proc. IEEE
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Sep. 2012, pp. 1651–1654.
[5] Z. Lucev, I. Krois, and M. Cifrek, “A capacitive intrabody communication
channel from 100 kHz to 100 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 61,
no. 12, pp. 3280–3289, Dec. 2012.
[6] R. Xu, W. Ng, H. Zhu, H. Shan, and J. Yuan, “Equation environment
coupling and interference on the electric-field intrabody communication
channel,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 2051–2059, Jul.
2012.
[7] J. Wang, Y. Nishikawa, and T. Shibata, “Analysis of on-body transmission mechanism and characteristic based on an electromagnetic field approach,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2464–
2470, Oct. 2009.
[8] K. Hachisuka, T. Takeda, Y. Terauchi, K. Sasaki, H. Hosaka, and K. Itao,
“Intra-body data transmission for the personal area network,” Microsyst.
Technol., vol. 11, pp. 1020–1027, Aug. 2005.
[9] L. Wang et al., “A wireless biomedical signal interface system-on-chip for
body sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 112–117, Apr. 2010.
[10] Y. Song, K. Zhang, B. Kang, R. Xie, F. Shang, and Q. Hao, “The sensitivity characteristics of the electrostatic coupling intra-body communication
based on the Mach-Zehnder electro-optic modulation,” in Communications in Computer and Information Science. vol. 202, Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 210–216.

CALLEJÓN et al.: GALVANIC COUPLING TRANSMISSION IN INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: A FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH

[11] H.-Y. Shih and Y.-C. Chang, “68.4 W 400 MHz intrabody communication
receiver front-end for biomedical applications,” Electron. Lett., vol. 48,
no. 3, pp. 143–144, Feb. 2012.
[12] H. Cho, J. Bae, and H.-J. Yoo, “A 37.5 body channel communication
wake-up receiver with injection-locking ring oscillator for wireless body
area network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Regular Papers, vol. 60, no. 5,
pp. 1200–1208, May 2013.
[13] M. Callejón, D. Naranjo, L. Reina-Tosina, and L. Roa, “Distributed circuit
modeling of galvanic and capacitive coupling for intrabody communication,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3263–3269, Nov.
2012.
[14] Y. Song, Q. Hao, K. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Chu, and B. Kang, “The simulation method of the galvanic coupling intrabody communication with
different signal transmission paths,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 60,
no. 4, pp. 1257–1266, Apr. 2011.
[15] K. Fujii, M. Takahashi, and K. Ito, “Electric field distributions of wearable
devices using the human body as a transmission channel,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 2080–2087, Jul. 2007.
[16] N. Haga, K. Saito, M. Takahashi, and K. Ito, “Equivalent circuit of intrabody communication channels inducing conduction currents inside the
human body,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2807–
2816, May 2013.
[17] R. Xu, H. Zhu, and J. Yuan, “Electric-field intrabody communication
channel modeling with finite element method,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 705–712, Mar. 2011.
[18] J. Bae, H. Cho, K. Song, H. Lee, and H.-J. Yoo, “The signal transmission
mechanism on the surface of human body for body channel communication,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 582–593,
Mar. 2012.
[19] M. A. Callejon, D. Naranjo-Hernandez, J. Reina-Tosina, and L. M. Roa,
“A comprehensive study into intrabody communication measurements,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas, vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 2446–2455, Sep. 2013.
[20] M. S. Wegmueller, A. Kuhn, J. Froehlich, M. Oberle, N. Felber, N. Kuster,
and W. Fichtner, “An attempt to model the human body as a communication channel,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1851–1857,
Oct. 2007.
[21] S. H. Pun, Y. M. Gao, P. U. Mak, M. I. Vai, and M. Du, “Quasi-static modeling of human limb for intra-body communications with experiments,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 870–876, Nov. 2011.
[22] Z. Lucev, A. Korican, and M. Cifrek, “A finite element method study of
the current density distribution in a capacitive intrabody communication
system,” in Proc. 12th IFMBE Proc. Mediterr. Conf. Med. Biolog. Eng.
Comput., 2010, pp. 422–425.
[23] Y. Song, K. Zhang, Q. Hao, L. Hu, J. Wang, and F. Shang, “A finiteelement simulation of galvanic coupling intra-body communication based
on the whole human body,” Sensors, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 13567–13582,
Oct. 2012.
[24] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2271–2293, 1996.
[25] AC/DC Module User’s Guide, Comsol Multiphysics Inc., Burlington USA,
2012.
[26] N. Cho, J. Yoo, S.-J. Song, J. Lee, S. Jeon, and H.-J. Yoo, “The human body
characteristics as a signal transmission medium for intrabody communication,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1080–1086,
May 2007.
[27] G. Koutitas, “Multiple human effects in body area networks,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1080–1086, May 2007.
[28] L. M. Roa, D. Naranjo, J. Reina-Tosina, A. Lara, J. A. Milán,
M. A. Estudillo, and J. S. Oliva, “Applications of bioimpedance to end
stage renal disease (ESRD),” in Modelling and Control of Dialysis Systems, Studies in Computational Intelligence. vol. 404, New York, NY,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 2013, pp. 689–769.
[29] K. Koshiji, K. Sasaki, D. Muramatsu, and K. Koshiji, “Input impedance
characteristics of wearable transmitter electrodes for intra-body communication,” in Proc. IEEE 1st Global Conf. Consum. Electron., 2012, pp. 362–
363.
[30] J. Rosell, J. Colominas, P. Riu, R. Pallas-Areny, and J. G. Webster, “Skin
impedance from 1 Hz to 1 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35,
no. 8, pp. 649–651, Aug. 1988.

783

M. Amparo Callejón was born in Huelva, Spain. She
received the Telecomm. Eng. degree in 2009 from the
University of Seville, Spain, where she is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Biomedical
Engineering Group.
Her current research interests include bioelectromagnetics and biosignal processing.

Javier Reina-Tosina (S’99–M’06) was born in
Seville, Spain. He received the Telecomm. Eng. and
Doctor degrees from the University of Seville, Spain,
in 1996 and 2003, respectively.
Since 1997, he has been with the Department of
Signal Theory and Communications, University of
Seville, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests include the integration of
information technologies in biomedicine, intelligent
devices for homecare, and bioelectromagnetics.

David Naranjo-Hernández (S’10–M’12) was born
in Azuaga (Badajoz), Spain. He received the
Telecomm. Eng. degree in 2007 from the University of Seville, Spain, where he is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree at the Biomedical Engineering Group.
His current research interests include smart sensor
networks and bioelectromagnetics.

Laura M. Roa (M’93–SM’96–F’03) was born in
Tarifa (Cádiz), Spain. She received the Ph.D. degree
(cum laude) from the University of Seville, Spain.
She is a Full Professor of systems and automatics engineering at the University of Seville, where
she founded the Biomedical Engineering Research
Group and is currently the In-Charge. Her research
interests include multiscale computational modeling
for multimodal diagnosis, arquitectures for the integration of social/health services, intelligent devices
for ambient assisted living, and bioelectromagnetics.
Prof. Roa is a Fellow of the American Institute for Medical and Biological
Engineering and the International Academy for Medical and Biological Engineering Sciences, and a member of the Royal Medical Academy of Seville,
Spain. She is currently the President of the Spanish Biomedical Engineering
Society. She is also member of the Advisory Board of the IEEE Transactions
on Information Technology in Biomedicine.

