IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

1473

Limited Correlation Between Conventional
Pathologist and Automatic Computer-Assisted
Quantification of Hepatic Steatosis due to
Difference Between Event-Based
and Surface-Based Analysis
Meihong Deng, Uta Dahmen, Jian Sun, Hai Huang, Christian Sehestedt, Andre Homeyer,
Andrea Schenk, and Olaf Dirsch

Abstract—Computer-assisted automatic quantification (CAQ)
was developed as an alternative method for the diagnosis of hepatic
steatosis in order to compensate for observer-dependent bias. Here,
we aim to demonstrate that CAQ can provide an accurate and precise result in analysis of fatty content, but that it is inappropriate to
validate CAQ by comparison with conventional pathologist estimation (PE). Male rats were fed with a methionine-choline-deficient
plus high-fat diet for three days, one week, or two weeks to induce mild, moderate, or severe steatosis. Samples were collected
from all liver lobes. Severity of hepatic steatosis was assessed by
an experienced pathologist who estimated the percentage of hepatocytes containing lipid droplets. Fatty content was quantified by
PE, CAQ, and biochemical analysis (BA). CAQ, PE, and BA can
correctly reflect severe fatty change. However, in the case of mild
and moderate steatosis, PE could not reflect the true fatty content
(r between PE and BA was <0). The result of CAQ correlated well
with that of BA among the various degrees of severity of hepatic
steatosis. In conclusion, due to a difference between event-based
and surface-based analysis, it is inappropriate to validate the CAQ
of hepatic steatosis by comparison with PE.

Manuscript received May 6, 2013; revised August 17, 2013; accepted September 5, 2013. Date of publication November 5, 2013; date of current version June
30, 2014. This work was supported by the DFG-funded Klinische Forschergruppe KFO117: “Optimierung der Leberlebendspende,” (Grant Da251/5-2 and
3, Project B2), and the BMBF-funded Virtual Liver Network.
M. Deng and H. Huang were with the Department of General, Visceral and
Transplantation Surgery, University Hospital Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany.
Both are now with the Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: meihongdeng@hotmail.com;
hansonhuangsums@hotmail.com).
U. Dahmen and J. Sun were with the Department of General, Visceral and
Transplantation Surgery, University Hospital Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany
and moved to the Experimental Transplantation Surgery, Department of General, Visceral, and Vascular Surgery, Universsity Hospital of Jena, 07743 Jena,
Germany (e-mail: uta.dahmen@med.uni-jena.de; sjmed02@outlook.com).
A. Homeyer and A. Schenk are with the Fraunhofer MEVIS, Institute for Medical Image Computing, University Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany (e-mail:
Andre.Homeyer@mevis.fraunhofer.de; andrea.schenk@mevis.fraunhofer.de).
O. Dirsch is with the Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Jena, 07743
Jena, Germany (e-mail: olaf.dirsch@gmail.com).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2282999

Index Terms—Biochemical analysis (BA), computer-assisted
quantification (CAQ), hepatic steatosis, pathologist estimation
(PE).

I. INTRODUCTION
IVER biopsy is regarded as the gold standard for qualitative and quantitative diagnosis of hepatic steatosis [1], [2].
With the emergence of other noninvasive diagnostic methods,
such as CT and MR, this gold standard has been challenged.
However, liver biopsy still plays an irreplaceable role in the
diagnosis of hepatic steatosis, since some pathological and morphological changes in the liver can only be identified by pathologist examination.
The classic pathological evaluation of the severity of fatty
change is an event-based estimation. It is generally determined by estimating the proportion of hepatocytes containing
fat droplets: less than 1/3 = mild, 1/3 to 2/3 = moderate, and
>2/3 = severe [1], [2]. However, observer-dependent bias can
contribute to the inaccurate and inconsistent quantitative assessment of hepatic steatosis. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the accuracy of quantification methods of fatty change.
Computer-assisted automatic quantification (CAQ) of fatty content was developed to eliminate observer-dependent bias. Most
CAQ algorithms use a surface-based analysis which measures
the total surface area covered by lipid droplets in relation to
the total surface area of the image [3]. It is commonly validated by comparison with the result of a pathologist’s estimation
(PE) which assesses the percentage of hepatocytes containing
lipid droplets. Some studies have demonstrated that the surfacebased algorithm for CAQ of liver fatty content correlated well
with the result of PE, and thus concluded that their CAQs were
valid [3]–[5]. Yet, recent studies have shown that CAQ can provide a more accurate and precise result in quantification of liver
content than PE [6]–[8]. One study has stated that “quantification of hepatic steatosis in histological sections is strongly
observer-dependent, not reproducible, and does not correlate
with the computerized estimation” [9].
In this study, we demonstrate that the surface-based computerassisted quantification of the fatty content in the liver correlates well with biochemical results, but does not and cannot

L

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1474

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

correspond to a pathologist-based estimation except when analyzing the extreme condition of no or 100% macrovesicular
steatosis.
II. METHODS
A. Experimental Design
In this study, we aimed to demonstrate that it is inappropriate
to compare the severity of hepatic steatosis as determined by
CAQ with that determined by a pathologist.
A rat hepatic steatosis model was established by feeding the
rats with methionine-choline-deficient plus high-fat (MCD +
HF) diet. The severity of hepatic steatosis was evaluated by
pathologist examination, CAQ, and biochemical analysis (BA)
of the fat content. Based on the PE, hepatic steatosis was graded
into three different severities: mild, moderate, and severe. The
hepatic steatosis quantified by all three methods was subjected
to correlation analysis.
B. Animals
Male inbred Lewis rats weighing 250 to 350 g were purchased
from the Animal Facility of University Hospital Essen. Animals
were housed under standard animal care conditions and fed
with rat chow ad libitum. All procedures were carried out in
accordance with German Animal Welfare Legislation.
C. Establishment of the Fatty Liver Model
In order to establish hepatic steatosis of different degrees
(mild, moderate, and severe), rats were treated with MCD +
HF (ssniff, Soest, Germany) diet for three days (n = 1), one
week (n = 1), or two weeks (n = 1). Rats were monitored daily
with respect to activity, body weight, food consumption, and
excretion.

Frost Plus microscope slide (R. Langenbrinck, Teningen, Germany) and dried at 37 ◦ C overnight. After deparaffinization with
xylol (Thermo, Rockford, IL, USA) and rehydration in ethanol
gradient, sections were stained with eosin (Sigma, St. Louis,
MO, USA) for 30 s. After washing in phosphate buffered saline,
sections were stained with hematoxylin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO,
USA) for 1 min. After rinsing with running tap water, sections
were dehydrated and mounted.
A Hamamatsu scanner (NanoZoomer 2.0-HT), Hamamatsu
Photonics K.K. (Japan) was used for generation of virtual images. The images have a dynamic magnification up to 40×
with 0.23-μm/pixel resolution. The digital images were exported from the Hamamatsu scan image at 20× magnification.
Fifteen nonoverlapping images were exported per tissue sample
slide (n = 15/slide). The images were used for automatic image
analysis.
F. Pathologist-Based Assessment
An experienced pathologist evaluated the scanned images of
whole slides. The severity of hepatic steatosis was evaluated
by estimating the percentage of hepatocytes containing lipid
droplets. Based on the size and the number of lipid drops within
the hepatocyte cytoplasm, the pathologist diagnosed either microvesicular or macrovesicular steatosis, respectively. Based on
the estimated number of hepatocytes containing lipid droplets,
the pathologist graded the severity as mild (less than one-third
of hepatocytes), moderate (less than two-thirds of hepatocytes),
or severe (more than two-thirds of hepatocytes).
Furthermore, for every single image, the relative percentage
of fat-containing hepatocytes was estimated (120 ROI/animal).
G. CAQ of Fatty Change

Body weight was monitored daily after starting MCD + HF
feeding. Livers were explanted to measure the liver weight. The
liver weight-to-body weight ratio (LW/BW) was calculated using the following formula: LW/BW = Liver Weight × 100/Body
Weight.
Samples were taken following the principles of design-based
stereology (standardized random sampling). The right median
lobe and left lateral lobe (LLL) were each divided into three
equal parts, based on the anatomical position (cranial part, intermediate part, and caudal part). The left median lobe was divided into two parts (cranial and caudal). A 0.3 × 0.3 × 0.3 cm3
sample was taken from the center of each part.
These eight samples/animal were fixed in formalin at 4 ◦ C for
48 h and then embedded in paraffin. The rest of the tissue from
each part was snap-frozen at −80 ◦ C and stored until BA was
performed for fatty content.

An algorithm was generated by modifying a previously generated algorithm based on the software analysis (Olympus Soft
Imaging Solution, Münster, Germany), for quantification of a
BrdU-labeling index [10]. Digital image analysis starts with the
step of color separation. The color images were converted into
gray-scale images from the red, green, and blue channels. The
green channel demonstrated the largest contrast between white
and grey color and as such was selected for color inversion. The
white fatty droplets were inverted into dark grey. The program
calculated the relevant grey value range for the inverted image.
The overflow was set at 49% in order to ignore 49% of the
lightest grey pixels when calculating the thresholds. Parameters focusing on the roundness (0.8–1) and area (80–200 pixels)
of the droplets were set to exclude the sinusoids and vessels.
The fatty droplets fulfilling the criteria of size and shape were
detected and their areas were calculated automatically. The extent of hepatic steatosis was calculated as the percentage of the
surface area of fatty droplets in relation to the total area of the
image.

E. Histology Processing and Image Acquisitions

H. BA of the Fatty Content

From each block, one section was cut at 4 μm, floating in
a water bath at 40 ◦ C. The sections were mounted on Super-

The liver sample was weighed to record the initial sample
weight (W0). The fat extraction was conducted using automated

D. Sampling

DENG et al.: LIMITED CORRELATION BETWEEN CONVENTIONAL PATHOLOGIST AND AUTOMATIC CAQ

1475

TABLE I
QUANTIFICATION OF FATTY CHANGE FROM ALL THREE METHODS.

Fig. 1. Fatty liver change. The upper images show the liver at the time of
harvest. The middle images are the whole H&E stained slide of the LLL scanned
by the Hamamatu scanner. The lower image shows one 20× view from the
Hamamatu scan. (LW/BW: liver weight to body weight ratio; RML: right median
lobe; LML: left median lobe; LLL: left lateral lobe).

laboratory equipment (Soxtherm SOX 414 and SOX 412,
Lennox Laboratory Supplies Ltd., Dublin, Ireland). The liver
tissue was homogenized and heated with hydrochloric acid to
unlock proteins and release bound lipids. This solution was
filtered. The remaining fat in the filter was extracted with
petroleum ether. The solvent was distilled and the dried residue
was weighed using a precision scale (Fisher scientific, Braunschweig, Germany) to record the final fat weight (W1). The fat
content was calculated by the difference between the initial and
final weights: lipid content in %w/w = (W1 × 100)/W0.
I. Statistical Analysis
Numerical variables were summarized and analyzed using
Sigmaplot 10.0 in combination with SigmaStat 3.0 (Statcon,
Witzenhausen, Germany). The data in Table I were presented as
mean and standard deviation. The coefficient of variation was
calculated. The correlation between the results of PE, CAQ,
and BA, was assessed using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients.
III. RESULTS
The body weight of all animals increased steadily (see supplemental Fig. 1). All animals were active throughout the observation period. This indicated that the steatosis induction protocol
was well tolerated by all rats, as had been previously observed.
Hepatic steatosis of different degrees was successfully induced
in rats treated with MCD + HF diet for an increasing number
of days.
Feeding a rat for three days caused mild steatosis. In the
rat treated with an MCD + HF diet for three days, the liver
was red and of normal size. The LW/BW was 3.69% which is

slightly higher than a normal LW/BW ratio of about 3%. Only
small vesicles could be found in individual hepatocytes. No
compression of hepatocyte nuclei was observed (see Fig. 1).
Feeding a rat for one week caused mild to moderate steatosis.
In the rat treated with an MCD + HF diet for one week, the liver
was found to be larger than normal. The LW/BW increased to
4.35%. Small lipid filled vesicles were seen in nearly all hepatocytes. Some hepatocytes even contained large fat droplets.
Feeding a rat for two weeks caused severe steatosis. In the
rat treated with an MCD + HF diet for two weeks, the liver
was found to be yellowish and much larger than normal. The
LW/BW was as high as 5.06%. Nearly all hepatocytes contained
single large fat droplets. The hepatocyte nuclei were pushed to
the side resulting in a crescent shape.
As a first step, we assessed the individual results generated by
each of the three different methods. The results of all three methods did correctly represent different extents (mild, moderate,
and severe) of steatosis. However, the result of the pathologistbased estimation had showed high variation among the mild (CV
= 282%) and moderate (CV = 84%) fatty change samples (see
Table I). This suggests that the fatty change distributed unevenly
in the liver. A pathologist-based estimation that is based on a
single view may not represent the true fatty change.
Next, we correlated the overall results from CAQ, BA, and
PE. The results from CAQ correlated strongly with the results
from BA (r = 0.975). The correlation coefficient obtained upon
correlation of the results from pathological analysis with the
other two methods was much lower (r = 0.897 versus CAQ, r =
0.913 versus BA) (see Fig. 2). The overall result of PE correlated
with the overall result of CAQ and BA; this suggests that the PE
can generally reflect the severity of fatty change. However, PE
has a weaker correlation with the other two methods.
As a third step, we correlated the results of each method according to the subgroups of severity of hepatic steatosis. The results generated with the CAQ did correlate with the results from

1476

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 2. Correlation between the results of computer assisted quantification,
PE, and BA. (AnalysSIS: computer assisted quantification, Patho: pathologist
estimation; and Bio: biochemical analysis, n = 20).

Fig. 3. Correlation between the results of computer assisted quantification, PE,
and BA among the different severities of fatty change. (AnalysSIS: computer
assisted quantification, Patho: pathologist estimation; and Bio: biochemical
analysis, n = 6).

BA in samples with high (r = 0.635), moderate (r = 0.992),
and mild (r = 0.672) degrees of steatosis (see Fig. 3). However, the extent of fatty content estimated by the pathologist
only correlated with the results from the CAQ (r = 0.6) and BA
(r = 0.652) in the highly steatotic samples. In the samples with
moderate and mild fatty change, PE did weakly/not at all correlate with the results from CAQ (PE versus CAQ: r = −0.245 in
moderate samples, and r = −0.425 in mild samples) or BA (PE
versus BA: r = −0.264 in moderate samples, and r = −0.523
in mild samples). This indicated that the PE of the fatty content only correlated with the CAQ and BA under the extreme
condition of severe steatosis.
Taken together, the extent of hepatic steatosis as determined
by CAQ correlated well with the BA results in all degrees of
severity but only correlated well with the PE in the extreme
situation of severe steatosis.
IV. DISCUSSION
The incidence of hepatic steatosis is high in western countries [11]. The quantification of severity of hepatic steatosis is an

important parameter in the evaluation of a liver graft [12], [13].
The severity of hepatic steatosis is a major factor determining
patient outcome after liver surgery [14]. Therefore, quantitative assessment of the fat content is necessary. Conventionally,
assessment by a pathologist was regarded as the gold standard.
Quantification of fatty change in the liver is based on the grading
system generated by Brunt et al. in 1999 [2]. However, observer
bias cannot be excluded in the case of pathologist-based estimation, which leads to a high risk of inconsistent results with
low interobserver reproducibility. Recent studies have revealed
that quantification of hepatic steatosis in histological sections
was strongly observer-dependent, not reproducible, and did not
correlate with the computerized estimation [9] and have additionally shown that the PE of the fat proportion overestimated
the severity of steatosis [15]. Image-based computer-assisted
automatic assessment was developed to compensate this pitfall
of the histology assessment. Most of the available programs in
the market follow a surface-based algorithm. The validation of
these programs is based on the correlation between the results
from CAQ and the PE [3]–[5].
In this study, we validate a custom-made algorithm for quantifying hepatic steatosis by comparing it with the result of BA,
which determines the relative weight of fat within the liver sample in respect to the total weight of the sample, expressed as
percentage. This principle is very similar to the surface-based
algorithm underlying CAQ, which calculates the relative area
covered by lipid droplets in relation to the total surface of the
section and is also expressed as percentage. Our findings show
that the results obtained from the surface-based computer algorithm correlated well with the results from the BA, irrespective
of the severity of hepatic steatosis.
We determined a high correlation between CAQ and PE when
considering the overall result, suggesting that PE can generally
reflect the severity of hepatic steatosis. However, the detailed
analysis revealed that the strength of correlation was related to
the severity of steatosis.
The PE only correlated with CAQ and BA in samples with
severe steatosis, but not in the samples with moderate or mild
steatosis. This is due to the inappropriate comparison between
two principally different methods. CAQ measures the percentage of the lipid droplets surface area with respect to the total
surface of the image. In contrast, PE is based on estimating the
percentage of the hepatocytes containing fatty change to the
total number of hepatocytes. If the result of computer assessment correlates with the PE, as reported by previous studies, the
correlation could be summarized as
CAQ(%) = k  × PE(%) − C, (k > 0, C > 0)
where k = % surface covered by lipid droplets per hepatocyte;
C = surface covered by nonhepatocyte structures in image (vascular structure, nonparenchymal cells, and bile duct).
If k, the relative surface covered by lipid droplets in hepatocytes was a constant and C, the relative surface covered
by nonhepatocyte structures in an image was a constant, the
correlation between pathologist and computer would be high.
However, the percentage of fat per hepatocyte varies throughout the liver. First, the fatty change in the liver follows a

DENG et al.: LIMITED CORRELATION BETWEEN CONVENTIONAL PATHOLOGIST AND AUTOMATIC CAQ

zonal distribution. For example, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis is
characterized by zone 3 accentuation of the lesion of steatosis [1]. Second, based on the size and number of fat vesicles and the compression of nucleus, steatosis is divided into
microsteatosis and macrosteatosis. In microsteatosis, single or
multiple small fatty vesicles appear in the cytoplasm without
compression of the nucleus. Since the number of vesicles per
hepatocyte varies throughout the liver, the relative amount of fat
per hepatocyte is not constant in microsteatosis. In macrosteatosis, a large lipid droplet is in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes compressing the nucleus. The size of the lipid droplet may also vary
from cell to cell. Thus, the relative amount of fat per hepatocytes is not constant in macrosteatosis either. In most cases,
both microsteatosis and macrosteatosis exist in the same liver.
Therefore, the relative amount of fat per hepatocyte is different
from cell to cell. A constant factor “k” in the aforementioned
formula does not exist in reality.
Furthermore, the extent of fatty change was calculated as the
percentage of the area of fatty droplets out of the total area
of the images in the computer analysis system. If the aforementioned formula is true, C should reflect the relative surface
covered by nonhepatocyte structures, expressed as a percentage.
If there are only hepatocytes in the liver, C should be equal to
0. In reality, a liver contains not only hepatocytes, but also nonparenchymal cells, vascular structures, and bile ducts. If these
structures are distributed evenly throughout the liver, and every
randomly selected image of a liver section would contain the
same percentage of these non-parenchymal structures, C should
be a constant. For example, all livers contain 15% nonparenchymal structures and these nonparenchymal structures distributes
evenly within the whole liver. In this case, C should be equal
to 15. However, in reality, these nonparenchymal structures distribute unevenly within the liver. The distribution of the number
and size of vessels, sinusoids and bile ducts per region of interest is variable throughout the liver. Therefore, the constant “C”
in the aforementioned formula does not exist in reality either.
Taken together, the surface-based quantification of the fatty
liver content can only correlate with the estimation by the pathologist in the two extreme cases of no steatosis or 100% steatosis.
It is inappropriate to make a comparison between these two principally different quantitative methods. CAQ can act as an acute,
precise, and unbias method for the microscopic quantification
of fatty change. It will be necessary to further investigate the
correlation between CAQ and the clinical outcome.
V. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the CAQ is an accurate and effective approach
to eliminate the observer-dependent bias in steatosis quantification. However, the validation of the computer assessment should
not be based on the comparison with the conventional PE.

1477

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. S. Dawiche for her help
in editing the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] E. M. Brunt, “Pathology of fatty liver disease,” Mod. Pathol., vol. 20,
pp. S40–S48, Feb. 2007.
[2] E. M. Brunt, C. G. Janney, A. M. Di Bisceglie, B. A. Neuschwander-Tetri,
and B. R. Bacon, “Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: A proposal for grading
and staging the histological lesions,” Amer. J. Gastroenterol., vol. 94,
pp. 2467–2474, Sep. 1999.
[3] H. Marsman, T. Matsushita, R. Dierkhising, W. Kremers, C. Rosen,
L. Burgart, and S. L. Nyberg, “Assessment of donor liver steatosis: Pathologist or automated software?” Hum. Pathol., vol. 35, pp. 430–435, Apr.
2004.
[4] R. N. Fiorini, J. Kirtz, B. Periyasamy, Z. Evans, J. K. Haines, G. Cheng,
C. Polito, D. Rodwell, S. F. Shafizadeh, X. Zhou, C. Campbell, J. Birsner,
M. Schmidt, D. Lewin, and K. D. Chavin, “Development of an unbiased
method for the estimation of liver steatosis,” Clin. Transplant., vol. 18,
pp. 700–706, Dec. 2004.
[5] C. M. Sabarense, K. S. Rocha, D. D. Rosa, J. H. Martins, M. M. Pereira,
F. F. Silva, and B. L. Steward, “A new computational method for hepatic
fat microvesicles counting in histological study in rats,” Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun., vol. 418, pp. 284–289, Feb. 10, 2012.
[6] M. Li, J. Song, S. Mirkov, S. Y. Xiao, J. Hart, and W. Liu, “Comparing
morphometric, biochemical, and visual measurements of macrovesicular
steatosis of liver,” Hum. Pathol., vol. 42, pp. 356–360, Mar. 2011.
[7] F. Ge, H. Lobdell, S. Zhou, C. Hu, and P. D. Berk, “Digital analysis
of hepatic sections in mice accurately quantitates triglycerides and selected properties of lipid droplets,” Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood.), vol. 235,
pp. 1282–1286, Nov. 2010.
[8] A. P. Levene, H. Kudo, M. J. Armstrong, M. R. Thursz, W. M. Gedroyc,
Q. M. Anstee, and R. D. Goldin, “Quantifying hepatic steatosis–more than
meets the eye,” Histopathology, vol. 60, pp. 971–981, May 2012.
[9] A. M. El-Badry, S. Breitenstein, W. Jochum, K. Washington, V. Paradis,
L. Rubbia-Brandt, M. A. Puhan, K. Slankamenac, R. Graf, and
P. A. Clavien, “Assessment of hepatic steatosis by expert pathologists:
The end of a gold standard,” Ann. Surg., vol. 250, pp. 691–697, Nov.
2009.
[10] M. Deng, R. Kleinert, H. Huang, Q. He, F. Madrahimova, O. Dirsch,
and U. Dahmen, “Statistical and economical efficiency in assessment of
liver regeneration using defined sample size and selection in combination
with a fully automated image analysis system,” J. Histochem. Cytochem.,
vol. 57, pp. 1075–1085, Nov. 2009.
[11] A. Dima, A. G. Marinescu, and A. C. Dima, “Non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease and the statins treatment,” Rom. J. Intern. Med., vol. 50, pp. 19–
25, Jan. 2012.
[12] L. McCormack, P. Dutkowski, A. M. El-Badry, and P. A. Clavien, “Liver
transplantation using fatty livers: Always feasible?” J. Hepatol., vol. 54,
pp. 1055–1062, May 2011.
[13] G. C. Farrell, N. C. Teoh, and R. S. McCuskey, “Hepatic microcirculation
in fatty liver disease,” Anat. Rec. (Hoboken), vol. 291, pp. 684–692, Jun.
2008.
[14] R. Vetelainen, A. van Vliet, D. J. Gouma, and T. M. van Gulik, “Steatosis
as a risk factor in liver surgery,” Ann. Surg., vol. 245, pp. 20–30, Jan.
2007.
[15] A. R. Hall, A. P. Dhillon, A. C. Green, L. Ferrell, J. M. Crawford, V. Alves,
C. Balabaud, P. Bhathal, P Bioulac-Sage, M. Guido, P. Hytiroglou,
Y. Nakanuma, V. Paradis, A. Quaglia, D. Snover, N. Theise, S. Thung,
W. Tsui, and D. J. van Leeuwen, “Hepatic steatosis estimated microscopically versus digital image analysis,” Liver Int., vol. 33, pp. 926–935, Jul.
2013.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

