IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

1659

Manikin-Integrated Digital Measuring System
for Assessment of Infant Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation Techniques
Jiheum Park, Student Member, IEEE, Chiyul Yoon, Jung Chan Lee, Member, IEEE, Jae Yun Jung, Do Kyun Kim,
Young Ho Kwak, and Hee Chan Kim, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The process of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
involves various components that must be followed to deliver high
quality of CPR. While the components commonly apply to CPR for
all ages from infant to adult, there are several different suggestions
for infant CPR such as two-thumb CPR and two-finger CPR. However, the comprehensive evaluation based on all these components
has been difficult in the absence of proper evaluation tool. Here, we
developed a new manikin-integrated, digital measuring system that
objectively estimates overall performance of infant CPR by evaluating individual CPR components one by one including different
hand placements. The system collects and analyzes data to present
estimations in digital scores according to a new evaluation index
constructed based on the previously verified one. The feasibility of
the system was validated through simulations with beginners and
experts in first aid, resulting in statistically significant differences
between the two groups with the indication of specific weaknesses
for each group which may provide a basis for creating customized
CPR training strategy in compliance with the personal level. We
believe that the system would become a valuable assessment tool
not only for infant CPR but also for the CPR technique, in general,
by reflecting every component in the evaluation.

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF KEY BASIC LIFE-SUPPORT COMPONENTS FOR INFANTS
ACCORDING TO 2010 AHA GUIDELINES [6]

Index Terms—Basic life support (BLS), infant cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR), performance evaluation, scoring system.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIC arrest can occur anywhere, at any time for anyone
in totally unexpected situations in the absence of health
care professionals, indicating importance of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) from the layperson [1]–[5]. According to
statistics reported in 2013 from American Heart Association

C

Manuscript received August 12, 2013; revised October 16, 2013; accepted
October 25, 2013. Date of publication November 5, 2013; date of current version
September 2, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Research
Foundation of Korea under BK21 Plus Program, Grant 2012R1A1A2008243
and Grant 2005-2001287 funded by the Korea Government (MEST). (Corresponding author: J. C. Lee.)
J. Park and C. Yoon are with the Interdisciplinary Program of Bioengineering, Graduate School, Seoul National University, Seoul 110–799,
Korea (e-mail: jp592@melab.snu.ac.kr; chiyul@melab.snu.ac.kr).
J. C. Lee is with the Institute of Medical and Biological Engineering, Medical Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul 110–799, Korea (e-mail:
ljch@snu.ac.kr).
J. Y. Jung, D. K. Kim, and Y. H. Kwak are with the Department of Emergency
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 110–799, Korea (e-mail:
matewoos@gmail.com; birdbeak@snuh.org; yhkwak@snuh.org).
H. C. Kim is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110–799, Korea (e-mail:
hckim@snu.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2288641

(AHA), 88% of cardiac arrests happen at home with no prognosis. Therefore, it is important to train nonexperts with reliable guidelines for providing effective CPR and precisely assess their performance to certify their abilities. Although a basic
life-support (BLS) sequence for CPR is concisely summarized
in three steps, chest compressions (CCs), opening airway, and
breathing (C–A–B), there are multiple key components underlying the sequence which must be followed to deliver high quality
of CPR [6]: hand placement, CPR sequence (C–A–B), compression rate, compression depth (CD), chest wall recoil, ventilation volume, compression interruptions time, compressionto-ventilation ratio, and breathing intervals (see Table I).

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1660

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of data acquisition process through the remodeled manikin. PCB where sensors as well as other electrical axillaries including a universal serial
bus port are mounted. (b) Four FSR sensors are located just below the nipple line in the chest in diamond shape. (c) Data flow diagrams for the manikin-integrated
digital measuring system. Measurement components include CC, FP, CD, BR, and BV.

For infant CPR, in particular, there are two different techniques recommended by the guidelines from the resuscitation
council (e.g., AHA, European Resuscitation Council), a twofinger (TF) technique with lone rescuer and a two-thumb (TT)
technique with two or more rescuers [7]. However, the existing guidelines have often caused a controversy over the effectiveness, calling for optimization of the performance [8], [9],
arguing for the TT technique in preference to the TF technique [10]–[12], or even proposing a new method for an alternative [13] while some have confirmed adequateness of the
current one [14]. One of the latest studies, moreover, reported
that the CPR-associated rib fractures in infants have dramatically increased since the guidelines were changed in 2005 [15],
suggesting significance of research on the CPR methodology to
improve its quality and validate the efficacy.
In order to find and validate better techniques, various studies
including manikin-based experiments as well as animal testing
that is expensive and time-consuming have been carried out [9],
[11], [12], [16]–[20]. Conventional way of estimating overall
CPR performance using recording manikin, however, has rather
relied on subjective decisions as it requires either raters for
checklist-based evaluation or video recordings or the both due
to the lack of its capabilities in quantitative analysis for every
component such that on–off lightings or those in different colors
are the only indications of right or wrong [21]–[25]. Otherwise,
the study focused on a few selected components instead of BLS
components as a whole even if their synergetic effects are critical
in CPR performance [9], [11], [18], [19], [26], [27].
Here, we developed a new manikin-integrated, digital measuring system that leaps over limitations existed in conventional assessing methods by objectively estimating overall performance
of infant CPR without needs for raters or video recordings.
The estimations were displayed in digital scores resulted from
evaluating every individual CPR component one by one including different hand placements. Based on the previously verified
evaluation index for scoring on the CPR performance [21], we

Fig. 2. Remodeled manikin. (a) Four FSR sensors are located on the top plate.
(b) PCB, sensors, battery, etc., are located inside the remodeled manikin. (c) TF
technique and (d) TT technique performed on the manikin.

created a new one in accordance to the most recent AHA guidelines for this study.
With a hypothesis that effective CPR assessment system
would successfully differentiate the personal level of CPR
performance, we validated efficacy of our developed system
through simulations with two different groups of participants,
beginners and experts.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Remodeled Manikin and Data Collection
The device was created by reconstructing a Resusci Baby
manikin (Laerdal Medical, Stavanger, Norway) to collect realtime continuous data of each evaluation component and to score
the performance (see Figs. 1 and 2). The evaluation components include CPR sequence, finger placement (FP), compression rate, compression depth (CD), compression-to-depression
ratio, compression interruptions, compression-to-ventilation ratio, breathing volume (BV), and breathing intervals. The FP

PARK et al.: MANIKIN-INTEGRATED DIGITAL MEASURING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSMENT OF INFANT CPR

involves position assessment for both the TF technique and the
TT technique. Using the characteristics of force sensitive resistance (FSR) sensor generating different values for pressing
center and edge with the same amount of the pressing force applied, we came up with diamond shape with different size of FSR
sensors (Interlink Electronics Inc., CA, USA) (see Figs. 1(a) and
2(a). Three of them located at top, right, and left are FSR 400
(diameter: 7.62 mm, voltage range: 0–4.5 V) and one at bottom is FSR 402 (diameter: 18.28 mm, voltage range: 0–4.5 V).
In this way, we were able to attain proper sensitivity for discriminating the TT from the TF technique and evaluating each
of their proper positions. For example, correct finger position
for the TF technique produced considerable amount of pressure
for top and bottom sensor with small amount of pressure for
right and left ones. Large output values for either right or left
sensor with the TF technique indicate deviation of the two fingers from the center to either side. Similarly, when those two
fingers were slightly positioned downward, top sensor would
produce lower pressure value due to edge pressing, indicating
wrong position. On the contrary, with slight upward position, the
top sensor would give considerable amount of pressure while
the bottom sensor gives small amount of pressure since the
edge of it is pressed instead of the center. With different size
of top and bottom FSR sensor, it was possible to attain those
sensitive detections. The output voltage values from each sensor follow the function of log depending on the pressing force
and they were calibrated to produce identical values with the
corresponding pressing force. Subsequently, output voltage values from each sensor were interpolated and displayed in either
2-D or 3-D graph on LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin,
TX, USA) frontal panel. The CD data were acquired by using
a hall sensor (WHS315-XPCN2, Winson Semiconductor Corp,
Hsin-Chu, Taiwan). The selected hall sensor produced signals
that exponentially vary depending on the intensity of magnetic
field, and this characteristic enabled to attain distance data. The
sensor was calibrated prior to its application to the device. The
depth data were utilized to measure compression rate as well as
compression-to-depression ratio. The device was also designed
to judge suitability of the ventilation volume. The air bag located
between two plates in the manikin swelled as air flowed into it
and the top plate accordingly was lifted up. The air pressure
sensor (33A-005G2210, Smate, Chang Hua, Taiwan) was used
for the ventilation data. The device further identified excess airing by measuring belly rise (BR). With excessive air volume,
not only the upper part of the top plate which corresponded to
chest but also lower part of the top plate would apparently rise
which corresponded to belly. The same hall sensor was used
for BR assessment. If the belly was raised beyond a certain
height, ventilation volume was regarded as inappropriate. The
printed circuit board (PCB) where microprocessor (ATmega
128L, Atmel, CA, USA) was located and all seven sensors were
connected was designed to fit inside of the manikin. Universal
serial bus (USB) port was also placed on the PCB to transfer
readings from each sensor to PC at a data transmission speed of
9600 Bd, and data packets were transmitted every 30 ms. The
received data were processed by LabVIEW for visualization.

1661

TABLE II
EVALUATION INDEX

The LabVIEW program was set to suspend after 2 min from the
start.

B. Evaluation Index and Scoring Procedure
The evaluation index was created to provide evaluation results in scores. In accordance with the 2010 AHA guidelines,
the standard set defined by Berden et al. [21] for scoring the CPR
performance was modified to propose new evaluation index (see
Table II). Similar to the standard set validated in advance, the
proposed new evaluation index presents partial and maximum
deduction points for each component and it was finalized under
an agreement with emergency pediatricians certified in BLS.
The digital measuring system built using MATLAB (The Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA) was designed to select the data
of wanted subjects to analyze the performance based on this
newly created evaluation index. Once a subject was selected,
the total score of the performance as well as the respective
scores of every evaluation component were displayed instantly.
The component scores, which were weighted differently based
on the evaluation index, were added up on the maximum of 100
points. The system moreover enabled to select a technique and
display the corresponding score as the subjects were allowed to
use either the TF technique, the TT technique, or the both while
performing CPR. The actual signals from each sensor used in the
analysis were not only processed for computing digital scores
but also presented in graphs to show the overall trends of the
performance (see Fig. 3).

1662

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 3. Representative signals performed by beginners and experts: (a) TF technique data of a beginner who received total 55.8 points. (b) TF data of an expert
who received total 88.4 points. (c) TT technique data of a beginner who received total 65.3 points. (d) TT data of an expert who received total 95.8 points.
Horizontal lines are threshold values. In the graph of “placement of fingers,” top (gray) and bottom (black) force resistance sensor signals for TF and right (gray)
and left (black) force resistance sensor signals for TT are presented in output voltage (V). The threshold value for the placement of fingers (2.3 V) corresponds to
∼0.3 N. CD and BR are presented in mm, and ventilation pressure is presented in Pa.

The manikin was originally fabricated in a way that breathing air does not flow into the air bag without opening airway.
Therefore, the CPR sequence was simply assessed by identifying whether signals from compression were ahead of those
from ventilation in each cycle. The FP evaluation was carried
out together with the CD data which fluctuated as repeating
CC. For the TF technique, the pressing intensity values of both
top and bottom FSR sensors (both right and left FSR sensors
for the TT technique) were measured at the moment when the
CD was maximized in each compression to identify whether
the center of the sensor was pressed. If the edge of the sensor was pressed instead of the center, the maximum pressing
intensity value would be lower. With the depth data, compression rate was calculated every moment instead of averaging
during performance. Note that compression rate was not cal-

culated during the ventilation period when compression was
in halt. Once the signal gave a wave-like shape, every cycle
was counted as compression and used in compression rate calculation. For CD, however, due to the limited CD (∼29 mm)
available by the original Resusci Baby manikin, full credit was
given for “CD” when the subject was pressed on its chest to
the maximum depth even if 4 cm is the value recommended by
the AHA guidelines for infant CPR. Without proper actions of
depression, signals from hall sensor measuring the CD would
fluctuate above a threshold value (5 mm). The digital measuring system checked every cycle whether the signal went down
to the value close to zero (< 5 mm), the condition accepted
as depression. High-quality CCs include not only adequate
compression rate, depth, and complete chest recoil but also minimal interruptions in CCs. The 2010 AHA guidelines particularly

PARK et al.: MANIKIN-INTEGRATED DIGITAL MEASURING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSMENT OF INFANT CPR

emphasized that compression should not be delayed more than
10 s. The depth data determined whether the compression was
interrupted overtime by measuring the period of suspension. For
compression-to-ventilation ratio, 30:2 is recommended for lone
rescuers and 15:2 is for two or more rescuers [6]. The number of
compression and ventilation was counted using signals from the
corresponding sensors in each cycle composed of a compression duration and a ventilation duration. Most of the previous
studies as well as recent AHA guidelines have outlined an effective ventilation as a visible chest rise instead of specifying
exact BV [6], [7], [12], [22], [24], [25]. Although AHA recommends the bag with a volume of at least 450–500 mL in the case
of using a bag valve mask [6] and Jansen et al. [24] specified
the cutoff ventilation volume as 0.8 L in their study for scoring
the performance, they were the amounts defined based on the
visible chest rise. Accordingly, a volume generating the pneumatic pressure >1.586 kPa was defined as a right BV in our
model and it was confirmed by experts. The BV was evaluated
together with BR to assess excessive airing in which belly raised
over 5.3 mm. In order to avoid duplicate points deduction between the compression-to-ventilation ratio and the BV, the user
received full points for the compression-to-ventilation ratio in
each cycle if the number of compressions was 25–35 for TF
(10–15 for TT) regardless of that of rescue breaths delivered,
evaluating the two components independently. For the last key
component for infant CPR, breathing intervals (one breath every
6–8 s), the system evaluated the performance by identifying the
start times of two recue breaths and measuring their intervals.
It is, however, recommended only when healthcare providers
achieve advanced airway by inserting a tube into the victim’s
airway [6], and it was, therefore, not counted for this study in
which subjects include laypersons.
C. Evaluation Method
In order to evaluate the system capabilities of distinguishing
personal level of expertise in delivering infant CPR, subjects
participated in the simulation were composed of 24 beginners
in first aid and 16 experts certified in BLS. It was assumed that
while experts would proficiently deliver effective CPR right
away beginners may know the step or the rule but not confidently carrying out CPR. Therefore, the beginners were briefly
instructed about each component specified in the evaluation index (see Table II) and what to observe to attain high performance
score before the simulation, which was unnecessary for experts.
For ventilation, a bag valve mask (LSR Standard Child w/Infant
Mask 0/1 in Carton, Laerdal Medical, Stavanger, Norway) was
given. The beginners were instructed about its use and appropriate chest rise using the bag valve mask was demonstrated, which
was also unnecessary for experts. Both groups were blinded to
the computer screen which visualized data recording and their
performance in real time; otherwise, they would have the chance
to correct their performance which was not intended. Computer
screen was opened only for audiences watching subjects’ performance. While TF CPR was performed by a lone rescuer, TT
CPR was performed by two rescuers following AHA guidelines. Out of 24 beginners, 8 participated in TF CPR and the

1663

Fig. 4. Comparison of total scores between beginners and experts in the TF
technique and the TT technique. Single asterisk (∗ ) and double asterisks (∗∗ )
indicate P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively.

other 16 in TT CPR. In TT CPR, one was in charge of CC and
the other was ventilation. After five cycles, they exchanged their
roles. In case of experts, eight experts participated in TF CPR
had participated again in TT CPR. With the assumption that all
experts are on the same level of carrying out infant CPR and
would attain high scores in the evaluation, we ignored any benefits that may exist by participating in the evaluation twice (e.g.,
gaining experience on how the dummy feels). Consequently,
eight datasets were acquired in each technique evaluation for
both beginners and experts. Each subject was responsible for
reviving an unconscious infant laid down on the hard ground by
performing CPR on the manikin for 2 min as the system itself
was programmed to stop its operation after 2 min. Stored data
from each subject were then instantly transferred to the digital
measuring system to produce performance score immediately
with detailed information. The resulted score was shown to all
subjects after their 2 min performance.
D. Statistics
The resulting performance scores between beginners and experts were compared with their total scores as well as each evaluation component scores. Nonparametric Mann–Whitney U test
was used for statistical analysis performed by using SPSS 17.0
for Windows (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). A p-value < 0.05
was considered statistically significant.
III. RESULTS
During the evaluation, there was no technical problem. All
signals measured from the sensors were successfully transferred
and recorded, and the signals were successfully converted into
total score as well as component scores via the digital measuring
system as shown in Fig. 2(c).
Mean of total scores of expert group was significantly higher
than that of beginner group in both the TT and TF techniques
(see Fig. 4). In the TF technique, “placement of hands,” “compression rate,” and “ventilation volume” were the principal

1664

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. (a) Comparison of component scores between beginners and experts for the TF technique. (b) Comparison of component scores between beginners and
experts for the TT technique. Single asterisk (∗ ) and double asterisks (∗∗ ) indicate P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively.

components distinguishing beginners from experts [see
Fig. 5(a)]. In the TT technique, “compression interruptions,”
“compression-to-ventilation ratio,” and “ventilation volume”
were the principal components distinguishing beginners from
experts [see Fig. 5(b)]. Beginners experienced major difficulties
in opening airway and delivering breath with proper volume,
which have affected scores of the compression-to-ventilation
ratio as well as the ventilation volume.
Comparing the two different methods for infant CPR, the TT
and TF techniques, mean of total scores acquired by the TT
technique turned out to be significantly higher than that by the
TF technique for both groups. While most subjects received full
credit for “CD” in the TT technique, experts as well as beginners lost points in the “CD” task with the TF technique. While
many experts as well as beginners lost points in “compression
interruptions” in the TF technique by delaying time to make successful ventilation, both experts and beginners lost less points
with the task in the TT technique. Seven out of eight experts
received perfect points for the compression interruptions in the
TT technique.
IV. DISCUSSION
We have developed an infant CPR performance assessment
system that transfers and stores meaningful data for assessing
every key component of infant CPR in accordance with the most

recent guidelines. The feasibility of the system was demonstrated by generating a significant difference between beginners
and experts in their performance. The results quantitatively indicated specific weaknesses of each group, which may be useful
in creating customized CPR training strategy depending on the
personal level. Some of the results also found to support existing
arguments regarding infant CPR. For example, while most subjects received full credit for “CD” in the TT technique, experts as
well as beginners lost points there in the TF technique, supporting the experimental results described by Udassi et al. [11] that
“CC depth and pressure was significantly higher with the TT
compared to the TF technique”; most beginners had difficulties
in opening airway and they were apt to delay compression while
trying to succeed in ventilation, supporting the statement in the
AHA guidelines that compressions only without ventilations are
recommended for rescuers untrained or trained and not proficient (see Table I); total scores of both experts and beginners for
the TT technique turned out to be significantly higher than those
for the TF technique, supporting the suggestions from the AHA
guidelines that if there are more than two rescuers, the TT technique is recommended. However, this does not necessarily mean
the TT technique is superior to the TF technique for providing
adequate cardiac output. In order to determine the superiority
between these two techniques, a comparison between TF and
TT with lone rescuers under the same protocol might need to be
done for future studies.

PARK et al.: MANIKIN-INTEGRATED DIGITAL MEASURING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSMENT OF INFANT CPR

The system was simple to apply and reproducible, shown
by how several electrical sensors with noncomplex functions
cost effectively produce highly operative system to comprehensively assess different infant CPR techniques based on the
most recent AHA guidelines. Due to the simplicity, the system would be readily adapted and generalized to a variety
of other CPR evaluation manikin models including adult one
with its corresponding evaluation index. Moreover, unlike the
method used in the previous studies to assess CPR performance
in which investigators were required to record performance results or the simple lightings [e.g., green (correct), green and
orange (too deep), red (wrong placement), or no light (too shallow)] [9], [11], [12], [16], [18], [19], [21]–[27] were only the
possible indications, our developed system allows for evaluating
overall performance with the mechanical device only by inclusively assess every BLS component. Therefore, the developed
system in this study is expected to play an essential role in various infant CPR related studies and to foster generating trained
bystanders as it is capable of providing immediate and detailed
evaluations on the quality of performance in comprehensible
scores for all users which might be a critical functionality for a
training tool.
During the evaluation, there were some of interesting observations. Unlike experts, beginners easily became confused
in the middle of their performance specifically when they recognized their mistakes and were unable to remember the next
step. The beginners became confused especially in TF CPR as
switching over to either compression or ventilation and performed markedly less cycles as a result, considering that about
five cycles for TF CPR and ten cycles for TT CPR can be done
in 2 min when every key BLS component is well observed.
Like this, TF CPR requires dual tasks while TT CPR enables
subjects to focus on either one by working in a group, and
this might be the primary reason for substantial improvement
of the performance score in TT CPR compared to that in TF
CPR regardless of the expertise. Another interesting observation was that beginners responsible for CC in TT CPR counted
the number of compressions aloud, something not seen in the
TF CPR evaluation. It seemed that the subjects were informing
their partners to prepare for ventilation as they were finishing
the suggested number of compressions. Subjects participating
in TT CPR were indeed less likely to violate “compression-toventilation ratio” than those in TF CPR. Counting the compression number aloud may be a natural phenomenon in TT CPR
when working with a partner. Experts barely lost points for
“compression-to-ventilation ratio” as they were trained to count
the number of compression aloud in both techniques. Another
observation was that beginners tended to perform relatively fast
compression. Without CPR experience, beginners may have no
idea how fast 100–120/min is. An auxiliary to compression rate
such as metronome or rhythm of life aid system developed by
Chen et al. [28] might be an essential item for beginners.
There were also several problems regarding Resusci Baby
manikin from Laerdal which we modified. Experts participated
in the study commented that the device required much less
compressing force due to the flexible chest compared to an
actual infant chest. The flexibility can be readily changed by

1665

replacing the spring to the one that has higher spring constant.
With the replaced spring, score acquisition for both “CD” and
“compression-to-depression ratio” may be affected, in which
most beginners as well as experts received perfect points in this
evaluation. Another issue was maximum CD allowable in the
manikin. It was originally fabricated to permit CD up to only
about 3 cm, precluding from satisfying recommended CD of
4 cm in the guidelines. Beginners were able to acquire high
score for “CD” since they were instructed to press the chest
to the maximum limit. If the device had allowed deeper CD
such as the “physiological” infant manikin designed by Martin
et al. [29], subjects should have had sense of 4 cm depth to
receive full credit for “CD,” which may require training. With
the modified manikin, Martin et al., however, have assessed
compression quality only. Here, our digital measuring system
would make it possible to assess overall performance when it is
integrated with their modified manikin.
V. CONCLUSION
The proposed system is expected to become an efficient evaluation and training tool for infant CPR as it has raised dependence
on mechanical system by excluding the necessity of raters who
have been responsible for manually recording the level of CPR
performance. The system is technically outstanding, yields significant difference between beginners’ and experts’ performance
by assessing every key BLS component described in the recent
guidelines, and is reliable by supporting previously proved advantages or disadvantages of the currently suggested infant CPR
methodologies. The evaluation results provided in this study also
should be useful in creating customized CPR training strategy
as it displayed specific weaknesses of each group in performing
infant CPR. Moreover, the system is designed to be amenable
to the new or different guidelines and therefore it is broadly
applicable ranging from infant to adult models. Considering the
system capabilities of real-time data recording process, which
was visualized only for audiences in this study to meet its own
purpose, our system also has great potential not only for evaluating training efficacy or CPR in general but also for evaluating
feedback and feed forward efficacy [28], [30] more in a concrete
way. We believe that we have provided groundwork to produce
reliable and comprehensive CPR assessment system for wide
range of CPR related research.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Adielsson, J. Hollenberg, T. Karlsson, J. Lindqvist, S. Lundin,
J. Silfverstolpe, L. Svensson, and J. Herlitz, “Increase in survival and
bystander CPR in out-of-hospital shockable arrhythmia: Bystander CPR
and female gender are predictors of improved outcome. Experiences from
Sweden in an 18-year perspective,” Heart, vol. 97, no. 17, pp. 1391-6,
Sep. 2011.
[2] J. Herlitz, L. Svensson, S. Holmberg, K. A. Angquist, and M. Young,
“Efficacy of bystander CPR: Intervention by lay people and by health care
professionals,” Resuscitation, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 291–295, Sep. 2005.
[3] J. Lopez-Herce and A. C. Alvarez, “Bystander CPR for paediatric out-ofhospital cardiac arrest,” Lancet, vol. 375, no. 9723, pp. 1321–1322, Apr.
17, 2010.
[4] B. McNally, R. Robb, M. Mehta, K. Vellano, A. L. Valderrama, P. W. Yoon,
C. Sasson, A. Crouch, A. B. Perez, R. Merritt, A. Kellermann, C. Centers
for Disease, and Prevention, “Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest surveillance—
cardiac arrest registry to enhance survival (CARES), United States,

1666

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

October 1, 2005–December 31, 2010,” MMWR Surveill. Summaries, vol.
60, no. 8, pp. 1–19, Jul. 29, 2011.
G. Ritter, R. A. Wolfe, S. Goldstein, J. R. Landis, C. M. Vasu, A. Acheson,
R. Leighton, and S. V. Medendrop, “The effect of bystander CPR on
survival of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest victims,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 110,
no. 5, pp. 932–937, Nov. 1985.
American Heart Association: Highlights of the 2010 American Heart
Association Guidelines for CPR and ECC, M. F. Hazinski, ed., American
Heart Association, Dallas, TX, USA, 2010.
M. D. Berg, S. M. Schexnayder, L. Chameides, M. Terry, A. Donoghue,
R. W. Hickey, R. A. Berg, R. M. Sutton, and M. F. Hazinski, “Part 13:
Pediatric basic life support: 2010 American Heart Association guidelines
for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care,”
Circulation, vol. 122, no. 18, Suppl. 3, pp. S862–S875, Nov. 2, 2010.
P. S. Martin, A. M. Kemp, P. S. Theobald, S. A. Maguire, and M. D. Jones,
“Do chest compressions during simulated infant CPR comply with international recommendations?,” Arch. Dis. Child, vol. 98, no. 8, pp. 576–581,
Aug. 2013.
P. S. Martin, P. S. Theobald, A. M. Kemp, S. O’Brien, S. A. Maguire,
and M. D. Jones, “Chest compression performance during infant CPR,” Arch. Dis. Child, vol. 96, p. A86, 2011. Available:
http://adc.bmj.com/content/96/Suppl_1/A86.1.abstract.
T. K. Huynh, R. J. Hemway, and J. M. Perlman, “The two-thumb technique using an elevated surface is preferable for teaching infant cardiopulmonary resuscitation,” J. Pediatr., vol. 161, no. 4, pp. 658–661, Oct. 2012.
J. P. Udassi, S. Udassi, D. W. Theriaque, J. J. Shuster, A. L. Zaritsky, and
I. U. Haque, “Effect of alternative chest compression techniques in infant
and child on rescuer performance,” Pediatr. Crit. Care Med., vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 328–333, May 2009.
S. Udassi, J. P. Udassi, M. A. Lamb, D. W. Theriaque, J. J. Shuster,
A. L. Zaritsky, and I. U. Haque, “Two-thumb technique is superior to
two-finger technique during lone rescuer infant manikin CPR,” Resuscitation, vol. 81, no. 6, pp. 712–717, Jun. 2010.
B. Z. Fakhraddin, N. Shimizu, S. Kurosawa, S. Hirokazu, M. Katsuyuki,
and S. Mizutani, “New method of chest compression for infants in a
single rescuer situation: Thumb-index finger technique,” J. Med. Dent.
Sci., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 15–22, Mar. 2011.
K. H. Lee, E. Y. Kim, D. H. Park, J. E. Kim, H. Y. Choi, J. Cho, and
H. J. Yang, “Evaluation of the 2010 American Heart Association guidelines for infant CPR finger/thumb positions for chest compression: A study
using computed tomography,” Resuscitation, vol. 84, no. 6, pp. 766–769,
Jun. 2013.
J. A. Reyes, G. R. Somers, G. P. Taylor, and D. A. Chiasson, “Increased
incidence of CPR-related rib fractures in infants—Is it related to changes
in CPR technique?,” Resuscitation, vol. 82, no. 5, pp. 545–548, May 2011.
M. L. Dorfsman, J. J. Menegazzi, R. J. Wadas, and T. E. Auble, “Twothumb vs. two-finger chest compression in an infant model of prolonged cardiopulmonary resuscitation,” Acad. Emerg. Med., vol. 7, no. 10,
pp. 1077–1082, Oct. 2000.
J. J. Menegazzi, T. E. Auble, K. A. Nicklas, G. M. Hosack, L. Rack, and
J. S. Goode, “Two-thumb versus two-finger chest compression during CPR
in a swine infant model of cardiac arrest,” Ann. Emerg. Med., vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 240–243, Feb. 1993.
S. K. Srikantan, R. A. Berg, T. Cox, L. Tice, and V. M. Nadkarni, “Effect
of one-rescuer compression/ventilation ratios on cardiopulmonary resuscitation in infant, pediatric, and adult manikins,” Pediatr. Crit. Care Med.,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 293–297, May 2005.
C. C. Whitelaw, B. Slywka, and L. J. Goldsmith, “Comparison of a twofinger versus two-thumb method for chest compressions by healthcare
providers in an infant mechanical model,” Resuscitation, vol. 43, no. 3,
pp. 213–216, Feb. 2000.
I. D. Berkowitz, H. Gervais, C. L. Schleien, R. C. Koehler, J. M. Dean, and
R. J. Traystman, “Epinephrine dosage effects on cerebral and myocardial
blood flow in an infant swine model of cardiopulmonary resuscitation,”
Anesthesiology, vol. 75, no. 6, pp. 1041–1050, Dec. 1991.
H. J. Berden, N. H. Pijls, F. F. Willems, J. M. Hendrick, and J. F. Crul, “A
scoring system for basic cardiac life support skills in training situations,”
Resuscitation, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 21–31, Feb. 1992.
A. H. Cimrin, H. Topacoglu, O. Karcioglu, M. Ozsarac, and C. Ayrik, “A
model of standardized training in basic life support skills of emergency
medicine residents,” Adv. Ther., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 10–18, Jan./Feb. 2005.
C. A. Graham and N. F. Lewis, “A scoring system for the assessment of
basic life support ability,” Resuscitation, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 111–114, Jan.
2000.

[24] J. J. Jansen, H. J. Berden, C. P. van der Vleuten, R. P. Grol, J. Rethans,
and C. P. Verhoeff, “Evaluation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation skills
of general practitioners using different scoring methods,” Resuscitation,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 35–41, Feb. 1997.
[25] P. A. van der Heide, L. van Toledo-Eppinga, M. van der Heide, and
J. H. van der Lee, “Assessment of neonatal resuscitation skills: a reliable and valid scoring system,” Resuscitation, vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 212–221,
Nov. 2006.
[26] S. O. Aase and H. Myklebust, “Compression depth estimation for CPR
quality assessment using DSP on accelerometer signals,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 263–268, Mar. 2002.
[27] J. B. Nysaether, E. Dorph, I. Rafoss, and P. A. Steen, “Manikins with
human-like chest properties—A new tool for chest compression research,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2643–2650, Nov. 2008.
[28] W. Chen, S. Bambang Oetomo, L. Feijs, P. Andriessen, F. Kimman,
M. Geraets, and M. Thielen, “Rhythm of life aid (ROLA): An integrated
sensor system for supporting medical staff during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) of newborn infants,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1468–1474, Nov. 2010.
[29] P. S. Martin, A. M. Kemp, P. S. Theobald, S. A. Maguire, and M. D. Jones,
“Does a more “physiological” infant manikin design effect chest compression quality and create a potential for thoracic over-compression during
simulated infant CPR?,” Resuscitation, vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 666–671, May
2013.
[30] P. Andriessen, A. M. Kemp, S. B. Oetomo, W. Chen, and L. M. Feijs,
“Efficacy of feed forward and feedback signaling for inflations and chest
compression pressure during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a newborn
mannequin,” J. Clin. Med. Res., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 274–278, Aug. 2012.

Jiheum Park (S’13) received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering at Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA, in 2011. Since March 2012, she has been
studying in the Graduate School, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
She is a Researcher in the Medical Electronics
Laboratory. The lab is concentrating on biomedical
related topics especially medical equipment and signal processing.

Chiyul Yoon received the B.S. degree from Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2008, where
he has been studying in the Graduate School, since
March 2008.
He is a Researcher in the Medical Electronics
Laboratory. The lab is concentrating on biomedical
related topics especially medical equipment and signal processing.

Jung Chan Lee (M’13) was born in Daegu, Korea, in 1978. He received the B.S. degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in biomedical engineering both from Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2001 and 2008,
respectively.
Since 2011, he has been a Research Professor with
the Institute of Medical and Biological Engineering,
Medical Research Center, Seoul National University.
His current research interests include artificial organs,
mechanical pump for medical use, and mechanical
design for medical device.
Dr. Lee is a member of the Korea Society of Medical and Biological Engineering and the EMBS.

PARK et al.: MANIKIN-INTEGRATED DIGITAL MEASURING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSMENT OF INFANT CPR

Jae Yun Jung received the Master’s degree in emergency medicine from the medical college Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2012.
From 2010 to 2012, he was a Clinical Fellow working at Seoul National University Hospital, where he
is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department
of Emergency Medicine. His major subject is a pediatric emergency medicine. Major research activities
include clinical studies of pediatric injury prevention
and some medical diseases such as intussusception,
simulation studies of pediatric cardiopulmonary re-

1667

Young Ho Kwak completed the residency training
at the Department of Pediatrics in 2001 and moved
to the residency program of the Department of Emergency Medicine, Seoul National University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, as a dual certified board
physician in pediatrics and emergency medicine. He
is currently the Director of the Department of Emergency Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital.
His research interest includes pediatric infectious diseases, sepsis, and pediatric emergency medicine.

suscitation.
Dr. Jung is a member of the Korea Society of Emergency Medicine.

Do Kyun Kim was trained in pediatrics and emergency medicine at Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea, between 1997 and 2001, and
2006 and 2008, respectively. Since Fall 2008, he has
been an Assistant Professor at the Department of
Emergency Medicine in Seoul National University
Hospital. He has wide ranging research interests including pediatric resuscitation, pediatric emergency
medicine, pediatric allergy, and particular interest in
child-focused device.

Hee Chan Kim (M’95) received the Ph.D. degree in
control and instrumentation engineering (biomedical
engineering major) from Seoul National University,
Seoul, Korea, in 1989.
From 1989 to 1991, he was a Staff Engineer working in the National Institute of Health-funded electrohydraulic total artificial heart project at the Artificial Heart Research Laboratory, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, USA. He joined the faculty of the
Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of
Medicine, Seoul National University and Seoul National University Hospital in 1991, where he is currently a Professor serving as
the Department Chair and leading Medical Electronics Laboratory (MELab).
Major research activities in the MELab include development of intelligent algorithms and electronic instrumentations for medical and biological applications
including artificial organs such as artificial heart and artificial pancreas, biosensors, ubiquitous healthcare, and man-machine interface. In these areas, he has
published more than 120 peer-reviewed scientific papers in international journals and holds more than 50 patents.
Dr. Kim is a member of the Korea Society of Medical and Biological Engineering, the EMBS, and the American Society of Artificial Internal Organs.

