IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

805

Assessment of Laparoscopic Skills Based on Force
and Motion Parameters
Tim Horeman∗ , Jenny Dankelman, Frank Willem Jansen, and John J. van den Dobbelsteen

Abstract—Box trainers equipped with sensors may help in acquiring objective information about a trainee’s performance while
performing training tasks with real instruments. The main aim
of this study is to investigate the added value of force parameters
with respect to commonly used motion and time parameters such
as path length, motion volume, and task time. Two new dynamic
bimanual positioning tasks were developed that not only requiring
adequate motion control but also appropriate force control successful completion. Force and motion data for these tasks were studied
for three groups of participants with different experience levels
in laparoscopy (i.e., 11 novices, 19 intermediates, and 12 experts).
In total, 10 of the 13 parameters showed a significant difference
between groups. When the data from the significant motion, time,
and force parameters are used for classification, it is possible to
identify the skills level of the participants with 100% accuracy.
Furthermore, the force parameters of many individuals in the intermediate group exceeded the maximum values in the novice and
expert group. The relatively high forces used by the intermediates
argue for the inclusion of training and assessment of force application during tissue handling in future laparoscopic skills training
programs.
Index Terms—Box trainers, force and motion surgical trainer
(ForMoST), force feedback, laparoscopy, objective assessment,
training methods.

I. INTRODUCTION
A. Training in Laparoscopic Surgery
N laparoscopic procedures, the moment arm between incision point and instrument fluctuates during the procedure
as the force exerted by the tip on the tissue depends highly on
the insertion depth of the instruments. These and other instrument handling difficulties make it essential to train this type
of surgical skills before the approach is used in the operation
theatre. One common training method for laparoscopic surgery

I

Manuscript received August 1, 2013; revised October 1, 2013; accepted
November 2, 2013. Date of publication November 7, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ T. Horeman is with the Department of Biomechanical Engineering, Faculty
of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering, Delft University of
Technology, Delft 2628 CD, Zuid Holland, The Netherlands (e-mail:
t.horeman@tudelft.nl).
J. Dankelman and J. J. van den Dobbelsteen are with the Department of
Biomechanical Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials
Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft 2628 CD, Zuid Holland,
The Netherlands (e-mail: j.dankelman@tudelft.nl; J.J.vandenDobbelsteen@
tudelft.nl).
F. W. Jansen is with the Department of Gynecology, Leiden University
Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, Zuid Holland, The Netherlands (e-mail:
F.W.Jansen@LUMC.nl).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2290052

Fig. 1. Top: connection of two vertical and two horizontal flexible elements
in Task 1. Bottom: placement of a silicone wire through two holes in Task 2.

is facilitated by a so-called “box trainer.” In a box trainer, one
can perform training tasks using real laparoscopic instruments
(see Fig. 1). Today, most of the available training tasks focus
on improving the trainee’s eye–hand coordination [1]. Assessment of the trainee’s performance can be either subjective when
based on the interpretation of the tutor or objective when quantitative measures are used. Objective scoring methods can be
based on time, errors, instrument motions, or forces exerted on
the instruments or training task. In many studies, assessment is
based on task errors and task time [2]. In other studies, task time
in combination with assessment parameters extracted from instrument motions are used for discrimination between experts,
intermediates, and novices [3]. In the study of Rosen et al. and
our own previous study, it was found that assessment based on
interaction force between instrument tip and environment alone
gives similar results [4]–[6].
All aforementioned studies indicate that skills assessment
based on motion, force information, or performance time is
possible. Therefore, the question arises whether a multitude of
sensor systems has added value when the discriminating power
of force, motion, and time parameters is comparable. The studies of Chamarra et al. [3] showed that the correlation of motion
parameters such as time, path length (PL), and motion smoothness is high. This indicates that fast performance on a training
task likely results in a good motion parameter score which is
in line with the opinion of some experts that measuring task
time is sufficient. However, our previous study regarding assessment based on force parameters shows that task time is not
representative for force application skills [5], [7].
Considering that force parameters are, other than motion parameters, indicators for tissue damage and therefore patient

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

safety, monitoring the presence of dangerous excessive forces
during training is recommendable [8]. Although force parameters are not correlated to task time, it is possible that force
parameters are correlated to some motion parameters making
the measurement of forces obsolete. To determine whether concurrent measurements of force and motion has added value for
the assessment of laparoscopic skills we studied time, force,
and motion parameters in training tasks that represent tissue
manipulation in surgery.
In order to find differences in tissue and instrument handling
between groups with different skills levels, new training tasks
are required particularly for training of instrument motion during
tissue manipulation. Those standardized tasks should combine
the strong aspects of the existing tasks (i.e., delicate position
control) and require active control of two hands. Moreover, to
mimic real in-vivo situations, force control should be part of the
training as well as technical insight of the instrument actions
necessary to complete the task efficiently.
B. Aims of This Study
The first goal is to identify whether motion parameters are
correlated to force parameters. The second goal is to determine
whether a combination of force, time, and motion parameters
can be used for classification of the skills of a trainee.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Participants
Based on the number of available residents and supervising
surgeons in the educational courses, 42 participants with three
different levels of experience in laparoscopy took part in this
study. The number of participants is similar to the number used
during comparable studies [3], [5]. The expert group (n = 11)
consisted of surgeons and gynecologists that performed over
100 laparoscopic procedures. The intermediates group (n = 19)
consisted of residents during their specialization in gynecology. All of them succeeded one or more laparoscopic training
sessions in eye–hand coordination. The group of novices (n =
12) consisted of first- and second-year medical students with
no experience in laparoscopic surgery or laparoscopic training.
Each participant was asked to answer a short questionnaire with
detailed information about prior experience in laparoscopy. All
of the participants were right handed.
B. Two New Dynamic Position Tasks
One of the standards that is commonly used to train basic
eye–hand coordination in laparoscopy is the fundamental laparoscopic skills (FLS) skills testing system. For this testing
system, five tasks (peg transfer, pattern cutting, endoloop, extracorporeal, and intracorporeal suturing) are used for skills assessment [9], [10]. Although those tasks are proven effective for
training of technical skills they focus mainly on laparoscopic
eye–hand coordination rather than tissue manipulation skills.
Since tissue manipulation is one of the most important issues
in surgery, objective structured assessment of technical skills
have been developed to assess the trainee in his performance in

daily practice [11]. In order to measure safe tissue handling in
box trainers however, additional tasks and performance metrics
need to be developed. In this study, we developed tasks that
focus on efficient and well-controlled bimanual tissue handling.
We used elastic materials that mimic tissues inside the abdomen
(see Fig. 1).
Task 1—Tissue attachment under traction: This task is made
from four different elastic elements with different elastic properties. All elements have equal lengths but the stiffness is different
due to differences in shape and thickness. Therefore, good force
balance requires that the elements are connected slightly outside
the task middle point. If only visual information is used to complete the task and force feedback is mainly ignored, is expected
that higher forces are exerted on the task than necessary. Moreover, smart positioning of the elements in both instruments and
a good strategy is required for efficient handling. Completion of
the task with only one instrument is not possible.
Task 2—Placement of a silicone wire: This task is made from
two elastic elements with different elastic properties. A piece of
artificial tissue with two holes at one side is connected to the
task’s ground plate on the other side. In order to drive the 2-mm
thick elastic wire through the holes the artificial tissue needs to
be turned and twisted for proper sight on the task. This is best
achieved using both instruments in parallel as the use of only
one instrument may result in fluctuating traction forces.
The new dynamic position tasks are based on an action
analysis of manipulations during tissue dissection in real
laparoscopic procedures. In tissue manipulation, often both laparoscopic grippers are used for the positioning of tissue in view
of the camera. The orientation of the tissue inside the grippers
is crucial for good inspection. Precise navigation of tissue under
tractive force is common during, for instance, laparoscopic sterilization. In female sterilization, the ovarian tube needs to be positioned perpendicular to the laparoscopic camera and stretched
for precise placement of a clip or ring. Placement of a clip on a
stretched ovarian tube requires precise alignment of instruments
and tissue. These manipulations are comparable with stretching
the “worm” before placing it over a small pin of the opposite
“worm” in our task. During this two-handed action, it is essential
that the tractive force, generated by both instruments, remains
low and constant when the clip is applied [7].
C. Test Protocol
The participants performed tasks inside a box trainer equipped
with two 5-mm trocars and one 11-mm trocar (Endopath XCEL,
Johnson & Johnson), two grippers (Endopath Ethicon Endosurgery, Johnson & Johnson), and a USB camera system (see
Fig. 2). The tasks were mounted on top of a custom-made 3DOF
force sensor (see Fig. 3). The top plate of the training box is
nontransparent and the USB camera is used for visualization of
the task on a computer screen. The order in which the tasks were
performed was randomized for each participant.
Before the measurements started, a picture was shown to
the participants to explain how to complete the two tasks. If
a problem occurred in the first 2 min of the task, a new measurement was started for the next attempt and all recorded data

HOREMAN et al.: ASSESSMENT OF LAPAROSCOPIC SKILLS BASED ON FORCE AND MOTION PARAMETERS

807

of the task by the experimenter so that the starting conditions
were the same across participants and trials. If it took students
more than 15 min to complete the task at the first trial, they were
excluded from the study and the data were removed.
D. Task Measurement Setup

Fig. 2. ForMoST system measures force and motion with TrEndo and ForceTRAP. The image of the task is displayed on a computer screen.

The TrEndo and new 3-D force measurement platform (ForceTRAP) were integrated in a force and motion surgical trainer
(ForMoST). The ForceTRAP is based on three parallel mechanism and uses the optical sensor unit of a commercially available
optoelectronic device for sensing [5], [6]. Fig. 3 shows the ForceTRAP as it is placed between the task and bottom plate of the
box. In this sensor, the first of three parallelogram mechanism
consists of the housing that is connected with two spring blade
to a U-profile that can only move in the X-direction. On this
U-profile, of the second parallelogram is fixed that allows only
movement in the Y -direction of the opposite U-profile. Finally,
a third parallelogram is fixed between the second parallelogram
and the optical sensor unit. Together, the three parallelograms
allow movement of the optical sensor unit in X, Y , and Z and
do not allow the sensor unit to rotate in any direction. The calibrated device has an accuracy of 0.1 N and threshold of 0.3 N. A
more detailed description of the calibration including pictures
of the setup and function fitting can be found in a previous study
about the force platform [6].
Custom made software was written in MATLAB (2012b) to
record the sensor output to a computer at a sample frequency of
30 Hz. A user interface allowed the experimenter to show the
different training tasks with description on the training screen,
to start and stop the USB video camera and to store data under
a predefined filename. Finally, the user interface allows the experimenter to mark specific events during a measurement. The
timestamp of these button presses was recorded alongside the
sensor data and used to link written remarks to the recorded
force and motion data.
E. Performance Parameters

Fig. 3. Prototype of the 3-D ForceTRAP that is fixated between training task
and bottom plate of ForMoST. The ForceTRAP is built from three parallelogram
mechanisms and components of a 3-D connection mouse. The three parallelogram mechanisms prevent rotations around the sensor’s midpoint. Therefore,
accurate force measurements become possible even if forces are exerted further
away from the sensors midpoint.

was deleted. If problems occurred after 2 min, the participant
was removed from the study. Problems that can occur during the
measurements are identified as: breaking of one of four artificial
tissues due to excessive forces in Task 1 and falling out of sight
of the silicon wire in Task 2. If necessary, participants received
additional verbal instructions during the tasks. All participants
performed only one of the two tasks in order to prevent learning
effects. At the start of Task 2, the thread was positioned on a
predefined location in the right upper corner of the ground plate

To use motion and force information for skills assessment
based on classification, performance parameters are required.
The nature of a performance parameter depends on the surgical
action it needs to reflect in a surgical training task. Seven existing
and two new parameters, based on force, motion, and time are
used to measure performance on the new training tasks. The
parameters were chosen partly because of their discriminating
power in earlier studies [5], [6] and partly based on the opinion
of experienced surgeons.
1) Force Related Parameters: Max absolute force (MAF):
The maximal force found in a trial indicating jerks or punches
in instrument–tissue interactions [4].
Mean absolute nonzero force): Indicating the averaged mean
absolute force of periods during training the absolute force is
not nonzero [3].
Force volume (FV): Indicating the volume of an ellipsoid
spanned around the standard deviations (SD) of the force along
the three main principal components (PC’s). The largest SD
found in the 3-D force defines the orientation of PC1. The second

808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

largest SD defines the orientation of PC2 perpendicular to the
first. PC3 oriented perpendicular to PC1 and PC2 [5].
4
(stdFp c1 · stdFp c2 · stdFp c3 )
(1.1)
3π
where V is the volume, stdFp c1 is the standard deviation of force
along PC1-axis, stdFp c2 is the standard deviation of force along
PC2-axis, and stdFp c3 is the standard deviation of force along
PC3-axis.
2) Motion Related Parameters: Path length (PL-left and PLright): Indicating the length of the 3-D instrument tip trajectory
and is used as a measure to determine the efficiency of instrument motion for both instruments [5].
Motion volume (MV-left and MV-right): MV is a measure for
the space required by the trainee to complete the task. Different
from PL, MV is influenced by the direction the instrument tip
moved in a 3-D space [5]. For calculation, (1.1) is used with left
or right instrument motion data instead of force data.
Mean distance between tips (MDBT): The MDBT indicates
if both instruments are in the area of interest:

(1.2)
T 2T D = (xl − xr )2 + (yl − yr )2 + (zl − zr )2
V =

where dist is the absolute distance between two tips, xl is the
position left tip on local x-axis, xr is the position right tip on
local x-axis, yl is the position left tip on local x-axis, yr is the
position right tip on local x-axis, zl is the position left tip on
local x-axis, and zr is the position right tip on local x-axis.
3) Force and Time Related Parameters: Max force area
(MFA)—where the MAF parameter indicates the highest measured absolute force, the MFA is defined as the largest period
with the highest absolute force between t1 and t2 . In earlier
study, MAF was referred to as force peak [5].
 t2
|F |dt
(1.3)
MFA =
t1

where F is the absolute force, t is the starting time of absolute
force peak, and t is the stopping time of absolute force peak.
4) Motion and Time Related Parameters: Out of view time
(OVT): Indicating the time that the instrument tips were not visual on the screen. In this new parameter, the local Z-axis is
pointing upward from the middle of the task. After transformation, the new global Z-axis is pointing from the task midpoint
toward the midpoint of the camera. The global X-axis (left
and right in the box) remains the same while the Y -axis is oriented perpendicular to X global and Z global. The total time
per instrument the max absolute distance between u (1.4) and
midpoint of training task is exceeded is a measure for OVT:

u = x2g + yg2 + zg2
um ax − u > 0

(1.4)

where u is the shortest distance between tip and midpoint on
task, um ax is the max allowed shortest distance between Z-axis
and u, xg is the position tip in global x coordinates, yg is the
position tip in global y coordinates, and zg is the position tip
in global z coordinates. The visual area between camera and
task is shaped like a cone, orienting from the lens. The shape

of the area that should not be left by the tip of the instruments
is defined as a globe to simplify the algorithm and to minimize
calculation power.
5) Time Related Parameters: Task time (T): Indicating the
period of time elapsed between the start of a training and the
first second after the task was completed.
F. Statistical Tests
A one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni Post-Hoc test (SPSS
17) was used to determine statistical differences between the
experience level of groups. A p-value of less than 0.05 (two
tailed) is considered to be significant. In the Pearson correlation
matrices (SPSS 17), a correlation between parameters with p <
0.05 (two tailed) was considered significant.
G. Correlation Between Force and Motion Parameters
Pearson correlation matrices were used to investigate the relation between all motion and force parameters [4]. If high
correlations are found between motion and force parameters,
many contacts between tip and tissue are expected. If there are
no correlations found, instrument motions are not directly related to the task and partly performed without contact between
tip and tissue.
H. PCA, Classifier, and Leave-One-Out-Cross
Validation (LOOCV)
Based on the classification methods used in our earlier study
[4], the amount of correctly classified subjects (e.g., LOOCV
score) is determined for the experts versus novices, experts versus intermediates, and intermediates versus novices. To investigate whether certain combinations of parameter categories (e.g.,
motion parameters, force parameters, or task-time parameter)
give a better LOOCV outcome, we determined the LOOCV
score for the combination task-time, force parameters, and motion parameters, the combination of force and motion parameters, the combination of task-time and motion parameters, and
finally of task-time and force parameters. Only when at least
one significantly different parameter is found for each of the
included categories, it is possible to perform the analysis.
1) PC Analysis: In this study, the PCA analysis was used to
calculate new PCs for the significant parameters of both tasks
(princom.m, MATLAB 2008b). For each group of highly correlated parameters in the correlation matrix, PC analysis (PCA)
was used to find new representative parameters for each group
of correlated parameters. PCA orders the newly calculated PCs
based on the amount of variance they explain. The first PC explains the most variance whereas the succeeding PC’s explain
the rest of the variance in decreasing order. For this study, we
sum up the number of PC’s from top down until a minimum
of 75% of the total variance in the data is explained. Since the
variance of the used parameters is extremely heterogeneous, all
data was first normalized before PCA was applied. The data of
each parameter were normalized according to:
Z=

x−μ
σ

(1.5)

HOREMAN et al.: ASSESSMENT OF LAPAROSCOPIC SKILLS BASED ON FORCE AND MOTION PARAMETERS

809

where Z is the standard force parameter score, x is the raw force
parameter score to be standardized, μ is the mean force parameter value, and σ is the standard deviation of force parameter.
2) Classifier: The two PCs that explain minimal 75% of the
variance of the data from the participants are now used as input
for the classifier (classify.m, MATLAB 2008b). The classifier
describes the boundary between two groups with different skills
levels with use of only two parameters.
3) Leave-One-Out-Cross Validation: To obtain the number
of participants that can be correctly classified based on the data,
an LOOCV program was written in MATLAB 2008b. For each
LOOCV case, the training set consists of the data of all minus
one participant while the data of that single participant is selected as a test case. The data of all participants are used once
as test case resulting in a number of LOOCV cases equal to the
amount of participants. During each LOOCV case, the skills
level of the test case is predicted based on its location with
respect to the boundary as determined by the LDA. Since the
real experience level of each test case is known, the predicted
outcome of each LOOCV case can be correct or incorrect. The
percentage correctly classified LOOCV cases indicates how reliable new participants are classified based on the used dataset
and force parameters. A more detailed description of LOOCV
for classification can be found in our previous study [5].
III. RESULTS
A. Statistical Difference Between Parameters
All participants were able to complete each of the two tasks
within 15 min. The results per parameter are represented in
Fig. 7-top for Task 1 and Fig. 7-bottom for Task 2. The presence
of a p-value in a graph indicates a statistical difference between
groups.
1) Task 1, Tissue Connection Under Traction: For Task 1,
the MAF, STD force, task time, PL-left, and PL-right were
found to be significantly different between the novice and expert
group. Between the intermediate and expert group, the MAF,
task time, PL-left, PL-right, MFA, and MDBT were found to
be significantly different. For none of the parameters significant
differences were found between the intermediate and novice
group.
2) Task 2: Placement of a Silicone Wire: For Task 2, the
task time, PL-left and PL-right, and OVT left were found to
be significantly different between the novice and expert group.
Between the intermediate and expert group the MAF, task time
and FV, were found to be significantly different. Between the
intermediate and novice group the FV, MDBT, PL-left, OVT
left, and MV-right were found to be significantly different.
B. Correlation Between Force and Motion Parameters
Fig. 4 shows the correlation between force, motion parameters, and task time for the dynamic position task (Task 2). The
yellow square in each of the three tables indicates the area where
correlating force and motion parameters can be found. The top
matrix of Fig. 4 shows that 12 of the 35 yellow blocks changed
color meaning that 37% of the parameters were correlated in the

Fig. 4. Correlation matrices of experts, intermediates, and novices for Task 2.
A green block indicates correlation between the parameter above and parameter
left of the block (p < 0.05). If green blocks are found in the yellow area, the
motion parameters above the block is correlated to a force parameter left of the
block.

expert group for Task 2. The lower matrix in Fig. 4 shows that
none of the blocks in the yellow area’s changed color indicating
that there is no correlation found between motion and force parameters for Task 2 in the intermediate group and novice group.
For the tissue connection task (Task 1), 8.6% of the force and
motion parameters were correlated in the novice group and none
in the intermediate and experts group. Looking at the correlation between task time and motion parameters a correlation was
found in each group between the PL of the left instrument and
task time. Correlation between task time and the PL of the right
instrument was found for both tasks in the intermediate groups,
Task 1 in the expert group and Task 2 in the novice group.

810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

TABLE I
PERCENTAGE CORRECTLY ASSIGNED PARTICIPANTS FOR EACH COMBINATION
OF GROUPS FOR BOTH TASKS

Fig. 5. LDA performed on the expert and novice data for Task 1 with all
significant parameters. PC1st and PC2nd, largest and second largest PC in
arbitrary units. Magenta line, boarder line as determined by the LDA. In this
example, 100% of the participants were correctly assigned with the LOOCV.

difference in motion parameters between the expert and intermediate group of Task 2, the LOOCV was performed with the
significant different force parameters (e.g., MAF and FV) and
task time. Task time was not significantly different between the
novice and intermediate group. Therefore, an LOOCV was performed with only force and motion parameters (e.g., FV, MDBT,
PL-left, OVT left, and MV-right) and task time. Table I shows
the outcome of the LOOCV after comparison of different skills
levels with different sets of significant parameters.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Aims of This Study

Fig. 6. LDA performed on the expert and novice data for Task 2 with all
significant parameters. PC1st and PC2nd, largest and second largest PC in
arbitrary units. Magenta line, boarder line as determined by the LDA. In this
example, 91% of the participants were correctly assigned with the LOOCV.

C. PCA, Classifier, and LOOCV
Fig. 5 shows the distribution of experts and novices in Task 1
when the first two PCs (PC1st and PC2nd) are calculated from
the LDA based on the significantly different MAF, STD force,
task time, PL-left, and PL-right parameter data. With this dataset
it is possible to discriminate between a novice and expert level
with 100% accuracy. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of experts
and novices when the significant different task time, PL-left and
PL-right and OVT left data is used in Task 2. With this dataset it
is possible to discriminate between the novice and expert level
with 91% accuracy.
For Task 1, none of the parameters showed significant difference between the novice and intermediate groups and therefore
the LOOCV was not performed. Since there was no significant

The first goal was to identify whether motion parameters are
correlated to force parameters in Tasks 1 and 2. The correlation
matrices indicated that a correlation between motion and force
parameters was found only in the expert group of Task 2. This
argues that motion and time parameters alone cannot be used to
asses a student’s tissue handling skills.
The second goal was to determine whether a combination of
force, time, and motion parameters can be used for classification
of the skills of a trainee. Especially, with Task 1 that required
adequate force control besides motion control, it is possible to
distinguish between novices and experts with 100% accuracy.
For Task 2, it is still possible to discriminate between intermediates and experts with accuracies up to 91% and 87% depending
on the set of parameters that is used as input for the LOOCV.
Interestingly, if motion and force parameters and task time are
used to distinguish between intermediates and experts in Task 1,
the success rate declines. This can be explained since there is no
correlation between motion and force parameter in the compared
groups. Due to the nature of the used PCA, it is possible that the
discriminative power of the force and motion parameters counteracts the discriminative power of the task time parameters
when they are not correlated

HOREMAN et al.: ASSESSMENT OF LAPAROSCOPIC SKILLS BASED ON FORCE AND MOTION PARAMETERS

For each of the part of this study (i.e., new tasks, performance parameters, correlation, and classification), the results
are discussed in more detail in the following paragraphs.
B. Discrimination Power of Tasks
In order to find differences in tissue and instrument handling
between groups with different skills levels, new training tasks
were developed particularly for training of instrument motion
and tissue manipulation. The results indicate that 7 out of 13
parameters were significantly different between skills levels for
Task 1 and 8 out of 13 parameters for Task 2. Although the
discriminating power of the used parameters is high in this study,
Table I shows that the discrimination power varies over each
combination of parameters in each task. Task 1 requires adequate
motion and force control and therefore the highest LOOCV
outcome was found if force parameters were used in the analysis.
The LOOCV for Task 2, which required mainly adequate motion
control, gave the best results if motion parameters were part of
the analysis. For both tasks, enough parameters were found to
be statistically different in order to classify between a novice
or intermediate level and an expert level with more than 87%
accuracy.

811

the unfamiliarity with mirror and scaling effects or depth perception difficulties. Since more instrument motions and tissue
manipulations are not intended or not effective, less correlation
is found.
For both tasks, higher correlation was expected in the expert groups compared with the novice and intermediate groups.
However, this is only partly true since no correlation was found
for Task 1 in the expert group. One reason could be that Task
2 was more familiar for the expert surgeons that all were
highly experienced with manipulating tissue. The experts recognized the step to step approach and created clear vision on
the backside of the silicone tissue before the thread was inserted. The novices and intermediates basically ignored this
first critical step and started to manipulate the tissue without
a clear strategy in mind till an opportunity occurred. In other
cases, some novices and intermediates tried to push the thread
in the hole without clear vision. Therefore, the clear uniform approach of the surgeons could explain a higher correlation in this
task.
Compared with the clear uniform approach that was observed in the expert group during Task 2, more different strategies were used to solve Task 1. This could explain why a
high correlation between force and motion parameters was not
observed.

C. Observations
The FV shows high differences between the intermediates
and novices as well as intermediates and experts in both tasks.
In general, a high FV as seen in the intermediate group, results from fast increasing and decreasing forces (i.e., force
spikes) in multiple directions. One explanation for this relatively large difference is that students in the intermediate group
are more convinced about their motion control but less skilled
as they may think. Since they are not familiar with these new
tasks, the high values in FV could indicate that fast increasing
forces result from a slow reaction on unexpected restrictions
in movements (i.e., contact with ground plate or stretched tissues). As also observed, the novices seemed imposed by the
given instruction to handle all instruments and tissues with
great care and move their instruments carefully in order to
prevent potential damage to the task. The experts, however,
have better understanding of the developed training tasks and
focus on adequate force and motion control thereby preventing sudden collisions between the solid parts of the tasks and
instruments.
D. Correlation Between Force and Motion Parameters
Compared with the intermediate and novice group, that
showed almost no correlation between force and motion parameters in both tasks, a correlation of 37% for Task 2 was found in
the expert group. In the expert group of Task 1, no correlation
was found between motion and force parameters. In general, if
a high correlation between force and motion occurs, better control is assumed due to more efficient instrument handling and
therefore less unintended force exertion during performance. In
the novice and intermediate group, however, many instrument
motions and tissue manipulations are accidental and caused by

E. Skills Classification
The results in Table I indicate that both tasks can be used to
classify the difference in skills levels between novices and experts with high accuracy. Compared with the standard tasks used
by Chmarra et al. [3] for classification, the new dynamic position task show slightly higher LOOCV results (±90% versus
±80%). If the difference between skills levels becomes smaller,
so is the discrimination power of the used LOOCV method.
Looking at the skills levels of the intermediates in this study,
it is still possible to discriminate them from the expert group
with acceptable accuracy but not from the novice group. Fortunately, for the assessing teacher, it is mainly interesting to know
whether an expert level is reached. If not, additional training is
required.
Besides skills level, also the nature of the training task determines the outcome of the LOOCV. In general, the LOOCV
outcome for Task 1 is slightly better compared with Task 2.
Looking at the individual results of the parameters in Fig. 7, it
becomes clear that mainly the force parameters have more discriminative power for Task 1. This task requires well-controlled
manipulation force for adequate completion whereas Task 2 is
performed efficiently when no force is exerted. Since instrument
positioning with tissue under traction in Task 1 was not trained
by the intermediates and novices, adequate force control was
found difficult explaining the difference in scoring with experts
on force parameters. Furthermore, all instrument motions (incl.
motion errors) with tissue under traction in Task 1 always resulted in force data whereas Task 2 only records force data when
motion or manipulation errors occurred. Therefore, the force
data of Task 1 gives force parameters with potentially more
discriminating power. Table I indicates that the discriminating

812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 7. Boxplot representation of the parameter results for (top) Task 1 and (bottom) Task 2. Each graph represents the results for the novice, intermediate, and
expert group.

power of the selected parameters is linked to the actual skills
levels in a group. For example, where multiple significant different motion parameters were found for the expert and novice

comparison of Task 1, none were found for Task 2. The force
parameters, however, proved useful for both tasks in this comparison.

HOREMAN et al.: ASSESSMENT OF LAPAROSCOPIC SKILLS BASED ON FORCE AND MOTION PARAMETERS

F. Fundamental Training Tasks
For further study, it is interesting to investigate the discriminative power of standard FLS tasks. When the guidelines and
instructions are considered, the results can be compared with
other studies performed with the FLS tasks. Although an additional set of tasks was developed especially for the assessment
of basic tissue handling during a dynamic position task it is
interesting to investigate the discriminative power of the tasks
used in FLS when motion and force data is used. Besides the
suture tasks, also the circle cutting task requires well-controlled
traction during cutting. Due to this nature, both the suture task
and circle cutting task could reflect important differences in
force control during delicate tissue handling.
V. CONCLUSION
A new set of dynamic position tasks was developed that requires not only motion control but also adequate force control
for good results. If the data from the motion, time, and force parameters are used for classification, it is possible to distinguish
the skills level of a novice or expert with an accuracy up to
100%. The results indicate that the tissue manipulation forces
of many intermediates exceed the levels of the novices indicating that the focus on task time and instrument motion alone
during a skills training course has a negative influence on the tissue handling skills of some students. The relatively high forces
used by the intermediates in combination with the apparent lack
of correlation between force and motion parameters argues for
the inclusion of training and assessment of force application in
tissue handling in laparoscopic skills training programs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank F. van Delft, a graduation
student from the Hogeschool Zuyd in Heerlen, for doing all the
necessary measurements during his internship. They also thank
all participating students, residents, and surgeons for taking part
in this study.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Campo, C. Reising, Y. Van Belle, J. Nassif, P. O’Donovan, and
C. R. Molinas, “A valid model for testing and training laparoscopic psychomotor skills,” Gynecological Surg., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 133–141, 2010.
[2] W. Kolkman, M. A. J. van de Put, R. Wolterbeek, J. B. M. Z. Trimbos, and
F. W. Jansen, “Laparoscopic skills simulator: Construct validity and establishment of performance standards for residency training,” Gynecological
Surg., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 109–114, 2007.
[3] M. K. Chmarra, S. Klein, J. C. F. de Winter, F. W. Jansen, and
J. Dankelman, “Objective classification of residents based on their psychomotor laparoscopic skills,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 24, pp. 1031–1039,
2010.
[4] C. Richards, J. Rosen, B. Hannaford, C. Pellegrini, and M. N. Sinanan,
“Skills evaluation in minimally invasive surgery using force/torque signatures,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 791–798, 2000.
[5] T. Horeman, J. Dankelman, J. J. van den Dobbelsteen, S. P. Rodrigues,
and F. W. Jansen, “Force parameters for skills assessment in laparoscopy,”
IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 312–322, 2012.
[6] T. Horeman, S. P. Rodrigues, F. W. Jansen, J. Dankelman, and
J. J. Dobbelsteen, “Force measurement platform for training and assessment of laparoscopic skills,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 3102–3108,
2009.
[7] T. Horeman, D. D. Kurteva, P. Valdastri, F. W. Jansen, J. J. van den Dobbelsteen, and J. Dankelman, “The influence of instrument configuration on
tissue handling force in laparoscopy,” Surg. Innov., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 260–
267, 2012.

813

[8] R. B. Singapogu, S. DuBose, L. O. Long, D. E. Smith, T. C. Burg,
C. C. Pagano, and K. J. Burg, “Salient haptic skills trainer: Initial validation of a novel simulator for training force-based laparoscopic surgical
skills,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1653–1661, 2013.
[9] A. M. Derossis, J. Bothwell, H. H. Sigman, and G. M. Fried, “The effect
of practice on performance in a laparoscopic simulator,” Surg. Endosc.,
vol. 12, pp. 1117–1120, 1998.
[10] J. H. Peters, G. M. Fried, L. L. Swanstrom, N. J. Soper, L. F. Silli,
B. Schirmer, and K. Hoffman, “Development and validation of a comprehensive program of education and assessment of basic fundamentals of
laparoscopic surgery,” Surgery, vol. 135, no. 1, pp. 21–27, 2004, SAGES
FLS Commitee.
[11] E. Hiemstra, W. Kolkman, R. Wolterbeek, B. Trimbos, and F. W. Jansen,
“Value of an objective assessment tool in the operating room,” Can. J.
Surg., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 116–122, 2011.
Tim Horeman was born in Haarlem, Holland, in
1980. He received the M.Sc. degree in biomedical
engineering from the Delft University of Technology
(DUT), Delft, The Netherlands, in 2008, with specialization in minimally invasive surgery and medical safety. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree at Minimally Invasive Surgery and Interventional Technology Group, Faculty of Mechanical,
Maritime, and Materials Engineering, DUT.
His research interests include endoscopic instrument development and training and assessment of
technical skills in minimally invasive surgery.
Jenny Dankelman received the degree in mathematics, with specialization in system and control engineering at the University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands, in 1984 and the Ph.D. degree at
the Man–Machine Systems Group, Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime, and Materials Engineering, Delft
University of Technology (DUT) , in 1989, on her
research of the dynamics of the coronary circulation.
Since 1992, she has been a Researcher at the Man–
Machine Systems Group, DUT. In 2001, she became
Professor in minimally invasive surgery and interventional techniques at the Department of Biomechanical Engineering. Her interests
and research projects include the fields of medical instruments, skills training,
and patient safety with a focus on minimally invasive techniques.
Frank Willem Jansen received the medical degree at
the University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, the residency in obstetrics and gynecology at
the Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands, and
the Ph.D. degree in laparoscopic surgery in gynecology in 1997.
He is a Senior Consultant and Head of the section
Minimally Invasive Surgery (MIS) in gynecology at
the Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Since 2009, he has been appointed as a
Professor, both at the Delft University of Technology
(MISIT Group) and the Leiden University (Medicine). His research interests
include technology and quality assessment studies (implementation, complication, and patient safety) and skills training in MIS.
John J. van den Dobbelsteen received the degree
in psychophysics at the University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands, and the Ph.D. degree
at the Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, for his research into human motor control, motor learning, and sensorimotor integration.
In 2005, he started as a Research Fellow at the Department of Biomechanical Engineering of the Delft
University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands,
where he is currently an Assistant Professor in the research group Minimally Invasive Surgery and Interventional Techniques. His research projects include the development of medical
trainers and measurement devices to study forces and motion during instrument–
tissue interaction in minimally invasive surgery, interventional radiology and
anesthesiology.

