784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Numerical Safety Study of Currents Induced in the
Patient During Rotations in the Static Field Produced
by a Hybrid MRI-LINAC System
Adnan Trakic∗ , Limei Liu, Hector Sanchez Lopez, Luca Zilberti, Feng Liu, and Stuart Crozier

Abstract—MRI-LINAC is a new image-guided radiotherapy
treatment system that combines magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and a linear particle accelerator (LINAC) into a single
unit. Moving (i.e., rotating or translating) the patient inside the
strong magnetic field of the split MRI-LINAC magnet can potentially induce high levels of electric fields and corresponding current
densities in the conducting tissues. The prediction and assessment
of patient safety in terms of electromagnetic field exposure have
received very little attention for a split cylindrical MRI magnet
configuration, especially in the vicinity of the gap region. In this
novel numerical study, based on the quasi-static finite-difference
method, rotation-induced electric fields and current densities are
calculated considering a split 1-T magnet and a tissue-accurate
2-mm-resolution human body model. The patient was modeled in
both axial and radial orientations relative to the magnet gap in a
number of treatment/imaging scenarios. It was found that rotating
the patient in the radial orientation produced an order of magnitude larger field exposure in the central nervous system than when
the patient was rotated in the axial orientation. Also, rotating the
patient with periods lower than about Tro t = 43.3 s may result in
field exposures above the limits set out in the international safety
guidelines. The novel results of this investigation can provide useful insights into the safe use of the MRI-LINAC technology and
optimal orientations of the patient during the treatment.
Index Terms—Body model, electric field and current density,
MRI-LINAC, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) patient safety,
quasi-static finite-difference (QSFD).

I. INTRODUCTION
AGNETIC resonance imaging (MRI) makes use of a
very strong static magnetic field produced by a main
superconducting magnet to generate high-resolution anatomical
images with outstanding soft tissue contrast [1]. Based on the

M

Manuscript received June 24, 2013; revised; accepted October 31, 2013. Date
of publication November 7, 2013; date of current version February 14, 2014.
This work was supported by an NH&MRC program grant and an Australian
Research Council Discovery grant. Dr. Luca Zilberti acknowledges funding by
EMRP (grant HLT06). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ A. Trakic is with the School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia (e-mail:
trakic@itee.uq.edu.au).
L. Liu, H. S. Lopez, F. Liu, and S. Crozier are with the School
of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia (e-mail: limei.liu@uq.edu.au;
hsanchez@itee.uq.edu.au; feng@itee.uq.edu.au; stuart@itee.uq.edu.au).
L. Zilberti is with the Divisione Elettromagnetismo, Istituto Nazionale di
Ricerca Metrologica, I-10135 Torino, Italy (e-mail: l.zilberti@inrim.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2289924

Faraday’s Law, a motion (i.e., translation and/or rotation) of the
conducting body in the static magnetic field may result in the
induction of electric fields and corresponding current densities,
which was studied extensively by various groups [2]–[9]. In
terms of the patient motion in MRI settings, the exact path of the
induced current depends on the magnitudes and distribution of
tissue conductivities in the heterogeneous body. With the recent
push toward higher MRI field strengths for improved image
resolution and contrast, the safety of the patient has become
of fundamental concern. In a series of computational studies
involving human voxel models, it has been shown that body
motions around and inside realistic MRI magnets can induce in
situ electric fields and current densities [10]–[14], and that the
magnitudes of these currents can in some cases be beyond the
limits set out in the international safety guidelines.
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
standard for exposure to magnetic fields at frequencies below
1 Hz assumes adverse biological reactions in 50% of human
subjects at 1.5 Tp eak or larger [15]. The symptoms include,
but are not limited to: headaches, nausea, vertigo, phosphenes
(light flashes), numbness and tingling, loss of proprioception
and balance, and a metallic taste in the mouth associated with
the rapid head movement. These biological responses are most
likely a result of synapse excitations in the central nervous system (CNS) [15]–[20], which contains predominantly the tissues
of the brain, spinal cord, and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). For
controlled environments, the IEEE guideline restricts the synaptic in situ electric field (primarily for the brain) to 25.03 mV·m−1
(below 20 Hz). Alternation of presynaptic membrane potentials
in retina with electric fields of around 53 mV·m−1
rm s (with corresponding current density of 8 mA·m−2 ) may result in electroand magneto-phosphenes, which are visual effects resulting
from the application of low-frequency electric and magnetic
fields to the retina [21]–[24].
In the IEEE guidelines, the electric field is used as the fundamental metric, rather than the current density, as the latter introduces an additional parameter (electrical conductivity), and thus
adds uncertainty beyond that which already existed in deriving
the electric field itself. The International Commission for Nonionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) [16] and the Directive
2004/40/EC of the European Parliament and Council [17] however stipulate that the current density averaged over a 1 cm2
must not exceed a threshold of 40 mA·m−2
rm s (below 1 Hz) in the
head and trunk.
A recent trend in the medical industry is to combine MRI
with a linear accelerator (LINAC) unit, as this presents an

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TRAKIC et al.: NUMERICAL SAFETY STUDY OF CURRENTS INDUCED IN THE PATIENT DURING ROTATIONS

attractive concept for image-guided monitoring and controlling of the multisession radiotherapy treatment of the target
pathology [25], [26]. MRI-LINAC provides clinicians with the
essential information about the shape/position of the pathology
and available radiotherapy treatment options. In order for both
devices to share the same observation space of the patient, the
cylindrical MRI system is commonly split into two halves and
the LINAC apparatus is inserted within the resulting gap or on
one side of the bore. Incidentally, a MRI-LINAC system with a
large central gap (i.e., about 0.5 m wide) should provide two access options for positioning the patient and the LINAC in either
an axial or radial direction. During the treatment, typically the
patient or the MRI-LINAC system is rotated around its long axis
in order to diffuse the LINAC beam outside the target pathology and thus to minimize the damage to the healthy tissue. The
spatial magnetic field pattern produced by a split magnet and
consequently the resulting patient field exposure due to rotation
is expected to be substantially different to that of a conventional
nonsplit cylindrical system, especially near the gap region. As
MRI-LINAC is a very new hybrid technology, the prediction
and assessment of patient safety in terms of electromagnetic
field exposure have received limited attention.
In this numerical study, rotation-induced in situ electric fields
and associated current densities are calculated considering a
split 1-T magnet of a realistic MRI-LINAC system and a tissueaccurate high-resolution human body model. The patient was
modeled in both axial and radial orientations relative to the
magnet gap in a number of treatment/imaging scenarios. This
study did not consider the patient exposure due to: 1) the LINAC
component; and 2) the eddy currents induced by MR gradient
switching. The novel results of this field exposure investigation
resulting from the rotation of the patient in the static magnetic field can provide useful insights in the safe use of the
MRI-LINAC technology.

785

Fig. 1. Computational resources: cut-out 3-D view of the male human voxel
model showing some of the major tissue types and a generic sketch of the split
actively-shielded main superconducting magnet of a MRI-LINAC system. The
sketch is not representative of the actual proprietary dimensions of the magnet
coils. The blue and red rings indicate the primary and secondary coils which
have currents flowing in the opposite directions.

TABLE I
TISSUE PROPERTIES OF THE PATIENT BODY MODEL IN TERMS OF ELECTRICAL
CONDUCTIVITY σ

II. METHODS
A. Split Main Magnet and Patient Model
To evaluate the patient exposure, this numerical study considered a realistic 1-T split MRI system manufactured by Agilent
Technologies, as shown as a generic sketch in Fig. 1. The magnet
had an inner and outer diameter of 0.9 and 1.8 m respectively,
with an overall length of 2 m. The gap for the LINAC insert was
0.5 m wide. In this study, it was assumed that the MRI-LINAC
unit remained stationary while the patient was rotated inside the
system. The patient was modeled with a heterogeneous wholebody male voxel phantom NORMAN (1.75 m, 73 kg) [27],
whose dimensions are very close to ICRP 89 guidelines [28] for
a reference man.
The high-resolution model had 277 × 148 × 871 voxels (i.e.,
approximately 8.3 million voxels) with vertical and horizontal
voxel dimensions of 2.021 and 2.077 mm, respectively. With
35 body tissues identified in the model, each voxel is assigned
a measured conductivity value [29]–[32] corresponding to its
dominant tissue type, as listed in Table I. Due to the large computational burden associated with the high-resolution (about
2 mm) simulations, the patient model was initially decreased

in resolution to about 8 mm. The low-resolution body models
were employed first to efficiently evaluate and record the peak
fields induced in the tissues with varying positions of the patient
within the split MRI magnet, after which a higher resolution
body model is then used for more detailed field evaluations at
the location(s) of interest. Fig. 1 shows a computer representation of a NORMAN body model illustrating some of the major
organs and tissues.

786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

B. Quasi-Static Finite-Difference (QSFD) Method


The electric field E , in the reference frame that is comoving
with the patient (i.e., primed components), is composed of the
incident primary E1 and induced secondary electric field E2 , as
was established in [7]–[9]:
E = E1 + E2
with
E1 = v × B and E2 = −∇Φ

(1)

where in the MR reference frame, v denotes the velocity of
the moving object, B is the magnetic field, and −∇Φ is the
negative gradient of the scalar electric potential that includes
both free and bound charges (i.e., ∇Φ = ∇Φfree + ∇Φb ound ).
The vector magnetic potential A defines the magnetic field via
B = ∇ × A, and any type of movement can be represented by
the generic (nonrelativistic) velocity:
v (r, t) = v0 (t) + ω (t) × r

(2)

which is composed of translation (defined by velocity v0 (t))
and rotation (defined by angular velocity ω (t) about origin). For
the time-invariant generic velocity, the primary electric field E1
can then be expressed as follows:
E1 = v × B = (v0 + ω × r) × (∇ × A) .

(3)

In 2-D axial-symmetric cylindrical coordinates, the vector
magnetic potential A components due to the main superconducting magnet can be calculated as follows [33]:
 m  R 2m  π
M

μJ0m z 2
F drs dz s
Aθ (r, z) =
2π
s =z m
s =R m
z
r
0
1
1
m =1


cos(θ)dθ
F = 
(rs )2 + r2 − 2rs r cos(θ) + (z s − z)2

(4)

where Ar (r, z) = 0 and Az (r, z) = 0. In (4), m = {1 · · · M }
denotes the number of the circular solenoids, μ is the permeability
ofthe medium, J0m is the current density in coil

−2
m in Am , the s-primed and un-primed cylindrical coordinate variables (i.e., {rs , z s } and {r, z}) refer to the source
points within the solenoid and to the field points inside the body
model, respectively. For each solenoid m, R1m and R2m are the
inner and outer radii, while z1m and z2m are the coil starting and
ending positions in the z-direction.
The inner integral in (4) can be evaluated with complete
elliptic integrals [35]. The vector potentials in (4) are converted
from 2-D cylindrical to 3-D Cartesian coordinates using the unit


1
Φi,j,k =

where

Ψ=

q =0

1


q =0

vector matrix transform:
⎤ ⎡
⎤
⎤⎡
⎡
cos (θ) −sin (θ) 0
Ar
Ax
⎥ ⎢
⎥
⎥⎢
⎢
⎣ Ay ⎦ = ⎣ sin (θ) cos (θ) 0 ⎦ ⎣ Aθ ⎦
Az

0

0

1

(5)

Az

where A = Ax î + Ay ĵ + Az k̂. Since the angular frequency of
body rotation is low, the quasi-static assumption applies, and
the induced fields (including the secondary electric field component −∇Φ) can be calculated with the QSFD method [34].
Based on the implementation of the QSFD scheme [34]–[36],
the computation of the electric field is given by the governing
surface integral equation:


(σE1 ) · ds =
(σ∇Φ) · ds.
(6)
S

S

Equation (6) is subject to a Neumann type boundary
condition:
∂Φ
= n̂ · (E1 )
(7)
∂n
which indicates that the normal component of the induced electric field on the tissue–air boundary is zero inside the body. To
calculate the scalar potential Φ, the computational space is divided into a large number of cubic cells (for instance, 277 ×
148 × 871 in the high-resolution model) and then (6) is approximated for each elementary voxel in the finite-difference
fashion. After discretization, the scalar potential for the voxel
(i, j, k) is given by (8), shown at the bottom of the page, in
which subscripts i, j, and k indicate the cell indices, s is the
unit vector normal to the cell faces, h is the cell size, σa is the
local harmonic averaged conductivity and subscript q indicates
two faces (0 or 1) in x, y, andz directions, respectively. Equation (8) in finite-difference form can be solved using an iterative
technique such as the successive over relaxation algorithm [33]
with the advantage of rapid convergence. After the scalar potential has been calculated, the electric field components were
evaluated using (1). The current density was calculated for each
voxel as the product of the induced electric field and electrical
conductivity of tissue:
J = σE .

(9)

C. Validation
The QSFD method was compared in terms of the electric
field E = v × B − ∇Φ to the analytical solutions obtained by
Cobos Sanchez et al. [9], which assume a sphere with a diameter
of 180 mm and electrical conductivity of 0.2 S·m−1 . In the first
validation, the sphere is assumed to rotate around the x-axis


a
a
a
Φi+q ,j,k σi+q
,j,k + Φi,j +q ,k σi,j +q ,k + Φi,j,k +q σi,j,k +q + Ψh

1  a
a
a
q =0 σi + q , j , k + σi,j +q ,k + σi,j,k +q

 q  a
 q  a
 q
a
σi+q
,j,k E1,(i+q ,j,k ) · sx + σi,j +q ,k E1,(i,j +q ,k ) · sy + σi,j,k +q E1,(i,j,k +q ) · sz

(8)

TRAKIC et al.: NUMERICAL SAFETY STUDY OF CURRENTS INDUCED IN THE PATIENT DURING ROTATIONS

Fig. 2. Model setups in terms of axial (A) and radial (B) orientations of the
rotated patient relative to the split magnet. The green component with the red line
indicates the LINAC unit with the LINAC beam. (a) Total of 55 low-resolution
simulation setups wherein the body model was equidistantly repositioned within
the magnet. These simulations measured the positions of the patient within
the magnet that corresponded with the peak field exposure. High-resolution
simulations with the body model positioned for the treatment/imaging of the:
(b) head, (c) chest, and (d) pelvis. In each case, the orange arrowed circle denotes
the rotation of the patient.

with an angular velocity of ω = ω î, in a uniform static magnetic
field B = B k̂, wherein ω = 0.37 rad·s−1 and B = 3 T. In the
second validation, the same sphere is rotated around the z-axis
(i.e., ω = ω k̂) at ω = 6.2 rad·s−1 in a magnetic field gradient G
= 10 T·m−1 such that B = G(−xî − yĵ + 2z k̂)/2. The sphere
was assumed to be centered at the origin.
D. Model Setup
Fig. 2 shows cut-out views of the MRI-LINAC system and
the patient residing within in various configurations, wherein
the green-colored component denotes the LINAC system. In all
simulations of this study, the body model was oriented in either
an axial (A) or radial (B) direction relative to the split magnet.
It was assumed that the patient is facing the positive y-axis of
MRI-LINAC system. The red line signifies the projection of the
LINAC beam toward the patient, which indicates the anatomical location under treatment. It was assumed that the model is

787

rotating around the long body axis with a period of Trot = 60 s,
which is indicated by the orange arrowed circle. For simplicity,
let us also assume that MR imaging can be performed concurrently as the patient is being rotated and that a dedicated motion
correction algorithm is used to correct any image distortions
caused by rotation.
The model setups for low- and high-resolution simulations
differed however. In the low-resolution case (i.e., about 8 mm),
a total of 55 QSFD simulations were performed with the model
repositioned (at intervals of Δx = Δz = 32 mm, indicated by the
blue arrowed line) relative to the iso-centre of the MRI-LINAC
system, which coincides with the treatment and imaging volume
region (TIVR), as shown in Fig. 2.
Consequently, the model was translated so that 55 anatomical points equally distributed from the top of the head to the
bottom of the feet would coincide with the TIVR. For each of
the 55 converged QSFD low-resolution simulations, both maximum raw and maximum 99th-percentile electric field and current density values (i.e., Em ax , Jm ax , Em ax 99%, and Jm ax 99%)
were recorded within the entire body model. The calculation of
the Em ax 99% and Jm ax 99% values was based on the ICNIRP
guidelines [16]. The high-resolution (i.e., about 2 mm) simulations were performed with the body model in three different
positions, i.e., with the head, chest, and pelvis coinciding with
the TIVR, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 2. This resulted in
a total of six high-resolution QSFD simulations, in which the
electric field (E) and 1 cm2 -averaged current density J1 cm 2 , as
well as their average, standard deviation, and maximum values
were evaluated and recorded in accordance with the ICNIRP
guidelines. The 1 cm2 -averaged current density was obtained
by averaging over a grid of 5 × 5 voxels in all three Cartesian
planes and taking the largest (worst-case) component values.
For orientation A, the symmetry of the patient-magnet system
advocates that the results should be independent whether the
patient is facing the x- or y-axis.
For orientation B, however this is not the case. For instance,
one would expect different currents to be induced as the patient
is rotated past the point of facing directly upwards/downwards
(along the y-axis) compared to being rotated past the point
of facing toward one end of the scanner (along the z-axis).
In order to evaluate the patient exposure in setup B for different angular orientations and LINAC treatment position, the
low-resolution model was repositioned along the x-axis from
x = −87.5 cm to x = 87.5 cm at equal intervals of Δx=
8 cm relative to the iso-centre of the MRI-LINAC system,
similar to the depiction in Fig. 2(a) (setup B), so that the
LINAC beam coincides with the top of the patient’s head at
x = −87.5 cm and with the bottom of the patient’s feet at
x = 87.5 cm. At each position along the x-axis, the model was
also assumed to rotate past different angular directions (i.e., from
θ = 0◦ to θ = 360◦ at intervals of Δθ = 20◦ ). That is, a complete revolution (i.e., θ = 0–360◦ ) is simulated because the body
model is not anatomically symmetric. The angular directions
θ = 0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , and 270◦ were used to denote the cases
wherein the patient rotated past the +y-axis, +z-axis, −y-axis
and −z-axis of the MRI-LINAC system, respectively. The total
number of low-resolution simulations was in this case 396 (i.e.,

788

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 3. Validation results for the conducting sphere (diameter = 180 mm,
σ = 0.2 S/m) rotating in a magnetic field. (a) Comparison of analytical [9] and
numerical (QSFD) in situ electric field E  when the sphere is rotating at ω x =
0.37 rad·s−1 in a B z = 3 T uniform magnetic field. The analytical equation for
the induced electric field has the form E  (r) = ωB(−zî + xk̂)/2. (b) Rotation
of the same sphere around the z-axis in a 10 mT·m−1 magnetic field gradient G
such that it produces the magnetic field B = G(−x î − y ĵ + 2z k̂)/2. The free
and bound charges that give rise to the spatial gradient of the scalar potential
∇Φ perfectly cancel out the external primary electric field E 1 = v × B, so that
the overall electric field inside the sphere is zero (i.e., E  = v × B − ∇Φ = 0)
as was also obtained by Cobos-Sanchez et al. [9].

18 angular and 22 axial orientations). For each of the 396 lowresolution simulations, the period of rotation was assumed to be
Trot = 60 s, as before. Once the 2-D (i.e., 18 × 22) exposure scan
was completed, a high-resolution simulation was performed at
the particular combination of the angular orientation and axial
position that corresponded with the recorded (whole-body) peak
electric field from the low-resolution simulation results.
III. RESULTS
A. Validation
Fig. 3 shows the validation result of the numerical QSFD
method against the analytical solutions in [9], which consider a
conducting sphere rotating in a magnetic field. Fig. 3(a) describes that the numerically calculated in situ electric field
distribution is in a very good agreement with the analytically derived solution, which has the following form: E (r) =
ωB(−zî + xk̂)/2 [9]. Both numerical QSFD and analytical solution predict in this case that a rotation of the sphere around the
x-axis at an angular velocity of ωx = 0.37 rad·s−1 in a Bz =
3 T uniform static magnetic field would induce a peak electric
field of 50 mV·m−1 with a corresponding current density of
10 mA·m−2 .
In the second validation example of Fig. 3(b) (where
ωz = 6.2 rad·s−1 and B = G(−xî − y ĵ + 2z k̂)/2 with G =
10 T·m−1 ), both the numerical QSFD and analytical solution [9]
predict that the primary (or external) electric field E1 = v × B
is perfectly canceled out by the spatial gradient of the scalar potential (i.e., ∇Φ = ∇Φfree + ∇Φb ound ), thereby resulting in no
electric field inside the sphere (i.e., E = v × B − ∇Φ = 0), as

Fig. 4. Whole-body peak in situ current density [(a): raw and (b): 99th percentile] and electric field [(c): raw and (d): 99th-percentile] as function of the
MRI-LINAC treatment/imaging location of the anatomy for both the axial (A)
and radial (B) orientations of the patient relative to the split MR magnet.

was also obtained by Cobos-Sanchez et al. in [9]. Consequently,
while Cobos-Sanchez et al. [9] employed a separate treatment of
the scalar fields ∇Φfree and ∇Φb ound , the present formulation
contained both contributions implicitly in ∇Φ.
B. Low-Resolution Patient Safety Simulations
Fig. 4 shows the maximum recorded (whole-body) electric
field Em ax and corresponding current density Jm ax (including
the ICNIRP recommended 99th-percentile) values for different
LINAC treatment points along the body. The induction of the
electric field and current density was due to the rotation (period
Trot = 60 s) of the electrically conductive body in the spatially
varying magnetic field of the split MR magnet. In the subplots
of Fig. 4, the horizontal axis signifies the azimuthal location of
the patient within the MRI-LINAC system that coincides with
the TIVR. We note therefore that the LINAC beam coincides
with the iso-centre of the MRI system. In Figs. 2 and 4, the first
marker 1 and the last marker 55 indicate the situations where,
respectively, the head and the feet are being imaged/treated by
the MRI-LINAC system.
From all subplots in Fig. 4, we note that positioning the
patient in the radial (B) orientation within the MRI-LINAC system will in general trigger larger peak electric field and current
density values during the treatment than when the patient is
positioned axially in the (A) orientation (see model setups in
Fig. 2). From the 99th-percentile values of Em ax and Jm ax [see
Fig. 4(d) and (b)], which according to the ICNIRP guideline [16]
provides a more reliable measure of the field exposure due to
potential numerical errors, the largest patient exposure occurred
during the lower chest treatment for orientation A (with peak

TRAKIC et al.: NUMERICAL SAFETY STUDY OF CURRENTS INDUCED IN THE PATIENT DURING ROTATIONS

789

Fig. 5. Coronal and sagittal high-resolution (2 mm) profiles of the in situ electric field (E) and 1 cm2 -averaged current density J1 c m 2 for both axial (a) and
radial (b) orientations of the patient when MRI-LINAC treatment/imaging is performed on the head, chest, and pelvis. The patient is assumed to rotate with a
period of T ro t = 60 s past the +y-axis.

Jm ax 99% = 0.16 mA·m−2 and Em ax 99% = 1.33 mV·m−1 ) and
during the knee treatment for orientation B (peak Jm ax 99% =
0.76 mA·m−2 and Em ax 99% = 8.63 mV·m−1 ). Moreover, for
orientation B, peak exposure could also occur during the treatment of the head, with peak values of similar magnitude to the
treatment of the knees in orientation B [see Fig. 4(b) and (d)].
The lowest exposure however occurred during the treatment of
the feet for orientation A (with Jm ax 99% = 0.03 mA·m−2 and
Em ax 99% = 0.36 mV·m−1 ) and during the treatment of the abdomen for orientation B (with Jm ax 99% = 0.39 mA·m−2 and
Em ax 99% = 5.56 mV·m−1 ). The peak raw values of Em ax and
Jm ax (for both orientations) were less than 13 mA·m−2 and
26 mV·m−1 , respectively.
C. High-Resolution Patient Safety Simulations
Overall, it took about 7.5 h and 1.68 GB of RAM (on 2.79 GHz
dual quad-core Intel(R) Core(TM) i7 CPU without hyperthreading) to complete one of the high-resolution simulations. Fig. 5
shows the central coronal and sagittal plots of the induced electric field intensity as well as the corresponding 1 cm2 -averaged
induced current density J1cm 2 for the three assumed positions of
the patient during the MRI-LINAC treatment/ imaging protocol

(i.e., head, chest, and pelvis) for both axial (A) and radial (B)
orientations. Each subplot also indicates the position and orientation of the patient relative to the MRI-LINAC system. Red and
blue colors denote the high and low values of E (and J1cm 2 ),
respectively. From Fig. 5, the largest J1cm 2 patient exposure
occurred in orientation B with peak values predominantly in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, brain, and peripheral spinal cord. The
corresponding largest induced electric field however occurred
in the proximal trunk and distal lower back region.
Fig. 6 shows the corresponding box and whisker plot of all
six setups showing the statistical distribution of the induced
electric field intensity and the corresponding 1 cm2 -averaged
induced current density J1cm 2 in the brain, CSF, and spinal cord
based on the whole-body high-resolution results, as illustrated
in Fig. 5. From the two different orientations A and B, and based
on results of Figs. 5 and 6, we note that the largest electric field
and current density exposures occurred when the patient was in
the radial orientation B during rotation.
Table II lists and quantifies the corresponding electric field
and 1 cm2 -averaged current density results for the tissues of the
brain, CSF, spinal cord, and all tissues in the model in terms
of the mean (Avg.), standard deviation (Std.), and maximum
(Max.) value for both the axial (A) and radial (B) orientations

790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 6. Box and whisker plots of the electric field (in mV·m−1 ) and 1 cm2 -averaged current density J1 c m 2 (in mA·m−2 ) within the brain, CSF, and spinal
cord. In each case, the results are plotted for both axial (A) and radial (B) orientations of the patient relative to the split MR magnet when the MRI-LINAC
treatment/imaging is performed on the head, chest, and pelvis.
TABLE II
HIGH-RESOLUTION (∼2 MM) ELECTRIC FIELD AND 1 CM2 -AVERAGED CURRENT DENSITY RESULTS FOR THE PATIENT MODEL ROTATING PAST THE +y-AXIS

of the patient when the MRI-LINAC treatment/ imaging is
performed on the head, chest, and pelvis, respectively. In
Table II, the bold values indicate the largest maximum values in the particular category of the head, chest, and pelvis
treatment. Table III lists the minimum recommended periods
of patient rotation that are likely to result in field exposures

below the IEEE electric field and ICNIRP 1 cm2 -averaged current density limits of 25.03 mV·m−1 (for CNS) and 40 mA·m−2
rm s
(for whole-body) [15], [16], respectively.
Fig. 7 shows the results of the 2-D low-resolution exposure
scan of the patient in orientation B, wherein the patient was both
displaced along the x-axis (from x = −87.5 cm to x = 87.5 cm,

TRAKIC et al.: NUMERICAL SAFETY STUDY OF CURRENTS INDUCED IN THE PATIENT DURING ROTATIONS

791

TABLE III
MINIMUM RECOMMENDED PERIODS OF ROTATION T ro t (IN SECONDS)

Fig. 8. Coronal and sagittal high-resolution (2 mm) profiles of the in situ
electric field (E) and 1 cm2 -averaged current density J1 c m 2 for the patient in
radial orientation B during the treatment/imaging of the head, while the patient
is rotating at T ro t = 60 s past the negative z-axis (i.e., θ = 270◦ ).

Fig. 7. Interpolated low-resolution 2-D exposure scan of the patient in orientation B, wherein the patient was both displaced along the x-axis and rotating
past different angular directions. The simulation results in terms of recorded
whole-body peak: (a) electric field and (b) current density.

at intervals of Δx = 8 cm) and assumed to rotate past different
angular directions (i.e., in range of 0–360◦ , at intervals of Δθ =
20◦ ). Specifically, Fig. 7(a) and (b) shows the simulation results
in terms of recorded whole-body peak electric field and current
density, respectively. From Fig. 7(a), it is noted that the largest
electric fields occurred during the treatment of the head (i.e.,
x = −87.5 cm) and when the patient moved past θ = 0◦ ,
90◦ ,180◦ , and 270◦ at Trot = 60 s, i.e., angular directions which
corresponded to +y-axis, +z-axis, −y-axis, and −z-axis of
the MRI-LINAC system, respectively. Fig. 7(b) indicates that,
due to the heterogeneous electrical conductivity distribution of
tissue, the peak current density may occur during the head treatment with the patient orientated at about θ = 270◦ and θ = 345◦ .
Since previous B model setups involved cases where the patient
was oriented at θ = 0◦ during head treatment (see Figs. 5 and 6
and Tables II and III), it was of interest in this particular study to

conduct a corresponding high-resolution simulation of electric
field and corresponding current density with the patient facing
θ = 270◦ (i.e., –z-axis), as shown in Fig. 8. From Fig. 8, we note
that the largest electric field and associated 1 cm2 -averaged current density occurred in the central region of the head and trunk,
with peak values of Em ax = 27.3 mV·m−1 and J1cm 2 m ax =
10.2 mA·m−2 (in the whole-body) The peak electric field
in CNS was Em ax = 18.1 mV·m−1 . The column Head∗ in
Table III lists the minimum recommended periods of rotation of
Trot = 43.3 s (for the IEEE) and Trot = 15.3 s (for the ICNIRP
standard).
IV. DISCUSSION
In terms of low-resolution 99th-percentile results, the overall
peak exposure in orientation B (with the patient facing the positive y-axis) was about 6.5 times (for electric field Em ax 99%)
and 4.7 times (for current density Jm ax 99%) larger than in orientation A. These findings were also in agreement with the
high-resolution results. According to Faraday’s law, a constant
rotation of a conducting body of any shape, size, and conductivity distribution in an axisymmetric magnetic field produces
no net electric field inside the body, given that the field’s axis of
symmetry is concentric with the body’s axis of rotation. Considering the results of orientation A, the small nonzero values
of electric field and current density induced by the rotation of
the patient in an axisymmetric magnetic field are most likely
due to a small lateral misalignment of about Δx ∼ 6 mm
that was present between the central body axis and the magnet’s axis of symmetry. Due to the constricted inner diameter of
the MR magnet bore and comparable lateral dimension of the

792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

patient, we can assume that only small axial misalignments are
possible for orientation A. This suggests that, from the perspective of body rotation in the magnetic field, it would be safer to
treat/image the patient in orientation A, rather than orientation
B. Consequently, the patient can be rotated faster in orientation
A as compared to the orientation B, under similar overall levels
of electric field and current density exposure. One disadvantage
of orientation A is that the LINAC proton beam is projected
radially into the treatment/imaging volume region, wherein it
undergoes a curved trajectory toward the target pathology due
to the Lorentz forces that exist between the charged particle
beam and the static magnetic field that is orthogonal to it. If
this intricacy is not accounted for during the treatment, it could
potentially lead to undesired obliteration of healthy tissue that
surrounds the target pathology of interest. Therefore, the advantages and disadvantages of the treating the patient in either
orientation A or B should be carefully considered in light of
various MRI and LINAC safety aspects.
From the orientation examples B in Fig. 5 (with the patient facing the positive y-axis), we note that the location
of the largest field exposure does not coincide with the actual anatomical location that is undergoing treatment/ imaging. For instance, treatment/imaging of the head produces the
largest body-rotation-induced electric fields and current densities in the central part of the body (i.e., particularly near the
lower chest, abdomen, and proximal trunk) and not so much
in the head region. From the results of Fig. 6, we note that
the largest 1 cm2 -averaged current densities are induced in
the bladder, GI tract, upper spine, and distal upper back as
well as the tissues of the brain. The largest exposure occurred
during the treating/imaging of the: 1) head in orientation A;
and 2) pelvis in orientation B. For the patient exposure in the
orientation B (assuming Trot = 60 s), the peak induced electric field was 13.75 mV·m−1 in the brain, 12.29 mV·m−1 in
the CSF, and 12.91 mV·m−1 in the spine, with corresponding
1 cm2 -averaged current density J1cm 2 values of 5.42, 9.03, and
4.35 mA·m−2 , respectively. In contrast, the corresponding peak
induced electric field and J1cm 2 were about one order of magnitude smaller in orientation A during treatment of the head
(i.e., Ebrain = 1.09 mV·m−1 , ECSF = 1.08 mV·m−1 , Espine
= 1.26 mV·m−1 , J1cm 2,brain = 0.63 mA·m−2 , J1cm 2,CSF =
0.78 mA·m−2 , J1cm 2,spine = 0.50 mA·m−2 ). Considering all
six simulation setups, Table II indicates that in terms of the
1 cm2 -averaged current density the largest field exposure occurred in CSF during the treatment/imaging of the pelvis in
setup B (J1cm 2,m ax = 9.03 mA·m−2 ). Accounting for all the tissue types (see Table II), the peak electric field of 37.11 mV·m−1
was induced during the head treatment in setup B.
All the simulation results were obtained with the assumed
and nominal period of rotation of Trot = 60 s. A linear scaling
of Trot will result in a proportional increase/decrease in electric field and current density results. From the CNS exposure
results in Figs. 5 and 6 and Tables II and III (with the patient
facing the +y-axis), the IEEE’s in situ electric field limit of
25.03 mV·m−1 [15] in the brain could be exceeded if either
the MRI-LINAC system or the patient was to be rotated with
a period of revolution smaller than about Trot = 33 s during

treatment/imaging of the pelvis in setup B. Periods of rotation
lower than about 13.55 s may exceed the ICNIRP J1cm 2 limit
of 40 mA·m−2
rm s [16] (orientation B, pelvis). For all specific
treatment/imaging locations (i.e., head, chest, and pelvis) and
patient orientations (i.e., A and B), to avoid field exposures
beyond the IEEE and ICNIRP limits, the minimum period of
revolution should be lower than the recommended values listed
in Table III. The shortest period of rotation (either MRI-LINAC
or patient) is about Trot = 0.88 s during the treatment of the
pelvis in patient orientation A.
Due to the field-patient asymmetry that is pertinent to orientation B, it was of interest to conduct further studies into the
field exposures when the patient is moving past different angular orientations. The low-resolution results of Fig. 7(a) have
shown that peak electric field could occur as the patient is rotated
past the four main axes of the magnet (i.e., +y-axis, +z-axis,
−y-axis and −z-axis, respectively). Due to the heterogeneity of
conducting tissue, Fig. 7(b) indicated that peak current densities
could be induced when the patient is moving past θ = 270◦ (i.e.,
–z-axis) and θ = 345◦ . The low-resolution findings of the θ
= 270◦ orientation case were subsequently collaborated with a
high-resolution simulation, wherein peak Em ax = 18.1 mV·m−1
(CNS tissue) and J1cm 2,m ax = 10.2 mA·m−2 (whole-body) were
recorded. The corresponding minimum recommended periods
of rotation (see Head∗, Table III) were 43.3 and 15.3 s for IEEE
and ICNIRP guidelines, respectively. These additional findings
for setup B suggests that, compared to the rotation past the +yaxis, it may be essential to rotate the patient even slower past
the −z-axis.
The use of pulsed gradient coils during imaging would produce eddy currents (and associated electric fields) inside the
patient that are up to three orders of magnitude higher in frequency than the electric fields and currents induced due to the
rotation of the patient in the static magnetic field. Since the electromagnetic fields are orthogonal, the motion-induced fields can
be considered and treated independently from those produced
by switched gradients. While the present study considered only
the patient-rotation-induced field exposure, a separate and parallel study is underway to specifically address the issue of eddy
current induction due to pulsing of split gradient coils in a hybrid
MRI-LINAC system.
In conclusion, this new study has calculated and assessed the
patient-rotation-induced in situ electric fields and associated current densities in a tissue-accurate 2-mm-resolution human body
when rotated (at nominal period of Trot = 60 s) in a field produced by a realistic split 1-T magnet of a MRI-LINAC system.
The patient was modeled in both axial and radial orientations
relative to the magnet gap in a number of treatment/imaging
scenarios. It was found that rotating the patient in the radial
orientation relative to the split magnet produced an order of
magnitude larger level of field exposure in the tissues of the
CNS than when the patient was rotated at the same rate in the
axial orientation. The patient safety limits set out in the IEEE
and ICNIRP guidelines may be exceeded if the patient is rotated at periods lower than about Trot = 43.3 s and Trot =
15.3 s, respectively. Rotating at these periods or slower is desirable for patient comfort and it is unlikely to pose an issue

TRAKIC et al.: NUMERICAL SAFETY STUDY OF CURRENTS INDUCED IN THE PATIENT DURING ROTATIONS

for the MRI-guided LINAC treatment in terms of dosimetric
independence. The results of this investigation can therefore
provide useful insights into the safe use of the MRI-LINAC
technology and optimal orientations of the patient during the
image-guided treatment.
REFERENCES
[1] P. T. Callaghan, Principles of NRM Microscopy. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
Science, 2006.
[2] H. Schrieber, “Some remarks on the analysis of electrical machinery in
rotating frames of reference,” Archiv fur Elektrotechnik, vol. 63, pp. 11–
115, 1981.
[3] D. Redzic, “Conductors moving in magnetic fields: Approach to equilibrium,” Eur. J. Phys., vol. 25, pp. 623–632, 2004.
[4] A. L. Kholmetskii, O. V. Missevitch, and T. Yarman, “Comment on the
note ‘Faraday’s law via the magnetic vector potential’ by Dragan Redzic,”
Eur. J. Phys., vol. 29, pp. L1–L4, 2008.
[5] D. Redzic, “Reply to comment on ‘Faraday’s law via the magnetic
vector potential’,” Eur. J. Phys., vol. 29, no. 1, L5, doi:10.1088/01430807/29/1/N02.
[6] P. Lorrain, J. McTavish, and F. Lorrain, “Magnetic fields in moving conductors: Four simple examples,” Eur. J. Phys., vol. 19, pp. 451–457, 1998.
[7] P. Lorrain, “Electrostatic charges in v × B fields: The Faraday disk and
the rotating sphere,” Eur. J. Phys., vol. 11, pp. 94–98, 1989.
[8] E. Bringuier, “Electrostatic charges in v × B fields and the phenomenon
of induction,” Eur. J. Phys., vol. 24, pp. 21–29, 2003.
[9] C. Cobos Sanchez, P. Glover, H. Power, and R. Bowtell, “Calculation of
the electric field resulting from human body rotation in a magnetic field,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, pp. 4739–4753, 2012.
[10] C. Cobos Sanchez, R. Bowtell, H. Power, P. Glover, L. Marin, A. Becker,
and A. Jones, “Forward electric field calculation using BEM for timevarying magnetic field gradients and motion in strong static fields,” Eng.
Anal. Bound. Elem., vol. 33, pp. 1074–1088, 2009.
[11] K. Jokela and R. D. Saunders, “Physiologic and dosimetric considerations
for limiting electric fields induced in the body by movement in a static
magnetic field,” Health Phys., vol. 100, no. 6, pp. 641–653, 2011.
[12] M. Chiampi and L. Zilberti, “Induction of electric field in human bodies
moving near MRI: An efficient BEM computational procedure,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2787–2793, Oct. 2011.
[13] S. Crozier, A. Trakic, H. Wang, and F. Liu, “Numerical study of currents
in workers induced by body-motion around high-ultrahigh field MRI magnets,” J. Magn. Resonance Imag., vol. 26, pp. 1261–1277, 2007.
[14] I. Laakso, S. Kannala, and K. Jokela, “Computational dosimetry of induced
electric fields during realistic movements in the vicinity of a 3 T MRI
scanner,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, pp. 2625–2640, 2013.
[15] IEEE Standard for Safety Levels with Respect to Human Exposure to
Electromagnetic Fields (0–3 kHz), IEEE Standard C95.6, New York, 2002.
[16] International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP), “Guidelines for limiting exposure to time varying electric, magnetic and electromagnetic fields (up to 300 GHz),” Health Phys., vol. 74,
pp. 494–522, 1998.
[17] Directive 2004/40/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council,
Official Journal of the European Union, L 159, 2004.
[18] “IEC. Particular requirements for the safety of magnetic resonance equipment for medical diagnosis,” In: Diagnostic imaging equipment. Publication of the IEC 60601-2-33, medical electrical equipment, part 2. International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), 3 rue de Varembe, P.O.-Box
131, CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland, 1995.
[19] National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB), “Restrictions on human
exposure to static and time-varying electromagnetic fields and radiation,”
Documents of the NRPB, vol. 4, no. 5, 1993.

793

[20] J. F. Schenck, C. L. Dumoulin, R. W. Redington, H. Y. Kressel,
R. T. Elliott, and I. L. McDougall, “Human exposure to a 4-Tesla magnetic
field in a whole-body scanner,” Med. Phys., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1089–1098,
1992.
[21] R. W. Knighton, “An electrically evoked slow potential of the frog’s retina,
I: Properties of response,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 38, pp. 185–197, 1975.
[22] J. Bergeron, M. R. Hart, J. A. Mallick, and L. H. String, “Strengthduration curve for human electro- and magnetophosphenes,” presented
at the Proceeding of the Bioelectromagnetics Society Annual Meeting,
Boston, MA, USA, 1995.
[23] T. F. Budinger, C. Cullander, and R. Bordow, “Switched magnetic field
thresholds for the induction of magnetophosphenes,” presented at the
Proceeding of the Annual Meeting, Society for Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine, New York, NY, USA, 1984, p. 18.
[24] E. L. Carstensen, “Sensitivity of the human eye to power frequency electric
fields,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 8, pp. 561–565, Aug.
1985.
[25] B. W. Raaymakers, J. J. W. Lagendijk, J. Overweg, J. G. M. Kok,
A. J. E. Raaijmakers, E. M. Kerkhof, R. W. van der Put, I. Meijsing,
S. P. M. Crijns, F. Benedosso, M. van Vulpen, C. H. W. de Graaff, J. Allen,
and K. J. Brown, “Integrating a 1.5 T MRI scanner with a 6 MV accelerator: Proof of concept,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. N229–N237,
2009.
[26] J. Yun, K. Wachowicz, M. Mackenzie, S. Rathee, D. Robinson, and
B. G. Fallone, “First demonstration of infrafractional tumor-tracked irradiation using 2D phantom MR images on a prototype LINAC-MR,”
Med. Phys., vol. 40, no. 5, 051718, 2013, doi: 10.1118/1.4802735.
[27] P. J. Dimbylow, “Current densities in a 2 mm resolution anatomically
realistic model of the body induced by low frequency electric fields,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 45, pp. 1013–1022, 2000.
[28] ICRP Publication 89, “Basic anatomical and physiological data for use in
radiological protection: Reference values. A report of age- and genderrelated differences in the anatomical and physiological characteristics of
reference individuals,” Ann. ICRP vol. 32, pp. 5–265, 2002.
[29] D. Andreuccetti, R. Fossi, and C. Petrucci, (2002). Dielectric properties of body tissues. Institute of Applied Physics—Italian National
Research Council. Florence, Italy, [Online]. Available: http://niremf.
ifac.cnr.it/tissprop/htmlclie/htmlclie.htm#atsftag
[30] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: I. Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2231–
2249, 1996.
[31] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.
[32] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2271–2293, 1996.
[33] L. K. Forbes, S. Crozier, and D. M. Doddrell, “Rapid computation of static
fields produced by thick circular solenoids,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 33,
no. 5, pp. 4405–4410, Sep. 1997.
[34] F. Liu, H. W. Zhao, and S. Crozier, “On the induced electric field gradients
in the human body for magnetic stimulation by gradient coils in MRI,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 804–815, Jul. 2003.
[35] F. Liu, H. W. Zhao, and S. Crozier, “The calculation of the induced electricfields induced by human body movement in high-field MRI,” J. Magn.
Resonance, vol. 161, pp. 99–107, 2003.
[36] F. Liu and S. Crozier, “Electromagnetic fields inside a lossy, multilayered
spherical head phantom excited by MRI coils, models and methods,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 49, pp. 1835–1851, 2004.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

