1114

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Accelerometry-Based Berg Balance Scale
Score Estimation
Heidi Similä, Jani Mäntyjärvi, Juho Merilahti, Mikko Lindholm, and Miikka Ermes

Abstract—The objective of the study was to investigate the validity of 3-D-accelerometry-based Berg balance scale (BBS) score
estimation. In particular, acceleration patterns of BBS tasks and
gait were the targets of analysis. Accelerations of the lower back
were measured during execution of the BBS test and corridor walking for 54 subjects, consisting of neurological patients, older adults,
and healthy young persons. The BBS score was estimated from one
to three BBS tasks and from gait-related data, separately, through
assessment of the similarity of acceleration patterns between subjects. The work also validated both approaches’ ability to classify
subjects into high- and low-fall-risk groups. The gait-based method
yielded the best BBS score estimates and the most accurate BBStask-based estimates were produced with the stand to sit, reaching,
and picking object tasks. The proposed gait-based method can identify subjects with high or low risk of falling with an accuracy of
77.8% and 96.6%, respectively, and the BBS-task based method
with corresponding accuracy of 89.5% and 62.1%.
Index Terms—Berg balance scale (BBS), fall-risk assessment,
gait analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
VERY third person over 65 years of age falls at least once
every year [1], and, for example, falling or stumbling was
the accident most commonly leading to death among both men
and women in Finland in 2010 [2]. Locomotion requires muscle
strength and balance. Problems with balance cause changes in
gait, such as decelerating one’s walking and shortening one’s
steps [3] to compensate for poor balance. One traditional method
of balance assessment is the Berg balance scale (BBS) [4], a
performance-oriented measure of balance that involves 14 tasks.
Performance of each task is scored on a scale of 0–4, making
the maximum possible score 56. According to Shumway-Cook
et al. [5], people with a score lower than 49 show increased risk
of falling, while those with a score over 49 have low fall risk. The
BBS scale is based, however, on subjective assessment by, for
example, a physiotherapist and yields information about balance
at that particular moment, so it is unsuitable for continuous fallrisk estimation in free-living situations.

E

Manuscript received April 29, 2013; revised August 22, 2013; accepted
October 24, 2013. Date of publication November 6, 2013; date of current version
June 30, 2014. This work was funded by Tekes (the Finnish Funding Agency for
Technology and Innovation), Pikosystems Oy, TietoEnator Oyj, YH Länsi Oy,
UPM-Kymmene Oyj, Turun Ortofysio Oy, ArctiCare Technologies Oy, Suomen
Ensiapupalvelu, and VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland.
H. Similä, J. Mäntyjärvi, and M. Lindholm are with the VTT Technical
Research Centre of Finland, Oulu 90571, Finland (e-mail: heidi.simila@vtt.fi;
jani.mantyjarvi@vtt.fi; mikko.lindholm@vtt.fi).
J. Merilahti and M. Ermes are with the VTT Technical Research Centre
of Finland, Tampere 33101, Finland (e-mail: juho.merilahti@vtt.fi; miikka.
ermes@vtt.fi).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2288940

As reviewed by Shany et al. [6] and Scanail et al. [7], wearable
sensors are increasingly being used for human gait and balance
assessment. Typically, one or more accelerometers and/or gyroscopes are used. Data-analysis methods and algorithms have
been developed for such purposes as activity recognition [8], fall
detection [9], gait analysis [10], and fall-risk estimation [11].
Studies that aim at distinguishing fallers from nonfallers, or
between people with high and low fall risk, via sensor data
usually compare the results with those of standard clinical fallrisk assessment scales such as the BBS [12], timed up-and-go
(TUG) [13], or physiological profile assessment [11]. They show
that analysis of sensor data can provide comparable results relative to the clinical measures [6], [7].
Three-dimensional accelerometry enables unobtrusive longterm monitoring of human movements in unsupervised conditions [14] and thus provides an opportunity for objective fall-risk
estimation in free-living situations [11] without the need for a
health-care professional’s presence. Some studies suggest that
body-worn kinematic sensors may even be more accurate than
the standard fall-risk metrics. For example, Greene et al. [15]
reported a mean accuracy of 76.8% in contrast to the 61.4% of
BBS testing and 60.6% of TUG in discriminating persons with
a history of falls. It was also indicated by Doheny et al. [16]
that accelerometry might improve discrimination between fallers and nonfallers from that of the standard clinical measure five
times sit-to-stand (STS-5).
Growing health-care impacts and costs of demographic ageing serve as motivation to develop methods for recognizing
individuals with increased fall risk more accurately and earlier, since this is an important element in the selection of the
evidence-based interventions with the greatest chance of a positive outcome [17]. Earlier detection of balance problems enables cost-effective targeting of fall-prevention actions to the
right people, early enough. For example, improvements in muscle strength can compensate somewhat for balance deficits and
diminish difficulties in moving [3].
In the research described here, the aim was to explore the use
of accelerometry in estimating the BBS score and, thus, facilitate
development of methods for estimating a person’s fall risk objectively and unobtrusively during daily activities. In particular,
the similarity (or distance) between different BBS tasks and gaitrelated acceleration trajectories were studied. Duda et al. [18]
state that in some cases general Euclidean distance may or may
not be meaningful, and it is hard to base choice of a metrics
on prior knowledge about the distributions. Therefore, another
objective was to examine whether the selection of a similarity
measure has an impact on the results. Fifty-four subjects from
three groups—neurological patients, older adults, and healthy

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SIMILÄ et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED BERG BALANCE SCALE SCORE ESTIMATION

young persons—were studied and a method for estimating a
person’s BBS score is proposed here.
II. METHODS
A. Data Collection
The test protocol included a BSS test [4], which was explained to the participants and evaluated by a physiotherapist,
and at least a 10-m walk back and forth in a corridor at one’s
own pace in one’s preferred footwear. The BBS test is used by
the health-care professionals at participating university hospital
as part of their care process for evaluation of balance deficits.
Alongside the self-reported history of imbalance, it has been
reported to predict falling with a sensitivity of 91% and specificity of 82% [5]. Kinetic data were collected during the tests
with a 3-D accelerometer (8 bit, 75-Hz alive heart monitor, from
Alive Technologies, of Queensland, Australia). It is often recommended that the sensor be attached at waist level, near the
center of mass [6]. To ensure comparability between the individual results, sensor placement was kept as uniform as possible;
the sensor was attached to the person’s lower back (lumbar
spine) with a tight elastic belt as described in [19]. Each task’s
start and end moments were marked by a researcher on the site
with computer software [20] to an accuracy of 1 s. The annotation entries were checked manually afterward to verify their
correctness.
The BBS consists of 14 physical tasks, such as transfer from
sitting to standing position, standing eyes shut, and picking up
an object from the floor [4], all normally part of daily activities.
Each task performance is assigned 0–4 points by a professional
observer, to give a total score of 0–56. The maximum score of 56
indicates that there is no increased risk of falling. For example,
the full score of four points is given for the BBS task transfer
from standing to sitting position when the person is able to sit
down on the chair without using his or her arms for assistance.
The score is reduced as the amount of help the person gets from
his or her arms, his or her legs, or the supervisor increases.
Use of the arms and/or legs in execution of the task affects the
speed and trajectories of the body. It can also be expected to
influence the signals captured by an accelerometer attached to
the body—e.g., altering the signal form.
B. Subjects
Fifty-four subjects were recruited for the study, for three
groups: 15 neurological patients (aged 40–68 years, with mean
and standard deviation (std) of 55.2 ± 7.3); 20 older adults
(aged 67–87 years, with mean+std 76.8 ± 5.6); and 19 healthy
young persons (aged 21–36 years), with mean+std = 27.5 ±
4.4. Seven of the patients had a diagnosis of cerebrovascular
diseases (ICD-10 I60–I69), one of injuries to the head (ICD-10
S00-S09), one of inflammatory disease of the central nervous
system (ICD-10 G00-G09), and six of diseases of nervous system (ICD-10 G20-G26), of which the most had a Parkinson’s
disease. Accelerometer data from five persons were lost due to
technical problems, resulting in inclusion of 19 subjects in the
older adults group, 13 in the neurological patients group and

1115

17 in healthy young persons’ group. The same physiotherapist
evaluated all the participants and the tests situations were as
identical as possible. The study was accepted by the ethical
committee of the hospital district. Preliminary analysis of differences in accelerometer signal features between the subject
groups are reported in [12].
C. Data Analysis
The first goal of the data analysis was to develop a method
for estimating the BBS score of a person on the basis of the
accelerometer data recorded 1) during performance of the BBS
tasks and 2) on gait. Both approaches were validated in terms of
their ability in classifying subjects into high- and low-fall-risk
groups. The second goal was to determine which of the BBS
tasks provide the best results and to compare the estimated BBS
scores between the subject groups.
D. Preprocessing of Data
The data analysis was carried out in the Matlab (from MathWorks, Inc.; Natick, MA, USA) programming environment.
Nine tasks from the BBS were selected for further analysis. The
tasks excluded, among them stool stepping, involve periodic
movements or movements that fewer test subjects were able to
perform. For example, only 39 subjects were able to execute the
standing on one foot task, so its inclusion in the analysis would
have complicated interpretation of the results. These tasks were
selected: sit to stand, stand without support, stand to sit, stand
eyes shut, stand feet together, reaching, picking up an object,
look behind, and tandem standing. The BBS estimation was
analyzed for combinations of one, two, and three tasks, for determination of which tasks lead to the best BBS score estimation
result. There would be 1001 distinct combinations of four tasks
out of nine, so the set size was limited to three tasks in this case.
With the exception of one subject in the neurological-patient
group for the stand to sit task, data existed for all nine tasks
selected for all 49 test subjects.
The data in the x, y, and z dimensions measured during the
BBS tasks and the gait were identified on the basis of manual annotations. In the BBS-task-based approach, the resultant
acceleration was calculated for these data samples according to
(1), where ax is acceleration in the medio-lateral, ay the vertical,
and az the anterior–posterior planes:

(1)
ares [n] = (ax [n])2 + (ay [n])2 + (az [n])2 .
The average signal length was calculated for each task, and each
subject’s data were normalized to the average for the relevant
task via resampling of the signal by means of either interpolation or decimation. This procedure enabled comparison of
waveforms between subjects. Two example cases are illustrated
in Fig. 1. Furthermore, to reduce the noise effect, the resulting
signals were filtered with a five-point floating average filter.
In the gait-based approach, the data were preprocessed according to Mäntyjärvi et al. [21], to construct a unique 3-D
gait pattern for each subject. While they used only two dimensions of the 3-D data, this paper uses all three dimensions. The

1116

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 1. Examples of the data resampling for two cases, denoted as A and B. The upper left picture illustrates the original signals. (a) Image in the upper right
features original and decimated signals, in which the number of data points is reduced from 202 to 153, and (b) original and interpolated signals, in which the
number of data points is increased from 125 to 153. Circles represent the original samples, and the resampled signals are plotted with asterisks (∗). The resampled
signals for A and B are plotted together at the bottom. The data were obtained during the stand to sit task.

procedure was similar otherwise. Data sequences representing
step pairs were separated out from the gait data. Visual inspection was applied during the process, to verify that the step pairs
had been detected correctly and that at least two separate pairs
were found for each subject. The test subject in question was
omitted from the gait-pattern examination if the step pairs were
not detectable; resulting in 47 subjects in gait-based BBS score
estimation. Intercorrelation of the signals representing the steps
of a specific subject was calculated for all three dimensions,
with a sliding window, to reveal the 60% of pairs that correlated
best. The aim was to discover the step pairs that represent the
typical gait pattern for the relevant person. With this procedure,
extraordinary steps due to turning, swaying, etc., are omitted.
The selected step pairs were averaged for each three dimensions
separately and concatenated to form a person’s signature gait
pattern. The left–right or right–left order of steps is taken into
account by creation of two gait patterns for each subject, which
represent both left–right and right–left combinations without
determination of which is which.
E. BBS Score Estimation
In the first part of the analysis, leave-one-out cross-validation
was applied for calculation of the BBS estimate for each subject.

In addition to distance between two samples, other metrics can
be used to measure the similarity of two vectors [18]. Since different similarity measures suit better for various types of data,
three similarity measures were tested, to compare the person’s
preprocessed data samples to the other subjects’ corresponding
ones. The experiments were done using basic measures such as
Euclidean distance (2) and correlation coefficient (3), and Tanimoto coefficient (4), which combines them both in operation.
The aim here was to find out whether the selection of the metrics
used has a significant impact on the results.

d (a, b) =

d


1/2
|ak − bk |

2

(2)

k =1

d

(ak − am ean ) (bk − bm ean )
2 d
2
k =1 (ak − am ean )
k =1 (bk − bm ean )

rab = 
d
s (a, b) =

at a

k =1

(3)

at b
.
+ bt b − at b

(4)

Sample vectors from two subjects are denoted as a and b, ak
and bk are the kth sample of vectors a and b, and am ean and
bm ean are the mean of a and of b, respectively.

SIMILÄ et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED BERG BALANCE SCALE SCORE ESTIMATION

Fig. 2.

1117

Data-analysis process for BBS tasks and gait-related acceleration signals.

The k-nearest-neighbor classification with a k value of 3 was
applied for selection of the three most similar reference subjects for the test subject under evaluation. That is, the three
subjects with the greatest similarity or smallest distance to the
subject in question were selected. A 1-s sliding window (based
on the original sampling frequency) was used to eliminate possible deviations in annotation markers. The greatest similarity
or smallest distance from that window was selected to represent
the similarity to, or distance from, the relevant reference subject.
An average of the real BBS scores of those three neighboring
subjects was used as a BBS estimate. In case the estimation is
based on data from more than one BBS task, the estimates for
individual tasks are averaged over all tasks selected.
F. Validation
The estimated BBS scores were used for classification of the
subjects into high- and low-fall-risk groups. With the real BBS
scores, a cut-off score of 49 [5] was used for determination of
the reference classes. A frequently used method of investigating
the sensitivity and specificity of a classifier, receiver operating curve (ROC), was applied. Area under curve (AUC) was
calculated for each ROC, to aid in comparison of results and
determination of the best task combinations. The data-analysis
process is illustrated in Fig. 2.
III. RESULTS
The task combinations that produced the highest AUC values with one, two, and three tasks and the gait-based results
are presented in Table I. The estimated BBS scores differed
significantly (one-way ANOVA, Kruskal Wallis test p < 0.05)
between subjects with low and high fall risk for all other cases
except the task stand to sit, for which Euclidean distance was
employed as a similarity measure.
In the BBS-task-based estimation, each time a task was added
to the algorithm the AUC value increased and the recognition of

subjects with a high risk of falling was improved. The best results
were obtained with the tasks stand to sit, reaching, and picking
object. The gait-based estimates produced higher AUC values
than did BBS-task-based analysis. The highest AUC values were
obtained with Tanimoto coefficient as a similarity measure in
both approaches.
The distributions of the estimated and real BBS scores in the
subject groups; healthy young people, older adults, and neurological patients are shown as boxplots in Fig. 3. The boxplots
represent estimated BBS scores with different similarity measures calculated with the combinations of three tasks shown in
Table I and the gait-based method.
The distributions of gait-based BBS estimates between subject groups are more similar to the real BBS score distributions
than to the ones obtained with the three BBS tasks. Furthermore,
the BBS-task-based estimates tend to have wider distributions
in the healthy-young-adult group and narrower distributions in
the older adult and patient groups in comparison to the real BBS
scores. In all cases, the mean of healthy-young-adults’ BBS
score differed significantly from the means for the other two
groups (p < 0.001).
The estimated BBS values are plotted against the real BBS
scores in Fig. 4 for the three subject groups; Tanimoto coefficient
is used here as a similarity measure with the combination of the
best three tasks (according to AUC analysis) and the gait-based
method, since it produced the highest AUC values.
The total estimation error was smaller for gait-based BBS
score estimation than for the BBS-task based method. The algorithm tends to overestimate the lower BBS scores under both
approaches.
IV. DISCUSSION
The aim of the research described here was to develop an
accelerometry-based method for estimating the BBS score by
using 1) combinations of data obtained during different BBS

1118

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

TABLE I
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR THE BEST CLASSIFICATION RESULTS (HIGHEST AUC VALUES) WITH RESPECT TO LOW- AND HIGH-FALL-RISK GROUPS FOR ONE, TWO,
AND THREE BBS TASKS AND THE GAIT-BASED METHOD WITH THREE SIMILARITY MEASURES

tasks and 2) the gait patterns. The approach was validated with
groups of real subjects: the neurological patients, older adults,
and healthy young persons. The results with the current dataset
indicate that the gait-based BBS estimation outperforms the
BBS-task-based estimation. Table I shows that if a threshold
of 49 is used also for the estimates to divide the subjects into
high- and low-fall-risk groups, the accuracy of identification
of people with low risk of falling is very high using gait-based
estimates. However, it might often be more important to identify
those people with high fall risk. Although the table suggests that
this would be done more accurately with the BBS-task-based
method, the higher AUC value indicates better classification
performance for the gait-based method. It should be noted, that
the classifier is not adjusted here, as the classification is based
on the same threshold value for the BBS estimates and the
reference BBS scores. The gait-based BBS estimation might
work better, since problems in balance cause changes in gait [3],
while each of the BBS tasks assess only a certain feature such
as coordination or muscle strength. By having only three tasks
included in the estimation of BBS score, some of the other

important aspects of balance may be omitted. This study also
shows that the selection of similarity measure has an effect on
the results; however, further studies are needed, to analyze how
significant the impact is and which similarity measure would be
the optimal choice for the algorithm.
The most significant BBS tasks for the algorithm presented in
this paper are stand to sit, reaching, and picking object, which
yield the best BBS score estimates with Tanimoto coefficient.
These tasks require lower body muscle strength and coordination, which are good indications of balance. Our finding that
stand to sit was an important determinant of a person’s balance is consistent with results of previous studies. According to
Tiedemann et al. [22], multiple-fallers show significantly worse
performance in the STS-5 test, in which stand to sit is part of
the movement, than nonmultiple-fallers do, with a sensitivity of
66% and specificity of 55% for separation of the two groups.
In addition, Doheny et al. [16] report several parameters, such
as mean sit-to-stand time, jerk, and spectral edge frequency
derived from acceleration signals measured during the STS-5
test, that differ significantly between fallers and nonfallers. The

SIMILÄ et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED BERG BALANCE SCALE SCORE ESTIMATION

1119

Fig. 3. Distributions of the real and estimated BBS scores in the subject groups: healthy young people, older adults, and neurological patients. The estimated
BBS scores were calculated with the three tasks producing the highest AUC values (see Table I) and gait data with all three similarity measures.

Fig. 4. Estimated versus real BBS scores for the three subject groups: healthy young persons, older adults, and neurological patients. The top three diagrams
represent the results for three tasks: stand to sit, reaching, and picking object, with Tanimoto coefficient as a similarity measure, and the bottom three are obtained
via the gait-based method, again with Tanimoto coefficient as a similarity measure. The mean and standard deviations of the estimation error for the three tasks
are 4.94 ± 2.38, 4.63 ± 3.89, and 5.08 ± 3.00 score points, for healthy young people, older adults, and neurological patients, respectively, resulting in total mean
error of 4.85 ± 3.14 points. The corresponding mean-error figures for the gait-based method are 0.88 ± 0.86, 4.94 ± 3.51, and 5.17 ± 3.01 score points, and the
total mean error is 3.53 ± 3.32 points.

BBS tasks of reaching forward and picking up an object from
the floor test the ability to shift one’s center of gravity. However, the functional-reach test alone—i.e., reaching only in the
forward direction—does not give results comparable to those
with BBS [23], [24], but, for example, in [23] reports significant
correlation between the multidirectional-reach test and BBS results. Similarly, our results in Table I indicate that with reaching

forward added in alongside the tasks stand to sit and picking
object, the identification of people with high fall risk shows
particular improvement, from 79% to 89.5%.
The distributions of the estimated BBS scores show that
the BBS-task-based method produces estimates that have more
unified distributions across subject groups, also resulting in individual estimates with less variance relative to each other. This

1120

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

is probably because of the way the algorithm handles averaging
over the various tasks—i.e., the estimate is based on only three
of the 14 BBS tasks, and a person may have been able to perform
those yet had problems with some of the other tasks. In addition,
the dataset obtained includes too few people with different balance abilities, and thus quite different BBS scores, for revealing
fully similar subjects. The neurological patients in this study
are an especially heterogeneous group, making for fewer points
of comparison in that set. This is indicated also by the estimation error, as it is smallest in the healthy-young-person group
and largest for the neurological-patient group. The tendency of
the algorithm to overestimate especially the lower BBS scores
presumably is caused by the fact that the dataset is skewed toward higher BBS scores as it features more people with high
BBS scores than with lower ones. The results shown here are
based on this particular dataset, and more data are needed if
reproducibility of the results is to be ensured.
In our approach, the unique gait pattern for a subject is constructed through averaging of the stride-length segments of the
data. Bautmans et al. [25] state also that reliability of gait features for purposes of identifying subjects with increased fall risk
is improved when the process uses the mean of two walks instead of a single walk. However, the data preprocessing to create
the unique gait patterns is more complicated than for nonperiodic movements such as stand to sit transfer, and in this case
visual inspection was required, to ensure the correctness of the
preprocessed signal.
It should be noted that clinical measures such as BBS, when
used as a reference measure, themselves display uncertainty in
prediction of future falling. For example, Muir et al. [26] state
that BBS is inadequate for identifying the majority of people
at risk of falling; however, it has good discriminative ability to
predict multiple falls. As the clinical fall-risk assessment scales
in current use have limitations with regard to their sensitivity
and specificity also, it would benefit our approach to have actual
history of falls as reference data and, on the other hand, longterm follow-up studies for prospective analysis of fall risk. The
current method could be used as a first indicator of balance problems and for recommendation of seeking further assessment. In
addition, since the method estimates the fall risk by finding the
most similar subjects from the reference dataset, with a larger
dataset in the future, the background information of those subjects might provide some idea of the underlying physiological
complications.
The data used in this paper were collected in supervised conditions. Accordingly, one aim for future work is to investigate
whether fall-risk estimate can be computed from data obtained
in unsupervised conditions—i.e., whether the movement data
corresponding to clinical balance tests such as the BBS and gait
tests could be recognized from the real-life data and used in calculation of a fall-risk estimate for a person. Furthermore, it is of
interest for us to study how this kind of long-term measurement
could be integrated into current health-care processes. Such
a solution would have clear benefits in fall-risk management
and fall prevention, as the fall risk could be continuously and
unobtrusively evaluated with the aid of low-cost sensors, enabling early interventions to decrease the risk more efficiently.

REFERENCES
[1] S. R. Lord, C. Sherrington, and H. B. Menz, Falls in Older People: Risk
Factors and Strategies for Prevention. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 2001, pp. 3–16.
[2] Statistics Finland, Accident Mortality in 1936 to 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.stat.fi/til/ksyyt/2010/ksyyt_2010_2011-1216_kat_005_en.html
[3] R. Tilvis, K. Pitkälä, T. Strandberg, R. Sulkava, and M. Viitanen, Eds.,
Geriatria. Duodecim, Porvoo (in Finnish), 2010.
[4] K. O. Berg, S. L. Wood-Dauphinee, J. I. Williams, and D. Gayton, “Measuring balance in the elderly: Preliminary development of an instrument,”
Physiother. Can., vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 304–311, Nov./Dec. 1989.
[5] A. Shumway-Cook, M. Baldwin, N. L. Polissar, and W. Gruber, “Predicting the probability for falls in community-dwelling older adults,” Phys.
Ther., vol. 77, no. 8, pp. 812–819, Aug. 1997.
[6] T. Shany, S. J. Redmond, M. R. Narayanan, and N. H. Lovell, “Sensorsbased wearable systems for monitoring of human movement and falls,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 658–670, Mar. 2012.
[7] C. N. Scanail, C. Garattini, B. R. Greene, and M. J. McGrath, “Technology
innovation enabling falls risk assessment in a community setting,” Ageing
Int., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 217–231, Jun. 2011.
[8] J. Pärkkä, M. Ermes, P. Korpipää, J. Mäntyjärvi, J. Peltola, and
I. Korhonen, “Activity classification using realistic data from wearable
sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 119–128,
Jan. 2006.
[9] P. Van de Ven, A. Bourke, C. Tavares, R. Feld, J. Nelson, A. Rocha, and
G. O. Laighin, “Integration of a suite of sensors in a wireless health sensor
platform,” in Proc. IEEE Sensors Conf., Oct. 2009, pp. 1678–1683.
[10] R. Moe-Nilssen and J. L. Helbostad, “Estimation of gait cycle characteristics by trunk accelerometry,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 121–126,
Jan. 2004.
[11] M. R. Narayanan, S. J. Redmond, M. E. Scalzi, S. R. Lord, R. G. Celler,
and N. H. Lovell, “Longitudinal falls-risk estimation using triaxial accelerometry,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 534–541,
Mar. 2010.
[12] J. Merilahti, T. Petäkoski-Hult, M. Ermes, H. Lahti, A. Ylinen, L. Autio,
E. Hyvärinen, J. Hyttinen, and M. van Gils, “Evaluation of new concept
for balance and gait analysis: Patients with neurological disease, elderly
people and young adults,” in Proc. Sixth Conf. Int. Soc. Gerontechnol.,
Jun. 2008, pp. 164–168.
[13] M. O’Sullivan, C. Blake, C. Cunningham, G. Boyle, and C. Finucane,
“Correlation of accelerometry with clinical balance tests in older fallers
and non-fallers,” Age Ageing, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 308–331, May 2009.
[14] M. J. Mathie, A. C. F. Coster, N. H. Lovell, B. G. Celler, S. R. Lord, and
A. Tiedemann, “A pilot study of long-term monitoring of human movements in the home using accelerometry,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 144–151, Jun. 2004.
[15] B. R. Greene, A. O’Donovan, R. Romero-Ortuno, L. Cogan,
C. N. Scanaill, and R. A. Kenny, “Quantitative falls risk assessment using
the timed up and go test,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 12,
pp. 2918–2926, Dec. 2010.
[16] E. P. Doheny, C. W. Fan, T. Foran, B. R. Greene, C. Cunningham, and
R. A. Kenny, “An instrumented sit-to-stand test used to examine differences between older fallers and non-fallers,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Conf., Aug./Sep. 2011, pp. 3063–3066.
[17] WHO Global Report on Falls Prevention in Older Age.
World Health Organization, France, 2007. [Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/ageing/publications/Falls_prevention7March.pdf
[18] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern Classification, 2nd ed.
New York: Wiley, 2001, pp. 187–192.
[19] R. Moe-Nilssen, “A new method for evaluating motor control in gait under
real-life environmental conditions. Part 2: Gait analysis,” Clin. Biomech.,
vol. 13, no. 4–5, pp. 328–335, Jun./Jul. 1998.
[20] J. Pärkkä, L. Cluitmans, and P. Korpipää, “Palantir context data collection,
annotation and PSV file format,” in Proc. Pervasive: Benchmarks and
Database Context Recog. Workshop, 2004, pp. 9–16.
[21] J. Mäntyjärvi, M. Lindholm, E. Vildjiounaite, S-M. Mäkelä, and H. Ailisto,
“Identifying users of portable devices from gait pattern with accelerometers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., Mar.
2005, vol. 2, pp. 973–976.
[22] A. Tiedemann, H. Shimada, C. Sherrington, S. Murray, and S. Lord, “The
comparative ability of eight functional mobility tests for predicting falls in
community-dwelling older people,” Age Ageing, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 430–
435, Jul. 2008.

SIMILÄ et al.: ACCELEROMETRY-BASED BERG BALANCE SCALE SCORE ESTIMATION

[23] R. Newton, “Validity of the multi-directional reach test: A practical measure for limits of stability in older adults,” J. Gerontol. Med. Sci., vol. 56A,
pp. 248–252, Apr. 2001.
[24] S. Bennie, K. Bruner, A. Dizon, H. Fritz, B. Goodman, and S. Peterson,
“Measurements of balance: Comparison of the ‘timed up and go’ test and
functional reach test with the Berg balance scale,” J. Phys. Ther. Sci.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 93–97, 2003.
[25] I. Bautmans, B. Jansen, B. V. Keymolen, and T. Mets, “Reliability and
clinical correlates of 3D accelerometry based gait analysis outcomes according to age and fall-risk,” Gait Posture, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 366–372,
Mar. 2011.
[26] S. W. Muir, K. Berg, B. Chesworth, and M. Speechley, “Use of the Berg
balance scale for predicting multiple falls in community-dwelling elderly
people: A prospective study,” Phys. Ther., vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 449–459,
Jan. 2008.

Heidi Similä received the M.Sc. degree in biophysics
from the University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, in 2006,
where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Information
Engineering.
She currently works as a Research Scientist at
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Oulu,
Finland. Her main research areas include biomedical
signal processing, health and wellness monitoring,
and ambient assisted living.

Jani Mäntyjärvi received the M.Sc. degree in biophysics and the Ph.D. degree in information processing from the University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, in
1999 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently a Principal Research Scientist
at the VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
Oulu, Findland, and leading a research team in CyberPhysical Solutions. He is a docent (with speciality in
adaptive interaction techniques) in the Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Oulu. His current research interests include personal
cyber-physical systems, distributed mobile sensing, computing and feedback
solutions, and especially, wearable, ensemble, and tangible interaction technologies.

1121

Juho Merilahti received the M.Sc. (Tech.) degree in
information technology (software engineering) from
Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland, in 2006.
Currently, he is working as a Research Scientist at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
Tampere, Finland. His main research topics include
biomedical signal processing concepts in personal
health systems. He is authored/coauthored more than
20 scientific publications and heading for Ph.D. under the topic “long-term activity behavior monitoring
possibilities in estimation of functioning of older adult.”

Mikko Lindholm was born in Turku, Finland, in
1959. He received the M.Sc. and Lic.Sc. (Tech.) degrees both in electrical engineering from the University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, in 1986 and 1989,
respectively.
Since then he has been with VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Oulu, Finland, where he
is currently working as a Senior Scientist at Health
Information Systems.

Miikka Ermes received the M.Sc. and D.Tech. degrees in biomedical signal processing from Tampere
University of Technology, Tampere, Finland, in 2005
and 2009, respectively.
He is currently working as a Senior Scientist at
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Tampere, Finland. His current research interests include
technologies to support healthy behaviors.

