IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

1625

Wearable Monitoring for Mood Recognition in
Bipolar Disorder Based on History-Dependent
Long-Term Heart Rate Variability Analysis
Gaetano Valenza, Member, IEEE, Mimma Nardelli, Antonio Lanatà, Member, IEEE, Claudio Gentili, Gilles Bertschy,
Rita Paradiso, and Enzo Pasquale Scilingo, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Current clinical practice in diagnosing patients affected by psychiatric disorders such as bipolar disorder is based
only on verbal interviews and scores from specific questionnaires,
and no reliable and objective psycho-physiological markers are
taken into account. In this paper, we propose to use a wearable
system based on a comfortable t-shirt with integrated fabric electrodes and sensors able to acquire electrocardiogram, respirogram,
and body posture information in order to detect a pattern of objective physiological parameters to support diagnosis. Moreover, we
implemented a novel ad hoc methodology of advanced biosignal
processing able to effectively recognize four possible clinical mood
states in bipolar patients (i.e., depression, mixed state, hypomania,
and euthymia) continuously monitored up to 18 h, using heart rate
variability information exclusively. Mood assessment is intended as
an intrasubject evaluation in which the patient’s states are modeled
as a Markov chain, i.e., in the time domain, each mood state refers
to the previous one. As validation, eight bipolar patients were monitored collecting and analyzing more than 400 h of autonomic and
cardiovascular activity. Experimental results demonstrate that our
novel concept of personalized and pervasive monitoring constitutes
a viable and robust clinical decision support system for bipolar disorders recognizing mood states with a total classification accuracy
up to 95.81%.
Index Terms—Autonomic nervous system (ANS), bipolar disorder, heart rate variability (HRV), mood recognition, pervasive
monitoring, wearable systems.

I. INTRODUCTION

W

EARABLE systems for physiological monitoring have
been gaining large interest over the last decade in

Manuscript received May 14, 2013; revised October 9, 2013 and August 14,
2013; accepted October 31, 2013. Date of publication November 11, 2013; date
of current version September 2, 2014.
G. Valenza, M. Nardelli, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo are with
the Department of Information Engineering and with the Research Centre “E. Piaggio,” Faculty of Engineering, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa,
Italy (e-mail: g.valenza@ieee.org; mimma.nardelli@for.unipi.it; a.lanata@
centropiaggio.unipi.it; e.scilingo@centropiaggio.unipi.it).
C. Gentili is with the Department of surgical, medical, molecular, and critical area pathology, section of psychology, University of Pisa, 56100 Pisa, Italy
(e-mail: claudio.gentili@med.unipi.it).
G. Bertschy is with the Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health, Strasbourg University Hospital, INSERM U1114, University of Strasbourg, F-67000
Strasbourg, France (e-mail: gilles.bertschy@chru-strasbourg.fr).
R. Paradiso is with the Smartex srl, Navacchio 56023, Italy (e-mail:
rita@smartex.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2290382

research and commercial fields [1]–[27]. The key benefits introduced by these wearable systems include their small size,
lightness, low-power consumption and, of course, wearability.
Major applications of such systems are related to medicine and
healthcare allowing for outpatient care and enhancing the quality of life for chronic disease patients, and preventing unnecessary hospitalizations. Long-term monitoring through wearable monitoring systems is a challenging task because of the
many issues involved such as movement artifact rejection, comfort, and power consumption. In order to meet this challenge,
long-term monitoring through multiple sensors are often recommended [1]. As a matter of fact, several systems have been
recently developed for monitoring blood pressure [3], [4], cardiac activity [5], [6], respiration [7], eye tracking [2], multivariate physiological signs [6], [8]–[10], [23]–[26], electrodermal
response [13], [14], physiological signs through antenna and
UWB radar [11], [12], brain activity [15], as well as neurorehabilitation activity [16]. The state of the art on wearable systems
for physiological monitoring can be found in these recent reviews [17]–[22].
In the abovementioned literature, some methods have proven
better than others when it comes to developing wearable systems for physiological monitoring, namely those systems based
on smart textiles used for autonomic nervous system (ANS)
activity monitoring (e.g., see [6], [9], [13], [14], [23]–[27]).
The major reason behind this choice is related to comfort and
its insensitivity to artifacting events. Although signal dynamics coming from electroencephalograms (EEG) provide direct
measurements of brain activity and, thus, are more effective in
applications such as monitoring of mental disorders, peripheral
measurements can also provide useful information. Indeed, both
EEG and ANS dynamics are affected by a pathological mental
status [9], [28]–[32]. It has been demonstrated how affective
elicitations lasting longer than 6 s allow the prefrontal cortex to
encode the stimulus information and to transmit it to other areas
of the central autonomic network down to the brainstem, thus
producing a context appropriate response [33]. Moreover, cortisol hormone levels are affected in mood disorders [34]–[36].
Finally, the parasympathetic ANS is anatomically connected
to central nervous system activity. As a counter-proof, vagus
nerve stimulation has been successfully used for the treatment
of resistant depression [37].
Recently, we have proposed a preliminary evaluation of a
multiparametric wearable platform for physiological/behavioral
monitoring of mood fluctuation in bipolar patients [9]. The

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1626

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

system has been developed in the frame of a European Project,
Personalized monitoring SYstems for Care in mental HEalth
(PSYCHE), whose goal was to find possible correlations
between ANS patterns and mood swings over short- and longterm monitoring (see details in Section II). In this study, we
present a part of the PSYCHE concept consisting of a wearable
monitoring platform enriched with a novel and effective signal
processing methodology able to recognize mood states using
long-term cardiovascular dynamics and past mood labels.
Given the experimental evidence over the past three decades
on ANS and cardiovascular dynamics, we have chosen the
heart rate variability (HRV) analysis [38], [39] as a noninvasive
marker for a personalized and accurate management of patients
affected by bipolar disorder.
A. Background on Bipolar Disorders
Bipolar disorder is very common in western population [40]–
[43]. A recent worldwide survey in 11 countries has found an
overall lifetime prevalence of 1% for the typical forms of bipolar
disorder and 1.4% for milder subthreshold disorders [44].
From the clinical point of view, bipolar disorder is a chronic
condition characterized by an impaired mood balance. Patients
experience episodes of altered mood states ranging from depression with sadness, hopelessness (including suicidal ideation),
loss of energy, anhedonia, and psychomotor retardation to mania characterized by euphoria or irritability, excessive energy,
hyperactivity, hypertrophic self-esteem, reduction in the need
of sleep, and psychomotor acceleration. The moderate form of
mania is called hypomania (at the stage of mania, change in behavior is so obvious that hospitalization is needed). Accordingly,
it is possible to identify four possible types of mood episodes
associated with such a disease: depression (DP), mania (MN),
hypomania (HY), and mixed state (MS), which corresponds to
the simultaneous presence of depression and mania. Patients
experiencing periods of relatively good affective balance are
defined as staying in euthymic state (ES) or remission.
B. Limits in the Diagnostic Approach of Bipolar Disorders
The diagnosis of bipolar disorders and, more in general, of
psychiatric pathological conditions is based on clinical evaluations through interviews and the evaluations of scores gathered
by quantitative psychopathological rating scales only. Although
these interviews are “structured” (i.e., questions and question
order are established and defined in specific manuals) and high
rates of consensus can be achieved among specialists (psychiatrists and clinical psychologists), the diagnosis is always based
on clinician observation, the patient’s subjective description, and
on the physician’s interpretation of such description. However,
specific physiological or biochemical markers to be taken into
account in current clinical practice are still missing. The most
important diagnostic system is based on the criteria proposed
by the diagnostic statistic manual of mental disorders (DSM-IVTR) [45] edited by the American Psychiatric Association. According to this manual, to be diagnosed with depressive episodes
the patient must have five out of nine possible symptoms. Similar cutoffs are applied for the diagnosis of other episodes. In line

with this approach, a patient who has had only four symptoms of
depressive episodes is considered remitted (although partially
remitted). These clearly can bring to biased interpretation and
inconsistency [46]–[48].
To overcome these issues, research has been done on proposing biomarkers that consider sleep quality [49]–[51], circadian
heart rate rhythms [52], [53], cortisol dynamics, [34]–[36], as
well as ANS functionality [9], [28]–[32]. However, none of
these studies has reached an acceptable level of accuracy for
clinical use in order to forecast the clinical course in patients. In
a recent study [9], we presented a multiparametric approach that
was successfully applied as a decision support system for the
diagnosis of bipolar disorder. We demonstrated that a singlevariable approach, as proposed by previous literature, is not
sufficient to robustly characterize mood episodes [9]. Instead, a
multiparametric and personalized approach, i.e., mood episodes
are identified as an intrasubject analysis, is much more effective. However, limitations of such an approach were twofold:
first, the temporal dynamics of a patient’s mood episodes were
not taken into account (patients passing from depression to euthymia through a mixed state would be evaluated as patients
passing from mixed state to depression through euthymia); second, patients experiencing more than two mood states were assessed by performing comparative evaluations for each couple
of mood states, i.e., two-class pattern recognition problem.
Here, we overcome such limitations describing a novel and
effective signal processing methodology applied to HRV data
gathered from bipolar patients, which significantly improved our
previous results. More specifically, the major assumption of the
method hereby proposed is that clinical mood state depends on
the previous mood state. In fact, in current clinical practice, it is
widely accepted that a specific psycho-pathological status is differently characterized by taking into account the clinical history
of the illness.Accordingly, our personalized approach identifies
mood states as an intrasubject analysis taking into account the
temporal dynamics of the illness. From a signal processing point
of view, patients’ mood changes are modeled as a discrete-time
stochastic process in which each recording, associated with a
specific mood state, also depends on the previous state respecting the so-called Markov property [54]. Of note, computational
architectures for modeling of human emotions were proposed as
being based on the Markov’s theory [55].We demonstrate that
mood changes in bipolar disorders can be modeled as a Markov
chain, in which each state is characterized by ANS-HRV features extracted over long periods of time (up to 18 h). Multiclass
recognition of these mood states achieved an accuracy as high
as 99%.
II. THE PSYCHE SYSTEM AND THE WEARABLE
MONITORING PLATFORM
PSYCHE stands for PerSonalized monitoring sYstems for
Care in mental HEalth and identifies a personalized, pervasive,
cost-effective, and multiparametric system for the long-term and
short-term acquisition of data gathered from patients affected
by mood disorders [9], [56], [57]. It was designed and is currently used in the framework of a European project PSYCHE,

VALENZA et al.: WEARABLE MONITORING FOR MOOD RECOGNITION IN BIPOLAR DISORDER BASED

1627

TABLE I
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS OF THE WEARABLE MONITORING PLATFORM
(PROVIDED BY SMARTEX S.R.L.)
Characteristics

Fig. 1. Overview of the PSYCHE system as a global platform serving as
decision support system for bipolar disorder management.

which is funded in the seventh framework programme (FP7).
The PSYCHE system supports a novel approach for bipolar disease management based on the paradigm that quasi-continuous
monitoring in a natural environment providing parameters, indices, and trends that will be used to assess mood status, support
patients, predict and anticipate treatment response in its early
phase, prevent relapse, and to alert physicians in case of a critical
event. PSYCHE serves as a decision support system that fills the
gap between research and clinical routine management of bipolar patients integrating the traditional clinical standard procedures of mood assessment with data coming from the pervasive
system, which includes physiological signals, as well as biochemical and behavioral data. A centralized server performing
data-mining procedures for mood evaluations is currently under
development along with the implementation of a user-friendly
patient interface (e.g., on a smartphone), and a professional
web-based interface used by clinicians to administer evaluation
questionnaires, look at physiological variable variations, communicate with patients, etc. The user-friendly device will also
monitor environmental information such as light, temperature,
and noise thereby completing the PSYCHE platform (see the
PSYCHE concept of decision support system for bipolar disorder on Fig. 1). Several signals are taken into account for the
patient’s physiological monitoring such as voice [57], activity
index, sleep pattern alteration [58], electrodermal response [56],
respiration activity, and electrocardiogram (ECG) [9].
In this study, we used the core sensing system of the project,
i.e., the PSYCHE wearable monitoring platform [9], whose technical specifications are reported in Table I. It was developed by
Smartex s.r.l (Pisa, Italy) and consists of a comfortable sensorized t-shirt having dry textile-based electrodes that acquire
the patient’s ECG, a piezoresistive sensor to acquire the respiration signal, and a three-axial accelerometer to track movement.
It is worth noting that the use of dry textile-based electrodes
provides several advantages. First, the system is easy to use
and allows to maximize comfort and to locate the sensors automatically. Second, a special multilayer structure increases the
amount of sweat and reduces the rate of evaporation reaching
electrochemical equilibrium between the skin and electrodes
after a couple of minutes. Therefore, the signal quality [6] is remarkably improved and kept as constant as possible. If contacts

Power supply
Litium battery (life up to 18 hours)
Data storage
MicroSD card
Data communication
Micro USB, bluetooth
Electrocardiogram
Measurement principle
Bio-potentials on the thorax
Sensors
Textile electrodes
Number of leads
1
Input auto configurable analog filter
0.67Hz to 40Hz
Analog-to-digital conversion
16 bits
Sampling rate
250 Hz
Respiration signal
Measurement principle
Piezoresistive method
Range of electrical resistance
20kΩ to 10MΩ
Bandwidth
DC to 10Hz
Resolution
12 bits
Sampling rate
25 Hz

with the skin in not good, for reasons of size, the quality of the
signals cannot be adequate for obtaining meaningful values. To
avoid this problem, a preliminary check on the quality of the
data is done using available shirts with different sizes before
giving the system to the patients.The shirt was designed following both a female and male model and is made of elastic fibers
that allow for tight adhesion to the user’s body, piezoresistive
fibers to monitor fabric stretching (and consequently respiration
activity), and metallic fibers knitted to create fabric electrodes
to monitor the ECG. These materials are knitted together and
are fully integrated in the garment without any mechanical and
physical discontinuity, creating areas with different functionalities. In this study, a comfortable t-shirt having two textile ECG
electrodes integrated in the inner side of the front part, below
the pectoral muscles in men and the breasts in women, and a
textile piezoresistive sensor located between the electrodes, on
the outer side, was used. The shirt is conceived to be similar in
term of look and feel perception to any other ordinary underwear garment. The shirt has been designed taking into account
the thermal comfort, both in the selection of the yarns and in
the stitches structure, several zones with an open net have been
inserted, and a polyamide yarn with antibacterial properties and
a natural feeling has been used as a basic component. As a
matter of fact, garments are made of commercial yarns, already
tested (and certified) for contact with human skin, and can be
easily washed and, in case, disinfected. The two ECG electrodes
and a piezoresistive sensor are finally connected to the portable
electronics, which is connected to the garment through a simple
plug that can be easily unplugged when necessary.
In this study, we used ECG information coming from the
PSYCHE wearable monitoring platform in order to extract the
interbeat interval series (hereinafter RR), i.e., the series constituted by the distance of two consecutive peaks of the ECG in a
patient as a noninvasive biomarker of ANS dynamics [38], [39].
While using the PSYCHE system, patients are asked to wear
the sensorized shirt. They are free to perform daily activities
at home or elsewhere, while the aforementioned physiological

1628

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Block scheme of the overall processing platform divided in three
logical units for acquisition, processing, and interpretation.

signals are monitored and stored in a microSD card. After about
18 h of monitoring, patients are asked to take the system back
to their physician, and the recorded data ae manually sent to
a central database. As aforementioned, the final version of the
PSYCHE system will provide an automatized storage process
by means of a smartphone or tablet without the involvement of
a technician.
III. DATA ACQUISITION, PROCESSING, AND INTERPRETATION
Acquisition, processing, and interpretation procedures aim
at extracting significant information from the acquired data in
order to well define and characterize the patient’s mood state.
Such procedures are divided into three units: data acquisition,
processing, and interpretation, whose general block scheme is
shown in Fig. 2.
A. Data Acquisition and Processing
Data acquisition is fully implemented in the embodied electronic device of the wearable platform and includes also a part of
the preprocessing step. In this unit, the analog ECG is acquired
and conditioned by means of an instrumentation amplifier and
filters. Then, the ECG is digitalized with a sample frequency of
250 Hz and stored into the microSD card for further analysis.
The processing unit is responsible for extracting and analyzing
features from the stored raw data collected as ASCII files. The
ECG signal is prefiltered through a tenth-order band-pass finite
impulse response filter with cutoff frequencies of 0.05–35 Hz
approximated by the Butterworth polynomial. Considering that
the patients wearing the sensorized shirt can move during the
acquisition, and that textile electrodes could lose contact with
the skin during body movement, an ad hoc algorithm for the
automatic removal of movement artifacts has been applied [9].
To this aim, the maximum and minimum envelopes of the ECG
filtered in the bandwidth from 0.1 to 4 Hz [59] are calculated.
Afterwards, movement artifacts are detected by using simple statistical thresholds, i.e., 95th percentile, on the average envelope
aforesaid, which the signal is considered affected by artifacts.

Further analyses such as R-peaks and feature extraction were
performed in all of the available artifact-free, nonoverlapped
time windows W of 5 min. Parts of the signals with artifacts
together with consecutive artifact-free ECG signals having dynamics less than 5 min were discarded and not considered for
further analysis. The W of 5 min was chosen in order to fulfill
the stationarity requirements in analyzing long-term RR series
(see recommendations in [38] and [60]).
In RR series extraction, referring to the change of the beat
interval corresponding to the R-peak, the well-known automatic
algorithm developed by Pan-Tompkins [61] was adopted for
automatic R-wave detection. Given the RR interval series, the
analysis is performed by extracting significant features using
the state of the art for assessing the autonomic regulation of the
heart rate [38], [39]. In particular, standard parameters that are
defined in the time and frequency domain and are correlated
with the sympatho-vagal balance as well as nonlinear measures
are taken into account. Time-domain features include the average and standard deviation values of the RR intervals, the
square root of the mean of the sum of the squares of differences
between subsequent NN intervals (RMSSD), and the number
of successive differences of intervals that differ by more than
50 ms (expressed as a percentage of the total number of heartbeats analyzed, pNN50). Moreover, the triangular index was
calculated as a triangular interpolation of the HRV histogram.
All extracted features in the frequency domain were based on
the power spectral density (PSD) of the HRV. An autoregressive
(AR) model was used to estimate the PSD in order to provide
better frequency resolution than in nonparametric methods. The
optimal order p was estimated according to the Akaike information criterion [62]. The Burg method was used to obtain
the AR model parameters. The standard frequency-domain parameters were: very low frequency, this spectral component in
general below 0.04 Hz; low frequency (LF), ranging between
0.04 and 0.15 Hz, and high frequency (HF), which is up to
0.4 Hz. For each of the three frequency bands, the peak value
corresponding to the frequency having maximum magnitude
was also evaluated. Moreover, the LF/HF ratio was calculated
in order to quantify sympathovagal balance and to reflect sympathetic modulations [38], [39].
Several nonlinear HRV measures were also extracted along
with the standard morphological and spectral features [38], [39].
Even if the physiological meaning of these features is still unclear, they resulted to be an important quantifier of cardiovascular control dynamics mediated by the ANS [63]–[72]. Nonlinear
measures are referred to as features extracted by means of the
phase space (or state space). Once the phase space is estimated
(by means of the so-called embedding procedure), the parameters that appears subject to an ANS modulation were evaluated.
More specifically, correlation dimension [73], sample entropy,
and approximate entropy [74], [75], features from the recurrence plot [76] by means of the recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) [77], and the detrended fluctuation analysis [78], [79]
were evaluated. RQA was chosen to quantify the number and
the duration of recurrences of the considered cardiovascular dynamical system. The following features were calculated [77]:

VALENZA et al.: WEARABLE MONITORING FOR MOOD RECOGNITION IN BIPOLAR DISORDER BASED

1629

Fig. 4. Simplified block scheme over multiple mood states representing the
Markov modeling of the mood recognition procedure.

Fig. 3.

Overall block scheme of the proposed mood recognition system.

recurrence rate, determinism, laminarity, trapping time, average
diagonal line length, entropy, and longest diagonal line.
B. Data Interpretation Through History-Dependent Analysis
and Pattern Recognition
Data interpretation is based on a personalized model in order
to accurately associate and recognize the obtained parameters
with the clinical mood status of the patient. Here, personalization is intended as intrasubject analysis. A logical scheme of
the proposed mood recognition system, which also includes
the previous steps, is shown in Fig. 3. Once all HRV features are extracted for each patient, the feature set related
to the k th acquisition can be defined as a multidimensional
vector Xn k (Tm ) representing n features evaluated within the
time window Tm . Therefore, Xn k (Tm ) is a matrix of features consisting of m rows (each of the rows corresponds to
one of the time windows Tm within the acquisition) and n
columns (each of the columns contains one of the HRV features). In order to consider the process of mood states such as
the Markov chain, i.e., Pr{Xn k = x|(Xn (k −1) = xk −1 )}, a simple rescaling procedure is applied. Specifically, for each column
of the matrix Xn k (Tm ), the matrix Yn k (Tm ) = [Xn k (Tm ) −
Median(Xn (k −1) (Tm ), m)]/MAD(Xn (k −1) (Tm )) is calculated, where MAD(X) = Median(|X − Median(X)|). The
quantity Median(Xn (k −1) (Tm ), m) is intended as a vector of
the median values of the features calculated through all the rows
m of the matrix Xn k (Tm ), thus over all the time windows Tm
of the acquisition k − 1.
This model is justified by the hypothesis that the transition
from a clinical mood state to another is dependent on the past
history of mood fluctuations. In other words, the current clinical status of a patient is influenced by the previous status, and
therefore also the neurovegetative balance should be rescaled
by a factor taking into account the previous clinical status. A
simplified block scheme representing such a rescaling procedure over multiple mood states of a patient is shown in Fig. 4.
The first observation of each patient was used exclusively to
obtain the rescaling values useful for the characterization of the
observation, which followed in time. This choice was justified
by the fact that no preceding recordings were available.

The obtained feature set Yn k (Tm ) is taken as an input of the
leave-one-out (LOO) procedure [80] applied on a support vector
machine (SVM)-based pattern recognition [81]. More specifically, we used a nu-SVM (nu = 0.5) having a radial basis kernel
function with γ = n−1 . A mood label, given by psychological
clinical assessment, was associated with each point in the feature
space Yn k (Tm ). More specifically, the initial mood, diagnostic
of the current bipolar episode, was determined by clinicians
according to DSM-IV-TR criteria [45] and resulted in a diagnosis of current episode of depression, hypomania, or mixed
state, which was the mood label at study entry. Then, its evolution toward another mood state (for instance transition from
hypomania to mixed state) or an ES (remission of manic and
depressive symptoms) was assessed using scores from quantitative psychopathological rating scales (for the scales and the
threshold scores, see paragraph IV). This was a purely clinical
evaluation that disregarded any physiological/biochemical reference analysis. The mood label associated with each patient’s
evaluation was assigned independently with respect to the previous ones. The focus on intrasubject analysis is mainly due to
the small number of patients involved and is focused to find
possible correlations between the pattern of physiological signals and mood fluctuations, which are much more interesting
for the psychiatric community. In order to compare the proposed
methodology with a standard approach, we evaluated the LOOSVM performance in discerning different mood patterns that are
independently processed. In other words, the feature set belonging to a specific acquisition of a patient is taken as an input for
the LOO-SVM classification without performing any rescaling
procedure, i.e., without using information related to previous
mood states. All of the classification results were expressed as
recognition accuracy in detailed confusion matrices [82]. The
generic element rij of the confusion matrix indicated a percentage as to how many times a pattern belonging to class i
was classified as belonging to class j. A more diagonal confusion matrix corresponded to a higher degree of classification.
All of the algorithms were implemented by using Matlab v7.2
endowed with two additional toolboxes for pattern recognition,
i.e., LIBSVM [83] and a time series analysis toolbox [84].
IV. EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL AND RESULTS
Besides the PSYCHE system and methodology of signal processing, an innovative aspect of this study is also represented
by the experimental protocol undertaken. In the following paragraphs, the recruitment of eligible subjects, experimental procedures, and results are described in detail.

1630

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE II
CLINICAL LABELS ASSOCIATED WITH EACH PATIENT DURING
EACH ACQUISITION
ID

ACQ. 1

ACQ. 2

ACQ. 3

ACQ. 4

ACQ. 5

BP1
BP2
BP3
BP4
BP5
BP6
BP7
BP8

HY
HY
HY
DP
DP
HY
DP
MS

HY
MS
HY
DP
DP
HY
DP
MS

HY
HY
HY
DP
HY
HY
ES
DP

ES
HY
ES
DP
DP
ES

ES
ES
DP
HY
ES

DP

DP

TABLE III
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP1

ACQ. 6

Hypomania
Euthymia

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Hypomania
91.99
88.64
80.40
29.20

Euthymia
8.01
11.36
19.60
70.80

Total Accuracies: Standard 55.79%; Markov 79.72%. Bold values

ES

ES

indicate the best correct classification results for each mood
state.

TABLE IV
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP3

Hypomania

Recruitment of eligible subjects: Patient recruitment was performed according to the following criteria.
1) Age between 18-65.
2) Presence of a mood episode at the moment of the recruitment of any polarity (depression, hypomania, mixed).
3) Low risk of suicidality (as assessed as no thoughts of death
and no previous attempts).
4) No somatic or neurologic disorders that might be related
to bipolar disorders (e.g., thyroid alterations).
5) Absence of cognitive impairment.
6) Absence of substance abuse disorders.
7) Necessity of a change in treatment (treatment change is
defined as a augmentation of doses, introduction of or
switch to new drugs, introduction of physical treatments).
8) Willingness of all patients to sign the informed consent for
the PSYCHE project approved by the ethical committee
of the University of Pisa and Strasbourg.
Following this criteria, 15 patients were recruited in the PSYCHE project, seven in Pisa, and eight in Strasbourg. Among
these, we used for our study eight subjects for a total of 42
acquisitions (two from Pisa and six from Strasbourg) because
they had more than one long-term acquisition and at least one
mood change.
Details on the patients’ acquisitions as well as mood state
information are reported in Table II.
Experimental procedures: Patients BP1, BP2, BP3, BP4,
BP5, and BP6 were recruited in the out-patient University clinic
of Strasbourg, France. Patients BP7 and BP8 were recruited in
high-intensity clinical facilities (psychiatric ward and day hospital) at the University Hospital of Pisa, Italy. The protocol planned
a study entry visit when the patient was experiencing a depressive, hypomaniac, or mixed phase. Patients were studied with
an average frequency of 2–3 times a month. Each patient was
evaluated and monitored from the day of the hospital admission
toward remission, i.e., until the reaching of an ES as long as such
a condition was presented within three months after the first visit.
In any case, in this study no more than six evaluations per patient
were performed. All clinical states were evaluated by clinicians
according to DSM-IV-TR criteria [45]. In this way, four possible clinical mood labels (depression, hypomania, mixed-state,
and ES) were assigned. The mood label associated with each patient’s evaluation was assigned independently with respect to the
previous ones. ES, i.e., clinical remission was defined by having a score below threshold on a quantitative psychopathological

Euthymia

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Hypomania
96.70
97.78
64.44
11.11

Euthymia
3.30
2.22
35.56
88.89

Total Accuracies: Standard 66.13%; Markov 93.33%. Bold
values indicate the best correct classification results for each
mood state.
TABLE V
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP2

Hypomania
Mixed-State

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Hypomania
97.03
86.46
62.5
3.75

Mixed-State
2.97
13.54
37.5
96.25

Total Accuracies: Standard 67.26%; Markov 91.35%. Bold
values indicate the best correct classification results for each mood
state.
TABLE VI
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP4

Depression
Euthymia

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Depression
98.53
99.68
83.91
8.05

Euthymia
1.47
0.32
16.09
91.95

Total Accuracies: Standard 57.31%; Markov 95.81%. Bold
values indicate the best correct classification results for each
mood state.

rating scale (for depressive symptoms, score below 8 on the 16item quick inventory of depressive symptomatology clinician
rating and for manic symptoms score below 6 on the Young
Mania rating scale). The same thresholds were also used to define a change in mood state. During the study, treatment choice
remained at the discretion of the clinician as well as the change
of treatment in case of lack of response.
The wearable system was given to the patients in the afternoon
and collected after the morning. Patients receiving the PSYCHE
wearable monitoring platform were asked to wear the sensorized
t-shirt at all times until the battery ran out, i.e., approximately
18 h. Therefore, there was no need of particular experimental
conditions as the patient was free to perform normal activities.
As soon as the subject gave the t-shirt back, the data were
downloaded and stored in the database for further analysis.
Results: Classifications were performed according to the
methodology described in Section III and reported as intrasubject evaluations. Tables III– X show the recognition accuracy in
terms of confusion matrices as well as the total average accuracy

VALENZA et al.: WEARABLE MONITORING FOR MOOD RECOGNITION IN BIPOLAR DISORDER BASED

TABLE VII
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP5

Depression
Hypomania

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Depression
85.44
74.87
23.02
3.77

Hypomania
14.56
25.13
76.98
96.23

Total Accuracies: Standard 81.21%; Markov 85.55%. Bold
values indicate the best correct classification results for each
mood state.

TABLE VIII
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP6

Hypomania
Euthymia

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Hypomania
88.75
93.98
27.27
7.49

Euthymia
11.25
6.02
72.73
92.51

Total Accuracies: Standard 80.74%; Markov 93.24%. Bold
values indicate the best correct classification results for each
mood state.

TABLE IX
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP7

Depression
Euthymia

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Depression
96.34
97.47
45.56
13.33

Euthymia
3.66
2.53
54.44
86.67

Total Accuracies: Standard 75.39%; Markov 92.07%. Bold
values indicate the best correct classification results for each
mood state.

TABLE X
CONFUSION MATRIX OF SVM CLASSIFIER FOR BP8

Mixed-State
Depression
Euthymia

Dataset
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov
Standard
Markov

Mixed-State
65.86
78.08
13.79
4.51
22.60
7.53

Depression
26.42
13.70
78.52
93.90
24.66
8.22

Euthymia
7.72
8.22
7.69
1.59
52.74
84.25

Total Accuracies: Standard 65.71%; Markov 85.41%. Bold values indicate the
best correct classification results for each mood state.

obtained through the LOO procedure on nu-SVMs. Standard
dataset refers to an independently processed feature set, i.e.,
the feature set belonging to a specific acquisition of a patient
is taken as an input for the LOO-SVM classification without
performing any rescaling procedure. Markov dataset refers to
the proposed methodology, i.e., feature set is processed ad hoc
in order to consider information from the previous mood state
(see details on paragraph III).
According to the description of data processing reported in
paragraph III, n = 24 features constituted the feature space
dimension of both standard and Markov datasets. No dimensionality reduction techniques were applied to reduce such a
dimension.
Since no patients had a maniac episode, we assigned four
labels: hypomania, depression, mixed state, and euthymia.
Patients BP1 and BP3 underwent five visits alongside longterm ANS monitoring. Starting from a period of hypomania,
patients reached the ES. As shown in Tables III and IV, considering the proposed Markov dataset, the subjective ANS patterns

1631

are well distinguished reaching more than 88% of accuracy
in recognizing the hypomaniac state. Concerning the results
obtained from data gathered from BP1, we report that higher
classification accuracy on hypomania class was achieved adopting a standard dataset. However, when using the same dataset,
high misclassification accuracy was obtained for the euthymia
class.
Likewise to BP1 and BP3, patient BP2 began the study showing hypomaniacal psychosis. Then, depressive behaviors were
diagnosed changing the mood state to mixed state. Afterwards,
the previous observed hypomania state was observed twice. In
this case, more than 86% and 96% accuracy was reached in
distinguishing hypomania from mixed-state patterns.
BP4 experienced depressive psychosis for the whole course of
the illness, reaching good affective balance after five monitoring
sessions. In order to take into account the unbalanced number of
available examples per class, two different learning rates were
considered in the SVM training phase, giving the euthymic
examples four times more penalty with respect to the depressive
examples. As the two considered states are very different in
clinical terms, the two patterns resulted strongly distinguished
with a recognition accuracy as high as 99.68%.
BP5 showed mood swings between depressive and hypomaniacal psychosis. Despite the fact that about 25% of the depressive
patterns were confused with the hypomaniacal ones, the hypomania states were recognized with more than 96% accuracy.
Likewise for BP1, results obtained on data gathered from BP2
and BP5 show that in using the standard approach, a higher classification accuracy for one class is associated with a very low
and insufficient accuracy on another one. Like BP4, patients
BP6 and BP7 displayed severe pathological behavior before
reaching the euthymic condition. Accordingly, accuracy greater
than 86% was obtained in recognizing such states.
BP8 showed mood swings among three states such as the
mixed state, depression, and euthymia. This case is very interesting for this study as we obtained interesting performance,
considering a three-class pattern recognition problem (see
Table X).
For each patient, higher total accuracy was obtained considering mood states as a Markov chain rather than using a standard
approach. Although a further statistical analysis revealed that
there are no differences between the sensitivity values given
by the two methodologies, significant differences were found
concerning the specificity values (p < 0.02) and total accuracies (p < 0.01) according to the nonparametric Wilcoxon signed
rank test for paired data performed on all the subjects. Moreover,
in order to generalize these results, it is worthwhile mentioning
that we tested the classifier also when data were normalized
with respect to a casual mood status achieving also lower performances than the proposed Markovian approach.
V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In conclusion, we presented a novel wearable system comprised of textile technology and biosignal processing able to
recognize the mood status of bipolar patients by means of
a personalized hardware and software platform. An effective

1632

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

methodology of signal processing based on a mood historydependent, long-term HRV analysis allowed for obtaining robust
recognitions validated in a dataset consisting of eight patients
who were monitored for up to 18 h and up to six times, thus collecting more than 400 h of data. As bipolar disorder is a chronic
illness having a high impact on society [40]–[43], research that
aims to establish a reliable decision system to support clinical
diagnoses is much needed. Physicians, in fact, currently rely
on rating scales and questionnaire scores [46]–[48] without any
objective clinical clues. Moreover, a typical feature of bipolar
disorder is that it is a chronic yet remittent disorder. Patients can
experience periods of relative well-being with possible abrupt
relapses.
A portable remote system able to detect and predict mood
changes will be important for obtaining very useful clinical
information even in the absence of direct contact with the
physician. This will allow for a more rapid and efficient use
of medical treatment and a shortening of the symptomatic period. Although research work reported on biomarkers having
statistical difference among different mood states [29], [32],
[34]–[36], [49]–[53], a single-variable approach is not sufficient to robustly characterize mood swings [9]. Starting from
the consideration that a correlation might exist between mental
disorders and ANS dynamical changes, we successfully applied
a multiparametric approach as a decision support system for the
diagnosis of bipolar disorder. Such information is gathered by
means of a wearable, comfortable, and unobtrusive monitoring
systems: the PSYCHE platform. ANS signals are acquired over
a long term as the mood has been defined as a long-lasting, diffuse, affective state, not associated with a specific trigger [85].
Therefore, no specific tasks are required in using the PSYCHE
system. HRV was chosen as a good noninvasive marker of the
ANS activity [38], [39], especially effective in emotion recognition systems [70], [86]–[90].
Here, we propose a personalized approach that identifies
mood states as intrasubject analysis taking into account the
temporal dynamics of the illness. This consideration represents
the great novelty of our approach and is implemented considering the ANS dynamics among mood fluctuations as a Markov
stochastic process [54], i.e., each mood state refers to the previous one. As literature supports, Markov’s theory has been
successfully applied to model human emotions [55].
Our methodological approach accounts for clinical course
during a mood fluctuation. The onset of a new mood state brings
the past clinical history along, and the identification of the next
state is more accurate if the previous one is considered. From a
point of view purely speculative, our approach goes beyond the
rigid application of DSM-IV-TR labels, but introduces the new
concept that the clinical diagnosis is looking backward. Better understanding of the patient’s mood status can be achieved
considering the dynamics of the disorder rather than the single
observation treated as completely independent. For instance,
patients with bipolar disorders present different clinical signs
whether a depressive episode follows or precedes a maniac
status [91].
Experimental results are very satisfactory. Considering patients with a mood label such as depression, hypomania, mixed

state, and ES, we are able to distinguish subjective mood states
with high accuracy, especially when a pathological clinical status is compared with the reference euthymic status (e.g., euthymic versus depressed, and euthymic versus mixed state).
Moreover, the comparison of the obtained findings through
Markov mood state modeling with a standard approach, inspired
by Valenza et al. [9], further confirms the crucial role played
by the long-term dynamics of pathological mental states. A
further statistical analysis, in fact, revealed that a reliable and
significantly higher specificity values are achieved only when
the temporal dynamics of the illness is taken into account.The
translational clinical application of the proposed methodology
is not a challenging task, as ECG monitoring systems are widely
available even in a portable fashion (e.g., standard ECG holter).
However, as the proposed methodology focuses on the intrasubject classification, the new training phase has to be performed
for every new patient. Ideally, such a training phase requires
at least four acquisitions of physiological data that cover all
the possible mood states, although a minimum switch of two
mood states is strongly needed. Moreover, during such a training phase, doctors have to determine the mood states during
each of the acquisitions. Then, these labels together with physiological data can be used to train the classifier. Only after this
training phase, the proposed system will be able to diagnose the
patient without an input from doctors. Major improvements of
the system are expected solving the intersubject variability issue
for the mood classification.
While the proposed experimental procedure provides for carrying out normal life activities, it is worthwhile mentioning that
different life activities could be easily associated with different
HRV dynamics. Using the methodology proposed in this study,
such changes are minimized considering long-term, historydependent dynamics referred to as one of the four possible
pathological mood states. Given the high classification accuracy,
it is indeed possible to hypothesize that the few misclassified
samples can be interpreted as either algorithmic/mathematical
artifacts or physiological outliers, i.e., events not related to mood
markers for any reason (including also misleading daily activities).
The impact of this research will open new opportunities to
create a closed loop between patients and clinicians through
continuous communication and feedback that facilitates disease
management by fostering a new collaboration, with more autonomy and empowerment for the patient. Constant monitoring
and feedback (to both patients and physicians) are the new keys
to managing the illness, to helping patients, to facilitating interaction between patient and physician, as well as to alerting professionals in case of relapse and depressive or manic episodes,
and as a ultimate goal, to identifying signal trends in order to
predict critical events. Moreover, the possibility of introducing
other past mood states to the analysis and mood state labeling
features is intriguing also from a clinical point of view. This
is because it introduces the idea that mood disorders cannot be
considered to be a series of independent and stand-alone states,
but rather a chronological sequence of mood states that are related to each other. Previous studies have been limited to not
considering this issue and may be one of the possible reasons

VALENZA et al.: WEARABLE MONITORING FOR MOOD RECOGNITION IN BIPOLAR DISORDER BASED

for their lack of ability to discriminate mood status at single
subject levels.
Considering mood episodes as interlinked will possibly lead
not only to a better characterization of the mood state and a
better comprehension of psychophysiology of mood disorders,
but also to the possibility of predicting the clinical course of the
disorder itself. Further studies with a larger number of recruited
patients will be provided a more complete understanding and
knowledge of HRV and ANS alterations in bipolar disorders,
therefore allowing for the assessment of the most important features related to pathological mental states. Currently, the proposed approach is under development in the framework of the
PSYCHE project, which is an European research Project that
aims at developing a pervasive and personalized monitoring
system for care assessment in mental health.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to Laura Maley for kindly reviewing
the paper. This research leading to these results received support from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme
under grant agreement no. 247777 (PSYCHE).
REFERENCES
[1] E. P. Scilingo, A. Lanatà, and A. Tognetti, “Sensors for wearable systems,” in Wearable Monitoring Systems. New York, NY, USA: SpringerVerlag, 2011, pp. 3–25.
[2] A. Lanata, G. Valenza, and E. P. Scilingo, “Eye gaze patterns in emotional
pictures,” J. Ambient Intell. Humanized Comput., vol. 4, no. 6, pp 705–715,
2013.
[3] R. G. Haahr, S. B. Duun, M. H. Toft, B. Belhage, J. Larsen, K. Birkelund,
and E. V. Thomsen, “An electronic patch for wearable health monitoring
by reflectance pulse oximetry,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 45–53, Feb. 2012.
[4] M. Tavakoli, L. Turicchia, and R. Sarpeshkar, “An ultra-low-power pulse
oximeter implemented with an energy-efficient transimpedance amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 27–38, Feb.
2010.
[5] F. Zhang and Y. Lian, “QRS detection based on multiscale mathematical
morphology for wearable ECG devices in body area networks,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 220–228, Aug. 2009.
[6] E. P. Scilingo, A. Gemignani, R. Paradiso, N. Taccini, B. Ghelarducci, and
D. De Rossi, “Performance evaluation of sensing fabrics for monitoring
physiological and biomechanical variables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 345–352, Sep. 2005.
[7] A. Lanatà, E. P. Scilingo, E. Nardini, G. Loriga, R. Paradiso, and D. DeRossi, “Comparative evaluation of susceptibility to motion artifact in different wearable systems for monitoring respiratory rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 378–386, Mar. 2010.
[8] Y. Chuo, M. Marzencki, B. Hung, C. Jaggernauth, K. Tavakolian, P. Lin,
and B. Kaminska, “Mechanically flexible wireless multisensor platform
for human physical activity and vitals monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 281–294, Oct. 2010.
[9] G. Valenza, C. Gentili, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Mood recognition
in bipolar patients through the psyche platform: Preliminary evaluations
and perspectives,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 49–58, 2013.
[10] W. Karlen, C. Mattiussi, and D. Floreano, “Sleep and wake classification
with ECG and respiratory effort signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 71–78, Apr. 2009.
[11] D. Zito, D. Pepe, M. Mincica, F. Zito, A. Tognetti, A. Lanata, and D. De
Rossi, “SoC CMOS UWB pulse radar sensor for contactless respiratory rate monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 6,
pp. 503–510, Dec. 2011.
[12] A. Alomainy, Y. Hao, and F. Pasveer, “Numerical and experimental evaluation of a compact sensor antenna for healthcare devices,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 242–249, Dec. 2007.

1633

[13] A. Lanatà, G. Valenza, and E. P. Scilingo, “A novel EDA glove based on
textile-integrated electrodes for affective computing,” Med. Biolog. Eng.
Comput., vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 1163–1172, 2012.
[14] G. Valenza, A. Lanatà, E. P. Scilingo, and D. De Rossi, “Towards a smart
glove: Arousal recognition based on textile electrodermal response,” in
Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 3598–3601.
[15] C.-T. Lin, C.-J. Chang, B.-S. Lin, S.-H. Hung, C.-F. Chao, and I.-J. Wang,
“A real-time wireless brain–computer interface system for drowsiness
detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 214–222,
Aug. 2010.
[16] E. Jovanov, A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and P. C. De Groen, “A wireless body
area network of intelligent motion sensors for computer assisted physical
rehabilitation,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2005
[17] E. D. de Bruin, A. Hartmann, D. Uebelhart, K. Murer, and W. Zijlstra,
“Wearable systems for monitoring mobility-related activities in older people: A systematic review,” Clin. Rehabil., vol. 22, no. 10–11, pp. 878–895,
2008.
[18] T. Yilmaz, R. Foster, and Y. Hao, “Detecting vital signs with wearable
wireless sensors,” Sensors, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 10 837–10 862, 2010.
[19] C. Poon, Q. Liu, H. Gao, W.-H. Lin, and Y.-T. Zhang, “Wearable intelligent
systems for e-health,” J. Comput. Sci. Eng, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 246–256,
2011.
[20] S. Patel, H. Park, P. Bonato, L. Chan, and M. Rodgers, “A review of wearable sensors and systems with application in rehabilitation,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 9, pp. 1–17, 2012.
[21] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable sensorbased systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern. C: Appl. Rev., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2010.
[22] P. Bonato, “Wearable sensors and systems,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 25–36, May/Jun. 2010.
[23] M. Di Rienzo, P. Meriggi, F. Rizzo, P. Castiglioni, C. Lombardi,
M. Ferratini, and G. Parati, “Textile technology for the vital signs monitoring in telemedicine and extreme environments,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 711–717, May 2010.
[24] P. Bonato, “Wearable sensors/systems and their impact on biomedical
engineering,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 18–20,
May/Jun. 2003.
[25] S. Bouwstra, W. Chen, L. Feijs, and S. B. Oetomo, “Smart jacket design
for neonatal monitoring with wearable sensors,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int.
Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sens. Netw., 2009, pp. 162–167.
[26] W. Chen, J. Hu, S. Bouwstra, and S. B. Oetomo, “Sensor integration for
perinatology research,” Int. J. Sens. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 38–49, 2011.
[27] G. Valenza, A. Lanatà, M. Ferro, and E. P. Scilingo, “Real-time discrimination of multiple cardiac arrhythmias for wearable systems based on neural
networks,” in Proc. Computers in Cardiology,, 2008, pp. 1053–1056.
[28] B. Levy, “Autonomic nervous system arousal and cognitive functioning
in bipolar disorder,” Bipolar Disorders, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 70–79, 2013.
[29] K. Latalova, J. Prasko, T. Diveky, A. Grambal, D. Kamaradova,
H. Velartova, J. Salinger, and J. Opavsky, “Autonomic nervous system
in euthymic patients with bipolar affective disorder,” Neuro Endocrinol.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 829–836, 2010.
[30] B. L. Henry, A. Minassian, M. P. Paulus, M. A. Geyer, and W. Perry,
“Heart rate variability in bipolar mania and schizophrenia,” J. Psychiatr.
Res., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 168–176, 2010.
[31] A. Voss, V. Baier, S. Schulz, and K. Bar, “Linear and nonlinear methods
for analyses of cardiovascular variability in bipolar disorders,” Bipolar
Disorders, vol. 8, no. 5p1, pp. 441–452, 2006.
[32] A. Fagiolini, K. Chengappa, I. Soreca, and J. Chang, “Bipolar disorder
and the metabolic syndrome: causal factors, psychiatric outcomes and
economic burden,” CNS Drugs, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 655–669, 2008.
[33] E. Ruiz-Padial, J. Vila, and J. F. Thayer, “The effect of conscious and
non-conscious presentation of biologically relevant emotion pictures on
emotion modulated startle and phasic heart rate,” Int. J. Psychophysiol.,
vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 341–346, 2011.
[34] R. Carney, K. Freedland, M. Rich, and A. Jaffe, “Depression as a risk
factor for cardiac events in established coronary heart disease: A review
of possible mechanisms,” Ann. Behav. Med., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 142–149,
1995.
[35] A. Glassman, “Depression, cardiac death, and the central nervous system,”
Neuropsychobiology, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 80–83, 1998.
[36] L. Watkins, J. Blumenthal, and R. Carney, “Association of anxiety with
reduced baroreflex cardiac control in patients after acute myocardial infarction,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 143, no. 3, pp. 460–466, 2002.
[37] D. Christmas, J. D. Steele, S. Tolomeo, M. S. Eljamel, and K. Matthews,
“Vagus nerve stimulation for chronic major depressive disorder: 12-month

1634

[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]
[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]
[46]
[47]

[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]

[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]

[58]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

outcomes in highly treatment-refractory patients,” J. Affect. Disorders, vol.
150, no. 3, pp. 1221–1225, 2013
A. Camm, M. Malik, J. Bigger, G. Breithardt, S. Cerutti, R. Cohen, Task
Force of the European Society of Cardiology, and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology, “Heart rate variability: Standards of
measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use,” Circulation,
vol. 93, no. 5, pp. 1043–1065, 1996
U. Rajendra Acharya, K. Paul Joseph, N. Kannathal, C. Lim, and J. Suri,
“Heart rate variability: A review,” Med. Biolog. Eng. Comput., vol. 44,
no. 12, pp. 1031–1051, 2006.
R. C. Kessler, K. A. McGonagle, S. Zhao, C. B. Nelson, M. Hughes,
S. Eshleman, H. U. Wittchen, and K. S. Kendler, “Lifetime and 12-month
prevalence of dsm-iii-r psychiatric disorders in the united states: Results
from the national comorbidity survey,” Arch. General Psychiatry, vol. 51,
no. 1, p. 8, 1994.
H. Wittchen and F. Jacobi, “Size and burden of mental disorders in
europe—A critical review and appraisal of 27 studies,” Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 357–376, 2005.
S. Pini, V. de Queiroz, D. Pagnin, L. Pezawas, J. Angst, G. B. Cassano, and
H. U. Wittchen, “Prevalence and burden of bipolar disorders in european
countries,” Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 425–434,
2005.
Y. Chen and S. Dilsaver, “Lifetime rates of suicide attempts among subjects with bipolar and unipolar disorders relative to subjects with other
axis i disorders,” Biological Psychiatry, vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 896–899,
1996.
K. R. Merikangas, R. Jin, J. P. He, R. C. Kessler, S. Lee, N. A. Sampson,
M. C. Viana, L. H. Andrade, C. Hu, E. G. Karam, M. Ladea, M. E.
Medina-Mora, Y. Ono, J. Posada-Villa, R. Sagar, J. E. Wells, and Z.
Zarkov, “Prevalence and correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the
world mental health survey initiative,” Arch. General Psychiatry, vol. 68,
no. 3, pp. 241–251, 2011.
A. P. Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV-TR. Arlington, VA, USA: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc., 2000.
E. Vieta, M. Reinares, and A. Rosa, “Staging bipolar disorder,” Neurotoxicity Res., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 279–285, 2011.
A. Andreazza, M. Kauer-Sant’Anna, B. Frey, D. Bond, F. Kapczinski,
L. Young, and L. Yatham, “Oxidative stress markers in bipolar disorder:
A meta-analysis,” J. Affective Disorders, vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 135–144,
2008.
M. Phillips and E. Vieta, “Identifying functional neuroimaging biomarkers
of bipolar disorder: Toward dsm-v,” Schizophrenia Bull., vol. 33, no. 4,
pp. 893–904, 2007.
H. Stampfer, “The relationship between psychiatric illness and the circadian pattern of heart rate,” Australasian Psychiatry, vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 187–198, 1998.
G. Iverson, H. Stampfer, and M. Gaetz, “Reliability of circadian heart
pattern analysis in psychiatry,” Psychiatr. Quart., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 195–
203, 2002.
G. Iverson, M. Gaetz, E. Rzempoluck, P. McLean, W. Linden, and
R. Remick, “A new potential marker for abnormal cardiac physiology
in depression,” J. Behavioral Med., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 507–511, 2005.
J. Taillard, P. Sanchez, P. Lemoine, and J. Mouret, “Heart rate circadian
rhythm as a biological marker of desynchronization in major depression:
A methodological and preliminary report,” Chronobiol. Int., vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 305–316, 1990.
J. Taillard, P. Lemoine, P. Boule, M. Drogue, and J. Mouret, “Sleep and
heart rate circadian rhythm in depression: The necessity to separate,”
Chronobiol. Int., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 63–72, 1993.
C. W. Gardine, Handbook of Stochastic Methods. vol. 3, Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1985.
A. Chandra, “A computational architecture to model human emotions,”
in Proc. Intelligent Information Systems, 1997, pp. 86–89.
A. Greco, A. Lanata, G. Valenza, G. Rota, N. Vanello, and E. Scilingo, “On
the deconvolution analysis of electrodermal activity in bipolar patients,”
in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc, 2012, pp. 6691–6694.
N. Vanello, A. Guidi, C. Gentili, S. Werner, G. Bertschy, G. Valenza,
A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “Speech analysis for mood state characterization in bipolar patients,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2012, pp. 2104–2107.
S. Mariani, M. Migliorini, G. Tacchino, C. Gentili, G. Bertschy, S. Werner,
and A. M. Bianchi, “Clinical state assessment in bipolar patients by means
of HRV features obtained with a sensorized t-shirt,” in Proc. IEEE Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 2240–2243.

[59] J. G. Webste, Medical Instrumentation: Application and Design.. New
York: Wiley, 1998.
[60] U. R. Acharya, K. P. Joseph, N. Kannathal, C. Lim, and J. Suri, “Heart
rate variability: A review,” Med. Biolog. Eng. Comput., vol. 44, no. 12,
pp. 1031–1051, 2006.
[61] J. Pan and W. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[62] H. Akaike, “Fitting autoregressive models for prediction,” Ann. Inst.
Statist. Math., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 243–247, 1969.
[63] F. Atyabi, M. Livari, K. Kaviani, and M. Tabar, “Two statistical methods
for resolving healthy individuals and those with congestive heart failure
based on extended self-similarity and a recursive method,” J. Biological
Phys., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 489–495, 2006.
[64] L. Glass, “Introduction to controversial topics in nonlinear science: Is the
normal heart rate chaotic?,” Chaos: Interdiscipl. J. Nonlinear Sci., vol. 19,
no. 2, p. 028501, 2009.
[65] L. Glass, “Synchronization and rhythmic processes in physiology,” Nature, vol. 410, no. 6825, pp. 277–284, 2001.
[66] A. Goldberger, C. Peng, and L. Lipsitz, “What is physiologic complexity
and how does it change with aging and disease?,” Neurobiol. aging, vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 23–26, 2002.
[67] C. Poon and C. Merrill, “Decrease of cardiac chaos in congestive heart
failure,” Nature, vol. 389, no. 6650, pp. 492–495, 1997.
[68] M. P. Tulppo, A. M. Kiviniemi, A. J. Hautala, M. Kallio, T. H. Seppänen,
T. Mäkikallio, and H. V. Huikuri, “Physiological background of the loss
of fractal heart rate dynamics,” Circulation, vol. 112, no. 3, p. 314, 2005.
[69] G. Wu, N. M. Arzeno, L. L. Shen, D. K. Tang, D. A. Zheng, N. Q. Zhao,
D. L. Eckberg, and C. S. Poon, “Chaotic signatures of heart rate variability
and its power spectrum in health, aging and heart failure,” PloS one, vol. 4,
no. 2, p. e4323, 2009.
[70] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “The role of nonlinear dynamics in affective valence and arousal recognition,” IEEE Trans. Affective
Computing, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 237–249, Apr.–Jun. 2012.
[71] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “Oscillations of heart rate and
respiration synchronize during affective visual stimulation,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 683–690, Jul. 2012.
[72] G. Valenza, L. Citi, E. Scilingo, and R. Barbieri, “Point-process nonlinear
models with laguerre and volterra expansions: Instantaneous assessment
of heartbeat dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 11,
pp. 2914–2926, Jun. 2013.
[73] J. Theiler, “Efficient algorithm for estimating the correlation dimension
from a set of discrete points,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 4456–4462,
1987.
[74] Y. Fusheng, H. Bo, and T. Qingyu, “Approximate Entropy and its application in biosignal analysis,” Nonlinear Biomed. Signal Process., vol. 2,
pp. 72–91, 2000.
[75] J. Richman and J. Moorman, “Physiological time-series analysis using
approximate entropy and sample entropy,” Amer. J. Physiol.—Heart Circulat. Physiol., vol. 278, no. 6, pp. H2039–H2049, 2000.
[76] N. Marwan, M. Carmen Romano, M. Thiel, and J. Kurths, “Recurrence
plots for the analysis of complex systems,” Phys. Rep., vol. 438, no. 5–6,
pp. 237–329, 2007.
[77] J. Zbilut and C. Webber Jr., Recurrence Quantification Analysis. New
York: Wiley Online Library, 2006.
[78] C. Peng, S. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Simons, H. Stanley, and
A. Goldberger, “Mosaic organization of DNA nucleotides,” Phys. Rev.
E, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 1685–1690, 1994.
[79] C. Peng, S. Havlin, H. Stanley, and A. Goldberger, “Quantification of
scaling exponents and crossover phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat
time series,” Chaos interdisciplinary J. Nonlinear Sci., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 82–
87, 1995.
[80] M. Kearns and D. Ron, “Algorithmic stability and sanity-check bounds for
leave-one-out cross-validation,” Neural Comput., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1427–
1453, 1999.
[81] B. Schölkopf, A. J. Smola, R. C. Williamson, and P. L. Bartlett, “New
support vector algorithms,” Neural Comput., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 1207–
1245, 2000.
[82] R. Kohavi and F. Provost, “Glossary of terms,” Mach. Learn., vol. 30,
no. June, pp. 271–274, 1998.
[83] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. (2011). LIBSVM: A library for support vector
machines. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. [Online]. 2, pp. 27:1–27:27.
Software Available:http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm
[84] A. Schlogl, time Series Analysis—A toolbox for the use with Matlab, [Online]. Available: http://pub.ist.ac.at/%7Eschloegl/matlab/tsa/ (Accessed: 3
Dec. 2012)

VALENZA et al.: WEARABLE MONITORING FOR MOOD RECOGNITION IN BIPOLAR DISORDER BASED

[85] S. Johnson, J. Gruber, and L. Eisner, “Emotion and bipolar disorder,”
in Emotion and Psychopathology.. Washington, DC, USA: American
Psychological Assoc., 2007.
[86] L. Ivonin, H.-M. Chang, W. Chen, and M. Rauterberg, “Automatic recognition of the unconscious reactions from physiological signals,” in Human
Factors in Computing and Informatics. New York, NY, USA: SpringerVerlag, 2013, pp. 16–35.
[87] L. Ivonin, H.-M. Chang, W. Chen, and M. Rauterberg, “Unconscious
emotions: quantifying and logging something we are not aware of,” Pers.
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 663–673, 2013.
[88] R. A. Calvo and S. D’Mello, “Affect detection: An interdisciplinary review of models, methods, and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Affective
Comput., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 18–37, Jan. 2010.
[89] G. Valenza, A. Lanatá, and E. P. Scilingo, “Improving emotion recognition systems by embedding cardiorespiratory coupling,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 449–464, 2013.
[90] G. Valenza, P. Allegrini, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Dominant lyapunov exponent and approximate entropy in heart rate variability during
emotional visual elicitation,” Frontiers Neuroeng., vol. 5, pp. 1–7, 2012.
[91] A. Koukopoulos, D. Reginaldi, L. Tondo, C. Visioli, and R. Baldessarini,
“Course sequences in bipolar disorder: Depressions preceding or following manias or hypomanias,” J. Affect. Disorders, vol. 151, pp. 105–110,
2013.

Gaetano Valenza (S’10–M’12) received the Ph.D.
degree in automation, robotics, and bioengineering
from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2013.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the
Department of Information Engineering and the Research Center “E. Piaggio,” University of Pisa. The
main topics of his research are biomedical signal processing, cardiovascular and neural modeling,
and wearable systems for physiological monitoring.
Applicative fields include affective computing, assessment of mood disorders, and characterization of
disorder of consciousness.

Mimma Nardelli received the Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees in biomedical engineering from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2009 and 2012, respectively. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of Pisa and is with the Research
Center “E. Piaggio.”
Her research interests are mainly related to the
study of nonlinear dynamics in physiological signals
gathered from the central and autonomic nervous systems. Her fields of application include affective computing, assessment of mood disorders, and disorders

1635

Claudio Gentili received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees
from the University of Pisa, Italy, in 2002 and 2007,
respectively, and the M.S. degree in psychology from
the University of Pavia, Italy, in 2009.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in clinical
psychology at Pisa University, Pisa, Italy. His main
fields of research are neurobiology of psychological
and personality traits, neurobiology and psychophysiology of anxiety and mood disorders. In particular,
he is interested in neurobiology of social anxiety and
social phobia using fMRI facilities.

Gilles Bertschy was born in 1961. He did his clinical
training in Besanon, France, and received the Ph.D.
degree in psychopharmacology at Paris-6 University,
Paris, France. He is a Professor of adult psychiatry in Strasbourg University, Strasbourg, France, and
the head of a division in the Strasbourg University
Hospital. His career lead him to work in the university departments of psychiatry in Cotonou, Benin and
Lausanne and Geneva, Switzerland. He is a Specialist
of mood disorders, he developed research activities
in the fields of clinics, biological markers and psychopharmacology.

Rita Paradiso received the graduate degree in
physics from the University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy,
and the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering in 1991.
She joined Smartex in 2000 as a R&D Manager,
and from July 2011 she is the CEO of the company.
She has gained experience in management and coordination of European projects. Her main research
topis include molecular electronics, biosensors, biomaterials for biomedical applications and e-textile.
She has more than 60 scientific publications and conference presentation since 1989.

of consciousness.

Antonio Lanatà (M’12) received the graduate degree in electronic engineering in 2001. He received
the Ph.D. degree in automation, robotics and bioengineering from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy,
in 2006.
He is with the Department of Information Engineering and with the Research Centre E. Piaggio,
Faculty of Engineering, University of Pisa, Italy. His
research interests are focused on developing Ultra
wideband wearable systems for biomedical applications and high-level signals processing. Currently, the
main fields of application are affective computing, mental and consciousness
disorders. He has published numerous articles in international scientific journals
and an author of several chapters of books.

Enzo Pasquale Scilingo (M’10) received the Laurea
degree in electronic engineering from the University
of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, and the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the University of Milan, MIlan, Italy, in
1995 and 1998, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
University of Pisa and carries out his research activity at the Information Engineering Department, where
he leads the laboratory Biolab and at the Research
Center “E. Piaggio.” He is currently coordinating
a European project EC-FP7-ICT-247777 “PSYCHEPersonalised monitoring SYstems for Care in mental Health.”

