814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Miniaturized Passive Hydrogel Check Valve for
Hydrocephalus Treatment
Helen N. Schwerdt∗ , Ruth E. Bristol, and Junseok Chae, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Improvements in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) draining
techniques for treatment of hydrocephalus are urgently sought after to substitute for current CSF shunts that are plagued by high
failure rates. The passive check valve aims to restore near natural
CSF draining operations while mitigating possible failure mechanisms caused by finite leakage or low resilience that frequently
constrain practical implementation of miniaturized valves. A simple hydrogel diaphragm structures core passive valve operations
and enforce valve sealing properties to substantially lower reverse
flow leakage. Experimental measurements demonstrate realization
of targeted cracking pressures (PT ≈ 20–110 mmH2 O) and operation at –800 < ΔP < 600 mmH2 O without observable degradation
or leakage.
Index Terms—Check valve, hydrogel, implantable microsystem,
intracranial pressure (ICP) regulation, passive valve.

I. INTRODUCTION
YDROCEPHALUS (HCP) is a chronic and often congenital neurological disorder caused by excessive accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the cerebral ventricles
leading to fatal increases in intracranial pressures (ICP) [1].
A large subset of HCP has been attributed to faulty arachnoid
granulations (AGs), the brain’s natural valve formations protruding from the arachnoid mater, which effectively become
obstructed and inhibit proper CSF draining [2]. Normally, these
AGs serve to provide a one-way conduit for CSF to drain from
the interior subarachnoid space (SAS) to the sagittal sinus immediately exterior to regulate ICP. ICP is defined as the pressure inside the skull enclosing the brain tissue and surrounding
CSF [2]–[4]. Standard treatments to safely lower and maintain
ICP in HCP involve implanting a macroscopic shunt, composed
of two catheters and one valve, to divert excessive CSF from
the brain to a reabsorption area such as the stomach or another distal organ [3], [4] (see Fig. 1). However, greater than
50% of these shunts fail within the first two years entailing
additional invasive surgeries [3]. Chief complications include
mechanical malfunctions, naturally caused obstructions, infec-

H

Manuscript received May 7, 2013; revised September 20, 2013; accepted
October 28, 2013. Date of publication November 11, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ H. N. Schwerdt is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ 85287 USA (e-mail: hschwerd@asu.edu).
R. E. Bristol is with the Department of Neurosurgery, Phoenix Children’s
Hospital, Phoenix, AZ 85016 USA (e-mail: rbristol@phoenixchildrens.com).
J. Chae is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ 85287 USA (e-mail: junseok.chae@asu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2290291

Fig. 1. Depiction of current HCP treatment methods versus an alternative fully
enclosed approach that would eliminate the need for relatively large subcutaneous catheters and valves. (a) Photographs of infants with HCP demonstrating
noticeable shunt protruding the skin as well as enlargement of the head. (b)
Photograph of commercial macroscopic shunt valve used to regulate CSF flow
through connected catheters (Medtronic, Inc.). (c) Illustration of how HCP
affects normal CSF draining through malfunctioning blocked AGs and how
a miniaturized valve may be appended to direct CSF flow from the brain at
the associated meningeal membrane without requiring excess through-cranium
catheters or distal tubing.

tions, subdural hematomas, blockage, overdrainage, and/or underdrainage [3]. Some of these complications may be attributed
to the shunts’ physically large and lengthy form making them
susceptible to external forces and/or siphoning effects. Additionally, intracranial catheters potentially expose the brain and
increase risks of infection. Instead, an alternative treatment approach targeting restoration of near natural draining operations
by directly rebuilding a CSF route through the attributed CSF
obstructing arachnoid membrane may potentially offer greater
reliability and safety to current fail-prone shunts. By confining
artificial draining mechanisms to the interior of the cranium and
miniaturizing the shunt system, the treatment may be considerably less prone to infections, externally induced obstructions,
siphoning effects, and physical trauma [3]. Such an approach
may be realized by insertion of a passive miniaturized check
valve channeling CSF directly across the arachnoid into the
sagittal sinus and in essence substituting for the obstructed AGs
(see Figs. 1 and 2).
II. BACKGROUND
Naturally existing AGs, in principle, function as a passive
check valve having three correlated features: 1) normally closed
and prevent flow when ΔP (differential pressure between SAS
and draining region) is less than the cracking pressure, PT , (ΔP

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SCHWERDT et al.: MINIATURIZED PASSIVE HYDROGEL CHECK VALVE FOR HYDROCEPHALUS TREATMENT

Fig. 2. Illustration of AG function as a one-way valve (protruding structures
from the dura mater) to direct CSF flow from the SAS enclosing the brain to the
sagittal sinus. (a) Under normal conditions the intracranial differential pressure
is around –100 < ΔP < 350 mmH2O (PN, in figure, indicates this normal ICP
range). (b) With HCP ΔP may reach fatally higher levels due to buildup of CSF
within the brain. (c) Current shunts direct CSF from the brain to the stomach
or other distal organs, requiring through-cranium catheters. (d) Miniaturized
hydrogel valve attempts to alleviate this perilous condition to substitute CSF
draining operations of blocked AGs and divert CSF directly to the sinus, as in
normal conditions.

< PT ); 2) possess high diodicity or unidirectional flow (flow out
of valve, QO ≥ 0); and 3) retain a designated nonzero or zero PT .
Check valves utilizing microelectromechanical system (MEMS)
technology have been subject to research for over 20 years and
are commonly in the form of a cantilever or duckbill flap, bridge
or perforated membrane, or spherical ball type valve [5]–[11].
However, to date, MEMS-based valves usually retain deficiency
in one or more of these three essential check valve properties
and predominantly so in avoiding leakage at ΔP < PT . In
addition to challenges in preventing static leakage due to insufficient back pressure or sealing mechanisms (QO = 0 at ΔP
< PT ) [5], [8], [9], other limitations may involve reverse flow
leakage at higher back pressures (ΔP << 0) [5], permanent deformation of the valve that directly undermines repeatability [9],
stiction of the valve seat that affects reproducibility and yield,
and/or finite leakage observed after longer or multiple periods of operation impairing its longevity—critical for permanent
chronic implants. To address many of these failure mechanisms,
more complex valve designs and fabrication processes have been
developed to realize adequate sealing with low or virtually zero
static and reverse flow leakage and higher reproducibility and
durability [10], [11]. These more complex valves were formed
on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and were constructed for application in drug delivery [10] or regulating intraocular pressure [11] for glaucoma treatment and demonstrated effective
operation as implemented in animal models. Unlike glaucoma
drainage devices possessing QO ≈ 1–5 μL/min and PT ≈ 68–
203 mmH2 O, HCP CSF shunting involves substantially higher
flow rates (QO ≈ 0.1–3.0 mL/min) and may target more variable
cracking pressures (PT ≈ 10–230 mmH2 O) [4]. Recently, Oh
et al. have implemented a parylene/PDMS composite duckbill
flap configuration, aiming for application in HCP, but the valve

815

retained challenges in reverse flow leakage and low diodicity due
to inadequate sealing mechanisms [5]. The miniaturized valve
presented herein attempts to alleviate challenges in valve sealing
through the use of a perforated membrane valve exploiting hydrogel material swelling characteristics to secure reliable sealing
and manipulate targeted PT . Hydrogel polymers swell and expand when immersed in liquids that diffuse through microscopic
pores in the gel matrix. This swelling phenomenon forms the
basic passive check valve functionality without requiring external control stimuli, and may effectively provide secure sealing
between the valve seat and inlet to minimize static and reverse
flow leakage issues. Hydrogel materials have been employed in
valves to possess environmentally (i.e., pH, temperature, etc.)
responsive characteristics for microfluidic lab-on-a-chip applications using in-plane actuation [9]. Unlike previously reported
hydrogel valves, the valve of this study is composed of only
silicon and hydrogel and is fabricated using standard planar
micromachining techniques for out-of-plane operation. Unlike
fabrication techniques used for intricate state-of-the-art MEMS
and microfluidic devices [12]–[19], minimal surface and bulk
micromachining steps are employed in the valve of this study.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Principles of Operation
The hydrogel check valve aims to regulate flow within QO ≈
0.1–3.0 mL/min and PT ≈ 10–230 mmH2 O in order to substitute
natural AG functionality and properly drain CSF in HCP and is
composed of only two materials, hydrogel and silicon, both of
which have demonstrated biocompatible properties [20], [21].
Additionally, the valve should operate without permanent deformation at an estimated –200 < ΔP < 600 mmH2 O to account for
the normal range of ICP in humans (–100 < PN < 350 mmH2 O)
as well as the potentially higher ICP (PN > 500 mmH2 O) observed in HCP [4]. A perforated hydrogel membrane performs
underlying valve operations by deflecting and allowing fluid to
flow through exposed membrane perforations in response to the
pressure (ΔP) across the valve [see Fig. 3 (a)]. The hydrogel
membrane remains swollen as it is immersed in a liquid at all
times. In idle and closed states (ΔP < PT ), the liquid induced
expansion of the hydrogel seals the inlet port and prevents fluid
outflow. PT may be manipulated during the fabrication process
by adjusting the ratio of the hydrogel crosslinker component,
i.e., ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDA), that directly influences amount of hydrogel swelling. At ΔP ≥ PT , sufficient
inlet pressure overwhelms hydrogel swelling forces allowing the
valve to open, at which point the opened valve’s flow characteristics are governed by the level of displacement of the hydrogel
membrane.
B. Design
In the valve’s open state, a perforated square diaphragm deflects and allows fluid to flow through exposed perforations in
response to the pressure ΔP across the valve. The deflection of
a suspended square membrane in response to pressure may be

816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF DESIGN PARAMETERS OF MINIATURIZED VALVE

Fig. 3. (a) Designated closed and open states of the miniaturized valve. In the
closed state (left) the hydrogel’s swelling force allows the perforated membrane
to seal the inlet channel and block flow (when ΔP < PT, cracking pressure).
In the open state, when ICP reaches PT (ΔP ≥ PT), the membrane deflects
upward to allow fluid to flow through the perforations through the membrane.
(b) (Left) Cross-sectional and (right) top-view fabrication process: (i) spinning
and patterning 4-μm-thick sacrificial PR on SiO2 coated Si, (ii) pouring and
UV patterning of hydrogel solution in enclosed 150-μm-thick spacer confined
area, (iii) DRIE of backside channels followed by wet etching of SiO2 and PR,
and (iv) swelling of hydrogel valve by immersion in water.

estimated by [22]

w0 = 0.802b ·

Pb
Et

1/3
(1)

where w0 is the maximum center displacement, b is the membrane side length halved, P is the pressure, E is Young’s modulus (E ≈ 100–300 kPa for swollen hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA)-based hydrogels) [23], and t is the membrane
thickness. Fluid flow rate (QO ) through the valve may then be
modeled by a linear expression, QO = ΔP/Rh , where Rh is
the hydraulic resistance, which for a rectangular orifice may be
expressed as follows [24]:
Rh ≈

12μL
wh3 (1 − 0.630h/w)

(2)

where μ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid (μ(water)
≈ 0.89 mPa·s at 24 ◦ C and ≈ 0.68 mPa·s at 38 ◦ C), L is the channel length, w is the channel width, and h is the channel height.
Rh may be modeled as a series configuration of resistors correlated with the inlet channel formed in the silicon substrate, the
variable gap formed by deflection of the hydrogel membrane,
and the perforation outlet vias of the membrane. Since the suspended hydrogel membrane is the sole pressure-responsive part
of the device, its vertical deflection mainly determines QO , as
desired. Accordingly, the cross-sectional areas of inlet and outlet vias are maximized to have negligible resistance and prevent
loading and limiting of QO . For example, an inlet diameter of
500 μm presents a fluidic resistance of ∼0.28 mmH2 O/mL/min

(in 38 ◦ C water), which allows flow, QO , of up to 1 mL/min
at ΔP ∼0.28 mmH2 O. The areal distribution of outlet vias
(perforations) was largely varied to balance the effects of lateral swelling while maintaining mechanical stability of the suspended membrane. According to the minimum size of inlet and
outlet vias that would ensure sufficient drainage, a suitable range
for diameter and thickness of the membrane based on the estimated deflection (1) were identified. Based on this simplified
model and intended operating range for ΔP and QO , selected
dimensions for the hydrogel valve are b ≈ 600–1150 μm, t ≈
100– 260μm, inlet channel side length of d = 400–700 μm, and
perforation outlet via side length of p = 200–400 μm.
In the valve’s closed state, when the differential pressure between SAS and draining region is less than the cracking pressure
(ΔP < PT ), its flow characteristics are predominantly governed
by the hydrogel material properties that will determine E in (1)
as well as PT . Hydrogel composition determines the stiffness
and mass swelling ratio (%S) of the solid hydrogel form, as
accorded by Flory theory and its extensions, whereby the volumetric swelling ratio for a highly swollen gel network may be
estimated by [25]
 −2/3
V
k
(3)
≈
V0
ζZ
where V and V0 are swollen and dry gel volumes, respectively, k
is gel’s elasticity, ζ is degree of gel ionization, and Z is potential
ions per dry gel volume. The Flory theory also suggests a linear
relationship between k and the ratio of crosslinker (EGDA).
Thus, it may be seen that the hydrogel volume is to the (–
2/3) power proportional to crosslinker ratio and this swelling
dependence may be used to predict and effectively control PT of
the valve. A summary of design parameters is shown in Table I.
PT may be estimated by rearranging (1) to solve for pressure P
as a function of the lateral expansion (w0 ) caused by hydrogel
expansion. For example, for a swelling ratio, %S, of 100% and
E = 200 kPa (average values derived from the literature [23]
for the given chemical composition) and b = 700 μm, for t =
150–260 μm, PT ≈ 10–95 mmH2 O, and is within scope of the
targeted range.
C. Fabrication
The fabrication of the hydrogel valve involves conventional
micromachining and photolithography processes on a standard
500-μm thick Si 1 0 0	 substrate and is outlined in Fig. 3(b).

SCHWERDT et al.: MINIATURIZED PASSIVE HYDROGEL CHECK VALVE FOR HYDROCEPHALUS TREATMENT

817

Fig. 4. Photographs of fabricated miniaturized hydrogel valves: (a) top view
of t ≈ 240 μm and b = 0.7 mm, (b) bottom view showing inlet via (d =
300 μm), and (c) cross-sectional view of t ≈ 110 μm and b = 0.95 mm.

First, plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition is used to
coat 0.2-μm thick SiO2 films on both sides of the Si substrate that will serve to enhance adhesion between subsequently
deposited hydrogel anchors. 4-μm thick photoresist (PR) (AZ
P4330-RS, AZ Electronic Materials) sacrificial layers are then
spin coated and patterned on the topside of the Si substrate.
The second step involves application and photopatterning of
the hydrogel diaphragm using photolithography. The chemical
composition of the hydrogel comprises the monomer, 2-HEMA,
crosslinker, EGDA, and photoinitiator, 2,2-dimethoxy-2phenylacetophenone, at a volumetric ratio of 1.0/0.04/0.l. After
treatment of the substrate with adhesion promoter solutions,
the liquid hydrogel is poured onto the topside of the substrate.
The hydrogel is confined at the edges of the wafer by 150-μm
rubber spacers that also fix the vertical separation between the
mask and substrate and determine the thickness of the resulting cured hydrogel. Cured hydrogel patterns are formed by UV
exposure through the mask. Third, deep reactive ion etching
(DRIE) is performed on the backside of the Si substrate to form
through-wafer inlet channels, followed by wet etching of the
topside exposed SiO2 and PR layers. Finally, the fourth step is
to immerse individual devices in water to swell the hydrogel
membranes. Fabricated valves are shown in Fig. 4.
D. Experimental Setup
Benchtop testing of the hydrogel check valve involved syringe pump injection of water to generate ΔP across the valve
and recording of the output steady state QO , similar to configurations of relevant prior studies [5], [9]. All experiments in
water were performed at 24 ◦ C. CSF has a density of 1.003–
1.008 g/cm3 , pH of 7.4 [2], and viscosity of 0.72 mPa·s at
38 ◦ C [26], which closely match those of water and may validate its use as the working fluid for preliminary benchtop testing. ΔP across the valve was monitored by converting voltage
output from a differential pressure transducer (PX26-001DV,
Omega) with 1% accuracy. Calibration of the pressure sensor
revealed a slope of ∼44.55 mmH2 O/mV with a coefficient of
determination value, as obtained from a fitted linear regression
model, of R2 = 0.9994. QO was determined by measuring float
height through a rotameter (FL-1441-G, Omega) with 5% accuracy and ∼3.5 μL/min resolution at discrete intervals of steady
state ΔP. Rotameter calibration indicated a detection slope of
∼273 mm/mL/min with R2 = 0.9897. The input flow settings

Fig. 5. Measured flow response of miniaturized valves demonstrating PT ≈
20–110 mmH2O that is within targeted PT ≈ 10–230 mmH2O with static and
reverse flow sealing and high diodicity where QO = 0 at steady state (ΔP =
0 mmH2O) and at high back pressures (ΔP < –800 mmH2O). Markers indicate
different valve design and geometries.
TABLE II
TARGETED AND MEASURED PERFORMANCE OF THE MINIATURIZED VALVE

on the syringe pump were set to minimum (1–3 μL/min) for
determining PT and increased gradually upon valve opening to
apply steady ΔP across the open valve and monitor the QO
upon stabilization for a given pump setting (∼5–15 min).
To estimate the effects of operating in the intended physiological environment, preliminary tests were also performed
using a simulated CSF solution. CSF contains a small amount
of proteins with concentrations ranging 0.03–0.3% and may
even possess small quantities of red and/or white blood cells,
which present themselves especially during instances of cerebral infections [26]. Such particulates may lodge themselves
into valve membrane-anchor elbows and negatively affect normal valve functions. To emulate the heterogeneous nature of
the real working fluid, CSF, polyethylene microparticles (Inhance Fluoro-Seal, HD-1800 HDPE), with a size distribution of
20–53 μm, mimicking cells and small particles in CSF, were
added to water at a 10% v/v concentration. The microparticle suspension was also heated to compare performance at the
physiological body temperature of ∼38 ◦ C.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Flow response measurements for three devices are shown in
Fig. 5. Preliminary over time flow response characteristics of a
valve are plotted in Fig. 6. Measurements were taken sequentially by manual installation of valves into the experimental
setup for each set of data over a span of few weeks. Between
measurements, valves remained immersed in water. Measurements of a valve in water and microparticle suspended liquids
are shown in Fig. 7. Table II summarizes the measured and targeted performance of the miniaturized valve. Due to the limited
resolution and response time of the flowmeter, exact cracking

818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 6. Preliminary over time measurements of valve with b = 0.8 mm, p =
0.4 mm, d = 0.3 mm, and t ≈ 260 μm. Valves were immersed and stored
in water between measurements and sequentially installed to test setup for
individual measurements.

Fig. 7. Measurements of valve (b = 1250 μm, p = 900 μm, d = 1000 μm,
and t ≈ 150 μm) with three different working fluid environments: (circle) water at 24 ◦ C, (square) 10% v/v microparticles suspended in water at 24 ◦ C,
and (triangle) 10% v/v microparticles suspended in water at ∼38 ◦ C. Valves
were immersed and stored in water between measurements and sequentially
installed to test setup for individual measurements. Measured PT ranged between 18–35 mmH2O, 13–31 mmH2O, and 12–23 mmH2O for water at 24 ◦ C,
microparticle suspension at 24 ◦ C, and microparticle suspension at ∼38 ◦ C,
respectively.

pressure levels were difficult to detect for some of the devices.
Therefore, all reported PT measurements correspond to approximations based on a fitted linear regression model that generates the x-intercept (PT ) based on open valve data (i.e., when
QO > 0).
Experimental measurements of the valves in water, as shown
in Figs. 5 and 6, demonstrate their ability to obtain high diodicity with no observable reverse flow leakage and have cracking
pressures of PT ≈ 20–110 mmH2 O, within the targeted range.
Furthermore, the valves are able to undergo high back pressures (ΔP < −800 mmH2 O) without noticeable deformation or
degradation while maintaining PT . Evidently, thicker hydrogel
membranes appear to present higher cracking pressures. Also,
as anticipated, the thickness of the membranes seems to correlate inversely to output flow rates; thinner membranes (i.e.,
t = 110 μm) display higher flow rates than thicker membranes

(i.e., t = 260 μm). The preliminary over time measurements (see
Fig. 6) show variation of cracking pressure (PT ) and linear fitted
slope of the open valve (QO /ΔP) in the range of 36–72 mmH2 O
and 0.373–0.420 μL/min/mmH2 O, respectively. The minor fluctuation of PT and slope is suspected to be caused by the manual
installation procedures used to connect valves into the experimental setup for each set of data. However, the preliminary data
may serve to highlight the robust properties of the valves over a
modest time period.
In the three different operational fluids, water, microparticle
suspension at ∼24 ± 0.5 ◦ C, and at ∼38 ± 1 ◦ C, the valve displays similar flow characteristics, as shown in Fig. 7. For valve
measurements in water and microparticle solution at ∼24 ◦ C,
the data points nearly overlay each other, while the open valve
in the heated microparticle solution displays a slightly lower fluidic resistance. This latter variation is likely caused by the lower
viscosity expected for the heated fluid (μ(water) ≈ 0.89 mPa·s at
24 ◦ C and ≈ 0.68 mPa·s at 38 ◦ C). On the other hand, PT showed
some variation among the three different working fluids spanning 18–35 mmH2 O, 13–31 mmH2 O, and 12–23 mmH2 O for
water at 24 ◦ C, microparticle suspension at 24 ◦ C, and microparticle suspension at ∼38 ◦ C, respectively. The slightly lower
range (13 and 12 mmH2 O) of valve PT in both microparticle
solutions in contrast to that of water (18 mmH2 O) may be a consequence of the obstruction caused by the introduced particles.
The microparticles may wedge into the crevices of the membrane anchors and obstruct out-of-plane deflection and swelling
of the valve membrane, preventing total closure in the valve’s
closed state. The inability of the valve to maintain the same
height as in the absence of obtrusion, may cause the valve to open
prematurely at lower ΔP. Nevertheless, leakage remains negligible (maximum reverse flow measured ∼–2.5 μL/min which
is also in the range of flowmeter resolution) and this seal capability may be owing to the swelling phenomena that allows
the membrane to expand and fill in crevices at the orifice that
possibly materialize from obstructing microparticles. Between
individual tests, the valve was perfused with the active working
fluid to pressure gradients of −700 < ΔP < 100 for 2–5 min
to allow possible movement of potentially trapped particulates
and/or create opportunities for trapping the particles in the valve.
The valve was also immersed in the microparticle solution over
a few days period and retested to observe possible effects of adsorption. The lower fluidic resistance associated with the valve
altogether used in these tests may be clearly discerned, and this
is due to the larger membrane (b = 1250 μm), and outlet perforation diameters (p = 900 μm) of this particular device. Still, the
microparticle experiments here do not thoroughly epitomize in
vivo reactive and hydrodynamic conditions involving the affinity
of certain CSF proteins and/or other particulates to the hydrogel
membrane and chronic pulsatile ICP fluctuations.
A few technical challenges on the reproducibility of the valves
include release-related stiction between the Si substrate and hydrogel diaphragm and stiction between residual sacrificial PR
and hydrogel diaphragm. For this study, stiction issues were
addressed by short ultrasonic release cycles (≤ 5–30 s) in acetone. However, the ultrasonic process was frequently observed
to damage and/or deform the hydrogel membrane, and, in many

SCHWERDT et al.: MINIATURIZED PASSIVE HYDROGEL CHECK VALVE FOR HYDROCEPHALUS TREATMENT

cases, lead to device failure. Several alternative remedies exist
to overcome these challenges while preventing destructive impact to device performance; potential solutions include changes
in design geometry (i.e., increasing the height of the sacrificial
PR layer and/or increasing the dimensions of the diaphragm
perforations), release methods (i.e., supercritical CO2 drying),
and/or materials (i.e., undercoating hydrogel with lower surface
energy materials, such as parylene and/or chemically treating
the interface between hydrogel and substrate) [27], [28].
Despite the material biocompatibility and biostability of the
two valve materials, silicon and hydrogel, [20], [21], the aspect
of structural biocompatibility may not be satisfactory for implant applications because of the hard silicon substrate and its
potential to scar surrounding tissue. In succeeding designs, the
corners of the silicon substrate will be rounded to lessen potential scarring. To soften the interface of the potential implant
device and relieve mechanical mismatch between the hard silicon substrate and the delicate surrounding cerebral tissues, the
valve substrate may eventually be replaced by a softer material,
such as silicone or PDMS. In its final implantable form, the die
will be mounted into a flexible polymer mold measuring ∼5 mm
in diameter to provide large enough area to suture through and
hold it to the dura. Alternatively, a grommet spanning the dural wall may be installed to hold the device into place and
further secured by flanges inserted at the sinus. The HEMAbased hydrogel is inherently nonbiodegradable [29], assuring
that material degradation is minimal in the long term. However,
accelerated and in vivo testing are still required to ensure that
the hydrogel valve maintains its mechanical properties over the
life time of the patient.
Concerning the use of a fluid absorbing polymer, one potential challenge may involve the retention of old and unreplenished fluid inside the hydrogel membrane that may potentially
cause infection in the long term. On the other hand, bacterial
growth into the hydrogel is unlikely due to the small pore diameters of the HEMA-based hydrogel (2–40 nm) [30]. Studies
have also demonstrated the possibility of modifying hydrogel
compositions to block transport and/or repel potentially harmful
molecules [31].
Another potential concern that may adversely affect the
valve’s performance is the affinity and/or spoliation of proteins
to the hydrogel membrane [32]. In the real operating environment, proteins in CSF may adsorb onto the hydrogel membrane and impact valve operation. Protein adsorption is also
believed to contribute to obstruction in currently implemented
commercial shunts [33], although such beliefs have been disputed by other studies showing virtually no impact caused by
protein content and instead have shown that blood cells have a
more noticeable effect on shunt performance [34]. In any case,
these CSF particulates may generate different surface interactions with the hydrogel valve than the microparticles that were
tested here. The effect of actual CSF particulates on the check
valve’s performance requires in vitro experiments with more
realistic working fluids, which will be performed in the future.
Although most benchtop experiments were performed here
at 24 ◦ C, the valve will operate at a higher body temperature of
37–38 ◦ C, when implanted. This higher temperature may not

819

only impact the flow characteristics of the fluid through the
valve due to the lower viscosity of the warmer liquid environment, but may accelerate physical strain of the hydrogel membrane over the long term. Even though the valves in this study
displayed very little variation in performance in the heated environment (see Fig. 7), potential disturbance or damage may not
be immediately apparent without long-term testing. In regards
to the hydrogel material, it has been shown that temperatures
of up to 40 ◦ C have negligible effect on the adhesion of the
hydrogel material to the silicon substrate [35] and very little
effect on the swelling ratio [36]. In the implanted setting, the
valve will encounter time-varying pulsatile ICP, which may be
mimicked by superposing pressure waves in the experimental
setup [37]. Controlled regularly and randomly intervolved time
and frequency variable pressure waves will be included in future
long-term studies to more accurately emulate the physiological
hydrodynamic environment.
V. CONCLUSION
A miniaturized valve operating at targeted ΔP and QO levels suitable for CSF draining with negligible leakage may
strengthen its potential utility as an alternative HCP treatment
method. The valve is relatively simple in design and fabrication, and only comprises two materials, silicon and hydrogel,
both of which are biocompatible. Experimental data (see Figs.
5–7) demonstrate the valve’s ability to operate within the targeted range of specifications required for application as an HCP
treatment device (see Table II). These preliminary results serve
to substantiate the novel passive hydrogel valve of this study as
well as its potential application to more safely treat HCP. Nevertheless, work remains to further expand on experimental data
to validate the hydrogel valve’s use in clinical fields. Benchtop
testing to characterize its long-term performance and durability
are ongoing. Also, work to increase reproducibility by improving release methods to reduce stiction will further permit a more
accurate characterization of valve fluid flow properties as relates
to its geometry (b, t, p, and d) and hydrogel material composition, which may be used to confirm manual controllability of
PT as well as other flow parameters (i.e., hydraulic resistance,
Rh ). Although CSF possesses nearly identical pH, density, and
viscosity to water, the composition of these two liquids differs
greatly and may affect valve operation. In essence, CSF contains
proteins and blood cells that are often considered to be a major
cause of physical blockages and clogging in standard shunts
used in practice [33]. Future in vitro tests will be performed using blood or similar biologically relevant liquids to analyze the
effect of protein and blood cell content on the performance of
the miniaturized valve. Future work to ensure its reliability and
durability as a permanent medical implant will entail long-term
and in-vivo testing.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Chabrerie and P. M. Black, “Ventricular shunts,” J. Intensive Care
Med., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 218–229, Sep. 2002.
[2] A. Brodbelt and M. Stoodley, “CSF pathways: A review,” Brit. J. Neurosurg., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 510–520, Oct. 2007.

820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

[3] J. M. Drake, J. R. W. Kestle, and S. Tuli, “CSF shunts 50 years on—past,
present, and future,” Childs Nerv. Syst., vol. 16, pp. 10–11, Nov. 2000.
[4] M. Czosnyka, Z. Czosnyka, H. Whitehouse, and J. D. Pickard, “Hydrodynamic properties of hydrocephalus shunts: United Kingdom shunt evaluation laboratory,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 43–
50, Jan. 1997.
[5] J. Oh, G. Kim, F. Kralick, and H. Noh, “Design and fabrication
of a PDMS/parylene microvalve for the treatment of hydrocephalus,”
IEEE/ASME J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 811–818, Aug.
2011.
[6] K. Oh and C. Ahn, “A review of microvalves,” J. Micromech. Microeng.,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. R13–R39, May 2006.
[7] P. J. Chen, D. Rodger, E. Meng, M. Humayun, and Y. Tai, “Surfacemicromachined parylene dual valves for on-chip unpowered microflow
regulation,” IEEE/ASME J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 223–231, Apr. 2007.
[8] J. Tirén, L. Tenerz, and B. Hok, “A batch-fabricated non-reverse valve
with cantilever beam manufactured by micromachining of silicon,” Sens.
Actuators, vol. 18, pp. 389–396, 1989.
[9] D. Kim and D. Beebe, “A bi-polymer micro one-way valve,” Sens. Actuators A, vol. 136, pp. 426–433, 2007.
[10] R. Lo, P. Li, S. Saati, R. N. Agrawal, M. S. Humayan, and E. Meng,
“A passive MEMS drug delivery pump for treatment of ocular diseases,”
Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 11, pp. 959–970, Apr. 2009.
[11] S. Moon, S. Im, J. An, C. J. Park, H. G. Kim, S. W. Park, H. I. Kim,
and J. Lee, “Selectively bonded polymeric glaucoma drainage device for
reliable regulation of intraocular pressure,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 325–335, Apr. 2012.
[12] W. C. Welch, J. Chae, and K. Najafi, “Transfer of metal MEMS packages
using a wafer-level solder transfer technique,” IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag.,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 643–649, Nov. 2005.
[13] S. Lee, G. Nam, J. Chae, H. Kim, and A. J. Drake, “Two-dimensional position detection system with MEMS accelerometer for mouse applications,”
in Proc. Des. Autom. Conf., Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2001, pp. 852–857.
[14] J. Chae, J. Giachino, and K. Najafi, “Wafer-level vacuum package with
vertical feedthroughs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Microelectromech. Syst.,
Miami, FL, USA, 2005, pp. 548–551.
[15] S. Je, F. Rivas, R. Diaz, J. Kwon, J. Kim, B. Bakkaloglu, S. Kiaei, and
J. Chae, “A compact and low-cost MEMS loudspeaker for digital hearing
aids,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 348–358, Oct.
2009.
[16] H. N. Schwerdt, W. Xu, S. Shekhar, A. Abbaspour-Tamijani, B. C. Towe,
F. A. Miranda, and J. Chae, “A fully passive wireless microsystem
for recording of neuropotentials using RF backscattering methods,”
IEEE/ASME J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1119–1130,
Oct. 2011.
[17] K. Najafi and J. Chae, “Micromachined capacitive lateral accelerometer
device and monolithic, three-axis accelerometer having same,” U.S. Patent
6 938 484, Aug. 29, 2006.
[18] Y. Yang and J. Chae, “Miniaturized protein separation using a liquid
chromatography column on a flexible substrate,” J. Micromech. Microeng.,
vol. 18, 125010 (9 pp.), Oct. 2008.
[19] W. Welch III, J. Chae, S. Lee, N. Yazdi, and K. Najafi, “Transient liquid
phase (TLP) bonding for microsystem packaging applications,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Solid-State Sens. Actuators, Jun. 2005, vol. 2, pp. 1350–1353.
[20] J. Montheard, M. Chatzopoulos, and D. Chappard, “2-Hydroxyethyl
methacrylate (HEMA): Chemical properties and applications in biomedical fields,” J. Macromol. Sci. Part C, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 1992.

[21] G. Kotzar, M. Freas, P. Abel, A. Fleischman, S. Roy, C. Zorman,
J. M. Moran, and J. Melzak, “Evaluation of MEMS materials of construction for implantable medical devices,” Biomaterials, vol. 23, no. 13,
pp. 2737–2750, Jul. 2002.
[22] S. Timoschenko, Theory of Plates and Shells. New York, NY, USA:
McGraw-Hill, 1940.
[23] H. Li, T. Y. Ng, Y. K. Yew, and K. Y. Lam, “Modeling and simulation of
the swelling behavior of pH-stimulus-responsive hydrogels,” Biomacromolecules, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 109–120, Oct. 2004.
[24] H. Bruus, Theoretical Microfluidics. New York, NY, USA: Oxford Univ.
Press, 2007.
[25] S. H. Gehrke, G. P. Andrews, and E. L. Cussler, “Chemical aspects of gel
extraction,” Chemical Eng. Sci., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 2153–2160, 1986.
[26] F. Yetkin, U. Kayabas, Y. Ersoy, Y. Bayinder, S. A. Toplu, and I. Tek,
“Cerebrospinal fluid viscosity: A novel diagnostic measure for acute
meningitis,” Southern Med. J., vol. 103, no. 9, pp. 892–895, Sep. 2010.
[27] S. Choi and J. Chae, “Methods of reducing non-specific adsorption in microfluidic biosensors,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 20, 075015 (9 pp.),
May 2010.
[28] C. Hassler, T. Boretius, and T. Stieglitz, “Polymers for neural implants,”
J. Polymer Sci.: Part B: Polymer Phys., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 18–33, Nov.
2010.
[29] Y. S. Casadio, D. H. Brown, T. V. Chirila, H.-B. Kraatz, and M. V. Baker,
“Biodegradation of poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA) and
poly{(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)-co-[poly(ethylene glycol) methyl
ether methacrylate]} hydrogels containing peptide-based cross-linking
agents,” Biomacromolecules, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 2949–2959, Oct. 2010.
[30] D. H. Walther, G. H. Sin, H. W. Blanch, and J. M. Prausnitz, “Pores-size
distributions of cationic 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) hydrogels,” Polymer Gels Netw., vol. 3, pp. 29–45, 1995.
[31] B. D. Krezović, S. I. Dimitrijević, J. M. Filipović, R. R. Nikolić, and
S. Tomić, “Antimicrobial P(HEMA/IA)/PVP semi- interpenetrating network hydrogels,” Polymer Bulletin, vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 809–819, Aug.
2012.
[32] Q. Garrett, B. Laycock, and R. W. Garrett, “Hydrogel lens monomer
constituents modulate protein sorption,” Investigative Ophthalmol. Visual
Sci., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 1687–1695, Jun. 2000.
[33] H. L. Brydon, G. Keir, E. J. Thompson, R. Bayston, R. Hayward, and
W. Harkness, “Protein adsorption to hydrocephalus shunt catheters: CSF
protein adsorption,” J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 64, no. 5,
pp. 643–647, May 1998.
[34] H. L. Brydon, R. Bayston, R. Hayward, and W. Harkness, “The effect of
protein and blood cells on the flow-pressure characteristics of shunts,”
Neurosurgery, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 498–505, Mar. 1996.
[35] M. J. Lesho and N. F. Sheppard, Jr., “Adhesion of polymer films to oxidized silicon and its effect on performance of a conductometric pH sensor,”
Sens. Actuators B, vol. 37, pp. 61–66, Jun. 1996.
[36] A. Quddos, H. U. Rehaman, A. Wadood, S. Sulfiqar, and M. L. Mirza,
“The effect of crosslinking agents on the synthesis and swelling of the
polymer networks,” J. Chemical Soc. Pakistan, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 299–
304, Jul. 2003.
[37] Z. H. Czosnyka, K. Cieslicki, M. Czosnyka, and J. D. Pickard, “Hydrocephalus shunts and waves of intracranial pressure,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 71–77, Jan. 2005.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

