IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

841

Telemetric Intracranial Pressure Monitoring
in Blast-Induced Traumatic Brain Injury
Usmah Kawoos∗ , Member, IEEE, Xu Meng, Member, IEEE, Shi-Min Huang, Student Member, IEEE,
Arye Rosen, Life Fellow, IEEE, Richard M. McCarron, and Mikulas Chavko

Abstract—The long-term monitoring of intracranial pressure
(ICP) is important for the management of acute and chronic neuropathological conditions which include head injury, traumatic
brain injury, hydrocephalus, etc. In this study, we developed an
implantable device for measuring ICP over long periods of time in
an animal model of blast-induced brain injury. The performance
of the device was first evaluated in vitro and subsequently utilized
to measure ICP in rats exposed to blast overpressures. The effects
of blast-induced brain injury on ICP were measured for six days. A
significant difference was observed between the injured group and
the nonexposed control group. ICP in injured animals showed a
biphasic transient increase; an immediate increase within the first
1–3 h and a more gradual elevation occurring two days after the
blast. The ability to monitor changes of ICP continuously over long
periods after brain injury and during the course of treatment may
improve the prognosis after injury and can also serve as a tool in
determining the therapeutic effectiveness of new drugs.
Index Terms—Blast injury, intracranial pressure (ICP), telemetric monitoring, traumatic brain injury (TBI).

I. INTRODUCTION
RAUMATIC brain injury (TBI) initiates a broad range of
complex mechanical and pathophysiological destructive
cascades and hence is associated with high mortality and morbidity rates. In blunt head trauma, primary brain injury results in
focal or diffuse damage. Secondary events inflicted on an already
ravaged brain may be even more detrimental to its function than
the initial insults. The primary aim of the intensive care management of TBI is to prevent or treat secondary ischemic injury
using a complex neuroprotective strategy including maintenance
of cerebral perfusion to meet the brain’s metabolic demands for
oxygen and glucose. Increased intracranial pressure (ICP) is an
important cause of secondary brain injury, and its degree and

T

Manuscript received July 6, 2013; revised October 2, 2013; accepted November 2, 2013. Date of publication November 14, 2013; date of current version
February 14, 2014. This work was supported in part by CDMRP Research Unit
#2780.00000.22.A0810. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ U. Kawoos is with the Department of NeuroTrauma, Operational and Undersea Medicine Directorate, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring,
MD 20910 USA (e-mail: usmahk@gmail.com).
X. Meng and A. Rosen are with the School of Biomedical Engineering,
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: xm26@drexel.edu;
ar86@drexel.edu).
S.-M. Huang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: sh592@drexel.edu).
R. M. McCarron and M. Chavko are with the Department of NeuroTrauma,
Operational and Undersea Medicine Directorate, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, MD 20910 USA (e-mail: richard.mccarron@med.navy.mil;
mikulas.chavko@med.navy.mil).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2291239

duration is associated with outcome after TBI [1]. Since the
brain is encased in a nonexpandable skull, an increase in the
ICP may impede cerebral blood flow (CBF) and lead to cerebral ischemia. The ICP measurement is the most widely used
intracranial monitor because the prevention and control of increased ICP and the maintenance of cerebral perfusion pressure
are the fundamental therapeutic goals after TBI.
A number of ICP measuring modalities have been reported
in the past years which include tethered and tether-less systems;
invasive and noninvasive methods; miniature and sizeable device types; and clinical and nonclinical applications. The tetherless systems have an evident advantage over tethered systems
as they can potentially be used in freely moving animals over
longer periods of time. Long-term ICP measurements with telemetric devices—Neurovent P-Tel and S-Tel, manufactured by
Raumedic, were reported to provide reliable dynamic measurements in minipigs over an 18-month time span [2]. The size of
these devices limits their use to large animals and cannot be implanted in smaller animals including rodent models. Silasi et al.
reported the use of blood pressure transmitters (PA-C10, Data
Sciences Int., St. Paul, MN, USA) for measuring ICP in awake
rats [3]. In their study, the pressure sensing element of the device
was placed in the epidural space. However, it has been widely
suggested that epidural pressure monitoring presents inaccuracies [4]–[7]. In a study which compared epidural pressures
with lumbar pressures [5], the epidural pressure monitoring was
reported to present artifactually high ICP values due to specific characteristics of the epidural intracranial space. This discrepancy was even greater at higher ICP values. The fiberoptic
cerebral pressure sensors like Camino probes (Integra Neurosciences, Plainsboro, NJ, USA) have been in clinical use for
decades [8], but also have shortcomings such as probe dislodgement, infection, need for recalibration, etc. [9]. In animal studies,
Chavko et al. used fiber optic pressure sensors (FISO Technologies, Quebec, Canada) to measure intraventricular pressure in
acute measurement conditions on anesthetized animals [10].
While these probes measure ICP accurately, their inability to
be employed for chronic measurements limits their use in studies of the neuropathophysiology or the efficacy of a treatment.
Among noninvasive ICP measurements, modalities based on
near infra-red spectroscopy [11], transcranial Doppler [12], tympanic membrane displacement [13]–[15], fundoscopy [16], etc.,
were explored. However, these methods are relatively inaccurate
when compared with invasive measures [17] and may not form
a routine alternative to invasive ICP monitoring. Even though
ventriculostomy has risks associated with it due to its invasive
nature, it is deemed to be the gold standard for accurate measurement of ICP.

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

842

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

In this paper, we describe an implant for small animal models
which measures intraventricular pressure over long periods of
time. The device was tested in a model of TBI induced by exposure to blast overpressure (BOP). There is increasing evidence
that blast exposures can cause brain damage [18] by mechanisms
that are not well known. Brain injury due to blast exposure is
known to alter brain dynamics leading to variations in the ICP
similar to other models of TBI, such as compact cortical impact. Our ICP monitoring device was specifically designed and
developed for rodents that are routinely used as animal models
to identify the pathological processes of brain injury [10].
II. DEVICE DESIGN
An analog ICP monitoring device was previously described
in [19] and [20]. This device was comprised of a pressure sensing interface, components to convert pressure measurements
into wirelessly transmittable signal and a power management
circuitry for optimal usage of an embedded battery. The device
was encased in a metal cylinder 12-mm diameter and 10-mm
height with a 4.5-mm conduit at the base. The pressure sensing element was at the bottom of the open end of the conduit
which was placed in the subarachnoid space for subdural pressure measurements. The dimensions of this device are not suitable for a complete implantation of the device in the rat model.
Consequently, the device was modified to accomplish complete
implantation on the rat head for the measurement of intraventricular pressure. The circuitry of this device is trimmed down
to pressure sensing, processing, and transmission at microwave
frequency while the power management circuitry is removed
from the device assembly. The ICP information from the MEMS
capacitive sensor (Murata Electronics, Vantaa, Finland) varies
the oscillation frequency of a 700-kHz Schmitt trigger oscillator
modulating a 2.4-GHz RF oscillator which is coupled to a planar
inverted F antenna. The circuit diagram is shown in Fig. 1(a).
The presentation of a typical frequency characteristic of the device is shown in Fig. 1(b) and the response of the device in time
domain is shown in Fig. 1(c). The pressure sensitive change in
the capacitance of the MEMS sensor alters the modulating frequency of the circuit. The photograph of one of the fabricated
devices is presented in Fig. 1(d). An external power supply is
used which is connected only when the measurements are collected. A cylindrical aluminum/plastic case (8-mm diameter and
6-mm height) with an open nozzle (stainless steel) on one side
(1-mm diameter and 4.5-mm length) was fabricated to contain
the electronics of the device. The power leads emanate from
the device which can be connected to an external power supply,
to provide a regulated voltage of 2.6 V. The pressure sensor is
positioned at the bottom of the case so that the pressure sensitive
membrane remains exposed to the inflow of cerebral spinal fluid
(CSF) through the open nozzle. In order to conduct the CSF up
through the nozzle via capillary action, a pair of holes (0.35-mm
diameter) is drilled at the end of the nozzle 1-mm distal to the
base of the case. The device is designed to have this pair of holes
placed in close proximity to subdural space in order to maintain

Fig. 1. (a) Circuit diagram of ICP monitoring device. (b) Conceptual presentation of the frequency characteristic of the device (ΔP —the change in pressure
and Δf —the change in modulating frequency). (c) Pressure-dependent modulating frequency in time domain [19]. (d) Pictures of the implantable device.

KAWOOS et al.: TELEMETRIC INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE MONITORING IN BLAST-INDUCED TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY

Fig. 2.

843

Photograph of the laboratory shock tube used in our study.

a closed system within the skull. The entire electronics are fully
encapsulated in a medical grade epoxy (EPO-TEK 302–3M,
Epoxy Technology Inc., Billerica, MA, USA) and sealed in the
case with biograde silicone. At the last step of fabrication process, a 2.5-μm parylene coating is applied to maintain integrity
and biocompatibility of the device. The parylene coated power
leads are placed in silastic tubing.
III. METHODS
A. TBI Model
Blast explosions as occur in the real world, such as from
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), can be simulated in a
laboratory by a shock tube. The pressure waves produced by
a shock tube have similar characteristics as the blast profile
of a native blast or IED explosion [21]. The advantage of using a shock tube is that the blast profiles that are generated
in repeated instances are more reproducible than the ones that
are created from explosions. The shock tube used in our study
is a horizontally mounted circular steel tube (12-in diameter
and 19.5-ft length). This tube is divided into a 2.5-ft compression chamber separated from a 17-ft expansion chamber by
one or more polyethylene Mylar sheets (Du Pont Co., Wilmington, DE, USA) of varying thickness, depending upon the
desired peak pressure. Fig. 2 shows the picture of the shock
tube used in our study. The peak pressure at the end of the
expansion chamber was measured by piezo-resistive pressure
gauges (Model 102M152, PCB, Piezotronics, Inc., Depew, NY,
USA) specifically designed for impulse pressure measurements.
Animals were secured to a Plexi-glass platform which was held
firmly inside the expansion chamber, approximately 1 ft from
the open end of the tube and exposed to a single BOP of 110-kPa
intensity [22].

Fig. 3. Details of the ICP monitoring device and pictorial presentation of
implantation in the rat model.

, National Research Council, National Academy Press, 1996 and
was approved by WRAIR/NMRC IACUC Committee.
Male, Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 350–400 g were anesthetized with 4% isoflurane, the site of surgery was shaved and
the animal’s head was secured in a stereotaxic frame while anesthesia was maintained by 1–2% isoflurane. An incision was then
made longitudinally along the dorsal midline of the head, the
skin was retracted, and the fascia was removed by scrubbing
it with cotton tipped applicators. A single 1-mm diameter hole
was drilled for accommodating the nozzle of the device, using
a tapered sterile dental burr with a stereotaxic high speed drill,
positioned 0.9-mm posterior to bregma and 1.5 mm lateral to
midline. The nozzle of the device was inserted through this hole
in the skull with the nozzle’s tip staying approximately 3 mm
below the surface of the skull to reach the lateral ventriclular
space [23]. The base of the device was cemented to the skull
using Loctite 454 adhesive. Skin was pulled over the device
and closed using surgical staples. The power terminals, approximately 5-cm long, were guided via a trocar under the skin to
emerge out through a small incision made at the dorsal surface
of rat. Loctite 454 was used to secure these terminals in an
opening made through a small plastic disc while the disc was
sutured to the incision at by Vicryl 4.0 suture via four equally
spaced holes placed on the rim of the disc. Fig. 3 shows the
device specifications and a pictorial presentation of the device
implanted in rat.

B. Animal Preparation and Device Placement
The experiments reported herein were conducted according
to the principles set forth in the “Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals,” Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources

C. ICP Measurements
The ICP measurements were performed in vitro and in vivo on
a digital oscilloscope (DPO7254, Tektronics, OR). The purpose

844

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

TABLE I
TIMELINE OF ICP MEASUREMENTS

of measuring the devices in vitro was to determine pressure–
frequency calibration characteristics of the device and to ascertain reliable integrity of the device in a liquid medium. In-vitro
tests were done for the same duration, or longer, as that of the invivo study. The method of in-vitro measurements is previously
described in detail in [19]. In-vivo measurements were conducted on lightly anesthetized animals while they were placed
on a warming blanket. ICP measurements were taken prior to
the blast exposure (baseline), on the day of exposure and daily
for five days after the exposure. On the first day of measurements, the performance of the device was checked by observing
a transient increase in ICP induced by Valsalva maneuver (i.e.,
compressing the carotid artery). The ICP was measured in two
groups of animals—those exposed to BOP (n = 4) of 110 kPa
and sham, nonblasted controls (n = 5). The course of events and
timeline of ICP measurements is shown in Table I. The data are
expressed as means ± SE and statistical significance was calculated by two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni posthoc
tests. For the purposes of ANOVA, ICP level was calculated
from four 15-min intervals during the first hour of recording.
IV. RESULTS
A. In-Vitro Calibrations
The in-vitro calibrations were carried out in two steps as
described in [19]. Briefly, the devices were calibrated in dry
conditions at 25 ◦ C followed by wet (in water) conditions over
a range of 30–37 ◦ C. In the first step, the devices were tested for
stability and measurement drift in air. In the second step, these
devices were calibrated in hydrostatic medium at temperatures
closer to the body temperature (36–37 ◦ C) over a period of eight
days. During this period, the integrity of device packaging was
also determined by leaving them immersed in water for the entire
duration. The temperature sensitivity over a range of 30–37 ◦ C
was measured for the devices by varying the water temperature.
The calibration data from wet tests obtained in the range of
physiological body temperatures were used to determine the
pressure values from in-vivo studies. A sample calibration curve
is shown in Fig. 4. The devices which were used in the study
presented here showed a temperature sensitivity of less than
1 mmHg/ ◦ C. The in-vitro zero drift over eight days was found
to be less than 2 mmHg.
B. In-Vivo Studies
ICP was measured continuously in two groups of animals,
controls and those exposed to blast, for 3 h or 1 h daily for seven

Fig. 4. Sample calibration curve obtained for the device in wet tests over a
period of eight days. The data are presented as mean ± SE.

days (see Table I). The Valsalva maneuver (i.e., compressing
the carotid artery) produced a transient increase in ICP and was
performed on each animal to check the proper function of the
device and the placement of conduit in the brain lateral ventriclular space. The baseline measurements showed ICP in the
physiological range (5–10 mmHg) in all animals and remained
stable in the sham-operated, nonblasted control group during the
whole interval of measurement (seven days). Fig. 5 shows ICP
recording from one blast exposed and one control animal. Exposure to blast resulted in biphasic significant increase in ICP. The
first increase occurred immediately or shortly after blast. The
second, delayed and more prolonged ICP increase was observed
on day 2 postblast; it returned to baseline on day 3 (see Fig. 4 ).
The group mean values of ICP for all days of measurement are
presented in Table II.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, we presented an analog implant to study the
long-term ICP dynamics after brain injuries of different origination. The explanted devices were tested in vitro and the performance of the devices was found to be acceptable and matched
similar dry tests carried out with these devices prior to their
in-vivo use. The pressure values shifted by 2.1 ± 0.33 mmHg
when measured from 0–50 mmHg in steps of 5 mmHg. Given
that the devices were calibrated in vitro in wet tests over a range
of 0–50 mmHg, the maximum estimated error in the ICP measurements is 4.86% of the full scale. A few possible sources of
error include: 1) the growth of fibrous material over the pressure
sensing element; 2) the clogging of the device nozzle; and 3)
the damage to the parylene coating during the course of study.
The device was originally designed to be a completely implantable and power sustainable unit for long-term studies in
large animal models. However, redesigning the device to reduce
its dimensions for applicability in small animals required altering the characteristics of being a total implant by the removal of
power supply. In the present design only the power terminals and
power source are not contained inside the body of animal. However, the modified design did not compromise the performance
of the device and a total implant version with an embedded

KAWOOS et al.: TELEMETRIC INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE MONITORING IN BLAST-INDUCED TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY

Fig. 5. Representative ICP recordings (upper part) in a blast-exposed animal
and (bottom part) in control animal. VM: Valsalva maneuver and B: blast. ICP
was measured for 3 h immediately after blast and at postblast days 1–3. At
postblast days 4 and 5, ICP was recorded for 1 h. Each dotted vertical line
represents transition from one day to the next, i.e., the gaps in time series over
seven days of measurement.
TABLE II
CHANGES IN ICP LEVEL IN ANIMALS AFTER EXPOSURE TO BLAST

845

the advantage of requiring a smaller incision and a narrower
burr hole for device implantation. Since the principle of pressure sensing and the device fabrication methods are the same
for these two designs, it is reasonable to assume that the in-vivo
performances of the small and large devices are comparable. In
a canine study [19], the measurements from the device with embedded battery were compared to simultaneous ICP recordings
by Camino pressure transducer; a correlation of 0.95 was found
between the two methods. A more dynamic digital ICP monitoring implant was described by Meng et al. with minimal or no
personnel interruption, that can be controlled remotely and can
measure pressure in unanesthetized pigs [24]. Even though the
digital version of the ICP monitoring device presented by Meng
et al. is an alternative to our device, the large size of the device
makes it unrealistic for small animal models. Moreover, it requires a more invasive implantation procedure than the smaller
device and has higher risks of postsurgical complications and
discomfort. This device was tested in a pig model for two days;
its longer term in-vivo performance in animals was not reported.
Additionally, the authors also pointed out that the digital version requires a longer stabilization period than the analog device
(presented here) after being implanted in the animal.
The biphasic increase in ICP observed in this study is in
agreement with the time course of the ICP increase observed
after closed head injury [25]–[27] and fluid percussion brain
injury [28]. The late rise in ICP is followed by a slow decline
toward control levels, which is reached in about a week [27].
The immediate increase was thought to be vascularly mediated
and was followed by a temporary lowering of the ICP, which
was attributed to the return of vascular control [25]. The late ICP
elevation was accompanied by decreases in CBF and metabolic
rate of oxygen, presumably secondary to brain edema [28], or
other secondary mechanisms of injury [25]. The ICP increased
in a dose-dependent manner, from a control level of 6-mm Hg
up to 15.7-mm Hg after exposure to a 60-kPa blast [18]. While
the initial elevation took place within 30 min after exposure to
60 kPa, it did not appear until after 2 and 6 h for 30 and 10 kPa,
respectively. In all cases, the ICP returned to control levels after
seven days.
In summary, an effective method of monitoring long-term
ICP dynamics in blast-induced TBI was developed and utilized
in rats. The method proved suitable for chronic pressure measurements and determining vital information on the elevation of
ICP and the degree of its subsequent recovery. The application
of our technique can be extended to further explore the effects of
various paradigms of brain injury and also to gauge the efficacy
of therapeutic interventions in a reliable manner.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

power management could be easily used in larger animals. In
addition to being capable of measuring intraventricular pressure
in large as well as small animal models, the present design has

The authors are grateful to Dr. S. Adeeb for her mentorship
in guiding the surgical procedures of this study. They also acknowledge Mr. J. Lankasky for his support in conducting the
experiments. The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy of the Department of
Navy, Department of Defense, of the U.S. Government.

846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

REFERENCES
[1] A. Marmarou, “Increased intracranial pressure in head injury and influence
of blood volume,” J. Neurotrauma, vol. 9, pp. S327–S332, Mar. 1992.
[2] M. Kiefer, S. Antes, S. Leonhardt, M. Schmitt, B. Orakcioglu,
O. W. Sakowitz, and R. Eymann, “Telemetric ICP measurement with the
first CE-approved device: Data from animal experiments and initial clinical experiences,” Acta. Neurochir. Suppl., vol. 114, pp. 111–116, 2012.
[3] G. Silasi, C. L. MacLellan, and F. Colbourne, “Use of telemetry blood
pressure transmitters to measure intracranial pressure (ICP) in freely moving rats,” Curr. Neurovasc. Res., vol. 6, pp. 62–69, Feb. 2009.
[4] L. Salvador, R. Valero, J. Carazo, L. Caral, J. Rios, E. Carrero, J. Tercero,
N. de Riva, P. Hurtado, E. Ferrer, and N. Fabregas, “Pressure inside the neuroendoscope: Correlation with epidural intracranial pressure during neuroendoscopic procedures,” J. Neurosurg. Anesthesiol., vol. 22, pp. 240–
246, Jul. 2010.
[5] M. A. Poca, J. Sahuquillo, T. Topczewski, M. J. Penarrubia, and A. Muns,
“Is intracranial pressure monitoring in the epidural space reliable? Fact
and fiction,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 106, pp. 548–556, Apr. 2007.
[6] P. K. Eide, “Comparison of simultaneous continuous intracranial pressure
(ICP) signals from ICP sensors placed within the brain parenchyma and
the epidural space,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 30, pp. 34–40, Jan. 2008.
[7] J. Zhong, M. Dujovny, H. K. Park, E. Perez, A. R. Perlin, and F. G. Diaz,
“Advances in ICP monitoring techniques,” Neurol. Res., vol. 25, pp. 339–
350, Jun. 2003.
[8] B. A. Gregson, K. Banister, and I. R. Chambers, “Statistics and analysis
of the Camino ICP monitor,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 70,
p. 138, Jan. 2001.
[9] S. Shapiro, R. Bowman, J. Callahan, and C. Wolfla, “The fiberoptic intraparenchymal cerebral pressure monitor in 244 patients,” Surg. Neurol.,
vol. 45, pp. 278–282, Mar. 1996.
[10] M. Chavko, W. A. Koller, W. K. Prusaczyk, and R. M. McCarron, “Measurement of blast wave by a miniature fiber optic pressure transducer in
the rat brain,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 159, pp. 277–281, Jan. 30, 2007.
[11] R. A. Weerakkody, M. Czosnyka, C. Zweifel, G. Castellani, P. Smielewski,
K. Brady, J. D. Pickard, and Z. Czosnyka, “Near infrared spectroscopy
as possible non-invasive monitor of slow vasogenic ICP waves,” Acta.
Neurochir. Suppl., vol. 114, pp. 181–185, 2012.
[12] J. Bellner, B. Romner, P. Reinstrup, K. A. Kristiansson, E. Ryding, and
L. Brandt, “Transcranial doppler sonography pulsatility index (PI) reflects
intracranial pressure (ICP),” Surg. Neurol., vol. 62, pp. 45–51, Jul. 2004.
[13] A. Reid, R. J. Marchbanks, D. M. Burge, A. M. Martin, D. E. Bateman,
J. D. Pickard, and A. P. Brightwell, “The relationship between intracranial
pressure and tympanic membrane displacement,” Br. J. Audiol., vol. 24,
pp. 123–129, Apr. 1990.
[14] S. M. Moss, R. J. Marchbanks, and D. M. Burge, “Long-term assessment
of intracranial pressure using the tympanic membrane displacement measurement technique,” Eur. J. Pediatr. Surg., vol. 1, pp. 25–26, Dec. 1991.
[15] S. Gwer, V. Sheward, A. Birch, R. Marchbanks, R. Idro, C. R. Newton,
F. J. Kirkham, J. P. Lin, and M. Lim, “The tympanic membrane displacement analyser for monitoring intracranial pressure in children,” Childs
Nerv. Syst., vol. 29, pp. 927–933, Jan. 30, 2013.
[16] L. Frisen, “Swelling of the optic nerve head: A staging scheme,” J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 45, pp. 13–18, Jan. 1982.
[17] P. H. Raboel, J. Bartek, Jr., M. Andresen, B. M. Bellander, and B. Romner,
“Intracranial pressure monitoring: Invasive versus non-invasive methods-a
review,” Crit. Care Res. Pract., vol. 2012, p. 950393, 2012.
[18] A. Saljo, B. Svensson, M. Mayorga, A. Hamberger, and H. Bolouri, “Lowlevel blasts raise intracranial pressure and impair cognitive function in
rats,” J. Neurotrauma, vol. 26, pp. 1345–1352, Aug. 2009.
[19] U. Kawoos, M. R. Tofighi, R. Warty, F. A. Kralick, and A. Rosen, “Transscalp evaluation of an intracranial pressure implant at 2.4 GHz,” IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 2356–2365, Oct. 2008.
[20] X. Meng, D. K. Cullen, M. R. Tofighi, and A. Rosen, “Pressure sensing
system for the study of blast-induced traumatic brain injury,” in Proc.
IEEE 37th Annu. Northeast Bioeng. Conf., 2011, pp. 1–2.
[21] J. Mediavilla Varas, M. Philippens, S. R. Meijer, A. C. van den Berg,
P. C. Sibma, J. L. van Bree, and D. V. de Vries, “Physics of IED blast
shock tube simulations for mTBI research,” Front. Neurol., vol. 2, p. 58,
2011.
[22] S. T. Ahlers, E. Vasserman-Stokes, M. C. Shaughness, A. A. Hall,
D. A. Shear, M. Chavko, R. M. McCarron, and J. R. Stone, “Assessment of
the effects of acute and repeated exposure to blast overpressure in rodents:
toward a greater understanding of blast and the potential ramifications for
injury in humans exposed to blast,” Front. Neurol., vol. 3, p. 32, Mar.
2012.

[23] G. Paxinos and C. Watson, The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates—The
New Coronal Set. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2004.
[24] X. Meng, K. Browne, S. M. Huang, D. K. Cullen, M. R. Tofighi, and
A. Rosen, “Dynamic study of wireless intracranial pressure monitoring
of rotational head injury in swine model,” Electron. Lett., vol. 48, no. 7,
pp. 363–364, Mar. 2012.
[25] K. Engelborghs, J. Verlooy, J. Van Reempts, B. Van Deuren, M. Van
de Ven, and M. Borgers, “Temporal changes in intracranial pressure in
a modified experimental model of closed head injury,” J. Neurosurg.,
vol. 89, pp. 796–806, Nov. 1998.
[26] S. Rooker, P. G. Jorens, J. Van Reempts, M. Borgers, and J. Verlooy,
“Continuous measurement of intracranial pressure in awake rats after
experimental closed head injury,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 131, pp. 75–
81, Dec. 30, 2003.
[27] S. Jamali, N. Bodjarian, B. Vigue, J. X. Mazoit, K. Samii, and M. Tadie,
“Increase in the chronically monitored cerebrospinal fluid pressure after
experimental brain injury in rats,” Brain. Inj., vol. 12, pp. 525–536, Jun.
1998.
[28] H. G. Fritz, B. Walter, M. Holzmayr, M. Brodhun, S. Patt, and R. Bauer,
“A pig model with secondary increase of intracranial pressure after severe
traumatic brain injury and temporary blood loss,” J. Neurotrauma, vol. 22,
pp. 807–821, Jul. 2005.

Usmah Kawoos (S’05–M’09) received the B.E. degree in medical electronics from the Visvesvaraya
Technologica University, Belgaum, India, in 2002,
and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA,
USA, in 2007 and 2009, respectively.
She is currently working as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Naval Medical Research Center, Silver
Spring, MD, USA. Her research interests include the
application of microwaves in medicine and the biocompatibility of medical implants.
Dr. Kawoos is a member of the IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques
Society (IEEE MTT-S), the Society of Women Engineers, and the Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society. She is a part of the Technical Program Committee on biological effects and medical applications of RF and microwave. She
was a recipient of a Dean’s Fellowship presented by the School of Biomedical
Engineering, Drexel University (September 2003–November 2005), the Best
Student Poster Award, Research Day, Drexel University College of Medicine
(October 2005), the Lee Smith Fellowship, Drexel University (2006–2007), and
the IEEE MTT-S Graduate Fellowship for Medical Applications (2008).

Xu Meng (S’08–M’13) received the B.E. degree in
electronics and telecommunications and the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering both from the Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2006 and
2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from Drexel University, Philadelphia,
PA, USA, in 2013.
His research interests include the clinical application of microwave and RF in medical implants and
telemedicine.
Dr. Meng is a member of the IEEE Microwave
Theory and Techniques Society (IEEE MTT-S), the Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, the Consumer Electronics Society, and the American
Association for the Advancement of Science. He is a recipient of a Calhoun
Fellowship presented by the School of Biomedical Engineering, Drexel University (September 2008–December 2012), the Provost Fellowship Drexel University (September 2008–September 2010), the National Science Foundation
Fellowship (July 2010), and the IEEE MTT-S Graduate Fellowship for Medical
Application (2011).

KAWOOS et al.: TELEMETRIC INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE MONITORING IN BLAST-INDUCED TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY

Shi-Min Huang (S’12) is currently a junior and
working toward the B.S./M.S. dual degree in electrical engineering at Drexel University, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.
He was selected as a STAR Scholar and worked
under the direction of Dr. Arye Rosen at Drexel
University, in the summer of 2011. He continues
working with Dr. Rosen and is currently involved
in the study of blast-induced traumatic brain injury
and microwave and RF application in biomedical
engineering.
Mr. Huang is a recipient of Dean’s Scholarship presented by Drexel University (September 2010–June 2015). He is a member of Pennoni Honors College,
Drexel University (September 2010–June 2015).

Arye Rosen (M’77–SM’80–LF’92) received the
Master’s degree in engineering from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, the M.Sc. degree in physiology from Jefferson Medical College,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
He, has been involved in research and development
of microwave/millimeter-wave devices and circuits,
microwave optical interaction, high-power semiconductor lasers, and the utilization of energies for application in therapeutic medicine for the past 40 years, currently holds an appointment as Academy Professor of biomedical and electrical engineering in
the School of Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems and Associate Vice Provost for strategic initiatives at Drexel University, Philadelphia,
PA, USA. He also holds the title of Associate in Medicine at Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, USA, where he has been engaged in research in
the Division of Cardiology since 1970. He has authored more than 200 technical papers, coedited two books: High-Power Optically Activated Solid-State
Switches (Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1993), and New Frontiers in Medical Device Technology (New York: Wiley, 1995), coauthored the book entitled,
RF/Microwave Interaction with Biological Tissues (New Jersey: Wiley 2006),
and authored six book chapters in the field of engineering and medicine. He
holds more than 60 U.S. patents in the fields of engineering and medicine.
Dr. Rosen is an elected member of the National Academy of Engineering,
“For contributions to microwave and laser technologies and the medical applications of these technologies.” (2002). He is an elected member of The Franklin
Institute’s Committee on Science and the Arts (2003), and a member of the John
Scott Award Advisory Committee, City of Philadelphia Board of Directors of
City Trusts (2004). He was IEEE Distinguished Microwave Lecturer from 1997
to 2000, during which time he has presented his and the work of others in
the U.S., Japan, Europe, and the Middle East. He is the recipient of numerous
awards, including the IEEE MTTS Microwave Career Award (May 2010), the
IEEE Third Millennium Medal (January 2000), and an IEEE Microwave Application Award (June 2000). He was also the recipient of a 1989 IEEE Region
One Award and a 1997 Drexel University College of Engineering, Electrical
and Computer Engineering Department, Distinguished Alumni Award.

847

Richard M. McCarron received the Master’s degree
in microbiology and chemistry and the Ph.D. degree
in imminology and biochemistry from the University
of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.
He is currently Head of the Trauma and Resuscitative Medicine Department, Naval Medical Research Center (NMRC), Silver Spring, MD, USA.
He has a joint appointment in the Department of
Surgery, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA. He has more than
25 years’ experience as a Research Scientist at the
NIH and NMRC. His expertise is in the basic and clinical neurosciences of ischemia/reperfusion injury and the pathophysiological responses to hemorrhage
and trauma. His early research explored pathogenic mechanisms associated with
blood–brain barrier disruption and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, as well as the initiation and progression of ischemia-mediated brain damage
associated with stroke. He is currently the Principal Investigator on several
projects aimed at development, test, and evaluation of technologies that will
enhance the safety, performance, and deployment readiness of Navy and Marine Corps personnel. Recent efforts are characterizing pulmonary and CNS
injury following blast exposure. The operational medicine component of these
research efforts focuses on emergent military issues, such as traumatic brain
injury (TBI) induced by blast overpressure. Other efforts are evaluating novel
hemostasis strategies including testing of militarily relevant dressings and recombinant factor VIIa as a hemostatic agent in severe hemorrhage and in TBI.
He is also engaged in evaluating and developing multifunctional blood substitutes for field resuscitation of casualties with severe hemorrhage with or without
TBI. The envisioned resuscitation fluid will incorporate oxygen carrying capacity (hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers), procoagulant, antiinflammatory, and
antiredox properties. These efforts are acutely relevant to combat injuries from
improvised explosive devices. In addition, he is active in undersea medicine
research, studying the molecular and immunological mechanisms associated
with hyperbaric oxygen toxicity and acclimation to rapid decompression, the
mechanisms of which may converge with some aspects of blast injury.
Dr. McCarron has received the NIH meritorious Service Award for research
in the field of ischemia-mediated pathology, is a two-time recipient of The
Cynthia Clarke Career Builder award, is a recipient of the US Army Medical
Research and Material Command Combat Casualty Care Research Award for
Excellence in 2008, and was the NMRC Senior Scientist of the Year in 2002 and
2007. He is well published in the peer-reviewed literature and has also published
several invited chapters and symposia.

Mikulas Chavko received the Master’s degree in
physical chemistry from Czech Technical University in Prague and the Ph.D. degree in biochemistry
from the University of Veterinary Medicine in Kosice,
Czechoslovakia.
He had been involved in research related to mechanisms of ischemic brain and spinal cord damage at
Slovak Academy of Sciences as a Principal Investigator and Department Head. He received a fellowship
from American Heart Association to study ischemic
brain damage at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Later, he received an associateship from the National Research
Council, Washington, DC, USA, and became a Principal Investigator at the
Naval Medical Research Institute in Bethesda, MD, USA, to study mechanisms
of hyperbaric brain O2 toxicity. Several years ago he initiated and established
research related to lung and brain injury as a result of exposure to blast overpressure at the Naval Medical Research Center (NRMC), Silver Spring, MD, USA.
Currently, he serves as a Principal Investigator and Head of Blast Research at
the Neurotrauma Department at the NMRC. He is an author of one monography
and more than 100 articles in scientific journals. He was invited to present his research to numerous domestic and international meetings. He received grants and
funding for his studies from Office of Naval Research, Arlington, VA, USA, and
Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program, Frederick, MD, USA.

