IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

821

Maximum-Likelihood Estimation for Indicator
Dilution Analysis
Maarten P. J. Kuenen∗ , Ingeborg H. F. Herold, Hendrikus H. M. Korsten, Jean J. M. C. H. de la Rosette,
Hessel Wijkstra, and Massimo Mischi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Indicator-dilution methods are widely used by many
medical imaging techniques and by dye-, lithium-, and thermodilution measurements. The measured indicator dilution curves are
typically fitted by a mathematical model to estimate the hemodynamic parameters of interest. This paper presents a new maximumlikelihood algorithm for parameter estimation, where indicator dilution curves are considered as the histogram of underlying transittime distribution. Apart from a general description of the algorithm, semianalytical solutions are provided for three well-known
indicator dilution models. An adaptation of the algorithm is also introduced to cope with indicator recirculation. In simulations as well
as in experimental data obtained by dynamic contrast-enhanced
ultrasound imaging, the proposed algorithm shows a superior parameter estimation accuracy over nonlinear least-squares regression. The feasibility of the algorithm for use in vivo is evaluated
using dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasound recordings obtained
with the purpose of prostate cancer detection. The proposed algorithm shows an improved ability (increase in receiver-operating
characteristic curve area of up to 0.13) with respect to existing
methods to differentiate between healthy tissue and cancer.
Index Terms—Maximum likelihood estimation, physiology, ultrasonography.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE use of indicator- or tracer-dilution methods for hemodynamic quantification in clinical applications has a long

Manuscript received August 7, 2013; revised October 17, 2013; accepted
November 3, 2013. Date of publication November 11, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. This work was supported by the Dutch Technology
Foundation (STW). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. P. J. Kuenen is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven
University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands and also with
the Department of Urology, Academic Medical Center University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands (e-mail: m.p.j.kuenen@tue.nl).
I. H. F. Herold and H. H. M. Korsten are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven,
The Netherlands and also with the Department of Anesthesiology,
Catharina Hospital, 5623 EJ Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: ingeborg.
herold@catharinaziekenhuis.nl; erik.korsten@catharinaziekenhuis.nl).
J. J. M. C. H. de la Rosette is with the Department of Urology, Academic
Medical Center University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands (e-mail: j.j.delarosette@amc.uva.nl).
H. Wijkstra is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands and
also with the with the Department of Urology, Academic Medical Center
University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands (e-mail:
h.wijkstra@amc.uva.nl).
M. Mischi is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven
University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
m.mischi@tue.nl).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2290375

history [1]. After injection of an indicator into the bloodstream,
an indicator dilution curve (IDC) can be obtained by measurement of the indicator concentration at a desired location downstream as function of time. Hemodynamic parameters of clinical
interest can be extracted from IDCs.
Indicator-dilution methods are used in a wide variety of clinical applications. Many techniques were first introduced for cardiovascular quantification, mainly for assessment of cardiac output and blood volumes [1]. The original techniques for IDC measurement, such as dye- and thermodilution, have the drawback
of being invasive and requiring patient catheterization [2], [3].
Nowadays, minimally-invasive imaging techniques, such as ultrasound [4], magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [5], scintigraphy [6], and computed tomography [7], are also available.
Their development has led to a wider spectrum of clinical applications, such as detection of ischemia, e.g., in the brain and
the myocardium [8], [9]. In other application areas, such as
oncology, indicator-dilution methods are used for detection of
angiogenesis [5], [10], [11].
The assessment of clinically relevant hemodynamic parameters from IDCs is based on modeling and analysis of the indicator transport kinetics. The first pass of an intravascular indicator
can be represented by mathematical models that describe the
distribution of indicator transit-times. Apart from providing a
stochastic interpretation, several widely adopted models also
offer a physiological representation of the hemodynamic phenomena. In fact, the first model proposed by Hamilton et al. [3]
describes the indicator washout from a single compartment.
More recent models, such as the local density random walk
(LDRW) model [12], [13], the lognormal model [14]–[16], and
the gamma-variate model [17], [18], provide a physiological
interpretation for the complete distribution of transit-times.
In many applications, estimation of the hemodynamic parameters of interest is performed by fitting of the IDCs to one of
these models. Nonlinear least-squares (NLS) regression is typically adopted for IDC model fitting [19], as it is well known that,
in the case of additive white noise, this algorithm provides the
maximum-likelihood (ML) estimates for the model parameters.
However, IDC noise is not always well described by additive
white noise [20]–[22]. As a result, NLS regression may not be
the optimal method for IDC parameter estimation.
This paper describes an alternative algorithm based on ML
estimation. The stochastic nature of IDC models is exploited
by considering the IDC as the observed histogram of indicator transit-times. The statistical properties of this histogram are
derived. ML parameter estimation is performed by finding the
parameter values that have the highest likelihood of producing

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

the measured transit-time histogram. Apart from a general description of the algorithm, model-specific solutions for the
LDRW, lognormal, and gamma-variate models are obtained.
In addition, a modification of the algorithm is proposed to cope
with the common problem of indicator recirculation.
The performance of the proposed ML algorithm is compared to that of NLS regression in simulations and in IDCs
measured in vitro by dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasound
(DCE-US) imaging. The feasibility of the algorithm in vivo
is also shown based on DCE-US data obtained from the prostate
microcirculation.

20
Number of indicator particles C(n)

822

Simulated IDC
LDRW fit, NLS
LDRW fit, ML

15

10

5

0
100

200

300
400
Time step n

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Statistics of Indicator Transit-Time Distributions
An IDC describes the indicator concentration as a function
of time at a fixed location downstream, after injection of an
indicator bolus upstream. Common models adopted to describe
these IDCs, e.g., the LDRW, lognormal, and gamma-variate
models, are probability distributions p(t|θ) that represent the
distribution of indicator transit-times between the injection and
the detection sites. The model-specific parameter vector θ defines the IDC shape and, for these three models, offers a direct
physiological interpretation of the indicator transport kinetics
as well [12], [15], [18].
By interpreting an IDC as a transit-time distribution p(t|θ),
indicator particles are expected to appear at the detection site
at time t with probability p(t|θ). The measured transit-time of
each indicator particle provides an observation of p(t|θ).
In reality, however, the transit-times of individual particles
cannot be measured. Ideally, a measured IDC provides the
amount of observed indicator particles C at N discrete-time
samples n with time step Δt. Hence, the measured IDC C(n) is
the observed histogram of p(t|θ) based on a total of K transittime observations. If these observations are independent, the
probability that k particles are observed at time n is given by
the binomial distribution as
 
K
P {C(n) = k} =
p(nΔt|θ)k (1 − p(nΔt|θ))K −k . (1)
k

500

600

Fig. 1. IDC simulation obtained as histogram of 2000 randomly LDRWdistributed transit-times. The fits based on NLS regression and ML estimation
are also shown.

sity [20], a correlation that cannot be explained by a standard
additive noise model.
The instantaneous signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the IDC is
given as
SNR(n) =

p(nΔt|θ)
(E{C(n)})2
=K
.
Var{C(n)}
1 − p(nΔt|θ)

(4)

Because the SNR relates linearly to the total number of indicator particles K, K can be used to control the SNR in IDC
simulations. The SNR is also influenced by the IDC shape: it is
relatively high in narrow IDCs that have relatively high values
of p(nΔt|θ) for only few samples.
B. ML Estimation
Based on the indicator transit-time statistics, we propose an
algorithm for ML estimation of the parameter vector θ. Given the
observed transit-times t(k) of K observed indicator particles, we
can evaluate the likelihood L(θ) of the IDC model parameters.
If we assume independence of the transit-times of indicator
particles, we have
L(θ) =

K


p(t(k)|θ).

(5)

k =1

An example of a simulated IDC based on (1) is shown in Fig. 1.
The expectation and the variance of (1) are given as
E{C(n)} = Kp(nΔt|θ)
Var{C(n)} = Kp(nΔt|θ)(1 − p(nΔt|θ)).

(2)
(3)

The expectation E{C(n)} resembles the model IDC; the variance Var{C(n)} represents the fluctuation of the amount of
indicator particles and can be considered as noise for the purpose of IDC fitting.
If the transit-time distribution is sampled by a sufficient number of time samples, such that p(nΔt|θ)  1, the variance
approximates the expectation. As a result, the noise power is
proportional to the signal amplitude. This relation, which can
also be appreciated in Fig. 1, may explain the previously observed correlation between IDC amplitude and IDC noise inten-

The ML solution of the parameters θ is found by maximizing
L(θ). In practice, ln (L(θ)) is often maximized, because the
logarithm is a monotonic function that transforms the product
into a more simple sum. A logarithmic transformation of (5)
yields
ln (L(θ)) =

K


ln (p(t(k)|θ)) .

(6)

k =1

As already discussed, the individual transit-times t(k) are unknown in reality. The transit-time histogram C(n) is obtained
instead. We can rewrite (6) in terms of C(n) by grouping all
particles that are sampled at the same time sample n as
ln (L(θ)) =

N

n =1

C(n) ln (p(nΔt|θ)) .

(7)

KUENEN et al.: MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION FOR INDICATOR DILUTION ANALYSIS

N
∂ ln (L(θ)) 
∂p(nΔt|θ)/∂θ
= 0.
=
C(n)
∂θ
p(nΔt|θ)
n =1

(8)

The obtained result can be used to find the ML estimate θ̂M L in
an iterative numerical optimization scheme. Because p(nΔt|θ)
is a probability distribution that integrates to 1, the area under
the IDC (AUC) cannot be included in the preceding analysis.
After determination of the IDC shape parameters, AUC can be
estimated as the linear scale factor between the measured IDC
C(n) and the fit p(nΔt|θ̂M L ) by, e.g., linear regression.
For three specific IDC models, a partially analytical solution
can be derived. As an example, this derivation is provided for
the LDRW model in the following section. The derivations for
the lognormal and gamma-variate models, which are similar to
those for the LDRW model, are reported in the Appendix.
1) Application to the LDRW Model: The LDRW model provides both a stochastic and a physiological interpretation for
the transit-time distribution. The model can be derived from
a discrete 1-D random walk process [23] and is also an analytical solution of the convective diffusion equation for the
1-D case [12], [24]. The adopted boundary conditions represent
a rapid injection and indicator mass conservation. Adopting a
modified parameterization θ = [μ, κ, t0 ] [25], the distribution of
transit-times is given as



κ (t − t0 − μ)2
κ
exp −
. (9)
p(t|θ) =
2π(t − t0 )
2(t − t0 )
In (9), μ represents the mean transit time (MTT), κ is a skewness
parameter related to the dispersion of the indicator bolus through
the circulation, and t0 represents the injection time. The LDRW
model has been shown to accurately represent IDCs obtained
by DCE-US in different applications, such as for cardiovascular
quantification [13], [20] and for analysis of the microcirculation
[26]. The model parameter κ has shown a promising value for
detection of abnormalities in the microcirculation that are related
to cancer [25].
To derive the ML solution for the LDRW model, the model
in (9) is differentiated with respect to θ as


∂p(t|θ)
μ
= p(t|θ) · κ 1 −
(10a)
∂μ
t − t0


(t − t0 − μ)2
∂p(t|θ)
1 1
= p(t|θ) ·
−
(10b)
∂κ
2 κ
t − t0


∂p(t|θ)
1
κμ2
1
= p(t|θ) ·
−
. (10c)
κ+
∂t0
2
t − t0
(t − t0 )2
We can insert (10) into (8) to obtain the equations that satisfy
the ML solution for the LDRW model as

N 

μ
1−
C(n) = 0 (11a)
nΔt − t0
n =1

16
IDC
LDRW fit, NLS
LDRW fit, ML
Truncation time 19.3 s

14
Acoustic intensity [a.u.]

In (7), the sum acts on the time samples n rather than on the
particles k. The likelihood function (7) equals the correlation
between the measured IDC and the logarithm of the adopted IDC
model. By differentiation of (7) with respect to θ and equating
it to zero, the ML solution for θ can be obtained. This yields

823

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

0

10

20

30

40
Time [s]

50

60

70

Fig. 2. IDC obtained in vivo by DCE-US, in which the tail of the transit-time
distribution cannot be observed due to indicator recirculation. Also shown are
LDRW model fits based on NLS regression and ML, obtained after truncation
of the IDC.
N 

1
n =1

μ2
− (nΔt − t0 ) + 2μ −
κ
nΔt − t0

N 


κ+

n =1

κμ2
1
−
nΔt − t0
(nΔt − t0 )2


C(n) = 0 (11b)

C(n) = 0. (11c)

In (11a), we have used the fact that κ is strictly positive. From
(11a) and (11b), the ML estimates for μ and κ can be obtained
as
	N
C(n)
(12a)
μ̂M L = 	Nn =1 C (n )
n =1 n Δ t−t 0


	
κ̂M L =

N
n =1 (nΔt − t0 )C(n)
	N
n =1 C(n)

−1
− μ̂M L

.

(12b)

We were not able to find an analytical solution for tˆ0 ,M L . If
this parameter is already known, its value can be inserted into
(12) to obtain a completely analytical ML solution. If t0 is unknown, its ML estimate can be obtained by numerically solving
(11c) after substitution of κ and μ by their ML solutions given
in (12). As a result, the ML parameter estimation problem is significantly less complex than conventional nonlinear regression
methods, because iterative optimization is only required for a
single parameter.
2) ML and Recirculation: A common issue in IDC analysis
is recirculation, i.e., subsequent passages of the indicator bolus
that overlap with the tail of the first-pass IDC. As a result, only
a limited part of the tail of the transit-time distribution can be
observed, as shown in Fig. 2.
Typically, the IDC is truncated by discarding the time segment
featuring recirculation from the analysis. Parametric curvefitting is then applied on the truncated IDC [20]. This approach
cannot easily be applied for the proposed ML algorithm, because truncation affects the transit-time distribution that can be
observed.
After truncating the IDC at time tTr = nTr Δt, the transittime distribution p(t|θ) is no longer completely sampled: transittimes beyond the truncation time tTr cannot be observed. Instead

824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

of the original distribution, the truncated transit-time distribution is observed. This is given as
⎧
p(nΔt|θ)
⎪
⎪
, n ≤ nTr
⎪
nTr
⎨
p(nΔt|θ)
pTr (nΔt|θ, nTr ) =
.
(13)
⎪
⎪
n =1
⎪
⎩
0,
n > nTr
In (13), the scaling term in the denominator ensures that
pTr (nΔt|θ, nTr ) integrates to 1, in order to properly define it as
a probability distribution.
The log-likelihood based on the truncated transit-time distribution can be expressed similar to (7) as
nTr


ln (LTr (θ)) =

C(n) ln (p(nΔt|θ))

n =1

− . . . ln

n
Tr

n =1

n
Tr

p(nΔt|θ)
C(n). (14)
n =1

The derivative of (14) with respect to θ is given as
n

Tr

∂ ln (LTr (θ))
∂p(nΔt|θ)/∂θ
=
C(n)
∂θ
p(nΔt|θ)
n =1

	n T r
nTr

=1 ∂p(nΔt|θ)/∂θ
C(n). (15)
− . . . n	
nTr
n =1 p(nΔt|θ)
n =1

The previous semianalytical solutions for the shape parameters,
as given in (12a) and (12b), do not represent the ML solution in
the case of truncation. For this reason, iterative optimization is
adopted to maximize (14). An example IDC model fit obtained
by this procedure is shown in Fig. 2. Similar to the original
algorithm, the parameter AUC is not included in this analysis,
but estimated afterward by linear regression with the fitted IDC.
3) Implementation: All proposed parameter estimation
methods were implemented in MATLAB (The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA), with the routine mle. For NLS regression, the
routine lsqcurvefit was adopted. In both cases, iterative optimization was performed with the built-in trust-region algorithm [27].
In all cases, the parameter t0 was considered unknown. For all
iterative optimization algorithms, parameter initialization was
performed as follows. The parameter t0 was initialized at 2 s
before the appearance time, which represents the time at which
indicator particles are first observed. The two shape parameters
were then initialized using the semianalytical ML algorithm
described in Section II-B1 and the Appendix. Finally, AUC was
initialized by linear regression as the linear scale factor between
the obtained IDC and the initialized IDC.
To prevent	
numerical issues, a lower bound of 0.5 was adopted
r
p(nΔt|θ) in (14). This lower bound implies
for the term nn T=1
that, after truncation, the remaining time samples cover at least
half of the original transit-time distribution.
C. Simulation Study
A simulation study was performed to test the proposed ML
algorithm. Simulated IDCs were derived as the observed his-

togram of transit-times, based on random sampling of the
transit-time distribution p(t|θ) as described in Section II-A.
The adopted time step was 0.1 s. An example of a simulated
IDC is shown in Fig. 1. Simulations were performed with both
K = 2 · 103 and K = 5 · 103 , which resulted in an SNR of 9
and 13 dB, respectively. These SNR values are in line with those
obtained in experimental data.
In this study, simulated IDCs were generated for three models,
each using ten different values for the two IDC shape parameters
within the following range:
1) LDRW model: κ ∈ [0.1, 1], μ ∈ [10, 40].
2) Lognormal model: μ ∈ [2, 3.5], σ ∈ [0.2, 1].
3) Gamma-variate model: α ∈ [4, 12], β ∈ [1, 4].
The parameter range was selected to represent IDCs with
MTTs ranging between approximately 10 and 40 s. For each
parameter combination, 25 simulated IDCs were obtained. In
total, 2500 IDCs were simulated for each model.
All simulated IDCs were fitted by the proposed ML algorithm, as well as by NLS regression. The performance of both
parameter estimation methods was evaluated by the bias and
standard deviation of the estimated parameters, relative to their
true values. This choice was motivated by the wide range of
adopted parameter values. In addition, we evaluated the fitting
accuracy by the determination coefficient R2 and the required
computation time for all algorithms.
The same IDCs were used to evaluate the parameter estimation performance in case of truncation. The optimal truncation
time generally depends on the application. In this study, we
adopted a cutoff percentage of 30%, i.e., at tTr , the model IDC
has decayed to 30% of its peak value [23].
In addition, we investigated the variation in the parameter
estimates with respect to the cutoff percentage by performing
parameter estimation with cutoff percentages ranging between
20% and 40%. The relative standard deviation (expressed as a
percentage of the mean) among the parameter estimates obtained
with different cutoff percentages was evaluated to measure this
variation.
D. Experimental Validation
An experimental validation of the proposed algorithm was
performed using DCE-US imaging. An in vitro setup was constructed at the Catharina Hospital (Eindhoven, The Netherlands). The setup, which is schematically shown in Fig. 3, consisted of an open network of tubes, in which flow was generated by a centrifugal pump (Medtronic 550 bio-console, Minneapolis, MN, USA). A 0.2 mL SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italy)
ultrasound-contrast-agent bolus was diluted in 20 mL of saline
and subsequently injected into the flow network, which was
kept open to avoid recirculation. The hydrostatic pressure was
stabilized at the output.
Cross-sectional ultrasound B-mode images were obtained directly before and after the tube network with an iE33 ultrasound
imaging system (Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA) and
a transesophageal X7-2t probe. Harmonic imaging was applied
(2.7–5.4 MHz) at a mechanical index of 0.2. From the obtained
image sequences, linearized acoustic time-intensity curves were

KUENEN et al.: MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION FOR INDICATOR DILUTION ANALYSIS

825

Acoustic intensity [a.u.]

200

150

100

50

0

Fig. 3.

IDC from ROI 1 (1.81 mm )
LDRW fit, NLS
LDRW fit, ML

40

50

Schematic overview of the in vitro setup.

60

70
Time [s]

80

90

100

Fig. 5. Experimentally obtained IDC as well as LDRW model fits based on
NLS regression and ML.

Fig. 4. DCE-US image and acoustic time-intensity curve quantification using
QLAB. In the top part, the two tubes for the inflow (left) and outflow (right) of
contrast agents are visible. The curves shown in the bottom part are sampled
from square ROIs in the top right of the image. The ROI size is indicative of
the SNR; the blue IDC, which is least noisy, is sampled from thelargest ROI,
whereas the noisy teal IDC is sampled from the smallest ROI.

obtained using QLAB acoustic quantification software (Philips
Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA), as shown in Fig. 4.
To avoid the influence of the injection function on our analysis, only the outflow curves were considered in this study. Fig. 4
also shows five square regions of interest (ROIs) of different
sizes (from 1.81 to 35.4 mm2 ) from which the acoustic timeintensity curves were sampled. The curves in Fig. 4 indicate
a correlation between the ROI size and the SNR of the curve.
The average SNR, obtained based on the fit with the smallest
mean squared error, ranged from 7 dB for the smallest ROI to
14 dB for the largest ROI. Because the number of observed
indicator particles K is approximately proportional to the ROI
size, this observed correlation between ROI size and SNR can
be explained by (4).
For a direct application of indicator dilution theory on the
acoustic time-intensity curves, the relation between contrastagent concentration and measured acoustic intensity must be
linear. For low concentrations and low mechanical index, a linear

relation was established by several researchers [20], [25], [28].
As a result, acoustic time-intensity curves may be interpreted
directly as IDCs.
Parameter estimation was performed by both ML and NLS
using IDCs obtained from 79 experiments, which were performed with four different volumes between 356 and 890 mL
and at six different flow values ranging from 1 to 4 L/min. As
a result, IDCs were obtained for a wide range of parameter values, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5. In a few curves, the presence
of air bubbles resulted in a few noisy samples. To prevent these
from affecting the parameter estimation, all IDCs were median
filtered with order three prior to curve-fitting.
Because the true values of the parameters were not available, an indirect method was adopted to evaluate the parameter
estimation performance. Since the IDCs were sampled from
concentric ROIs (see Fig. 4), we expected the associated true
parameter values to be constant across the ROIs. Consequently,
we considered the variation among the parameter estimates obtained from different ROIs as an indirect error metric. The determination coefficient R2 was adopted to evaluate the overall
quality of curve-fitting. The analysis was performed using the
complete IDC for fitting, and also after discarding the IDC tail
(≤ 30% of the peak value). Furthermore, the sensitivity of the
estimated parameters with respect to the cutoff percentage was
evaluated as described in Section II-C.
E. In Vivo Evaluation
The feasibility of the proposed algorithm for in vivo use was
evaluated with IDCs obtained by DCE-US imaging of the human
prostate with the purpose of cancer detection. Cancer detection
has been investigated using various imaging modalities, such as
DCE-US and dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI [5], [10], [11],
[29], [30], and is based on detection of microvascular changes
related to angiogenesis and, therefore, to cancer growth.
This study was performed at the Academic Medical Center University Hospital (Amsterdam, The Netherlands) after
approval was granted by the local ethics committee; written
informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to this
study. 17 DCE-US datasets were obtained from nine patients
who underwent radical prostatectomy.

826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Cancer [5x5mm ROI]
35
IDC
LDRW fit, NLS
LDRW fit, ML
Truncation time 18.7 s

Acoustic intensity [a.u.]

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
−5

0

10

20

30

40
Time [s]

50

60

70

80

wash-in time (WIT, the time it takes for the IDC to rise from
5% to 95% of PI).
The tissue classification performance was assessed for each
individual parameter using a binary decision threshold. This
threshold was shifted over the observed range of parameter values in healthy tissue and cancer. At each threshold level, the
sensitivity and specificity for tissue classification were evaluated to derive the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve.
The area under the ROC curve was adopted to measure the tissue classification performance [32]. The optimal sensitivity and
specificity were determined as the point on the ROC curve closest to ideal classification. A comparison was performed between
the parameter estimates obtained by NLS and those obtained by
ML.

Healthy tissue [5x5mm ROI]
10

Acoustic intensity [a.u.]

III. RESULTS

IDC
LDRW fit, NLS
LDRW fit, ML
Truncation time 31.9 s

8
6

A. Simulation Study

4
2
0
−2

0

10

20

30

40
Time [s]

50

60

70

80

Fig. 6. Top: IDCs obtained in vivo from cancer and bottom: healthy tissue.
LDRW model fits based on NLS regression and ML are also shown, as well as
the truncation time.

Data acquisition was performed using an iU22 ultrasound
imaging system (Philips Healthcare, Bothell, WA, USA) and
either a C8-4v or C10-3v transrectal probe. The adopted imaging mode was power modulation, at a frequency of 3.5 MHz
and a mechanical index of 0.06. In each DCE-US dataset, two
IDCs were obtained by QLAB from square ROIs (5 × 5 mm).
The ROIs were selected based on the histology ground truth to
represent healthy tissue and cancer.
All obtained IDCs were fitted by the LDRW model, using
both ML and NLS, as shown in Fig. 6. Because the optimal
truncation time is generally difficult to define in these data, all
IDCs were fitted using three truncation times, with recirculation
cutoff percentages of 30%, 40%, and 50%, respectively. The
optimal truncation time was selected based on the minimum
mean squared error, averaged between ML and NLS, of the IDC
fit. The determination coefficient R2 was adopted to measure
the quality of the obtained IDC fits.
A number of features were extracted from the fitted IDCs in
order to evaluate their potential to discriminate between healthy
tissue and cancer. We adopted several features that were proposed in the literature [25], [26], [31], namely, the LDRW parameter κ, the parameter AUC, the peak intensity (PI), the fullwidth at half maximum (FWHM, the period during which the
IDC exceeds PI/2), the mean transit time (MTT = μ), and the

An example of curve-fitting using both NLS and ML is shown
in Fig. 1. No significant difference in curve-fitting accuracy
was observed between NLS and ML. For K = 2 · 103 , both
algorithms fitted the complete IDC with R2 = 0.87 and the
truncated IDC (cutoff percentage 30%) with R2 = 0.80. For
K = 5 · 103 , these statistics were 0.94 and 0.90, respectively.
The average computation time required to fit one IDC
was evaluated on a Windows-based workstation with an Intel Core2Duo processor running at 3.16 GHz with 3.49 GB of
RAM. The required computation time for NLS was 0.035 s. For
the ML algorithm, the average computation time was 0.032 s
for estimation based on the complete IDC, as described in Section II-B1 and the Appendix, and 0.055 s for estimation based
on the truncated IDC, as described in Section II-B2.
For each parameter, the estimation accuracy was evaluated by
the relative bias and standard deviation with respect to the true
values. Table I reports the results for a complete as well as for
a truncated IDC fitting. In general, the ML algorithm provided
higher estimation accuracy than NLS.
The sensitivity of the parameter estimation with respect to
the recirculation cutoff percentage is reported in Table II. For
all parameters, ML provided more consistent results than NLS.
B. Experimental Validation
Experimental IDCs were obtained from five ROIs in 79 available recordings. Due to the presence of artifacts in some recordings, we considered only those recordings that could be fitted
with an average determination coefficient R2 ≥ 0.9 (averaged
across all ROIs, both algorithms, and all IDC models). Based on
this criterion, the parameter estimation precision by NLS and
ML was compared using 71 recordings.
Fitting of the IDCs obtained from these recordings provided
an average R2 (across all models) of 0.94 for ML, compared
to 0.95 for NLS. If the IDC was truncated at a recirculation
cutoff percentage of 30%, the average R2 was 0.92 for both
algorithms.
The precision of the estimated parameters, assessed as the relative standard deviation among the parameter values estimated

KUENEN et al.: MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION FOR INDICATOR DILUTION ANALYSIS

827

TABLE I
ACCURACY (RELATIVE BIAS ± STANDARD DEVIATION [%]) OF PARAMETER ESTIMATION BASED ON 2500 SIMULATED IDCS PER MODEL

TABLE II
RELATIVE STANDARD DEVIATION [%] AMONG PARAMETER ESTIMATES
OBTAINED WITH DIFFERENT RECIRCULATION CUTOFF PERCENTAGES (20%,
25%, 30%, 35%, 40%) IN 2500 SIMULATED IDCS PER MODEL

TABLE IV
RELATIVE STANDARD DEVIATION [%] AMONG PARAMETER ESTIMATES
OBTAINED WITH DIFFERENT RECIRCULATION CUTOFF PERCENTAGES
(20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%) IN EXPERIMENTALLY OBTAINED IDCS
FROM 71 RECORDINGS

TABLE III
RELATIVE STANDARD DEVIATION [%] AMONG PARAMETER ESTIMATES
OBTAINED FROM VARIOUS ROIS REPRESENTING THE SAME UNDERLYING
KINETIC PARAMETERS IN EXPERIMENTALLY MEASURED IDCS
FROM 71 RECORDINGS

in different ROIs, is reported for all models in Table III, both
for fitting the complete IDC and for truncation of the IDC at
a recirculation cutoff percentage of 30%. Similar to the simulation results, ML showed a smaller variation in the parameter
estimates than NLS for all parameters.
The sensitivity of parameter estimation to the recirculation
cutoff percentage is reported for two ROIs in Table IV. For all
models, the ML algorithm provided a smaller variation than
NLS.
C. In Vivo Evaluation
The IDCs obtained in vivo were estimated with an average
determination coefficient R2 = 0.92 for both algorithms. For
several IDC parameters, the classification performance obtained
by ML and NLS is reported in Table V. The largest difference
in classification performance between ML and NLS was found
for κ: the area under the ROC curve obtained by ML was 0.13

Fig. 7. Bland–Altman plot of the LDRW parameter κ, estimated by both NLS
and ML. The solid lines represents the average difference and the dashed lines
represent 95% limits of agreement.

larger than that obtained by NLS. For this parameter, the estimates obtained by the two algorithms were compared in a
Bland–Altman plot [33], which is shown in Fig. 7. The average
difference between κ estimates obtained in cancer and healthy
tissue increased by 0.06 if ML was adopted instead of NLS. The
parameters AUC and PI showed a very similar classification
performance for NLS and ML.

828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

TABLE V
SENSITIVITY, SPECIFICITY, AND ROC CURVE AREA FOR TISSUE CLASSIFICATION
Parameter
κ
AUC
PI
FWHM
MTT
WIT

Sensitivity [%]
76.5
58.8
70.6
82.4
64.7
52.9

NLS
Specificity [%]
52.9
82.4
70.6
70.6
64.7
76.5

ROC curve area
0.62
0.69
0.73
0.75
0.64
0.67

IV. DISCUSSION
In all studies, the proposed algorithm provided accurately
fitted IDCs. In fact, the obtained determination coefficient R2 ,
which is theoretically optimized by NLS, was approximately
equal for ML and NLS in all studies.
The accuracy of the estimated parameters is, however, more
important than the fitting accuracy. To this end, we assessed the
bias and standard deviation. Relative statistics were adopted to
accommodate for the wide range of parameter values.
The simulation results, reported in Table I, indicate superior
results for ML than for NLS for all three adopted models, both
with and without truncation. No bias in the parameter estimation was found for either method. The required computation
times were similar. Only for fitting of truncated IDCs, the ML
algorithm required more computation time than NLS, perhaps
because NLS was implemented using a dedicated NLS optimization routine.
In the experimental data, assessment of the parameter estimation accuracy is more complicated, because the true parameter
values are unknown. By assuming IDCs sampled from different
ROIs (as shown in Fig. 4) to satisfy the same true parameter
values, we assessed the precision among parameter estimates
obtained from IDCs sampled from different ROIs. Table III
shows the parameter estimates obtained by ML to be more consistent across the different ROIs than those obtained by NLS.
This result was found for all three adopted models, both with
and without IDC truncation.
In applications where indicator recirculation is significant,
the definition of the optimal IDC truncation time, minimizing
the effect of recirculation on the analysis, is complicated. For
this reason, the sensitivity of parameter estimation to the time
at which the IDC is truncated was also evaluated. As shown in
Table II, the simulation study showed that the ML algorithm is
less dependent on the truncation time than NLS. This finding
was also confirmed with our experimental data (see Table IV).
As a result, ML is more robust with respect to the truncation
time choice than NLS.
The in vivo evaluation shows the feasibility of the ML algorithm for use in quantitative DCE-US imaging for cancer
detection. In fact, for several parameters, the classification ability based on ML is improved with respect to that based on NLS.
The classification results of NLS and ML for the IDC amplitude parameters AUC and PI are very similar, probably because
the parameter AUC is not included in ML estimation. Because

Sensitivity [%]
76.5
58.8
70.6
82.4
64.7
52.9

ML
Specificity [%]
82.4
82.4
70.6
76.5
64.7
82.4

ROC curve area
0.75
0.70
0.73
0.79
0.62
0.70

this parameter is estimated afterward by linear regression, the
optimization criterium is the same for both algorithms.
For the proposed ML algorithm, IDCs are interpreted as the
observed histogram of the transit-time distribution. Although
this paper focuses on the first pass of an intravascular indicator, the methodology is applicable for any transit-time distribution. The proposed approach explicitly requires transit-times of
indicator particles to be independent. In fact, this assumption
follows from the classical assumption in the indicator-dilution
theory that the indicator is well mixed with the carrier fluid [34].
Therefore, the independence assumption is merely made explicit
by the proposed algorithm.
In general, the log-likelihood function to be maximized, given
by (7), equals the correlation between the IDC and the logarithm
of the model distribution. With the semianalytical ML solutions,
presented for three common indicator dilution models, iterative
optimization is not required if the injection time parameter t0
is known. This may be useful in system identification methods
based on two IDCs representing the input and output of the
system, where t0 = 0 [13]. In this paper, as often in practice, t0
was considered unknown. In this case, ML estimation requires
iterative optimization for only a single parameter, t0 . The modelspecific solutions are valid only if the complete IDC is available
for parameter estimation.
Indicator recirculation, a common problem in IDC analysis,
is approached by truncation of the transit-time distribution. The
modified log-likelihood function, given by (14), contains an
additional term that represents the fraction of the AUC that is
still observed after truncation.
In the transit-time statistics described in Section II-A, the difference between the observed IDC and its corresponding model
curve results from the limited amount of indicator particles K,
which represents the sample size of the observed transit-time
distribution. As shown in (4), the SNR scales linearly with K.
It is particularly low in situations where K is relatively small,
e.g., when only a small ROI can be selected to obtain the IDC.
This can be observed in Fig. 4.
In a previous study based on DCE-US, it was observed that the
IDC noise intensity is correlated with the IDC itself [20]. This
correlation can also be observed for the experimental IDCs in
Figs. 4 and 5. This phenomenon cannot be explained by standard
additive Gaussian noise statistics. It is, however, explained by
the modeled transit-time statistics; as formulated in (3), the IDC
noise intensity is linearly related to the IDC itself. Because
the proposed ML algorithm is based on these statistics, it is

KUENEN et al.: MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION FOR INDICATOR DILUTION ANALYSIS

better suited to deal with this phenomenon than standard NLS
regression algorithms.
Because measurement inaccuracies are not primarily considered in this paper, the proposed algorithm is generally applicable
in a variety of applications. However, if measurement inaccuracies represent the dominant source of errors, the proposed
algorithm may not provide optimal results. In this situation,
ML estimation should be based on the measurement statistics
rather than the transit-time statistics. For example, if the measurement errors are well represented by additive white noise,
NLS will provide the most accurate results. For specific acquisition modalities, such as ultrasound and MRI, the statistics of
acquisition noise are well documented [21], [22]. In general, the
optimal algorithm choice should be based on the measured IDC
noise statistics.
In the future, an application-specific parameter estimation
method could be developed that optimally deals with both acquisition noise and transit-time statistics. Alternatively, parameter estimation can be optimized with respect to the primary
sources of variability.
V. CONCLUSION
An ML algorithm is presented for the estimation of hemodynamic parameters from IDCs. This algorithm is based on the
transit-time statistics of indicator particles. Semianalytical solutions are provided for three commonly adopted IDC models and
the algorithm is extended to deal with the typical problem of indicator recirculation. A performance evaluation in simulations
as well as in the experimental data obtained by DCE-US shows
superior results of the proposed algorithm over NLS regression.
In addition, the feasibility of the algorithm is shown with in vivo
data.
APPENDIX
ML ALGORITHM FOR LOGNORMAL AND
GAMMA-VARIATE MODELS
This appendix reports the ML algorithm for the lognormal
and gamma-variate models. Only the main results are provided;
the methodology is identical to that described in Section II-B1.
Similar to the obtained results for the LDRW model, the solutions provided here are the ML solutions only if the complete
IDC is available.
A. Lognormal Model
The lognormal model describes the distribution of indicator
transit-times as function of the parameters θ = [μ, σ, t0 ] as


(ln(t − t0 ) − μ)2
1
exp
. (16)
p(t|θ) = √
2σ 2
2πσ(t − t0 )
The derivative of p(t|θ) with respect to θ is given as
ln(t − t0 ) − μ
∂p(t|θ)
= p(t|θ) ·
∂μ
σ2

(17a)

∂p(t|θ)
μ2 − σ 2 − 2μ ln(t − t0 ) + (ln(t − t0 ))2
= p(t|θ) ·
∂σ
σ3
(17b)

829

ln(t − t0 ) − μ + σ 2
∂p(t|θ)
.
= p(t|θ) ·
∂t0
σ 2 (t − t0 )

(17c)

Similar to (12a) and (12b), the ML solution for the shape
parameters μ and σ can be written as function of the sampled
IDC C(n) and t0 as
	N
ln(nΔt − t0 )C(n)
μ̂M L = n =1 	N
(18a)
n =1 C(n)
	
 12
N
2
2
n =1 (ln(nΔt − t0 )) C(n)
σ̂M L =
− μ̂M L
. (18b)
	N
n =1 C(n)
B. Gamma-Variate Model
The indicator transit-time distribution can also be described
as a gamma-variate with parameters θ = [α, β, t0 ] as


1
t − t0
(t − t0 )α −1 exp −
p(t|θ) = α
.
(19)
β Γ(α)
β
The derivative of (19) with respect to θ is
∂p(t|θ)
= p(t|θ) · (ln(t − t0 ) − ln(β) − ψ(α)) (20a)
∂α
∂p(t|θ)
t − t0 − αβ
= p(t|θ) ·
(20b)
∂β
β2


1−α
∂p(t|θ)
1
= p(t|θ) ·
+
.
(20c)
∂t0
t − t0
β
In (20a), ψ(α) = d(ln Γ(α))/dα is the polygamma function
of order 1. Similar to the lognormal and LDRW models, the ML
solution for the shape parameters α and β can be derived from
(20b) and (20c) in semianalytical fashion as
	N
	N
(nΔt − t0 )C(n)
C(n)
− 	Nn =1 C (n ) (21a)
β̂M L = n =1	N
C(n)
n =1
n =1 n Δ t−t 0
	N
(nΔt − t0 )C(n)
.
(21b)
α̂M L = n =1 	N
β̂M L n =1 C(n)
REFERENCES
[1] K. Zierler, “Indicator dilution methods for measuring blood flow, volume
and other properties of biological systems: A brief history and memoir,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 28, pp. 836–848, 2000.
[2] G. Fegler, “Measurement of cardiac output in anesthetized animals by a
thermo-dilution method,” Exp. Physiol., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 153–164, 1954.
[3] W. F. Hamilton, J. W. Moore, J. M. Kinsman, and R. G. Spurling, “Simultaneous determination of the pulmonary and systemic circulation times in
man and of a figure related to cardiac output,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 84,
pp. 338–344, 1928.
[4] S. B. Feinstein, B. Coll, D. Staub, D. Adam, A. F. Schinkel, F. J. ten Cate,
and K. Thomenius, “Contrast enhanced ultrasound imaging,” J. Nucl.
Cardiol., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 106–115, 2010.
[5] P. S. Tofts, “Modeling tracer kinetics in dynamic Gd-DTPA MR imaging,”
J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 91–101, 1997.
[6] H. O. Anger, “Scintillation camera with multichannel collimators,” J.
Nucl. Med., vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 515–531, 1964.
[7] K. Miles, M. Hayball, A. Dixon, K. Miles, M. Hayball, and A. Dixon,
“Colour perfusion imaging: A new application of computed tomography,”
Lancet, vol. 337, no. 8742, pp. 643–645, 1991.
[8] E. Donnemiller, J. Heilmann, G. K. Wenning, W. Berger, C. Decristoforo,
R. Moncayo, W. Poewe, and G. Ransmayr, “Brain perfusion scintigraphy
with 99mTc-HMPAO or 99mTc-ECD and 123I-beta-CIT single-photon

830

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

emission tomography in dementia of the Alzheimer-type and diffuse Lewy
body disease,” Eur. J. Nucl. Med., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 320–325, 1997.
K. Wei, A. R. Jayaweera, S. Firoozan, A. Linka, D. M. Skyba, and S. Kaul,
“Quantification of myocardial blood flow with ultrasound-induced destruction of microbubbles administered as a constant venous infusion,”
Circulation, vol. 97, pp. 473–483, 1998.
N. Lassau, L. Chami, B. Benatsou, P. Peronneau, and A. Roche, “Dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (DCE-US) with quantification
of tumor perfusion: A new diagnostic tool to evaluate the early effects of
antiangiogenic treatment,” Eur. Radiol. Suppl., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. F89–F98,
2007.
G. Russo, M. Mischi, W. Scheepens, J. de la Rosette, and H. Wijkstra,
“Angiogenesis in prostate cancer: Onset, progression and imaging,” BJU
Int., vol. 110, pp. E794–E808, 2012.
C. W. Sheppard, Basic Principles of the Tracer Method. New York, NY,
USA: Wiley, 1962.
M. Mischi, A. A. C. M. Kalker, and H. H. M. Korsten, “Contrast echocardiography for pulmonary blood volume quantification,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1137–1147, Sep.
2004.
R. W. Stow and P. S. Hetzel, “An empirical formula for indicator-dilution
curves as obtained in human beings,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 7, pp. 161–167,
1954.
H. Qian and J. B. Basingthwaighte, “A class of flow bifurcation models with lognormal distribution and fractal dispersion,” J. Theory Biol.,
vol. 205, pp. 161–168, 2000.
M. Mischi, H. C. M. van den Bosch, J. A. den Boer, J. Verwoerd,
R. J. E. Grouls, C. H. Peels, and H. H. M. Korsten, “Intra-thoracic blood
volume measurement by contrast magnetic resonance imaging,” Magn.
Reson. Med., vol. 61, pp. 344–353, Jan. 2009.
H. K. Thompson, C. F. Starmer, R. E. Whalen, and H. D. McIntosh, “Indicator transit time considered as a gamma variate,” Circ. Res., vol. 14,
pp. 502–515, 1964.
M. Mischi, J. A. den Boer, and H. H. M. Korsten, “On the physical and
stochastic representation of an indicator dilution curve as a gamma variate,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, pp. 281–294, 2008.
D. W. Marquardt, “An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear
parameters,” J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 431–441, 1963.
M. Mischi, A. A. C. M. Kalker, and H. H. M. Korsten, “Videodensitometric methods for cardiac output measurements,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal
Process., vol. 5, pp. 479–489, 2003.
R. F. Wagner, S. W. Smith, J. M. Sandrik, and H. Lopez, “Statistics of
speckle in ultrasound B-scans,” IEEE Trans. Sonics Ultrason., vol. SU30, no. 3, pp. 156–163, May 1983.
J. Sijbers, A. J. den Dekker, P. Scheunders, and D. van Dyck, “Maximumlikelihood estimation of Rician distribution parameters,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 357–361, Jun. 1998.
M. Mischi. (2004). “Contrast echocardiography for cardiac quantifications,” Ph.D. dissertation, Eindhoven Univ. Technol., [Online]. Available:
http://www.sps.ele.tue.nl/members/M.Mischi/
K. H. Norwich and S. Zelin, “The dispersion of indicator in the cardiopulmonary system,” Bull. Math. Biophys., vol. 32, pp. 25–43, 1970.
M. P. J. Kuenen, M. Mischi, and H. Wijkstra, “Contrast-ultrasound diffusion imaging for localization of prostate cancer,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 1493–1502, Aug. 2011.
C. Strouthos, M. Lampaskis, V. Sboros, A. McNeilly, and M. Averkiou,
“Indicator dilution models for the quantification of microvascular blood
flow with bolus administration of ultrasound contrast agents,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1296–1310, Jun.
2010.
R. H. Byrd, J. C. Gilbert, and J. Nocedal, “A trust region method based
on interior point techniques for nonlinear programming,” Math. Prog.,
vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 149–185, 2000.
M. Lampaskis and M. Averkiou, “Investigation of the relationship of nonlinear backscattered ultrasound intensity with microbubble concentration
at low MI,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 306–312, 2010.
M. Smeenge, J. J. M. C. H. de la Rosette, and H. Wijkstra, “Current status
of transrectal ultrasound techniques in prostate cancer,” Curr. Opin. Urol.,
vol. 22, pp. 297–302, 2012.
M. P. J. Kuenen, T. A. Saidov, H. Wijkstra, and M. Mischi, “Contrastultrasound dispersion imaging for prostate cancer localization by improved spatiotemporal similarity analysis,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 39,
no. 9, pp. 1631–1641, 2013.
N. Elie, A. Kaliski, P. Péronneau, P. Opolon, A. Roche, and N. Lassau,
“Methodology for quantifying interactions between perfusion evaluated

by DCE-US and hypoxia throughout tumor growth,” Ultrasound Med.
Biol., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 549–560, 2007.
[32] M. H. Zweig and G. Campbell, “Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC)
plots: A fundamental evaluation tool in clinical medicine,” Clin. Chem.,
vol. 39, pp. 561–577, 1993.
[33] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 327,
no. 8476, pp. 307–310, 1986.
[34] K. L. Zierler, “Theoretical basis of indicator-dilution methods for measuring flow and volume,” Circ. Res., vol. 10, pp. 393–407, 1962.

Maarten P. J. Kuenen received the M.Sc. degree in
electrical engineering from the Eindhoven University
of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 2009.
After receiving his M.Sc. degree, he was researcher
at the Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, where he contributed
to the development of accurate validation techniques
for prostate cancer imaging methods.
Since 2009, he has been working towards a Ph.D.
degree at the Eindhoven University of Technology, in
close collaboration with the Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands. His research focuses on the
development of quantitative contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging techniques
for localization of prostate cancer.

Ingeborg H. F. Herold was born in Utrecht, The
Netherlands, in 1970. She graduated in medicine at
the University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in 1998.
She was a Resident in Anesthesiology at the
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands and followed a fellowship in Intensive Care at the Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. After her traineeship,
she was a Staff Member for more than two years
in Intensive-care at the University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Since 2008, she
has been working at the Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, as an
Anesthesiologist-Intensivist. In collaboration with the Eindhoven University of
Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, she is involved in a research project
for the Ph.D. degree on intrathoracic blood volume measurement with contrast
enhanced ultrasound.

Hendrikus H. M. Korsten graduated in medicine
from the University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands, in 1978. During his training as an Anesthesiologist at the University of Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands, he started the Ph.D. study on the
measurement of intrathoracic fluid content during
open-heart surgery, for which he received the Ph.D.
degree form the University of Leiden, Leiden, The
Netherlands, in 1984.
Since June 1983, he has been a Staff Member in
the Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care,
and Pain-Treatments, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. From
1989 until 1993, he was the Chairman of the professional medical staff of this
hospital. He is also an Intensivist and was the Head of the Intensive Care during
1993–2001. He was one of the initiators of a national intensive-care database.
He was also involved in research projects on data storage and data mining of
patient data, as well as the development of artificial intelligence in the intensive
care. Since 2001, he has been a Part-time Professor at the Eindhoven University
of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

KUENEN et al.: MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION FOR INDICATOR DILUTION ANALYSIS

Jean J. M. C. H. de la Rosette graduated in medicine
from the Radboud University Hospital, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands, in 1992. In 1993, he obtained his
Doctorate degree from the same University.
In 1992, he was appointed as a Consultant Urologist and the Director Minimal Invasive Urology in
the Department of Urology at the Radboud University Hospital. Since 2002, he has been a Professor and
Chairman of the Department of Urology, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. He has published more than
300 peer-reviewed articles in the field of urology with special focus on minimally invasive therapy, oncological urology, and endourology.
Prof. de la Rosette is a member of various urological societies including the
American Urological Association, the European Association of Urology, the
Endourological Society, and the Société International d’Urologie.

Hessel Wijkstra received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering, and the Ph.D. degree from both from
the Twente University of Technology, Enschede, The
Netherlands, with the Ph.D. thesis “The flow pulse
response of the ventricular pressure source.”
He has been performing biomedical research in the
Department of Urology of the Radboud University
Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Since 2004,
he has been a Faculty Member in the Department
of Urology, Academic Medical Center, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Since
November 2010, he has been a Part-time Professor at the Eindhoven University
of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, focusing on the clinical validation
and implementation of contrast-enhanced ultrasound techniques. His main research interest includes imaging, particularly contrast-enhanced ultrasound, in
the diagnosis and treatment of prostate and kidney cancer.

831

Massimo Mischi (SM’10) received the M.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree from
the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands, in 2004.
In 2007, he became an Assistant Professor, and
since 2011, he has been an Associate Professor in the
Department of Electrical Engineering at the Eindhoven University of Technology, where he coordinates the Biomedical Diagnostics Research Team.
His research interests include model-based quantitative analysis of biomedical signals, with focus on ultrasound and magnetic
resonance imaging, and on electrophysiology.
Dr. Mischi received the Dutch VIDI Grant in 2009 and the European ERC
Starting Grant in 2011 for his research on angiogenesis imaging by contrastenhanced ultrasound. He is the Vice-chairman of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society Benelux Chapter and the Secretary of the Dutch
Society of Medical Ultrasound.

