848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Improved Pulse Wave Velocity Estimation Using an
Arterial Tube-Load Model
Mingwu Gao, Guanqun Zhang, N. Bari Olivier, and Ramakrishna Mukkamala∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Pulse wave velocity (PWV) is the most important index of arterial stiffness. It is conventionally estimated by noninvasively measuring central and peripheral blood pressure (BP)
and/or velocity (BV) waveforms and then detecting the foot-to-foot
time delay between the waveforms wherein wave reflection is presumed absent. We developed techniques for improved estimation
of PWV from the same waveforms. The techniques effectively estimate PWV from the entire waveforms, rather than just their feet,
by mathematically eliminating the reflected wave via an arterial
tube-load model. In this way, the techniques may be more robust to
artifact while revealing the true PWV in absence of wave reflection.
We applied the techniques to estimate aortic PWV from simultaneously and sequentially measured central and peripheral BP waveforms and simultaneously measured central BV and peripheral
BP waveforms from 17 anesthetized animals during diverse interventions that perturbed BP widely. Since BP is the major acute
determinant of aortic PWV, especially under anesthesia wherein
vasomotor tone changes are minimal, we evaluated the techniques
in terms of the ability of their PWV estimates to track the acute
BP changes in each subject. Overall, the PWV estimates of the
techniques tracked the BP changes better than those of the conventional technique (e.g., diastolic BP root-mean-squared errors
of 3.4 versus 5.2 mmHg for the simultaneous BP waveforms and
7.0 versus 12.2 mmHg for the BV and BP waveforms (p < 0.02)).
With further testing, the arterial tube-load model-based PWV estimation techniques may afford more accurate arterial stiffness
monitoring in hypertensive and other patients.
Index Terms—Arterial stiffness, blood pressure (BP), blood velocity, pulse transit time (PTT), pulse wave velocity (PWV), transfer
function.

Manuscript received March 22, 2013; revised October 29, 2013; accepted
November 2, 2013. Date of publication December 3, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. This work was supported by a NIH Grant 1 R03
AG041361, a National Science Foundation CAREER Grant 0643477, a Michigan Universities Commercialization Initiative Grant, and the Telemedicine and
Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC) at the U.S. Army Medical
Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC) through Award W81XWH10-2-0124. The work of N. B. Olivier was supported by Retia Medical. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
M. Gao is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA (e-mail: gaomingw@msu.edu).
G. Zhang was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA. He is now with Sotera
Wireless, San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: zhanggu2@msu.edu).
N. B. Olivier is with the Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA (e-mail:
olivier@cvm.msu.edu).
∗ R. Mukkamala is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA (e-mail:
rama@egr.msu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2291385

I. INTRODUCTION
ULSE wave velocity (PWV) is the speed of energy wave
transmission in the arteries. According to the Bramwell–
Hill equation, PWV varies inversely with the square root of
arterial compliance [1]. PWV indeed increases as the arteries
stiffen with aging and disease [2]–[4]. PWV in the aorta is now
the most important index of arterial stiffness for two reasons [5].
First, it is an independent predictor of all-cause mortality and
cardiovascular events in hypertensive and other patients [5],
[6]. Second, while direct measurement of arterial compliance
involves nontrivial tracking of changes in vessel area and BP,
PWV is easier to measure [5], [7].
PWV is most easily determined as the ratio of the distance
and pulse transit time (PTT) between central and peripheral arterial sites. Conventionally, PTT is estimated by measuring blood
pressure (BP) or velocity (BV) waveforms at these sites with
noninvasive tonometers or Doppler ultrasound probes and then
detecting the foot-to-foot time delay between the waveforms.
This foot-to-foot detection technique is also applicable to sequential measurements of the waveforms via a simultaneously
measured ECG (i.e., ECG gating).
The foot-to-foot detection technique may be explained as
follows. BP and BV waveforms arise as the superposition of
transmitted and reflected waves. As a result, as shown in Fig. 1(a)
[8], they vary in shape throughout the arterial tree. If wave
reflection were absent, a pair of BP (or BV) waveforms would
mainly differ by just a time delay equal to PTT, whereas a
pair of BP and BV waveforms would likewise differ by the
time delay as well as a scale factor (equal to the arterial area
times the characteristic impedance) [8]. Hence, the premise of
this technique is that interference from the reflected wave is
negligible during late diastole and early systole.
However, wave reflection interference around the waveform
feet can become nontrivial with changes in heart rate (HR) [9].
For example, during tachycardia, the time delay between the forward and backward waves in the central aorta is a large fraction
of the cardiac cycle length. Hence, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the
backward wave may be prominent near the central BP waveform foot. Further, the relative magnitude of wave reflection
increases with peripheral resistance [8], [10]. Just as important,
since the technique restricts its analysis to one pair of waveform
samples per cardiac cycle, it is not robust to motion and other
artifact often present in the noninvasive waveforms, as shown
in Fig. 1(c) [11]. In fact, detection of the foot can be subjective even for invasive waveforms during normal conditions [see
Fig. 1(c)] [12].
Even seemingly small detection errors caused by wave reflection interference and/or artifact can result in serious PWV

P

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GAO et al.: IMPROVED PULSE WAVE VELOCITY ESTIMATION USING AN ARTERIAL TUBE-LOAD MODEL

849

Fig. 1. Conventional foot-to-foot detection technique for PTT estimation is prone to error due to wave reflection interference and waveform artifact. (a) Blood
pressure and velocity (BP and BV) waveforms arise as the sum of transmitted and reflected waves. As a result, these waveforms vary in shape throughout the
arterial tree. Hence, the premise of the technique is that wave reflection interference is negligible at the waveform feet. Adapted from [8]. (b) Measured and fitted
central BP waveforms (upper) and calculated transmitted and reflected waves in the central aorta (lower) during tachycardia. The reflected wave (gray) is actually
prominent near the waveform feet such that the apparent (central BP) foot deviates from the true (transmitted wave) foot. (c) Detection of the foot is often difficult
due to noninvasive waveform artifact (upper) [13] and can be subjective even for invasive waveforms (lower) [12]. Just a 0.01 s error in foot detection can result in
a PWV error of ∼15% of the entire PWV range [13], [14].

errors. For example, using average adult values of 0.5 m and
0.06 s for the distance and PTT between carotid (central) and
femoral (peripheral) arteries [13], [14], just a 0.01 s error in foot
detection, which is not uncommon [see Fig. 1(c)], yields a PWV
error of about 1.4 m/s. This error magnitude is of concern, as
the physiologic range of PWV is, for the most part, only from
about 6 to 16 m/s [13]. Indeed, a 1 m/s change in PWV has been
shown to increase the risk of mortality by 39% and to yield an
adjusted relative risk for mortality of 0.71 in end-stage renal
disease patients [15], [16].
Hence, while the conventional technique does yield PWV
estimates with predictive value, it also produces errors that carry
clinical consequences. Three examples follow.
First, PWV and BP often show positive correlation. In fact,
PWV is frequently advocated as a way to achieve continuous,
noninvasive, and cuff-less BP monitoring [17]–[20]. The mechanism is well known. Increases in BP cause decreases in arterial
compliance, as slack collagen fibers become stiffer. The arterial compliance decreases, in turn, cause increases in PWV as
per the Bramwell–Hill equation. While changes in vasomotor
tone could also acutely modulate arterial compliance, this effect
is less of a factor in large arteries wherein smooth muscle is
relatively sparse [21]. However, plots of BP versus PWV typically show excessive scatter about the line of best fit even under
general anesthesia wherein changes in vasomotor tone are minimal [17]. As shown herein, this scatter can be reduced with
improved analysis techniques.
Second, arterial elastic modulus, which is another more
difficult-to-measure index of arterial stiffness, does not change
by increasing HR [22]. Yet, PWV was shown to increase with
atrial pacing-induced increases in HR despite no change in BP
or other relevant variables [23]. This finding, which suggests
the need for a HR correction of PWV for risk stratification [23],
must be due to error in estimating PWV [24] caused by progressive wave reflection interference [see Fig. 1(b)].
Third, several studies that have compared PWV to arterial compliance and other more difficult-to-measure indices of

arterial stiffness have shown that PWV is of inferior clinical
value. In one study, arterial compliance discriminated the severity of coronary artery disease, which is strongly associated
with large artery stiffness, better than PWV [25]. In another
study, arterial elastic modulus discriminated arterial stiffness
patients from healthy subjects better than PWV (p < 0.0001
versus p = 0.004) [26]. In a third exemplary study, arterial elastic modulus afforded a greater odds ratio for predicting all-cause
mortality in end-stage renal disease patients than PWV (9.2 versus 5.4) [15], [27]. Hence, improving the accuracy of estimating
PWV could enhance its predictive value.
In this study, we conceived techniques for improved PWV
estimation from central and peripheral BP and/or BV waveforms. These techniques effectively estimate PWV from the
entire waveforms, rather than just their feet, by mathematically
eliminating the reflected wave via an arterial tube-load model.
In this way, the techniques may be robust to artifact while revealing the true PWV (i.e., PWV in absence of wave reflection).
Further, they may be applied to sequential waveform measurements via a simultaneously measured ECG. We tested these
techniques in terms of the ability of their PWV estimates to
track large changes in BP in anesthetized animals. Our results
show superior BP-PWV correlation than the conventional technique. Preliminary versions of this study have been reported in
abbreviated form [28], [29].
II. ARTERIAL TUBE-LOAD MODEL-BASED PWV
ESTIMATION TECHNIQUES
The techniques are illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3 and are implemented in four steps. First, arterial transmission and reflection
are represented with a tube-load model that has been shown
to have excellent predictive value in other applications (see
Section V) [30]–[33]. Second, the transfer function coupling
measured central and peripheral BP and/or BV waveforms
is defined in terms of the unknown model parameters. The
parameters represent the true PTT, peripheral resistance and

850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 3. Arterial tube-load model-based technique for estimating PWV from
sequentially measured central and peripheral BP and/or BV waveforms. Here,
x(t) and y(t) are any of the input–output pairs in Fig. 2(b). (a) Impulse train
formation. (b) ECG gating. (d) Parameter estimation. (d) PWV Calculation.

where Li , Ai , and Ci are large artery length, area, and compliance, while ρ is the blood density and allows waves to travel
along the tube with constant PTT [30], [31], [34]

ρLi Ci
.
(2)
Tdi =
Ai

Fig. 2. Arterial tube-load model-based technique for estimating PWV from
simultaneously measured central and peripheral BP and/or BV waveforms. See
text for details. (a) Arterial tube-load model center. (b) parameter estimation.
(c) PWV Calculation.

compliance, and possibly the characteristic impedance times the
arterial area. Third, all parameters are estimated by finding the
transfer function, which when applied to one of the waveforms,
optimally fits the other. Fourth, PWV is calculated from the
PTT estimate. Below, we describe the techniques and a way to
augment the computational speed in implementing them.
A. PWV Estimation from Simultaneous Measurements
The arterial tree is modeled as m parallel, uniform tubes with
terminal loads, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The ith tube (i = 1, . . .,
m) represents the wave travel path between the central aorta and
the ith peripheral artery. Each tube is frictionless and thus has
constant characteristic impedance

ρLi
(1)
Zci =
Ai Ci

The ith load represents the arterial bed distal to the ith peripheral artery. Each load has frequency-dependent impedance
[Zi (ω)] characterized by peripheral resistance [ri ] and compliance [ci ] while matching Zci at high frequency [30], [31], [34].
This model may be explained as follows. Cardiac ejection
initiates pressure and velocity waves that travel from left to right
along a tube. These forward waves move without distortion and
are proportional to each other (via a characteristic impedance
time arterial area scale factor). The waves are reflected in the
opposite direction at the terminal load with relative magnitude
and phase based on frequency according to the wave reflection
coefficient
Γi (ω) =

Zi (ω) − Zci
ri ci
=
. (3)
Zi (ω) + Zci
ri ci + 2Zci ci + jω2ri ci Zci ci

The backward pressure and velocity waves likewise travel
along the tube without distortion and are proportional to each
other. The actual BP (or BV) waveform at any point on the tube
may thus be expressed as the sum (or difference) of the forward
and backward pressure (or velocity) waves after time shifting
to account for the wave travel time (as determined with PTT).
In this way, the model mimics the progressive distortion that
experimental BP and BV waveforms undergo with increasing
distance from the heart [see Fig. 1(a)]. Also, from these expressions, transfer functions relating a pair of BP and/or BV
waveforms at any points on the tube may be defined in terms of
the model parameters.
In particular, the transfer functions relating a peripheral BP or
BV waveform [ppi (t) or upi (t)] to a central BP or BV waveform

GAO et al.: IMPROVED PULSE WAVE VELOCITY ESTIMATION USING AN ARTERIAL TUBE-LOAD MODEL

[pc (t) or uc (t)] may be defined in terms of Tdi , ri ci , Zci ci , and
possibly Ai Zci , as shown in Fig. 2(b). (The central waveform
is regarded as the output here to increase computational speed,
as described below.) These three or four parameters are estimated by finding the transfer function, which when applied to
the former waveform, best fits the latter waveform in the least
squares sense. This optimization is achieved via a numerical
search, as described below. PWV is then computed from the Tdi
estimate and the distance between the two arterial measurement
sites [Li ], as shown in Fig. 2(c). (Note that only the parameters
characterizing a single tube and load are relevant; however, the
parallel tube-load model is shown in Fig. 2(a) to better indicate
the physical meaning of the relevant tube and load.)
B. PWV Estimation from Sequential Measurements
An ECG is simultaneously obtained during sequential measurements of the central and peripheral waveforms [x(t) and
y(t), which represent any of the input–output pairs shown in
Fig. 2(b)]. Then, an impulse train [rx (t)] is formed from the
segment of the ECG obtained during the x(t) measurement
by placing unit impulses at the R-wave locations, as shown in
Fig. 3(a) [35]. (Note that the R-wave is generally straightforward
to detect due to its relatively high frequency characteristic, and
effective R-wave detection techniques are available [36].) Next,
an impulse response [hx (t)] is identified, which when convolved
with rx (t), best fits x(t) in the least squares sense, as indicated
in Fig. 3(b) [35]. This optimization is achieved in closed-form
via autoregressive exogenous input (ARX) identification [37].
Next, this analysis is repeated for the y(t) measurement to yield
an impulse response relating ry (t) to y(t) [hy (t)], as shown in
Fig. 3(a) and (b). The impulse responses hx (t) and hy (t) represent x(t) and y(t) in response to the same cardiac excitation
(i.e., a single, average cardiac contraction). Consequently and
finally, the appropriate technique in Fig. 2(b) is applied to hx (t)
and hy (t) [instead of x(t) and y(t)], as indicated in Fig. 3(c)
and (d).

851

parameters were known, Ai Zci or its reciprocal is a linear parameter in the transfer function. Hence, for each candidate Tdi , ri ci ,
and Zci ci , this remaining parameter is computed in closed-form
via the linear least squares solution.
Thirdly, the number of transfer function applications (i.e.,
convolutions) is reduced. The idea is to apply the transfer function in parts according to how it was derived (i.e., by adding or
subtracting forward and backward waves after time shifting to
account for their wave travel time). More specifically, first, the
forward wave at the terminal load is computed by applying the
transfer function 1/(1+Γi (ω)) to the peripheral input for each
candidate ri ci and Zci ci . The key point here is that this transfer
function is not parameterized by Tdi . Then, the backward wave
at the terminal load is computed by either subtracting the forward wave from the measured peripheral BP input or subtracting
the measured peripheral BV input from the forward wave. Next,
the forward wave is advanced in time and the backward wave
is delayed in time, both by Tdi , for each candidate Tdi . Then,
the time shifted waves are either added to predict the central BP
output (exactly or to within an Ai Zci scale factor) or subtracted
to predict the central BV output (exactly or to within a 1/Ai Zci
scale factor). In this way, the transfer function applications are
performed only over a two-dimensional space (defined by ri ci
and Zci ci ) rather than a three-dimensional space (defined by
Tdi , ri ci , and Zci ci ).
Finally, the speed in executing the search is increased by
parallel computation. That is, the mean squared error between
the predicted and measured output is computed for multiple
candidate parameter sets at a time using multiple processors.
III. TECHNIQUE EVALUATION
We applied the new and conventional techniques to invasive
BP and BV waveforms from animals during wide changes to
BP. We evaluated and compared the techniques in terms of the
ability of their PWV estimates to track BP in each subject. We
provide details below.

C. Implementation to Augment Computational Speed

A. Experimental Data

The three or four unknown model parameters (i.e.,
Tdi , ri ci , Zci ci , and possibly Ai Zci ) of the transfer functions
in Fig. 2(b) are estimated by searching over a physical range
of candidate parameter sets. That is, the output is predicted by
applying the transfer function to the input for each candidate set
of parameters. The parameter set that yields the minimum mean
squared error between the predicted and measured output is then
selected as the final estimate. This numerical search generally
produces the optimal solution but is computationally expensive.
Its speed is augmented as follows.
First, the number of candidate parameter sets is reduced. More
specifically, since large artery characteristic impedance is often
much smaller than peripheral resistance [8], the following constraint is employed: 0 < Zci ci < ri ci . Further, the Tdi parameter
is confined to be within a range established by the foot-to-foot
detection technique.
Second, the number of search dimensions is reduced when
Ai Zci is an unknown parameter. In particular, if the other three

We collected data from six healthy adult beagles (10–12 kg)
under an experimental protocol approved by the Michigan State
University All-University Committee on Animal Use and Care.
For each dog, we induced and maintained general anesthesia
using an intravenous injection of propofol (2.2– 6.6 mg/kg) and
an inhaled mixture of oxygen and isoflurane (1.5%–2.5%). We
inserted a micromanometer-tipped catheter (Millar Instruments)
percutaneously into a femoral artery for a peripheral BP waveform. We likewise inserted a similar catheter into the opposite
femoral artery and used fluoroscopic guidance (GE) to position
it in the aorta for a central BP waveform. We placed a catheter
in a cephalic vein for drug and fluid infusions as well as other
instruments to address different specific aims. We interfaced
all analog transducer outputs to a personal computer via a data
acquisition system (DataQ Instruments). We then recorded the
measurements at a sampling rate of 500 Hz during a baseline period and infusions of dobutamine, phenylephrine, and nitroprusside in three of the dogs and esmolol and saline in the remaining

852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

dogs. We used several infusion rates for each intervention and
allowed recovery periods between the interventions.
We also studied two datasets previously collected from
healthy animals under general anesthesia. The data collection procedures were approved by institutional animal care
committees and are described in detail elsewhere [32], [38].
One dataset included central (ascending aorta) and peripheral (femoral artery) BP waveforms via micromanometer-tipped
catheters, along with surface ECGs, from six dogs (10–12 kg
adult beagles) during a baseline period and hemodynamic drug
infusions, blood volume changes, and cardiac pacing. The other
dataset consisted of a central (ascending aorta) blood flow waveform via an ultrasonic flow probe and a peripheral (femoral
artery) BP waveform via a fluid-filled catheter from five swine
(30–34 kg) before and after the infusion of hemodynamic drugs
and blood volume changes. The waveforms were available at a
sampling rate of >250 Hz.
Importantly, isoflurane was used to achieve a deep plane of
anesthesia in all 17 animals. Isoflurane is a potent vasodilator and severely blunts cardiovascular reflexes [39]. Indeed, the
animals were hypotensive at baseline, and there was little HR
response to the vasoactive drug infusions and blood volume
changes. So, both basal vasomotor tone and changes in vasomotor tone were minimal. As a result, the acute BP changes
served as a particularly useful reference for PWV estimates in
this study. However, there was one exception in the dog in which
low rate cardiac pacing was performed. As the pacing rate was
decreased to 25 bpm, severe hypotension ensued. Under this
dire situation, peripheral resistance, which was measured using
a femoral artery blood flow probe that happened to be placed
in this particular dog [32], increased reflexively perhaps due
to a central ischemic response. We therefore excluded the data
during the low rate cardiac pacing, which was last intervention
performed in this dog.

For comparison, we applied the foot-to-foot detection technique to estimate average PWV over 15-s intervals from the
same waveform pairs. We specifically implemented all of the
automatic foot detection methods in [40], [41] including a recently proposed diastole-patching method [42] and settled on the
tangent line intersection method, as it performed best overall.
(Note that the diastole-patching method performed similarly to
this method as applied to the BP waveforms but is not applicable
to BP and BV waveforms [42].)
We evaluated the PWV estimates of each technique in terms
of their ability to track diastolic and mean BP in particular. In
theory, the PWV estimates of the conventional technique should
track diastolic BP best by virtue of being derived from the waveform feet, whereas the PWV estimates of the new techniques
should correlate best with mean BP by virtue of arising from all
waveform samples. First, we measured the average diastolic and
mean BP over 15-s intervals. Then, we found the line of best fit
between the PWV estimates of a technique and one of the measured BP parameters for each subject. (Note that use of higher
order polynomials did not materially improve the fit.) We used
the resulting correlation coefficient between the PWV estimates
and measured BP parameters as one evaluation metric. Next,
we predicted each BP parameter from the corresponding PWV
estimate and best-fit-line. Finally, we computed the root-meansquared error (RMSE) between the predicted and measured BP
parameters for another evaluation metric. (Note that we used
the same data for determining the line of best fit and computing
the RMSE, as our goal was to establish the ability of the PWV
estimates to track the BP parameters rather than the capacity of
the best fit line to predict BP parameters from PWV estimates.
Further, we employed this procedure for all techniques to obtain
a fair comparison.)
We statistically compared the correlation coefficients and
RMSEs of the techniques. We specifically applied paired t-tests
to compare the subject average metrics after log transformation
to make the data more normally distributed.

B. Data Analysis
With these data, we were able to assess the new techniques
as applied to: 1) simultaneous central and peripheral BP waveforms, 2) sequential central and peripheral BP waveforms, and
3) simultaneous central BV and peripheral BP waveforms. We
obtained the central BV waveform by dividing the central blood
flow waveform by the nominal aortic cross-sectional area of the
swine.
For the simultaneous measurements, we applied the techniques to estimate PWV for each beat of the waveforms. We
then averaged the PWV estimates over 15-s intervals.
For the sequential measurements, we applied the technique
to 15-s intervals of the waveforms to obtain a PWV estimate.
For the ARX identification step, we set the autoregressive and
moving average orders to the number of samples between the
R-wave and the peak of the BP waveform. We determined this
order empirically. For the tube-load model parameter estimation
step, we used one beat length of the impulse responses, as they
should eventually converge to the same exponential diastolic
decay [38].

IV. RESULTS
Table I shows the mean and standard deviation for diastolic
and mean BP in each subject. The average standard deviation
was 16 ± 8 mmHg, so BP usually changed appreciably in each
subject. If the BP changes were trivial, then a meaningful assessment of the techniques could not have been obtained in terms
of tracking BP in each subject.
Fig. 1(b) shows a sample of the measured and fitted central
BP waveforms and estimated forward and backward waves in
the central aorta from simultaneous central and peripheral BP
waveforms from a dog during high rate cardiac pacing. The foot
of the measured waveform is ambiguous (e.g., there are multiple
local minima). The forward and backward waves, which are
buttressed by the agreement between the fitted and measured
waveforms, indicate that wave reflection is the main cause of
the ambiguity. That is, the backward wave is prominent during
late diastole and early systole. As a result, the foot of the central
BP waveforms, relative to the foot of the forward wave (i.e., the
true foot), is to the left (when defined as the global minimum) or

GAO et al.: IMPROVED PULSE WAVE VELOCITY ESTIMATION USING AN ARTERIAL TUBE-LOAD MODEL

853

TABLE I
SUBJECT-BY-SUBJECT BP STATISTICS

Fig. 4. Sample plots of mean BP versus PWV estimates from simultaneously and sequentially measured central and peripheral BP waveforms from Dog 3. A
value of unity was used here and elsewhere for the length component of the PWV estimates, as it has no impact on the correlation between BP and PWV within
a subject. Line and equation indicates line of best fit. (Note that the PWV estimates are clustered for the sequential measurements due to waveform sampling and
that this clustering is masked for the simultaneous measurements due to averaging the PWV estimates).

Fig. 5. Sample plots of mean BP versus PWV estimates from simultaneously
measured central BV and peripheral BP waveforms from Pig 2.

right (when defined as the initial, steep BP rise). This example
suggests that the arterial tube-load model-based techniques can
mitigate wave reflection interference.
Fig. 4 illustrates sample plots of mean BP versus the PWV
estimates from simultaneous and sequential central and peripheral BP waveforms from Dog 3, while Fig. 5 shows sample
plots of mean BP versus the PWV estimates from simultaneous central BV and peripheral BP waveforms from Pig 2. The
arterial tube-load model-based techniques and the foot-to-foot
detection technique showed the expected positive correlation between MAP and PWV. However, the new techniques exhibited
noticeably reduced scatter about the line of best fit compared
to the conventional technique. Note that this latter technique

performed about the same for simultaneous and sequential
measurements.
Tables II—IV illustrate the quantitative results for each subject. For the simultaneous central and peripheral BP waveforms
from dogs, the arterial tube-load model-based technique was
able to reduce the average of the RMSEs by 35% and increase
the average of the correlation coefficients by 11% relative to
the foot-to-foot detection technique. These differences were all
statistically significant. For the sequential central and peripheral BP waveforms from dogs, the new technique was able
to decrease the average of the RMSEs by 30% and increase
the average of the correlation coefficients by 4% compared to
the conventional technique. These differences were statistically
significant only for diastolic BP. Further, the RMSEs and correlation coefficients of the new techniques were not significantly
different for simultaneous and sequential measurements (not
shown in tables). For the simultaneous central BV and peripheral BP waveforms from swine, the new technique was able to
decrease the average of the RMSEs by 38% and increase the
average of the correlation coefficients by 43% relative to the
conventional technique. These differences were all statistically
significant. Hence, the arterial tube-load model-based paradigm
afforded superior improvement in the pigs. The likely reason
is that the swine waveforms were contaminated by a greater
amount of measurement artifact. That is, these waveforms were
measured with an aortic flow probe, which yielded noticeable
noise that obfuscated the central BV foot detection as shown in

854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

TABLE II
SUBJECT-BY-SUBJECT RESULTS FOR SIMULTANEOUS CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL BP WAVEFORMS FROM DOGS

Fig. 6.

Typical noise level in central BV waveform measurement from a pig.

Fig 6, and a low fidelity BP catheter, whereas all of the canine
waveforms were obtained with high fidelity BP catheters. These
results suggest that the new techniques can mitigate waveform
artifact.
Finally, the computational speed of the arterial tube-load
model-based techniques was about 20% faster than real time
when executed in MATLAB on a desktop computer with eight
2.5 GHz processors. In other words, the average PWV estimate over a 15-s interval of the waveforms could be obtained in
about 12 s on this platform. The speed of the techniques using
just one processor would be about five times slower than real
time but may likely be enhanced to at least real time via another
programming language.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Summary
We have proposed techniques for improved estimation of
PWV, which has emerged as the most important index of arterial
stiffness, from central and peripheral BP and/or BV waveforms.
The idea is to estimate PWV from the entire waveforms, rather
than just their feet, by mathematically eliminating the reflected
wave via an arterial tube-load model. Hence, these techniques
may be more robust to waveform artifact and more closely

indicate the true PWV than the conventional foot-to-foot detection technique. Further, the new techniques are applicable
to simultaneously or sequentially measured waveforms and can
estimate PWV within or near real-time.
It is not easy to measure the true PWV in absence of wave
reflection, so we did not evaluate the techniques against direct reference measurements. However, BP is the major acute
determinant of aortic PWV [21], especially under general anesthesia wherein vasomotor tone changes are usually minimal.
Hence, we indirectly tested the techniques using BP changes as
a reference. We specifically applied the techniques to estimate
aortic PWV from simultaneously and sequentially measured
central and peripheral BP waveforms and simultaneously measured central BV and peripheral BP waveforms from 17 anesthetized animals during diverse acute interventions that often
perturbed BP widely (see Table I).
Overall, the techniques tracked the BP changes in each
subject better than the foot-to-foot-detection technique (see
Tables II— IV). This improvement was greater in magnitude
in terms of RMSE (about 35% on average) than correlation
coefficient (about 20% on average) and reached statistical significant in most cases. The improvement may have been attained
by mitigation of both artifact and wave reflection.
Although the waveforms here were obtained with invasive
sensors and thus generally of high quality, the central BV waveforms from the swine still showed a noticeable level of noise
(see Fig. 6). The relative performance of the new techniques
was best when applied to these waveforms (see Tables II—IV),
thereby indicating their artifact mitigation capability. We expect
that these techniques will be able to offer greater improvements
in PWV estimation accuracy over the conventional technique
when applied to patient waveforms, which are obtained with
noninvasive sensors and thus often show much more artifact.
During high rate cardiac pacing, the estimated backward wave
was prominent near the central BP waveform foot [see Fig. 1(b)].
As a result, this apparent foot was at a significantly different
location than the “true” foot of the estimated forward wave

GAO et al.: IMPROVED PULSE WAVE VELOCITY ESTIMATION USING AN ARTERIAL TUBE-LOAD MODEL

855

TABLE III.
SUBJECT-BY-SUBJECT RESULTS FOR SEQUENTIAL CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL BP WAVEFORMS FROM DOGS

TABLE IV.
SUBJECT-BY-SUBJECT RESULTS FOR SIMULTANEOUS CENTRAL BV AND PERIPHERAL BP WAVEFORMS FROM SWINE

[see Fig. 1(b)], thereby suggesting wave reflection interference
mitigation capability of the new techniques.
B. Extension of Techniques for Local PWV Estimation
According to the Waterhammer equation [8], PWV is also
sometimes determined as the characteristic impedance times the
arterial area divided by the blood density. The numerator term is
estimated by measuring central BP and BV waveforms and then
finding the slope of the line that best relates the initial systolic
samples of the waveforms [43]. This technique estimates local
PWV unlike the foot-to-foot detection technique, which estimates regional PWV. However, the early systolic BV–BP slope
technique can similarly be compromised by wave reflection interference and waveform artifact.
The arterial tube-load model-based techniques were designed
to obtain an artifact robust estimate of the true regional PWV
from central and peripheral BP and/or BV waveforms. However,
they can potentially be extended to likewise yield an artifact
robust estimate of the true local PWV from central BV and BP
waveforms as follows.
The arterial tree is modeled as a single uniform tube with
terminal load, as shown in Fig. 7(a). The tube represents the
wave travel path along a segment of the aorta and likewise has

Fig. 7. Potential arterial tube-load model-based technique for estimating local
(rather than regional) PWV from simultaneously measured central BV and BP
waveforms. This technique could also be extended to simultaneous measurements as indicated in Fig. 3. (a) Arterial tube-load model center. (b) parameter
estimation. (c) PWV Calculation.

constant characteristic impedance

Zc0 =

ρL0
A0 C0

(4)

856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

where L0 , A0 , and C0 are aortic segment length, area, and
compliance, respectively, and allow waves to travel with constant PTT

ρL0 C0
Td0 =
.
(5)
A0
The load represents the remainder of the arterial tree and
similarly has frequency-dependent impedance [Z0 (ω)] characterized by the total peripheral resistance [r0 ] and compliance
[c0 ] and Zc0 . According to this model, the transfer function relating a central BV waveform [uc (t)] to a central BP waveform
[pc (t)] may be defined in terms of Td0 , r0 c0 , Zc0 c0 , and A0 Zc0 ,
as shown in Fig. 7(b). These four parameters are estimated analogously to the regional PWV estimation techniques. Local PWV
is then computed from the A0 Zc0 estimate and the nominal ρ
value, as shown in Fig. 7(c).
However, this extended technique obviously needs to be
tested. Note that it may likewise be amenable to sequential
waveform measurements (see Fig. 3).
C. Relationship to Previous Techniques
Related techniques have been proposed in the literature. We
compare and contrast the arterial tube-load model-based techniques here with several previous techniques.
Techniques have been proposed to estimate regional PWV
from central and peripheral waveforms using a black-box, rather
than physical model-based, transfer function [44], [45]. In particular, an impulse response is identified that optimally couples
the central waveform to the peripheral waveform. Then, PTT is
determined as the time delay of the impulse response. Hence,
these techniques may likewise be robust to artifact and reveal
the true PWV. A significant advantage of the techniques is that
they are applicable to arbitrary waveforms (e.g., pulse oximeter and impedance waveforms) rather than being limited to BP
and BV waveforms. On the other hand, the arterial tube-load
model-based techniques here extract PTT not just from the time
delay of the transfer function but also from its shape [see Tdi
parameter in the transfer functions of Fig. 2(b)] and could thus
be more accurate.
Arterial tube-load model-based techniques have been proposed to estimate regional PWV from only peripheral BP waveforms. One technique models multiple peripheral BP waveforms
as outputs to the common central BP waveform input [30]. The
transfer functions that couple the common input to each output is
defined in terms of the parameters of an arterial tube-load model.
These parameters, which represent PTT to each peripheral artery
and other arterial properties, are then estimated from two or more
peripheral BP waveforms via multi-channel blind system identification. Another technique defines the transfer function relating
a peripheral BP waveform to the central BP waveform in terms
of the arterial tube-load model parameters (see Fig. 2(a)) [33].
PTT and the other model parameters are then estimated from
one peripheral BP waveform and a one-time PTT measurement
by exploiting the fact that central BV is negligible during diastole. A third technique uses the same model-based transfer
function and estimates its parameters from one peripheral BP

waveform by assuming that the central BP waveform obeys
certain smoothness constraints [31]. These techniques have reduced measurement requirements and are thus more convenient
than the techniques here as well as the conventional techniques.
However, for the same reason, the previous techniques should
yield markedly less accurate PWV estimates. For example, the
PTT estimates even from multiple peripheral BP waveforms are
unable to indicate the absolute PTT value [30].
Finally, an arterial tube-load model-based technique has been
proposed to estimate forward and backward waves from central
and peripheral BP waveforms [32]. In particular, the PTT model
parameter is first estimated via the foot-to-foot detection technique. Then, with PTT known, both the order and parameters
of the load are estimated in closed-form. While this technique
is similar to the techniques here, it obviously does not offer an
improved PWV estimate.
D. Contributions
As just indicated, the unique idea here is to enhance PWV
estimation accuracy by combining the arterial tube-load model
with standard measurements that are being made in practice.
Some other contributions of this study are: 1) defining an ECG
gating approach to be able to apply arterial tube-load modelbased PWV estimation techniques to sequential measurements;
2) developing ways to augment the speed of these techniques; 3)
demonstrating that the techniques can indeed improve the accuracy of regional PWV estimates from BP and/or BV waveforms
and simultaneous or sequential measurements; and (d) proposing to improve the estimation of local PWV from standard measurements via an arterial tube-load model-based technique.
E. Limitations
Some limitations of this study are as follows. First, the arterial
tube-load model employed here (see Figs. 2 and 7) ignores elastic and geometric tapering and, to a large extent, branching [46].
The model thus assumes that the main reflection sites are at the
small arteries. While other reflection sites may also be important
in actuality [47], [48], the arterioles may indeed often constitute
the dominant wave reflection site [49]. One reason is that this
site is where the arterial radius changes most abruptly [46]. As a
result, the model is usually able to predict experimental BP and
BV waveforms quite well [46]. Further, this simplicity affords a
small number of parameters that can be uniquely estimated, but
with some bias, from limited measurements. Note that the footto-foot detection technique may likewise be subject to similar
assumptions. Second, while the arterial tube-load model-based
techniques for regional PWV estimation (see Fig. 2) may offer a
means to improve the accuracy of PTT, they do not address the
distance between the measurement sites that is also needed to
compute PWV. Hence, the distance measurement component of
regional PWV estimation remains problematic [50]. Note that
this component is important for comparisons amongst patients
but has little value in tracking arterial stiffness changes within
a patient. Finally, BP is surely not an ideal reference for assessing the aortic PWV estimates in general. However, the acute
BP changes likely sufficed as a reference in this study because

GAO et al.: IMPROVED PULSE WAVE VELOCITY ESTIMATION USING AN ARTERIAL TUBE-LOAD MODEL

vasomotor tone generally has little impact on the large, elastic arteries [21], especially under general anesthesia, and other
mechanisms for arterial compliance changes occur very slowly
over time (e.g., aging, disease). If BP were a poor reference
here, it is unlikely that the new techniques would consistently
track the BP changes better than the conventional technique.
F. Conclusions
In sum, we have proposed and evaluated arterial tube-load
model-based techniques for estimating PWV from a pair of
hemodynamic waveforms. Our results indicate that these techniques: 1) can improve PWV estimation accuracy by mitigating
waveform artifact and wave reflection interference and 2) are
applicable to simultaneously or sequentially measured central
and peripheral BP and/or BV waveforms.
Future efforts are needed to bring these techniques to practice. Most importantly, since humans may show different wave
reflection patterns than animals, human testing is mandatory.
For example, the techniques should be evaluated in patients in
terms of both accuracy and predictive value relative to the conventional techniques. It would also be worthwhile to refine the
new techniques, especially by exploring more accurate arterial
models. If subsequent studies prove successful, then these techniques may be employed for more faithful monitoring of arterial
stiffness in hypertensive, end-stage renal disease, diabetic, and
geriatric patients. A more immediate application could be to
use the techniques as a short-term surrogate outcome of clinical
trials for determining the efficacy of therapies aimed at reducing
arterial stiffness.
DISCLOSURE
Retia Medical, LLC (East Lansing, MI, USA) is developing
technology involving the tube-load model upon which the techniques herein are based. MG is a paid intern for Retia Medical;
NBO has received a research grant from Retia Medical; and
RM is a paid consultant for, and has equity interests in, Retia
Medical.GZ declares no conflicts of interests.
REFERENCES
[1] J. C. Bramwell and A. V. Hill, “The velocity of the pulse wave in man,” in
Proc. Royal Soc. London Series B Containing Papers Biol. Char., vol. 93,
no. 652, pp. 298–306, 1922.
[2] A. U. Ferrari, A. Radaelli, and M. Centola, “Invited review: Aging and the
cardiovascular system,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 2591–2597,
2003.
[3] K. Hirata, M. Kawakami, and M. F. O’Rourke, “Pulse wave analysis and
pulse wave velocity—A review of blood pressure interpretation 100 years
after Korotkov,” Circulation J., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 1231–1239, 2006.
[4] H. Y. Lee and B. H. Oh, “Aging and arterial stiffness,” Circulation J.,
vol. 74, no. 11, pp. 2257–2262, 2010.
[5] G. Mancia, R. Fagard, K. Narkiewicz, and J. Redon, “2013 ESH/ESC
guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: The task force
for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of
Hypertension and of the European Society of Cardiology,” Eur. Heart J.,
vol. 34, no. 28, pp. 2159–219, Jul. 2013.
[6] C. Vlachopoulos, K. Aznaouridis, and C. Stefanadis, “Prediction of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality with arterial stiffness a systematic
review and meta-analysis,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 55, no. 13,
pp. 1318–1327, 2010.

857

[7] P. Boutouyrie, S. Laurent, and M. Briet, “Importance of arterial stiffness
as cardiovascular risk factor for future development of new type of drugs,”
Fundam. Clinical Pharmacol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 241–246, 2008.
[8] W. W. Nichols and M. F. O’Rourke, McDonal’s Blood Flow in Arteries,
5th ed.: London U.K., Hodder Arnold, 2005.
[9] A. Noordergraaf, Circulatory System Dynamics. New York, NY, USA:
Academic Press, 1978.
[10] S. Söderström, G. Nyberg, M. F. O’Rourke, J. Sellgren, J. Pontén,
S. Soderstrom, and J. Ponten, “Can a clinically useful aortic pressure
wave be derived from a radial pressure wave?”,” Brit. J. Anaesthesia,
vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 481–488, Apr. 2002.
[11] J. Sola, S. F. Rimoldii, and Y. Allemann, “Ambulatory monitoring of the
cardiovascular system: The role of pulse wave velocity,” New Developments Biomed. Eng., Ch. 12, pp. 391–424, 2010.
[12] W. Milnor, Hemodynamics. Baltimore, MD, USA: Williams & Wilkins,
1982.
[13] P. Boutouyrie, S. Laurent, and M. Briet, “Determinants of pulse wave velocity in healthy people and in the presence of cardiovascular risk factors:
‘Establishing normal and reference values,’,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 31, no. 19,
pp. 2338–2350, Oct. 2010.
[14] J. Sugawara, K. Hayashi, Y. Yokoi, and H. Yanaka, “Carotid-femoral pulse
wave velocity: Impact of different arterial path length measurements,”
Artery Res., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 27–31, 2010.
[15] J. Blacher, A. P. Guerin, B. Pannier, S. J. Marchais, M. E. Safar, and
G. M. London, “Impact of aortic stiffness on survival in end-stage renal
disease,” Circulation, vol. 99, no. 18, pp. 2434–2439, May 1999.
[16] A. P. Guerin, J. Blacher, B. Pannier, S. J. Marchais, M. E. Safar, and
G. M. London, “Impact of aortic stiffness attenuation on survival of patients in end-stage renal failure,” Circulation, vol. 103, no. 7, pp. 987–992,
Feb. 2001.
[17] J. D. Pruett, J. D. Bourland, and L. A. Geddes, “Measurement of pulsewave velocity using a beat-sampling technique,” Ann. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 341–347, 1988.
[18] M. Proença, A. Falhi, D. Ferrario, O. Grossenbacher, J. Porchet, J. Krauss,
and J. Sola, “Continuous non-occlusive blood pressure monitoring at the
sternum,” Biomedizinische Technik. Biomed. eng., vol. 57, pp. 2–5, Aug.
2012.
[19] H. Gesche, D. Grosskurth, G. Küchler, and A. Patzak, “Continuous blood
pressure measurement by using the pulse transit time: Comparison to a
cuff-based method,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 309–315,
Jan. 2012.
[20] Y. Choi, Q. Zhang, and S. Ko, “Noninvasive cuffless blood pressure estimation using pulse transit time and hilbert–huang transform,” Comput.
Electr. Eng., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 103–111, Jan. 2013.
[21] A. C. Burton, “Relation of structure to function of the tissues of the wall
of blood vessels,” Physiol. Rev., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 619–642, 1954.
[22] D. H. Bergel, “The dynamic elastic properties of the arterial wall,” J.
Physiol., pp. 458–469, 1961.
[23] P. Lantelme, C. Mestre, M. Lievre, A. Gressard, and H. Milon, “Heart
rate: An important confounder of pulse wave velocity assessment,” Hypertension, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1083–1087, Jun. 2002.
[24] C. S. Hayward, A. P. Avolio, and M. F. O’Rourke, “Arterial pulse wave
velocity and heart rate,” Hypertension, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. e8–e9, Oct. 2002.
[25] T. K. Waddell, A. M. Dart, T. L. Medley, J. D. Cameron, and
B. A. Kingwell, “Carotid pressure is a better predictor of coronary artery
disease severity than brachial pressure,” Hypertension, vol. 38, no. 4,
pp. 927–931, 2001.
[26] W.-C. Yu, S.-Y. Chuang, Y.-P. Lin, and C.-H. Chen, “Brachial-ankle vs
carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity as a determinant of cardiovascular
structure and function,” J. Human Hypertension, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 24–31,
Jan. 2008.
[27] J. Blacher, B. Pannier, A. P. Guerin, S. J. Marchais, M. E. Safar, and
G. M. London, “Carotid arterial stiffness as a predictor of cardiovascular
and all-cause mortality in end-stage renal disease,” Hypertension, vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 570–574, Sept. 1998.
[28] G. Zhang, M. Gao, and R. Mukkamala, “Robust, beat-to-beat estimation
of the true pulse transit time from central and peripheral blood pressure or
flow waveforms using an arterial tube-load model,” in Proc. 2011 Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 2011, pp. 4291–4294.
[29] D. Xu, G. Zhang, N. Olivier, and R. Mukkamala, “Monitoring aortic
stiffness in the presence of measurement artifact based on an arterial
tube model,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Jan., vol. 2010,
pp. 3453–3456.
[30] J.-O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, and H. H. Asada, “Estimation of pulse transit
time using two diametric blood pressure waveform measurements,” Med.
Eng. Phys., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 753–759, Sept. 2010.

858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

[31] J.-O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, F. A. Jaffer, and H. H. Asada, “Subject-specific
estimation of central aortic blood pressure using an individualized transfer function: A preliminary feasibility study,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 212–20, Mar. 2012.
[32] G. Swamy, N. B. Olivier, and R. Mukkamala, “Calculation of forward and
backward arterial waves by analysis of two pressure waveforms,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 2833–2839, Dec. 2010.
[33] G. Swamy, D. Xu, N. B. Olivier, and R. Mukkamala, “An adaptive transfer
function for deriving the aortic pressure waveform from a peripheral artery
pressure waveform,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 297, no. 5, pp. H1956–H1963,
Nov. 2009.
[34] M. Sugimachi, T. Shishido, K. Miyatake, and K. Sunagawa, “A new
model-based method of reconstructing central aortic pressure from peripheral arterial pressure,” Jpn. J. Physiol., vol. 51, pp. 217–222, 2001.
[35] T. J. Mullen, M. L. Appel, R. Mukkamala, J. M. Mathias, and R. J. Cohen,
“System identification of closed-loop cardiovascular control: Effects of
posture and autonomic blockade,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 272, pp. H448–
H461, 1997.
[36] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[37] L. Ljung, System Identification: Theory for the User. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, USA: Prentice Hall, 1987.
[38] R. Mukkamala, A. T. Reisner, H. M. Hojman, R. G. Mark, and
R. J. Cohen, “Continuous cardiac output monitoring by peripheral blood
pressure waveform analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 459–467, Mar. 2006.
[39] D. Ross, Animal Models in Cardiovascular Research, 3rd ed. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2009, p. 135.
[40] Y. C. Chiu, P. W. Arand, S. G. Shroff, T. Feldman, and J. D. Carroll,
“Determination of pulse-wave velocities with computerized algorithms,”
Amer. Heart J., vol. 121, no. 5, pp. 1460–1470, 1991.
[41] E. Hermeling, K. D. Reesink, R. S. Reneman, and A. P. G. Hoeks, “Measurements of local pulse wave velocity: Effect of signal processing on
precision,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 774–781, 2007.
[42] O. Vardoulis, T. G. Papaioannou, and N. Stergiopulos, “Validation of a
novel and existing algorithms for the estimation of pulse transit time:
Advancing the accuracy in pulse wave velocity measurement,” Amer. J.
Physiol. Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 304, no. 11, pp. H1558–H1567,
Jun. 2013.
[43] K. H. Parker, “An introduction to wave intensity analysis,” Med. Biol.
Eng. Comput., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 175–188, 2009.
[44] T. W. Latson, W. C. Hunter, N. Katoh, and K. Sagawa, “Effect of nitroglycerin on aortic impedance, diameter, and pulse-wave velocity,” Circulation
Res., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 884–890, May 1988.
[45] R. M. Xu, D. K. L. Ryan, C. A. Rickards, G. Zhang, and V. A. Convertino,
“Improved pulse transit time estimation by system identification analysis
of proximal and distal arterial waveforms,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 301,
pp. 1389–1395, 2011.
[46] G. Zhang, J.-O. Hahn, and R. Mukkamala, “Tube-load model parameter
estimation for monitoring arterial hemodynamics,” Frontiers Physiol.,
vol. 2, no. November, p. 72, Jan. 2011.
[47] A. W. Khir and K. H. Parker, “Wave intensity in the ascending aorta:
Effects of arterial occlusion,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 647–
655, Apr. 2005.
[48] P. Segers and P. Verdonck, “Role of tapering in aortic wave reflection:
Hydraulic and mathematical model study,” J. Biomech., vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 299–306, 2000.
[49] M. F. Orourke and T. Yaginuma, “Wave reflections and the arterial pulse,”
Archives Internal Med., vol. 144, no. 2, pp. 366–371, 1984.
[50] T. Weber, M. Ammer, M. Rammer, A. Adji, M. F. O’Rourke,
S. Wassertheurer, S. Rosenkranz, and B. Eber, “Noninvasive determination of carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity depends critically on assessment of travel distance: A comparison with invasive measurement,”
J. Hypertension, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1624–1630, Aug. 2009.

Mingwu Gao received the B.S. degree in electrical
engineering at Chu Kochen Honors College, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, in 2007, and the M.S.
degree in electrical engineering at Ohio State University, Columbus, USA, in 2009. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree from the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, USA.
He completed a summer internship in Real
Time Embedded System Lab, GE Global Research,
Niskayuna NY, in 2012. He is an Intern at Retia Medical LLC. His current research interests include biomedical signal processing,
patient monitoring, hemodynamic modeling, and system identification.

Guanqun Zhang received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Fudan University, Shanghai,
China, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA, in 2012.
He is currently a Senior Scientist in Sotera Wireless, Inc., San Diego, CA. His current research
interests include vital signs monitoring, hemodynamic system modeling, and cardiovascular signal
processing.

N. Bari Olivier received the D.V.M. degree in veterinary medicine from Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, USA, in 1981, and the Ph.D. degree
in physiology from Michigan State University, East
Lansing, USA, in 1990.
Since 1990, he has been at the Faculty of the
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, where he is currently an Associate Professor and Chief of Clinical Cardiology. His current
research interests include cardiovascular physiology
and biomedical engineering, with a specific interest in cardiac electrophysiology
as it pertains to arrhythmias.

Ramakrishna Mukkamala (M’02) received the
B.S.E. degree in biomedical/electrical engineering
from Duke University, Durham, NC, USA, in 1993,
and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, in 1995
and 2000, respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow/Research Engineer
at the Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and
Technology, Cambridge, from 2000 to 2002. Since
then, he has been on the faculty of the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA, where he is currently a Professor. He is a Paid Consultant for, and
has equity interests in, Retia Medical. His current research interests include
biomedical signal processing and identification, modeling of physiologic systems, cardiovascular physiology, and patient monitoring.
Dr. Mukkamala was a recipient of an AHA Scientist Development Grant in
2005, an NSF CAREER Award in 2007, and an MSU Teacher-Scholar Award
in 2008.

