IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

957

Application of Describing Function Analysis
to a Model of Deep Brain Stimulation
Clare Muireann Davidson∗ , Annraoi M. de Paor, and Madeleine M. Lowery

Abstract—Deep brain stimulation effectively alleviates motor
symptoms of medically refractory Parkinson’s disease, and also
relieves many other treatment–resistant movement and affective
disorders. Despite its relative success as a treatment option, the basis of its efficacy remains elusive. In Parkinson’s disease, increased
functional connectivity and oscillatory activity occur within the
basal ganglia as a result of dopamine loss. A correlative relationship between pathological oscillatory activity and the motor
symptoms of the disease, in particular bradykinesia, rigidity, and
tremor, has been established. Suppression of the oscillations by
either dopamine replacement or DBS also correlates with an improvement in motor symptoms. DBS parameters are currently chosen empirically using a “trial and error” approach, which can be
time-consuming and costly. The work presented here amalgamates
concepts from theories of neural network modeling with nonlinear control engineering to describe and analyze a model of synchronous neural activity and applied stimulation. A theoretical
expression for the optimum stimulation parameters necessary to
suppress oscillations is derived. The effect of changing stimulation
parameters (amplitude and pulse duration) on induced oscillations
is studied in the model. Increasing either stimulation pulse duration or amplitude enhanced the level of suppression. The predicted
parameters were found to agree well with clinical measurements
reported in the literature for individual patients. It is anticipated
that the simplified model described may facilitate the development
of protocols to aid optimum stimulation parameter choice on a
patient by patient basis.
Index Terms—Basal ganglia, control theory, mean field model,
Parkinson’s disease, pathological oscillations.

α
û

ω
a
b
c

NOMENCLATURE
Fractional pulse duration of the applied stimulation.
Equivalent non-linearity: a mathematical combination
of the sigmoidal non-linearity and the applied stimulation.
Angular frequency at which oscillations occur (rad/s).
Amplitude of the applied stimulation.
Parameter to determine the frequency of the oscillations in the model.
Variable to allow mathematical simplification.

Manuscript received February 8, 2013; revised October 19, 2013; accepted
November 24, 2013. Date of publication December 6, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. This work was supported by the Science Foundation
Ireland under Grant 10/RFP/ECE2720. This work was presented in a preliminary form at the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Conference 2011
[36]. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ C. M. Davidson is with the School of Electrical, Electronic and Communications Engineering, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland (e-mail:
clare.davidson@ucdconnect.ie).
A. M. de Paor and M. M. Lowery are with the School of Electrical, Electronic
and Communications Engineering, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
(e-mail: annraoi.depaor@ucd.ie; madeleine.lowery@ucd.ie).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2294325

d
D(Ym )
f
g
G(s)
h
i
K
k
m
n
P (s)
T
u
y
Ym

Variable to allow mathematical simplification.
Describing function.
Variable to allow mathematical simplification.
Scaling factor to convert arbitrary units of amplitude
to milliamps.
Transfer function.
Parameter to reflect the effect of dopamine on the
system.
Stimulation intensity of clinical data points (mA).
Total gain around the loop.
Parameter which sets the range of values of h for which
oscillations are obtained.
Minimization variable.
Minimization variable.
Characteristic polynomial of linearized feedback loop.
Period of the applied stimulation (s).
Deviation from zero of the total synaptic current of
the population of neurons in the model.
Deviation from zero of the local field potential of the
population of neurons in the model.
Amplitude of oscillations generated in the model.
I. INTRODUCTION

EEP brain stimulation (DBS) is a clinically accepted treatment for the symptoms of advanced Parkinson’s disease
(PD) when they are no longer readily controllable with drug
therapy alone. The principal sites of application found to be
effective are the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and the globus pallidus pars interna (GPi) [1], [2], with other targets including the
globus pallidus pars externa (GPe) [3] and the pedunculopontine nucleus [4] also yielding improvements in motor symptoms.
Although several hypotheses have been proposed in an attempt
to elucidate the basis for the clinical efficacy of DBS, the underlying mechanisms of action are still not clearly understood.
In current clinical practice, stimulation parameter settings are
chosen using a “trial and error” approach [5], [6]. This is a
time consuming and expensive process for both patients and
clinicians, with no guarantee that the optimum stimulation parameters will eventually be reached. In general, stimulation at a
frequency greater than 100 Hz, and normally in the 130–185 Hz
range, is required to relieve motor symptoms of the disease,
and clinical studies report that DBS amplitudes ranging from
1–5 V and pulse durations from 60–450 μs have been found to
be effective [7]–[9].
Abnormal, pathological activity occurs in the neurons of the
basal ganglia (BG) in both patient [10], [11] and animal models [12], [13] of Parkinson’s disease. An increase in spontaneous firing rate and periodic oscillatory activity is typically

D

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

recorded [14]–[16]. A correlation between this oscillatory activity and the motor symptoms of PD has been observed. In
particular, a link between oscillations in the beta-band range of
frequencies (12–30 Hz) and bradykinesia and rigidity has been
established [17], [18], in addition to a correlative relationship
between oscillations in the tremor (or theta) frequency range
(3–10 Hz) and limb tremor in patients [19]. DBS has been shown
to suppress beta and tremor oscillatory activity in recorded LFP
data, with a parallel improvement in the Parkinsonian motor
symptoms of the patient observed [18], [20].
Within the BG, the STN forms an important feedback loop
with the GPe. Based on results from an in vitro study of isolated
cortex-striatum-STN–GPe cultures, Plenz and Kital hypothesized that this loop can form a central BG pacemaker that effectively dictates the synchronized oscillatory activity observed
in both the normal and pathological BG [21]. They concluded
that the synchronized bursting activity of their in vitro model
captures the major pattern of activity observed in an in vivo animal model. This idea was explored theoretically by Gillies et al.
who developed a computational model capturing the dynamics
of the STN–GPe loop and studied the conditions under which
the system generates repetitive bursting oscillations [22]. Many
subsequent computational studies have also used the BG pacemaker circuit that arose from the experimental work of Plenz
and Kital as the basis for simulating pathological neuronal oscillations in Parkinson’s disease [23]–[25]. An alternative hypothesis to the central pacemaker proposed in [21] is similarly
founded on the basis of enhanced neural synchronization. This
theory suggests that the synchronized activity is not limited
to the STN–GPe loop, but involves much of the basal gangliathalamocortical motor circuit (BGTCMC), with the pathological
oscillations present in Parkinson’s disease arising from a loss
of segregation within the nuclei of the BG [26]. This abnormal
coupling of cortical and BG loops may be induced by the loss of
striatal dopamine in Parkinson’s disease [27]. There is growing
evidence that this increase in interneuron synchrony occurring
as a result of dopamine depletion plays a critical role in the
pathology of Parkinson’s disease [14], [28]–[30]. Alterations in
the connectivity resulting in a reorganization of the BGTCMC,
due to the chronic dopamine depletion of Parkinson’s disease,
was observed by Moran et al. using an animal model of the
disease to optimize a theoretical model of this circuit [31]. An
increase in functional connectivity was also revealed in a recent
functional MRI study [32]. However, it was also noted in [33]
that this increased coupling, in particular in the context of the
STN and GPe, could be a cause or as a result of the changes in
activity of these neuronal circuits.
Although initial studies focused on changes in firing rates
of target nuclei, there is growing evidence that DBS exerts at
least some of its therapeutic influence through the suppression
of pathological oscillations. In order to investigate this theoretically, the study presented in this paper focuses on exploring a new, macroscopic neural-mass-type model which can
be adapted to represent any synchronous group of neurons.
The model captures key features of the physiological system
representing an oscillating closed loop within the BGTCMC
and the pathological oscillations occurring in Parkinson’s dis-

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of simplified mean field model of synchrony
within a closed loop of interacting neurons, and (b) the intersection of the G(jω)
and D (Y1 ) loci, illustrated with b = k = 50π. This intersection is the critical
m
point for oscillations to occur in the model, as described in (12).

ease. The model is developed using concepts from control system engineering and allows the emergence and suppression of
oscillations to be studied. The resemblance of the DBS suppression of pathological oscillations in the BGTCMC to the
concept of “high-frequency” dither injection used to quench
“low-frequency” oscillations in nonlinear control feedback
loops was initially explored in [34]. The model described in [34]
is simplified in this study, and the analysis further developed,
utilizing control system theory. This approach allows the inclusion of a model of DBS reflecting the parameters typical of
a clinical setting. The effect of changing DBS amplitude and
pulse duration is examined through the exploration of analytical
expressions in the model described. The model predictions are
then compared with clinical data obtained from the published
literature [35]. Although the results are specific to this model, it
is envisaged that by studying this system of reduced complexity, insight can be gained into the mode of action of DBS that
may be applicable in a clinical setting, revealing potential improvements to current practice and guiding the design of future
stimulation paradigms.
II. METHODS
A. Model Development
1) Second order model: The model presented here represents a population of neurons. The mean field potential is taken
as the output from the population, and summarizes the behavior of the network. As is common in this field [37], the loop
model contains a sigmoidal, nonlinear element, and a transfer
function, Fig. 1(a). This represents one of the simplest possible
positive feedback loops that will generate and sustain oscilla-

DAVIDSON et al.: APPLICATION OF DESCRIBING FUNCTION ANALYSIS TO A MODEL OF DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION

tions. The output u from the sigmoidal nonlinearity represents
the deviation from zero of the total synaptic current of the group
of neurons, and y, the output from the transfer function block
is the deviation from zero of the resulting local field potential
(LFP), i.e., the extracellular voltage recorded in the vicinity of
this group of neurons. Here, this loop is used to represent a
neuronal circuit in the BGTCMC, based on the premise that increased synchronized oscillatory activity occurs in this network
in Parkinson’s disease.
A sigmoidal function is typically used in classic mean field
models to represent the relationship between the average membrane depolarization and the average neuron firing rate or population response [37], [38]. As described in [38], the significance
of the sigmoidal shape to the physiology is intuitive; in a population of neurons, if the level of excitation is too low, it will
fail to excite any neurons, whereas a plateau representing the
maximum level of excitation of the population is reached at
and above the excitation level necessary to maximally excite all
neurons. The sigmoidal representation is also consistent with
response curves from single cell recordings. For mathematical
convenience, the sigmoid in this model is chosen as the arctan
function
u=

y
2
arctan
π
h

(1)

where we propose that h reflects the effect of dopamine on the
system, as this is the parameter that increases the gain (or excitability) in the model when decreased. Since the total synaptic
current should be inversely related to the level of dopamine,
h thus plays a role analogous to the role of dopamine in the
BG [30]. The sigmoid is centered at the origin on the x–y plane,
as from a mathematical viewpoint, this cancels out the dc offset
of the output from the function. The transfer function G(s) in
the model is chosen as second order and given as
G(s) =

ks
.
(s + b)2

(2)

This is the simplest second-order form of G(s) which will generate and sustain oscillations. The choice of a second-order
system follows from the demonstration by Rosenblum and
Pikovsky [39], that the LFP of a group of interconnected neurons with excitatory interconnections grows in accordance with
second-order dynamics. The mean field evolution differential
equation given in complex number terms in [39] is reformulated
in [40] as two coupled nonlinear ordinary differential equations
and analyzed in polar coordinates illustrating the second-order
nature of the dynamics. The parameters b and k are constants,
with b setting the frequency of the resulting oscillations and
k setting the range of values of h for which oscillations are
obtained. In the fourth-order model of the system described
in [34], from which this model is developed, the transfer function has a zeroth-order numerator. However, in this second-order
model, the s term (or zero) is introduced as it is necessary to
obtain the desired oscillatory behavior in this system of reduced
complexity.

959

In small signal analysis, the sigmoid (1) may be represented
by its gain at the origin as

2
du 
(3)
=
dy y =0
πh
and the characteristic polynomial of the linearized feedback loop
is given by
P (s) = (s + b)2 − Ks

(4)

where s = σ + jω is the Laplace transform variable. K is used
to represent the gain around the loop, which in this case is π2kh .
2

The root locus calibration equation, given by K = (s+b)
,
s
is used to find the values of|K|which yield root loci [41]. To
determine the gain at which harmonic oscillation at angular
frequency ω = b will result, we set s = jb and arrive at k =
πbh. For k > πbh, the saturation inherent in the arctan function
limits the oscillation amplitude, while the frequency remains
approximately constant.
As h, the parameter modeling the effect of dopamine on the
system, is decreased, the slope of the arctan function close to
the origin π2h increases. This leads to an increase in the small
signal gain around the loop making it more excitable. From (3)
it is clear that by decreasing h, analogous to the depletion of
dopamine in the BG, oscillations will eventually result. This is
consistent with the assumed model of the physiological system
where a decrease in the level of dopamine in the BG leads to
an increase in functional connectivity, and hence an increase in
excitability resulting from the loss of segregation of previously
distinct BG loops. The amplitude of oscillations in the model
is limited by the saturation effect of the arctan function, again
reflecting the neuronal population dynamics.
2) Addition of DBS: The DBS waveform is modeled as a
biphasic rectangular, periodic pulse train applied additively at
the input to the sigmoidal function. a denotes the amplitude
of stimulation, with T the period, and α is the fractional pulse
duration, defined as the fraction of T occupied by either the
positive or negative pulse, both of which are of equal duration
and equal amplitude. It is assumed that the frequency of this
stimulation lies well above the passband of the transfer function
G(s).
In order to simplify the model for the ease of analysis, the
concept of the equivalent nonlinearity is utilized [42]. This can
be used as both an analysis technique in order to examine the
effect of a combination of a high-frequency signal, known as
“dither,” and a nonlinearity, or as a synthesis technique, where
the applied high-frequency dither signal is constructed for a
specific system in order to produce a more desirable nonlinear
function [43]. In this study, the analysis technique is applied
such that the original nonlinearity (the sigmoid), and the applied DBS are combined mathematically, resulting in a single
“equivalent nonlinearity” [34], [42]. Since the frequency of the
DBS is much higher than the system oscillation frequency, it
may be assumed that y remains constant over a DBS cycle. The
signal u consists of a slowly varying component superimposed
on a series of harmonics of the DBS frequency. These harmonics
are strongly attenuated by G(s), so that y essentially responds

960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

to the low-frequency component of u, which we denote by û,
evaluated as the mean value of u over a cycle of DBS. Under
these conditions [44], the equivalent nonlinearity replaces the
original sigmoid and the applied stimulation. The effective output of the equivalent nonlinearity û depends on both a and α,
and may be expressed as





y+a
y−a
2
α · arctan
+ α · arctan
û =
π
h
h
y
. (5)
+ (1 − 2α) · arctan
h
The input to the arctan function spends a fraction α of the
period T at y + a and a fraction α of the period at y − a. For
the remaining fraction (1 − 2α) the input to the arctan is equal
to y. The validity of (5) depends upon it being possible, with acceptable accuracy, to consider y constant over a cycle of DBS.
Typically, the frequency of DBS in clinical practice is of the
order of 130–185 Hz, whereas the pathological oscillations exhibited in Parkinson’s disease, represented here by y, are in
the tremor (3–10 Hz) and beta (12–30 Hz) range of frequencies [28]. Thus, y can be regarded as being constant over a DBS
cycle. This brings the problem within the range of validity of the
equivalent nonlinearity, as discussed on a Fourier series basis
in [44]. The validity of this substitution has been confirmed by
simulation for a fourth-order representation of the system [34],
and equally can be shown to apply to the second-order model
studied here. The slope at the origin of the equivalent nonlinearity is then given by


2
2αa2
dû
=
.
(6)
1− 2
dy y =0
πh
a + h2
The increase in the slope of the original nonlinearity π2h caused
by a decrease in h is thus offset in (6) by the reduction of the
term in square brackets occurring as either the DBS amplitude or
pulse duration is increased, thereby counteracting the increase in
excitability around the loop and suppressing oscillatory activity
once again.
B. Model Analysis
1) Describing Function Analysis: The describing function
is the effective gain relating a sinusoidal input to the fundamental sinusoidal component of the resulting output of a nonlinear
element [45]. Describing function analysis is a technique commonly used in control engineering, and is applied here to both
the sigmoidal nonlinearity (the arctan function u versus y) and
the “sigmoid plus DBS” equivalent nonlinearity (û versus y).
This is to allow further examination of the effects of changing
the amplitude, pulse duration, and frequency of the applied stimulation on oscillations in the model. The describing function, or
equivalent gain, of a nonlinear element subjected to a sinusoidal
input is, in general, a function of both the amplitude and the
frequency of the input [45]. Describing function analysis is an
approximation technique, however it is considered to be a reliable estimation of the effective gain provided the linear part
of the system is low pass, and therefore filters out the higher
order harmonics generated by the nonlinear characteristic [46].

In order to calculate the describing function, the fundamental
component of the output of the nonlinearity is found by standard
Fourier analysis [41], [45]. In the special case that the nonlinearity is an odd function (as applies here), there is no phase shift
between the fundamental component of the output and the input,
and so the describing function is a real valued function. Assuming an oscillation within the system which is close enough to
sinusoidal, the representation
y = Ym sin ωt

(7)

may be made, and following the technique outlined in [41],
where


	 2π
ω
Ym sin ωt
2
ω
arctan
D(Ym ) =
sin ωt · dt (8)
πYm t=0 π
h
the describing function of the arctan nonlinearity is evaluated as



Ym2
4h
+1−1 .
(9)
D(Ym ) =
πYm2
h2
The describing function of the equivalent nonlinearity, û versus Ym , representing the original arctan nonlinearity and the
applied stimulation, given explicitly in (5), considering y to
be constant over a DBS cycle as explained previously, is simωt
) in (8) by α ·
ilarly evaluated by replacing arctan( Y m sin
h
y +a
y −a
arctan( h ) + α · arctan( h ) + (1 − 2α) · arctan( hy ). This
yields



Ym2
4h
+1−1
D(Ym ) =
πYm2
h2



8αh
Ym2
Ym
−
(f )
(10)
+1−
πYm2
h2
h
where f is given by



 2
2
(d
+
1
−
c
)
+
(d2 + 1 − c2 )2 + 4c2 d2

f=
2

(11)

with c = Yam and d = Yhm . For all choices of c and d examined,
the value of the describing function at Ym = 0 is the maximum
value of D(Ym ). Since the describing function represents an
equivalent gain of the nonlinearity, it follows that as the amplitude of the input signal approaches zero, the value of the
describing function approaches the small signal gain of the nonlinearity, which is equal to the slope at the origin of the original
nonlinearity (when no DBS is applied), or of the equivalent
nonlinearity (when DBS is applied).
In terms of the describing function, the condition for the
existence of a steady state, almost sinusoidal oscillation in a
positive feedback loop is
G(jw) =

1
.
D(Ym )

(12)

By evaluating G(jw) at w = b, the critical value of D(Ym ) for
oscillations to occur in the model is found to be 2b
k (detailed in
Appendix). This is illustrated in Fig. 1(b), where the intersection
k
. Equating 2b
point of the G(jω) and D (Y1 m ) loci occurs at 2b
k

DAVIDSON et al.: APPLICATION OF DESCRIBING FUNCTION ANALYSIS TO A MODEL OF DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION

961

with (9) and solving for Ym , the amplitude of the model output,
yields

in [35]. Squaring (15) and rearranging yields

 

i2j =


Ym =

2k
πb



1−

πbh
.
k

(13)

It has been confirmed by simulation that (13) gives a reliable
value for the amplitude of the oscillation in the range k > πbh.
This is illustrated in Fig. 3, where the oscillation amplitude of
simulations for particular values of h are shown with the plot of
(13).
2) Comparison of Model Predictions with Clinical Data: In
the clinical setting, DBS is typically applied at frequencies in
excess of 100 Hz. Both the amplitude and pulse duration of the
stimulation can then be adjusted as required to yield the desired
clinical response. In order to examine the effects of changing
these parameters in the theoretical model, the critical amplitude
of stimulation ac necessary for suppressing the oscillations of
the system was expressed as a function of the fractional pulse
duration α. Equating (6) which represents the gain at the origin
of the equivalent nonlinearity (original sigmoidal nonlinearity
with applied stimulation), which is equal to the describing func1
tion evaluated at Ym = 0, with 2b
k , the critical value of G (j b) for
oscillations to occur, yields an expression for ac , the value of a
that just suppresses oscillations in the system

ac = h

(1 −
2α −

π bh
k )
.
(1 − π kbh )

(14)

To compare the model predictions with clinical observations,
data published in [35] presenting the relationship between the
electrical stimulation frequency and the DBS intensity necessary to alleviate tremor in four individual patients was obtained
from the literature (with permission, A. L. Benabid) and fitted to
the theoretical curve described in (14) using a least-squares minimization routine. This aims to minimize the error between the
theoretically generated data of the amplitude of stimulation necessary to just obtain suppression of the oscillations in the model,
and the clinical measurements of the amplitude of stimulation
to just abolish tremor in the patients. Four subject datasets were
presented graphically in [35]. The data points for frequencies
of stimulation less than 320 Hz were obtained from each of
these, and converted to the form (αj , ij ), where ij is the stimulation intensity (in milliamps), necessary to abolish tremor for
the corresponding fractional pulse duration αj calculated from
the frequency and pulse duration (60 μs) of the applied stimulation. Letting k = b in (14), which absorbs the scaling of k
into the parameter h, and hence mathematically simplifies the
expression, the fit to the clinical data can be described by

ij = gh

1 − πh
2αj − (1 − πh)

(15)

for a particular choice of g and h, where g is a scaling factor
to convert the dimensionless units in (14) to milliamps as used

2αj i2j
− (gh)2 .
1 − πh

(16)

1
Taking m = (gh)2 and n = 1−π
h , the error function to be minimized in order to obtain the optimum fit of the theoretical curve
to each set of the data points is defined as

E=

N


2
m − 2αj i2j n + i2j .

(17)

j =1
E
Setting δδ m
and δδEn equal to zero yields two simultaneous equations that can be expressed in the form
 
m
Y =A
(18)
n

where

⎡

N


⎤

⎢ −
⎥
⎢
⎥
j =1
⎢
⎥
⎥
Y =⎢
⎢ N
⎥
⎢ 
⎥
⎣−
4⎦
αj ij
i2j

(19)

j =1

and

⎡
⎢ N
⎢
⎢
A=⎢
⎢ N
⎢
⎣
αj i2j
j =1

−2

N


⎤
αj i2j

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥.
⎥
N
⎥

2 2⎦
−2
α i
j =1

(20)

j j

j =1

The solution obtained for m and n gives the optimum fit of the
theoretical curve described by (14) to the specified clinical data
points.
III. RESULTS
A. Describing Function
Fig. 2 presents the emergence and suppression of oscillations
in the model of the system in terms of the describing function.
The dotted line, equal to 2b
k in each figure, marks the threshold above which oscillations are present in the system. The
simulated steady-state output of the model is also shown for
each case. Fig. 2(a) illustrates a nonoscillating system, where
D(Ym ) plotted as a function of the amplitude of oscillation
Ym lies entirely below the critical ordinate 2b
k . This is plotted using (9) with h = 0.35, and represents a non-Parkinsonian
state. In Fig. 2(b) the value of h is reduced to 0.28, a value at
which the plot of D(Ym ) intersects the 2b
k point, indicating that
oscillations are introduced into the system, representing synchronous oscillations generated by strongly coupled neurons
under Parkinsonian conditions. The third plot, Fig. 2(c), shows
the same h value as in Fig. 2(b), but with the introduction of
DBS (a = 15 and α = 0.052, equivalent to a 400 μs pulse duration at a frequency of 130 Hz). This counteracts the decrease
in h, causing the maximum value of the describing function,
which is equal to the slope of the equivalent nonlinearity, as

962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 4. Amplitude of oscillations (normalized values) present in the system
as a function of amplitude of applied DBS, given in arbitrary units a.u. The
plot illustrates five different pulse durations of stimulation, ranging from 60 to
400 μs. h is chosen to be 0.313.

Fig. 2. D(Y m ) plotted as a function of the amplitude of oscillation, Y m , as
given in (9), with the simulated steady-state output of the corresponding system
also shown. Y m is given in arbitrary units (a.u.). The ordinate 2 which has been
emphasized with a dotted line is 2kb with b = k, which is the threshold above
which oscillations will be present in the system. (a) Depicts a nonoscillating system, where h = 0.35. (b) Shows the intersection that occurs with the decreased
value of h = 0.28 representing a system with a depleted level of dopamine.
(c) DBS (a = 15 and α = 0.052) is applied to the system causing D(Y m = 0)
in (10) to approach the critical value 2kb , thus counteracting the decrease in h
and thereby suppressing the oscillations.

Fig. 5. Amplitude of oscillations (normalized values) present in the system as
a function of pulse duration of applied DBS. The plot illustrates five different
amplitudes of stimulation. h is chosen to be 0.313.

Fig. 3. Amplitude of oscillations Y m in the system as a function of the parameter h, which represents the effect of dopamine on the system. The discrete
points show the amplitude of oscillations from simulations of the model for
particular values of h. Both h and Y m are in arbitrary units (a.u), and b = k.

in (6), to approach the critical 2b
k ordinate, with the result that
oscillations are markedly suppressed in the system.
The amplitude of oscillations Ym in the zero DBS system,
calculated from (13), is presented in Fig. 3 as a function of h, the
parameter representing the effect of dopamine on the system.
Oscillations occur in the system for π kbh < 1 and continue to
increase in amplitude as h decreases. In this figure, b and k are
assumed to be equal.
B. Suppression of Oscillations by High-Frequency Stimulation
Figs. 4 and 5 are based on equating the describing function
under DBS given in (10) to the critical value 2b
k , with b = k.
Fig. 4 presents the amplitude of oscillations in the model plotted

as a function of the amplitude of stimulation for five different
pulse durations. The amplitude of oscillation is normalized
with
√
respect to the amplitude without DBS, which is π2 1 − πh, as
follows from (13). Stimulation is applied at a fixed frequency of
130 Hz, and the curves are parametrized by DBS pulse duration.
Oscillation amplitude is reduced as the stimulation amplitude
is increased. In addition, suppression of the oscillations in the
system is achieved at lower amplitudes of stimulation for longer
pulse durations. Fig. 5 presents the normalized amplitude of
oscillations as a function of pulse duration for five different
amplitudes of stimulation. As in the previous figure, suppression
of the oscillations in the system is obtained at shorter pulse
durations for higher amplitudes of stimulation.
C. Comparison With Clinical Data
For any particular value of the parameter h chosen, the model
predicts that there exists a minimum value of stimulation amplitude a, necessary to suppress the ensuing oscillations, as given
in (14). This minimum value is also dependent upon the pulse
duration or frequency of stimulation used. Fig. 6 illustrates the
clinical data from four patients obtained from [35], in which
the minimum amplitude of stimulation in milliamps necessary
to alleviate tremor in both Parkinsonian and essential tremor
patients for a range of stimulation frequencies, at a fixed pulse
duration of 60 μs, was measured. These data were fitted to the

DAVIDSON et al.: APPLICATION OF DESCRIBING FUNCTION ANALYSIS TO A MODEL OF DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION

Fig. 6. Clinical data for four patients taken from [35] fitted using a leastsquares minimization routine to the theoretical curve given by (14), which
describes the critical stimulation amplitude necessary to suppress the oscillations
in the system as a function of the pulse duration of stimulation (converted here
to frequency). The stimulation amplitude was converted to milliamps using a
scaling factor, and is expressed as a function of frequency of stimulation. A
pulse duration of 60 μs was used, as in [35]. The values of h and g calculated
for each patient data set is shown on each plot.

theoretical curve obtained from the model using the leastsquares minimization routine described. It was plotted as a
function of frequency of stimulation calculated from pulse duration of stimulation using the relationship between this α the
fractional pulse duration and the frequency of stimulation.
IV. DISCUSSION
Control theory and concepts applied to the theoretical analysis of nonlinear feedback systems are utilized in this study to
provide a framework with which to explore the effects of highfrequency stimulation on oscillations in a second-order model
representing excessive neural synchrony in Parkinson’s disease.
Describing function analysis, a well-established framework in
nonlinear control systems [45], is used to analyze the effects of
changing the parameters of the applied stimulation in the model.
The methods employed to investigate the model ensure that
it is analytically tractable, and enable theoretical analysis and
cause and effect relationships to be established in a manner not
possible with more complex network-type models. This allows
the relationships between stimulation parameters and the amplitude of oscillations in the system to be explored, and also the
minimum amplitude and pulse duration of stimulation required
to suppress oscillations to be predicted. The theoretical predictions are compared to clinical data presented as the relationship
between the electrical stimulation frequency and the DBS intensity necessary to alleviate tremor in four individual patients,
published in [35].
Using the theoretical model, the complete elimination of oscillations was explored. In order to achieve the required clinical
outcome in a patient however, it may be necessary only to reduce the amplitude of the oscillations to a particular fraction of
their original amplitude, rather than eliminate oscillatory activity entirely. In the model, the parameters α and a, representing
fractional pulse duration of stimulation and amplitude of stimulation, respectively, are adjusted independently. This is based on

963

the fact that they do not occur as a simple product in (5), and so
for example, doubling one and halving the other does not yield
the same effect on the amplitude of oscillations in the system.
Identification of the optimal stimulation parameters should also
take into account both the minimization of side effects in the
patient and power consumption in order to maximize battery
life.
There is a wide variation in response times of the different
Parkinsonian symptoms to the DBS [6]. Although the maximum
effect on some symptoms, for example rigidity, occurs within
a minute of applying stimulation, others, including bradykinesia, can take days to reach maximal improvement [6]. Clinical
data may therefore, although indicative, not give an accurate
reflection of optimum parameter settings, as the clinical effect
of the stimulation is assessed over a relatively short time period,
minutes rather than hours or days.
Theoretical models enable the system level response of a
neural population to be studied in a mathematically simplified
manner due to the reduced number of parameters. This can be
advantageous as it allows comparison with clinical data which
reflects the activity of a neural ensemble where recording from
individual neurons is not possible [47]. It is also possible to include a model of DBS reflecting the parameters typical of those
used in a clinical setting. An obvious limitation to manipulating
the model at a system level is that subtle relationships between
small groups of neurons are lost, and so physiological detail and
accuracy are reduced.
The trend of the theoretical results illustrated in Figs. 4 and
5 are supported by clinical studies reported in the literature [5],
[8], [9]. Moro et al. observed a progressive improvement in
bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor as the amplitude of stimulation was increased for fixed frequency and pulse duration, as
well as a progressive improvement in these three symptoms
with increasing frequency above 50 Hz, although with maximum benefit observed at 185 Hz [7]. In [8], postural and action
tremor was measured in order to quantify the clinical effectiveness of the applied stimulation. Tremor amplitude decreased as
the amplitude of applied stimulation was increased with a pulse
duration of 120 μs reported to be up to 30% more effective than
the 60 μs pulse duration. Similarly, Rizzone et al. reported a
decrease in the amplitude of stimulation necessary to achieve
a reduction in contra-lateral wrist rigidity as the pulse duration
was increased [9]. In the model presented in this study, when
compared to the DBS-off state the oscillations are reduced by
14.7% for a pulse duration of 60 μs and 31.5% for a pulse duration of 120 μs for stimulation applied at 130 Hz with a = 0.2.
When the stimulation amplitude is increased to a = 0.28, the
reduction in oscillation amplitude is 24.0% and 58.1% for pulse
durations of 60 and 120 μs, respectively. These results indicate a
greater increase in effectiveness in doubling the pulse duration
of stimulation than that observed in [8] although a measured
reduction in oscillatory activity in the BG does not necessarily
translate into a corresponding measured improvement in motor
symptoms.
The emergence of oscillations in the model studied here occurs when the parameter h, representing the effect of dopamine
on the system, is reduced to a critical threshold, Fig. 3. This

964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

effectively increases the gain in the feedback loop in the model
which could be related to an increase in the synaptic connections as studied in [48] or an increase in the striatal inhibition
as suggested in [33]. In the physiological system, the exact relationship between the pathological oscillations and dopamine
levels is not fully understood. However, depletion of dopamine
in the striatum is a characteristic of both Parkinson’s disease and
animal models of the disease [49] with an increase in the synchronous oscillatory activity also observed [50], [51]. This is at
least in part due to the depletion of dopamine in the BG, where
levels of dopamine have been shown to modulate the oscillatory activity in the beta band [52]. The loss of striatal dopamine
continues as the disease progresses, and it is proposed that motor symptoms, including bradykinesia and rigidity, the severity
of which has been shown to be correlated with levels of betaband oscillatory activity [18], occur when dopamine levels are
reduced to 50% [53]. As has been assumed in the theoretical
model, this loss of dopamine has been shown to increase the
functional coupling within distinct circuits of the BG in the
physiological system [27], [31], [32].
Modeling the BGTCMC as a control system and analyzing
it using control theory, allows the generation of results that can
be readily compared with clinically observed behavior. The parameters of the model described could be chosen to represent a
particular individual’s behavior based on recorded LFP data. For
example, the dominant frequency of the LFP data corresponds
to the angular frequency of the oscillations which is represented
by the parameter b. With b and k chosen to be equal, the choice
of h, representing the excitability of the network, would then
be dictated by the amplitude of the oscillations present in the
LFP data. The model in this way could be tuned to individual patient parameters. The minimum stimulation amplitude necessary
to suppress oscillations as a function of stimulation frequency
could then be theoretically predicted on a patient specific basis.
The model predictions obtained in this study were found to agree
well with published clinical data on the relationship between
stimulation amplitude and frequency for reducing Parkinsonian
tremor. This close agreement supports the representation of the
physiological system, in terms of neural oscillations and their
subsequent suppression with high-frequency stimulation, by a
reduced second-order system. The translation and application
of the results obtained to a clinical environment may facilitate
the choice of DBS parameter settings necessary to suppress
pathological oscillations in patients, potentially providing an
improvement on the current empirical approach followed.
APPENDIX
DERIVATION OF CRITICAL VALUE OF DESCRIBING FUNCTION
Evaluating (2) at s = jω yields




jkω


|G(jω)| = 
−ω 2 + j2ωb + b2 
and taking ω = b gives
|G(jb)| =

k
.
2b

As given in (7), the output from the G(s) block, y, can be
approximated as
y = Ym sin(ωt).
Considering only the fundamental component of u, and using
phasor representation yields
U̇ = D(Ym ) · Ẏ .
Also, from Fig. 1(a)
Ẏ = G(jω) · U̇ .
Therefore,
G(jω) =

1
D(Ym )

as in (12), and
2b
k
is the condition under which sinusoidal oscillations occur in the
system, at a frequency of b radians per second.
D(Ym ) =

REFERENCES
[1] M. D. Johnson, S. Miocinovic, C. C. McIntyre, and J. L. Vitek, “Mechanisms and targets of deep brain stimulation in movement disorders,”
Neurotherapeutics, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 294–308, 2008.
[2] T. Wichmann and M. R. DeLong, “Deep-brain stimulation for basal ganglia disorders,” Basal Ganglia, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 65–77, 2011.
[3] J. L. Vitek, T. Hashimoto, J. Peoples, M. R. DeLong, and R. A. Bakay,
“Acute stimulation in the external segment of the globus pallidus improves
Parkinsonian motor signs,” Movement Disorders, vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 907–
915, 2004.
[4] A. Stefani, A. M. Lozano, A. Peppe, P. Stanzione, S. Galati, D. Tropepi,
M. Pierantozzi, L. Brusa, E. Scarnati, and P. Mazzone, “Bilateral deep
brain stimulation of the pedunculopontine and subthalamic nuclei in severe
Parkinson’s disease,” Brain, vol. 130, no. 6, pp. 1596–1607, 2007.
[5] J. Volkmann, J. Herzog, F. Kopper, and G. Deuschl, “Introduction to the
programming of deep brain stimulators,” Movement Disorders, vol. 17,
no. S3, pp. S181–S187, 2002.
[6] A. M. Kuncel and W. M. Grill, “Selection of stimulus parameters for deep
brain stimulation,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 115, no. 11, pp. 2431–2441,
2004.
[7] E. Moro, R. J. Esselink, J. Xie, M. Hommel, A. L. Benabid, and P. Pollak,
“The impact on Parkinson’s disease of electrical parameter settings in
STN stimulation,” Neurology, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 706–713, 2002.
[8] P. E. O’Suilleabhain, W. Frawley, C. Giller, and R. B. Dewey, “Tremor
response to polarity, voltage, pulsewidth and frequency of thalamic stimulation,” Neurology, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 786–790, 2003.
[9] M. Rizzone, M. Lanotte, B. Bergamasco, A. Tavella, E. Torre, G. Faccani,
A. Melcarne, and L. Lopiano, “Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic
nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: Effects of variation in stimulation parameters,” J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 215–219,
2001.
[10] M. Magnin, A. Morel, and D. Jeanmonod, “Single-unit analysis of the
pallidum, thalamus and subthalamic nucleus in Parkinsonian patients,”
Neuroscience, vol. 96, no. 3, pp. 549–564, 2000.
[11] M. Weinberger, N. Mahant, W. D. Hutchison, A. M. Lozano, E. Moro,
M. Hodaie, A. E. Lang, and J. O. Dostrovsky, “Beta oscillatory activity
in the subthalamic nucleus and its relation to dopaminergic response in
Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 3248–3256, Dec.
2006.
[12] M. Filion and L. Tremblay, “Abnormal spontaneous activity of globus
pallidus neurons in monkeys with MPTP-induced Parkinsonism,” Brain
Res., vol. 547, no. 1, pp. 140–144, 1991.
[13] T. Wichmann and J. Soares, “Neuronal firing before and after burst discharges in the monkey basal ganglia is predictably patterned in the normal state and altered in Parkinsonism,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 95, no. 4,
pp. 2120–2133, Apr. 2006.

DAVIDSON et al.: APPLICATION OF DESCRIBING FUNCTION ANALYSIS TO A MODEL OF DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION

[14] M. D. Bevan, P. J. Magill, D. Terman, J. Bolam, and C. J. Wilson, “Move
to the rhythm: Oscillations in the subthalamic nucleus—External globus
pallidus network,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 525–531, 2002.
[15] W. D. Hutchison, J. O. Dostrovsky, J. R. Walters, R. Courtemanche,
T. Boraud, J. Goldberg, and P. Brown, “Neuronal oscillations in the basal
ganglia and movement disorders: Evidence from whole animal and human
recordings,” J. Neurosci., vol. 24, no. 42, pp. 9240–9243, 2004.
[16] A. Raz, E. Vaadia, and H. Bergman, “Firing patterns and correlations of
spontaneous discharge of pallidal neurons in the normal and the tremulous
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine vervet model of Parkinsonism,” J. Neurosci., vol. 20, no. 22, pp. 8559–8571, 2000.
[17] N. Ray, N. Jenkinson, S. Wang, P. Holland, J. Brittain, C. Joint, J. Stein,
and T. Aziz, “Local field potential beta activity in the subthalamic nucleus
of patients with Parkinson’s disease is associated with improvements in
bradykinesia after dopamine and deep brain stimulation,” Exp. Neurol.,
vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 108–113, 2008.
[18] A. A. Kuhn, F. Kempf, C. Brucke, L. Gaynor Doyle, I. Martinez-Torres,
A. Pogosyan, T. Trottenberg, A. Kupsch, G.-H. Schneider, M. I. Hariz,
W. Vandenberghe, B. Nuttin, and P. Brown, “High-frequency stimulation
of the subthalamic nucleus suppresses oscillatory beta activity in patients
with Parkinson’s disease in parallel with improvement in motor performance,” J. Neurosci., vol. 28, no. 24, pp. 6165–6173, 2008.
[19] P. Tass, D. Smirnov, A. Karavaev, U. Barnikol, T. Barnikol, I. Adamchic,
C. Hauptmann, N. Pawelcyzk, M. Maarouf, V. Sturm, H.-J. Freund, and
B. Bezruchko, “The causal relationship between subcortical local field
potential oscillations and Parkinsonian resting tremor,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 7, no. 1, 016009, (16 pp.), 2010.
[20] P. Silberstein, A. Pogosyan, A. A. Kühn, G. Hotton, S. Tisch, A. Kupsch,
P. Dowsey-Limousin, M. I. Hariz, and P. Brown, “Cortico-cortical coupling in Parkinson’s disease and its modulation by therapy,” Brain,
vol. 128, no. 6, pp. 1277–1291, Jun. 2005.
[21] D. Plenz and S. T. Kital, “A basal ganglia pacemaker formed by the subthalamic nucleus and external globus pallidus,” Nature, vol. 400, pp. 677–682,
1999.
[22] Gillies, D. Willshaw and Z. Li, “Subthalamic pallidal interactions are
critical in determining normal and abnormal functioning of the basal
ganglia,” Proc. Roy. Soc. London. Series B, Biol. Sci., vol. 269, no. 1491,
pp. 545–551, 2002.
[23] J. E. Rubin and D. Terman, “High frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus eliminates pathological thalamic rhythmicity in a computational model,” J. Computat. Neurosci., vol. 16, pp. 211–235, 2004.
[24] M. Pirini, L. Rocchi, M. Sensi, and L. Chiari, “A computational modelling
approach to investigate different targets in deep brain stimulation for
Parkinson’s disease,” J. Computat. Neurosci., vol. 26, pp. 91–107, 2009.
[25] X.-J. Feng, E. Shea-Brown, B. Greenwald, R. Kosut, and H. Rabitz, “Optimal deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus: a computational
study,” J. Computat. Neurosci., vol. 23, pp. 265–282, 2007.
[26] H. Bergman, A. Feingold, A. Nini, A. Raz, H. Slovin, M. Abeles, and
E. Vaadia, “Physiological aspects of information processing in the basal
ganglia of normal and Parkinsonian primates,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 32–38, 1998.
[27] M. Rivlin-Etzion, O. Marmor, G. Heimer, A. Raz, A. Nini, and
H. Bergman, “Basal ganglia oscillations and pathophysiology of movement disorders,” Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 629–637,
2006.
[28] J. Dostrovsky and H. Bergman, “Oscillatory activity in the basal ganglia—
Relationship to normal physiology and pathophysiology,” Brain, vol. 127,
no. 4, pp. 721–722, 2004.
[29] P. Brown, “Bad oscillations in Parkinson’s disease,” in Parkinson’s Disease
and Related Disorders, vol. 70 (Journal of Neural Transmission Supplementa), P. Riederer, H. Reichmann, M. B. H. Youdim, and M. Gerlach,
Eds. Vienna, Austria: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 27–30.
[30] N. Mallet, A. Pogosyan, A. Sharott, J. Csicsvari, J. P. Bolam, P. Brown,
and P. J. Magill, “Disrupted dopamine transmission and the emergence of
exaggerated beta oscillations in subthalamic nucleus and cerebral cortex,”
J. Neurosci., vol. 28, no. 18, pp. 4795–4806, 2008.
[31] R. J. Moran, N. Mallet, V. Litvak, R. J. Dolan, P. J. Magill, K. J. Friston,
and P. Brown, “Alterations in brain connectivity underlying beta oscillations in Parkinsonism,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 7, no. 8, e1002124, (15
pp.), 2011.
[32] S. Baudrexel, T. Witte, C. Seifried, F. von Wegner, F. Beissner, J. C. Klein,
H. Steinmetz, R. Deichmann, J. Roeper, and R. Hilker, “Resting state
FMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus motor cortex connectivity in
Parkinson’s disease,” NeuroImage, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1728–1738, 2011.

965

[33] A. Kumar, S. Cardanobile, S. Rotter, and A. Aertsen, “The role of inhibition in generating and controlling Parkinson’s disease oscillations in the
basal ganglia,” Front. Syst. Neurosci., vol. 5, art. 86, pp. 1–14, 2011.
[34] A. de Paor and M. Lowery, “Analysis of the mechanism of action of deep
brain stimulation using the concepts of dither injection and the equivalent
nonlinearity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 2717–2720,
Nov. 2009.
[35] A. Benabid, P. Pollak, D. Hoffmann, C. Gervason, M. Hommel, J. Perret,
J. de Rougemont, and D. Gao, “Long-term suppression of tremor by
chronic stimulation of the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus,” Lancet,
vol. 337, no. 8738, pp. 403–406, 1991.
[36] C. Davidson, M. Lowery, and A. de Paor, “Application of non-linear
control theory to a model of deep brain stimulation,” in Proc. IEEE Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 30–Sep. 3, 2011, pp. 6785–6788.
[37] O. David and K. J. Friston, “A neural mass model for MEG/EEG: Coupling and neuronal dynamics,” NeuroImage, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1743–1755,
2003.
[38] H. R. Wilson and J. D. Cowan, “Excitatory and inhibitory interactions
in localized populations of model neurons,” Biophys. J., vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 1–24, 1972.
[39] M. Rosenblum and A. Pikovsky, “Delayed feedback control of collective
synchrony: An approach to suppression of pathological brain rhythms,”
Phys. Rev. E, vol. 70, 041904, pp. 1–11, Oct. 2004.
[40] A. Hearn, M. Lowey, and A. De Paor, “Some thoughts on electrical
interventions for the control of tremor in Parkinson’s disease,” Adv. Electr.
Electron. Eng., vol. 7, pp. 334–337, 2008.
[41] H. M. Power and R. J. Simpson, Introduction to Dynamics and Control.
New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1978.
[42] J. C. Lozier, “Carrier-controlled relay servos,” Electr. Eng., vol. 69, no. 12,
pp. 1052–1056, Dec. 1950.
[43] J. Ringwood, F. Taussi, and A. de Paor, “The effect of pulsatile blood
flow on blood pressure regulatory mechanisms,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Control Appl., 2012, pp. 609–614.
[44] R. J. Simpson and H. M. Power, “Applications of high frequency signal
injection in non-linear systems,” Int. J. Control, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 917–
943, 1977.
[45] C. Phillips and R. Harbor, Feedback Control Systems, 4th ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2000.
[46] S. Engelberg, “Limitations of the describing function for limit cycle prediction,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 1887–1890,
2002.
[47] G. Deco, V. K. Jirsa, P. A. Robinson, M. Breakspear, and K. Friston, “The
dynamic brain: From spiking neurons to neural masses and cortical fields,”
PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 4, no. 8, e1000092, pp. 1–35, 2008.
[48] A. J. N. Holgado, J. R. Terry, and R. Bogacz, “Conditions for the generation of beta oscillations in the subthalamic nucleus–globus pallidus
network,” J. Neurosci., vol. 30, no. 37, pp. 12 340–12 352, 2010.
[49] H. Bergman and G. Deuschl, “Pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease:
From clinical neurology to basic neuroscience and back,” Movement Disorders, vol. 17, no. S3, pp. S28–S40, 2002.
[50] T. Wichmann and M. R. DeLong, “Functional and pathophysiological
models of the basal ganglia,” Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 751–
758, 1996.
[51] P. Brown, A. Oliviero, P. Mazzone, A. Insola, P. Tonali, and V. Di Lazzaro,
“Dopamine dependency of oscillations between subthalamic nucleus and
pallidum in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurosci., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1033–
1038, 2001.
[52] N. Jenkinson and P. Brown, “New insights into the relationship between
dopamine, beta oscillations and motor function,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 34,
no. 12, pp. 611–618, 2011.
[53] C. H. Hawkes, K. D. Tredici, and H. Braak, “A timeline for Parkinson’s
disease,” Parkinsonism Related Disorders, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 79–84, 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

