404

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Resource Optimized TTSH-URA for Multimedia
Stream Authentication in Swallowable-CapsuleBased Wireless Body Sensor Networks
Wei Wang, Member, IEEE, Chunqiu Wang, Student Member, IEEE, and Min Zhao

Abstract—To ease the burdens on the hospitalization capacity, an emerging swallowable-capsule technology has evolved to
serve as a remote gastrointestinal (GI) disease examination technique with the aid of the wireless body sensor network (WBSN).
Secure multimedia transmission in such a swallowable-capsulebased WBSN faces critical challenges including energy efficiency
and content quality guarantee. In this paper, we propose a joint
resource allocation and stream authentication scheme to maintain the best possible video quality while ensuring security and
energy efficiency in GI-WBSNs. The contribution of this research
is twofold. First, we establish a unique signature-hash (S-H) diversity approach in the authentication domain to optimize video
authentication robustness and the authentication bit rate overhead
over a wireless channel. Based on the full exploration of S-H authentication diversity, we propose a new two-tier signature-hash
(TTSH) stream authentication scheme to improve the video quality
by reducing authentication dependence overhead while protecting
its integrity. Second, we propose to combine this authentication
scheme with a unique S-H oriented unequal resource allocation
(URA) scheme to improve the energy-distortion-authentication
performance of wireless video delivery in GI-WBSN. Our analysis and simulation results demonstrate that the proposed TTSH
with URA scheme achieves considerable gain in both authenticated
video quality and energy efficiency.
Index Terms—Multimedia stream authentication, swallowablecapsule, wireless body sensor networks (WBSNs).

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT advances in the electric microsystem and wireless body sensor networks (WBSNs) technologies have
largely paved the way of e-health solutions for remote patient
monitoring [1]–[4]. In the rapid expansion of remote healthcare
applications, the authentication issue is a key factor to be addressed since the medical data transfer over the wireless links
is prone to error, interception, and manipulation. The altered
medical information may lead to inappropriate or even wrong
diagnosis and decision by the doctors in the remote medical

R

Manuscript received June 15, 2013; revised September 24, 2013; accepted
November 21, 2013. Date of publication November 26, 2013; date of current
version March 3, 2014. This work was supported in part by South Dakota State
University faculty startup funds.
W. Wang and C. Wang are with Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 57006 USA
(e-mail: wei.wang@ieee.org; chunqiu.wang@sdstate.edu).
M. Zhao is with the Montefiore Mount Vernon hospital, Mount Vernon, NY
10467 USA (e-mail: minzhao930@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2292883

Fig. 1. Example of swallowable video-capture capsule for remote medical
diagnosis in WBSN. Security is an important issue for such applications.

stations, which is a life-critical problem to the patients. Such
sensitivity to attacks for content delivery over wireless channels
poses considerable challenges in designing robust yet efficient
video authentication strategies for integrity and nonrepudiation
protection. Another challenge is to ensure the battery lifetime for
such devices, where large capacity batteries cannot be easily deployed. In this paper, we focus our study on an emerging remote
monitoring technology for gastrointestinal (GI) disease patients.
The system is illustrated in Fig. 1. A swallowable-capsule (typically 3 cm in length and 1 cm in diameter) integrated with
a video capturing and wireless transmission microsystem on
board is ingested into the patient body, providing real-time pictures for the doctors to examine the disease development in the
patient’s digestive system. The monitored video data are processed and wirelessly transmitted to the local receivers (e.g.,
special receiver belts). Then, the medical information can be
delivered through internet to hospitals, where doctors can diagnose the symptoms and give corresponding consultancy.
In this paper, we address two of the most critical challenges—
security and resource efficiency— in designing a practical transmission scheme for such swallowable-capsule-based WBSN remote video-streaming applications. We propose a new signaturehash (S-H)-based scheme to improve authenticated video quality
within a given energy consumption budget and authentication bit
resource budget in the swallowable-capsule based WBSNs. This
study is not limited to the swallowable-capsule video-streaming
applications; it can also be applied to other real-time video monitoring services with high requirements of security and resource

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: RESOURCE OPTIMIZED TTSH-URA FOR MULTIMEDIA STREAM AUTHENTICATION IN SWALLOWABLE-CAPSULE

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE KEY NOTATIONS USED IN THE EQUATIONS

efficiency such as remote business meeting, military surveillance, and neighborhood monitoring.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we discuss the related works and background. In Section III,
we formulate the energy-distortion-authentication problem in a
cross-layer fashion. In Section IV, we analyze the unique S-H
diversity at the application layer and present the proposed TTSH
algorithm. In Section V, we propose the lower layer network resource allocation scheme with S-H diversity consideration. We
discuss the simulation results and conduct performance evaluation in Section VI. Our conclusion is drawn in Section VII.
The nomenclature is summarized in Table I for reference convenience.
II. RELATED WORK
Research works on energy efficient stream-level authentication schemes recently have been reported in the literature. However, the intra-inter predictive (I-P) mode diversity in the video
coding domain, and the S-H diversity which represents a corresponding approach in the authentication domain, have rarely
been mentioned in the past video stream authentication literature. Furthermore, most of the current research works regarding
multimedia stream authentication focus on the application layer
only, largely ignoring any cooperative consideration of qualitydriven stream authentication and energy-driven resource allocation at lower layers of WBSNs.
In [5], the content verification using stream authentication
was advocated. The authors also proposed new authentication
techniques to optimize the media quality by considering the distortion weight and bit rate overhead of each image/video packet.
The authors of [6] proposed a broadcast stream authentication

405

scheme based on batch signatures to improve error resilience and
to reduce authentication latency. In their approach, the signature
was generated based on the concatenation of crypto-hash codes,
and was dispatched together with hash codes for each packet to
improve error resilience. The research presented in [7] proposed
a joint source-channel coding scheme with the consideration
of authentication bit overhead. The mathematical relationship
between authentication probability and the authentication resource budget was formulated and bit allocations for source,
channel, and authentication content were tuned collaboratively
to achieve an optimal authentication result. In [8], the authors
proposed a new approach to optimize the rate-distortion performance for an authenticated video by considering the additional
rate and dependence overhead for stream authentication. In this
approach, the expected distortion for H.264 video transmissions
with authentication was minimized within the constraints for a
total transmission rate. In [9], the authors proposed a qualityoptimized stream authentication scheme for JPEG2000-coded
digital images transmitted over wireless channels. The end-toend distortion of authenticated images was minimized in that
approach by allocating more authentication information redundancy to the important packets with larger distortion reduction
weights. Similar research regarding quality-driven multimedia
authentication at the stream level can be found in [10]–[13].
However, these aforementioned stream authentication schemes
targeted generic lossy networks rather than WBSNs. Their primary goal was the reduction of data rate rather than improving energy efficiency. In [14], an energy-consumption reduction
scheme in the WBSNs was developed which applied a sophisticated transmission power control technique to achieve reliable
communication by studying the sensor placement and link layer
channel characterization in the energy-constrained WBSNs. In
our previous research [15], we proposed a new idea of lower
layer resource allocation to achieve WBSN image transmission energy efficiency by considering application-layer stream
authentication. In our work [16], we proposed a comprehensive energy-distortion-authentication optimization framework
in WBSN to maximize the authenticated image quality subject
to energy consumption constraints. However, these approaches
assume that a single signature is attached to each image or groupof-pictures (GOP), and the potential of S-H diversity gain is not
explored.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The problem of joint video stream authentication and resource
allocation design in swallowable-capsule WBSNs can be formulated in a cross-layer fashion by optimizing both applicationlayer authentication parameters and lower layer network
transmission parameters. Specifically, the application-layer authentication parameter ai denotes the authentication predecessor
packet to attach the crypto-hash link to. The mode of S-H, ∂i ,
fully tunes the S-H diversity in tradingoff the authentication
bit resources for the video quality gain. The authentication ancestor selection scheme explicitly determines the redundancy
degree |πi | of each packet. The lower layer resource allocation
transmission strategies include rate, power, and retry control to

406

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Fig. 3.

Fig. 2.

Rate-dependence overhead with S-H diversity of stream authentication.

fine-tune the energy-distortion performance. Thus, the overall
problem can be formulated as an expected authenticated quality
(i.e., distortion reduction) maximization problem with authentication bit budget and transmission energy budget constraints.
{ai , ∂i , ηi }
i∈[0,1,...,N −1]
s.t.



= arg max {E [D]}

(1)

signature packet. On the other hand, in case 2, packet 3 may
have an individual signature for the verification of itself. The
error resilience is improved while the bit rate overhead is also
increased by attaching the independent signature.
In an open wireless environment with possible packet injection and manipulation attacks, we denote the “trust media” as
the pictures decoded exclusively from the verifiable packets.
The expected authenticated video quality can be expressed as
follows:
E [D] =

{|πi | Lhash + ∂i Lsig } ≤ Bm ax

(2)

i

and

Illustration of S-H mode selection tradeoff.



Ei ≤ Em ax .

(3)

i

Note that both the expectation of authenticated distortion reduction and the energy consumption are correlated to application
layer authentication parameters and lower layer resource allocation parameters. The authentication S-H mode switching tunes
the tradeoff between authentication dependence and extra bit
rate overhead. The network resource allocation balances the
transmission energy cost and video quality gain.
IV. PROPOSED STREAM AUTHENTICATION WITH S-H
DIVERSITY
A. S-H Diversity and Authentication Dependence Analysis
The stream authentication strategy at the application layer can
be flexibly designed to fine-tune the authentication dependence
and bit rate overhead. The authentication dependence dominates
the verification probability of each frame. The bit rate overhead
determines the energy consumption cost. This tradeoff can be
adjusted by means of S-H mode switching as illustrated in Fig. 2.
For example, the packet with index 3 (denoted by the distortion
reduction value D3 in this figure) can choose the hash mode
to attach its crypto-hash tag to a certain previous video frame
as illustrated in case 1. The advantage of this approach is the
reduced bit rate overhead, since the length of a signature is
much larger than that of a crypto-hash tag. The disadvantage
of this approach is the decreased error resilience due to the introduced authentication dependence. The verification of packet
3 will then depend on the successful transmission and verification of all the packets along the authentication path back to the

N
−1


Di (1 − ρi ) (1 − ci )



(1 − ρk ) (1 − ck ) (4)

k ∈v i

i=0

where the packet loss rate is directly related to the wireless
channel bit error rate (BER), e, and the total packet length
including an extra hash tag and/or signature bit rate overhead.
ρ = 1 − (1 − e)L +|π |L h a s h +∂ L s i g +L o v e r h e a d .

(5)

These equations illustrate that the valid video frame must be
received without the transmission error, verified by the cryptohash links, and delivered without attacks.
We now quantitatively analyze the benefits and drawbacks of
S-H mode selection for a video packet using an example illustrated in Fig. 3. Let Di and Li denote the distortion reduction
associated with packet i|i = 0, 1. Also, assume the channel BER
is e. The probability of being compromised is not considered
in this analysis for simplicity. In the first case using cryptohash for packet 1, the total expected distortion reduction can be
expressed as
E1 [D] = D0 (1 − e)L 0 +L s i g +L h a s h
+ D1 (1 − e)L 1 (1 − e)L 0 +L s i g +L h a s h

(6)

with the authentication bit overhead
R1b = Lsig + Lhash

(7)

In the second case with both individual signatures attached to
the packets, the total distortion reduction is
E2 [D] = D0 (1 − e)L 0 +L s i g + D1 (1 − e)L 1 +L s i g

(8)

with the authentication bit overhead
R2b = 2Lsig .

(9)

Because D0 (1 − e)L 0 +L s i g +L h a s h ≤ D0 (1 − e)L 0 +L s i g and
D1 (1 − e)L 1 (1 − e)L 0 +L s i g +L h a s h ≤ D1 (1 − e)L 1 +L s i g , we

WANG et al.: RESOURCE OPTIMIZED TTSH-URA FOR MULTIMEDIA STREAM AUTHENTICATION IN SWALLOWABLE-CAPSULE

407

have E1 [D] ≤ E2 [D], and the equality holds in error free
channels, assuming Di = 0 for ∀i, 0 < i < N . In fact, this
observation can be derived for the general case with multiple
packets, N > 2. For the packet selected to employ a digital
signature as its authentication mode, the distortion reduction
contribution to the whole video sequence is D (1 − e)L +L s i g ,
which will not negatively affect the verification probability of
any other packet. On the other hand, the upper bound of distortion reduction contribution
for a packet using the hash mode

is D (1 − e)L (1 − e) j ∈v (L j +|π j |L h a s h )+L s i g , which never exceeds the distortion reduction contribution of the signature
mode, achieving equality only in error-free channels. The reason is that when attaching a crypto hash tag to other packets, a
packet with a signature has to be selected as the origin of the
authentication path. Multiple packets can also be part of this
authentication path and the verification of the current packet
then depends on the successful verification of the entire set of
packets along the path.
B. Simplified TTSH Stream Authentication
As illustrated in the previous discussion, the rate-authentication-distortion tradeoff for application-layer stream authentication can be adjusted by means of S-H mode selection. For
a typical video packet, it can either select a new individual
signature as its authentication origin or attach a crypto-hash
tag to a previous video packet leading to an existing signature. Furthermore, the selection of authentication parent packet
can also tune the rate-authentication-distortion tradeoff when
crypto-hash mode is selected. In an effort to optimally balance
the gain and cost tradeoffs, we propose a TTSH stream authentication algorithm as described in Algorithm 1.
V. PROPOSED S-H UNEQUAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION (URA)
FOR ENERGY-AUTHENTICATION-DISTORTION OPTIMALITY
A. Energy-Distortion-Resource Modeling
The network transmission strategies including power, rate,
frame, and retry control can be flexibly adjusted to fine-tune
the tradeoff between energy consumption and video quality. In
order to establish this tradeoff relationship mathematically, we
propose a layer-2 energy-distortion model relating resource allocation parameters to the distortion and energy consumption
for each packet in a way similar to [15], [17]. The total energy
consumption of transmitting a video packet including the network protocol overhead and stream authentication overhead can
be expressed as
E = (Pt + Pr )

L + |π| Lhash + ∂Lsig + Loverhead
.
Rs b

(10)

The estimation of total energy consumption is related to resource allocation parameters, including the transmission power
Pt , transmission data rate r which can be expressed as the multiplication of frequency symbol rate Rs , and the modulation
constellation size b, i.e., r = Rs b. The power also affects the
packet error rate (i.e., the layer-2 distortion of one packet) since
higher power typically leads to higher signal-to-noise ratio and

lower BER. According to [18] and [19], the relationship between
transmission power and BER can be expressed as
⎛
⎞⎞2

⎛
2N0 Rs 2b − 1
be
⎝erf c−1 ⎝ 	

 ⎠⎠ . (11)
Pt =
3A
2 1− 1
b

22

Thus, given the resource allocation parameters such as power
and rate, the layer-2 energy consumption can be mathematically modeled as (10) and the layer-2 packet distortion can
be expressed as (5). When retransmission is considered, the
packet error rate will be substituted by ρ ⇐ ρm , according to
[20]–[22]. The total energy consumption can be substituted to
m
E ⇐ E × 1−ρ
1−ρ similarly.
B. URA With S-H Diversity
The S-H diversity in the authentication domain provides
an ideal foundation for URA since the signature packets are
much more important than the crypto-hash packets. The energydistortion-authentication gain can be significantly improved by

408

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

TABLE II
SIMULATION SETUP

S-H-based URA. The design guideline can be summarized as
follows: more communication resources can be allocated to signature packets to improve the verification probability of all video
packets and hence the authenticated video quality; less communication resources need to be allocated to crypto-hash packets,
saving a significant amount of communication energy. In response to such a unique S-H diversity, we propose a geneticbased evolution algorithm (GA) to achieve the best possible
video distortion-authentication performance with energy constraints, as illustrated in Algorithm 2. The GA algorithm is
selected due to two reasons: first, GA is a global optimization
process that achieves the best network resource allocation strategy; second, GA is suitable for continuous transmission power
optimization since it is mapped to the desirable BER according
to (11), which could be flexibly encoded as genes on the chromosomes in GA. In real practice, the GA can be utilized as an
offline optimization process, and the solutions can be stored as
a lookup table on the swallowable capsules in order to reduce
the real-time computational complexity. Because our proposed
framework is generic, other optimization algorithms (e.g., hillclimbing, dynamic programming, etc.) can also be seamlessly
applied.

VI. SIMULATION
In this section, we evaluate the proposed TTSH stream authentication scheme with S-H diversity consideration against
traditional crypto-hash chain authentication at the application
layer. Also, we evaluate the energy-distortion-authentication
performance of the proposed S-H URA against a traditional
equal resource allocation (ERA) approach. The simulation setup
is summarized in Table II.

Fig. 4.

Authenticated video quality with various authentication bit budgets.

A. Distortion-Authentication Performance of TTSH
Fig. 4 illustrates the authenticated video quality performance
with various authentication bit budgets under different wireless channel conditions. The proposed TTSH scheme achieves
higher authentication video quality compared to the traditional
hash-chain-based stream authentication scheme. The reason is
twofold. Unlike traditional scheme, the proposed TTSH scheme
uses as many signatures as possible to improve error resilience.
The individually verifiable signature packets significantly contribute to the improved distortion-authentication performance.
Second, the proposed TTSH scheme distributes the signature
packets optimally among the packets in the video sequence.
The results of the proposed TTSH scheme are small signature
groups with short authentication chains, which increase the error robustness. The corresponding overhead of the proposed
TTSH scheme is at maximum equivalent to the authentication
bit budget. The proposed TTSH scheme can also adapt the S-H
allocation to the authentication bit budget. TTSH allocates more
signature packets utilizing more authentication resource bits,
and improving the authenticated video quality at the expense of
increased authentication overhead. The traditional hash chain
stream authentication scheme, on the other hand, relies only
on fixed crypto-hash tag allocation. Therefore, the traditional
approach’s static authentication resource allocation cannot satisfy the authentication bit budget in resource constrained sensor
networks.

WANG et al.: RESOURCE OPTIMIZED TTSH-URA FOR MULTIMEDIA STREAM AUTHENTICATION IN SWALLOWABLE-CAPSULE

Fig. 5. Error resilience performances of TTSH and hash chain authentication
with 4096 bits authentication bit budget.

Fig. 6.

409

Energy-distortion-authentication performance of TTSH with URA.

Our proposed TTSH stream authentication scheme achieves
improved distortion-authentication performance compared to
the traditional hash chain authentication scheme in various wireless channel conditions as illustrated in Fig. 5. When the channel
BER is low, the authenticated distortion reduction performances
of the TTSH and hash chain authentication schemes are close.
When the channel BER increases, the authenticated video quality of both schemes decreases, but the performance degradation
of TTSH is much slower than that of hash chain authentication.
In the proposed TTSH scheme, the avalanche effect of packet
verification failure is reduced considerably due to the contribution of signature packets to improving error resilience.
B. Energy-Distortion-Authentication Performance of URA
With S-H Diversity
The proposed application-layer TTSH scheme improves the
stream authentication resilience, whereas the gain in energydistortion-authentication performance is achieved through intelligent lower-layer network resource allocation. Fig. 6 illustrates
the energy-distortion-authentication performance gain of the
proposed joint design of TTSH and URA compared with the traditional approach utilizing hash chain authentication and ERA.
The proposed scheme achieves higher authenticated video quality given the same energy consumption budget. This is because
the S-H diversity is fully considered in the proposed URA
scheme. In the proposed URA scheme, more communication
resources and efforts are allocated to those important signature packets to improve the authenticated video quality. The
energy efficiency is achieved by allocating less communication
resources to the less significant crypto-hash packets. When the
energy resources become scarce, the proposed URA scheme can
still allocate communication resource efficiently by favoring signature packets, vital to the stream authentication. Thus, the authenticated video quality is improved due to the proposed URA
scheme aimed at allocating more resources to important signature packets while also accommodating less important packets.

Fig. 7. Energy-distortion-authentication performance with compromise probability and energy budget constraint 5 mJ.

The performance of the proposed TTSH with URA scheme is
also evaluated over nonsecure channels, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
It is noted that the performance improvements become even
more evident when the communication channel is subject to
more integrity attacks. The reason for such performance gains is
twofold. First, unlike traditional chain authentication, the signature packets in the proposed TTSH scheme can significantly reduce the verification failure propagation and lower the risk of the
video sequence being compromised. In addition, the proposed
lower-layer URA scheme further protects the transmission of
signature packets. Since the loss or compromise of signature
packet jeopardizes the verification of the entire video sequence,
the proposed URA scheme reduces the risk of signature packet
loss by employing more resources, given the constrained energy
budget. Thus, the proposed TTSH plus URA scheme achieves
significantly improved energy-distortion-authentication performance over nonsecure wireless channels.

410

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate a new S-H diversity to improve the energy-distortion-authentication performance for secure swallowable-capsule based WBSN video streaming. In our
study, we propose a joint stream authentication and resource
allocation scheme employing a unique S-H diversity approach.
The proposed TTSH scheme in the authentication domain significantly improves the in-body video content authentication
error resilience over error-prone wireless channels. The proposed S-H oriented URA scheme further improves the energy
efficiency and authenticated video quality by unequally allocating communication resources between signature packets and
crypto-hash packets. Our analysis and simulation results demonstrate that our proposed joint design employing S-H diversity
achieves considerable gains in energy and quality compared to
other known traditional schemes.

[16] W. Wang, D. Peng, H. Wang, H. Sharif, and H. H. Chen, “A multimedia
quality-driven network resource management architecture for wireless
sensor networks with stream authentication,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 439–447, Aug. 2010.
[17] W. Wang, D. Peng, H. Wang, H. Sharif, and H.-H. Chen, “Energyconstrained distortion reduction optimization for wavelet-based coded image transmission in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1169–1180, Oct. 2008.
[18] S. Haykin, Communication System, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
1994, pp. 510–553.
[19] W. Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, 7th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2000, pp. 85–86.
[20] M. van der Schaar and N. Shankar, “Cross-layer wireless multimedia
transmission: Challenges, principles, and new paradigms,” IEEE Wireless
Commun, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 50–58, Aug. 2005.
[21] L. Qiong and M. van der Schaar, “Providing adaptive QoS to layered video
over wireless local area networks through real-time retry limit adaptation,”
IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 278–290, Apr. 2004.
[22] M. van der Schaar, D. Turaga, and R. Wong, “Classification-based system for cross-layer optimized wireless video transmission,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 1082–1095, Oct. 2006.

REFERENCES
[1] C. McCaffrey, O. Chevalerias, C. O’Mathuna, and K. Twomey,
“Swallowable-Capsule Technology,” IEEE Pervas. Comput., vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 23–29, Jan. 2008.
[2] P. Jesudoss, A. Mathewson, W. Wright, C. McCaffrey, V. Ogurtsov,
K. Twomey, and F. Stam, “System packaging and integration for a swallowable capsule using a direct access sensor,” in Proc. Eur. Microelectron.
Packag. Conf., Jun. 2009, pp. 1–4.
[3] J. A. Cafazzo, K. Leonard, A. C. Easty, P. G. Rossos, and C. T. Chan,
“Bridging the self-care deficit gap: Remote patient monitoring and the
hospital-at-home,” Springer Electron. Healthcare, vol. 1, pp. 66–73, 2009.
[4] G. B. Prasad, K. Seema, U. H. Shrikant, G. K. Garge, S. Anand, and
M. Hegde, “SeaMo+: A virtual real-time multimedia service framework
on handhelds to enable remote real-time patient monitoring for mobile
doctors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. Syst. Netw., Jan. 2013, pp. 1–6.
[5] Q. Sun, J. Apostolopoulos, C.-W. Chen, and S.-F. Chang, “Qualityoptimized and secure end-to-end authentication for media delivery,” IEEE
Proc., vol. 96, no. 1, pp. 97–110, Jan. 2008.
[6] Y. Zhou and Y. Fang, “Multimedia broadcast authentication based on batch
signature,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 72–77, Aug. 2007.
[7] Z. Li, Q. Sun, Y. Lian, and C.-W. Chen, “Joint source-channelauthentication resource allocation and unequal authenticity protection for
multimedia over wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 9,
no. 4, pp. 837–850, Jun. 2007.
[8] Z. Zhang, Q. Sun, W. Wong, J. Apostolopoulos, and S. Wee, “Ratedistortion-authentication optimized streaming of authenticated video,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 544–557,
May 2007.
[9] Z. Zhang, Q. Sun, W. Wong, J. Apostolopoulos, and S. Wee, “An optimized
content-aware authentication scheme for streaming JPEG-2000 images
over lossy networks,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 320–331,
Feb. 2007.
[10] S. Miner and J. Staddon, “Graph-based authentication of digital streams,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy, May 2001, pp. 232–246.
[11] Q. Sun, D. He, and Q. Tian, “A secure and robust authentication scheme
for video transcoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 16,
no. 10, pp. 1232–1244, Oct. 2006.
[12] Q. Sun and S.-F. Chang, “A secure and robust digital signature scheme for
JPEG2000 image authentication,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 480–494, Jun. 2005.
[13] C.-K. Wong and S. Lam, “Digital signatures for flows and multicasts,” in
Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols, Oct. 1998, pp. 198–209.
[14] W. Lee, M. Choi, and N. Kim, “Experimental link channel characteristics
in wireless body sensor systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Network., Feb.
2012, pp. 374–378.
[15] W. Wang, D. Peng, H. Wang, H. Sharif, and H.-H. Chen, “Energydistortion-authentication optimized resource allocation for secure wireless image streaming,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf.,
Apr. 2008, pp. 2810–2815.

Wei Wang (M’10) received the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of Nebraska Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA, in 2009.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD,
USA. His major research interests include wireless
sensor networks, multimedia computing, information
security, and educational robotics.
Dr. Wang received two Best Paper Awards of IEEE
WCNC 2008 and ANSS 2011. He serves as an Associate Editor of Wiley Security in Communication Networks Journal.

Chunqiu Wang (S’12) received the B.E. degree in
electronic information engineering from Shandong
University, Jinan, China, in 2012. He is currently
working toward the Master’s degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD,
USA.
His research interests include wireless sensor networks and multimedia communications.

Min Zhao received the Ph.D. degree in pharmacology from Creighton University, Omaha, NE, USA, in
2008.
She is currently a Resident Doctor of internal medicine in Montefiore Mount Vernon hospital,
Mount Vernon, NY, USA. She was an Adjunct Assistant Professor in the Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences in South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD, USA from 2011 to 2013. Her research interests include eye pharmacology and computer-based
medical applications in internal medicine.

