1100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Scattering Transform for Intrapartum Fetal Heart Rate
Variability Fractal Analysis: A Case-Control Study
Václav Chudáček, Joakim Andén, Stéphane Mallat, Fellow, IEEE, Patrice Abry∗ , Fellow, IEEE, and Muriel Doret

Abstract—Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring, aiming at
early acidosis detection, constitutes an important public health
stake. Scattering transform is proposed here as a new tool to analyze intrapartum fetal heart rate (FHR) variability. It consists of a
nonlinear extension of the underlying wavelet transform, that thus
preserves its multiscale nature. Applied to an FHR signal database
constructed in a French academic hospital, the scattering transform is shown to permit to efficiently measure scaling exponents
characterizing the fractal properties of intrapartum FHR temporal dynamics, that relate not only to the sole covariance (correlation scaling exponent), but also to the full dependence structure of
data (intermittency scaling exponent). Such exponents are found to
satisfactorily discriminate temporal dynamics of healthy subjects
(from that of nonhealthy ones) and to emphasize the role of the
highest frequencies (around and above 1 Hz) in intrapartum FHR
variability. This permits us to achieve satisfactory classification
performance that improves on those obtained from the analysis
of International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO)
criteria, notably by classifying as healthy a number of subjects that
were incorrectly classified as nonhealthy by classical clinically used
FIGO criteria. Combined to obstetrician annotations, these scaling
exponents enable us to sketch a typology of these FIGO-false positive subjects. Also, they permit us to monitor the evolution along
time of the intrapartum health status of the fetuses and to estimate
an optimal detection time-frame.
Index Terms—Classification, fractal, health status time evolution, intrapartum fetal heart rate variability (F-HRV), multiscale,
nonlinear, scattering transform.

I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation: Intrapartum Fetal Heart Rate Variability
Surveillance and Acidosis Detection
N delivery wards throughout the world, cardiotocograms
(CTG)—combination of the fetal heart rate (FHR) and uterine contraction signals [1]—are monitored with the aim to detect

fetus hypoxia. Early detection enables obstetricians to act accordingly and reduce the subsequent fetal and neonatal mortality
(cf. e.g., [1, 2]). In clinical routine, intrapartum surveillance essentially relies on the visual inspection of the FHR signal, with
a significant part of the final assessment relying on the evaluation of fetal heart rate variability (F-HRV). The health status of
the fetus can be assessed using International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) guidelines [3], that essentially
consist of a set of rules evaluating manually extracted temporal
characteristics of CTG, such as baseline level, variability level,
number and type of decelerations, and their relation to contraction occurrence times (cf. [4]). Departures from normality, as
defined by clinical guidelines, are regarded as a sign of degradation of fetal oxigenation and practically result in actions from
obstetricians either aiming at improving the fetal state or at operating the delivery. While application of the FIGO rules permits
high sensitivity to intrapartum acidosis detection, it also results
in a poor specificity: Strict application of FIGO rules leads to a
significant number of unnecessary operative delivery decisions,
where postbirth exams a posteriori indicate that the fetus was
efficiently coping with stress [4]. Operative deliveries may result
in either immediate or long-term severe consequences for both
the newborn and the mother. It thus constitutes an important
public health stake to reduce the number of unnecessary operative deliveries, which motivates significant research efforts
1) to automatize the computation of robust features from digitized CTG and 2) to produce sound statistical characterization
of CTG and F-HRV beyond the essentially morphological (or
geometric) FIGO criteria (cf. e.g., [5]–[8] for tentative reviews).

I

B. Motivation: Related Works: Intrapartum F-HRV
Statistical Characterization

Manuscript received August 30, 2013; revised November 22, 2013; accepted
November 30, 2013. Date of publication December 6, 2013; date of current
version March 17, 2014. This work was supported by ANR BLANC 2010 FETUSES 18535, HCL-HFME PHRC, ANR-10-BLAN-0126, ERC InvariantClass
320959. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
V. Chudáček is with the Physics Department, CNRS, ENS Lyon, Lyon 69007,
France and also with the Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
(e-mail: vaclav.chudacek@ens-lyon.fr).
J. Andén and S. Mallat are with the Math Department, CNRS, ENS Paris,
Paris 75005, France (e-mail: joakim.anden@ens.fr; stephane.mallat@ens.fr).
∗ P. Abry is with the Physics Department, CNRS, ENS Lyon, Lyon 69007,
France (e-mail: patrice.abry@ens-lyon.fr).
M. Doret is with the Obstetrics Department, Femme-Mère-Enfant Hospital,
Lyon 69500, France (e-mail: muriel.doret@chu-lyon.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2294324

To go beyond the clinically used static, temporal, and patternbased description of F-HRV, it has naturally been envisaged to
use frequency-based analysis. Following the seminal work in [9]
for adult heart rate characterization, spectrum estimation tools
were massively used for intrapartum F-HRV analysis (e.g., [10]
and references therein). However, spectrum estimation for intrapartum F-HRV analysis suffers from important shortcomings.
First, because of the time-evolving nature of the delivery process
(baseline variations, occurrence of decelerations), intrapartum
F-HRV signals are much less stationary than adult HRV signals
are. This lead to the use of joint time-frequency representations
to account for the time-varying nature of the frequency content
of intrapartum F-HRV [11], or, along another line, to adaptive (or data-driven) characterization (cf. e.g., [12]). Second,
spectrum estimation only captures the (second-order statistics)
correlation of data—thus neglecting higher statistical order

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHUDÁČEK et al.: SCATTERING TRANSFORM FOR INTRAPARTUM FETAL HEART RATE VARIABILITY FRACTAL ANALYSIS

forms of dependences. Tremendous research efforts were devoted to overcome this limitation, often referred to as nonlinear
analysis in the literature, to explicitly emphasize that the capture of information beyond (linear) correlation is intended [6],
[13], [14]. Entropy rates, stemming from dynamical system
modeling, and probing partially the joint distribution function,
thus higher order statistics, have also been used (cf. e.g., [15]).
Alternatively, to describe F-HRV beyond correlation, the point
process nature of heart beat has been fruitfully explored [16].
The fractal, or scaling, paradigm has also been involved into
F-HRV analysis [14], [17] and recently, multifractal analysis
has been shown to permit an efficient measure of statistical
dependence beyond the sole correlation [18]–[20].
C. Motivation: Goals and Contributions
The present contribution intends to explore the benefits of
using the scattering transform for intrapartum F-HRV analysis. It consists of a recently proposed nonlinear and multiscale transform [21], shown to be highly effective to classify
audio signals, image textures, and to analyze fractal properties [22], [23]. The scattering transform is defined in Section II.
It is applied to an FHR database, described in Section III, carefully constructed, and well documented by obstetricians at the
Femme-Mère-Enfant (Woman–Mother–Child) academic public
Hospital (HFME) in Lyon, France. It is shown, first, how the
scattering transform enables us to capture and quantify the fractal properties of intrapartum F-HRV data, and how the extracted
(correlation and intermittency) scaling exponents enable us to
distinguish subjects suffering from acidosis from healthy ones,
and how these scaling exponents emphasize the role of the
highest frequencies (around and above 1 Hz) in F-HRV temporal dynamics (cf. Section IV-A). Classification performance
are then quantified and compared against FIGO-based achieved
ones (cf. Section IV-B). Furthermore, it is shown how these
scaling exponents enable us to track the evolution along time
of the fetus health status from healthy to nonhealthy (cf. Section IV-C). Finally, making use of the documentation provided
by the obstetricians, a typology of the subjects misclassified as
nonhealthy using the FIGO-rules (FIGO-false positive (FIGOFP)), compared to the classification achieved using scatteringtransform-based scaling exponents, is performed in Section IVD. This contribution elaborates on a preliminary work presented
at EMBC2013 [24].
II. METHODS
A. Scattering Transform
A scattering transform provides locally translation-invariant
multiscale coefficients, which characterize the scaling properties of signals. They are computed by iteratively calculating the
modulus of complex wavelet coefficients [21], [22], [25]. Let
X(t) denote the time series to analyze. The wavelet ψ(t) is a
complex analytic band-pass filter, whose transfer function is thus
supported over positive frequencies. Let ψj (t) = 2−j ψ(2−j t)
denote the dilated templates of ψ at scales a = 2j . While the
wavelet transform computes X  ψj (t) for multiple scales 2j ,

1101

the scattering transform outputs locally translation-invariant coefficients by averaging the modulus of these complex coefficients. Let φ(t) be a low-pass filter, which is dilated to adjust the
averaging support: φJ (t) = 2−J φ(2−J t). The first-order scattering coefficients are thus defined as the average amplitude of
wavelet coefficients, for any 1 ≤ j ≤ J, over half-overlapping
time windows of size 2J , centered at the points t = k2J −1 ,
k ∈ N:
SX(j, k) = |X  ψj |  φJ (t = k2J −1 ).

(1)

The averaging operation results in the loss of the high-frequency
contents of |X  ψj 1 (t)|, which can be recovered by computing a
new set of wavelet coefficients |X  ψj 1 (t)|  ψj 2 (t). Averaging
their modulus defines the second-order scattering coefficients at
each t = k2J −1 , for any 1 ≤ j1 < j2 ≤ J:
SX(j1 , j2 , k) = X  ψj 1 |  ψj 2 |  φJ (t = k2J −1 ).

(2)

This iterative procedure can be extended to higher orders.
Third-order coefficients are similarly defined for any 1 ≤ j1 <
j2 < j3 ≤ J by SX(j1 , j2 , j3 , t) = |X  ψj 1 |  ψj 2 |  ψj 3 | 
φJ (t). Only the two first-order coefficients are exploited in this
study.
By definition, the amplitude of second-order coefficients depends upon that of the first-order coefficients. To remove such
dependence, it is convenient to introduce the normalized secondorder scattering coefficients:
SX(j1 , j2 , k)

.
SX(j
1 , j2 , k) =
SX(j1 , k)

(3)

In the sequel, the vector of scattering coefficients aggregates,
for each time position k, the first- and normalized second-order
coefficients:



SX(k) = {SX(j, k)}1≤j ≤J , {SX(j
1 , j2 , k)}1≤j 1 < j 2 ≤J .
(4)
While providing a multiscale representation of X, the scattering
transform consists of a highly nonlinear transform, as opposed
to the underlying discrete wavelet transform.
In practice, in the present contribution, a complex wavelet
is used, consisting of the analytic part (restriction to positive
frequencies) of a Battle–Lemarié cubic spline wavelet [21].
The window φ is the cubic spline scaling function associated with this wavelet. The ScatNet software is available at
http://www.di.ens.fr/data/software/scatnet/.
B. Fractal Dynamics
When computed from time series X possessing fractal dynamics, or scale-invariant, properties, as well as stationary increments, the scattering coefficients have been shown [25] to
exhibit power-law behavior with respect to scales:
SX(j, k)  2j z 1 (k ) ,

SX(j
1 , j2 , k)  2

(j 2 −j 1 )z 2 (j 1 ,k )

(5)
.

(6)

As first-order coefficients average amplitude wavelet coefficients, z1 directly provides an estimate of the Hurst
parameter H for fractional Brownian motion and is in general

1102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

related to the covariance function of data; it is thus referred to as
the correlation scaling exponent. The normalized second-order
scattering coefficients provide an information beyond secondorder statistics [25]. Furthermore, for exactly scale-invariant
processes, z2 (j1 ) has been shown to be independent of j1 :
z2 (j1 ) ≡ z2 , ∀j1 [25]. For fractional Brownian motion, for instance, z2 = −1/2. For multifractal processes, z2 has been
shown to be related to the intermittency or multifractality parameter. In general, the z2 (j1 ) captures the bursty or intermittent
nature of data: The larger the z2 (j1 ), the more bursty in time the
data. The z2 (j1 ) are thus referred to as the intermittency scaling
exponents.
The scaling exponents z1 and z2 (j1 ) thus provide features
characterizing the fractal dynamics of X, where z1 gives a
global regularity information which mostly depends upon its
second-order statistics, whereas z2 (j1 ) depend upon higher order statistics. Fractal properties in time series, in general, and
in HRV in particular, can also be analyzed using other tools
such as, e.g., those developed and used in [18] and [19] . However, while the scattering transform is not primarily intended
for fractal analysis, but rather for nonlinear analysis, it also formally offers an original manner to measure fractal properties in
data via nonlinear transformations. Such connections are made
explicit in [25]. While theoretically formally equivalent when
applied to synthetic truly fractal processes, the scattering based
measurements of fractal property on real world data may potentially differ from those obtained from other fractal estimation
tools.

C. Data Preprocessing and Scattering
Transform Computation
As common practice for HRV analysis (cf., e.g., [14], [26]),
the lists {tn }n =1,...,N of R-peaks are transformed into regularly
sampled beat-per-minute (BpM) time series, X(t), by linear
interpolation of the measurements {(tn /1000, 60 000/(tn +1 −
tn ))}n =1,...,N . As F-HRV carries by nature no information beyond 3 Hz, the sampling frequency is set to fs = 8 Hz, (using higher fs has been observed to yield no improvement in
classification).
To be able to follow the evolution along time of the health
status of the fetuses, the scattering transform is computed in
T-minute long sliding windows. For clinical practice, obstetricians expect regular and short updates on the fetus health status,
with a typical update period of 5 to 10 min. Thus, for this
study, J = 12 is used so that 2J /fs = 512 s  8.5 min (as the
optimal use of the current version of the scattering transform
used here requires power of 2 sample size), with 50% overlap. Even though the database consists of only 45 subjects, this
sliding time-window analysis procedure amounts to computing
scattering coefficients, SX(k), for 507 different time windows,
indexed by k, for each subject.
While studying the evolution along time, k, of the statistics
of SX(k) enables us to follow the time evolution of the fetus
health status, an average performed on the last-K-windows before delivery can be assumed to measure the fetus health status

before delivery, and hence at the time when obstetricians make
the decision to operate delivery or not.
By construction of the BpM time series (interpolation at
8 Hz), octave j1 , corresponding to frequencies ranging from
2 to 4 Hz, contains no or little information related to F-HRV
temporal dynamics and is thus discarded from analysis.
III. DATABASE
A. Data Measurement
Intrapartum CTG have routinely been monitored at HFME
over the last 30 years, with systematic STAN-based surveillance for fetuses suffering from initial intermediate FHR during labor or with high risk of fetal asphyxia (postdate delivery, intrauterine growth restriction, diabetes, occurrence of abnormalities in CTG,...). CTGs are measured using the STAN,
Neoventa Medical (Moelndal, Sweden) system (STAN 21 or 31
systems, 12-bit resolution, 500-Hz sampling rate for the FECG
signal), thus producing high-quality data compared to the less
invasive but far less reliable ultrasound Doppler-effect-based
measurements. From CTG measurements, for each subject, a
list, {tn }n =1,...,N , of beat-by-beat R-peak occurrence time (in
milliseconds) is available.
B. Database
Obstetricians have carefully selected subjects and annotated
files according to FIGO guidelines to create a documented
database. The following criteria were used for inclusion of a subject into the database: The database must contain representative
healthy and nonhealthy subjects, which were correctly diagnosed by FIGO-rules as such, as well as representative healthy
subjects which were incorrectly diagnosed as nonhealthy by
FIGO-rules; For each subject, the F-HRV time series are at
least 30-min. long, and many recordings last for several hours;
data have good quality, i.e., there are in general few outliers
or missing beats in the R-peak occurrence time list; recordings are well-documented by obstetricians. The documentation
include umbilical cord artery acid–base (pH) status describing
fetal acid–status at delivery, AGPAR score, delivery mode, delay
from end-of-recording to delivery time. It also includes description of further obstetrician motivations for operative delivery,
related to the occurrence of final bradycardia, shape of decelerations, and their delay with respect to contractions, level of
variability, and reactivity.
The database is organized into three classes:
1) FIGO-TN: Fifteen fetuses with normal fetal outcome (defined as Apgar score of 10 at 5 min of life and arterial umbilical
cord pH > 7.30, hence nonacidotic thus healthy) and CTG classified as normal, thus referred to as FIGO-true negatives.
2) FIGO-TP: Fifteen fetuses with fetal acidosis (arterial umbilical cord pH < 7.05, hence abnormal) and CTG classified as
abnormal (hence correctly diagnosing fetal state as abnormal),
thus referred to as FIGO-TPs;
3) FIGO-FP: Fifteen fetuses with normal fetal outcome
(Apgar score of 10, arterial umbilical cord pH > 7.30, hence

CHUDÁČEK et al.: SCATTERING TRANSFORM FOR INTRAPARTUM FETAL HEART RATE VARIABILITY FRACTAL ANALYSIS

Fig. 1. Fractal Dynamics: log 2 SC (j) versus log 2 2 j = j (top-left), and
log 2 SC (j1 , j2 ) versus log 2 2 j 2 −j 1 = j2 − j1 for j1 = 2 (top-right), j1 = 3
(bottom-left) and j1 = 4 (bottom-right).

healthy), yet with pathological CTG (hence incorrectly diagnosed as abnormal), thus referred to as FIGO-FPs.
These three classes correspond to only two groups for fetal
health status: nonhealthy, equivalent to the FIGO-TP class, and
healthy corresponding to the union of the FIGO-TN and FIGOFP classes.
This three-class database provides us with a FIGO reference
benchmark reported in Table II. The goal of this case study
analysis is twofold: To improve performance, by decreasing
the number of FPs, and to produce a typology of these FPs to
analyze why they were misclassified.
IV. RESULTS
A. Fractal Dynamics and Scattering Transform: Scaling
Range and Scaling Exponents as Discriminating Features
1) Fractal Dynamics and Scattering Transform: It has often been argued in the literature that fractal temporal dynamics
constitutes a relevant and fruitful model for F-HRV modeling
(cf. e.g., [14], [17], [19]). Equations (5) and (6) in Section II-B
indicate that, for time series with fractal dynamics and stationary increments, the scattering coefficients are expected to
show power-law behaviors with respect to scales. To investigate such behaviors on F-HRV BpM time series, let us compute
SC(j) and SC(j1 , j2 ), corresponding respectively to the averages, per class, for each class C = T P, T N, F P , of the firstorder SX(j, t) and normalized second-order SX(j1 , j2 , t) scattering coefficients, over the last-3-windows. The choice K = 3,
which (given the overlap) corresponds to the last 17 min before
delivery, and hence matches the decision time frame in clinical
situation, is further justified in Section IV-C.
Fig. 1 displays log2 SC(j) as a function of log2 2j = j
and log2 SC(j1 , j2 ) as a function of j2 − j1 , for different j1
(95% confidence intervals, computed from within-class standard

1103

deviations are superimposed). Linear behaviors in such log–
log plots (superimposed dashed lines) indicate that power-law
behaviors such as those modeled in (5) and (6) are observed
in F-HRV BpM time series, and hold on average across octaves 3 ≤ j ≤ 9 for SC(j) (top-left plot) and for 3 ≤ j2 − j1 ≤
J − 2 − j1 for SC(j1 , j2 ). These observations validate the relevance of the concept of fractal to describe F-HRV temporal
dynamics across time scales ranging from 1 s ≤ 2j ≤ 1 min
approximately (or equivalently for frequencies in 0.01 ≤ f ≤ 1
Hz). That range encompasses and slightly enlarges the frequency
range involved into the low-frequency versus high-frequency
band decomposition, classically used for adult HRV analysis [9], [14] and much debated in the context of intrapartum
F-HRV (cf. e.g., [27]). Also, the interplay between fractal properties and decelerations, a hallmark characteristic of intrapartum
FHR time series, has been discussed in [17].
Fig. 1 also clearly evidences that the log2 SC(j1 , j2 ), as functions of j2 − j1 do not overlap when computed for various j1 ,
and thus that z2 (j1 ) do depend on j1 , in contradistinction with
the theoretical results in [25] that show that for processes with
exact scale invariance and stationary increments SC(j1 , j2 ) and
z2 (j1 ) should not depend on j1 . These empirical observations
clearly indicate that the z2 (j1 )s for different j1 s do not probe
the same information beyond correlation and also fractal constitutes only a global and approximate model for F-HRV temporal
dynamics, rather than a strictly exact one.
These empirical observations (first, scaling behaviors of
the scattering coefficients over scales that range from 0.01 ≤
f ≤ 1 Hz; second, departures from exact scale invariance)
suggest to measure systematically the scaling exponents
{z1 (k), z2 (j1 , k), j1 = 2, 3, 4}, for each subject of each class
and for each time window k, and for different j1 , and to investigate their potential as discriminating features for acidosis
detection.
2) Scaling Exponent Estimation: Estimation of the scaling
exponents {z1 (k), z2 (j1 , k), j1 = 2, 3, 4}, per subject and per
time window, is achieved by linear regressions in log2 SX(j, k)
versus j diagrams (for 3 ≤ j ≤ 8) and in log2 S̃X(j1 , j2 , k)
versus j2 − j1 (for 3 ≤ j2 − j1 ≤ J − 3 − j1 .
3) Discriminating Power of z1 : Fig. 2 compares, by means
of Boxplots, for the last-3-windows, the distributions per class
(TP, FP, TN) or health status (nonhealthy; healthy) of the correlation scaling exponents z1 and z2 (j1 ). It is complemented
by Table I, reporting the p-values obtained using the Wilcoxon
ranksum test, with equality in mean of the distributions as null
hypothesis. Both Fig. 2 and Table I clearly indicate that the
scaling exponent z1 efficiently discriminates healthy from nonhealthy, and further also distinguishes the three pairs of classes,
with the distributions of z1 for the TN and FP classes being
much closer than they are from that of the TP class. This is a
clear indication that z1 sees the FIGO-FP as closer to the FIGOTN, than to the FIGO-FP and thus actually as healthy subjects.
This is in close agreement with what has been observed using
Hurst parameter, or some multifractal attributes as discriminative features (cf. [17], [19], [27].
4) Discriminating Power of z2 (j1 ): Fig. 2 and Table I show
that the intermittency scaling exponent z2 (j1 = 2) achieves a

1104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 2. Boxplots comparing, for the last-K-windows, the distributions per class
(TP, FP, TN) and group (non-H, H) of the scaling exponents z1 (top left) and
z2 (j1 ) for j1 = 2 (top right), j1 = 3 (bottom left) and j1 = 4 (bottom right).
Central marks and box edges correspond to median and 25th–75th percentiles,
whiskers indicate extreme values that are not considered outliers, while outliers
are plotted individually.
TABLE I
DISCRIMINATION: P-VALUES FROM WILCOXON RANKSUM TEST FOR THE NULL
HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY IN MEAN OF THE DISTRIBUTIONS

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE: SPECIFICITY, SENSITIVITY, POSITIVE PREDICTIVE VALUE,
F-MEASURE [28], AND MATTHEWS CORRELATION COEFFICIENT [29]

good discrimination between healthy and nonhealthy and between the three pairs of classes, and that the distributions of
z2 (j1 = 2) for the TN and FP classes are much closer between
each other than they are from the distribution for TP class. Interestingly, for z2 (j1 = 3) and z2 (j1 = 4), conclusions differ as
those two scaling exponents do not discriminate neither healthy
from nonhealthy subjects nor the FP from the TP classes, which
constitutes the contribution major target.
This clearly indicates that the z2 (j1 ) for different j1 do not
probe the same information, and thus confirms that F-HRV BpM
fractal dynamics are only approximately (and not exactly) described by exact scale-invariant processes.
5) Frequency Band Analysis: This analysis can be made
more precise in terms of frequency bands. Octave j1 = 2 represents frequencies ranging from 1 to 2 Hz, i.e., around and above 1
Hz (or equivalently time scales ranging from 0.5 to 1 s), which
correspond to the highest frequencies contributing to F-HRV
temporal dynamics; z2 (j1 = 2) thus measures the temporal dynamics beyond correlation specifically attached to that range

that will be referred to as the highest frequency, that thus turns
out to be crucial to discriminate healthy from nonhealthy temporal dynamics. Note that octave j1 = 2 corresponds to frequencies beyond the traditional high-frequency band, stemming from
the adult-devised high-frequency/low-frequency band splitting,
corresponding, respectively, to [0.15, 0.40] and [0.04, 0.15] Hz.
Conversely, Octaves j1 = 3 and j1 = 4, ranging, respectively,
from 0.5 to 1 Hz and 0.25 to 0.5 Hz, essentially match the highfrequency band. The dependence structure for those frequency
ranges, measured by z2 (j1 = 3) and z2 (j1 = 4), is found to be
nondiscriminative between healthy and nonhealthy.
Interestingly, this indicates that dependence information beyond correlation, relevant to discriminate between the temporal
dynamics of healthy and nonhealthy fetuses, must be associated
with the highest frequencies around and above 1 Hz of F-HRV,
beyond the classical HF band. This provides us with new lights
on the temporal dynamics of F-HRV.
From now on, further analyses are therefore focused on the
two scaling exponents, z1 and z2 (j1 = 2), as they show the
largest powers in discriminating healthy from nonhealthy and
FIGO-TP from FIGO-FP.
6) Interpretations in Terms of Frequency Contents of F-HRV
and Good Variability: The boxplots in Fig. 2, as well as the
scatterplot of z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) for the last-3-windows, in Fig. 3
(middle plot), reveal that z1 and z2 (j1 = 2) for healthy subjects takes systematically lower values compared to those of
nonhealthy subjects.
From (5), lower z1 indicate larger contributions of high frequencies (or fine scales) to F-HRV temporal dynamics, compared to low frequencies (coarse scales) (where fine scales refer to j1 = 3, hence to a  1 s and to f  1 Hz, and coarse
scales to j1 = 8, hence to a  1 min or f  0.015 Hz). This
high-frequency dominant contribution for healthy subjects is in
agreement with earlier results obtained using multifractal analysis (cf. [17], [19]).
Exponent z2 (j1 = 2), computed from normalized secondorder scattering coefficients and from (6), requires more subtle
interpretations: First, Figs. 1 and 2 unambiguously show that
the log2 SC(j1 , j2 ), and thus the z2 (j1 = 2) for j1 = 2, computed from the nonhealthy class, are systematically larger than
those obtained from the healthy FIGO-FP subjects, themselves
larger than those produced by the healthy FIGO-TN subjects.
This indicates that the temporal dynamics of nonhealthy fetuses
are more intermittent and bursty than that of healthy fetuses.
This can naturally be expected generically via the interpretation
that a biological system under stress likely yields complicated
reactions, materialized by bursty and intermittent temporal dynamics. Second, resulting from the dependence structure beyond
the simple correlation structure, z2 (j1 = 2) measures the way
the energy at high frequencies (around 1 and 2Hz) is modulated
along time: Smaller z2 (j1 = 2) for healthy fetuses thus also
indicate that such modulations occur at higher frequency than
they do for nonhealthy subjects.
Such analyses renew the notion of good variability: Instead
of being defined as the amplitude of the fluctuations of the BpM
time series, at a a priori chosen scale, being larger than the
given threshold, it is proposed here that good variability can be

CHUDÁČEK et al.: SCATTERING TRANSFORM FOR INTRAPARTUM FETAL HEART RATE VARIABILITY FRACTAL ANALYSIS

1105

Fig. 3. Classification: Left: scatterplot of z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) for the all time windows, for the three classes (FIGO-TP: red “o”, FIGO-FP, black “+”, FIGO-TN,
blue ∗), the spontaneous fluctuations of the FIGO-TN scaling exponents defines the healthy domain as the union of an ellipse level line, corresponding to the
largest achieved MCC, of the best fit bivariate Gaussian and z1 ≤ T 1 , z2 (j1 = 2) ≤ T 2 zones. Middle; scatterplot of the median of z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) for the
last-K-windows (black numbers correspond to the identifiers s of the FIGO-FP subjects, as used in the typology in Section IV-D); ROC curve obtained by varying
ellipse level line, with best MCC shown as a (red) “o” (and compared to the ROC stemming from the use of the sole z1 ).

measured via the fractal paradigm, i.e., by the way such fluctuations vary from one scale to the other, or, in other words,
by a scaling exponent. In this framework, good variability is
assessed by low correlation and intermittency scaling exponents, that indicate a larger contribution of high frequencies to
temporal dynamics. High frequencies and low frequencies are
empirically (and not a priori) defined as the upper and lower
limits of the observed scaling behaviors matching (5) and (6)
and corresponding to time scales of the order of respectively, 1 s
(or 1 Hz) and 1 min. (or 0.015 Hz).

empirical observation reported along Section IV-A: z2 (j1 ), related to higher order dependence structure, captures temporal
dynamics features that are not already captured in z1 (related to
the sole second-order correlation) and illustrates the benefits on
the nonlinear nature of the scattering transform. Fig. 3 (left plot)
and Table II show, second, that the scattering-transform-based
z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) exponent classification procedure benefits from
excellent performance, and, at optimum (i.e., for the largest
MCC), yields significant improvements compared to results obtained from a FIGO-criteria based classification.

B. Classification Performance
From the scatterplots in Fig. 3, it can be observed 1) that
z1 and z2 (j1 = 2) are, for the last-3-windows (middle plot)
systematically larger for nonhealthy subjects that thus live in
the upper-right corner of the z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) plan; and 2) that the
joint distribution of z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) for the FIGO-TN class, for
all time windows (left plot), can be well modeled by a bivariate
Gaussian law. This lead us to define the healthy domain as the
inside of the ellipse corresponding to the level line of the fitted
bivariate Gaussian law that maximizes the Matthews correlation
coefficient (MCC) of a classification performed using the last3-windows, complemented with the union of the portions of the
plan delimited by z1 ≤ T1 , z2 (j1 = 2) ≤ T2 , with Ti defined as
the mean of zi for the FIGO-TN class. That definition of the
healthy domain as well as the choice K = 3 is further justified
in Section IV-C2.
From that definition of the healthy domain, each time window can be classified as healthy or nonhealthy. Then a per subject majority vote procedure classifies each subject as healthy
or nonhealthy. This is illustrated in Fig. 3 (center plot) which
shows the median last-3-window position for each of the 45
subjects, compared to the healthy domain. A receiver operational characteristic (ROC) curve can be computed by varying
the bivariate Gaussian distribution elliptic level line. It is plotted in Fig. 3 (left plot) and shows, first, that the ROC curve
obtained from using jointly z1 and z2 (j1 = 2) exhibits systematically better performance than that obtained from the use
of the sole z1 (see also Table II). This clearly validates the

C. Time Evolution
1) Sample Paths in the z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) Plan: So far, focus has
been only on the last-3-windows before delivery. However, the
scaling exponents z1 (c, s, k), z2 (c, s, k, j1 = 2) can be studied
as functions of time k, to analyze the time evolution of the fetus
health status. A healthy subject remains healthy from the beginning to the end of the recording; thus the corresponding sample
path remains quasi-exclusively within the healthy domain, as illustrated in Fig. 4, left plot. Conversely, for long enough recordings, a nonhealthy subject starts evolution in the healthy domain and moves outside after a certain time, as shown in Fig. 4,
middle-left plot. This can also be seen on the scatterplot gathering the 507 time windows for the three classes: A large number
of the nonhealthy subject early time windows (when the subject is presumably still healthy) sit in the healthy domain, while
the late windows are outside. For the FIGO-FP that are correctly
identified as healthy by the scaling exponents z1 , z2 (j1 = 2), the
corresponding sample paths quasi-continuously remain within
the healthy domain, as illustrated in Fig. 4, middle-right plot.
For some FIGO-FP that are either not correctly identified as
healthy by the scaling exponents z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) or close to the
border, the corresponding sample path often leaves temporarily
the healthy domain, before returning into it and leaving it again,
as illustrated in Fig. 4, right plot. Sample paths for all subjects
are available at perso.ens-lyon.fr/patrice.abry/SamplePaths.pdf.
These time evolutions can be further quantified. On average,
the FIGO-TP spend more than 50% of their time outside the

1106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 4. Sample paths in z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) plan. A Healthy subject (top left) performs a random walk in the healthy domain; a nonhealthy subject starts in the
healthy domain but at some time leaves it definitely toward the upper-left corner (top right); an FP subject correctly identified as healthy by the scaling exponents
also remains in the healthy domain (bottom left), while an FP subject incorrectly classified as nonhealthy by the scaling exponents oscillates around the border of
the healthy domain. Upper and lower triangles mark, respectively, the beginning and end of the sample paths.

Fig. 5. Time Evolution. Left: ROC curves for different K s, red “∗” indicate
for each K the largest MCC. It shows that K = 3 yields optimal performance.
Right: performance (sensitivity, specificity, and MCC) as functions of K .

healthy domain, against less than 5% for the FIGO-TN and
FIGO-FP. Moreover, the FIGO-TP spend, on average, 6 time
windows, out of the last 7 (last  35 min. before delivery) outside the healthy domain, against less than 1 for the FIGO-TN and
FIGO-FP. This clearly underlines a significant difference in the
health status time evolution between the FIGO-TP and FIGOFP classes, while FIGO-TP subjects remain for long periods of
time outside of the healthy domain, FIGO-FP subjects leave it
only occasionally and for short periods of time, before returning
into it and possibly leave it again briefly. The sample path of
the scaling exponents z1 , z2 (j1 = 2) in the corresponding 2-D
plan can thus be considered as a time evolving diagnostic tool
for obstetricians.
2) Last-K-Windows and Healthy Domain: ROC curves were
computed from the last-K-windows vote procedure, for different choices of K, 1 ≤ K ≤ 41, and compared in Fig. 5, left
plot. This clearly shows that optimal classification performance
are obtained for K = 3 (hence justifying that choice for the
design of the healthy domain). This indicates that the last 17min. before delivery provide an optimal time frame for scaling
exponent based decision making. The ellipse corresponding to
the largest MCC for K = 3 has thus been selected to define the
healthy domain used for classification. Fig. 5, right plot, shows
how classification performance degrade for other choices of K.
Variance in estimation of the scaling exponent is likely large
enough to explain that the use of the sole last window, K = 1,
performs worse than K = 3, despite corresponding to a shorter
time before delivery. For K = 5 (last 25 min), performance degrade only slightly (compared to K = 3), in agreement with the
fact that FIGO-TP are found consistently nonhealthy as early
as 6 windows before delivery (cf. Section IV-C1). When K is

further increased, sensitivity and MCC are monotonously decreasing, a direct consequence of the fact that during early windows, nonhealthy subjects are actually still healthy; thus the
majority vote procedure involving early windows places nonhealthy subjects into the healthy domain.
This time evolution analysis of z1 , z2 (j1 ) sample path constitutes one of the rare quantitative measure of the departure from
healthy to nonhealthy fetus and of the corresponding departure time. Also, it quantifies objectively the optimal time frame,
K = 3 to 5, corresponding to 17 to 25 min, within which fractal
dynamics must be measured to assess the health status of fetuses
and to permit an efficient detection of nonhealthy subjects. An
optimal time varying classification can thus be constructed using
a K = 3 majority vote procedure.
D. Typology for FP Subjects
Beyond the classification performance, figures reported in
Table II, this database can be further analyzed using the annotations provided by obstetricians, so as to determine which
FIGO-FP are actually correctly reclassified as healthy by scaling
exponents z1 , z2 (j1 = 2).
Obstetrician annotations indicate that FIGO-FP subjects FP1,
FP2, FP4, FP7, FP8, FP10, FP12, FP13, and FP15 were classified pathological by FIGO-rules because of a long-period of low
variability, which precisely means that the corresponding BpM
time series show a variability of less than 5 BpM over at least
20 min. The scatterplot of the scaling exponents z1 , z2 (j1 = 2)
in Fig. 3, left plot, shows that all such subjects remain in the
healthy domain and are thus classified correctly as healthy. Obstetrician annotations also indicate that FIGO-FP subjects FP2,
FP3, FP4, FP5, FP7, FP8, FP10, FP12, and FP15 were classified
pathological because of low reactivity, that is a weak reactivity
of the fetus heart after decelerations induced by contractions.
Again, the scatterplot shows that these subjects are correctly
classified as healthy using the scaling exponents z1 , z2 (j1 = 2).
This illustrates that subjects annotated by obstetricians as suffering from either low variability or low reactivity, essentially
because they present BpM time series with low amplitudes in
fluctuations, may actually very well exhibit temporal dynamics
that very much resemble that of healthy subjects, rather than
that of nonhealthy ones. Interestingly, this confirms that scaling exponents taking low values constitute a measure of good
variability, that turns out to be more relevant and robust than

CHUDÁČEK et al.: SCATTERING TRANSFORM FOR INTRAPARTUM FETAL HEART RATE VARIABILITY FRACTAL ANALYSIS

the sole thresholding of the amplitude of the BpM time series
fluctuations. Also, it is interesting to note that for low variability
subjects (FP2, FP5, FP7, FP8, FP12, FP15), the sole exponent
z1 , taking a low value, is enough to classify them as healthy,
while for low reactivity subjects (FP1, FP3, FP10, FP13), z1
takes a large enough value to match the nonhealthy subject values. However, for these subjects, exponent z2 (j1 = 2) takes a
low value thus maintaining them into the healthy domain. There
is hence a clear benefit in using jointly the scaling exponents z1
and z2 (j1 = 2).
Some FP subjects remain incorrectly classified by the scaling exponents z1 and z2 (j1 = 2) (FP9, FP11, and FP14). For
those subjects, obstetrician annotations indicate heart rate decelerations, which are labeled either as complicated-shape, or
as deep or as delayed after contraction. Also, FP3, FP10, and
FP12 (close to healthy domain border) are indicated to suffer from delayed after contraction decelerations. Earlier studies
reported in [19] or [12] on the same database show that these
same subjects were also either not correctly classified or close to
the border, using multifractal attributes or adaptive complexity
measures as features.
These observations tend to suggest that the occurrence of
complicated-shape, or deep or late decelerations in F-HRV accompanies an actual change in the temporal dynamics of the
BpM time series, which is thus felt by the scaling exponents.
This change tends to occur jointly on z1 and on z2 (j1 = 2) and
thus affects the entire dependence structure of the BpM time
series, and not only their sole correlation structure. Also, this
change corresponds to a reduction of the contribution of high
frequencies, in a manner that tends to resemble the temporal
dynamics of nonhealthy subjects. Therefore, healthy subjects
presenting such types of decelerations have undergone a change
in their temporal dynamics that corresponds, though less pronounced, to that of nonhealthy subjects. They are thus less easy
to disentangle from nonhealthy subjects.
V. DISCUSSIONS, CONCLUSION, AND PERSPECTIVES
The potential of the two correlation and intermittency scaling
exponents measured from scattering transforms to characterize
intrapartum F-HRV has been explored. Such exponents constitute quantitative measures of the fractal nature of BpM time
series temporal dynamics, with the particular property, that they
explore temporal dynamics, beyond the sole correlation level
(or second statistical order), via the entire dependence structure
of data (at all statistical order) levels.
These scattering-transform-based scaling exponents permit
to first confirm that fractal dynamics is a characteristic of the FHRV BpM signal, in frequencies ranging from 10 mHz to 1 Hz,
but also that exact scale invariance processes (such as fractional
Brownian motions of multifractal) constitute only approximate
models. Second, they enable us to show clear differences between the temporal dynamics of healthy and nonhealthy fetuses
(for the former, high frequencies contribute more than for the
later), and thus to renew the practical measure of good variability. Furthermore, computed from sliding short time windows, the
scaling exponents z1 and z2 (j1 = 2) enable us to characterize

1107

the evolution along time of the fetus health status, to visualize
when and how fetuses depart from the healthy domain, thus
providing obstetricians with a potentially interesting tool to assist forming diagnostics. Combined to obstetrician annotations,
these scaling exponents also enable us to draw a typology of
FIGO-FP subjects.
The results obtained from this case study and documented
database are promising and this study will continue along different lines, under current investigations. At the methodological
level, features extracted from scattering coefficients will first be
compared, both in terms of nature (what they actually measure
in data) and of performance (how well they classify), against
other classical, or less classical, linear, and mostly nonlinear
features (FIGO-criteria; entropy-rate [15]; fractal and multifractal [17], [19], [27], ...). Notably, attention will be focused
on whether, besides overall classification performance, the misclassified subjects are always the same or differ, when using different types of features. Second, it will be investigated whether
the use of the entire collection of (54 per window) scattering
coefficients into supervised machine-learning type classifiers
(such as SVM) yields better or complementary classification
performance, compared to those achieved from the sole two
scaling exponents only, retained to achieve a nonsupervised
classification. At the practical level, the results obtained on this
case-study database will be comforted and complemented on
the large database currently been constituted at HFME (above
3000 subjects targeted). A large database should permit us to
address two issues: How can the individual classification power
of various features be compared (cf. [6], [30]) ? How should
supervised classification strategies (relying on sets of selected
features) be implemented and compared ?

REFERENCES
[1] E. Chandraharan and S. Arulkumaran, “Prevention of birth asphyxia: Responding appropriately to cardiotocograph (ctg) traces,” Best Pract. Res.
Clin. Obstetr. Gynaecol., vol. 21, pp. 609–624, 2007.
[2] G. A. Macones, G. D. Hankins, C. Y. Spong, J. Hauth, and T. Moore, “The
2008 national institute of child health and human development workshop
report on electronic fetal monitoring: Update on definitions, interpretation,
and research guidelines,” Obstetr. Gynecol., vol. 112, no. 3, pp. 661–666,
2008.
[3] FIGO, Guidelines for the use of fetal monitoring, Int. J. Gynaecol. Obstetr.vol. 25, pp.159–167, 1987
[4] I. Amer-Wahlin, C. Hellsten, H. Hagberg, A. Herbst, I. Kjellmer, H. Lilja,
C. Mansson, L. Martensson, P. Olofsson, A. Sundstrom, and K. Marsál,
“Cardiotochography only versus cardiotochography plus st analysis of
fetal electrocardiogram for intrapartum fetal monitoring: A Swedish randomised controlled,” Trial. Lancet., vol. 358, no. 9281, pp. 534–538,
2001.
[5] W. Jarish and J. S. Detwiler, “Statistical modeling of fetal heart rate variability,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 582–589, Oct.
1980.
[6] B. Fulcher, A. Georgieva, C. Redman, and N. Jones, “Highly comparative
fetal heart rate analysis,” Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., pp. 3135–3138, Sep. 1–28, 2012.
[7] J. Bernardes and D. Ayres-De-Campos, “The persistent challenge of fetal heart rate monitoring,” Curr. Opin. Obstetr. Gynecol., vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 104–109, 2010.
[8] M. J. Stout and A. G. Cahill. (2011, Mar.). Electronic fetal monitoring:
Past, present, and future. Clin. Perinatol. [Online]. 38(1), pp. 127–42,
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clp.2010.12.002

1108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

[9] S. Akselrod, D. Gordon, F. A. Ubel, D. C. Shannon, A. C. Berger, and
R. J. Cohen, “Power spectrum analysis of heart rate fluctuation: A quantitative probe of beat-to-beat cardiovascular control,” Science, vol. 213,
no. 4504, pp. 220–222, 1981.
[10] J. V. Laar, M. Porath, C. Peters, and S. Oei, “Spectral analysis of the fetal
heart rate variability for fetal surveillance: Review of the literature,” Acta
Obstetr. Gynecol., vol. 87, pp. 300–306, 2008.
[11] E. Salamalekis, P. Thomopoulos, D. Giannaris, I. Salloum, G. Vasios,
A. Prentza, and D. Koutsouris, “Computerised intrapartum diagnosis of
fetal hypoxia based on fetal heart rate monitoring and fetal pulse oximetry recordings utilising wavelet analysis and neural networks,” BJOG,
vol. 109, no. 10, pp. 1137–1142, Oct. 2002.
[12] H. Helgason, P. Abry, P. Goncalvès, C. Gharib, P. Gaucherand, and
M. Doret, “Adaptive multiscale complexity analysis of fetal heart rate,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2186–2193, Aug. 2011.
[13] M. Ferrario, M. G. Signorini, G. Magenes, and S. Cerutti, “Comparison
of entropy-based regularity estimators: Application to the fetal heart rate
signal for the identification of fetal distress,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 119–125, Jan. 2006.
[14] P. Hopkins, N. Outram, N. Lofgren, E. Ifeachor, and K. Rosen, “A comparative study of fetal heart rate variability analysis techniques,” in Proc.
28th IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2006, pp. 1784–1787.
[15] M. Cost, A. L. Goldberger, and C.-K. Peng, “Multiscale entropy analysis
of biological signals,” Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter Phys., vol. 71,
no. 2, pp. 021906-1–021906-18, Feb. 2005.
[16] R. Barbieri, E. C. Matten, A. A. Alabi, and B. E.M. , “A point-process
model of human heartbeat intervals: New definitions of heart rate and
heart rate variability,” Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 288,
pp. H424–H435, 2005.
[17] P. Abry, S. Roux, V. Chudáček, P. Borgnat, P. Goncalves, and M. Doret,
“Hurst exponent and intrapartum fetal heart rate: Impact of decelerations,”
in Proc. 26th IEEE Int. Symp. Comput.-Based Med. Syst.), 2013, pp. 131–
136.
[18] H. Wendt, P. Abry, and S. Jaffard, “Bootstrap for empirical multifractal
analysis,” IEEE Signal Proc. Mag., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 38–48, Jul. 2007.
[19] M. Doret, H. Helgason, P. Abry, P. Gonçalvès, C. Gharib, and
P. Gaucherand, “Multifractal analysis of fetal heart rate variability in
fetuses with and without severe acidosis during labor,” Am. J. Perinatol.,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 259–266, 2011.
[20] R. F. Leonarduzzi, G. Schlotthauer, and M. E. Torres, “Wavelet leader
based multifractal analysis of heart rate variability during myocardial
ischaemia,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2010, pp. 110–113.

[21] S. Mallat, “Group invariant scattering,” Pure Appl. Math., vol. 10, no. 65,
pp. 1331–1398, 2012.
[22] J. Anden and S. Mallat, “Multiscale scattering for audio classification,”
in Proc. Int. Soc. Music Information Retrieval Conf., vol. 103, New York,
NY, USA, 2011, pp. 657–662.
[23] J. Bruna, “Intermittent process analysis with scattering moments,” Ph.D.
dissertation, École Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France, 2012.
[24] V. Chudáček, J. Anden, S. Mallat, P. Abry, and M. Doret, “Scattering
transform for intrapartum fetal heart rate characterization and acidosis
detection,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2013, pp. 2898–2901.
[25] J. Bruna, S. Mallat, E. Bacry, and J. Muzy, “Intermittent process analysis
with scattering moments,” in arXiv:1311.4104, 2013.
[26] J. V. Laar, M. Porath, C. Peters, and S. Oei, “Spectral analysis of the fetal
heart rate variability for fetal surveillance: Review of the literature,” Acta
Obstetrica Gynecologica, vol. 87, pp. 300–306, 2008.
[27] P. Abry, H. Wendt, S. Jaffard, H. Helgason, P. Gonçalvès, E. Pereira,
C. Gharib, P. Gaucherand, and M. Doret, “Methodology for multifractal
analysis of heart rate variability: From LF/HF ratio to wavelet leaders,”
presented at the Proc. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biolgy Society
Conf., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010.
[28] G. Hripcsak and A. S. Rothschild. (2005). Agreement, the
f-measure, and reliability in information retrieval. J. Amer.
Med. Informat. Assoc. [Online]. 12(3), pp. 296–298. Available:
http://jamia.bmjjournals.com/content/12/3/296.short
[29] B. Matthews, “Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of T4 phage lysozyme,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 405, pp. 442–
451, 1975.
[30] B. D. Fulcher, M. A. Little, and N. S. Jones. (2013). Highly comparative time-series analysis: The empirical structure of time series
and their methods. J. Roy. Soc. Interf. [Online]. 10(83). Available:
http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/10/83/20130048.short

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

