IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

871

Investigation of Low-Voltage Pulse Parameters
on Electroporation and Electrical Lysis Using a
Microfluidic Device With Interdigitated Electrodes
Bashir I. Morshed∗ , Member, IEEE, Maitham Shams, and Tofy Mussivand

Abstract—Electroporation (EP) of biological cells leads to the
exchange of materials through the permeabilized cell membrane,
while electrical lysis (EL) irreversibly disrupts the cell membrane.
We report a microfluidic device to study these two phenomena
with low-voltage excitation for lab-on-a-chip (LOC) applications.
For systematic study of EP, we have employed a quantification
metric: flow Index (FI) of EP. Simulation and experimental results
with the microfluidic device containing interdigitated, coplanar,
integrated electrodes to electroporate, and rapidly lyse biological
cells are presented. H&E stained human buccal cells were subjected to various pulse magnitudes, pulsewidths, and number of
pulses. Simulations show that an electric field of 25 kV/cm with a
20 V applied potential produced 1.3 ◦ C temperature rise for a 5 s of
excitation. For a 20 V pulse-excitation with pulse-widths between
0.5 to 5 s, EL was observed, whereas for lower excitations, only EP
was observed. FI of EP is found to be a direct function of pulse
magnitudes, pulsewidths, and numbers of pulses. To release DNA
from nucleus, excitation-pulses of 5 s were required. Quantification
of EP would be useful for systematic study of EP toward optimization with various excitation pulses, while low-voltage requirement
and high yield of EP and EL are critical to develop LOC for drug
delivery and cell-sample preparation, respectively.
Index Terms—Electric field, electrical lysis (EL), electroporation
(EP), flow index of electroporation, microfluidic device.

I. INTRODUCTION
LASMA membrane of a cell is a 5 to 8 nm thick proteinlipid bilayer, and forms a physical barrier separating cell
contents from the extracellular environment [1]. Permeabilization or breaking down of the plasma membrane is necessary for
many applications based on lab-on-a-chip (LOC) technology.
When a cell is placed inside an electric field, charges accumulate along the plasma membrane, inducing a potential across
the membrane [2]. The induced membrane potential causes an

P

Manuscript received July 9, 2013; revised September 15, 2013; accepted
October 28, 2013. Date of publication November 20, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. This work was supported by the Canadian Microelectronics Corporation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ B. I. Morshed is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152 USA (e-mail: bmorshed@
memphis.edu).
M. Shams is with the Electronics Department, Carleton University, ON K1S
5B6, Canada (e-mail: shams@doe.carleton.ca).
T. Mussivand is with the Medical Devices Innovation Institute, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada (e-mail: tmussivand@ottawaheart.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2291794

electrical force on bilayer phospholipids (e.g., 1,2-dimyristoylsn-Glycero-3-phosphorylcholine, DMPC), and exerts a stress
for reorientation due to electric dipole properties [3]. If the applied electric field is increased such that the induced membrane
potential reaches a critical value of 1 V, these dipoles undergo
conformal changes in membrane structure causing formation of
a large number of hydrophilic pores or channels through the
plasma membrane [4]–[6]. This phenomenon of numerous reversible pore formation in the plasma membrane, due to a high
electric field of intensity in several kV/cm and duration of μsto-ms, is known as electroporation (EP) [7], [8]. This induces a
temporary loss of semipermeability of plasma membrane, and
can cause in ion leakage, escape of metabolites, selective release of intracellular molecules, and increased uptake of drugs,
molecular probes, and genetic materials [8]–[15]. Medical applications include controlled drug delivery, gene transfection,
and vascular therapy [16].
If the electric field is sustained for a critical duration,
cell membrane completely disintegrates, causing cell lysis
[17]–[28], a process of breaking a open cell through rupturing
this cellular plasma membrane by external physical or chemical
stimulus, releasing the contents of the cell including deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) [29], [30]. Other methods for lysis include
mechanical shear [31], liquid shear [32], gaseous shear [33], osmotic pressure [34], electroosmotic [35], sonication [36], chemical stimulus [37] using nonionic detergents and lysis agents,
e.g., Chelex, QIAamp [1], [37]–[39], laser [40], [41], and thermal [42], [43] stimulations. Electrical lysis (EL), a rapid mechanism, on a microfluidic platform can be used for biodefense
and diagnostic systems [44]. EP and EL of biological cells on
microfluidic chips are of recent interest due to simple, low-cost
device, and fast operation [8], [17].
A major challenge of studying EP and EL is the lack of
any systematic quantitative metric that will allow comparative
study of experiments and improve classification in describing
the severity. EP and EL are known to be dependent on various
parameters including the electrical excitation durations, electric
field magnitudes, number of excitation pulses, frequency, orientations of the electric field, cell size and shape, as well as buffer
osmolarity and conductivity [45]–[49]. The majority of studies
have quantified EP through the percentage of cells undergoing
EP detected by stain uptake [50], and percentage of fluorescent
cells [51], [52]. An indirect approach to quantify severity of
EP is detection of increase in transmembrane conductance that
increases conductance with higher electric field or increasing
number of pulses [46]. Some approaches are critically cell-size

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

dependent such as determining the amounts of stains uptake per
cell after a certain number of cell lysis and measurement of
stains with a calibrated microscope [53], and the percentage of
area coverage by stained cells after EP [54]. Other quantification
approaches are critically time dependent such as determining the
delivery rate [55] and transfection rate [56].
The applied potential required for EL of protoplast cells and
other plant cells were demonstrated to be as low as 10 to 30 V
that generated electric field between 1 to 10 kV/cm [19], [57].
Human cells, such as breast cancer cells, require higher potential
and electric field; such as 40 V to generate around 20 kV/cm as
reported by Nashimoto [58]. Release of intracellular molecules
through EL has been reported such as genetic materials and
ribonucleic acid (RNA) [58]. Lu et al. showed human colon
carcinoma can be lysed inside microchannels that released nucleus [22]. Munce et al. demonstrated that EL can extract cell
contents within cytoplasm [59]. Marc et al. demonstrated EL
releases oregon green and fluorescein dye from cells [60]. Rosa
et al. and Park et al. reported release of DNA from bordetella pertussis and vaccinia virus, respectively; none of those
has nucleus [61], [62]. Nanosecond pulses have been shown
to affect only intracellular membranes without rupturing cell
membranes [63].
For low-voltage EP and EL, we report a novel microfluidic device with integrated coplanar interdigitated electrodes,
along with top cell-loading ports that increases throughput and
reusability. Furthermore, to quantify the severity of EP, we apply a quantitative image analysis approach along with a quantification metric: flow index (FI) of EP [64]. This enables us to
perform quantitative comparison for systematic analysis. We hypothesize that disintegration of nuclear membrane will require
application of pulses with higher energy. We experimentally
show that EL of human cell can be performed with low voltage
excitation and longer pulse duration. DNA release by rupturing
the nuclear membrane requires pulses with even longer durations containing higher energy.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Microfluidic Device Design, Fabrication, and
Postprocessing
The microfluidic device was designed using MEMSPro version 5.1 (SoftMEMS, CA, USA). The device housed a microfluidic chamber for EP and EL composed of five parallel
microchannels. Each microchannel was 12 mm long, 400 μm
wide, and 40 μm deep. These microchannels merged at both
ends and terminated at two fluidic ports. The device also contained an integrated electrode layer. To generate an electric field
inside the microchannel, this layer was utilized to design interdigitated fingers of 420 μm length and 10 μm width at the
bottom of each microchannel placed perpendicular to the axis
of the microchannel (see Fig. 1). The gaps between fingers were
10 μm. The fingers were alternatively connected to two thick
electrodes of 0.5 mm width on both sides of the microchannel,
thus forming an interdigitated configuration. The thick electrodes connected the fingers with two electrode ports. There
were 31 cell loading ports directly above the microchannels to

Fig. 1. (a) Layout of the microfluidic device with enlargement of a section
(A) of the microfluidic chamber. (b) Photograph of the prototyped device after
postprocessing, with an inset depicting an optical microscope image of a cell
loading port, a portion of a microfluidic channel and interdigitated electrodes,
while another inset showing the interdigitated electrode design.

quickly load samples. The chip layout contains three mask layers: electrode mask (labeled green), microchannel mask (labeled
red), and port mask (labeled green) as shown in Fig. 1(a). Note
that the overlap of two different layers depicts as a yellowish
color. The chip boundary is shown with the brown rectangle,
and the adjacent scale is in micron. Three types of ports were
designed for fluidic access (fluidic port, φ = 1.5 mm), electrical
access (electrode port, φ = 1.2 mm), and sample cell access (cell
loading port, φ = 1 mm). The cell loading ports were directly
above the five parallel microchannels of the chamber, and were
laterally spaced by 2 mm.
The microfluidic device was fabricated through SensoNit
Fabrication Process (Micronit, Inc., The Netherlands). The chip

MORSHED et al.: INVESTIGATION OF LOW-VOLTAGE PULSE PARAMETERS ON ELECTROPORATION AND ELECTRICAL LYSIS

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the experimental setup of the microfluidic device
connected to a pulse generator and an oscilloscope through a capacitor (C ) and a
diode (D). The fluidic path is indicated in blue, while the optical path is indicated
in yellow.

comprised of two glass slides of 1.1 and 0.7 mm thickness as
substrates. The top slide contained the ports and the bottom
slide contained the microchannel and the integrated electrodes.
The fabrication process involved creation of trenches through
wet chemical etching for microchannels using channel mask,
then the deposition of electrode materials using sputter coating
technique inside 200 nm deep cavities etched at the bottom of
the trenches using electrode mask. The electrodes composed of
180 nm thick platinum (Pt) layer on top of 20 nm thick tantalum (Ta), which serves as the adhesion layer between the Pt
and the etched glass surface. Ports were created on the top slide
with powder blasting technique using port mask. The two glass
slides were aligned and thermally fused. The fabricated device
was 3 cm long, 1.5 cm wide, and 1.8 mm thick. A microscopic
image of a microchannel, a cell loading port, and the interdigitated integrated electrodes within the microfluidic chamber of
the fabricated device is shown in Fig. 1(b).
Postprocessing involved fixation of fluidic and electrical connectivities. Nanoport assemblies (Upchurch Scientific, WA,
USA) were affixed on top of the fluidic ports for fluidic access through capillary tubing connections. External electrodes
were connected to the integrated electrodes through the electrode ports using silver conductive epoxy (Cat. 8331-14G, MG
Chemicals, ON, Canada). A photograph of the postprocessed
device is shown in Fig. 1(b). For initial wetting of the microchannel surfaces, a 10% detergent solution (Triton X-100,
Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) was introduced inside the
microchannels and washed thoroughly with ddH2 O.

873

the electrode ports to limit the residual voltage developed across
the fingers inside the microchannels. Two syringe pumps (Cat.
780100C, Cole-Parmer, IL, USA) were used to introduce (or
to remove) buffer fluids inside the microchannels through the
fluidic ports. The test-fixture included a clean glass slide of dimension 75 mm × 25 mm (Cat. 12-550-15, Fisher Scientific,
PA, USA) on which the fabricated and postprocessed device was
secured using silicone to enable proper positioning on the microscope stage. As the fluidic ports provided open fluidic paths
for buffer, fluid loading (and removal) was performed through
both syringe pumps in the same operating mode (i.e., loading
mode or removal mode). Experiments were performed on the
stage of an optical microscope (CKX41, Olympus Corp., IL,
USA) with an integrated charge-coupled device (CCD) camera
to capture the sequence of images at every 0.5 s interval starting from the pulse excitation. The CCD camera was connected
to a workstation with ImagePro Express software (Media Cybernetics, Inc., MD, USA) that acquired and saved the image
sequences.
C. Cell Sample Preparation
Sample cells were collected noninvasively using buccal swabs
from volunteers and stained using both Haematoxylin (Cat.
3530-16, Ricca Chemical, TX, USA) and Eosin Y (Cat. SE22500D, Fisher Chemical, PA, USA) stains (known as H&E staining). The average diameter of the sample cells were 40 μm
and approximate concentration of a thousand cell/mL. Haematoxylin stain colors basophilic structures (such as chromosomes)
with blue-purple hue. Eosin Y stain colors eosinophilic structures (like cytoplasm) in bright pink or magenta. A centrifugebased method for freely flowing cell staining was developed,
where the protocol replaces the conventional washing step with
several “centrifuge-and-discard supernatant” steps. Briefly, the
procedure involved washing sample cells to centrifuge tubes
with 2 mL of deionized H2 O. Then, 10 μL of Haematoxylin and
20 μL of Eosin Y stain were added successively after centrifugation at 2000 r/min for 5 min then discarding the supernatant
for three times. Stained sample cells were stored in a dark shelf
and used within several days. The concentrations of the cells
in samples were very low (∼100 cells per mL). After staining
process, there was no noticeable degradation of stains even after
1 week [64].
D. Experimentation Procedure

B. Experimental Setup
The schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown
in Fig. 2. As the source of electrical excitation, a pulse generator (HP33120A, Hewlett-Packard Company, CA, USA) was
used. An oscilloscope (TDS-3012, Tektronix, Inc., OR, USA)
was used to monitor and record the pulse waveform. A capacitor, C, of 1 μF (SN010M050ST, Cornell Dubilier, SC, USA)
was included in series of the pulse generator to block any dc
offset voltage while passing the pulse excitation; hence reducing power loss, electrode degradation, and increasing fault tolerance of the experimental setup. A reverse-biased diode, D,
(IN4007, Texas Instruments, TX, USA) was connected across

Prior to an experiment, the device was washed thoroughly
with flowing ddH2 O and then dried with blowing hot air. The
device was then secured on the stage of a microscope. Fluidic
ports were connected to the syringe pumps through the capillary
tubes and the external electrodes were connected to the pulse
generator as shown in Fig. 2. The pumps were engaged to inject
10 μL of buffer fluids inside the microchannels at the rate of
50 μL/min. When the microfluidic chamber was filled with the
introduced buffer fluid, the pumps were disengaged. After the
buffer fluid flow was stopped, a 5 μL of the stained cell-sample
solution was introduced in the microfluidic chamber through
the cell loading ports by using a micropipette. Then, the cells

874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 3. 3-D model of the microfluidic device containing microchannel of the
microfluidic chamber, integrated electrodes, and loading ports used for electric
field and thermal simulations. The inset shows the interdigitated fingers at the
bottom of a microchannel.

were allowed 30 s to settle at the bottom of the microchannel.
The focal plane of the microscope was fine-tuned such that
some of the stained cells inside the chamber can be clearly
observed through the CCD camera. The pulse excitation and
the image capture sequence were initiated at the same instance.
For EP experiments, excitation pulse magnitudes ranged from
2.5 to 20 V, resulting in estimated electric fields between 2.5 to
20 kV/cm. The pulse-width range was between 1 μs to 5 s, and
the number of pulses was between 1 to 100. The rising edge of
the initial pulse triggered the oscilloscope to capture the pulse
waveform. The image capturing system saved the sequence of
images in the hard disk of the workstation. For EL experiments,
single pulses of long durations were investigated. The fluid after
the pulse treatment was collected using a micropipette through
the cell loading ports and observed under a 100× magnification
oil-immersion optical microscope.
III. RESULTS: SIMULATION
A. Model of the Microfluidic Device
Analysis of the developed electric fields and temperature rise
inside the microchannels within the microfluidic chamber of the
device was performed with finite element method (FEM) using
Comsol Multiphysics software (Comsol, Inc., Burlington, MA,
USA). The model of the essential components of the microdevice was generated using the 3-D Modeler (see Fig. 3). The
material parameters were from Comsol Multiphysics Material
Database available with the software. The model was meshed
with a maximum growth rate of 1.3 resulting in 2258 159 tetrahedron elements with 385 863 mesh points and 3045 076 degrees
of freedom.
B. Electric Field Simulations
Electric field simulations were performed using conductive
dc media physics. The positive and negative electrodes were
excited by applying potentials of 20 and 0 V, respectively.
The boundary conditions for all external surfaces were set to

Fig. 4. FEM simulation of electric field of the model along xz-plane with a
section enlarged to show distribution of electric fields.

electrical insulation, and all internal boundaries were electrical
continuity. Isotropic conductivity was selected for all materials. Simulations were performed iteratively until the relative
error converged below 0.1, while the absolute error tolerance
was 0.01. A representative result is shown in Fig. 4 depicting
the distribution of electric fields for excitation potential of 20 V.
The peak electric fields inside the microfluidic chamber reached
up to 25 kV/cm. The electric field near the electrodes at the bottom of the microchannel were higher. This is advantageous as
cell samples were allowed to settle near the bottom of the microchannel after loading inside of the microfluidic chamber, due
to the average density of cell (∼1.5 gm/cm3 ) to be higher then
the density of the medium (∼1 gm/cm3 ). Portions of the cells
away from the electrodes by 10 μm or more along z-axis might
not experience the critical electric field for poration.
C. Thermal Simulations
Application of electrical current through the buffer fluid
causes generation of heat (primarily Joule heating). The upper bound of such heat can be obtained by assuming that all
power consumed in the microfluidic device has been dissipated
as heat resulting in a heat generation (Q = V × I), where V
is the applied potential and I is the current flow. The general
heat transfer physics was applied to simulate conductive and
convective heat transfer of the materials, and heat radiation is
ignored for a conservative estimate.
The device delivering 20 V resulted 1 V drop across a 50
Ω internal resistance of the power supply (based on empirical
data). The calculated internal resistance of the buffer fluid is 1
kΩ, the average current flow is 20 mA, and power dissipation
is 0.4 W inside the five microchannel paths. Hence, the average power dissipation in each microchannel is 0.08 W. With a
25% upper bound tolerance, a power dissipation of 0.1 W for
each microchannel path was simulated. The heat generation per
unit volume was calculated by dividing the power dissipation
in the volume of that microchannel, and used as the volumetric

MORSHED et al.: INVESTIGATION OF LOW-VOLTAGE PULSE PARAMETERS ON ELECTROPORATION AND ELECTRICAL LYSIS

875

heat source. Transient analysis was performed using generalized minimal residual solver. The relative error tolerance for
convergence was 0.01, while the absolute tolerance was 0.001.
With these criteria, the obtained simulation results served as a
conservative estimate of the temperature rise for electric current.
The initial temperatures of all subdomains were set to 300◦ K
(for room temperature of 26.8 ◦ C). The temperature at infinite
was set to 298◦ K. All internal boundaries were set to thermal
conductivity while all external boundaries were set to convective heat flux dissipation with the heat transfer coefficient h of
5, 10, and 20 W/m2 K, as the range of h is typically between
4.4 to 32.2 W/m2 K corresponding to stationary air to forced
air cooling, respectively. Theoretical calculation with an airflow
rate of 1 m/s provides a heat transfer coefficient of 22.4 W/m2 K.
The approach provides an estimate with reduced computational
complexity [22], [65]–[67].
The transient thermal simulation for 5 s pulsewidth resulted
a maximum temperature rise of 1.3◦ K of the fluid inside the
microchannels of the chamber and the temperature increased to
2.2◦ K after 10 s of continuous excitation as shown in Fig. 5(a).
The maximum temperate was observed at the middle of the
microchannel under the loading ports, resulting from convection
flow of water with higher temperature toward the opening of
the loading port. Transient simulations over 10 s period for h
values of 5, 10, and 20 W/m2 K are plotted in Fig. 5(b). The
temperature rises were below 2.9◦ K for all cases for up to 10 s
of excitation. For instance, with an excitation of 5 s duration,
the rises of temperature were 1.7, 1.45, and 1.3 ◦ C for h of
5, 10, and 20 W/m2 K, respectively. These thermal simulations
indicate that the upper bound of temperature rise due to the
electrical excitation was insignificant to cause damage of cells.
These results are also in agreement with literatures that indicate
a typical temperature rise due to Joule heating in buffer fluids are
within several degrees [15], [22]. As biological cells can sustain
a larger range of temperature variation in nature (typically up
to 10 ◦ C), this temperature rise due to the excitation is not
expected to cause any significant change of cells. For thermal
lysis, the required temperature is 70 to 80 ◦ C [42], well beyond
the temperature rise from these electric pulse stimulations.
IV. RESULTS: EXPERIMENTAL
A. Excitation Parameters
Experiments were conducted over a range of applied pulse
parameters, such as magnitudes (from 2.5 to 20 V), pulsewidths
(from 1 μs to 5 s), and numbers of pulses (from 1 to 100 pulse)
to determine the effect of pulse parameters on EP and EL. Initial
results have been reported elsewhere [64].
B. Image Processing for Quantification of EP
The image sequences captured from the experiments show
stain reduction inside the sample cells after the application for
various electrical excitations. The amounts of stain reduction
were dependent on the applied pulse parameters. A representative example is shown in Fig. 6, where the set of images was
captured at 0 and 145 s after a single pulse excitation of 1 ms

Fig. 5. (a) Temperature inside the microchannel visualized along xz-plane after
electrical excitation of 20 V for 10 s. A section of the channel is enlarged to
depict the corresponding temperature distribution. (b) Plot of transient increase
of temperature for the heat transfer coefficient (h) of 5, 10, and 20 W/m2 K, for
an electric excitation of 20 V for 10 s. The initial temperature of all subdomains
were at the room temperature of 300◦ K.

duration and 5 V magnitude. The estimated maximum electric
field was 5 kV/cm. The observation of reduction of Eosin Y
stain suggests occurrence of EP, as stain of cytoplasm (Eosin Y)
is diluted through the pores formed during EP (either by fluids
exiting the cell and reducing stains within cells, or surrounding fluid entering the cell and reducing stain concentration in
cells) [50], [53], [54]. Haematoxylin stain, on the other hand, has
not reduced, suggesting that the chromosomes have not exited
from the cell. It is evident that performing this type of qualitative
analysis is challenging for comparison with other experimental
cases. To allow quantitative analysis, the following approach
was followed.

876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 7. Cell structures were broken and cytoplasm released to buffer medium
as a pulse of 20 V magnitude and 500 ms duration was applied. The release of
cytoplasm concluded from the diffused Eosin Y stains observed in (b).

pixel (NSP) [64]. Mathematically,
Number of stained pixels in an image
of the sequence
.
NSP =
Number of stained pixels in the first image
of the sequence

(1)

For EP, the gradual decrease of NSP of exponential patterns
was observed [64], [68].
C. Observations

Fig. 6. (a-b) A set of images from EP experiments, followed by plots of
extracted pixel data, for both the y-axis (plot below) and the x-axis (inset), from
the pair of images captured at (a) 0 s, and (b) 145 s after the application of a 5 V,
1 ms pulse. Pixel data for Eosin Y from (a) are plotted with blue, while data from
(b) are plotted with red. Decreased number of pixel data in red demonstrates a
dilution of Eosin Y stained pixels due to EP. A temporal NSP plot would show
a gradual decrease of NSP as provided in [64], [68].

The captured images were analyzed using software codes
written in Visual Basic and MATLAB for quantitative analysis.
The procedure is described elsewhere [68], and are mentioned
briefly here. First, the frames were extracted in bitmap (BMP)
format from the captured image sequence. Each pixel represented by a set of (R,G,B) values within a “color cube,” where
the stain color range of Eosin Y is approximated as the region of
interest (ROI) [68]. The Visual Basic code determined the number of pixels within the ROI in each BMP file. The MATLAB
script plotted these pixel data for each row or column in an
image, or the total number of pixel data for a sequence of images against elapsed time. The images from a representative
experiment are shown in Fig. 6 as an illustration.
The temporal plot of the total number of stained pixels provides quantitative measure of stain reduction due to EP. To be
able to compare results from various experiments with different
excitation parameters, all stained pixel data need to be normalized with respect to the number of stained pixels in the first image
of the sequence. This will eliminate the bias on the initial state
(e.g., number, size) of stained cells within the image sequence.
The normalized value of the total stained pixels of each image
is calculated by dividing the total number of stained pixels of an
image by the total number of stained pixels of the first image of
that sequence. This parameter is denoted by normalized stained

If the change of NSP reduction at the end of observation
(145 s) was less than 5%, then the excitation was considered
to cause no effect. If the reduction of stain was higher, but cell
membrane was not disintegrated (visually), then the excitation
was considered to cause EP. Finally, if the cell membranes were
broken or cell structures disintegrated, the excitation was considered to cause EL. A summary of all experimental observations
is tabulated in Table I.
The experimental results demonstrated that a single pulse
caused higher impact on the cell membrane compared to a pulse
train delivering the same total amount of energy. Hence, for EL
experiments, only single pulses were considered. As EL requires
high energy pulses with the electric field above the critical level
and pulsewidth larger than the critical time duration, all EL
events were observed on the upper right hand corner of the
energy-space plot (discussed later in Section V). Such pulses
cause substantial electrolysis (Redox reaction) resulting in a
significant bubble formation.
For a single pulse and 20 V magnitude, pulse width of 100 ms
caused severe damage to cell membrane with a large irreversible
visible pore, whereas smaller pulsewidths only caused EP or
no effect was observed. With larger pulsewidths (500 ms or
more) with the same applied potential, cellular structures were
observed to be disintegrated or completely destroyed. For instance, Fig. 7(a) shows many visible stained cell structures prior
to pulse application (0 s), and Fig. 7(b) shows few cell structures
immediately after the pulse application (0.5 s). The dissipation
of pink stain in the buffer medium is suggestive of the Eosin
Y stained cytoplasm being dispersed in the buffer fluid. With
increased pulsewidth of 1 s, cell structures were observed to
be completely disintegrated (see Fig. 8). The probability of the
cells being completely hidden under bubbles is low, as depicted
in Fig. 8(c), which is a superimpose of Fig. 8(a) on the inversion
of Fig. 8(b).

MORSHED et al.: INVESTIGATION OF LOW-VOLTAGE PULSE PARAMETERS ON ELECTROPORATION AND ELECTRICAL LYSIS

877

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS WITH VARIOUS ELECTRICAL EXCITATION
PARAMETERS

Fig. 8. Observations under a microscope after applying a single pulse of 20 V
magnitude for 1 s duration. (a) Image prior to excitation (at 0 s). (b) Image
immediately after excitation (at 1 s). Bubbles due to excitation limited visible
area. (c) Superimposed images obtained by subtracting image (b) from image
(a) and enlarged to show the loading port.

is broken as DNA is tightly packed in a spring-like coil formation inside the nucleus with a packing ratio of 10 000 to 1 [69].
Using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, USA) image
processing tool, the background color from Fig. 9(b) is reduced
as shown in Fig. 9(e) that clearly showed the exposed DNA.
This figure shows the distinctly distinguishable blue color of
the Haematoxylin stains of DNA as well as the denucleated
cell membranes to the right. The span of area occupied by the
DNA was measured to be 45 μm, five to ten times larger than
nucleus, suggesting that the DNA was uncoiled after release
through EL. Observing the lysate under an optical microscope
with a high magnification of 100× (oil-immersion) with optical
microscope provided clear views of released DNA identified
by the blue stain and the telltale sign of the extremely coiled
structure of DNA (see Fig. 10).
For release of DNA from inside of cells, nuclear membrane
must also be ruptured in addition to plasma membrane. Nuclear
membrane is a double bilayer lipid membrane. Experimental
data suggest that a single pulse of 20 V amplitude for 5 s duration
showed exposed DNA. Based on the internal resistance of the
power supply and the voltage drop across it, the dissipated power
for this condition has been calculated to be 0.4±0.1 W and the
energy spent to be 2±0.5 J.
Analysis of exposed DNA is presented in Figs. 9 and 10. Fig. 9
provides two images of the same position inside the microfluidic
chamber, but at two different vertical heights. The focal plane of
Fig. 9(a) was at the bottom surface of the channel, whereas the
focal plane of Fig. 9(b) was 10 μm vertically above. These images show the released DNA (identified with blue Haematoxylin
stain) indicating that DNA was spatially distributed along the
height. DNA, in the formation of chromatins, histones, and other
proteins, becomes spatially distributed when nucleus membrane

D. Quantification Metrics
To quantify the severity of EP, a quantification metric “Flow
Index of Electroporation” (FI of EP) has been defined as the
amount of NSP reduction over a certain amount of time [64].
This metric can be calculated by subtracting the final value of
the NSP from 1. Mathematically,
FI of EP = 1 − Final value of the NSP.

(2)

FI of EP is a numeric indicator of the severity of EP and
relates to the amounts of fluidic exchange between an electroporated cell and its environment. A higher value of FI of EP
represents higher amounts of fluidic exchange. The minimum
value of FI of EP can be 0 that represents an absolute absence of
EP. The maximum value of FI of EP can be 1 that might occur
in the case of cell lysis. Thus, the metric provides a quantitative
approach for comparison of experimental results for improved

878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 10. (a)–(b) Two samples of the released DNA collected from the device
after excitation of 20 V for 5 s, and observed under 100× objective lens with
oil immersion technique in lysates collected from the device. The DNA strands
are identified by the blue stain of Haematoxylin and the coiled structure that
is unique to chromatins composed of DNA, histones, and other proteins. (c)
Sample cell prior to lysis inside the microfluidic chamber with H&E staining
is shown for a size comparison. (d) Rearranged cell membrane structures after
pulse treatment with an excitation of 20 V for 5 s.

Fig. 9. (a)–(b) Two images taken from the same position, but focused at two
different heights (10 μm apart), which show the released DNA through electrical
lysis with an excitation of 20 V for 5 s. (c–d) Enlarged image set from the same
area as in (a) and (b), respectively. The red arrows (darker and longer) indicate
the spots where the contrast in the image (a) is higher than that of the image (b),
whereas the green arrows (lighter and shorter) indicates vice versa. The image
set demonstrates that DNA, with higher contrast in image (b), was distributed
vertically inside the microchannel, whereas the electrodes with higher contrast
in image (a), were located at the bottom surface of the microchannel. (e) Image
of exposed DNA was filtered to reduce background using ImageJ that clearly
shows stained DNA released after EL.

classification, systematic study, quantitative analysis, and optimization of EP.
The last column values (within parenthesis) of Table I provides the list of FI of EP for various electrical pulse excitation
conditions from the experiments at 145 s after the excitation. FI
of EP for various excitation pulse magnitudes and total excitation time are plotted in Fig. 11. It is important to note from this
figure that higher FI of EP occurs for lesser number of pulses
for the same energy delivery. Thus, applying a single pulse can
be considered as the ceiling of achievable FI of EP for a given
energy and experimental setup. The findings elucidate to the
following two exception cases of overlapping observations (see
Fig. 11).
1) There are six sets of EP observations where the excitation condition (voltage and total excitation time) overlaps. We

Fig. 11. Graphical representation of FI of EP versus the pulse magnitude and
the total excitation time. FI of EP for no EP or EL observed, and lysis observed
are denoted as 0 and 1, respectively. Note that a single pulse can be considered
as the ceiling of achievable FI of EP for the energy stimulation in a given
experimental condition. There are potentially three distinct regions on a total
excitation time versus applied voltage surface (energy-space plot) as indicated.

note that in each set, FI of EP is higher for lesser number of
pulses, i.e., a single pulse produced higher FI of EP compared
to multiple pulses delivering the same amount of energy. The
differences are more prominent with higher energy pulses. As in
all of the overlapping observations at the same excitation point,
the single pulse case has produced the maximum FI of EP, so
FI of EP due to a single pulse can be treated as the ceiling of
achievable FI of EP for that amount of energy.
2) There are two sets of observations where EP observed overlap with no effect observed. The values of FI of EP for these
excitation points are 0.0661 (5 V, 1 pulse of 1 ms duration)
and 0.0516 (20 V, 1 pulse of 10 μs duration). Corresponding

MORSHED et al.: INVESTIGATION OF LOW-VOLTAGE PULSE PARAMETERS ON ELECTROPORATION AND ELECTRICAL LYSIS

879

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS FOR VARIOUS APPLIED
EXCITATION PARAMETERS

excitations for “no effect observed” have multiple pulses delivering the same amount of energy (5 V, 100 pulses of 10 μs
duration and 20 V, 10 pulses of 1 μs duration, respectively).
In accordance to the previous scenario, a single pulse inflicted
higher impact on the cell membrane resulting EP compared to
“no EP or EL observed” with multiple pulses delivering the
same total amount of energy.
“Degree of electroporation” term was denoted previously to
refer to severity or extent of EP [70], [71]. Here, we define the
degree of EP as the ratio of the total pore area that is formed
during EP to the surface area of the cell. Using this definition,
it clearly represents the extent of pore formation during the
EP process and becomes an important criterion to distinguish
among various cases of EP. This definition can be represented
mathematically as follows:
Degree of electroporation =

Total pore area
.
Cell surface area

(3)

Degree of EP represents a metric for denoting severity of
EP. The significance of degree of EP is that higher degree of
EP will allow higher amount of fluidic exchange through the
cell membrane within a given duration in a certain buffer fluid.
FI of EP has a positive correlation with degree of EP and the
time duration of EP. Hence, the product of degree of EP with
the corresponding EP duration can be a direct indication of
the total fluidic exchange among various excitation conditions
represented by FI of EP. These metrics, FI of EP, and degree
of EP, allow quantitative analysis to compare EP to optimize
fluidic exchange (e.g., for drug delivery).
V. DISCUSSIONS

Fig. 12. Artistic sketch showing the effects of applying electric fields above
the critical level with different pulsewidths on the sample cell with nucleus
causing electroporation, electrical lysis, and nucleus membrane disintegration
that released DNA.

Both the magnitude and the duration of the applied electric
field are important criteria that determine the effect to be experienced by the cells. For micron width pulses, no visible effect
of cell membrane was observed with electric field strength up
to 20 kV/cm. For pulsewidths between 1 to 500 ms, EP phenomenon were detected, where narrower pulses did not cause
any morphological changes in cell shape, size or orientation
compared to relatively wider pulses causing significant cell
membrane deformation. In all cases, for the same amount of
energy delivery, single pulse caused the most significant deformation of the cell membrane. As pulses of duration over 500 ms
with magnitude of 20 V were applied, cell membrane structures were destroyed causing EL. Released DNA were detected
with 20 V applied potential and pulsewidths beyond 5 s. These
findings are depicted with an artistic sketch in Fig. 12. From
experimental data, the critical electric field Ec is 2 MV/m and
the critical time for lysis tc is 0.5 s (N = 3). The large duration
of pulse (tn ≈ 5 s) required to release DNA by breaking the
nuclear membrane might be due to smaller size of nucleus compared to the cell or the double bilayer lipid membrane enclosure
of nucleus compared to single bilayer lipid membrane of the
cell or a combination of both.

A. Pulse Parameter Requirement for EP, EL, and DNA Release
The summary of experimental observation of EP, EL, and
DNA release are given in Table II. In Fig. 11, the excitation
conditions are plotted on an Euclidian surface with x-axis as
the applied potential and y-axis as the total time of excitation
(= pulsewidth × number of pulses). The xy-plane of this graph
provides information on the energy delivered during the excitation as the bottom left corner represents the least energy delivery
and the top right corner represents the highest energy delivery.
This plot can be distinctly separated into three regions: 1) EL
lysis region at the top right-hand corner, 2) EP region in the middle, and 3) the region where no observable effect at the bottom
left-hand corner. Such observations are consistent with similar
reports [16].

B. Comparison With Other Studies
Table III compares the features of the device in this paper
with other similar devices reported in the literature. This paper
is the first to use coplanar interdigitated electrode configuration
for EL, which provides area coverage of up to 50%, higher than
any other configurations and requires a low excitation potential.
Furthermore, the position of the electrodes at the bottom of the
microchannels compared to that in the sidewalls of microchannels enables the accommodation of larger (or smaller) cells with
respect to the electrode spacing.
The cell samples used in this paper are human buccal cells,
which are relatively large compared to virus or bacteria cells.
This paper also uses a single pulse for cell lysis compared to

880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF THE MICROFLUIDIC DEVICE OF THIS PAPER WITH THE LITERATURE

Platinum (Pt) layer of the finger to break and to develop the
above-mentioned defects.
Electrolysis of water:
Cathode:
2H2 O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH −
Anode:
4OH− → O2 +2H2 O + 4e−
Dissolving of Tantalum:
Anode:
Ta +10OH− → Ta2 O5 +5H2 O.
D. Potential for On-Chip Integration
Fig. 13. Two types of defects observed in the integrated electrodes (fingers)
inside the cell microfluidic chamber of the device after repeated electrical lysis
experimentation: (a) Crack and (b) Lift off.

multiple pulses in other works, as our other study with EP has
determined that a single pulse causes more severe damage to cell
membrane compared to multiple pulses with the same energy
content [64], [68]. Other techniques including electrochemical
cell lysis using interdigitated integrated electrodes have been
reported with lower magnitude of applied potential (e.g., 5 V)
and longer time duration (e.g., 5 min) [72], in comparison to
the results from our work using EL without any chemical lysis
agent.
C. Reusability and Degradation
After prolonged excitation or repeated experiments, the electrodes degraded and defects were noted. Two types of defects
were observed in the fingers of the interdigitated integrated electrodes (see Fig. 13).
1) Crack: Development of thin cracks disconnected a portion
of the finger from the excitation source.
2) Lift-off: Portions of electrodes were completely lifted off,
moved elsewhere in the channel disconnecting portions of fingers, and sometimes short-circuited adjacent fingers.
As the electrodes connected to anode side were only degraded,
the electrochemical reaction might be the possible cause of such
defects. If heat was the cause of such defects, both electrodes
would be equally affected. Analyzing electrochemical reactions
that would occur at the anode and the cathode of the interdigitated electrodes, the Tantalum (Ta) adhesion layer of the Anode
terminal would turn to Tantalum Oxide (Ta2 O5 ), which does
not possess the adhesion properties and would dissolve causing

For LOC integration, the microfluidic chamber needs to be
incorporated with other on-chip biochemical processing techniques. Various drugs can be loaded into the cell through onchip EP. On-chip EL for DNA analysis is quite demanding,
where DNA purification can be done with microbeads, and
on-chip polymerize chain reaction amplification can use microreactors [73], [74] or continuous flow microchannel [75].
For sequencing of DNA on-chip, capillary electrophoresis [76],
DNA microarray [77] or other solid state DNA sequencing [78]
techniques can be implemented in the downstream.
VI. CONCLUSION
The developed microfluidic device has been successfully used
to demonstrate EP for a range of excitation conditions with various applied voltages, pulsewidths, and number of pulses, and
EL for high energy pulses, as well as DNA release with a low
operating voltage of 20 V. Electric field simulations showed that
electric field strength of over 20 kV/cm is developed with the
application of 20 V. Thermal simulations showed that the upper
bound of temperature rise of the microchannel was 1.3 ◦ C, at
20 V excitation for 5 s, which would not influence any significant
change of cell morphology. Quantitative image analysis and the
quantification metric, FI of EP, allowed quantitative comparison
and analysis of various excitation conditions. Higher energy delivered by higher applied voltages, longer pulse durations, and
increased numbers of pulses resulted in higher FI of EP, and
is consistent with other studies [46]. For the same total energy
delivery, a single pulse produced higher FI of EP compared to
multiple pulses. EL was observed for pulses over 0.5 s with
20 V applied potential. For release of DNA, an excitation pulse
of 20 V and 5 s or longer durations were required. The method
allowed quantitative analysis of EP for various electrical excitations, and thus would enable improved classification, systematic

MORSHED et al.: INVESTIGATION OF LOW-VOLTAGE PULSE PARAMETERS ON ELECTROPORATION AND ELECTRICAL LYSIS

study, quantitative analysis, and optimization of EP. On-chip EL
and DNA release integrated with other microfluidic processing
steps would allow development of a complete genetic analysis
solution through LOC technology.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and
editors for their valuable comments, suggestions and insights to
improve the quality of this manuscript.

REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Graham and J. A. Higgins, Membrane Analysis, NY, USA: BIOS
Scientific, 1997.
[2] C. Yao, D. Mo, C. Li, C. Sun, and Y. Mi, “Study of transmembrane
potentials of inner and outer membranes induced by pulsed-electric-field
model and simulation,” IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1541–
1549, Oct. 2007.
[3] Q. Hu, V. Shidhara, R. P. Joshi, J. F. Kolb, and K. H. Schoenbach, “Molecular dynamics analysis of high electric pulse effects on bilayer membranes
containing DPPC and DPPS,” IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., vol. 34, no. 4,
pp. 1405–1411, Aug. 2006.
[4] R. P. Joshi and K. H. Schoenbach, “Electroporation dynamics in biological cells subjected to ultrafast electrical pulses: A numerical simulation
study,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1025–1033, 2000.
[5] M. Tarek, “Membrane electroporation: A molecular dynamics simulation,” Biophys. J., vol. 88, pp. 4045–4053, 2005.
[6] D. Moldovan, D. Pinisetty, and R. V. Devireddy, “Molecular dynamics
simulation of pore growth in lipid bilayer membranes in the presence of
edge-active agents,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 91, no. 20, pp. 204 104–3,
2007.
[7] E. Neumann, A. E. Sowers, and C. A. Jordan, Electroporation and Electrofusion in Cell Biology. New York, NY, USA: Plenum Press, 1989.
[8] M. Fox, D. Esveld, A. Valero et al., “Electroporation of cells in microfluidic devices: A review,” Anal. Bioanal. Chem., vol. 385, pp. 474–485,
2006.
[9] H. Fujimoto, K. Kato, and H. Iwata, “Electroporation microarrray for
parallel transfer of small interfering RNA into mammalian cells,” Anal.
Bioanal. Chem., vol. 392, pp. 1309–1316, 2008.
[10] S. Koda, Y. Inoue, and H. Iwata, “Gene transfection into adherent cells
using electroporation on a dendrimer-modified gold electrode,” Langmuir,
vol. 24, no. 23, pp. 13 525–13 531, 2008.
[11] C. Ionescu-Zanetti, A. Blatz, and M. Khine, “Electrophoresis-assisted
single-cell electroporation for efficient intracellular delivery,” Biomed.
Microdevices, vol. 10, pp. 113–116, 2008.
[12] H. Wang and C. Lu, “Microfluidic electroporation for delivery of small
molecules and genes into cells using a common dc power supply,” Biotechnol. Bioeng., vol. 100, no. 3, pp. 580–586, 2008.
[13] Z. Fei, S. Wang, Y. Xie, B. Henslee, C. Koh, and L. Lee, “Gene transfection
of mammalian cells using membrane sandwich electroporation,” Anal.
Chem., vol. 79, no. 15, pp. 5719–5722, 2007.
[14] Y. Huang and B. Rubinsky, “Microfabricated electroporation chip for
single cell membrane permeabilization,” Sens. Actuators, vol. 89, pp. 242–
249, 2001.
[15] J. C. Weaver, “Electroporation of cells and tissues,” IEEE Trans. Plasma
Sci., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 24–33, Feb. 2000.
[16] S. B. Dev, D. P. Rabussay, G. Widera, and G. A. Hofmann, “Medical
applications of electroporation,” IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 206–223, Feb. 2000.
[17] B. I. Morshed, M. Shams, and T. Mussivand, “Electrical lysis: Dynamics
revisited and advances in on-chip operation,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 37–50, 2013.
[18] R. B. Brown and J. Audet, “Current techniques for single-cell lysis,” J.
Roy. Soc. Interf., vol. 5, pp. S131–S138, 2008.
[19] S. W. Lee and Y. C. Tai, “A micro cell lysis device,” Sens. Actuators,
vol. 73, pp. 74–79, 1999.
[20] C. E. Sims, G. P. Li, M. R. Chang, N. Allbritton, and M. Bachman,
“Fast electrical lysis of cells for capillary electrophoresis,” Analyt. Chem.,
vol. 75, no. 15, pp. 3688–3696, 2003.

881

[21] J. Gao, X. Yin, and Z. Fang, “Integration of single cell injection, cell lysis,
separation and detection of intercellular constituents on a microfluidic
chip,” Lab Chip, vol. 4, pp. 47–52, 2004.
[22] H. Lu, M. A. Schmidt, and K. F. Jensen, “A microfluidic electroporation
device for cell lysis,” Roy. Soc. Chem., vol. 5, pp. 23–29, 2005.
[23] H. Wang, A. K. Bhunia, and C. Lu, “A microfluidic flow-through device
for high throughput electrical lysis of bacterial cells based on continuous
DC voltage,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 22, pp. 582–588, 2006.
[24] D. W. Lee and Y. Cho, “A continuous electrical cell lysis device using a
low DC voltage for a cell transport and rupture,” Sens. Actuators, vol. B
124, pp. 84–89, 2007.
[25] K. Lu, A. M. Wo, Y. Lo, K. Chen, C. Lin, and C. Yang, “Three dimensional electrode array for cell lysis via electroporation,” Elsevier Biosens.
Bioelectron., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 24–33, 2006.
[26] H. Kido, M. Micic, D. Smith, J. Zoval, J. Norton, and M. Madou, “A
novel, compact disk-like centrifugal microfluidics system for cell lysis
and sample homogenization,” Colloids Surf. B: Biointerf., vol. 58, pp. 44–
51, 2007.
[27] P. J. Marc, C. E. Sims, M. Bachman, G. P. Lia, and N. L. Allbritton, “A
microfluidic device for physical trapping and electrical lysis of bacterial
cells,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 92, pp. 214 103–3, 2008.
[28] Y. Lin and G. Lee, “An integrated cell counting and continuous cell
lysis device using an optically induced electric field,” Sens. Actuators B,
vol. 145, pp. 854–860, 2010.
[29] D. Voet and J. G. Voet, Biochemistry, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, 2004.
[30] H. Lodis, A. Berk, C. A. Kaiser, M. Krieger, A. Bretscher, H. Ploegh, A.
Amon, and M. P. Scott, Molecular Cell Biology. New York, NY, USA:
Freeman, 2003.
[31] M. Wurm and A.-P. Zeng, “Mechanical disruption of mammalian cells in
a microfluidic system and its numerical analysis based on computational
fluid dynamics,” Lab Chip, vol. 12, pp. 1071–1077, 2012.
[32] D. C. Augenstein, A. J. Sinskey, and D. I. C. Wang, “Effect of shear on
the death of two strains of mammalian tissue cells,” Biotechnol. Bioeng.,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 409–418, 1971.
[33] B. Arrojo, M. Figueroa, A. M. Corral, J. L. Campos, and R. Mendex, “Influence of gas flow-induced shear stress on the operation of the anammox
process in a SBR,” Chemosphere, vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 1687–1693, 2008.
[34] S. Razin, “Osmotic lysis of mycoplasma,” Microbiology, vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 471–475, 1963.
[35] D. W. Lee and Y. Cho, “A continuous cell lysis device using focused high
electric field and self-generated electroosmotic flow,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst., 2006, pp. 426–429.
[36] P. Rajasekhar, L. Fan, T. Nguyen, and F. A. Roddick, “A review of the
use of sonication to control cyanobacterial blooms,” Water Res., vol. 46,
no. 14, pp. 4319–4329, 2012.
[37] S. C. Dixon, J. Horti, Y. Guo, E. Reed, and W. D. Figg, “Methods for
extracting and amplifying genomic DNA isolated from frozen serum,”
Nature Biotechnol., vol. 16, pp. 91–94, 1998.
[38] R. Halim, R. Harun, M. K. Danquah, and P. A. Webley, “Microalgal cell
disruption for biofuel development,” Appl. Energy, vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 116–
121, 2012.
[39] J. Kim, M. Johnson, P. Hill, and B. K. Gale, “Microfluidic sample preparation: Cell lysis and nucleic acid purification,” Integr. Biol., vol. 1, pp. 574–
586, 2009.
[40] M. D. Dhawan, F. Wise, and A. J. Baeumner, “Development of a laserinduced cell lysis system,” Analyt. Bioanalyt. Chem., vol. 374, pp. 421–
426, 2002.
[41] H. Lai, P. A. Quinto-Su, C. E. Sims, M. Bachman, G. P. Li, V. Venugopalan,
and N. L. Allbritton, “Characterization and use of laser-based lysis for cell
analysis on-chip,” J. Roy. Soc. Interf., vol. 5, pp. S113–S121, 2008.
[42] K. Zhua, H. Jin, Y. Maa, Z. Ren, C. Xiao, Z. He, F. Zhang, Q. Zhu,
and B. Wang, “A continuous thermal lysis procedure for the large-scale
preparation of plasmid DNA,” J. Biotechnol., vol. 118, pp. 257–264, 2005.
[43] S.-K. Baek, J. Min, and J.-H. Park, “Wireless induction heating in a
microfluidic device for cell lysis,” Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 909–917, 2010.
[44] R. W. Doebler, B. Erwin, A. Hickerson, B. Irvine, D. Woyski, A. Nadim,
and J. D. Sterling, “Continuous-flow, rapid lysis devices for biodefense
nucleic acid diagnostic systems,” J. Assoc. Lab. Autom., vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 119–125, 2009.
[45] K. Maswiwat, D. Wachner, and J. Gimsa, “Effects of cell orientation
and electric field frequency on the transmembrane potential induced in
ellipsoidal cells,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 74, pp. 130–141, 2008.
[46] B. L. Ibey, D. G. Mixon, J. A. Payne, A. Bowman, K. Sickendick, G. J.
Wilmink, W. P. Roach, and A. G. Pakhomov, “Plasma membrane perme-

882

[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]

[62]
[63]

[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

abilization by trains of ultrashort electric pulses,” Bioelectrochemistry,
vol. 79, no. 114, pp. 114–121, 2010.
H. Wang and C. Lu, “High-throughput and real-time study of single
cell electroporation using microfluidics: Effects of medium osmolarity,”
Biotechnol. Bioeng., vol. 95, pp. 1116–1125, 2006.
R. Ziv, Y. Steinhardt, G. Pelled, D. Gazit, and B. Rubinsky, “Microelectroporation of mesenchymal stem cells with alternating electrical current pulses,” Biomed. Microdev., vol. 11, pp. 95–101, 2009.
A. Agarwal, I. Zudans, E. A. Weber, J. Olofsson, O. Orwar, and
S. G. Weber, “Effect of cell size and shape on single-cell electroporation,” Anal. Chem., vol. 79, no. 10, pp. 3589–3596, 2007.
C. Chen, J. A. Evans, M. P. Robinson, S. W. Smye, and P. O’Toole, “Measurement of the efficiency of cell membrane electroporation using pulsed
ac fields,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53, pp. 4747–4757, 2008.
H. He, D. C. Chang, and Y. Lee, “Using a micro electroporation chip to
determine the optimal physical parameters in the uptake of biomolecules
in hela cells,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 70, pp. 363–368, 2007.
H. Wang and C. Lu, “Electroporation of mammalian cells in a microfluidic
channel with geometric variation,” Anal. Chem., vol. 78, no. 14, pp. 5158–
5164, 2006.
S. M. Kennedy, Z. Ji, J. C. Hedstrom, J. H. Booske, and S. C. Hagness,
“Quantification of electroporative uptake kinetics and electric field heterogeneity effects in cells,” Biophysical J., vol. 94, pp. 5018–5027, 2008.
M. Olbrich, E. Rebollar, J. Heitza, I. Frischauf, and C. Romanin, “Electroporation chip for adherent cells on photochemically modified polymer
surfaces,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 92, pp. 013 901-1–013901-3, 2008.
K. Huang, Y. Lin, K. Su, and H. Chen, “An electroporation microchip
system for the transfection of zebrafish embryos using quantum dots and
GFP genes for evaluation,” Biomed. Microdev., vol. 9, pp. 761–768, 2007.
J. A. Kima, K. Choa, Y. S. Shin, N. Jung, C. Chunga, and J. K. Changa,
“A multi-channel electroporation microchip for gene transfection in mammalian cells,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 22, pp. 3273–3277, 2007.
N. Ikeda, N. Tanaka, Y. Yangida, and T. Hatsuzawa, “On-chip single-cell
lysis for extracting intracellular material,” Japan. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 46,
no. 9B, pp. 6410–6414, 2007.
Y. Nashimoto, Y. Takahashi, and T. Yamakawa, “Measurement of gene
expression from single adherent cells and spheroids collected using fast
electrical lysis,” Anal. Chem., vol. 79, no. 7, pp. 6823–6830, 2007.
N. R. Munce, J. Li, P. R. Herman, and L. Lilge, “Microfabricated system
for parallel single-cell capillary electrophoresis,” Analyt. Chem., vol. 76,
no. 17, pp. 4983–4989, 2004.
P. J. Marc, C. E. Sims, M. Bachman, G. P. Lia, and N. L. Allbritton, “Fastlysis cell traps for chemical cytometry,” Lab Chip, vol. 8, pp. 710–716,
2008.
C. Rosa, P. A. Tilley, J. D. Fox, and K. V. Kaler, “Microfluidic device
for dielectrophoresis manipulation and electrodisruption of respiratory
pathogen bordetella pertussis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 10,
pp. 2426–2432, Oct. 2008.
K. Park, D. Akin, and R. Bashir, “Electrical capture and lysis of vaccinia
virus particles using silicon nano-scale probe array,” Biomed. Microdev.,
vol. 9, pp. 877–883, 2007.
S. J. Beebe, P. M. Fox, L. J. Rec, K. Somers, R. H. Stark, and
K. H. Schoenbach, “Nanosecond pulsed electric field (nsPEF) effects on
cells and tissues: Apoptosis induction and tumor growth inhibition,” IEEE
Trans. Plasma Sci., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 286–292, Feb. 2002.
B. I. Morshed, M. Shams, and T. Mussivand, “Identifying severity of
electroporation through quantitative image analysis,” Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 98, pp. 143704-1–143704-3, 2011.
U. Danielsson, “Convective heat transfer measured directly with a heat
flux sensor,” Amer. Physiol. Soc., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1275–1281, 1990.
J. P. Holman, Heat Transfer. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill, 2009.
J. H. Hienhard IV, J. H. Hienhard V, A Heat Transfer Textbook, Cambridge,
MA: Phlogiston Press, 2008.
B. I. Morshed, M. Shams, and T. Mussivand, “Effectiveness of multiple
pulses on flow index of electroporation,” in Proc SPIE, 2012, vol. 8344,
pp. 834 417/1–8.
A. T. Annunziato, “DNA packaging: Nucleosomes and chromatin,” Nature
Educ., vol. 1, no. 1, p. 26, 2008.
J. Olofsson, M. Levin, A. Stromberg, S. G. Weber, F. Ryttsen, and
O. Orwar, “Generation of focused electric field patterns at dielectric surfaces,” Anal. Chem., vol. 77, pp. 4667–4672, 2005.
J. Olofsson, M. Levin, A. Stromberg, S. G. Weber, F. Ryttsen, and
O. Orwar, “Scanning electroporation of selected areas of adherent cell
cultures,” Anal. Chem., vol. 79, pp. 4410–4418, 2007.

[72] S. K. Jha, G.-S. Ra, G.-S. Joo, and Y.-S. Kim, “Electrochemical cell lysis on a miniaturized flow-through device,” Curr. Appl. Phys., vol. 9,
pp. e301–e303, 2009.
[73] E. T. Lagally and R. A. Mathies, “Monolithic integrated PCR reactor-CE
system for DNA amplification and analysis to the single molecule limit,”
in Proc. IEEE-EMBS Microtechnol. Med. Biol., 2002, pp. 437–441.
[74] V. P. Iordanov, J. Bastemeijer, A. Bossche, and P.M. Sarro, “PCR array
on chip for thermal characterization,” in Proc. IEEE Sens., 2003, vol. 2,
pp. 1045–1048.
[75] M. U. Kopp, A. J. de Mello, and A. Manz, “Chemical amplification:
Continuous-flow PCR on a chip,” Sci. Mag., vol. 280, pp. 1046–1048,
1998.
[76] B. M. Paegel, C. A. Emrich, G. J. Wedemayer et al., “High throughput
DNA sequencing with a microfabricated 96-lane capillary array electrophoresis bioprocessor,” in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., USA, 2002, vol. 99,
pp. 574–579.
[77] M. Schienle et al., “A fully electronic DNA sensor with 128 positions and
in-pixel A/D conversion,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 39, no. 12, pp.
2438–2445, Dec. 2004.
[78] S. Purushothaman et al., “Towards fast solid state DNA sequencing,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2002, vol. IV, pp. 169–172.

Bashir I. Morshed (M’12) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical and electronics engineering from
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2001, the MA.Sc. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the
University of Windsor, ON, Canada, in 2004, and
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
from Electronics Department, Carleton University,
ON, Canada, in 2010.
He was awarded the prestigious Canadian Commonwealth Fellowship. Since 2011, he has been an
Assistant Professor of the Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Memphis, TN, USA.

Maitham Shams is an Associate Professor in the
Department of Electronics, Carleton University, ON,
Canada. He received the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1994
and 1999, respectively.
His research interests include digital circuits
optimization, subthreshold circuits, FinFETs, asynchronous circuits design, and medical devices.

Tofy Mussivand received the undergraduate degree
in engineering and management in 1963. He received
the Ph.D. degree in medical engineering and medical
sciences from the University of Akron and Northeastern Ohio Universities Colleges of Medicine, Rootstown, OH, USA, in 1988.
He worked in senior positions in government,
crown corporations, and the private sector. He worked
at the Cleveland Clinic prior to be invited to return
to Canada to continue his pioneering work in various
medical devices areas in 1989.

