900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

An Efficient Finite Element Approach for Modeling
Fibrotic Clefts in the Heart
Caroline Mendonca Costa, Fernando O. Campos, Anton J. Prassl, Rodrigo Weber dos Santos,
Damián Sánchez-Quintana, Helmut Ahammer, Ernst Hofer, and Gernot Plank∗

Abstract—Advanced medical imaging technologies provide a
wealth of information on cardiac anatomy and structure at a
paracellular resolution, allowing to identify microstructural discontinuities which disrupt the intracellular matrix. Current stateof-the-art computer models built upon such datasets account for
increasingly finer anatomical details, however, structural discontinuities at the paracellular level are typically discarded in the
model generation process, owing to the significant costs which incur when using high resolutions for explicit representation. In this
study, a novel discontinuous finite element (dFE) approach for discretizing the bidomain equations is presented, which accounts for
fine-scale structures in a computer model without the need to increase spatial resolution. In the dFE method, this is achieved by
imposing infinitely thin lines of electrical insulation along edges of
finite elements which approximate the geometry of discontinuities
in the intracellular matrix. Simulation results demonstrate that
the dFE approach accounts for effects induced by microscopic size
scale discontinuities, such as the formation of microscopic virtual
electrodes, with vast computational savings as compared to high
resolution continuous finite element models. Moreover, the method
can be implemented in any standard continuous finite element code
with minor effort.
Index Terms—Bidomain equation, computational efficiency,
defibrillation, finite element analysis, numerical models, tissue
structure.

I. INTRODUCTION
OMPUTATIONAL modeling of cardiac electrophysiology at the tissue and organ scale relies mostly on continuum formulations which characterize emergent bioelectric
phenomena such as wavefront propagation at a macroscopic

C

Manuscript received July 19, 2013; revised October 21, 2013; accepted
November 15, 2013. Date of publication November 21, 2013; date of current
version February 14, 2014. This work was supported by the Austrian Science
Fund (FWF) under Grants P19993-N15 and SFB F3210-N18, NIH 1RO1 HL
10119601, SIMNET Styria as well as by FAPEMIG-Brazil. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
C. M. Costa, F. O. Campos, A. J. Prassl, H. Ahammer, and E. Hofer are
with the Institute of Biophysics, Medical University of Graz, A-8010 Graz,
Austria (e-mail: caroline.mendonca-costa@medunigraz.at; fernando.campos@
medunigraz.at; anton.prassl@medunigraz.at; helmut.ahammer@medunigraz.
at; ernst.hofer@medunigraz.at).
R. Weber dos Santos is with the Graduate Program on Computational Modeling, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Campus Universitário, 36036-330
Juiz de Fora - MG, Brazil (e-mail: rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br).
D. Sánchez-Quintana is with the Departamento de Anatomı́a, Biologı́a Celular y Zoologı́a, Universidad de Extremadura, Avenida de la Universidad, 10003
Caceres, Spain (e-mail: damians@unex.es).
∗ G. Plank is with the Institute of Biophysics, Medical University of Graz,
A-8010 Graz, Austria (e-mail: gernot.plank@medunigraz.at).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2292320

size scale. Such models are built upon the assumption of an
electric syncytium, that is, diffusive material properties of the
tissue are continuous. The validity of this assumption at a macroscopic size scale is supported by the successful application of
macroscopic models such as the cardiac bidomain model [1],
whose predictions are very well in line with experimental observations [2]. When viewed at a finer microscopic size scale
though, cardiac tissue is a discrete medium in which electrical
impulses propagate discontinuously [3]. Under healthy conditions during normal propagation there are no direct significant
manifestations of microscopic discontinuities which would play
a major role at the tissue and organ scale, however, when external electric fields are applied [4] or when discontinuities become
more pronounced as it may be the case under pathological conditions, conduction pathways at the microscopic size scale are
altered to an extent which can cause noticeable effects at the
macroscopic size scale as well. A particularly important case is
fibrosis, a degenerative progressive disease in which connective
tissue invades the intracellular matrix thus interrupting the intracellular space. While such disruptive lines or layers can be very
thin, longitudinally they may grow over several space constants.
Such elongated fibrotic inlays can induce discontinuous zig-zag
propagation patterns which are associated with significant conduction delays [5]. Thus, despite their thinness, such structures
lead to an apparent conduction slowing which shortens wavelength and induces wavefront fractionation, both factors which
are known to promote the formation of arrhythmias.
In continuum models such fine-scale structures are not explicitly accounted for, particularly in larger tissue preparations
or in whole organ models. The choice of spatial resolution h
in continuum models is mainly dictated by the physics of the
model equations and the level of geometric detail one wishes
to account for. In terms of physical constraints upon h, the fast
transients involved in electrical activation last less than 1 ms
which translates into steep wave fronts of extent <1 mm, necessitating high spatiotemporal resolution. Current state-of-the-art
organ scale models use fairly high paracellular resolutions with
h ≈ 100 μm which correspond roughly to the length of a single
cell [6]. While such high resolutions suffice to accommodate
explicit representations of fine structures such as endocardial
trabeculae or major vessels in the myocardium, they are insufficient to spatially resolve thin, but elongated fibrotic textures
which may cause noticeable effects at a global macroscopic size
scale.
Using standard continuous finite element (FE) techniques
structures at such a fine size scale can only be represented explicitly by using sufficiently high spatial resolutions, which may be

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

COSTA et al.: EFFICIENT FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH FOR MODELING FIBROTIC CLEFTS IN THE HEART

901

prohibitive in terms of the computational costs involved. In this
study, a novel computationally efficient discontinuous FE (dFE)
bidomain modeling approach is presented, which accommodates fine-scale structural detail without the need to increase spatial resolution. Instead, standard discretizations (h ≈ 100 μm)
are used upon which the finer structures at size scales  h are
conformally projected. Insulation is enforced along the conformal projections in the intracellular space through splitting
of FE nodes, while the interstitial space remains coupled. The
method provides increased flexibility by allowing to account
for microstructural details in bidomain simulations with minimal extra computational cost.
II. METHODS
A. Discontinuous Finite Element Approach
The basic idea of the proposed dFE technique is to model microscopic conduction barriers as infinitely thin insulating lines
or surfaces in a conformal FE mesh. Geometry and topology
of such barriers are extracted from high-resolution images and
projected onto a coarse FE mesh by marking those element
edges/faces which best approximate the topology of conduction barriers. Across the marked edges, electrical insulation of
the intracellular space is enforced via no-flux boundary conditions which are imposed by decoupling nodes shared between
adjacent elements. This is achieved by assigning a new nodal
index to a shared node in a FE located at one side of an insulating line/surface, while keeping the original nodal index at
the other side. Spatial coordinates of the split nodes remain unchanged, since the width of the isolating structure is assumed to
be infinitely small. The basic principle is illustrated in Fig. 1(a)–
(d). Renumbering of nodes 1 and 4 in elements Qd1 and Qd3
imposes no-flux boundary condition, thus impeding wavefront
propagation across the insulating boundary. In this study, we aim
at developing the discontinuous FE method for 2-D meshes. We
start off from pure quadrilateral meshes which are derived from
segmented decimated images of histologically processed tissue
slices.
B. Governing Equations
The bidomain equations in the elliptic-parabolic form are
given by
 


∇ · σ i ∇Vm
−∇ · (σ i + σ e ) ∇φe
=
(1)
−∇ · σb ∇φe
0
βCm

∂Vm
= (∇ · σ i ∇φi )
∂t
− βIion (Vm , η)
∂η
= g(Vm , η)
∂t
V m = φi − φ e

(2)

(3)
(4)

where φi and φe are the intracellular and extracellular potentials,
respectively, Vm = φi − φe is the transmembrane voltage, σ i
and σ e are the anisotropic intracellular and extracellular conductivity tensors, respectively, σb is the isotropic conductivity

Fig. 1. Upper panels show element connectivity of continuous FE (left) and
dFE (right) mesh. Lower panels indicate wave front propagation patterns for
both cases. In the right dFE panel nodes 1 and 4 are decoupled, preventing
impulse propagation across the line 1-4-7, only node 7 allows transduction.
Impact of nodal splitting upon propagation pattern when stimulating node 0 is
illustrated using artificial isochrones.

of a surrounding bath or of larger interstitial cleft spaces, β
is the bidomain surface-to-volume ratio, Cm is the membrane
capacitance per unit area, and Iion is the ionic current density
which depends on Vm and a state vector η.
At tissue boundaries, no-flux boundary conditions are imposed for φi , with the potential φe and the normal component
of the extracellular current being continuous. At boundaries of
the conductive bath surrounding the tissue, no-flux boundary
conditions on φe are imposed.
In a general case, the sizes of intracellular and extracellular
domain are unequal, necessitating a domain mapping operator
for data transfer between the domains. This is the case in the
presence of a bath or larger cleft spaces within the myocardium,
or, as in this study, when additional insulating boundary conditions are applied to the intracellular domain. The mapping
operator P is shown in (6), which gives the FE discretization of
the bidomain equations
Kie φe = −P (Ki Vm )

(5)

Ki Vm = −βMi Im − Ki (P T φe )

(6)

where K∗ and M∗ are stiffness and mass matrices, respectively,
with ∗ = e|i being either the extracellular space Ωe or the intracellular space Ωi , P is a prolongation operator from Ωi to Ωe ,
its transpose P T is a restriction operator from Ωe to Ωi , and Im
is the transmembrane current.
In the continuous case in absence of a bath, P and P T are 1:1
injections. In the presence of a bath, data are mapped 1:1 within

902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 2. Generalized dFE mapping between intracellular domain Ω i , and extracellular domain Ω e in presence of a bath. Source terms from nodes 4 and 9
of the Ω i grid are mapped onto node 5 of the Ω e grid, i.e., node 5 in domain
Ω e “sees” two source points. Conversely, nodes 4 and 9 in domain Ω i sense the
same extracellular potential Φ e from node 5. Nodes which were not split, e.g.
6, map 1:1 to an extracellular node. Pure bath nodes such as 12 are not mapped.

A representative, artifact-free slice was chosen from which a
square region of 2000 × 2000 pixels, pixel size of 10 × 10 μm2 ,
was selected for model construction [see Fig. 3(a)].
2) Image Segmentation: Trichrome stain labels myocytes
pinkish-red and connective tissue bluish-green, interstitial cleft
spaces remain unstained [see Fig. 3(a)]. For the construction of
a computer model only two spaces are discriminated, the intracellular space consisting of myocytes and the interstitial space
consisting of cleft space and connective tissue. Fig. 3(b) shows
binarization results, with connective tissue and cleft spaces appearing in white and myocytes in black.
3) Downsampling: For the dFE approach, a coarse representation of a domain is needed upon which fine scale details
are projected. Such a coarse representation was derived from the
segmented high-resolution image [see Fig. 3(b)] by downsampling the image to 200 × 200 pixels (pixel size 100 × 100 μm2 )
[see Fig. 3(c)], a standard resolution in state-of-the-art models [6], [7]. This reduction entailed a loss of information. Only
structures >100 μm were retained and explicitly represented in
the FE grid, any structures <100 μm disappeared.
4) Skeletonization: A skeletonization algorithm was employed to extract the network of connective tissue from the
high-resolution image. Fig. 3(d) shows the skeletonization result. Note that the skeletonized microstructure is visualized as
thin lines of 1 pixel width. The topology of the connective tissue network is given now as a set of line segments which is a
suitable format for being projected onto a 2-D FE mesh.
5) Fiber Detection: Prevailing myocyte orientations a.k.a.
“fiber orientations” were extracted by converting the color highresolution image to a grayscale image. The grayscale image
was downsampled and an intensity gradient method [8] was
applied to both high- and low-resolution images to compute
fiber orientations.
D. Mesh Generation and Postprocessing

Fig. 3. (a) Histological image selected for building FE meshes. Image consists
of 2000 × 2000 pixels (pixel size 10 × 10 μm2 ). (b) Segmentation result for
high resolution image. (c) Segmentation result for lower resolution image. Image
consists of 200 × 200 pixels (pixel size 100 × 100 μm2 ). (d) Visualization of
extracted skeleton showing a magnification of the area indicated by the red
square in panel B).

the myocardium and no mapping is performed in the bath. In
the discontinuous case, within the myocardium, data are either
mapped 1:1 or 1 : n at split nodes, where n is the multiplicity
of the splitting (see Fig. 2).
C. Construction of a 2-D Test Case
1) Sectioning, Histological Staining and Image Acquisition:
For the sake of testing the proposed dFE method a 2-D test
case is constructed. Rabbit ventricles were embedded in paraffin
wax, microtome sliced and stained using Masson’s trichrome
staining [see Fig. 3(a)]. Slices were imaged at high resolution.

1) Generation of High and Lower Resolution Meshes: Two
sets of FE meshes were generated directly from the segmented
images shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c) [9]. In this process, each pixel
was replaced by a 2-D quadrilateral element of the same size, i.e.,
10 × 10 μm2 for the high-resolution image and 100 × 100 μm2
for the low-resolution image. In the FE mesh of the intracellular
grid only those pixels were included which have been previously
identified as myocardium, pixels classified as interstitial space or
connective tissue were discarded whereas in the FE mesh of the
extracellular grid, all pixels were considered. That is, two grids
were generated, a high-resolution grid which accounted for all
structural detail present in the histological images [see Fig. 3(b)],
and a coarser grid which accounted only for those structures
which could be spatially resolved at the coarser resolution [see
Fig. 3(c)].
2) Skeleton Projection: To account for fine-scale structures
in the coarse FE mesh the line segments computed during
the skeletonization procedure are projected onto the mesh [see
Fig. 4(a)]. In a first sweep of this process, the coarse mesh is
searched for intersections of element edges and element diagonals with the line segments [see Fig. 4(b)]. Information on

COSTA et al.: EFFICIENT FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH FOR MODELING FIBROTIC CLEFTS IN THE HEART

903

Fig. 5. Comparison between the setups. (a) dCM setup, which consists of the
projected discontinuities, represented by the red dotted lines, over the CM setup.
(b) Comparison between the representation of the discontinuous structures on
the dCM setup and the actual structures on the FM setup.

E. Simulation Setups

Fig. 4. (a) Projection of skeleton onto coarse grid. (b) Search for edge and
diagonal intersections. (c) Nodes selected for splitting are highlighted in green.
Diagonals selected for splitting the quadrilateral elements into two triangles are
highlighted as green lines. (d) Modified grid after nodal and element splitting.

intersections, such as the numbers of two elements sharing an
intersected edge, the element number of elements with intersected diagonals, and the index of the node closest to the intersection are stored.
3) Nodal and Element Splitting: By the end of the skeleton projection, all elements with intersections were processed.
Those nodes in elements with intersections were marked for
splitting [see Fig. 4(c)]. Depending on number and location of
marked nodes within the element, different procedures were implemented. In those rare cases where all four nodes of a quad
were marked, the element was removed from the mesh. Special treatment was implemented for cases when two marked
nodes were not directly connected by an element edge, i.e., the
nodes were located at diagonals of a quad. In this case, the FE
mesh was modified by splitting the quadrilateral element into
two triangular elements, and by splitting the nodes that span the
edge shared by the two triangular elements [see Fig. 4(c) and
(d)]. This procedure allows smoother projections which avoid
unnecessarily jagged fault lines [see Fig. 4(d)]. In all other
cases no grid modifications were required since electrical insulation across the assumed conduction barriers can be achieved
by decoupling along preexisting edges of the quadrilateral
element.
By the end of the splitting procedure a hybrid mesh, with
quadrilateral and triangular elements, is generated. Information
on nodal splitting is stored in a list, which holds the indices
of the nodes marked for splitting, the indices of the elements
where these nodes should be split and the new nodal index that
should be attributed to these nodes. This list is used as input to
the simulator to perform the nodal splitting on the fly. The nodal
splitting is done via renumbering of nodes in elements of the
intracellular grid.

To evaluate the dFE method three different setups were used:
1) a fine mesh (FM) consisting of 2000 × 2000 quadrilateral
elements with an edge length of 10 μm capturing full microstructural detail [see Fig. 3(b)]; 2) a coarser mesh (CM) consisting
of 200 × 200 quadrilateral elements with an edge length of
100 μm, where only those major structures were explicitly represented which could be resolved at the lower resolution [see
Fig. 3(c)]; 3) the CM was used, but the dFE method was applied
(dCM) which led to the insertion of 18 377 additional nodes. The
total number of nodes N in each FE grid were 4004001, 40401,
and 58778 for FM, CM, and dCM, respectively. A comparison
between the setups is shown in Fig. 5. In panel (A) the discontinuous structures represented by the decoupled nodes are
presented over the CM. Note that the fine structures present in
the FM are not present in the CM, but are included as the insulating lines shown in red, that were created by decoupling the
highlighted nodes. In panel (B) the representation of the discontinuous structures is compared against the actual fine structures
that are present in the FM. Note that, although the representation is slightly jagged, it matches the original structures fairly
well. Fine structures that were below 200 μm of diameter were
removed from the CM and dCM setups to reduce computational
cost. Such small structures do not induce virtual electrodes polarizations, as shown in [10], and thus can be ignored. Since
numerical parameters were kept constant throughout all simulation runs, the relative computational costs are proportional to
N . That is, the computational cost of CM and dCM relative to
the FM were 1.00% and 1.46%, respectively.
The Beeler–Reuter–Drouhard–Roberge model as modified
in [11] was employed to describe the cellular dynamics of a
mammalian ventricular cell. To distinguish differences between
FM and dFE simulations which arise due to the representation of structural discontinuity and the averaged representation
of fiber orientations, two sets of conductivities were used. An
isotropic setup, using intracellular and extracellular conductivities of 0.11963 and 0.625 S/m, respectively, served to assess
differences attributable solely to the alternative representation
of structural discontinuity. Alternatively, an anisotropic setup
in which longitudinal conductivities in the intracellular and

904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fig. 6. Spatial distribution of the transmembrane potential (a and c) and extracellular potential (b and d), when using the isotropic (a and b) and anisotropic
(c and d) setups. Results are shown for all three models, FM, CM, and dCM, at 0.5 and 1.5 ms postshock.

extracellular spaces were set to 0.11963 and 0.625 S/m, respectively, and transverse conductivities to 0.02621 and 0.236 S/m,
respectively. This setup can be considered to be more realistic
by accounting for anisotropy, however, for gauging the quality
of approximation of the dFE approach it is less suitable, since
additional discrepancies will incur due to the downsampling of
the fiber field. Bidomain surface-to-volume ratio β and membrane capacitance Cm were chosen as 1400 cm−1 and 1 μF/cm2 ,
respectively.
Wavefront propagation was initiated by electric field stimulation applied via two line electrodes located at top and bottom of the domain, as shown at the right bottom of Fig. 6.
In line with our goal of evaluating the quality of the dFE approximation relative to high-resolution models, the application
of an electric field has been chosen as a test case since induced virtual electrode polarization patterns [4] are highly sensitive to the presence of structural discontinuity. In particular, a
field strength of 4 V/cm was applied for 2 ms which was sufficiently strong to elicit suprathreshold responses around finescale discontinuities. Cathodal and anodal stimulation were implemented as time-varying Dirichlet boundary conditions along

which Φe = 0 mV and Φe = 8000 mV was enforced during the
stimulus period. After the end of the stimulus, the anode was
kept grounded while the cathodal Dirichlet boundary condition
was removed, i.e., extracellular potentials Φe along the top edge
of the domain could float which is analog to opening the stimulation circuit in an experimental setting.
F. Evaluation of Discontinuous FE Method
The dFE method was evaluated by comparing against the FM
grid. Potential benefits of the dFE method were investigated
by assessing whether and as to which degree the dFE method
provides more accurate predictions of activation patterns, i.e.,
differences to the reference FM grid are reduced, and the savings
in terms of computational cost.
Simulation results were qualitatively evaluated by visually
comparing the spatial distribution of transmembrane voltage Vm
and extracellular potential φe between the three different setups
FM, CM, and dCM 0.5 and 1.5 ms after the break of the stimulus,
as shown in Fig. 6. In addition, activation times were computed
for the intracellular grid as the instant where a threshold of
−10.0 mV is achieved. Difference in activation times relative to

COSTA et al.: EFFICIENT FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH FOR MODELING FIBROTIC CLEFTS IN THE HEART

905

the FM grid was then calculated at all nodes which were present
in both the FM as well as the CM/dCM grids. Execution times
for the full bidomain simulation sequence were recorded and
compared against the FM case. Speedup was calculated as the
FM grid execution divided by CM/dCM grids execution times.
G. Computational Considerations
The bidomain equations were solved with the cardiac arrhythmia research package (CARP) [12], running on 1 to 16 cores of
an 8 Quad-Core AMD OpteronTM 8386 SE 2.8 GHz processors
cluster with 128 GB of RAM running a 64-bit Linux system.
The specifics of the numerical regimes used in CARP have been
described extensively elsewhere [13]–[15]. Image segmentation
and skeletonization were performed in custom written software
(Courtesy of Prof. H. Ahammer). Fiber detection, downsampling, and mesh generation and postprocessing procedure were
implemented in MATLAB (The Mathworks, Nantucket, USA).
Visualization of results was performed with the custom written
Meshalyzer software (Courtesy of Dr. E. J. Vigmond).
III. RESULTS
A. Evaluating Polarization Patterns and Activation Times
Postshock polarization patterns predicted by the dFE method
were compared against the reference solution computed at the
fine FM grid and the standard solution computed with the continuous FE method on the CM grid. Fig. 6 presents the spatial
distribution of Vm and Φe for all three scenarios 0.5 and 1.5 ms
postshock. Figs. 6(a) and (b) show results for isotropic conductivity settings in which case all observed differences are
attributable to the presence or absence of fine-scale discontinuities, but not to differences in fiber orientations. While there were
minor visible deviations between FM and dCM case, a qualitative visual comparison against the standard CM case reveals
that the dFE method captures structure-induced polarizations
more accurately than the standard FE approach, with the solution being much closer to high-resolution reference simulation.
In the CM simulation many fine-scale discontinuities which
were explicitly represented in the FM case were absent. Thus,
virtual electrode polarizations were induced to a much lesser
degree which was particularly striking in the lower left quadrant of the domain [see Fig. 6(a) and (c)]. Hence, no wavefront
propagation was initiated there, thus leading to a noticeable activation delay in this region. This is illustrated in the activation
maps in Fig. 7(a) which present the spatial distribution of differences in local activation times relative to the reference FM case.
Mean activation time errors and standard deviations were 1.37 ±
1.11 and 0.35 ± 0.69 ms in the isotropic CM and dCM cases,
respectively.
In the anisotropic case, additional deviations emerged due to
differences in fiber orientation between FM and dCM grid which
influenced the formation of virtual electrode polarizations. This
is apparent when comparing polarization patterns in FM/dCM
panels between Fig. 6(a) and (c) or activation time errors between Fig. 7(a) and (b). Nonetheless, the overall distribution of
Vm and Φe achieved with the dFE method approximates the so-

Fig. 7. Spatial distribution of the activation time errors for the transmembrane
potential, when using the isotropic (a) and anisotropic (b) setups. Results are
shown for CM and dCM relative to FM.
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF EXECUTION TIMES (T ) AND SPEEDUPS (S) FOR SOLVING THE
TOTAL SYSTEM USING FINE MESH (FM), COARSE MESH (CM) AND
DECOUPLED COARSE MESH (dCM)

lution obtained with the high resolution FM significantly better
than in the standard CM case, as evidenced by comparing the
CM and dCM panels in Fig. 6(c) and (d), albeit the match is not
as close as in the isotropic case. In the anisotropic case, mean
activation time errors and standard deviations were 1.40 ± 1.3
and 0.63 ± 1.03 ms, respectively.
B. Computational Costs
The reduction in terms of nodes in the coarser CM and dCM
meshes relative to the FM mesh translated into significant savings in execution times. As shown in Table I, when running
on a single core simulation using the coarse CM mesh executed 158.9× faster than the corresponding run which used the
FM mesh. Such speedups are within the range expected due
to the reduction in workload by a factor of ∼100. Comparable reductions in execution time (126.1×) were measured with
the dFE method on the coarse dCM mesh, with speedups being slightly smaller than in the CM case, due to the marginally

906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

higher workload imposed by additional 18 377 nodes. While the
overall speedups decreased slightly when increasing the number
of compute cores n even with n = 16 reductions in execution
time were significant. Solving the FM problem within similar
time frames as the dCM problem would necessitate engaging a
much larger number of cores, in the range n > 1000.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, a novel discontinuous FE approach for modeling fine-scale structural discontinuities in cardiac bidomain
simulations has been developed. The method accounts for the
presence of insulating microstructures, as they arise in the aging
myocardium or under pathologies such as fibrosis, without increasing the mesh resolution to spatially resolve these structures
explicitly. Instead, electrical insulation due to such structures
arising at size scales below a given spatial resolution are accounted for by a nodal splitting approach which imposes no-flux
boundary conditions on intracellular current density and allows
for discontinuities in intracellular potential φi while keeping
the extracellular domain continuous. Simulation results demonstrate that the dFE method reduces computational costs significantly, by about two orders of magnitude. Qualitatively, relevant
mechanisms such as virtual electrode formation around insulating obstacles, the subsequent initiation of wavefronts and their
fractionation when encountering with such barriers, are captured
faithfully. Quantitative comparison revealed only very minor
differences relative to significantly more expensive simulation
performed in a matching high-resolution mesh. The proposed
method can be implemented in any continuous FE bidomain
code with very minor effort which is a major advantage from
a practical point of view. This additional flexibility renders the
dFE method highly suitable for being used in modeling studies which seek to investigate bioelectric phenomena related to
myocardial tissue structure at a microscopic size scale in the
context of whole organ simulations.
A. Shock-Induced Polarizations and Activation Patterns
In the process of aging or in diseased hearts, active myocytes
are being replaced by connective tissue which invades spaces
between myocytes, thus interrupting the intracellular matrix.
Current flux between myocytes situated at opposite sites of fibrotic lesions, no matter how thin they are, is prevented, which
renders the intracellular space discontinuous along such fracture lines. Such discontinuities may not show any noticeable
manifestations at a macroscopic size scale and, therefore, their
presence is most often fully ignored in computer models. However, there are various important scenarios in which microscale
fibrotic lesions show prominent effects which are not limited to
minor modulation of local behavior in the vicinity of the lesion,
but influence behavior at the tissue and organ scale.
One such important effect is the induction of virtual electrode polarizations when external electric fields are applied [4].
Virtual electrodes form around such discontinuities which may
initiate propagating wavelets after the break of a shock. There
is mounting evidence that this mechanism plays a crucial role
in success and failure of defibrillation shocks [16], [17] in ad-

dition to other mechanisms which are driven by continuous
macroscopic size scale factors such as fiber rotation [18] or
unequal anisotropy ratios [2]. It has been shown that a critical
minimum size is required for such structures to elicit propagated
responses [17], [19]. However, even lesions which are thin in
width and well below a critical size, if their spatial extent in
the longitudinal direction is sufficient as it is the case with fibrotic textures classified as patchy fibrosis [20], they constitute
an important substrate for eliciting shock-induced propagated
responses which clearly influence the outcome of defibrillation
shocks.
Moreover, fibrosis does not only manifest during stimulation
with electric fields, it has a profound impact upon activation patterns. Again, elongated lesions provide a substrate which structurally constrains conduction pathways through which electrical activation wave fronts stumble following complex zig-zag
patterns. At a macroscopic size scale, these altered micropropagation patterns may not be noticeable, but they manifest as
apparent conduction slowing an important factor known to promote arrhythmias by shortening the effective wavelength [21].
However, wavefront fractionation due to microscopic lesions
may manifest at a macroscopic size scale depending on the incidence direction of wavefronts. Under incidence directions in
parallel to a lesion electrogram fractionation at a given observation site may be negligible, however, large conduction delays
between depolarization events may arise at the same observation site which are reflected as electrogram fractionation in the
extracellular space, if incidence direction is orthogonal to the
prevailing direction of fibrotic lesions [5].
The dFE method accounts for these effects in a computationally efficient manner. As illustrated in Fig. 6(a) and (b), virtual
electrode polarization patterns were very similar between the
FM and dCM case while computations were 126× to 203×
less costly. In the standard CM case, many virtual electrode
polarizations were missing, particularly in the lower left quadrant, which had a profound impact upon postshock evolution.
The postshock excitable gap was much larger in this case and
the total activation time needed to depolarize the tissue sheet
was significantly prolonged. This was also reflected in a much
closer match in local activation times between dCM and FM as
compared to the CM case [see Fig. 7(a) and (b)].
In the isotropic case, differences arose due to the imperfect approximation of fracture lines [see Fig. 4(b)]. Including
anisotropy gave rise to additional deviations as a consequence
of extracting fiber orientations from low-resolution images. Induced polarizations depend on the angle between lesion and
fiber orientation [18]. In the high-resolution FM case, there is
a fine-grained variation in fiber angle along a lesion which is
much coarser in the dCM case, thus leading to differences in
average angle between dCM and FM. Despite these additional
uncertainties, dCM results match the FM case much closer than
the standard CM results.
B. Discontinuous FE Method Versus High-Resolution Models
In recent years, major advances in imaging technology [22]
alongside with other factors such as a massive increase in

COSTA et al.: EFFICIENT FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH FOR MODELING FIBROTIC CLEFTS IN THE HEART

available compute power [23]–[25], significant advancements in
numerical methods for solving the bidomain equations [13], and
image-based mesh generation techniques to spatially discretize
complex geometries [26], [27] led to an increased interest in using anatomically highly accurate tomographic reconstructions
of individual hearts [6], [7]. In ex vivo MRI scans, ultrahigh spatial resolutions of around ≈25 μm can be achieved [22] which
allow us to identify fine structures at a paracellular size scale.
Histological images such as used in this study provide even
higher resolution and more structural detail, but typically these
techniques are vastly time consuming, destructive, and susceptible to artifacts [6] which limits their application to smaller tissue samples [28]. Models using such high-spatial resolutions are
feasible and have been employed to study the role of microstructure in the formation of virtual electrode polarizations, and in
electrogram fractionation, however, these studies have been limited to simpler model geometries such as 2-D sheets [17], thin
ventricular or atrial slices [19], [5] or small transmural wedge
preparations [29]. While using such simplified model geometries can be insightful under many circumstances, mechanisms
which govern success and failure of defibrillation therapy or
formation and maintenance of arrhythmias can only be fully
appreciated at the organ scale since factors such as biventricular
geometry, structure of the endocardium, tissue orthotropy, specialized conduction system, physiological differences between
right and left chambers as well as the presence of transmural,
apico-basal, and regional heterogeneities are known to be implicated in the underlying processes.
With current technology organ scale simulations at such ultrahigh resolutions <25 μm which could explicitly resolve mezoscale structures as modeled in this study with the dFE method,
are not feasible yet, however, such simulations may become
feasible over the next decade. Further methodological advances
will enable research to take advantage of massively parallel
high-performance computers to deal with workloads imposed
by problem sizes of several tens to hundreds of million of unknowns. However, even in such scenarios discontinuous FE
methods such as dFE may be of great utility. Not only execution times alone, also handling the overall amount of data
generated, the computational costs of postprocessing and visualization remain to be expensive. Further, using high resolutions
in areas devoid of any mezo-scale structures may not be warranted. Therefore, it is common to reduce image resolution prior
to mesh generation down to h ≈ 100 μm. Such paracellular resolutions at length of a single myocyte seem to be a viable tradeoff between compute cost and anatomical detail. Models at this
spatial discretization resolve the physics of the bidomain equations with high numerical accuracy and allow fast simulation
and analysis cycles, the sweeping of large parameters spaces, or
performing simulations on cheaper hardware. However, valuable information on the cardiac microstructure, available at full
resolution, is lost in the decimation process and, thus, its effects
cannot be studied in the resulting model. While this may be
negligible in many cases, particularly when macroscopic phenomena are under consideration, there are many problems of
high practical relevance in which accounting for the myocardial
microstructure may be crucial.

907

The strength of the proposed dFE is its ability to account
for the presence of microscopic structures which are at size
scales below a chosen spatial resolution without any increase
in computational costs. While the dFE method cannot achieve
an identical match with the high-resolution model, the observed
differences are only marginal—particularly when viewed in context of uncertainties model parameters are afflicted with—and
the savings in computational costs are vast. The main limitation
is rather image processing and representation as a skeleton. Any
inaccuracies in these preprocessing steps will introduce errors
in the simulations. Any missing skeleton representation of a
fibrotic structure cannot cause a secondary source during field
stimulation. Therefore, activation patterns in these regions will
locally differ from the high-resolution model. However, this is
a limitation of the preprocessing methods only, not of the dFE
method itself.
C. Comparison With Previous Studies and Other Techniques
In a previous study [30], the basic principle of using the
dFE method for modeling fibrotic cleft spaces has been outlined for a simpler monodomain formulation. This concept has
been applied successfully in subsequent studies for this very
purpose [31]. This paper extends this idea by generalizing the
dFE method to render it suitable for being used with a full bidomain formulation. In this case, the two spaces—intracellular
and interstitial—are treated differently. Only the intracellular
space is decoupled, but not the interstitial space. Thus, there
is no 1:1 relationship anymore between FE nodes in the two
domains, requiring a more elaborate mapping procedure when
exchanging data between the two interpenetrating grids. Further, in contrast to other previous studies, detailed simulations
were performed to quantitatively assess potential deviations relative to the computationally more expensive standard method
which relies upon high-resolution meshes. As a benchmark, a
simulation setup has been chosen which aims at modeling microscopic size scale virtual electrode polarizations induced by
electric field stimulation. In such a scenario, the use of a full
bidomain formulation is mandatory and the induced polarization patterns are highly sensitive to the present fibrotic cleft
spaces. In addition, the polarization patterns are also highly
sensitive to fiber orientation and anisotropy. Therefore, in this
study an anisotropic setup, which includes fiber orientation, is
quantitatively compared against an isotropic setup.
Various methods for modeling of cracks using continuum FE
discretizations have been developed for a variety of applications in other fields of research. Similar approaches which rely
upon nodal renumbering, as proposed in this study, have been
used in other application such as, e.g., [32] and [33]. While the
proposed method bears similarities with other approaches, the
way it is applied in this study is novel and unique due to the
specific requirements imposed by the bidomain models where
two spaces interpenetrate and isolation has to be enforced only
in one of them.
Trew and coworkers developed a finite volume method for
modeling discontinuities in cardiac tissue which would be applicable to the problem described in here as well [34]. They argued

908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

that the FVM paradigm has an distinct advantage over FE formulations in that planes of intracellular disruption can be represented without an implicit gain of extracellular volume. Their rationale was based on previous studies by Hooks et al. in which a
FE formulation was used [28]. The gain of volume resulted from
the fact that their standard FE formulation represented cleavage
planes as volumetric elements so that the width of planes could
not be smaller than the mesh resolution. While their argument
is correct, the dFE method overcomes this very difficulty and
allows to model cleavage planes of infinite thinness the same
way as their FVM approach. Considering that a large percentage
of currently used bidomain solver codes relies on FE discretizations, a key advantage of our dFE method lies in that the cost of
extending an existing continuous FE bidomain code to support
modeling of fine-scale discontinuities is very minor.
Whether to use the dFE method or the FVM-based method
due to Trew et al. [34] is a question of preference, technically
both methods achieve the same goal. The preprocessing task of
identifying zero-flux faces is the same with both methods with
the minor difference that in the dFE case the no-flux conditions
are controlled on a per nodal basis and not over entire element
faces. The FVM allows imposing no-flux conditions across faces
in a mesh in a somewhat more natural way. With the dFE method
the number of unknowns increases due to nodal splitting which
increases the overall system size. However, in the most widely
used scenario which relies on tetrahedral elements for spatial
discretization, the dFE method may result in much smaller system sizes than the FVM since the sought after unknowns are
potentials at element nodes and not potentials at element centers as it is the case with the FVM developed by Trew et al. [34].
Thus, the overall number of unknowns in this particular FVM
scenario may be significantly higher, by about a factor of 5.
D. Extension to 3-D
For the sake of elucidating the basic principle of the dFE
method in a bidomain context, 2-D grids were used in this
study, however, the method extends naturally to 3-D without
any further modifications. A simplified monodomain version of
the dFE method has been employed already in a previous study
which investigated the role of fibrosis in the formation and maintenance of arrhythmias in a 3-D model of the human atria [31].
In contrast to this study, bidomain effects were neglected and
discontinuities in the fibrotic substrate were represented in a
statistical sense. Thus, the additional complexity of intersecting fracture lines or surfaces with a preexisting FE mesh and
the projection operations between intracellular and extracellular
grids were not required.
As in the 2-D scenario, in 3-D the only information needed is
on the elements marked for splitting, and the subset of nodes in
these elements to be split, but neither dimensionality nor type of
element matter. The more challenging problem are the preprocessing algorithms which generate the splitting information. To
be of wider applicability all steps in the pipeline which include
segmentation, mesh generation, finding discrete representation
of discontinuities, and intersecting them with the previously
generated mesh have to be executed in an almost fully automatic fashion, as it is the case for the 2-D method presented in
this study. The critical difficulties in a generic 3-D scenario are

to find discrete representations of the discontinuous planes and
to intersect these planes with a fully unstructured grid. While
this can be addressed in 2-D by skeletonization of fracture lines,
analog skeletonization methods applicable in 3-D are not readily
available.
In previous studies [28], fracture planes were identified manually and represented by bilinear FEs. While this is a feasible
approach for a small number of samples, for high throughput modeling studies it would be prohibitive. Moreover, these
discrete representations were projected onto structured grids
without attempts to remesh to accommodate discontinuities as
smoothly as possible [34]. Thus, fracture planes are represented
as jagged surfaces which may cause spurious polarizations when
applying external electric field, since, unlike with unstructured
grids which smoothly accommodate organ surfaces, fiber orientations cannot be aligned in parallel to the organ surface. This
is a well-known artifact in defibrillation studies which represent
complex geometries with structured voxel-based grids.
Ideally, accounting for fine-scale discontinuities is integrated
in the mesh generation process to obtain smooth boundaryfitted representations. However, image-based mesh generation
of complex structures such as organ-scale heart models at a
paracellular resolution is a highly challenging problem in its
own right [26], [27]. To our knowledge, there are currently no
mesh generation methods available which would be able to deal
with this added complexity.
In the near future, we aim at extending the method presented
in this study to a 3-D scenario by first developing an analog
representation of the skeleton in 3-D using the available image processing technology. To our understanding, as the 3-D
datasets typically consist of 2-D image stacks, the 3-D problem
could be treated as a set of pseudo-2-D problems, that can later
on be combined to construct a complete 3-D representation of
the discontinuous structures. Moreover, extending the procedure used in this study to search for intersections between the
discontinuous structures and the previously generated mesh to a
3-D scenario should be straightforward, with intersections now
occurring between tridimensional planes instead of lines.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, a novel computationally efficient discontinuous
FE method is presented which allows us to account for effects
due to uncoupling structures in cardiac tissue upon wavefront
propagation and field-induced polarization patterns on a coarser
computational grid, without the need to use high-resolution
meshes to spatially resolve these structures explicitly. Comparison between computationally expensive high-resolution bidomain simulations and the novel dFE method used on coarser
grids demonstrated that an excellent qualitative and quantitative
match could be achieved at a fraction of the computational costs.
REFERENCES
[1] W. T. Miller and D. B. Geselowitz, “Simulation studies of the
electrocardiogram—Part I: The normal heart,” Circ. Res., vol. 43, no. 2,
pp. 301–315, Aug. 1978.
[2] N. G. Sepulveda, B. J. Roth, and J. Wikswo, Jr. (1989, May). Current injection into a two-dimensional anisotropic bidomain. Biophys. J. [Online].

COSTA et al.: EFFICIENT FINITE ELEMENT APPROACH FOR MODELING FIBROTIC CLEFTS IN THE HEART

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

55(5), pp. 987–999. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3495(89)
82897-8
M. S. Spach, “The discontinuous nature of electrical propagation in cardiac muscle. Consideration of a quantitative model incorporating the
membrane ionic properties and structural complexities. The ALZA distinguished lecture,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 209–261,
1983.
V. G. Fast, S. Rohr, A. M. Gillis, and A. G. Kléber, “Activation of cardiac
tissue by extracellular electrical shocks: Formation of ‘secondary sources’
at intercellular clefts in monolayers of cultured myocytes,” Circ. Res.,
vol. 82, no. 3, pp. 375–385, Feb. 1998.
F. Campos, T. Wiener, A. Prassl, R. Weber Dos Santos, D. SanchezQuintana, H. Ahammer, G. Plank, and E. Hofer. (2013, Apr.). Electroanatomical characterization of atrial microfibrosis in a histologically detailed computer model. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. [Online]. 60(8).Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2013.2256359
G. Plank, R. A. Burton, P. Hales, M. Bishop, T. Mansoori, M. O. Bernabeu,
A. Garny, A. J. Prassl, C. Bollensdorff, F. Mason, F. Mahmood,
B. Rodriguez, V. Grau, J. E. Schneider, D. Gavaghan, and P. Kohl, “Generation of histo-anatomically representative models of the individual heart:
Tools and application,” Philos. Transact. A Math Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 367,
no. 1896, pp. 2257–2292, 2009.
M. J. Bishop, G. Plank, R. A. B. Burton, J. E. Schneider, D. J. Gavaghan, V.
Grau, and P. Kohl. (2010, Feb.). Development of an anatomically detailed
mri-derived rabbit ventricular model and assessment of its impact on
simulations of electrophysiological function. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol. [Online]. 298(2), pp. H699–H718. Available: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1152/ajpheart.00606.2009
W. J. Karlon, J. W. Covell, A. D. McCulloch, J. J. Hunter, and
J. H. Omens, “Automated measurement of myofiber disarray in transgenic mice with ventricular expression of RAS,” Anat. Rec., vol. 252,
no. 4, pp. 612–625, 1998.
R. Weber dos Santos, U. Steinhoff, E. Hofer, D. Sánchez-Quintana, and
H. Koch, “Modelling the electrical propagation in cardiac tissue using detailed histological data,” Biomedizinische Technik. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48,
pp. 476–479, 2003.
M. Bishop, G. Plank, and E. Vigmond, “Investigating the role of the coronary vasculature in the mechanisms of defibrillation clinical perspective,”
Circ. Arrhythm Electrophysiol., vol. 5, pp. 210–219, 2012.
K. Skouibine, N. Trayanova, and P. Moore, “Anode/cathode make and
break phenomena in a model of defibrillation,” IEEE Trans Biomed Eng.,
vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 769–777, Jul. 1999.
E. Vigmond, M. Hughes, G. Plank, and L. Joshua Leon, “Computational
tools for modeling electrical activity in cardiac tissue,” J. Electrocardiol.,
vol. 36, pp. 69–74, 2003.
G. Plank, M. Liebmann, R. W. dos Santos, E. J. Vigmond, and G. Haase,
“Algebraic multigrid preconditioner for the cardiac bidomain model,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 585–596, Apr. 2007.
E. J. Vigmond, R. W. dos Santos, A. J. Prassl, M. Deo, and G. Plank,
“Solvers for the cardiac bidomain equations,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.,
vol. 96, no. 1–3, pp. 3–18, 2008.
G. Plank, L. Zhou, J. L. Greenstein, S. Cortassa, R. L. Winslow, B.
O’Rourke, and N. A. Trayanova. (2008, Sep.). From mitochondrial ion
channels to arrhythmias in the heart: Computational techniques to bridge
the spatio-temporal scales. Philos. Trans. A, Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. [Online]. 366(1879), pp. 3381–3409. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2008.0112
F. H. Fenton, S. Luther, E. M. Cherry, N. F. Otani, V. Krinsky, A. Pumir,
E. Bodenschatz, and R. F. Gilmour, Jr. (2009, Aug.). Termination of
atrial fibrillation using pulsed low-energy far-field stimulation. Circulation [Online]. 120(6), pp. 467–476. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.108.825091
S. Luther, F. H. Fenton, B. G. Kornreich, A. Squires, P. Bittihn, D. Hornung, M. Zabel, J. Flanders, A. Gladuli, L. Campoy, E. M. Cherry, G.
Luther, G. Hasenfuss, V. I. Krinsky, A. Pumir, R. F. Gilmour, Jr, and
E. Bodenschatz. (2011, Jul.). Low-energy control of electrical turbulence in the heart. Nature [Online]. 475(7355), pp. 235–239. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature10216
G. Plank, A. Prassl, E. Hofer, and N. A. Trayanova. (2008, Mar.). Evaluating intramural virtual electrodes in the myocardial wedge preparation:
Simulations of experimental conditions. Biophys. J. [Online]. 94(5), pp.
1904–1915. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.107.121343
M. J. Bishop, G. Plank, and E. Vigmond. (2012, Feb.). Investigating
the role of the coronary vasculature in the mechanisms of defibrillation.
Circ. Arrhythm Electrophysiol. [Online]. 5(1), pp. 210–219. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.111.965095

909

[20] S. de Jong, T. A. B. van Veen, H. V. M. van Rijen, and J. M. T. de Bakker.
(2011, Jun.). Fibrosis and cardiac arrhythmias. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol.
[Online]. 57(6), pp. 630–638. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/FJC.
0b013e318207a35f
[21] P. L. Rensma, M. A. Allessie, W. J. Lammers, F. I. Bonke, and
M. J. Schalij, “Length of excitation wave and susceptibility to reentrant
atrial arrhythmias in normal conscious dogs,” Circ. Res., vol. 62, no. 2,
pp. 395–410, 1988.
[22] J. E. Schneider, J. Böse, S. D. Bamforth, A. D. Gruber, C. Broadbent,
K. Clarke, S. Neubauer, A. Lengeling, and S. Bhattacharya. (2004).
Identification of cardiac malformations in mice lacking PTDSR using a
novel high-throughput magnetic resonance imaging technique. BMC Dev.
Biol. [Online]. 4, p. 16. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1471-213X-4-16
[23] S. Niederer, L. Mitchell, N. Smith, and G. Plank. (2011). Simulating
human cardiac electrophysiology on clinical time-scales. Front Physiol.
[Online]. 2, p. 14. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2011.00014
[24] A. Neic, M. Liebmann, E. Hoetzl, L. Mitchell, E. J. Vigmond, G. Haase,
and G. Plank. (2012, Aug.). Accelerating cardiac bidomain simulations
using graphics processing units. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. [Online].
59(8), pp. 2281–2290. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2012.
2202661
[25] D. F. Richards, J. N. Glosli, E. W. Draeger, A. A. Mirin, B. Chan, J.L. Fattebert, W. D. Krauss, T. Oppelstrup, C. J. Butler, J. A. Gunnels,
V. Gurev, C. Kim, J. Magerlein, M. Reumann, H.-F. Wen, and J. J. Rice.
(2013, Jun.). Towards real-time simulation of cardiac electrophysiology in
a human heart at high resolution. Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10255842.2013.795556
[26] A. J. Prassl, F. Kickinger, H. Ahammer, V. Grau, J. E. Schneider, E. Hofer,
E. J. Vigmond, N. A. Trayanova, and G. Plank. (2009, May). Automatically
generated, anatomically accurate meshes for cardiac electrophysiology
problems. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. [Online]. 56(5), pp. 1318–1330.
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2009.2014243
[27] S. Institute. (2013). bioMesh3D: Quality Mesh Generator for Biomedical
Applications. Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute (SCI). [Online].
Available: http://www.biomesh3d.org
[28] A. D. Hooks, A. K. Tomlinson, G. S. Marsden, I. J. LeGrice, B. H. Smaill,
A. J. Pullan, and P. J. Hunter, “Cardiac microstructure: Implications for
electrical propagation and defibrillation in the heart,” Circulat. Res.,
vol. 91, pp. 331–338, 2002.
[29] D. A. Hooks, M. L. Trew, B. H. Smaill, and A. J. Pullan. (2006, Mar.). Do
intramural virtual electrodes facilitate successful defibrillation? modelbased analysis of experimental evidence. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. [Online]. 17(3), pp. 305–311. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1540-8167.2006.00360.x
[30] C. M. Costa, F. O. Campos, A. J. Prassl, R. W. dos Santos, D. SanchezQuintana, E. Hofer, and G. Plank, “A finite element approach for modeling
micro-structural discontinuities in the heart,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 437–440.
[31] K. McDowell, F. Vadakkumpadan, R. Blake, J. Blauer, G. Plank,
R. MacLeod, and N. Trayanova, “Mechanistic inquiry into the role of
tissue remodeling in fibrotic lesions in human atrial fibrillation,” Commun. ACM, vol. 104, no. 12, 2013.
[32] A. Grillo, D. Logashenko, S. Stichel, and G. Wittum, “Simulation of
density-driven flow in fractured porous media.,” Adv. Water Res., vol. 33,
pp. 1494–1507, 2010.
[33] T. Moes and N. Dolbow J. Belytschko, “A finite element method for crack
growth without remeshing,” Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng., vol. 46, pp. 131–
150, 1999.
[34] M. Trew, I. L. Grice, B. Smaill, and A. Pullan, “A finite volume method
for modeling discontinuous electrical activation in cardiac tissue,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 590–602, May 2005.
Caroline Mendonca Costa received the B.Sc. degree
in computer science from the Federal University of
Juiz de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora, Brazil, in 2009 and
the M.Sc. degree in computational modeling from the
UFJF in 2011. She is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree at the Institute of Mathematics and Scientific Computing, University of Graz, Graz, Austria,
and Research Assistant at the Institute of Biophysics,
Medical University of Graz, Austria.
Her research interests include methodological and
applied aspects of computational modeling of cardiac
electrophysiology, with emphasis on the role of tissue microstructure and model
parametrization.

910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 3, MARCH 2014

Fernando O. Campos received the B.Sc. degree
in informatics from the Federal University of Juiz
de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora, Brazil, in 2005; the
M.Sc. degree in computational modeling from UFJF
in 2008; and the Ph.D. degree from the Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria, in 2012.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Biophysics, Medical University of Graz, Graz,
Austria. He is a Member of the Austrian Society for
Biomedical Engineering. His research interests include computational modeling of the electrical activity in the heart, with emphasis on the role of tissue microstructure and triggered
activity on arrhythmogenesis.

Anton J. Prassl received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the Institute of
Biomedical Engineering, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria, in 2003 and 2008, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Biophysics, Medical University of Graz,
Graz. From 2006 to 2007, he was a Research Scholar
at the Johns Hopkins University. His research interests include computational modeling of electrical and
mechanical activity of the heart.

Rodrigo Weber dos Santos received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Juiz de Fora, Brazil,
in 1995; the M.Sc. degree from UFRJ, Computer and
Systems Engineering, in 1998; and the D.Sc. degree
from UFRJ, Mathematics Department, in 2002.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science, the Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil, and with
the Graduate Program in Computational Modelling.
Prior to this, he was a Research Fellow with the Department of Biosignals, PTB, Berlin, Germany (2002–2004); and with CERN,
Geneva, Switzerland (1995–1996). His research interests include parallel computing, numerical methods for PDEs and mathematical and computational modelling of the heart.

Damián Sánchez-Quintana received the M.D. and
Ph.D. degrees in medicine from the University of
Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain, in 1979 and 1986,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor of human anatomy at
the Faculty of Medicine of Badajoz. In 1995, he was
a Senior Visitor at the Laboratory of Professor Robert
H. Anderson, in the Department of Paediatrics, National Heart and Lung Institute, London. Since 1996,
he has been involved in the study of the macroscopic
and microscopic structure of morphologic substrates
underlying different arrhythmias in different areas of the heart such as triangle
of Koch, cavo-tricuspid isthmus, cardiac nodes and their vascularization, left
atrium, and pulmonary veins.

Helmut Ahammer received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in experimental physics from the University of
Graz, Graz, Austria, in 1990 and 1996, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor of medical
physics and biophysics at the Institute of Biophysics,
Medical University of Graz, Graz, where he is involved in the field of image processing and quantitative image analysis. His current research interests
include fractals, nonlinear methods, and quantitative
methods in order to analyze digital images of biological objects.

Ernst Hofer received the M.Sc. degree in 1997
and the Ph.D. degree in 1985 in electrical engineering from the Technical University of Graz, Graz,
Austria.
From 1985 to 1990, he was an Assistant Professor at the Karl-Franzens-University Graz, Graz.
Since 1990, he has been an Associate Professor of
medical physics and biophysics in the Department
of Biophysics, Medical University of Graz, Graz.
His current research interests include development
of scientific instruments and measurement systems
for cardiac electrophysiology, specifically for measurement and analysis of microscopic excitation spread in cardiac tissue. He is currently the Vice-President
of the Austrian Society for Biomedical Engineering.

Gernot Plank received the M.Sc. degree in 1996 and
the Ph.D. degree in 2000 in electrical engineering
from the Technical University of Graz (TUG), Graz,
Austria.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the Institute of Biophysics, Medical University of
Graz, Graz and Academic Fellow with the Oxford
e-Research Centre, University of Oxford, U.K. Prior,
he was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Technical University of Valencia, Spain (2000–2002), the University of Calgary, AB, Canada in 2003 and Marie Curie
Fellow with Johns Hopkins University (2006–2008). His research interests include methodological and applied aspects of computational modeling of cardiac
electrophysiology and mechanics.

