IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

731

Identification of COPD Patients’ Health Status
Using an Intelligent System in the
CHRONIOUS Wearable Platform
Christos C. Bellos, Athanasios Papadopoulos, Roberto Rosso, and Dimitrios I. Fotiadis, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The CHRONIOUS system offers an integrated platform aiming at the effective management and real-time assessment
of the health status of the patient suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). An intelligent system is developed
for the analysis and the real-time evaluation of patient’s condition.
A hybrid classifier has been implemented on a personal digital assistant, combining a support vector machine, a random forest, and
a rule-based system to provide a more advanced categorization
scheme for the early and in real-time characterization of a COPD
episode. This is followed by a severity estimation algorithm which
classifies the identified pathological situation in different levels and
triggers an alerting mechanism to provide an informative and instructive message/advice to the patient and the clinical supervisor.
The system has been validated using data collected from 30 patients
that have been annotated by experts indicating 1) the severity level
of the current patient’s health status, and 2) the COPD disease level
of the recruited patients according to the GOLD guidelines. The
achieved characterization accuracy has been found 94%.
Index Terms—Chronic disease monitoring, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), hybrid classification, severity
estimation.

I. INTRODUCTION
HRONIC diseases are health conditions that affect a
large number of people requiring frequent hospitalization and treatment. A well-known and one of the most frequent
chronic diseases is the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Its monitoring includes vital signs recordings, medication, and/or lifestyle changes such as diet, exercise, and stress
management and its treatment aims to improving symptoms,
preventing progression of disease, and preserving optimum respiratory functioning improving the quality of the patient life.
The CHRONIOUS system [1] provides services to clinicians
and their patients suffering from COPD, but it has also been
designed as an adaptive platform to monitor other chronic diseases. It is a personalized disease monitoring and management

C

Manuscript received March 22, 2013; revised November 4, 2013; accepted
November 21, 2013. Date of publication November 27, 2013; date of current
version May 1, 2014. This work was supported in part by the European Commission through the IST Project FP7-ICT-2007-1-216461 CHRONIOUS.
C. C. Bellos, A. Papadopoulos, and D. I. Fotiadis are with the Foundation for
Research and Technology—Hellas, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Department of Biomedical Research, GR 45110 Ioannina, Greece
(e-mail: cbellos@cc.uoi.gr; thpapado@cc.uoi.gr; fotiadis@cc.uoi.gr).
R. Rosso is with TESAN S.p.A., 36100 Vicenza, Italy (e-mail: rosso@
tesan.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2293172

platform whose main components include a wearable T-shirt
integrating several sensors, a personal digital assistant (PDA)
for the evaluation of the health status, and a central system
which performs data collection and extended data analysis. The
CHRONIOUS system can provide decision support and extract
clinical knowledge by analyzing the collected data using algorithms, which add “intelligence” to the system. The platform
provides a clear view of the health status of the monitored patient through a highly personalized index.
The advantages of the proposed system are the ability to be
used by patients suffering from several diseases, the monitoring
and treatment of which requires the collection of heterogeneous
data captured from different sources. The employment of intelligent algorithms into a smart device (SD) in combination with
the sensor jacket and the wearable platform results in the direct
analysis of the patient’s data both indoors and outdoors, providing real-time assessment of the severity of the health status.
The system is fully personalized and accompanied by several
peripheral devices such as glucometer or blood pressure monitors that could easily function and cover patient’s and clinician’s
specific needs.
Several research groups have presented decision support systems (DSS) to enhance the management of chronic diseases employing onsite or telehealth technologies [2]. The state-of-the-art
systems include wireless body area networks utilizing miniature
sensors for the monitoring of vital signs [3]. The analysis of the
collected data is performed in real time or mainly utilizing offtime environments. Several existing systems are equipped with
a simple DSS to analyze the huge amount of collected data.
These systems have mainly been applied for the management of
chronic diseases, other than COPD, such as diabetes [4], cardiologic disease [5], and the stability of the lung-transplant recipients in pulmonary transplantations [6]. In the field of COPD,
there are recent studies that utilize mainly the patient’s physical
activity in the home environment together with heart rate, respiratory rate, or oxygen saturation measurements [7]–[12]. By
using a neural network to achieve identification of walking and
cycling motor tasks, researchers demonstrated that identification
of the exercise activities could be achieved with high reliability
up to 98% across subjects [7], [8]. However, a huge variance
was noticed, since the sensitivity of the neural network ranged
from 93% to 98% across subjects for misclassification equal to
5%. Chen [9] utilized a random forest classifier (RF) with 50
trees to examine an optimized activity monitoring system for
COPD patients that perform feature extraction on wearable sensors and resulted in a significant classification error to more than

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

732

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

15%. However, the quality of signals which are acquired from
the wearable devices or the data acquired through the patient’s
interface are critical parameters for the performance of the DSS
and cannot provide high performance in a wearable system. In
another research study [13], a supervised system with an RF has
been designed in order to promote the rehabilitation of patients
with the use of a DSS which observes and controls physical
ergometer training sessions of COPD patients with moderate
results. Newandee et al. [14] have studied COPD severity classification using principal component and cluster analysis on heart
rate variability parameters using heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration signals. Another study [12] focused on high risk
patient especially COPD disease at home by using several vital signs (SO2, CO2, Peak flow, Heart Rate, Blood Pressure,
temperature, and Breathe Rate) as an input vector to computeraided diagnosis system of reinforcement learning process based
on back propagation.
In this study, the intelligent part of the CHRONIOUS system,
which is a module embedded into mobile application, is presented. The data collection and the clinical protocol followed
are briefly presented, while the methodology for the data analysis and the moderately results are analytically described. The
proposed system is an eight-stage process (see Fig. 2) which is
based on the acquisition of several vital signs (respiration, electrocardiography (ECG), oxygen saturation) and data acquired
from wearable sensors (accelerometer, audio, ambient humidity,
and body and environmental temperature). Moreover, information acquired from questionnaires is stored in the database and
fused with all the acquired data.
Compared to other existing systems for COPD [2], [3], [8],
[9], the proposed system collects and analyzes data from the
patient continuously, is fully personalized, and provides realtime decision that can be used for the monitoring and treatment
of the patient. In this study, methodologies, techniques, and
mainly the results of the classification mechanism that have
been utilized in the latest version CHRONIOUS system are
presented. Thirty patients have participated in the pilot studies.
The correctly classified instances approximate 94% of the total
instances of the dataset.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. CHRONIOUS System
The CHRONIOUS system [15] consists of two primary functional blocks (see Fig. 1), the wearable platform and the SD, and
two secondary blocks, the home patient monitor (HPM) and the
external devices.
Several wearable sensors such as the acceleration sensor for
activity monitoring, the environmental sensor to control the
quality of patients’ living environment, and the audio sensor
to monitor patient’s lifestyle, which were presented in the first
column of Table I, have been utilized to measure vital signals (i.e., ECG, respiration) as well as other information. Additional external devices are integrated to measure blood glucose,
body weight, and blood pressure. The HPM is responsible for
displaying the data of the SD on a larger screen offering a
more comfortable and user-friendly way to the patients that are

Fig. 1.

Functional blocks of the platform and their connectivity.

interacting with the system. The SD used in the CHRONIOUS
system is a PDA. The module of the intelligent core, embedded
in the SD, is based on a hybrid classification system to evaluate
the patient’s health status. This part of the CHRONIOUS system
and the underlying techniques are analyzed in what follows.

B. Data Collection
Data from 30 patients suffering from COPD have been
recorded. The data collection took place in the patients’ house
and in two pilot hospitals: the Careggi Hospital in Italy and the
University Hospital of Barcelona in Spain.
The dataset consists of information acquired by three main
sources: 1) Sensors: signals, discrete, and continuous, acquired
by sensors that are attached to the wearable jacket and reported
in Table I with the mark “Wearable.” 2) External Devices: data
acquired from the body weight, blood pressure, and blood glucose devices. 3) Database: static information stored in the existing database (e.g., questionnaires, dietary, lifestyle, or demographics data). The questionnaires gather information regarding
patients’ lifestyle and mental status (e.g., “How many times do
you wake up during the night to pee?” “Is your appetite good?”
“Any nausea or vomiting?” “How do you feel?” “How is your
mood today?”). For the first approach of the training process,
clinicians provided an extra feature that specifies the assessment
of the abnormality of the situation and constitutes the class index
for the specific instance. The implemented system is designed
for classifying five levels of severity, but during the data collection phase, clinicians annotated the instances at two levels of
severity (Level1-mild and Level2-moderate), due to the limited
health conditions that were appeared. This dataset is composed
from the initial phase of the pilot studies, and thus, additional
data will enrich the current patient’s dataset. Moreover, for the
second approach of the training process, clinicians indicated the
level of the disease in the GOLD categorization [16] for each

BELLOS et al.: IDENTIFICATION OF COPD PATIENTS’ HEALTH STATUS USING AN INTELLIGENT SYSTEM

733

TABLE I
EXTRACTED FEATURES AND THEIR SOURCE

patient. The recruited patients were classified as stage III–IV
according to the GOLD guidelines.
During the data collection, the patient is observed by his/her
physician who attends all the data collection phase and is able
to terminate the procedure at any moment according to the
exclusive medical criteria.
In order to form the dataset and due to the heterogeneous
distribution of the dataset instances, the stratified tenfold cross
validation has been employed in order to randomize the records
and split the available instances into training and testing dataset
and to minimize any possible correlation between them.
C. Method
The developed approach consists of eight stages. In Fig. 2,
the flowchart of the method that was followed using the RF
classification method is displayed. A detailed description of
these stages is presented in the following sections.

Fig. 2.

Flowchart of the method.

E. Feature Extraction
All the extracted features as well as their source signal are
shown in Table I.
F. Heterogeneous Data Fusion
Features are extracted from various sensors’ acquired signals
and enter the heterogeneous data fusion component, which fuses
all available data acquired from different sources and in various
formats (i.e., XML data, binary, database stored information).

D. Preprocessing and Signal Denoising
ECG and respiration signals need to be preprocessed and
denoised in order to properly extract features [17]. The preprocessing of ECG involves the removal of the base line wander
noise and the high-frequency noise as well as the enforcement
of a QRS detection technique [18]. The respiration rate is calculated using the reference respiration signal, where a dominant
frequency detection algorithm is applied based on a short-time
Fourier transform. In our work, a hamming window is employed and a 60-s window size has been selected due to the
low-frequency nature of the respiration signal (<2 Hz).

G. Missing Values Replacement
In order to impute missing values, we rely on the fact that
the recorded data and information acquired from questionnaires
are from a specific subject. The methods that were investigated
are the list wise detection [19], mean/mode imputation [20], and
K-NN estimation [21]. The missing value imputation consists
of two subalgorithms which utilize the first-order Markov chain
model for each instance [22]: 1) most probable value estimation,
which uses the probability tables and estimates the most probable value at timestamp, and 2) parameter adaptation: the second

734

Fig. 3.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Flowchart of the hybrid classifier.

algorithm updates the conditional probability table P (qi |qi−1 )
for each record.
H. Feature Selection
Two different feature selection (FS) algorithms [23] are applied to identify the most important clinical-pathological information for individualized health status identification. These are
the gain ratio attribute evaluation (Gain) [24] and correlationbased feature subset selection (CFS) [25] methods. The importance of the features and the clinical parameters in the studied
disease is ranked and all the redundant information is removed.
The Gain is selected from the ranking methodology and the
CFS is selected from the correlation-based methodology. The
first algorithm evaluates the worth of an attribute by measuring the gain ratio with respect to the class, while the second
evaluates the worth of a subset of attributes by considering the
individual predictive ability of each feature along with the degree of redundancy between them. The features that are mostly
used by the system are pointed in Table I with asterisk and cross
in the case of the use of correction-based algorithm and gain,
respectively.
I. Hybrid Classification System
This stage of the method includes the development of the
DSS. The aim of the DSS is to classify the patient’s current
health status and provide the level of severity. The DSS component is integrated to a portable application running in the SD
in order to exploit the mobility and portability of the SD and
recognize and assess in real time, both indoors and outdoors,
health episodes. A hybrid system has been developed to classify
the constructed dataset (see Fig. 3), which combines an RF, a

support vector machine (SVM), and a rule-based system running in parallel. In order to conclude to the implementation of the
intelligent core module utilizing the hybrid classifier, we have
developed other classifiers both supervised and unsupervised,
and compared them according to their accuracy and efficiency
on the COPD constructed dataset.
The results of all the implemented classification schemes,
(i.e., artificial neural networks (aNNs) with one and two hidden layers and random tree decision trees) are presented in
Section III. The SVM and the RF were selected for the hybrid classifier implementation due to their better classification
accuracy. Moreover, clinicians provided some simple rules, indicating a threshold value for some attributes and the output
classification level of each rule. After the classification with the
hybrid system, those thresholds are updated by more complex
rules, where associations among various attributes are extracted
and indicated by the system.
The SVM has been designed for the categorization of the
patient’s health status in five levels of severity, and thus, the
classification problem is characterized as multiclass [26], [27].
We have utilized three kernels of the developed SVMs [28]:
Polynomial, sigmoid, and radial basis function (RBF), while
their respective parameters are optimized (C in RBF: 911.8,
Sigmoid: 178.9, Polynomial: 1015.9, 2nd degree of polynomial
kernel and gamma for RBF: 6.35, Sigmoid: 10.57, Polynomial:
19.53) with the differential evolution method [29].
Moreover, an RF [30] has been developed. The RF algorithm
consists of many decision trees where a new subset of samples
is selected from the dataset for the construction of each tree.
Initially, a subset m of the features is employed as the candidate
splitter of the node of the tree [31]. Then, data are sorted by
the values of the current feature, and a selection estimator is
utilized to split the tree nodes. Two instances of the RF have
been developed, one with the Gini index and one with the relief selection estimator, which are the widely used, to test their
accuracy [32]. In the implementation of the hybrid classifier,
the Gini index has been used. Gini index is a nonpurity method
to split properties for classes, binary, discrete, and other types
of fields. It was proposed by Breiman et al. in 1984 [10] and
improved by Shankar and Karypis [11] applying the Gini index in feature weighting of the categorization by centroid. The
samples that were not selected for the construction of the tree
are called out-of-bag (OOB) samples and form the test set of
the decision tree. OOB error is called the error of the tree using
these samples, and the average of the OOB errors of all trees
represents the generalization error of the forest. Once the forest
is constructed, a new sample runs through each tree in the forest and the tree selects the class that the sample belongs to by
applying a majority voting procedure. The predicted class is the
one that gains most of the votes (see Fig. 3).
Finally, the rule-based system constitutes of simple rules provided by clinicians to finally classify the patient’s health status
in different levels of severity. The respective thresholds of the
utilized attributes are presented in Table II, while the last column
of the table indicates the accuracy of each rule, if it is applied
independently to the dataset. However, it appears to have quite
low classification performances. This enhances the need for the

BELLOS et al.: IDENTIFICATION OF COPD PATIENTS’ HEALTH STATUS USING AN INTELLIGENT SYSTEM

TABLE II
RULES THAT ARE INDICATED BY CLINICIANS CHARACTERIZING FIVE LEVELS
OF SEVERITY AND THE ACHIEVED ACCURACY FOR EACH RULE APPLIED
INDEPENDENTLY

utilization of a more advanced classification system for the characterization of patient’s health status, like the proposed hybrid
classifier.
J. Rule Extraction
The implemented classical RF described in the previous stage
is transformed to rules. The weight of the leaf node is defined
as the number of training samples which are used to classify an
instance using the specific branch. The branches of the selected
trees, where the weight of the node is larger than 15, are selected
and converted to rules. The rules are created by combining the
information of the tree from the root node to the specific leaf
node.
A sample set of rules extracted from the hybrid classification
system is shown in Table III as well as the classified levels. The
rules have physical meaning, according to the medical knowledge and clinical experience, and have been validated by the
clinicians. It is important to underline that they provide a combination of the medical knowledge concerning the disease which
allows the physicians to diagnose the disease and its severity
with high specificity.
K. Severity Estimation
The parameters of the training are being passed to the mobile
application, and there a severity estimation procedure is performed. After the data instance construction and the triggering
of the hybrid classification system, the final level of severity is

735

TABLE III
SAMPLE SET OF RULES EXTRACTED FROM THE HYBRID CLASSIFIER

selected from a majority voting among the result of the three
classifiers, as depicted in Fig. 3.
An abnormal health episode is recognized by the severity
estimation component and actions (alerts, reminders, etc.,) are
formed and send to the appropriate recipients (patient, health
professional, call center, etc.). The system generates alerts in the
case of invalid medical data or if current activity and behavior
lay outside the well-established activity pattern and locomotion
behavior. The respective action depends upon the severity of
the episode and varies according to the identified level. When
the severity is being assessed to a low level (Level 1, Level 2,
Level 3), a simple recommendation or an alert is presented to
the patient’s HPM or/and SD. When the severity is assessed
to a higher level (Level 4, Level 5), a web service is triggered
in order to form an SMS or an e-mail and send the respective
notifications and alarms to the clinician.
III. RESULTS
In this section, the performance of each classification technique where the stratified tenfold cross validation is utilized
for splitting the dataset to training and testing is presented.
The different classifiers’ performances are presented and evaluated based on their scores as well as their limitations in the
specific application, while they are also compared to the hybrid classifier outcome. For the first approach of the training
process, clinicians specified the severity level of the current patient’s health status and thus assessed all the instances of the
dataset. As it is described in Section II-B, only two levels of
severity (mild, moderate) appeared during the data collection
and clinicians’ annotation phase. However, the developed hybrid classifier is designed to be compatible with five levels of
severity. Therefore, a one-against all approach was utilized to
the SVM development that is integrated in the hybrid classifier.
Two different SVMs have been developed: each one for each
level of assessment and the final result was chosen according to
outcome. Different kernels are utilized (i.e., RBF, sigmoid, and
polynomial) as well as different FS algorithms are applied in
order to have a clear view of the correct parameters that have to
be applied in the hybrid classifier.
In addition, besides SVM, the hybrid system utilizes an RF in
order to enhance the accuracy and extract useful rules that can

736

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TABLE IV
HIGHEST PERFORMANCE OF SEVERAL CLASSIFICATION METHODS UTILIZING
CLINICIANS’ ANNOTATION OF THE DATASET

TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE OF HYBRID CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS IN THE
CATEGORIZATION OF DISEASE LEVEL

TABLE VII
COMPARATIVE RESULTS FOR SEVERAL CLASSIFIERS UTILIZING THE DATASET
ANNOTATION ACCORDING TO THE GOLD INDEX

TABLE V
RESULTS OF THE APPLIED NEURAL NETWORK ONE HIDDEN LAYER AND
(TWO HIDDEN LAYERS)

easily be interpreted. The final implemented RF has 12 trees and
Gini estimator since it results in the best ratio accuracy to performance time. Furthermore, in order to compare the results and
optimize the performance of the RF, other parameters (i.e., evaluation measure, FS algorithm applied) have been investigated.
The performance of the different classification schemes,
which have been utilized apart from the SVM and RF, appeared to be quite good. For comparison reasons, it is useful
to summarize the highest classification performance for all the
different classification schemes implemented. In each case, the
categorization result is accompanied by an FS methodology
(see Table IV). Similar experiments have been performed using
the aNN, with the results presented in Table V, as well as the
random tree decision tree technique.
The proposed methodology involves a hybrid approach. The
hybrid parallel classifier (HPC) combines three classifiers in
parallel and uses the majority voting to result to the final classification level: 1) the implementation of the RF, 2) the implementation of the SVM, and 3) the implementation of a rule-based
system, where the rules are provided by clinicians and are shown
in Table II. Moreover, a hybrid serial classifier (HSC) that combines two classifiers serially has been implemented. In the last
case, an RF initially classifies the instances and the respective
assessment level is being used as an extra attribute in the SVM
classifier. The HPC is selected as the classification scheme since
it provides the highest accuracy (94.06% correctly classified instances instead of 93.50% of the HSC and below 90% of the
other classifiers developed and applied, while after applying the

CFS to the HPC the accuracy is increased to 94.39%). The SVM
with the RBF kernel appears the highest performance in both
hybrid classification systems.
The outcome of these hybrid classification systems are shown
in Table VI. Since there are two classification levels of the
disease, there are two sensitivities and two specificities for the
hybrid classifier, one for each output classification level (95.8%,
94.8% sensitivity and 61.5%, 66.7% specificity in Level 1 and
Level 2, respectively).
Besides the above classification process, where the COPD
dataset was annotated by the clinicians, another approach where
the methodology remains the same but the COPD dataset was
annotated according to GOLD guidelines was followed. Therefore, we had two classification levels since the recruited patients were in stage III–IV according to the GOLD guidelines.
The comparative results of all the implemented classifiers are
depicted in Table VII.
IV. DISCUSSION
The CHRONIOUS intelligent system provides an estimation
of the severity of the COPD patient’s condition and detects possible critical health episodes in real time as it is embedded in a
mobile application. The aim of the developed hybrid methodology is to limit the decision error, but increase the system
accuracy, concurrently.
In this study, we have obtained encouraging results of the performance and the accuracy of the implemented hybrid system.
Comparing the results of the implemented SVM classifiers, we
conclude that the performance of the RBF kernel provides the
highest classification result with an average value of the two
one-against-all SVMs 89%. The missing levels of the patient’s
data in the present dataset are a limitation of the system and

BELLOS et al.: IDENTIFICATION OF COPD PATIENTS’ HEALTH STATUS USING AN INTELLIGENT SYSTEM

should be taken into consideration in order to be enriched with
the rest of the severity levels.
As it is shown in Table VI, the categorization performance
of the hybrid system achieves 94% accuracy. However, its performance is higher using the CFS FS method, which indicates
the increased classification ability of the proposed system. Furthermore, the utilization of the unsupervised method of rule
generation scheme enriches the outcome with the extracted
rules that gives a justification about the classification results
defining the rules that have been triggered. The extracted rules
(applied in specific features) do not improve the overall performance of the system but mainly provides matching with clinical
knowledge and somehow etiology of the extracted classification
results.
Regarding the accuracy and the level of confidence that the
outcome of the CHRONIOUS systems could provide to the
clinicians, we note that it is not an absolute measure since the
amount of the collected data is limited and a more extensive
dataset is required for the testing of the DSS system in all
the levels of patient’s health status. However, the above results
represent an actual situation in which the hybrid system results
in an improved categorization of the patients’ condition. The
enrichment of the patient’s database with additional patient’s
data and more clinical conditions including samples belonging
to all categories will improve the accuracy and the clinicians’
confidence to the CHRONIOUS system.
Even that the most recent literature and the references to similar systems are limited, the comparison with similar studies
should be performed. Thus, as it is referred in Section I, the
judgment of this study with a similar system is difficult due to
differences in their main functionalities. The type of the system, the degree of supervision that patients’ need, the level of
patient’s diseases, the quality of the collected data, and the patients’ home environment are some of the factors that influence
greatly the system’s performance. In spite of the above, the
development of such multiple systems needs great care in its
evaluation and optimization for the improvement of its performance in multiple levels.
The innovation of the system lies on the fact that various
heterogeneous data are captured from different sources, fused
and analyzed with high classification accuracy. As mentioned
before, none of the existing systems for COPD classification
combine all the heterogeneous information reported in Table I.
The large number of data and the heterogeneity of the attributes
that are utilized in our work make the system adaptable to the
needs of several diseases, increasing the number of patients that
could gain from it. Moreover, the developed system is portable
and all algorithms have been implemented in C#. The classifiers
which have been developed and the HPC are running in the smart
device (portable PDA) and in combination with the jacket and
the wearable platform allow monitoring of the patient’s health
status both indoors and outdoors providing real-time assessment
of the severity of the health status. Finally, the generated rules
have been trained using datasets gathered from patients suffering
from COPD, resulting to a disease-specific system that could
enrich the medical knowledge or insert new parameters under
consideration.

737

V. CONCLUSION
The CHRONIOUS system offers an effective platform for the
satisfaction of the clinical and the patient’s needs in the area of
early diagnosis of patient’s health status. The data analysis and
fusion component fuses all acquired data and forms a multidimensional vector to feed the implemented hybrid classification
system, triggering the decision making phase. The intelligent
system offers an innovative and a completely portable system
aiming at the effective management of the health status of the
patients suffering from COPD both indoors and outdoors.
The proposed hybrid methodology achieves increased classification performance for the real COPD patient’s recordings
providing an accurate categorization of health status of them.
The level of precision of the hybrid system as well as the evaluation of the extracted rules by the experts enhances the possibility
of future evolution and clinical use.
As for the future work, the employment of larger datasets,
with annotated instances to all five severity levels of the initial
approach, will improve the performance of the CHRONIOUS
system and enhance the validation procedure.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Papadopoulos, D. I. Fotiadis, M. Lawo, F. Ciancitto, C. Podolak,
R. L. Dellaca, G. Munaro, and R. Rosso, “CHRONIOUS: A wearable
system for the management of chronic disease,” presented at the 9th Int.
Conf. Inf. Technol. Appl. Biomed., Larnaca, Cyprus, 2009, Paper Th.1.3.4.
[2] S. McLean, U. Nurmatov, J. Liu, C. Pagliari, J. Car, and A. Sheikh, “Telehealthcare for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (review),” Cochrane
Database Syst. Rev., no. 7 , Jul. 6, 2011.
[3] M. Chen, S. Gonzalez, A. Vasilakos, H. Cao, and V. Leung, “Body area
networks: A survey,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 16, pp. 171–193, 2011.
[4] R. Bellazzi, C. Larizza, S. Montani, A. Riva, M. Stefanelli, and
J. Tuominen, “A telemedicine support for diabetes management: The
T-IDDM project,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 69, pp. 147–
161, Aug. 2002.
[5] J.-L. Baldinger, J. Boudy, B. Dorizzi, J.-P. Levrey, R. Andreao, C. Perpère,
F. Delavault, F. Rocaries, C. Dietrich, and A. Lacombe, “Tele-surveillance
system for patient at home: The MEDIVILLE system,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Comput. Helping People with Special Needs, 2004, vol. 3118, pp. 400–
407.
[6] B. C. Karl, S. M. Finkelstein, and W. N. Robiner, “The design of an
Internet-based system to maintain home monitoring adherence by lung
transplant recipients,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 66–76, Jan. 2006.
[7] D. M. Sherrill, M. L. Moy, J. J. Reilly, and P. Bonato, “Objective field
assessment of exercise capacity in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,”
presented at the 15th Annu. Congr. Int. Soc. Electrophysiol. Kinesiol.,
Boston, MA, USA, 2004.
[8] M. L. Moy, D. M. Sherrill, P. Bonato, and J. J. Reilly, “Monitoring cumulative free-living exercise in COPD,” presented at Amer. Thoracic Soc.
2004, Orlando, FL, USA, 2004.
[9] B. Chen, S. Patel, L. D. Toffola, and P. Bonato, “Long-term monitoring
of COPD using wearable sensors,” presented at the 2nd Conf. Wireless
Health, San Diego, CA, USA, Oct. 10–13, 2011.
[10] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, C. J. Stone, and R. Olshen, Classification and
Regression Trees. Monterey, CA, USA: Wadsworth, 1984.
[11] S. Shankar and G. Karypis, “A feature weight adjustment algorithm for
document classification,” in Proc. SIGKDD Workshop Text Mining, 2000,
pp. 55–72.
[12] I. Jung and G.-N. Wang, “User pattern learning algorithm based MDSS
framework under ubiquitous,” Proc. World Acad. Sci., Eng. Technol.,
vol. 26, pp. 661–665, Dec. 2007.
[13] B. Song, K. H. Wolf, M. Gietzelt, A. L. Scharaa, U. Tegtbur, R. Haux, and
M. Marschollek, “Decision support for teletraining of COPD patients,”
Methods Inf. Med., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 96–102, 2010.
[14] D. A. Newandee, S. S. Reisman, M. N. Bartels, and R. E. De Meersman, “COPD severity classification using principal component and cluster

738

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

analysis on HRV parameters,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu., Proc. Bioeng.
Conf., Mar. 2003, pp. 134–135.
C. Bellos, A. Papadopoulos, R. Rosso, and D. I. Fotiadis, “CHRONIOUS:
A wearable platform for monitoring and management of patients with
chronic disease,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2011, pp. 864–867.
(2013, Oct.). Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2008, revised 2011, [Online]. Available: http://www.
goldcopd.org/uploads/ users/files/GOLD_Report_2011_Feb21.pdf
C. Bellos, A. Papadopoulos, R. Rosso, and D. I. Fotiadis, “Extraction and
Analysis of features acquired by wearable sensors network,” in Proc. 10th
IEEE Int. Inf. Technol. Appl. Biomed., Corfu, Greece, Nov. 2–5, 2010,
pp. 1–5.
I. Fatimah, N. A. Osman, J. Usman, and N. A. Kadri, “Performance evaluation of Coifman wavelet for ECG signal denoising,” in Proc. Int. Fed.
Med. Biol. Eng., 2007, pp. 419–422.
J. L. Peugh and C. K. Enders, “Missing data in educational research: A
review of reporting practices and suggestions for improvement,” Rev.
Educ. Res., vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 525–556, 2004.
S. van Buuren, “Multiple imputation of discrete and continuous data by
fully conditional specification,” Stat. Methods Med. Res., vol. 16, pp. 219–
242, 2007.
W. Ling and F. Dong-Mei, “Estimation of missing values using a weighted
K-nearest neighbors algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Environ. Sci. Inf. Appl.
Technol., 2009, vol. 3, pp. 660–663.
W. Holmes Finch, “Imputation methods for missing categorical questionnaire data: A comparison of approaches,” J. Data Sci., vol. 8, pp. 361–378,
2010.
D. Taniar, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Technologies (Advances in Data Warehousing and Mining), vol. 2. Hershey, PA, USA:
IGI Global, 2007.
J. R. Quinlan, C4.5 Programs for Machine Learning. San Mateo, CA,
USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1994, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 235–240.
A. G. Karegowda and M. A. Jayaram, “Cascading GA & CFS for feature
subset selection in medial data mining,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Adv. Comput.
Conf., Patiala, India, Mar. 6–7, 2009, pp. 1428–1431.
C. Hsu and C. Lin, “A comparison of methods for multiclass support
vector machines,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 415–425,
Mar. 2002.
M. Kumar and M. Gopal, “Reduced one-against-all method for multiclass
SVM classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, pp. 14238–14248, 2011.
N. E. Ayat, M. Cheriet, and C. Y. Suen, “Automatic model selection for
the optimization of SVM kernels,” Pattern Recog., vol. 38, pp. 1733–1745,
2005.
M. M. Efrén and V. R. Jesús, “A comparative study of differential evolution variants for global optimization,” in Proc. Genetic Evol. Comput.
Conf., 2006, pp. 485–492.
L. Brieman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learning J., vol. 45, pp. 5–32,
2001.
E. E. Tripoliti, D. I. Fotiadis, M. Argyropoulou, and G. Manis, “A six
stage approach for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease based on fMRI
data,” J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 43, pp. 307–320, 2010.
L. Rokach and O. Maimon, “Data mining with decision trees,” Series
Mach. Perception Artificial Intell., vol. 69, pp. 71–71, 2008.

Christos C. Bellos received the Diploma degree
in electrical and computer engineering from the
National Technical University of Athens, Athens,
Greece, in 2006.
He has published 20 scientific papers on international conferences and achieved experience on software engineering principles, like advanced modeling
with UML, entity relationship modeling, and relational database design. He has gained professional experience on software development, web applications,
and mobile development. He has more than five years
of professional experience on data fusion, feature extraction, and data analysis
methodologies as well as decision support systems. He is also a member of the research group of the “Foundation for Research and Technology—Hellas/Institute
of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Department of Biomedical Research”
and has participated in several R&D European and National funded projects.

Athanasios Papadopoulos received the degree in
physics from the Department of Physics, University
of Patras, Patras, Greece, in 1994. He received the
M.Sc. degree in medical physics from the University
of Surrey, Surrey, U.K., and the Ph.D. degree from
the Department of Medical Physics, Medical School,
University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, in 2006.
He is serving as a Radiation Physicist in the Department of Nuclear medicine, University Hospital
of Ioannina, Greece. He is also a member of the research group of the “Foundation for Research and
Technology—Hellas/Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Department of Biomedical Research” and has participated in several R&D funded
projects. He is the coeditor and the author of a book and two book chapters,
respectively, and is the author of several papers in scientific journals and international conference proceedings. His major research interests include medical
image processing, medical decision support, computer-aided detection and diagnosis, machine learning, and data mining.

Roberto Rosso was born on March 30, 1955. He received the M.Sc. degree (first class) in electronic engineering from the University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
He joined TESAN SpA, Vicenza, Italy, in 2000,
where his main responsibilities cover the whole process of developing innovative services for TESAN
customers (local healthcare & social service authorities). He is also responsible for the company’s R&D
program, which focuses on the integration of portable
medical devices within TESAN ICT infrastructure,
tailoring hardware, and software developments to the
specific service needs of the end users and customer’s organizations. He was
the coordinator of Chronious ICT FP7 project and actually he is coordinator of
Chromed FP7 Health project.

Dimitrios I. Fotiadis (SM’06) received the diploma
degree in chemical engineering from the National
Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece, in
1985, and the Ph.D. degree in chemical engineering
and materials science from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 1990.
He is currently a Professor of Biomedical Engineering in the Department of Materials Science
and Engineering, University of Ioannina, Ioannina,
Greece, where he is also the Director of the Unit
of Medical Technology and Intelligent Information
Systems, and is also an Affiliated Member of Foundation for Research and
Technology—Hellas, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Dept.
of Biomedical Research. He was a Visiting Researcher at the RWTH, Aachen,
Germany, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston. He has coordinated and participated in several R&D funded projects. He is the author
or coauthor of more than 150 papers in scientific journals, 300 papers in peerreviewed conference proceedings, and more than 30 chapters in books. He is
also the editor or coeditor of 16 books. He is a member of IEEE Technical
Committee of information Technology in Healthcare and an Associate Editor
in the journal IEEE Biomedical and Health Informatics. His research interests
include modeling of human tissues and organs, intelligent wearable devices for
automated diagnosis, and bioinformatics.

