1560

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Autoregressive Hidden Markov Models for the Early
Detection of Neonatal Sepsis
Ioan Stanculescu, Christopher K. I. Williams, and Yvonne Freer

Abstract—Late onset neonatal sepsis is one of the major clinical
concerns when premature babies receive intensive care. Current
practice relies on slow laboratory testing of blood cultures for diagnosis. A valuable research question is whether sepsis can be
reliably detected before the blood sample is taken. This paper investigates the extent to which physiological events observed in the
patient’s monitoring traces could be used for the early detection
of neonatal sepsis. We model the distribution of these events with
an autoregressive hidden Markov model (AR-HMM). Both learning and inference carefully use domain knowledge to extract the
baby’s true physiology from the monitoring data. Our model can
produce real-time predictions about the onset of the infection and
also handles missing data. We evaluate the effectiveness of the
AR-HMM for sepsis detection on a dataset collected from the
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh.
Index Terms—Autoregressive hidden Markov model (ARHMM), intensive care, neonatal sepsis, real-time inference.

I. INTRODUCTION
ATE onset neonatal sepsis is a bloodstream infection, usually bacterial, generally occurring after the third day of life.
Its onset is a major cause of mortality, lifelong neurodisability,
and increased health care costs [1]. Estimates show that 10% of
all neonates and 25% of very low birth weight babies (VLBW,
<1500 g birth weight) are affected [2], [3]. This number rises
to 50% for extremely preterm infants [1].
The major challenge in successfully treating septic babies
is making the diagnosis of infection in the first place. Early
signs are subtle and yet it is at this stage that treatment will
be effective. A deterioration of the baby’s condition over the
course of a few hours is a strong symptom for neonatal sepsis,
and prompts clinicians to take a blood sample for laboratory
testing. However, laboratory culture results can take up to a day
before becoming available. Because of the dangers of delaying
treatment, antibiotic therapy is usually started at the same time
as taking the blood sample. However, applying low thresholds

L

Manuscript received July 7, 2013; revised October 23, 2013; accepted November 30, 2013. Date of publication December 11, 2013; date of current version
September 2, 2014. The work of Ioan Stanculescu was supported by the Scottish
Informatics and Computer Science Alliance and the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council.
I. Stanculescu and C. K. I. Williams are with the School of Informatics,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, U.K. (e-mail: i.a.stanculescu@
sms.ed.ac.uk; c.k.i.williams@ed.ac.uk).
Y. Freer is with the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Simpson Centre for Reproductive Health, The Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SA,
U.K. (e-mail: Yvonne.Freer@nhslothian.scot.nhs.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2294692

in suspecting sepsis results in a high number of patients being
treated unnecessarily for each true case [4]. Thus, if achievable,
a reliable early detection of sepsis based on monitoring data
would be of great value.
In modern Neonatal Intensive Care Units (NICUs), the
patient’s vital signs are continuously monitored and often
recorded. In this paper, we exclusively rely on the information
contained in these traces for building a sepsis detection system. Clinical events informative of the baby’s health condition,
such as bradycardias or oxygen desaturations, can be associated
with patterns in the monitoring data (see Fig. 1 and Table I).
However, accurately detecting these events is a nontrivial task
and the problem of high false alarm rates is well known [5]. A
solution proposed by Quinn et al. [6] is the factorial switching
linear dynamical system (FSLDS), which is closely related to
other work generalizing state-space models [7], [8]. The FSLDS
is shown to produce accurate real-time inferences about clinical
events affecting NICU data.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic approach for monitoring the evolution of baby-generated clinical events. An increased
incidence of such events is a symptom of sepsis [1]. Starting
from this hypothesis, we study the amount of predictive information about neonatal sepsis that can be extracted from the distribution of clinical events. First, using domain knowledge, we
define and annotate a set of clinical events. Our main contribution is the formulation of sepsis detection as inference and learning in an autoregressive hidden Markov model (AR-HMM). In
addition, we show how exact inference can be obtained in the
presence of missing data. The effectiveness of the method is
tested both on prediction of sepsis/normality on a second-bysecond basis, and in terms of detected sepsis episodes. We also
study the relevance of individual clinical event streams.
Griffin, Moorman et al. [9], [10] have previously proposed
using heart rate data to discriminate sepsis (positive culture)
and sepsis-like (negative culture) babies pooled together, from
a control group (no culture). They observed a positive skew
in the interbeat (RR) interval histograms in the hours before
the clinical suspicion of sepsis, and an absence of skew during normal periods. This finding was quantified by a set of
summary statistics referred to as the heart rate characteristics
(HRC). The HRC are then fed to a logistic regression classifier.
A larger dataset was employed for demonstrating that HRC add
predictive information to a classifier using only demographic
features to discriminate sepsis and sepsis-like illness patients
from controls [4]. More precisely, they showed an increase in
area under ROC curve (AUC) from 0.72 to 0.77 on a test set. In
recent work [11], they conducted a clinical trial which showed
that HRC monitoring can decrease mortality. However, this

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

STANCULESCU et al.: AUTOREGRESSIVE HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS FOR THE EARLY DETECTION OF NEONATAL SEPSIS

1561

Fig. 1. Examples of clinical events affecting neonatal monitoring data. In panel (a), several instances of bradycardia (“BR”) and mini-bradycardia (“MB”) can
be seen on the ECG heart rate trace (“HR”). Around time t = 1450, a sudden fall in both the core and peripheral temperatures (“TC” and “TP”) signals the start of
a handling (“HD”) event. Note that physiological events occurring during handling episodes are not used for sepsis detection. Panel (b) shows several instances of
physiological events. Since the pulse oximeter heart rate trace (“PR”) agrees with the HR trace, the two instances of desaturation (“DS”) annotated on the oxygen
saturation channel (“SO”) are genuine events.
TABLE I
EXHAUSTIVE LIST OF CLINICAL EVENTS MONITORED FOR DETECTING NEONATAL SEPSIS

approach does not fully exploit the sequential nature of the monitoring data, nor does it explore the use of other physiological
channels for sepsis detection.
A novel case definition for neonatal bloodstream infection
is introduced in Modi et al. [1]. This study is motivated by
statistics saying that around two-thirds of the positive cultures
are skin commensals or mixed growth. First, they identify ten
binary clinical signs predictive of a positive blood culture. Then,
the number of present clinical signs is used to predict a positive
blood culture. Based on the classification results, a new case
definition is proposed: a baby is infected if either a recognized
pathogen is found or if the test yields mixed growth or skin
commensal and ≥ 3 clinical signs are present. Note that this
study still relies on laboratory results and thus is not being
directed toward an earlier detection of the infection.
The Artemis system [12], a stream computing project for
neonatal intensive care sets the detection of sepsis as one of its
primary objectives. Their method introduces patient agents able
to perform multidimensional temporal abstraction on monitoring data [13]. In [14], they propose the use of both heart rate and
respiratory rate variabilities for real-time sepsis detection. The
latter is intended to help discriminate sepsis from confounding

factors such as surgery or narcotics. A performance evaluation
of this approach is yet to be published.
The time-series model we use for the early detection of neonatal sepsis is described in Section II. Inference in the presence
of missing data is discussed and we also explain how durations
can be explicitly modeled. Section III begins by discussing the
diagnosis of neonatal sepsis. We then describe the data we have
collected and the set of clinical events that affects it. We follow
by showing how the model introduced in the previous section is
trained. The results are presented and analyzed in Section IV.
We conclude and highlight the directions of future research in
Section V.

II. HIDDEN STATE MODELS
The family of hidden Markov models (HMMs) is a flexible
tool for generative probabilistic modeling of sequential data.
It is often employed solving for sequential classification tasks.
Its applicability has been long proven in areas such as speech
recognition [15], natural language processing [16], biological
sequence analysis [17], or electrocardiography [18], [19]. For

1562

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014


and can take one of L = Ss=1 L(s) settings. The events are
assumed to be conditionally independent given the state
p(xt | xt−1 , zt ) =

S




(s)  (s)
p xt xt−1 , zt .
s=1

Fig. 2. DAG of the AR-HMM for sepsis detection. Squares indicate discrete
variables and shaded nodes are observed.

sepsis modeling, we restrict the discussion to a particular type
of HMM: the autoregressive HMM.

Each of the events is modeled as a Markov chain with parameters
(s)
(s)
{φl|k j , πl|j }. Importantly, clinical event streams tend to have
long runs in the same setting. This motivates our preference
for an AR-HMM over a standard HMM, where observations
are correlated only through the hidden variables. Notice that, in
general, clinical events are not marginally independent.

A. Autoregressive HMM
An AR-HMM enhances the HMM architecture by introducing a direct stochastic dependence between observations [20],
[21]. It is designed to explicitly model the (possibly long range)
correlations in sequential data. We first give a brief description
of the model and then explain how it can be applied for neonatal
sepsis detection.
Like the HMM, the AR-HMM models two types of variables:
hidden discrete states zt and observations xt . In an HMM, the
current observation is independent of all the other observations
given the current state. Consequently, there is no explicit constraint on HMM samples to be smooth. The AR-HMM encourages correlation among observations by adding direct dependencies between them. Samples drawn from an AR-HMM are
thus smoother than samples from an HMM, usually making the
former a better generative model in time-series problems.
The hidden states of an AR-HMM can take one of J values and are organized as a first-order Markov chain with parameters θj |i = p(zt = j|zt−1 = i) and πj = p(z1 = j). Observations in the general AR-HMM can be continuous, but
for our purposes, we restrict the discussion to the discrete
case. Furthermore, we introduce direct dependencies only between consecutive observations. The corresponding directed
acyclic graph (DAG) is shown in Fig. 2. Conditioned on the
state zt , the emission process is again a first-order Markov
chain parameterized by φl|k j = p(xt = l|xt−1 = k, zt = j) and
πl|j = p(x1 = l|z1 = j). The joint probability distribution for a
sequence of length T is
p(z1:T , x1:T ) = πz 1 πx 1 |z 1

T


θz t |z t −1 φx t |x t −1 z t ,

(1)

t=2

where we have employed the notational convention at 0 :t 1 
at 0 , at 0 +1 , . . . , at 1 .
For neonatal condition monitoring, the hidden state variables
are modeling the state of the infection. At each time step t, we
(1)
(2)
(S )
are observing a set of S clinical events xt , xt , . . . , xt . For
(s)
each of them, xt denotes which of its possible L(s) settings
clinical event s takes on at time t. Thus, AR-HMM observations
are given by the cross product
(1)

xt = xt

(2)

⊗ xt

(S )

⊗ · · · ⊗ xt

B. Inference
For real-time prediction, we are interested in inferring the
presence of neonatal sepsis from the patient’s historical data
up to a query time. Technically, this corresponds to computing
the filtering distribution p(zt |x1:t ). It is also useful to study
if observing future data improves the filtering prediction. This
means computing the smoothing distribution p(zt |x1:T ). The
latter is also useful for unsupervised parameter estimation. We
first show how the forward–backward algorithm [15] is applied
for AR-HMM inference. Then, we explain how we extend it to
address the problem of missing data.
The forward–backward algorithm is a message passing routine which exploits conditional independence relationships for
doing exact inference in HMMs. In the AR-HMM, the past
observations are independent of the future observations given
both the current state and the current observation: xt 0 ⊥⊥
xt 1 |zt , xt , ∀t0 , t1 t0 < t < t1 . Using this, we can write
p(zt , x1:T ) = p(zt , x1:t )p(xt+1:T |zt , x1:t )
= p(zt , x1:t )p(xt+1:T |zt , xt )
= α(zt )β(zt ),

(2)

where we have defined the forward message α(zt )  p(zt , x1:t )
and the backward message β(zt )  p(xt+1:T |zt , xt ). The messages can be computed recursively in a forward pass for α and
in a backward pass for β [20], [21]. When the likelihoods are
precomputed, the total computational cost is O(T J 2 ).
If is often the case that we do not have access to observations at
all-time steps. We make a missing at random (MAR) assumption
[22], which means there is no need to explicitly model the
missing data mechanism. For sepsis modeling, missing data
issues mainly occur when the patient is being handled by clinical
staff. This will be detailed in Section III-C.
One advantage of generative probabilistic models is that they
can handle missing data in a principled way by marginalization.
For a sequence of length T , let V be the set of time steps for
which we have observations. We define xvt0 :t 1 = {xt |t0 ≤ t ≤
t1 , t ∈ V} as the set of observed variables between t0 and t1 .
Using this notation, xv1:T is the set of observed variables for the
given sequence. Similarly, let M = {1 : T } \ V and xm
1:T be
the set of missing observations. The goal of filtering becomes

STANCULESCU et al.: AUTOREGRESSIVE HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS FOR THE EARLY DETECTION OF NEONATAL SEPSIS

Fig. 3. Topology giving the transition matrix for the new hidden state variables
in an explicit duration model with τ 0 = 4.

computing
p(zt |xv1:t ) =



v
p(zt , xm
1:t |x1:t ),

xm
1 :t

while for smoothing we want

v
p(zt , xm
p(zt |xv1:T ) =
1:T |x1:T ).
xm
1 :T

In the AR-HMM, such marginalizations need to consider the
direct dependencies between consecutive observations. For instance, if t − 1 ∈ M, then the forward message at time t must
take into account the uncertainty about the unobserved quantity xm
t−1 . Our solution is a simple extension of AR-HMM
inference. For t ∈ M only, we now compute α(zt , xm
t )
v
m
v
m
,
x
)
and
β(z
,
x
)
=
p(x
|z
,
x
).
A
full
exp(zt , xm
t
t
t
t
t
1:t
t+1:T
planation is given in the Appendix. After recursively obtaining
these messages the desired inference results for
 t ∈ M are obtained by marginalization (e.g., p(zt , xv1:t ) = x mt α(zt , xm
t )).
If |V| = Tv and |M| = Tm , then the computational expense increases to O(Tv J 2 + Tm J 2 L3 ). Since we expect the amount of
missing data to be relatively small compared to the size of the
dataset, the increase will be modest.
For neonatal condition monitoring the observations are a
cross-product of discrete variables (see Section II-A). Missing
data can independently occur for each of the monitored events.
This means that at certain time steps only some dimensions of xt
are observed. We only need to marginalize over the remaining
ones. Extending the missing data inference routine for this case
was straightforward.
In practice, forward and backward messages defined as above
exponentially decay to zero. For preventing this, we have derived
a scaled version of the recursions [23]. It follows the same
reasoning as shown in [24, Sec. 13.2.4] for the HMM.
C. Explicit Duration Modeling
HMM-like models make the implicit assumption that the time
spent in each hidden state follows a geometric distribution. For
sepsis monitoring, we expect episodes of infection to last for
at least a few hours. Thus, assuming a geometric distribution
for their duration is likely to be a performance limiting factor.
There is a large body of work on methods that explicitly model
the time spent in each regime (e.g., [15] and [25]).
One solution discussed in [25] and [26] is to replace each
state variable with τ0 copies of itself. Each copy shares the
same emission distribution as the original variable. Transitioning between the new states is given by the topology exemplified
in Fig. 3. The distribution of staying times becomes
	


τ −1
p(τ |p, τ0 ) =
(3)
pτ −τ 0 (1 − p)τ 0 .
τ0 − 1

1563

It is defined for τ ≥ τ0 and is equivalent to the negative binomial
distribution [26]. Its mean and variance are E[τ ] = τ0 /1 − p
and V ar[τ ] = pτ0 /(1 − p)2 , respectively. Inference in the explicit duration AR-HMM shares the same routines with a standard AR-HMM. Taking advantage of the state topology constraints explained earlier, the cost of the forward–backward
algorithm becomes O(T J(J + 2(τ0 − 1))).
III. METHODS
A. Neonatal Sepsis Diagnosis
The result of the blood culture is widely regarded as the
“gold standard” for diagnosing neonatal sepsis. Nevertheless,
it is acknowledged that the test can have a poor accuracy [1],
[4], [9]. First, small sample volumes and antibiotic therapy can
give false-negative results [1]. Estimates show that 30% to 40%
of sepsis cases have negative blood tests [9]. Second, positive
blood cultures do not always imply infection. The reason is that
blood samples often contain contaminants [1].
In the NICU at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, the diagnosis method follows the work of Modi et al. [1]. Positive cultures
are classified as either recognized pathogens, mixed growth, or
skin commensal. For cultures in the first category, clinicians are
certain that the patient is infected and the diagnosis is “proven
sepsis”. The latter two categories cannot distinguish true infection from sample contamination and, if corroborated with
the presence of ≥ 3 clinical signs, the diagnosis is recorded as
“suspected” sepsis.
B. Neonatal Monitoring Data
We have collected anonymized data from VLBW babies admitted at the NICU in the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh between
2008 and 2011. All the analyzed patients were intrinsically unstable, and thus nursed in incubators. The data consists exclusively of physiological monitoring channels sampled once per
second. These are: heart rate, core and peripheral temperatures
(“TC” and “TP”) and oxygen saturation (“SO”). Heart rate measurements are available from two sources: ECG leads (“HR”)
and pulse oximeter (“PR”). Our samples are monitoring windows with a duration of 30 h and fall into one of the following
two categories: the sepsis group or the control group. Sepsis
samples have been selected such that the time the positive blood
sample was taken occurs precisely 24 h after the start of the
window.
For the sepsis group, we first considered monitoring all babies
who had at least one blood sample taken for culture analysis.
The group was refined to include only samples where the culture
grew organisms ordinarily considered as pathogenic leading to
a diagnosis of “proven sepsis.” This was 10% of the original
group, as 65% of the samples were negative, and the remaining
25% were allocated to either the mixed growth or skin commensal categories. For the control group, there was no suspicion of
sepsis in a consecutive three-day period around the selected
intervals and no blood sample had been analyzed.
In order to investigate the utility of multichannel data for
sepsis detection, we selected babies for which all the channels

1564

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

above were present. These are needed for defining the events
given in Table I. Since there was no systematic reason for the absence of any of these five channels, this is an unbiased selection
criterion. During this step, 20% of the sepsis samples were removed. Finally, in some cases, the bedside devices consistently
failed to record measurements (or probes were displaced) for
extended periods of time. We placed a data availability threshold of 50% for all channels. This resulted in a reduction from
26 to 18 sepsis samples.
Under the same data availability criteria, we selected sufficient control samples to provide an equal amount of data to the
sepsis group. In summary, we are studying 36 samples divided
as follows:
1) the sepsis group: 18 samples obtained from 18 different
patients, mean gestation 27.2 weeks (SD = 1.5), mean
birth weight 873 g (SD = 256), and mean age 14.5 days
(SD = 8.5);
2) the control group: 18 samples obtained by taking two
samples from each of nine different patients,1 mean gestation 26.7 weeks (SD = 1.7), mean birth weight 837 g
(SD = 139), and mean age 15.2 days (SD = 14.0).
Three patients have samples in both sepsis and control groups,
which means we are analyzing a total of 24 different neonates.
C. Clinical Events for Sepsis Detection
This study is centered around the idea that the onset of neonatal sepsis is associated with an increase in clinically significant
events. In the following, we summarize the knowledge about
NICU monitoring data used for defining and annotating these
events. We then discuss some summary results of the annotation
process.
It is useful to classify clinical events into physiological events
and artifactual events. During physiological events, the monitoring traces reflect the true values of the baby’s vital signs.
Artifactual events occur when the traces are corrupted by faults
with the monitoring equipment and do not reflect the true state
of the patient. Table I gives the list of clinical events we use,
together with their brief descriptions. This list is adapted from
the one proposed in [6] for the purposes of this study. Here, we
chose not to monitor blood sampling episodes, because of the
small amount of blood pressure data available. Several examples
of clinical events are shown in Fig. 1. Note that the inclusion
of the X-factor [6] makes the list exhaustively cover all the patterns appearing in the monitoring data. Since the X-factor can
be either physiological or artifactual, it cannot be directly used
for inferring the patient’s state of health.
For all the monitoring data in our study, expert annotations
were initially obtained for bradycardia, desaturation, handling,
and for the X-factor. In subsequent data exploration, the Xfactor annotations were inspected for any recurring patterns
potentially predictive of sepsis. Annotators found low-amplitude
bradycardia-like patterns to display a higher incidence in the
hours before the positive test [see Fig. 4(c)]. These would often
1 One control sample initially selected has been discarded due to an atypical oxygen saturation trace. This was most likely caused by a fault with the
monitoring equipment. The sample was readily classified as an outlier.

TABLE II
CLINICAL EVENT INCIDENCE (NUMBER OF EVENTS), TOTAL AND MEDIAN
DURATIONS FOR THE SEPSIS/CONTROL GROUPS

appear in clusters and close to significant drops in the heart rate.
They were not initially annotated as bradycardias because they
did not fall into our standard working definition (see Table I).
We chose to separately define these events as mini-bradycardias,
bradycardias with a drop of 15 to 30 bpm. Thus, annotations for
mini-bradycardias were a later addition.
Less clinical expertise is required for annotating the remaining two events, probe dropouts, and oximeter errors. Thus, these
artifactual events were handled automatically. The monitoring
equipment already marks probe dropouts by recording the value
0. Dropout statistics depend on the channels affected by each
clinical event, but on average we lack monitoring data for 2%
of the time. Oximeter errors are characterized by a disagreement between the two heart rate channels (see Table I). We first
aligned “HR” traces with respect to the “PR” ones by maximizing their cross-correlation. An HMM finding periods of
oximeter error was then applied to the difference between the
aligned “HR” and “PR.” We tested this procedure by comparing
it against expert annotations obtained for a subset of our data.
An AUC of 0.96 obtained by cross-validation encouraged us to
apply the method on the whole dataset.
We frequently observe instances of the other physiological events during handling episodes. An example is shown in
Fig. 1(a). In such cases, we cannot distinguish whether the events
are caused by the baby’s true state of health or because an extremely fragile patient is being handled by staff. Our solution
is to not use these instances for sepsis detection. Consequently,
we rely exclusively on physiological events happening outside
handling episodes. Such instances can be confidently classified
as being baby generated.
Table II summarizes the output of the data annotation process.
Baby-generated physiological events display a higher incidence
in the sepsis group. Also, the amount of patient handling does
not differ much between the two groups. The same conclusion
can be drawn about the numbers of both X episodes and oximeter
errors.
A visualization of the time evolution of the number of babygenerated physiological events is shown in Fig. 4. The samples in the sepsis group are naturally aligned using the time of
the positive blood test. Importantly, labels for baby-generated
physiological events cannot be provided for all the data. First,

STANCULESCU et al.: AUTOREGRESSIVE HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS FOR THE EARLY DETECTION OF NEONATAL SEPSIS

1565

Fig. 4. Time evolution of the median weighted number of baby-generated physiological events for both sepsis and control groups. The data have been aligned
such that for babies in the sepsis group 0 denotes the time the positive blood sample was taken. The counts are computed hourly and summarize the preceding
3-h period. The error bars mark the first and third quartiles. We have used a small offset between the two patient groups to improve readability. (a) Bradycardia.
(b) Desaturation. (c) Mini-Bradycardia.

as already explained, handling periods were discarded. Second,
during probe dropouts, there is no access to the true values of the
baby’s vital signs and consequently it is impossible to provide
annotations. Similarly, during oximeter error events one cannot
annotate desaturations. The counts shown have been weighted
according to this information. More precisely, if p% of a monitoring interval could be annotated, the count for that interval
was multiplied by 100/p. For the sepsis group, there is an increase in baby-generated bradycardias and mini-bradycardias
in the 9 h before the positive test. Desaturations are generally
more present in the sepsis group, but seem to be less informative
about the onset of the infection.
These findings can be associated with the work of Griffin,
Moorman et al. [9], [10]. We do not have access to RR data, but
a positive skew in the RR histograms translates into a negative
skew of “HR” data, due to the inverse relationship between intervals and frequencies. By computing the sample skewness of
the “HR” channel, we found that indeed lower values of skewness often characterize the hours before the positive blood test.
However, by removing the bradycardias and mini-bradycardias
from the analysis most of the skewness is eliminated. Thus, the
distribution of heart rate events and the skew of RR histograms
can be interpreted as different observations of the same phenomenon. Our findings about mini-bradycardia events preceding the neonatal sepsis diagnosis provide quantitative evidence
with respect to the claims about patterns in heart-rate decelerations made in [27].
The periods of time for which annotations of baby-generated
events could not be provided will be treated as missing data. The
sources of missing data identified in this section are handling
episodes, probe dropouts, and oximeter errors. As discussed
previously, the summary statistics of these events do not substantially differ between the two patient groups, justifying the
MAR assumption made in Section II-B.

variable which can take on values zt = normal or zt = sepsis.
In the following, we explain how we label the presence of sepsis
in the training data. These labels are then used for supervised
learning of the AR-HMM parameters.
Labeling the sepsis variable is different for the two patient
groups. For the sepsis group, we know the exact time of the
positive blood test. Following consultation with clinicians, it
was agreed that labeling the period of 6 h before this moment
as sepsis would be reasonable. The onset of the infection cannot
be assumed to be an instantaneous event. Thus, we define a
transition period in which the patient progresses from being in
the normal state to being in the sepsis state. We take this to be
12 h between 18 and 6 h before the positive test. This period is
left unlabeled and will not be used for either training or testing.
All monitoring data before the transition period (i.e., the first
6 h of a sample in the sepsis group) is labeled as normal. We
do not assign a label to the data after the positive test, as this is
likely to be affected by the patient’s response to treatment and
has less relevance for the task of real-time sepsis detection. All
the data in the control group are labeled as normal.
The use of the annotations simplifies parameter estimation.
Our optimization goal is maximizing the joint probability of
the labeled hidden states and the corresponding observations.
Maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates of the state transition
probabilities are given by
nj |i + ξ
,
j  (nj  |i + ξ)

θ̂j |i = 

(4)

where nj |i is the number of times, we transit from hidden state i
to hidden state j. Here, we use a symmetric Dirichlet prior with
parameter ξ = 1, in order to prevent estimates from being too
small when data counts are low. Similarly, we learn the emission
probability parameters using
(s)

(s)
φ̂l|k j

D. Model Fitting
We fit an AR-HMM model to observations of S = 3 babygenerated physiological events: bradycardias, desaturations, and
mini-bradycardias. The hidden state is chosen to be a binary

(s)

=

nl|k j + ξ

(s)
l  (nl  |k j

,

(5)

+ ξ)

where nl|k j is the number of times event s transitions from
setting k to setting l when the hidden state takes on value j. In

1566

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE III
SUMMARY STATISTICS OBTAINED BY CROSS-VALIDATION IN A
SECOND-BY-SECOND ANALYSIS

Section III-C, we explained why it was not always possible to
annotate baby-generated events. We could use an expectationmaximization (EM) procedure to account for missing data when
estimating parameters. However, the total amount of annotated
data is much larger than the amount of missing data. Thus, we
would expect the benefits to be minimal.
Note that, in the absence of any sepsis labels, the AR-HMM
can be trained unsupervised. Maximum likelihood parameters
are usually determined by optimizing the probability of the
observations with EM. The inference procedure described in
Section II-B can be used in the expectation step.

Fig. 5. ROC curves corresponding to different models for sepsis detection.
(a) Filtering. (b) Smoothing.
TABLE IV
MONTE CARLO ESTIMATES OF THE EXPECTED NUMBER OF BABY-GENERATED
EVENTS OVER A T = 3-h PERIOD

IV. RESULTS
In this section, we describe experimental results for detecting
neonatal sepsis on the data introduced in Section III-B. We
show the models’ performance and discuss learnt parameters in
Section IV-A. The relevance of individual physiological event
streams is examined in Section IV-B. An alternative episodebased analysis is presented in Section IV-C.
The following results have been obtained using leave-oneout cross-validation. The quality of the second-by-second inferences is measured against the sepsis labeling defined in
Section III-D. We draw ROC curves showing the dependence
between the false positive rate (FPR) and the true positive rate
(TPR). We report the AUC and the equal error rate (EER).2
These evaluation criteria are preferred because they account for
the class imbalance in our dataset. If misclassification costs had
been available, we could have visualized the expected cost in
ROC space as explained in [28]. Posterior distributions are given
as gray-scale horizontal bars, with white meaning 0 sepsis probability and black corresponding to probability 1. For the episodebased analysis, we use precision-recall (PR) curves3 [29].
We report the average precision (AP) [30] and the maximum
F-score.4 Both the second-by-second and the episode-based
analyses are projections of the inferences onto different metrics and can reveal different performance aspects.
A. Model Evaluation With a Second-by-Second Analysis
ROC curves for several sepsis models are given in Fig. 5, and
the corresponding summary statistics are presented in Table III.
We are mainly interested in real-time prediction. Smoothing
results can be interpreted as an upper bound for the predictive
power of the selected physiological events.
2 EER is the error rate computed at the threshold for which the FPR equals
the false negative rate (FNR). Note that FNR = 1 − TPR.
3 Precision is defined as TP/(TP+FP) and recall equals the TPR.
4 The F-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall.

“AR-HMM md” is the standard AR-HMM model which handles missing data. If we do label the missing data assuming no
baby-generated physiological event was happening, we obtain
a model without any missing data, “AR-HMM wmd.” This approach performs worse, mostly due to long handling events happening during sepsis episodes wrongly classified as normal. The
marginalization performed in the missing data approach helps
to correctly classify these periods as sepsis. The benefits of explicitly modeling events as Markov chains with AR-HMMs are
clear when compared to an “HMM,” whose performance is close
to that of a random classifier. “AR-HMM ed” explicitly models
staying times in the hidden states. For each hidden state, the parameters of the corresponding event duration distribution (3) can
be learnt from the sepsis labeling. However, due to the lack of
diversity in the length of labeled sepsis episodes, we treat τ0 as a
hyper-parameter, and consider values in {5, 10, 15, 25, 50, 100}.
To avoid bias, we determine the performance of the explicit duration model using nested cross-validation (see, e.g., [31]). In
the inner cross-validation steps, selection for τ0 was performed
using the filtering AUC. Table III shows that the explicit duration model delivers the best performance for both filtering and
smoothing.
The fitted emission distributions can be used to characterize the sepsis and normal regimes. Since the learnt φ’s are
hard to interpret directly, we show an alternative representation
which can be easily associated with the information in Fig. 4.
More precisely, we used a Monte Carlo approach to estimate
the expected number of physiological events over a T = 3-h
period. For each event–regime pair, we separately sampled the
corresponding Markov chain. In all cases, N = 5000 samples of
length T = 3 h have been empirically found to suffice for convergence. Table IV shows these estimates. In the sepsis state,
we see an approximately threefold increase in the expected incidence of the monitored events compared to periods when the
patients are not infected.

STANCULESCU et al.: AUTOREGRESSIVE HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS FOR THE EARLY DETECTION OF NEONATAL SEPSIS

1567

Fig. 6. Cross-validation inference for both patient groups using the explicit-duration AR-HMM. The top row of each figure represents the sepsis labeling. Normal
periods are white, sepsis periods are black. Transitioning and treatment periods are not assigned any label. For each sepsis sample sk or control sample ck , the top
row of the corresponding image represents the filtering distribution and the bottom row represents the smoothing distribution. (a) Sepsis group. (b) Control group.
TABLE V
SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR THE SECOND-BY-SECOND ANALYSIS OF EXPLICIT
DURATION AR-HMMS MODELING SEVERAL SETS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL EVENTS

Fig. 6 shows inference results for the model delivering the best
performance, the explicit duration AR-HMM. For 12 samples
in the sepsis group (s1−7 , s9 , s11 , s12 , s16 , and s18 ), a significantly long sepsis episode is identified during 6 hours before the
positive blood test. In all but two samples (s2 and s3 ), the sepsis
episode is detected at least 3 h before the positive test. For two
cases (s10 and s14 ), sepsis episodes are flagged mostly during
the transition period rather than the sepsis one. In the remaining
four samples (s8 , s13 , s15 , and s17 ), no clear sepsis episode has
been identified. The sepsis periods flagged in the control group
are usually short. We believe that many of them can be explained
by handling events which do not display corresponding falls in
either “TC” or “TP” channels.

Fig. 7. ROC curves corresponding to different sets of physiological events
modeled with an explicit duration AR-HMM for sepsis detection. (a) Filtering.
(b) Smoothing.

TPR values at high FPRs, monitoring only desaturations delivers
a surprisingly good performance. However, when choosing an
operating point from these ROC curves, we are more interested
in the performance at low FPRs.
The event-type analysis is continued in the next section when
looking at episode-based analysis.

B. Physiological Event Evaluation

C. Episode-Based Analysis

It is useful to understand which types of physiological events
contribute most for detecting sepsis. Since bradycardias and
mini-bradycardias are intimately related, we phrase this question
as asking whether monitoring desaturations brings additional
information about sepsis compared to only monitoring the heart
rate. In Fig. 7 and Table V, we compare an explicit duration
AR-HMM monitoring all events (“ALL”) with one monitoring
only heart rate channel events (“BR+MB”) and one looking only
at desaturations (“DS”). For all event types, ROC curves have
been obtained using nested cross-validation. This analysis shows
that monitoring desaturations on top of monitoring the heart rate
channel does not give better performance. Also, due to better

We have also evaluated our models from the perspective of
detecting episodes of infection. This analysis is intended to be
closer to clinical practice than the second-by-second evaluation.
Similar procedures have been used in applications such as object
detection [30] or keyword spotting [32, Sec. 17.19].
First, the posteriors are thresholded to give a binary output.
Strings of 1’s are predicted sepsis episodes. Since true episodes
last for at least a few hours, we keep only instances longer than
1 h. An inferred episode overlapping with the sepsis period but
not with any normal period is a true positive (TP). If multiple TPs are detected for a sepsis patient, then only the first is
recorded. Episodes exclusively contained in either the transition

1568

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE VI
SUMMARY STATISTICS OBTAINED BY CROSS-VALIDATION IN AN
EPISODE-BASED ANALYSIS

TABLE VII
SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR THE EPISODE-BASED ANALYSIS OF EXPLICIT
DURATION AR-HMMS MODELING SEVERAL SETS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL EVENTS

or treatment periods are not labeled. All remaining episodes are
false positives (FP). The number of positive examples is the
number of infected patients. In this setting, evaluation via a PR
curve is a better choice than via a ROC one, as true negative
episodes are hard to define, and are not necessary for a PR curve.
Table VI shows the AP and maximum F-score for the same
set of models discussed in Section IV-A. The performance of the
explicit duration model is again computed using nested crossvalidation. However, we now optimize the filtering AP in the
inner cross-validation. Most of the findings in Table III are
confirmed in PR space as well. Again, the explicit duration
model dominates the other models, although its filtering AP
score equals that of the standard AR-HMM model.
It was interesting to perform the evaluation of Section IV-B
using the episode-based analysis. The summary statistics are
given in Table VII. The episode-based analysis reveals bigger
performance differences between the models. Monitoring desaturations on top of monitoring the heart rate channels improves
both filtering and smoothing performance. Monitoring only desaturations does much worse when we assess the detected infection episodes.
V. DISCUSSION
This paper introduces a hidden variable probabilistic model
capable of making early predictions about the onset of neonatal sepsis. Our approach extensively uses domain knowledge to
facilitate learning and inference. We have explained how missing data can be treated and experimented with explicit duration
modeling. The results show that by monitoring the incidence of
baby-generated physiological events, we can often detect sepsis
well in advance of the time when a positive blood test was taken.
In the remainder, we discuss a number of ways in which this
study can be extended.
The primary direction is to directly use the raw physiological
data to infer sepsis. A hierarchical model can be obtained assuming that the clinical events are unobserved and placing the
hidden state variables of the AR-HMM on top of the FSLDS
of Quinn et al. [6]. Inference in the resulting model can be
performed using the same methods as for the FSLDS [33]. A

direct comparison against the results presented in Section IV is
possible, partly because the AR-HMM can be obtained by conditioning the hierarchical model on the clinical events. We can
interpret the AR-HMM results as an upper bound for the performance of a fully automated sepsis detection system relying
on the distribution of clinical events. The bound is justified by
the fact that any automated system for inferring clinical events
from monitoring data cannot outperform an expert annotator.
Automatically detecting sepsis from monitoring data also opens
up the opportunity to study much larger datasets.
In Section III-C, we have explained how the distribution of
physiological events is related to previous work on using the
loss of variability in the vital signs for sepsis prediction [9],
[14]. It would be interesting to define such events and see what
predictive effect they have in our framework, either on their
own or combined with the other events. However, assessment of
variability requires comparison of data over a given time frame,
and there are many possible ways to come up with measures
of variability. It could be interesting to look at this question in
the FSLDS framework [6], where a new factor and dynamical
model for low variability could be introduced.
In Section III-D, we have explained a method for labeling
periods of infection. The main difficulty was that while the
time of the positive test is known, the time of the sepsis onset
cannot be exactly determined. An interesting alternative is to
construct a probabilistic labeling of sepsis. At the time of the
positive test, the probability of sepsis should be 1 and going
back in time it should monotonically decay to 0. In this case,
the goal of learning is to minimize the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the labeling and the posterior distribution of
the AR-HMM. This objective can be optimized by a gradient
descent method using inference as a subroutine. The procedure
is closely related to discriminative training of HMMs [34], [35].
A difficulty of this approach is that some parametric form of the
labeling distribution should be fixed a priori.
APPENDIX
AR-HMM INFERENCE WITH MISSING DATA
When there is no missing data, the messages in (2) can be
recursively computed as follows:
α(zt ) = p(xt |zt , xt−1 )
β(zt ) =





p(zt |zt−1 )α(zt−1 )

(6)

z t −1

p(zt+1 |zt )p(xt+1 |zt+1 , xt )β(zt+1 ).

(7)

zt + 1

In the presence of missing data, V is the set of time steps for
which we have observations. We would like to treat both t ∈ V
and t ∈
/ V in a unified framework. Thus, we introduce a function
V (xt ) : {1, . . . , L} → {0, 1}

δx t x vt , if t ∈ V
V (xt ) =
1,
if t ∈
/V
where δij is the Kronecker delta. For any t0 < t < t1 , the following holds:

STANCULESCU et al.: AUTOREGRESSIVE HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS FOR THE EARLY DETECTION OF NEONATAL SEPSIS

p(zt , xvt0 :t 1 ) =



p(zt , xvt0 :t−1 , xt , xvt+1:t 1 )V (xt ).

(8)

xt

If xt is not observed, the summation in (8) represents the
marginalization of the hidden variable xt from p(zt , xvt0 :t 1 , xt ).
If xt is observed, then the summation only selects the term
p(zt , xvt0 :t−1 , xvt+1:t 1 , xvt ).
Applying (8) together with (2) we get

p(zt , xv1:t−1 , xt , xvt+1:T )V (xt )
p(zt , xv1:T ) =
xt

=



p(zt , xv1:t−1 , xt )p(xvt+1:T

|zt , xt , xv1:t−1 )V

1569

p(zt , xv1:t−2 , xt−1 , xt , xvt+1:T )V (xt )V (xt−1 )

p(zt , zt−1 , xv1:t−2 , xt−1 , xt , xvt+1:T )V (xt )V (xt−1 )
=
z t −1

=



α(zt−1 , xt−1 )p(zt |zt−1 )p(xt |zt , xt−1 )β(zt , xt ).

z t −1

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We would like to thank Prof. N. McIntosh for providing expert
insight
and supervising with data annotation.
(xt )

xt

=



p(zt , xv1:t−1 , xt )p(xvt+1:T |zt , xt )V (xt )

xt

=



α(zt , xt )β(zt , xt )

xt

where we have defined the messages
α(zt , xt )  p(zt , xv1:t−1 , xt )V (xt )
β(zt , xt )  p(xvt+1:T |zt , xt )V (xt )
and we have used the fact that V 2 (xt ) = V (xt ). Similar to (6)
and (7), the following recursions can be written

p(zt , xv1:t−2 , xt−1 , xt )V (xt−1 )
α(zt , xt ) = V (xt )
x t −1



= V (xt )

p(zt−1 , zt , xv1:t−2 , xt−1 , xt )V (xt−1 )

x t −1 z t −1



= V (xt )
×


z t −1

= V (xt )

p(xt |zt , xt−1 )

x t −1

p(zt−1 , zt , xv1:t−2 , xt−1 )V (xt−1 )


p(xt |zt , xt−1 )

x t −1



β(zt , xt ) = V (xt )



p(zt |zt−1 )α(zt−1 , xt−1 )

z t −1

p(xt+1 , xvt+2:T |zt , xt )V (xt+1 )

xt + 1

= V (xt )



p(zt+1 , xt+1 , xvt+2:T |zt , xt )V (xt+1 )

xt + 1 zt + 1

= V (xt )



p(zt+1 |zt )p(xt+1 , xvt+2:T |zt+1 , xt )V (xt+1 )

xt + 1 zt + 1

= V (xt )



zt + 1

p(zt+1 |zt )



p(xt+1 |zt+1 , xt )β(zt+1 , xt+1 ).

xt + 1

When training an AR-HMM with missing data via EM, the
following quantities are needed in the M-step
p(zt , zt−1 , xv1:T )

p(zt , zt−1 , xv1:t−2 , xt−1 , xt , xvt+1:T )V (xt )V (xt−1 )
=
x t ,x t −1

=



x t ,x t −1

α(zt−1 , xt−1 )p(zt |zt−1 )p(xt |zt , xt−1 )β(zt , xt )

REFERENCES
[1] N. Modi, C. J. Doré, A. Saraswatula, M. Richards, K. B. Bamford,
R. Coello, and A. Holmes. (2009, Jan.). A case definition for national
and international neonatal bloodstream infection surveillance. Arch. Disease Childhood—Fetal Neonatal Edition [Online]. 94(1), pp. F8–F12.
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/adc.2007.126458
[2] B. J. Stoll, N. Hansen, A. A. Fanaroff, L. L. Wright, W. A. Carlo,
R. A. Ehrenkranz, J. A. Lemons, E. F. Donovan, A. R. Stark,
J. E. Tyson et al. (2002). Late-onset sepsis in very low birth
weight neonates: The experience of the NICHD Neonatal Research
Network. Pediatrics [Online]. 110(2 Pt 1), pp. 285–291. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12165580
[3] C. M. Beck-Sague, P. Azimi, S. N. Fonseca, R. S. Baltimore, D. Powell,
L. A. Bland, M. J. Arduino, S. McAllister, R. S. Huberman, and
R. L. Sinkowitz, “Bloodstream infections in neonatal intensive care unit
patients: Results of a multicenter study,” Pediatr. Infect. Disease J., vol. 13,
no. 12, pp. 1110–1116, 1994.
[4] M. P. Griffin, T. M. O’Shea, E. A. Bissonette, F. E. Harrell, D. E. Lake,
and J. R. Moorman. (2003). Abnormal heart rate characteristics preceding neonatal sepsis and sepsis-like illness. Pediatr Res [Online]. 53(6),
pp. 920–926. Available: http://www.biomedsearch.com/nih/Abnormalheart-rate-characteristics-pre ceding/12646726.html
[5] J. Quinn. (2007). “Bayesian Condition Monitoring in Neonatal Intensive Care,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Edinburgh, [Online]. Available:
http://hdl.handle.net/1842/2144
[6] J. A. Quinn, C. K. I. Williams, and N. McIntosh, “Factorial switching
linear dynamical systems applied to physiological condition monitoring,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 1537–1551,
Sep. 2009.
[7] R. Shumway and D. Stoffer, “Dynamic linear models with switching,” J.
Amer. Statist. Assoc., vol. 86, pp. 763–769, 1991.
[8] Z. Ghahramani and M. I. Jordan, “Factorial hidden Markov models,”
Mach. Learn., vol. 29, pp. 245–273, 1997.
[9] M. P. Griffin and J. R. Moorman, “Toward the early diagnosis of neonatal
sepsis and sepsis-like illness using novel heart rate analysis,” Pediatrics,
vol. 107, pp. 97–104, 2001.
[10] J. Moorman, D. Lake, and M. Griffin, “Heart rate characteristics monitoring for neonatal sepsis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 1,
pp. 126–132, Jan. 2006.
[11] J. R. Moorman, W. A. Carlo, J. Kattwinkel, R. L. Schelonka,
P. J. Porcelli, C. T. Navarrete, E. Bancalari, J. L. Aschner, M. W.
Walker, J. A. Perez, C. Palmer, G. J. Stukenborg, D. E. Lake, and
T. M. OShea. (2011). Mortality reduction by heart rate characteristic monitoring in very low birth weight neonates: A randomized
trial. J. Pediatr. [Online]. 159(6), pp. 900–906.e1. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022347611006718
[12] M. Blount, M. Ebling, J. Eklund, A. James, C. McGregor, N. Percival,
K. Smith, and D. Sow, “Real-time analysis for intensive care: Development
and deployment of the artemis analytic system,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Mag., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 110–118, Mar./Apr. 2010.
[13] M. Stacey, C. McGregor, and M. Tracy, “An architecture for multidimensional temporal abstraction and its application to support neonatal
intensive care,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
Aug. 2007, pp. 3752–3756.
[14] C. McGregor, C. Catley, and A. James, “Variability analysis with analytics
applied to physiological data streams from the neonatal intensive care
unit,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Comput.-Based Med. Syst., 2012, pp. 1–5.

1570

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

[15] L. Rabiner, “A tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and selected applications in speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257–286, Feb.
1989.
[16] C. D. Manning and H. Schütze, Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1999.
[17] A. Krogh, M. Brown, I. S. Mian, K. Sjlander, and D. Haussler, “Hidden Markov models in computational biology: Applications to protein
modeling,” J. Molecul. Biol., vol. 235, pp. 1501–1531, 1994.
[18] D. Coast, R. Stern, G. Cano, and S. Briller, “An approach to cardiac
arrhythmia analysis using hidden Markov models,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 826–836, Sep. 1990.
[19] R. Andreao, B. Dorizzi, and J. Boudy, “ECG signal analysis through hidden Markov models,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1541–
1549, Aug. 2006.
[20] Y. Ephraim, D. Malah, and B.-H. Juang, “On the application of hidden
Markov models for enhancing noisy speech,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process., vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 1846–1856, Dec. 1989.
[21] P. Woodland, “Hidden Markov models using vector linear prediction and
discriminative output distributions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process., 1992, vol. 1, pp. 509–512.
[22] R. Little and D. Rubin, Statistical Analysis With Missing Data. New
York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1987.
[23] I. Stanculescu, “Dynamical models for neonatal intensive care,” Forthcoming Ph.D. thesis, School of Informatics, Univ. Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
U.K., 2014.
[24] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2007.
[25] M. Johnson, “Capacity and complexity of HMM duration modeling techniques,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 407–410, May
2005.
[26] K. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, (Adaptive
Computation and Machine Learning Series). Cambridge, MA, USA:
MIT Press, 2012.
[27] A. Flower, R. J. Moorman, D. Lake, and J. Delos, “Periodic heart rate
decelerations in premature infants,” Exp. Biol. Med., vol. 235, no. 4,
pp. 531–538, 2010.
[28] F. Provost and T. Fawcett. (2001, Mar.). Robust classification for imprecise environments. Mach. Learn. [Online]. 42(3), pp. 203–231. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1007601015854
[29] V. Raghavan, P. Bollmann, and G. S. Jung. (1989, Jul.). A critical investigation of recall and precision as measures of retrieval system performance. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. [Online]. 7(3), pp. 205–229. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/65943.65945
[30] M. Everingham and J. Winn. (2012). “The PASCAL Visual Object
Classes Challenge 2012 (VOC2012) Development Kit,” [Online]. Available: http://www.pascal-network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2012
[31] S. Varma and R. Simon. (2006, Feb.). Bias in error estimation when using
cross-validation for model selection. BMC Bioinformat. [Online]. 7(1),
pp. 91+. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-7-91
[32] S. J. Young, G. Evermann, M. J. F. Gales, T. Hain, D. Kershaw, G. Moore,
J. Odell, D. Ollason, D. Povey, V. Valtchev, and P. C. Woodland, The
HT Book, version 3.4. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Engineering
Department, 2006.
[33] D. Barber and B. Mesot, “A novel Gaussian sum smoother for approximate
inference in switching linear dynamical systems,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 19, B. Schölkopf, J. Platt, and T. Hoffman,
Eds. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2007, pp. 89–96.

[34] L. Bahl, P. Brown, P. De Souza, and R. Mercer, “Maximum mutual information estimation of hidden Markov model parameters for speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 1986,
vol. 11, pp. 49–52.
[35] A. Krogh and S. K. Riis, “Hidden neural networks,” Neural Comput.,
vol. 11, pp. 541–563, 1999.

Ioan Stanculescu received the B.Sc. degree in electronics, telecommunications, and information technology from the Politehnica University of Bucharest,
Bucharest, Romania, in 2009, and the M.Sc. degree in artificial intelligence from
the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K., in 2010, where he is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation, School of Informatics.
His research is centred on developing probabilistic models for explaining time series data and has deep interests in machine learning and Bayesian
inference.

Christopher K. I. Williams received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1990 and 1994, respectively,
under the supervision of Geoff Hinton.
He is currently a Professor of machine learning in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K. He was a member of the Neural
Computing Research Group at Aston University from 1994 to 1998, and has
been at the University of Edinburgh since 1998. He is interested in a wide
range of theoretical and practical issues in machine learning, statistical pattern
recognition, probabilistic graphical models and computer vision. This includes
theoretical foundations, the development of new models and algorithms, and applications. His main areas of research are in visual object recognition and image
understanding, models for understanding time-series, unsupervised learning,
and Gaussian processes.
Dr. Williams was the Program Cochair of NIPS in 2009, and is on the editorial boards of the Journal of Machine Learning Research, the International
Journal of Computer Vision, and Proceedings of the Royal Society A.

Yvonne Freer received the Ph.D. degree in nursing from the University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K., in 1997.
She is currently a Clinical Academic Nurse at the Royal Infirmary of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K. Her research has been on clinically focused issues within the neonatal intensive care unit and she has published papers in peer
reviewed journals on aspects of information and communication technologies.
One of her primary research interests is providing support for parents of babies
admitted to the neonatal unit, through collaboration and information sharing.

