IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1621

Fast X-Ray Luminescence Computed
Tomography Imaging
Xin Liu∗ , Member, IEEE, Qimei Liao, and Hongkai Wang

Abstract—X-ray luminescence computed tomography (XLCT)
opens new possibilities to perform molecular imaging with X-ray.
However, challenges remain in dynamic XLCT imaging, where
short scan time, good spatial resolution, and whole-body field of
view should be considered simultaneously. In this paper, by the
use of a single-view XLCT reconstruction method based on a compressive sensing (CS) technique, incorporating a cone beam XLCT
imaging system, we implement fast 3-D XLCT imaging. To evaluate
the performance of the method, two types of phantom experiments
were performed based on a cone beam XLCT imaging system.
In Case 1, one tube filled with the X-ray-excitable nanophosphor
(Gd2 O3 :Eu3 + ) was immerged in different positions in the phantom to evaluate the effect of the source position on single-view
XLCT reconstruction accuracy. In Case 2, two tubes filled with
Gd2 O3 :Eu3 + were immerged in different heights in the phantom
to evaluate the whole-body imaging performance of single-view
XLCT reconstruction. The experimental results indicated that the
tubes used in previous phantom experiments can be resolved from
single-view XCLT reconstruction images. The location error is less
than 1.2 mm. In addition, since only one view data are needed to
implement 3-D XLCT imaging, the acquisition time can be greatly
reduced (∼1 frame/s) compared with previous XLCT systems.
Hence, the technique is suited for imaging the fast distribution
of the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors within a biological object.
Index Terms—Fluorescence, hybrid imaging, image reconstruction techniques, optical tomography, X-ray imaging.

I. INTRODUCTION
-RAY luminescence computed tomography (XLCT) has
been recently proposed as a new molecular imaging
modality [1]–[7]. In principle, when the imaged object is irradiated with X-ray, the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors in the
imaged object will produce visible or near-infrared (NIR) luminescence which can be measured by sensitive photon detectors,
as shown in Fig. 1. Subsequently, by solving a mathematical

X

Manuscript received September 22, 2013; revised November 22, 2013; accepted December 6, 2013. Date of publication December 11, 2013; date of
current version May 15, 2014. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 81371604, Grant 81230035, and
Grant 81071220, and by the Shaanxi Natural Science Foundation under Grant
2013JM4008. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ X. Liu is with the School of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an 710032, China (e-mail: xinliu.c@gmail.com).
Q. Liao is with the Department of Computation Application, School of
Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an 710032,
China (e-mail: anne20@fmmu.edu.cn).
H. Wang is with the Crump Institute of Molecular Imaging, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90066 USA
(e-mail: wang.hongkai@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2294633

Fig. 1.

Schematic diagram of CB-XLCT imaging.

model, the 3-D distribution of the nanophosphors in the imaged
object can be recovered.
Compared with other optical molecular imaging modalities,
e.g., fluorescence molecular tomography (FMT) [8]–[10] or bioluminescence tomography (BLT) [11]–[13], XLCT offers two
main advantages. First, the X-ray excitation spectrum is undetectable with photon detectors. As a result, the autofluorescence
can be avoided, which is helpful for imaging low concentration
information. Second, XLCT is expected to have increased depth
imaging performance compared with the other optical imaging
because of the high penetration of X-ray photons in tissues,
which offers the potential to use clinically available.
With the advances in the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors
[14]–[17], imaging systems, and reconstruction methods
[1]–[7], dynamic XLCT imaging is now possible. By adding
time as a new dimension, dynamic XLCT imparts the ability to capture the complete dynamic course of the X-rayexcitable nanophosphors (drug) within small animals in vivo.
It is also helpful for better studying metabolic processes of
nanophosphors-based drugs.
Nevertheless, challenges still remain in imaging fast and
whole-body biological activities using XLCT, where short scan
time, good spatial resolution, and whole-body field of view
(FOV) need to be considered simultaneously. For example,
in a current widely used narrow beam XLCT imaging system [1]–[3], to collect XLCT data, an X-ray source and detector were mounted on opposite sides of the imaged object,
similar to the first-generation X-ray CT scanning strategy. A
disadvantage of such system was that the data acquisition generally took long time (typically, ≥624 s) [2]. To reduce the
imaging time, Chen et al. designed a cone beam X-ray luminescence computed tomography (CB-XLCT) imaging system [6].
In their reports, by using a cone beam X-ray illumination and
a highly sensitive charge-coupled device (CCD) camera detection, they decreased the data acquisition time. However, to
collect multiple-view data (generally, ≥four views) which were
used to perform XLCT reconstruction, a rotating mechanism

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1622

was used. This meant to rotate the imaged object and to repeat
the measurements several times in XLCT imaging processes,
leading to the increased imaging time (typically, ≥134 s). As
a result, the previous XLCT imaging techniques were not suitable for imaging fast distribution of the nanophosphors within
a biological object.
The goal of this paper is to improve acquisition speed without
significant lose of spatial resolution; therefore, we extend the
application of XLCT for fast dynamic imaging study. To achieve
the goal, a simple and effective strategy is to use single-view
data acquired by a CB-XLCT system. The imaging approach can
directly reduce XLCT imaging time because only one view data
need to be acquired to implement 3-D XLCT imaging and the
imaged object need not to be rotated in imaging processes. That
is, the integrating time of CCD for collecting single-view data
is the imaging time of XLCT system. However, due to the high
scattering of light in biological tissues, the reconstruction of
XLCT is an ill-posed problem [6]. Moreover, the ill-posedness
will further aggravate if underdetermined data (e.g., single-view
data) are used. As a result, the ill-posedness will adversely affect
the image quality of XLCT reconstruction.
Note that in most biological applications, based on the biological characteristics, the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors are
sparsely distributed in the tissues. This means that the nanophosphors in imaging domain are generally very sparse. As a result,
the compressive sensing (CS) technique can be used in XLCT
reconstruction processes to get high-quality and robust reconstruction results, even if the measurement data are very limited [18], [19]. In addition, it should also be noted that the
performance of CS depends on the restricted isometry property
(RIP) of the measurement matrix, i.e., the measurement matrix
must be incoherence or orthogonality. To improve the RIP, i.e.,
to improve the recovery performance of sparse signals, recently,
a preconditioning matrix method has also been widely used,
as described in [20]–[22]. These methods together provide the
possibility to implement the single-view XLCT reconstruction.
Based on the consideration of previous problems, in this paper, by applying a CS technique to a single-view XLCT reconstruction, combined with a CB-XLCT imaging system, we implement fast 3-D XLCT imaging. To evaluate the performance of
the method, two types of phantom experiments were performed
based on a CB-XLCT imaging system. In Case 1, one tube filled
with the X-ray-excitable nanophosphor (Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ ) was immerged in different positions in the phantom to evaluate the
effect of the source position, i.e., the distribution of nanophosphor in imaged object, on single-view XLCT reconstruction
accuracy. In Case 2, two tubes filled with Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ were immerged in different heights in the phantom to evaluate the wholebody imaging performance of single-view XLCT reconstruction. Here, the X-ray-excitable nanophosphor we employed was
Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ , due to its NIR emission wavelength. The experimental results indicate that the tubes filled with Gd2 O3 :Eu3+
can be resolved from single-view XCLT reconstruction images.
The location error is less than 1.2 mm. In addition, since only
one view data need to be collected to implement 3-D XLCT
imaging, the imaging time can be greatly reduced (∼1 frame/s)
compared with the previous XLCT systems. Hence, the tech-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

nique is suited for imaging the fast distribution of the X-rayexcitable nanophosphors (other similar materials or chemical
elements) within a biological object.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the imaging
model and reconstruction method are described. In Section III,
the experimental materials are detailed. In Section IV, the experimental results are shown. Finally, we discuss the results and
draw conclusions in Section V.
II. METHODS
A. Forward Problem
In XLCT imaging, X-rays are emitted from the X-ray source
and travel through tissues. As shown in Fig. 1, as soon as X-ray
is transported to nanophosphors in tissues, the nanophosphors
will emit visible or NIR light, which can be expressed according
to [4], as follows:
S(r) = ηA(r)ρ(r)

(1)

where S(r) is the source energy density (W/mm3 ), ρ(r) is the
density (concentration) of the nanophosphor (g/mL), A(r) is the
X-ray intensity (W/mm2 ), and η is the light yield which is defined as the quantum yield per unit nanophosphor concentration.
According to Lambert–Beers’ law, during the course of X-rays
traveling through the tissues, the X-ray intensity distribution
A(r) can be expressed as follows:
  r

μ(τ )dτ
(2)
A(r) = A0 exp −
r0

where A0 (r) is the X-ray source intensity at the initial position r0 , and μ(τ ) is the X-ray attenuation coefficient (mm−1 )
which can be obtained from X-ray transmission data using an
attenuation-based CT technique.
Since biological tissue has highly scattering and weakly absorbing properties in the NIR spectral window, the NIR light
S(r) (e.g., the emitted NIR light from Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ ) in the
tissues can be obtained by solving the following diffusion
equation [23] combined with the Robin-type boundary condition [24]:
⎧
⎨ −∇[D(r)∇Φ(r)] + μa (r)Φ(r) = S(r) r ∈ Ω
(3)
⎩ 2γD(r) ∂Φ(r) + Φ(r) = 0
r ∈ ∂Ω
∂n
where Ω is the domain of the imaged object and ∂Ω is the
boundary; Φ(r) is the photon flux density (W/mm2 ); μa (r) is the
absorption coefficient (mm−1 ); D(r) = 1/(3(μa (r) + μs (r)) is
the diffusion coefficient (mm) with μs (r) being the reduced
scattering coefficient (mm−1 ); n denotes the outward normal
vector to the boundary ∂Ω, and γ is a constant depending upon
the optical reflective index mismatch at the boundary.
Knowing the optical properties, the diffusion equation can
be solved using the finite-element method [25]. Based on the
finite-element theory, (3) can be discretized into the following
matrix equation:
KΦ = FηAρ

(4)

LIU et al.: FAST X-RAY LUMINESCENCE COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY IMAGING

1623

with


⎧
1
⎪
⎪
⎨ Kij = Ω (D∇ψi ∇ψj + μa ψi ψj )dr+ 2γ ∂ Ω ψi ψj dr

⎪
⎪
⎩ Fij =
ψi ψj dr
Ω

(5)
where Kij and Fij are the elements of matrices K and F,
respectively. ψi and ψj are the volume elements that discretize
the imaging domain and form a geometrical mesh defined over
the entire imaging domain.
Since the matrix K is positive definite, (4) can be changed to
Φ = Jρ

(6)

−1

where J = K FηA. Finally, by removing the unmeasurable
interior values Φi g n o in Φ and the rows of the matrix J corresponding to Φi g n o , the final matrix equation is generated as
follows:
Φm eas = Wρ

(7)

where W is a weight (measurement) matrix describing the forward model of the CB-XLCT imaging.
B. Inverse Problem
The goal of XLCT reconstruction is to recover the X-rayexcitable nanophosphor density ρ from the measured photon
density Φm eas on the boundary ∂Ω. However, as mentioned
in Section I, due to the high scattering of light in biological
tissues and the use of underdetermined data (single-view data),
the weight matrix W in (7) is poorly conditioned. As a result,
it is impractical to solve ρ directly from (7).
Considering that in most biological applications, the distributions of X-ray-excitable nanophosphors in tissues are very
sparsely, herein, the CS technique [18], [19] is used to obtain
high-resolution and robust XLCT reconstruction images. Note
that the performance of CS depends on the RIP of the measurement (weight) matrix W [18], [19], i.e., the measurement matrix
W must be incoherence or orthogonality. To improve the RIP,
i.e., to improve the recovery performance of sparse signals, in
this paper, a preconditioning matrix method [20]–[22] is used.
More specifically, by multiplying both sides of (7) by a preconditioning matrix P, we obtain
#
Φ#
m eas = W ρ

(8)

#

where W = PW denotes the preconditioned forward matrix, and Φ#
m eas = PΦm eas denotes the preconditioned measurements. It is well known that the RIP can be improved by the use
of the preconditioning matrix P [20]–[22]. However, optimizing
to have the best RIP is a combinatorial optimization problem.
In this paper, according to the description in [20] and [21], to
minimize the coherence of W# , the preconditioning matrix P
is given as follows:
P = (ΛΛT + λI)−1/2 UT
T

Fig. 2. CB-XLCT imaging system. (i) EMCCD. (ii) Lens. (iii) Lead shield.
(iv) X-ray tube. (v) Rotation stage. (vi) X-ray detector panel. In XLCT imaging
processes, the imaging system is enclosed in a light-tight environment to avoid
the outside light effect. Note that the rotation stage (v) is unnecessary for XLCT
imaging.

(9)

where UΛV is the singular value decomposition of the forward matrix W, I is an identity matrix, λ is a regularization
parameter, and T represents transposition operation.

After preconditioning, the nanoparticle density distribution
ρ(r) can be recovered by solving the following optimization
problem:
#
min ρ0 subject to Φ#
m eas = W ρ
ρ

(10)

where ρ0 denotes the 	0 -norm of ρ. In this paper, we do not
intend to develop any new method for solving (10). Instead,
considering the time consumption of reconstruction, we use a
standard orthogonal least squares (OLS) method for the solver
(10). The details of the process can be found in [26]. In addition,
we also point out that there are many recent works [27]–[31]
in developing efficient methods for addressing the optimization problem. All these methods can be directly used to further
improve the optimization efficiency.
III. EXPERIMENT MATERIALS
A. CB-XLCT Imaging System
To evaluate the performance of the method, we performed the
physical phantom experiments on a custom-made CB-XLCT
system. As shown in Fig. 2, the imaging system included a
cone beam X-ray source (iv), a CMOS X-ray detector panel
(vi), and a electron-multiplying CCD (EMCCD) camera (i).
The X-ray source used in the system was a microfocus X-ray
source with the maximal power of 80 W (Oxford Instrument,
U.K.) and could irradiated 13 μm cone beam X-rays. It was
placed 26.5 cm away from the surface of the imaged object.
The transmitted X-rays were detected by a CMOS X-ray flatpanel detector (2923, Dexela, U.K.) with pixel size of 74.8 μm
covering a 3888 × 3072 digital image matrix. A −80◦ cooled
EMCCD camera (iXon DU-897, Andor, U.K.) coupled with a
50-mm f/1.8D lens (ii) (Nikon, Melville, NY) was positioned
at 90◦ toward the X-ray axis, which was used to collect the
luminescent photons emitted from the imaged object. To protect
the EMCCD chip from X-ray irradiation, a 4 mm depth of lead
shield (iii) was used.

1624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

D. Imaging Protocol
In luminescence imaging, the X-ray source voltage and current were set to 80 kV and 1 mA, respectively. The integrating
time of EMCCD was set to 1 s, the EM gain was set to 260, and
the EMCCD binning was set to 1 × 1. Since only single-view
luminescent data need to be acquired to implement 3-D XLCT
imaging, the total XLCT imaging time was 1 s.
In X-ray scanning, the X-ray source voltage and current were
set to 45 kV and 1 mA, respectively. Full-angle X-ray projection
images were obtained with a step of 1◦ , resulting in 360 angular
positions. The integrating time of each projection was 600 ms.
Finally, a steel anchor point, which could be imaged in the
two imaging systems, was plastered on the phantom surface to
provide the height information for coregistration.
E. Reconstruction of Experimental Data
Fig. 3. Setup for two types of physical phantom experiments. The transparent
glass tubes (outer diameter 0.4 cm) filled with the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors (Gd2 O3 :Eu3 + ) was placed inside a cylinder phantom (a glass cylinder
of 3.0 cm outer diameter filled with 1% intralipid and water). (a) Case 1: One
tube was immersed in different positions in the phantom to evaluate the effect
of the source position on single-view XLCT reconstruction accuracy. (b) Case
2: Two tubes were immersed in different heights in the phantom to evaluate the
whole-body imaging performance of single-view reconstruction.

The system can perform not only XLCT imaging, but also
conventional X-ray imaging. When collecting the luminescence
images, the EMCCD camera was used. When collecting the
X-ray images, the X-ray flat panel detector was used. Note that
the rotation stage (v) in Fig. 2 is unnecessary for XLCT imaging,
which is only needed in XCT imaging.
B. Experimental Sets
In the experiments, a transparent glass cylinder (outer diameter 3.0 cm; see black circles in Fig. 3) was used as the phantom. The phantom was filled with 1% intralipid and water, with
the absorption coefficient μa = 0.02 cm−1 and reduced scattering coefficient μs = 10 cm−1 . One (two) transparent glass tube
(tubes) (outer diameter 0.4 cm; see the red circles in Fig. 3) filled
with Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ was used as the X-ray luminescent sample.
To evaluate the performance of the method, two types of
phantom experiments were performed. In Case 1, the phantom
contained one tube filled with Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ . But, the tube was
immerged in three different positions (I–III) in the cylinder
phantom [see Fig. 3(a)], which were used to evaluate the effect
of the source position, i.e., the distribution of the nanophosphor
in imaged object, on single-view XLCT reconstruction accuracy.
In Case 2, two tubes were immerged in the phantom and were far
away from each other with center distance 2.9 cm along Z-axis,
as shown in Fig. 3(b). It was used to evaluate the whole-body
imaging performance of single-view reconstruction.
C. X-Ray-Excitable Nanophosphors
In our experiments, the Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ was used as a luminescent activator due to its NIR emission wavelength. Here,
Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ was synthesized using a co-precipitation method.

For XLCT reconstruction, the forward model W was generated by the finite-element method. In detail, the cylinder phantom in Fig. 3 was discretized into 2991 nodes and 12 425 tetrahedral elements. The detectors were located on the boundary
finite-element nodes which were between 5.3 cm height range
and inside 160◦ FOV. Reconstructions were performed using the
OLS method [26]. In the reconstruction, ρ = 0 was used as the
initial solution of (10) and Φ#
m eas was used as the initial residual
vector. For Experiment 1, λ = 2e−4 , λ = 2e−3 , and λ = 2e−4
were used as the regularization parameters for Cases I–III, respectively. For Experiment 2, λ = 7e−1 was used as the regularization parameter. The reconstruction was terminated after
130 iterations or when mean square error of the current residual
was less than 1e−16 . The time cost of reconstruction was about
7.5 s on an Intel 2.80-GHz Quad processor and 12-GB RAM
personal computer.
For XCT reconstruction, the reconstruction was performed
using the Feldkamp–Davis–Kress (FDK) method [32].
In this paper, the FEM was implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics 3.3 (COMSOL, Inc., Burlington, MA, USA). The
OLS and FDK methods were implemented in MATLAB 7.3
(MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA).
IV. RESULTS
A. Case 1: One Tube Immersed in Three Different Positions
in the Phantom
Fig. 4 shows the 2-D projection images of X-ray and luminescence from Case 1. In this case, one tube filled with the
X-ray-excitable nanophosphor was placed in the three different
positions in the phantom (I–III) to evaluate the effect of the
source position on single-view XLCT reconstruction accuracy.
Fig. 4(a)–(c) shows the luminescence projection images, which
are acquired by the EMCCD camera (integrating time: 1 s; EM
gain: 260; CCD binning: 1 × 1). Fig. 4(d)–(f) depicts the corresponding X-ray projection images, which are acquired by the
X-ray detector panel.
Fig. 5 shows the reconstructed tomographic images from
Case 1. The bottom row of Fig. 5 shows the reconstructed XCT
tomographic image. The top row of Fig. 5 shows the reconstructed XLCT tomographic image, which have been fused with

LIU et al.: FAST X-RAY LUMINESCENCE COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY IMAGING

1625

TABLE I
SINGLE-VIEW RECONSTRUCTION RESULTS OF XLCT FROM CASE 1

TABLE II
IMAGING TIME FOR THE DIFFERENT XLCT IMAGING SYSTEMS AND
IMAGING METHODS

Fig. 4. Projection images of the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors (Gd2 O3 :
Eu3 + ) from Case 1. In this case, one tube filled with Gd2 O3 :Eu3 + was
immersed in the different positions in the phantom (I–III) to evaluate the
effect of the source position on single-view XLCT reconstruction accuracy.
(a)–(c) depict the 2-D luminescence projection images acquired by EMCCD
camera (Integrating time: 1 s; EM gain: 260; CCD binning: 1 × 1). (d)–(f) depict the corresponding 2-D X-ray projection images acquired by X-ray detector
panel.

Fig. 6. Three-dimensional visualization results of the reconstructed XLCT
tomographic images from Case 1. (a) I, (b) II, and (c) III. These XLCT tomographic images were obtained by using the OLS method, incorporating the
single-view data [see Fig. 4(a)–(c)].

Fig. 5. XLCT reconstruction results (Case 1) for illustrating the effect of the
source position (I–III) on single-view XLCT reconstruction accuracy. The top
row depicts the reconstructed XLCT images obtained by single-view data [see
Fig. 4(a)–(c)]. The bottom row depicts the corresponding XCT tomographic
images. The green curves in top row depict the phantom boundary obtained
by back-projecting the 72 white light images, which are used to validate the
registration accuracy of XLCT and XCT systems.

the corresponding XCT images. These XLCT images were obtained by the OLS method, incorporating the single-view data
[see Fig. 4(a)–(c)]. The time cost for XLCT reconstruction was
about 7.5 s.
The experimental results indicate that it is feasible to perform
3-D XLCT imaging using single-view data. The tube immersed
in different positions in the phantom can be resolved from singleview XCLT reconstruction images and the location errors are
less than 1.2 mm (see Table I). Here, the location error is determined by calculating the distance between the center of the
tube in the reconstructed XCT images and the location of the
maximum value of the reconstructed XLCT images. In addition,
we also observe that the reconstruction results were not significantly affected by the position information of the tube placed

in the phantom. Finally, we should note that the imaging time
can be greatly reduced (∼1 frame/s) compared with the other
XLCT imaging systems (see Table II) because only one view
data need to be acquired to implement 3-D XLCT imaging.
Fig. 6 shows the 3-D visualization results of the reconstructed
XLCT tomographic images, which reflects the 3-D location
information of the tube filled with Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ in the phantom
(Case 1). These XLCT tomographic images were obtained by
the use of the OLS method, incorporating the single-view data
[see Fig. 4(a)–(c)]. The results further validate the feasibility of
single-view XLCT reconstruction.
B. Case 2: Two Tubes Immersed in Different Heights
in the Phantom
Fig. 7 shows the 2-D X-ray projection image and 2-D luminescence projection image from Case 2, respectively. In this case,
two tubes filled with Gd2 O3 :Eu3+ were immerged in different
heights in the cylinder phantom, which was used to evaluate the
whole-body imaging performance of single-view reconstruction.
Fig. 8 demonstrates the simultaneous whole-body imaging
performance of single-view XLCT reconstruction. Fig. 8(a)
depicts the 3-D visualization result of the reconstructed two

1626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

the imaging time of XLCT can be greatly reduced (see Table II).
This means that we can achieve the whole-body imaging at a
high time resolution (∼1 frame/s) by the use of the single-view
reconstruction method combined with the CB-XLCT imaging
system.
V. DISCUSSION

Fig. 7. Projection images of the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors (Gd2 O3 :
Eu3 + ) from Case 2. In this case, two tubes were immerged in different heights
in the cylinder phantom to evaluate the whole-body imaging performance of
single-view XLCT reconstruction. (a) Two-dimensional X-ray projection image.
(b) Corresponding 2-D luminescence projection image acquired by EMCCD
camera (Integrating time: 1 s; EM gain: 260; CCD binning: 1 × 1).

Fig. 8. Phantom experiment (Case 2) for illustrating the simultaneous wholebody imaging performance of single-view XLCT reconstruction. (a) Threedimensional visualization results of the reconstructed XLCT tomographic images, where two tubes filled with Gd2 O3 :Eu3 + were immerged in the phantom
and were far away from each other with center distance 2.9 cm along Z -axis.
Note that these XLCT tomographic images were reconstructed by using singleview data [see Fig. 7(b)], incorporating the OLS method. The black circles in
(a) indicate the positions of investigated slices. (b) and (c) Reconstructed XLCT
tomographic images corresponding to the black circles indicated in (a). The images in (b) and (c) are normalized by the maximum of the reconstructed results
and then displayed on the same color scale.
TABLE III
SINGLE-VIEW RECONSTRUCTION RESULTS OF XLCT FROM CASE 2 (UNIT: MM)

tubes. Similar to Section IV-A, the XLCT reconstruction was
performed by using single-view data [see Fig. 7(b)] and the time
cost of reconstruction was about 7.5 s. Fig. 8(b) and (c) shows
the reconstructed XLCT tomographic images corresponding to
the black circles in Fig. 8(a).
The experimental results indicate that two tubes with a relatively large distance (2.9 cm center-to-center distance along
Z-axis) can be localized simultaneously and the location error
is less than 1.2 mm (see Table III). In addition, similar to Case 1,

XLCT has been proposed as a new molecular imaging modality. However, challenges still remain in imaging fast and wholebody biological activities using XLCT, where short data collection time, optimal image quality, and whole-body FOV should
be considered simultaneously. In this paper, by applying the
CS technique to single-view data acquired by a CB-XLCT system, we implemented fast XLCT imaging and then evaluated its
performance using two types of physical phantom experiments.
It was shown in the phantom experiments that the tubes filled
with the X-ray-excitable nanophosphor could be located from
the reconstructed XLCT images (see Figs. 5, 6, and 8). The
location errors were less than 1.2 mm (see Tables I and III).
Moreover, we also found that the position information of the
tube immersed in the phantom has slight effect on the singleview XLCT reconstruction results (see Figs. 5 and 6). It further
validated the robustness of single-view XLCT reconstruction.
On the other hand, it was worth noting that in this paper, the
reconstructed XLCT results were obtained by using single-view
data. In other words, the integrating time of CCD for collecting
single-view data was the imaging time of the XLCT system. As
a result, the imaging time could be greatly reduced compared
with previous XLCT imaging systems (see Table II). Further,
by using the single-view scanning strategy, the whole-body 3-D
XLCT tomographic image could also be achieved (see Fig. 8).
Based on the experimental results, we believe that the singleview reconstruction method combined with the CB-XLCT system provides an attractive method for dynamic XLCT imaging
study. First, this technique allows us to achieve the whole-body
3-D XLCT imaging at a high time resolution (e.g., ∼1 frame/s
implemented in this paper). Second, the imaging time resolution
(i.e., the integrating time of CCD) can be further improved when
a large X-ray tube current is used (e.g., 30 mA used in [2]). As a
result, this technique has the potential in real-time XLCT imaging. Finally, this imaging method and system are fairly flexible
to extend to other optical imaging modalities, e.g., FMT or BLT.
It should be noted that in this paper, the obtained reconstruction results of XLCT are based on a basic assumption that
the X-ray-excitable nanophosphors are sparsely distributed in
the imaged object. The sparse/compressible property is critical
for the imaging quality of the single-view XLCT reconstruction [18], [19]. In addition, due to the ill-posed problem in the
reconstruction, the spatial resolution of the single-view reconstruction based on the CB-XLCT system is relatively lower than
that of narrow beam XLCT [2]. For example, based on the proposed method, it may also be difficult to resolve the locations
of the two tubes if the two tubes are closer to each other. So, a
tradeoff between imaging time and reconstruction performance
must be considered. To further improve the spatial resolution of
the single-view reconstruction, the following methods could

LIU et al.: FAST X-RAY LUMINESCENCE COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY IMAGING

1627

be considered: 1) constructing the forward model using the
radiative transport equation or Monte Carlo simulation method
rather than using the diffusion approximation model; 2) solving
the reconstruction problem combined with a priori information
provided by CT or magnetic resonance imaging; and 3) applying
the permissible region strategy to decrease the ill-posedness of
XLCT reconstruction. When the previous methods were used in
single-view reconstruction, the reconstruction quality of XLCT
could be expected to be further improved.
On the other hand, in the XLCT reconstruction processes, the
parameter λ in (9) is important. In the study, the parameter is
selected empirically based on the reconstruction results. Moreover, in this study, the experiments are performed based on a
homogeneous physical phantom, which is simpler than the in
vivo animal study. Ultimately, in in vivo experiment, the specificity, sensitivity, toxicity, and the stability of the X-ray-excitable
nanophosphor in biological tissues need to be thoroughly considered. Systematic studies will be investigated in our future
work.
In conclusion, by applying the CS technique to a single-view
XLCT reconstruction, combined with a CB-XLCT imaging system, we implement fast 3-D XLCT imaging. The technique provides a relative good imaging quality (location errors <1.2 mm)
and a high time resolution (∼1 frame/s). Future works will
be focused on applying the imaging system and reconstruction method to image fast biological distributions of the NIRemitting nanophosphors (other similar materials or chemical
elements) within small animal in vivo.

[11] G. Wang, W.-X. Cong, K. Durairaj, X. Qian, H.-O. Shen, P. Sinn,
E. Hoffman, G. McLennan, and M. Henry, “In vivo mouse studies with
bioluminescence tomography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 14, no. 17, pp. 7801–7809,
2006.
[12] X. Gu, Q. Zhang, L. Larcom, and H. Jiang, “Three-dimensional bioluminescence tomography with model-based reconstruction,” Opt. Exp.,
vol. 12, no. 17, pp. 3996–4000, 2004.
[13] C. Qin, J. Tian, X. Yang, K. Liu, G. Yan, J. Feng, Y. Lv, and M. Xu,
“Galerkin-based meshless methods for photon transport in the biological
tissue,” Opt. Exp., vol. 16, no. 25, pp. 20317–20333, 2008.
[14] G. Wakefield, E. Holland, P. J. Dobson, and J. L. Hutchison, “Luminescence properties of nanocrystalline Y2 O3 :Eu,” Adv. Mater., vol. 13, no. 20,
pp. 1557–1560, 2001.
[15] M. Nichkova, D. Dosev, R. Perron, S. J. Gee, B. D. Hammock, and
I. M. Kennedy, “Eu3 + -doped Gd2 O3 nanoparticles as reporters for optical detection and visualization of antibodies patterned by microcontact
printing,” Anal. Bioanal. Chem., vol. 384, no. 3, pp. 631–637, 2006.
[16] R. Bazzi, M. A. Flores-Gonzalez, C. Louis, K. Lebbou, C. Dujardin,
A. Brenier, W. Zhang, O. Tillement, E. Bernstein, and P. Perriatc, “Synthesis and luminescent properties of sub-5-nm lanthanide oxides nanoparticles,” J. Lumin., vol. 102/103, pp. 445–450, 2003.
[17] A. M. Pires, M. F. Santos, M. R. Davolos, and E. B. Stucchi, “The effect
of Eu3 + ion doping concentration in Gd2 O3 fine spherical particles,” J.
Alloys Compounds, vol. 344, no. 1/2, pp. 276–279, 2002.
[18] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[19] E. J. Candès and M. B. Wakin, “An introduction to compressive sampling,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 21–30, Mar. 2008.
[20] K. Schnass and P. Vandergheynst, “Dictionary preconditioning for greedy
algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1994–2002,
May 2008.
[21] A. Jin, B. Yazici, A. Ale, and V. Ntziachristos, “Preconditioning of the
fluorescence diffuse optical tomography sensing matrix based on compressive sensing,” Opt. Lett., vol. 37, no. 20, pp. 4326–4328, 2012.
[22] J. Duarte-Carvajalino and G. Sapiro, “Learning to sense sparse signals:
Simultaneous sensing matrix and sparsifying dictionary optimization,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1395–1408, Jul. 2009.
[23] J. J. Duderstadt and L. J. Hamilton, Nuclear Reactor Analysis. New
York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1976.
[24] M. Schweiger, S. R. Arridge, M. Hiraoka, and D. T. Delpy, “The finite
element method for the propagation of light in scattering media: Boundary
and source conditions,” Med. Phys., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 1779–1792, 1995.
[25] A. Joshi, W. Bangerth, and E. M. Sevick-Muraca, “Adaptive finite element
based tomography for fluorescence optical imaging in tissue,” Opt. Exp.,
vol. 12, no. 22, pp. 5402–5417, 2004.
[26] T. Blumensath and M. E. Davies, “Gradient pursuits,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2370–2382, Jun. 2008.
[27] D. Needell and J. Tropp, “CoSaMP: Iterative signal recovery from incomplete and inaccurate samples,” Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal., vol. 26,
no. 3, pp. 301–321, 2009.
[28] D. L. Donoho, Y. Tsaig, I. Drori, and J.-L. Starck, “Sparse solution of
underdetermined systems of linear equations by stagewise orthogonal
matching pursuit,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 1094–
1121, Feb. 2012.
[29] J. A. Tropp and A. C. Gilbert, “Signal recovery from random measurements via orthogonal matching pursuit,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53,
no. 12, pp. 4655–4666, Dec. 2007.
[30] D. Donoho, M. Elad, and V. Temlyakov, “Stable recovery of sparse overcomplete representations in the presence of noise,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 6–18, Jan. 2006.
[31] R. G. Baraniuk, V. Cevher, M. F. Duarte, and C. Hegde, “Model-based
compressive sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1982–
2001, Apr. 2010.
[32] L. A. Feldkamp, L. C. Davis, and J. W. Kress, “Practical cone-beam algorithm,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 612–619, 1984.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to H. Lu for providing the corresponding X-ray equipments.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Pratx, C. Carpenter, C. Sun, and L. Xing, “X-ray luminescence computed tomography via selective excitation: A feasibility study,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1992–1999, Dec. 2010.
[2] G. Pratx, C. M. Carpenter, C. Sun, R. P. Rao, and L. Xing, “Tomographic
molecular imaging of X-ray-excitable nanoparticles,” Opt. Lett., vol. 35,
no. 20, pp. 3345–3347, 2010.
[3] C. M. Carpenter, G. Pratx, C. Sun, and L. Xing, “Limited-angle X-ray luminescence tomography: Methodology and feasibility study,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 3487–3502, 2011.
[4] C. Carpenter, G. Pratx, C. Sun, and L. Xing, “Hybrid X-ray/optical luminescence imaging: Characterization of experimental conditions,” Med.
Phys., vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 4011–4018, 2010.
[5] W. Cong, H. Shen, and G. Wang, “Spectrally resolving and scatteringcompensated X-ray luminescence/fluorescence computed tomography,”
J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 066014-1–066014-7, 2011.
[6] D. Chen, S. Zhu, H. Yi, X. Zhang, D. Chen, J. Liang, and J. Tian, “Cone
beam X-ray luminescence computed tomography: A feasibility study,”
Med. Phys., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 031111-1–031111-14, 2013.
[7] C. Li, K. Di, J. Bec, and S. R. Cherry, “X-ray luminescence optical tomography imaging: Experimental studies,” Opt. Lett., vol. 38, no. 13,
pp. 2339–2341, 2013.
[8] V. Ntziachristos, “Fluorescence molecular imaging,” Annu. Rev. Biomed.
Eng., no. 8, pp. 1–33, 2006.
[9] X. Liu, B. Zhang, J. Luo, and J. Bai, “4-D reconstruction for dynamic fluorescence diffuse optical tomography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 31,
no. 11, pp. 2120–2132, Nov. 2012.
[10] X. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Zhang, and J. Bai, “Unmixing dynamic fluorescence diffuse optical tomography images with independent component analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 1591–1604, Sep. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

