IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

1131

Drift-Free Position Estimation for Periodic
Movements Using Inertial Units
Nora Millor, Pablo Lecumberri, Marisol Gómez, Alicia Martı́nez-Ramı́rez, and Mikel Izquierdo

Abstract—Latest advances in microelectromechanical systems
have made inertial units (IUs) a powerful tool for human motion
analysis. However, difficulties in handling their output signals must
be overcome. The purpose of this study was to develop the novel
“PB-algorithm” based on polynomial data fitting, splines interpolation, and the wavelet transform, one after the other, to cancel
drift disturbances in position estimation for periodic movements.
High-accuracy position measurements from an optical system (Vicon Nexus 1.0) were used to validate the proposed method and
comparison with another drift-correction algorithm was provided.
Results indicate the accuracy with respect to the Vicon’s reference
signal (euclidean error lower than 54.62 × 10−3 m and correlation
coefficient higher than 0.968). A reduction of the root-mean-square
error of 68.74% was obtained when the proposed two-step method
was compared with a modified-band limited Fourier linear combiner. All methods were applied to data from the 30-s chair stand
test, which is one of the most used clinical tests dealing with lower
body strength assessment, falls prediction, and gait disorders in
older adults. The relevance of this study is that after cancelling drift
disturbances, and obtaining an accurate Z-position estimation, it
is possible to evaluate the sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit transitions
from the whole test.
Index Terms—Accelerometer, drift problem, human movement
analysis, splines, wavelets, 30-s chair stand test (CST).

I. INTRODUCTION
NERTIAL units (IUs) comprising accelerometers, gyroscopes, and, in some cases, magnetometers have become an
innovative noninvasive solution not only to assess sports-related
performance [1] but also as a clinical source of functional capacity assessment [2]–[5]. This is of special interest when dealing
with frailty or with Parkinson disease since patient’s displacement to a clinic or an institution to make the measurements is

I

Manuscript received February 28, 2013; revised August 19, 2013 and October 10, 2013; accepted October 14, 2013. Date of publication December 12,
2013; date of current version June 30, 2014. This work was supported in part
by the Spanish Department of Health and Institute Carlos III of the Government
of Spain [Spanish Net on Aging and frailty; (RETICEF)], the Department of
Health of the Government of Navarre and Economy, and the Competitivity Department of the Government of Spain, under Grants RD012/043/0002, 87/2010,
and DEP2011–24105, respectively.
N. Millor is with the Research, Studies and Sport Medicine Center, Government of Navarra, and the Department of Mathematics, Public University of
Navarra, Pamplona 31500, Spain (e-mail: nora.millor@unavarra.es).
P. Lecumberri, M. Gómez, and A. Martı́nez-Ramı́rez are with the Department of Mathematics, Public University of Navarra, Pamplona 31500,
Spain (e-mail: pablo.lecumberri@unavarra.es; marisol@unavarra.es; alicia.
martinez@unavarra.es).
M. Izquierdo is with the Department of Health Sciences, Public University
of Navarra, Pamplona 31500, Spain (e-mail: mikel.izquierdo@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2286697

often inadvisable [6]–[8]. Indeed, expensive and sophisticated
measurement tools such as force platforms or vision systems
are being confined to making experiments in laboratories.
One of the main limitations of IUs is that their outputs are relative data sets (i.e., angles between segments and their acceleration or velocity), while standard technologies directly provide
absolute and relative body segment position/and orientation in
a fixed reference frame. In fact, finding 3-D segment position,
absolute angles, and complete kinematics is the major difficulty
when using body-fixed inertial sensors [9]–[11]. In this regard,
one of the most common problems is the drift effect, an encumbering noise that arises when integrating the acceleration
signal to obtain velocity or position, which can even hide the
real outcome.
Through the literature, different methods can be found to
partially solve this problem: aided sensors or sensing systems
data fusion [11]–[14], wavelet analysis [15], [16], Fourier-based
filters [17]–[21], band-pass filtering [22], and polynomial data
fitting [23]. Generally, they tend to use the aid of an externally
referenced sensor or prior knowledge of the motion as well as
complex linear and adaptive filtering or other data processing to
estimate displacement from the acceleration signal. This study
develops a new method to cancel the drift effect based on the use
of a single IU and jointly considering different processing methods. In particular, polynomial data fitting [23], spline interpolation, and wavelet transform were employed one after the other.
The idea is to obtain an accurate estimation of the Z-position
signal without any restriction (i.e., previous knowledge of acceleration, velocity, and/or position at reference points [23]) other
than the movement’s periodicity. This way, the inertial technology arises as a powerful tool to measure activity during mobility
related activities in a noninvasive manner.
The 30-s chair stand test (CST) is one of the most used clinical
tests dealing with the lower body strength assessment in older
adults [24]–[26]. Moreover, this test has been reported to be a
good falls predictor [27] and to have a high correlation to gait
and other activities performance [28], [29], especially in older
frail population [30]–[32]. The relevance of this study for 30-s
CST users lies in its enabling automatic cycle’s counting and
subsequent definition of the movement’s phases. Second, the
current 30-s CST’s output information would be improved by
automatic analysis of kinematic and kinetic variables describing the movement’s performance from IU´s data recordings. In
addition, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, drift-canceling
methods have not been deeply tested with long duration and
wide movement amplitudes as the ones of the 30-s CST.
The aim of this study was to develop a novel two-step processing method (i.e., polynomial data fitting followed by baseline

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1132

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

estimation) to cancel drift disturbances in position estimation
for periodic movements. High-accuracy position measurements
from an optical system (Vicon Nexus 1.0) were used to validate the proposed method and to compare its performance with
another drift-correction algorithm [17].
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Subjects
Seven healthy subjects (five males and two females, age: 22 ±
5 years, body mass: 68.5 ± 8.6 kg, height: 1.7 ± 0.1 m) volunteered to participate in this study. All of them were thoroughly
informed about the experimental procedure, the purpose, nature,
and possible risks associated with the study, as well as the right
to finish their participation at their will. Subsequently, subjects
gave their written informed consent to participate.
These experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Committee of the Public University of Navarra,
and the Department of Health Sciences of the Government of
Navarra, according to the Declaration of Helsinki.

Fig. 1. Changes in global and IU’s local Cartesian reference axes when the
subject is trying to stand up at the beginning of the 30-s CST. (a) Initial position;
global and local reference axes coincide. (b) When the subject changes position,
the global axis remains unchanged. (c) Whereas the IU’s local reference axis
rotates with the physical device.

B. Testing Procedures
The 30-s CST consists in standing up and sitting down from
a chair with arms crossed across the chest as many times as
possible within 30 s. All trials were performed in a laboratory
with the same chair and ambiance conditions. The chair was
backless to permit full visibility of the marker tracker by the
optical system during the task performance. Each subject was
asked to perform two sets of the 30-s CST under two different
conditions. The first one, called self-adjusted test (SA-test), was
carried out after the command “slow but comfortable velocity
performance,” while the second one, called high-speed test (HStest), obeyed the command “as fast as possible.” There were
2 min of resting time between both trials in order to let the subject
recover from the first performance. The reasoning behind this
methodology is that during the self-adjusted trial the movement
performance is expected to be different from the high-speed
one. In fact, trunk angular displacements were assessed to be
lower during the high-speed trial [33], raising the impact of
geometrical errors [34]. Similarly, smoother displacements were
detected when carrying out the 30-s CST for the self-adjusted
conditions compared to the fast ones. Therefore, the HS-task is
regarded as an extreme scenario in terms of position estimation’s
difficulty.
C. Instrumentation
An IU integrating three accelerometers, three gyroscopes,
and three magnetometers (MTx, Xsens Technologies B.V. Enschede, Netherlands) attached over the L3 region of the subject’s
lumbar spine provided the kinematic data recorded in each trial
at a sampling rate of 100 Hz. MTx combines itself nine individual microelectromechanical systems sensors to furnish accurate
3-D orientation as well as other kinematic data such as: 3-D acceleration, 3-D rate of turn (rate gyro), and 3-D earth-magnetic
field. A detailed description of the MTx’s calculation methods
can be found elsewhere [1]. Optical motion analysis system

Fig. 2. Reference systems changes to obtain the global values from MTx
and Vicon. Subindexes “L,” “G,” and “V” refer to the MTx local, global, and
Vicon local coordinate systems, respectively, and R L G and R V G to the rotation
matrices to change coordinates from the first indicated reference system to the
second one.

(Vicon Nexus 1.0) was used as truth reference and it was time
synchronized with the MTx to compare both signal results.
The IU provided linear acceleration and rate of turn in a
sensor-fixed Cartesian reference frame (xyz). Before the beginning of the test, with the subject sitting on the chair and his back
in upright position, the sensor-fixed reference frame was aligned
with the Earth-fixed global reference frame (XYZ), whose
Z-axis lies on the vertical pointing upwards, its X-axis lies
on the lateral direction, and its Y -axis on the anterior–posterior
direction (see Fig. 1). Orientation data consisting in the Euler
angles (in XYZ or roll-pitch-yaw order) defined the rotation
that aligned the global axis to the sensor-fixed reference frame
at each time instant. Then, linear acceleration in the global reference frame was obtained from the acceleration and orientation
data provided by the IU [see Fig. 2(a)]. Furthermore, optical
data were also collected using a 100-Hz six-camera Vicon system (Vicon Motion System, Oxford, U.K.), in order to check the
new method’s accuracy [35]. Specifically, in our study, a Vicon
Nexus 1.0 was employed, using only three from the six available
cameras. They were previously calibrated similarly to [36] and
the data from the two systems were time-synchronized through
sync pulses in order to compare both of them in an offline analysis with Matlab (Math Works, Massachusetts, USA). One 4-mm
Vicon reflective marker was placed on the MTx to acquire its
3-D position for subsequent comparisons.

MILLOR et al.: DRIFT-FREE POSITION ESTIMATION FOR PERIODIC MOVEMENTS USING INERTIAL UNITS

Fig. 3. (a) Z -position signal (blue line) gravity error correction (green line),
and the Vicon reference signal (black line). Red line is the tendency line based
on fourth-level polynomial estimation that tracks the gravity error. (b) Corrected
and reference signal enlargement.

Fig. 4. Z -position free-drift obtaining algorithm: (a) double integration process, (b) first correction (C1), and (c) second correction (C2).

D. Signal Processing
1) Drift Effect Correction: The Z-position signal, obtained
through double integration of the Z-acceleration, was used to
detect the subject’s up and down positions and hence automatically obtain the number of complete sit-stand-sit repetitions
during the 30-s CST. However, the raw Z-acceleration signal
provided by the IU has to be treated as previously mentioned.
First, the coordinate reference system needed to be changed
from local to global. Second, the gravity acceleration component, roughly estimated as 9.8 m/s2 , had to be removed (see
Fig. 3).
Finally, relative position was obtained through double integration of the acceleration data [see Fig. 4(a)], assuming resting
initial conditions. However, this straightforward process was
hindered by noise in the acceleration signal as well as by approximation errors due to numerical integration. This drift effect

1133

that occurs for various reasons (e.g., vibration or environmental
temperature fluctuations) can, in practice, make the position or
velocity signals became unusable within several seconds. Therefore, an added step to solve this problem is needed. Here, a new
method based on polynomial curve adjustment and splines approximation is proposed. In doing so, we will be able to achieve
a correct Z-position overcoming the drift-error problem.
Our correction method first tries to estimate the drift caused
by a small dc bias in the Z-acceleration signal principally due
to assuming a gravity component of 9.8 m/s2 . This gross approximation leaves a small continuous component which gives
rise to a quadratic component in the double-integrated signal.
Here, a fourth-order polynomial was used to obtain the estimation parameters from the position signal, without incurring
in overfitting. Then, the derivative of the estimated polynomial
was employed to adjust the velocity signal and get the position
signal through integration [see Fig. 4(b)].
However, some baseline fluctuations can still be observed
after removing the polynomial estimation of the drift component
so a second step is needed to correct them. In this case, local
maxima and minima position signal information and one of the
following assumptions were used.
1) Hypothesis 1: “Subjects reach the same position when
they make contact with the chair each cycle.” Therefore,
differences in the minimum values of the Z-position signal are due to baseline drift. This baseline is estimated as
a cubic spline passing through the minima (with a tolerance of 5 mm) and minimizing the differences between
movement ranges in different standings [see Fig. 5(a)].
2) Hypothesis 2: “Subjects reach the same vertical position
when they get to the upright position.” In this case, the
baseline drift causes the variation of the maximum peaks
from the Z-position. The baseline is then estimated as the
signal in the 0–0.25 Hz frequency range with minimum
distance to the Z-position maximum points [see Fig. 5(b)].
Here, low-frequency interpolation of the maxima series
was employed. The condition of zero initial velocity
is imposed to reduce inaccuracies in the first samples’
estimation.
3) Hypothesis 3: “Subjects do not always get to the same
upright or sitting positions; instead, they reach different
maximum and minimum peaks each cycle.” In this case,
baseline drift is assumed to be common to both maxima
and minima series of peaks and of low frequency. First,
two cubic splines are used to interpolate the maxima and
minima series, respectively. Second, the wavelet analysis
was used to extract the common low-frequency component. In this case, a wavelet analysis of 15 levels using
a fourth-order Coiflet was applied to both interpolation
signals and the mean of the coefficients up to level 7 is
used to synthesize the low-frequency baseline estimation
[see Fig. 5(c)].
E. Reference Systems Unification
Vicon reference system had to be changed to the global axes
used by the MTx. To this purpose, some calibration measures

1134

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 6. (a) Z -position signal error after the selected correction methodology.
(b) Representation of the MTx signal verses the Vicon reference one.

G. Modified-Band Limited Fourier Linear Combiner
(BMFLC) Versus PB-Algorithm

Fig. 5. Final drift effect correction under different conditions from one subject
performing the HS-test. The left side shows the drifted Z -position signal (red
line) along with the estimated baseline [blue line in (a) and (b), black dotted
line in (c)]. The blue and green lines in (c) are the spline-based interpolation of
maxima and minima, respectively. The right side shows the corrected Z -position
(green line) with the reference Vicon Z -position signal (black line). The three
different hypotheses are represented in (a), (b), and (c).

The method reported in this study was compared to a recent modified-BMFLC drift-correction algorithm [14]. The 30-s
CST meets the quasi-periodic motion requirement for this driftcorrection algorithm to be applied. In the literature, there are
other methods to correct the drift effect, but this was probably
the first one which tried to cancel it when obtaining the position from the acceleration signal. First, as in [17], the cutoff
frequency and the order of the high-pass filter were selected
according to the 30-s CST conditions. A fourth-level filter was
chosen and the cutoff frequency was set at the movement’s
fundamental frequency. Finally, in order to achieve a good BMFLC algorithm performance, 200 intermediate subfrequencies
were selected between the movement’s fundamental and tenthharmonic frequencies.
III. RESULTS
A. Number of Full Stands

from the Vicon system collected after each measurement were
used to obtain the rotation matrix needed to make the coordinates
change [see Fig. 2(b)]. This arrangement makes it possible to
compare the trajectory reconstructed from IU’s data and the one
provided by the Vicon system.
F. Statistical Parameters for Comparisons
Comparisons were done based on parameters such as the
euclidean error (EE), (1.1), similarly to [35], and accuracy, defined as the percentage of the whole signal without error. Furthermore, statistical parameters such as the root-mean-squared
error (RMSE), (1.2), and the correlation coefficient (r) were also
obtained to check our method’s accuracy:

N




ZpositionVicon (n)−ZpositionM T x (n) (1.1)
EE = 


n =1



N
1 
RMSE = 
ZpositionVicon (n)−ZpositionM T x (n).
N n =1
(1.2)

The mean and standard deviation of the number of full stands
was 12 ± 3 and 29 ± 6 repetitions for the SA-test and the
HS-test, respectively.
B. Vicon Reference Signal Versus Hypothesis 1, 2, and 3
The Z-position obtained from the present two-step IU’s data
processing method provided the same number of full stands as
that reported by the Vicon system. A maximum error of the
order of 0.002 m was observed when calculating the difference
of both trajectories (1.1), (see Fig. 6).
Table I shows the values of the EE, RMSE, and the correlation coefficient (r) of each 30-s CST task in the sagittal plane
(i.e., the one where the up and down trajectory is principally
located). Mean EE and RMSE values were always lower than
21.58 × 10−3 m and 27.80 × 10−3 m, respectively. The correlation coefficient was always greater than 0.96. Moreover,
since the HS-test represents an extreme scenario for vertical
trajectory assessment, better accuracy was obtained at SA-test
performance (mean EE of 13.85 × 10−3 m and a coefficient of
correlation of 0.99).
The corrected signals showed a mean EE of 31.4 ± 24.7 ×
10−3 m, (see Table I) after the gravity correction. Then, it

MILLOR et al.: DRIFT-FREE POSITION ESTIMATION FOR PERIODIC MOVEMENTS USING INERTIAL UNITS

TABLE I
HYPOTHESIS AND “BMFLC-ALGORITHM” COMPARISONS

was improved up to 19.5 ± 12.3 × 10 −3 m after the second
step. Accuracy differences, however, were noticed depending
on the method used. Second and third procedures gave better Z-position approximations. Specifically, for the HS-test, the
maximum EE decreased using the third assumption instead of
the first one from 100.4 × 10−3 to 54.62 × 10 −3 m. Overall,
the third assumption was regarded as the more accurate due to
the high variability of the maximum and minimum positions
reached by the subjects during the test performance.
C. Modified-BMFLC Versus PB-Algorithm
Compared to the Vicon’s reference signal, the modifiedBMFLC algorithm showed an EE of 32.81 ± 37.12 × 10 −3 m.
and a correlation coefficient below 0.890. By using this paper’s drift-correction proposal, an improvement of 40.75% and
62.90%, with respect to the BMFLC’s mean EE was achieved
under the HS and SA test conditions, respectively.
IV. DISCUSSION
This study is the first step to obtain a procedure to analyze the
30-s CST data. By instrumenting the test, both current parameters such as the number of performed cycles and new kinematic
information could be automatically obtained.
The main result of this paper was that the new two-step
processing method, or PB- algorithm, is able to cancel drift
disturbances in position estimation for periodic movements facilitating the analysis of the 30-s CST using a single IU. Polynomial curve adjustment followed by splines interpolation and
wavelet transform was used as an innovative method to correct
the drift signal from the integrated acceleration. These results
are useful for establishing movement’s phases and computing
kinetic parameters from 30-s CST’s data. This methodology
could also be used in other test involving periodic movements
with little or no modification.
One of the preliminary steps of the 30-s CST evaluation is
to determine the beginning and end of each up-and-down cycle from the recorded sensor’s signals. In this regard, the Zposition stands as the best reference for cutting the whole 30-s
signal into cycles since it is the main component of the stand-up
and sit-down movement. This approach allows for the automatic recording of the number of full stands without the encumbrance of human counting error. So, once the sit-to-stand test is

1135

TABLE II
PB-ALGORITHM VERSUS MODIFIED-BMFLC (% IMPROVEMENT)

divided into cycles, it is possible to examine each of their phases
separately in order to obtain kinematic variables related to the
movement’s performance.
It is know, however, that the accuracy of the displacement
obtained from IU’s data may be rather poor due to the inherent
drift effect, mainly caused by the noise and dc bias of the acceleration signal, which grows quadratically with time. These are
the reasons why IUs are seldom used alone in the measurement
of displacement and different techniques are available through
the literature in order to solve this problem. They range from
using either aided sensors or sensing systems [11]–[13], [18]
to using signal analysis such as filters [22], frequency treatment [17]–[21], or baseline estimation [23] to remove the sensor noise. Regarding signal analysis two techniques are typically used: adaptive filtering methods based on Fourier series
and the wavelet transform. In the first case, the weighted fequency Fourier linear counter [17], [21], [20] and especially,
the band-limited multi-Fourier linear combiner (BMFLC) are
used to estimate the displacement due to a periodic motion
from an accelerometer’s data. In doing so, periodic signals can
be modeled by series of sine and cosine components and zero
phase band-pass filtering removes the unwanted noise. However, for the 30-s CST signals, better Z-position estimation is
obtained when using the PB-algorithm instead of the BMFLC
algorithm. The reason for this difference may be that both algorithms are tailored to different kinds of movements. While the
displacements typically analyzed with the BMFLC techniques
were tremors of about 0.2 mm. [17], [21], [26], the 30-s CST entails up and down movements of about 30 cm. In this manner, a
reduction of approximately 70% of the RMS error was obtained
with the proposed two-step processing method (see Table II). In
addition, another disadvantage of the BMFCL algorithm is the
fact that is specifically focused to periodic signals, something
that is not always true for the quasi-periodic 30-s CST’s movement. Furthermore, a large number of intermediate frequencies
were needed when using the BMFLC algorithm to obtain a good
Z-position approximation which makes it dependent on the input signal.
In this study, polynomial curve adjustment, and baseline interpolation (i.e., cubic splines and wavelet analysis) were used
in an innovative method, called the PB-algorithm, to correct the
drift from the double-integrated acceleration signal. First, the
use of a fourth-level polynomial was able to correct the effect of
the gravity vestige that biased the acceleration signal and which
completely hid the true Z-position. Second, baseline interpolation from local maxima and minima yielded an even better

1136

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Z-position estimation eliminating the remaining drift artifact.
Three alternative hypotheses were proposed to drive the interpolation process: 1) equal minimum values when sitting down;
2) equal maximum values when standing up; and 3) maximum
and minimum values affected by the same low-frequency baseline deviation. Min. and max. Z-position variability has been
assessed from the Vicon system. The average values were 1.94%
and 82.21% for max. and min. Z-positions, while there was a
maximum variation of 6.28% and 207.9% for max. and min.
Z-position. Therefore, the third hypothesis provides a more accurate Z-position estimation since subjects do not always get the
same position either when they upright stand up or when they
reach the seat. Moreover, results show it provides better results
in almost every test condition. We obtain an original method
to first estimate the drift corrected Z-position signal from the
Z-acceleration and have then a reference to automatically analyze the 30-s CST.
A comparison with the position provided by a Vicon system
was used in this study to check the validity of the PB-algorithm
for the 30-s CST. The present results showed higher accuracy of
the Z-position estimation for the 30-s CST than that obtained
with the modified-BMFLC algorithm, even for the HS-test. As
reported in Giasanti et al. [34], lower accuracy in the position
estimation is achieved when the movement involves greater accelerations (i.e., in high-speed movements). The PB-algorithm
proposed in this study outperformed the BMLFC algorithm under both test’s conditions (SA-test and HS-test).
Despite the extra processing, the use of IUs shows several
advantages over optical systems. First, IUs do not constrain the
measurement volume and do not suffer from shadowing problems. In addition, they can be easily attached to the human body
without hindering the execution of motor tasks. Finally, the results show that the PB-algorithm performs satisfactorily under
different velocity conditions. This suggests that the proposed
procedure could be applied to evaluate the test performance of
aged or Parkinson’s affected subjects with low-velocity movements without the constraint of a laboratory setting.

V. CONCLUSION
In summary, this study introduces a new perspective for
analyzing periodic movements based on the position signal.
Once the drift is removed, the position information obtained
from IUs’ data is similar in quality to the one provided by expensive laboratory-fixed instruments like optical systems. This
paper presents an accurate two-step processing method, or
PB-algorithm, based on considering polynomial data fitting
followed by cubic splines and wavelet analysis, for drift cancellation in periodic movements with a single IU. In the case of
the 30-s CST, it leads to obtaining automatically the test outcome (the number of completed cycles) as well as meaningful
kinematic data for the evaluation of the movement execution
as in [37]. It could also be applied to other tests dealing with
stand-up or sit-down movements such as the sit-to-walk test,
widely used in medical applications [38]. This could lead to an
improvement of clinical settings as well as rehabilitation ther-

apies and fall risk identification, which is nowadays based on
parameters obtained from visual observations.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Martinez-Ramirez, P. Lecumberri, M. Gomez, and M. Izquierdo,
“Wavelet analysis based on time-frequency information discriminate
chronic ankle instability,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 256–264,
Mar. 2010.
[2] M. C. Boonstra, R. M. van der Slikke, N. L. Keijsers, R. C. van Lummel,
M. C. de Waal Malefijt, and N. Verdonschot, “The accuracy of measuring
the kinematics of rising from a chair with accelerometers and gyroscopes,”
J. Biomech., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 354–358, 2006.
[3] R. Moe-Nilssen and J. L. Helbostad, “Trunk accelerometry as a measure
of balance control during quiet standing,” Gait Posture, vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. 60–68, Aug. 2002.
[4] P. H. Veltink and H. M. Franken, “Detection of knee unlock during stance
by accelerometry,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 395–402,
Dec. 1996.
[5] P. H. Veltink, H. B. Bussmann, W. de Vries, W. L. Martens, and R. C. van
Lummel, “Detection of static and dynamic activities using uniaxial accelerometers,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 375–385,
Dec. 1996.
[6] H. Jeon, S. K Kim, B Jeon, and K. S Park, “Distance estimation from
acceleration for quantitative evaluation of parkinson tremor,” in Proc IEEE
Int. Conf. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, vol. 6, pp. 393–396.
[7] P. Fazio, G. Graneri, I. Casetta, E. Cesnik, S. Mazzacane, P. Caliandro,
F. Pedrielli, and E. Graneri, “Gait measures with a triaxial accelerometer among patients with neurological impairment,” Neurol. Sci., vol. 34,
pp. 435–440, Mar. 2012.
[8] C. C. Yang, Y. L. Hsu, K. S. Shih, and J. M. Lu, “Real-time gait cycle
parameter recognition using a wearable accelerometry system,” Sensors,
vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 7314–7326, Aug. 2011.
[9] K. Aminian, C. Trevisan, B. Najafi, H. Dejnabadi, C. Frigo, E. Pavan,
A. Telonio, F. Cerati, E. C. Marinoni, P. Robert, and P. F. Leyvraz, “Evaluation of an ambulatory system for gait analysis in hip osteoarthritis and
after total hip replacement,” Gait Posture, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 102–107,
Aug. 2004.
[10] H. Dejnabadi, B. M. Jolles, E. Casanova, P. Fua, and K. Aminian, “Estimation and visualization of sagittal kinematics of lower limbs orientation
using body-fixed sensors,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 7,
pp. 1385–1393, Jul. 2006.
[11] J. R. W. Morris, “Accelerometry—Technique for measurement of human
body movements,” J. Biomech., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 729–732, Nov. 1973.
[12] A. J. Padgaonkar, K. W. Krieger, and A. I. King, “Measurement of angular
acceleration of a rigid body using linear accelerometers,” J. Appl. Mech.,
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 552–556, 1975.
[13] H. Rehbinder and X. M. Hu, “Drift-free attitude estimation for accelerated
rigid bodies,” Automatica, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 653–659, Apr. 2004.
[14] A. T. M. Willemsen, C. Frigo, and H. B. K. Boom, “Lower-extremity angle measurement with accelerometers—Error and sensitivity analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 1186–1193, Dec. 1991.
[15] B. Najafi, K. Aminian, F. Loew, Y. Blanc, and P. A. Robert, “Measurement
of stand-sit and sit-stand transitions using a miniature gyroscope and its
application in fall risk evaluation in the elderly,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 843–851, Aug. 2002.
[16] S. C. Shen, C. J. Chen, and H. J. Huang, “A new calibration method for
low cost MEMS inertial sensor module,” J. Marine Sci. Technol., vol. 18,
no. 6, pp. 819–824, Dec. 2010.
[17] W. T. Latt, K. C. Veluvolu, and W. T. Ang, “Drift-free position estimation of periodic or quasi-periodic motion using inertial sensors,” Sensors,
vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5931–5951, Jun. 2011.
[18] C. N. Riviere and N. V. Thakor, “Modeling and canceling tremor in
human-machine interfaces,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 29–36, May 1996.
[19] C. N. Riviere, R. S. Rader, and N. V. Thakor, “Adaptive canceling of physiological tremor for improved precision in microsurgery,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 839–846, Jul. 1998.
[20] U. X. Tan, K. C. Veluvolu, W. T. Latt, C. Y. Shee, C. N. Riviere, and
W. T. Ang, “Estimating displacement of periodic motion with inertial
sensors,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 1385–1388, Jul. 2008.
[21] K. C. Veluvolu and W. T. Ang, “Estimation of physiological tremor
from accelerometers for real-time applications,” Sensors, vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 3020–3036, Mar. 2011.

MILLOR et al.: DRIFT-FREE POSITION ESTIMATION FOR PERIODIC MOVEMENTS USING INERTIAL UNITS

[22] M. Djuric-Jovicic, N. Jovicic, and D. B. Popovic, “Kinematics of gait: new
method for angle estimation based on accelerometers,” Sensors, vol. 11,
no. 11, pp. 10571–10585, Nov. 2011.
[23] M. Djuric-Jovicic, N. Jovicic, D. B. Popovic, and A. R. Djordjevic, “Nonlinear optimization for drift removal in estimation of gait kinematics based
on accelerometers,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, no. 16, pp. 2849–2854, Nov.
2012.
[24] C. J. Jones, R. E. Rikli, and W. C. Beam, “A 30-s chair-stand test as a
measure of lower body strength in community-residing older adults,” Res.
Quart. Exercise Sport, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 113–119, Jun. 1999.
[25] W. N. Smith, G. Del Rossi, J. B. Adams, K. Z. Abderlarahman,
S. A. Asfour, B. A. Roos, and J. F. Signorile, “Simple equations to predict
concentric lower-body muscle power in older adults using the 30-second
chair-rise test: a pilot study,” Clin. Interventions Aging, vol. 5, pp. 173–
180, 2010.
[26] H. W. Tang, P. S. Lin, H. H. Liu, S. C. Liu, H. S. Cheng, and
A. M. K. Wong, “The relationships between knee extensor muscle strength
and 30-s chair stand test in community-dwelling elderly of different health
statuses,” J. Aging Phys. Activity, vol. 16, pp. S176–S176, Jul. 2008.
[27] K Yuuji, “The CS-30 test is a useful assessment tool for predicting falls
in community-dwelling elderly people,” Rigakuryoho Kagaku, vol. 23,
pp. 441–445, 2008.
[28] S. Toshimichi, “Elderly people’s stand up ability and excretion independence,” Rigakuryoho Kagaku, vol. 22, pp. 89–92, 2007.
[29] M. Yukiyasu, “Relationship of a 30-second chair-stand test to gait performance in stroke patients,” Rigakuryoho Kagaku, vol. 19, pp. 69–73,
2004.
[30] M. Baruth, S. Wilcox, S. Wegley, D. M. Buchner, M. G. Ory, A. Phillips,
K. Schwamberger, and T. L. Bazzarre, “Changes in physical functioning
in the active living every day program of the active for life initiative,” Int.
J. Behav. Med., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 199–208, Sep. 2011.
[31] A. Foley, S. Hillier, and R. Barnard, “Effectiveness of once-weekly gymbased exercise programmes for older adults post discharge from day rehabilitation: A randomised controlled trial,” Br. J. Sports Med., vol. 45,
no. 12, pp. 978–986, Sep. 2011.

1137

[32] E. Marues, J. Carvalho, A. Pizarro, F. Wanderlay, and J. Mota, “The
influence of physical activity, body composition, and lower extremity
strength on walking ability,” Motor Control, no. 15, pp. 494–506, Sep.
2011.
[33] W. G. M. Janssen, J. B. J. Bussmann, H. L. D. Horemans, and H. J. Stam,
“Analysis and decomposition of accelerometric signals of trunk and thigh
obtained during the sit-to-stand movement,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 265–272, Mar. 2005.
[34] D. Giansanti, V. Macellari, G. Maccioni, and A. Cappozzo, “Is it feasible
to reconstruct body segment 3-D position and orientation using accelerometric data?,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 476–483,
Apr. 2003.
[35] D. Giansanti, G. Maccioni, F. Benvenuti, and V. Macellari, “Inertial measurement units furnish accurate trunk trajectory reconstruction of the sitto-stand manoeuvre in healthy subjects,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 45,
no. 10, pp. 969–976, Oct. 2007.
[36] M Angermann, P Robertson, T Kemptner, and M Khider, “A high precision reference data set for pedestrian navigation using foot-mounted
inertial sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Indoor Positioning Indoor Navigat.,
Sep. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[37] N. Millor, P. Lecumberri, M. Gómez, A. Martı́nez-Ramı́rez, and
M. Izquierdo, “An evaluation of the 30-s chair stand test in older adults:
Frailty detection based on kinematic parameters from a single inertial
unit,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 10, pp. 86–95, 2013.
[38] P. Dehail, E. Bestaven, F. Muller, A. Mallet, B. Robert, I. BourdelMarchasson, and J. Petit, “Kinematic and electromyographic analysis of
rising from a chair during a “Sit-to-Walk” task in elderly subjects: Role
of strength,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1096–1103, Dec. 2007.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

