476

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Patient-Specific 12-Lead ECG Reconstruction
From Sparse Electrodes Using Independent
Component Analysis
Gill R. Tsouri and Michael H. Ostertag

Abstract—We propose and evaluate a method of 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) reconstruction from a three-lead set. The
method makes use of independent component analysis and results
in adaptive patient-specific transforms. The required calibration
process is short and makes use of a single beat. We apply the
method to two sets of leads: leads I, II, V2 and the Frank XYZ
leads. Performance is evaluated via percent correlation calculations between reconstructed and original leads from a publicly
available database of 549 ECG recordings. Results depict percent
correlation exceeding 96% for almost all leads. Adaptability of the
method’s transform is shown to compensate for changes in signal
propagation conditions due to breathing, resulting in reduced variance of reconstruction accuracy across beats. This implies that the
method is robust to changes that occur after the time of calibration.
Accurate and adaptive reconstruction has the potential to augment
the clinical significance of wireless ECG systems since the number
of sensor nodes placed on the body is limited and the subject could
be mobile.
Index Terms—Biomedical signal processing, blind source separation, body sensor networks, electrocardiography.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE electrocardiogram (ECG) aids cardiologists in the diagnosis of heart conditions. There are multiple setups for
ECG electrodes, but the standard clinical 12-lead ECG is the
setup most commonly used. Traditionally, a clinical 12-lead
ECG uses electrodes accurately placed at predefined sites on
the body and requires the patient to recline and be still to avoid
motion artifacts. Consequently, 12-lead ECG monitoring is limited to short timespans while remote long-term ECG monitoring
relies on one-lead or three-lead ECGs, which provide limited information on heart condition. Reduced-lead ECG systems are
important for improving patient comfort during long-term monitoring and in cases where placing many electrodes on a patient
interferes with auscultation, examination, or resuscitation.
The data from a 12-lead ECG are quite redundant. Some leads
can be reconstructed with a high degree of accuracy from other

T

Manuscript received June 14, 2013; revised September 21, 2013 and
November 5, 2013; accepted November 30, 2013. Date of publication December 11, 2013; date of current version March 3, 2014.
G. R. Tsouri is with the Communications Research Laboratory, Department
of Electrical and Microelectronic Engineering, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623 USA (e-mail: grteee@rit.edu).
M. H. Ostertag is with the Department of Electrical and Microelectronic Engineering, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623 USA (e-mail:
michael.h.ostertag@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2294561

leads in the set. This has been the basis for reduced-lead systems developed in the past [1]–[5]. The basic idea is to provide
a clinical 12-lead ECG using as little as three leads. A common assumption in previous lead reconstruction work was that
the signals from the heart propagate in a homogenous medium,
which allows for the use of linear transformation in the form
of matrices to translate reduced-lead observations to the full
12-lead ECG. The three prominent types of lead reconstruction
transforms are the universal, population-specific, and patientspecific transforms. In all cases, the transforms are fixed and do
not adapt to changes over time. It is widely accepted that universal transforms are not reliable due to the wide degree of variance
in the transforms across time and across patients. Each patient
has a different composition of chest tissues, different size, shape,
or location of the heart, and different levels of aging and disease [6]. Population-specific transforms have proven to be more
effective than their universal counterparts. By segmenting patients based on their age, gender, and disease classification, the
transform becomes better customized and produces more accurate reconstruction. The patient-specific transforms perform
best due to the anatomical and diagnostic differences across
patients [7]. In [8], a comprehensive analysis was performed to
assess reconstruction accuracy of transforms derived via predictive lead fitting using linear regression. Combinations of —four
to five leads were used to reconstruct 12-lead ECG. Patientspecific transforms were found to perform best. The transforms
in [8] were trained over vast data and were not adaptive, i.e.,
their coefficients were fixed after calibration.
In this contribution, we propose, analyze, and evaluate a
patient-specific and adaptive 12-lead reconstruction method
based on independent component analysis (ICA). The 12-lead
ECG is reconstructed from a set of just three leads. As with
other patient-specific transforms, the proposed method relies on
calibration of a transform matrix to a specific patient. However,
the calibration process does not require vast data. Instead, just
a single beat is required which means that calibration time is
approximately 1 s. In contradistinction to previous transforms,
the proposed method generates adaptive transforms capable of
compensating for changes in signal propagation conditions from
the time of calibration, i.e., the transform’s coefficients change
over time. We are unaware of previous work making use of
transforms that adapt over time to reconstruct a 12-lead ECG
from a reduced-lead set.
ICA is a technique for blind-source separation. It extracts statistically independent sources, also known as independent components (ICs), from a set of observations. Rows of sources(s)

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TSOURI AND OSTERTAG: PATIENT-SPECIFIC 12-LEAD ECG RECONSTRUCTION FROM SPARSE ELECTRODES

477

are related to rows of observations (x) by the mixing matrix (A)
as follows:
x = As.

(1)

The mixing matrix is square in many popular ICA algorithms
in order to exploit the inverse to minimize the convergence
time [9]. ICA is widely used in many domains such as acoustics, image analysis noise reduction, and electroencephalography signal interpretation [9], [10]. Specifically, past use of ICA
for ECG was limited to reducing noise and suppressing motion
artifacts [11] and separating maternal and fetal ECGs [12].
In past work [13], we reported on a preliminary attempt to
apply ICA for reconstructing precordial ECG leads. The preliminary method presented in [13] allows for reconstructing leads
V1, V3, V4, and V6 from leads V2 and V5. In this contribution,
we expand the work in [13] to derive a new method for a complete 12-lead ECG reconstruction from just three leads. The
method uses an improved calibration technique to customize
the reconstruction transforms per patient and produces much
better results than before. Two different reduced-lead sets are
investigated in this paper: leads I, II, V2 and Frank XYZ leads.
Performance of both sets is evaluated over the PhysikalischTechnische Bundesanstalt (PTB) diagnostic ECG database as
made available through PhysioNet [14]. In addition, the adaptability of the method’s transforms to signal propagation conditions is demonstrated over a long period of time.
II. PROPOSED METHOD
We treat the sensed signals from the three leads as a sparse
measure of the required 12-lead set. The first stage of the proposed method consists of basic preprocessing in which the ECG
waveform is filtered and the QRS complexes are identified. Next,
a training sequence from a single beat creates a patient-specific
transform that relates the ICs from the reduced-lead set to the 12
to-be-reconstructed leads. After the training sequence, all electrodes that are not part of the reduced-lead set may be removed.
A flow diagram of the proposed method is depicted in Fig. 1 and
each step is described in more detail in the following sections.
A. Signal Preprocessing
The first preprocessing stage includes band-pass filtering of
the ECG waveforms. Two digital filters were developed using
the Parks–McClellan algorithm [15]. The first is a high-pass
filter with the end of the stop band at a frequency of 0.5 Hz to
remove any dc offset and baseline drift. The second is a lowpass filter with the start of the stop band at 150 Hz to reduce the
amount of high-frequency noise in the signal. The filters were
cascaded and the specific frequencies were selected to meet the
American Heart Association standards [16].
The second preprocessing stage was designed to perform
QRS detection. The detection algorithm is similar to the Pan–
Tompkins QRS detection algorithm [17]. A 100 ms moving
average is taken of the square of the approximate derivative and

Fig. 1.

Flow diagram of proposed method.

is obtained with:
y[n] = −x[n − 10] − 2x[n − 5] + 2x[n + 5]+x[n + 10].
(2)
The resulting function (y [n]) is normalized and any peak
that has a value above the threshold of 0.125 and occurs at least
200 ms from the previous peak is marked as a QRS complex. The
200 ms wait was selected because the heart cannot beat faster
due to physiological limitations. Once the QRS complexes are
located, the beat domain is defined as spanning three-eighths
the time between the current and previous peak and five-eighths
the time between the current and next peak.
B. Transform Training Sequence
ICA is applied to a single detected beat. The ICs are extracted
from the reduced three-lead set resulting in:
⎤
⎡
⎤⎡
⎤
⎡
aX bX cX
IC1
xX
xRLS = ⎣ xY ⎦ = As = ⎣ aY bY cY ⎦ ⎣ IC2 ⎦ (3)
xZ
aZ bZ cZ
IC3
where xRLS is a matrix of the observations from the reducedlead set (each row in xRLS is comprised of samples of a single
lead taken during the training beat), A is the 3 × 3 mixing matrix, and s is the set of ICs generated from the reduced-lead set
using ICA (each row in s represents a sampled IC signal during the training beat). The patient specific 12-by-3 reconstruction transform matrix (Ar ) is derived using the pseudoinverse
matrix:

−1
(4)
Ar = xobs sT ssT
where xobs is a matrix of the observed 12-leads during the single
detected beat (each row is comprised of samples of a single lead
taken during the raining beat). Note that Ar does not change
during the beat, i.e., a single matrix is obtained from all samples
taken during the training beat.
At this point, the excess electrodes may be removed from
the patient since they can be reconstructed by the previously

478

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

mentioned transform and the ICs generated from a reduced-lead
set.
C. Reconstruction Sequence
The set of three leads used for training is also used for the
reconstruction of the missing leads. ICs are generated from a
one-beat segment of the reduced-lead set using ICA with an
initial guess of the mixing matrix that was found during the
training phase. This starting point helps the ICA algorithm to
converge to a more consistent ordering and orientation of ICs.
A known problem with ICA is the ordering of ICs. The ICs
may alternate row positions in s, which would be compensated
for by corresponding changes in the matrix A. To fix the ordering problem, ICs are sorted based upon the correlation of
the current set of ICs with the original set, i.e., the ordering
which correlates the best with the ICs obtained upon training
is chosen. To reconstruct the missing leads, the sorted ICs are
left-multiplied by the reconstruction transform as follows:
⎤
⎤
⎡
⎡
bI
cI
xI
aI
⎡
⎤
bII
cII ⎥ IC1
⎢ xII ⎥
⎢ aII
⎥
⎢
⎣ IC2 ⎦ (5)
xr = ⎢
..
.. ⎥
⎣ ... ⎦ = Ar s = ⎣ ...
.
. ⎦ IC3
xV 6
aV 6 bV 6 cV 6
where s now represents the ICs obtained by applying ICA to the
current beat and xr holds the 12 reconstructed leads.
The adaptability of the transforms stems from the fact that
although the patient-specific reconstruction matrix Ar does not
change after training, the matrix A obtained by the ICA algorithm per detected beat does vary. The result is that changes in
A across detected beats compensate for changes in the reducedlead set observations due to variability in signal propagation
conditions. This will be demonstrated in a later section.
III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Two sets of reduced leads were evaluated: leads I, II, V2
and the Frank XYZ leads. The set comprising leads I, II, V2
was chosen due to a high degree of orthogonality between the
limb leads and V2, which suggests that more information can
be obtained. This lead set represents a scenario in which the
method could be easily integrated into current hospital setups.
The Frank XYZ lead set was chosen due to the appeal of using
differential measurements, which are much more convenient
to acquire compared to single-ended measurements, especially
when considering a wireless ECG system.
The ICA algorithm used to find the ICs throughout the evaluation was the FastICA algorithm [9]. FastICA is based on
an optimization iteration scheme designed to maximize nonGaussianity to achieve statistical independence of the ICs.
The two sets were evaluated using recordings from the PTB
diagnostic ECG database as made available through PhysioNet
[14]. The database consists of 549 ECG recordings from 290
subjects with a variety of diagnostic classes: 52 healthy controls, 148 myocardial infarctions, and the remainder with other
cardiac diagnoses. For each recording, the three limbs, three
augmented, six precordial, and three Frank leads were captured
simultaneously at a sampling frequency of 1 kHz.

The figure of merit used for comparing the actual leads to
reconstructed leads was percent correlation (ρ), which is similar
to the metric used in [8]. It is defined as follows:

N
i=1 x [i] x̃ [i]


× 100%
(6)
ρ = 

N
2
N
2
i=1 x [i]
i=1 x̃ [i]
where the index value i represents the samples within a beat of
length N samples, x [i] is the original ECG signal sample, and
x̃ [i] is the reconstructed ECG signal sample. A perfect match
in the timing of the two signals would correspond to a ρ value
of 100%. We chose this metric instead of a mean-square error
estimate since it represents the matching of signal patterns. Since
cardiac activity is inferred by the changes of the signal over
time, time variations in the signal pattern are more important
for diagnosis than the average absolute difference between the
signals.
Both reduced-lead sets were used for reconstruction over the
entire PTB database. Percent correlation for the first beat after
the training sequence (t = 0 s) and a beat 30 s after the training sequence (t = 30s) was derived across reconstructed leads
and across patients and the mean and standard deviation were
extracted per lead.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Reduced-Lead Set: Leads I, II, and V2
In initial tests, we observed that different sets of limb leads
generated identical ICs, which was likely due to the fact that
they were physically connected in the hospital setting. Because
leads I, II, and III were found to be exchangeable, leads I and II
were arbitrarily selected. The third lead is required to monitor
their orthogonal direction. Lead V2 was selected as the third
lead since it is the most orthogonal precordial lead and had been
successfully used before [2]. Eventually, the reduced-lead set of
leads I, II, and V2 was selected because the three leads capture
data that encompasses all orientations of the heart.
The reconstructed leads were compared to original leads using ρ as defined in (6). The probability density function (PDF)
of ρ was evaluated using the histogram method. We found that
an overwhelming majority of reconstruction instances exhibit
very high ρ for all reconstructed leads. This was the case for
reconstruction at both time instances, suggesting accurate reconstruction across time.
Statistical averages from the PDFs are provided in Table I,
where the mean μ and standard deviation σ were calculated over
the entire data. Each row in the table corresponds to a certain
time difference between training and reconstruction and each
table entry provides the mean and standard deviation in parenthesis. The limb and augmented leads initially provided nearly
perfect reconstructions with average ρ value of 99.9%–100%
for leads III, AVR, AVL, and AVF and 94.9%–98.1% for V1,
V3, V4, V5, and V6. After 30 s, reconstruction accuracy remained high. Due to the spatial proximity of leads V1 and V3 to
a lead from the reduced set (V2), they were reconstructed more
accurately than V4–V6. The lower reconstruction correlations
of leads V4–V6 suggest that the limb leads cannot as accurately

TSOURI AND OSTERTAG: PATIENT-SPECIFIC 12-LEAD ECG RECONSTRUCTION FROM SPARSE ELECTRODES

479

Fig. 2. Typical example of reconstructing 12-lead ECG with the proposed method using reduced-lead set of I, II, and V2. The black curves are the original leads
of patient S0009 and the gray curves are the reconstructed versions. The average percent correlation across all leads is 97.99%.
TABLE I
STATISTICS OF CORRELATIONS BETWEEN ACTUAL AND RECONSTRUCTED
LEADS FOR RECONSTRUCTION USING THE REDUCED-LEAD
SET: LEADS I, II, AND V2

reconstruct the precordial leads and that a reduced-lead set containing more than one precordial lead could be chosen to improve precordial lead reconstruction. Nonetheless, reconstruction accuracy is high across all leads.
A typical example for 12-lead reconstruction is depicted in
Fig. 2. Note that a considerable amount of discrepancy between
actual and reconstructed leads can be attributed to the difference
in noise superimposed over the signals.
B. Reduced-Lead Set: Frank XYZ Leads
The PDF of ρ was estimated as before and the corresponding
statistical averages were evaluated and are provided in Table II.
Overall reconstruction accuracy is high across all leads and
we observe the same trends as for the I, II, and V2 leads set.
Accuracy is slightly lower than for the previous set with the
exception of leads V4–V6, where reconstruction is better. A
typical example of reconstruction is provided in Fig. 3.
Note that the variation in accuracy across the two lead sets is
low and inconsistent. We conclude that both lead sets perform
well.

TABLE II
STATISTICS OF CORRELATIONS BETWEEN ACTUAL AND RECONSTRUCTED
LEADS FOR THE REDUCED-LEAD SET: FRANK’S XYZ LEADS

C. Comparison With Past Work
We are unaware of previous work making use of transforms
that adapt over time. In past methods, the transforms remain
fixed after calibration, and reconstruction accuracy is averaged
across time per lead. When adaptive transforms are considered it
makes sense to test for reconstruction accuracy at specific times
across all subjects. Furthermore, the proposed method makes use
of three leads and requires a single beat for calibration whereas
previous methods with best accuracy make use of four to five
leads and are calibrated using all available beats. In addition, an
adaptive transform is expected to provide better performance in a
dynamic environment where the subject is not forced to remain
still. As all available databases and past methods assumed a
stationary subject (usually in a supine position), a comparison
with past work is problematic.
We benchmark performance of the proposed method to the
best results of nonadaptive patient-specific transforms reported

480

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Fig. 3. Typical example of reconstructing 12-lead ECG with the proposed method using reduced-lead set of X, Y , and Z . The black curves are the original leads
of patient S0001 and the gray curves are the reconstructed versions. The average percent correlation across all leads is 96.73%.
TABLE III
MEAN OF SIMILARITY COEFFICIENT RESULTS AS TAKEN FROM [8, TABLE 8]

in [8], where a reduced set of four to five leads was used and
calibration considered all beats. We find that reconstruction accuracy is approximately the same. More specifically, when considering [8, Table 8] we find that the proposed method has
an accuracy level across the entire data that is slightly lower
than the accuracy of reconstructing QRST interval in [8] and
higher than the accuracy of reconstructing deviation at J point.
A relevant subset of the table in [8] is provided in Table III for
reference. Note that results in [8] were generated using four predictor leads, where our proposed method uses three leads. The
table summarizes results from predictor lead sets where leads I,
II, and V2 were included. The same leads were used to evaluate
our proposed method in Table I.
D. Comparison With Fixed Transforms
To further evaluate the proposed method, we implemented
two fixed transforms and compared their performance with that
of the proposed method over the PTB diagnostic ECG database.
The first transform was the Dower universal transform [4]. The
second transform was a patient-specific transform we generated using linear regression. The Dower transform is a standard
transform that reconstructs a 12-lead ECG from a Vector CardioGram (VCG) lead set. The linear regression patient-specific
transform was generated using least-squares estimation over the
same training beat as used for generating the ICA transform.

All three methods were used to reconstruct a full 12-lead ECG
from the reduced-lead set of Frank’s XYZ leads.
After the preprocessing stage, the first beat of each patient was
used to train the linear regression transform and ICA transform.
All three methods were then used on all subsequent beats to
reconstruct the full 12-lead ECG.
If the minimum of the peak cross-correlation between the
current set of ICs and the original ICs used for training was
less than 0.9, then the beat was not reconstructed by any of the
methods. Poor correlation between ICs likely indicates a fault
in the ICA method caused by a convergence to an incorrect set
of ICs or an error in the sorting of the ICs. ICA convergence can
be improved using a more efficient ICA convergence algorithm.
Since the focus of our investigation is ECG reconstruction and
not ICA, we avoided beats that failed ICA convergence. Out of
the entire database 42,008 beats generated ICs with this level of
correlation. These beats were used to evaluate all three transforms.
The statistical mean and standard deviation over all reconstructed beats is summarized in Table IV. As expected, the
universal transform provides poor results compared to the two
patient specific transforms. Both patient specific transforms perform very well with percent correlation higher than 96% across
almost all leads.
The linear regression transform provides slightly higher average accuracy compared to the ICA transform across some of
the leads. However, note that the standard deviation of the ICA
transform is noticeably lower than the standard deviation of the
linear regression transform (with the exception of lead V5). This
indicates that that the ICA transform’s average performance is
more representative of its instantaneous performance. While
there are beats for which the linear regression transform performs very well, there are also cases where is performs poorly.

TSOURI AND OSTERTAG: PATIENT-SPECIFIC 12-LEAD ECG RECONSTRUCTION FROM SPARSE ELECTRODES

TABLE IV
STATISTICS OF CORRELATIONS BETWEEN ACTUAL AND RECONSTRUCTED
LEADS ACROSS ENTIRE DATABASE USING FRANK’S XYZ LEADS AND THREE
RECONSTRUCTION MATRICES: UNIVERSAL TRANSFORM, PATIENT SPECIFIC
LINEAR REGRESSION, AND ADAPTIVE ICA

481

required to fully understand the adaptability of the transform.
We elaborate on that in the next section.
V. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE RESEARCH

Fig. 4.

Adaptability of coefficients of mixing matrix A for patient s0404lrem.

This result implies that the ICA transform adapts to changes
in signal propagation conditions across beats and thus could
provide a more reliable reconstruction. We elaborate on more
results supporting this premise next.
E. Adaptability of the Transform
We observed that transform A for extracting the ICs from
the observations changed over time. An example is provided
in Fig. 4, where the nine coefficients of A are presented over
time for patient s0404lrem from the database. It is clear that
coefficients change their values periodically and that the rate
of change is approximately ten cycles/min. We speculated that
the coefficients are changing to compensate for the periodic
changes in signal propagation conditions from the heart to the
electrodes caused by breathing. We evaluated the stationarity of
ICs by finding the correlation between ICs from beats across
the breathing cycle and found that it is close to one. This is
suggestive that the ICs are rather stationary. More research is

The proposed method relies on efficient implementation of
the ICA algorithm. A known problem with ICA is that the
mixing matrix, which translates the observations to the ICs, is
not unique. Many matrices would result in the same set of ICs
ordered differently. This is known as the ICA sorting problem.
In this paper, we resolved the sorting problem by reordering the
ICs based on their correlations with the ICs from the training
beat. A more efficient way can be sought by utilizing constrained
ICA (cICA). cICA takes advantage of prior information on the
ICs to help the ICA convergence process. New reconstruction
algorithms may be developed where the ICs from training are
used as prior knowledge.
Another problem with ICA is that the convergence to ICs can
sometimes fail. Although ICA convergence was not a limiting
problem in the analysis we performed over the database, the
issue of convergence could be looked into by assessing performance of other ICA convergence algorithms.
The proposed method requires online computational power
for implementing ICA since the ICs need to be found for every
beat. Our implementation was in MATLAB on a standard PC
and we noticed that finding ICs takes less than half a second.
Since future systems can implement ICA much more efficiently
using C or Field programmable gate array (FPGA), we do not
identify a complexity problem in implementing our proposed
method.
The ability to fully evaluate the adaptability of the proposed
transform depends on the variability of propagation conditions
and subject’s posture during the ECG recordings. Available
databases provide ECG data taken from stationary subjects assuming a relaxed position. It follows that recordings were performed under relatively unchanging signal propagation conditions. The only perceived change can be attributed to breathing
of the subject. All past work (including the work presented in
this paper) relied on such databases.
Training any reconstruction transform while the subject is
in a specific posture might provide a transform inadequate for
reconstructing leads when the patient assumes a different posture. This is especially true for the majority of transforms which
are fixed after training and therefore do not have the capability
to adapt to varying propagation conditions due to posture. The
problem of posture extends beyond ECG reconstruction. Direct
12-lead measurements using a full set of electrode are strongly
affected by posture. In most cases, ECG is observed while the
patient is in a supine position. Despite its apparent importance,
we are unaware of past work looking at the effect of posture on
reconstruction. This could prove to be a very interesting topic
for future research on adaptive transforms. When considering
the proposed method in this paper the central question is: Are
ICs obtained from data gathered in different postures always the
same? If so, then our proposed method has the required adaptability to compensate for posture: ICA would reach same ICs
regardless of posture and the trained transform would present a

482

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

12-lead ECG. If not, then our proposed method might be posture
specific as all past methods are.
Further research is required into the effect of changing subject
postures and motion on reconstruction accuracy. It would require
large studies designed to obtain sufficient data. We postulate that
adaptive transforms would present performance gains in such
conditions and could potentially advance cardiac monitoring for
mobile subjects.
VI. CONCLUSION
An adaptive patient-specific method of reconstructing a 12lead ECG from reduced sets was proposed. The method was
investigated using two sets of three leads: I, II, and V2 and
Frank’s XYZ leads. Performance was evaluated over a publicly
available database of 549 ECG recordings.
The proposed method was shown to generate highly similar
and reproducible ICs and provided accurate reconstruction from
both sets of leads. The ability to accurately reconstruct a 12-lead
ECG using Frank’s XYZ leads is particularly promising due
to its applicability in wireless ECG systems where differential
measurements must be taken without common ground.
Not only does the proposed method utilize a patient-specific
transform from the ICs to the conventional leads, but the transform from observation points to ICs were shown to adapt over
time. This property is useful in compensating for changes caused
by breathing and could potentially compensate for patient posture. It could also prove useful for extracting vital signs such as
respiration rate.
REFERENCES
[1] G. E. Dower, H. B. Machado, and J. A. Osborne, “On deriving the electrocardiogram from vectorcardiographic leads,” Clin. Cardiol., vol. 3, no. 2,
pp. 87–95, 1980.
[2] S. P. Newlan, J. A. Kors, S. H. Meij, J. H. van Bemmel, and
M. L. Simoons, “Reconstruction of the 12-lead electrocardiogram from
reduced lead sets,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 11–18, 2004.
[3] D. Q. Feild, C. L. Feldman, and B. M. Horáček, “Improved EASI coefficients: Their derivation, values, and performance,” J. Electrocardiol.,
vol. 35, pp. 23–33, 2002.
[4] D. Dawson, H. Yang, M. Malshe, S. T. Bukkapatnam, B. Benjamin, and
R. Komanduri, “Linear affine transforms between 3-lead (Frank XYZ
leads) vectorcardiogram and 12-lead electrocardiogram signals,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 42, pp. 622–630, 2009.
[5] D. Q. Feild, S. H. Zhou, E. D. Helfenbein, R. E. Gregg, and J. M Lindauer,
“Technical challenges and future directions in lead reconstruction for
reduced-lead systems,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 41, pp. 466–473, 2008.
[6] R. J. A. Schijvenaars. (2000, Sep. 6). Intra-Individual Variability of the
Electrocardiogram: Assessment and Exploitation in Computerized ECG
Analysis. Erasmus MC: Univ. Med. Center Rotterdam. Retrieved from
http://hdl.handle.net/1765/20458.
[7] R. E. Gregg, S. H. Zhou, J. M. Lindauer, E. D. Helfenbein, and
D. Q. Feild, “Limitations on the re-use of patient specific coefficients
for 12-lead ECG reconstruction,” Comput. Cardiol., vol. 35, pp. 23–33,
2002.

[8] B. M. Horáček, J. W. Warren, and J. J. Wang, “On designing and testing
transformations for derivation of standard 12-lead/18-lead electrocardiograms and vectorcardiograms from reduced lead sets of predictor leads,”
J. Electrocardiol., vol. 41, pp. 220–229, Jan. 2008.
[9] A. Hyvärinen and E. Oja, “Independent component analysis: Algorithms
and applications,” Neural Netw., vol. 13, no. 4/5, pp. 411–430, 2000.
[10] C. J. James and C. W. Hesse, “Independent component analysis for
biomedical signals,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 26, pp. R15–R39, 2005.
[11] T. He, G. Clifford, and L. Tarassenko, “Application of independent component analysis in removing artefacts from the electrocardiogram,” Neural
Comput. Appl., vol. 15, pp. 105–116, 2006.
[12] J. Lee, K. L. Park, and K. J. Lee, “Temporally constrained ICA-based
fetal ECG separation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 41, no. 21, pp. 1158–1160,
Oct. 2005.
[13] M. H. Ostertag and G. R. Tsouri, “Reconstructing ECG precordial leads
from a reduced lead set using independent component analysis,” in Proc.
IEEE 33rd Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 30, 2011–Sep. 3, 2011,
pp. 4414–4417.
[14] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. N. Amaral, L. Glass, J. M. Hausdorff,
P. C. Ivanov, R. G. Mark, J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C. K. Peng, and
H. E. Stanley, “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components
of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,” Circulation,
vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, Jun. 2000.
[15] T. W. Parks and J. H. McClellan, “Chebyshev approximation for nonrecursive digital filters with linear phase,” IEEE Trans. Circuit Theory, vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 189–194, Mar. 1972.
[16] P. Kligfield, L. S. Gettes, R. Childers, E. W. Hancock, G. V. Herpen,
P. Macfarlane, O. Pahlm, and S. Galen, “Recommendations for the standardization and interpretation of the electrocardiogram, Part I: The electrocardiogram and its technology,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 394–412,
Mar. 2007.
[17] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.

Gill R. Tsouri received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical and computer engineering from
Ben-Gurion University, Israel, in 2000, 2004, and
2008, respectively.
In 2008, he joined the Rochester Institute of
Technology, New York, USA, where he established
the Communications Research Laboratory. His current research interests include body area networks,
biomedical signal processing, and wireless physical
layer security.

Michael H. Ostertag is currently working toward
the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering at the
Rochester Institute of Technology, New York, USA.
In 2013, he joined BlackBox Biometrics where he
is now Lead Electrical Engineer. His current interests
include developing new technologies for physiological monitoring.

