1628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Investigating the Role of Vibrotactile Noise in Early
Response to Perturbation
Pilwon Hur∗ , Yao-Hung Wan, and Na Jin Seo

Abstract—Timely reaction to perturbation is important in activities of daily living. Modulation of reaction time to and early
recovery from perturbation via vibrotactile noise was investigated.
It was hypothesized that subthreshold vibrotactile noise applied to
the upper extremity can accelerate a person’s reaction to and recovery from handle perturbation. This intervention was developed
based on previous studies in which the earliest cue available for people to detect handle perturbation was somatosensation detecting
changes in pressure on the hand whose sensitivity can improve with
subthreshold vibrotactile noise. To induce a handle perturbation, a
sudden upward load was applied to the handle that subjects were
lightly grasping. Eighteen healthy subjects were instructed to stop
the handle from moving up when they detected the perturbation.
The muscle reaction time and handle stabilization time with and
without vibrotactile noise were determined. The results showed
that the muscle reaction time and handle stabilization time significantly decreased by 3 ms (p = 0.018) and 6 ms (p = 0.023),
respectively, when vibrotactile noise was applied to the upper extremity, regardless of where the noise was applied among four
different locations within the upper extremity (p > 0.05). In conclusion, the application of subthreshold vibrotactile noise enhanced
persons’ muscle reaction time to handle perturbation and led to
early recovery from the perturbation. Use of the vibrotactile noise
may increase a person’s ability to rapidly respond to perturbation of a grasped object in potentially dangerous situations such as
holding onto ladder rungs from elevation or manipulating knives.
Index Terms—Handle perturbation, muscle reaction time,
stochastic resonance.

I. INTRODUCTION
BJECT manipulation with a stable hand grip is one of the
most frequent activities of daily living. Once the stability
of hand grip is threatened by perturbation of the grasped objects,
timely response to tighten the grip against the perturbation is
critical. This is especially true when a person’s safety is at
risk such as grasping a ladder rung to climb in workplace or
manipulating a knife in the kitchen. Therefore, investigating

O

Manuscript received September 9, 2013; accepted December 4, 2013. Date
of publication December 11, 2013; date of current version May 15, 2014. This
work was supported by NIOSH UIC ERC T42OH008672 and American Heart
Association Midwest Affiliate Postdoctoral Fellowship 12POST12090039. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ P. Hur is with the Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, College of Engineering and Applied Science, University of WisconsinMilwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53212 USA (e-mail: pilwonhur@gmail.com).
Y.-H. Wan and N. J. Seo are with the Department of Industrial and
Manufacturing Engineering, College of Engineering and Applied Science,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53212 USA (e-mail:
yaohung1025@gmail.com; seon@uwm.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2294672

Fig. 1. Illustration of threshold stochastic resonance. In threshold stochastic
resonance [8], there are three necessary components: a threshold, a signal, and
noise. (a) Weak signal below the sensory threshold is not detectable. (b) If an
optimal level of random noise is added to the signal, the noise-added signal may
be detectable, increasing a person’s tactile acuity.

factors that modulate grip reaction time to object perturbation
may have potentials to enhance a person’s safety and efficiency
during handle grasping or object manipulation.
Reaction time to object perturbation can be modulated by several factors. The reaction time for children to increase pinch grip
force in response to a sudden increase in the grasped object’s
weight gradually becomes shorter with increasing age, reaching
adult values at 6–10 years [1]. People can react faster to object
perturbation during pinch grip when the object’s weight suddenly increases compared to when the object’s weight suddenly
decreases [2]. Pinch grip response to object perturbation is faster
when the arm is moving the object up, compared to when the
arm is stationary [2]. Anticipation of object perturbation also
shortens reaction time to object perturbation [1], [3].
Another potential candidate to shorten reaction time to object
perturbation is enhancement of somatosensation via subthreshold vibrotactile noise. Somatosensation detecting pressure on
the hand has been shown to play an important role in people’s
ability to react to handle perturbation [4]. A body of literature in neuroscience shows that somatosensation, specifically
tactile sensation, can be improved by using subthreshold vibrotactile noise [5]–[7]. Enhancement of somatosensation via
vibrotactile noise may be accomplished by a phenomenon called
stochastic resonance where nonzero subthreshold noise maximizes a response of a nonlinear system to a weak input signal [5]–[7]. In general, stochastic resonance indicates that the
flow of information through a system (i.e., the coherence between the input signal and the system response) is maximized
when the input signal is accompanied with a noise whose intensity is set to an optimal value. Stochastic resonance [8] specifically involves three components: a threshold, a signal, and noise.
A signal that does not reach the sensory threshold is not detectable [see Fig. 1(a)]. When small random noise is added to
the system, the noise-added signal may become detectable [see
Fig. 1(b)], increasing tactile acuity.

0018-9294 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HUR et al.: INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF VIBROTACTILE NOISE IN EARLY RESPONSE TO PERTURBATION

1629

The concept of stochastic resonance has been applied to enhance somatosensation in various populations. Subthreshold
vibrotactile noise applied to the feet has been shown to enhance vibrotactile sensitivity of the feet in both young and old
adults [9]. In addition, the ability of detecting vibration in the
hand for older adults, stroke patients, and diabetic patients significantly improved with the application of subthreshold noise
to the hand [6]. Furthermore, detection of monofilament touch at
the fingertip improved when subthreshold vibrotactile noise was
applied at the wrist and dorsal hand among stroke patients [10].
It has been postulated that such enhancement of somatosensation is achieved via the low-level noise raising the resting
potential of mechanoreceptors or sensory neurons within the
somatosensory pathways, thus making the mechanoreceptors or
sensory neurons more readily depolarized with a weak input
signal [6], [10]–[12]. However, it is not known whether the application of vibrotactile noise to the hand to enhance somatosensation of the hand can also elicit faster muscular reaction time to
and thus faster recovery from perturbation of a grasped object.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of
vibrotactile noise on grip reaction time and stabilization time
in response to handle perturbation. It was hypothesized that
people react faster to handle perturbation and stabilize the handle
faster with vibrotactile noise applied to the upper extremity
than without vibrotactile noise. The functional significance of
this study is that understanding of the role of vibrotactile noise
on early biomechanical reaction to perturbation may be used
to help enhance people’s safety and efficiency during object
manipulation.

Fig. 2. Experimental setup. (a) Subjects were instructed to sit in a chair with
the hand resting on the handle. (b) At a random time, the latch was released,
dropping the weight (20% of each subject’s hand strength), which applied
sudden upward force to the handle. The subjects were instructed to stabilize the
handle as soon as they noticed the perturbation.

II. METHODS

Fig. 3. Vibrotactile device (C-3 Tactor). The contactor is the vibrating part in
contact with the skin.

Eighteen right-handed healthy young adults (14 males and 4
females, mean ± standard deviation (SD) of age = 25 ± 6 years)
with no history of neuromuscular or orthopedic conditions participated in the study. All subjects signed a consent form and
followed a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board.

The latch and weights were located behind the subjects and
the subjects wore headphones during the experiment to ensure
that they did not receive any visual or auditory cues from the
latch or weight movement related to perturbation. The subjects
were also instructed to look forward at the eye level instead of
toward the overhead handle. Six practice trials were given prior
to testing for each subject so that subjects became familiar with
the protocol. The weight was equivalent to 20% of the subject’s
hand strength to hold onto the handle [13] as in the previous
study [4]. The nondominant hand was used because people usually hold onto the ladder rung with the nondominant hand while
performing another task (e.g., painting, spraying water, nailing,
hanging decorations) with the dominant hand, and injuries due
to falls from ladders are critical issues in workplaces and home
environment [14]. Also, the nondominant hand is typically used
to stabilize a food object that is being cut by the dominant hand
using a knife [15].
Vibrotactile noise was applied to upper extremity skin using
EAI C-3 Tactor (Engineering Acoustics, Inc., Casselberry, FL,
USA) (see Fig. 3). The vibrotactile device generated white random noise, low-pass filtered at 500 Hz because this range covers the sensitive frequencies for all mechanoreceptors [16]. The
noise intensity was adjusted to be 50% of the sensory threshold

A. Subjects

B. Procedure
An experiment was conducted to determine subjects’ muscle
reaction time and handle stabilization time in response to perturbation of a grasped handle with versus without subthreshold
vibrotactile noise. Our previous study simulating perturbation
of a grasped ladder rung showed that somatosensation detecting
pressure on the hand was the sensory cue available for people to react to the perturbation [4], providing a suitable testing
paradigm for the present study. Thus, the same experimental
setup was used: initially, subjects were instructed to grasp an
overhead circular handle (radius 24.7 mm) lightly with the hand
without extra effort [see Fig. 2(a)]. While the subject was lightly
grasping the handle, a latch holding a weight was opened at a
random time, and the weight pulled the handle suddenly upward
[see Fig. 2(b)]. Subjects were instructed to stop the handle from
moving upward as soon as they noticed the handle perturbation.

1630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 5. To determine muscular responses to the handle perturbation, EMG for
eight upper limb muscles were recorded. These muscles contribute to moving
and stabilizing the upper limb [37].

Fig. 4. Four skin sites for noise were (a) middle fingertip, (b) thenar eminence, (c) volar forearm, and (d) dorsal forearm. For the fingertip location, the
vibrotactile device was embedded into the handle (a).

of each noise application location, since noise at 50% of the
sensory threshold was shown to enhance tactile acuity the most
in healthy adults [9]. The sensory threshold was determined as
the lowest noise intensity at which subjects were able to feel the
vibration. During the noise off trials, the vibrotactile device was
still attached to the skin and was turned OFF. Since subthreshold vibrotactile noise was used, subjects could not tell when the
vibration was ON.
To examine the effect of the location to which the vibrotactile
noise is applied in the upper extremity, the vibrotactile device
was applied to four different upper extremity sites in separate
trials. The four sites were as follows: the tip of the middle
finger; the thenar eminence; the volar forearm, approximately
a third of the forearm length from the wrist; and the dorsal
forearm, approximately a third of the forearm length from the
wrist (see Fig. 4). For the fingertip location, the perturbation
signal (i.e., increase of force/pressure at the fingertip) added
with vibrotactile noise is to be sensed by the middle fingertip,
whereas for the other three sites the perturbation signal and noise
are received by different body parts and may be integrated in the
central nervous system [10]. The former condition (application
of noise directly to the perturbation signal) has been typically
used to demonstrate the benefit of stochastic resonance in the
past [6], [9], [11], [12]. The latter conditions (application of
noise remotely from the signal) were tested because, if effective,
they may be more applicable as an assistive device to benefit
hand somatosensation during activities of daily living without
having the noise-generating device physically interfering with
finger-object manipulation.
To quantify muscle reaction time, muscle activity was
recorded using surface electromyography (EMG) (Bortec
Biomedical Ltd., Calgary, AB, Canada). Muscle activities for
the following muscles were recorded: flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS), flexor carpi ulnaris, extensor digitorum communis,
biceps, triceps, deltoid, pectoralis major (Pmajor), and latissimus dorsi (Ldorsi) muscles (see Fig. 5). These muscles were
examined, since they contribute to moving and stabilizing the
upper limb [17], [18]. Bipolar surface electrodes were placed
on the skin overlying the muscle belly. The muscles were lo-

cated using the anatomical landmarks following literature [19]
and confirmed through palpation and visual observation of the
EMG signals using an oscilloscope while subjects performed
muscle-specific movements [20]. The EMG data were sampled
at 1 kHz.
To quantify handle stabilization time, the position of the handle was recorded by using a marker-based motion capture system (Optotrak 3-D Investigator Motion Capture System, NDI,
Waterloo, ON, Canada). The marker data were sampled at
100 Hz. To mark the onset of perturbation, force on the handle
was recorded by using a load cell (SM-1000, Interface, Inc.,
Scottsdale, AZ, USA). The force data were sampled at 1 kHz.
The handle force data were applied with the low-pass Butterworth filter at the cutoff frequency of 30 Hz to remove line
noise and noises from the load cell and amplifier. Testing of the
four noise locations was randomized. Within each location, six
repetitions (three with noise and three without noise) were randomized. Data for three repetitions for each noise condition were
averaged for statistical analysis. Breaks of approximately 2 min
were given between consecutive trials to prevent muscle fatigue.

C. Analysis
The EMG data were used to determine the muscle reaction
time. For each of the eight muscles, an envelope of the EMG
signal was obtained by using 10 ms moving root mean square
(RMS) technique. Each muscle’s reaction time was determined
as the time interval between the onset of handle perturbation and
when the RMS EMG exceeded mean +3 SDs of the baseline
RMS EMG [see Fig. 6(a)]. The baseline was defined as the
100 ms time period immediately before the onset of handle
perturbation [see Fig. 6(a)]. The onset of handle perturbation
was defined as when the handle force started increasing at more
than 50 N/s for at least 20 ms, as in the previous study [see
Fig. 6(a)] [4]. The earliest reaction time among the eight muscles
was used for analysis.
Handle movement onset time was defined as when the slope
of displacement–time curve exceeded 100 mm/s for more than
50 ms [see Fig. 6(b)] [4]. Handle stabilization time was defined
as when the slope of handle displacement–time curve became
less than 50 mm/s for more than 100 ms after the handle began
moving [see Fig. 6(b)] [4].

HUR et al.: INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF VIBROTACTILE NOISE IN EARLY RESPONSE TO PERTURBATION

1631

Fig. 8. Handle stabilization time with versus without subthreshold vibrotactile
noise. Vibrotactile noise shortened handle stabilization time (p = 0.023). No
significant effect of noise location and no significant interaction of noise ×
location were found. Error bar represents ± one standard error.

Fig. 6. (a) Time course of normalized RMS EMG from the FDS muscle. (b)
Time course of handle displacement. Muscle reaction time, handle movement
onset time, handle stabilization time, onset of handle perturbation, and baseline
are shown from a sample data.

Fig. 7. Muscle reaction time with versus without subthreshold vibrotactile
noise. Vibrotactile noise shortened muscle reaction time (p = 0.018). No significant effect of noise location and no significant interaction of noise × location
were found. Error bar represents ± one standard error.

Statistical analyses were performed to determine whether
muscle reaction time, handle stabilization time, and handle
movement onset time were significantly affected by the withinsubject variables of noise application (ON versus OFF), noise
location (fingertip, thenar area, volar forearm, and dorsal forearm) and their interaction (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA; v17).
Two-way repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
used for each response. In addition, to examine time sequence
of the events (i.e., muscle reaction time, handle movement onset
time, and handle stabilization time) after handle perturbation,
one-way repeated-measures ANOVA was performed. A significance level of 0.05 was used.
III. RESULTS
The application of vibrotactile noise significantly shortened
the muscle reaction time (p = 0.018) and shortened the handle
stabilization time (p = 0.023), regardless of where the noise
was applied (see Figs. 7 and 8). The muscle reaction time
following the handle perturbation decreased from 36 ± 2 ms
(mean ± standard error) without vibrotactile noise to 33 ± 2 ms
with vibrotactile noise. The muscle reaction times decreased
with noise when noise was applied to the fingertip (from 36 ±

2 ms without noise to 31 ± 2 ms with noise), thenar area (from
37 ± 3 ms to 33 ± 3 ms), dorsal forearm (from 40 ± 2 ms
to 36 ± 3 ms), and volar forearm (from 33 ± 3 ms to 32 ± 3 ms
with noise) (see Fig. 7). Repeated measures ANOVA showed
that the effect of noise on the muscle reaction time was statistically significant (p = 0.018), while there was neither significant
effect of noise location nor interaction between noise application
and noise location on the muscle reaction time (p > 0.05).
Handle stabilization time decreased from 324 ± 12 ms without vibrotactile noise to 318 ± 12 ms with vibrotactile noise.
The handle stabilization times decreased with noise when noise
was applied to the fingertip (from 327 ± 12 ms without noise
to 318 ± 13 ms with noise), thenar area (from 322 ± 11 ms to
319 ± 12 ms with noise), dorsal forearm (from 326 ± 12 ms
to 320 ± 12 ms), and volar forearm (from 320 ± 13 ms to
313 ± 13 ms) (see Fig. 8). Repeated measures ANOVA showed
that the effect of noise on the handle stabilization time was
statistically significant (p = 0.023), while there was neither significant effect of noise location nor interaction between noise
application and noise location on handle stabilization time (p >
0.05). Handle movement onset time was not affected by noise
application (52 ± 2 ms without noise versus 52 ± 1 ms with
noise), noise location or their interaction (p > 0.05).
The time course of the perturbation event was such that muscle reaction occurred, on average, at 35 ± 2 ms after the handle
force increase (perturbation), followed by the handle movement onset at 52 ± 2 ms and by the handle stabilization at
321 ± 11 ms after the handle perturbation (pooled for noise application and noise location conditions). In agreement with the
finding from the previous study [4], the three events occurred at
different times in the aforementioned order (p < 0.001 for event
in ANOVA). This result verifies that somatosensation detecting
force/pressure increase on the hand was the cue for subjects to
react to the perturbation, not the sensation related to movement
and muscle length changes, as in the previous study [4].
IV. DISCUSSION
Subthreshold vibrotactile noise applied to the upper extremity
significantly shortened the muscle reaction time to handle perturbation as well as the handle stabilization time. The muscle
reaction time and handle stabilization time decreased regardless of where the noise was applied among the middle fingertip,

1632

thenar area, volar forearm, and dorsal forearm although the
most reduction occurred when the noise was applied to the fingertip. To our best knowledge, this study is the first study to
show that a mechanical subthreshold vibrotactile noise applied
at the upper extremity shortened muscle reaction time to handle perturbation and subsequently accelerated recovery from the
perturbation. This study is also the first to show that not only
noise applied directly to the body part sensing the perturbation
(finger in this study) but also noise applied to other body parts
not involved in sensing the perturbation (the thenar area and
forearm) had an effect facilitating motor behavior in response
to perturbation. The finding in this study suggests a potential
for development of a device-generating low-level subthreshold
vibrotactile noise to accelerate people’s upper limb reaction to
and recovery from perturbation as a means to enhance a person’s safety and efficiency during handle grasping and object
manipulation.
Noise shortened the muscle reaction time, probably by accelerating sensory detection of the perturbation. As in Hur et al. [4],
we believe that the sensory cue available to detect the perturbation in the present study was somatosensation detecting
force/pressure change on the hand. Specifically, proprioception
related to limb movement or muscle length change does not appear to have resulted in the muscular reaction to the perturbation,
because handle movement was not observed before the onset of
muscle activation for both noise ON and OFF conditions. Instead, a reflex mechanism involving somatosensory detection of
the force/pressure increase at the hand is more likely to have
caused muscle reaction, since the muscle reaction time of 35 ms
after the handle force increase is similar with the latency of upper
extremity cutaneous reflex of 33–53 ms [21]–[24] as well as the
latency of proprioceptive reflex for upper extremity soft-tissue
stimulation of approximately 40 ms [25].
Subthreshold vibrotactile noise may have improved detection
of the force/pressure increase on the hand via stochastic resonance. Noise applied directly to a tactile signal has been shown
to improve persons’ detection of the signal [6], [7]. These previous studies have postulated that noise may increase the resting
potential and thus excitability of mechanoreceptors at the periphery [6], [7].
Besides the direct addition of noise to a signal, recent studies show that persons’ detection of an external sensory signal
can also improve with noise applied remotely from the signal,
through integration of noise and signal within the central nervous system [26]. For instance, Enders et al. [10] reported that
touch sensation of the fingertips for stroke survivors enhanced
when subthreshold vibrotactile noise was applied at the wrist or
dorsum of the hand. Manjarrez et al. [27] showed that remote
noise applied to the third hindpaw pad of cats increased sensory
evoked potentials at both the spinal cord and somatosensory
cortex in response to tactile stimuli at the central pad of the hindpaw, suggesting increased excitability of sensory neurons at the
spinal as well as supraspinal levels through interneuronal connections between different parts of the body [28]. It is unlikely
that the remote vibrotactile noise at the thenar area or the forearm
influenced mechanoreceptors at the fingertip, since the vibration
substantially decays as it travels through the skins [29], [30]. In
summary, the present study showed that application of noise at

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

the fingertip as well as other parts of the upper extremity (thenar
area, volar forearm, dorsal forearm) resulted in faster muscular
reaction to handle perturbation and early recovery from handle
perturbation, possibly via increased excitability of mechanoreceptors and/or sensory neurons resulting in the input signal (the
force/pressure change on the hand) crossing over the sensory
threshold earlier, thereby accelerating muscular response. However, the exact mechanisms will have to be investigated in the
future.
The finding in this study is limited to the specific subthreshold vibrotactile noise used in this study. For instance, tendon
vibrations which are typically suprathreshold at a fixed frequency between 50 and 250 Hz are known to suppress sensation or sensation-induced muscle activity [31]–[33]. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation which are also typically
suprathreshold at a fixed frequency between 10 and 250 Hz
has been shown to reduce excitability for the agonist muscle,
increase excitability for the antagonist muscles [34], [35], inhibit primary somatosensory cortex activity [36], and decrease
sensory threshold [35] depending on stimulation frequency. It
should also be noted that this study investigated only the immediate effect of subthreshold vibrotactile noise on reaction to
handle perturbation. Future studies may examine the effects of
long-term exposure to subthreshold vibrotactile noise on persons’ response to handle perturbation. Further, the benefit of
subthreshold vibrotactile noise for populations with reduced
sensation such as elderly population or stroke survivors may be
worth investigating.
V. CONCLUSION
This study demonstrated that use of subthreshold vibrotactile
noise at the upper extremity shortened the muscle reaction time
to handle perturbation and contributed to early recovery from
handle perturbation, possibly via enhanced somatosensation of
the hand. Shortened muscle reaction time to perturbation and
early recovery was achieved for all four noise locations on the
upper extremity. This study demonstrates a potential for use
of vibrotactile noise to increase a person’s ability to respond to
object perturbation in a timely manner, increasing the likelihood
that the person may recover from perturbation in dangerous
activities of daily living or occupation including manipulating
knives and holding onto scaffolds from elevation.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Eliasson, H. Forssberg, K. Ikuta, I. Apel, G. Westling, and R. Johansson,
“Development of human precision grip. V. Anticipatory and triggered grip
actions during sudden loading,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 425–
433, 1995.
[2] L. Mrotek, B. Hart, P. Schot, and L. Fennigkoh, “Grip responses to object
load perturbations are stimulus and phase sensitive,” Exp. Brain Res.,
vol. 155, no. 4, pp. 413–420, 2004.
[3] D. Kourtis, H. Kwok, N. Roach, A. Wing, and P. Praamstra, “Maintaining
grip: Anticipatory and reactive EEG responses to load perturbations,” J.
Neurophysiol., vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 545–553, 2008.
[4] P. Hur, B. Motawar, and N. J. Seo, “Muscular responses to handle perturbation with different glove condition,” J. Electromyography Kinesiology,
2013, doi:10.1016/j.jelekin.2013.10.004.
[5] K. Wiesenfeld and F. Moss, “Stochastic resonance and the benefits of
noise: From ice ages to crayfish and SQUIDs,” Nature, vol. 373, no. 6509,
pp. 33–36, 1995.
[6] W. Liu, L. A. Lipsitz, M. Montero-Odasso, J. Bean, D. C. Kerrigan,
and J. J. Collins, “Noise-enhanced vibrotactile sensitivity in older adults,

HUR et al.: INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF VIBROTACTILE NOISE IN EARLY RESPONSE TO PERTURBATION

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

patients with stroke, and patients with diabetic neuropathy,” Arch. Phys.
Med. Rehabil., vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 171–176, 2002.
J. Collins, T. Imhoff, and P. Grigg, “Noise-mediated enhancements and
decrements in human tactile sensation,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 56, no. 1,
pp. 923–926, 1997.
Z. Gingl, L. B. Kiss, and F. Moss, “Non-dynamical stochastic resonance:
Theory and experiments with white and arbitrarily coloured noise,” Europhys. Lett., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 191–196, 1995.
C. Wells, L. M. Ward, R. Chua, and J. T. Inglis, “Touch noise increases
vibrotactile sensitivity in old and young,” Psychol. Sci., vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 313–320, 2005.
L. Enders, P. Hur, M. Johnson, and N. J. Seo, “Remote vibrotactile noise
improves light touch sensation in stroke survivors’ fingertips via stochastic
resonance,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 10:105, 2013.
K. A. Richardson, T. T. Imhoff, P. Grigg, and J. J. Collins, “Using electrical noise to enhance the ability of humans to detect subthreshold mechanical cutaneous stimuli,” Chaos, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 599–603, 1998.
N. T. Dhruv, J. B. Niemi, J. D. Harry, L. A. Lipsitz, and J. J. Collins, “Enhancing tactile sensation in older adults with electrical noise stimulation,”
Neuroreport, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 597–600, 2002.
P. Hur, B. Motawar, and N. J. Seo, “Hand breakaway strength model—
Effects of glove use and handle shapes on a person’s hand strength to hold
onto handles to prevent fall from elevation,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, no. 6,
pp. 958–964, 2012.
CPSC. (2013, Jul.). Ladder safety 101 [Online]. Available http://www.
cpsc.gov/onsafety/2011/12/ladder-safety-101/
R. Sainburg and S. Duff, “Does motor lateralization have implications for
stroke rehabilitation?” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 311–322,
2006.
R. S. Johansson and J. R. Flanagan, “Coding and use of tactile signals
from the fingertips in object manipulation tasks,” Nature Rev. Neurosci.,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 345–359, 2009.
J. Di Domizio and P. J. Keir, “Forearm posture and grip effects during
push and pull tasks,” Ergonomics, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 336–343, 2010.
M. L. Richardson, Muscle Atlas of the Extremities. Seattle, WA, USA:
Bare Bones Books, 2011.
J. V Basmajian, Biofeedback: Principles and Practice for Clinicians, 3rd
ed. Baltimore, MD, USA: Williams & Wilkins, 1989.
L. Smith, E. Weiss, and D. Lehmkuhl, Brunnstrom’s Clinical Kinesiology,
5th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: F.A. Davis Company, 1996.
R. Garnett and J. A. Stephens, “The reflex responses of single motor units
in human first dorsal interosseous muscle following cutaneous afferent
stimulation,” J. Physiol., vol. 303, pp. 351–364, 1980.
J. R. Jenner and J. A. Stephens, “Cutaneous reflex responses and their
central nervous pathways studied in man,” J. Physiol., vol. 333, no. 1,
pp. 405–419, 1982.
D. Corden, O. Lippold, K. Buchanan, and C. Norrington, “Long-latency
component of the stretch reflex in human muscle is not mediated by
intramuscular stretch receptors,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 184–
188, 2000.
E. P. Zehr, D. F. Collins, and R. Chua, “Human interlimb reflexes evoked
by electrical stimulation of cutaneous nerves innervating the hand and
foot,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 140, no. 4, pp. 495–504, Oct. 2001.
E. Hagert, J. K. E. Persson, M. Werner, and B.-O. Ljung, “Evidence of
wrist proprioceptive reflexes elicited after stimulation of the scapholunate
interosseous ligament,” J. Hand Surg. Am., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 642–651,
Apr. 2009.
I. Hidaka, D. Nozaki, and Y. Yamamoto, “Functional stochastic resonance
in the human brain: Noise induced sensitization of baroreflex system,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 85, no. 17, pp. 3740–3743, 2000.
E. Manjarrez, G. Rojas-Piloni, and I. Mendez, “Stochastic resonance
within the somatosensory system: Effects of noise on evoked field potentials elicited by tactile stimuli,” J. Neurosci., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1997–2001,
2003.
M. Merzenich, J. Kaas, J. Wall, and M. Sur, “Progression of change
following median nerve section in the cortical representation of the hand
in areas 3b and 1 in adult owl and squirrel monkeys,” Neuroscience,
vol. 10, pp. 639–665, 1983.
L. R. Manfredi, A. T. Baker, D. O. Elias, J. F. Dammann, M. C. Zielinski,
V. S. Polashock, and S. J. Bensmaia, “The effect of surface wave propagation on neural responses to vibration in primate glabrous skin,” PLoS
One, vol. 7, no. 2, e31203, Jan. 2012.
Y. Kurita, M. Shinohara, and J. Ueda, “Wearable sensorimotor enhancer
for fingertip based on stochastic resonance effect,” IEEE Trans. HumanMach. Syst., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 333–337, May 2013.

1633

[31] M. O. Conrad, R. A. Scheidt, and B. D. Schmit, “Effects of wrist tendon
vibration on arm tracking in people poststroke,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 106,
no. 3, pp. 1480–1488, Sep. 2011.
[32] M. O. Conrad, R. A. Scheidt, and B. D. Schmit, “Effects of wrist tendon
vibration on targeted upper-arm movements in poststroke hemiparesis,”
Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 61–70, 2011.
[33] A. C. Smith, C. K. Mummidisetty, W. Z. Rymer, and M. Knikou, “Effects
of mechanical vibration of the foot sole and ankle tendons on cutaneomuscular responses in man,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 545, pp. 123–126, Jun.
2013.
[34] M. Tinazzi, S. Zarattini, M. Valeriani, S. Romito, S. Farina, G. Moretto,
N. Smania, A. Fiaschi, and G. Abbruzzese, “Long-lasting modulation of
human motor cortex following prolonged transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS) of forearm muscles: Evidence of reciprocal inhibition
and facilitation,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 161, no. 4, pp. 457–464, Mar. 2005.
[35] T. Mima, T. Oga, J. Rothwell, T. Satow, J. Yamamoto, K. Toma,
H. Fukuyama, H. Shibasaki, and T. Nagamine, “Short-term highfrequency transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation decreases human
motor cortex excitability,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 355, no. 1/2, pp. 85–88,
Jan. 2004.
[36] G. Macefield and D. Burke, “Long-lasting depression of central synaptic transmission following prolonged high-frequency stimulation of cutaneous afferents: A mechanism for post-vibratory hypaesthesia,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 78, no. 2, pp. 150–158, Feb.
1991.
[37] M. Richardson, Muscle Atlas of the Extremities, 1st ed. Seattle, WA,
USA: Bare Bone Books, 1997.

Pilwon Hur received the B.S. degree in mechanical
engineering from Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea,
in 2004, the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea, in 2006, and
the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL,
USA.
He currently holds the position of Postdoctoral
Research Fellow in the industrial engineering at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA. His research interests include human postural control system, gait, ergonomics, biomechanics,
neuromechanics and rehabilitation interventions for the elderly and stroke survivors. He uses stochastic approaches, optimizations, control theories, Bayesian
framework, virtual reality, human–computer interactions, mobile technologies,
etc.

Yao-Hung Wan received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from Chung Yuan Christian University, Zhongli,
Taiwan, both in industrial and systems engineering
and the M.S. degree in industrial and manufacturing engineering from the University of WisconsinMilwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
His research interests include biomechanics, rehabilitation, and ergonomics.

Na Jin Seo received the Ph.D. degree in industrial
and operations engineering from the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
She is an Assistant Professor in the Department
of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering and
the Department of Occupational Science and Technology at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee,
Milwaukee, WI, USA. Her research interests include
biomechanics, rehabilitation, and ergonomics.

