IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1651

Behavioral Characteristics of Manual Palpation
to Localize Hard Nodules in Soft Tissues
Jelizaveta Konstantinova∗ , Min Li, Gautam Mehra, Prokar Dasgupta, Kaspar Althoefer, Member, IEEE,
and Thrishantha Nanayakkara, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Improving the effectiveness of artificial tactile sensors for soft-tissue examination and tumor localization is a pressing need in robot-assisted minimally invasive surgery. Despite the
availability of tactile probes, guidelines for optimal palpation behavior that best exploit soft-tissue properties are not available
as yet. Simulations on soft-tissue palpation show that particular
stress–velocity patterns during tissue probing lead to constructive
dynamic interactions between the probe and the tissue, enhancing
the detection and localization of hard nodules. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first attempt to methodically evaluate the
hypothesis that specific human palpation behaviors (defined by the
fingers’ velocity, trajectory, and exerted force) directly influence
the diagnosis of soft-tissue organs. Here, we use simulation studies involving human participants to establish open hypotheses on
the interaction and influence of relevant behavioral palpation variables, such as finger trajectory, its velocity, and force exerted by
fingers on the accuracy of detecting embedded nodules. We validate
this hypothesis through finite element analysis and the investigation
of palpation strategies used by humans during straight unidirectional examination to detect hard nodules inside silicone phantoms
and ex-vivo porcine organs. Thus, we conclude that the palpation
strategy plays an important role during soft-tissue examination.
Our findings allow us, for the first time, to derive palpation behavior guidelines suitable for the design of controllers of palpation
robots.
Index Terms—Medical robotics, minimally invasive surgery, palpation, tactile sensors.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE realization of artificial tactile feedback is an important
and desired feature for various surgical systems including
surgical robots. It has already been established that the presence
of tactile feedback would increase the effectiveness of robot-

T

Manuscript received May 29, 2013; revised September 25, 2013 and November 21, 2013; accepted December 18, 2013. Date of publication January 2, 2014;
date of current version May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by the
STIFF-FLOP Project grant from the European Commission Seventh Framework Programme under agreement 287728 and the National Institute for Health
Research Biomedical Research Centre based at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS
Foundation Trust and King’s College London. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ J. Konstantinova is with the Department of Informatics, King’s College London, London WC2R 2LS, U.K. (e-mail: jelizaveta.zirjakova@kcl.ac.uk).
M. Li, G. Mehra, K. Althoefer, and T. Nanayakkara are with the Department of
Informatics, King’s College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K. (e-mail:
min.m.li@kcl.ac.uk; mehragautam1@gmail.com; kaspar.althoefer@kcl.ac.uk;
thrish.antha@kcl.ac.uk).
P. Dasgupta is with the MRC Centre for Transplantation, DTIMB and NIHR
BRC, King’s College London, Guy’s Hospital, London SE1 9RT, U.K. (e-mail:
prokarurol@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2296877

assisted minimally invasive surgery (RMIS) and lead to better
clinical outcomes [1]–[3]. In order to implement tactile sensing for this type of procedure, researchers have developed a
range of sensing devices [4]–[6]. In particular, attention is paid
to developing probing devices that can scan the surface of soft
tissue and identify the presence and location of malignant or benign formations [7]–[9]. Traditional open surgery allows direct
access to organs, and therefore the possibility to palpate an organ. Palpation during RMIS is considered desirable, but can be
only achieved indirectly through an appropriately programmed
robotic tool deployed via a small opening in the abdomen and
equipped with tactile or force sensing capabilities. The development and practical implementation of tactile sensors for medical
applications started at the end of the 20th century [3], [10]. However, palpation tools are not used in RMIS. The main reason for
that is, that only well tested and approved devices can be used
for surgical applications. Likewise, the result of tactile examination, such as detection of abnormalities should be accurate
and reliable. However, the implementation of robot-based organ
palpation is complicated due to the nonlinear behavior of soft
tissues as well as the uncertainties of the environment that are
caused by internal liquids and displacement of internal organs.
The variability of tactile information should be reduced to a
minimum through optimal design of the probing devices and
by choosing the most appropriate probing behaviors, given the
medical context (such as specific organ or type of disease). This
paper focuses on studying effective ways of soft-tissue tactile
examination; the detected strategies and behaviors allow the detection of lumps in organs with higher accuracy than approaches
that do not employ strategies.
In-vivo and ex-vivo studies on human organs can be conducted to test our hypotheses [11], [12]. However, the location
of a tumor can change due to deformation and displacement of
an organ during and after tactile examination. Thus, the verification of the effectiveness of tactile examination, especially
with regards to tumor localization, can be complicated. Another
approach is to use finite element (FE) simulations to understand
the responses of soft tissue [13], [14]. However, such models are
often very simplified and do not model all facets of real surgical
conditions. Therefore, in order to understand the effectiveness
of a soft-tissue examination approach, we suggest studying how
humans use their hands to palpate soft tissue. This paper studies
various aspects of manual palpation, which once understood,
have a high potential to improve the palpation-based robotic
examination of soft-tissue organs.
Manual palpation of soft tissue is a technique making use
of tactile sensation—a method commonly applied to examine

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

soft tissue during open surgery. The palpation movements and
strategies are specific to the body area being examined. For
instance, in prostate examination, a global organ palpation is
carried out first; then an area of interest (e.g., near a found abnormality) is focused on and examination movements, such as
tapping, vibration-inducing movements, and sliding are applied
locally [15]. It is reported in the literature that the method of
physical examination of soft tissue is not standardized and may
vary depending on the physician’s preferences [16]. During one
single examination, various techniques (such as circular movements and tissue rolling between finger) are applied [15], [17].
It is noted that the effectiveness of manual palpation to detect
lumps and other abnormalities is constrained by the physical
limits of human tactile perception and by physician’s palpation
abilities.
Existing palpation studies can be divided into two groups.
The first set of works is concentrated on the comparison of
the performance of human tactile sensation with existing tactile
devices [18], [19]. In that case, the main focus is on the evaluation of sensitivity and accuracy of a particular tactile device.
Other researchers discuss clinical studies describing methods
of manual soft-tissue examination for different organs, such as
patterns of movement and recommendations for manual palpation procedure [20], [21]. These studies evaluate the accuracy
and tumor detection rates for manual palpation, but are not providing general physical quantifications for different movement
types during palpation. A study [22] discusses the importance of
force and velocity during virtual palpation simulation via a haptic device. Furthermore, this work highlights the dependence
of the magnitude of the finger velocity during palpation with
regards to the stiffness of the environment.
The objective of our study is to test several probing behavioral
hypotheses to identify the most fruitful manual palpation strategies for the localization of tumors in soft tissue during straight
unidirectional movements. Based on the relevant literature, we
test two open hypotheses about the characteristics of manual
palpation to understand applied strategies to detect and localize
hard formations, such as nodules in soft tissue: 1) the palpation
speed influences the correct localization of an embedded hard
nodule; 2) the localization and detection rate of nodules can
vary depending on the palpation force and velocity. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first paper that tests force–velocity
modulation characteristics of manual palpation to detect hard
nodules in soft tissues.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
methodology of experimental studies and validation studies on
palpation are presented. Section III discusses FE simulations.
Then, in Section IV, the experimental studies and data analysis
on manual palpation are described. Section V concludes the
paper.
II. MANUAL PALPATION STUDIES
A. Evaluation of Manual Palpation
Previous clinical studies on manual soft-tissue examination
behaviors for different organs, [20], [21] suggest that patterns of
movement of fingers do matter in the effectiveness of detecting

Fig. 1. Phantom tissue with the locations of embedded hard nodules used for
evaluation palpation tests.

hard nodules in soft tissue. However, there is no fundamental
evidence supporting the argument that temporal modulation patterns of movement variables play a role during palpation. Validation palpation tests were carried out to understand the possible
influence of variable palpation behavior on the process of the
localization of hard nodules. This test is designed to analyze
the strategies, evaluating velocities, trajectories, and palpation
forces that humans apply to detect hard inclusions. The subjects
were first asked to apply “unrestricted” palpation, i.e., to palpate
a phantom tissue with one finger in an unprescribed and unconstraint way, with the aim of detecting embedded nodules. One
finger palpation is used in order to be comparable with artificial
palpation approaches involving a single probe during RMIS [8].
This work was approved by the King’s College London
Biomedical Sciences, Dentistry, Medicine and Natural & Mathematical Sciences Research Ethics Subcommittee. A total of 20
subjects participated in this experimental studies. In the study
group, ten of the participants were certified experts in palpation techniques with at least five years surgical experience—
senior residents and fellows were gynecologists accredited by
the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, London.
The remaining subjects were considered novices with regards to
soft-tissue palpation. The stiffness ratio between soft and hard
silicone was chosen in such a way to correspond to the commonly found stiffness ratio between healthy soft-tissue material
and tumors [23]. Therefore, for the creation of the phantom tissue, silicone gel RTV6166 (Techsil Limited, U.K.) with mixture
ratio 4:6 and 900 mPa·s viscosity was employed. To simulate
artificial tumors, transparent silicone nodules were embedded
in the phantom tissue. Hard silicone rubber compound RTV615
(Techsil Limited, U.K.) with mixture ratio 10:1 was used to fabricate hard spherical nodules with 4000 mPa·s viscosity. The silicone phantom used for evaluation studies (130 × 85 × 30 mm3 ),
Fig. 1, contained four nodules of different diameters—15, 12,
9, and 6 mm, all embedded 9 mm from the surface.
B. Experimental Setup
The experimental arrangement (see Fig. 2) was designed to
detect the finger pressure, trajectory, and velocity, thus allowing
the main characteristics of the finger movement to be recorded.
The force values of the applied pressure were measured with a
force/torque sensor (Mini 40, ATI industrial automation), which
is a 6 degrees-of-freedom sensor with a force sensing range
of ±10 N in X- and Y -direction, ±30 N in Z-direction and
±0.5 Nm for torque readings; normal force resolution is 0.01 N.

KONSTANTINOVA et al.: BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MANUAL PALPATION TO LOCALIZE HARD NODULES IN SOFT TISSUES

Fig. 2. Schematic arrangement of an experimental setup—the subject performs palpation with one finger: (1) the main palpation features are: applied
pressure P, velocity V , and trajectory in 3-D space XYZ; (2) the applied force
is measured using a force/torque sensor, mounted under the transparent support
plate; (3) the trajectory is measured by a 3-D vision system; and (4) all acquired
sensor data are synchronized and processed.

The sensor is mounted under a base plate, supporting the examined target material (i.e., the silicone phantom or the animal
organ). To reduce the effect of friction, the surface of the sample
tissue is lubricated (Boots Pharmaceuticals Intrasound Gel).
A 3-D vision system (Microsoft Kinect camera system) was
used to record the trajectories of the finger during the palpation
tests. The Kinect system is equipped with a depth sensor and
a video camera (640 × 480 pixel resolution, image acquisition
30 fps). The OpenCV package for Microsoft Visual C++ was
used to track the 3-D movements of a subject’s hand while performing palpation. Spatial position readings were recorded and
used to obtain the magnitude of the finger tangential velocity.
Evaluation tests were carried out to check the measurement accuracy of the camera. The value of position accuracy depends
on the velocity of the moving object, i.e., here, the finger. Therefore, to test the accuracy of Kinect system, the mean velocity of
palpation was applied. First, the hand position was recorded with
the Kinect-based system, using a hand-tracking algorithm. Concurrently, the trajectory of the hand was recorded using stereovision (two separate cameras), and the position was obtained
from a colored marker on the finger using the MATLAB Computer Vision Toolbox. The 2-D position values of the marker on
the moving finger were analyzed from each camera separately;
then the 3-D position of the marker in space was reconstructed.
Comparing the obtained 3-D values from Kinect sensor and our
stereovision system, we find the position accuracy for the Kinect
camera to be 1–2 mm.
C. Data Analysis
Data processing and statistical analysis were conducted using
MATLAB 7.12.0 and R statistics i386 2.15.2 software packages. In order to smooth noisy peaks from the positional data,
a second-order low-pass filter was used with cut-off frequency
of 0.2 Hz and stop-band attenuation of 16 Hz. Three-way anal-

1653

Fig. 3. Representative example of palpation path over a phantom tissue with
four embedded nodules (diameters in mm marked with arrows): (a) modulation
of velocity magnitude and (b) modulation of applied finger pressure.

ysis of variance (ANOVA) and two-way t-tests were used in
order to analyze the interaction between various palpation factors and conditions on the detection rate of hard nodules and
to observe the sources of variations, where appropriate. The
impact of a factor was considered significant, if the null hypothesis was rejected with a 95% confidence level, for p < 0.05. A
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to check if the data follows
normal distribution.
D. Results of Validation Studies
As part of our analysis, we are interested in establishing
whether there is a correlation between the palpation variables
during hard nodule localization, based on results from validation
palpation studies. To understand the mechanisms and behaviors
used by subjects to obtain explicit information about the properties of the embedded nodule, we examined the experiments on
“unrestricted” one-finger palpation. Fig. 3 demonstrates the distribution of palpation velocity and applied finger pressure over
the phantom organ. Naturally, palpation parameters are variable
and are based on the judgment of the subject. However, one can
notice dependences between applied force and velocity, as well
as a certain type of behavior applied to the tissue at locations
above the nodules. However, it is not possible to draw any conclusions about the impact of palpation force and velocity, based
just on the representation of the parameters’ magnitudes.
To observe the cross modulations of applied pressure and
velocity, we decided to investigate the local extrema of each
measurement (force and velocity) and the associated concurrent
values of the other measurement (velocity and force). Local
extrema, in this case, are considered local maxima and local
minima of force or velocity magnitude, and are found using a
second derivative test. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of force and
velocity for the local maxima and minima of the other measurement. The presented data are separately normalized with

1654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 4. Distributions of (a) normalized force magnitude and (b) normalized
force magnitude; the y-axis shows the (1) local minima and (2) local maxima
peaks of force and velocity measurements, respectively.

regards to the maximum value of each variable. The general
trend is for velocities to increase in response to higher forces
being applied. The velocity magnitude [see Fig. 4 (a)] does not
vary significantly for maximum and minimum force. In addition,
according to the two-way t-test there is no significant difference
between the velocity at local minima and that for local maxima
of force pressure (p > 0.07). However, the force values, corresponding to extrema values of velocity [see Fig. 4(b)] belong
to two different distributions (p < 0.05). The force magnitude
tends to decrease for higher velocities, but showing a large deviation. These observations demonstrate that to explore a soft
environment and to locate some hard inclusions in an efficient
way one applies variable examination behaviors. However, to
understand the characteristics of manual palpation one needs to
examine the modulations of force and velocity in the vicinity of a
buried nodule. For this purpose, FE simulations were carried out
using force and velocity parameters, obtained during evaluation
palpation studies, followed by additional palpation experiments
that are focused on unidirectional manual palpation.
III. FINITE ELEMENT SIMULATIONS
A. Design of FE Simulations
As first step to study the patterns of unidirectional manual
palpation, FE analysis is carried out. Simulations can help to
understand stress responses experienced by the soft tissue during tactile examination [24]. An important feature of manual
palpation—the detection rate of hard nodules—depends on the
magnitude of stress in the contact area with a finger. The higher
the force per unit area is applied, the more stress is induced in
that area. The analysis presented in this section will be used to
explain the behavioral patterns of manual palpation.
The process of unidirectional one-finger manual palpation
over a silicone phantom was simulated in an FE modeling environment. Validation experiments on manual palpation are used
to obtain the input parameters, such as the velocity and force
exerted by the finger. To understand the impact of palpation
behavior, these parameters were varied during our simulation
study.

Fig. 5. FE simulation of stress in the silicone phantom indented with a fingertip (diameter 20 mm) above the nodule location (diameter 10 mm) for the
location above the nodule. Here, the tangential velocity and the normal force
are decreasing during the palpation movement.

FE simulations were conducted in ABAQUS 6.10. The silicone phantom was modeled based on the studies described
in [25]—a nonlinear, isotropic, incompressible, and hyperelastic Arruda–Boyce model was used. The silicone phantom was
modeled as a rectangular cuboid with dimensions 50 × 50 ×
30 mm3 . The element size of the mesh of the FE model was
1 mm, using a quadrilateral element type. The diameter of the
embedded spherical nodule was set to 10 mm and depth 2 mm,
according to the experimental studies presented in Section IV-A.
The fingertip contact was modeled as a discretely rigid (undeformable) sphere with 20-mm diameter. Based on validation
simulations, it was found that the rigid sphere can be modeled
with 20-mm diameter. The contact between the soft tissue and
the indenting body was modeled as frictionless, assuming a perfectly lubricated surface. At the beginning of all simulations,
the soft tissue was indented by 3 mm, according to the initial
indentation used by subjects during palpation experiments.
B. Results of FE Simulations
To understand the possible combination of force–velocity
modulations during palpation, four types of palpation behaviors
in the vicinity of a hard nodule were simulated: 1) decreasing
tangential velocity (from 100 to 50 mm/s) and decreasing the
normal force (from 15 to 8 N); 2) increasing tangential velocity
(from 50 to 100 mm/s) while decreasing normal force (from 15
to 8 N); 3) constant tangential velocity (75 mm/s) and decreasing
normal force (from 15 to 8 N); and 4) no modulation in force
(12 N) and velocity (75 mm/s)—both variables remain constant
while moving across the nodule.
For demonstration purposes, Fig. 5 shows the FE simulations
with the deformation at the contact point above the nodule; in
the shown example, the tangential velocity decreases while the
normal force is decreases.
The results of the simulations with hard nodule buried 2 mm
from the surface are shown in Fig. 6. One can observe that
applied force–velocity modulations are causing different stress
responses in the area around the hard nodule. The decrease of the
stress magnitude can be observed after the nodule location has
been reached. The responses from the simulations (3) and (4)

KONSTANTINOVA et al.: BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MANUAL PALPATION TO LOCALIZE HARD NODULES IN SOFT TISSUES

1655

Fig. 7. Phantom sample used for unidirectional palpation with marked palpation path.

Fig. 6. FE simulation of stress for different palpation strategies: (a) increased
velocity and decreased force; (b) decreased velocity and decreased force;
(c) constant velocity and decreased load; and (d) constant velocity and force.

show some peaks not only in the area of the nodule but also after
it has been detected. However, these peaks are not observed for
the strategies shown under (1) and (2). For the decreased velocity strategy (2) the stress distribution is relatively uniform and
less intense. The result of simulation with increasing-velocity
strategy (1) shows one high peak before the nodule, only.
Different palpation behavior strategies, described by finger
velocity and applied force, result in different stress responses,
that with great potential lead to different tactile experiences in
human. Therefore, taking into account the simulation results, it
is required to test further the validity of the proposed hypotheses
with the help of palpation studies.
IV. ASSESSMENT OF PALPATION TECHNIQUES
In order to test the hypotheses proposed in Section I, two
sets of palpation tests involving human participants and a test
rig with silicone phantoms were carried out to understand the
characteristics of manual palpation to localize hard nodules during unidirectional movement. In the first test, manual palpation
strategies to detect hard embodiments within the silicone phantoms were studied. The impact of the velocity of subject’s finger
traversing over the tissue surface was recorded and examined
during the second test. Two palpation tests are described hereafter.
A. Test 1: To Understand Strategies to Detect
Hard Embodiments
1) Experimental Protocol: In order to further understand
what kind of behavior is used particularly for nodule localization, the recordings of movements of the finger when positioned
in the vicinity of the buried nodules are investigated. During this
test, subjects were asked to palpate a silicone phantom block
(100 × 100 × 30 mm3 ) in a linear unidirectional way in order
to sense three hard inclusions, 9.4 ± 0.8 mm in diameter, along
a predefined path (see Fig. 7). According to TNM classification
of malignant tumors [26], the tumors in the T1 stage vary from
0.5 to 20 mm in size. This range of tumor sizes was modeled
with a normal distribution of 9.75 ± 1 mm. The distribution of
the size of fabricated hard nodules was 9.4 ± 0.8 mm, which
was not significantly different from that of the corresponding

Fig. 8. Trajectory of palpation path—several trials of one selected subject;
area of interest around the third nodule is shown with five interval regions
(1–5).

tumor nodules (p > 0.7 according to one way t-test). Each subject performed five trials. Hard nodules were embedded 30 mm
apart at different depths from the surface: 2, 6, and 11 mm.
During evaluation palpation tests, subjects were encouraged
and allowed to apply any desired palpation trajectories and use
various patterns, such as those learned and developed during
their professional practice. To measure the variability of applied
force and velocity when the finger is in the vicinity of a hard nodule, subjects were asked to palpate the tissue in a unidirectional
fashion. This type of palpation is one of the possible patterns
for soft-tissue examination. For instance, the work in [27] validates the autonomous exploration of the soft tissue with a snake
robot employing a circular pattern. However, in this paper, we
focus on a straight unidirectional palpation, as this pattern is
the easiest for artificial palpation and enables fast and efficient
coverage of the target area [28].
2) Results: There were three nodules placed along the palpation path for this test. Only the third nodule (buried 2 mm
deep from the surface) was sensed by all subjects. As we are
only interested to study the force and velocity modulations in
the area of a detected hard nodule, the measurements from the
region of the third nodule were analyzed separately. To observe
the modulations of palpation behavior, the area around the nodule was separated into five interval regions. Fig. 8 demonstrates
the location of the regions in respect to the location of the third
nodule and displays the trajectory of the palpation path for one
selected subject.
Each region represents a facet of the palpation movement
in the vicinity of the nodule (see Fig. 8). The area around the
nodule is divided up into regions as follows: the region closest
to the nodule has a width of 10 mm (Region 3), while regions

1656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 10. Slope of force versus slope of velocity for subjects: two distinctive
strategies can be identified—increasing and decreasing velocity. Outlier results
are classified as “undefined strategy.”
Fig. 9. (a) Force and (b) velocity distribution trends across ten selected subjects: subjects 1–5 are experts, and subjects 6–10 are novices.

further away from the nodule have a width of 5 mm (1, 2, 4,
and 5). An experimental evaluation of the variables, force and
velocity, for each region shows that the variance of each variable
does not exceed 5%. The chosen unidirectional palpation path
allows arranging the regions sequentially, and forcing the subjects to conduct the experiment along a straight line. However,
the experimental study does not explore circular pattern-based
palpation, which would be more appropriate if the trajectory was
following a curve or any other nonstraight trajectory around a
nodule, as it is often the case in the medical environment.
Fig. 9 shows the mean force and velocity for each region
applied by ten selected subjects—five experts and five novices.
To identify possible trends in force and velocity modulation, the
effects of force and velocity magnitude on the particular location (region) in the area around the nodule, and the influence of
each individual subject were tested with the help of three-way
ANOVA tests. The velocity computed based on the smoothed
position profile was compared with the optimal estimate of the
velocity using a Kalman filter to obtain the average velocity
error in each region. The average velocity error was found to
be 0.11 ± 0.79 mm/s. The result showed that the pressure applied by the finger (F(3.94) = 7.92, p < 0.00001) depends on
the distance between the finger tip and the location of the hard
inclusion. The effect of velocity and the impact from each individual was not significant (F(3.94) = 0.37, p = 0.55 for force
measurements and F(3.94) = 0.02, p = 0.9 for the influence of
each subject). These results show that the modulation of finger
pressure is consistent for all trials, when the finger is in the
vicinity of a detected nodule. However, the insignificance of the
velocity magnitude in this context may suggest that the modulation of velocity changes differently among individuals due to
some difference in their palpation behavior. Alternatively, the
modulation of velocity may not heavily contribute to sense a
nodule.
To check the presence of different behaviors of palpation,
a first-degree polynomial was fitted to the normalized mean
values of force and velocity for each region (1–5), and the slope
(gradient) of the polynomial fit of the force was plotted versus

the slope of the corresponding velocity polynomial (see Fig. 10).
Two distinctive strategies were observed. It appears that 50% of
subjects have decreased both finger pressure and velocity while
conducting an examination in the vicinity of the nodule. 30%
of subjects have increased the velocity magnitude while at the
same time decreased the applied force. 20% of the subjects do
not vary velocity and force significantly. The group of experts
participated in the studies performed on the same level as other
subjects, i.e., showing similar behaviors like all other subjects.
To validate the statistical significance separately for behaviors with different variation of velocity, a three-way ANOVA test
was conducted again for two separate strategies, i.e., increasing
velocity with decreasing force and decreasing velocity with decreasing force. The impact of both finger velocity (F(4.00) =
9.16, p < 0.0001) and finger force (F(4.0) = 4.83, p < 0.01)
in the vicinity of a nodule were significant for the strategy
with decreasing velocity. Similar observations can be made for
the strategy, where the velocity increases: the impact of both
velocity and force are significant for locations near the nodule (F(4.17) = 4.59, p < 0.01) and (F(4.17) = 4.36, p < 0.01).
Thus, one can see that during a soft-tissue examination and hard
nodule probing, the finger palpation properties can be varied in
two different ways. In particular, the subject either increases or
decreases the finger velocity while, at the same time, reducing
the applied pressure. In addition, the smallest group of subject
does not apply any force–velocity modulation.
B. Test 2: To Understand the Impact of Traversing Velocity
1) Experimental Protocol: This set of experimental studies was designed to evaluate the impact of the velocity of the
subject’s finger during palpation on the detection rate of hard
nodules. To perform manual palpation of an organ sample as
close as possible to real organ palpation, subjects were asked
first to localize embedded nodules during three sets of experiments, applying unidirectional palpation across the surface of a
semispherical silicone phantom, that was fabricated according
to the size of an average human kidney (length 120 mm, width
65 mm, and depth 30 mm). This was followed by three sets of
experiments where unidirectional palpation was applied to an

KONSTANTINOVA et al.: BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MANUAL PALPATION TO LOCALIZE HARD NODULES IN SOFT TISSUES

Fig. 11. Silicone phantom sample for Test 2, embedded nodules are marked
(1, 2, 3).

Fig. 12. Summary of hard nodule detection rate for (a) different subjects
(novices: 1–10, and experts: 10–20), (b) silicone and porcine kidney, and
(c) velocity.

ex-vivo porcine kidney of average length 125 mm, width 80 mm,
and depth 30 mm. Hard nodules of 9.4 ± 0.8 mm in diameter
were embedded at different depths from the surface—1, 3, and
5 mm (see Fig. 11), in a such way that it is possible to detect the
presence of a nodule for an average subject. The nodules in the
tissue sample were inserted through skew cut from the posterior
part, and the depth was assessed using a needle test rod. The
principal difference of each experimental set was the applied
palpation velocity—slow, natural, and fast. “Natural” palpation
velocity is defined as the speed of palpation that feels most comfortable to the subject. Consequently, slow and fast traversing
velocities were defined as velocities that are lower and higher
than the natural velocity, respectively. The range of the velocity
magnitude is different for each subject, and is discerned during
an analysis. One of the aims of this study was to evaluate how
the velocity range varies across trials and across subjects.
2) Results: In order to get a better understanding of the impact of the finger velocity on the detection of hard nodules,
additional studies were carried out. Fig. 12 shows the summarized data for Test 2 that presents the influence of separate factors such as subject, palpation medium, and traversing velocity,

1657

with regards to the detection rate of hard nodules. A three-way
ANOVA test was carried out, to evaluate the importance of each
separate palpation behavioral element and their influence on the
detection rate. To compensate the individual bias, a weighting
was applied on the detection rate of hard nodules for all sets of
experiments for all subjects. The weight was calculated from
the best performance of each subject with no false positives. We
found that the type of palpation medium had a significant effect
on the results (F(3.99) = 6.23, p < 0.0001). While on the other
hand, the subject (F(3.99) = 2.27, p = 0.14) and the palpation
velocity (F(3.99) = 0.61, p = 0.44) did not influence the detection rate of hard nodules. Therefore, it is important to emphasize
the significance of the correctly chosen palpation technique for
a given environment and to analyze the process of soft-tissue
examination considering features of the target material.
To evaluate the impact of the traversing velocity for the given
medium (here: the silicone phantom) a three-way ANOVA test
was performed on the set of palpation cases. First, we studied
the group of subjects with low level of palpation experience.
Three factors influencing the detection rate were considered—
subject sequence number, applied pressure, and the magnitude
of palpation velocity. The velocity had a significant effect on the
detection rate (F(4.17) = 3.14, p < 0.001). While the effects of
both force and subject sequence number have shown virtually
noeffect—(F(4.17) = 0.61, p > 0.3) and (F(4.17) = 1.01, p >
0.4), respectively. Second, the same analysis was carried outfor
the group of experts. Similarly, the impact of velocity was significant (F(4.24) = 8.97, p < 0.00001). In addition, experts have
used variable finger pressure to detect hard nodules (F(4.24) =
16.67, p < 0.00001). This result confirms the importance of
correctly chosing the traversing velocity and applied force; as
is clear from the results, the experts achieved a higher detection
rate.
To understand how the magnitude of velocity influences the
detection rate of hard nodules, an analysis of different velocity magnitudes is carried out. Test 2 required to perform three
trials using fast, natural and slow palpation velocities. The magnitudes of velocity were defined by the participants, based on
their personal preference. Therefore, the values of the chosen
palpation velocities for different subjects for the same trial (for
instance, for natural velocity) are not the same. Thus, velocity
data, which was defined experimentally, was divided into three
groups based on their magnitude. For this purpose, k-means
clustering was used. The data for experts and novices were processed spearately. The results of the velocity distribution of both
participant groups for three clusters are presented in Fig. 13.
Compared with the experimentally defined velocities, there was
100%, 50%, and 61% correlation for the group of novices and
75%, 38%, and 55% correlation for the group of experts with
sets of fast, natural, and slow magnitudes of velocities.
To evaluate the impact of the velocity magnitude, the detection rate for each cluster for each group was calculated as
shown in Table I. It can be observed that the velocity magnitude
applied by the group of experts is higher. However, the results
for the detection rate for each set of velocity are similar. These
results demonstrate the importance of the correctly chosen velocity magnitude. According to the data, the highest detection

1658

Fig. 13.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Clusters of velocity distribution for (a) novices and (b) experts.
TABLE I
IMPACT OF PALPATION VELOCITY

rate of nodules for the silicone phantom is observed for slow
palpation velocity.
V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we test two hypotheses to understand the characteristics of manual palpation to localize hard nodules in soft
tissues: 1) the speed of palpation influences the detection rate of
hard nodules; and 2) force–velocity modulations during manual
palpation influences the localization and detection rate of hard
nodules. Thus, to get a better understanding of how the process
of tactile probing during robotic surgery should be implemented,
the manual palpation has been studied.
The presented work explores, with the help of the experimental studies and statistical evaluation, the influence of the
palpation velocity on the detection rate of hard nodules. It was
shown that the application of the appropriate palpation velocity
increases the performance. The results of Test 2 show that experts use both applied force and velocity to locate hard nodules,
while for novices just the variability of velocity significantly
influences the detection rate. However, the detection rate for
novices and experts does not differ significantly. Our analysis has shown that experts use a complex modulation strategy,
of both force and velocity. However, the novices take simpler
approach that involves just velocity modulations as shown in
Fig. 13—the impact of exerted force is insignificant on the detection rate according to the statistical evaluation. Therefore,
the first hypothesis holds more validity for the subjects with no
palpation experience.

In this paper, we try to understand the main characteristics
of manual palpation to detect hard nodules, with the help of
palpation studies involving human participants. The developed
experimental equipment allowed recording forces applied by
subjects during palpation, as well as to follow the dynamics of
the movement. By conducting tests on manual palpation, together with FE simulations, the strategies used to detect hard
nodules during unidirectional palpation are examined. Based
on the experimental evidence, we conclude that certain manual palpation strategies are applied to detect hard formations
in soft tissue. Consequently, force–velocity modulations are applied differently for the detected palpation strategies. The correct
combination of palpation variables for a given examination environment may lead to a higher detection rate of nodules. This
supports our second hypothesis outlined in this paper.
Ten out of twenty participants in our studies had at least five
years experience in manual palpation. Therefore, we expected
their palpation trajectory to follow distinct patterns different
from those of the nonexperts. For instance, during the evaluation test, the majority of subjects have indicated that in order to
locate a hard nodule and understand its shape, they have applied
circular movements around suspicious area. Such types of palpation (we can call them high-level techniques) are very useful
to be applied during manual soft-tissue examination, as they are
easier to implement. However, the objective of this study is to
provide a basis to design optimal robotic behaviors during softtissue examination to localize hard nodules. Thus, we examine
low-level aspects of manual palpation, such as finger exerted
pressure and palpation velocity.
To sum up, the detection and localization of stiff abnormalities, such as nodules, in soft tissues is influenced not only by
the parameters of the probe, but also by the employed palpation strategy—the correct choice of force and velocity components for the given environment. The interaction dynamics of
the finger or a probe during palpation is the result of the applied force–velocity modulations on the given properties of soft
tissue. The work presented in this paper opens a question to develop behavioral guidelines for soft-tissue examination during
RMIS.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Medical and Engineering
Community for their useful comments. The work described in
this paper has been partially funded by the Seventh Framework
Programme of the European Commission under grant agreement
287728 in the framework of EU project STIFF-FLOP, and by
the National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research
Centre based at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust
and King’s College London. The views expressed are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR
or the Department of Health. They also acknowledge the MRC
Centre for Transplantation, KCL, KHP, and the GSTT Charity.
REFERENCES
[1] O. A. J. Van der Meijden and M. P. Schijven, “The value of haptic feedback
in conventional and robot-assisted minimal invasive surgery and virtual

KONSTANTINOVA et al.: BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MANUAL PALPATION TO LOCALIZE HARD NODULES IN SOFT TISSUES

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

reality training: A current review,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1180–
1190, 2009.
A. M. Okamura, “Haptic feedback in robot-assisted minimally invasive
surgery,” Curr. Opin. Urol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 102–107, Jan. 2009.
H. R. Lee and M. H Nicholss, “Review article tactile sensing for
mechatronics—A state of the art survey,” Mechatronics, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 1–31, Feb. 1999.
P. Puangmali, K. Althoefer, L. D. Seneviratne, D. Murphy, and
P. Dasgupta, “State-of-the-art in force and tactile sensing for minimally
invasive surgery,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 371–381, Apr. 2008.
R. S. Dahiya, G. Metta, M. Valle, and G. Sandini, “Tactile sensing—From
humans to humanoids,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–20, Feb.
2010.
S. Schostek, M. O. Schurr, and G. F. Buess, “Review on aspects of artificial
tactile feedback in laparoscopic surgery,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 31, no. 8,
pp. 887–898, Oct. 2009.
M. Jia, J. W. Zu, and A. Hariri, “A new tissue resonator indenter device
and reliability study,” Sensors, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1212–1228, Jan. 2011.
P. Puangmali, H. Liu, L. D. Seneviratne, P. Dasgupta, and K. Althoefer,
“Miniature 3-axis distal force sensor for minimally invasive surgical palpation,” IEEE /ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 646–656,
Aug. 2011.
Z. Cui, Z. Han, H. Pan, and Y. Shao, “Design of a 3-axial force/torque
sensor for arthroscopy force sensing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mechatronics
Automat., 2011, pp. 243–248.
P. Dario and M. Bergamasco, “An advanced robot system for automated
diagnostic tasks through palpation,” IEEE Trans. Bio-med. Eng., vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 118–126, Feb. 1988.
S. Schostek, C.-N. Ho, D. Kalanovic, and M. O. Schurr, “Artificial tactile sensing in minimally invasive surgery—A new technical approach,”
Minim. Invasive Ther. Allied Technol., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 296–304, Jan.
2006.
M. D. Naish, M. T. Perri, D. A. Bottoni, A. L. Trejos, S. Member,
R. V Patel, and R. A. Malthaner, “Palpation system for minimally invasive localization of occult tumors,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd RAS EMBS Int.
Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatron., 2010, pp. 662–667.
Z. Gao, T. Kim, D. L. James, J. P. Desai, and S. Member, “Semi-automated
soft-tissue acquisition and modeling for surgical simulation,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Sci. Eng., 2009, pp. 268–273.
P. Boonvisut, R. Jackson, and M. C. Cenk, “Estimation of soft tissue
mechanical parameters from robotic manipulation data,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2012, pp. 4667–4674.
N. Wang, G. J. Gerling, R. M. Childress, and M. L. Martin, “Quantifying palpation techniques in relation to performance in a clinical prostate
exam,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1088–1097,
Jul. 2010.
S. McDonald, D. Saslow, and M. H. Alciati, “Performance and reporting
of clinical breast examination: A review of the literature,” CA: A Cancer
J. Clin., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 345–361, 2004.

1659

[17] K. J. Saunders, C. A. Pilgrim, and H. S. Pennypacker, “Increased proficiency of search in breast self-examination,” Cancer, vol. 58, no. 11,
pp. 2531–2537, Dec. 1986.
[18] C. Kut, C. Schneider, N. Carter-Monroe, L.-M. Su, E. Boctor, and
R. Taylor, “Accuracy of localization of prostate lesions using manual palpation and ultrasound elastography,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 7261, pp. 7261281–726128-9, 2009.
[19] J. C. Gwilliam, Z. Pezzementi, E. Jantho, A. M. Okamura, and S. Hsiao,
“Human vs. robotic tactile sensing: Detecting lumps in soft tissue,” in
Proc. IEEE Haptics Symp., Mar. 2010, pp. 21–28.
[20] M. E. Murali and K. Crabtree, “Comparison of two breast self-examination
palpation techniques,” Cancer Nursing, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 276–282, Aug.
1992.
[21] B. A. Hungerford, W. L. Gilleard, M. Moran, and C. Emmerson, “Evaluation of the ability of physical therapists to palpate intrapelvic motion with
the stork test on the support side research report evaluation of the ability
of physical therapists to palpate intrapelvic motion with the stork test on
the support side,” Phys. Therapy, vol. 87, no. 7, pp. 879–887, 2007.
[22] E. Karadogan, R. L. W. Ii, J. N. Howell, and R. R. Conatser, “A stiffness discrimination experiment including analysis of palpation forces and
velocities,” Simul. Healthc., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 279–288, 2010.
[23] T. A. Krouskop, T. M. Wheeler, F. Kallel, B. S. Garra, and T. Hall, “Elastic
moduli of breast and prostate tissue under compression,” Ultrason. Imag.,
vol. 20, pp. 260–274, 1998.
[24] X. Wang, L. J. Sliker, H. J. Qi, and M. E. Rentschler, “A quasi-static
model of wheel-tissue interaction for surgical robotics,” Med. Eng. Phys.,
vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1368–1376, Sep. 2013.
[25] K. Sangpradit, H. Liu, L. D. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Tissue identification using inverse finite element analysis of rolling indentation,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2009, pp. 1250–1255.
[26] W. A. Woodward, E. A. Strom, S. L. Tucker, M. D. McNeese,
G. H. Perkins, N. R. Schechter, S. E. Singletary, R. L. Theriault,
G. N. Hortobagyi, K. K. Hunt, and T. A. Buchholz, “Changes in the 2003
American joint committee on cancer staging for breast cancer dramatically
affect stage-specific survival,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 21, no. 17, pp. 3244–
3248, Sep. 2003.
[27] R. E. Goldman, A. Bajo, and N. Simaan, “Algorithms for autonomous
exploration and estimation in compliant environments,” Robotica, vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 71–87, Mar. 2012.
[28] H. Liu, D. P. Noonan, B. J. Challacombe, P. Dasgupta, L. D. Seneviratne,
and K. Althoefer, “Rolling mechanical imaging for tissue abnormality
localization during minimally invasive surgery,” IEEE Trans. Bio-med.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 404–414, Feb. 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

