1196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Noninvasive Subject-Specific Monitoring
of Autonomic-Cardiac Regulation
Pedram Ataee*, Student Member, IEEE, Jin-Oh Hahn, Member, IEEE, Guy A. Dumont, Fellow, IEEE,
and W. Thomas Boyce

Abstract—This paper presents a feasibility study of a modelbased approach to noninvasive and subject-specific monitoring
of autonomic-cardiac regulation. The proposed approach is built
upon individualizing a physiologically-based model by applying
a parameter estimation method to routine clinical observations,
thereby assuring physical transparency, computational efficiency,
and clinical adaptability. To develop an efficient parameter estimation procedure, a parametric sensitivity analysis was performed on
the autonomic-cardiac regulation model to identify high-sensitivity
model parameters whose changes exert significant impacts on the
system outputs. Then, a parameter estimation problem formulated as a nonlinear optimization was solved to estimate highsensitivity model parameters associated with autonomic-cardiac
regulation, whereas the remaining parameters were fixed at their
nominal values. The proposed approach can potentially monitor
temporal changes in autonomic-cardiac regulation by identifying
time-varying changes in the autonomic-cardiac model parameters, including sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve activities
on the heart (modulating heart rate), and sympathetic nerve activity on the arterial tree (modulating total peripheral resistance).
The proof-of-concept for the proposed approach was tested using
a number of experimental data from the MIMIC database and
the orthostatic hypotension tests. Our finding shows that the proposed approach is able to provide low-variance estimates of the
autonomic-cardiac model parameters, which are consistent with
their anticipated behaviors inferred from the physiologic knowledge. An extensive comparison study must be conducted in the
future to establish the clinical validity of the proposed approach.
Index Terms—Autonomic-cardiac regulation, parameter estimation, subject-specific monitoring.

I. INTRODUCTION
UTONOMIC-CARDIAC regulation operates through interactions between the autonomic nervous system (ANS)
and the cardiovascular system (CVS). The ANS dictates homeostasis in the CVS in order to maintain adequate blood flow to

A

Manuscript received May 9, 2012; revised October 31, 2012, April 7, 2013,
July 24, 2013, and November 4, 2013; accepted December 8, 2013. Date of
publication January 2, 2014; date of current version March 17, 2014. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
*P. Ataee is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z4 (e-mail:
pedrama@ece.ubc.ca).
J. O. Hahn is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA (e-mail: jinoh.hahn@ualberta.ca).
G. A. Dumont is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z4 (e-mail:
guyd@ece.ubc.ca).
W. T. Boyce is with the College for Interdisciplinary Studies and Faculty
of Medicine, 440–2206 East Mall, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada V6T 1Z3 (e-mail: tom.boyce@ubc.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2296892

deliver oxygen and nutrients to organs, by adjusting its effectors against internal (e.g., orthostatic hypotension) and external
(e.g., hemorrhage) perturbations [1]–[3]. Specifically, the ANS
adjusts blood pressure (BP), cardiac output (CO), and heart
rate (HR) using different mechanisms, e.g., adjusting sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve activity (SNA and PSNA) on
sinoatrial node, cardiac contractility, and total peripheral resistance (TPR) [4]–[6]. In particular, SNA and PSNA are controlled to maintain homeostasis in the CVS against physical
and/or emotional stressors acting on the CVS [7], [8]. In this
regard, autonomic-cardiac regulation is closely linked to cardiovascular disorders. It has been suggested that the capacity of
autonomic-cardiac regulation (i.e., a measure of sympathovagal
balance [9]) is an important predictor of an individuals’s health
outcome [9], [10].
Noninvasive, subject-specific monitoring of autonomiccardiac regulation has potential to improve current treatments of
autonomic-cardiac disorders such as chronic hypertension and
spinal cord injury (SCI). For example, insufferable side-effects
of anti-hypertensive drugs in individuals with chronic hypertension may ultimately be mitigated by controlling daily drug
intake through monitoring of the capacity of in vivo autonomiccardiac regulation. The capacity of autonomic-cardiac regulation is also a criterion used to assess the severity of injury in
individuals with SCI as well as an indicator of life satisfaction
in individuals with high thoracic and cervical SCI [11], [12].
Moreover, it may be used to improve the current classification
systems for Paralympics to ensure a fair competition among paralympians [13]. In general, autonomic-cardiac regulation monitoring can be used to categorize severity of the spinal cord injury
in HR and BP regulation with better accuracy, and it can also be
beneficial in assigning proper special care to individuals with
chronic hypertension as well as SCI.
Several noninvasive, subject-specific, data-driven indices of
autonomic-cardiac regulation, including the respiratory sinus
arrhythmia (RSA) and preejection period (PEP), have been
introduced using the autonomic blockade research methodology [14]. RSA and PEP are used as an index of PSNA [15], [16]
and SNA [16], [17] on cardiac cycle, respectively. However,
there are critical limitations to the use of RSA and PEP measures [18], [19]. For example, RSA is not a good measure of
PSNA on HR during mechanical ventilation or severe physical
activity [18], [20], [21]. PEP can only indicate the SNA on the
heart, but it cannot be used to assess the sympathetic outflows
to blood vessels. Besides, RSA has limited capability in differentiating the interindividual differences of parasympathetic
nervous system [18]. More importantly, these two measures

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ATAEE et al.: NONINVASIVE SUBJECT-SPECIFIC MONITORING OF AUTONOMIC-CARDIAC REGULATION

TABLE I
PARAMETERS IN THE MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF AUTONOMIC-CARDIAC
REGULATION [35]

are both calculated based on the heart rhythm alone; however,
previous investigations (e.g., [22]) show that SNA and PSNA
may be better estimated by looking into multiple effector
mechanisms.
Noninvasive, subject-specific, and model-based estimation
techniques to identify and monitor autonomic-cardiac variables including blood flow and blood pressure have drawn
attention [23]–[29]. Nevertheless, only a small number of
studies have addressed the identification of subject-specific,
time-varying model parameters in the autonomic-cardiac regulation using model-based estimation techniques (e.g., [30]). The
objective of this study is to develop a model-based approach
to noninvasive and subject-specific monitoring of autonomiccardiac regulation. The proposed approach is potentially able
to monitor temporal changes in autonomic-cardiac regulation
by identifying time-varying changes in the autonomic-cardiac
model parameters, including SNA and PSNA on the heart (modulating HR), and SNA on the arterial tree (modulating TPR). We
evaluated the proposed approach using a number of experimental data from the MIMIC database and the orthostatic hypotension tests performed in the Center for Hypotension at the New
York Medical College.
II. METHOD AND ALGORITHM
In this paper, we used a physiologically-based mathematical model of autonomic-cardiac regulation described by a
set of nonlinear, coupled delay-differential equations. The
mathematical model consists of 12 subject-specific parameters
(VH, βH, α, Psp , αsp , ΔV, γ, Ca , τ, δH, H0 , Ra0 ; see Table I) and
two outputs: HR and BP. This model was chosen for its relative
simplicity, which is crucial for successful parameter estimation
with routinely available clinical measurements. However, it is
emphasized that the general idea constituting the proposed approach is applicable to more complicated physiologically-based
autonomic-cardiac regulation models upon availability of additional measurements.
To monitor the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve activities, we estimated the corresponding parameters in the
mathematical model. The time-varying model parameters
were estimated through a nonlinear optimization problem by
minimizing the least squares error between measured and
model-estimated output (i.e., HR and BP) signals (Fig. 1).
To this aim, parametric sensitivity analysis was used to

1197

classify the model parameters into two groups (i.e., highsensitivity versus low-sensitivity) according to the significance of each model parameter on the system outputs as well
as the physiology underlying autonomic-cardiac regulation.
Note that high-sensitivity parameters (whose changes significantly affect the system outputs) associated with autonomiccardiac regulation were continuously estimated, whereas
low-sensitivity parameters were fixed at their nominal values. In
conclusion, the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve activities can be estimated properly using HR and BP measurements,
which can be noninvasively measured in clinical practice. In addition to HR and BP signals, CO measurement obtained using a
direct or an indirect technique can be helpful in improving the
fidelity of the estimated parameters.
A. Experimental Data
In this paper, we used experimental data from the MIMIC
database and the orthostatic hypotension tests, each of which is
described in detail below.
The MIMIC (Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring for Intensive Care) database is described in detail in [31] and freely
available on the PhysioNet website [32]. It contains multiple
physiologic signals from 121 subjects recorded from monitors
in the intensive care units (ICUs) at the Beth Israel Hospital, Boston, MA [33]. In this database, the measured data of
each subject typically contains ECG signals recorded by surface
ECG leads at 500-Hz sampling rate, and arterial blood pressure
(ABP) signal recorded by invasive radial artery catheterization at
125-Hz sampling rate [33]. The data also contains several signals
including systolic, diastolic, and mean ABP as well as beat-tobeat HR, which are computed and sampled at 0.9765 Hz [33].
The CO signal recorded using thermodilution technique is also
available in some subjects. In this paper, four one-hour data segments containing HR, mean ABP, and CO signals corresponding
to four (out of 121) different subjects were extracted, and were
subsequently used for analysis.
The orthostatic hypotension dataset used in this study were
collected in the Center for Hypotension at the New York Medical
College and are described in [34]. A single lead ECG, beat-tobeat continuous BP, respiratory plethysmography, and capnography recordings as well as a Modelflow estimate of beat-to-beat
CO (using a proprietary arterial pulse contour method) are included for each subject undergoing head-up tilt table testing
(up to 70◦ ). We used experimental data from two healthy subjects to test initial proof-of-concept of the proposed approach to
monitoring autonomic-cardiac regulation.
B. Mathematical Model
We propose a model of autonomic-cardiac regulation based
on the models developed by Ottesen [8] and Fowler and
McGuinness [35]. Our model is built upon two differential (1)–
(2) having nonlinear and delayed dynamic couplings, each of
which describes the dynamics of HR and BP regulation:
Ḣ(t) =



βH Ts
− VH Tp + δH H0 − H(t)
1 + γ Tp

(1)

1198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Ṗ (t) = −

H(t)ΔV
P (t)
+
Ra0 (1 + αTs )Ca
Ca

(2)

where H is HR and P is BP, Ts = g1 (P (t − τ )) is the sympathetic control with the strength βH on the heart and α on TPR,
and Tp = 1 − g1 (P (t)) is the parasympathetic control with the
1
strength VH on the heart, where g1 (x) = 1+x
4 . Note that Ts
(sympathetic control function) and Tp (parasympathetic control
function) are dependent of BP, and the time delay associated
with the sympathetic pathway is denoted by τ . Since the
parasympathetic nervous system is relatively fast-acting in comparison with the sympathetic nervous system, the time delay associated with the parasympathetic nervous system is neglected.
This model is devised based on the physiologic mechanisms
underlying the autonomic-cardiac regulation, and therefore is
equipped with parameters having physiologic implications that
dictate essential short-term regulation mechanisms of HR and
BP such as baroreflex control of HR and TPR. The definitions
and nominal values of the parameters in (1)–(2) are adopted
from Fowler and McGuinness [35] and summarized in Table I.
To emulate the in vivo sympathetic and parasympathetic control functions, Ts and Tp with any explicit algebraic definition
must always satisfy the following properties [8]:
r 0 < Ts < 1; Ts  1 for P (t − τ ) small, and Ts  0 for
P (t − τ ) large
r 0 < Tp < 1; Tp  0 for P (t) small, and Tp  1 for P (t)
large
r ∂ T p > 0 and ∂ T s < 0; i.e., Ts and Tp are monotonic
∂P
∂P
functions.
1
Though the model g1 (x) = 1+x
4 may reproduce the baroreflex activity with acceptable accuracy, it may have limited capability to be adapted at the individual level since it does not
involve any tunable parameters. In this regard, we replaced it by
the well-known sigmoid function [8], [36]–[39], which includes
parameters to represent interindividual differences in barore1
flex activity. That is, g1 (P ) = 1+P
4 in (1)–(2) is replaced with
g2 (P ) = 1 − σ(P ), where σ(P ) is defined as follows:
σ(P ) =

1
1+

e−α s p (P −P s p )

50 ≤ P ≤ 200.

(3)

The sigmoid function σ(P ) is characterized by two variables,
setpoint Psp , and sensitivity αsp . αsp shows the amount of
baroreflex compensatory response against BP perturbation at
Psp [22]. Since the maximum slope of the sigmoid function
occurs at Psp , the baroreflex compensatory response assumes
its maximum at Psp . Further, Psp shows the central tendency
of the mean ABP [22]. Note that the parameters in the sigmoid
function can be specified for each individual under different
physiological conditions.
C. Sensitivity Analysis
Since the number of measured variables is significantly less
than the number of unknown parameters in the autonomiccardiac regulation model, complete estimation of subjectspecific model parameters is likely not feasible [23], [40], [41].
To systematically select a subset of the model parameters
amenable to identification from the observation of system out-

puts, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the parameters in
the autonomic-cardiac regulation model and investigated the
impacts of each model parameter on the system outputs [42].
It is noted that H0 and Ra0 were excluded from this analysis,
since they are not expected to vary within the time scale of
interest (hours and up to days) within an individual. Indeed, H0
denotes the intrinsic or “denervated” HR, which is not expected
to change in an individual. In addition, Ra0 denotes the minimum
TPR when the sympathetic excitation to the arterial tree (i.e.,
vasoconstriction) is minimal, which should be characterized
mostly by the geometry (and properties to some extent) of the
arterial vessels that is not supposed to vary significantly within
the time scale of our interest. In this paper, therefore, H0 and Ra0
were classified into the category of “invariant” parameters. Thus,
nominal values listed in Table I were assigned to H0 and Ra0
during the parameter estimation procedure. In clinical practice,
H0 and Ra0 must be replaced by values assigned according to
age, gender, and other relevant covariates.
We then classified the remaining model parameters into highsensitivity and low-sensitivity groups based on the results of the
sensitivity analysis, thereby identifying a subset of parameters
with significant impact on the system outputs that must be individualized by the parameter estimation procedure. Essentially,
even a small change in the high-sensitivity parameters yields a
considerable change in system outputs. However, they are not
significantly impacted by (even large) changes in low-sensitivity
parameters.
Traditionally, parametric sensitivity in dynamic systems has
been analyzed in the frequency domain [43]. However, the
frequency-domain technique is not applicable to the autonomiccardiac regulation model (1)–(2), mainly due to the nonlinearities in the model. To resolve this challenge, this paper seeks to
carry out sensitivity analysis in the time domain. To this aim,
the sensitivity functions for HR and BP are defined as follows:


 H(t, μj ) − H(t, μj,0 ) 
μj
×
S H (t, μj ) = 
 H(t, μj )
μj − μj,0


 P (t, μj ) − P (t, μj,0 ) 
μj
P
×

.
S (t, μj ) = 

μj − μj,0
P (t, μj )

(4)
(5)

In (4)–(5), S X (t, μj ); X = H, P is the instantaneous sensitivity
of X at time t due to a perturbation in the parameter μj . In other
words, S H (t, μj ) and S P (t, μj ) represent percent changes in
HR and BP at time t due to a certain percentage perturbation in
the parameter μj from its nominal value. The total sensitivity
function (6) is obtained by combining the sensitivity functions
of the two system outputs, i.e., HR (H) and BP (P ):
S H (t, μj ) + S P (t, μj )
(6)
2
where we decided to use equal weights of 0.5 to both SH and SP
since we aim to analyze autonomic-cardiac regulation as a whole
rather than BP or HR regulation separately. Due to the nonlinearity in the autonomic-cardiac regulation model, S(t, μj ) can
assume different values depending on the amount and direction
of perturbations given to the independent variable μj . To develop
S(t, μj ) =

ATAEE et al.: NONINVASIVE SUBJECT-SPECIFIC MONITORING OF AUTONOMIC-CARDIAC REGULATION

a robust sensitivity metric against variations in the magnitude of
perturbations, we elaborated on the sensitivity function (6) by
considering the variation in μj up to +/−50% in 1% increments,
which yields the sensitivity metric as a function of time (7):

 3μ
j,0
 2

S 2 (t, μj ).
(7)
Sj (t) = 
μ j = 12 μ j , 0

Finally, a scalar metric Sj in (8) is calculated by aggregating the sensitivity values Sj (t) in time to obtain the overall
sensitivity of a particular parameter on the system output:

 tf in a l

Sj = 
Sj2 (t).
(8)
tin it ia l

The parameters are classified into high-sensitivity and lowsensitivity groups based on the values of Sj .
D. Parameter Estimation
To estimate subject-specific time-varying high-sensitivity parameters in (1)–(2), a parameter estimation method was developed based on an optimization problem minimizing the normalized L1 -error between measured versus model-estimated HR
and BP signals. The error function (i.e., the objective function)
was specified as follows:

n 

 Xs (t, M ) − Xm (t) 
EP + E H


(9)
; EX =
J=


2
X
(t)
m
t=0
where Xm (t) and Xs (t, M ) (X = H, P ) are measured and
model-estimated output signals, respectively, and M is the set of
high-sensitivity parameters in the autonomic-cardiac regulation
model, i.e., M = {VH, βH, α, Psp , ΔV }.
For each 30 s-long data segment, parameter estimation was
performed by optimizing the high-sensitivity parameters in (1)–
(2) so that the error function (9) was minimized, while lowsensitivity parameters as well as H0 and Ra0 were fixed at their
corresponding nominal values (see Table I). The optimization
problem was solved using the fmincon routine with the active-set
algorithm in the MATLAB Optimization Toolbox [44], which
finds the constrained minimum of the multivariable nonlinear
scalar function J in (9) using the quasi-Newton approximation
that determines the search direction using an approximation
of the Hessian matrix during each optimization iteration [44].
The set of optimized high-sensitivity parameters minimizing the
error function were used as their optimal estimates associated
with the corresponding data segment.
To perform the parameter estimation for the first data segment, the high-sensitivity parameters (VH, βH, α, Psp , and ΔV ;
see Table I) were initialized by assigning random values from a
uniform distribution in the neighborhood (+/−10%) of their respective nominal values. In all the remaining data segments, the
high-sensitivity parameters were initialized by the corresponding estimates in the previous data segment. We assumed that
the high-sensitivity model parameters vary slowly within each
30 s-long segment, so that they can be approximated as constants within each data segment. In fact, we assumed that the

1199

hemodynamic state of the subject is stable in each 30-s interval,
and thus the model parameters to be identified can be regarded
as constants. If a data segment involves abrupt changes in physiologic and/or mental states, the model parameters may represent
the “average” state corresponding to the data segment.
The model-estimated HR and BP signals were calculated by
solving the model (1)–(2) on the interval [0 s, 30 s] using the estimates of high-sensitivity model parameters in each 30 s-long
segment during the optimization process. In each segment, the
model-estimated HR and BP in the previous segment were assigned as initial conditions for HR and BP, whereas the first
measured HR and BP samples were used as initial conditions to
solve model-estimated HR and BP in the first segment. In order
to prevent the divergence of high-sensitivity model parameters
out of physiologically relevant range during the course of optimization procedure, the range of each model parameter was
constrained as follows:
μj,Nom
(10)
2 < μj < 2μj,Nom ; μj ∈ M
where μNom is the nominal value of μ taken from Table I.
E. Proof-of-Concept
To test the proposed approach, it is necessary to evaluate the
accuracy and repeatability of the parameter estimation procedure. To evaluate the accuracy of the parameter estimates, the
proposed parameter estimation method was first tested against
the idealized data. The idealized data are a set of 30 s-long
simulated HR and BP signals under the idealized setting with
nominal model parameter values in the absence of any structural
uncertainty (i.e., model mismatch). We performed a total of 500
parameter estimation trials, which resulted in 500 sets of highsensitivity parameter estimates. For each parameter estimation
trial, the high-sensitivity parameters were randomly initialized
in the neighborhood (+/−50%) of their corresponding nominal values while the low-sensitivity parameters were fixed at
their nominal values. The accuracy of the parameter estimation
method was assessed by examining the distributions of the index
(11), which is the ratio of each individual parameter estimate
and its actual counterpart.
=
IμEval
j

μEst
j
,
μNom
j

1 ≤ j ≤ 12.

(11)

To evaluate the repeatability of the parameter estimation
method, it was applied 50 times to each 30 s-long segment of
the experimental data corresponding to four subjects obtained
from the MIMIC database (case numbers 476, 486, 289, and
477). For each 30 s-long data segment, 50 parameter estimation
trials were carried out with 50 distinct, randomized initial conditions for the high-sensitivity parameters. Mean and standard
deviation of the estimated high-sensitivity parameters associated with each 30 s-long data segment were analyzed to assure
the repeatability of the proposed parameter estimation method.
In comparison with HR and BP which can be easily measured
in clinical practice, CO measurement is usually accessible only
from critically ill patients. To assess the benefit of using CO
measurements in the parameter estimation procedure (i.e., to

1200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 1. Measured versus the model-estimated signals (Case No.: 289); blue:
measured signals, black: model-estimated signals.

Fig. 3. Overall sensitivity (mean and standard deviation) of autonomic-cardiac
model parameters over 100 sensitivity analysis runs with nominal values selected
from +/−20% the associated nominal values introduced in Table I.
TABLE II
SENSITIVITY-BASED PARAMETER CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 2.

S j : The overall sensitivity of autonomic-cardiac model parameters.

quantify how much the availability of CO data can improve its
performance), we applied the proposed parameter estimation
procedure to both idealized and experimental data in the absence/presence of CO data. In case the CO data were available,
the stroke volume (ΔV ) was not estimated but was calculated
directly by dividing CO by HR, thereby eliminating uncertainty
associated with ΔV . On the other hand, it was fixed at its nominal value in the absence of CO data. Our expectation was that the
use of CO measurement may lead to better model-estimated HR
and BP signals, and accordingly, the estimates of the autonomiccardiac model parameters with better accuracy.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Sensitivity Analysis
The overall sensitivity metric Sj of the autonomic-cardiac
model parameters are illustrated in Fig. 2. The model parameters were classified into high-sensitivity (Psp , ΔV, VH, βH, and
α; see Table I) and low-sensitivity parameters (γ, Ca , τ, αsp ,
and δH; see Table I) based on their overall sensitivity metric
(8) (see Fig. 2 ). It is noted that all the parameters pertaining to
ANS (VH , βH , α, and Psp ) were assigned to the high-sensitivity
group as anticipated. We classified Psp and αsp into two

different groups (i.e., high-sensitivity and low-sensitivity) based
on their overall sensitivity metric (8) (see Fig. 2) since they
are correlated and describe a biological mechanism. The highsensitivity parameters were used to fit the model-estimated HR
and BP to their measured counterparts during the parameter
estimation procedure.
Since the sensitivity analysis was performed in the neighborhood of the nominal values shown in Table I, the classification
results obtained based on Sj may be affected by the nominal
values. To investigate the effect of perturbations in the nominal
values on Sj and also to assess the consistency of the parameter
classification strategy employed in this paper, we repeated the
sensitivity analysis for 100 sets of distinct nominal values. Each
set contained nominal values randomly selected from +/−20%
intervals in the neighborhood of the associated nominal values
listed in Table I. Fig. 3 shows the mean and standard deviation
of 100 calculated Sj values associated with each model parameter. It can be concluded that the classification shown in Table II
would not be significantly affected by reasonable perturbations
in the nominal model parameter values.
B. Parameter Estimation
1) Idealized Data: Overall, the proposed parameter estimation procedure performed well in the idealized data with known
model parameter values. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of index
(11) for the estimated high-sensitivity parameters (VH, βH, α,
and Psp ) obtained from the 500 parameter estimation trials on
the idealized data. The distributions corresponding to VH, βH, α,
and Psp are mostly centered around the unity (see Fig. 4), suggesting that high-sensitivity parameters are accurately estimated
based on our proposed parameter estimation procedure even

ATAEE et al.: NONINVASIVE SUBJECT-SPECIFIC MONITORING OF AUTONOMIC-CARDIAC REGULATION

1201

Fig. 4. Distribution of the index IμEjva l for the estimated high-sensitivity parameters in a set of 500 idealized simulations.

Fig. 6. Experimental results from a MIMIC data (Case No.: 486). (a) Measured
versus model-estimated signals: BP, HR, and CO; (b) Identification results: αT s ,
β H T s , and V H T p .

Fig. 5. Experimental results from a MIMIC data (Case No.: 476). (a) Measured
versus model-estimated signals: BP, HR, and CO; (b) Identification results: αT s ,
β H T s , and V H T p .

though the low-sensitivity parameters were fixed at their nominal values. Since the parameter estimation could accurately estimate the autonomic-cardiac model parameters in the idealized
data, its potential to accurately estimate the model parameters
in experimental data can be regarded as promising.

2) MIMIC Data: The top panel of Figs. 5–8 depicts the
measured signals (BP, HR, and CO) for four individuals taken
from the MIMIC database, and the bottom panel depicts the
baroreflex-modulated SNA and PSNA (VH Tp , βH Ts , and
αTs ) derived from the estimated model parameters for the
corresponding four individuals, where the solid line shows an
average value of 50 estimated baroreflex-modulated SNA and
PSNA, whereas the shaded area indicates the corresponding
standard deviation. The relatively small standard deviation
(which suggests the uncertainty related to parameter estimation)
supports the repeatability of the proposed parameter estimation
procedure.
We further scrutinized the experimental results to examine
whether the identified autonomic-cardiac model parameters are
reasonable based on a priori knowledge on the behavior of
autonomic-cardiac regulation as follows.
Consider Fig. 5. First, a gradual decrease in BP during
t = 100s–500s is the consequence of gradual decrease in αTs
(baroreflex-modulated SNA on arterial tree), while a sudden
drop ( −5%) of CO at t = 360 s is compensated by the increase in αTs at t = 360 s to maintain stable HR and BP. Moreover, an abrupt increase in HR ( +25%) at around t = 1000 s
is caused by an abrupt increase in βH Ts (baroreflex-modulated

1202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 7. Experimental results from a MIMIC data (Case No.: 289). (a) Measured
versus model-estimated signals: BP, HR, and CO; (b) Identification results: αT s ,
β H T s , and V H T p .

Fig. 8. Experimental results from a MIMIC data (Case No.: 477). (a) Measured
versus model-estimated signals: BP, HR, and CO; (b) Identification results: αT s ,
β H T s , and V H T p .

SNA on the heart) at t = 1000 s. Note that HR and BP are dependent variables according to the model (1)–(2), but CO is an
independent variable.
Now consider Fig. 6. At t = 1740 s , a sudden drop ( −30%)
in the measured CO is observed. However, there is no specific
change in HR and BP. Therefore, it is reasonable not to observe
any changes in βH Ts and VH Tp (baroreflex-modulated PSNA
on the heart), but to observe a sudden increase in αTs to maintain
stability of the system by increasing TPR. There are abrupt increases in BP ( +30%) and HR ( +5%) at t = 2700 s, which
are caused by the increase in αTs and decrease in VH Tp . Overall, these results suggest the physiologic relevance and consistency of the proposed parameter estimation procedure. Similar
interpretation could be made for the remaining data which the
proposed approach was tested against.
Finally, it is important to note that SNA and PSNA may or may
not act antagonistically. Indeed, βH Ts and VH Tp at t = 1000 s
in Fig. 5(b) act antagonistically, whereas the opposite pattern can
be observed in Fig. 6(b). For example, a large reduction in VH Tp
occurs at t = 2700 s, which is accompanied by a slight reduction
in βH Ts . In fact, simultaneous activation of SNA and PSNA is
not uncommon according to the recently proposed notion of
co-activation [9]. For example, a series of studies performed

by Cacioppo and Berntson shows that psychological processes
and higher neuro-behavioral substrates can result in independent
activation or even co-activation of SNA and PSNA [9], [45].
3) Orthostatic Hypotension Data: During the postural changes
from supine to upright positions (which can be caused either by
tilting bed or standing), blood volume is redistributed in the
lower extremities due to the gravity [46]. As a consequence,
blood volume returning to the heart in each cardiac cycle (venous
return) falls resulting in diminished SV and CO. In response to
this decrease in CO, SNA, and PSNA on the heart increases and
decreases respectively to stabilize ABP by modulating HR and
SV. The activation of SNA on the arterial tree is different for
standing and tilting situations, because the body skeletal muscle
contraction helps to maintain venous return in an appropriate
range during standing whereas muscle contraction has no role
during tilting.
Fig. 9 shows the results of applying the proposed parameter
estimation procedure to the orthostatic hypotension test data
of two subjects. In regards to the first subject, the two upper
panels of Fig. 9(a) show that the subject is in the supine position
and starts to be tilted at t = 400 s, and brought back to the
supine position at t = 1060 s after the tilting maneuver ends.
The three lower panels in Fig. 9(a) show that βH Ts increases

ATAEE et al.: NONINVASIVE SUBJECT-SPECIFIC MONITORING OF AUTONOMIC-CARDIAC REGULATION

1203

Fig. 9. Parameter estimation results on the orthostatic hypotension dataset to monitor SNA and PSNA during a tilt test. The two top panels show the measured
versus model-estimated HR and BP signals, and the three bottom panels show the identification results: V H T p , β H T s , and αT s . (a) Subject I and (b) Subject II.

and VH Tp decreases to increase HR to maintain the homeostasis
in BP regulation once the tilting maneuver commences. After
tilting maneuver ends, HR decreases while BP increases with
some delay [see Fig. 9(a)]. Note that this observation can only
be caused by an increase in VH Tp and a decrease in βH Ts to
decrease HR, and an increase in αTs to increase mean ABP
through TPR. The three lower panels in Fig. 9(a) clearly show
that the proposed approach could successfully estimate these

anticipated changes in SNA and PSNA acting on both the heart
and the arterial tree. The results shown for the second subject in
Fig. 9(b) exhibit trends consistent to those of the first subject,
and they both support the potential of the proposed approach in
monitoring the autonomic-cardiac regulation.
The model parameters of autonomic-cardiac regulation (e.g.,
VH, βH, α, and Psp ) and, therefore, baroreflex-modulated
SNA and PSNA (αTs, βH Ts , and VH Tp ) are subject-specific,

1204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

TABLE III
STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF THE IDENTIFIED BAROREFLEX-MODULATED
SNA AND PSNA: MEAN±STD

time-varying (short-term and long-term), and health-dependent.
The model parameters are subject-specific because of physiologic differences of the ANS and CVS among different individuals which results in different statistical properties (e.g., mean
and variance) in the baroreflex-modulated SNA and PSNA (Table III). The model parameters of autonomic-cardiac regulation
are also time-varying in both short-term and long-term periods.
For example, the model parameters are continuously adjusted in
response to physical and emotional stressors in order to maintain the stability of vital physiologic variables such as HR and
BP (short-term). Besides, as humans age, the neural reflexes
become slower, thereby resulting in larger delays in the sympathetic pathways (τ ) associated with older adults (long-term). We
showed that autonomic-cardiac regulation is health-dependent
since individuals with different types of stress reactivity can be
differentiated by the characteristic of autonomic-cardiac regulation, especially the baroreflex characteristic (Ts and Tp ) [47].
Therefore, developing a subject-specific monitoring method for
autonomic-cardiac regulation can be used in identifying the underlying regulation mechanism, and diagnosing the ANS- and
CVS-related deficiencies [30], [48]. Further, we may be able to
infer valuable physiologic information from autonomic-cardiac
regulation monitoring based on the variation of estimated parameters in different subjects at the same physiologic condition, and similarly within a subject at different physiologic
conditions.
C. Limitations
This study provides an initial proof-of-concept for the physiologic relevance of the autonomic-cardiac regulation parameters
estimated by the proposed approach (as demonstrated by the
physiologically anticipated changes in the estimated SNA and
PSNA parameters in response to head-up tilt tests; see Fig. 9).
However, clinical strength of the proposed method for diagnostic/therapeutic procedures is yet to be deeply investigated. In
this regard, this study must be regarded as a preliminary feasibility study to estimate autonomic-cardiac regulation parameters
based on easily accessible clinical measurements, but additional
in-depth work is necessary before the clinical value of the proposed method can be claimed. A number of methodological
limitations of the proposed approach are discussed below.
First, comparing the parameter estimation results with and
without the use of CO measurements, the results with the CO
measurements incorporated into the parameter estimation procedure were superior to the results without CO measurements.
This means that the proposed approach may benefit from the
availability of CO measurements. Fig. 10 shows an example

Fig. 10. Measured versus the model-estimated HR and BP signals with and
without using measured CO signal (Case No.: 289); blue: measure signals,
black: model-estimated signals with measured CO, red: model-estimated signals
without measured CO.

of comparing model-estimated HR and BP signals with and
without CO measurements (Case No.: 289). The thermodilution
technique (which is accepted as the gold standard CO measurement technique [49]) was used in this individual to measure
CO.
Fig. 10 shows that the accuracy of the model-estimated HR
and BP signals can be improved by using the measured CO signal in the parameter estimation procedure. Accordingly, it is expected that the accuracy of the estimated baroreflex-modulated
SNA and PSNA (i.e., αTs , βH Ts , and VH Tp ) will be enhanced
as well. Considering that currently available techniques for direct measurement of CO with acceptable accuracy, including the
thermodilution technique, are highly invasive [50], the use of CO
data for the purpose of parameter estimation may not be practical. Noninvasive techniques including echocardiography [51]
and electrical velocimetry [52] as well as the use of pulse contour methods to estimate CO from arterial BP waveform using
the morphological feature therein (e.g., [50], [53], [54]) can be
considered as potential alternatives.
Second, possible interdependence between model parameters
was not explored in this paper. For example, physiology dictates
that SV (ΔV ) is essentially related to the arterial compliance
(Ca ) and TPR (in particular, Ra0 ), e.g., SV is affected by the
afterload if TPR increases. The incorporation of a priori knowledge on the interdependence between model parameters may
have improved the outcomes of the parameter estimation. It is
important to emphasize that the structural coupling among α,
Ca , and Ra0 , and between ΔV and Ca [2] was considered in
the sensitivity analysis of model parameters used in this study
(Table II). Indeed, α could be uniquely identified since Ra0 and
Ca were fixed at their nominal values. Likewise, ΔV could also
be identified uniquely since Ca was fixed at its nominal value.
Third, due to the nonlinear dynamic nature of the autonomiccardiac regulation, the sensitivity of the model parameters may
depend on their respective nominal values. This in turn suggests
that the classification of the autonomic-cardiac parameters as
presented in Table II may also depend on the values of the model
parameters (or equivalently, the underlying physiologic state).

ATAEE et al.: NONINVASIVE SUBJECT-SPECIFIC MONITORING OF AUTONOMIC-CARDIAC REGULATION

The nominal model parameter values used in this study was
well suited for an average adult under stable resting state. However, the model parameters may need to be re-classified when
applying the proposed parameter estimation approach to subject groups under highly nonnominal physiologic and/or mental
conditions.
Fourth, to make the maximal use of the limited information
contained in the HR and BP data, this paper chose to identify a
subset of parameters characterizing the autonomic-cardiac regulation model that largely impact the HR and BP signals. This
approach is in fact not uncommon when identifying systems
involving many parameters (see, e.g., [55]). It was claimed that
fixing the invariant parameters may be well justified physiologically (see Section II.C for details).The effect of fixing lowsensitivity parameters on the estimates of high-sensitivity SNA
and PSNA parameters is expected to be nonsignificant, since the
low-sensitivity parameters cannot largely alter the HR and BP
signals (which are used in the parameter estimation procedure
to estimate the SNA and PSNA parameters) due to their small
impact on these signals.

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This paper presented an initial proof-of-concept of a modelbased and subject-specific monitoring approach to autonomiccardiac regulation using a computationally efficient parameter
estimation method with routine clinical measurements: HR, BP,
and CO. This method is effective in estimating the time-varying
and subject-specific characteristics of autonomic-cardiac regulation, since it accommodates complex nature of the regulation mechanism through a mathematical model rather than
calculating arguable features directly from signal measurements [18], [21]. Our proposed model-based monitoring method
has potential to eliminate the limitations of competing methods
currently available (e.g., RSA and PEP), such as the lack of
inter-individual separability.
In the future, an intensive experimental validation of the proposed method must be performed in clinical experiments to assess its efficacy in estimating the autonomic-cardiac regulation.
Also, the method needs to be improved by incorporating the
impact of the respiratory system on the regulation mechanisms
for HR and BP, which will consequently lead to an enhancement in the fidelity of the parameter estimation results (i.e.,
in terms of αTs , βH Ts , and VH Tp ). Note that, the parameter
estimation technique must be revised to be applicable to the
mathematical model with respiratory effects. In addition, the
proposed method must be compared with the conventional markers of SNA and PSNA, including the time-domain measures of
the heart rate variability. Further, the use of multidimensional
autonomic-cardiac spaces (such as VH Tp –βH Ts , VH Tp –αTs ,
βH Ts –αTs ) may be investigated to assess and differentiate the
capacity of autonomic-cardiac regulation in different individuals. Finally, studies involving clinical trials must be conducted
to determine and elucidate the clinical usefulness of the method
for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.

1205

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully thank Dr. J. Stewart for providing the
orthostatic hypotension dataset.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Dudkowska and D. Makowiec, “Seidel-Herzel model of human baroreflex in cardiorespiratory system with stochastic delays,” J. Math. Biol.,
vol. 57, pp. 111–137, 2008.
[2] R. Dampney, J. Horiuchi, and L. McDowall, “Hypothalamic mechanisms
coordinating cardiorespiratory function during exercise and defensive behaviour,” Auton. Neurosci.: Basic Clinical, vol. 142, no. 1–2, pp. 3–10,
2008.
[3] J. Elghozi and C. Julien, “Sympathetic control of short-term heart rate variability and its pharmacological modulation,” Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol.,
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 337–47, 2007.
[4] B. Appelhans and L. Luecken, “Heart rate variability as an index of regulated emotional responding,” Rev. Gen. Psychology, vol. 10, pp. 229–240,
2006.
[5] E. Magosso, V. Biavati, and M. Ursino, “Role of the baroreflex in cardiovascular instability: A modeling study,” Cardiovascular Eng., vol. 1,
pp. 101–115, 2001.
[6] S. Cavalcanti, “Arterial baroreflex influence on heart rate variability:
A mathematical model-based analysis,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput.,
vol. 38, pp. 189–197, 2000.
[7] D. Mohrman, Cardiovascular Physiology. New York, NY, USA:
McGraw-Hill, 2006.
[8] J. Ottesen, “Modelling of the baroreflex-feedback mechanism with timedelay,” J. Math. Biol., vol. 36, pp. 41–63, 1997.
[9] G. Berntson, G. Norman, L. Hawkley, and J. Cacioppo, “Cardiac autonomic balance versus cardiac regulatory capacity,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 45, pp. 643–652, 2008.
[10] F. Lombardi, G. Sandrone, S. Pernpruner, R. Sala, M. Garimoldi,
S. Cerutti, G. Baselli, M. Pagani, and A. Malliani, “Heart rate variability as
an index of sympathovagal interaction after acute myocardial infarction,”
Amer. J. Cardiology, vol. 60, no. 16, pp. 1239–1245, 1987.
[11] A. Laird, A. Finch, P. Waite, and P. Carrive, “Peripheral changes above
and below injury level lead to prolonged vascular responses following
high spinal cord injury,” Amer. J. Physiol.—Heart Circulatory Physiol.,
vol. 294, no. 2, pp. H785–H792, 2008.
[12] R. Teasell, J. Arnold, A. Krassioukov, and G. Delaney, “Cardiovascular
consequences of loss of supraspinal control of the sympathetic nervous
system after spinal cord injury,” Archives Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 81,
no. 4, pp. 506–516, 2000.
[13] P. Mills and A. Krassioukov, “Autonomic function as a missing piece of
the classification of Paralympic athletes with spinal cord injury,” Spinal
Cord, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 768–776, 2011.
[14] G. Berntson, J. Cacioppo, P. Binkley, B. Uchino, K. Quigley, and
A. Fieldstone, “Autonomic cardiac control. III. Psychological stress and
cardiac response in autonomic space as revealed by pharmacological
blockades,” Psychophysiology, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 599–608, 1994.
[15] M. Mantaras, S. Carrasco, M. Gaitan, and R. Gonzalez, “Comparison of
indexes of respiratory sinus arrhythmia,” in Proc. 25th Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Cancun, Mexico, 2003, pp. 232–235.
[16] W. Boyce, J. Quas, A. Alkon, N. Smider, M. Essex, and D. Kupfer,
“Autonomic reactivity and psychopathology in middle childhood,” Brit.
J. Psychiatry, vol. 179, no. 2, pp. 144–150, 2001.
[17] J. Quas, A. Bauer, and W. Boyce, “Physiological reactivity, social support,
and memory in early childhood,” Child Develop., vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 797–
814, 2004.
[18] P. Grossman and E. Taylor, “Toward understanding respiratory sinus
arrhythmia: relations to cardiac vagal tone, evolution and biobehavioral functions,” Biological Psychology, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 263–285,
2007.
[19] J. Cacioppo, G. Berntson, P. Binkley, K. Quigley, B. Uchino, and
A. Fieldstone, “Autonomic cardiac control. ii. noninvasive indices and
basal response as revealed by autonomic blockades,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 586–598, 1994.
[20] F. Yasuma and J. Hayano, “Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: why does the
heartbeat synchronize with respiratory rhythm?” Chest, vol. 125, pp. 683–
690, 2004.

1206

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

[21] J. Houtveen, P. Groot, and E. Geus, “Effects of variation in posture and
respiration on RSA and pre-ejection period,” Psychophysiology, vol. 42,
no. 6, pp. 713–719, 2005.
[22] G. Berntson and J. Cacioppo, Integrative Physiology: Homeostasis, Allostasis and the Orchestration of Systemic Physiology. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ Pr, 2007, pp. 433–452.
[23] M. Olufsen and J. Ottesen, “A practical approach to parameter estimation applied to model predicting heart rate regulation,” J. Math. Biol.,
2012.
[24] M. Olufsen, A. Alston, H. Tran, J. Ottesen, and V. Novak, “Modeling heart
rate regulation-part I: sit-to-stand versus head-up tilt,” Cardiovascular
Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 73–87, 2008.
[25] J. Ottesen, “On the track of syncope induced by orthostatic stress—
feedback mechanisms regulating the cardiovascular system,” in Proc. 7th
IFAC Symp. Modelling Control Biomed. Syst., 2009, pp. 187–191.
[26] S. Cavalcanti, S. Cavani, A. Ciandrini, and G. Avanzolini, “Mathematical
modeling of arterial pressure response to hemodialysis-induced hypovolemia,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 36, pp. 128–144, 2006.
[27] H. Van de Vooren, M. Gademan, C. Swenne, B. TenVoorde, M. Schalij,
and E. Van der Wall, “Baroreflex sensitivity, blood pressure buffering, and
resonance: What are the links? Computer simulation of healthy subjects
and heart failure patients,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 102, pp. 1348–1356,
2006.
[28] C. Taylor and C. Figueroa, “Patient-specific modeling of cardiovascular
mechanics,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 11, pp. 109–134, 2009.
[29] M. Aoi, B. Matzuka, and M. Olufsen, “Toward online, noninvasive, nonlinear assessment of cerebral autoregulation,” in Proc. 33rd Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Boston, MA, USA, 2011, pp. 2410–2413.
[30] M. Olufsen, H. Tran, J. Ottesen, and Others, “Modeling baroreflex regulation of heart rate during orthostatic stress,” Regulatory, Integrative Comparative Physiol.: Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 291, no. 5, pp. R1355–R1368,
2006.
[31] G. Moody and R. Mark, “A database to support development and evaluation of intelligent intensive care monitoring,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiology, 1996, pp. 657–660.
[32] A. Goldberger, L. Amaral, L. Glass, J. Hausdorff, P. Ivanov, R. Mark,
J. Mietus, G. Moody, C. Peng, and H. Stanley, “Physiobank, physiotoolkit,
and physionet: Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,” Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, 2000.
[33] G. Moody, R. Mark, and A. Goldberger, “PhysioNet: a Web-based resource
for the study of physiologic signals,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 70–75, May/Jun. 2001.
[34] A. Ocon, M. Medow, I. Taneja, and J. Stewart, “Respiration drives phase
synchronization between blood pressure and RR interval following loss
of cardiovagal baroreflex during vasovagal syncope,” Heart Circulatory
Physiol.: Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 300, no. 2, pp. H527–H540, 2011.
[35] A. Fowler and M. McGuinness, “A delay recruitment model of the cardiovascular control system,” J. Math. Biol., vol. 51, pp. 508–526, 2005.
[36] F. Melchior and R. Srinivasan, J. Charles, “Mathematical modeling of human cardiovascular system for simulation of orthostatic response,” Amer.
J. Physiol., vol. 262, no. 6, pp. H1920–H1933, 1992.
[37] D. Eckberg, “Arterial baroreflexes and cardiovascular modeling,” Cardiovascular Eng., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 5–13, 2008.
[38] S. Cavalcanti and E. Belardinelli, “Modeling of cardiovascular variability
using a differential delay equation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 43,
no. 10, pp. 982–989, Oct. 1996.
[39] L. McDowall and R. Dampney, “Calculation of threshold and saturation
points of sigmoidal baroreflex function curves,” Heart Circulatory Physiol.: Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 291, no. 4, pp. H2003–H2007, 2006.
[40] C. Cobelli and J. DiStefano, “Parameter and structural identifiability concepts and ambiguities: A critical review and analysis,” Amer. J. Physiol.,
vol. 239, no. 1, pp. R7–R24, 1980.
[41] A. Cintrón-Arias, H. T. Banks, A. Capaldi, and A. L. Lloyd, “A sensitivity
matrix based methodology for inverse problem formulation,” J. Inverse
Ill-posed Problems, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1–20, 2009.
[42] M. Gevers, “A personal view of the development of system identification:
A 30-year journey through an exciting field,” IEEE Control Syst. Mag.,
vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 93–105, Dec. 2006.
[43] M. Eslami, Theory of Sensitivity in Dynamic Systems: An Introduction.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1994.
[44] MATLAB Optimization Toolbox User’s Guide, MathWorks, Natick, MA,
USA, 2010.
[45] G. Berntson, G. Norman, L. Hawkley, and J. Cacioppo, “Spirituality and
Autonomic Cardiac Control,” Ann. Behavioral Med., vol. 35, pp. 198–208,
2008.

[46] R. Freeman, W. Wieling, F. Axelrod, D. Benditt, E. Benarroch,
I. Biaggioni, W. Cheshire, T. Chelimsky, P. Cortelli, C. Gibbons,
D. Goldstein, R. Hainsworth, M. Hilz, G. Jacob, H. Kaufmann, J. Jordan,
L. Lipsitz, B. Levine, P. Low, C. Mathias, S. Raj, D. Robertson,
P. Sandroni, I. Schatz, R. Schondorff, J. Stewart, and J. van Dijk, “Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic hypotension, neurally
mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome,” Clin. Auton.
Res., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 69–72, 2011.
[47] P. Ataee, G. Dumont, and W. Boyce, “Baroreflex modeling in the genesis
of stress reactivity using sigmoidal characteristic,” in Proc. Amer. Control
Conf., 2010, pp. 3566–3571.
[48] M. Olufsen, J. Ottesen, H. Tran, L. Ellwein, L. Lipsitz, and V. Novak,
“Blood pressure and blood flow variation during postural change from
sitting to standing: Model development and validation,” J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 99, no. 4, pp. 1523–1537, 2005.
[49] W. Ganz, R. Donoso, H. Marcus, J. Forrester, and H. Swan, “A new
technique for measurement of cardiac output by thermodilution in man,”
Amer. J. Cardiology, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 392–396, 1971.
[50] N. Fazeli and J. Hahn, “Estimation of cardiac output and peripheral resistance using square-wave-approximated aortic flow signal,” Frontiers
Physiol., vol. 3, no. July, pp. 1–10, 2012.
[51] H. Ihlen, J. Amlie, J. Dale, K. Forfang, S. Nitter-Hauge, J. Otterstad,
S. Simonsen, and E. Myhre, “Determination of cardiac output by Doppler
echocardiography,” Brit. Heart J., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 54–60, 1984.
[52] N. Zoremba, J. Bickenbach, B. Krauss, R. Rossaint, R. Kuhlen, and
G. Schälte, “Comparison of electrical velocimetry and thermodilution
techniques for the measurement of cardiac output,” Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1314–1319, 2007.
[53] R. Mukkamala, A. Reisner, H. Hojman, R. Mark, and R. Cohen, “Continuous cardiac output monitoring by peripheral blood pressure waveform
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 459–467, Mar.
2006.
[54] T. Parlikar, T. Heldt, G. Ranade, and G. Verghese, “Model-based estimation of cardiac output and total peripheral resistance,” in Proc. Comput.
Cardiology, 2007, pp. 379–382.
[55] J. Chase, C. Starfinger, C. Hann, J. Revie, D. Stevenson, G. Shaw, and
T. Desaive, “Model-based prediction of the patient-specific response to
adrenaline,” Open Med. Informat. J., vol. 4, pp. 149–163, 2010.

Pedram Ataee (S’02) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2004 and 2006, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
He is also the Team Lead of Department of
Machine Learning at Thalmic Labs Inc., Kitchener,
Ontario, ON, Canada.

Jin-Oh Hahn (M’08) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in mechanical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1997 and 1999,
and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA, in 2008.
From 2010 to 2012, he was with the University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, USA, where he was an Assistant Professor with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, an Assistant Adjunct Professor with the
Department of Biomedical Engineering, and a Research Affiliate at the Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital. Since 2012, he has
been with the University of Maryland, MD, USA, where he is an Assistant
Professor with the Department of Mechanical Engineering.
His current research interests include dynamical systems and controls approach to health monitoring, diagnostics and maintenance of dynamic systems,
with applications to bio-systems and healthcare, automotive systems, structural
systems, and energy systems.

ATAEE et al.: NONINVASIVE SUBJECT-SPECIFIC MONITORING OF AUTONOMIC-CARDIAC REGULATION

Guy A. Dumont (M’77−SM’84−F’99) received the
Dipl. Ing. degree from Ecole Nationale Suprieure
d’Arts et Mtiers, Paris, France, in 1973, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, in 1977.
He was with Tioxide, France, from 1973 to 1974,
and again from 1977 to 1979. He was with Paprican from 1979 to 1989, first in Montreal and then in
Vancouver. In 1989, he joined the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, where he
is a Professor, Co-founder of the Electrical and Computer Engineering in
Medicine (ECEM) research group, and an Associate Member of the Department of Anesthesia, Pharmacology and Therapeutics. From 1989 to 1999, he
held the Paprican/NSERC Chair in Process Control, and from 2000 to 2002,
he was also the Associate Dean, Research for the Faculty of Applied Science.
His current research interests include adaptive control, predictive control, and
signal processing with applications to patient monitoring, and automated drug
delivery in anesthesia. He was the General Chair for the 30th Annual Meeting
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society held in Vancouver in
August 2008, and Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE from 2008 to 2010.
Dr. Dumont was awarded a 1979 IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control
Honorable Paper Award; a 1985 Paprican Presidential Citation; a 1990 UBC
Killam Research Prize; the 1995 CPPA Weldon Medal; the 1998 Universal
Dynamics Prize for Leadership in Process Control Technology; the 1998 IEEE
Control Systems Society Control Systems Technology Award; NSERC Synergy
Awards in both 1999 and 2002; the 2010 Brockhouse Canada Prize for Interdisciplinary Research in Science and Engineering; in 2011–2012, he was a UBC
Peter Wall Distinguished Scholar in Residence.

1207

W. Thomas Boyce received the Baccalaureate degree
in philosophy and psychology at Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, and the M.D. degree at Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. He then
did pediatric residency training at the University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA, and was named
a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholar
at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA.
Prior to his appointment at the University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, he spent twenty
years on the pediatrics and public health faculties of the University of California,
San Francisco and Berkeley, CA, USA. He is currently the Sunny Hill Health
Centre/BC Leadership Chair in Child Development at the University of British
Columbia. He serves as Co-Director of the Experience-Based Brain and Biological Development Program of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and is a Member of the Institute of Medicine and Harvard University’s National
Scientific Council on the Developing Child. As a social epidemiologist and
a developmental-behavioral pediatrician, his research addresses how genetic,
neural, and psychosocial processes work together to produce inequalities in
childhood health and disease across different socioeconomic groups. His work
has shown how psychological stress and neurobiological reactivity to aversive
social contexts interact to produce disorders of both physical and mental health
in populations of children.

