IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

411

Using Pressure Map Sequences for Recognition of
On Bed Rehabilitation Exercises
Ming-Chun Huang, Student Member, IEEE, Jason J. Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Wenyao Xu, Member, IEEE,
Nabil Alshurafa, Student Member, IEEE, Xiaoyi Zhang, Student Member, IEEE, and Majid Sarrafzadeh, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Physical rehabilitation is an important process for
patients recovering after surgery. In this paper, we propose and
develop a framework to monitor on-bed range of motion exercises
that allows physical therapists to evaluate patient adherence to set
exercise programs. Using a dense pressure sensitive bedsheet, a
sequence of pressure maps are produced and analyzed using manifold learning techniques. We compare two methods, Local Linear
Embedding and Isomap, to reduce the dimensionality of the pressure map data. Once the image sequences are converted into a low
dimensional manifold, the manifolds can be compared to expected
prior data for the rehabilitation exercises. Furthermore, a measure to compare the similarity of manifolds is presented along with
experimental results for five on-bed rehabilitation exercises. The
evaluation of this framework shows that exercise compliance can be
tracked accurately according to prescribed treatment programs.
Index Terms—Isomap, local linear embedding, manifold learning, pressure images, range of motion, rehabilitation exercise.

I. INTRODUCTION
N traditional medicine, physical rehabilitation programs are
performed in hospitals or outpatient treatment centers, where
therapists trained in rehabilitation provide guidance as well as
monitor patient recovery. Rehabilitation exercise programs help
patients return to regular health after surgical procedures or
illness.
Physical rehabilitation is well recognized to provide accelerated and long lasting benefits to patients [2]. Johns Hopkins
Hospital implemented physical rehabilitation programs in early
postsurgical stages, and found up to 22% reduction in ICU stays
and clear reductions in net financial costs [3]. The aim of such
rehabilitation regimens is to improve muscular strength and specific body range of motion. Patients undergoing physical rehabilitation follow the exercises assigned by physical therapists on
a regular or semiregular basis. There is a need for physical therapists to manually monitor and evaluate the rehabilitation process

I

Manuscript received June 15, 2013; revised September 4, 2013 and December
16, 2013; accepted December 20, 2013. Date of publication January 2, 2014;
date of current version March 3, 2014.
M.-C. Huang, J. J. Liu, N. Alshurafa, X. Zhang, and M. Sarrafzadeh are with
the Wireless Health Institute, Department of Computer Science, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 94607, USA (e-mail: mingchuh@cs.ucla.edu;
jasonliu@cs.ucla.edu;
nabil@cs.ucla.edu;
stevezhanggeek@gmail.com;
majid@cs.ucla.edu).
W. Xu is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the
State University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo, NY 14260–1660, USA
(e-mail: wenyaoxu@buffalo.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2296891

in order to check that the patients’ recovery progresses according to plan. With manual monitoring, there is not only a large
cost in tracking rehabilitation progress, but also the measurement of progress is difficult to quantize. Automated monitoring
of rehabilitation exercises is proposed here as a solution.
A. Related Work
In this subsection, we describe the current literature in the field
of automated physical rehabilitation monitoring. Zhou and Hu’s
survey [4] of human motion tracking systems for rehabilitation
targeted primarily stroke sufferers, but this list of technological
approaches can be applied to rehabilitation in general. Specialized exercise equipment, such as treadmills, or even robotic
guidance devices [5] have been investigated for strength building applications. In addition, visual tracking of body posture has
undergone much research, however many relied on marker systems placed on the body [6]. Furthermore, marker-free systems
try to overcome these limitations by building 2-D [7] or 3-D
models of the human body [8]. Other nonvisual methods have
been researched, such as using inertial sensors [9]. Combination
of sensors are also described, such as Huang’s et al. work with
inertial sensors and visual camera that tracked both (fine-grain)
finger and (course-grain) hand movements for upper extremities
rehabilitation [10]. These systems require extensive deployment
or calibration and can be inconvenient for the users.
This paper focuses on rehabilitation monitoring of subject
motions and posture changes, and in particular, with patients
who are bed-ridden or restricted to motions on bed. There are
current research approaches that focus on posture change detection, such as research by Nakajima et al. in which real-time
video image sequences were used to extract optical flow information [11]. Jones et al. used a 24 pressure sensor array to
identify posture movement times and then evaluated sleep restlessness [12], while Adami et al. used four load cell sensors
with 200-Hz sampling rates to analyze time varying waveforms
as patients move on bed [13].
Accurate detection of posture movement are shown in these
previous methods. They are able to show the existence of posture changes, but they do not target the recognition of actual
posture. A system to detect transitions between sitting and lying
postures using large pressure sensor arrays placed under the mattress was developed by Foubert et al. [14]. Yousefi et al. were
successful in recognizing sleep posture using principal component analysis (PCA) [15], while Hsia et al. used statistical
feature extraction [16]. Harada et al. investigated body posture
tracking and used generative models of human body pressure
to match the patient’s pressure distribution [17]. Similarly, our

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

412

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Process flow for on-bed exercise monitoring.

previous work in this field investigated static posture recognition [18], however, this current paper focuses on the transitional
and dynamic nature of body motion as seen in pressure image
sequences. Most related studies used a very limited number of
sensors for measuring pressure distribution and do not report
any dynamic on-bed motion results. Therefore, we conclude
that there are no similar type of on-bed exercise monitoring
methods with which to compare our results.
(a)

(b)

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Bedsheet Design
The bedsheet system consists of three components: a 64 ×
128 pressure sensor array, an embedded data sampling unit,
and a tablet for data analysis and storage. The sensor array is
based on an eTextile material which is fiber-based yarn coated
with piezoelectric polymer [19], [20]. Without pressure, the resistance of the eTextile material is high. As external force is
applied to the surfaces of the material, the eTextile fibers are
squeezed together and, due to its pressure sensitive characteristics, the electrical resistance decreases in that region.
The bedsheet itself has a three-layer structure. The top layer
is regular fabric that is coated with 64 parallel conductive lines.
The middle layer is the eTextile material and the bottom layer
has 128 conductive lines arranged perpendicular to the top 64
lines. At each intersection of conductive lines, the structure
forms a pressure sensitive resistor. There are effectively 8192
pressure sensors in total.

Fig. 2. Comparison visualization of Dimension Reduction to two dimensions.
(a) PCA. (b) LLE manifold.

PCA is a well known method of dimension reduction and has
widespread use in applications such as face recognition [21],
speech analysis [22], and medical classification [23]. PCA finds
the principal components, i.e., the main orthogonal base axes
with which each data sample can be linearly constructed. The
result is that only a subset of base axes are required to sufficiently
represent the original data.
Fig. 2 is an example of the benefit of using manifold learning
for this application. Compared with PCA, manifold learning
is better suited to identify the underlying topological structure
that is nonlinear in the high dimensional image space. Manifold
learning approaches are also less prone to overfitting since the
intrinsic dimensionality of manifolds is low (see Section IV-C
for discussion on intrinsic dimensionality).
C. Algorithm Overview

B. Manifold Structure of Pressure Image Sequences
In general, image analysis on raw high dimensional data is
computationally expensive, so dimension reduction techniques
are usually applied to transform the data into another domain to
either make it more manageable or useful for further analysis.

Fig. 1 introduces the three main steps, and this process is
described in more detail in the following section.
Step 1: Preprocessing of the pressure image
Step 2: Dimension reduction via manifold learning
Step 3: Activity recognition using manifold matching.

HUANG et al.: USING PRESSURE MAP SEQUENCES FOR RECOGNITION OF ON BED REHABILITATION EXERCISES

Exercise recognition uses a subject’s prerecorded training
data to match exercises under test. The training data consists
of samples of on-bed exercises that are analyzed to produce a
low dimensional representation, i.e., a manifold, from the original high resolution pressure images. When new exercise data
is recorded, it is mapped to the same low dimensional manifold representation and matched to the closest training exercise
manifold.

413

sample x can be formulated as:
e = x −

k


N


xj −

j =1

• Step 1: Pre-processing
The pre-processing of the raw pressure images is required
so that the image sequences can be standardized in such a way
to enable successful recognition. The eTextile material exhibits
voltage leakage across adjacent sensors. This causes noise and
artifacts that affect recognition performance, and preprocessing
mitigates these side effects as much as possible.
First, the subject can be located anywhere on the bedsheet,
so to correct this, the images are aligned to a common center of
mass and relocated to the center of the image. A smoothing filter
of a symmetric 5 × 5 unit normal distribution is applied. This
smoothing minimizes the effect of noise in the pressure map.
The images are normalized so that the sum of pixel weights is
one. This step attempts to counteract the effects for different
body mass.
• Step 2: Dimension Reduction Using Manifold Learning
In this paper, we investigate two other methods of dimension
reduction: local linear embedding (LLE) and Isomap. Both of
these are manifold learning types of dimension reduction. The
advantage of manifold learning techniques is that they can find
the underlying structure, or the manifold, and can be visualized
if the inherent dimension is low enough.

A. Local Linear Embedding
The first method to map the image sequence X to a low
dimensional space is based on the LLE framework by Saul
and Roweis [24], which has various applications in machine
learning systems [25]. LLE is an unsupervised algorithm that
reconstructs the global data nonlinearly while preserving local
linearity. After the computation, similar images will be clustered
within the low dimensional manifold. In general, there are three
steps in the algorithm, which will be described in the following.
1) k-Nearest Neighbor Searching: The first step is to search
k-nearest neighbors for each image. In the searching process,
we use Euclidean distance to evaluate the similarity between
images. For this paper, we searched for the 30 nearest neighbors
of each image.
2) Weighted Reconstruction With Nearest Neighbors: The
second step is to reconstruct a sample image using its nearest neighbors. Assume that an arbitrary image x has k-nearest
neighbors xi . Then, x can ideally be represented as a linear
combination of its neighbors. In general, an exact reconstruction will not be found, so a reconstruction error e for a single

(1)

where wi denotes the reconstruction weight for the neighbor xi .
For N images, we can write the total error as:
E=

III. ALGORITHMIC FRAMEWORK FOR EXERCISE MONITORING

wi xi 

i=1

N


wij xij 

(2)

i=1

where each xj is an image. xij is the ith neighbor of xj , and wij
is the reconstruction weight for xij . The optimization process
minimizes the reconstruction error of all images by finding appropriate values for the weights wij . There are two attributes of
the problem to ensure it is well-imposed: (1) exclusiveness: the
weight wij is zero if xij is not in the nearest neighbor list of xj ;
(2) normalization: the sum of the weights of nearest neighbors
of xj should be 1. Equation (2) has a closed least square solution
and the weights wij can be solved efficiently [24].
3) Low Dimensional Embedding Construction: The third
step is to construct the corresponding embedding in a low dimensional space. Based on the calculation results from the second
step, the intrinsic geometrical structure of each local cluster is
characterized by wij . We assume that the neighborhood relation
in high dimensional space should be preserved in low dimensional space, i.e., within a manifold. Based on this assumption,
the embedding process finds the low dimensional representation
y of x by minimizing the following error E  :
E =

N

j =1

yj −

N


wij yij 

(3)

i=1

where yj and yij are the corresponding points of xj and xij in
the low dimensional manifold, respectively. We note that (3) is
in a quadratic form and the embedding optimization process is
efficiently solvable. Furthermore, all the manifold points yi will
be computed globally and simultaneously, and no local optima
will affect the construction result.
Equations (2) and (3) indicate that the low dimensional construction is only based on the local neighborhood data. This
means that the computed manifold yi can be translated with
an arbitrary displacement. Moreover, LLE states the computed
manifold yi can be rotated by an arbitrary angle without affecting (3) too. These geometric attributes can be represented and
formulated with the following two constraints:
N

i=1

yi = 0,

N
1 
yi · yi = 1.
N i=1

(4)

Therefore, manifold construction problem becomes an eigenvalue problem [24], in which we select the matrix rank to have
the desired manifold dimension.
B. Isomap
The second method to map the image sequence X to a low
dimensional space is based on the Isomap framework by Tenenbaum et al. [26]. Isomap also performs nonlinear dimension

414

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

reduction and extends the classical linear Multidimensional
Scaling (MDS) method [27]. MDS finds a set of co-ordinates
that satisfies given pairwise distances between points. However,
given that the points may lie on a manifold inside a high dimensional space, linear pairwise distances may not represent
the true structure.
1) k-Nearest Neighbor Searching: This stage is similar to
LLE where k-Nearest Neighbors for each original image are
selected using the Euclidean distance in high dimensions.
2) Computation of Geodesic Pairwise Distance: The distances between all pairs of images are estimated given the distances between local sets of images. This results in the geodesic
X
along a
pairwise distances, i.e., the shortest path distances Dij
curved surface. Floyd’s algorithm can be used to find the shortest paths between every pair of images in a graph, or other faster
methods [28].
3) Low Dimensional Embedding via Multidimensional
Scaling: The final stage of Isomap applies the regular MDS
algorithm to the geodesic distances. MDS finds points Y that
minimize the total error between pairwise distances in high
dimensional space and pairwise distances in low dimensional
space:

min
Y

N 
N


X
Y 2
(Dij
− Dij
)

(5)

i=1 j =1

Y
is the pairwise distance between points in the low dwhere Dij
dimensional space Y . The low dimensional embedding is solved
by taking the co-ordinates of the top d eigenvectors of the innerproduct matrix of the geodesic pairwise distances [27].
Contrasting with LLE, Isomap preserves pairwise distances
within the manifold, while LLE preserves the local linear structure within the manifold.
• Step 3: Exercise Recognition Using Manifold Matching
1) Map Input to Manifold: Once the training data has been
reduced in dimensionality to its corresponding low dimensional
form, we can evaluate the process using new test data against
the training data. The testing data needs to be converted into
manifold form. Note that it is possible to run the whole LLE
or Isomap algorithm again on the combined testing data and
training data in order to find the low dimensional representation
of the test data, however this is not necessary.
Instead, a portion of the algorithm needs only to be executed
[24], [29]. Given a new test image x̂, we wish to find its low
dimensional representation, ŷ. To do so, the weights wi are
computed from the k nearest neighbors of x̂ in the training set,
xi . This is again the least squares solution to minimize

x̂ −

k


wi xi 

(6)

i=1


with the constraint ki=1 wi = 1. Since the corresponding low
dimensional co-ordinates of xi are known during the training
phase, we can construct the resultant embedded co-ordinates for

ŷ using the same weights:
ŷ =

k


wi yi

(7)

i=1

where yi are the corresponding embedded points of xi .
2) Manifold Matching: Exercise tracking involves checking
how well the testing data follows the trajectory of a given exercise manifold. We can compare trajectories using a similar idea
to the Hausdorff distance. The distance of a point to a manifold
is equal to the shortest Euclidean distance to any point in the
manifold. The similarity of two manifolds is the mean of the
point distances of all the points of one manifold, M1 to the
other manifold, M2 . This is expressed as
s(M1 , M2 ) =

TM
1 1

TM 1

i=1

min

1≤j ≤T M 2

M1 (i) − M2 (j)

(8)

where TM 1 and TM 2 are the number of points in each manifold.
This metric allows manifolds of different lengths to be compared
since different subjects take different times to perform each
activity. Since the Hausdorff metric is not symmetric, we can
take the following sum as the manifold matching metric,
d(M1 , M2 ) = s(M1 , M2 ) + s(M2 , M1 ).

(9)

So, to measure how well a subject adheres to the prescribed
exercise, the testing data is mapped to corresponding low dimensional embedding points that defines a manifold, then the
manifold is measured against the expected exercise manifold.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Experimental Setup
We evaluated this framework for exercise monitoring onten
subjects, seven male subjects, and three female subjects. The
weight of the subjects ranged from 50 to 85 kg, and height
between 155 and 188 cm. There were five selected on-bed exercises: alternating leg lifts, head lifts, alternating heel slides,
alternating side-to-side lateral rolls, and sit ups. These exercises
have been selected as being appropriate for on-bed monitoring [30]. In the training data collection, at least five sets of
image sequences were recorded for each of the five on-bed exercises for each subject, so there were more than 250 exercise
sequences under test. Each image sequence comprises one exercise activity, e.g., one leg lift exercise activity includes lifting
of the right leg followed by the left leg. The order of left and
right does not matter in this system. Each image sequence of
exercise activity contained at least 40 individual images. Small
variations in body, arm, and leg positions were allowed for each
subject since only gross motor functions would be analyzed.
Examples of exercise and sample images are shown in Figs. 3
and 4.
The training data for each subject was combined and manifold learning was applied to generate the training manifolds for
the exercises. Testing was carried out by exercise activity and
repeated for each of the exercise activities.

HUANG et al.: USING PRESSURE MAP SEQUENCES FOR RECOGNITION OF ON BED REHABILITATION EXERCISES

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
Fig. 3.

415

(e)

Sample images. (a) Leg lift. (b) Head lift. (c) Heel slide. (d) Lateral roll. (e) Sit up.
TABLE I
CONFUSION MATRIX LLE

LL
HL
HS
LR
SU
Precision

LL
42
9
7
0
0
72.4%

HL
4
42
0
0
0
91.3%

HS
6
2
54
0
0
87.1%

LR
0
0
0
50
1
98.0%

SU
0
0
0
0
56
100%

Recall
80.8%
79.2%
88.5%
100%
98.2%

SU
0
0
0
1
54
98.2%

Recall
86.5%
83.0%
88.5%
98.0%
94.7%

TABLE II
CONFUSION MATRIX ISOMAP

Fig. 4.

Example of heel slide exercise.

B. Experimental Evaluation
Manifolds within high dimensional space exist because similar patterns that correspond to exercises trace similar paths.
Distinguishing between different exercises is possible since the
corresponding low dimensional manifold representations exhibit different paths. Due to the smooth body pressure transformations in the image sequences, manifold learning methods
such as LLE and Isomap are able to produce low dimensional reconstructions of the data points. Manifold learning is well suited
to this type of exercise recognition application because human
body motion is somewhat limited on-bed and there are only
slight variations in posture changes across different subjects.
Tables I and II show recognition results for the five exercises
in ten subject dependent testing, i.e., subjects are not tested with
training data from other subjects. Notably, the highest recognition rates are lateral rolls and sit ups. This can be expected
since these exercises involve the greatest physical exertion and
hence the greatest pressure image differences. The other three
exercises exhibit a comparably lower rate of recognition due to
more of a fine grain difference in the pressure image sequences.

LL
HL
HS
LR
SU
Precision

LL
45
7
6
0
0
77.6%

HL
3
44
1
0
0
91.7%

HS
4
2
54
0
0
90.0%

LR
0
0
0
49
3
94.2%

The confusion matrix shows that there are the most misclassifications between leg lifts versus head lift, followed by leg lifts
versus heel slides. The former observation is explained by similar muscular pressure that is required when lifting one’s head
and legs, in that more pressure is added in the back region. As
to the latter, there are clear similarities in the pressure images
of Fig. 3, and the leg positions only constitute minor variations
in the overall pressure maps.
Fig. 5 shows samples of the low dimensional visualization of
manifolds for some of the exercises. Generally, the shapes of
the manifolds give an indication of the differences between the
exercises. It is interesting to note in Fig. 5(d) that the variations
in sit ups can be seen. Compared to leg lifting or rolling motions,
the subjects showed a greater range of styles in the sit-up action.
Some people could sit up directly with legs slightly bent and,
later on, needed to rotate their body or use hands to facilitate
the effort.

416

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

(a)

(b)
(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. Samples of exercise manifolds Isomap. (a) Leg lift (blue) versus head
lift (red). (b) Roll (blue) versus sit up (red).

(c)

(d)

Fig. 5. Samples of exercise manifolds LLE. (a) Leg lift. (b) Heel slide.
(c) Lateral roll. (d) Sit up.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8. Intrinsic dimensionality of the manifolds are found at the knee points
of the graph.

Fig. 6. Samples of exercise manifolds LLE. (a) Leg lift (blue) versus head lift
(red). (b) Roll (blue) versus sit up (red).

C. Comparing LLE and Isomap
The accuracy results between LLE and Isomap are somewhat
similar as shown in Tables I and II. LLE has higher accuracy
for the lateral rolls and sit ups, while Isomap shows higher
accuracy for leg lifts, head lifts, and heel slides. This suggests
that LLE, since it uses linear structure, is able to differentiate
larger motions, while Isomap, since it uses a distance based
metric in the regions about each point of interest, is more suited
to finer grained motions in these exercises.
Fig. 6 shows samples of how head lifts appear on a leg-lift
manifold under LLE, and sit up compared to lateral rolls. Fig. 7
shows the same results for Isomap. It is evident that the sample
exercises can be discerned from each other. It is interesting to
note that the manifold shapes produced by Isomap tend to be
more variable, which may contribute to the slight variation in
accuracy levels.
The dimension reduction algorithm requires the data to be
nonsparse, i.e., there must be sufficient sampling of pressure
images to track motions. The current state of technology for
pressure images of this resolution are 2–5 samples per second.
Higher sampling rates can be achieved with the loss of image
resolution, i.e., more images can be sampled per second but with
lower pixel resolution.

To verify that manifold learning is an appropriate method for
exercise recognition, we investigate the intrinsic dimension, i.e.,
how many variables are sufficient to describe the changes in the
data. Fig. 8 suggests that the intrinsic dimension of the rehabilitation exercise data is 2. In the dimensionality graph, this is seen
at the knee point, i.e., where the curves have the largest break.
As we reduce the dimensionality of the reconstruction space,
the reconstruction error or residual variance slowly increases
until dimension 2. A single dimension is clearly not sufficient
as it produces large reconstruction errors.
D. Sequential Evaluation
As a further evaluation of this framework for exercise recognition, we investigated a longitudinal study of continuous monitoring through a number of set exercise activity programs. More
specifically, each of the five exercises was performed sequentially to analyze whether the algorithm can separate and recognize the exercises. The order of exercises was chosen arbitrarily
and it is not atypical in rehabilitation therapy. Fig. 9 shows
the evaluation results of this experiment, where red dash line
represents the ground truth, and the blue line represents the
classification results. We can see that three sets of five different exercises are performed sequentially in this evaluation, and
finally 13 out of the 15 exercises are recognized correctly.

HUANG et al.: USING PRESSURE MAP SEQUENCES FOR RECOGNITION OF ON BED REHABILITATION EXERCISES

Fig. 9.
truth.

Set of 15 exercise activities performed sequentially against ground

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an on-bed exercise monitoring system design,
that allows care-givers to track compliance to physical rehabilitation programs, is presented. We employ the novel use of
dimension reduction techniques from pressure images to find intrinsic subspace representations of the data. We also evaluated
a metric to match manifolds to enable quantified measurement
of adherence to prescribed exercises.
Future work involves quantifying the performance of a given
exercise with respect to standard exercise models, i.e., how
closely is the patient following the exercise patterns such as
angle of leg lifts and length of heel slide. Other future endeavors includes facilitating a system to work on chairs for sitting
rehabilitative exercise, not only in clinical rooms or home-base
care but also for cars or wheelchairs. 3-D model reconstruction
of patients from 2-D pressure image is another goal that can be
accomplished using the results of this research work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Medisens Wireless Inc. for
their contributions in discussion, building and supply of the
hardware.
REFERENCES
[1] A. L. Behrman and S. J. Harkema, “Physical rehabilitation as an agent for
recovery after spinal cord injury,” Phys. Med. Rehab. Clin. North Amer.,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 183–202, 2007.
[2] M. Fransen, J. Crosbie, and J. Edmonds, “Physical therapy is effective for
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee: A randomized controlled clinical
trial,” J. Rheumatol., vol. 28, no. 1, 2001.
[3] R. Lord, C. Mayhew, R. Korupolu, E. Mantheiy, M. Friedman, J. Palmer,
and D. Needham, “ICU early physical rehabilitation programs: Financial
modeling of cost savings,” Crit. Care Med., Jan. 2013.
[4] H. Zhou and H. Hu, “Human motion tracking for rehabilitation—A survey,” Biomed. Signal Proc. Contr., vol. 3, pp. 1–18, 2008.
[5] H. I. Krebs, B. T. Volpe, M. L. Aisen, and N. Hogan, “Increasing productivity and quality of care : Robot-aided neuro-rehabilitation,” Rehabil.
Res. Development, vol. 37, p. 639, Nov. 2000.
[6] Y. Tao and H. Hu, “Buiding a visual tracking system for home-based
rehabilitation,” in Proc. 9th Chinese Autom. Comput. Soc. Conf. U.K.,
2003, pp. 343–348.
[7] R. Fablet and M. J. Black, “Automatic detection and tracking of human
motion with a view-based representation,” in Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis.-Part I, 2002, pp. 476–491.

417

[8] Q. Delamarre and O. Faugeras, “3d articulated models and multiview
tracking with physical forces,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 81,
no. 3, pp. 328–357, 2001.
[9] E. Jovanov, A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, P. de Groen, B. Johnson, S. Warren,
and G. Taibi, “A WBAN system for ambulatory monitoring of physical
activity and health status: Applications and challenges,” in Proc. 27th
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Jan. 2005, pp. 3810–3813.
[10] M.-C. Huang, W. Xu, Y. Su, B. Lange, C.-Y. Chang, and M. Sarrafzadeh,
“Smartglove for upper extremities rehabilitative gaming assessment,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Pervas. Technol. Related Assist. Envir., 2012, pp. 20:1–
20:4.
[11] K. Nakajima, Y. Matsumoto, and T. Tamura, “Development of real-time
image sequence analysis for evaluating posture change and respiratory
rate of subject in bed,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 22, no. 3, 2001.
[12] M. Jones, R. Goubran, and F. Knoefel, “Identifying movement onset times
for a bed-based pressure sensor array,” in Proc. IEEE Med. Meas. Appl.
Int. Workshop, Apr. 2006, p. 111.
[13] A. M. Adami, M. Pavel, T. L. Hayes, and C. M. Singer, “Detection of
movement in bed using unobtrusive load cell sensors,” Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, p. 481, Mar. 2010.
[14] N. Foubert, A. McKee, R. Goubran, and F. Knoefel, “Lying and sitting
posture recognition and transition detection using a pressure sensor array,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Med. Meas. Appl., May 2012, pp. 1–6.
[15] R. Yousefi, S. Ostadabbas, M. Faezipour, M. Farshbaf, M. Nourani,
L. Tamil, and M. Pompeo, “Bed posture classification for pressure ulcer prevention,” in Proc. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Sep. 2011, p. 7175.
[16] C.-C. Hsia, Y.-W. Hung, Y.-H. Chiu, and C.-H. Kang, “Bayesian classification for bed posture detection based on kurtosis and skewness estimation,”
in Proc. e-health Network., Appl. Serv., HealthCom 10th Int. Conf., Jul.
2008, pp. 165–168.
[17] T. Harada, T. Sato, and T. Mori, “Human motion tracking system based on
skeleton and surface integration model using pressure sensors distribution
bed,” in Proc. Workshop Human Motion, 2000, p. 99.
[18] J. J. Liu, W. Xu, M.-C. Huang, N. Alshurafa, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “A
dense pressure sensitive bedsheet design for unobtrusive sleep posture
monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervas. Comput. Commun., Mar.
2013, pp. 207–215.
[19] W. Xu, Z. Li, M.-C. Huang, N. Amini, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “eCushion:
An eTextile device for sitting posture monitoring,” in Proc. Body Sensor
Networks (BSN), May. 2011, pp. 194–199.
[20] W. Xu, M.-C. Huang, N. Amini, J. J. Liu, L. He, and M. Sarrafzadeh,
“Smart insole: A wearable system for gait analysis,” in Proc. 5th Int.
Conf. Pervas. Tech. Relat. Assist. Env., 2012, pp. 18:1–4.
[21] J. Yang, D. Zhang, A. Frangi, and J.-Y. Yang, “Two-dimensional pca: a
new approach to appearance-based face representation and recognition,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 131–137, Jan.
2004.
[22] S. Wang, X. Ling, F. Zhang, and J. Tong, “Speech emotion recognition
based on principal component analysis and back propagation neural network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Meas. Technol. Mechatron. Autom., 2010, vol. 3,
pp. 437–440.
[23] X. Long, B. Yin, and R. Aarts, “Single-accelerometer-based daily physical
activity classification,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2009, pp. 6107–6110.
[24] L. Saul and S. Roweis, “Think globally, fit locally: Unsupervised learning
of low dimensional manifolds,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 4, pp. 119–155,
Dec. 2003.
[25] Z. Li, W. Xu, A. Huang, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Dimensionality reduction
for anomaly detection in electrocardiography: A manifold approach,” in
Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Wearable Implant. Body Sens. Netw., 2012, pp. 161–
165.
[26] J. B. Tenenbaum, V. d. Silva, and J. C. Langford, “A global geometric
framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” vol. 290, no. 5500,
pp. 2319–2323, 2000.
[27] J. Kruskal and M. Wish, Multidimensional Scaling, (Sage University Paper series on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, 07-011).
Beverly Hills, CA, USA: Sage Publications, 1978.
[28] V. Kumar, A. Grama, A. Gupta, and G. Karypis, Introduction to Parallel
Computing: Design and Analysis of Algorithms. Redwood City, CA,
USA: Benjamin-Cummings Publishing Co., Inc., 1994.
[29] M. Zhang and A. Sawchuk, “Manifold learning and recognition of human
activity using body-area sensors,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
Apps Workshop, Dec. 2011, vol. 2, pp. 7–13.
[30] S. Nettina and L. W. Wilkins, The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice.
Philadelphia, PN, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006.

418

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH 2014

Ming-Chun Huang (S’11) received the B.S. degree
in computer science from National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. He is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in computer science at the University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
His research interests are in the area of medical
sensor system design, computational modeling, and
motivation-driven research, named data networking,
and applications of smart infrastructure design.
Mr. Huang won the Best Medical & Performance Application Paper Award
of IEEE Conference on Implantable and Wearable Body Sensor Networks, in
2013, and the Best Demonstration Award in ACM Wireless Health Conference
in 2011. He currently holds five patents.

Nabil Alshurafa (S’13) received the B.Sc. degree in
computer science, graduating summa cum laude from
the University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA,
in 2003. He received the M.Sc. degree in computer
science with an emphasis on artificial life, robotics
and global optimization, in 2010, and is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science at the University of California, Los Angeles.
He served for eight years as a Project Manager and
Software Developer in the field of signal processing, feature extraction, and classification for object
recognition and target tracking, and was awarded several government grants.
His current research interests include signal processing for activity recognition,
machine learning, prediction and modeling in wireless health, and system optimization for remote health monitoring.

Jason J. Liu (S’10) received the B.Sc. degree in computer science and the B.E. degree in electrical engineering with first class honors from the University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia. He received the M.S.E.
degree in robotics from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, and is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science at the
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
His research interests include computer vision, machine learning, medical informatics, wireless
health, and human-computer interaction.
Mr. Liu received a Best Paper Award at the IEEE Conference on Implantable
and Wearable Body Sensor Networks in 2013.

Xiaoyi Zhang (S’13) is currently an undergraduate
student with the Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. His
research interests are in the area of body sensor network, wireless health, data visualization, computer
vision applications, and human–computer interaction. He has interned at Apple and Google Research.
He is also a creative Project Leader in Hackathon.
In LA Hacks, Mr. Zhang won Best Overall, Mobile
App & Data Visualization. He won second place in
Facebook Hackathon. In HackUCLA, he won Grand
Prize & Tech Difficulty Prize.

Wenyao Xu (M’13) received the Ph.D. degree from
the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2013.
Currently, he is an Assistant Professor with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, the State University of New York
(SUNY), New York, NY, USA. His current research
interests include embedded system design, biomedical signal processing, human computer interaction,
integrated circuit design technologies, and their applications in medical and healthcare domains.
Dr. Xu received the Best Paper Award of the IEEE Conference on Implantable
and Wearable Body Sensor Networks in 2013 and the Best Demonstration Award
of ACM Wireless Health Conference in 2011. He holds five international/US
patents.

Majid Sarrafzadeh (F’96) received the Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA, in
1987.
He joined Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
USA, as an Assistant Professor in 1987. In 2000, he
joined the Department of Computer Science, University of California, LA, USA. He is a Co-Founder and
a Co-Director of the UCLA Wireless Health Institute. His current research interests include embedded
computing with emphasis on healthcare. He has published over 400 papers, co-authored five books, and is a named inventor on many
U.S. patents. He has collaborated with many industries in the past 25 years. He
co-founded two companies during 2000—they were both acquired around 2004.
He has recently co-founded MediSens and Bruin Biometrics, both in the area
of Technology in Healthcare.

