1676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Continuous Wave Simulations on the Propagation of
Electromagnetic Fields Through the Human Head
Jeffrey M. Elloian∗ , Gregory M. Noetscher, Sergey N. Makarov, and Alvaro Pascual-Leone

Abstract—Characterizing the human head as a propagation
medium is vital for the design of both on-body and implanted
antennas and radio-frequency sensors. The following problem has
been addressed: find the best radio-frequency path through the
brain for a given receiver position—on the top of the sinus cavity. Two parameters, transmitter position and radiating frequency,
should be optimized simultaneously such that 1) the propagation
path through the brain is the longest; and 2) the received power
is maximized. To solve this problem, we have performed a systematic and comprehensive study of the electromagnetic fields excited
in the head by small on-body magnetic dipoles (small coil antennas). An anatomically accurate high-fidelity head mesh has been
generated from the Visible Human Project data. The base radiator
was constructed of two orthogonal magnetic dipoles in quadrature,
which enables us to create a directive beam into the head. We have
found at least one optimum solution. This solution implies that a
distinct RF channel may be established in the brain at a certain
frequency and transmitter location.
Index Terms—Biomedical applications of electromagnetic radiation, electromagnetic propagation in absorbing media, medical
diagnosis, mesh generation, surface waves.

I. INTRODUCTION

special consideration. This paper investigates the fields excited
by orthogonal coil antennas on the head, and optimizes the
transmitter position and frequency (100 MHz to 1 GHz) to obtain
a channel through the brain.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
To remotely detect changes of internal organs, one can exploit the changes in magnitude, phase, and delay spread caused
by shifts in the material properties. However, to observe such
changes, one must first have a propagation path that transverses
the organ of interest, the brain. Clearly, the effect of the material properties on this channel is proportional to the length
of the path within the organ. However, in maximizing the path
length, one must simultaneously maximize the received power.
The greater the signal-to-noise ratio of the received signal, the
more detail one can observe.
Given a fixed observation point, the optimal transmitter frequency and position is desired to produce a channel through the
brain with the aforementioned properties. Several antenna types
are considered and discussed before the selected orthogonal coil
antenna is used to generate a directed beam on an anatomically
accurate human head mesh. Simulations are then conducted to
find this optimal channel.

VER the past few years, there has been significant development in the field of wireless body area networks
with numerous applications involving sensing or transmission
of data from different points around or through the body [1], [2].
Clearly, there are multiple health-care advantages to being able
to obtain information around the body remotely without dangerous and expensive, invasive procedures. A notable application
is reviewed in [3], as the potential for the early diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s disease through the detection of internal changes
of material properties is discussed. These problems require a
signal path through the brain [1].
The human body is a unique transmission medium and may, in
general, be described as a fairly dense, lossy, dielectric requiring

A. Antenna Selection

Manuscript received May 7, 2013; revised; accepted December 20, 2013.
Date of publication January 9, 2014; date of current version May 15, 2014.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. M. Elloian is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01605 USA (e-mail:
jelloian@wpi.edu).
G. M. Noetscher and S. N. Makarov are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01605
USA (e-mail: gregn@wpi.edu; makarov@wpi.edu).
A. Pascual-Leone is with the Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain
Stimulation, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: apleone@bidmc.harvard.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2013.2297871

Selection of an antenna for the purpose of investigating propagation channels within the human body is not a trivial task.
If one were to select a traditional dipole, the multipath caused
by the boundaries between organs would cause the dispersed
wave to be completely untraceable at the receiver, limiting the
information that can be gathered about the channel. Furthermore, a dipole primarily radiates in the electric field, which is
significantly affected by the permittivity of the human body.
Although this can be mitigated by selecting a magnetic dipole
or a loop, one would still need to find a way to “steer” the beam
to a receiver on the head, providing information about a single,
desired path.
There are several possible designs for wearable antennas,
which typically are members of the patch family, as these can be

O

III. ANTENNA SELECTION AND HUMAN MODEL
The human body is a lossy transmission medium, which
presents several challenges in itself. Prior to the introduction
of powerful simulation tools, researchers relied on theoretical
derivations to guide experimentation. This is especially true for
electromagnetic fields in biological tissue due to the difficulty
involved in acquiring in vivo empirical results.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ELLOIAN et al.: CONTINUOUS WAVE SIMULATIONS ON THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS THROUGH THE HUMAN HEAD

made conformal [4]. The objective of most wearable antennas
is to transmit to a base station away from the body [4], [5].
Conversely, this project requires the antenna to able to transmit
through the body.
The loop is a very simple option for selecting an antenna that
can propagate through the body. A small loop or coil is very
similar to a small dipole; however, it is horizontally polarized
as opposed to vertically polarized [6]. This implies that a dipole
would be radiating in Eθ , whereas a loop is radiating in Hθ .
Fig. 2 illustrates the orientation of the Hθ with respect to two
orthogonal coils (described in the following section). Therefore,
the loop antenna should be less affected by dielectric loading.
Unfortunately, the radiation pattern remains nearly the same as
a dipole; thus, it can be difficult to properly distinguish the angle
of arrival for internal channels [6].
An interesting variation of the classic loop is presented in [7].
The authors created segmented loop antennas to generate a uniform current distribution throughout the length of the antenna.
Without segmentation (and the addition of the corresponding
matching capacitance), there were regions with large specific
absorption rate values. Once these so-called “hot-spots” appear,
one must reduce the transmit power in order to avoid possible
tissue damage [7]. This was of particular interest because the
goal of the study was to improve the efficiency of the coupling
that would power an implant.
Another variation is the fat arm spiral antenna, designed as
means of wirelessly streaming images from an endoscopic capsule to a technician in real time, while providing more bandwidth
(from 460 to 535 MHz) than traditional spiral or helix antennas.
This additional bandwidth was provided by thickening the spiral. The antenna produces an omnidirectional radiation pattern
vital to the particular case study, as the orientation of the capsule
in the digestive tract relative to a fixed receiver is arbitrary [8].
A more complex approach is offered by Karathanasis and
Karanasiou, who have developed a phased array-based reflector
system to do beamforming within the human body. As opposed
to a single radiating element, this system employs a 1.25 m ×
1.2 m ellipsoidal cavity and changes the excitation phase to
cause a local maximum in a given area, capable of inducing
localized brain hyperthermia or treating hypothermia [9].

1677

Fig. 1. Problem geometry for two orthogonal coils with respect to the H plane.
The coils were modeled as loops with equivalent magnetic moments m.

this condition, and provided that the loops are excited close to
the dielectric interface (i.e., the surface of the human body), the
electric fields in the second medium (the body) in the H-plane
(for horizontal and vertical loops, respectively) reduce to [10]:


|sin (2θ)|
E1x = jωμ0 k1 nm
(1)
|cos (θ)| + j |sin (θ)|


sign (y) |sin (2θ)|
(2)
E2x = ωμ0 k1 nm
|cos (θ)| + j |sin (θ)|

where k1 is the wavenumber through medium 1, n = ε2 /ε1
is the refractive index, y is the distance along the dielectric
interface, and m is the magnetic dipole moment. These predict
two main lobes for each dipole, centered at θ = 45◦ , and φ =
±90◦ (the H-plane) [10]. By exciting the orthogonal coils 90◦
out of phase, it is possible to cause destructive interference in
one lobe and constructive interference in the other, as shown in
Fig. 2. The small size and highly directive pattern of this antenna
make it an excellent candidate for this study.

B. Orthogonal Coil Antennas

C. Field Propagation

A possible solution to this problem was proposed in [3],
where two orthogonal coil antennas were excited with a 90◦
phase difference to produce a single concentrated beam at 45◦ ,
without the need for a large or complicated array. This configuration, shown in Fig. 1, provides a maximum directivity of more
than 10 dB, allowing one to use less transmitted power, while
reducing interference caused by undesired reflections.
This special beamforming property only holds true when the
loops are close to an air–dielectric interface that satisfies the
quasi-static limit of σ > εω [10]. It is possible for a loop or
dipole to generate a directive beam under the condition that the
ratio of permititivies of the transmission media is large (greater
than 4). With εr of air being 1 and εr of body tissues being on
the order of 17–70, this is clearly applicable [11], [12]. Under

The most basic case of a time-varying harmonic field is the
plane wave, which is an approximation of a propagating field
far enough from the source that the wave front appears to be
uniform. However, the intensity need not be uniform across the
entire wave front. Indeed, the wavenumber can be a complex
value, which is vital for the definition of the surface wave, as
one can define a transverse wave impedance [13].
When waves come into contact with different media, the appropriate boundary conditions must be respected. This is a classic field closely tied with optics via Snell’s law, giving rise to
different modes. The most fundamental is the transverse electromagnetic mode, but waveguides operate on the principle of
transverse electric, or transverse magnetic modes depending
whether the E or the H field is perpendicular to the interface [14].

1678

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Note that p is the so-called “numeric distance,” given by
k2
p = jk2 ρ( 2k22 ). Norton provides tables of Fe for various values
1
of p in [20]. The rate of decay is proportional to e−p , similar to
the traditional far-field result, but the wave will be coupled to
the surface as opposed to radiating into space.
On the other hand, the Zenneck wave can be expressed along
the length of a boundary (again, medium 1 is the dielectric and
medium 2 is air) as [17]:
E1z =

jωμ0 k2 j k 1 z (1)
Ae
H0 (k2 ρ)
k12


E2z

jωμ0 j
=
Ae
k2

k2
2
k1

(6)



z

(1)

H0 (k2 ρ)

(7)

(1)

Fig. 2. Analytical electric field pattern with respect to the H plane for two
orthogonal coils close to the human head. The coils are excited 90◦ out of phase
(right) to null one beam and (left) to amplify the other.

Sommerfeld analytically characterized surface waves along
a cylindrical wire, showing both the skin effect (with regards
to the concentration of current within the wire) as well as the
elliptical polarization of the electric field in the direction of
propagation [15]. Less than a decade later, Zenneck introduced
his controversial explanation of the surface waves observed in
Sommerfeld’s result [16]. Traditionally, it is accepted that radiation decays proportional to 1r in the far field; however, Zenneck
believed radios could transmit further by propagating through
the ground via a so-called “Zenneck wave,” which decays at
a slower rate of √1r . Although it was later determined that the
ionosphere was acting as a reflector, permitting the transmission
of electromagnetic waves over long distance, the existence of
the Zenneck wave has long been debated [17].
The human body may be modeled as a planar set of layered,
homogenous boundaries with the appropriate permittivities and
conductivities [14]. By using a spatial transmission line propagation model, the transverse wave impedance of the ith boundary
in the x-direction can be expressed by Lea et al. [13]:
Zi = 

kx,i
ω ε i −j σ i
ε0



, (TM) ; Zi =
k0

ωμ0
, (TE) .
kx,i

(3)

In general, the input impedance, from the perception of the
boundary, must cancel to produce a surface wave on that boundary [13], [18]. The two major types of surface waves discussed
are Norton and Zenneck waves. Norton waves are bound to
a material interface and are described by the geometrical optics field subtracted from the radiating field [19]. Although an
approximation intended for engineering purposes, the Norton
wave equations describe the rate of decay. Assuming medium 2
is air, a Norton wave is given by [17]


jωμ0 ej k 2 p
s
(4)
Fe
E2z (p, 0) =
2π
p
√
√
Fe = 1 + j πpe−p [1 − erf (j p)] .
(5)

where H0 are Hankel functions. Note that the Zenneck decays
at a much slower rate of √1r ; however, the appropriate material
parameters of the boundary must be selected for a Zenneck wave
solution to exist. A more detailed discussion on these waves can
be found in [17] and [19].
Based on the transverse impedances simulated by Lea et al.
[13], it is unlikely that a Zenneck wave can be excited on the
body with a short electric dipole. Considering that the body
model used in [13] is inductive at lower frequencies, the conditions for the Norton or Zenneck surface waves could not be
met, thus no TE surface waves could be observed below 5 GHz.
Conversely, the fundamental TM mode produced surface waves,
as the component of the electric field that is perpendicular to the
surface is less affected by dielectric losses (severely attenuating
any TE waves). Similarly, the presence of Norton waves was
confirmed via simulation [13].
D. Human Body Meshes
In recent years, significant interest has been placed in the development of accurate human body meshes. Although it is easier
to develop an analytical model for planar interfaces, such as the
one shown in [13], the accuracy of such models is limited. The
human body is far from a simple planar interface and the relatively high conductivity and permittivity of the lossy organs has
a profound effect on the transmission characteristics [3]. Once
one refines a model to include internal organs (more complex
than planar homogeneous media), it is impractical to develop a
full analytical model.
Fortunately, computational advances have resulted in detailed
and reliable electromagnetic solution techniques such as finite
difference time-domain, method of moments, and the finite element method (FEM). In order to use these powerful tools for
medical analysis, one requires a mesh of the test subject. A
mesh is a series points that make up triangles and tetrahedra
to form a 3-D structure that closely approximates the object in
question. As one would expect, the finer the resolution of the
mesh, the larger the mesh, and the longer the computation time.
With accurate, computationally feasible meshes of the human
body, it would be possible to run a variety of EM simulations
to advance science and medicine, minimizing the number of
dangerous tests that need to be done to live subjects. Examples

ELLOIAN et al.: CONTINUOUS WAVE SIMULATIONS ON THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS THROUGH THE HUMAN HEAD

of commercially available human body models can be found
in [21]–[25].
Custom meshes were constructed for this project from the raw
cryoslice data provided by the Visible Human Body Project [26].
The images were produced by photographing slices of the axial
plane of a female subject at a resolution of 2048 × 1216 pixels,
with each pixel having an area of 0.33 mm2 .
Organs, including the brain, skull, jaw, tongue, and spine,
were identified in pertinent cryoslices and hand-segmented using ITK-Snap [28], meshed, and imported into MATLAB. This
time-consuming process described in [3] results in large, fine
resolution triangular surface meshes. Each of these was further
simplified using surface-preserving Laplacian smoothing [29]
to enable fast, yet accurate simulations. Resulting models have
1000–12 000 triangles per structure and mesh description via
the NASTRAN file format [30], [31] allows users to import into
custom and commercial simulation software packages. In this
way, all meshes were imported into Ansys’ High Frequency
Structural Simulator (HFSS) v. 14, a commercially available
FEM electromagnetic simulation suite, and the mesh checking
tools resident in this package were utilized to check each model
for manifoldness, intersection, and other relevant properties.
Creation of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), a highly conductive liquid that entirely encompasses the brain and is vital to
the accuracy of any electromagnetic simulation involving the
head, followed a slightly different process. Since the brain can
move about in the CSF, certain cryoslices depicted the brain
directly adjacent to the skull with no space allocated for the
CSF. Therefore, the brain mesh model was converted via 3-D
Delaunay tessellation to a strictly convex shape. Such an operation will allow for all nonconvex cavities on the brain surface
to be filled with the CSF. This boundary triangular mesh may
be extracted from the tetrahedral mesh and scaled to match an
expected 2.5-mm-thick CSF layer.
The final mesh used in these simulations is a refined version of
the one presented in [3] with additional organs and tissues shown
in Fig. 3 to provide a more accurate model of the human head.
Although not directly intersecting the YZ plane in Fig. 3, the eyes
are also included in the simulations. The brain is considered a
single combined mass, whose permittivity as also given in [27].
The ventricles in the brain are assumed to be filled with CSF.
IV. MODELING RESULTS
Simulations were performed using HFSS. The meshes used
to generate the model were constructed from data provided by
the U.S. National Library of Medicine [26]. After segmenting
and meshing individual organs of the female human head model,
the results were imported into HFSS and assigned their respective dielectric constant (εr ) and conductivity (σ), which were
obtained from [27]. The frequency dependence of both of these
material properties was accounted for in the simulations.
As an extension of the work done in [3] which utilized pulses,
the finite element solver in HFSS was used to conduct continuous wave (CW) simulations at specific frequencies. The coils
were constructed of 0.4-mm-thick wire, and were 7 mm in diameter. In order to assist in characterizing the human head channel

1679

Fig. 3. Cross section of the sagittal (YZ) plane of the human head model. (a)
Locations of included organs. (b) Examples of antenna locations with respect to
θ. The phase of the excitation was adjusted such that the 45◦ beam transverses
the head, as indicated by the green and purple arrows.

Fig. 4. Close-up view of the two orthogonal loop antennas used in the following simulations. Only the skin, skull, CSF, and brain meshes are shown for
clarity.

as a transmission medium, the transmitting antenna was positioned around the head in a spherical-based coordinate system as
shown in Fig. 1. The distance from the center of mass of the head
to the center of the coil antennas was adjusted such the edges
were approximately 1 mm from the surface. This adjustment
was necessary because the human head is clearly not a perfect
sphere, and the coils were to remain close to but not intersecting
the dielectric interface. An example is shown in Fig. 4.
At each labeled point in Fig. 3, the antenna was laterally
translated (without rotation) and excited in a manner that would
direct the beam through the head. The testing points extended
from −60◦ to +60◦ in steps of 5◦ in either cut-plane (sagittal
YZ and coronal XZ planes) for a total of 49 different testing
points. Only the results for the sagittal plane are considered in

1680

Fig. 5. Magnitude and direction of the Poynting vector for selected antenna
positions at 100 MHz. The red crosses show the locations of the transmitter (the
size is exagerated for clarity).

this paper, as the coronal plane is more symmetric and did not
provide a feasible point to extract the fields.
For brevity, the complete set of calculations is not included
in this paper. Instead, only the most interesting and useful field
plots are displayed. It is important to note that the organs within
the human head have a high relative dielectric constant (> 50),
which results in a slower phase velocity. This delay is intentionally used in [3] to remotely detect changes within the body;
however, it also scales the magnitude of the received electric
field. In order to more easily detect the propagation paths within
the head, the Poynting vector (S = E × H ∗ ) is plotted on a
logarithmic scale. This shows the direction of power flow and
eliminates the oscillating standing waves.
A. Poynting Vector at Selected Frequencies
Again, the goal of this study is to establish a channel though
the human head. Not only must the power penetrate the head
and travel through the brain, it must be extracted. To achieve this
objective, two design variables must be optimized: the location
measured from the center of the head (given as the angle θ)
and the frequency of excitation f . Fig. 5 shows the propagation

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 6. Magnitude and direction of the Poynting vector for selected antenna
positions at 500 MHz.

of power at 100 MHz. At low frequencies the wavelength in
free space is over a meter, and even in the brain (with one
of the highest dielectric constants of εr = 88.9 at 100 MHz),
the wavelength is still greater than 300 mm [27]. The resulting
Poynting vector plots resemble those of the near field of the
orthogonal coils in free space.
Mid-range frequencies, such as 500 MHz, cause the wavelength to be closer to the Fresnel region and allow the antenna
to demonstrate the targeted directive pattern described in [10],
S
at
as shown in Fig. 6. The CSF, with εr = 70.1 and σ = 2.28 m
500 MHz, begins to act like the walls of a waveguide around the
brain [27]. Depending on the direction of excitation, this effect
steers the beam along the inner contour of the brain to either the
cerebellum or the sinus cavity. Unfortunately, at higher frequencies the difference in ε causes a much larger angle of refraction
at the sinus(air)/muscle interface, making the field more difficult
to recover.
As one increases the frequency, the problems observed in
Fig. 6 begin to escalate. Fig. 7 illustrates the Poynting vector for
the orthogonal coils being excited at 1 GHz. The 45◦ beam is
still clearly present, albeit curved by the aforementioned waveguide effect of the CSF, but reflections from this boundary begin to eliminate the propagating component of the wave. This

ELLOIAN et al.: CONTINUOUS WAVE SIMULATIONS ON THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS THROUGH THE HUMAN HEAD

1681

Fig. 8. (a) Magnitude of the Poynting vector evaluated at the test point above
the sinus cavity as shown in Fig. 3 for different excitation positions and frequencies. (b) Length of the path of power propagation through the brain. The star
indicates the selected optimal compromise in maximizing the received power
and propagation distance through the brain (at θ = +15◦ and f = 400 MHz).

Fig. 7. Magnitude and direction of the Poynting vector for selected antenna
positions at 1 GHz.

cancellation would make signal extraction very challenging, as
there is little to no forward propagating power through the brain
that exits the head.
B. Optimized Transmitter Location
The ideal transmission channel would propagate through a
long path within the brain and be received with the maximum
power transfer through this path. A longer propagation path
through the brain will experience a greater effect in attenuation
and phase velocity due to abnormalities in the material properties in the brain. Furthermore, increasing this length would help
negate the effects the short distances required to enter or leave
the brain. Clearly, maximizing the power received (i.e., concentrating the beam) allows one to more easily observe these
changes in the presence of noise.
This now becomes an optimization problem, where one must
maximize the path length through the brain without compromising received power. A test point was selected on top of the sinus
cavity [as shown in Fig. 3(b)] to measure the received fields. Although similar study could be preformed with a more practical
receiver on the tongue, the sinus cavity destroys all paths to the
tongue at higher frequencies.

The transmitting coils were moved from θ = −60◦ to + 60◦
in steps of 5◦ at a constant distance of approximately 1 mm to the
surface of the head, as depicted in Fig. 3(b). At each transmission
point, the fields were simulated for excitations from 100 MHz
to 1 GHz in steps on 100 MHz. The magnitude of the Poynting
vector at the test point shown in Fig. 3(b) is summarized in
Fig. 8(a).
The disproportionately large magnitudes near −60◦ in
Fig. 8(a) are caused by the close proximity of the transmitter
on the front of the head and the test point in the sinuses. These
values are less relevant as there is virtually no path through the
brain. Near +15◦ , the magnitude reaches a local plateau between −40 and −35 dB before sharply dropping. Fig. 9 is an
example of antenna located at this location. One may note that
the high intensity is caused by the waveguide properties of the
CSF channeling the power into the sinus cavity at frequencies
between 200 and 600 MHz. Higher frequencies at this position begin to suffer from reflection, reducing the magnitude of
received Poynting vector.
Fig. 8(b) plots the path length through the brain on the same
axes as Fig. 8(a). We define the propagation path to exclusively
be the curved distance (following the vectors), not the perpendicular distance, from the transmitter to the test point. Each
distance was graphically calculated using vector plots such as
those in Figs. 5–9. Only the portion of this curve that is inside
the brain is considered, and cases that did not have a path from
the antenna to the test point via the brain were discarded as
having a path length of 0.

1682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 9. Magnitude and direction of the Poynting vector for an antenna placed
at θ = +15◦ at selected frequencies.

The optimal location and frequency for the transmitter is
problem dependent, as one must find a compromise between
a long propagation path through the brain and high received
power. We selected the starred point in Fig. 8 (at θ = +15◦
and f = 400 MHz), where |S| > −40 dB, and the path length
through the brain is at least 125 mm. Other transmitter locations
and frequencies produced a shorter path, or the received power
was too low to be feasibly measured with noise.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The simulations presented in this paper demonstrate the existence of a channel through the brain to the sinus cavity. By
exciting orthogonal coil antennas in quadrature, a directed beam
can be generated and steered through a dielectric medium. By
adjusting the transmitter position and excitation frequency, an
optimal path through the brain was found.
The model simulated in [3] demonstrated faint, yet distinct
surface waves along the head. No surface waves were observed
on the new mesh. In order to better classify the fields on this
earlier model, the magnitude of the electric field was simulated
following a segmented line along the surface of the head. The
observed waves could be described by the Norton wave with a

rate of decay proportional to e−r , which is much slower than
the expected rate of 1r [17].
When the brain undergoes any form of serious trauma,
through either injury or the development of a tumor, the physical and electric properties change accordingly. Recent studies
indicate that different levels of blood content, potentially caused
by burst blood vessels in the head, will lead to different dielectric properties [32], [33]. The channel established earlier in this
text can be used to detect such abnormalities.
A CW is ideal for detecting volumetric changes of the brain.
It is narrowband, straightforward to produce and measure, and
provides a clear phase reference. Conversely, a broadband pulse
would provide additional frequency diversity, allowing one to
determine the existence of small objects, such as localized lacuna tumors in the brain. This is possible because the additional
frequencies allow one to resolve more paths, thus obtaining additional information from the multipath characteristics of the
channel. Broadband pulse simulation is beyond the scope of
this study. An excellent example of such an analysis is provided
in [32], but requires complex signal processing and 72 antennas
to image the entire head. On the contrary, the CW technique
shown here allows for simple and rapid detection of any general
abnormality in the brain by observing the integral characteristics of the wave. This, perhaps, could be used as a screening
measure to determine if more in-depth analysis is needed.
The meshes used in this study were improved from those
in [3] from both an anatomical and material perspective. Previous versions did not include separate layers for the fat, muscle,
and other organs. Furthermore, in this new study, all material
properties were obtained from [27], the internationally recognized Foundation for Research on Information Technologies in
Society. However, the previous model still illustrates a similar
path through the brain to the tongue at a similar transmission position. This implies that the existence of the path may be robust
to material changes. One may need to tune the exact frequency
and position, but there should be at least one acceptable transmission path. The variance in the conditions for generating these
paths for different head models would be a worthwhile avenue
of research for conducting practical microwave tomography.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper would not have been possible without meshing assistance provided by A. T. Htet of Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The authors would also like to thank Dr. S. Louie of Ansys
for her advice regarding the simulation software and methods.
Dr. Rao of the MITRE Corporation also provided invaluable
advice. All simulations were performed at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute.
REFERENCES
[1] P. S. Hall, Y. Hao, and S. L. Cotton, “Progress in antennas and propagation
for body area networks,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Signals Syst. Electron., Sep.
17–20, 2010, vol. 1, pp. 1–7.
[2] A. Gupta and T. D. Abhayapala, “Body area networks: Radio channel
modelling and propagation characteristics,” in Proc. Australian Commun.
Theory Workshop, Jan. 30–Feb. 1, 2008, pp. 58–63.

ELLOIAN et al.: CONTINUOUS WAVE SIMULATIONS ON THE PROPAGATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS THROUGH THE HUMAN HEAD

[3] G. Noetscher, A. Htet, J. Elloian, S. Makarov, F. Sciré-Scappuzzo, and
A. Pascual-Leone, “Detecting in vivo changes of electrical properties of
cerebral spinal fluid using microwave signals from small coil antennas—
Numerical simulation,” in Proc. IEEE Signal Process. Med. Biol. Symp.,
Dec. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[4] N. H. M. Rais, P. J. Soh, F. Malek, S. Ahmad, N. B. M. Hashim, and
P. S. Hall, “A review of wearable antenna,” in Proc. Loughborough Antennas Propag. Conf., Nov. 16/17, 2009, pp. 225–228.
[5] J. C. G. Matthew, B. Pirollo, A. Tyler, and G. Pettitt, “Body wearable
antennas for UHF/VHF,” in Proc. Loughborough Antennas Propag. Conf.,
Mar. 17/18, 2008, pp. 357–360.
[6] C. Balanis, Antenna Theory, 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: WileyInterscience, 2005, pp. 231–265.
[7] M. Mark, T. Bjorninen, L. Ukkonen, L. Sydanheimo, and J. Rabaey,
“SAR reduction and link optimization for mm-size remotely powered
wireless implants using segmented loop antennas,” in Proc. IEEE Top.
Conf. Biomed. Wireless Technol., Netw., Sens. Syst., Jan. 16–19, 2011,
pp. 7–10.
[8] S. Lee and Y. Yoon, “Fat arm spiral antenna for wideband capsule endoscope systems,” in Proc. IEEE Radio Wireless Symp., Jan. 10–14, 2010,
pp. 579–582.
[9] K. Karathanasis and I. Karanasiou, “Combining reflector focused and
phased array beamforming for microwave diagnosis and therapy,” in Proc.
IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Bioinformat. Bioeng., Nov. 11–13, 2012, pp. 223–
226.
[10] S. Makarov and G. Noetscher, “Directional in-quadrature orthogonal-coil
antenna and an array thereof for localization within a human body in a
Fresnel region,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Antennas Propag. Soc., Jul.
8–14, 2012, p. 1/2.
[11] J. Kim and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “Implanted antennas inside a human body:
Simulations, designs, and characterizations,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1934–1943, Aug. 2004.
[12] C. Gabriel S. Gabriel, “Compilation of the dielectric properties of body
tissues at RF and microwave frequencies,” Armstrong Lab. (1996).
[Online]. Available: http://www.brooks.af.mil/AFRL/HED/hedr/reports/
dielectric/home.html
[13] A. Lea, P. Hui, J. Ollikainen, and R. Vaughan, “Propagation between onbody antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3619–
3627, Nov. 2009.
[14] F. Ulaby, E. Michielssen, and U. Ravaioli, Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics, 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Pearson Education,
2010.
[15] A. Sommerfeld, “Electromagnetic waves near wires,” Wied. Ann., vol. 67,
pp. 223–290, 1899.
[16] J. Zenneck, “Ueber die fortplanzung ebener electromagnetischen wellen
laengs einer ebenen leiterflaeche und ihre bezeihung zur drahtlosen telegraphie,” Ann. Phys., vol. 23, pp. 846–866, 1907.
[17] R. King and M. Brown, “Lateral electromagnetic waves along plane
boundaries: A summarizing approach,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 595–
611, May 1984.

1683

[18] A. Lea, P. Hui, J. Ollikainen, and R. Vaughan, “Theory of propagation
for direct on-body wireless sensor communications,” in Proc. 2nd IET
Seminar Antennas Propag. Body-Centric Wireless Commun., Apr. 2009,
pp. 1–5.
[19] J. Wait, “The ancient and modern history of EM ground-wave propagation,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 7–24, Oct. 1998.
[20] K. A. Norton, “The propagation of radio waves over a plane earth,” Nature,
vol. 135, pp. 954–955, 1935.
[21] Ansoft Human Body Model, Ansoft Human Body Model Documentation,
Ansys, Canonsburg, PA, USA, 2012.
[22] Computer Simulation Technology. (Mar. 2013). HUGO Human Body
Model. . [Online]. Available: http://www.cst.com/Content/Applications/
Article/HUGO+Human+Body+Model
[23] Speag. (2012). “High Resolution Phantom Models,” [Online].
Available: http://www.speag.com/products/semcad/applications/medicaltechnology-simulations/high-resolution-phantom-models
[24] C. Penney, (Jan. 23, 2008). “Computation of fields and SAR for MRI
with finite-difference, time-domain software,” [Online]. Available:
http://www.remcom.com/storage/downloads/publications/computation%
20of%20fields%20and%20sar%20for%20mri_mw%20journal%20dec%
2007_final.pdf
[25] FEKO. (2013). “Bio-Electromagnetics,” [Online]. Available: http://
www.feko.info/applications/Bio-Electromagnetics
R

[26] U.S. National Library of Medicine. The Visible Human Project . (2000).
[Online]. Available: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/visible/visible_
human.html
[27] [IT’IS Foundation. (2012). “Tissue Properties,” IT’IS Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.itis.ethz.ch/itis-for-health/tissueproperties/database/dielectric-properties
[28] P. A. Yushkevich, J. Piven, H. C. Hazlett, R. G. Smith, S. Ho, J. C. Gee,
and G. Gerig, “User-guided 3D active contour segmentation of anatomical
structures: Significantly improved efficiency and reliability,” Neuroimage,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1116–1128, Jul. 1, 2006.
[29] J. Vollmer, R. Mencl, and H. Müller, “Improved Laplacian smoothing of
noisy surface meshes,” Comput. Graph. Forum, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 131–
138, Sep. 1999.
[30] MD NASTRAN INPUT, Copyright© 2010 MSC.Software Corporation.
(2010). [Online]. Available: http://www.aero.polimi.it/∼lanz/bacheca/
downloads/cost/aa10_11/MD_Nastran_Input.pdf
[31] La syntaxe particulière de NASTRAN. (2013), [Online]. Available: https://
moodle.polymtl.ca/pluginfile.php/120548/mod_page/content/3/Travaux_
pratiques/TP1/suppl_labo_sem0.pdf
[32] D. Ireland and M. Bialkowski, “Microwave head imaging for stroke detection,” Progress Electromagn. Res. M, vol. 21, pp. 163–175, 2011.
[33] U. Serguei, Y. Semenov, and D. R. Corefield, “Microwave tomography
for brain imaging: Feasibility assessment for stroke detection,” Int. J.
Antennas Propag., vol. 2008, 2008, pp. 1–8.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

