IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

1337

Shape Analysis of the Human Brain: A Brief Survey
Matthew J. Nitzken, Member, IEEE, Manuel F. Casanova, Georgy Gimel’farb, Tamer Inanc, Member, IEEE,
Jacek M. Zurada, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Ayman El-Baz, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The survey outlines and compares popular computational techniques for quantitative description of shapes of major structural parts of the human brain, including medial axis
and skeletal analysis, geodesic distances, Procrustes analysis, deformable models, spherical harmonics, and deformation morphometry, as well as other less widely used techniques. Their
advantages, drawbacks, and emerging trends, as well as results
of applications, in particular, for computer-aided diagnostics, are
discussed.
Index Terms—Brain, diagnostics, shape analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE human brain belongs to the most complex anatomical structure in the human body. Individual brains vary
substantially, and therefore analyzing the brain presents a real
challenge [1]. Fig. 1 illustrates the complexity of the brain represented in a three-dimensional (3-D) mesh format. Computeraided medical diagnostics call for the quantitative analysis of
many structural parts of the brain, such as the cortex, ventricles,
corpus callosum, hippocampus, brain stem, and gyrifications.
This survey focuses primarily on applications of various shape
analysis techniques to the human brain. Methods of shape analysis for the human brain include techniques such as medial axis
and skeletal analysis, geodesic distances, Procrustes analysis,
deformable models, SPHARM, deformation-based morphometry, symmetry-based analysis, Laplace-Beltrami operators, and
homologous modeling, among other techniques.
In 1979, Lande [3] proposed to analyze the shape of the brain
by measuring the brain volume. While the volumetric analysis
of brain scans arguably does not yield sound discriminatory features, it was a key starting point for shape analysis related to
the brain. Later on, Desimone et al. [4] and Martin et al. [5]

T

Manuscript received March 25, 2013; revised September 12, 2013 and
November 08, 2013; accepted December 20, 2013. Date of publication January 9, 2014; date of current version June 30, 2014.
M. J. Nitzken and A. El-Baz are with the BioImaging Laboratory, Bioengineering Department, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292 USA
(e-mail: mjnitz02@louisville.edu; aselba01@louisville.edu).
M. F. Casanova is with the Department of Psychiatry, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY 40202 USA (e-mail: m0casa02@louisville.edu).
G. Gimel’farb is with the Department of Computer Science, University
of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand (e-mail: g.gimelfarb@auckland.
ac.nz).
T. Inanc is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292 USA (e-mail:
t.inanc@louisville.edu).
J. M. Zurada is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292 USA and also with the Spoleczna
Akademia Nauk, 90-011 Lodz, Poland (e-mail: jacek.zurada@louisville.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2298139

Fig. 1. 3-D mesh brain representation (the expanded section details its complexity and variability due to multiple different structures and gyrifications).
Courtesy of Barras et al. [2].

proposed two more elaborate shape analysis frameworks. The
first framework examined color, shape, and texture of the cortex
on 2-D scans of the brain. The second framework performed
a more advanced analysis, by examining pregenerated mesh
models of the brain ventricles. To more accurately represent
the brain, the meshes were decomposed using eigenvectors, that
were obtained in a way similar to conventional principal component analysis (PCA). These early frameworks for examining the
shapes of brain constructs did not produce reliable descriptors
of brain-related health or behavioral disorders, such as autism
and Alzheimer’s disorder. However, they inspired extensive subsequent research that helped to push the current field of brain
shape analysis into the forefront of research and development
for computer-assisted medical diagnostics.
Generally, shape analysis is applied to digital geometric models of surfaces and/or volumes of objects-of-interest in order to
detect similarities or differences between the objects [6]. Typically, shape analysis is fully automated or is a combination
of automated and manual processing, and it is closely paired
with some kind of object segmentation. Segmented objects are
represented in a variety of digital formats including volumes,
point clouds, and meshes. Most typically, the outer boundary
(or surface) of an object, or a manifold representing this object,
is examined.1
Surface analysis, formally called surface interrogation, and
computer-aided design systems, explicitly examine intrinsic and
extrinsic geometric properties of surfaces of objects and manifolds, including visual pleasantness, technical smoothness, and
geometric constraints [8]. It is often used to detect surface imperfections, analyze shapes, or visualize different forms.
Shape analysis techniques can be primarily classified into
first- and second-order types, each containing large numbers
of congruency-based, intrinsic, and graph-based shape descriptors [8]. The first-order methods typically rely on surface normal
1 By Henri Poincare [7], a manifold is the level set of a continuously differentiable function between Euclidean spaces that satisfies the non-degeneracy
hypothesis of the implicit function theorem. In a simplified version, it can be
thought of as an object with no holes or discontinuities.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1338

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

vectors, inflections, and other intrinsic descriptors, obtained,
e.g., by the Laplace–Beltrami analysis or the more popular
geodesic path analysis. Some congruency methods fall into this
category, such as the shape distribution and symmetry analysis.
Second-order analysis generally is based on the surface curvature and second derivatives. Typical descriptors are produced by
moment analysis, spherical harmonics (SPHARMs), and Procrustes analysis, being invariant with respect to congruency and
medial axis, skeletal, and Reeb graph analysis, which also heavily rely on the curvature. Importantly, many second-order analysis methods incorporate first-order techniques.
Both categories of shape analysis depend critically on shape
interrogation, or extraction of structural characteristics of a
shape from its geometric model [8], and remeshing, i.e., repartitioning of primitive components to fit best the original shape.
Most commonly, vertex–vertex or face–vertex methods are used
to construct the meshes. The vertex–vertex method deals with
a point cloud, where the points relate to critical junctures in
an object, while the face–vertex method exploits faces that interconnect vertices in a specific and controlled manner [9]. A
widely known example of the latter is Delaunay triangulation,
in which every face is a triangle and the final mesh consists
of a large number of interconnected triangular faces. While the
remeshing helps to preserve the original shape of the object, it
can also be used to enhance some features of the shape. A primitive (such as a triangle that minimally characterizes the shape)
can locally fit any such feature.
Some of the most popular shape analysis techniques, for application to the human brain, are detailed and compared below.
These include 1) the medial axis and skeletal analysis, which
is commonly used for surface (2-D) and volume (3-D) reconstruction in complex models; 2) geodesic distances to compare
different brains in detail by using intrinsic and graph based analysis; 3) Procrustes analysis that can provide accurate and quick
statistical evaluation of shapes in rigid objects; 4) deformable
models evolving to fit boundaries of complex objects; 5) more
recent 3-D surface approximation with SPHARMs in order to
analyze the brain shape in detail; 6) the use of morphometrybased techniques to accurately analyze the volume of objects;
7) an examination of alternative and lesser used techniques.
II. MEDIAL AXIS AND SKELETAL ANALYSIS
Medial axes of complex 2-D/3-D graphical models are widely
used for surface reconstruction and dimensionality reduction. A
medial axis, or a skeleton of an object, is defined as the set of
internal points with more than one closest point on the object’s
surface (see Fig. 2). Generally, it is represented by a polygon or
a similar simple construction of concatenated arcs and parabolas
that follow the would-be centerline of the object. The medial axis
and skeletal graphs facilitate indexing, matching, segmenting,
or associating objects with one another. Medial axis analysis
has a wide range of uses that can be used in many anatomical
applications outside of the brain, such as virtual colonoscopies.
The notion of a skeleton of a 2-D or 3-D shape was first
introduced by Blum et al. [11], [12]. The underlying idea was
to place a primitive shape inside an object, such as a ball. The

Fig. 2. Medial axis of a 2-D object: the outer black line shows the boundary
of the object and the central dark line connecting the points T1 and T2. Inner
isolines indicate the same distances from the boundary [10].
TABLE I
AUTOMATED (A) OR SEMIAUTOMATED (SA) MEDIAL AXIS ANALYSIS: GROUND
TRUTH (GT) FROM CLINICIAN (C) OR NONCLINICIAN (N) EXPERTS;
DIMENSIONALITY (DIM) AND SIZES (#) OF EXPERIMENTAL IMAGE DATABASES

primitive is then inflated it until reaching the object’s surface,
and this process is repeated until the object is filled with the
maximum-size primitives. Connected centers of the primitives
form the skeleton that represents geometric properties of the
object’s interior, such as bends and elongations, and reveals the
geometric structure, or constituent parts of the object, and gives
information about the object’s position, orientation, and size.
Table I indexes applications of skeletons for human brain
analysis, starting from the novel proposal by Naf et al. [13]. Naf
classified various organs, including the brain, after characterizing their structure in 3-D images with Voronoi diagrams and
skeletons. Excepting [15], all the methods in Table I were used
for medical diagnostics or classification.
Golland et al. [14] analyzed skeletons of the corpus callosum
in 2-D images in order to classify cases of schizophrenia. The
initial skeletons were refined using snakes, or active contours,
which evolved from different randomly chosen starting points.
Then, the curvature angles and the width of the skeleton were
used as discriminatory features. The angles were calculated between each set of adjacent points along the sampled medial axis,
and the width was defined as the radial distance from the medial axis point to the surface boundary. Sampling more points
of the skeleton provided finer details, but also increased the
analysis time. The approach was tested on clinical datasets for
normal and schizophrenic patients. A relatively high accuracy
(more than 70% in the best case) was obtained for identifying
schizophrenia in patients by statistical shape analysis of the corpus callossum and hippocampus [16] (the accuracy of a linear

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

1339

Fig. 4. Elnakib et al. [19] skeleton extraction method showing the centerline
extraction method on the left and the final extracted centerline on the right.

Fig. 3. Shown is a visual representation of Pizer’s [15] medial axis approach. Due to the complexity of the shape, it is initialized with three skeletons
(a). These are then individually examined (b) to create a composite skeleton of
the parent figure (c).

classifier in determining schizophrenic patients on the training
data proved to be consistently higher than the one using cross
validation).
As noted in [14] and [16], the main advantages and drawbacks of skeletons relates to their compact and intuitive shape
representation that can be used for segmentation, tracking, and
object recognition, as well as their high sensitivity to noise in
the object’s boundary, respectively. The complex and spatially
variant structure of the brain leads to a large amount of noise
along the typical shape boundary. To overcome this challenge,
frequently the typical general shapes of the objects are known
in advance from segmented training samples and methods using
fixed topology skeletons have been proposed in [14] and [16].
The significant benefit of such skeletons is that they can be adjusted to each current object of similar shape and optimized for
accuracy.
Pizer et al. [15] proposed another method of quantifying object shapes in 2-D images that can be used in a variety of applications, including different brain structures. In this case, the
skeletons were used to register brain shapes and compare the
brain ventricles and brain stem. These structures could then be
quantitatively described using a combination of the medial axes
and distance analysis.
Golland’s works [14], [16] dealt primarily with the corpus
callosum of the shape that typically featured no extending appendages. Contrastingly, Pizer’s medial axis analysis was focused on the brain ventricles, shapes of which (and thus their
skeletons) often have one or more appendages. The skeletal
appendages extend outward to include additional information
about the more complex shapes. In Pizer’s case, the medial axis
analysis was modified to incorporate intersection points where
multiple skeletons can be fused together, as, e.g., in Fig. 3. The
resulting more complex skeletons proved to be useful for solving
various problems, including segmentation and image registration [15]. Both Pizer’s and Goland’s approaches can be easily
extended from 2-D to 3-D objects, at the expense of increased
computational time due to the calculation of 3-D distances.
Styner and Gerig [17] expanded Pizer’s concepts and analyzed the brain ventricles in 3-D images using Voronoi skeletons
and PCA to obtain discriminatory features of shape changes and

Fig. 5. Visual representation of a simple geodesic distance. The two points on
the curve (shown as red circles) are connected by Euclidean (red straight line)
and geodesic (green curved line) distance lines. Note how the geodesic distance
follows the arc of the curve.

locality. SPHARMs were used to analyze similarities between
the skeletons and compare twin ventricles. Similar to Pizer’s
implementation, Styner and Gerig’s skeletons contain many detailed branches and intersections that represented the shape of
the object. To reduce the effect of the noise in the outer object’s boundary of the shape, the shape was smoothed by using
PCA to include only dominant characteristics of shapes. After
this initial simplification, the Voronoi skeleton was constructed
using standard medial axis computation. Then PCA was used
once again to “prune” smaller and less important branches of
the skeleton.
Gorczowski et al. [18] used skeletons to analyze shapes and
poses of five brain structures in order to classify autism. The
mean classification accuracy on the basis of only poses, only
shapes, or combined poses and shapes was 56%, 60%, and 64%,
respectively, for an image database of 46 autistic and 24 control
subjects. Although the combined features gave better results,
the overall classification rate was rather low.
Elnakib et al. [19] obtained notably better classification accuracy, using a method shown in Fig. 4, for autistic and control
subjects by analyzing the corpus callosum centerline: the study
correctly classified 94% autistic and 88% control subjects at
the 85% confidence level, 94% autistic and 82% control subjects at the 90% confidence level, and 82% autistic and 76.5%
control subjects at the 95% confidence level for the database
of 17 autistic and 17 normal subjects. They further extended
their centerline extraction implementations [21]–[24] to examine more aspects of the corpus callosum and its 3-D centerline
as applied to autism and dyslexia. This study was also explored
by Casanova et al. [25], [26] and El-Baz et al. [27].
Paniagua et al. [20] used SPHARMs to calculate the mean latitude axis of ventricles in neonates. While this is not a full medial
axis computation, it can be computed in a straightforward manner when using SPHARM. Importantly, Paniagua introduced a
fusion of the medial axis technique with SPHARM analysis to
achieve a diagnostic classification in neonatal subjects. This is

1340

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

consistent with the modern trend of combining techniques for
better accuracy.
In total, the medial axis and skeletal analysis are important
for examining basic locations and shapes of structural parts of
the brain. The main advantages of this method are that it creates
simple representations of objects along with similarity measures
and accurate descriptions for very complex shapes. These are
useful in applications such as object classification and matching
for medical diagnostics or understanding of object structure and
construction. The limited use of the object’s surface is the major
drawback of the skeletal analysis that significantly decreases
the usefulness of the medial axes and skeletons in applications
dealing with the surface characteristics and/or small variations
in shapes.

TABLE II
AUTOMATED (A) OR SEMIAUTOMATED (SA) GEODESIC DISTANCE ANALYSIS:
GROUND TRUTH (GT) FROM CLINICIAN (C) OR NONCLINICIAN (N) EXPERTS;
DIMENSIONALITY (DIM) AND SIZES (#) OF EXPERIMENTAL IMAGE DATABASES

III. GEODESIC DISTANCES
Of primary interest in the analysis of the brain is the ability
to make detailed comparisons of different brains. This often
requires some form of nonrigid registration of the two surfaces
of interest, or surface matching. A popular approach to this shape
analysis problem is the use of geodesic distances. Geodesic
distances can serve as an important geometric measurement
of the brain and can help to provide a means of understanding
complex shapes. Geodesic distances can serve to deliver a wealth
of information about the surface geometry of a shape [8]. One of
the first uses of geodesic distances, as applied to the brain, was
by Griffin [28] in 1994. Griffin proposed the use of geodesic
distance to characterize the cortical shape of the brain. This was
later expanded on by Khaneja [29] who used geodesic distance
to examine the curvature of sulci in the brain.
Geodesic distance is a combination of intrinsic and graphbased analysis. It is defined as the length of the graph of a
geodesic between two vertices within an object [30]. It is the
shortest path between two points that can be found in a curved
space (such as the surface of a sphere) and has a wide array of
practical uses. If you have ever boarded a plane to travel between
continents there is a strong likelihood that you have traveled
on a geodesic path, because these are the shortest distances
between two points. In the sulci of the brain, geodesic paths
that connect two points in a single sulcus will often follow the
curvature of the sulcus [31]. The detection of geodesic paths
is also heavily utilized on the surfaces of meshes for common
graphics operations such as mesh segmentation, watermarking,
editing, and smoothing [8].
Table II lists the applications of geodesic distance to the human brain analysis. Early application methods by Wang et al.
[31] analyze the individual sulci of the brain. No methods that
are primarily based on geodesic distance analysis have been
used solely for medical diagnostics or classification.
The geodesic distance can be defined in a number of ways,
although the most common calculations are for the Gaussian
curvature and the mean surface curvature of an object. These
metrics allow features of the brain, such as the gyrus and sulcus,
to be easily calculated by examining each point. Information
about the convex and concave areas of the sulci can be determined by examining the sign of the Gaussian curvature to

Fig. 6. Illustration showing the calculated geodesic distance between two
points on a synthetic surface. (a) Original synthetic surface. (b) Synthetic surface
overlayed with geodesic distances between four example points, calculated using
the fast marching method [31], [41].

determine if the value is greater than or less than the mean
surface curvature.
Once the points of interest are determined, the geodesic
distance can be computed using a number of different methods [39]–[41]. One of the most popular is the fast marching
method proposed by Kimmel and Sethian [41]. This method
has gained wide acceptance due to the speed of the calculations, and its easy applicability to a vast array of applications,
which include 2- and 3-D structures. An example of the result
of the fastmarching method is illustrated on a synthetic surface
in Fig. 6.
Wang et al. [31] proposed the use of geodesic distance analysis to analyze the sulci and gyral fissures of the brain for matching brains. Locations were classified and compared between
subjects. Areas where the sulci and gyri were similar could then
be detected in the brain. Their results showed that surface correspondences could be found between brains, and that the fissures
could be consistently identified across brains. Pastore et al. [32]
used geodesic distances to improve the segmentation accuracy
(see Fig. 7) of the sulci and gyri in the brain. They found that
geodesic distances proved to be a precise, efficient, and versatile method for segmenting the external boundary of the brain
because the gyrifications of the brain have large curvatures and
this feature is carried over into the MRI images.
Huang et al. [33] proposed a method for the extraction of
brain for comparison of contours using geodesic distances. Results they obtained showed that geodesic distances could aid in
making extractions consistent across datasets, and the proposed
method achieved a tight brain mask around the brain cortex.

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

1341

TABLE III
AUTOMATED (A) OR SEMIAUTOMATED (SA) PROCRUSTES ANALYSIS: GROUND
TRUTH (GT) FROM CLINICIAN (C) OR NONCLINICIAN (N) EXPERTS;
DIMENSIONALITY (DIM) AND SIZES (#) OF EXPERIMENTAL IMAGE DATABASES

Fig. 7. Example of a geodesic distance calculation between two points (p and
q) on the boundary of a 2-D MRI scan [32]. The area has been zoomed and
binarized so that the curvature can be clearly seen.

such as the cortex and white matter of the brain prove more
challenging for a solely geodesic analysis.

IV. PROCRUSTES ANALYSIS
Mio et al. [34] used geodesic distances to compare brains by
comparing the decomposed geodesic curvature of each brain.
Their work illustrated how geodesic distance could be successfully used to quantify morphological similarity and differences,
and to identify particular regions where shape similarity and
divergence were the most pronounced.
Butman et al. [35] identified the brain ventricles and computed the volume of hydrocephalus in subjects using geodesic
distance. Similar to the results of Huang, Butman showed that
segmentation results were robust throughout datasets and able
to classify hydrocephalus.
Hua et al. [36] combined geodesic distances with vector image diffusion, a method of examining intrinsic geometric characteristics (e.g., mean curvatures) using a multiscale diffusion and
scale space, to match brains of different subjects. This method
was shown to be superior to anisotropic diffusion and SIFT curvature matching algorithms in finding stable keypoints. Liang
et al. [37] approximated the curved cingulum bundle using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) tractography and geodesic distances.
Although there were many limitations found, a significant reduction in fractional anisotropy values, within specific anatomical
regions, were detected when using geodesic distances.
Joshi et al. [38] analyzed the sulcal curvature in the cortex of
the human brain using geodesic curvature. They concluded that
geodesic curvature showed promising prospects for analyzing
the sulcal curvature in case of small temporal lobe lesions. In
the literature and application, geodesic distances are most often
used to examine the curvatures of locations of the brain and
to locate key points that can be identified due to their curved
nature. Geodesic distances have proven to be a useful shape
analysis tool in segmentation, registration, and analysis, and
are also unique in that they incorporate aspects of first- and
second-order analysis.
Geodesic distances have a large number of applications, but
primary advantages are their applications in segmentation and
the identification of locations in the shapes of brains. This
method provides an excellent metric for examining curvature
and localized areas of objects, and can provide many discriminatory metrics for classification. Their major drawbacks are
their generally localized nature, and the fact that it is difficult to
examine large and complex objects that have numerous inflections in their curvature. Three-dimensional analysis of shapes

Procrustes analysis is a statistical form of congruent shape
analysis that primarily focuses on the distributions of sets of
shapes. It is interesting to note that Procrustes was a rogue and
bandit who was the son of Poseidon in ancient Greek mythology
[42]. He was known for either stretching people or cutting off
their limbs to force them to fit within a statically sized iron
bed. The process of Procrustes analysis thereby refers to shape
analysis in which properties such as translation, rotation, and
scaling are removed so that the shape can be fit into a common
reference frame. The process is inherently congruent. Procrustes
analysis is most commonly performed by superimposing shapes
on top of one another and then applying uniform properties so
that geometric transformation of the objects are removed and
the shapes can be compared. Procrustes analysis has also served
an important role in shape warping, especially as applied to the
brain [43].
Table III exemplifies applications of procrustes analysis to
brain analysis. It includes methods starting with the early application by Duta et al. [44] which analyzes the properties of
the skull structure. Bienvenu et al. [46] used Procrustes analysis
primarily for medical diagnostics or classification.
Nicolae Duta et al. [44] proposed a method for the basis
of Procrustes analysis in 2-D shape models in medical image
analysis. Duta defines the main reasons for the use of Procrustes
analysis as a convenient way to compute a prototype (average
shape) from a set of simultaneously aligned shapes. Once the
point correspondences are found, there exists an analytical or
exact solution to the alignment problem.
Mathematically, Procrustes analysis seeks a solution to the
following problem: assume we are given a set of m shape ink =1...m
stances where Sk = (xki , yik )i=1...n k that is represented by a set
of landmarks or boundary points. This set is partitioned into
a set of clusters and for each shape cluster a mean shape, or
prototype, must be computed. The set of prototypes can then
be used for segmentation or the calculation of other metrics.
One such metric is a Procrustes residual, which is defined as
a deviation in landmarks on a specific object from the consensus of a group, or the prototypes. Duta illustrated the usage of
Procrustes analysis for the segmentation of objects and registration of different objects following segmentation. They also
introduced algorithms for global and local similarity measures
using Procrustes analysis.

1342

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 9. Illustration of a 3-D deformable model as it contracts on a star-like
object [50]. Three frames of progression are shown starting at the left with the
original spherical model. The model gradually deforms around the object until
it has converged on the star in the center.

Fig. 8. (a) Magnetic resonance image of the human brain. Neuroanatomic
structures of the brain are highlights by a neuroanatomist (b) Structures shown
in yellow are able to be accurately classified by Procrustes analysis. Image
courtesy of Duta et al. [47].

Penin et al. [45] proposed a method for the study of the skull
of humans and brains as compared to other primates through
the use of tri-dimensional Procrustes analysis. In this study,
29 key features were identified as common landmarks between
the different skulls, and the shapes were defined as Procrustes
residuals. A Procrustes residual is a deviation in a landmark from
the consensus of a group. One downside noted by Penin was
that in Procrustes analysis the size and shape are calculated as
independent vectors when using using traditional shape theory,
meaning that normalization of objects is often required during
preprocessing.
Bienvenu et al. [46] proposed a similar method for examining
endocranial variations. Bienvenu found that Procrustes analysis was more favorable in examining the skull, as it has less
variability than the cortical surface itself, and is therefore less
subjective to the noise introduced by the large differences in the
cortex. Similar to Penin, Bienvenu selected specific landmarks
commonly found on the enocranial surface and generated a prototype. This prototype was then used to examine the differences
between males and females of different species. It was found
that Procrustes analysis was capable of determining not only the
gender, but the species as well due to the large variation in the
landmarks of the prototypes.
In a follow up to his previous work, Duta examined the automated construction of shape models using Procrustes analysis [47]. This study determined that the major advantage of
Procrustes analysis, as applied to the brain, is that Procrustes
analysis is a reliable method of classifying and segmenting
anatomical structures in relatively rigid objects including the
ventricles and corpus callosum of the brain (see Fig. 8). It struggles with more complex structures of the brain, specifically the
gray and white matter. Procrustes analysis therefore provides an
accurate and fast method of analysis in objects that do not have
significant variation. This limits its applicability to only specific
cases; however, it is a useful measure for examining the shape
of the brain and its more rigid structures.
One of the more direct problems related to Procrustes analysis
is the method of selecting landmarks on the brain. Because of

the variability in sulci and notable landmarks on the brain, there
may be an impact on the resulting analysis. Furthermore, the
selection of landmarks could introduce a bias into the analysis.
If landmarks are not appropriately located, areas may either be
over- or undercompensated for, adding an additional degree of
complication to this form of analysis. It is likely one of the
driving reasons that this methodology has only seen moderate
modern adoption.
Procrustes analysis, while useful, does not provide an in-depth
analysis of complex objects as some other methods. Discussion
of deformable models and SPHARMs will illustrate examples
of some of the more popular techniques for identifying mathematical differences between 3-D shapes that the human eye is
unlikely to be able to classify.
V. DEFORMABLE MODELS
Deformable models, also known as active surfaces, are a
model-based technique that combines geometry, physics, and
approximation theory in order to offer a unique and powerful approach to image analysis [48]. Deformable models have proven
useful in a variety of applications for the brain including segmentation, shape representation, matching, and motion tracking.
Unlike more rigid methods of analysis, deformable models are
capable of accommodating for significant variability in shapes
(see Fig. 9), like the brain, over time and across different individuals. While deformable models were originally used in the field
of computer vision, their application to the analysis of complex
medical objects, such as the brain, was quickly realized by the
scientific community. In their 2-D forms, deformable models
are often referred to as active contours or snakes [49], [50].
Deformable models have mathematical foundations in geometry, physics, and shape approximation theory [48]–[50]. Geometry is used to represent an object’s shape, and deformable
models commonly make use of complex geometric representations, such as splines, that offer flexibility and many degrees
of freedom. Physics is applied to impose constraints controlling how that shape can vary, with respect to properties such as
space and time. The name “deformable models” is most closely
associated with the incorporation of this elasticity theory at a
physical level. Therefore, deformable models are most commonly constructed inside a Lagrangian dynamics setting that
is able to respond naturally to constraints and applied forces.
As a model deforms in the Lagrangian setting, the deformation
energy will give rise to internal elastic forces. Potential energy
functions for the external model are defined so that the model

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

TABLE IV
AUTOMATED (A) OR SEMIAUTOMATED (SA) DEFORMABLE MODEL ANALYSIS:
GROUND TRUTH (GT) FROM CLINICIAN (C) OR NONCLINICIAN (N) EXPERTS;
DIMENSIONALITY (DIM) AND SIZES (#) OF EXPERIMENTAL IMAGE DATABASES

Fig. 10. Segmentation results of the brain showing the gray matter and white
matter are shown here. The goal of such work in this figure is to analyze the
volume, and the deformable model proves useful in isolating the voxels that
belong to the brain. After identifying the desired portion of the brain with a
deformable model, calculating the volume becomes a trivial task [52].

deforms to fit the data. Through the combination of these two
energies, deformable models can be used for many situations.
Some of the most common shape analysis applications of deformable models are in the areas of segmentation and volume
analysis, along with shape matching and registration.
Table IV exemplifies applications of deformable model to human brain analysis. It includes methods starting with the early
application by Davatzikos et al. [51] which was used to identify the central sulci and interhemispheric fissures in the brain.
No methods that are primarily based on deformable model
analysis have been used primarily for medical diagnostics or
classification.
Davatzikos et al. [51] proposed one of the earliest methods
for analyzing the cortical surface of the brain using deformable
models. They used deformable models to identify similar landmarks on different brains for alignment. Their results showed
that deformable models could be used to to register two different brains with one another, and in order to select cortical and
subcortical landmarks on the brain cortex.
Dale et al. [52] used a simplified deformable model to segment the cortex of the brain (similar to Fig. 10). The algorithm
proved to be a robust method of identifying the cortex of the
brain with an average accuracy of 96% across a wide variety
of subjects. In 2002, Smith [53] introduced the brain extraction
tool (BET). An intensity model is used to initialize the surface
model, which is then refined to extract the brain. It was shown
to be a fast and accurate method of extraction, having a mean
percentage error of about 7% over 45 datasets. Zhuang et al. [54]
used a model-based level set to perform skull stripping on pediatric and youth brains. The approach showed good accuracy

1343

using the DICE metrics with noteable improvements over the
BET proposed several years before by Smith [53].
Joshi et al. [55] used deformable models to register sulci along
with a coregistration of brain volume data. Results showed a
statistical improvement over the AIR [61], [62] and HAMMER
[63], [64] methods. Tu et al. [56] use deformable models to
aid in segmenting specific locations found in the brain. The
discriminative model they developed played a major role in
obtaining clear segmentations. Additionally, the segmentation
could be further improved by adjusting the smoothness of the
model and constraining the shape with a global shape model.
Huang et al. [57] proposed the use of deformable models to
segment the cortex, gray matter, and CSF of the human brain.
They showed good results when the data was analyzed using
the DICE metric. They concluded that deformable models led
to improved segmentation accuracy and robustness when applied using a hybrid approach against, as opposed to using only
geometric or statistical features. On real clinical MRI datasets,
the hybrid approach demonstrated an improved accuracy over
other state-of-the-art approaches.
Liu et al. [58] suggested a deformable model that driven by
radial basis functions to be used for automated extraction of the
brain. This model proved to be an accurate and fast technique,
having a similar accuracy to the BET proposed by Smith [53].
Li et al. [59] proposed an alternative method for the automated
extraction of the brain using a deformable model. Their method
was an extension of the human brain extraction tool and was
found to more reliably extract brains through the inclusion of
a deformable model. Hashioka et al. [60] proposed a method
that utilized active contour modeling (ACM), also commonly
referred to as “snakes,” for the extraction of the cortex in the
neonatal children. The results showed a sensitivity of 98.5%
with a false positive ratio of 13.8%. While their results were
largely successful when an optimal head contour was present,
they noted that a nonoptimal contour performed less robustly.
While deformable models may not be in the forefront of
diagnosis classifications, they have become an integral element
of shape analysis. The primary advantage is in the area of shape
segmentation, in which these models excel. Deformable models
are also very adaptable at isolating complex regions of shapes for
further analysis. Deformable models provide useful and accurate
ways to identify and segment locations in the brain which is a
critical step in analyzing the shape of the brain. The major
drawback of using deformable model analysis is that it does not
often provide many metrics for directly examining the brain for
the purpose of classification or matching.
VI. SPHERICAL HARMONICS
Dealing with the orientation of the brain and aligning two
brain objects with one another to compare differences in shape
can prove challenging and time consuming. SPHARM, a popular method of shape analysis, can be used to remove these factors. SPHARM analysis [65], [66] considers 3-D surface data
as a linear combination of specific basis functions. Additionally, SPHARM provides a rotation invariant common coordinate system in which shapes can be analyzed. The main goal of

1344

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

SPHARM is to decompose a 3-D object into concentric, or unit,
spheres. This process is what discards the orientation information that primarily accompanies a 3-D shape representation of
an object. The result is a shape descriptor that is both descriptive
and invariant to orientation.
Consideration of the analysis of the entire brain for purposes
of identifying differences in shape between different structures is
one of the major advantages of SPHARMs. The volume changes
in the brain are intuitive features that can be used to describe
illness, disorders, and atrophy. The area that SPHARM seeks to
address is the structural changes inherent to the surface of the
brain. This is an area that SPHARM analysis seeks to address.
The use of SPHARM applied to brain analysis was first proposed
by Gerig et al. [65] for the analysis of the lateral ventricles of
the brain. SPHARM was originally developed as a technique
for model-based segmentation and data storage; however, its
applications have grown in recent years. One important factor
of SPHARM analysis is that it relies primarily on the surface
of a shape and manifold properties. Due to this, only shapes
without holes or disconnects in their surfaces can be accurately
analyzed.
SPHARM is a global-based shape analysis technique that is
hierarchical in nature. Any shape can be parameterized by a set
of basis functions, and these basis functions are the referred to
as SPHARMs. SPHARM is based on Laplace’s equation and
involves a mathematical solution of the angular components
of the equation. SPHARMs were first discovered by Simon de
Laplace in 1782, although it would take several centuries before
they were applied to the shape analysis of the brain.
SPHARM basis functions Ylm , −l ≤ m ≤ l of degree l and
m are defined on θ ∈ [0; π] × φ ∈ [0; 2π] by the following definitions [65]:

2l + 1 (l − m)! m
m
P (cos θ)eim θ
Yl (θ, φ) =
4π (l + m)! l
Yl−m (θ, φ) = (−1)m Ylm ∗ (θ, φ)

(1)

where Ylm ∗ denotes the complex conjugate of Ylm . Plm describes the associated Legendre polynomials given as
Plm (ω) =

m +l
(−1)m
2 m2 d
(1
−
ω
)
(ω 2 − l)l .
2l l!
dω m +l

(2)

The surface is then decomposed from the Cartesian
coordinate functions and is represented as v(θ, φ) =
(x(θ, φ), y(θ, φ), z(θ, φ))T . To express a surface using
SPHARMs the following equation is used:
v(θ, φ) =

∞ 
l


m
cm
l Yl (θ, φ)

(3)

l=0 m =−l

where the coefficients cm
l are 3-D vectors that are typically obtained through solving a least-squares problem for the points.
As previously mentioned, these basis functions allow for a hierarchical description of the surface of a shape. The more coefficients are used in the reconstruction, the more detail is present
in the final constructed shape.

Fig. 11. Decomposition of an object, as described by Gerig et al. [65]. In the
upper section of the image the SPHARM are plotted overlayed on top of a unit
sphere, and below the polar plot of the unit spheres are shown to give a more
detailed understanding of the actual information contained within each sphere.

Table IV lists applications of SPHARM to human brain
analysis. It includes methods starting with the early application by Keleman [67], along with notable applications, e.g.,
Gerig et al. [65], which have shown SPHARM as a potential
method for classifying neurological disorders. SPHARM has
been widely applied as a method for potential diagnosis.
Brechbhler et al. [78] demonstrated the usage of SPHARM
as a method for parameterizing closed surfaces of 3-D objets.
In 1999, Keleman [67] demonstrated an ability of SPHARM
to analyze shape deformations in neuro-radiological data. Keleman used training data to compute SPHARM representations
of the brain which were than simplified using PCA and applied
to segment a cortex. Their results showed that SPHARM was
a promising technique for improving standard brain segmentations because of the included 3-D forces SPHARM offered.
Gerig et al. [65] proposed one of the most significant applications of SPHARM. It was used to analyze the volume similarity between twin brains and demonstrated that SPHARM
shape measures reveal new information in addition to size measurements. They proposed that this information might become
relevant for an improved understanding of the structural differences not only in normal populations, but also in comparisons
between healthy controls and autistic patients. A sample example of the deformation of an object is shown in Fig. 11. Styner
and Gerig [79] later proposed a framework package based on
SPHARM analysis entitled SPHARM-PDM that could be used
for analysis of a multitude of brain structures. This SPHARMPDM package has been used for examining various brain structures, including work by Kim et al. [76] on the hippocampus,
and by Paniagua et al. [20] (previously mentioned) on the lateral
ventricles in neonates.
Chung et al. [66] proposed a method to analyze the computed
SPHARM coefficients to identify autism in subjects. While the
SPHARM coefficients did not generate reliable results, their
work showed the ability to accurately and efficiently encode
neurological information using a weighted-SPHARM. Chung
et al. [70] continued their application to explore statistically significant differences between autistic and control subjects using
the coefficients. While their work showed some areas of statistical difference, the locations were largely random. This study did

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

1345

TABLE V
AUTOMATED (A) OR SEMIAUTOMATED (SA) SPHARM ANALYSIS: GROUND
TRUTH (GT) FROM CLINICIAN (C) OR NONCLINICIAN (N) EXPERTS;
DIMENSIONALITY (DIM) AND SIZES (#) OF EXPERIMENTAL IMAGE DATABASES

Fig. 12. Method proposed by Nitzken [73] for the approximation of the 3D
brain cortex shape for autistic (A) and normal subjects (C).
TABLE VI
AUTOMATED (A) OR SEMIAUTOMATED (SA) VOXEL- AND
DEFORMATION-BASED MORPHOMETRY ANALYSIS: GROUND TRUTH (GT)
FROM CLINICIAN (C) OR NONCLINICIAN (N) EXPERTS; DIMENSIONALITY
(DIM) AND SIZES (#) OF EXPERIMENTAL IMAGE DATABASES

show that the weighted SPHARM provides better smoothing in
cortical applications than other comparative methods.
Uthama et al. [68] proposed the analysis of the ventricle geometry using SPHARM between Parkinson’s disease (PD) and
control patients. They showed that a statistically significant comparison (p < 0.05) of controls and PD subjects could be made
using SPHARM, and that it was able to detect subtle changes
in synthetic and clinical brain ventricle data. Uthama et al. [71]
also proposed the use of SPHARM to perform fMRI spatial
analysis. They demonstrated differences in the way PD patients
and healthy controls respond to an increased task demand. The
analysis illustrated that the inability to respond to task demand
was reflected in the failure of PD subjects to increase basal ganglia output, and a reliance on cerebellar and cortical activity to
enable successful performance.
Abdallah et al. [69] applied a parameterization to 3-D meshes,
and then used SPHARM application to improve the shape detection of the ventricles. Results showed that a parameterization
of a shape followed by SPHARM analysis can lead to improve
comparisons and better shape descriptors.
Esmaeil-Zadeh et al. [72] use SPHARM to analyze the hippocampus to classify subjects as either normal or epileptic. Their
results showed that in an optimum case, a 90.32% rate of classification of left and right anterior temporal lobes could be achieved
when validated using the leave-one-out method.
Nitzken et al. [73], [80] proposed an alternative use SPHARM
by using the SPHARM reconstruction error to classify autism
(see Fig. 12). Classification accuracies on a test population of
100% could be achieved and illustrates a potentially effective
way of classifying autism in subjects. Nitzken et al. [74], [81]
later expanded this theory to the classification of dyslexia. A
variation was further used to examine changes related to aging
in the human brain [82].
Geng et al. [75] demonstrated the use of SPHARM coefficients to perform nonrigid registration of brain white matter
and fiber tracts. This method performed better than standard
second-order registration methods, although this could also be
attributed to the use of higher orders when applying SPHARM.
Overall, it was found that SPHARM provided a notable

improvement. In 2013, Hosseinbor et al. [77] proposed a further
expansion of SPHARM to a 4-D representation of subcortical
structures. This new 4-D SPHARM is entitled HyperSPHARM
and is intended to serve as a method of tracking changes over
time using SPHARM. This allows SPHARM to directly compete with applications typically reserved to methods such as
voxel- and deformation-based morphometry.
SPHARM is one of the most beneficial methods of shape
analysis for providing meaningful global analyses of objects.
SPHARM excels in brain analysis areas that involve large surfaces, such as the cortex and white matter. The major drawbacks
to SPHARM analysis are that it can be difficult to localize the
SPHARM analysis to understand select locations. It also struggles with applications such as segmentation and automated identification of objects in 2-D images. SPHARM’s greatest strength
comes in its ability to distinguish between shapes and its applications such as clinical diagnosis classification.
VII. VOXEL- AND DEFORMATION-BASED MORPHOMETRY
Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) is another technique for
examining the entire brain [91], [92]. Table VI lists applications of morphometry-based techniques to human brain analysis.
VBM is a technique wherein brains between subjects are generally warped, aligned, and normalized in order to remove large
differences between the brains, and a volume is then compared
across each brain on a voxel by voxel basis. In VBM-smoothed
values of the voxels or an averaging of a voxel and its neighbors
are typically used. The major usage for VBM is the detection of
differences and similarities for images between two populations
or shapes [86]. Deformation-based morphometry (DBM) is a
similar form of statistical analysis to VBM. However, instead

1346

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

of measuring the changes between voxels, the changes on the
deformation fields are used. The most common variant of DBM
in brain shape analysis is tensor-based morphometry (TBM),
which is based on the Jacobian determinants. While DBM and
more specifically TBM are able to detect more subtle changes
between brains, they introduce a significantly higher degree of
computational complexity when compared to VBM, because the
warping often involves highly nonlinear algorithms. Both VBM
and TBM are commonly used in calculating cortical thickness
measurements as well.
In 2001, Ashburner et al. [93] made a case for VBM in
response to criticism posed in Dr. Bookstein’s article “VoxelBased Morphometry Should Not Be Used with Imperfectly Registered Images” [91]. He explains that VBM was a method originally intended to explore cortical thickness that benefits from
not being affected by volume changes, the major weakness of
volumetric analysis. While acknowledging the partial volume
effect as a potential issue, Ashburner also details how modern
normalization techniques allow for high-resolution image alignments and warping. He also discusses that VBM is not subject
to the issues of landmark selection as found in other analysis
methods like Procrustes analysis. In summary, VBM is a useful and reliable method for examining the volume of the brain
and its subcomponents, while avoiding the traditional pitfalls
associated with volumetric measurements.
Afzali et al. [86] explored the differences between using VBM
and the tractography of diffusion tensor MRIs for patients with
epilepsy. Compared to the tractography methods, VBM showed
a consistently accurate performance in analyzing the volume
of the hippocampus and frontal lobe of the brain. Afzali does
discuss the downside of partial volume effects and increased
statistical analysis complexity for VBM. However, he notes that
with modern computing power the second fact becomes increasingly less significant,. It is also important to note that modern
techniques have greatly reduced partial volume effects.
Chung et al. [83] introduced a tensor-based model for analyzing the brain surface in 2002. Chung applied a diffusion
smoothing operator that is based on a standard Laplace–Beltrami
operator to the tensors of the cortex and brain stem to determine
local differences. The approach demonstrated that TBM could
detect a localized regions of difference on the shapes of two
clinical groups. Wang et al. [87] applied a multivariate TBM
to the lateral vents and the hippocampus. Wang demonstrated a
straightforward framework for performing TBM operations on
subcomponents of the brain to be used by other researchers.
Lepore et al. [85] applied a generalized TBM method to
HIV/AIDs patients to examine differences between the corpus
callosum and brain surfaces of individuals. Lepore also explored
the use of multivariate tensors and discussed how increasing
the number of parameters for these tensors could improve the
multivariate statistics. Lepore commented how TBM is useful in
both registration and statistical analysis, illustrating the multiple
use cases for many brain analysis applications.
Leow et al. [84] proposed using TBM to identify changes
in the brains of aging subjects. Leow’s results showed that in
Alzheimer’s patients, there were reliable brain shape changes
in the tensors over time relative to baseline controls. Leow also

illustrated several methods for correcting distortion in TBM
techniques. Fletcher et al. [89] combined TBM and boundarybased methods to track longitudinal brain changes in subjects.
This method was compared to those that do not involve boundary detection, and demonstrated how the inclusion of boundary parameters helped to correct for noise at the tissue boundaries. It also helped to remove bias-correction, which may occur
from warping algorithms, and added only minimal performance
degradation. Fletcher, like Leow, also explored the proposition
of using TBM to detect Alzheimer’s in patients. Yang et al. [88]
used VBM for the application of Alzheimer’s as well. Yang
studied the changes of VBM measurements in patients over a
three-year period. The study showed that atrophy clusters in the
brain could be detected in patients who had been diagnosed with
Alzheimer’s.
Shi et al. [90] used TBM to examine the effects of prematurity in the brains of newborns. Different from other methods,
Shi registered the surface fluid of the brain instead of the cortex,
and applied a TBM approach to this surface fluid. The statistical
analysis showed common clusters of significant difference between the brains of the subjects. Shi also showed that the TBM
approach was sensitive enough to measure the largely smooth
surface of the surface fluid and discern small, but meaningful
differences.
VIII. ADDITIONAL METHODS OF SHAPE ANALYSIS
Table VII details additional applications of shape analysis. It includes additional methods such as graph-matching,
symmetry-based analysis, Laplace–Beltrami analysis, and volumetric analysis. Many different methods have been applied as
potential methods of diagnosis or classification.
A. Distance Mapping
Distance mapping is a technique that has similarities to
geodesic distance and medial axis analysis. It differs in that
more generalized distance metrics and locations are often computed and examined. He et al. [94] proposed a method of brain
analysis using distance mapping (see Fig. 13). They examined
the statistical differences in distances at the border of a segmented corpus callosum in autistic patients. They hypothesized
that a statistical mean difference between segmented images
could be discovered; however, it was ultimately concluded that
no meaningful statistical difference in shape between subjects
could be found using the proposed method.
El-Baz et al. [95] proposed an alterative distance mapping
technique based on the fast marching method. They used this
technique to approximate the thickness of the white matter in
autistic patients. They expanded their work to improve the accuracy and explore the technique in different brain abnormalities [117]–[123].
B. Entropy-Based Particle Systems
Cates et al. [96] introduced a novel approach to brain shape
analysis using an entropy-based system. Points are modeled on
the surface of the brain as particles. These particles are then

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

1347

TABLE VII
AUTOMATED (A) OR SEMIAUTOMATED (SA) ADDITIONAL METHODS OF SHAPE ANALYSIS: GROUND TRUTH (GT) FROM CLINICIAN (C) OR NONCLINICIAN (N)
EXPERTS; DIMENSIONALITY (DIM) AND SIZES (#) OF EXPERIMENTAL IMAGE DATABASES

Fig. 13. Method proposed by He et al. [94] using distance mapping to examine
areas of significant difference along the outer edge of the corpus callosum.

Fig. 14. Method proposed by Yamaguchi et al. [100] illustrating the concept
of homologous modeling on two brains.

optimized and negative energy is measured to create a distribution of each unique shape. The technique is useful in both 2and 3-D analysis. The computational efficiency of the approach
is based on the number of particles used. Cates applied the approach to the examination of the hippocampus. The advantages
to the technique showed results consistent with many other techniques, while requiring a minimum amount of parameter tuning.
Due to this fact it could be easily adapted to the brain curvature.

able to achieve satisfactory identification rates for finding sulci
using the proposed graph-matching strategy.
Long et al. [99] suggested that the brain shape could be decomposed to a graph by subdividing the images into a tree
structure containing various properties of the specific brain. By
manually selecting important locations for placing the subdivision structures, the brain could be successfully classified for
cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease.

C. Graph Matching

D. Homologous Modeling

Graph matching techniques involve converting more complex
information into a more simplified graph-based representation.
Similarities in the graphs are then used to identify, segment,
and analyze the more complex information. Geraud et al. [97]
proposed a method of graph matching analysis. They utilized a
Markovian relaxation on a watershed-based adjacency graph to
improve the segmentation of neighboring structures in the brain.
The results showed a good initial approach to the application of
graph matching in the area of segmentation and identification.
Yang et al. [98] proposed that two graph-matching techniques
can be used to constrain a search neighborhood and the genetic
algorithms can be used to optimize sulci labeling. They were

Homologous modeling is a mesh-based technique in which
items having the same number of analysis points in the same
locations on two different models can be examined. The technique has been applied to many different applications, but due
to implementation complexity is rarely applied to the the whole
brain. However, it may also be appropriate for the analysis of
other discrete brain structures (e.g., corpus callosum, amygdala,
or hippocampus).
Yamaguchi et al. [100] demonstrated a method based on a
homologous model to calculate a sulcal-distribution index for
brains to identify brain fissures (see Fig. 14). A mean displacement of 1.3 ± 0.7 mm was found. Their results suggested that

1348

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

a homologous model could be used to correspond the sulci
and gyri among the evaluating brains effectively. Yamaguchi
et al. [101] proposed a later method to statistically quantify the
brain shape using a homologous model. The work examined the
changes in the frontal and occipital lobes between male and female subjects. A significant difference (p < 0.05) was detected
in the sample population and the model was able to successfully
detect the locations in the brain that differ significantly.
E. Laplace–Beltrami
Laplace–Beltrami methods comprise any methods that rely
heavily on the Laplace–Beltrami operator. The Laplace–
Beltrami operator of a smooth function f on a Riemannian
manifold M and is defined as f = div(gradf ), where div and
grad are the divergence and gradient operators of the manifold
M [104]. This technique is most commonly used in smoothing
applications or curvature analysis.
Angenent et al. [102] was the first researcher to propose brain
analysis using a Laplace–Beltrami model. Angenent hypothesized that a brain could be flattened by using a Laplace–Beltrami
operator on the brain surface. The technique was shown to be
an efficient method of flattening the brain.
Lai et al. [103] used Laplace–Beltrami nodal curves, and
geodesic curve evolutions to segment to the corpus callosum.
In small datatests, the method appeared to show positive results
and be robust.
Shishegar et al. [104] analyzed the first 20 eigenvalues of
the Laplace–Beltrami spectrum to classify epilepsy. In the best
testing results, Shishegar acheived a 91.9% true positive rate
and a 33.3% false positive rate using out of normal range classifiers and cross validation, illustrating that while there were
difficulties, it was a promising method.
Germanaud et al. [105] computed the eigenfunctions of the
Laplace–Beltrami operator to decompose meshes for left- and
right-handed subjects. Germanaud was able to detect shallow
folds and rare deep folds in the brain which lead to the quantification and classification of brains using the Spangy method.
F. Reeb Graph
A Reeb graph describes the connectivity of the level sets of an
object [124]. Visually, a constructed Reeb graph looks similar to
a medial axis skeleton. Makram et al. [106] suggested a method
of using Reeb graph analysis to drive an elastic registration
model for the detection of maxilla malformations. The results of
detection were deemed satisfactory to a clinician, but not actual
values were not reported. The method illustrated the potential
for Reeb graph analysis as a registration framework.
Shi et al. [107] used reeb graph analysis to isolate, extract,
and reconstruct enhanced brain surfaces. The system was able
to process cortical surfaces with the accuracy of freesurfer, but
at a lower computational cost.
G. Spectral Matching
Spectral correspondence as a way to examine the shapes of
objects was first pioneered by Reuter [125], [126] in 2005,
and as later expanded by Rustamov [127] where they were

Fig. 15. As shown by Fournier et al. [114], the human brain has a slight
asymmetry based on if subjects are right or left handed.

combined with Laplace–Beltrami operators. In 2011, Lombaert
et al. [108] proposed a method of spectral correspondence that
was applied to brain shapes. They used an eigendecomposition
to match brain surfaces between subjects. Initially, the spectra
are computed for each brain. These spectra are then sorted and
aligned. The result allows point locations between two brains to
be quickly matched. The method is primarily applicable to brain
registration. Lombaert et al. [109] proposed an extension of this
work for corresponding features on the surface of the brain,
entitled FOCUSR. The surface features of each brain were used
to drive the alignment. The primary advantage of FOCUSR over
competing techniques is the speed required to match the brains
to one another. The spectral matching technique required a mere
208 s to achieve the same accuracy as FreeSurfer, a commercial
brain analysis tool, which required several hours.
H. Symmetry Analysis
Symmetry-based techniques exploit the fact that the human
brain is largely symmetric along the sagittal plane, and use
this information to make observations. Prima et al. [110] proposed an early method of symmetry-based brain analysis. Primaanalyzed brain symmetry to automatically compute the midsaggital plane and obtain subvoxel accuracy in computing, reorienting, and recentering 3-D images in a time efficient manner.
Gefen et al. [111] aligned individual brain images along symmetry lines to create more accurate 3-D models. Gefen concluded that some regions yielded better restoration in 3-D models than other regions, but overall the alignment results were
accurate and consistent.
Liu et al. [112] examined the topic of multimodality brain
registration by aligning the symmetry planes of objects using
affine transformations. Liu surmised that the test objects were
successfully matched and the symmetry planes were accurately
computed.
Feng et al. [113] used the symmetry properties of the brain
to improve brain segmentation algorithms. Feng’s algorithm,
while effective at determining bilateral symmetry, was limited
by only being applicable to 2-D images.
Fournier et al. [114] examined the asymmetries in brains of
humans and chimpanzees and compared left- and right-handed
individuals to search for a difference (see Fig. 15). Fournier
was able to recover typical global asymmetry patterns and

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

hypothesized that future symmetry-based analysis could provide an automated way of comparing individuals.

1349

to the lack of consistency found across different subjects,
but is also due to the difficulty in properly registering and
aligning brains so that like areas can be examined.

I. Volumetric Analysis
Volumetric techniques measure the volume of an object. Herman et al. [115] proposed a method based on volumetric analysis
to use gradient-based boundary tracking to examine the volume
between control and Alzheimer’s patients. Herman concluded
that the gradient-based methods are superior to standard thresholding methods, but did not provide a detailed summary of the
diagnostic results.
Wagenknecht et al. [116] used a 3-D live-wire approach to
extract volumes of interest from a brain for comparison or
identification. An average miscalculation rate less than 0.0039
was reported, and the proposed method showed to be accurate
and robust for extracting volumes of interest and calculating
various properties for them.
IX. DISCUSSION
A. Research Challenges
The brain has long been a topic of research, but utilizing shape
analysis with the help of computers enables researchers to examine its shape and texture. There are several major challenges
facing shape analysis methods related to the brain or other complex medical structures. The brain is a complex and very diverse
organ. Unlike more rigid and well-defined objects that may be
easily represented by geometric shapes, the brain suffers from
large irregular variabilities. The lack of overall consistency in
the brain requires the techniques that analyze it to be flexible,
and be able to adaptable to changes in contrast, shape, varying
degrees of noise, and abnormality. This illustrates why techniques that rely on predetermined templates or shape models
may suffer from difficulty in brain applications. This problem
of consistency and complexity is the driving issue that leads to
many of the challenges. These challenges can be summarized
as follows:
1) Due to the size and complexity of the brain and other
medical objects, mesh-based approaches often require a
significantly large number of nodes or points of reference
to perform an accurate surface or shape analysis. Even
with modern computing, the complexity of the brain still
poses a computational efficiency challenge.
2) Medial axis and other skeleton-based analysis may require
a large amount of branches and complex paths to accurately represent all of the distinct locations in the human
brain.
3) The known shape analysis and diagnostic techniques for
the brain largely rely on the accuracy of brain segmentation and ability to properly determine structures in the
brain. Even with the combination and fusion of modern techniques (e.g., active contours, deformable models, SPHARM, and geodesic distances), identification and
segmentation accuracies still suffer significant errors when
applied to large sets of data.
4) Computer-aided diagnostic systems have faced great difficulty in accurately classifying neurological diseases based
on shape metrics over the past decades. This is largely due

B. Comparisons and Trends
While there is a high degree of merit in all applications of
shape analysis to the brain, some techniques are more suited
to specific applications than others. There are four generalized
applications of shape analysis techniques with the brain: examination of individual sulci and their curvatures on the brain,
examination of the entire human brain and white matter as a
whole, registration of brain shapes amongst subjects, and examination of the subcomponents of the brain (e.g., corpus callosum,
ventricles, hippocampus). Due to the wide variety of shapes and
curvatures in the human brain, many techniques can be used
with an array of different brain applications. However, it should
be noted that most of the techniques are more commonly used
in one or two areas.
Geodesic distances, medial axis, skeletal analysis, and
Laplace–Beltrami methods are the most common methods used
for examination of the individual sulci and brain curvature, with
geodesic distances between the most prevalent in modern applications. SPHARM, voxel- and tensor-based morphometry, volume analysis, symmetry-based modeling, and deformable models are the most common for analysis of the brain and white matter. However, SPHARM is generally reserved for mesh-based
applications, and deformable models are often preferred for registration and segmentation applications. While having some uses
in whole brain shape analysis, Procrustes analysis, homologous
modeling, graph matching, and symmetry-based modeling are
most commonly used for brain registration and segmentation applications. Voxel- and tensor-based morphometry, medial axis,
skeletal analysis, SPHARM, and distance mapping are the most
preferable methods for the examination of subcomponents of the
brain, and while typically not always used exclusively, geodesic
distances are often combined with these methods. Voxel- and
tensor-based morphometry and SPHARM also have significant
applications in brain shape registration. It should be specifically
noted that deformable models have a high degree of applicability to all of the mentioned analysis methods, and are often
combined with or frequently used in many forms of brain shape
analysis.
Longitudinal studies and those that examining comparisons
between populations tend to most commonly use SPHARM
or morphometry-based approaches, because these approaches
often take factors of data alignment into account. Geodesic distances can also contribute to longitudinal studies. Deformable
models, medial axis, and geodesic distance analysis are good
methodologies for examining subcortical structures or legions
in the brain along with intricate details about specific anatomy.
Cortical thickness studies are most suited for morphometry or
distance-based techniques as these provide the most straightforward approaches for measurement studies. In summary, some
methods are more suited to specific applications; however,
unique studies may need to explore a combination of techniques
and approaches due to the abnormality of the brain shape.

1350

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

To address the aforementioned challenges, recent trends in
shape analysis of the brain involve the following aspects:
1) Many of the methods discussed were initially applicable
to 2-D analysis, but in recent years nearly all methods have
evolved for use in 3-D applications.
2) Deformable model methods [57]–[59] have seen an increase in usage and have additionally taken the place of
many segmentation methods in the past five years, leading to an improved accuracy in brain segmentation. These
advances will undoubtedly help to push forward new and
improved shape analysis techniques.
3) More complex techniques such as SPHARM, started by
Gerig et al. [65], have been further developed by others
[69], [70], [72]–[74] in recent years and have shown great
promise in advancing the field for analysis of the cortex
and white matter, along with analysis of subcomponents
of the brain. These methods have illustrated the potential
for utilizing methods that are parameter invariant to solve
many of the difficult alignment and registration errors that
are often associated with the brain.
4) Automation has become increasingly important in modern methods, and the rate of semiautomated and manual
methods has drastically decreased. Modern methods are
generally expected to perform in an automated manner,
and the reduction in human interaction has resulted in an
increase in the accuracy for newer techniques.
5) Methods such as medial axis analysis [19] and geodesic
distances [38] are now more frequently combined with
other techniques leading to more accurate segmentation,
registration, and classification of the human brain and its
various subcomponents, such as the ventricles and corpus
callosum.
X. CONCLUSION
This survey details the numerous methods for solving the
complex problem of brain shape analysis. Early techniques,
which suffered from lower accuracies, slow computation times,
and significant user input, have given rise to complicated modern
techniques that offer high degrees of automation and improved
accuracy. Methods such as SPHARM, deformation-based morphometry, and deformable models will likely become the dominant modes for use in brain shape analysis going forward.
Geodesic distances, medial axis, and Laplace–Beltrami operations, among others, will become methods used to support
and enhance these dominant modes of brain shape analysis.
An amalgamation of techniques opens new opportunities for
researchers and engineers to develop more advanced analysis
methods. Exciting new opportunities, such as HyperSPHARM
and 4-D analysis techniques, provide a look into the future of
where modern techniques and amalgamations may be headed.
In conclusion, the future of the field of shape analysis for the
brain is evolving rapidly, and new techniques will develop and
emerge as technology continues to progress.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Casanova, A. El-Baz, and J. Suri, Imaging the Brain in Autism.
York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2013.

New

[2] V. Barras, A. Simons III, and M. Arbib, “Synthetic event-related potentials: A computational bridge between neurolinguistic models and
experiments,” Neural Netw., vol. 37, no. 0, pp. 66–92, 2013.
[3] R. Lande, “Quantitative genetic analysis of multivariate evolution, applied to brain: Body size allometry,” Evolution, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 402–
416, 1979.
[4] R. Desimone, S. Schein, J. Moran, and L. Ungerleider, “Contour, color,
and shape analysis beyond the striate cortex,” Vis. Res., vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 441–452, 1985.
[5] J. Martin, A. Pentland, and R. Kikinis, “Shape analysis of brain structures
using physical and experimental modes,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc.
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 1994, pp. 752–755.
[6] M. Delfour and J.-P. Zolsio, Shapes and Geometries: Metrics, Analysis, Differential Calculus, and Optimization, (Advances in Design and
Control), 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, Dec. 2010.
[7] H. Poincaré, Analysis Situs, (Series Journal de l’Ecole polytechnique II
sér), 1st ed. Paris, France: Gauthier-Villars, 1895.
[8] L. de Floriani and M. Spagnuolo, Shape Analysis and Structuring, (Mathematics and Visualization), 1st ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer, Nov.
2010.
[9] D. Guliato and R. Rangayyan, Modeling and Analysis of Shape: With
Applications in Computer-Aided Diagnosis of Breast Cancer, (Synthesis
Lectures on Biomedical Engineering), 1st ed. San Mateo, CA, USA:
Morgan Kaufmann, Jan. 2011.
[10] D. Attali, J.-D. Boissonnat, and H. Edelsbrunner, “Stability and computation of medial axes—A state-of-the-art report,” in Mathematical
Foundations of Scientific Visualization, Computer Graphics, and Massive Data Exploration. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2009.
[11] H. Blum, “A transformation for extracting new descriptors of shape,”
Models Percept. Speech Visual Form, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 362–380, 1967.
[12] H. Blum, “Biological shape and visual science (Part I),” J. Theoret. Biol.,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 205–287, 1973.
[13] M. Naf, O. Kubler, R. Kikinis, M. E. Shenton, and G. Szekely, “Characterization and recognition of 3D organ shape in medical image analysis using skeletonization,” in Proc. Math. Methods Biomed. Image
Anal.Workshop., Jun. 1996, pp. 139–150.
[14] P. Golland, W. Grimson, and R. Kikinis, “Statistical shape analysis using
fixed topology skeletons: Corpus callosum study,” in Information Processing in Medical Imaging. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag,
1999, pp. 382–387.
[15] S. M. Pizer, D. S. Fritsch, P. A. Yushkevich, V. E. Johnson, and
E. L. Chaney, “Segmentation, registration, and measurement of shape
variation via image object shape,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 18,
no. 10, pp. 851–865, Oct. 1999.
[16] P. Golland, “Statistical shape analysis of anatomical structures” Ph.D.
dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, Aug. 2001.
[17] M. Styner and G. Gerig, “Three-dimensional medial shape representation incorporating object variability,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., vol. 2, pp. II–651–II–656.
[18] K. Gorczowski, M. Styner, J.-Y. Jeong, J. S. Marron, J. Piven,
H. C. Hazlett, S. M. Pizer, and G. Gerig, “Statistical shape analysis
of multi-object complexes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2007, pp. 1–8.
[19] A. Elnakib, M. F. CasaNova, G. Gimel’farb, A. E. Switala, and A. El-Baz,
“Autism diagnostics by centerline-based shape analysis of the corpus
callosum,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano Macro, Apr.
2011, pp. 1843–1846.
[20] B. Paniagua, A. Lyall, J. B. Berger, C. Vachet, R. M. Hamer, S. Woolson,
W. Lin, J. Gilmore, and M. Styner, “Lateral ventricle morphology analysis via mean latitude axis,” Proc. Soc. Photo Opt. Instrum. Eng.,
vol. 8672, Mar. 2013.
[21] A. Elnakib, M. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, A. El-Baz, and K. Suzuki,
“Autism diagnostics by 3D shape analysis of the corpus callosum,” in
Machine Learning in Computer-Aided Diagnosis: Medical Imaging Intelligence and Analysis, K. Suzuki, Ed. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global,
2012, pp. 315–335.
[22] A. Elnakib, M. Casanova, G. Gimelrfarb, A. Switala, and A. El-Baz,
“Dyslexia diagnostics by 3-D shape analysis of the corpus callosum,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 700–708, Jul. 2012.
[23] A. Elnakib, A. El-Baz, M. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, and A. Switala,
“Image-based detection of corpus callosum variability for more accurate
discrimination between dyslexic and normal brains,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano Macro, 2010, pp. 109–112.
[24] A. Elnakib, A. El-Baz, M. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, and A. Switala,
“Image-based detection of corpus callosum variability for more accurate

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]

[46]

[47]
[48]

discrimination between autistic and normal brains,” in Proc. 17th IEEE
Int. Conf. Image Process., 2010, pp. 4337–4340.
M. F. Casanova, A. El-Baz, A. Elnakib, J. Giedd, J. M. Rumsey,
E. L. Williams, and A. E. Switala, “Corpus callosum shape analysis with
application to dyslexia,” Transl. Neurosci., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 124–130,
Jun. 2010.
M. F. Casanova, A. El-Baz, A. Elnakib, A. E. Switala, E. L. Williams,
D. L. Williams, N. J. Minshew, and T. E. Conturo, “Quantitative analysis of the shape of the corpus callosum in patients with autism and
comparison individuals,” Autism, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 223–238, Mar. 2011.
A. El-Baz, A. Elnakib, M. Casanova, G. Gimelfarb, A. Switala, D. Jordan,
and S. Rainey, “Accurate automated detection of autism related corpus
callosum abnormalities,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 929–939, 2011.
L. D. Griffin, “The intrinsic geometry of the cerebral cortex,” J. Theoret.
Biol., vol. 166, no. 3, pp. 261–273, 1994.
N. Khaneja, M. I. Miller, and U. Grenander, “Dynamic programming
generation of curves on brain surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 1260–1265, Nov. 1998.
M. Berger and B. Gostiaux, Differential Geometry: Manifolds and Curves
and And Surfaces, (Series Graduate texts in mathematics). New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1988.
Y. Wang, B. S. Peterson, and L. H. Staib, “3D brain surface matching
based on geodesics and local geometry,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 89, no. 23, pp. 252–271, 2003.
J. Pastore, E. Moler, and V. Ballarin, “Segmentation of brain magnetic
resonance images through morphological operators and geodesic distance,” Digital Signal Process., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 153–160, 2005.
A. Huang, R. Abugharbieh, R. Tam, and A. Traboulsee, “MRI brain
extraction with combined expectation maximization and geodesic active
contours,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Signal Process. Inf. Technol., Aug.
2006, pp. 107–111.
W. Mio, J. C. Bowers, M. K. Hurdal, and X. Liu, “Modeling brain
anatomy with 3D arrangements of curves,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Oct. 2007, pp. 1–8.
J. A. Butman and M. G. Linguraru, “Assessment of ventricle volume
from serial MRI scans in communicating hydrocephalus,” in Proc. 5th
IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano, May 2008, pp. 49–52.
J. Hua, Z. Lai, M. Dong, X. Gu, and H. Qin, “Geodesic distance-weighted
shape vector image diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 14,
no. 6, pp. 1643–1650, Nov. 2008.
X. Liang and J. Zhang, “White matter integrity analysis along cingulum
paths in mild cognitive impairment—A geodesic distance approach,” in
Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Bioinformat. Biomed. Eng., May 2008, pp. 510–513.
A. A. Joshi, D. W. Shattuck, H. Damasio, and R. M. Leahy, “Geodesic
curvature flow on surfaces for automatic sulcal delineation,” in Proc. 9th
IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., May 2012, pp. 430–433.
R. Kimmel and N. Kiryati, Finding Shortest Paths On Surfaces By Fast
Global Approximation And Precise Local Refinement. Citeseer, 1994.
R. Kimmel, A. Amir, and A. M. Bruckstein, “Finding shortest paths on
surfaces using level sets propagation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 635–640, Jun. 1995.
R. Kimmel and J. A. Sethian, “Computing geodesic paths on manifolds,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 95, no. 15, pp. 8431–8435, 1998.
E. Tripp, The Meridian Handbook of Classical Mythology. New York,
NY, USA: Penguin, 1974.
A. W. Toga and P. M. Thompson, “The role of image registration in brain
mapping,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 19, no. 1–2, pp. 3–24, Jan. 2001.
N. Duta, A. K. Jain, and M. P. Dubuisson-Jolly, “Learning 2-D shape
models,” Proc. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf.,
vol. 2, pp. 8–14, 1999.
X. Penin, C. Berge, and M. Baylac, “Ontogenetic study of the skull
in modern humans and the common chimpanzees: Neotenic hypothesis
reconsidered with a tridimensional procrustes analysis,” Amer. J. Phys.
Anthropol., vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 50–62, 2002.
T. Bienvenu, F. Guy, W. Coudyzer, E. Gilissen, G. Roualdès, P. Vignaud,
and M. Brunet, “Assessing endocranial variations in great apes and humans using 3-D data from virtual endocasts,” Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol.,
vol. 145, no. 2, pp. 231–246, 2011.
N. Duta, A. K. Jain, and M. P. Dubuisson-Jolly, “Automatic Construction
of 2-D Shape Models,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 23,
no. 5, pp. 433–446, May 2001.
T. McInerney and D. Terzopoulos, “Deformable models in medical image
analysis,” in Proc. Math. Methods Biomed. Image Anal., 1996., Proc.
Workshop, Jun. 1996, pp. 171–180.

1351

[49] C. Xu and J. L. Prince, “Snakes, shapes, and gradient vector flow,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 359–369, Mar. 1998.
[50] C. Xu and J. L. Prince, “Gradient vector flow deformable models,”
in Handbook of Medical Imaging. San Diego, CA, USA: Academic,
2000, pp. 159–169.
[51] C. Davatzikos, “Spatial transformation and registration of brain images
using elastically deformable models,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand.,
vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 207–222, 1997.
[52] A. Dale, B. Fischl, and M. Sereno, “Cortical surface-based analysis—
Part I: Segmentation and surface reconstruction,” Neuroimage, vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 179–194, 1999.
[53] S. M. Smith, “Fast robust automated brain extraction,” Hum. Brain
Mapp., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 143–155, Nov. 2002.
[54] A. H. Zhuang, D. J. Valentino, and A. W. Toga, “Skull-stripping magnetic resonance brain images using a model-based level set,” Neuroimage, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 79–92, Aug. 2006.
[55] A. A. Joshi, D. W. Shattuck, P. M. Thompson, and R. M. Leahy,
“Surface-constrained volumetric brain registration using harmonic mappings,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 1657–1669, Dec.
2007.
[56] Z. Tu, K. L. Narr, P. Dollar, I. DiNov, P. M. Thompson, and
A. W. Toga, “Brain anatomical structure segmentation by hybrid discriminative/generative models,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 495–508, Apr. 2008.
[57] A. Huang, R. Abugharbieh, and R. Tam, “A hybrid geometric statistical
deformable model for automated 3-D segmentation in brain MRI,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1838–1848, Jul. 2009.
[58] J. X. Liu, Y. S. Chen, and L. F. Chen, “Accurate and robust extraction of
brain regions using a deformable model based on radial basis functions,”
J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 183, no. 2, pp. 255–266, 2009.
[59] J. Li, X. Liu, J. Zhuo, R. P. Gullapalli, and J. M. Zara, “A deformable
surface model based automatic rat brain extraction method,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano Macro, Apr. 2011, pp. 1741–1745.
[60] A. Hashioka, S. Kobashi, K. Kuramoto, Y. Wakata, K. Ando, R. Ishikura,
T. Ishikawa, S. Hirota, and Y. Hata, “Shape and appearance knowledge
based brain segmentation for neonatal MR images,” in Proc. World Autom. Congr., Jun. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[61] R. P. Woods, S. T. Grafton, C. J. Holmes, S. R. Cherry, and
J. C. Mazziotta, “Automated image registration—Part I: General methods
and intrasubject, intramodality validation,” J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr.,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 139–152, 1998.
[62] R. P. Woods, S. T. Grafton, J. D. Watson, N. L. Sicotte, and
J. C. Mazziotta, “Automated image registration—Part II: Intersubject
validation of linear and nonlinear models,” J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr.,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 153–165, 1998.
[63] D. Shen and C. Davatzikos, “HAMMER: Hierarchical attribute matching mechanism for elastic registration,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Math.
Methods Biomed. Image Anal., 2001, pp. 29–36.
[64] T. Liu, D. Shen, and C. Davatzikos, “Deformable registration of cortical structures via hybrid volumetric and surface warping,” Neuroimage,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1790–1801, Aug. 2004.
[65] G. Gerig, M. Styner, D. Jones, D. Weinberger, and J. Lieberman, “Shape
analysis of brain ventricles using SPHARM,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop
Math. Methods Biomed. Image Anal., 2001, pp. 171–178.
[66] M. K. Chung, K. M. Dalton, and R. J. Davidson, “Encoding neuroanatomical information using weighted spherical harmonic representation,” in Proc. 14th Workshop Statist. Signal Process., Aug. 2007,
pp. 146–150.
[67] A. Kelemen, G. Székely, and G. Gerig, “Elastic Model-Based Segmentation of 3D Neuroradiological Data Sets,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 828–839, Oct. 1999.
[68] A. Uthama, R. Abugharbieh, A. Traboulsee, and M. J. McKeown, “Invariant SPHARM shape descriptors for complex geometry in MR region
of interest analysis,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., Aug. 2007, pp. 1322–1325.
[69] A. Ben Abdallah, F. Ghorbel, H. Essabbah, and M. H. Bedoui, “Chapter
9: Shape analysis of left ventricle using invariant 3D spherical harmonics
shape descriptors,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Geometr. Model. Imag., Jul.
2008, pp. 53–58.
[70] M. K. Chung, K. M. Dalton, and R. J. Davidson, “Tensor-based cortical
surface morphometry via weighted spherical harmonic representation,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1143–1151, Aug. 2008.
[71] A. Uthama, R. Abugharbieh, S. J. Palmer, A. Traboulsee, and
M. J. McKeown, “SPHARM-based spatial fMRI characterization with

1352

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]
[79]

[80]

[81]
[82]

[83]
[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]
[88]

[89]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

intersubject anatomical variability reduction,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
Process., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 907–918, Dec. 2008.
M. Esmaeil-Zadeh, H. Soltanian-Zadeh, and K. Jafari-Khouzani,
“SPHARM-based shape analysis of hippocampus for lateralization in
mesial temporal lobe epilepsy,” in Proc. 8th Iran. Conf. Electr. Eng.,
May 2010, pp. 39–44.
M. Nitzken, M. F. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, F. Khalifa, A. Elnakib,
A. E. Switala, and A. El-Baz, “3-D shape analysis of the brain cortex
with application to autism,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag.,
Nano Macro, Apr. 2011, pp. 1847–1850.
M. Nitzken, M. F. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, A. Elnakib, F. Khalifa,
A. Switala, and A. El-Baz, “3D shape analysis of the brain cortex with
application to dyslexia,” in Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process.,
Sep. 2011, pp. 2657–2660.
X. Geng, T. J. Ross, H. Gu, W. Shin, W. Zhan, Y.-P. Chao, C.-P. Lin,
N. Schuff, and Y. Yang, “Diffeomorphic image registration of diffusion
MRI using spherical harmonics,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 747–758, Mar. 2011.
H. Kim, T. Mansi, A. Bernasconi, and N. Bernasconi, “Vertex-wise shape
analysis of the hippocampus: Disentangling positional differences from
volume changes,” Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist Interv., vol. 14,
Pt. 2, pp. 352–359, 2011.
A. Hosseinbor, M. K. Chung, S. Schaefer, C. van Reekum, L. PeschkeSchmitz, M. Sutterer, A. L. Alexander, and R. J. Davidson, “4D hyperspherical harmonic (hyperspharm) representation of multiple disconnected brain subcortical structures,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Med. Image
Comput. Comput. Assist. Intervent., Sep. 2013, pp. 598–605.
C. H. Brechbhler, G. Gerig, and O. Kbler, “Parametrization of closed
surfaces for 3-D shape description,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand.,
vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 154–170, 1995.
M. Styner, I. Oguz, S. Xu, C. Brechbuhler, D. Pantazis, J. J. Levitt,
M. E. Shenton, and G. Gerig, “Framework for the statistical shape analysis of brain structures using SPHARM-PDM,” Insight J., vol. 1071,
no. 1071, pp. 242–250, 2006.
M. Nitzken, M. Casanova, F. Khalifa, G. Sokhadze, and A. El-Baz,
“Shape-based detection of cortex variability for more accurate discrimination between autistic and normal brains,” in Multi Modality State-ofthe-Art Medical Image Segmentation and Registration Methodologies,
A. S. El-Baz, R. Acharya U, A. F. Laine, and J. S. Suri, Eds. New
York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 161–185.
A. Elnakib, M. Nitzken, M. Casanova, H. Park, G. Gimel’farb, and A. ElBaz, “Quantification of age-related brain cortex change using 3d shape
analysis,” in Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2012, pp. 41–44.
E. L. Williams, A. El-Baz, M. Nitzken, A. E. Switala, and
M. F. Casanova, “Spherical harmonic analysis of cortical complexity
in autism and dyslexia,” Transl. Neurosci., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 36–40, Mar.
2012.
M. K. Chung, K. J. Worsley, and A. C. Evans, “Tensor-based brain surface modeling and analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2003, vol. 1, pp. I–467–I–473.
A. D. Leow, A. D. Klunder, C. R. JackJr., A. Toga, A. Dale,
M. A. Bernstein, P. J. Britson, J. L. Gunter, C. P. Ward, J. L. Whitwell,
B. J. Borowski, A. S. Fleisher, N. C. Fox, D. Harvey, J. Kornak,
N. Schuff, C. Studholme, G. Alexander, and M. W. Weiner Thompson, “Longitudinal stability of MRI for mapping brain change using
tensor-based morphometry,” NeuroImage, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 627–640,
2006.
N. Lepore, C. Brun, Y. Y. Chou, M. C. Chiang, R. A. Dutton,
K. M. Hayashi, E. Luders, O. L. Lopez, H. J. Aizenstein, A. W. Toga,
J. T. Becker, and P. M. Thompson, “Generalized tensor-based morphometry of HIV/AIDS using multivariate statistics on deformation tensors,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 129–141, Jan. 2008.
M. Afzali and H. Soltanian-Zadeh, “Comparison of voxel-based morphometry (VBM) And tractography of diffusion tensor MRI (DT-MRI)
in temporal lobe epilepsy,” in Proc. 18th Iran. Conf. Electr. Eng., 2010,
pp. 18–23.
Y. Wang, T. F. Chan, A. W. Toga, and P. M. Thompson, “Shape analysis
with multivariate tensor-based morphometry and holomorphic differentials,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2009, pp. 2349–2356.
H. Yang, W. Liu, H. Xia, Z. Zhou, and L. Tong, “Longitudinal change
of the grey matter of mild cognitive impairment patients over 3 years by
using voxel-based morphometry,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng.
Informat., 2012, pp. 304–308.
E. Fletcher, A. Knaack, B. Singh, E. Lloyd, E. Wu, O. Carmichael,
and C. DeCarli, “Combining boundary-based methods with tensor-based

[90]

[91]
[92]
[93]
[94]
[95]

[96]
[97]

[98]
[99]
[100]

[101]

[102]
[103]

[104]
[105]

[106]

[107]
[108]
[109]

[110]

morphometry in the measurement of longitudinal brain change,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 223–236, Feb. 2013.
J. Shi, Y. Wang, R. Ceschin, X. An, M. D. Nelson, A. Panigrahy, and
N. Lepore, “Surface fluid registration and multivariate tensor-based morphometry in newborns—The effects of prematurity on the putamen,” in
Proc. Asia-Pacific Signal Inf. Process. Assoc. Annu. Summit Conf., 2012,
pp. 1–8.
F. L. Bookstein, “’Voxel-based morphometry’ should not be used with
imperfectly registered images,” Neuroimage, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1454–
1462, Dec. 2001.
U. Grenander and M. I. Miller, “Computational anatomy: An emerging discipline,” Quart. Appl. Math., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 617–694,
1998.
J. Ashburner and K. J. Friston, “Why voxel-based morphometry should
be used,” NeuroImage, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1238–1243, 2001.
Q. He, Y. Duan, J. Miles, and N. Takahashi, “Statistical shape analysis of
the corpus callosum in subtypes of autism,” in 7th IEEE Int. Conf. Proc.
Bioinformat. Bioeng., Oct. 2007, pp. 1087–1091.
A. El-Baz, M. F. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, M. Mott, and A. E. Switala,
“Autism diagnostics by 3-D texture analysis of cerebral white matter
gyrifications,” Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv., vol. 10, Pt
2, pp. 882–890, 2007.
J. Cates, P. T. Fletcher, M. Styner, M. Shenton, and R. Whitaker, “Shape
modeling and analysis with entropy-based particle systems,” Inf. Process
Med. Imag., vol. 20, pp. 333–345, 2007.
T. Geraud, J. F. Mangin, I. Bloch, and H. Maitre, “Segmenting internal
structures in 3-D MR images of the brain by Markovian relaxation on a
watershed based adjacency graph,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Process.,
Oct. 1995, vol. 3, pp. 548–551.
F. Yang and F. Kruggel, “Optimization algorithms for labeling brain sulci
based on graph matching,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
Oct. 2007, pp. 1–7.
S. S. Long and L. B. Holder, “Graph based MRI brain scan classification and correlation discovery,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Computat. Intell.
Bioinformat. Computat. Biol., May 2012, pp. 335–342.
K. Yamaguchi, S. Kobashi, I. Mohri, S. Imawaki, M. Taniike, and Y. Hata,
“Brain shape homologous modeling using sulcal-distribution index in
MR images,” in Proc. Syst., Man Cybern., IEEE Int. Conf., Oct. 2009,
pp. 1102–1106.
K. Yamaguchi, S. Kobashi, K. Kuramoto, Y. T. Kitamura, S. Imawaki,
and Y. Hata, “Statistical quantification of brain shape deformation with
homologous brain shape modeling,” in Proc. World Autom. Congr., Sep.
2010, pp. 1–6.
S. Angenent, S. Haker, A. Tannenbaum, and R. Kikinis, “On the LaplaceBeltrami operator and brain surface flattening,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 700–711, Aug. 1999.
R. Lai, Y. Shi, N. Sicotte, and A. W. Toga, “Automated corpus callosum
extraction via Laplace–Beltrami nodal parcellation and intrinsic geodesic
curvature flows on surfaces,” in Proc.IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Nov.
2011, pp. 2034–2040.
R. Shishegar, H. Soltanian-Zadeh, and S. R. Moghadasi, “Hippocampal
shape analysis in epilepsy using Laplace-Beltrami spectrum,” in Proc.
19th Iran. Conf. Electr. Eng., May 2011, p. 1.
D. Germanaud, J. Lefevre, R. Toro, C. Fischer, J. Dubois, L. HertzPannier, and J. F. Mangin, “Larger is twistier: Spectral analysis of gyrification (SPANGY) applied to adult brain size polymorphism,” Neuroimage, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 1257–1272, Nov. 2012.
M. Makram, H. Kamel, and M. Emna, “3D elastic registration using
a balanced multi resolution reeb graph: Application for a detection of
a maxilla facial malformation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
Eng., May 2008, pp. 1063–1071.
Y. Shi, R. Lai, and A. Toga, “Cortical surface reconstruction via unified
reeb analysis of geometric and topological outliers in magnetic resonance
images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., 2012.
H. Lombaert, L. Grady, J. R. Polimeni, and F. Cheriet, “Fast brain matching with spectral correspondence,” Inf. Process Med. Imag., vol. 22,
pp. 660–673, 2011.
H. Lombaert, L. Grady, J. R. Polimeni, and F. Cheriet, “FOCUSR: Feature oriented correspondence using spectral regularization—A method
for precise surface matching,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 2143–2160, Sep. 2013.
S. Prima, S. Ourselin, and N. Ayache, “Computation of the mid-sagittal
plane in 3D brain images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 122–138, Feb. 2002.

NITZKEN et al.: SHAPE ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN BRAIN: A BRIEF SURVEY

1353

[111] S. Gefen, Y. Fan, L. Bertrand, and J. NissaNov, “Symmetry-based 3D
brain reconstruction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano
Macro, Apr. 2004, pp. 744–747.
[112] X. Liu, C. Imielinska, A. F. Laine, and A. D’Ambrosio, “Symmetry
based multi-modality registration of the brain imagery,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Signal Process. Inf. Technol., Dec. 2007, pp. 807–812.
[113] J. Feng, F. Desheng, and B. Shuoben, “Brain image segmentation based
on bilateral symmetry information,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Bioinformat.
Biomed. Eng., May 2008, pp. 1951–1954.
[114] M. Fournier, B. Combes, N. Roberts, S. Keller, T. J. Crow, W. D. Hopkins,
and S. Prima, “Surface-based method to evaluate global brain shape
asymmetries in human and chimpanzee brains,” in Apr. 2, 2011, pp.
310–316
[115] G. T. Herman, M. I. Kohn, and R. E. Gur, “Computerized threedimensional volume analysis from magnetic resonance images for characterization of brain disorders,” in Proc. Biomed. Eng., Proc. Spec. Symp.
Matur. Technol. Emerg. Horiz., Nov. 1988, pp. 65–67.
[116] G. Wagenknecht and S. Winter, “Volume-of-interest segmentation of
cortical regions for multimodal brain analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Nuclear
Sci. Symp. Conf. Rec., Oct. 2008, pp. 4368–4372.
[117] M. F. Casanova, A. El-Baz, M. Mott, G. Mannheim, H. Hassan, R. Fahmi,
J. Giedd, J. M. Rumsey, A. E. Switala, and A. Farag, “Reduced gyral
window and corpus callosum size in autism: Possible macroscopic correlates of a minicolumnopathy,” J. Autism. Dev. Disord, vol. 39, no. 5,
pp. 751–764, May 2009.
[118] M. F. Casanova, A. S. El-Baz, J. Giedd, J. M. Rumsey, and A. E. Switala,
“Increased white matter gyral depth in dyslexia: Implications for corticocortical connectivity,” J. Autism. Dev. Disord, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 21–29,
Jan. 2010.
[119] A. El-Baz, M. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, M. Mott, A. Switala,
E. Vanbogaert, and R. McCracken, “A new CAD system for early diagnosis of dyslexic brains,” in Proc. 15th IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process.,
2008, pp. 1820–1823.
[120] A. El-Baz, M. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, M. Mott, A. Switala,
E. Vanbogaert, and R. McCracken, “Dyslexia diagnostics by 3D texture analysis of cerebral white matter gyrifications,” in Proc. 19th Int.
Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2008, pp. 1–4.
[121] A. El-Baz, M. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, M. Mott, and A. Switwala,
“A new image analysis approach for automatic classification of autistic
brains,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2007, pp. 352–355.
[122] A. El-Baz, M. Casanova, G. Gimel’farb, M. Mott, and A. Switala, “An
MRI-based diagnostic framework for early diagnosis of dyslexia,” Int. J.
Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 3, no. 3–4, pp. 181–189, 2008.
[123] R. Fahmi, A. El-Baz, H. Abd El Munim, A. Farag, and M. Casanova,
“Classification techniques for autistic Vs. typically developing brain using MRI data,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano Macro,
2007, pp. 1348–1351.
[124] H. Doraiswamy and V. NataraJan, “Efficient algorithms for computing
Reeb graphs,” Computat. Geometry, vol. 42, no. 67, pp. 606–616, 2009.
[125] M. Reuter, F.-E. Wolter, and N. Peinecke, “Laplace-spectra as fingerprints for shape matching,” in Proc. 2005 ACM Symp. Solid Phys. Model.,
NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 101–106.
[126] M. Reuter, F.-E. Wolter, and N. Peinecke, “Laplace–Beltrami spectra
as shape-DNA of surfaces and solids,” Comput.-Aided Design, vol. 38,
no. 4, pp. 342–366, 2006.
[127] R. M. Rustamov, “Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions for deformation invariant shape representation,” in Proc. 5th Eurograph. Symp. Geometry
Process., 2007, pp. 225–233.

Manuel F. Casanova received the B.S. degree from
the University of Puerto Rico, Puerto, Rico, in 1975,
the M.D. degree from the School of Medicine, University of Puerto Rico, in 1979, and the Internship
and Residency Neurology from the University District Hospital, in 1983.
From 1983 to 1986, he was Clinical and Research Fellow at The Johns Hopkins University, MD,
USA. He is currently the Gottfried and Gisela Kolbe
Endowed Chair in psychiatry in the University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA. Dr. Casanova was
a Magisterial Speaker at the World Autism Congress in 2010 and the recipient
of an EUREKA award from the the National Institute of Mental Health. He has
received the titles of Stanley Scholar from the United States and an Honorary
Professor degree from the University of Krasnoyarsk, Russia. He is one of the
founding members for the International Autism Institute. He serves on the Editorial Board of 20 journals and has published more than 200 peer reviewed
articles and 70 book chapters.

Matthew J. Nitzken (M’10) received the B.S. and
M.Eng. degrees in 2009 and 2010, respectively, from
the University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.
He is currently a Doctoral Candidate in the electrical and computer engineering program at the University of Louisville. He has a strong focus in the fields
of shape analysis, computer-aided detection and diagnosis, and the understanding of complex brain disorders. His primary area of expertise is in 2-dimensional
and 3-dimensional shape analysis, and over the years
he has worked extensively in brain, lung, heart, and
prostate analysis. He has more than 20 combined publications and book chapters and has submitted numerous patents in the field of brain and lung shape
analysis. His work has had the opportunity to be presented at conferences in
countries around the world, including the United States, Germany, Spain, and
Japan, among others.

Tamer Inanc (M’xx) received the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees from Department of Electrical Engineering,
Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA,
USA, in 1996 and 2002, respectively, under supervision of Prof. M. Sznaier.
After receiving the Ph.D. degree, he did a Postdoctoral Scholarship at California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, between 2002 and 2004
under the supervision of Prof. R. M. Murray. He
started working as an Assistant Professor in 2004
at Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA. He has been working as an
Associate Professor at the same department since 2010. His research interests include control systems, robust identification, active vision systems, autonomous
robotics, biometrics and control systems and identification applications to bioengineering problems.

Georgy Gimel’farb received the Ph.D. degree from
the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences in 1969 and
an advanced Doctor of Engineering degree from the
Higher Certifying Commission of the USSR in 1991.
After working for a long time in the Glushkov Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian Academy of
Sciences, he joined in 1997 the University of Auckland (New Zealand) where he is currently a Professor
of Computer Science and a Codirector of the Intelligent Vision Systems Laboratory. He authored or
coauthored more than 45 journal articles, 260 papers
in peer-reviewed conference proceedings, 65 book chapters, two textbooks,
and four books, including the monograph ”Image Textures and Gibbs Random
Fields” (Kluwer Academic, 1999). His research interests include probabilistic
image modeling, statistical pattern recognition, texture analysis in medical and
remotely sensed images, and computer stereo vision. In 1997, he received a
prestigious State Premium of Ukraine in Science and Technology for fundamental and applied results in image and signal recognition.

1354

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Jacek M. Zurada (LF’96) received the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in 1968 and 1975, respectively from
the Gdansk Institute of Technology, Gdansk, Poland.
He currently serves as a Professor of electrical and
computer engineering at the University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, USA. He authored or coauthored several books and more than 370 papers in the area of
computational intelligence, neural networks and machine learning, logic rule extraction, and bioinformatics, and delivered numerous presentations and seminars throughout the world. His work has been cited
more than 7400 times.
Dr. Zurada currently serves as IEEE V-President for Technical Activities
(TAB Chair) and also chairs the IEEE TAB Management Committee. He was
the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS (1997–
03), Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
and was member of the Editorial Board of The Proceedings of the IEEE. In
2004–05, he was the President of the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society.
He is an Associate Editor of Neurocomputing, Neural Networks, and of several
other international journals. He holds the title of a Professor in Poland, the Membership of the Polish Academy of Sciences, and has been awarded numerous
awards, including the Joe Desch Award in 2013 and four honorary professorships of Chinese universities, including of Sichuan University in Chengdu. He
is a Board of Directors Member of IEEE, IEEE CIS, and IJCNN.

Ayman El-Baz (M’05) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from Mansoura University, Egypt, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Louisville, KY, USA, in 2006.
He Associate Professor in the Department of Bioengineering at the University of Louisville, KY. Dr.
El-Baz has twelve years of hands-on experience in the
fields of bioimaging modeling and computer-assisted
diagnostic systems. He has developed new techniques
for analyzing 3D medical images. His work has been
reported at several prestigious international conferences (e.g., CVPR, ICCV,
MICCAI, etc.) and in journals (e.g., IEEE TMI, IEEE TIP, IEEE TBME, IEEE
TITB, Brain, etc.). His work related to novel image analysis techniques for lung
cancer and autism diagnosis have earned him multiple awards, including: first
place at the annual Research Louisville 2002, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010,
2011 and 2012 meetings, and the ”Best Paper Award in Medical Image Processing” from the prestigious ICGST International Conference on Graphics, Vision
and Image Processing (GVIP-2005). He has authored or coauthored more than
300 technical articles.

