IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

1363

Semantic Description of Liver CT Images:
An Ontological Approach
Nadin Kökciyan, Rüştü Türkay, Suzan Üsküdarlı, Pınar Yolum, Barış Bakır, and Burak Acar

Abstract—Radiologists inspect CT scans and record their observations in reports to communicate with physicians. These reports
may suffer from ambiguous language and inconsistencies resulting
from subjective reporting styles, which present challenges in interpretation. Standardization efforts, such as the lexicon RadLex for
radiology terms, aim to address this issue by developing standard
vocabularies. While such vocabularies handle consistent annotation, they fall short in sufficiently processing reports for intelligent
applications. To support such applications, the semantics of the
concepts as well as their relationships must be modeled, for which,
ontologies are effective. They enable the software to make inferences beyond what is present in the reports. This paper presents
the open-source ontology ONLIRA (Ontology of the Liver for Radiology), which is developed to support such intelligent applications,
such as identifying and ranking similar liver patient cases. ONLIRA
is introduced in terms of its concepts, properties, and relations.
Examples of real liver patient cases are provided for illustration
purposes. The ontology is evaluated in terms of its ability to express
real liver patient cases and address semantic queries.
Index Terms—Liver, ontology, radiology.

I. INTRODUCTION
ADIOLOGISTS document imaging observations for communicating with medical professionals. A radiology report
is a medico-legal document that serves as a communication link
between a radiologist and a referring physician. It consists of
the observations of a radiologist regarding scanned images of a
patient. Clinicians, radiologists, and peers are interested in the
reports to retrieve information for assistance in diagnosis, education, comparison, and improving standards [1]. The utility of
radiology reports may extend beyond physician interpretation to
support these needs by, for example, automatically identifying
similar cases, ranking, and summarization.
Radiology reports are prepared according to institutional conventions and facilities. Personal preferences of a radiologist may
also influence the report, such as a tendency to report detailed

R

Manuscript received April 7, 2013; revised October 28, 2013; accepted
December 31, 2013. Date of publication January 9, 2014; date of current version June 30, 2014. This work was supported by the Turkish Research and
Technology Council under Grant TUBITAK 110E264 and Bogazici University
Research Fund under Grant 5324.
N. Kökciyan, S. Üsküdarlı, and P. Yolum are with the Department of
Computer Engineering, Bogazici University, 34470 Istanbul, Turkey (e-mail:
nadin.kokciyan@boun.edu.tr; suzan.uskudarli@boun.edu.tr; pinar.yolum@
boun.edu.tr).
R. Türkay and B. Bakır are with the Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 34452 Istanbul, Turkey (e-mail: rustuturkay@hotmail.com; drbarisbakir@
yahoo.com).
B. Acar is with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
Bogazici University, 34470 Istanbul, Turkey (e-mail: acarbu@boun.edu.tr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2298880

versus brief listing of observations [1], [2]. In such cases, it is
not clear whether the omission of an observation in a report
implies that no such condition was observed or that it was not
considered important by the radiologist to report. In practice, it
is common for radiology reports to be unstructured and mostly
verbose [3]. Ambiguous phrases are common in such documents, which may lead to misinterpretation. Natural language
documents are difficult to process and their effectiveness is limited (see Section IV). Furthermore, interoperability issues that
arise with different institutions and countries, as in the case of
teleradiology [3], make the problem even more challenging.
For effective and long-term use of radiology reports, it is
beneficial to maintain structured and standardized reports [4].
International standards for vocabularies have been developed
to facilitate consistency, reduce subjectivity, and automate processing. One formal ontology is the Foundational Model of
Anatomy (FMA) [5] for anatomical information and some of the
well-known vocabularies are SNOMED CT [6] for clinical information and the International Classification of Diseases version
10 (ICD-10)1 for disease information. RADLEX [7] is an extensive lexicon for radiology that supplements FMA and SNOMED
CT. It is increasingly used by a variety of health-related organizations for reporting and decision support systems, research,
and education. RADLEX addresses standardization issues very
well, however, it is limited in the support it can offer for intelligent processing since it lacks semantic relations. Semantic relations themselves are processable and thus useful in supporting
intelligent applications such as semantic searching and browsing, case similarity, classification, and automated reporting (see
Section IV for further discussion). This is due to capturing the
relation as well as the related objects leading to more complex
processing and reasoning.
This paper presents ONLIRA2 (Ontology of Liver for Radiology), which was developed as part of the CaReRa project3 with
the aim of supporting intelligent software tools for liver patients.
ONLIRA specifies the semantics of liver imaging observations.
Our evaluation of ONLIRA revealed that it is sufficiently expressive to capture most statements present in radiology reports. Reports created with ONLIRA may be semantically searched, and
yield higher precision and recall values in comparison to keyword searching of textual reports. The remainder of this paper
1 http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2010/en
2 ONLIRA is available online: http://vavlab.ee.boun.edu.tr/pages.php?p=
research/CARERA/OnliraDownload.php
3 CaReRa—Content Based Case Retrieval In Radiological Databases (Cases
of Liver Diseases) is supported by the Scientific and Technological Research
Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) and part of the COST Action “Semantic
Keyword-based Search on Structured Data Sources (KEYSTONE)” (IC1302)
http://www.vavlab.ee.boun.edu.tr/pages.php?p=research/CARERA/carera.html.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1364

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

is organized as follows: Section II presents ONLIRA, and
Section III evaluates ONLIRA in terms of expressiveness and
retrieval performance. Section IV discusses related work and
Section V presents future work and conclusions.
II. ONLIRA
ONLIRA aims to model the imaging observations of the liver
domain with an emphasis on properties and relations between
the liver, hepatic veins, and liver lesions. The design of ONLIRA
was based on elicitation sessions with radiologists for gaining
insight into imaging observations of the liver. Each session was
structured in terms of clarifications and questions related to
earlier sessions, validation of concepts via concrete examples,
and detailed elicitation of new concepts. Real liver patient reports were used during these meetings to assure that our evolving design was sufficiently expressive. This section describes
ONLIRA through examples. Parts of the ontology as well as the
examples are presented with figures to highlight significant aspects. In these figures, ovals depict concepts/instances, arrows
labeled with a relation name depict relationships between concepts/instances, and boxes containing property value pairs depict properties.
Before starting modeling, RadLex was carefully examined to
determine relevant concepts. Communications with the RadLex
team resolved any issues regarding concept associations. Considering the wide use of RadLex, associations with the RadLex
terms were kept for interoperability purposes.
Three aspects of the liver were considered during modeling.
First, essential concepts, such as a lobe or a lesion, are represented. Second, individual properties of these concepts, such
as the size or density of a liver, are captured. Finally, the relationships between the concepts are captured. The relations
are important because they describe how different concepts relate to each other. For example, between a liver concept and a
lobe concept, one can specify a hasLobe relation to show that a
liver contains lobes. Developing ONLIRA in OWL enables us to
clearly specify cardinality or functionality requirements among
relations. For example, a liver can have at most one left lobe,
while it can have many lesions. Or, size property can be specified both for a liver and a given lobe, but not for a segment.
These constraints are critical in specifying a domain rigorously.
With OWL in hand, it was possible to develop a realistic ontology of the liver. However, the domain that describes imaging
observations of the liver is large. In order to narrow down our
scope, we identified the following requirements based on the
elicitation sessions and built our ontology accordingly:
Liver: The anatomical properties of the liver, such as its contour, size, density, its lobes should be described. Additionally,
for the referential model of segments and, regions must be defined as this is crucial in describing the location of an anomaly.
Lesion: The characteristics of a lesion, such as size, margin,
shape, contrast pattern, composition, calcification, density, and
its contents must be defined. Likewise, clusters of lesions must
be defined in terms of its largest lesion.
Hepatic vascularity: The veins within a liver should be
described.

Fig. 1. Relations between the Liver, Area, Lesion, HepaticVascularity, and
Parenchyma.

Relationships: The relationships between the concepts must
be defined. Relationships associate concepts via semantic relations, such as a lesion being located within a segment. The
representation of relationships in this ontology, in contrast to
lexicons, enable semantic reasoning which is a prerequisite for
intelligent applications, such as semantic searching of reports.
Liver: This is the basic concept in ONLIRA that allows us to
describe various properties of the liver, such as its size, density,
and so on. These are represented as data properties in OWL.
For example, the size of a liver is represented as the greatest
craniocaudal dimension. The craniocaudal dimension is defined
with the :hasCraniocaudalDimension property and assigned an
integer value indicating millimeters. For example, the statement
:Liver1 hasCraniocaudalDimension {210} states that a liver that
is referred as Liver1 has craniocaudal dimension of 210 mm. In
addition to defining the size of the liver, sizes of each lobe of
the liver can also be defined. Another important aspect of size
is its change over time. The :hasSizeChange property specifies
a change in the liver size, such as increased. For example, a
particular right lobe instance, RightLobe1 , has enlarged is stated
by: RightLobe1 :hasSizeChange {“increased”}.
Further, a liver’s relation to other concepts such as a lesion or
a parenchyma can be specified using relations in OWL. Some of
these are shown in Fig. 1. Each liver contains the parenchyma,
a connective tissue. To represent properties of this tissue, we
can identify the parenchyma of a given liver, using the :hasParenchyma functional property. The fact that the property is
functional ensures that each liver has one parenchyma. Each
liver is composed of three lobes: RightLobe, LeftLobe, and CaudateLobe. The :hasLobe property relates a Liver to each of its
Lobes. A liver can only have one instance of each lobe. Hence, a
maximum cardinality restriction is specified for each lobe (i.e.,
maximum 1 RightLobe).
To refer to particular parts of the liver, an eight-segment referential model is used. Each segment instance refers to a segment
in the Liver. The Liver and the Lobe can only be segmented by
specific segments. This is specified by imposing restrictions on
the :isSegmentedBy property. Hence, for example, caudate lobe
can only be segmented by Segment 1, whereas left lobe can be
segmented by Segments 2, 3, or 5. Another manner of referencing parts of the liver are by regions. There are four instances of
Region named AnteriorRegion, LateralRegion, MedialRegion,

KÖKCIYAN et al.: SEMANTIC DESCRIPTION OF LIVER CT IMAGES: AN ONTOLOGICAL APPROACH

1365

TABLE I
ASSERTIONS OF :isLocatedInRegion RELATION FOR LIVER SEGMENTS

Fig. 3. Description of an enlarged liver, decreased parenchyma density, and
normal hepatic portal vein (Ex. 1).

Fig. 2.

Relations between Lesion and other concepts.

and PosteriorRegion. Table I shows the relationships between
Regions and Segments.
There may be abnormal areas of the liver a radiologist wishes
to identify. The margin, size, shape, and density of an area can
be specified. For example, the shape of the area is described
with the :hasAreaShape property that may take the following
values: band, fusiform, linear, nodular, ovoid, serpiginious, and
other. The density of an area is represented with :hasAreaDensity
data property that takes a value of hyperdense, hypodense, or
isodense. The :isCalcified property indicates whether an area
is calcified. If so, a second data property, :hasCalcification,
specifies the type of calcification: coarse, focal, millimetric,
punctate, or scattered.
Lesion: A particularly important type of an area is a lesion.
ONLIRA defines Lesion as a subclass of an Area. A lesion is
characterized by additional properties to basic Area properties.
The relations of Lesion are shown in Fig. 2.
The location of a lesion may be described in relation to a vasculature proximity, which is considered important with respect
to estimating the progression of the condition. Such proximity
is described as adjacent, bended, and so on. This proximity is
specified in relation to a specific vein specified with the :isCloseToVein property.
Additionally, properties that pertain to internal composition
of the lesion can be specified. For example, the fact that a lesion
contains a debris and its location with respect to the lesion (e.g.,
floating inside) can be specified. Similarly, an observation of
leveling can be described (e.g., fluid-gas) to express the internal
composition.
There are various lesion components, such as septa or polyp,
that can further be described in ONLIRA. For these components,
one can specify whether it is calcified (e.g., capsule or polyp).
If a component is indeed calcified, a second property describes
the calcification type that is observed. For some components,
such as septa, the size in terms of its width and diameter can
be described. For others, such as a wall, its size is merely a
reflection of thickness.
A lesion’s internal composition, such as cystic, solid, and so
on, can also be specified. Each composition can further be classi-

fied. For example, abscess and cystic with debris are subclasses
of cystic, whereas predominant solid is an example subclass of
solid.
Hepatic vascularity: Characteristics of the hepatic vascular
system may be out of the ordinary or a lesion may be described in
relation to a specific vein. In ONLIRA, the hepatic vascular system
is represented with the HepaticVascularity concept. The liver
contains three vascularity types: HepaticArtery, HepaticPortalVein, and HepaticVein. LeftPortalVein and RightPortalVein
are subclasses of HepaticPortalVein. LeftHepaticVein, MiddleHepaticVein, and RightHepaticVein are subclasses of HepaticVein. The liver can only have one instance of each type of
vein. Hence, a maximum cardinality restriction is specified for
each type of vein. The vasculature of the liver is basically specified in terms of the vein lumen diameter (e.g., increased) and
vein lumen type (e.g., obliterated).
III. EVALUATION
A. Qualitative Assessment
We have worked with 30 radiology reports of different patients to demonstrate the expressivity of ONLIRA. Here, we have
identified the following sample report texts (examples) to evaluate ONLIRA to demonstrate how and to what extent we can
represent these statements. For each example, we depict how
the concepts are related and what properties apply with a figure.
1) “The liver’s location and margin are normal. Its size has
been observed to be enlarged (Craniocaudal dimension is
195 mm). The density of the parenchyma shows steatosis
and is significantly decreased. The portal venous system
is observed to be normal.” We depict the ontological construction of this example in Fig. 3. Note that since ONLIRA
does not contain a concept for steatosis, we do not express
it.
2) “The liver’s size, location, and margin are normal. The
density of the parenchyma is homogeneous. A hypodense
lesion with a diameter of 3 mm and an indistinct margin has been observed in the liver’s 7th Segment.” This
example is depicted in Fig. 4.
3) “The liver’s location and margin are normal. The density
of the parenchyma is decreased. In the liver parenchyma,
multiple nodular, hypodense lesions with peripheric contrast pattern have been observed, such that the largest of
the lesions is subcapsular localized in Segment 2 with size

1366

Fig. 4.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Description of a liver with a hypodense lesion in Segment 7 (Ex. 2).

Fig. 5. Description of the largest lesion in a hypodense, nodular, lesion cluster
(Ex. 3).

2.5 cm × 3.5 cm, an indistinct margin has been observed.”
This example is depicted in Fig. 5.
The examples presented in this section (extracted from real
case reports) demonstrate that ONLIRA is capable of expressing most of imaging observations and covers the requirements
elicited during the initial phase of this study. There are a few
conditions that are not covered, such as a lesion being located
between segments or spans over several segments. These will
be addressed in the next version of the ontology.
B. Quantitative Assessment
Next, we studied how an ontology could help in searching
radiology reports. Since the radiology reports were generally
written in natural language, an obvious method for searching
them was a keyword-based search using natural language processing (NLP). If the reports had been described ontologically
as advocated in this paper, the reports could have been searched

through description logic query languages such as DL query [8].
To illustrate this, we took 30 radiology reports of different
patients written in natural language and converted them into
ONLIRA instances. We compared two different approaches, an
ontology-based (semantic search) and an NLP-based approach
(keyword search) for searching radiology reports. To highlight
differences between the two approaches, we described five
queries expressed in both DL query and keywords. A report
was retrieved if it satisfied the DL query or it contained all of
the keywords in the search query.
To establish a gold standard, two board certified radiologists
manually evaluated each query to decide which reports should
be retrieved. Radiologists agreed with each other on 86% of the
query results (kappa = 0.86). We evaluated both approaches
against the gold standard by comparing their precision and recall. Precision is the proportion of truly retrieved reports to the
total number of reports retrieved. Recall is the proportion of
truly retrieved reports to the total number of reports that should
have been retrieved. Five queries with corresponding precision
(p1, p2), recall (r1, r2) results are shown in Table II. p1 and r1
were computed according to the first radiologist, p2 and r2 were
computed according to the second radiologist.
q1—Find all reports related to a lesion: In both approaches,
12 reports were retrieved with a precision of 1 (12/12), whereas
both approaches achieved r1 of 0.80 (12/15) and r2 of 0.86
(12/14). Nonretrieved reports contained area descriptions, and
both radiologists considered areas as lesions. In ONLIRA, a lesion
is defined to be an area but the inverse is false. Hence, some
reports have not been matched. In keyword search, the word
“area” did not match the word “lesion”; the same reports were
not retrieved there, either.
q2—Find all reports that contain a lesion in the posterior
region of the liver: In semantic search, six reports were retrieved
with a precision of 1 (6/6). ONLIRA describes segment and region
relation, and it can infer the region given segment number even
when the region is not explicitly stated in reports. Reports were
retrieved with r1 of 1 (6/6) and r2 of 0.86 (6/7). No reports were
retrieved with keyword search because the word “posterior” was
not contained in any of the reports where location of lesions were
only described with segment information.
q3—Find all reports that contain a lesion that has a size
greater than 10 mm: In semantic search, five reports were retrieved with a precision of 1 (5/5). As in the first query, areas
were considered as lesions by both radiologists. Therefore, we
obtained r1 of 0.62 (5/8) and r2 of 0.71 (5/7), where nonretrieved
reports were on areas. No reports were retrieved with keyword
search because there were not any reports that contained all of
the words within the query (i.e., lesion size greater than 10 mm).
q4—Find all reports that contain a liver increased in size: In
semantic search, reports were retrieved with p1 of 1 (7/7) and p2
of 0.86 (6/7). We got r1 of 0.78 (7/9) and r2 of 0.86 (6/7). Nonretrieved reports stated an increase in lobe size but not explicitly on
liver size. Hence, these reports were not retrieved. Such logical
implications can later be handled via rules expressed in Semantic
Web Rule Language in ONLIRA. Here, we could formulate a rule
as Liver(?x) ∧ RightLobe(?y) ∧ size(?y, ‘increased’) =⇒
size(?x, ‘increased’). This rule states that if a size increase

KÖKCIYAN et al.: SEMANTIC DESCRIPTION OF LIVER CT IMAGES: AN ONTOLOGICAL APPROACH

1367

TABLE II
RECALL AND PRECISION VALUES FOR FIVE QUERIES FOR SEMANTIC SEARCH AND KEYWORD SEARCH

in the right lobe is observed, then it can be concluded that the
liver size has increased, too. In this way, we could make further
inferences by using rules on top of ONLIRA.
In keyword search, a precision of 0.50 was observed (1/2).
One report states that a liver has normal size but an increased
density. This report was incorrectly retrieved as a result for this
query, since the increase was not related to the liver. r1 was
observed as 0.11 (1/9) and r2 as 0.14 (1/7). Recall values were
low because in six reports, instead of the word “increase” its
synonym “enlarged” had been used, and other reports were not
retrieved because of logical implications mentioned earlier. It is
possible to improve keyword search by including synonyms of
each word, which may result in an increase in recall (since more
documents will be matched) but possibly decrease of precision
(some of the words may be matched for the wrong reason).
q5—Find all reports that contain hypodense areas: In semantic search, 11 reports were retrieved with a precision of 1 (11/11),
r1 of 0.85 (11/13), and r2 of 0.69 (11/16). In nonretrieved reports, it was stated that the density was decreased and steatosis
was observed which implied an hypodense density. This logical
implication can also be handled with a semantic rule in ONLIRA.
Only three reports were retrieved with a precision of 1 (3/3) with
keyword search because lesions were not treated as areas, i.e.,
reports including hypodense lesions were not retrieved. Hence,
we observed r1 of 0.23 (3/13) and r2 of 0.19 (3/16). Overall, our
results show that in all cases, semantic search performs either
as good as or better than keyword search.
IV. DISCUSSION
RadLex [7] is a language of radiology terms (>30 000 terms)
developed to enable standardization among various software that
use radiology terms. RadLex terms correspond to a dictionary
of concepts. RadLex has been widely used in many successful
applications, including systems to annotate and transform image markups [9] as well as retrieval engines that search through
medical documents and images [10]. Unfortunately, relations
of concepts are not always part of its description. For example,
RadLex can express that a right lobe is a type of lobe, but cannot
express that a right lobe can contain a lesion. Applications that

use RadLex need to handle these relations in their own context; hence, need to develop their own integrity checks to assure
that statements make sense. With the use of an ontology, on
the other hand, concepts can easily be related to each other as
demonstrated in Section III. Furthermore, integrity and cardinality requirements can be specified and enforced for inferencing
purposes. Therefore, the use of ontology, with concepts and their
relations, is an important step toward developing applications
that require semantic processing capabilities [11].
MEDICO consists of an image parsing system, a contextsensitive annotation tool, and a retrieval engine of medical images [12]. The MEDICO ontology uses the well-known FMA
ontology and terminologies like RadLex and ICD-10. It is used
to represent extracted metadata from DICOM and medical annotations. The annotated images can be searched through keywords from the ontology. Their work focuses on automatically
annotating parts of images with the corresponding ontology
concepts. This paper focuses on the processing of ontologically
structured reports. Presently, for the purposes of this paper, the
reports are manually created by radiologists via a form-based
reporting tool driven by ONLIRA. This tool provides generation
of ONLIRA-based instances. The presence of the relations and
their constraints enable the inferences to be useful for intelligent processing, such as during retrieval (as outlined in the
queries in Section III).
Gibaud et al. develop an application ontology (OntoVIP) to
annotate, index, and retrieve medical image simulation object
models [13], which are then used to simulate medical images.
Similar to our approach, they consider concepts and relations
among concepts. However, their use of the ontology is different
than ours since they use it to create simulation objects.
Sevenster et al. introduced an ontology-based technology that
binds image and knowledge, and evaluated it in the neuro domain [14]. Their system allows a user to select a body part from
an MR image and infers relevant information about the part
using the well-known SNOMED CT ontology, among various
other things. They experimentally show that this ontology-based
approach achieves a high recall. Our experimental results are in
line with this result, such that when the data are ontologically
represented, recall increases.

1368

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

To extract information from existing radiology reports retrospectively, Lacson et al. developed an ontology-utilizing toolkit
in the radiology domain [15]. They propose an information
retrieval approach in the domain of radiology by augmenting
an NLP engine with an ontology. The search queries are processed to obtain a set of keywords enhanced with similar words
(based on existing dictionaries), which are then used to search
through radiology reports. Query processing with enhancement
yields better results than simple keyword search. Their work, unlike ours, does not focus on the specification and utilization of
relations.
V. CONCLUSION
To demonstrate how the ontology can indeed be beneficial
for semantic processing, we have first developed an ontology
of the liver for radiology. This ontology contains various concepts as well as their relationships. We have then demonstrated
how this ontology can be used to express radiology reports with
example statements from real radiological reports. Our experiments show that ONLIRA is capable of representing many useful
statements. We have then studied the performance of searching ontology-based reports in comparison to searching free text
reports using NLP techniques. Our results show that when radiology reports are ontology-based, information can be searched
with both higher precision and higher recall. The major reason
for this is that the semantic content of the reports, rather than just
lexicons, is represented and semantically queried. Hence, information that cannot be captured with keywords can be queried
successfully.
ONLIRA and its applications intend to serve as a proof of
concept, which would require scaling up to the whole body and
merged with a comprehensive ontology like RadLex. As shown
in Section III, there are still some important concepts that are not
captured by the current version of ONLIRA. Gallbladder is one of
them. Adding such important concepts and relations to ONLIRA
will be our immediate next step. Presently, ONLIRA is utilized
in a Web-based data collection tool that has been developed
as part of the CaReRa project. The liver imaging observations
are collected based on ONLIRA. The most significant direction
we are pursuing is the development of a model for semantic
query handling, which shall expand or restrict queries over liver
patients. The aim is to deliver a satisfactory set of similar cases
given a particular liver patient case.

[3] P. Ross, R. Sepper, and H. Pohjonen, “Cross-border teleradiology—
Experience from two international teleradiology projects,” Eur. J. Radiol.,
vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 20–25, 2010.
[4] D. Liu, M. Zucherman, and W. B. Tulloss, “Six characteristics of effective
structured reporting and the inevitable integration with speech recognition,” J. Digit. Imag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 98–104, 2006.
[5] C. Rosse and J. L. Mejino Jr., “A reference ontology for biomedical informatics: The Foundational Model of Anatomy,” J. Biomed. Inform.,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 478–500, 2003.
[6] S. Schulz, B. Suntisrivaraporn, F. Baader, and M. Boeker, “SNOMED
reaching its adolescence: Ontologists and logicians health check,” Int. J.
Med. Inform., vol. 78, no. Suppl 1, pp. S86–S94, 2009.
[7] S. Kundu, M. Itkin, D. A. Gervais, V. N. Krishnamurthy, M. J. Wallace,
J. F. Cardella, D. L. Rubin, and C. P. Langlotz, “The IR Radlex Project:
An interventional radiology lexicon—A collaborative project of the Radiological Society of North America and the Society of Interventional
Radiology,” J. Vascular Interven. Radiol., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 433–435,
2009.
[8] M. Horridge, N. Drummond, J. Goodwin, A. Rector, R. Stevens, and
H. Wang, “The Manchester OWL syntax,” presented at the 2nd Workshop
OWL Experiences Dir., Athens, GA, USA, 2006.
[9] M. A. Levy, M. J. O’Connor, and D. L. Rubin, “Semantic reasoning with
image annotations for tumor assessment,” in Proc. AMIA Annu. Symp.
Proc., 2009, pp. 359–363.
[10] A. Hanbury, C. Boyer, M. Gschwandtner, and H. Mller, “KHRESMOI:
Towards a multi-lingual search and access system for biomedical information,” in Proc. Med-e-Tel, Luxembourg, 2011, pp. 412–416.
[11] D. Rubin, “Creating and curating a terminology for radiology: Ontology
modeling and analysis,” J. Digit. Imaging, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 355–362,
2008.
[12] S. Seifert, M. Thoma, F. Stegmaier, M. Hammon, M. Kramer, M. Huber,
H.-P. Kriegel, A. Cavallaro, and D. Comaniciu, “Combined semantic and
similarity search in medical image databases,” in Proc. Med. Imaging: Adv.
PACS-Based Imaging Inform. Ther. Appl., 2011, pp. 796 703–796 713.
[13] B. Gibaud, G. Forestier, H. Benoit-Cattin, F. Cervenansky, P. Clarysse,
D. Friboulet, A. Gaignard, P. Hugonnard, C. Lartizien, H. Liebgott,
J. Montagnat, J. Tabary, and T. Glatard, “OntoVIP: An ontology for the
annotation of object models used for medical image simulation,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Healthcare Inform., Imag. Syst. Biol., 2012, pp. 110–110.
[14] M. Sevenster, R. van Ommering, and Y. Qian, “Bridging the text-image
gap: A decision support tool for real-time PACS browsing,” J. Digit. Imag.,
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 227–239, 2012.
[15] R. Lacson, K. P. Andriole, L. M. Prevedello, and R. Khorasani, “Information from searching content with an ontology-utilizing toolkit (iSCOUT),”
J. Digit. Imag., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 512–519, 2012.

Nadin Kökciyan received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in computer engineering from Galatasaray University, Istanbul, Turkey and Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, respectively. She is working toward the
Ph.D. degree in computer engineering at Bogazici
University, where she is studying privacy in social
networks under the supervision of P. Yolum.
Her research interests include ontology engineering, privacy in social software, and multiagent
systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank D. L. Rubin and C. F.
Beaulieu (Department of Radiology at Stanford University),
and B. Collins (Department of Radiology at University of Pennsylvania) for their gracious feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Hall, “The radiology report of the future,” Radiology, vol. 251, no. 2,
pp. 313–316, 2009.
[2] C. J. Garvey and S. Connolly, “Radiology reporting—Where does the
radiologist’s duty end?” Lancet, vol. 367, no. 9508, pp. 443–445, 2006.

Rüştü Türkay is a Medical Doctor. He worked as an
Assistant Doctor in Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Radiology, Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey between 2005 and 2010. He works as a Radiology Specialist in Cekirge State Hospital, Bursa,
Turkey. He has (co)authored more than 10 papers in
peer-reviewed journals and conferences.

KÖKCIYAN et al.: SEMANTIC DESCRIPTION OF LIVER CT IMAGES: AN ONTOLOGICAL APPROACH

Suzan Üsküdarlı received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
She worked in silicon valley area in USA as a
Researcher in virtual purposeful communities. Since
2005 she has been the Faculty Member at the Department of Computer Engineering at Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey. Her research interests include
social web, semantic web, and software engineering.
Her experience includes collaborative projects related
to radiology-based support systems.

Pınar Yolum received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA.
She is an Associate Professor of computer engineering in Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey,
where she leads a research group in multiagent systems that works on trust, agent communication, and
social networks. She has (co)authored more that 50
papers in selected journals and conferences.
Dr. Yolum serves on the Editorial Board of Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
and Journal of AI Research. She is an Elected Board Member of International
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. She served as
the Program Cochair of International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, in 2011.

1369

Barış Bakır is a Radiology Specialist. He works as an
Associate Professor of radiology in Istanbul Faculty
of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
His main work focuses on gastrointestinal radiology.
He has (co)authored more than 200 papers in selected
journals and conferences.

Burak Acar received the Ph.D. degree in electrical
and electronics engineering from Bilkent University,
Ankara, Turkey, in 2000, on electrocardiogram signal
processing.
He worked at St. George’s Hospital Medical
School, London, U.K., and at the Department of Radiology, Stanford Medical School, CA, USA. He has
been at Bogazici University since 2003. His research
interests include 2-D/3-D video/image processing,
image analysis, medical decision support systems,
search and retrieval, medical imaging simulations,
brain network analysis via MRI. He has several journal/conference papers and
seven US patents, receiving over 1800 citations.
Dr. Acar received the Excellence in Research Award from Bogazici University Foundation in 2006, the Young Researcher Award from Turkish Academy
of Sciences in 2008, the German DFG Mercator Visiting Professorship at TU
Munich in 2012.

