1848

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Reliable and Energy-Efficient Communications for
Wireless Biomedical Implant Systems
Georgia D. Ntouni, Athanasios S. Lioumpas, and Konstantina S. Nikita, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Implant devices are used to measure biological parameters and transmit their results to remote off-body devices. As
implants are characterized by strict requirements on size, reliability, and power consumption, applying the concept of cooperative
communications to wireless body area networks offers several benefits. In this paper, we aim to minimize the power consumption of
the implant device by utilizing on-body wearable devices, while
providing the necessary reliability in terms of outage probability and bit error rate. Taking into account realistic power considerations and wireless propagation environments based on the
IEEE P802.l5 channel model, an exact theoretical analysis is conducted for evaluating several communication scenarios with respect to the position of the wearable device and the motion of the
human body. The derived closed-form expressions are employed
toward minimizing the required transmission power, subject to
a minimum quality-of-service requirement. In this way, the complexity and power consumption are transferred from the implant
device to the on-body relay, which is an efficient approach since
they can be easily replaced, in contrast to the in-body implants.
Index Terms—Biomedical implants, IEEE P802.15 channel
model, power consumption, reliability, wireless body area network
(WBAN).

I. INTRODUCTION
MPLANT devices are used in many biomedical and clinical applications where the continuous monitoring of a human
body biological parameter is crucial [1]. Wireless body area networks (WBANs) comprise low-power devices in, on, or around
the human body and are used in order to monitor physiological signals for healthcare applications [2]. Ubiquity, reduced
risk of infection and early diagnosis of a health risk are among
the advantages of the WBANs with implant devices. Nevertheless, they usually involve an invasive procedure, and therefore,
reliability, low-power consumption, and long-lifetime are vital
characteristics that they should provide.
In healthcare applications, reliable communication implies
that the communication link does not suffer from outages and

I

Manuscript received July 5, 2013; revised November 17, 2013; accepted
January 10, 2014. Date of publication January 14, 2014; date of current version November 3, 2014. This work was supported by the European Union
(European Social Fund) and Greek national funds through the Operational Program “Education and Lifelong Learning” of the National Strategic Reference
Framework—Research Funding Program: ARISTEIA, Project 68/1142 DEMII-MED, Implantable and Ingestible Medical Devices: Optimal-PerformanceOriented Design and Evaluation Methodology.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 10682 Athens, Greece (e-mail:
gntouni@biosim.ntua.gr; alioumpas@biosim.ntua.gr; knikita@ece.ntua.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2300151

that the quality of service (QoS) will be preserved within a
desirable range, while maintaining the maximum transmission
power below a required level. Low-power transmissions are important because the radio frequency (RF) emissions may be
harmful for the patients. The specific absorption rate (SAR),
defined as the rate at which the human body absorbs RF energy,
should comply with the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) regulations [3], laying out its expectations for the development and approval of new medical body area networks,
i.e., short-range, low-energy wireless networks capable of connecting medical devices together. Thus, the tradeoff between
transmission power and QoS is a substantial research topic of
critical importance especially for WBANs.
A. Motivation
Toward these goals, the concept of cooperative communications [4], [5] has been applied to WBANs in order to address
the challenges related to energy efficiency and QoS requirements [2], [6], [7]. In this paper, following the same concept,
we consider using implantable devices employed with biosensors that transmit their measurements to an off-body access
point (AP) through wearable devices which act as relays. The
assessment of the performance of these systems over realistic
wireless propagation channel models, especially developed for
WBANs constitutes our major motivation. Moreover, this study
is also motivated by the crucial tradeoff between the transmission power and the QoS requirements for medical applications
involving implants, taking into account the power transmission
constraints and the required reliability in terms of the average
bit error rate (ABER) and outage probability (OP).
B. Contribution and Related Works
The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we evaluate
the performance of cooperative WBANs over realistic wireless propagation channels and derive specific closed-form expressions for the ABER and the OP of these channels. Several scenarios are investigated with respect to the location of
the on-body wearable devices (e.g., wrist, chest). While the
IEEE P802.15 channel model, which has been developed based
on real-field measurements [8]–[11], has been widely used for
evaluating the performance of WBANs via computer simulation [2], [6], [7]; to the best of the authors’ knowledge, a complete study containing both simulations and a specific theoretical
analysis extracting suitable equations has not been conducted
yet, especially for scenarios involving both the “in-body to onbody” and “on-body to off-body” wireless propagation links.
Although, the performance of wireless communication systems

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

NTOUNI et al.: RELIABLE AND ENERGY-EFFICIENT COMMUNICATIONS FOR WIRELESS BIOMEDICAL IMPLANT SYSTEMS

over well-known fading channels, such as the Nakagami-m and
the Log-normal fading channels has been widely investigated
(e.g., [12]–[14]), their relation to the IEEE P802.15 channel
model and the corresponding power measurements is not always obvious and especially when considering specific setups
with in-body, on-body, and off-body wireless devices. Therefore, a complete theoretical analysis was considered necessary
in order to provide those ABER and OP expressions that are the
most accurate when studying WBANs communication using
IEEE P802.15 channel model. Closed-form expressions eliminate the need for time-consuming simulations and can be used
for formulating practical optimization problems that can be
solved fast and accurately.
In [6], considering on-body scenarios and using a decodeand-forward (DF) strategy, it was shown via simulations and
experiments that the OP can be improved up to 15 dB in typical
IEEE 802.15.6 channels. In [7], the coexistence of multiple
WBANs was investigated for the case where the WBANof-interest employs the DF strategy. In [15], an experimental investigation into the dynamic on-body channel with body
movements was investigated, proposing a three-state Fritchman
model to describe the burst characteristics of on-body fading.
Several interference mitigation schemes, such as adaptive modulation as well as adaptive data rate and duty cycle for body area
networks (BANs), were presented in [16], while [17] provided
theoretical analysis and Markov chain modeling of interference
mitigation schemes, such as adaptive modulation and adaptive
data rate for BANs.
Second, we employ the theoretical analysis in order to minimize the required transmission power (also constrained by the
SAR limits), subject to a minimum QoS requirement, either
expressed in terms of the ABER or the OP. This is an efficient approach since the complexity and power consumption
are transferred from the in-body implants to the on-body relays,
which can be easily replaced.
C. Outline
This paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III illustrate
the system and channel model, respectively. The theoretical performance of the communication scheme under investigation is
presented in Section IV, while Section V includes the optimization problem based on the theoretical results. Finally, Section VI
presents the numerical results and some concluding remarks are
highlighted in Section VII.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a system model where an implant device S
(source) communicates with an off-body AP D (destination)
via a number of on-body devices Ri (relays), which DF the
signal they receive from the implant to the AP (see Fig. 1).
Specifically, we define these devices as follows.
1) Implant device (S): A device that is implanted inside the
human body either exactly below the skin or deeper in the
tissue. A deep tissue implant is located at a distance of
about 90 mm or more from the body surface.

Fig. 1.

1849

System model overview.

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF MICS AND ISM STANDARDS

2) On-body or wearable device (R): This is considered to
be a device that is located directly on the surface of the
human skin or at most 20 mm away from it.
3) Off-body device (D): This device is an AP which has no
contact with the human body and is at a distance between
10 cm to 5 m away from the human body.
The links between the implant device and the wearable ones
are expressed as SRi , where i = {c, w} denotes the location
of the wearable device on the human body (c and w stand
for chest and wrist, respectively). Similarly, the links between
the wearable devices and the AP are denoted as Ri D, where
i = {c, w}.
III. CHANNEL MODEL
The IEEE 802.15.6 is working on the RF signal propagation
inside and near the human body and has developed realistic
channel models for different scenarios and frequency bands
which are used in biomedical applications [9]. In this paper, the
communication links SRi and Ri D are modeled according to
these recommendations, as it will be explained later.
The devices involved in biomedical applications must comply
with the rules adopted by the FCC with respect to the frequency
bands and power limitations [3]. The frequency bands that are
used for medical applications are the Medical Implant Communication Service (MICS) band (402–405 MHz) and the Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) band (2360–2400 MHz).
The MICS standard, established by FCC, recommends that the
transmission power should not exceed 25 μW in order to avoid
electromagnetic (EM) emissions that could be harmful for the
human health [18]. The main characteristics of the MICS and
ISM frequency bands are summarized in Table I.

1850

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE II
IMPLANT TO RELAY (SRi ) COMMUNICATION CHANNEL PARAMETERS

When the RV, s, is normally distributed with zero mean and
s
standard deviation σ, the RV, Z = 10− 1 0 , follows a Log-normal
distribution with μlog = 0, σlog = σ ln10(10) and a probability
density function (pdf) given by [19, ch. 5]
−
1
√ e
fZ (z) =
zσlog 2π

The channel amplitude of the SRi and Ri D links is denoted
by hSR i and hR i D , respectively, and consist of the time-domain
representation of the channel, namely the output of the channel
when its input is a delta function δ(t). If the transmission power
of the implant and wearable devices are Ps and Pr , respectively,
then the instantaneous signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the SRi
and Ri D links can be expressed as
γSR i =

Ps |hSR i |2
N0

γR i D =

and

Pr |hR i D |2
N0

(1)

where N0 is the power spectral density of the zero mean complex
additive white Gaussian noise, which equals to
NF

N0 = k T0 B 10 1 0 [W ]

(2)

where k is the Boltzmann constant, To is the body temperature in
Kelvin, B is the bandwidth in Hz and NF is the noise figure at the
receiver in dBm. Assuming T0 = 310◦ K = 37◦ C and NF = 8
dB, the total noise power is −110.92 dBm at MICS and −117.73
dBm at ISM [18]. In order to comply with the channel models
developed in [9], where the channel amplitudes include both the
path loss and the shadowing effects, the channel has not been
normalized.
A. In-Body to On-Body (SRi ) Communication Channel
The statistical path loss model, characterizing the channel
between an implant device and a wearable one at a distance d
(MICS band), is expressed as
d
+ s [dB]
d0

PL (d) = PL (d0 ) + 10n log10

(3)

where PL (d0 ) is the path loss in dB at a reference distance
d0 = 50 mm, n is the path loss exponent and s ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) is
a random variable (RV) that is normally distributed [8]. The
values of these parameters, which depend on the kind of implant employed (near surface or deep implant), are given in
Table II.
As a result, the squared absolute value of the channel gain,
hSR i , will be given by
|hSR i |2 = 10−

P L (d )[d B ]
10

(4)

|hSR i |2 = 10
where ct = 10−

P L (d 0 )+ 1 0 n lo g 1 0
10

d
d0

.

− 1s0

10

− 1s0

= ct 10

γSR i =

(6)

ct Ps − s
10 1 0
N0

(7)

which follows the Log-normal distribution with μγ S R i =
ln(ct

Ps
N0

) and σγ S R i =

σ ln (10)
.
10

B. On-Body to Off-Body (Ri D) Communication Channel
The path loss of the link between the wearable relay and
the AP, PL R i D , at ISM frequency band depends on the distance
and the orientation between the two devices, the part of the
body where the relay is located and the motion of the human
body. The best fitting distributions for these scenarios have been
found to be the Log-normal, the Gamma, or the Nakagami-m
distributions [8].
Considering that |hR i D |2 = PL R i D , and using (1) where the
second equation defines the SNR of the channel from the relay to
the AP, the distribution that the SNR, γR i D , has can be specified
for each of the possible scenarios as follows.
1) Log-Normal Distribution Model: For the case that the
path loss, PL R i D , follows the Log-normal distribution with location parameter, μ, and scale parameter, σ; it can be inferred
that the SNR, γR i D , also follows the Log-normal distribution
Pr
), σγ R i D = σ [19] and a pdf given by
with μγ R i D = μ + ln( N
0
Pr

fγ R i D (γ) =

))
l n γ −( μ + l n (
N0
1
2σ 2
√ e−
.
γσ 2π

(8)

2) Gamma Distribution Model: The path loss of the channel,
PL R i D , may be Gamma distributed with the shape parameter, k,
and the scale parameter, θ. This implies that the SNR, γR i D , is
Pr
θ, and a pdf
also Gamma distributed with kγ R D = k, θγ R D = N
0
is expressed as
γ

fγ R i D (γ) =

− Pr
1
θ
γ k −1 e N 0
Pr
k
( N 0 θ) Γ(k)

(9)

where Γ(•) is the Gamma function.
3) Nakagami-m Distribution Model: Defining x = PL R i D ,
and for the case that the path loss of the channel follows the
Nakagami-m distribution, its pdf is expressed as
f (x; m, Ω) =

(5)

.

Thus, using (1), the SNR of the link between the implant and
the wearable device can be expressed as

or after using (3)
P L (d 0 )+ 1 0 n lo g 1 0 d
d0
−
10

[ l n ( z ) −μ l o g ] 2
2σ 2
lo g

m 2
2mm
x2m −1 e− Ω x .
Γ(m)Ωm

(10)

Taking into account (1), it follows that the SNR, γR i D ,
is Nakagami-m distributed with parameters mγ R i D = m and

NTOUNI et al.: RELIABLE AND ENERGY-EFFICIENT COMMUNICATIONS FOR WIRELESS BIOMEDICAL IMPLANT SYSTEMS

Ωγ R D =

Pr
N0

hypergeometric function, i.e.,

Ω, and a pdf given by

− Pr γ
2mm
Ω
2m −1
N0
fγ R i D (γ) =
γ
e
.
Pr
m
Γ(m)( N 0 Ω)
m

2

(11)

IV. THEORETICAL PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, we derive analytical closed-form expressions
for the ABER and the OP considering a variety of communications scenarios.
A. Average Bit Error Rate
Considering binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation,
the BER as a function of the instantaneous SNR, γ, is given by

1
√
Pe (γ) = Q( 2γ) = Erfc( γ)
2

(12)

1) ABER for the Gamma Distribution Model: For the case
that the SNR is distributed as a Gamma RV, (13) can be solved
in closed form by averaging (9) over (12). Thus, using [20,
(1.5.3.1)], the ABER for the Gamma model, Pe,Gam , is given
by


1
1
Γ(2kγ ) −2k γ −k γ 2 F1 kγ , 2 + kγ , 1 + kγ , − ϑ γ
2
Pe,Gam =
ϑγ
Γ(kγ )
Γ(1 + kγ )
(14)
where
2 F1 (a, b; c; z)

=

n =0

n

(a)n (b)n z
(c)n n!

p Fq (N ; V ; z) =

∞

(N1 )k (N2 )k . . . (Np )k z k
(V1 )k (DV2 )k . . . (Vq )k k!

(15)

is the Gauss hypergeometric function with (q)k = q (q + 1)(q +
k − 1) and (q)0 = 1 denoting the Pochhammer symbol.
2) ABER for the Nakagami-m Distribution Model: Considering the Nakagami-m case, the ABER can be derived by averaging (10) over (12). After some mathematical manipulations,
the ABER, Pe,Nak , is finally expressed as in (16), shown at
the bottom of the page, where p Fq (N ; V ; z) is the generalized

(17)

k =0

with p being the length of vector N and q the length of vector
V.
3) ABER for the Log-Normal Distribution Model: On the
other hand, the integral in (13) cannot be solved in a closed
form for the case that the SNR follows the Log-normal distribution, and therefore, calculating the ABER, Pe,Log , requires
the approximation of the error function. Toward employing an
approximation with satisfactory accuracy over the whole range
of values [0, ∞], the approximation proposed in [21] was used,
i.e.,
Erfc(x) = 2 (0.168 e−1.752x + 0.144 e−1.05x
2

where Erfc(•) denotes the Gaussian error function. The ABER
is derived by averaging Pe (γ) over the pdf of γ, i.e.
 ∞
 ∞
1
√
Pe =
Erfc( γ)fγ (γ)dγ. (13)
Pe (γ)fγ (γ)dγ =
2
0
0

∞


1851

2

+ 0.002 e−1.206x )
2

(18)

as well as the upper bound [22]
1
1
1 −4x 2
2
2
e
+ e−2x + e−x .
(19)
3
6
2
After approximating the error function as a sum of exponentials and using the pdf of the Log-normal distribution (13), the
integral that has to be calculated becomes a series of sums that
have the following form:
 +∞
( l n ( x ) −μ ) 2
1 −bx
1
√
ae
e− 2 σ 2 dx.
(20)
I=
2
x 2πσ
0
Erfc(x) ≤

Defining the Frustration function as [23]
 +∞
(ln (x )+ l 2 )2
1
2
√
Fr(k, l) =
e−k x e− 2 l 2
dx
x 2πl
0

(21)

the integral can be written as follows:
σ2
σ
a 
.
(22)
I = Fr beμ+ 2 ,
2
2
Thus, the ABER for the Log-normal model, Pe,Log , using the
best approximation (18) is expressed as in (23), shown at the
bottom of the page, while it can bounded by (24), as shown
at the bottom of the next page, after using the upper bound
approximation (19) for the error function.
4) ABER for the In-body to Off-Body (SD) Communication
Channel: Assuming that the wearable device decodes and forwards the received signal from the implant device to the AP, the



− 34 	
3




√
mγ 4
1
mγ
mγ
1
+ mγ ×
Pe,Nak = √
Γ(mγ ) − 6
Γ
3 π
Ωγ
Ωγ
4
6 πΓ(mγ ) Ωγ

 




 



1 1
1 5
3
3 3
3 7
Ωγ
Ωγ
, + mγ ; ,
+ mγ p F q
, + mγ ; ,
× p Fq
+2 Γ
;
;
4 4
2 4 4mγ
4
4 4
2 4 4mγ






σ2
σ2
σ2
μ γ + 2γ σγ
μ γ + 2γ σγ
μ γ + 2γ σγ
Pe, Log−appr = 0.168 Fr 1.752 e
,
,
,
+ 0.144 Fr 1.05 e
+ 0.002 Fr 1.206 e
2
2
2

(16)

(23)

1852

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

end-to-end ABER for BPSK modulation can be expressed as
Pe,SD = (1 − Pe,SR i )Pe,R i D + Pe,SR i (1 − Pe,R i D )

(25)

where Pe,SR i and Pe,R i D are the ABER of the SRi and the Ri D
links, respectively. As already mentioned, the SRi communication link follows the Log-normal distribution, whereas the Ri D
link can be Log-normal, Gamma, or Nakagami-m distributed,
i.e., Pe,SR i = {Pe,Log -appr , Pe,Log -b ound } and Pe,R i D =
{Pe,Gam , Pe,Nak , Pe,Log -appr , Pe,Log -b ound } depending on the
location of the wearable device on the human body, its orientation to the AP, the motion of the human body, and its distance
from the AP.
B. Outage Probability
One important performance measure regarding the transmission rate and reliability of these systems is the OP. In what
follows, the exact expressions for the OP will be derived for
each type of the end-to-end communication channel.
1) Single Wearable Device: Transmitting data from the implant to the off-body AP through a relay requires two time slots.
In a slow fading communication channel with channel gain h,
transmission power Pt and noise power N0 , the maximum mutual information, R, is expressed as


Pt
1
R = log2 1 + |h|2
(26)
2
N0
where the factor 1/2 comes from the two time-slot requirement.
Denoting the mutual information of the SRi and Ri D links as
RSR i and RR i D , respectively, the maximum mutual information
of the SD link is given by

Assuming that |h|2 follows a Log-normal distribution with
parameters μ and σ, it can be shown that (29) equals
 2 Ro

⎡
⎤
(2
−1)N 0
ln
−μ
Pt
1
⎦ . (30)
√
PLog {R < Ro } = Erfc ⎣−
2
σ 2
For the case that |h|2 has a Gamma distribution with parameters
k and θ, (29) is expressed as


2 Ro
0
Γ(k) − Γ k, (2 θ P−1)N
t
(31)
PGam m a {R < Ro } =
Γ(k)
where Γ(k, s) is the lower incomplete Gamma function. Finally,
when |h|2 follows a Nakagami-m distribution with parameters
m and Ω, (29) becomes

 2 Ro
2 
(2
−1)N 0
m
Γ(m) − Γ m, Ω
Pt
.
PNak {R < Ro } =
Γ(m)
(32)
2) Multiple Wearable Devices: Considering a topology with
K relays, each of which decodes and forwards the data it receives from the implant to the off-body AP, the maximum endto-end mutual information is equal to
RSD = max min{RSR j , RR j D }
j ∈K

(33)

i

where the index j accounts for each of the K relays. In this case,
the OP of the whole system is given by
Po u t =
=

K 

j=1

RSD = min{RSR i , RR i D }.

i




1 − 1 − P {RS R j < Ro } 1 − P {RR j D < Ro } .
i

i

(27)

The OP of the in-body to off-body (SD) communication channel
for a given rate Ro equals [24]
Po u t = P {min{RS R i , RR i D } < Ro }
= [1 − (1 − P {RS R i < Ro }) (1 − P {RR i D < Ro })] .

(28)
Using (26), each of the two probabilities shown in (28) can be
expressed as follows:


(22Ro − 1)N0
2
P {R < Ro } = P |h| <
Pt
 2Ro

(2
− 1)N0
2
= F|h|
(29)
Pt
where F|h|2 (x) is the cumulative distribution function of the
distribution that |h|2 follows.

(34)
V. OPTIMIZING ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RELIABILITY
The closed-form expressions derived in Section IV regarding
the ABER and the OP can be exploited toward the following
dual optimization problems.
A. Optimization With ABER Constraints
1) Minimizing the required transmission power for achieving
a predetermined QoS requirement in terms of the ABER,
i.e.,
Minimize Ps ≤ Pth,1 & Pr ≤ Pth,2
subject to Pe,SD ≤ Pe,th

(35)

where Pth,1 and Pth,2 are the thresholds applied to the
implant and to the relay transmission power, respectively,
and Pe,th is the maximum value of the ABER that satisfies
our requirements regarding the system reliability.







σ2
σ2
σ2
1
1
1
μ γ + 2γ σγ
μ γ + 2γ σγ
μ γ + 2γ σγ
Pe, Log-bound = Fr 4 e
,
,
,
+ Fr 2 e
+ Fr e
6
2
12
2
4
2

(24)

NTOUNI et al.: RELIABLE AND ENERGY-EFFICIENT COMMUNICATIONS FOR WIRELESS BIOMEDICAL IMPLANT SYSTEMS

1853

TABLE III
RELAY TO DESTINATION (Ri D) COMMUNICATION CHANNEL DISTRIBUTION
AND PARAMETERS OF |h|2

2) Maximize the performance in terms of the ABER, given
the maximum allowable implant and relay transmission
power, i.e.,
Minimize Pe,SD
subject to Ps ≤ Pth,1 & Pr ≤ Pth,2 .

(36)

Fig. 2. Comparison between the theoretical and simulation results for scenarios representing the three different types of distributions that SNR may have
(see Table III).

B. Optimization With OP Constraints
1) Minimizing the required transmission power for achieving
a predetermined QoS requirement in terms of the OP, i.e.,
Minimize Ps ≤ Pth,1 & Pr ≤ Pth,2
subject to Pout,SD ≤ Pout,th for Ro

(37)

where Pout,th is the threshold applied to the OP in order to
satisfy the desired system reliability and Ro is a specified
value of the system data rate.
2) Maximize the performance in terms of the OP, given
the maximum allowable implant and relay transmission
power, i.e.,
Minimize Pout,SD for Ro
subject to Ps ≤ Pth,1 & Pr ≤ Pth,2 .

(38)

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, the theoretical analysis is employed for evaluating the performance of the biotelemetry scheme under investigation, considering various scenarios as regards the location of
the wearable devices, the motion of the human body, its orientation to the AP, and its distance from it. Table III summarizes
the parameters of the Ri D communication links that relate the
theoretical results in terms of the SNR distributions with these
practical communication scenarios. In all simulations, the implanted device is considered to be embedded below the head
skin at a depth 10 mm. The relays are placed either on the right
wrist (50 cm away from the implant) or on the chest (30 cm
away from the implant).
The strong agreement between theoretical results and simulations is illustrated in Fig. 2 for various scenarios. As regards the approximation of the Log-normal distribution, it can
be observed that its accuracy improves for ABER ≤ 2 × 10−1 .
Figs. 3 and 4 illustrate the ABER for the case of a single wearable device. It can be easily observed that increasing the implant

Fig. 3. ABER performance: One wearable device placed on a walking human
body at about 1 m away from the AP with an orientation of 0◦ is employed for
relaying the signal to the AP.

transmission power leads to an accordingly decreasing ABER.
On the other hand, increasing the relay transmission power improves the system performance until the ABER reaches a floor,
indicating the criticality of the communication link between the
implant and the relay, which determines the system performance
that cannot become better than the performance of the SRi link,
no matter how much the relay transmission power increases.
Furthermore, as depicted in Fig. 4, considering nonidentical
average SNRs at the SRi and Ri D links, employing two relays
may not always result in sufficiently improved performance
compared with the single relay case. For example, it can be seen
that the performance gain that stems from adding a wrist relay

1854

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 4. ABER performance: Two wearable devices placed on a walking human
body at about 1 m away from the AP with an orientation of 0◦ are employed for
relaying the signal to the AP.

Fig. 6. OP performance: Two wearable devices placed on a walking human
body at about 2 m away from the AP with an orientation of 0◦ are employed for
relaying the signal to the AP, assuming SNRS R i = SNRR i D .

Fig. 5. OP performance: One wearable device placed on a walking human
body at about 2 m away from the AP with an orientation of 0◦ is employed for
relaying the signal to the AP, assuming SNRS R i = SNRR i D .

Fig. 7. Optimization problem for ABER: A chest relay placed on a human
subject walking at about 1 m away from the AP with an orientation of 0◦ is
employed for relaying the signal to the AP.

is negligible, when a chest relay is already in use, whereas it is
important adding a chest relay when a wrist relay is in use.
In addition to this, the performance in terms of the OP is
depicted in Figs. 5 and 6, illustrating the data rate limitations
under the existing maximum implant transmission power restrictions, i.e., 25 μW (−16 dBm). Employing two relays on the
chest maximizes the probability of achieving a 250 kbps data
rate. It should be noted that in our analysis we have not used
error correction coding or other techniques that could enhance
the achievable data rate besides the increase in the transmission
power.
Afterward, utilizing the optimization problems (see Section V) and the closed-form expression for the ABER and the

OP, we examine the minimum transmission power at both the
implant and the wearable devices, while satisfying a required
ABER or OP and taking into account the FCC power limitations
(see Fig. 7). As shown in Table I, in order to avoid dangers of
EM emissions for the human health, the transmission power of
the implant (Ps ) should be less than 25 μW (−16 dBm) and
that of the relay (Pr ) less than 0.5 mW (−3 dBm). Once again,
the criticality of the link between the implant and the relay is
highlighted. Besides that, as shown in Fig. 8, for the data rate
used in our simulations, an acceptable OP can be achieved using
transmission power both to the implant and to the relay that are
lower than the limits stated previously.

NTOUNI et al.: RELIABLE AND ENERGY-EFFICIENT COMMUNICATIONS FOR WIRELESS BIOMEDICAL IMPLANT SYSTEMS

Fig. 8. Optimization problem for OP (Ro =1 bits/s/Hz): A chest relay placed
on a human subject walking at about 1 m away from the AP with an orientation
of 0 ◦ is employed for relaying the signal to the AP.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a biotelemetry communication scheme was considered, consisting of an implant device and wearable on-body
devices for relaying the information to an off-body AP. The
performance of this scheme was assessed theoretically in terms
of the ABER and OP, taking into account the realistic channel
model proposed by the IEEE P802.15 group. Exact closed-form
expressions were derived, considering a variety of practical
communication scenarios as regards the number and position
of the wearable devices and the motion of the human body,
demonstrating the important benefits from employing wearable
devices in specific body locations. The closed-form expressions
were exploited toward optimizing the tradeoff between energy
consumption and performance, and providing insight into the
design of biotelemetry systems regarding the type of the wearable devices, their location, and the required transmission power.
Due to the strict power limitations of the implanted device, the
utilization of a wearable device is necessary for forwarding the
sensed information to an off-body AP several centimeters away
from the human body. Finally, the severe propagation conditions
within the human body critically affect the communication link
between the implanted device and the wearable relays, which
determines the performance of the overall communication link
to the AP, while the location of the wearable relays on the
human body (e.g., chest or wrist) plays an important role for the
provided QoS and the power consumption of the implant device.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ullah, H. Higgins, B. Braem, B. Latre, C. Blondia, I. Moerman,
S. Saleem, Z. Rahman, and K. S. Kwak, “A comprehensive survey of
wireless body area networks,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1065–
1094, 2010.
[2] G. E. Arrobo and R. D. Gitlin, “Improving the reliability of wireless body
area networks,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
Boston, MA, USA, Aug. 2011, pp. 2192–2195.
[3] Federal Communications Commissio, “Rules and Regulations: Medical
area body network,” Federal Register, vol. 77, no. 176, pp. 55715–55735,
Sep. 2009.
[4] Y.-W. Hong, W.-J. Huang, F.-H. Chiu, and C.-C. J. Kuo, “Cooperative
communications resource constrained wireless networks,” IEEE Signal
Process. Mag., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 47–57, May 2007.

1855

[5] D. S. Michalopoulos, A. S. Lioumpas, G. K. Karagiannidis, and
R. Schober, “Selective cooperative relaying over time-varying channels,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2402–2412, Aug. 2010.
[6] D. B. Smith and D. Miniutti, “Cooperative body-area-communications:
First and second-order statistics with decode-and-forward,” in Proc. IEEE
Wireless Commun. Network. Conf., Paris, France, Apr. 2012, pp. 689–693.
[7] J. Dong and D. Smith, “Cooperative body-area-communications: Enhancing coexistence without coordination between networks,” in Proc. IEEE
23rd Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Sydney, Australia,
Sep. 2012, pp. 2269–2274.
[8] K. Y. Yazdandoost and K. Sayrafian-Pour, Channel Model for Body Area
Network (BAN), IEEE P802.15-08-0780-09-0006, pp. 41–56, 2009.
[9] D. Miniutti, L. Hanlen, D. Smith, A. Zhang, D. Lewis, D. Rodda, and B.
Gilbert, Narrowband On-Body to Off-Body Channel Characterization for
Body Area Networks, IEEE P802.15-08-0559-00-0006, Aug. 2008.
[10] J. Y. Oh, J. H. Kim, H. S. Lee, and J. Y. Kim, “PSSK modulation scheme
for high-data rate implantable medical devices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 634–640, May 2010.
[11] M. Kim and J. I. Takada, “Characterization of wireless on-body channel
under specific action scenarios at sub-GHz bands,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 5364–5372, Nov. 2012.
[12] L. Hong and A. G. Armanda, “Bit error rate performance of MIMO MMSE
receivers in correlated Rayleigh flat-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 313–317, Jan. 2001.
[13] G. K. Karagiannidis, D. A. Zogas, and S. A. Kotsopoulos, “Performance analysis of triple selection diversity over exponentially correlated
Nakagami-m fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 8,
pp. 1245–1248, Aug. 2003.
[14] M. K. Simon and M. Alouini, “A unified approach to the performance analysis of digital communication over generalized fading channels,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 86, no. 9, pp. 1860–1877, Sep. 1998.
[15] B. Zhen, M. Kim, J. I. Takada, and R. Kohno, “Characterization and
modeling of dynamic on-body propagation at 4.5 GHz,” IEEE Antennas
Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 1263–1267, Dec. 2009.
[16] W. B. Yang and K. Sayrafian-Pour, “Interference mitigation using adaptive
schemes in body area networks,” Int. J. Wireless Inf. Netw., vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 193–200, Aug. 2012.
[17] W. B. Yang and K. Sayrafian-Pour, “Theoretical analysis and modeling
of link adaptation schemes in body area networks,” in Wireless Mobile
Communication and Healthcare. vol. 61, Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag, 2013, pp. 189–198.
[18] J. Abouei, J. D. Brown, K. N. Plataniotis, and S. Pasupathy, “Energy
efficiency and reliability in wireless biomedical implant systems,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 456–466, May 2011.
[19] A. Papoulis, Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes,
3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1991.
[20] A. P. Prudnikov, Y. A. Brychkov, and O. I. Marichev, Integral and Series:
Special Functions, vol. 2, 3rd ed. Gordon and Breach Science Publishers,
1992.
[21] P. Loskot and N. C. Beaulieu, “Prony and polynomial approximations for
evaluation of the average probability of error over slow-fading channels,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 1269–1280, Mar. 2009.
[22] M. Chiani, D. Dardari, and M. K. Simon, “New exponential bounds and
approximations for the computation of error probability in fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 840–845, Jul.
2003.
[23] C. Abou-Rjeily and A. Slim, “Cooperative diversity for free-space optical
communications: Transceiver design and performance analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 658–663, Mar. 2011.
[24] K. Woradit, T. Q. S. Quek, W. Suwansantisuk, H. Wymeersch,
L. Wuttisittikulkij, and M. Z. Wim, “Outage behavior of selective relaying
schemes,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 3890–3895,
Aug. 2009.

Georgia D. Ntouni was born in Patras, Greece, in
1989. She received the Diploma degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of
Patras, Patras, Greece, in 2012.
In January 2013, she joined the Biomedical Simulations and Imaging Laboratory, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece, where she
is working as a Research Assistant. Her current research interests include medical telemetry, wireless
communications, and optimization of telecommunications systems.

1856

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Athanasios S. Lioumpas was born in Thessaloniki,
Greece, in June 1982. He received the Diploma and
Ph.D. degrees both in electrical engineering from the
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,
Greece, in 2005 and 2009, respectively.
From 2010 to 2013, he was as a Senior Researcher
in the Department of Digital Systems, University of
Piraeus, while in 2013, he joined the National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece. He has
published more than 40 scientific articles in international journals and conferences, while he has been
granted five patents. His research interests include mobile communications
(LTE, UMTS, GSM), digital communications over fading channels, future network architectures, and machine-to-machine and next-generation wireless communications.
Dr. Lioumpas serves as an Editor for IEEE Communications Letters. Moreover, he has served as a Technical Program Chair in several international conferences. He received the Best Paper Award of the Wireless Communications
Symposium in IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC’07),
Glasgow, U.K., June 2007. In 2012, he received the Greek Ministry of Education, Lifelong Learning and Religious Affairs for contributing to the Greek
Higher Education and scientific excellence.

Konstantina S. Nikita (M’96–SM’00) received the
Diploma degree in electrical engineering and the
Ph.D. degree from the National Technical University
of Athens (NTUA), Athens, Greece, and the M.D. degree from the Medical School, University of Athens,
Athens, Greece.
From 1990 to 1996, she worked as a Researcher at
the Institute of Communication and Computer Systems. In 1996, she joined the School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, NTUA, as an Assistant Professor, where since 2005, she has been a Professor.
She has authored or coauthored 176 papers in refereed international journals
and chapters in books, and more than 300 papers in international conference
proceedings. She is editor of four books in English, and author of two books
in Greek. She holds two patents. She has been the Technical Manager of several European and National R&D projects. She has been the advisor of 22
completed Ph.D. theses, several of which have received various awards. Her
current research interests include biological effects and medical applications of
radiofrequency electromagnetic fields, biomedical telemetry, biomedical signal
and image processing and analysis, simulation of physiological systems, and
biomedical informatics.
Dr. Nikita is a member of the Editorial Board of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, the IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, the Wiley-Bioelectromagnetics, the Journal of Medical and Biological
Engineering and Computing and a guest editor of several international journals.
She has received various honors/awards, among which, the Bodossakis Foundation Academic Prize (2003) for exceptional achievements in “Theory and
Applications of Information Technology in Medicine.” She has been a member
of the Board of Directors of the Atomic Energy Commission and of the Hellenic
National Academic Recognition and Information Center, as well as a member of
the Hellenic National Council of Research and Technology. She has also served
as Deputy Head of the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering of the
NTUA. She has been honorary chair/chair of the program/organizing committee of several international conferences and she has served as keynote/invited
speaker at international conferences, symposia and workshops organized by
NATO, WHO, ICNIRP, IEEE, URSI, COMCON, PIERS, etc. She is a member
of the Hellenic National Ethics Committee, a Founding Fellow of the European
Association of Medical and Biological Engineering and Science, a member of
the Technical Chamber of Greece and of the Athens Medical Association. She is
also the Founding Chair and Ambassador of the IEEE-Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, Greece chapter and the Vice Chair of the IEEE Greece
Section.

