1196

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Investigation of Galvanic-Coupled Intrabody
Communication Using the Human
Body Circuit Model
Behailu Kibret, Student Member, IEEE, MirHojjat Seyedi, Student Member, IEEE,
Daniel T. H. Lai, Member, IEEE, and Micheal Faulkner, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Intrabody Communication (IBC) is a technique that
uses the human body as a transmission medium for electrical signals to connect wearable electronic sensors and devices. Understanding the human body as the transmission medium in IBC
paves way for practical implementation of IBC in body sensor
networks. In this study, we propose a model for galvanic couplingtype IBC based on a simplified equivalent circuit representation
of the human upper arm. We propose a new way to calculate the
electrode–skin contact impedance. Based on the model and human
experimental results, we discuss important characteristics of galvanic coupling-type IBC, namely, the effect of tissues, anthropometry of subjects, and electrode configuration on signal propagation.
We found that the dielectric properties of the muscle primarily
characterize the received signal when receiver electrodes are located close to transmitter electrodes. When receiver and transmitter electrodes are far apart, the skin dielectric property affects the
received signal.
Index Terms—Body sensor networks, capacitive coupling,
electrode, galvanic coupling, intrabody communication (IBC),
measurement setup, modeling, simplified equivalent circuit.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE accomplishments in telemedicine technology and body
sensor networks contribute to the fulfillment of the pervasive healthcare visions [1]. In body sensor networks, shortrange wireless communication between biomedical sensors is
achieved using commonly used radio frequency-based wireless
links, e.g., Bluetooth and Zigbee. These protocols are designed
for communications at distances of several tens of meters by
radiating electromagnetic energy into the air; hence, they intrinsically require more power [2], [3]. As an alternative, a
new method of wireless data transmission that uses the human body as transmission medium or intrabody communication
(IBC), was first proposed for personal area networks by Zimmerman [4]. This technique uses near-field and electrostatic coupling of signals; consequently, low-frequency communication

T

Manuscript received January 21, 2013; revised June 11, 2013, August 22,
2013, and December 15, 2013; accepted January 13, 2014. Date of publication
January 17, 2014; date of current version June 30, 2014.
The authors are with the College of Engineering and Science, Victoria
University, Footscray, Vic. 3011, Australia (e-mail: behailu.kibret@live.
vu.edu.au; mirhojjat.seyedi@live.vu.edu.au; daniel.lai@vu.edu.au; mike.
faulkner@vu.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2301165

without electromagnetic radiation can be achieved that potentially leads to reduced power consumption.
Generally, there are two approaches of IBC, namely, capacitive coupling and galvanic coupling. In capacitive coupling,
the signal is transmitted through the human body, and a return
path is formed by the capacitive coupling between the transmitter electrodes and receiver electrodes through the external
environment, e.g., air. In this approach, the transmission quality
is affected by the noisy environment and the size of the receiver
ground planes [5]. In galvanic coupling, which is the focus of
this study, the signal is applied differentially between two transmitter electrodes and received differentially by two receiver
electrodes [6]. The signal in the galvanic coupling approach is
confined within the body as it is transmitted from a pair of transmitter electrodes to a pair of receiver electrodes, and therefore,
is less prone to noise from the external environment [7].
Several groups have attempted to investigate the propagation mechanism in IBC [8], and models based on finite-element
methods [9], [10], finite difference time-domain [11], quasistatic electromagnetic principles [12], [13], and equivalent electrical circuits [14]–[16] have been proposed. Recently, a more
comprehensive model of signal transmission on the human
body surface for capacitive coupling IBC was proposed by
Bae et al. [17], based on the electromagnetic theory. However,
there are still some gaps in knowledge. For example, the effect of various tissues on signal propagation in galvanic IBC
has not been analyzed in detail. Some of the proposed models did not include the effect of the electrode–skin contact
impedance [9], [17] and in other models, the impedance was
not clearly presented [10], [14]. In addition, the models do not
take into account subject-specific anatomical parameters, i.e.,
anthropometry. For these reasons, current IBC models do not
accurately describe or predict the empirical measurements of
signal propagation through human subjects.
In this study, we propose a new circuit model of the transmission medium in galvanic coupling-type IBC based on simplified equivalent circuit representation of the human upper
arm. We propose a new way to calculate the electrode–skin
contact impedance from the human body input impedance measurement, which has not been previously emphasized. Moreover, we analyze the effect of tissues and electrode configuration on galvanic coupling IBC. We demonstrate that the
proposed model successfully predicts gain and phase shift measurements over six human subjects with various anthropometric
measures.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KIBRET et al.: INVESTIGATION OF GALVANIC-COUPLED INTRABODY COMMUNICATION USING THE HUMAN BODY CIRCUIT MODEL

This study is organized as follows. In Section II, the dielectric spectrum of biological tissues based on a single Cole–Cole
dispersion and a macroscopic circuit model of tissues is discussed. This is followed by the construction and discussion of a
simplified equivalent circuit model of the human upper arm in
Section III. In this section, the component impedances of the
simplified circuit are analyzed taking into consideration the new
proposed approach of calculating the electrode–skin impedance.
Section IV presents the measurement setup and calculation procedures, followed by the discussion of the experimental and
calculation results in Section V.
II. MODEL FOR DIELECTRIC SPECTRUM OF TISSUES
In this study, the frequency range selected for the investigation of the transmission medium in galvanic-coupled IBC is
from 200 kHz to 10 MHz. We set the lower bound of the frequency range, which is well above the spectrum of biological
signals, based on the low-frequency limitation of the measuring
devices we used. At the upper frequency bound, 10 MHz, the
dimension of the upper arm is smaller compared to the wavelength of the signal; therefore, the signal propagating within
the arm can still be considered to be in the near-field region of
the electromagnetic field. This region can be modeled by static
circuit models, which our study is based upon. Moreover, at
higher frequencies, it is thought that the human body radiates
the signals to the air as electromagnetic waves and the signals
are no longer confined within the body due to the human body
antenna effects [18].
For the given frequency range, the dielectric spectrum of
tissues can be approximated by the second Cole–Cole dispersion
of Gabriel’s parametric relation [19]. For a single dispersion, the
expression for complex relative permittivity (ε∗r ) as a function
of angular excitation frequency (ω) is given as




ε∗r (ω) = εr (ω) − jεr (ω)
= ε∞ +

Δεn
σi
+
,
jωε0
1 + (jωτn )1−α n

(1)

where n = 2 represents the second dispersion region in the


Gabriel dispersion relation, εr and εr are the real and imaginary parts of ε∗r , Δεn refers to the strength of the dispersion,
ε∞ is permittivity at infinite frequency, τn is the relaxation time
constant, αn is distribution parameter that controls the width
of the dispersion, σi is the static ionic conductivity, and ε0 is
permittivity of vacuum.
The complex conductivity can be calculated from (1) as




σ ∗ (ω) = σ (ω) + jσ (ω) = jωε0 ε∗r (ω),




(2)

where σ and σ are the real and imaginary parts of σ ∗ .
Since the fundamental processes of charge build up and conduction in tissue occur in parallel [20], we propose a simple
two-component equivalent circuit that represents the admittance
Y of tissues, which is a parallel combination of conductance G
and susceptance B, as shown in (3). For this model, we assumed
homogenous dielectric properties of tissue; thus, the admittance
can be represented in terms of specific conductivity and relative

1197

Fig. 1. Current flow paths in galvanic coupling [21]. The primary flow is
the current flowing between the Tx electrodes, which does not contribute to
the potential difference detected by Rx electrodes. The secondary flow is the
current that induces a potential difference on Rx electrodes. Z t 1 represents the
impedance of the primary flow path, Z l 1 and Z l 2 refer to the impedance of the
longitudinal forward and return path of the secondary flow, respectively, and
Z t 2 refers to the transverse path of the secondary flow. l is the distance between transmitter and receiver electrode pairs. The distance between transmitter
electrodes A 1 and A 2 is dts and between receiver electrodes B 1 and B 2 is drs .

permittivity, which are estimated by (1) and (2), respectively, as
Y (ω) = G(ω) + jB(ω)

(3)

and frequency-dependent conductance and susceptance for uniform cross section of tissues are defined as








G(ω) = Kσ (ω) = Kωε0 εr
B(ω) = Kσ (ω) = Kωε0 εr (ω),

(4)
(5)

where K is the ratio of the cross-sectional area to length of
tissues. This definition is based on the implicit assumption that
current density is uniform throughout the cross section. For
the frequency range we used, the skin-depth of all tissues is
large compared to the radius of the upper arm; therefore, the
assumption of uniform current density is justified.
III. HUMAN BODY EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT MODEL
Since our study of galvanic signal coupling focuses on the
near-field region of the electromagnetic field, where the signals exhibit dipole type field behavior, we used the electric field
intensity (current density) vectors of the electric dipole to represent the current flow paths in galvanic coupling as shown in
Fig. 1.
We assumed that the upper arm is composed of concentric
layers of the skin, subcutaneous fat, muscle, and cortical bone.
In this study, we investigated these tissues based on their dielectric and anatomical characteristics to calculate their impedances
and thus their contributions to the pathways of current flow in
galvanic current coupling. Based on the current paths defined,
each of the four tissues in the upper arm can be represented by
four distinctive impedances characterizing a unique galvaniccoupled setup as shown in Fig. 1. The setup depends on the
geometry and location of the electrodes, namely, the separation
between transmitter and receiver electrodes, which is depicted
as l in Fig. 1, the distance between the transmitter electrode pair
(dts ), and the distance between receiver electrode pair (drs ).

1198

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 4. Simplified equivalent circuit representation of the upper arm for galvanic coupling-type IBC, for the case of gelled electrodes, where Z o is the
output impedance of the transmitter, Z i is the input impedance of receiver, and
the i1 to i5 are the mesh currents.

Fig. 2.

Impedance magnitude |Z |, in ohms, of tissues in the upper arm.

Fig. 3. Impedance phase angle (degree) as function of frequency for tissues
in the upper arm.

The impedances are calculated using
Z(ω) =

1
1
=
,
Y (ω)
Kωε0 (εr (ω) + jεr (ω))

(6)

where Y (ω) is the complex admittance characterizing a single homogenous tissue and calculated based on (3); and K is
the ratio of the effective cross-sectional area to length of a tissue. The effective cross-sectional area and length depend on
electrode configurations, width, and depth of current distribution, and subject-specific anatomical parameters such as tissue
thickness.
We compared the impedance characteristics of each tissue
in order to investigate their contributions to current flow in the
upper arm. For simplicity, we considered a unit cell volume (i.e.,
cube of side 1 cm) of each tissue; and as a result, the value of
K is equal to 1 cm. Figs. 2 and 3 show the impedance modulus
and the corresponding phase angle, respectively, of each tissue
calculated using (6).
Based on the impedance of tissues and human body anatomy,
we propose the simplified equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 4.
From Fig. 2, bone and fat have large impedance values. As a

result, we assumed their contribution to longitudinal and transverse flow path is very small, and modeled their effects as an
open circuit. A muscle remains a potential current flow path
in both longitudinal and transverse directions due to its small
impedance over frequency. Therefore, its effect is included in the
circuit as Zmtt and Zmtr , representing the transverse impedance
of muscle at transmitter and receiver side, respectively; and Zm l ,
the longitudinal impedance. Moreover, the skin is located in direct contact with the coupling electrodes; and its impedance
decreases as frequency increases. Zsl thus represents the longitudinal impedance of the skin.
Another current flow path, we took into account is the path
perpendicular to the surface of the coupling electrodes. In our
abstraction of the upper arm, fat is located between the skin
and muscle, and thickness of fat can be large enough that it can
impede the current flowing from the skin to muscle. Therefore,
the impedance of fat tissue underneath the location of electrodes
is represented by the series fat impedance, Zf .
Another factor that we considered for simplification of the
equivalent circuit is the condition of the coupling electrodes. We
modeled the pregelled Ag/AgCl electrodes used in this study.
The impedance of the skin at lower frequencies gets smaller
in areas where the gel is applied; as a result, more current
can be injected into the lower tissues compared to using dry
electrodes [20]. We combined the individual impedances of the
contacts among the skin, gel, and electrode as a single electrode–
skin contact impedance, Zes . In addition to this, we observed
that the calculated transverse impedance of the ungelled skin
is very large compared to the measured electrode–skin contact
impedance due to the small cross-sectional area to length ratio
of the ungelled skin and its smaller conductivity. Consequently,
we approximated the transverse impedance of the skin as open
in the simplified equivalent circuit model.
A. Transverse Impedances, Zmtt and Zmtr
The transverse impedances depend on the location and shape
of the electrode, such as the interelectrode distance, electrode
pair separation, and electrode area. They also depend on anatomical parameters, such as the muscle thickness. Fig. 5 shows the
cross section of the upper arm along transverse axis at the transmitter side.

KIBRET et al.: INVESTIGATION OF GALVANIC-COUPLED INTRABODY COMMUNICATION USING THE HUMAN BODY CIRCUIT MODEL

Fig. 5. Cross section of the upper arm abstraction along the transverse axis at
the transmitter location. ts is the skin thickness, tf is the fat thickness, tm is
the muscle thickness, rb is the bone radius, r is the radius of the arm, dts is the
interelectrode distance, dm t is the transverse path length of muscle, and θ is the
radian angle formed by the two electrodes of the transmitter.

1199

of a cylindrical shell is rectangular and its value can be calculated as width multiplied by height. According to our definition,
the secondary current that is responsible for the potential difference across the receiver electrodes is the current flowing
within the tissues located under the surface of the receiver electrodes. Therefore, we assumed that the width of the secondary
transverse current path at the receiver side is equal to the diameter of the receiver electrodes. This implies that the remaining
transverse current distribution belongs to the primary current.
Therefore, we approximate wmt equal to the distance between
transmitter and receiver electrodes, l.
The ratio of the cross-sectional area to length, Kmtt , for Zmtt
is calculated as
tm wmt
.
(11)
Kmtt =
dmt
The transverse impedance Zmtr at the receiver was similarly
calculated.
B. Longitudinal Impedances, Zm l and Zsl

To determine some of the anatomical parameters, we measured anthropometry of the upper arm that includes perimeter
and skinfold measurements at location where electrodes are attached. We approximated the cross section of the upper arm to a
circle so that the measured perimeter of the arm at the transmitter side is equal to the circumference, ct , of the circular cross
section of the arm. The radius of the arm at the transmitter side
is calculated using
r = ct /(2π),

(7)

and the radian angle θ in Fig. 5 can be calculated by
θ = dts /r.

(8)

Accurate measurement of the tissue thickness is a complicated
task and in vivo measurement requires imaging modalities like
MRI [22]. We assumed the skin thickness ts = 0.2 cm and the
bone radius rb = 1 cm for all subjects based on statistical measurements of the skin thickness [23] and humerus radii [24]. In
addition to this, we approximated the thickness of fat, tf , to half
of the skinfold thickness (SFT) less skin thickness. We measured the SFT on locations of the upper arm where electrodes
are attached. For the measurement, we used Harpenden skinfold caliper, which has measuring range of up to 80 mm, dial
graduation 0.2 mm, and accuracy 99.00%. Averages of three
measurements were used.
The muscle thickness is then
tm = r − (ts + tf + rb ).

(9)

The longitudinal impedances represent the impedance of the
longitudinal current path of the secondary current. For symmetrical electrodes located along the longitudinal axis of the arm,
the forward and return secondary flow path impedances are
equal. The longitudinal impedances also depend on the electrode configuration and anatomical parameters.
In the previous section, we approximated the width of the
transverse secondary current to the diameter of receiver electrodes. Since the longitudinal impedances represent the longitudinal secondary current flow path, we assumed the path width
equal to the electrode diameter. From Fig. 6, the cross-sectional
area of the skin, Asl , which contributes to the longitudinal skin
impedance is calculated as
Asl = Arec + A1 − A2 ,

where Arec = hrec wrec is the area of the rectangle formed by
the broken line. The area of the upper circular segment, A1 is
calculated as
 

θ1
1
A1 = r1 θ1 r1 − wrec cos
(13)
2
2
and the area of the lower circular segment, A2 , is calculated as
 

θ2
1
A2 = r2 θ2 r2 − wrec cos
,
(14)
2
2
where r1 = r, which is the radius of the arm calculated from
(7), r2 = r1 −ts , θ1 is calculated as
θ1 =

The geometry of muscle tissue considered is similar to the
portion of a cylindrical shell. Since the cylindrical shell has
unequal interior and exterior arc lengths, the average arc length
was used. For muscle, this average length depicted (see Fig. 5)
as dmt is calculated as

height of the rectangle, hrec

dmt = θ(r − ts − tf − tm /2).

width of the rectangle, wrec

(10)

Let wmt be the width of the transverse flow path at the transmitter side. Along the longitudinal axis, the cross-sectional area

(12)

hrec =

de
,
r1

(15)

ts
 ,
cos θ21

wrec = 2r1 sin



θ1
2

(16)


,

(17)

1200

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

and
hrec =

r1 − r2
 .
cos θ21

(24)

Using (12)–(14), the area for the longitudinal muscle
impedance can be calculated.
C. Fat Series Impedance, Zf
The current from electrodes and through the gelled skin suffers attenuation by fat tissue before entering muscle tissue. The
effect of fat is represented by a series impedance, Zf . We assumed that the cross-sectional area of fat where current flows
to be equal to area of the electrodes. The fat thickness was approximated by measuring the SFT at the locations of electrodes
attachments. Therefore, the cross-sectional area to length ratio,
Kf , in the calculation of Zf is given by
Kf =

πd2e
,
4tf

(25)

where de is diameter of electrode and tf is the thickness of fat,
which is calculated from the measured SFT and skin thickness,
ts as
Fig. 6. Cross section of the arm, where the electrode is attached. r1 is the
radius of upper arc, r2 is the radius of lower arc, θ1 is the central angle for the
upper arc in radian, θ2 is the central angle for the lower arc in radian, A 1 is the
area of the upper circular segment, A 2 is the area of the lower circular segment,
h re c is the height of the rectangle, w re c is the width of the rectangle and de is
the electrode diameter.

and θ2 is calculated as
θ2 = 2 sin−1



wrec
2r2


.

(18)

We set the length of the skin contributing to the longitudinal
impedance of the skin to the distance of transmitter and receiver
electrode pair separation, which is l. Therefore, the ratio of the
cross-sectional area to length of the longitudinal skin impedance
Zsl , Ksl , is
Asl
.
(19)
l
Using a similar approach, the cross-sectional area of the muscle longitudinal path can be calculated. The known terms in this
calculation are
SFT
r1 = r −
,
(20)
2
where r is the radius of the arm from (7), SFT is the measured
skinfold thickness.
Ksl =

r2 = rb

(21)

where rb is the radius of the bone. And wrec , width of the
rectangle is the same as that of the skin. From these


wrec
(22)
θ1 = 2 sin−1
2r1


wrec
−1
θ2 = 2 sin
(23)
2r2

tf =

SFT
− ts .
2

(26)

D. Electrode–Skin Impedance, Zes
The electrode–skin impedance, Zes , is composed of the skin
impedance underneath the electrode, electrode impedance, and
gel applied. In the literature, the electrode–skin impedance data
are limited to the lower frequency range, due to the focus on
the application of biomedical electrodes in detection of biologically generated signals. For IBC application, bulk impedance
measurements of the arm with electrodes attached were carried
out in [6] and [7]; and the impedance was referred as contact
impedance, which other authors took these measurement values for the electrode or electrode–skin impedance. The bulk
impedance does not represent the impedance of the skin, electrode, or their combination; rather it is the input impedance of
the arm with electrodes attached. Within this context, we propose a new approach to calculate the electrode–skin impedance
based on impedance measurements using a vector network analyzer (VNA). The circuit diagram of the proposed electrode–skin
impedance measurement system is shown in Fig. 7.
On the surface of the upper arm, we attached two round
pregelled Ag/AgCl electrodes (diameter 1 cm) side by side and
close to each other, and ensuring no contact between the electrolytic gel to avoid short circuit. In this configuration, most of
the current is flowing in the primary current flow path formed by
the gelled skin so that the effect of the inner tissues is negligible.
The complex reflection coefficient of the attached electrodes was
measured using VNA. It was found that the measurement values
do not vary significantly for electrode separations as much as
3 mm. The impedance seen by the VNA, Zxm , is calculated by
Zxm = Ro

1+Γ
,
1−Γ

(27)

KIBRET et al.: INVESTIGATION OF GALVANIC-COUPLED INTRABODY COMMUNICATION USING THE HUMAN BODY CIRCUIT MODEL

1201

Fig. 7. Circuit diagram proposed to calculate the electrode–skin impedance.
Z x m is the impedance seen by the VNA port, Z s and Y o are the series residual impedance and stray admittance of test leads, respectively, Z D U T is the
input impedance of the arm with electrodes attached, Z e s is the electrode–skin
impedance, and R o is the output impedance of the VNA.

where Ro is the output impedance of the VNA, and Γ is the
complex reflection coefficient.
Since the known load available for calibration does not fit with
the test lead connectors, we adapted the alternative technique
of measuring their effect directly. The effect of the test leads is
considered by measuring the series residual impedance, Zs , and
the stray admittance, Yo , of the test leads, by applying an openshort compensation technique. Zs is measured by shorting the
test leads and Yo is measured leaving the test leads open with
the same separation as when the test leads were attached to
the electrodes. Since the series residual impedance, Zs , is very
small (Zs << 1/Yo ), the open measurement is approximated to
Yo .
The impedance formed by the two electrodes, gel and skin,
ZDUT , is calculated as
ZDUT =

Zxm − Zs
.
1 − (Zxm − Zs )Yo

(28)

Fig. 8. Normalized electrode–skin impedance modulus (for electrode area of
1 cm 2 ), in ohms, as a function of frequency, calculated based on impedance
measurements on six subjects. The electrodes used are pregelled Ag/AgCl
electrodes.

Fig. 9. Measurement setup for galvanic coupling IBC using the human upper
arm as transmission path.

And from (28) and Fig. 7, the electrode–skin impedance, Zes ,
is calculated as
Zes = (ZDUT )/2.

(29)

The electrode–skin impedance, Zes , calculated based on (29),
for six subjects is shown in Fig. 8; the measurement setup is
discussed in the next section. The impedance was normalized
to 1-cm2 electrode area.
IV. MEASUREMENT SETUP AND CALCULATION PROCEDURE
The proposed simplified equivalent circuit was empirically
compared by carrying out gain and phase shift measurements
of galvanic coupling IBC system using the human upper arm as
transmission medium. The measurement setup, shown in Fig. 9,
is composed of a battery powered VNA (miniVNA Pro, output impedance Zo = 50 Ω and input impedance Zi = 50 Ω,
frequency range 100 kHz to 200 MHz, manufactured by Mini
Radio Solutions), baluns (Coaxial RF transformers, FTB-1-1+,
turns ratio of one, manufactured by Mini-Circuits), and round
pregelled self-adhesive Ag/AgCl snap single electrodes (1-cm
diameter, manufactured by Noraxon). The VNA is set to sweep
constant interval frequency of range 200 kHz to 10 MHz in 800
points with 0-dBm output power, which is well below the safety

Fig. 10. Block diagram of the measurement setup. B is half of the measured
insertion loss of the baluns and cables, and H is the gain (in decibels) of
the human arm and electrodes. V i is the input voltage and V o is the potential
difference detected.

limit set by International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection [25]. The signal is coupled to the upper arm
by electrodes A1 and A2 via Tx of VNA; and at Rx, the VNA
detects the potential difference across electrodes B1 and B2 .
The VNA is connected with laptop, where VNA manufacturerprovided software calculated the gain in decibels and phase shift
in degrees based on the measured potential difference and the
input voltage. The block diagram of the measurement setup is
shown in Fig. 10. To minimize the uncertainties associated with
measurement, gain measurements were repeated every 30 s for
five times and their average was taken. Factors that contributed
to the slight variations in measurements include cable and body

1202

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

movements; hence, cable lengths were minimized and subjects
were asked to keep still.
We used baluns to isolate the common ground return paths of
the VNA to achieve galvanic-coupled IBC system represented
by our simplified equivalent circuit. The baluns are connected to
the VNA ports, as shown in Fig. 9, using coaxial cables allowing
sufficient separation between them, so that the parasitic coupling
impedance between the baluns was much higher compared to the
longitudinal impedances of the system. Even though the effect
of baluns can be eliminated by calibration of the VNA, the shape
of the test leads does not allow the use of the available known
loads that are needed for calibration. Therefore, we measured
the insertion loss of the two baluns and the test leads, which
is 4 dB at 200 kHz and decreases to 1 dB at 10 MHz, which
matches to the measurement data provided by the manufacturer.
The measured phase shift also decreases from 45◦ at 200 kHz
to −10◦ at 10 MHz.
Let GA be the gain calculated by the VNA. From Fig. 10,
assuming that the 50-Ω output impedance of the VNA is transformed across the balun and included in H, then


|Vo |
GA = 20 log10
dB
(30)
|Vi |
and it can be written as GA = 2B + H, where B is half of the
measured insertion loss. It follows that the measured gain due
to the human arm, electrodes, and impedances of the VNA is
H = GA − 2B.
From the simplified circuit shown in Fig. 4, let H1 be the
calculated gain in decibels due to human arm, electrodes, and
impedances of the VNA, and it is calculated as


|Vo |
H1 = 20 log10
dB.
(31)
|Vi |
Note that the output impedance (Zo = 50 Ω) in Fig. 4
is included as part of the simplified circuit when computing
H1; therefore, the assumption in (30) to include the output
impedance of the VNA with H is validated.
Since the simplified equivalent circuit in Fig. 4 is system of
linear equations, the voltage ratio in (31) does not change for any
value of input voltage, Vi . And the output voltage is calculated by
applying mesh current law to the simplified circuit and solving
⎡

Vi

⎤

⎡

⎢
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎢0⎥
⎢
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎢ ⎥
⎢ 0 ⎥ =⎢
⎢
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎢0⎥
⎣
⎣ ⎦

the linear equations with five unknowns using MATLAB. The
five linear equations for a single frequency are shown in (32)
in a matrix form, which can also be represented inr matrix
multiplication form
V = ZI,

(33)

where V is column vector holding the voltage across independent voltage sources in each mesh, Z is a 5×5 matrix holding the
impedances seen by each mesh current, and I is column vector
holding the mesh currents. Therefore, the current can be solved
by the multiplication of the impedance inverse matrix with the
voltage vector
I = Z−1 V

(34)

so that the output voltage, Vo , can be calculated as
Vo = Zi i3

(35)

and the phase shift is calculated as


imag(Vo )
−1
Θrad = tan
real(Vo )

Θrad 360
.
(37)
2π
We assumed the phase angle of the input voltage, Vi , is zero;
therefore, the phase shift is equal to the phase angle of the output
voltage, Vo and calculated in radians using (36) and in degrees
using (37). Also, we subtracted the phase shift due to baluns and
cables from the measured phase shift in a similar fashion we did
for the gain calculation. Fig. 11 shows the measured gain H and
Fig. 12 shows the corresponding phase shifts.
For measurement, five male and one female subject participated. The subjects’ ages were in late twenties and the anatomical parameters are shown in Table I. Subject 4 is the female
volunteer. During the measurement, the subjects were asked to
stand in a relaxed manner arms by the side to ensure that the
current is confined within the arm by avoiding external physical
contacts with the arm. We placed the electrode pair A1–A2 (see
Fig. 9) at location of the deltoid muscle and near the upper head
of the bicep brachii, respectively, and electrode pair B1–B2
at location of the brachialis and the lower head of the triceps
brachii, respectively.
Θdeg =

2Zes + Z0 + 2Zf + Zmtt

−Zmtt

0

−Zf

−Zmtt

Zmtt + 2Zm l + Zmtr

−Zmtr

−Zm l

0

−Zmtr

Zmtr + 2Zfm + 2Zes + Zin

−Zf

−Zf

−Zm l

−Zf

2Zf + Zm l + Zsl

−Zm l

−Zf

0

0
−Zf

−Zf
⎤

−Zm l
−Zf
0
2Zf + Zm l + Zsl

⎡

⎤

i1
⎥ ⎢ ⎥
⎥ ⎢ i2 ⎥
⎥ ⎢ ⎥
⎥ ⎢ ⎥
⎥ × ⎢ i3 ⎥
⎥ ⎢ ⎥
⎥ ⎢i ⎥
⎦ ⎣ 4⎦
i5

(36)

(32)

KIBRET et al.: INVESTIGATION OF GALVANIC-COUPLED INTRABODY COMMUNICATION USING THE HUMAN BODY CIRCUIT MODEL

Fig. 11.

Measured gain (dB) as a function of frequency for six subjects.

Fig. 12. Measured phase shift (degree) as a function of frequency for six
subjects.

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The calculated electrode–skin contact impedance, as shown in
Fig. 8, decreases with an increase in frequency, similar in manner to the impedance of the skin shown in Fig. 2. At lower frequencies, the dielectric property of the skin is dominated by the
outermost layer of the skin called stratum corneum (SC), which
is composed of dead and flat skin cells. The dielectric property
of SC depends on the state of the superficial layers and the water content of the surrounding air in contact with the skin [20].
The effect of SC vanishes as frequency increases; this phenomenon is manifested by the decreasing skin impedance. The
value and pattern of the calculated electrode–skin impedance
agree well with the low-frequency impedance data found in the
literature [26], where the impedance of the electrode and gelled
skin was measured for frequencies up to 1 MHz.
As shown in the graph of Fig. 8, all subjects, excluding subjects 2 and 4, have similar impedances for most part of the
frequency range, but with small variation at low frequencies
that could be due to the variations in the degree of individual
skin hydration. The impedance of subject 2 is smaller compared

1203

to that of the other subjects; furthermore, repeated impedance
measurement on this subject confirmed the small impedance
value. The anthropometry measurement of subject 2 reveals
that he has exceptionally small SFT (0.32 mm), which could be
the cause of the small impedance value. On the other hand, the
anthropometry measurement of subject 4 does not support the
larger impedance value, except this subject is the only female.
But, we did not hasten to the conclusion that gender could affect impedance value; larger number of subjects is required for
detailed analysis which we have differed to future work.
Generally, measured gain increases with frequency, as shown
in Fig. 11, which is similar to galvanic-coupled IBC gain measurements reported by other authors. From careful investigation
of the relationship between the anthropometry and measurement setup parameters of subjects with their corresponding gain
measurement, we found out there is a direct link between the
transmitter and receiver separation distance (l) and the measured gain, for most part of the frequency range. But, no clear
link is shown between the parameters and the measured phase
shift, except the distribution of l is reflected on the distribution
of phase shifts. Subject 6 has the shortest distance, whereas
subject 1 has the longest distance, which the gain measurement
reflects for most part of the frequency range. The electrode distances (l) of subject 1, 2, 3, and 4 are relatively close and similar
behavior is shown on their gain and phase measurement for
most part of the frequency range. An exception to the general
gain pattern, Subject 3 has different gain and phase shift patterns at low frequency, which could arise from the variability
of the skin admittance at low frequency due to the state of skin
hydration and other physiological factors [20]. The gain of subject 5 also exhibit a different pattern; the relationship between
gain and l is no longer followed at higher frequency. Moreover,
gain and phase shift for subjects 5 and 6 show larger difference
compared to that of the remaining subjects; but similar large
difference is not reflected in l. These discrepancies led us to see
additional relationships among the parameters of subjects 5 and
6, which show that l is smaller than the transmitter interelectrode
distance, dts , for both subjects. These observations initiated further measurements to investigate how l and its relationship with
other parameters, such as dts and drs , affect gain and phase shift
measurements. So far, our proposed equivalent circuit supports
the observation.
We carried out additional measurements on subject 1. Fig. 13
shows the measured gain of subject 1 for different electrode
configuration by varying the parameters l, dts , and drs . Figs. 14
and 15 show the corresponding phase shift measurements with
additional plots of muscle and skin impedance phase angles.
Though the other subject-specific parameters, such as the SFT
and circumference of the arm are important in the calculation of
impedance elements, they cannot be varied to investigate their
effect on the measured gain and phase shift.
In order to demonstrate the relationship between l and gain
(phase shift), we first considered the case l > dts by varying
l to 10 and 15 cm while holding other parameters constant,
which are dts = 8.5 cm and drs = 12 cm. The measurement
results are shown on Fig. 13 for gain and Fig. 15 for phase shift
with the plots of dts8.5drs12l10 and dts8.5drs12l15 and their

1204

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

TABLE I
ANATOMICAL AND MEASUREMENT SETUP PARAMETERS OF THE SUBJECTS

Fig. 13. Gain measurement (solid lines) and corresponding calculation results
(broken lines) on subject 1. The electrodes are placed on different location
highlighting the relationship among different measurement parameters. The
plot dts8.5drs9l5 is measured gain for the case that dts >l, which is dts =
8.5 cm, drs = 9 cm, and l = 5 cm. The plot dts8.5drs12l10 is gain for the case
of dts = 8.5 cm, drs = 12 cm, and l = 10 cm. And the plot dts8.5drs12l15 is
gain for the case of dts = 8.5 cm, drs = 12 cm, and l = 15 cm.

Fig. 14. Phase shift measurement and corresponding calculation results on
subject 1 for the case dts8.5drs9l5, dts > l, which is dts = 8.5 cm, drs = 9 cm,
and l = 5 cm. And the plot in broken line is the impedance phase angle for
muscle.

corresponding calculation results. For 5 cm increase of l, the
gain reduced by 3 dB and the phase shift rose slightly to 4◦ ; the
same changes are predicted by our model. Though the calculation results predict the changes in gain and phase shift, they
do not fit the measured results at higher frequencies. For frequencies greater than 6 MHz, the normal course of the measured

Fig. 15. Phase shift measurement and corresponding calculation results on
subject 1. The electrodes are placed on different location highlighting the relationship among different measurement parameters. The plot dts8.5drs12l10 is
phase shift for the case of dts = 8.5 cm, drs = 12 cm, and l = 10 cm. And the
plot dts8.5drs12l15 is phase shift for the case of dts = 8.5 cm, drs = 12 cm,
and l = 15 cm. The plot in broken line is the impedance phase angle of the skin.

gain and phase shift changes with a more pronounced divergence
at approximately 8 MHz. We also observed similar frequency
characteristics in the measured electrode–skin impedance. But,
these frequency characteristics were not observed at the measured insertion loss of baluns and cables, dismissing the possibility that it is introduced by measuring devices. The dielectric
properties of tissues also do not show changes at these frequencies. This suggests that the cause could be due to intrinsic
characteristics of the electrode, its contact to the skin, or the
possibility of propagation mechanism in the form of electromagnetic radiation. Additional work is required to clarify this
problem.
Moreover, we investigated this electrode configuration based
on calculation results from the equivalent circuit. From our
calculation result, as l increases, the value of longitudinal
impedances Zsl and Zm l increases, which lead to a decrease
in the current flowing through them. For the case l > dts , a
more closer look revealed that, as l increases, the current in the
fat impedance at the receiver side (Zf ) reduces significantly.
In other words, the small current from Zm l gets more attenuated by Zf so that a negligible amount of current from Zm l
passes through Zf to reach the receiver electrodes. This implies
that the current at the receiver, i3 (see Fig. 4), is dominated by
the current in Zsl , i4 , indicating the frequency characteristics

KIBRET et al.: INVESTIGATION OF GALVANIC-COUPLED INTRABODY COMMUNICATION USING THE HUMAN BODY CIRCUIT MODEL

of the potential difference detected by the receiver is primarily
influenced by the skin impedance.
This observation is also supported by the impedance characteristics of the skin. Among all circuit elements within the
equivalent circuit, only the skin admittance and electrode–skin
contact admittance exhibit similar frequency characteristics with
the measured gain. As shown in Fig. 2, the impedance of the
skin decreases with frequency. This implies that the admittance
increases with frequency in a similar fashion to the measured
gain. We also found that the measured phase shift is similar to
the impedance phase angle of the skin as shown in Figs. 3 and
15 plotted for comparison. This also suggests that, for the case
l > dts , the dielectric properties of the skin dominates the gain
and phase shift characteristics.
The other case we studied is when dts > l. We took different
measurements for this case by varying the value of the parameters accordingly and similar results were observed. One of our
measurement results for the case dts = 8.5 cm, drs = 9 cm, and
l = 5 cm, is shown in Fig. 13 for gain and Fig. 14 for phase shift
with the plot dts8.5drs9l5. As shown in the graphs, the gain and
phase shift measurement results for this electrode configuration
have different characteristics similar to the measurement results
of subjects 5 and 6. The gain is larger, about −45 dB at low
frequencies, and rises slowly to −40 dB as frequency increases,
unlike for the other case where gain appreciably increases with
frequency. The phase shift is larger at low frequencies, about
50◦ , but quickly falls to 20◦ at around 1 MHz and decreases
slowly to 10◦ at 10 MHz.
We also studied this case of electrode configuration using the
equivalent circuit. Since the value of l is relatively smaller compared to dts , more current flows in the longitudinal impedances
of the skin (Zsl ) and muscle (Zm l ) when compared to that of the
previous case. As a result, the current in Zm l is no longer attenuated by Zf to a negligible level. The impedance of fat, as shown
in Fig. 2, is constant for the frequency range; thus, all frequency
components of the current flowing in Zf are attenuated equally.
This implies that the frequency characteristics of the current
flowing in Zf are not altered much, except for constant attenuation with respect to frequency. From the calculation results,
we saw that the current in Zf is larger than the current flowing
in Zsl . This suggests that the output current, i3 , is dominated by
the current flowing through the muscle longitudinal impedance
(Zm l ) and passing via Zf . Hence, the potential difference detected is more influenced by muscle tissue. This observation is
also supported by the comparison of muscle impedance characteristics to the measured gain and phase shift for this case.
Based on Fig. 2, the muscle admittance has similar frequency
characteristics to the measured gain for the case dts > l. The
measured phase shift also shows similarity to the phase angle
of the muscle impedance as shown in Fig. 3 and also in Fig. 14
plotted for the purpose of comparison with the measured phase
shift. The comparison of the muscle impedance phase angle to
the measured phase shift shows similarity for most part of the
frequency range, but large differences at low frequencies. The
large phase shift at low frequency could be due to the insertion of
balun that has similar large phase shift at the same low frequencies. Though we subtracted the phase shift due to baluns from

1205

the measured phase shift, no other component of the system
shows such phase shift characteristics at low frequencies.
Another electrode configuration we investigated is the case
when drs < l and l > dts . For changes of drs from 12 to 4.5 cm
while keeping the other parameters constant, which is dts =
8.5 cm and l = 10 cm, the gain decreases by 3 dB and phase
increases by 3◦ . Gain and phase shift plots for this specific
case overlaps with the plot of dts85drs12l15. The calculation
result and impedance characteristics again show that the dielectric properties of the skin mainly affect the detected potential
difference similar to the first case discussed.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a simplified equivalent circuit model of the
upper arm for galvanic coupling-type IBC of frequency range
200 kHz to 10 MHz. We addressed a new way of calculating
the electrode–skin contact impedance based on the measured
impedance of the arm. Based on the equivalent circuit, we also
investigated the effect of tissues, anthropometry of subjects,
and electrode configuration on the measured gain and phase
shift. With the aid of the equivalent circuit we saw that, for the
case l > dts , the secondary current on the skin is important in
characterizing the detected potential difference. On the other
hand, for the case l < dts , the current distribution on muscle is
more important in characterizing the measured gain and phase
shift. Our future work will focus on the possible applications of
these findings to medical tissue diagnosis.

REFERENCES
[1] U. Varshney, “Pervasive healthcare and wireless health monitoring,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 12, pp. 113–127, Jul. 2007.
[2] Z. Lucev, I. Krois, and M. Cifrek, “Intrabody Communication in
Biotelemetry,” in Wearable and Autonomous Biomedical Devices and Systems for Smart Environment, A. Lay-Ekuakille and S. C. Mukhopadhyay,
Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 351–368.
[3] M. Estudillo, D. Naranjo, L. M. Roa, and J. Reina-Tosina, “Intrabody
Communications (IBC) as an Alternative Proposal for Biomedical Wearable Systems,” in Handbook of Research on Developments in E-Health and
Telemedicine: Technological and Social Perspectives, M. Cruz-Cunha, A.
J. Tavares, and R. Simoes Ed. Chicago, IL, USA: IGI Global, 2009, vol.
1, p. 1–28.
[4] T. G. Zimmerman, “Personal area networks: Near-Field Intrabody Communication,” IBM Sys. J., vol. 35, no. 3–4, pp. 609–617, 1996.
[5] Z. Lucev, I. Krois, and M. Cifrek, “A capacitive intrabody communication channel from 100 kHz to 100 MHz,” in Proc. IEEE Instrum. Meas.
Technol. Conf., May 2011, pp. 1–4.
[6] M. S. Wegmueller, M. Oberle, N. Felber, N. Kuster, and W. Fichtner,
“Signal transmission by galvanic coupling through the human body,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 963–969, Apr. 2010.
[7] K. Hachisuka, T. Takeda, Y. Terauchi, K. Sasaki, H. Hosaka, and K. Itao,
“Intra-body data transmission for the personal area network,” Microsyst.
Technol., vol. 11, pp. 1020–1027, 2005.
[8] M. Seyedi, B. Kibret, D. T. Lai, and M. Faulkner, “A survey on intrabody communications for body area network applications,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2067–2079, Aug. 2013.
[9] R. Xu, H. Zhu, and J. Yuan, “Electric-field intra-body communication
channel modeling with finite element method,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 705–712, Mar. 2011.
[10] M. S. Wegmueller, A. Kuhn, J. Froehlich, M. Oberle, N. Felber, N. Kuster,
and W. Fichtner, “An attempt to model the human body as a communication channel,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1851–1857,
Oct. 2007.

1206

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

[11] K. Fujii, M. Takahashi, and K. Ito, “Electric field distributions of wearable
devices using the human body as a transmission channel,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 2080–2087, Jul. 2007.
[12] S. Pun, Y. Gao, P. Mak, M. Vai, and M. Du, “Quasi-static multilayer
electrical modeling of human limb for IBC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 870–876, Nov. 2011.
[13] Y. Gao, S. H. Pun, M. Du, M. I. Vai, and P. U. Mak, “A preliminary
two dimensional model for Intra-body Communication of Body Sensor
Networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Sens., Sens. Netw. Inf. Dec. 2008, pp.
273–278.
[14] Y. Song, Q. Hao, K. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Chu, and B. Kang, “The simulation method of the galvanic coupling intrabody communication with
different signal transmission paths,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 60,
no. 4, pp. 1257–1266, Apr. 2011.
[15] M. Wegmueller, M. Oberle, N. Kuster, and W. Fichtner, “From dielectrical
properties of human tissue to intra-body communications,” in Proc. World
Congr. Med. Phys. Biomed. Eng., 2007, vol. 14, pp. 613–617.
[16] M. Callejon, L. Roa, L. Reina-Tosina, and D. Naranjo, “Study of attenuation and dispersion through the skin in intra-body communications
systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 159–165,
Jan. 2012.
[17] J. Bae, H. Cho, K. Song, H. Lee, and H. J. Yoo, “The signal transmission
mechanism on the surface of human body for body channel communication,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 582–593,
Mar. 2012.
[18] N. Cho, J. Yoo, S. J. Song, J. Lee, S. Jeon, and H. J. Yoo, “The human body
characteristics as a signal transmission medium for intrabody communication,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1080–1086,
May 2007.
[19] S. Gabriel, R. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological
tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2271–2293, Nov. 1996.
[20] S. Grimnes and O. G. Martinsen, Bioimpedance and Bioelectricity Basics.
London, U.K.: Academic, 2008.
[21] M. Wegmueller, “Intra-body communication for biomedical sensor networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Inf. Technol. Electr. Eng., ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland, vol. 68, 2007.
[22] M. Makhsous, F. Lin, A. Cichowski, I. Cheng, C. Fasanati, T. Grant, and
R. W. Hendrix, “Use of MRI images to measure tissue thickness over
the ischial tuberosity at different hip flexion,” Clin. Anat., vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 638–645, Jan. 2011.
[23] V. Brodar, “Observations on skin thickness and subcutaneous tissue in
man,” Z. Morph. und Anthrop., vol. 50, pp. 386–395, 1960.
[24] S. H. Goldberg, R. Omid, A. N. Nassr, R. Beck, and M. S. Cohen, “Osseous anatomy of the distal humerus and proximal ulna: Implications for
total elbow arthroplasty,” J. Shoulder Elbow Surg., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. S39–
S46, Sep. 2007.
[25] A. Ahlbom, U. Bergqvist, J. Bernhardt, J. Cesarini, M. Grandolfo,
M. Hietanen, A. Mckinlay, M. Repacholi, D. Sliney, and J. Stolwijk,
“Guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electric, magnetic, and
electromagnetic fields (up to 300 GHz). International commission on nonionizing radiation protection,” Health Phys., vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 494–522,
Oct. 1998.
[26] J. Rosell, J. Colominas, P. Riu, R. Pallas-Areny, and J. G. Webster, “Skin
impedance from 1 Hz to 1 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35,
no. 8, pp. 649–651, Aug. 1988.

Behailu Kibret (S’11) received the B.Sc. degree
from the Faculty of Engineering, Bahir Dar University, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia, in 2005. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree at Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia.
His research interest includes electromagnetics
theory in intrabody communication and body area
networks.

MirHojjat Seyedi (S’10) received the M.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from the Azad University of
Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2008. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree from the College of Engineering and Science, Victoria University, Melbourne,
Australia.
Since 2010, he has been involved in research in
the areas of body area network and intrabody communication.

Daniel T. H. Lai (M’06) received the B.Eng. (Hons.)
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer systems
from Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the
University of Melbourne and Victoria University
(20072010). Since 2011, he has been with the College of Engineering and Science, Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia. His research interests include new sensing and communication technologies
for body sensor network in healthcare. Since 2010,
he has been involved in research in the areas of body
area network and intrabody communication. His research interest also includes
the design of new noninvasive and proactive sensing technologies capable of
detecting, diagnosing, and predicting health risks. He has more than 60 peerreviewed publications and is a current reviewer for several international journals,
e.g., IEEE TRANSACTIONS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND BIOMEDICINE,
Journal of Biomechanics and Sensors and Actuators. He is also actively involved in organization of several workshops and international conferences.

Micheal Faulkner (M’84) received the B.Sc. degree in engineering from London University, London, U.K., and the Ph.D. degree from the University
of Technology, Sydney, Australia.
He is currently a Professor at Victoria University,
Melbourne, Australia. He founded and led the Mobile
Communications and Signal Processing Research
Group in 1988 which morphed into the Centre for
Telecommunications and Microelectronics (CTME)
in 2002. He has been involved in standardization
and commercialization activities in the IEE802.11n
(WLAN) space. He currently leads the Telecom and Microelectronics Group at
the CTME. He has supervised research projects in radio propagation measurements (wideband channel sounding, direction of arrival etc.), MIMO, transceiver
algorithms, architectures and circuits, physical layer signal processing, and modulation. His research interests cover all areas of wireless system design and his
current activities are focused on cognitive radio and flexible transceiver designs.

