IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

1285

Three-Dimensional Transcranial Ultrasound Imaging
of Microbubble Clouds Using a Sparse
Hemispherical Array
Meaghan A. O’Reilly∗ , Member, IEEE, Ryan M. Jones, Student Member, IEEE,
and Kullervo Hynynen, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—There is an increasing interest in bubble-mediated focused ultrasound (FUS) interventions in the brain. However, current technology lacks the ability to spatially monitor the interaction of the microbubbles with the applied acoustic field, something
which is critical for safe clinical translation of these treatments.
Passive acoustic mapping could offer a means for spatially monitoring microbubble emissions that relate to bubble activity and
associated bioeffects. In this study, a hemispherical receiver array
was integrated within an existing transcranial therapy array to
create a device capable of both delivering therapy and monitoring
the process via passive imaging of bubble clouds. A 128-element receiver array was constructed and characterized for varying bubble
concentrations and source spacings. Initial in vivo feasibility testing
was performed. The system was found to be capable of monitoring bubble emissions down to single bubble events through an ex
vivo human skull. The lateral resolution of the system was found
to be between 1.25 and 2 mm and the axial resolution between
2 and 3.5 mm, comparable to the resolution of MRI-based temperature monitoring during thermal FUS treatments in the brain.
The results of initial in vivo experiments show that bubble activity
can be mapped starting at pressure levels below the threshold for
blood–brain barrier disruption. This study presents a feasible solution for imaging bubble activity during cavitation-mediated FUS
treatments in the brain.
Index Terms—Blood–brain barrier (BBB), focused ultrasound
(FUS), passive cavitation mapping, transcranial ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
RANSCRANIAL focused ultrasound (FUS) has been clinically investigated for the treatment of chronic pain [1],
glioblastoma [2], and essential tremor [3]. These treatments are
thermal in nature and can be monitored using magnetic reso-

T

Manuscript received August 7, 2013; revised October 21, 2013; accepted
January 9, 2014. Date of publication January 16, 2014; date of current version
March 17, 2014. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health
under Grants R01-EB009032 and R01-EB003268, as well as the Canada Research Chair Program. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. A. O’Reilly is with the Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON
M4N 3M5, Canada (e-mail: moreilly@sri.utoronto.ca).
R. M. Jones is with the Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON M4N
3M5, Canada and the Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON M5S 2J7, Canada (e-mail: rmjones@sri.utoronto.ca).
K. Hynynen is with the Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON M4N
3M5, Canada, and the Department of Medical Biophysics and Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
M5S 2J7, Canada (e-mail: khynynen@sri.utoronto.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2300838

nance imaging (MRI) thermometry. However, other FUS brain
treatments, such as disruption of the blood–brain barrier (BBB)
for targeted drug delivery to the brain [4]–[6] and cavitationenhanced stroke treatments [7], [8] are nonthermal and are more
difficult to monitor in real time by MRI. Further, disruption of
the BBB using FUS has now been tested in nonhuman primates, with no cognitive deficits reported [9]. This represents
a major milestone in translation to clinical testing, but eventual
implementation in routine clinical practice will require a robust,
real-time monitoring technique.
McDannold et al. [10] first reported an association between
successful BBB disruption (BBBD) and an increase in cavitation activity. Recently, the spectral information from microbubble emissions during BBBD has been used to select treatment
pressures [11] and to modulate them in real time [12] to ensure
treatment safety and efficacy. However, these treatment control
schemes do not provide any information regarding the spatial
extent of the cavitation activity.
Passive imaging could provide a means to localize cavitation activity in the brain. Passive cavitation detectors (PCDs)
are long established for investigating cavitation phenomena
[13]–[15], and advancement from single element PCDs [16]
to arrays of PCDs has added spatial information to cavitation
studies [17], [18]. Passive imaging has long been used to localize
sources [19]–[21] in a number of different fields, but has been
of high interest in recent ultrasound research [22]–[25] due to
its potential to map bubble activity during cavitation-enhanced
therapies and thereby enhance treatment safety and assess outcome. However, passive imaging has had limited investigation
for brain treatments due to the challenges associated with ultrasound imaging through the skull. The skull bone is highly
attenuating and aberrating to sound, particularly at higher frequencies, and brain imaging is typically limited to targets visible
through the temporal or suboccipital windows [26], [27]. Cavitation mapping could be utilized with narrow aperture arrays, as
has been demonstrated in soft tissues [24] and in one transcranial study in primates [25], by utilizing the minimally perturbing
acoustic windows in the skull. However, passive beamforming
is based on the interference of time-delayed waveforms, resulting in a point spread function (PSF) that is highly dependent
on array geometry. Thus, passive imaging algorithms achieve
the best resolution when large apertures are used [21] and so
optimal implementation of these algorithms would use an array
that covered the entire skull surface.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

was determined. This time of flight measurement was repeated
at various source locations, moving the source around the field
using a Parker/Velmax 3-D positioning system (Parker, Hannifin, PA, USA; Velmax Inc, Broomfield, NY, USA).

(a)

B. Bench-Top Experiments

(b)

Fig. 1. (a, left) Receive elements sparsely potted within the tube transmit
elements. (a, right) Top projection of the receive array element configuration.
(b) Experimental setup.

In this study, we describe a sparse hemispherical receiver
array for passive imaging of transcranial sources. We have previously described a method using this array for transcranial
vascular imaging [28]. Here, we characterize the receiver array and examine its potential for imaging bubble clouds during
ultrasound brain therapy. The results and their implication for
therapeutic ultrasound use in the brain are discussed.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Array Design
The receiver array consisted of 128 piezoceramic disc elements (Del Piezo Specialties, LLC., West Palm Beach, FL,
USA), 2.54 mm in diameter, and with center frequencies of
612 kHz. The elements were integrated into the array described
by Song and Hynynen [29] which is a 30 cm diameter hemispherical array consisting of 1372 tube elements with a fundamental frequency of 306 kHz. The receivers were potted in the
middle of 128 transmit elements, in a sparse arrangement [see
Fig. 1(a)] that was optimized to suppress grating lobes through
numerical simulations [30]. Dual-mode (therapy/imaging) ultrasound arrays have been presented which use the same elements for transmit and receive [31], [32]. Here, we have a large
available array surface area and so have chosen separate receive
elements tuned to the second harmonic of the transmit array in
order to minimize interference from the transmit signal, emphasize the harmonic signal content in the captured waveforms and
suppress the strong fundamental signals reflected from the skull
bone.
The locations of the receivers were determined by triangulation. A 1.5 mm, 765 kHz narrow-band source was excited using
an impulse from a pulser/receiver (Panametrics, Olympus-NDT,
Inc., Waltham, MA), and the time of flight to each array element

The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1(b). The transducer
was placed in a rubber-lined tank filled with degassed, deionized
water, centered below the 3-axis positioning system. An ex vivo
human skullcap was degassed for at least 2 h prior to experimentation. The skullcap was placed in the tank, between the array
and thin-walled tubing was placed on the acoustic axis within
2 cm of the geometric focus. The frame holding the skullcap
limited the depth in the dome that it could be placed, and so positioning of the tube distal to the geometric focus allowed a central target in the brain to be simulated. During the experiments,
measurements were also performed for targets at the geometric
focus of the array, and proximal of the geometric focus.
A subset of the therapeutic array was driven during the experiments using a 128 channel driving system (Verasonics, Inc.,
Redmond, WA, USA). Due to the low driving frequency, the
aberrations due to the skull were minimal [33], and the transmit
array was focused using geometric focusing only. The transducer was excited using a 5 cycle burst, and focal pressures
between approximately 0.15 and 0.35 MPa (mechanical index
= 0.25 – 0.59) were achieved through the skull. The pressure at
the focus was determined for one focal position in the skull cavity using a calibrated fiber-optic hydrophone (Precision Acoustics, Ltd., Dorset, U.K.). The profile was then measured with
the 1.5 mm diameter ceramic source/receiver used in the array triangulation measurements, and the fiber-optic hydrophone
measurements were used to calibrate the ceramic receiver. The
voltage generated by the ceramic receiver was measured by an
oscilloscope (TDS 3014B, Tektronix, Richardson, TX, USA).
The focal pressure in subsequent measurements was monitored
with the ceramic source/receiver. The pulse repetition frequency
(PRF) during the different experiments was between 1 and
100 Hz. The raw RF data from the receiver array were captured
using a 128 channel receiver (SonixDAQ, Ultrasonix, Richmond, BC, Canada).
Performance of the array was assessed by mapping the activity of Definity microbubbles (1–3 μm mean diameter, Lantheus
Medical Imaging, North Billerica, MA, USA) flowing in tube
phantoms. The microbubble solution was gravity fed through the
tube phantoms. Estimates of the bubble concentrations used in
this study were determined from Coulter counter measurements.
Samples were taken from three vials of Definity and measured
in a Coulter counter (Multisizer 3, Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea,
CA, USA) within approximately 30 min of activation. A 30 μm
aperture tube was used. Each sample was measured three times.
The concentrations cited in this study are based on a mean measured concentration of (5.3 ± 1.1) ×109 bubbles/mL for the
undiluted agent. The concentration of microbubbles was varied
from 5.3×106 microbubbles/mL, or approximately five times
the expected concentration in the blood stream given a clinical
dose, to 320 microbubbles/mL, or approximately 3×10−4 times

O’REILLY et al.: THREE-DIMENSIONAL TRANSCRANIAL ULTRASOUND IMAGING

the clinical concentration. The polytetrafluoroethylene tubing
(Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA) used in the first three experiments was 0.8 mm in inside diameter (ID) (outside diameter
(OD) = 1.4 mm), and the average flow rate in the tubing was approximately 7 mL/min. In the fourth experiment, a smaller tube
size (ID = 0.26 mm, OD = 0.75 mm) was used in order to examine the resolution of the system. The flow rate in the smaller
tube size was approximately 0.08 mL/min. In the final experiment, three tubing sizes were used: the 0.8 and 0.26 mm ID
tubes, and a third tube with ID = 0.51 mm and OD = 1.07 mm.
The flow rates in the three tubes were approximately 0.47, 0.32
and 0.16 mL/min, from largest to smallest, correspondingly.
Experiment 1: A tube was mounted on the three-axis positioner, parallel to the y-axis, and mechanically scanned through
a fixed transducer focus in 1 mm increments along the x-axis.
At each position, a reference sonication with the tube filled with
saline or deionized water was taken and compared with a sonication when the tube was filled with a solution of microbubbles.
Experiment 2: The tubing was fixed at the transducer focus and different concentrations of microbubbles were flowed
through the tube to determine the minimum bubble concentration that could be detected. Measurements at the highest and
lowest bubble concentrations were performed at several locations along the acoustic axis of the dome.
Experiment 3: Two tubes were placed approximately 5 mm
apart. A volume scan of the two tubes was performed using
electronic steering to scan a 20 × 20 ×10 mm3 volume with a
2 mm step size. Data were captured from the sonications at each
transmit focus and used to create a maximum pixel projection
of the tubes.
Experiment 4: Five tubes, each with an ID of 0.26 mm and
an OD of 0.75 mm, were placed in a row along the x-axis
with their walls touching. The tubes were aligned parallel to the
y-axis. The tubes were initially filled with deionized water and a
reference sonication was performed by scanning the transducer
focus through an xz-plane that intersected the tubes. Two tubes
at a time were then filled with a solution of microbubbles, while
leaving the rest filled with water. The sonications were repeated
for different spacings of the bubble-filled tubes (i.e., adjacent,
one tube spacing, two tube spacing). The data captured for each
transmit focus were used to create a maximum pixel projection
of the tubes. The same process was repeated for a seven-tube
phantom with the tubes stacked in the z-direction, in order to
determine the axial resolution of the array.
Experiment 5: Three tubes with different diameters (IDs =
0.8, 0.51, and 0.26 mm) were joined using superglue to form
a bifurcation. Microbubble solution was flowed from the large
tube into the small tubes, with the flow direction aligned parallel
to the system y-axis. A volume scan was performed by scanning
through a 14 × 6 × 8 mm3 volume (1 mm step size, x and y;
2 mm step size, z). Data were captured for each transmit focus
and used to create a maximum pixel projection image.
C. In Vivo Experiments
Two Wistar rats (Male, 600–700 g) were used to initially
assess the system in vivo. The animals were anesthetized via

1287

intramuscular injection of ketamine (40–50 mg/kg) and xylazine
(10 mg/kg). The animal’s heads were shaved with an electric
razor and the remaining hair was removed using a depilatory
cream. The animals were placed supine on a platform with their
heads supported by a membrane touching the water filled array.
Ultrasound gel was used to ensure good coupling between the
animals head and the membrane. Sonications were performed
through the rat skull bone but in the absence of a human skull
cap.
Sonications were performed outside the MRI; however, the
platform with the animal was moved between the array and a
1.5 T MRI (Signa 1.5 T, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA)
for treatment planning and assessment of BBBD.
All sonications were 130 bursts in length. Bursts consisted
of 5 cycles of ultrasound at a driving frequency of 306 kHz,
repeated at a rate of 1 Hz. The treatment duration was selected
to match the available receive buffer size, while keeping close to
the 2 min treatment time used in our previous studies [12], [34].
The transmit bursts were kept at only 5 cycles in length since
previous studies have shown short pulses can be effective at
disrupting the BBB [34], [35], and by using short pulses interference of skull echos with the microbubble emissions was
reduced. The transmit and receive equipment was as described
in the bench-top experiments. Waveforms were captured during
each burst for later reconstruction. In each animal, an initial sonication was performed without microbubbles to acquire baseline
acoustic maps. Next, a low power sonication was performed (estimated in situ pressure = 0.25 MPa). The sonication was started
simultaneously with the injection of a bolus of Definity contrast
agent (0.02 mL/kg) delivered via a tail vein catheter. Contrast
enhanced (0.2 mL/kg Omniscan, GE Healthcare) T1-weighted
MRI images (FSE, TE = 10 ms, TR = 500 ms, ETL = 4, field
of view (FOV) = 6 cm×6 cm, slice thickness = 1 mm, 128 ×
128) were obtained to assess the integrity of the BBB. Following the MRI scans, a second sonication was performed in the
same target location, at higher power (estimated in situ pressure
= 0.5 MPa), and the MRI scans were repeated. At least 10 min
passed between sonications in an animal.

D. Data Processing
The data were postprocessed in MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA). Reference data taken with the tube phantoms
filled with saline or deionized water were subtracted from data
captured with microbubbles in the tube. This was done in order
to suppress the reflections from the skull, tube and hydrophone
mounts, and was performed line by line on the raw RF data
prior to further processing. The resulting signals were then digitally filtered with a fourth-order Butterworth band-pass filter.
The low frequency cutoff was 400 kHz to suppress the transmit
frequency. The high frequency cutoff was experimentally varied
between 800 kHz and 1.5 MHz to examine the effect of the filter
on the reconstructed images.
Images were reconstructed by beamforming over a reconstruction grid using geometric delays and optional additional delay terms to account for the effects of the skull.

1288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Mathematically, this can be expressed as
⎡
2 ⎤

I (r) = max ⎣
Qi (r; t) ⎦
t

(1)

i

where I(r) is the intensity at a point r = (x,y,z) in the reconstruction grid, and Qi (r;t) is the time-delayed waveform for receiver
i and point r, which can be expressed as follows:
	


 ri − r 
− si ·  ri − r 
(2)
Qi (r; t) = pi t +
c
where pi (t) is the pressure value recorded by element i at time
t, ri is a vector of the coordinates of receiver element i, c is the
speed of sound in the medium, si is a delay term to compensate
for the effect of the skull on the waveform received by element
i, and . represents the Euclidean norm. Multiplication by ri r, the Euclidean norm of the distance between element i and
the point r, accounts for spherical spreading [21].
The skull delay terms were determined using a fixed 765 kHz
source emitting from a location within the reconstruction grid.
The source was excited with an impulse and signals received at
each element were recorded. This was repeated with the skull
placed between the array and source. The necessary delays to
account for the propagation effects of the skull were then determined by cross correlating the signals with and without the
presence of the skull. As an example, in one correction, the mean
correlation coefficient across all channels was 0.93 ± 0.11. In
this correction, 20 channels recorded very poor signals transcranially for calculating the delays. The mean time delay across the
remaining 108 channels was measured to be 2.4 ± 0.8 μs. The
correlation coefficients, number of dropped channels, and mean
time delay varied with skull placement in the dome. In general,
the skull delay parameters {si } vary with source location, receiver element location, and frequency [36]. However, the delay
parameter will not vary substantially over a small reconstruction
grid with a narrow frequency band [37]. This method was used
to simplify the experiments while in clinical cases computed
tomography (CT)-based corrections [37] could be calculated
using methods similar to those used for correcting the transmit
beams in previous clinical FUS investigations [1]–[3].
III. RESULTS
Fig. 2 shows three line profiles across the 0.8 mm tubing at
three different locations within a fixed transducer focus. The
line profiles were obtained at the highest bubble concentration,
5.3 × 106 bubbles/mL, and show that cavitation sources can
be resolved within different subvolumes of the transmit focus.
Fig. 3 shows reconstructed images for a fixed tube position with
decreasing bubble concentration, and using two different high
frequency cutoffs (0.8 and 1.5 MHz). Using the 1.5 MHz cutoff, it can be seen that the ability to reconstruct the images at
low bubble concentrations is hindered by a poor signal-to-noise
ratio. At 2.1 × 104 bubbles/mL, or 2% of the clinical concentration in the blood stream, a source can still be observed in the
reconstruction. However, at 5.2 × 103 bubbles/mL, or 0.5% of
the clinical concentration, the source is not distinguishable in

Fig. 2. Normalized intensity line profiles resulting from shifting a 0.8 mm
tube in 1 mm increments through a fixed transducer focus. Each profile has been
normalized to its maximum.

Fig. 3. Normalized intensity maps for varying bubble concentrations reconstructed using (top) a 1.5 MHz high frequency cutoff and (bottom) a 0.8 MHz
high frequency cutoff. The maps are normalized to the maximum intensities
within each frame. The flow direction is parallel to the y-axis

the reconstruction when using a 1.5 MHz high frequency cutoff. This is in part due to coherent noise at discrete frequencies
around 1 MHz that can be seen in the frequency domain and can
be larger than the frequency component of the bubble activity
for low concentrations. The image can be improved by filtering
out these noise components. When a narrower passband is used
(400–800 kHz) to emphasizes signals around the receive center
frequency and the transmit second harmonic, then bubbles can
be visualized even at as low a concentration as 320 bubbles/mL.
At this concentration, there is approximately 1 bubble per 6 mm
of tubing, so the images produced can be assumed to be of a
single bubble.
Using the results from a single bubble, the PSF for different locations in the field can be determined. Fig. 4(a) shows a
3-D −3 dB intensity isosurface of the reconstruction of a single
bubble located near the geometric focus of the array. Also shown
in Fig. 4(a) are line profiles through the source along the three
Cartesian axes. In Fig. 4(b), the full-width at half-maximum

O’REILLY et al.: THREE-DIMENSIONAL TRANSCRANIAL ULTRASOUND IMAGING

1289

Fig. 5. Normalized intensity maps generated with (left) a single frame at 5.3
× 106 bubbles/mL, (centre left) a single frame at 320 bubbles/mL showing one
source, (centre right) a single frame at 320 bubbles/mL showing two distinct
sources, and (right) a time-averaged map of 524 frames captured at 100 Hz PRF,
and 320 bubbles/mL. The flow direction is parallel to the y-axis.

Fig. 4. (a, top) Three-dimensional rendering of the intensity map for a bubble
located at approximately the geometric focus. (a, bottom) Normalized intensity
profiles for a single bubble along the x, y, and z directions. The axes are in mm
from the source location. (b) FWHM dimensions for single bubbles measured
at the geometric focus and at 20 mm out of the dome along the acoustic axis.
Measurements shown are the mean value averaged over 10 bubble measurements
at each location, and the error bars represent one standard deviation.

(FWHM) dimensions of the reconstruction are plotted, averaged over 10 bubble measurements at the geometric focus, and
at 20 mm out of the array, along the acoustic axis. As expected,
the axial FWHM was greater than the lateral FWHM since the
array geometry affords tighter focusing in the lateral plane. The
lateral FWHM measurements were similar at the two locations,
at approximately 1.3 mm, while they varied in the axial direction (2.7 ± 0.1 mm at the geometric focus, versus 3.1 ± 0.2 mm
at 20 mm out of the dome). Thus, close to the geometric focus,
the ratio of the axial FWHM to lateral FWHM is approximately
2.06, close to the ratio of 2 that is expected for a hemispherical
geometry, and greater than 2 when the source is out of the dome
and the effective aperture of the array is reduced [23].
Microbubble activity in the tubing was detected and mapped
for sources from 20 mm out of the dome to 15 mm proximal to the geometric focus (approximately 2 cm from the skull
surface). More extreme locations were not investigated due to
the limited electronic steering range afforded by the subset of
transmit elements used in this study.
At the lowest bubble concentration, the tube was sonicated
and RF data were acquired at a rate of 100 Hz for a total of 5.24 s
(524 frames). Source displacement between frames is parallel
with the tubing, consistent with motion of bubbles as they flow
through the tubing, and in Fig. 5, it can be seen that a time average of the 524 frames produces a similar image to the single
frame with a concentration of 5.3 × 106 bubbles/mL. Further
analysis of this dataset found that a minimum of approximately
100 frames at the low concentration were needed to produce a
time-averaged image (not shown) similar to the high concentration image. At the low bubble concentration, some frames
contained no bubbles (not shown), while others contained the
image of one bubble or two separated bubbles (see Fig. 5). In
the frequency domain, differences in bubble response can be

Fig. 6. (Top) Intensity maps corresponding to four spectra shown in (bottom).
(Bottom) Normalized power spectra of the beamformed signal at the grid point
of maximum intensity from four different frames showing the response at the
second harmonic. The thick black line shows the spectrum from a frame in
which no bubble response was detected. The remaining three profiles show the
frequency response for three frames containing bubbles. The spectra amplitudes
are normalized to the frame having the greatest response.

observed. Fig. 6 shows the bubble response at the transmit second harmonic for four of the 524 frames, and the corresponding
maps. It can be seen that the spectral content at the second
harmonic corresponds to the presence of a bubble on the reconstructed maps. It can also be seen that the center frequency
of the response varies slightly between frames, which is expected since the microbubbles used are polydisperse. A strong
frequency component is visible around 1 MHz. In some frames,
this component is stronger than the bubble response (as can be
seen later in the in vivo results) and narrow filtering is required
to produce an image as seen in Fig. 3. In a separate study, we
have shown the potential use of single bubbles maps to image
beyond the diffraction limit [28].
In Fig. 7(a), a maximum-pixel projection of two tubes with
the highest concentration of microbubbles is shown with the

1290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 8. (Top row) Scale representation of the tube spacing and orientation for
three different tube spacings (inner wall-to-wall = 0.5, 1.25, and 2 mm). (Bottom
row) Normalized maximum pixel projection image of the tubes generated by
scanning the transducer focus in the xz-plane, perpendicular to the tube direction.

Fig. 7. (a, left) Maximum pixel projection image of two 0.8 mm diameter
tubes with –3dB isosurfaces shown, using source-based skull phase correction.
(a, center, right) Z -projection grayscale images of 3-D volumes reconstructed
using source-based skull phase correction (center) or no phase correction (right).
(b) Maximum pixel z-projection image of the tubes reconstructed over a 10 ×
10 × 10 cm3 volume.

–3 dB isosurfaces illustrated. Z-projection images of the volume are also shown, illustrating the difference between the reconstruction when a skull phase correction technique is used
and when no skull correction is used. It is clear that use of a
correction technique is needed in order to suppress grating lobes
and ensure good image quality. Fig. 7(b) shows an image of the
same two tubes reconstructed over a 10 × 10 × 10 cm3 volume. The signal is well localized to the tubes without any strong
grating lobes present in the surrounding field.
The resolution of the system was experimentally determined
for sources close to the geometric focus. In Fig. 8, it can be seen
that when the two 0.26 mm internal diameter tubes were in contact with each other, they appeared as one source. However, with
approximately 1.25 mm spacing, the two sources are just resolvable, and at 2 mm spacing, they are distinctly separate. Here, we
define “distinctly separate” as when the intensity between the
two peaks is less than 50% (–3 dB) of the peak intensity. Thus,
the lateral resolution of the system likely falls between approximately 1.25 and 2 mm. The axial resolution of the system was
inferior to the lateral resolution, which was expected based on
the array geometry and the larger simulated [30] and measured
PSF in this direction. In Fig. 9, the two sources are spaced axially, and it can be seen that at 1.25 mm spacing, they cannot be
resolved, while at 4.25 mm spacing, they are clearly separate.
At 2, 2.75 and 3.5 mm, two sources can be seen, although less
distinctly as separate. In fact, at 2.75 mm spacing, the sources

Fig. 9. (Top row) Scale representation of the tube spacing and orientation
for five different tube spacings (inner wall-to-wall = 1.25, 2, 2.75, 3.5, and
4.25 mm). (Bottom row) Normalized maximum pixel projection image of the
tubes generated by scanning the transducer focus in the xz-plane, perpendicular
to the tube direction.

are less clearly separated (min. intensity between peaks = 69%)
than at 2 or 3.5 mm (min intensities between peaks = 52%,
50%), which could be attributable to the sensitivity of the reconstruction algorithm to source phase offset [30]. Thus, there
is a transition zone between 2 and 3.5 mm axial spacing, where
two sources may be distinguishable as separate depending on
their phase offset. In addition, at 3.5 mm spacing, there is an
observed displacement in the location of the sources. Repetition
of the experiment found that in the 2–3.5 mm transition zone, a
deviation in the source locations was observed at some spacings,
suggesting that this artifact may occur when two sources are in
close proximity and is possibly also dependent on phase offset.
The observed deviation (mean ± S.D.) over three repetitions
was 1.1 ± 0.5 mm.
Fig. 10 shows the bifurcated tube phantom constructed with
the three different tube sizes and a z-projection image of a
flattened volume reconstruction of the tube (2 cm stack). Unlike the two tubes of equal size (Experiment 3, Fig. 7), the

O’REILLY et al.: THREE-DIMENSIONAL TRANSCRANIAL ULTRASOUND IMAGING

1291

Fig. 10. (Left) Image of bifurcating tube phantom. At the bifurcation point,
a tube with an ID of 0.8 mm bifurcates to a tube with an ID of 0.26 mm and
a tube with an ID of 0.51 mm. (Right) Z -projection image of a reconstructed
volume showing the bifurcation (2 cm stack).

signal obtained from the three different tubes produced different maximum intensities, with the signal in the larger tubes
being substantially greater (2.1 and 1.7 times larger) than that
in the small tube. Therefore, the individual frames were first
normalized to themselves, and those where the frame contained
only noise were discarded, prior to combining the normalized
frames and taking the maximum projection. Included frames
had a peak signal intensity greater than 12 times the mean intensity of the entire frame. In the resulting image, the bifurcation
can be clearly seen.
Finally, Fig. 11 shows results from the in vivo testing. T1weighted MR images are shown at three time points, one baseline image without MRI contrast before FUS, and two contrastenhanced images taken following each of the two FUS exposures (low power/high power). Correspondingly, passive acoustic maps are shown for a baseline exposure without microbubbles, and for the two FUS exposures with microbubbles. The
passive acoustic maps were reconstructed from the captured
burst 30 s after the start of the sonication. The reconstructed
maps represent the lateral plane of peak intensity in the passive
map volume. In Fig. 11(c), the maximum pixel intensity in the
passive map corresponding to each frame is plotted for the three
sonications (no microbubbles, pressure below BBBD threshold
+ microbubbles, pressure above BBBD threshold + microbubbles). From Fig. 11, it can be seen that passive maps of cavitation
activity can be generated below the threshold for BBBD. It is
also clear that what is being mapped is microbubble activity and
not an artifact, based on the absence of coherent sources in the
baseline intensity maps and the presence of bolus wash-in trends
in the peak intensity versus time curves for the FUS sonications
with microbubbles. The sonication that produced BBBD also
had a much greater increase in peak passive map intensity over
baseline than the sonication that did not result in disruption. In
the frequency domain, we can also see that at baseline, there is
no second harmonic content. For the case without BBBD, we
observe a small second harmonic content, but still smaller than
other frequency content. When the BBB is disrupted, the second harmonic component in the beamformed signal is greatly
increased, which is consistent with the literature [10].

Fig. 11. (a) T1-weighted MR images of the same rat taken without contrast
at baseline (left) and with contrast following FUS+MBs at power levels below
(middle) and above (right) the threshold for BBBD. (b) Corresponding passive
acoustic maps from the burst 30 s into the sonication for sonications without MBs
(left), with MBs but no BBBD (center), and with MBs and BBBD (right). The
lateral plane of maximum intensity is shown. (c) Plots of the peak passive map
intensity as a function of time for each of the three sonications. (d) Frequency
spectrum at the point of maximum intensity for a 200 μs time window during
the burst 30 s into the sonication. Traces are shown at baseline (no bubbles) and
for sonications with and without BBBD.

IV. DISCUSSION
The results of this study show that the fabricated array is
capable of mapping microbubble activity, down to the single
bubble level, at diagnostically safe pressure levels, and would
thus be suitable for use in both low and high-intensity therapeutic ultrasound applications. The use of low frequencies both on
transmit and receive minimizes the attenuating and aberrating
effects of the skull, allowing these single bubble events to be
recorded and spatially mapped. Despite the use of low frequencies and a long excitation pulse by diagnostic standards, good
imaging resolution can be achieved since resolution in passive
imaging is primarily dependent on the array aperture and the
source frequency [21], and is not substantially affected by the
transmit pulse length [38].

1292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

By distributing the receive elements over the entire hemisphere, the imaging resolution is optimized. By comparison, previous studies have utilized narrow aperture linear [23], [24], [38]
or planar 2-D [39] arrays. For narrow apertures, the resolution
of passive beamformed images, particularly the axial resolution,
is limited even at high frequencies. For example, Gyöngy and
Coussios [23] report an axial FWHM of 5 mm for the PSF of a
7.5 MHz source, which is too high of a frequency for transskull
applications. Here, at submegahertz frequencies, we achieved an
axial FWHM of less than 3 mm at the geometric focus through
a human skull.
Near the geometric focus, the imaging resolution afforded by
this system, at the frequency band used in this study, is close to
1.25 mm in the lateral direction, and between 2 and 3.5 mm in the
axial direction, in agreement with numerical simulations [30].
This resolution is already on the order of that used in MRI
thermometry for monitoring FUS thermal ablation in the brain
(voxel size = 1.1 mm in-plane, 3–5 mm slice thickness [2]).
In addition, the excitation pressures used in this study were
maintained within a diagnostically acceptable range. Thus, in its
present state, this technology represents a realistic solution for
monitoring bubble-mediated FUS interventions, and for bubbleenhanced brain imaging, at least in the mid-brain.
The receiver array could be used with existing monitoring
and control schemes for BBBD [11], [12], using the spectral
information from the received waveforms to control the treatment, and the time-domain data to map the bubble activity. It
could also be used to monitor other brain treatments, such as
cavitation-enhanced stroke treatments [7], [8]. In addition, the
passive cavitation mapping could be used to ensure that there is
no bubble collapse during thermal ablation of brain tissue since
inertial cavitation may increase the risk of hemorrhage [40].
Flow rates in this study ranged between 0.08 mL/min and
approximately 7.6 mL/min. Flow rates as high as 127 mL/min
have been measured in the middle cerebral artery in humans,
with a mean vessel diameter of 6.5 mm [41], so the conditions
here would model flow in some of the smaller cerebral vessels.
It was observed that with two sources in close proximity, a
small displacement artifact might occur. This is hypothesized to
be related to the phase-offset between the sources [30] and is
thus dependent on the location and separation of the sources in
the dome. In future work, it might be possible to reduce these
artifacts using different excitation pulse schemes.
The image of the bifurcating tube phantom (see Fig. 10) required the frames to be normalized to themselves prior to combining them into the final image. The image in Fig. 10 therefore
maps the location of the cavitation activity, without regards to
the relative strength. Since the intensity values from the larger
tubes were substantially larger than the small tube, the small tube
was suppressed in the final image if the values were normalized
to the maximum intensity in all frames. However, in individual
frames where bubbles in the small tube were excited, the signal
from the tube was still strong relative to the background.
The in vivo results demonstrated that the bubble activity mapping can be performed without impacting on the BBB. This is
important because it indicates that the method could be used for
imaging, as well as confirming sonication targets through a low

power sonication before the BBB disrupting sonication is performed. The MR images and passive maps were misregistered
by approximately 5–7 mm in the z-direction. This was thought to
have occurred due to the need to move the platform holding the
animal between the array and the MRI. In future experiments,
the experimental fixture will be improved to attempt to minimize
this motion error so that the positional agreement between the
MRI enhancement and passive maps can be compared. Future
experiments will also consider in vivo experiments performed
through an ex vivo human skullcap, which was not used here in
order to simplify the experiments while establishing feasibility.
This study has several limitations. First, in the bench-top studies, a skullcap was used instead of a full cranium. It has not been
examined how the reflections from the skull base might affect
the images. In this study, short pulses were used to image a target
central to the skull cavity. For similar conditions, the reflections
from the skull base would likely be separable from the bubble
signals. However, challenges might arise when the target is close
to the skull or when the transmit pulse is long, and future work
should investigate these conditions. It should be noted that several studies have reported the use of very short pulses to disrupt
the BBB, and so the work presented here is still highly applicable to therapeutic ultrasound [34], [35], [42]. Reconstruction
volumes in this study were generally small, although reconstruction over a more significant volume can be easily be performed
(see Fig. 7). In addition, previous numerical analysis suggests
that our existing receive array has sufficient FOV to be able to
beamform sources anywhere in the skull cavity [30]. However,
since the transmit focus is small (FWHM = 2.2 mm laterally,
6.1 mm axially for the full hemispherical transmit array [29]),
large reconstruction volumes may not be necessary to apply
these beamforming methods for directing ultrasound therapy.
Finally, phase correction through the skull was performed using a source-based correction method. However, without phase
correction, some targets were still imageable (see Fig. 7), and
noninvasive phase correction techniques based on CT derived
bone-density information could be used to correct for the skull
aberrations [37], [43] on receive [30] when CT data are available. One of these methods [37] is currently used in clinical
treatments for precise focusing of the therapy beam [1]–[3].
One notable limitation of this method is that absolute intensities in the resulting activity maps cannot be directly compared.
For bubble clouds, the resulting signal is influenced by bubbles that are not spatially resolvable and that may be oscillating
at different phases. As a result, absolute intensity values may
provide less information than the spatial extent of the cavitation
activity or the frequency content. For the case of a single bubble,
the response of individual bubbles is expected to vary since the
bubble population is polydisperse and thus will have different
resonant frequencies. Analysis of single bubble responses using this technique could provide a means to investigate bubble
properties in the vasculature and should be investigated in the
future.
The image formation in this study was performed offline on
a standard CPU (Dell Vostro 420, Intel Core2 Quad CPU), and
for a voxel size of 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 mm3 , reconstruction of a
20 × 20 × 20 mm3 volume from a single excitation pulse took

O’REILLY et al.: THREE-DIMENSIONAL TRANSCRANIAL ULTRASOUND IMAGING

approximately 64 s. Recently, we have implemented this algorithm on a graphics processing unit (NVIDIA Tesla K20, 5 GB
Memory) and achieved reconstruction times of under 100 ms for
the same volume and voxel dimensions. Thus, this technique can
be implemented with available technology to image cavitation
activity in real-time during ultrasound therapy.
V. CONCLUSION
A 128-channel sparse hemispherical receiver array has been
constructed that is capable of passively imaging microbubble
activity transcranially and on the scale of single bubbles. This
study shows the feasibility of 3-D mapping of microbubble
activity for monitoring of therapeutic ultrasound procedures in
the brain. Initial in vivo results demonstrate that bubble activity
can be mapped below the threshold for BBBD. Future work will
focus on comprehensive in vivo testing of the array.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank S. Rideout-Gros and A.
Garces for their assistance with the in vivo experiments, and
E. Ye for his assistance in implementing the reconstruction algorithms on the GPU.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Martin, D. Jeanmonod, A. Morel, E. Zadicario, and B. Werner, “Highintensity focused ultrasound for noninvasive functional neurosurgery,”
Ann. Neurol., vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 858–861, 2009.
[2] N. McDannold, G. T. Clement, P. Black, F. Jolesz, and K. Hynynen, “Transcranial magnetic resonance imaging- guided focused ultrasound surgery
of brain tumors: Initial findings in 3 patients,” Neurosurgery, vol. 66, no. 2,
pp. 323–332, 2010.
[3] N. Lipsman, M. L. Schwartz, Y. Huang, L. Lee, T. Sankar, M. Chapman,
K. Hynynen, and A. M. Lozano, “MR-guided focused ultrasound thalamotomy for essential tremor: A proof-of-concept study,” Lancet Neurol.,
vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 462–468, 2013.
[4] K. Hynynen, N. McDannold, N. Vykhodtseva, and F. Jolesz, “Noninvasive
MR imaging-guided focal opening of the blood-brain barrier in rabbits,”
Radiology, vol. 220, no. 3, pp. 640–646, 2001.
[5] J. Choi, M. Pernot, S. Small, and E. Konofagou, “Noninvasive, transcranial
and localized opening of the blood-brain barrier using focused ultrasound
in mice,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 95–104, 2007.
[6] P.-Y. Chen, H.-L. Liu, M.-Y. Hua, H.-W. Yang, C.-Y. Huang, P.-C. Chu,
L.-A. Lyu, I.-C. Tseng, L.-Y. Feng, H.-C. Tsai, S.-M. Chen, Y.-J. Lu,
J.-J. Wang, T.-C. Yen, Y.-H. Ma, T. Wu, J.-P. Chen, J.-I. Chuang,
J.-W. Shin, C. Hsueh, and K.-C. Wei, “Novel magnetic ultrasound focusing system enhances nanoparticle drug delivery for glioma treatment,”
Neuro Oncol., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1050–1060, 2010.
[7] W. C. Culp, R. Flores, A. T. Brown, J. D. Lowery, P. K. Roberson,
L. J. Hennings, S. D. Woods, J. H. Hatton, B. C. Culp, R. D. Skinner,
and M. J. Borrelli, “Successful microbubble sonothrombolysis without
tissue-type plasminogen activator in a rabbit model of acute ischemic
stroke,” Stroke, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 2280–2285, 2011.
[8] A. Burgess, Y. Huang, A. C. Waspe, M. Ganguly, D. E. Goertz, and
K. Hynynen, “High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) for dissolution
of clots in a rabbit model of embolic stroke,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 8, art.
no. e42311, pp. 1–7, 2012.
[9] N. McDannold, C. D. Arvanitis, N. Vykhodtseva, and M. S. Livingstone,
“Temporary disruption of the blood-brain barrier by use of ultrasound
and microbubbles: Safety and efficacy evaluation in rhesus macaques,”
Cancer Res., vol. 72, no. 14, pp. 3652–3663, 2012.
[10] N. McDannold, N. Vykhodtseva, and K. Hynynen, “Targeted disruption
of the blood-brain barrier with focused ultrasound: Association with cavitation activity,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 793–807, 2006.
[11] C. D. Arvanitis, M. S. Livingstone, N. Vykhodtseva, and N. McDannold,
“Controlled ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier disruption using passive acoustic emissions monitoring,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 9, art. no.
e45783, pp. 1–16, 2012.

1293

[12] M. A. O’Reilly and K. Hynynen, “Blood-brain barrier: Real-time
feedback-controlled focused ultrasound disruption by using an acoustic
emissions-based controller,” Radiology, vol. 263, no. 1, pp. 96–106, 2012.
[13] A. A. Atchley, L. A. Frizzell, R. E. Apfel, C. K. Holland, S. Madanshetty,
and R. A. Roy, “Thresholds for cavitation produced in water by pulsed
ultrasound,” Ultrasonics, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 280–285, 1988.
[14] R. A. Roy, S. I. Madanshetty, and R. E. Apfel, “An acoustic backscattering technique for the detection of transient cavitation produced by
microsecond pulses of ultrasound,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 87, no. 6,
pp. 2451–2458, 1990.
[15] S. I. Madanshetty, R. A. Roy, and R. E. Apfel, “Acoustic microcavitation:
Its active and passive acoustic detection,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 90,
no. 3, pp. 1515–1526, 1991.
[16] B. A. Rabkin, V. Zderic, and S. Vaezy, “Hyperecho in ultrasound images of
HIFU therapy: Involvement of cavitation,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 31,
no. 7, pp. 947–956, 2005.
[17] C. H. Farny, R. G. Holt, and R. A. Roy, “Temporal and spatial detection
of HIFU-induced inertial and hot-vapor cavitation with a diagnostic ultrasound system,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 603–615,
2009.
[18] J. Gateau, J.-F. Aubry, D. Chauvet, A.-L. Boch, M. Fink, and M. Tanter,
“In vivo bubble nucleation probability in sheep brain tissue,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 56, no. 22, pp. 7001–7015, 2011.
[19] T. Sato, K. Uemura, and K. Sasaki, “Super-resolution acoustical passive
imaging system using algebraic reconstruction,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 1802–1808, 1980.
[20] S. J. Norton and M. Linzer, “Backprojection reconstruction of random
source distributions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 81, pp. 977–985, 1987.
[21] S. J. Norton and I. J. Won, “Time exposure acoustics,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1337–1343, May 2000.
[22] V. A. Salgaonkar, S. Datta, C. K. Holland, and T. D. Mast, “Passive cavitation imaging with ultrasound arrays,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 126,
no. 6, pp. 3071–3083, 2009.
[23] M. Gyöngy and C.-C. Coussios, “Passive spatial mapping of inertial cavitation during HIFU exposure,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 1,
pp. 48–56, Jan. 2010.
[24] C. R. Jensen, R. W. Ritchie, M. Gyöngy, J. R. T. Collin, T. Leslie, and
C.-C. Coussios, “Spatiotemporal monitoring of high-intensity focused
ultrasound therapy with passive acoustic mapping,” Radiology, vol. 262,
no. 1, pp. 252–261, 2012.
[25] C. D. Arvanitis, M. S. Livingstone, and N. McDannold, “Combined ultrasound and MR imaging to guide focused ultrasound therapies in the
brain,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, no. 14, pp. 4749–4761, 2013.
[26] S. W. Smith, N. M. Ivancevich, B. D. Lindsey, J. Whitman, E. Light,
M. Fronheiser, H. A. Nicoletto, and D. T. Laskowitz, “The ultrasound
brain helmet: Feasibility study of multiple simultaneous 3 d scans of
cerebral vasculature,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 329–338,
2009.
[27] B. D. Lindsey, E. D. Light, H. A. Nicoletto, E. R. Bennett,
D. T. Laskowitz, and S. W. Smith, “The ultrasound brain helmet: New
transducers and volume registration for in vivo simultaneous multitransducer 3-d transcranial imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr.,
Freq. Control, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1189–1202, Jun. 2011.
[28] M. A. O’Reilly and K. Hynynen, “A super-resolution ultrasound method
for brain vascular mapping,” Med. Phys., vol. 40, no. 11, art. no. 110701,
pp. 1–7, 2013.
[29] J. Song and K. Hynynen, “Feasibility of using lateral mode coupling
method for a large scale ultrasound phased array for noninvasive transcranial therapy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 124–133, Jan.
2010.
[30] R. M. Jones, M. A. O’Reilly, and K. Hynynen, “Transcranial passive
acoustic mapping with hemispherical sparse arrays using CT-based skullspecific aberration corrections: A simulation study,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 58, no. 14, pp. 4981–5005, 2013.
[31] E. S. Ebbini, H. Yao, and A. Shrestha, “Dual-mode ultrasound phased
arrays for image-guided surgery,” Ultrason. Imag., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 65–
82, 2006.
[32] A. J. Casper, D. Liu, J. R. Ballard, and E. S. Ebbini, “Real-time implementation of a dual-mode ultrasound array system: In vivo results,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2751–2759, Oct. 2013.
[33] K. Hynynen and F. A. Jolesz, “Demonstration of potential noninvasive
ultrasound brain therapy through an intact skull,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 275–283, 1998.
[34] M. A. O’Reilly, A. C. Waspe, M. Ganguly, and K. Hynynen, “Focusedultrasound disruption of the blood-brain barrier using closely-timed short
pulses: Influence of sonication parameters and injection rate,” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 587–594, 2011.

1294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

[35] J. J. Choi, K. Selert, F. Vlachos, A. Wong, and E. E. Konofagou, “Noninvasive and localized neuronal delivery using short ultrasonic pulses and
microbubbles,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 108, no. 40, pp. 16539–
16544, 2011.
[36] S. Pichardo, V. W. Sin, and K. Hynynen, “Multi-frequency characterization of the speed of sound and attenuation coefficient for longitudinal
transmission of freshly excised human skulls,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56,
no. 1, pp. 219–250, 2011.
[37] G. T. Clement and K. Hynynen, “A non-invasive method for focusing
ultrasound through the human skull,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, no. 8,
pp. 1219–1236, 2002.
[38] K. J. Haworth, T. D. Mast, K. Radhakrishnan, M. T. Burgess,
J. A. Kopechek, S.-L. Huang, D. D. McPherson, and C. K. Holland, “Passive imaging with pulsed ultrasound insonations,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 132, no. 1, pp. 544–553, 2012.
[39] C. M. Coviello, R. J. Kozick, A. Hurrell, P. P. Smith, and C.-C. Coussios,
“Thin-film sparse boundary array design for passive acoustic mapping
during ultrasound therapy,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq.
Control, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2322–2330, Oct. 2012.
[40] K. Hynynen, A. H. Chung, V. Colucci, and F. A. Jolesz, “Potential adverse
effects of high-intensity focused ultrasound exposure on blood vessels in
vivo,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 193–201, 1996.
[41] K. W. Stock, S. G. Wetzel, P. A. Lyrer, and E. W. Radü, “Quantification of
blood flow in the middle cerebral artery with phase-contrast MR imaging,”
Eur. Radiol., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 1795–1800, 2000.
[42] K. F. Bing, G. P. Howles, Y. Qi, M. L. Palmeri, and K. R. Nightingale,
“Blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption using a diagnostic ultrasound scanner and definity in mice,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1298–
1308, 2009.
[43] J. F. Aubry, M. Tanter, M. Pernot, J. L. Thomas, and M. Fink, “Experimental demonstration of noninvasive transskull adaptive focusing based
on prior computed tomography scans,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 113,
no. 1, pp. 84–93, 2003.

Meaghan A. O’Reilly (S’10–M’13) received the
B.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering from Queen’s
University, Kingston, ON, Canada, in 2007, the M.Sc.
degree in biomedical engineering from the University
of Oxford, Oxford, U.K., in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in applied physics from the University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland, in 2012.
She is currently a Research Associate in the Focused Ultrasound Laboratory at the Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON, which she joined in
2009.

Ryan M. Jones (S’12) received the B.Sc. (Hons.) degree in physics from Queen’s University, Kingston,
ON, Canada, in 2010. Since 2010, he has been a
graduate student in the Focused Ultrasound Laboratory at the Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto,
ON, while working toward the Ph.D. degree in the
Department of Medical Biophysics at the University
of Toronto, Toronto.
He is currently supported by an Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada. His current research interests include therapeutic ultrasound, passive
imaging and beamforming of ultrasound contrast agents, as well as numerical
modeling of transcranial ultrasound propagation.

Kullervo Hynynen (SM’06) received the Ph.D. degree from the University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen,
U.K.
After completing his postdoctoral training in
biomedical ultrasound, also at the University of Aberdeen, he accepted a faculty position at the University of Arizona in 1984. He joined the faculty at the
Harvard Medical School, and Brigham and Women’s
Hospital in Boston, MA, USA, in 1993. There he
reached the rank of Full Professor, and founded and
directed the Focused Ultrasound Laboratory. In 2006,
he moved to the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. He is currently the
Director of the Physical Sciences research platform and the Centre for Research
in Image-Guided Therapeutics at the Sunnybrook Research Institute and a Professor in the Department of Medical Biophysics at the University of Toronto.
Dr. Hynynen holds a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Imaging Systems and
Image-Guided Therapy awarded by the Government of Canada.

