IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

1431

A Review on the State-of-the-Art Privacy-Preserving
Approaches in the e-Health Clouds
Assad Abbas and Samee U. Khan, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Cloud computing is emerging as a new computing
paradigm in the healthcare sector besides other business domains.
Large numbers of health organizations have started shifting the
electronic health information to the cloud environment. Introducing the cloud services in the health sector not only facilitates the
exchange of electronic medical records among the hospitals and
clinics, but also enables the cloud to act as a medical record storage center. Moreover, shifting to the cloud environment relieves
the healthcare organizations of the tedious tasks of infrastructure
management and also minimizes development and maintenance
costs. Nonetheless, storing the patient health data in the thirdparty servers also entails serious threats to data privacy. Because
of probable disclosure of medical records stored and exchanged
in the cloud, the patients’ privacy concerns should essentially be
considered when designing the security and privacy mechanisms.
Various approaches have been used to preserve the privacy of the
health information in the cloud environment. This survey aims to
encompass the state-of-the-art privacy-preserving approaches employed in the e-Health clouds. Moreover, the privacy-preserving approaches are classified into cryptographic and noncryptographic
approaches and taxonomy of the approaches is also presented.
Furthermore, the strengths and weaknesses of the presented approaches are reported and some open issues are highlighted.
Index Terms—Access control, e-Health cloud, privacy preserving, security.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE development of new technologies has deeply influenced the traditional healthcare practices. Over the past
few decades, technology has seamlessly been integrated into our
lives and has elevated the need for the development of sociotechnical systems in the healthcare domain. There has been a lot
of research in the electronic healthcare area with focus on utilizing the electronic patient records for patient monitoring and
diagnosis. Provision of health services using digital technology
has been termed as e-Health [1]. Moreover, traditional clinical settings with paper-based medical records and prescriptions
have also advanced to the Personal Health Records (PHRs) and
the Electronic Health Records (EHRs). The PHRs and EHRs,
both are the electronic versions of patient health information.
However, the PHRs are controlled by patients themselves [2];
whereas, the EHRs are managed by the healthcare providers [3].

T

Manuscript received February 14, 2013; revised October 14, 2013 and
December 15, 2013; accepted January 10, 2014. Date of publication January
16, 2014; date of current version June 30, 2014.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58108 USA (e-mail: assad.
abbas@my.ndsu.edu; samee.khan@ndsu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2300846

The e-Health necessitates entire restructuring and digitalization
of healthcare infrastructure, including production, supply, and
management [4]. The new paradigm, for provision of ubiquitous health services at affordable prices, has been adopted by
countries, such as USA [5], Canada [6], U.K. [7], Korea [4], and
European Union [8]–[10].
Several healthcare providers and insurance companies today
use one or the other form of electronic medical record systems.
Usually, a patient may have many healthcare service providers,
including primary care physicians, specialists, and therapists.
In addition, a patient may register with several health insurance
companies for different types of insurances, such as medical,
dental, and vision [11]. Consequently, the EHR of a patient
may exist at various locations in the healthcare community networks. From the clinical standpoint, it is important to access the
up-to-date integrated patient health information [12]. However,
sharing and integration of the EHRs, that are managed by several
healthcare providers is slow and costly [11] and requires effective, secure, and low cost mechanisms to share EHRs among
several healthcare providers.
The requirements for storage and continuous availability
of e-Health data necessitate the use of the cloud computing
services [13]. Cloud computing is emerging as a promising
paradigm for computing and is drawing the attention from both
academia and industry [14]. The cloud-computing model shifts
the computing infrastructure to third-party service providers that
manage the hardware and software resources with significant
cost reductions [15], [16]. Cloud computing has shown great
potential to enhance collaboration among different healthcare
organizations and to fulfill the common requirements, such as
scale, agility, cost effectiveness, and availability [12]. Moreover,
migration of patient health records to the cloud storage relieves
the healthcare providers from the infrastructure management
tasks [17], [18]. Although there is no standard definition of
the e-Health cloud, it can be considered as a platform that, besides storing gigantic volumes of the health data, also serves
as a structured management of the health data across multiple
healthcare providers. The health data can further be extracted
from different databases for treatments and other analytical purposes [19]. Typically, the cloud consists of layered elements,
such as physical storage, service infrastructure, application, and
communication infrastructure. Moreover, the e-Health cloud infrastructure may be 1) implemented internally by the healthcare
provider (private), 2) maintained by some external party (public), 3) or is maintained by the healthcare provider and external
party together (hybrid) [20]. In [19], Wu et al. uses a private
cloud, whereas [21] and [22] public and hybrid clouds have
been used, respectively.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1432

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Nevertheless, automated PHRs are exposed to possible abuse
and require security measures based on the identity management, access control, policy integration, and compliance management [23]–[26], [27]. In [28], it is claimed that storing huge
volumes of patients’ sensitive medical data in third-party cloud
storage is susceptible to loss, leakage, or theft. Moreover, traditional network security mechanisms are also not sufficient for
the data outsourced for storage [29]. Therefore, confidentiality and integrity of the stored health data is deemed as one of
the major challenges elevated by the external storages. In [30],
Kamara and Lauter articulates that using cryptographic storage
significantly enhances security of the data. Particularly, in the
public cloud environment operated by the commercial service
providers and shared by several other customers, data privacy
and security is the most anticipated requirement.
Various mechanisms have been developed to preserve and
enhance the privacy of the e-Health systems in the cloud environment. We present an overview of the most common privacy
preserving approaches that have been used in the e-Health clouds
in particular. To the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive survey available focusing solely on privacy issues of the
e-Health cloud. Takabi et al. [24] and Xiao et al. [31] provide an
overview of the existing security and privacy issues in the cloud
environment with the contemporary privacy measures. Ahuja
et al. [13] discussed about the current research and trends in the
e-Health cloud with a minimal focus on privacy issues. In [32],
Li analyzes properties of the existing PHRs and identifies the
particular privacy risks. No thorough discussion on the privacypreserving approaches pertaining to the e-Health cloud is presented. In [33], Rosenthal et al. introduce the cloud architecture
for bio-medical applications with discussion on the security and
privacy issues. However, in [20] and [34] the authors have discussed some privacy-preserving efforts particular to the e-Health
clouds. We present taxonomy of the approaches that have been
used to preserve the health data privacy in the cloud. Besides
the discussion on the privacy-preserving approaches, the survey
also highlights the strengths and weaknesses of the presented
approaches. Moreover, we discuss the privacy-preserving requirements and report what types of requirements are fulfilled
by each of the presented approaches and also highlight some
open research issues. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the need and requirements of privacy in the e-Health cloud with the discussion on threat models. The privacy-preserving approaches used in the cloud-based
health systems are presented in Section III. Section IV presents
comparison of the presented approaches and Section V concludes the discussion and highlights the open research issues and
areas.
II. NEED AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PRIVACY IN THE
E-HEALTH CLOUD
Recent trends in the healthcare, centering on accessing the information anytime and anywhere, encourage moving the healthcare information towards the cloud. Despite the fact that the
cloud offers several benefits, it also entails special threats to the
health data in terms of privacy and security [35]. The concept of

privacy preserving is considerably more than merely maintaining the confidentiality of data. Metri et al. [36] argue that threats
to the data privacy in the cloud include spoofing identity, tampering with the data, repudiation, and information disclosure.
In spoofing identity attack, the attacker pretends to be a valid
user whereas data tampering involves malicious alterations and
modification of the content. Repudiation threats are concerned
with the users who deny after performing an activity with the
data. Information disclosure is the exposure of information to
the entities having no right to access information [36]. The
same threats prevail for the health data stored and transmitted
on the third-party cloud servers. Essentially, the cloud service
providers should completely recognize as well as deal with the
security concerns in the cloud to enhance the trust level of the
patients and healthcare organizations [37]. In the United States
for example, use and disclosure of the Protected Health Information (PHI) should be in accordance with the requirements of the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
The HIPAA requires that maintaining the confidentiality of the
health data is not an option, but an obligation [38].
Typical entities in a cloud-based health record system are patients, hospital staff, such as doctors, nurses, pharmacies, and
laboratory staff, insurance companies, and the cloud service
providers. Due to the distributed architecture of the cloud, the
patient EHRs are stored at and shared among many third-party
providers. Therefore, the data is susceptible to unauthorized access and attacks. Various approaches being used to maintain
privacy of the e-Health cloud are based on particular adversarial
models. One model assumes the cloud servers as untrusted entities that could possibly disclose the sensitive health information.
Moreover, such untrusted cloud servers are vulnerable to threats
from the internal and external adversaries. The adversaries may
not only attempt to access the encrypted health data through
forged credentials but also can gain access to the health data as
privileged users. In the second model, threats to the health data
stored in the trusted cloud servers can be from the inside adversaries. For instance, parts of the data may be saved by a doctor
who could subsequently share the data with unauthorized entities, thereby causing the information disclosure [39]. Moreover,
identities of the entities must be kept anonymous and flows of the
health data from different sources in the cloud must be intricate
enough to infer the linkablity among them. In the third model,
the cloud servers are semitrusted. The semitrusted cloud servers
are usually considered as honest, however, they are curious to
obtain as much information about the health data as possible and
may collude with some malicious users [17]. In such situations,
the adversaries may not only tamper the patient health data but
can also share or sell the health information to the unauthorized
parties. For example, the medicine prescribed by a doctor may
be revealed to the representatives of the pharmaceutical company [35] or the expense information pertaining to the insurance
company may be tampered. Therefore, the health data privacy
preserving in the cloud has multiple requirements to be fulfilled.
The requirements include integrity, confidentiality, authenticity,
accountability, audit, nonrepudiation, anonymity, and unlinkability [20], [40]. Each of the aforementioned requirements is
briefly defined next in context of the e-Health systems.

ABBAS AND KHAN: REVIEW ON THE STATE-OF-THE-ART PRIVACY-PRESERVING APPROACHES IN THE e-HEALTH CLOUDS

1) Integrity—to ensure that the health data captured by a
system or provided to any entity is true representation of
the intended information and has not been modified in any
way [31].
2) Confidentiality—to ensure that the health data of patients is kept completely undisclosed to the unauthorized
entities.
3) Authenticity—ensures that the entity requesting access is
authentic. In the healthcare systems, the information provided by the healthcare providers and the identities of the
entities using such information must be verified.
4) Accountability—an obligation to be responsible in light of
the agreed upon expectations. The patients or the entities
nominated by the patients should monitor the use of their
health information whenever that is accessed at hospitals,
pharmacies, insurance companies etc.
5) Audit —to ensure that all the healthcare data is secure and
all the data access activities in the e-Health cloud are being
monitored.
6) Nonrepudiation—repudiation threats are concerned with
the users who deny after performing an activity with the
data. For instance, in the healthcare scenario neither the
patients nor the doctors can deny after misappropriating
the health data.
7) Anonymity—refers to the state where a particular subject
cannot be identified. For instance, identities of the patients
can be made anonymous when they store their health data
on the cloud so that the cloud servers could not learn about
the identity.
8) Unlinkability—-refers to the use of resources or items
of interest multiple times by a user without other users
or subjects being able to interlink the usage of these resources [41]. More specifically, the information obtained
from different flows of the health data should not be sufficient to establish linkability by the unauthorized entities.
III. PRIVACY-PRESERVING APPROACHES IN THE
E-HEALTH CLOUDS
Numerous approaches have been proposed to preserve the
privacy of the patient health data. However, there is no clear classification of the privacy-preserving approaches. Therefore, we
classify the privacy-preserving approaches used in the e-Health
clouds into 1) cryptographic and 2) noncryptographic approaches at the top level. The cryptographic approaches to
mitigate the privacy risks utilize certain encryption schemes
and cryptographic primitives. Conversely, noncryptographic approaches mainly use policy-based authorization infrastructure
that allows the data objects to have access control policies. Cryptographic and noncryptographic privacy-preserving approaches
are presented in Section III-A and Section III-B.
A. Cryptographic Approaches
The cryptographic approaches commonly used in the
e-Health cloud-based systems to protect data use encryption
schemes, such as Public Key Encryption (PKE) and Symmetric
Key Encryption (SKE). However, there are some other cryp-

Fig. 1.

1433

Taxonomy of the privacy preserving approaches in the e-Health cloud.

tographic primitives that are also used to preserve the privacy
of the health data. These primitives include 1) searchable encryption, 2) (Hierarchical) Identity-Based Encryption (HIBE),
3) Proxy Re-encryption (PRE), 4) Predicate/Hierarchical Predicate Encryption (HPE), and 5) (Fully) homomorphic encryption. In this section, we briefly define and present the approaches
based on the PKE, SKE, and several cryptographic primitives
that are used to preserve the privacy of the e-Health cloud. Fig. 1
presents taxonomy of the privacy-preserving approaches.
1) PKE-Based Hybrid Approaches: The PKE technique requires two separate keys; one of the keys is private whereas the
other is public. Solutions based on the PKE are secure but using
the PKE alone seems computationally less efficient due to the
slower operations and the larger key sizes. Therefore, the PKE
is used in combination with the SKE where symmetric keys are
used to encrypt the contents while public/private keys are used to
secure the symmetric keys. Consequently, in this section we term
the approaches that use the PKE in conjunction with symmetric cryptographic technique as hybrid approaches. The common
public key algorithms use the RSA and Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) techniques for generating public/private parameters used for security services. For instance, the RSA-OAEP
[64] and ECIES [65] are based on the RSA and ECC, respectively. The PKE-based hybrid approaches to protect the health
data in the cloud are presented below.
The authors in [11] presented a reference model for preserving privacy of the healthcare applications in the untrusted
cloud. The authors emphasized on a patient centric, role-based
EHR model that allows the users to maintain anonymity. The
model uses an anonymous signature scheme called group signatures [66] for authenticity and integrity of the EHRs. The group
signature scheme allows a group member to anonymously sign
a message on behalf of all the group members. Moreover, the
authors suggested maintaining the logs of all the accesses and
modifications to the EHRs.
Jafari et al. [42] presented a model to allow such a patientcentric control over the EHRs that restricts the patients to modify the contents authored by other parties, such as doctors and

1434

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

lab staff. The authors used the Digital Rights Management
(DRM)-based approach for secure management of the health
records in the cloud. In the DRM approach, the data is always
stored in an encrypted form and the license is issued by the
owner, whereas the policies expressed in the license are enforced by the agent. The Content Key Encryption (CKE) is used
in DRM systems to control the electronic content, and more
precisely the CKE relates to a DRM system that employs the
user-based CKE [67]. The data is encrypted using a content key
and only the users having valid license are allowed to decrypt
and use the content. The health record service provider acts as
the distributor by providing the protected content only to the
authorized users. However, the provider cannot access the contents in clear text form. Patients and physicians are assigned the
public and the private keys for encryption and decryption.
Mashima and Ahamad [39] proposed the system architecture and related protocols that enable either explicit or implicit
patient control over the heath information. The access control
mechanism focuses on when and how the patient health information is accessed. The authors presented the notion of “accountable usage” and the updated health records to enable robust patient centric monitoring. The records are encrypted through the
PKE with corresponding hash values. Moreover, to ensure the
usage of record by only trusted entities, the concept of Universal Designated Verifier Signatures (UDVS) is introduced. The
UDVS function as standard digital signatures that are publicly
verifiable. The signatures have additional capability of designating the signature to any designated verifier [68]. However, the
proposed scheme exhibits drawback in assuming that the health
data is first created by record issuers that have knowledge about
the contents of records, hash values, and signatures. If such information is disclosed, then the monitoring system would not
be able to effectively manage the access control.
Kaletsch and Sunyaev [21] proposed a framework called Online Referral and Appointment Planer (ORAP) to support secure exchange of the EHRs from general health practitioners to
specialist doctors. In the ORAP security model, the EHRs are
only stored at the physicians’ practice places, that are considered as the only trusted environment. The EHRs are encrypted
and signed before transmission to the central cloud storage and
can be decrypted by the receiving specialists only. The ORAP
uses German Healthcare Telematics Infrastructure components
to provide the secure encryption and signatures for all documents transferred particular to the patients’ health. The framework uses Amazon’s S3 Cloud for temporary storage of large
scaled attachments that are obviously considered as encrypted.
However, the ORAP lacks in integration of patient centric functions that makes it less flexible in providing role-based access.
A solution to address the security issues particular to the enduser platforms and external storage is presented in [43]. The presented architecture consists of Trusted Virtual Domains (TVD)
to establish the access control. The TVDs are combinations of
different virtual machines that trust on each other and have common security policies. The TVD platforms contain the security
kernel and other physical components that virtual machines may
utilize to enforce the policies [69]. A major advantage of using
the TVD approach is its flexibility of integration with the legacy

systems. In the proposed approach, the data that needs to be
transmitted and stored on the external storages is automatically
encrypted through the PKE. When a client machine wants to
connect with the TVD, the underlying infrastructure authenticates the integrity of the client platform. However, deploying
the TVD-based solutions may result in increased complexity and
scalability issues in the situations where the security domains
are implemented on each client machine.
Pecarina et al. [44] presented the PKE-based architecture
to ensure enhanced control through anonymity and unlinkability in a semitrusted health cloud. The approach introduces
the anonymity boundaries between the Cloud Service Provider
(CSP) and the users to ensure the selective anonymity of the
PHRs while submitting the health records to the cloud. Patients
encrypt their PHRs using the public key of the CSP before storing at the cloud. The CSP decrypts the records using the private
key, stores the PHR and location, and encrypts them through the
SKE. Pairing the patients’ master key and the encrypted location
permits the CSP to preserve the administrative control on the
cloud storage.
2) Approaches Based on the SKE: The SKE uses the same
keys for encryption and decryption. The SKE-based schemes
are effective in securing the data but introduce additional complexity in the EHR systems as they may require additional procedures to implement the access control [51]. The SKE-based
algorithm currently in use and acting as standard is the Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES). The AES was recommended as a
standard by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) after the limitations of the Data Encryption Standard
were exposed [70]. Moreover, there are also some commonly
used stream ciphers, such as RC4and A5/1. The SKE-based approaches to protect the health data in the cloud are presented
below.
A mechanism for unlinkability between the patients and electronic medical records in the cloud environment is presented by
Li et al. [59]. The patients’ electronic medical records are encrypted through the SKE and are stored in an anonymous way.
The doctors use digital signatures to process the patient health
records after the treatment for storage at the cloud. The Electronic Medical Record number (PID), identity seed stored inside
the Patients’ Health Card (SID), a random value (R), and a serial
number for treatment (SN) are required to access the patients’
electronic medical record. Moreover, to access the heath data,
a smart card is required that contains the SID. Furthermore, the
PID is stored in two parts separately that restricts the illegitimate
access over the patient data.
Chen et al. [22] used the SKE to encrypt the patient health
data file in normal and emergency situations. The approach
ensures data privacy in a hybrid cloud for sharing the EHRs.
The patients’ health data is stored on the hospital’s private cloud
as well as on the public cloud of the healthcare provider. The
patients’ medical records can only be decrypted through the
private content key that is split randomly and stored in two
different parts. One of the keys is escrowed at the hospital server,
while the other is stored at the smart card owned by the patient.
Therefore, only the authorized users can have access to the
patient EHRs.

ABBAS AND KHAN: REVIEW ON THE STATE-OF-THE-ART PRIVACY-PRESERVING APPROACHES IN THE e-HEALTH CLOUDS

A dynamic access structure to enforce precise access control
over the PHRs in multiuser cloud environment is introduced by
Chen et al. [60]. The health records are encrypted and decrypted
through Lagrange multipliers using the SKE. The approach allows the data owners to generate and share the keys. An important feature of the approach is automatic revocation of the users.
However, the task is costly in terms of computations. The complexities of key management to grant access dynamically over
the PHRs are reduced by managing a partial order relationship
among the users.
A role-based and time-based access control approach is introduced by Zhang et al. [61]. The approach is effective in
storing the encrypted EHRs on the untrusted clouds and solves
the issues of key distribution among the legitimate users. The
approach applies time-bound hierarchical key management that
allows the legitimate users to access the EHRs for a specific
period of time, based on their access roles. For time-bound hierarchical key management, see [71].The EHRs are encrypted
through the SKE. However, the approach is limited in the sense
that it requires a user to work in multiple roles. Consequently,
the users have to possess and manage multiple keys.
3) Approaches Based on Alternative Cryptographic Primitives: In this section, we present the privacy-preserving approaches based on cryptographic primitives mentioned earlier.
a) Attribute-based encryption (ABE) approaches:
Attribute-based encryption (ABE)—introduced by Sahai
et al. [72], the ABE is a cryptographic primitive based on
the PKE where the messages can be encrypted and decrypted
on the basis of user attributes. A ciphertext can be decrypted
only when the attributes and the decryption keys are available.
The ABE enables the users to selectively share the encrypted
data and also provides a fine-grained access [73]. Usually, the
attribute-based approaches are considered as costly in terms
of decryption because of bilinear computation steps [56]. The
variants of the ABE are briefly presented as follows.
Ciphertext policy attribute-based encryption (CP-ABE)—
first introduced in [74], a message in the CP-ABE is encrypted
under an access policy that defines the access structure, whereas
the users’ private keys are associated with a set of attributes.
Later, Zhou and Huang [75] in their construction reduced the
size of ciphertext from the linear to a constant size. However,
the CP-ABE is limited in terms of specifying the access policies
and management of the user attributes.
Key policy attribute-based encryption (KP-ABE)—in contrast
to the CP-ABE, the access policies in the KP-ABE are associated
with the private key whereas a set of descriptive attributes is used
to label the ciphertext [72]. A user can decrypt the ciphertext
only if the data attributes satisfy the defined access structure.
However, the KP-ABE is limited in allowing the encryptor to
decide about the decryptor of the data.
Multiauthority attribute-based encryption (MA-ABE)—
allows the users’ keys to be collectively generated by multiple
trusted authorities that are responsible for governing the subsets
of the users’ attributes. The user obtains a part of the secret key
from each trusted authority, thereby preventing collusion [76].
For situations that require access rights based on identities, the
ABE is considered as an inefficient technique.

1435

TABLE I
ATTRIBUTES IN ATTRIBUTE-BASED ENCRYPTION APPROACHES

Broadcast ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption
(bABE)—is effective in direct revocation of the user keys
without the need of refreshing system parameters or data reencryption. Although, the bABE ensures the health data confidentiality, it causes increased computational overheads in enforcing the access policies.
Some of the privacy-preserving approaches based on the ABE
and its variations, used in the e-Health cloud systems are presented below. Table I presents the attributes that are used to
specify the access policies.
The issues of concurrently achieving the fine-grained access, scalability, and confidentiality of the outsourced data are
addressed by Yu et al. [17]. The data encrypted by a single
owner is subsequently shared with multiple users by distributing the keys. To enable data owner to delegate the computational
tasks to the untrusted cloud servers, the access policies based on
the attributes are enforced. The approach ensures the accountability of the users’ secret keys. In the proposed approach the
tasks of re-encrypting the data files and updating of the secrete
keys are delegated to the cloud servers. To deal with the heavy
computation overheads caused by reencryption of data files and
update of secret key, the KP-ABE, PRE, and lazy reencryption
are combined. The purpose of lazy reencryption is to restrict the
revoked users from learning the updated contents and keys if
the file contents have been modified after user revocation.
Thomas et al. [45] proposed an ABE-based architecture to
preserve the confidentiality of the EHRs. The authors used
the ABE and the PKE for scalable authorization secrets. The
patient’s smart card and PIN are used for authorization and
authentication using the PKE. The patient is provided with a
Transaction Access Code (TAC) that may be sent to a physician
via a telephone or through any other remote mechanism. The
physician in turn creates an EHR and once the TAC is verified,
the EHR is encrypted and sent to the storage provider. The decryption operation requires the health professional to obtain the
TAC and acquire authentication from the Private Key Generator
(PKG). Ruj et al. [48] also proposed an ABE-based access control mechanism to maintain anonymity of the users storing the
PHRs on the cloud. Although, the identity of the entities storing
the data is hidden, their credentials are verified. The approach
is resistant to replay attacks and accomplishes the distribution
of the keys in a decentralized fashion.

1436

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

An attribute-based infrastructure for the EHRs where the patients encrypt their EHR files using the bABE is presented by
Nararyan et al. [46]. The bABE effectively makes plaintext
accessible to the users satisfying the policies attached to the
ciphertext, with an additional functionality of user revocation.
The approach solves the key management issues by using the
users’ attributes for data encryption thereby, allowing every user
to have only one private key for their attribute set for decryption.
The approach also allows users to carry out private searches for
the corresponding keywords over the encrypted data without
revealing the keywords or partial matches to the cloud system.
Moreover, the system permits the healthcare providers to perform keyword-based searches on the patients’ records. The keyword search functionality is provided by combining the bABE
and the Public-Key Encryption with Keyword Search (PEKS)
approach originally presented by Boneh et al. [77].
Li et al. [49] used the ABE to manage the access control
over the health data in multi-owner, multi-authority, and multiuser cloud environment. The patients are capable of setting
their own preferences, generating the decryption keys using the
MA-ABE, and subsequently distributing the keys to the authorized users. Moreover, the attributes are managed in distributed
fashion by each authority. To minimize the complexity of key
distribution, the system has been divided into multiple security
domains and each domain is responsible for managing only a
limited set of users. The proposed scheme is claimed to be flexible in supporting efficient and on-demand revocation of the user
access rights. Nevertheless, the proposed approach suffers from
excessive computational overhead at the data owner side. Li
et al. [50] extended the work presented in [49] and proposed another framework for secure sharing of the PHRs in multiowner
environment that divides the PHRs into different sub-domains.
The use of the MA-ABE is extended to the public domains. The
approach minimizes the intricacies and costs of key management for users and data owners while augmenting the privacy
guarantees. To encrypt the patient health record, the ABE is
used. Moreover, the approach presented in [49] is improved in
terms of efficient management and on-demand user/attribute revocation. Although the approach enhances the scalability of the
system, it is unable to efficiently handle the situations where data
access rights are granted based on the users’ identities instead
of the attributes. Another MA-ABE-based framework to offer
patient centric access over the PHRs is presented in [78]. The
framework assumes multiple owners of the PHRs and divides
the entire system into different security domains and personal
domains.
An approach called Efficient and Secure Patient-centric Access Control Scheme (ESPAC) for the cloud storage using the
CP-ABE is presented by Barua et al. [47]. The scheme permits access to the health data based on access privileges. The
ESPAC uses the IBE for secure transmission of the data between
the remote patient and the e-Health cloud provider; whereas,
the access control is realized by using the CP-ABE. The performance results show that the ESPAC scheme is applicable to
resist the DOS attacks in a dual server mode. However, lack of
dynamicity and flexibility in patient data attainment and then
transmitting to the hospital servers makes this approach ineffi-

cient. Suhair et al. [51] also used the CP-ABE to encrypt the
EHRs based on the healthcare providers’ attributes or credentials in a multi-owner cloud setting. The healthcare providers
share one public key for the EHR encryption and consequently,
avoid the distribution and management overheads of the public
keys. Akinyele et al. [52] also proposed a flexible approach using the ABE to offer a secure encryption of the electronic health
data when it is being transferred to the storage outside the trust
boundaries of the healthcare organization. The approach allows
generation of the self-protected electronic medical records that
can be stored at the cloud servers as well as cell phones to
ensure availability when the provider is offline. A policy engine generates the access policies over the medical record(s)
according to the user types (physician, patient, and insurance
agent). Moreover, the policy engine identifies a set of attributes,
such as record type, patient age, and date to encrypt the records
using the CP-ABE. Likewise, the CP-ABE has also been used
in [76], [79]–[81], and [82] for secure storage and exchange of
the PHRs on the cloud.
b) Approaches based on miscellaneous cryptographic
primitives: In this section, we present the privacy-preserving
approaches based on the cryptographic primitives other than the
ABE.
Searchable encryption —is an important cryptographic primitive that permits to perform search operations over the encrypted
data without revealing the information about the contents and
the user query to the untrusted servers [83]. The first practical approach using searchable encryption based on symmetric
key cryptography was introduced in [83], whereas the authors
in [77] were the first to introduce the public key searchable encryption. However, the searchable encryption techniques suffer
from issues of functional usability and computational inefficiencies. The approaches presented in [46], [53], and [54] allow
searching over the encrypted EHRs.
Predicate encryption and hierarchical predicate encryption
(HPE)—Predicate encryption is a PKE-based paradigm used
to offer fine-grained access control over the encrypted data. In
predicate encryption, the secret keys correspond to the predicates and these secret keys are used to decrypt the ciphertext associated with the attributes corresponding to the predicate [84].
The HPE is a cryptographic primitive that facilitates the delegation of the search capabilities. However, the delegated users
have more restrictive capabilities as compared to the delegating
user [53], [85]. The HPE-based schemes can be used to realize
the searchable encryption.
Identity-based encryption—Shamir [86] first introduced the
notion of identity based cryptography. However, a fully functional Identity Based Encryption (IBE) scheme was introduced
by Boneh and Franklin [87]. The IBE uses any string for instance, a name or an email address as the public key and the
corresponding decryption keys are issued by a trusted party. A
variant of the IBE called the Hierarchical IBE (HIBE) allows
multiple PKGs arranged in a hierarchical form to easily handle
the task of private key generation [88]. An HIBE approach to
protect the EHRs is presented in [54].
Proxy-reencryption (PRE)—is a cryptographic primitive that
allows a semitrusted proxy to convert theciphertext encrypted

ABBAS AND KHAN: REVIEW ON THE STATE-OF-THE-ART PRIVACY-PRESERVING APPROACHES IN THE e-HEALTH CLOUDS

under the public key of one user into a ciphertext that can be
decrypted through the other user’s private key [89].
(Fully)Homomorphic Encryption (FHE)—homomorphic encryption is a particular type of encryption that permits computations on ciphertexts and also results are obtained in an encrypted
form. The concept of FHE presented by Gentry [90] allows evaluating arbitrary number of additions and multiplications over the
encrypted data without being able to decrypt. Another homomorphic scheme called “Somewhat Homomorphic Encryption
(SwHE)” performs limited numbers of homomorphic operations
by evaluating circuits of some specified depth. The FHE-based
solutions seem less practical because of their inefficiency. However, Lauter et al. [58] argue that the SwHE in some scenarios,
such as medical and financial has proved really practical.
Li et al. [53] addressed the issues associated with Authorized
Private Keyword Searches (APKS) on the encrypted EHRs in
the cloud environment under the authorization of local trusted
authorities. The threat model assumes that the cloud server is
honest but curious to learn the data contents by honestly following the protocol. The authors proposed solution for the APKS
based on the cryptographic primitive called the HPE. Besides
documents and query privacy, the proposed scheme supports
multi-dimensional multiple keyword searches, delegation, and
revocation of search capabilities. By using the attribute hierarchy, the technique not only enhances the search efficiency but
also improves the query privacy.
Benaloh et al. [54] presented a Patient Controlled Encryption
(PCE)-based electronic medical record system that allows patients to generate and share the encryption keys for delegation
of the access rights. The EHRs are partitioned in a hierarchical
structure using the HIBE. Each section of the structure is encrypted with a public key that is managed by the patients. The
authors used the PKE to store the data in encrypted form over
third-party storage. The decryption operation requires a subkey that is derived from a master private key. The decryption
keys are distributed by the patients to grants access over certain
parts of the medical record. Moreover, the approach provides an
efficient mechanism for searchability of the encrypted data.
Leng et al. [55] proposed an approach that allows the owner of
the PHRs to delineate the access control through sticky policies
before uploading the PHRs on the cloud. The sticky policies are
employed to regulate the access and usage of data and accompany the data. The entities satisfying the access requirements
specified in the sticky policies are allowed to access the data.
The approach uses a cryptographic primitive called Conditional
Proxy Re-encryption (C-PRE) to enforce the fine-grained access over the PHRs. In the C-PRE as compared to the PRE, the
delegator categorizes plaintexts into portions and also the permissions to decrypt each portion are delegated through a proxy
under the same pair of keys. The approach assumes the presence
of multiple trusted authorities in the PHR system. The trusted
authorities ensure the enforcement of the sticky policies besides
authorizing the users to get the decryption keys for read and
write operations. A more practical construction based on the
PRE is presented in [91].
Lin et al. [56] presented a cloud-assisted privacy-preserving
mobile health monitoring system to preserve privacy of the

1437

clients and the mobile health (mHealth) service providers. The
adversarial model assumes the honest but curious server. The
approach deals with the insiders who commit deliberate or nonintentional attacks to obtain information. The privacy of clients
is protected using identity-based encryption. Moreover, the approach uses homomorphic encryption while transferring the data
from the mobile health provider to the cloud. The homomorphic
encryption is effective in performing the meaningful computations over the encrypted data [58]. The decryption complexities of the client or the health provider are alleviated by using
the outsourcing decryption technique [92] and the key privacy
proxy re-encryption, without compromising on the privacy of
the involved parties. In [57], the authors introduced a multiparty
computational approach using the homomorphic encryption to
process the encrypted ECG signals while preserving the patients’ privacy. Lauter et al. [58] also applied SwHE to enable
the cloud to perform computations over the encrypted patient
data on patients’ behalf.

B. Noncryptographic Approaches
Quite a few noncryptographic approaches have been proposed to preserve privacy of the health data in the cloud. The
noncryptographic approaches mainly use certain policy-based
authorization infrastructure that allows the data objects to have
access control policies. Some of the aforementioned systems
also use few cryptographic primitives, such as hash functions
and digital signature verification. Below, we present the systems
that use the noncryptographic approaches for preserving privacy
in the e-Health cloud.
Fan et al. [8] developed the Data Capture and Auto Identification Reference (DACAR) platform to deal with the issues
of security, integrity, confidentiality, and integration of various
health services. The DACAR makes use of the private cloud
for data storage and the hybrid cloud for hosting the services.
To integrate different health services, the DACAR uses Service
Oriented Architecture (SoA). The DACAR architecture consists
of three layers. The bottom layer deals with security and confidentiality mechanism. The Single Point of Contact is the middle layer used to fulfill the authorization requirements. The top
layer has data buckets, ID mapping, and audit trial services. The
database level encryption, digital signature verification, hashing,
and integrity check-sum are applied on the DACAR platform
to grant the access to the trustworthy individuals, roles, and
application services.
Wu et al. [12] proposed broker-based authorization approach
for selective sharing of the composite EHRs from the multiple
healthcare service providers. The approach introduces an EHR
aggregator for retrieval and aggregation of the distributed EHRs
among multiple clouds to construct the virtual composite EHRs.
Moreover, a policy manger supports the specification and enforces the access control policies. Based on the composite EHR
schema, the EHR instances from different healthcare domains
can be integrated. However, the access control policy infrastructure may come across the policy composition issues in case of
multiple healthcare providers.

1438

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF PRIVACY PRESERVING APPROACHES

Chadwick and Fatema [62] presented an approach where patients’ privacy policies are stuck with the data indicating who
could have access to the data. The authors introduced a master
policy decision point to support multiple sub-ordinate policy
decision points. The cloud application developers use the Application Independent Policy Enforcement Point (AIPEP) to call
the authorization services. The AIPEP accepts web service requests from applications and formulates web service decision
responses to the application. The authorization infrastructure
inquires whether the users have read permissions. If the infrastructure is unable to support a sticky policy, then the sender
of the query is informed about the fact as well. The validation
tests of infrastructure were conducted by running the authorization services on a small cloud server. Nonetheless, the proposed
policy-based infrastructure does not obviate the need for trust

as the cloud data is still susceptible to disclosure threats by the
cloud service providers.
Haas et al. [40] presented an approach that not only allows
the patients to audit the access over the EHRs but also enables
them to identify the sources of data leak. A policy-based access
structure is introduced that prevents the linking of different data
sets for a single patient. The data before writing to the external
storage is passed to a pseudonymity service that ensures the
anonymity of the data. The data is further encrypted with a
unique key before storage on a third-party server. By tracing the
data flows the approach ensures the auditing of the health data.
A cloud-based PHR system called MyPHRMachines that allows patients to build their personal health data repository is
presented in [63]. After upload the PHRs on MyPHRMachine,
the patient can access the PHRs through Virtual Machine (VM)

ABBAS AND KHAN: REVIEW ON THE STATE-OF-THE-ART PRIVACY-PRESERVING APPROACHES IN THE e-HEALTH CLOUDS

to delegate the access rights selectively to individual caregivers
(general physician, hospital, and insurance companies). The
caregivers are provided access to VMs through a ciphered VM
identifier via email. The patients can monitor the PHRs through
the remote desktop protocol and shutdown the VM session if
they realize a misuse of PHR data. All of the communication is
protected using the SSH protocol that besides others, effectively
counters the Man-In-The-Middle attacks.
IV. COMPARISON OF THE PRIVACY-PRESERVING APPROACHES
A detailed comparison of the presented approaches in terms
of the privacy requirements is provided in Table II. As can
be observed that majority of the presented techniques fulfill
the privacy-preserving requirements, such as integrity, confidentiality, authenticity, accountability, and audit. However, the
requirements, such as nonrepudiation, anonymity, and unlinkability are met by only a few techniques. There appears an
important relationship between the anonymity and unlinkability and most of the presented approaches maintain unlinkability
through anonymity. Another important observation is particular
to the ABE-based approaches. The ABE approaches may propagate the keys to the unwanted users having attributes similar
to the legitimate users. Nonetheless, the ABE approaches have
been quite effectively utilized to achieve a desired level of privacy. We also observe that most of the presented cryptographic
techniques have successfully been able to minimize the key
management overheads despite of their inherent complexities.
For instance, the PKE is considered as less efficient in terms of
computation whereas the ABE has a standing of costly decryption primitive because of bilinear computations. However, the
presented schemes in this survey based on the aforementioned
cryptographic schemes sufficiently minimized the key management overhead. The noncryptographic approaches can never be
truly secure in public clouds because they are susceptible to
information disclosure by some insiders or the other hackers.
However, noncryptographic approaches when used only in private clouds preserve the privacy to a desired level because the
infrastructure in such cases is trusted. Therefore, for systems
operating in public or hybrid clouds, using reasonably strong
cryptography is highly important.
In Table II, “” and “×”symbols represent whether a particular privacy-preserving requirement is fulfilled or not, respectively whereas “-” represents that a particular requirement is not
discussed. Moreover, in Table II, due to space limitations, the
privacy-preserving requirements are abbreviated as follows:
Integrity: IN, Confidentiality: CO, Authenticity: AU, Accountability: AC, Audit: AT, Nonrepudiation: NR, Anonymity:
AN, Unlinkability: UN.
V. CONCLUSION AND OPEN RESEARCH ISSUES
The privacy of the electronic health data in the cloudcomputing environment is a serious issue that requires special
considerations. We have presented a state-of-the-art review on
the approaches and methodologies that are currently being used
to deal with the important issue of privacy. We have categorized the privacy-preserving approaches into cryptographic and

1439

noncryptographic approaches. Moreover, we have developed
taxonomy of the techniques that have been applied to preserve
the privacy of the existing data. We also presented a detailed
comparison of the privacy-preserving approaches from the perspective of the fulfillment of the privacy-preserving requirements and key management overhead. Despite all the efforts
made to enhance the privacy of the electronic health data, there
are certain areas and issues still open and need more attention.
We briefly highlight the issues as under:
An important issue that arises due to the nature of the cloud
is secure provenance. Generally, the provenance may include
tracking and monitoring of 1) actions taken, 2) the entities taking the actions, 3) the location of the actions, and 4) the reason
for action [93]. Although the health cloud environment is protected against the privacy threats, still provenance of the health
data may reveal sensitive information to the unauthorized individuals by monitoring the sequence of the events. Therefore,
it is highly desirable that the mechanisms should be developed
to deploy efficient auditing and accountability mechanisms that
anonymously monitor the utilization of health records and track
the provenance to ensure the confidentiality of the data.
Likewise, searchable encryption approaches based on PKE
presented are computationally far less efficient as compared to
symmetric key approaches [56]. Consequently, there is a significant need to devise more usable and efficient data search
strategies without compromising on privacy of the cloud environment in general and the e-Health clouds in particular.
Another important issue worth investigating is determining
and verifying the integrity of the health data in the cloud environment. Although existing privacy preserving mechanisms
offer support to maintain the integrity of data in the cloud, assimilating the integrity verification mechanism with the existing
solutions will offer the patients and the data owners to realize
an increased sense of control over the data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank U. S. Khan, M. Ali,
S.-ur-Rehman Malik, K. Bilal, and N. Jabeen for the valuable
reviews, suggestions, and comments.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Slamanig and C. Stingl, “Privacy aspects of e-health,” in Proc. 3rd
IEEE Int. Conf. Availability, Rel. Security, Mar. 2008, pp. 1226–1233.
[2] D. C. Kaelber, A. K. Jha, D. Johnston, B. Middleton, and D. W. Bates,
“A research agenda for personal health records (PHRs),” J. Am. Med.
Informat. Assoc., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 729–736, 2008.
[3] L. C. Huang, H. C. Chu, C. Y. Lien, C. H. Hsiao, and T. Kao, “Privacy
preservation and information security protection for patients’ portable
electronic health records,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 743–
750, 2009.
[4] H. J. Cheong, N. Y. Shin, and Y. B. Joeng, “Improving korean service
delivery system in health care: Focusing on national e-health system,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. e-Health, Telemedicine Social Med., Feb. 2009,
pp. 263–268.
[5] (2012, Dec. 24). “Federal health IT initiatives,” [Online]. Available:
http://www.hhs.gov.
[6] (2012, Dec. 24). “Canada health infoway,” [Online]. Available:
http://www.infoway-inforoute.ca
[7] J. Dzenowagis and G. Kernen, “Connecting for health: Global vision, local
insight,” World Health Organization, Z699.5.M39, 2005, pp. 1–36.

1440

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

[8] L. Fan, W. Buchanan, C. Thummler, O. Lo, A. Khedim, O. Uthmani,
A. Lawson, and D. Bell, “DACAR platform for e-health services cloud,”
in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., Jul. 2011, pp. 219–226.
[9] P. G. Goldschmidt, “HIT and MIS: Implications of health information
technology and medical information system,” Commun. ACM, vol. 48,
no. 10, pp. 69–74, Oct. 2005.
[10] E. Davidson and D. Heslinga, “Bridging the IT adoption gap for small
physician practices: An action research study on electronic health records,”
ACM J. Inf. Syst. Manag., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 15–28, Jan. 2007.
[11] R. Zhang and L. Liu, “Security models and requirements for healthcare
application clouds,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., Miami,
FL, USA, Jul. 2010, pp. 268–275.
[12] R. Wu, G.-J. Ahn, and H. Hu, “Secure sharing of electronic health records
in clouds,” in Proc. 8th IEEE Int. Conf. Collaborative Comput., Netw.,
Appl. Work-sharing, 2012, pp. 711–718.
[13] S. P. Ahuja, S. Mani, and J. Zambrano1, “A survey of the state of cloud
computing in healthcare,” Netw. Commun. Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 12–
19, Sep. 2012.
[14] P. Mell and T. Grance. (2011). “The NIST definition of cloud computing,”
NIST Specialpublication. [Online]. Available: http://predeveloper.att.
com/home/learn/enablingtechnologies/The_NIST_Definition_of_Cloud_
Computing.pdf
[15] B. Grobauer, T. Walloschek, and E. Stocker, “Understanding cloud computing vulnerabilities,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 50–57,
Mar. 2011.
[16] R. Chow, P. Golle, M. Jakobsson, E. Shi, J. Staddon, R. Masuoka, and
J. Molina, “Controlling data in the cloud: outsourcing computation without
outsourcing control,” in Proc. ACM Workshop on Cloud Comput. Security,
Nov. 2009, pp. 85–90.
[17] S. Yu, C. Wang, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Achieving secure, scalable and finegrained data access control in cloud computing,” in Proc. IEEE Infocom,
Mar. 2010, pp. 1–9.
[18] B. Horowitz. (2012, Dec. 20). “Cloud comput. brings challenges for health care data storage, privacy,” [Online]. Available:
http://www.eweek.com/c/a/Health-Care-IT
[19] J. Vilaplana, F. Solsona, F. Abella, R. Filgueira, and J. Rius, “The cloud
paradigm applied to e-Health,” BMC Med. Inf. Decision Making, vol. 35,
no. 13, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[20] E. AbuKhousa, N. Mohamed, and J. Al-Jaroodi, “E-health cloud: Opportunities and challenges,” Future Internet, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 621–645, Jul.
2012.
[21] A. Kaletsch and A. Sunyaev, “Privacy engineering: Personal health records
in cloud computing environments,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst., Dec.
2011, pp. 1–11.
[22] Y. Y. Chen, J. C. Lu, and J. K. Jan, “A secure EHR system based on hybrid
clouds,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 3375–3384, 2012.
[23] G. Ahn, H. Hu, J. Lee, and Y. Meng, “Representing and reasoning about
web access control policies,” in Proc. 34thIEEE Annu. Conf. Comput.
Softw. Appl.), Jul. 2010, pp. 137–146.
[24] H. Takabi, J. Joshi, and G. Ahn, “Security and privacy challenges in cloud
computing environments,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 24–31,
2010.
[25] R. Wu, G. J. Ahn, H. Hu, and M. Singhal, “Information flow control in
cloud computing,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Collaborative Comput.: Netw.,
Appl. Work-sharing, Oct. 2010, pp. 1–7.
[26] R. Wu, G. Ahn, and H. Hu. (2013, Dec. 14) “Secure sharing of electronic health records in clouds,” [Online]. Available:
http://www.public.asu.edu/∼hongxinh/papers/TrustCol12.pdf
[27] N. Gonzalez, C. Miers, F. Redı́golo, T. Carvalho, M. Simplicio,
M. Naslund, and M. Pourzandi, “A quantitative analysis of current security concerns and solutions for cloud computing,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE
Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., Nov. 2011, pp. 231–238.
[28] M. Johnson, “Data hemorrhages in the health-care sector,” Financial Cryptography Data Security, vol. 5628, pp. 71–89, Apr. 2009.
[29] M. Kallahalla, E. Riedel, R. waminathan, Q. Wang, and K. Fu, “Plutus:
Scalable secure file sharing on untrusted storage,” Fast, vol. 3, pp. 29–42,
2003.
[30] S. Kamara and K. Lauter, “Cryptographic cloud storage,” Financial Cryptography Data Security, vol. 6054, pp. 136–149, 2010.
[31] Z. Xiao and Y. Xiao, “Security and privacy in cloud computing,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2012.
[32] J. Li, “Electronic personal health records and the question of privacy,”
Computers, 2013, DOI: 10.1109/MC.2013.225.
[33] A. Rosenthal, P. Mork, M. H. Li, J. Stanford, D. Koester, and P. Reynolds,
“Cloud computing: A new business paradigm for biomedical informa-

[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]

[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]

tion sharing,” J. Biomed. Informatics, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 342–353,
2010.
A. J. L. Fernández, I. C. Señor, P. Á. Oliver L., and A. Toval, “Security
and privacy in electronic health records: A systematic literature review,”
J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 46, pp. 541–562, 2013.
N. Dong, J. Hugo, and J Pang, “Challenges in e-health: From enabling
to enforcing privacy,” in Foundations of Health Informatics Engineering
and System. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012, pp. 195–206.
P. Metri and G. Sarote, “Privacy issues and challenges in cloud computing,” Int. J. Adv. Eng. Sci. Technol., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 001–006, 2011.
S. Allen. (2012, Dec. 20). “Cloud computing and health care security,”
[Online]. Available: http://cloudcomputing.syscon.com/node/1796151,
2011
(2013, Jan. 4), Health Insurance Portability and Accountability [Online].
Available: http://aspe.hhs.gov/admnsimp/final/pvcpre03.htm
D. Mashima and M. Ahamad, “Enhancing accountability of electronic
health record usage via patient-centric monitoring,” in Proc. 2nd ACM
SIGHIT Sympo. Int. Health Informat., Jan. 2012, pp. 409–418.
S. Haas, S. Wohlgemuth, I. Echizen, N. Sonehara, and G. Müller, “Aspects
of privacy for electronic health records,” Int. J. Med. Informat., vol. 80,
no. 2, pp. e26–e31, 2011.
A. Pfitzmann and M. Hansen. (2013, Sep. 28). “Anonymity, unlinkability, unobservability, pseudonymity, and identity management—A
consolidated proposal for terminology,” [Online]. Available: http://
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.154.421&rep=rep1
&type=pdf
M. Jafari, R. S. Naini, and N. P. Sheppard, “A rights management approach
to protection of privacy in a cloud of electronic health records,” in Proc.
11th Annu. ACM Workshop Digital Rights Manag., Oct. 2011, pp. 23–30.
L. Hans, A. R. Sadeghi, and M. Winandy, “Securing the e-Health
cloud,” in Proc. 1st ACM Int. Health Informat. Sympo., Nov. 2010, pp.
220–229.
J. Pecarina, S. Pu, and J.-C. Liu, “SAPPHIRE: Anonymity for enhanced
control and private collaboration in healthcare clouds,” in Proc. IEEE 4th
Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., 2012, pp. 99–106.
H. Thomas, H. Löhr, A. R. Sadeghi, and M. Winandy, “Flexible patientcontrolled security for electronic health records,” in Proc. 2nd ACM
SIGHT Sympo. Int. Health Informatics, Jan. 2012, pp. 727–732.
S. Narayan, M. Gagn´e, and R. Safavi-Naini, “Privacy preserving EHR
system using attribute-based infrastructure,” in Proc. ACM Cloud Comput.
Security Workshop), Oct. 2010, pp. 47–52.
M. Barua, X. Liang, R. Lu, and X. Shen, “ESPAC: Enabling security
and patient-centric access control for e-health in cloud computing,” Int. J.
Security Netw., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 67–76, 2011.
S. Ruj, M. Stojmenovic, and A. Nayak, “Privacy preserving access control
with authentication for securing data in clouds,” in Proc. 12th IEEE /ACM
Int. Sympo. Cluster, Cloud Grid Comput., 2012, pp. 556–563.
M. Li, S. Yu, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Securing personal health records
in cloud computing: Patient-centric and fine-grained data access control
in multi-owner settings,” Security Privacy in Commun. Netw., vol. 50,
pp. 89–106, Sep. 2010.
M. Li, S. Yu, Y. Zheng, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Scalable and secure sharing
of personal health records in cloud computing using attribute-based encryption,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 131–143,
Jan. 2013.
A. Suhair, S. Radziszowski, and R. K. Raj. (2012, Dec. 20). “Designing
a secure cloud-based EHR system using ciphertext-policy attributebased encryption,” [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.rit.edu/
∼spr/PUBL/ehr11.pdf
J. A. Akinyele, C. U. Lehmann, M. D. Green, M. W. Pagano, Z. N. J. Peterson, and A. D. Rubin, “Self-protecting electronic medical records using
attribute-based encryption,” Cryptology e-Print Archive, Rep. 2010/565,
2010.
M. Li, S. Yu, N. Cao, and W. Lou, “Authorized private keyword search
over encrypted data in cloud computing,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Distrib.
Comput. Syst., Jun. 2011, pp. 383–392.
J. Benaloh, M. Chase, E. Horvitz, and K. Lauter, “Patient controlled
encryption: Ensuring privacy of electronic medical records,” in Proc. ACM
Workshop Cloud Comput. Security, Nov. 2009, pp. 103–114.
C. Leng, H. Yu, J. Wang, and J. Huang, “Securing personal health records
in the cloud by enforcing sticky policies,” Telkomnika Indonesian J. Elect.
Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2200–2208, 2013.
H. Lin, J. Shao, C. Zhang, and Y. Fang, “CAM: Cloud-assisted privacy
preserving mobile health monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 985–997, Jun. 2013.

ABBAS AND KHAN: REVIEW ON THE STATE-OF-THE-ART PRIVACY-PRESERVING APPROACHES IN THE e-HEALTH CLOUDS

[57] M. Barni, P. Failla, R. Lazzeretti, A-R. Sadeghi, and T. Schneider,
“Privacy-preserving ECG classification with branching programs and neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Forensics Security, vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 452–468, Jun. 2011.
[58] K. Lauter, M. Naehrig, and V. Vaikuntanathan, “Can homomorphic encryption be practical?” in Proc. 3rd ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Security Workshop, 2011, pp. 113–124.
[59] Z. R. Li, E. C. Chang, K. H. Huang, and F. Lai, “A secure electronic
medical record sharing mechanism in the cloud computing platform,” in
Proc. 15th IEEE Int. Sympo. Consum. Electron., Jun. 2011, pp. 98–103.
[60] T. S. Chen, C. H. Liu, T. L. Chen, C. S. Chen, J. G. Bau, and T.C. Lin,
“Secure dynamic access control scheme of PHR in cloud computing,” J.
Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 4005–4020, 2012.
[61] R. Zhang, L. Liu, and R. Xue, “Role-based and time-bound access
and management of EHR data,” Security Commun. Netw., 2013, DOI:
10.1002/sec.
[62] D. W. Chadwick and K. Fatema, “A privacy preserving authorization system for the cloud,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 78, pp. 1359–1373, Dec.
2011.
[63] P. V. Gorp and M. Comuzzi, “Lifelong personal health data and application
software via virtual machines in the cloud,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informatics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–10, Jan. 2012.
[64] E. Fujisaki, T. Okamoto, D. Pointcheval, and J. Stern, “RSA-OAEP is
secure under the RSA assumption,” in Proc. CRYPTO, 2001, pp. 260–274.
[65] A. Liu and P. Ning, “TinyECC: A configurable library for elliptic curve
cryptography in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Inf.
Process. Sensor Netw., 2008, pp. 245–256.
[66] G. Ateniese, J. Camenisch, M. Joye, and G. Tsudik, “A practical and
provably secure coalition-resistant group signature scheme,” in Proc. Adv.
Cryptology, 2000, pp. 255–270.
[67] A. V. Loenen “User based content key encryption for a DRM system,”
WIPO Patent WO/2006/038204, Apr. 13, 2006.
[68] R. Steinfeld, L. Bull, H. Wang, and J. Pieprzyk, “Universal designatedverifier signatures,” in Advances in Cryptology-Asiacrypt. Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer, 2003, pp. 523–542.
[69] J. L. Griffin, T. Jaeger, R. Perez, R. Sailer, L. Van Doorn, and R. Cáceres,
“Trusted virtual domains: Toward secure distributed services,” in Proc.
1st IEEE Workshop Hot Topics in Syst. Dependability, 2005, pp. 1–6.
[70] M. Agrawal and P. Mishra, “A comparative survey on symmetric key
encryption techniques,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 877–882,
2012.
[71] E. Bertino, N. Shang, and S. S. Wagstaff, “An efficient time-bound hierarchical key management scheme for secure broadcasting,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 65–70, Apr.–Jun. 2008.
[72] A. Sahai and B. Waters, “Fuzzy identity based encryption,” Adv. Cryptol.
Eurocrypt, vol. 3494, pp. 457–473, May 2005.
[73] V. Goyal, O. Pandey, A. Sahai, and B. Waters, “Attribute-based encryption
for fine-grained access control of encrypted data,” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf.
Comput. Commun. Security, Oct. 2006, pp. 89–98.
[74] J. Bethencourt, A. Sahai, and B. Waters, “Ciphertext-policy attribute-based
encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Sympo. Security Privacy, 2007, pp. 321–334.
[75] Z. Zhou and D. Huang, “On efficient ciphertext-policy attribute based
encryption and broadcast encryption,” in Proc. 17th ACM Conf. Comput.
Commun. Security, 2010, pp. 753–755.
[76] M. Chase and S. S. Chow, “Improving privacy and security in multiauthority attribute-based encryption,” in Proc. 16th ACM Conf. Comput.
Comm. Security, 2009, pp. 121–130.
[77] D. Boneh, G. D. Crescenzo, R. Ostrovsky, and G. Persiano, “Public key
encryption with keyword search,” in Proc. Adv. Cryptology-Eurocrypt,
2004, pp. 506–522.
[78] M. Irfan and S. Yasin, “A novel framework for securing medical records
in cloud computing,” Int. J. Modern Eng. Res., vol. 3, pp. 2697–2699,
2013.
[79] S. Yu, C. Wang, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Attribute based data sharing with
attribute revocation,” in Proc. 5th ACM Sympo. Inf., Comput. Commun.
Security, 2010, pp. 261–270.
[80] L. Ibraimi, M. Asim, and M. Petkovic, “Secure management of personal health records by applying attribute-based encryption,” University
of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands Tech. Rep., TR-CTIT-09-41, 2009.
[81] C. Wang, X. Liu, and W. Li, “Design and implementation of a secure cloud–based personal health record system using ciphertext—policy
attribute—based encryption,” Int. J. Intell. Inf. Database Syst., vol. 7,
no. 5, pp. 389–399, 2013.

1441

[82] G. Hsieh and R. J. Chen, “Design for a secure interoperable cloud-based
personal health record service,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., 2012, pp. 472–479.
[83] D. X. Song, D. Wagner, and A. Perrig, “Practical techniques for searches
on encrypted data,” in Proc. IEEE Sympo. Security Privacy, 2000, pp. 44–
55.
[84] J. Katz, A. Sahai, and B. Waters, “Predicate encryption supporting
disjunctions, polynomial equations, and inner products,” in Proc. Adv.
Cryptology—Eurocrypt, 2008, vol. 26, pp. 146–162.
[85] E. Shi and B. Waters, “Delegating capabilities in predicate encryption systems,” in Automata, Languages and Programming. Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer, 2008, pp. 560–578.
[86] A. Shamir, “Identity-based cryptosystems and signature schemes,” in
Proc. CRYPTO, 1985, pp. 47–53.
[87] D. Boneh and M. K. Franklin, “Identity-based encryption from the weil
pairing,” in Proc. CRYPTO, 2001, pp. 213–229.
[88] C. Gentry and A. Silverberg, “Hierarchical ID-based cryptography,” in
Proc. Adv. cryptology, 2002, pp. 548–566.
[89] M. Blaze, G. Bleumer, and M. Strauss, “Divertible protocols and atomic
proxy cryptography,” in Proc. Advances in Cryptology, 1998, pp. 127–
144.
[90] C. Gentry, “Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices,” in Proc.
ACM Sympo. Theory Comput., 2009, pp. 169–178.
[91] G. Ateniese, K. Fu, M. Green, and S. Hohenberger, “Improved proxy reencryption schemes with applications to secure distributed storage,” ACM
Trans. Inform. Syst. Security, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–30, 2006.
[92] M. Green, S. Hohenberger, and B. Waters, “Outsourcing the decryption
of ABE ciphertexts,” in Proc. Usenix Security, San Francisco, CA, USA,
Aug. 8–12, 2011, pp. 34–49.
[93] R. Lu, X. Lin, X. Liang, and X. S. Shen, “Secure provenance: the essential
of bread and butter of data forensics in cloud computing,” in Proc. 5th
ACM Sympo. Inf., Comput. Commun. Security, 2010, pp. 282–292.

Assad Abbas completed Master of Science in Informatics from University of Skovde, Sweden in 2010.
Currently, he is pursuing PhD at Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Dakota State
University, USA. He is affiliated with COMSATS
Institute of Information Technology, Pakistan since
2004. His research interests are mainly but not limited
to Cloud Computing, Information Systems, Knowledge Based Medical Decision Support Systems, and
Data Mining.

Samee U. Khan (SM’12) received a BS degree from
Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Topi, Pakistan, and a PhD
from the University of Texas, Arlington, TX, USA.
Currently, he is Assistant Professor of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at the North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND, USA. Prof. Khan’s research interests include optimization, robustness, and security
of: cloud, grid, cluster and big data computing, social networks, wired and wireless networks, power
systems, smart grids, and optical networks. His work
has appeared in over 225 publications. He is a Fellow of the Institution of
Engineering and Technology (IET, formerly IEE), and a Fellow of the British
Computer Society (BCS).

