IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1839

A Smartphone-Centric System for the Range
of Motion Assessment in Stroke Patients
Wang Wei Lee, Shih-Cheng Yen, Arthur Tay, Ziyi Zhao, Tian Ma Xu, Karen Koh Mui Ling,
Yee-Sien Ng, Effie Chew, Angela Lou Kuen Cheong, and Gerald Koh Choon Huat

Abstract—The range of motion (ROM) in stroke patients is often severely affected. Poststroke rehabilitation is guided through
the use of clinical assessment scales for the rROM. Unfortunately,
these scales are not widely utilized in clinical practice as they are
excessively time-consuming. Although commercial motion-capture
systems are capable of providing the information required for
the assessments, most systems are either too costly or lack the
convenience required for assessments to be conducted on a daily
basis. This paper presents the design and implementation of a
smartphone-based system for automated motor assessment using
low-cost off-the-shelf inertial sensors. The system was used to automate a portion of the upper-extremity Fugl–Meyer assessment
(FMA), which is widely used to quantify motor deficits in stroke
survivors. Twelve out of 33 items were selected, focusing mainly
on joint angle measurements of the upper body. The system has
the ability to automatically identify the assessment item being conducted, and calculate the maximum respective joint angle achieved.
Preliminary results show the ability of this system to achieve comparable results to goniometer measurements, while significantly
reducing the time required to conduct the assessments. The portability and ease-of-use of the system would simplify the task of
conducting range-of-motion assessments.
Index Terms—Body sensor networks, mobile nodes, patient rehabilitation, wearable sensors.

I. BACKGROUND
TROKE is the fourth leading cause of death in the United
States, with about 795 000 people experiencing stroke each
year [1]. Globally, an estimated 15 million people suffer stroke
yearly [2]. In Singapore, stroke is a major cause of death, with

S

Manuscript received August 30, 2013; accepted January 10, 2014. Date of
publication January 20, 2014; date of current version November 3, 2014. This
work was supported in part by the Singapore Millennium Foundation and in
part by NUS MOE Tier 1 Grant R263-000-A42-112.
W. W. Lee, S.-C. Yen, A. Tay, and Z. Zhao are with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore (e-mail: lee_wang_wei@nus.edu.sg; shihcheng@nus.edu.sg; arthurtay@
nus.edu.sg; ziyi.zhao@nus.edu.sg).
K. K. M. Ling, A. L. K. Cheong, and G. K. C. Huat are with the
Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore (e-mail: karenkoh7@gmail.com; angela_cheong@nuhs.edu.sg;
gerald_koh@nuhs.edu.sg).
T. M. Xu is with the Ang Moh Kio-Thye Hwa Kwan Community Hospital,
Singapore (e-mail: imxu@thkmc.org.sg).
Y.-S. Ng is with the Singapore General Hospital, Singapore (e-mail:
ng.yee.sien@sgh.com.sg).
E. Chew is with the Division of Neurology, University Medicine Cluster,
National University Hospital, Singapore (e-mail: Effie_CHEW@nuhs.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2301449

more than 10 000 new patients being hospitalized due to stroke
each year [3]. Stroke affects a person’s cognitive, language, perceptual, sensory, and motor abilities [4]. The recovery process
is very long, extending beyond the hospital stay and into the
home setting, and are guided by clinical assessments such as
their range of motion. Accurate assessment of their ranges is
hence crucial in selecting the best therapies for stroke patients.
The Fugl–Meyer assessment of sensorimotor recovery after
stroke (FMA) is widely used in clinical trials to quantify motor
deficits in patients after stroke [5]. The main evaluation aspects
of the FMA include motor movements, balance, sensation, joint
ROM and pain, thus providing a concise scale to quantify stroke
severity with sound psychometric properties. However, the FMA
is rarely used in clinics due to its lengthy administration time, as
it consists of a 33-item upper extremity subscale and a 17-item
lower extremity subscale [6]. A typical full-scale assessment
would require more than an hour to conduct. A shorter version
of the FMA (S-FM) was developed by Hsieh et al. [7] to reduce
its administration time. Despite the reduction in items, the S-FM
is still not very widely used. One of the reasons is that the
S-FM is still based on observations of subjects’ motor behavior,
and measurements are conducted manually using a goniometer
or visual estimation. As a result, the accuracy and consistency
may vary greatly across clinicians [8]. A precise, reliable, yet
convenient method of performing such assessments is thus imperative, and this is where the use of electronic tools may be
useful.
The first step to such an effective electronic assessment tool is
the ability to accurately measure joint ROM. Traditionally, electronic assessments of ROM are performed using multicamera
vision systems, which are often too elaborate, expensive, and
inconvenient to perform on large numbers of patients. Other
vision-based systems such as Microsoft Kinect have seen significant adoption in applications for posture and gesture detection. However, such systems suffer from skeletal merging [9]
and thus do not work reliably when the caregiver is within
the field of view of the camera, or if the subject were to sit
on a wheelchair/bed. In recent years, there have been a growing number of attempts to track movements in humans using
wearable devices instead [10]. Methods such as e-textiles [11],
optical linear encoders [12], and fiber optics [13] have been
investigated with the aim of providing accurate joint angle measurements. However, these approaches require the calibration of
equipment for individual patients, due to the variations in joint
sizes and skin elasticity. Inertial measurement units (IMU) are
less sensitive to such variations, since they work by comparing orientation between limbs, instead of measuring the amount

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1840

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 2.

Fig. 1.

General system architecture.

of bend at a joint. In IMU systems, MEMS (microelectromechanical systems) sensors such as accelerometers, gyroscopes,
magnetometers or a combination of them are used to estimate
the orientation of the limbs the sensors are attached to. Estimation of joint angles and joint kinematics using IMUs have been
extensively studied [14]–[18]. The accuracy and reliability of
IMU-based systems have since improved to the point where applications in motion capture, gait, and posture analysis are also
possible [19], [20], and commercial motion capture systems are
now readily available [21], [22].
Despite the availability of technology for accurate joint motion capture, a convenient, user-friendly and cost-effective motor
ability assessment tool has yet to appear. Many of the systems
mentioned are rather complicated, requiring skilled personel to
operate. In addition, these systems often require a PC to process
the data from the sensors, which translates to reduced portability
and convenience.
The aim of this paper is to introduce a new joint-angle measurement system, designed specifically for physicians to conduct ROM assessments quickly and easily within the hospital.
Although it is also based on IMUs, the system is operated from
a smartphone instead, thus improving its mobility. As a start, 12
simple assessment activities from the upper extremity FMA that
do not involve muscle-group synergies were selected and implemented in the system. These activities can be automatically
identified and measured by the system, thus ensuring that the
interface remains simple and user friendly. Developed in collaboration with healthcare professionals from Singapore General
Hospital (SGH) and Ang Moh Kio-Thye Hwa Kwan community Hospital (AMKH), the system aims to provide doctors and
therapists with a practical tool to perform ROM measurements.
Section II will elaborate on the design and implementation
considerations of the system. Section III focuses on validating the accuracy of the system against the goniometer, while
Sections IV and V present the discussion and conclusions,
respectively.
II. DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
A. System Architecture
There are two main parts to the system (see Fig. 1)—the sensor nodes (see Fig. 2) and the application. The sensor nodes

Sensor node.

are responsible for acquiring data on the orientation and movement of the patient’s limbs. A total of seven sensor nodes are
used. Each node includes tri-axial accelerometer, gyroscope, and
magnetometer sensors that are polled by an on-board microcontroller. Also included is a wireless communication module and
battery. Each node measures 66.6 mm × 28.2 mm × 18.1 mm
and weighs 22 g. When used with a fully charged battery, each
node lasts 179 min on average.
A sensor-fusion algorithm runs on each node, where raw
sensor readings are combined to continuously update the 3-D
orientation of the sensor. Compared to implementing the fusion algorithm on the smartphone, calculations performed on
individual nodes greatly reduce the computational load on the
smartphone, while improving reliability of the orientation estimates since it does not have to deal with the possible loss of
sensor readings during wireless transmission.
The IEEE 802.15.4 [23] standard for wireless communication is used for all nodes, in order to reduce size and power
consumption. A single larger node capable of communicating
on both WiFi and the IEEE 802.15.4 standard is included in the
system. Known as the master node, it acts as a bridge between
the other (slave) nodes and the smartphone, while at the same
time collecting data from its on-board sensors. This eliminates
the need for a separate network adapter for the phone. Another
advantage of this solution is the distribution of processing load,
as the master node encapsulates the network protocol needed to
communicate with the rest of the slave nodes. The architecture
of the sensor layer is illustrated in Fig. 3.
The application layer runs on an Android smartphone. It receives the orientation of all nodes from the master node via
WiFi, from which the posture of the subject can then be derived.
The computation of joint angles and the identification of assessment exercises are performed at this stage. The application also
serves as the user interface of the system.
B. System Configuration
The system is built using commercially available components. Each slave node consists of an 8 bit microprocessor
(ATMEGA328, Atmel), a triaxial accelerometer (ADXL345,
Analog Devices), a triaxial gyroscope (ITG3200, InvenSense),
a triaxial magnetometer (HMC5883L, Honeywell), as well as a
IEEE 802.15.4 compliant wireless module (XB24-A, Digi). The
master node uses a different microprocessor (LPC1768, NXP),
and also includes a WiFi module (RN-131C, Roving Networks)
in addition to the sensors used on the slave nodes.

LEE et al.: SMARTPHONE-CENTRIC SYSTEM FOR THE RANGE OF MOTION ASSESSMENT IN STROKE PATIENTS

Fig. 5.

Fig. 3.

Sensor-layer architecture in detail.

1841

Pipelined data transmission.

MSM7227) and 384 MB of RAM, both of which operate on
version 2.2 (Froyo) of the Android operating system.
The system is configured to sample at 25 Hz, which is more
than sufficient to capture a stroke patient’s motion activities
because of the degraded motor function. 25 Hz is also sufficient
for detecting abnormal tremors [24], although this feature was
not yet implemented. The sampling rate was limited by the
wireless bandwidth (IEEE:802.15.4) available.
C. Communication

Fig. 4. Placement of nodes on a patient. (a) Back. (b) Upper Arm. (c) Lower
Arm. (d) Wrist.

Fig. 4 illustrates the placement of the nodes. As the assessment items involve joint-angle measurement of the shoulder,
elbow and wrist joints on both sides of the upper body, seven
nodes are used simultaneously, thus reducing the need to constantly reposition the nodes for each exercise.
The smartphone application is implemented in Java for the
Android mobile operating system. The application has been
tested to run on a Motorola Milestone 2 smartphone with a
1 GHz CPU (TI-OMAP 3630) and 512 MB of RAM, as well as
an HTC Legend smartphone with a 600 MHz CPU (Qualcomm

A star network topology is adopted for internodal wireless
communication, where the master node maintains a direct communication link to the slave nodes.
In order to minimize data loss due to wireless packet collisions, time divisional multiple access (TDMA) is implemented
by an application layer protocol (See Fig. 5). Under this scheme,
beacon signals are broadcast by the master node to demarcate the
boundaries of each period. Each period consists of multiple time
slots reserved for slave nodes to transmit data. Hardware timer
and serial interrupts are used to ensure that all slave nodes adhere to strict timing constraints, transmitting only within their
predefined time slots. With this implementation in place, the
system has been tested to be capable of interfacing up to seven
slave nodes at 25 Hz, with minimal data loss from packet collision. This was later verified using time stamps on samples
from experiments performed on patients. An average of 3.5% of
packets were lost per session, while the average time between
consecutive samples was 40 ms.
D. Orientation Sensing
Data fusion of the readings from the accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer provides consistent orientation estimates while reducing gyroscope drift, as well as measurement
noise from the accelerometer and magnetometer [25]. While
many commercial orientation sensors adopt the Kalman filter
due to its accuracy and effectiveness [26], they can be

1842

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE I
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SYSTEM AND OPTICAL MEASUREMENTS

difficult to implement and require high sampling rates. To reduce
the computational load, we adopted the algorithm by Sebastian
Madgwick [25] which has been tested to be comparable to a proprietary Kalman-based filter used in a commercial IMU-based
motion capture product. The main advantage of the algorithm
is its low computational demands, and the ability to operate
on low sampling rates. This enables orientation estimates to be
calculated on the nodes itself, thus reducing the computational
tasks of the smartphone application.
The system uses quaternions [27] to describe the estimated
orientation of the sensor. Not only is it a more compact representation compared to discrete cosine matrices, it also avoids
the problem of gimbal lock when the pitch reaches ±90◦ (as
compared to Euler Angles) [27].
To relate the sensor frame to Earth frame of reference for
comparison, vectors representing the x-, y-, and z-axis components in the sensor frame were multiplied by the discrete cosine
matrix (DCM) derived from the quaternion output of the algorithm. Equation (1) describes the formula to obtain the DCM
for converting from sensor frame to Earth frame, where q0 to q3
are elements of the quaternion.
⎤
⎡ 2
2q0 − 1 + 2q12 2 (q1 q2 − q0 q3 ) 2 (q1 q3 + q0 q2 )
⎥
⎢
DCM=⎣2 (q1 q2 + q0 q3 ) 2q02 − 1 + 2q22 2 (q2 q3 − q0 q1 ) ⎦
2 (q1 q3 + q0 q2 ) 2 (q2 q3 + q0 q1 ) 2q02 − 1 + 2q32
(1).
To evaluate the accuracy of the system, the sensor-fusion algorithm was tested against a 10 camera Vicon Bonita optical
system (accuracy ± 0.5 mm). A sensor node was strapped onto
the Active Wand provided by the manufacturer, which is a rigid
structure with optical markers meant for calibration [See Fig.
6(a)]. The sampling rate of the optical system was set to 200 Hz,
while signal acquisition and computation of angles was performed using Vicon Tracker software version 1.3.1. The quaternion output from the sensor node was computed at 25 Hz and
conversion to angles was performed offline. For comparison, the
output from the Vicon system was downsampled to match the
system output.
Before each test, the wand was left stationary for 10 s for
the algorithm to converge. This initial position was also used
to offset between the optical system’s coordinate frame and
Earth frame as computed by the sensor. The wand was then
offset along the x-axis of the Earth frame, followed by another
offset on the x-axis in the opposite direction, beyond the initial
position. Such movements were repeated at least 15 times for
each axis with offset magnitudes within ±90◦ . The maximum
angular velocity during movement was always below 360◦ /s.
All movements were conducted by hand.
The root-mean-squared error was computed on the difference
between the two systems, and results were tabulated in Table I.
The error was found to be within 5◦ in all the three planes of

Fig. 6. Comparison with Vicon system. (a) Attaching a sensor (circled) to the
Active Wand (b) Typical output from both systems.

interest. This was higher than the error reported in [25], possibly due to the much lower sampling rate used (25 Hz vversus
512 Hz) as well as magnetic interference from the circuitry
within the Active Wand. Nevertheless, this performance should
be sufficient for our application.
E. User Interface
1) Design Criteria: Central to the system is the user interface (UI), and one important requirement is its usability. Therapists often have to pay full attention to guiding and supporting
their patients during the assessments, and thus cannot afford to
spend much time setting up and operating a system.
Another requirement mentioned is the flexibility of the software during operation. The therapist should not be forced to
conduct the assessment exercises in a predefined order, as depending on the current posture of the patient, the therapist may
want to start with the most convenient assessment exercise first.
Taking the above factors into account, the system adopts a
very minimalist UI. Only crucial information is displayed on the
screen, and large fonts are used to render them. In most cases,
only one button is needed to conduct the full assessment. Audio
cues are used to indicate to the therapist when a measurement
is obtained, thus reducing the need to constantly look at the
smartphone during the assessment.
2) Automatic Exercise Detection: One innovative feature of
the UI is an activity detection algorithm. This feature eliminates
the need for the user to scroll through a long list to select different
exercises, while still allowing the user to conduct the assessment
in any order.
The algorithm works by comparing the initial and final orientation of the limbs. While most exercises (e.g., shoulder flexion,
extension, abduction) involve the measurement of an angle with
respect to a fixed reference (e.g., gravity vector), some exercises,
such as wrist ulnar deviation, involve the measurement of the
angle between the starting and ending positions. As such, there
is a need to manually indicate to the system when the subject
has adopted the starting position. A system of neutral postures
was thus introduced. Neutral postures are postures that a subject
has to adopt at the beginning of each assessment exercise. The
orientation of the sensors in each neutral posture corresponds
to the starting position for the exercise, thus providing a reference from which the end position will be measured against (See
Fig. 7). Note that Neutral 0 is optional as the computation of
joint ROM for each of the activities do not require the initial

LEE et al.: SMARTPHONE-CENTRIC SYSTEM FOR THE RANGE OF MOTION ASSESSMENT IN STROKE PATIENTS

1843

Fig. 7. Neutral postures at start of assessment. Postures 1 and 2 differ in the
positions of the palms.

Fig. 9. Screenshots of User Interface. (a) Landing page. (b) Connected to
master node. (c) During assessment. (d) Summary Table.
Fig. 8.

Flowchart for activity detection. Neutral 0 is not explicitly checked.

angle to be known. However, adopting Neutral 0 at the beginning of an activity would still improve detection accuracy, as
the number of possible activities would be reduced. Note that
the neutral positions adopted here are not the ones that are commonly used in the FMA [5], [7]. These neutral positions were
adopted primarily to make it easier for us to measure the range
of motion of different joints.
The logic used in activity detection is based on a set of experimentally derived thresholds, and guided by the patient’s posture
at the start of the activity. Fig. 8 illustrates the logic flow. For example, a patient starting in neutral posture 2 who flexes his/her
wrist downward would be recognized as performing the wristflexion assessment.
The algorithm has been kept intentionally simple considering
the limited processing capability of mobile phones, although
the accuracy should improve with further refinement and better
hardware.
3) Operation: The smartphone has to enable WiFi hotspot
mode to connect to the master node. The master node searches
for the pre-defined SSID of the hotspot when turned on. To
establish the connection, the user has to press the Connect button
after the application is launched [See Fig. 9(a)].

Before the assessment begins, the user has to enter the identification of the patient. The user is then taken to the assessment
interface once the ID is entered. Within the assessment interface,
there is only a single toggle button to start and stop the activity.
The subject should adopt the respective neutral posture before
the start button is pressed. Automatic activity detection begins
once the start button is pressed. Once the application recognizes
the activity, a ‘beep’ sound is played, while it continuously calculates the respective joint angle [see Fig. 9(c)]. When the same
button is depressed again to stop the activity, the maximum joint
angle is recorded. The application is capable of recognizing two
different activities simultaneously, one on each side of the body.
A checklist of measurements is presented in between activities to indicate to the therapists which measurements have been
performed [see Fig. 9(d)].
Although much effort has been invested to ensure that the activity detection algorithm identifies the correct activity, there
may be instances when the subject may not be capable of
adopting the right neutral posture, or when the subject is not
capable of moving enough to trigger the detection. In such situations, a manual override can be invoked by tapping on the
name of the activity. The user will then be presented with a list
of activities to choose from.

1844

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE II
ACTIVITIES AND THEIR RESPECTIVE NEUTRAL POSTURES

III. DATA COLLECTION
A. Methodology
A preliminary study was conducted, where the system was
tested on five subjects undergoing rehabilitation at AMKH (2
males and 3 females, mean age of 68 years). All participants
were newly disabled in-patients (less than 3 months) undergoing
rehabilitation for a wide variety of diagnoses. Research ethics
approval was obtained from the NUS Institutional Review Board
(Reference Code 11-013 and Approval Number NUS-1270). All
subjects provided informed consent, and participation was voluntary. The purpose of the study was to determine the agreement
between existing goniometric measurements and measurements
by the system. Feedback on the usability of the system was also
gathered from therapists and patients during the study.
Two therapists, each with more than ten years of experience in neuro-rehabilitation of stroke patients were recruited
to perform manual measurements using goniometers. The goniometers used were from HighRes (Baseline©, ±1◦ ), as these
are the standard instruments used by the therapists. Maximual
active ROM measurements were taken when the subject wearing the sensor system has achieved the maximal excursion of
a particular movement in a specific joint by a therapist following protocols described by Clarkson [28]. The equivalent angle
measured by the sensor was recorded by an independent engineering research assistant.
A typical assessment consists of the 12 activities listed in
Table II . The activities were performed sequentially, while
the order of the activities were not fixed. Each subject was
subjected to two consecutive assessments on the same day, each
time by a different therapist, but with minimal change in node
placement between the assessments. The therapists performed
the measurements independently. Only one set of measurements
was taken per activity per therapist, as it was too tiring for
the patient to perform repeated assessments. The correlation
coefficient between the values obtained by our system and the
therapists were computed to quantify the similarity between the
two measurements.
The agreement between the two methods was assessed using
the limits of agreement approach, which provides information
on the extent of random variation between the methods [29]. The
mean of the differences between each pair of measurements was
computed (bias), together with the 95% upper and lower bounds
of the differences (reference interval). The results are visualized
using a Bland-Altman plot, as shown in Fig. 10(b). Briefly, the
Bland–Altman plot illustrates the difference between each pair
of measurements against the mean of the pair of measurements.
The mean and reference interval are also illustrated as hori-

Fig. 10. Plots comparing the system with goniometer readings. (a) System
versus goniometer plot (correlation coefficients for individual activities are
listed in the legend). (b) Bland–Altman plot.

TABLE III
ICC RESULTS FOR OVERALL INTERCHANGEABILITY

zontal lines. The resulting plot depicts the overall degree of
agreement, as well as how well the methods agree in relation to
the magnitude of the measurement.
To evaluate the interchangeability of the two methods, the
intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) was used [30]. The ICC
describes “the proportion of variance of an observation due
to between-subject variability in the true scores” [30]. The index ranges from 0 to 1, with a higher index corresponding
to lower variations between measurements. Each measurement
was treated as an item in the ICC model, and pairs of results from
both tools were treated as raters. As each angle was only measured once by both methods, the ICC(A,1) index was used [30].
In accordance to the proposal by [31], two methods can be
judged interchangeable provided 1) no marked additive or nonadditive systematic bias is exhibited by each method; 2) the
difference between the two mean readings is not “statistically
significant”; and 3) the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval of the ICC is at least 0.75.

LEE et al.: SMARTPHONE-CENTRIC SYSTEM FOR THE RANGE OF MOTION ASSESSMENT IN STROKE PATIENTS

1845

TABLE IV
BA PLOT STATISTICS FOR EACH OF THE ACTIVITIES PERFORMED BY THE TWO THERAPISTS

B. Results
The data collected during our study are shown in Fig. 10(a).
Each data point indicates a measurement that was collected
simultaneously by our system and by one of the therapists.
Overall, we found the correlation coefficient between the two
measurements to be 0.963, with individual activities exhibiting
correlation coefficients that ranged from 0.49 (for elbow flexion)
to 0.91 (for shoulder extension). This showed that the measurements provided by our system were similar to those obtained by
therapists, but could be obtained much more easily and quickly.
The Bland–Altman plot is shown in Fig. 10(b). We found
the mean difference between the two methods to be 0.82◦ , suggesting that there was minimal bias between the methods. The
95% reference interval was from −15.21◦ to 16.84◦ , which represented the extent to which the methods differed. This was
not unexpected as goniometry is known to have a reliability of
±10◦ [32].
The ICC for the two methods was computed to be 0.981,
with the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval at 0.976.
This demonstrates strong interchangeability, as it far exceeds
the criteria of 0.75 set by Lee et al. in [31].
Breaking down the results into individual activities yielded
mixed results (see Table IV). It is apparent that activities such
as shoulder flexion, shoulder abduction, internal rotation of the
arm, elbow flexion, and forearm pronation all exhibited significant differences in biases between the two therapists. As
the nodes were not shifted between the two readings taken by
the therapists, the difference in bias may be considered as a
sign of intertherapist inconsistency. This is not surprising, as
research has shown that in the absence of standardized measurement procedures, interrater reliability for goniometry tends
to be poor [33], [34]. However, this is not enough to conclude
that the proposed system is more precise, since no replicate
measurements were performed for each joint angle [35]. This
is because it was not possible for patients to replicate the same
joint angle across assessments. In addition, there may have been
some errors introduced in the system’s readings as the straps
used to mount the nodes may not have been secure enough.
For example, during activities such as elbow flexion or shoulder
flexion, bulging of muscles or movement of clothing beneath

the straps can affect the alignment of the node on the limbs.
Further improvement is hence required to minimize such errors.
As therapist and system measurements were taken from the
same assessments, we could not directly compare the amount of
time saved from using the system. Nevertheless, time taken for
each activity was logged by the system. On average, measurement of a single activity took 18 s by the therapist, while the
system took only 2 s. This does not include the time needed to
assist and guide the patient to perform the activities. A typical
complete assessment took 54 min on average. It should be noted
that the system is capable of recording from both sides simultaneously, but this feature was not exploited in our experiment.
Further time savings could potentially be achieved if that were
the case.

IV. DISCUSSION
As a proof of concept, the system has demonstrated the ability of mobile platforms to perform real-time data acquisition
and interpretation, in the form of measuring joint angles and
detecting the type of activity. The system has also shown comparable levels of accuracy in measuring a range of joint angles
when compared to the goniometer. More importantly, the time
required to conduct the assessment has been dramatically reduced through the use of the system. However, to conclusively
access accuracy and reproducibility of the devices, multiple sets
of testing need to be done, and we are currently in the process
of doing so.
Due to the continuous nature of the data acquisition, the system is able to capture additional information not easily available
currently. For example, the system is able to capture transient
maximum joint angles, which are maximum joint angles that a
subject can achieve, but is unable to sustain. Therapists, however, can only measure sustained angles, as the subject needs to
hold the angle for a period long enough for the measurement to
be taken. Fig. 11 illustrates one such situation.
Feedback from the clinicians was that the transient maximum
angles are important, as they represent the actual maximum
range of motion of a joint. The period of time in which the
subject can hold a transient maximum is also a sign of muscle

1846

Fig. 11.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Transient maximum versus sustained maximum.

endurance. Other qualitative measures, such as the time-course
of angular change, potentially has important applications under
spasticity conditions including stroke and spinal cord injury, as
well as rigidity/tremor conditions such as Parkinson’s disease.
Such information would be useful in guiding measurement and
therapeutic interventions.
With such a mobile platform in place, it is now possible to
design assessment procedures that are more comprehensive and
representative of the range of movements required by patients
in a natural setting, as the entire system can be deployed anywhere and at any time. The excellent Internet connectivity of
smartphones also means that a comprehensive telerehabilitation system with remote assessment capabilities can be established in the near future. Further advances in MEMS fabrication
would also mean that much smaller devices with minimal power
consumption or energy-harvesting circuitry would improve the
comfort and convenience of wearing such devices.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a smartphone centric, wireless wearable system
for automating joint ROM measurements has been described.
A preliminary test on five patients in a clinical setting has been
conducted, and the results are generally positive. In the long
run, it is our aim to use the system to measure other aspects
such as balance and muscle synergies, both important aspects
in providing a comprehensive poststroke assessment, while remaining low-cost, portable, and easy to use. Toward that end, a
larger study is required to validate the accuracy and reliability of
the system on a sufficiently large group of poststroke patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Z. Lee, P. Zhou, F. Gao,
and S. Purnima, as well as the staff and patients of AMKH for
their contributions in conducting the FMA assessments.
REFERENCES
[1] V. L. Roger, A. S. Go, D. M. Lloyd-Jones, E. J. Benjamin, J. D. Berry,
W. B. Borden, D. M. Bravata, S. Dai, E. S. Ford, and C. S. Fox, “Heart
disease and stroke statistics—2012 update a report from the american
heart association,” Circulation, vol. 125, no. 1, pp. e2–e220, 2012.

[2] J. McKay, G. A. Mensah, and K. Greenlund, The Atlas of Heart Disease
and Stroke. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2004.
[3] N. Venketasubramanian and C. Chen, “Burden of stroke in Singapore,”
Int. J. Stroke, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 51–54, 2008.
[4] National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS).
(2004). “Stroke: Hope through research,” [Online]. Available:
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/stroke/detail_stroke.htm
[5] I.-P. Hsueh, M.-J. Hsu, C.-F. Sheu, S. Lee, C.-L. Hsieh, and J.-H. Lin,
“Psychometric comparisons of 2 versions of the Fugl–Meyer motor
scale and 2 versions of the stroke rehabilitation assessment of movement,” Neurorehabilitation Neural Repair, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 737–744,
2008.
[6] A. Fugl-Meyer, L. Jääskö, I. Leyman, S. Olsson, and S. Steglind, “The
post-stroke hemiplegic patient. 1. a method for evaluation of physical
performance,” Scand. J. Rehabil. Med., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 13–31, 1974.
[7] Y.-W. Hsieh, I.-P. Hsueh, Y.-T. Chou, C.-F. Sheu, C.-L. Hsieh, and
G. Kwakkel, “Development and validation of a short form of the Fugl–
Meyer motor scale in patients with stroke,” Stroke, vol. 38, no. 11,
pp. 3052–3054, 2007.
[8] V. Pomeroy, A. Pramanik, L. Sykes, J. Richards, and E. Hill, “Agreement
between physiotherapists on quality of movement rated via videotape,”
Clin. Rehabil., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 264–272, 2003.
[9] K. LaBelle, “Evaluation of kinect joint tracking for clinical and in-home
stroke rehabilitation tools,” Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
IN, USA, 2011.
[10] A. Pantelopoulos and N. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable sensor-based
systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man
Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2010.
[11] C. K. Lim, I.-M. Chen, Z. Luo, and S. H. Yeo, “A low cost wearable
wireless sensing system for upper limb home rehabilitation,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Robot. Autom. Mechatronics., 2010, pp. 1–8.
[12] P. Gibbs and H. Asada, “Wearable conductive fiber sensors for multi-axis
human joint angle measurements,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 2, pp. 1–18,
2005.
[13] J.-W. Lee, L.-Y. Hong, J.-H. Jun, K.-H. Lee, K.-S. Kim, D.-J. Kim, and
K.-H. Kim, “A simple optical angular sensors to measure the human joint
angle,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. SICE-ICASE, 2006, pp. 1125–1126.
[14] M. El-Gohary, S. Pearson, and J. McNames, “Joint angle tracking with
inertial sensors,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Int. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Society
Conf., 2008, pp. 1068–1071.
[15] S. Bakhshi, M. H. Mahoor, and B. S. Davidson, “Development of a body
joint angle measurement system using imu sensors,” in Proc. Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 6923–6926.
[16] J.-H. Kim, N. D. Thang, H. S. Suh, T. Rasheed, and T.-S. Kim, “Forearm
motion tracking with estimating joint angles from inertial sensor signals,”
in Proc. IEEE Biomed. Eng. Informatics, 2nd Int. Conf., 2009, pp. 1–4.
[17] K. J. O’Donovan, R. Kamnik and D. T. O’Keeffe, G. M. Lyons, “An inertial and magnetic sensor based technique for joint angle measurement,” J.
Biomechanics, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2604–2611, 2007.
[18] P. Picerno, A. Cereatti, and A. Cappozzo, “Joint kinematics estimate using
wearable inertial and magnetic sensing modules,” Gait Posture, vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 588–595, 2008.
[19] Great Lakes NeuroTechnologies. (2012) “Movement disorder assessment systems: Kinesia,” [Online]. Available: http://glneurotech.
com/Kinesia/kinesia-hardware.php
[20] D. Álvarez, J. C. Alvarez, R. C. Gonzalez, and A. M. López, “Ambulatory
human upper limb joint motion monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Instrum.
Meas. Technol. Conf., 2012, pp. 15–19.
[21] XSens. (2011). “MTW wireless motion tracker,” [Online]. Available:
http://www.xsens.com/en/mtw
[22] APDM movement monitoring solutions. (2010). “Opals available now,”
[Online]. Available: http://apdm.com/products/movement-monitors/opal/
[23] P. Baronti, P. Pillai, V. W. Chook, S. Chessa, A. Gotta, and Y. F. Hu,
“Wireless sensor networks: A survey on the state of the art and the 802.15.
4 and Zigbee standards,” Comput. Commun., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1655–1695,
2007.
[24] P. E. O’Suilleabhain and J. Y. Matsumoto, “Time-frequency analysis of
tremors,” Brain, vol. 121, no. 11, pp. 2127–2134, 1998.
[25] S. O. Madgwick, A. J. Harrison, and R. Vaidyanathan, “Estimation of
IMU and MARG orientation using a gradient descent algorithm,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2011, pp. 1–7.
[26] J. L. Marins, X. Yun, E. R. Bachmann, R. B. McGhee, and M. J. Zyda, “An
extendedKalman filter for quaternion-based orientation estimation using
MARG sensors,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ IntIntell. Robots Syst. Conf., 2001,
vol. 4, pp. 2003–2011.

LEE et al.: SMARTPHONE-CENTRIC SYSTEM FOR THE RANGE OF MOTION ASSESSMENT IN STROKE PATIENTS

[27] E. Pervin and J. Webb, Quaternions in Computer Vision and Robotics.
Defense Technical Information Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA: Department
of Computer Science, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1982.
[28] H. M. Clarkson, Musculoskeletal Assessment: Joint Range of Motion and
Manual Muscle Strength. Baltimore, MD, USA: Williams & Wilkins,
2000.
[29] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Int. J. Nursing
Studies, vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 931–936, 2010.
[30] K. McGraw and S. Wong, “Forming inferences about some intraclass
correlation coefficients,” Psychological Methods, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 30–46,
1996.
[31] J. Lee, D. Koh, and C. Ong, “Statistical evaluation of agreement between
two methods for measuring a quantitative variable,” Comput. Biol. Med.,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 61–70, 1989.
[32] A. D. Armstrong, J. C. MacDermid, S. Chinchalkar, R. S. Stevens, and
G. J. King, “Reliability of range-of-motion measurement in the elbow and
forearm,” J. Shoulder Elbow Surg., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 573–580, 1998.
[33] D. L. Riddle, J. M. Rothstein, and R. L. Lamb, “Goniometric reliability
in a clinical setting shoulder measurements,” Physical Therapy, vol. 67,
no. 5, pp. 668–673, 1987.
[34] R. Gajdosik, “Comparison and reliability of three goniometric methods
for measuring forearm supination and pronation,” Perceptual Motor Skills,
vol. 93, no. 2, pp. 353–355, 2001.
[35] B. Carstensen, Comparing Clinical Meas. Methods: A Practical Guide
ser. Statistics in Practice. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2010.

Wang Wei Lee received the the B.Eng degree (with
the First Class Hons.) in computer engineering from
the Department Electrical and Computer Engineerin,
National University of Singapore, in 2012, where he
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree under
the supervision of Prof. N. Thakor, Dr. Y. Shih-Cheng
and Dr. Y. Haoyong.
His current research interests include Neuromorphic Tactile Sensing and its applications.

Shih-Cheng Yen received the B.S.E. and M.S.E. in
1993, and the Ph.D. in 1998, all from the Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, and also serves
as the Deputy Director of the Singapore Institute of
Neurotechnology (SINAPSE). His research focuses
on the neural coding, neuroprostheses, and neurotherapeutic devices.

Arthur Tay received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical engineering from the National University
of Singapore, Singapore, in 1995 and 1998, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. His research interests include applications of mathematical
system science tools in biomedical engineering, semiconductor manufacturing, and process control.

Ziyi Zhao, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

1847

Tim Ma Xu graduated from Nanyang Polytechnic in
2000. He completed Bachelor in Sciences (Occupational Therapy) at Curtin University of Technology,
Australia, in 2005 and Master of Occupational Therapy degree from La Trobe University, Australia, in
2008.
He is currently the Operations Manager and Principal Occupational Therapist at the THK Therapy
Services, Thye Hua Kwan Moral Charities.

Karen Koh Mui Ling received the Bachelor’s degree
in health sciences (Physiotherapy) from The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, in 1999.
She is currently a Research Coordinator at the Saw
Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore. Her research interests include
rehabilitation.

Yee-Sien Ng received the Bachelor of Medicine and
Surgery from the National University of Singapore
and completed a Fellowship in Neuro-rehabilitation
from Harvard Medical School.
He is currently the Head and Senior Consultant
of the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine at the
Singapore General Hospital in Singapore. He is also
a member of the Royal Colleges of Physicians in the
U.K. His main research interests are in neurorehabilitation, spasticity, rehabilitation engineering, and the
epidemiology of disability.

Effie Chew completed her medical degree at the
University of Melbourne, Australia and advanced
specialist training in Rehabilitation Medicine in
Singapore.
She obtained her fellowship in neurorehabilitation
at Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School. She is currently a Consultant in Rehabilitation Medicine, Division of Neurology, University Medicine Cluster, National University Hospital
(NUH).

Angela Lou Kuen Cheong received the Bachelor’s
degree in helath sciences (Nursing) from The University of Sydney, Darlington, N.S.W., Australia, in
2009.
She is currently a Research Assistant at the Saw
Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University Health System, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Her research interests include stroke
and geriatric rehabilitation.

Gerald Koh Choon Huat received the Master’s degree in family medicine in 2000, the Master’s degree in gerontology and geriatrics from the European Institute of Gerontology, University of Malta,
Msida, Malta, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in family
medicine from Western University, Canada, in 2012.
He is currently an Associate Professor and Director of Medical Undergraduate Education at Saw Swee
Hock School of Public Health. His current research
interests include stroke and geriatric rehabilitation,
and medical education.

