IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1857

Development of mHealth Applications
for Pre-Eclampsia Triage
Dustin T. Dunsmuir, Beth A. Payne, Garth Cloete, Member, IEEE, Christian Leth Petersen, Member, IEEE,
Matthias Görges, Member, IEEE, Joanne Lim, Member, IEEE, Peter von Dadelszen,
Guy A. Dumont, Fellow, IEEE, and J. Mark Ansermino

Abstract—The development of mobile applications for the diagnosis and management of pregnant women with pre-eclampsia is
described. These applications are designed for use by communitybased health care providers (c-HCPs) in health facilities and during
home visits to collect symptoms and perform clinical measurements
(including pulse oximeter readings). The clinical data collected in
women with pre-eclampsia are used as the inputs to a predictive
model providing a risk score for the development of adverse outcomes. Based on this risk, the applications provide recommendations on treatment, referral, and reassessment. c-HCPs can access
patient records across multiple visits, using multiple devices that
are synchronized using a secure Research Electronic Data Capture server. A unique feature of these applications is the ability to
measure oxygen saturation with a pulse oximeter connected to a
smartphone (Phone Oximeter). The mobile health application development process, including challenges encountered and solutions
are described.
Index Terms—Decision support, mobile health (mHealth) application, oxygen saturation, pre-eclampsia, predictive model, risk
score.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, and in particular pre-eclampsia (commonly defined as the presence of
new hypertension and proteinuria in pregnancy) and eclampsia
(commonly defined as seizures during pregnancy not from a preexisting condition), remain one of the top two causes of global
maternal mortality and morbidity [1]. The majority of these

T

Manuscript received August 29, 2013; revised November 15, 2013; accepted
January 10, 2014. Date of publication January 17, 2014; date of current version
November 3, 2014. This work was supported in part by the University of British
Columbia with grants from Saving Lives at Birth (Grand Challenges Canada
portfolio) and in part by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
D. T. Dunsmuir, C. L. Petersen, J. Lim, and J. M. Ansermino are with
the Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada (e-mail:
ddunsmuir@cw.bc.ca; cpetersen@cw.bc.ca; jlim2@cw.bc.ca; anserminos@
yahoo.ca).
B. A. Payne and P. von Dadelszen are with the Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4,
Canada (e-mail: bpayne@cw.bc.ca; pdadelszen@cw.bc.ca).
G. Cloete is with the Department of Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, WC 7602, South Africa (e-mail:
garthcloete@sun.ac.za).
M. Görges and G. A. Dumont are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z
4H4, Canada (e-mail: mgorges@cw.bc.ca; guyd@ece.ubc.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2301156

deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) primarily due to delays in triage (early identification of who is at
risk), prompt treatment, and transportation to facilities that can
provide expert care [2]. PIERS on the Move (POTM) is a lowcost, easy-to-use, mobile health (mHealth) application for accurately predicting the risk of adverse outcomes associated with
pre-eclampsia in pregnant women. This application combines
two separate previously successful innovations: 1) a predictive
score, called the mini pre-eclampsia integrated estimate of risk
(miniPIERS) score [3], and 2) the Phone Oximeter, consisting
of a smartphone application and pulse oximeter sensor [4]. The
application identifies the risk of adverse outcomes in pregnant
women with pre-eclampsia and suggests actions to manage this
risk. The prediction of adverse outcomes is based on symptoms,
clinical signs, and the blood oxygen saturation (SpO2 ) level, as
measured with the Phone Oximeter.
This paper describes the design process of two versions of the
POTM application, the original version (application referred
to as POTM), and a simplified, community-based version for
the Community Level Interventions for Pre-eclampsia cluster
randomized controlled trial (application referred to as CLIP
POTM), which is taking place in Nigeria, Mozambique, Pakistan, and India [5].
A. Application Versions
The original POTM was developed for trained nurses and
midwives in South African health facilities. After three usability
studies with iterative improvements to the design, a clinical
study at Tygerberg Hospital in Cape Town, South Africa, has
been undertaken. At the time of publication, 202 women have
been assessed with the POTM application as part of the clinical
study. The purpose of this study is to verify that POTM correctly
identifies women who are at high or low risk of adverse maternal
outcomes. Meanwhile, iterative improvements to the application
have continued based on additional usability tests and feedback
from the health care providers involved in the clinical study.
In the CLIP trial [5], community-based health care providers
(c-HCPs) will use the CLIP POTM application during their
regular antenatal visits to pregnant women. It is planned that
more than 500 c-HCPs will use the application to assess over
30 000 pregnant women throughout their pregnancies. The CLIP
POTM version is simplified for ease of use by the c-HCPs
who have less medical training than the users of the original
version of POTM. The design process of modifying POTM
for CLIP included a series of rapid prototyping mockups of
the application presenting the mapping of study protocols to

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1858

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

application pages and individual page layouts. Prototypes of the
working CLIP POTM application were then implemented. At
each stage, feedback from the study leaders in the participating
countries was obtained. In addition, members of our team have
visited each country to provide future users with prototypes of
the CLIP POTM. Their feedback led to further modifications
in the design, thus ensuring the application is optimized for
efficient use and acceptance among the users.
The design process described in this paper includes the specification of features and the user interface design choices made
during development. Also described, are the details of the implementation, including the dynamic visit protocol and the synchronization of data across study devices. Many challenges encountered during this process are highlighted along with potential
solutions.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Predictive Model
The fullPIERS [6] clinical prediction model predicts adverse
maternal outcomes occurring as a result of pre-eclampsia, based
on demographics, symptoms, clinical signs (including SpO2 ),
and laboratory tests. However, the laboratory tests are frequently
not available outside of a tertiary hospital setting. The miniPIERS model [3] was developed to avoid the need for these laboratory tests and uses only simple demographics, symptoms, and
clinical signs; this simplified prediction model includes parity,
gestational age at presentation, systolic blood pressure, dipstick
proteinuria, and the presence of the following symptoms: chest
pain, shortness of breath, headache, visual disturbances, and
vaginal bleeding with abdominal pain. The miniPIERS model
outputs a score for the risk of an adverse outcome. This score,
a probability rating, is used within a decision tree model to
give treatment recommendations. In addition, the decision tree
includes past maternal adverse events, the current stage of pregnancy, and SpO2 .
B. Phone Oximeter
The Phone Oximeter [4] is a smartphone application, which
receives data in real time from a connected pulse oximeter.
A pulse oximeter is a noninvasive sensor that measures oxygen saturation by shining infrared and red light through a part
of the body, such as a finger. The noninvasiveness and potential
low cost of this sensor technology facilitates its mobility and
use in low resource settings. Unfortunately, artifacts caused by
improper application of the sensor or movement of the patient
during recordings can limit the robustness of the measurement.
The risk of recording inaccurate data can be mitigated by clearly
displaying the data quality in real time. The Phone Oximeter accomplishes this within the smartphone application (see
Section IV-B).
Smartphones are rapidly becoming available in many low resource settings and their small size and weight facilitate their
use during home visits. The developed Phone Oximeter applications can run on existing smartphones, already owned or used by
health care providers. Another advantage of using smartphones

is that they can serve as communication devices to facilitate
escalation of care and a 3G or Wi-Fi connection allows sending
of data to a central server. GPS functionality can also be used to
track data collection locations.
The Phone Oximeter was first developed as a mobile application for use in continuous monitoring of SpO2 during anesthesia [4] and later in data collection applications for 1-min
spot-checks of SpO2 [7] in a range of studies taking place in
LMICs. The applications were developed using the LambdaNative framework, which provides the ability to compile applications for Android or iOS operating systems [8]. For the POTM
clinical study, the application is running on iPod Touch (fourth
generation model; Apple Inc., Cupertino, CA) and iPhone (3 GS
A1303 model; Apple Inc.) devices and for the CLIP trial, the
application will run on Android (4.0; Google Inc., Mountain
View, California) devices. These Android phones are manufactured by companies located in Asia and Africa. Mobile phone
adoption in LMICs is increasing rapidly. Africa has seen an
enormous growth in mobile phone usage in recent years, with
648.4 million mobile phone subscriptions in 2011, more than in
the United States or the European Union [9]. This provides an
ideal opportunity to embrace the use of mHealth applications.
C. Related Work
Even before smartphones, personal digital assistants (PDAs)
were used as the first electronic mHealth tools. They offer a
significant advantage over paper data collection even when it
is necessary to train the local health care workers. Blaya et al.
[10] demonstrated that PDAs were more efficient than paper
and preferred for collecting tuberculosis bacteriology data in
Peru. Data were collected over a large geographical area, much
of which did not have Internet access. The CLIP trial will be
performed in similar environments.
Thriemer et al. [11] also compared PDAs with paper data
collection forms for hospital registration of feverous patients in
Tanzania. Data entry by PDA was found to be much faster and
cheaper despite the added cost of the devices. Direct data entry
also saves the cost and time of data reentry from paper to an
electronic record, and PDA data entry was greatly preferred by
the users. The PDA forms included follow-up questions, which
automatically appeared only if deemed appropriate based on
the previous answers. The POTM applications also include this
form of branching logic to show or hide the applicable fields
and forms dynamically based on previous field values. Finally,
Byass et al. [12] used PDAs successfully for household surveys
in Burkina Faso, using GPS to record locations as is done in the
POTM applications.
All of the aforementioned studies took advantage of mobile
devices to perform data validation and inform the user of any
errors. Byass et al. found that missing data still occurred and
unfortunately often went unnoticed until the end of the study.
For our applications, data are uploaded regularly and viewing of
the online reports can rapidly identify these errors and missing
entries. None of these studies included connecting sensors directly to the data collection device, whereas the Phone Oximeter
applications connect directly to a pulse oximeter.

DUNSMUIR et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF MHEALTH APPLICATIONS FOR PRE-ECLAMPSIA TRIAGE

Fig. 1. Simplified diagram of the decision tree for a pregnant woman who is
not in labor and is eligible for the POTM clinical study. aSpO2 = blood oxygen
saturation, in percent. bsBP = systolic blood pressure, measured in millimeters
of mercury. c GA = gestational age of the fetus, measured in weeks.

III. SPECIFICATIONS
Specification documents were created to detail and define the
requirements and design parameters of the applications. These
documents provided guidance and documentation for the entire
application development process. The requirement specifications contain a general description of the goal of the project and
the specific requirements necessary to achieve this goal. The design document includes property tables and flowcharts to define
the content and order of data collection application pages. The
same iterative design and development cycle was used for each
of the two applications, which consisted of the specifications,
portable document format (PDF) mockups, and then prototypes.
Throughout the process, user feedback was obtained and usability studies were performed with the prototypes.
A. Decision Support
The decision tree for determining treatment recommendations
was an important component of the specification development
for the application. The goal of this decision tree is to use the
collected data to direct management and suggest treatments
based on the risk of adverse events in the individual patient.
Even when the miniPIERS score is below a threshold of 25%
(low risk), low SpO2 (93% or below) is considered to indicate
a woman at high personal risk for complications. Based on our
previous research into predicting adverse maternal outcomes
using pulse oximetry, the optimal threshold for the SpO2 is
93% [13]. Preliminary data from our POTM clinical validation
study have also shown that combining the SpO2 directly into
the miniPIERS predictive model increases the power of the
model [14]. This adjustment may be made in future studies.
The decision tree defines which data are used in the decision
making process and the order in which the data are used. Fig. 1
is a simplified (assumes patient is eligible and still pregnant)

1859

diagram of the POTM decision tree used with all women in
the clinical study who have not already experienced an adverse
event. To be eligible, a woman must be hypertensive (systolic
blood pressure greater than 140 mmHg), or have proteinuria
with severe signs or symptoms. A pregnant woman who already
has eclampsia or another adverse maternal outcome does not
need the miniPIERS score calculated. For those women who
have experienced an adverse event, the process of fetal delivery
is initiated once the patient has been medically stabilized.
To ease the workload of the c-HCP, the CLIP data collection
protocol is dynamic, with only a limited dataset being required
during each home visit. CLIP POTM enforces variations in the
study protocol requirements for data collection based on whether
it is the first visit with a patient or a subsequent visit with historical data available for the patient. This selective dynamic
display of application pages ensures that the c-HCP follows a
set path through the study protocol based on the clinical status of
the specific woman. For example, CLIP POTM provides three
methods for calculating the estimated date of delivery (EDD)
of the pregnant woman. This calculation is only necessary during the first visit, unless it was previously entered using the
symphysis-fundal height method with a measurement of less
than 24 cm. This is due to the inaccuracy of measurements performed during early pregnancy (low fundal height). The c-HCP
must measure the fundal height at each visit until it is at least
24 cm. CLIP POTM uses this logic to only display the EDD
page when appropriate.
Another example of dynamic application flow is present on
the ‘‘Signs” page. This page displays a two-by-two grid of
fields for entering two readings of the blood pressure, each of
which include systolic and diastolic values. If a third reading is
deemed necessary (e.g., if the two systolic or diastolic readings
vary by more than 10 mmHg), the grid automatically expands
to include a third column. The c-HCP is trained to know that
an additional confirmatory measurement should be performed;
however, by automatically displaying the third column, CLIP
POTM seamlessly enforces adherence to the study protocol.
The mean systolic and diastolic values are calculated and a
systolic blood pressure of 160 mmHg is used as a threshold for
severe hypertension.
The application selectively requires the performance of additional investigations. If the woman is hypertensive, the application will suggest the need for a dipstick proteinuria measurement
and ask about the symptoms the woman is experiencing. This
type of flexible protocol is established within the specification
as a flowchart. The protocol would be much more complex to
follow if data collection was being done on paper, which would
require full memorization of the flowchart by each c-HCP.

IV. APPLICATION DESIGN
The POTM and CLIP POTM applications have been developed through an iterative process heavily influenced by our previous Phone Oximeter applications and usability studies with
potential users.

1860

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Symptom page in CLIP POTM. To increase ease of use of the application by c-HCPs, the page design has been simplified and a language independent
pictogram has been used.

A. Mockups
Once the specification document was approved, the next stage
was the creation of application mockups. Mockups were created
using Balsamiq Mockups (Balsamiq Studios, Sacramento, CA),
which provides a simple drag-and-drop interface for placing
common graphical elements on a page. Graphical elements,
such as buttons, can also link pages together. The resulting series
of mockups was exported as an interactive PDF file providing
a walk-through of the application. This was much easier and
faster than programming prototypes and led to rapid iterative
modifications of the application design. Rapid feedback on the
design could be obtained from investigators in the CLIP study
countries who consulted with their team (including future users)
by simply emailing them the mockup PDF. These international
team members were not required to perform a software install
process and the PDF could be annotated with standard document
annotation tools.
B. User Interface Design
The user interface designs of POTM and CLIP POTM consider the user’s technical abilities, the type of data being collected, and the size of the mobile device display. In CLIP POTM,
the amount of data being collected has been significantly reduced as the c-HCPs have minimal medical training and minimal smartphone experience. Thus, the amount of data entry was
reduced and the displays have been simplified compared to the
original POTM application. Buttons have been made larger and
easier to press on the smaller mobile device screen.
In CLIP POTM, language independent and culturally appropriate pictograms are used throughout the application to comple-

Fig. 3. Oxygen saturation spot-check page within POTM. A simple colorcoding of the signal quality is used as the current waveform background color
and within the progress bar to show quality over time. This example shows a
recording at the 41 s mark (of 60 s). The start of the recording was poor quality
data, as shown by the red section on the left, but the newest data are of excellent
(green) quality.

ment the text fields (see Fig. 2). The country specific pictogram
of the symptom is displayed with the simple choice (Yes or
No) for the presence or absence of the symptom in the woman
being assessed. In contrast, within the POTM application, the
symptoms were listed on a single screen with no pictograms,
which also included follow-up questions and intensity ratings
for each symptom present. Section IV-C describes other changes
in the design that were motivated by usability studies and user
feedback.
For both applications, multiple language support was required. Translations in the necessary languages are stored as
a comma-separated value file with one column per language.
Translated text was required to be within a certain length so it
would fit within the application. The translation text file is the
source for all static text displayed within the application. Choosing a language from the login screen specifies which column to
use in the translation file. CLIP POTM can display right-to-left
text such as Arabic characters.
The oxygen saturation page of POTM is used to perform
spot-check measurements of SpO2 . The design of this page
was influenced by previous Phone Oximeter applications and
feedback received from users [4]. The Phone Oximeter has been
used in five data collection studies in Uganda, Bangladesh, and
India. The goal of this page is to ensure that an accurate SpO2
recording is made. This is accomplished by clearly displaying
the quality of the signal in the current recording (see Fig. 3). A
pulse oximeter must be precisely applied and remain in place
with minimal movement during recordings or artifacts will occur

DUNSMUIR et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF MHEALTH APPLICATIONS FOR PRE-ECLAMPSIA TRIAGE

in the signal. Artifacts will result in an inaccurate SpO2 value,
which will in turn undermine the reliability of the decision tree.
By directly connecting the pulse oximeter to a mobile device
in POTM, the risk of an inadequate recording can be mitigated.
The direct connection of the pulse oximeter to the mobile device
provides real-time access to not only the SpO2 and heart rate
(HR) trends, but also the photoplethysmogram (PPG) waveform
and a number of error flags supplied by the pulse oximeter
module. For increased reliability, the application takes a 1-minlong recording, rather than an instantaneous reading. The PPG
waveform is shown onscreen throughout this recording. The
median values of the SpO2 and HR trends are calculated over
this minute, but all sections of the recordings with low signal
quality are excluded from the calculation.
A signal quality index (SQI) algorithm rates the quality of
data, in 1-s segments, in real time [7]. The output of the SQI
algorithm is a rating with a range from 0 to 100, where the range
from 90 to 100 is considered to be of a high quality.
The user interface clearly displays the signal quality using
color and displays an explanatory message if the quality is low.
The SQI value is mapped to a simple color-coded scale from
dark red for an SQI of 0 to green for high quality (90–100).
The SQI color is used as the background color for the waveform
and is also the color added to the progress bar for each second
during a recording. The progress bar shows the changes in signal
quality throughout the recording (see Fig. 3). This progress bar
fills from left to right with the current data quality color as the
recording progresses. If the progress bar has very little green
within it, the user should cancel the recording and attempt to
reposition the sensor or reduce movement in the patient before
attempting another measurement. Once a green background has
been obtained, a new recording can be commenced. Below the
waveform a short message provides the current status of the
recording that explains any current problem with the signal
(e.g., “No sensor: Check connection”). During the recording,
the current trend values are displayed above the progress bar.
At the end of the recording, the median values are shown. On
some patients, it may not be possible to get a high quality signal
for a full minute. In such a case, the user may choose to accept
a recording that has some low quality sections within it. Only
the high quality (green) sections of the recording are included
in the median SpO2 and HR trend calculations.
C. Usability Studies
The inclusion of health care personnel in the countries that
are anticipated to use the application in the development of
the specifications, design, and usability studies has been essential to the creation of an easy-to-use application. A total of 37
nurses and midwives evaluated the user interface through three
usability studies from November 2011 to January 2013. Each
usability study demonstrated improvements in the ease of use
of the application, and also provided valuable information on
how to further improve the interface and information flow. All
tasks within the usability studies were timed and carefully monitored. Any errors in normal use of the app were recorded and
then categorized by severity (from problematic to critical) and

1861

section of the application (keypad, navigation, etc.). Options to
prevent these errors in the future were then devised, discussed
and implemented before the next usability study.
The first usability study revealed that entering patient contact details was the most time-consuming task. This task only
occurs when first creating a patient record and the difficulty in
completing it quickly was due to user inexperience with a small
onscreen keypad. The keypad size was expanded for the next
usability study, resulting in a decrease in mean task completion
time from 10:24 (minutes:seconds) to 5:46. The POTM application tasks during an evaluation are much faster than the entering
of contact details, with the mean time for an entire evaluation
being reduced from 16:38 to 14:34 between usability studies.
Although the use of mobile devices is becoming widespread
in the CLIP trial countries, many of our potential users have not
had prior experience with smartphones or at least have not used
any smartphone applications involving data collection. For example, many of the users did not know how to scroll on a touchscreen device. To address this problem, the amount of information on one screen has been kept to a minimum and if scrolling
is necessary, the application auto-advances the scrolling as the
user enters data. Some users were unaware of the purpose or
use of a dropdown list. The interface now avoids the use of
dropdown lists, and instead shows all options simultaneously
with checkboxes or radio buttons. This makes navigation more
intuitive for novice users as it more closely resembles the paper
data collection forms familiar to them.
For all three usability studies, users completed the poststudy
system usability questionnaire [15]. Overall, users were pleased
with the application, and believed it would improve their ability
to care for hypertensive women.
D. Data Security
As with any clinical study, collected data must be stored
securely. Security is a challenge when data are collected on
mobile devices used by the c-HCP during their home visits to
pregnant women. If unencrypted data were stored on a device
and this mobile device was stolen or misplaced, unauthorized
parties could access the data.
Strategies have been developed to ensure data are only accessible to those authorized to access the data. First, all of the data
stored by CLIP POTM are encrypted using the Blowfish algorithm [16], a symmetric Feistel cipher using a 128-bit key. The
only access to this data is through using the application, which
requires a username and password. No effective cryptanalysis
has been developed for breaking the full 16-round Blowfish algorithm used in these applications [17]. Second, to deter the
theft of devices, all devices are clearly marked as being used for
medical research purposes.
E. Data Tracking
Within the CLIP trial, c-HCPs will perform their visits without supervision therefore a method was needed to verify that
these visits were actually performed. In addition, if inconsistencies in data are discovered, a method to determine which steps
led to poor data quality was required to ensure more accurate

1862

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

data collection in the future. For these reasons, CLIP POTM
uses GPS-based location information and includes an audit trail
of each c-HCP’s modifications to the data on the device.
The c-HCP must login to the application using secure userspecific credentials to initiate data entry. Each time a c-HCP
logs into the device the audit trail file is amended. This file
initially contains the user name, time, and the version of the
application being used. Each time the user creates a new record;
adds, edits, or deletes field values; or has values calculated by
the application, the action is added to the audit file. Thus, if a
team leader needs to view a record of all the actions taken by a
c-HCP, they can retrieve this file from the device. Additionally,
the application uses the GPS coordinates provided by the device
to track usage. The application records the current GPS location
each time a new visit begins.
To enable recording of complete audit trails, it is necessary
that each c-HCP have their own username and password credentials. It is not possible, nor should it be necessary to setup
in advance a master list of all users who will use all the devices
involved in a study. Instead, the task of user control is delegated
to local data managers who will be more knowledgeable about
individual users than any higher level investigator. Initially, an
instance of the CLIP application has a single default administrator password. These credentials are shared only with the data
managers at each study cluster center. The administrator credentials allow them to login to the setup pages of CLIP POTM. The
administrator can then add, edit, or remove individual c-HCP
users and setup their passwords. These newly created credentials can then be used to login to the main application functions
on the specific device. This protocol allows flexibility for adapting the user list when c-HCPs leave or join the study, and it
also maintains security, as only the administrator password will
work on all devices. This type of credentials organization is
much simpler than centrally administering all usernames and
passwords, which would require extensive communication with
study sites and a synchronization process for the credentials.
The local administrator setup pages allow the entry of the
cluster ID associated with their location. This ID is used at the
start of each patient’s ID within that study cluster and is used
to enable targeted data synchronization as described in the next
section.
F. Data Synchronization
Datasets collected during the POTM clinical study and CLIP
trial are each stored on Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) [18] servers. Synchronization with the online REDCap
project uses the REDCap application programming interface
(API) and maximizes the advantages of data collection on a
mobile device. It provides easy data transfer from each device to a central location and allows data to be synchronized
between multiple devices. Data synchronization is required to
allow women to be seen by a different c-HCP or with a different
device at subsequent visits. The historical visit data and basic
demographic data should be available on each device within a
study cluster. This is accomplished by using the REDCap API
upload and download record functions.

TABLE I
SYNCHRONIZATION STEPS

There are numerous technical challenges to this data synchronization process. First, there is the potential for conflicting
data and data loss. Establishing clear rules regulating data editing minimizes this risk. Second, the REDCap project does not
allow access to a normalized database or provide SQL query
procedures; instead the API treats the entire data collection as
one large table. The synchronization process (see Table I) uses
multiple steps to work around this problem. Third, Internet connections within the countries targeted for the study have limited
speed and connectivity. Thus, the synchronization algorithm
limits the transfer of data to only new and necessary data.
Conflicts with data synchronization were likely to occur if a
patient’s record was edited on two different devices and then
these devices were both synchronized with REDCap. Each patient record consists of a set of demographics and zero or more
assessment visits. The CLIP POTM conflict resolution strategy
consists of always using the newest values when changes are
made to the demographic baseline data and restricting changes
of visit data to the single device that initiated the visit.
Each visit is identified by a start timestamp and universal
unique identifier (UUID) for the device. The first time CLIP
POTM is run on a device, a UUID is generated to identify the
device based on version 4 of the UUID specification [19]. The
UUID of the device is saved with a visit when it is started.
Historical visit data for a patient are available within CLIP
POTM during the subsequent c-HCP visits but these data cannot
be edited on a different device. Editing of historical visits is
allowed to remedy data entry errors, but only within 24 h of a
visit and on the same device. Deleting a visit is also possible,
but only within 24 h and only for incomplete visits. New (less
than 24 h old) incomplete visits are not uploaded to REDCap.
These rules ensure the maintenance of records on the devices. As
visits can only be edited in one location, there is no possibility
of conflicts in their values.

DUNSMUIR et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF MHEALTH APPLICATIONS FOR PRE-ECLAMPSIA TRIAGE

To assist with synchronization, CLIP POTM has an additional
timestamp field for each REDCap form with the last updated
time. Demographic data for a patient can be updated on any
device. The form timestamps are specifically used to determine
which instance of a form is newer, the local copy or the one
on REDCap. Additionally, demographic data should never be
deleted, only updated. By default, the REDCap API upload ignores blank values so none of the field values will be overwritten
with blank values.
Local Internet connectivity for CLIP POTM is not typically
available during home visits. Thus, no live search of records can
happen during a c-HCP’s home visit. The historical data must
already be present on the device. For this reason, the synchronization process (see Table I) ensures that all the newest data
from all women within a study cluster are present on all the
devices within that cluster.
The synchronization process is designed to transfer only new
data specific to the research cluster (geographical region). All
IDs within a cluster begin with the same digits, but the REDCap
API does not provide SQL queries, so the application must
perform the filtering on a list of all IDs and then use the filtered
list to download the specific cluster data. Initially, downloading
only the timestamp fields of records in the cluster greatly reduces
the data download requirements when compared to downloading
all data. The timestamps from the local records are compared
to the downloaded timestamps and new information overrides
old information. If the REDCap timestamp is older or does not
exist, then the local data are uploaded. If the local timestamp is
older or does not exist, then the REDCap data are downloaded.
No action is performed if the timestamps are identical.
The aforementioned process enables each device to stay up
to date with all the data from across the cluster, provided that
the device is synchronized on a regular basis.
V. DISCUSSION
The miniPIERS model integrated into an mHealth application combined with a pulse oximeter and used within clinical
studies is a large step forward in reducing adverse events related to pre-eclampsia and eclampsia. The decision making for
this complex disease has many challenges in settings that lack
medical expertise.
The successful development of an mHealth tool, as with any
application, must consider the user and the setting in which it is
deployed. Achieving the acceptance of the mobile application
by investigators in the countries involved in the CLIP trial has
been an ongoing process and a learning experience for all involved. This effort involves introducing new processes and new
technology to users with very little relevant technology experience. The users required significant amounts of training, but
they also provided valuable feedback that led to new ideas on
how to simplify the information presented in the application.
An mHealth application for use in a hospital setting will be very
different from an mHealth application for use in the community,
even if they have a similar desired outcome.
CLIP POTM began with a single specification document, but
we discovered differing requests from the different countries

1863

with their cultural differences, leading to modified application
versions for each country. In addition to different pictograms
and languages, some of the data fields and recommendations
for treatment were specific to users and locations. For example,
in India, an Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) performs
the home visit, but must bring the woman to an Auxiliary Nurse
Midwife (ANM) if they require treatment. The CLIP POTM for
India was altered to advise the ASHA to refer to an ANM when
necessary rather than directly recommending the treatment. In
India, the CLIP study will also be using the Maternal Newborn Health numbers that already exist as unique identifiers of
women, instead of creating a new CLIP ID number for each
woman.
In addition, use cases of real world scenarios must be considered. In certain circumstances, such as when the patient is
having a seizure, the data collection must be cut short to provide
rapid life saving treatment. Based on feedback from a site visit
to India, first aid information was added to the application for
managing an adverse outcome. While waiting for transport, the
c-HCP is given the option of continuing data collection.
The development of an mHealth application requires considerations of data security and synchronization, but above all,
the application must be developed with input from users. This
is necessary to design a flexible application that considers the
users training and limitations and anticipates possible scenarios
that will be encountered.
VI. FUTURE WORK
The POTM and CLIP POTM applications apply the power of
mobile devices and pulse oximetry to the task of pre-eclampsia
adverse outcome prediction, monitoring, triage, and treatment,
but there is much more that can be done. Mobile device use is
growing in many LMICs, where health management is also in
great need of improvement. mHealth tools are perfectly positioned to fit this need. We plan to extend our current applications
to a comprehensive perinatal health record, reduce the cost of
pulse oximetry, and add new sensor measurements.
Our future applications will include a full health record for
pregnant women during antenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal
care including the identification and management of postpartum hemorrhage. In addition, sepsis and pneumonia diagnostic
applications are being developed for children under 5 years of
age. These can be used for assessment of children and combined
with pregnancy tools for assessment of women with septic complications of pregnancy.
Finally, the Audio Phone Oximeter [20], which consists of a
pulse oximeter sensor connected directly to the audio port of a
phone, is an innovative solution to pulse oximetry on a mobile
device. This eliminates the pulse oximeter processing module,
which is an expensive piece of hardware that performs the processing of the pulse oximeter signals. Instead the processing
required to extract the HR and SpO2 from the PPG waveform
will be done directly on the phone. Additional sensors such as
a semiautomated blood pressure cuff and a temperature sensor, which also connect to the audio port of any mobile device,
are being developed. The combination of sensors with decision

1864

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

support algorithms, all managed by a mobile phone, is a path to
decreasing adverse health events globally at an affordable cost.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the participants of the usability studies
and all who provided feedback through the development of this
pre-eclampsia triage application. They also acknowledge the
supporting work of the Pediatric Anesthesia Research Team
and the PIERS study group in the development of POTM. They
thank N. Hayashida for her creation of the CLIP country-specific
pictograms (see example in Fig. 2).
REFERENCES
[1] R. Lozano, M. Naghavi, K. Foreman, S. Lim, K. Shibuya, V. Aboyans,
J. Abraham, T. Adair, R. Aggarwal, S. Y. Ahn, M. A. AlMazroa, M.
Alvarado, H. R. Anderson, L. M. Anderson, K. G. Andrews, C. Atkinson,
L. M. Baddour, S. Barker-Collo, D. H. Bartels, M. L. Bell, E. J. Benjamin,
D. Bennett, K. Bhalla, B. Bikbov, A. Bin Abdulhak, G. Birbeck, F. Blyth,
I. Bolliger, S. Boufous, C. Bucello, M. Burch, P. Burney, J. Carapetis, H.
Chen, D. Chou, S. S. Chugh, L. E. Coffeng, S. D. Colan, S. Colquhoun,
K. E. Colson, J. Condon, M. D. Connor, L. T. Cooper, M. Corriere, M.
Cortinovis, K. Courville de Vaccaro, W. Couser, B. C. Cowie, M. H. Criqui,
M. Cross, K. C. Dabhadkar, N. Dahodwala, D. De Leo, L. Degenhardt,
A. Delossantos, J. Denenberg, D. C. Des Jarlais, S. D. Dharmaratne, E.
R. Dorsey, T. Driscoll, H. Duber, B. Ebel, P. J. Erwin, P. Espindola, M.
Ezzati, V. Feigin, A. D. Flaxman, M. H. Forouzanfar, F. G. R. Fowkes,
R. Franklin, M. Fransen, M. K. Freeman, S. E. Gabriel, E. Gakidou, F.
Gaspari, R. F. Gillum, D. Gonzalez-Medina, Y. A. Halasa, D. Haring,
J. E. Harrison, R. Havmoeller, R. J. Hay, B. Hoen, P. J. Hotez, D. Hoy,
K. H. Jacobsen, S. L. James, R. Jasrasaria, S. Jayaraman, N. Johns, G.
Karthikeyan, N. Kassebaum, A. Keren, J. Khoo, L. M. Knowlton, O.
Kobusingye, A. Koranteng, R. Krishnamurthi, M. Lipnick, S. E. Lipshultz,
S. L. Ohno, J. Mabweijano, M. F. MacIntyre, L. Mallinger, L. March, G.
B. Marks, R. Marks, A. Matsumori, R. Matzopoulos, B. M. Mayosi, J. H.
McAnulty, M. M. McDermott, J. McGrath, Z. A. Memish, G. A. Mensah,
T. R. Merriman, C. Michaud, M. Miller, T. R. Miller, C. Mock, A. O.
Mocumbi, A. A. Mokdad, A. Moran, K. Mulholland, M. N. Nair, L.
Naldi, K. M. V. Narayan, K. Nasseri, P. Norman, M. O’Donnell, S. B.
Omer, K. Ortblad, R. Osborne, D. Ozgediz, B. Pahari, J. D. Pandian, A.
P. Rivero, R. P. Padilla, F. Perez-Ruiz, N. Perico, D. Phillips, K. Pierce,
C. A. Pope, E. Porrini, F. Pourmalek, M. Raju, D. Ranganathan, J. T.
Rehm, D. B. Rein, G. Remuzzi, F. P. Rivara, T. Roberts, F. Rodriguez
de León, L. C. Rosenfeld, L. Rushton, R. L. Sacco, J. A. Salomon, U.
Sampson, E. Sanman, D. C. Schwebel, M. Segui-Gomez, D. S. Shepard,
D. Singh, J. Singleton, K. Sliwa, E. Smith, A. Steer, J. A. Taylor, B.
Thomas, I. M Tleyjeh, J. A. Towbin, T. Truelsen, E. A. Undurraga, N.
Venketasubramanian, L. Vijayakumar, T. Vos, G. R. Wagner, M. Wang,
W. Wang, K. Watt, M. A. Weinstock, R. Weintraub, J. D. Wilkinson, A.
D. Woolf, S. Wulf, P. Yeh, P. Yip, A. Zabetian, Z. Zheng, A. D. Lopez,
and C. J. L. Murray, “Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of
death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: A systematic analysis for the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010,” The Lancet, vol. 380, no. 9859,
pp. 2095–2128, 2012.
[2] S. Thaddeus and D. Maine, “Too far to walk: Maternal mortality in context,” Soc. Sci. Med., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 1091–1110, 1994.
[3] B. A. Payne, J. A. Hutcheon, J. M. Ansermino, D. R. Hall, Z. A. Bhutta,
S. Z. Bhutta, C. Biryabarema, W. A. Grobman, H. Groen, F. Haniff, J. Li,
L. A. Magee, M. Merialdi, A. Nakimuli, Z. Qu, R. Sikandar, N. Sass, D.
Sawchuck, D. W. Steyn, M. Widmer, J. Zhou, and P. von Dadelszen, “A
risk prediction model for the assessment and triage of women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy in low-resourced settings: The miniPIERS
(Pre-eclampsia Integrated Estimate of RiSk) multi-country prospective
cohort study,” PLoS Med., vol. 11, no. 1, e1001589, pp. 1–13, 2013.
[4] W. Karlen, G. A. Dumont, C. Petersen, J. Gow, J. Lim, J. Sleiman, and
J. M. Ansermino, “Human-centered phone oximeter interface design for
the operating room,” in Proc. Inter. Conf. Health Inform., Rome, Italy,
2011, pp. 433–438.
[5] University of British Columbia. (2014) Community level interventions
for pre-eclampsia (CLIP). [Online]. Available: http://clinicaltrials.gov/
ct2/show/NCT01911494. NLM Identifier: NCT01911494

[6] P. von Dadelszen, B. Payne, J. Li, J. M. Ansermino, F. B. Pipkin, A. M.
Côté, M. J. Douglas, A. Gruslin, J. A. Hutcheon, K. S. Joseph, P. M. Kyle,
T. Lee, P. Loughna, J. M. Menzies, M. Merialdi, A. L. Millman, M. P.
Moore, J. M. Moutquin, A. B. Ouellet, G. N. Smith, J. J. Walker, K. R.
Walley, B. N. Walters, M. Widmer, S. K. Lee, J. A. Russell, and L. A.
Magee, “Prediction of adverse maternal outcomes in pre-eclampsia: Development and validation of the fullPIERS model,” The Lancet, vol. 377,
no. 9761, pp. 219–227, 2011.
[7] D. Dunsmuir, C. Petersen, W. Karlen, J. Lim, G. Dumont, and
J. M. Ansermino, “The phone oximeter for mobile spot-check,” Anesth.
Analg., vol. 115, S2 Suppl., Abstract 21, p. 26, 2012.
[8] C. L. Petersen, M. Görges, D. Dunsmuir, J. M. Ansermino, and
G. A. Dumont, “Experience report: Functional programming of mHealth
applications,” presented at the 18th ACM SIGPLAN Int. Conf. Functional
Program., Boston, MA, USA, 2013, pp. 357–362.
[9] E. Yonazi, T. Kelly, N. Halewood, and C. Blackman. (2012, Dec.). eTransform Africa: The transformational use of information and communication
technologies in Africa; the executive summary and overview. [Online].
Available: http://go.worldbank.org/CXS4GFJDE0
[10] J. A. Blaya, T. Cohen, P. Rodriguez, J. Kim, and H. S. Fraser, “Personal
digital assistants to collect tuberculosis bacteriology data in Peru reduce
delays, errors, and workload, and are acceptable to users: Cluster randomized controlled trial,” Int. J. Infect. Dis., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 410–418,
2009.
[11] K. Thriemer, B. Ley, S. M. Ame, M. K. Puri, R. Hashim, N. Y. Chang, L.
A. Salim, R. L. Ochiai, T. F. Wierzba, J. D. Clemens, L. von Seidlein, J. L.
Deen, S. M. Ali, and M. Ali, “Replacing paper data collection forms with
electronic data entry in the field: Findings from a study of communityacquired bloodstream infections in Pemba, Zanzibar,” BMC Res. Notes,
vol. 5, no. 113, pp. 1–7, 2012.
[12] P. Byass, S. Hounton, M. Ouédraogo, H. Somé, I. Diallo, E. Fottrell,
A. Emmelin, and N. Meda, “Direct data capture using hand-held computers in rural Burkina Faso: Experiences, benefits and lessons learnt,” Trop.
Med. Int. Health, vol. 13, Suppl. 1, pp. 25–30, 2008.
[13] A. L. Millman, B. Payne, Z. Qu, M. J. Douglas, J. A. Hutcheon, T. Lee,
L. A. Magee, K. R. Walley, and P. von Dadelszen, “Oxygen saturation as
a predictor of adverse maternal outcomes in women with preeclampsia,”
J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Can., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 705–714, 2011.
[14] B. Payne, D. Dunsmuir, G. Cloete, G. A. Dumont, D. Hall, J. A. Hutcheon,
J. Lim, R. Sikandar, R. Qureshi, E. van Papendorp, M. Ansermino, and
P. von Dadelszen, “Re-calibration and improvement of a mobile health
decision aid for women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy in lowresourced settings,” presented at the 2013 mHealth Summit, Washington,
DC, Dec. 2013.
[15] J. R. Lewis, S. C. Henry, and R. L. Mack, “Integrated office software
benchmarks: A case study,” presented at Conf. Human–Comput. Interaction, Cambridge, U.K., 1990, pp. 337–343.
[16] B. Schneier, “Description of a new variable-length key, 64-bit block cipher
(Blowfish),” Lect. Notes Comp. Sci. Fast Software Encryption, vol. 809,
pp. 191–204, 1993.
[17] T. Nie and T. Zhang, “A study of DES and Blowfish encryption algorithm,”
presented at TENCON, Singapore, 2009, pp. 1–4. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TENCON.2009.5396115
[18] P. A. Harris, R. Taylor, R. Thielke, J. Payne, N. Gonzalez, and
J. G. Conde, “Research electronic data capture (REDCap)—A metadatadriven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 377–
381, 2009.
[19] Information Technology—Open Systems Interconnection—Procedures
for the Operation of OSI Registration Authorities: Generation and Registration of Universally Unique Identifiers (UUIDs) and Their Use as ASN.1
Object Identifier Components, ISO/IEC Standard 9834–8:2008, Sep. 17,
2012.
[20] C. L. Petersen, H. Gan, M. J. MacInnis, G. A. Dumont, and J. M. Ansermino, “Ultra-low-cost clinical pulse oximetry,” presented at IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 2874–2877. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610140

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

