IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

1261

Gait Parameter Estimation From a Miniaturized
Ear-Worn Sensor Using Singular Spectrum Analysis
and Longest Common Subsequence
Delaram Jarchi∗ , Charence Wong, Richard Mark Kwasnicki, Ben Heller, Garry A. Tew,
and Guang-Zhong Yang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a new approach to gait analysis and parameter estimation from a single miniaturized ear-worn
sensor embedded with a triaxial accelerometer. Singular spectrum
analysis combined with the longest common subsequence algorithm has been used as a basis for gait parameter estimation. It
incorporates information from all axes of the accelerometer to estimate parameters including swing, stance, and stride times. Rather
than only using local features of the raw signals, the periodicity
of the signals is also taken into account. The hypotheses tested by
this study include: 1) how accurate is the ear-worn sensor in terms
of gait parameter extraction compared to the use of an instrumented treadmill; 2) does the ear-worn sensor provide a feasible
option for assessment and quantification of gait pattern changes.
Key gait events for normal subjects such as heel contact and toe
off are validated with a high-speed camera, as well as a force-plate
instrumented treadmill. Ten healthy adults walked for 20 min on
a treadmill with an increasing incline of 2% every 2 min. The
upper and lower limits of the absolute errors using 95% confidence intervals for swing, stance, and stride times were obtained as
35.5 ± 3.99 ms, 36.9 ± 3.84 ms, and 17.9 ± 2.29 ms, respectively.
Index Terms—Body sensor networks, e-AR sensor, gait, longest
common subsequence (LCSS), singular spectrum analysis (SSA).

I. INTRODUCTION
YSTEMATIC evaluation of bipedal locomotion, or ‘gait
analysis’, can provide useful information regarding human
biomechanics, behavior, and pathology. Traditionally, this task
is conducted subjectively with a set of predefined observationbased protocols. This has recently been replaced by more objective techniques employing optical tracking, multiple cameras,

S

Manuscript received November 6, 2012; revised November 2, 2013 and December 18, 2013; accepted December 23, 2013. Date of publication January 13,
2014; date of current version March 17, 2014. This work is supported by the
U.K.’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under the ESPRIT
Programme Grant EP/H009744/1. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. Jarchi is with the Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College London, London,
SW7 2AZ U.K. (e-mail: d.jarchi@imperial.ac.uk).
C. Wong and R. M. Kwasnicki are with the Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College
London, London, SW7 2AZ U.K. (e-mail: charence.wong05@imperial.ac.uk;
richard.kwasnicki07@imperial.ac.uk).
B. Heller is with the Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, S1 1WB U.K.
(e-mail: B.Heller@shu.ac.uk).
G. A. Tew is with the University of York, York YO10 5DD U.K. (e-mail:
garry.tew@york.ac.uk).
G.-Z. Yang is with the Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College, London, SW7 2AZ
U.K. (e-mail: g.z.yang@imperial.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2299772

and force plates in dedicated gait laboratories for detailed gait
measurements. Recent advances in wearable sensing technologies have improved the practical use of wireless inertial sensors for gait analysis, allowing them to be used in a range of
environments and integrated into prosthetic and assistive devices [1]–[3].
The major advantage of such sensing technologies is in their
ability for long-term continuous monitoring of the patient in a
free-living environment, rather than specialized laboratory settings. In addition, specific context-aware gait monitoring systems can be developed to help understand the progression of
disease, assess the efficacy of treatment and subsequent rehabilitation processes, and predict the onset of adverse events such
as unstable gait patterns that may lead to high probabilities of
falls in elderly patient groups.
Evaluating the use of accelerometers for gait analysis in research studies is not new, but their usage for everyday clinical
utilisation remains limited. More than a decade ago, Aminian
et al. used two accelerometers; one on the heel and the other on
the trunk of the body, to detect walking patterns [4]. As MEMSbased devices and miniaturized, wireless embedded platforms
are becoming increasingly popular, they have attracted extensive
interests for gait analysis. For example, a study on gait analysis
was performed by using multiple sensors including accelerometers, gyroscopes, and pressure sensors for detecting heel contact
and toe off with good accuracies [5].
One of the major research topics in the use of these sensors
is how to balance the complexity (e.g., the number of sensors
required and their practical embodiment) against the reliability and the underlying information content captured. Naturally,
the use of multiple sensors provides more information that is
directly or indirectly related to the gait patterns. However, this
can complicate system design in terms of cross-node communication, synchronization, and modeling. It also affects user
compliance, as consistent placement of multiple sensors is difficult, thus affecting the overall reliability and accuracy of the
system. Such an approach, therefore, still tends to be limited to
laboratory experiments.
To circumvent these problems, integrating all sensing capabilities into a single wireless sensor node has clear advantages,
particularly for patient studies. Existing research has shown
that detection of certain spatiotemporal gait parameters is possible with a single sensor. For example, lower trunk acceleration
can be used to predict step length and walking speed [6], [7].
Changes in gait cycle variability have been used for studying

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

musculoskeletal disorders [8]. For detailed gait analysis, other
parameters such as swing and stance durations are also required.
Thus far, the detection of toe off with a single accelerometer is
poorly studied, and most studies are limited to multiple sensor configurations [9]–[11]. However, there have been attempts
recently to estimate major gait events from lower trunk accelerations using a single accelerometer [12], [13].
With the constraint of using a single sensor, prior research
has also been directed to the issue of optimal sensor placement
focusing on patient cohort comparisons. To this end, it is necessary to address the practical requirements of: 1) ease of sensor
placement; 2) consistency and repeatability; and 3) the underlying information content. Such a problem can be treated as a
feature selection problem with a multiobjective function by incorporating the above considerations and other system related
constraints [14].
Previous research has shown that by placing the sensor behind the ear, most of the aforementioned listed constraints can
be satisfied [15]. This placement also takes advantage of the
intrinsic capabilities of the skeletal bone in transmitting both
high- and low-frequency waves during different phases of the
gait cycle to the cranium, which can be picked up by the sensor. This, in essence, reproduces the mechanism of how humans
control gait and balance. Based on this concept, we have developed an ear-worn activity recognition (e-AR) sensor by using
the body sensor network platform [16]. It has been shown that
gait-related force estimations, including weight acceptance, and
impulse can be derived from the sensor. This has been validated
using a force-plate instrumented treadmill for both normal participants and patients after knee surgery [17].
Thus far, the algorithms used for gait pattern analysis are limited to extraction of peaks in the raw acceleration signals mainly
to identify heel contacts [6], [7]. To this end, it is necessary to
extract both heel contact and toe-off events from acceleration
signals with accurate validation using, e.g., synchronized video
or force-plate data. In practice, the detection of heel contact and
toe-off events has been used in different clinical applications.
These applications include improving the gait of stroke patients
for functional electrical stimulation [18], evaluating pathological gait impairments [19], investigating prescription footwear
on quality of the gait for rehabilitation [20], investigating the
influence of ageing on gait parameters [21], as well as observing
the recovery of orthopaedic patients after surgery [22].
The purpose of this paper is to provide a robust technique
for detailed gait analysis by addressing the current drawbacks
of using only heel contacts in single-accelerometer-based approaches. The proposed method is based on singular spectrum
analysis (SSA) for time-series analysis. It incorporates a timeseries matching approach called longest common subsequence
(LCSS) to improve the noise-resilience of the proposed algorithm. Detailed validation of the proposed method with a highspeed camera and a force-plate instrumented treadmill is provided. The results have shown the importance of the estimated
gait parameters for potential clinical applications of the method.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In
Section II, details on experimental setup and sensor placement
are first described. This is followed by an introduction to the

Fig. 1. e-AR sensor (left), axes of orientations defined for this paper (middle),
and how the sensor is worn on the ear (right).

SSA and LCSS algorithms to be used. In Section III, validation
and experimental results are provided. Finally, Section IV concludes the paper by summarizing its main contributions, as well
as its limitations and potential future improvements.
II. METHODS
A. Sensor Hardware and Placement
In this paper, an e-AR sensor is used for recording the acceleration signals arising from gait patterns. The sensor contains an 8051 processor that has a 2.4-GHz transceiver (Nordic
nRF24E1), a 3-D accelerometer (Analog Devices ADXL330),
a 2-MB EEPROM (Atmel AT45DB161), and a 55-mAhr LiPolymer battery [23]. The range of accelerations in SI units is
-29.43 m/s2 to 29.43 m/s2 . The weight of the sensor is about
7.4 g, allowing it to be easily used in both laboratory and freeliving conditions. Fig. 1 shows the configuration of the device
and how it is worn on the ear.
B. Singular Spectrum Analysis (SSA)
SSA is a model-free technique that can be applied to timeseries data to decompose it into a number of orthogonal components. These components include slowly varying trend, oscillatory, and unstructured noise [24]. SSA has been successfully used in many times-series analysis applications including denoising and prediction. For example, it has been applied
to bio-signals such as single-channel respiratory data and the
source signals are effectively separated [25], [26]. Generally, the
SSA algorithm consists of two main stages: decomposition and
reconstruction.
Decomposition: This stage consists of two steps called embedding and singular value decomposition (SVD).
Embedding: In this step, by using a delayed version of the
input time-series, a multidimensional matrix called the trajectory matrix is created. Therefore, the time-series s of length n
is converted into an l × k matrix as the trajectory matrix:
X = [xij ] = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xk ]
⎡ s
s
s
...
⎢
⎢
=⎢
⎢
⎣

0

1

2

s1
s2
..
.

s2
s3
..
.

s3
s4
..
.

...
...
..
.

sl−1

sl

sl+1

...

sk −1 ⎤
sk ⎥
⎥
sk +1 ⎥
.. ⎥
⎦
.
sn −1

(1)

where k = n − l + 1 and l is the window length (embedding
dimension) (1 ≤ l ≤ n). Vectors xi = [si−1 , si , . . . , si+l−2 ]T

JARCHI et al.: GAIT PARAMETER ESTIMATION FROM A MINIATURIZED EAR-WORN SENSOR USING SINGULAR SPECTRUM ANALYSIS

form the columns of the trajectory matrix and are called
l-lagged vectors. It is evident from (1) that the elements of
all the diagonals i + j = constant of the trajectory matrix are
the same. Therefore, the trajectory matrix is a Henkel matrix.
Singular value decomposition(SVD): In this step, SVD is applied to the trajectory matrix to represent it as a sum of rankone biorthogonal elementary matrices. Let S = XXT and assume λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λl are eigenvalues of S in decreasing order of
corresponding
magnitudes (λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥, . . . , ≥ λl ≥ 0) and the √
eigenvectors are u1 , u2 , . . . , ul . If vi = XT ui / λi , then it is
possible to write the trajectory matrix as:
X = X1 + X2 + · · · + Xd
(2)
√
where d = argmaxi {λi > 0} and Xi = λi ui viT . The vector
ui is the ith left eigenvector,√the vector vi is the ith right eigenvector, and the collection ( λi , ui , vi ) is called the ith eigentriple of the SVD in (2). The projection of the time-series onto
the direction of each eigenvector gives the corresponding principle component.
Reconstruction: In this step, the eigentriples are grouped
into m disjoint subsets. By setting the indices for subsets
(I1 , I2 , . . . , Im ), the elementary matrices of each group are
summed together as:
XI j = Xi j 1 + · · · + Xi j p

(3)

where Ij = ij 1 , . . . , ij p . The original trajectory matrix can be
written as the sum of all the resulted matrices XI j :
X = XI 1 + · · · + XI m .

(4)

Grouping of the eigentriples depends on the application and
therefore there are no fixed rules for this purpose. The final
step of the SSA algorithm is diagonal averaging in which the
final elementary matrix, which is the sum of all elementary matrices in the group, is transformed into a time-series of length
n. Each element of the resultant time-series is computed using
the average of the matrix elements over the diagonal elements
i + j = constant. Considering a general l × k matrix, the qth element of the time-series is given by averaging over the diagonal
elements i + j = q + 2. The reconstruction step of SSA algorithm is useful for time-series denoising. The SSA algorithm
for time-series reconstruction, based on grouping one set of elementary matrices given the corresponding indices, is summarized in Algorithm 1. The input to this algorithm is the original
time-series (s), the set of indices (I) to group the elementary
matrices, and the embedding dimension (l). The output is the
reconstructed time-series based on grouping the corresponding
elementary matrices.
C. Longest Common Subsequence (LCSS)
Let a and b be finite discrete time-series. ap1 denotes the
time-series a with a discrete time index varying between 1 and
p. Similarly, bq1 denotes the time-series b with a discrete time
index varying between 1 and q. In addition, let ai ,bi be the ith
sample of time-series a and b, respectively.
The LCSS algorithm has been initially used for string matching applications [27]. It has been subsequently extended to

1263

measurements of the similarity of two time-series having different lengths [28], [29]. The algorithm uses dynamic programming and matching regions in time and space to avoid matching
regions that are distant or degenerate. The recursive formulation
of the LCSS is defined in [29] as follows:
LCSSδ, (ap1 , bq1 ) =
⎧
0
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
1 + LCSSδ, (ap−1
, bq1 −1 )
1

⎪
⎪
LCSSδ, (ap−1
, bq1 )
⎪
1
⎪
⎩ Max
LCSSδ, (ap1 , bq1 −1 )

if
if



p < 1 or q < 1,
dLP (ap , bq ) <  and
(5)
| p − q |< δ,

otherwise

where p and q are the lengths of time-series a and b, respectively,
whereas dL P (ap , bq ) is any LP -norm of the (ap − bq ). The
constant δ provides flexible control of the matching region in
time, while the constant  is a threshold for matching in space.
The value given as the output of the LCSS depends on the length
of its input time-series. Therefore, the similarity Sδ, of the two
series is measured by normalizing the output of the LCSS as:
Sδ, (a, b) =

LCSSδ, (ap1 , bq1 )
.
min(p, q)

(6)

D. Gait Parameter Estimation
For estimation of gait parameters, the gait signals need to
be segmented from the acceleration data. In traditional experiments, the acceleration signals are often labeled manually. However, in applications that require continuous monitoring, the gait
signals need to be segmented automatically. Recently, a method
has been proposed to discriminate walking from nonwalking
activity [30]. This method was based on SSA and can be further extended for automatic gait segmentation using acceleration
signals.
In order to estimate the gait parameters, the essential gait
events need to be located on the signals. The events considered
in this paper include right heel contact (RHC), left heel contact
(LHC), right toe off (RTO), and left toe off (LTO).
To locate specific gait events, an experiment was first performed in which the e-AR signals were synchronized with
a Photron FASTCAM SA3 high-speed camera operating at
250 Hz. The gait events extracted from the images were used
to locate the events on the signals. To make the synchronization possible, two big heel strikes were performed in the experiment. These heel strikes produce large peaks in the e-AR
signals. Finding the corresponding image of each large peak is
useful to resample the accelerometry data linearly to the highspeed camera frame rate. Three experiments were performed

1264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 2. Raw acceleration signals and the corresponding video frames for the
large heel strikes captured by a high-speed camera at a frame rate of 250 frames
per second.

using a subject walking on the instrumented treadmill under the
following conditions:
1) Constant speed, zero incline;
2) Increased speed, zero incline;
3) Increased incline, constant speed.
As an example, the results for increasing incline and constant
speed are shown in Figs. 2 and 3. In Fig. 2, the raw acceleration
signals are displayed, which illustrates two clear peaks. The
raw accelerations are obtained from a 12-bit analog-to-digital
converter where readings from 0 to 4095 represent -29.43 m/s2
to 29.43 m/s2 . The corresponding images for the large peaks
given by the high-speed camera are shown in Fig. 2. After
resampling, two gait cycles are selected and the gait events are
located on the acceleration signals. In Fig. 3, two consecutive
gait cycles and the images given by the high-speed camera for
the main gait events (RHC, LHC, RTO, and LTO) are provided.
In summary, for detection of heel contacts, as detailed below,
the signals of the anterior–posterior (AP) and superior–inferior
(SI) axes should be used. They contain local minima in both
axes for heel contacts. To determine which heel contact corresponds to the left and which one to the right, the acceleration
signal of the medio–lateral (ML) axis is used. The mean value
of the acceleration amplitudes from one RHC to the next LHC is
larger than the mean value of the acceleration amplitudes from
the LHC to the next RHC. For detection of toe-off events, the
best axis to use is the ML axis. The accelerations of the ML
axis are segmented using RHCs and the toe-off events are then
detected. The RTO is the first local minimum after the LHC, and
the LTO is a local maximum before the LHC (due to slightly
different appearance of the LHCs on the ML axis; throughout
the paper, this local maximum is referred to a local maximum
before the main valley of the ML axis cycle segmented from
RHC to the LHC). Since raw acceleration signals can be noisy,
there may be an abundance of local maxima/minima. Therefore,
instead of directly locating the toe-off events on the raw accelerations, a number of gait cycles are grouped together. By using

Fig. 3. Top row: Example three-axis e-AR signals corresponding to two consecutive gait cycles. Second and third rows: The images given by the high-speed
camera for main gait events which are shown using the arrows on the signal of
ML axis.

SVD, LCSS, and peak detection, toe-off events are estimated.
In fact, these events are located on enhanced gait cycles, which
result in a more accurate estimation than locating them on raw
accelerations.
Therefore, by using all the axes, we are able to locate the
essential gait events (RHC, LHC, RTO, and LTO) and then
estimate the gait parameters based on the extracted time stamps.
In the following sections, detailed explanations for estimating
all the gait parameters are provided.
1) Trend Removal: The e-AR acceleration signals can contain artifacts created by head motion. This artifact is added to the
accelerometer data as a trend that can be removed by the SSA
algorithm. To remove the trend of the signal, SSA is applied to
the e-AR signals. The first eigentriple that relates to the trend
of the data is selected, its elementary matrix is formed and then
used to reconstruct a time-series. This time-series is subtracted
from the original signal. In the following, the signal of the AP
axis (s2 ) is used and its trend is removed by SSA:
s2 ←− AccY (AP)

s = SSA(s2 , I = (1), l), see Algorithm 1

s2 = s2 − 
s

(7)

where 
s is the trend of the signal along the AP axis, 
s2 is the
corresponding data after trend removal. Since the SSA algorithm

JARCHI et al.: GAIT PARAMETER ESTIMATION FROM A MINIATURIZED EAR-WORN SENSOR USING SINGULAR SPECTRUM ANALYSIS

1265

Fig. 5. Dominant oscillation of AP axis and the local minima and maxima. The
invalid local minima/maxima for detection of heel contacts should be removed.

Fig. 4. Signal of the AP axis, before and after trend removal and the corresponding eigenvalues.

is based on a linear combination of elementary matrices related
to eigentriples, the trend removal can also be performed by
grouping all eigentriples except the first one as:

s2 = SSA(s2 , I = (2, . . . , l), l).

(8)

The aforementioned equation is used to remove the trend from
other axes (ML and SI). When SSA is applied to the processed
signal (after trend removal from the AP axis), the first two
eigenvectors correspond to the most dominant oscillation of the
signal. In Fig. 4, the gait signal from the AP axis is shown before
and after trend removal. In this figure, the generated eigenvalues
are shown for each signal separately after applying the SSA
algorithm. It is evident that the first eigenvalue before trend
removal has a large value, which after normalization makes other
eigenvalues very close to zero. However after trend removal,
the first two eigenvalues have close values related to the most
dominant oscillation of the signal from the AP axis. In the
next step, these two first eigenvectors from the AP axis are
reconstructed using SSA for determining the RHC and LHC.
2) Detection of RHC and LHC: To detect the RHC and LHC,
the signal of the AP axis is used to find an interval in the time
domain for detecting heel contact. After removing the trend
from the AP axis, a peak detection method is applied to the
dominant oscillation of the AP axis (obtained by reconstructing
the signal using the first two largest eigenvalues) to identify the
local maxima and local minima. Most existing methods have
applied the peak detection method to the raw signals to find the
heel contact [6], [10], [17], [31]. There are also methods based
on autocorrelation analysis to estimate the gait cycle considering
variations in the speed of walking [7].
The objective of applying the peak detection method to the
first dominant oscillation of the AP signal is to exploit the periodicity of the signal for detecting RHC/LHC, not just by relying
on the explicit peaks in the data. This is important in that not
all heel contacts produce distinctive peaks in the AP/SI signals,
particularly for patient data. Since walking generates repetitive
patterns, the analysis of periodic features of the signal can reveal
important information regarding periodicity of the underlying
patterns. It is worth noting that not only the periodicity of the
acceleration data is taken into account, but also the amplitudes

Fig. 6. Top row: The signal of the AP axis and its dominant oscillation, and
the local minima and maxima are shown. It can be seen from this plot that there
are no distinctive peaks for all the heel contacts. Bottom row: The signal from
the ML axis is used to determine the LHCs and RHCs.

of acceleration in two axes (AP and SI) are used to detect heel
contacts.
Once the local maxima and minima of the dominant oscillation of the AP signal have been found, a local minimum in
between may appear if there is a deviation on dominant oscillation forming two very close local maxima. As an example, it
can be seen from Fig. 5 that the amplitude of such local minima
can be close to the amplitude of each local maximum. The same
situation may happen in which an invalid local maximum and
several close local minima points are formed. A simple process
is performed to remove these invalid local maxima/minima. After finding all these extrema of the first dominant oscillation of
the AP axis, a further validation process is performed. In order
to estimate the LHC and RHC more accurately, a short interval
around each local minimum of the dominant oscillation of AP
axis is constructed. An example of these intervals is shown in
Fig. 6. These intervals are important for subsequent incorporation of the SI axis information to find heel contacts, by using
both the AP and SI axes.
Since after removing the trend from the AP or SI axis the
signal is centered around zero, the mean value needs to be
added back to form the original data after detrending. Finally,
the signals of the AP and SI axes, after trend removal and mean
correction, are multiplied in each specified interval (based on
the detected local minima of the dominant oscillation) and the
point that gives the minimum value is considered as the index
of heel contact.
After finding the heel contacts, the signal of the ML axis is
used to determine the RHC and LHC. First, three local minimum

1266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

indices (given by using the dominant oscillation of the AP axis)
should be selected. If the mean amplitude value of the signal of
the ML axis from the first local minimum’s index to the second
one is bigger than the mean value from the second to the third
one, the first local minimum is regarded as the RHC, the second
as the LHC, and the third as the RHC. In a similar manner,
if the mean amplitude of the signal of the ML axis from the
first local minimum’s index to the second one is smaller than
the mean value from the second to the third one, the first local
minimum is regarded as the LHC, the second as the RHC, and
the third as the LHC. In Fig. 6, the signal of the ML axis, the
dominant oscillation of the signal from the AP axis, and its local
minima/maxima for detecting the RHC and LHC are shown.
Therefore, the dominant oscillation of the AP axis is used for
determining intervals that contain the time index of the heel
contacts. Based on these intervals, heel contacts are extracted
using accelerations of both the AP and SI axes. Finally, the ML
axis is used for determination of RHC and LHC.
3) Extraction of Gait Cycles: In this step, the information
given by the previous step is used to segment the signal from
the ML axis. This is important for finding the toe-off points, as
the synchronization experiment showed that the ML axis is the
best axis for estimating the toe-off points. Therefore, the signal
of the ML axis is segmented between two consecutive RHCs.
4) Applying SVD: Since the acceleration signals can be
noisy for practical applications, filtering of the raw signals is
required.
The proposed technique in this paper is to apply SVD to a
number of gait cycles (segmented from one RHC to the next
RHC, with possible length extension, using the ML axis) and
extract the main gait cycle:
⎡
⎤

s1 (RHC(i) : RHC(i) + q − 1)
⎢
⎥
..
Xc = ⎣
⎦
.

s1 (RHC(i + N − 1) : RHC(i + N − 1) + q − 1)
⎤
c0
.
(9)
= ⎣ .. ⎦
cN −1
⎡

[U, Σ, V] = SVD(XTc )

(10)

gc = v1 /norm(v1 )

(11)

where q = max{RHC(i + j +1)−RHC(i + j)}j =0,...,N −1 all i
+ 1, 
s1 is the acceleration signal of the ML axis (after trend
removal and mean correction), cj (j = 0, . . . , N − 1) denotes
each individual gait cycle, Xc is an (N × q) matrix of N gait
cycles, SVD performs singular value decomposition, RHC(i)
denotes the time-point index of the ith RHC, v1 is the first
vector (having the largest eigenvalue) of the V matrix which
contains the right singular vectors, and gc is considered to be
the main gait cycle. The main gait cycle is used as a template
in the next step to estimate the toe-off events and also realign
the gait cycles to obtain enhanced (filtered) gait cycles.
5) Applying LCSS: For every N groups of gait cycles, the
main gait cycle, gc , which is obtained by applying SVD to the
N gait cycles, is compared to each individual cycle and their

Fig. 7. Ten main gait cycles (red) segmented based on the LHCs in the time
domain and the reconstructed template (blue) with the point correspondence
output of LCSS for detecting the LTO on the main gait cycle. The minimum
bounding envelop (MBE) is shown in grey, which is a region that covers all
matching areas within δ in time and  in space.

similarity value is estimated by the LCSS algorithm. If the similarity given by the LCSS is less than a defined threshold, the
corresponding gait cycle is removed. All the other gait cycles
are then resampled to produce the enhanced gait cycles. The
resampling technique used in this study uses the point correspondence of the main gait cycle and the raw cycle. It keeps
only the samples corresponding to the main gait cycle.
6) Detection of RTO and LTO: As the synchronization results suggest, the RTO event is the first local minimum after
the LHC and the LTO is a local maximum before the LHC.
However, detection of the RTO and LTO from raw gait cycles
are difficult since there may be several local maxima or minima
coexisting. One effective strategy, is to estimate the RTO and
LTO from the main gait cycles gc (obtained for every N groups
of gait cycles) by considering the expected shape of the gait
cycle and applying the LCSS algorithm as explained below.
Here, for the detection of the LTO on the main gait cycle gc ,
it is estimated based on a peak before the maximum of LHCs (in
time domain based on the time-stamps) for N grouped cycles.
RTO is detected on gc as the first peak after the minimum of
LHCs in the time domain for the N grouped cycles.
Detection of LTO has shown to be more difficult than RTO due
to the different appearance of LHC on the ML axis which creates
extra local maxima/minima before LHC that are not related to
LTO (see Figs. 3 and 7). Therefore, for a more robust detection
of LTO, a template based on expected shape of cycles from
ML axis is constructed and the point on the main gait cycle gc
which is related to the first peak of the template, using the point
correspondence result of LCSS, is considered as the LTO. As

JARCHI et al.: GAIT PARAMETER ESTIMATION FROM A MINIATURIZED EAR-WORN SENSOR USING SINGULAR SPECTRUM ANALYSIS

1267

an example, ten extracted gait cycles (red) and the constructed
template (blue) with the results from LCSS are shown in Fig. 7.
The last point of each main gait cycle is based on the maximum
of LHCs for all the grouped cycles. From Figs. 3 and 7, the
importance of using a template for a more robust detection of
LTO can be seen.
Finally, after detecting the representative LTO and RTO on
the main gait cycle based on LCSS, the corresponding point
of the peaks for LTO and RTO are located on each raw cycle. Therefore, RTO and LTO are not directly located on
raw gait cycles. They are first located on the main gait cycle gc , then on the raw cycles based on the outputs of LCSS.
LTO is detected on gc using a template and applying LCSS
(LCSS(r, gc (1 : gi )), see Algorithm 2) and RTO is detected on
gc using a peak detection technique. Then, LTO and RTO are
located on the enhanced cycle, which is obtained by resampling the raw gait cycle based on the main gait cycle and
the point correspondence output of LCSS (LCSS(gc , cj ), see
Algorithm 2).
7) Estimating gait parameters: Once all the gait events
(RHC, LHC, RTO, and LTO) have been detected from the accelerometer data, it is possible to estimate the gait parameters
using the corresponding time-stamps. These parameters include:
1) Left swing time: ts (LHC(i)) − ts (LTO(i)).
2) Right swing time: ts (RHC(i + 1)) − ts (RTO(i)).
3) Left stance time: ts (LTO(i + 1)) − ts (LHC(i)).
4) Right stance time:ts (RTO(i)) − ts (RHC(i)).
5) Left stride time: ts (LHC(i + 1)) − ts (LHC(i)).
6) Right stride time: ts (RHC(i + 1)) − ts (RHC(i)).
where ts (.) denotes the corresponding time-stamp given the
time-point index of its input time-series, i denotes the index
of the event, then i + 1 is the index of the next event. Other
important gait parameters can be obtained by using the estimated
heel contact and toe-off events.
For example, the step asymmetry can be obtained as follows:
Step asymmetry:
ts (LHC(i)) − ts (RHC(i))
ts (RHC(i + 1)) − ts (LHC(i))
The pseudocode for estimating the gait parameters is provided
in Algorithm 2.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In order to quantify the performance of the proposed method
for gait parameter estimation, a dataset is used to validate the
accuracy of the estimated gait parameters using e-AR versus the
results produced by using an instrumented treadmill with force
plates. In the following, the results of applying the proposed
method to the dataset are provided.
For validation of gait parameters estimated by analyzing the
e-AR signals, a laboratory-based experiment was conducted
where ten asymptomatic subjects walked on a force-plate instrumented treadmill (Gaitway Treadmill, Kistler Instrument
Corp., Amherst USA) at a speed of 3.2 km/h for 20 min. After
each two-minute interval, the treadmill incline was increased
by 2%. Detection of gait events using an inclined treadmill is

more difficult than a flat treadmill since walking on an inclined
treadmill results in smoother accelerations that make it more
difficult to detect the gait events. The current study is partially
validated for walking on a flat treadmill.
The raw acceleration signals given by the high-speed e-AR
sensor with a sampling frequency of 130 Hz were segmented
into 1 min windows. For each minute, which also related to
the same percentage of incline, the gait parameter estimation
method as explained in Section II-D is used to estimate the
essential gait parameters. Since for each minute of the data, the
percentage of the incline is constant, 15 gait cycles (N ) have
been selected and the parameters are then estimated. Therefore,
the trends of the gait signals are first removed, then the relevant
RHC and LHC are estimated. The SVD is applied to 15 gait
cycles. For grouping of these gait cycles, the parameter q in (9)
is set to 310. The LCSS is then evaluated by having the main
gait cycle derived by SVD and that from the raw data as the
input.

1268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

The value of τ2 parameter in Algorithm 2 controls the number
of discarded cycles. The value of τ2 is set to be 0.65 in this study,
which is empirically defined. Therefore, after segmenting the
gait cycles using the estimated RHCs from the ML axis, the
cycles that have less than 0.65 similarity based on the point
correspondence output of the LCSS are removed. To apply the
SSA algorithm, the embedding dimension is set to be 100 in this
study.
In the LCSS algorithm, the value of , which represents the
degree of matching in the space can be set to half of the standard
deviation of the input time-series which has been shown to
provide good results [29]. The warping length δ in the LCSS
algorithm is a percentage of the time-series length. Based on the
given experiments in [29], the performance of the warping from
5% to 20% of the time-series length is evaluated. By increasing
the value of δ, the space search is larger and less accurate results
may be obtained. In the proposed algorithm, the LCSS algorithm
is called for two different objectives:
1) To identify the similarity of the main gait cycle and each
raw cycle (to remove less useful cycles based on the similarity value) and also to locate the RTO/LTO detected
using main gait cycle on each raw cycle.
2) To find the LTO on the main gait cycle, based on a predefined template, to be located later on each raw cycle.
For the first objective, the value of  is set to 0.3 multiplied
by the minimum of the standard deviation of the two input timeseries. The value of δ is set to 0.15 multiplied by the minimum
size of its inputs (15% of the time-series length). For the template
r in Algorithm 2, a1 , b1 and 2z12 are set to 10, 40, and 600, and
a2 ,b2 and 2z22 are set to 10, 120, and 600, respectively. The time
index t starts from 1 to 150. Since the template length is about
half of the cycles (310), then for the LCSS algorithm, the δ is
set to 0.30 multiplied by the minimum size of its inputs (30%
of the time-series length) and  is set to 1.5 multiplied by the
minimum of the standard deviation of the two input time-series.
The RTO and LTO are estimated using the output of LCSS
and the peaks of the main gait cycle. In Fig. 8, three example raw
cycles and the corresponding main gait cycles are shown. The
raw cycle in Fig. 8(c) is removed due to a very low similarity
value to the main gait cycle, while the raw cycle in Fig. 8(a)
has a strong similarity to the main gait cycle. In Fig. 8(b), it can
be seen why we choose to detect the peaks from the main gait
cycle rather than the raw cycle to ensure the robustness of the
algorithms. In addition, LTO can be better detected using the
predefined template and applying the LCSS algorithm as shown
in Fig. 7.
After resampling based on the main gait cycle and output of
LCSS, the gait cycles are enhanced. The results are shown in
Fig. 9. In this figure, cycles from each 1 min samples of the data
are selected, then all the cycles toward the end of the experiment
have been added to a matrix and their corresponding 2-D pattern
is created. It can be seen from this figure that the enhancement
of the gait cycle preserves the overall trend of the peaks while
making it easier to estimate the essential gait events. This way
of grouping and enhancing the gait cycles, which can also be
applied to other acceleration axes, is useful for detecting gait
pattern changes in certain applications for patient groups. For

Fig. 8. Main gait cycle given by the SVD algorithm is compared to each
cycle using the LCSS method. (a) The main gait cycle is very similar to the
raw cycle, the point correspondence is shown in the bottom plot. (b) The raw
cycle has about 71% similarity to the main gait cycle. (c) The raw cycle has
about 43% similarity to the main cycle, therefore, it will be removed not to have
contribution in estimation of gait parameters.
TABLE I
THE MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION (SD) OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THE ESTIMATED GAIT PARAMETERS (IN SECONDS) USING E-AR AND
FORCE DATA

the ten healthy adults shown in Fig. 9, the estimated LTO and
RTO indices are shown in white in Fig. 10. After obtaining
the index of all gait events, the gait parameters (e.g., swing,
stance, and stride times) for the left and right foot can thus be
estimated. The same gait parameters are also estimated using
the force data.
Force-plate detection of heel contact and toe off were performed on the treadmill sampled at 500 samples/s. An algorithm
was implemented in MATLAB (The Mathworks Inc.) to partition force traces into right and left steps. A threshold of 10%
of bodyweight was used to determine heel contact, and 5% was
used to determine toe off. These relatively large thresholds were
needed in order to account for the increased noise on the force
traces caused by the moving belt. The trials in which there was
no clear separation of consecutive strides (i.e., when the front
foot contacted either the anterior or posterior force-plate before
the rear-foot left the same plate) were discarded.
For each subject having the same percentage of incline (and
per minute), the corresponding right/left swing, right/left stance,
and right/left stride times estimated from the e-AR and the force
data are shown in Fig. 11 as a Bland–Altman plot. In Table I,
the mean and standard deviation of the relative and absolute
difference between estimations are shown. It can be seen from
this table and the Bland–Altman plot (see Fig. 11) that the best

JARCHI et al.: GAIT PARAMETER ESTIMATION FROM A MINIATURIZED EAR-WORN SENSOR USING SINGULAR SPECTRUM ANALYSIS

1269

Fig. 9. Raw and enhanced ML cycles by LCSS and SSA. The results are shown for ten healthy adults walking on the treadmill. In each plot, the raw cycles (top)
and the enhanced ones (bottom) from the ML axis are grouped together having an increased incline angle as the gait cycle number increases. The created images
of the consecutive cycles are also shown. The first half of cycles are shown in blue and the second half in red.

1270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 11. Bland–Altman plot for the estimated left/right swing, left/right stance,
and left/right stride using the e-AR and force-plate treadmill. The horizontal axis
for each plot is the average of estimation using the two methods and the vertical
axis is the difference between the two methods.

Fig. 10. Peaks detected as LTO and RTO for ten healthy adults are shown in
white which create a trace in the vertical axis.

estimation is for the stride times. The absolute error of estimations (in seconds) for each subject in different inclination
angle is shown in Fig. 12. There are some outliers for some
subjects. A careful examination of the raw signals shows that
for the tenth subject, for example, the ML acceleration deviates
significantly from the normal ones, which can be due to inconsistent walking of the person on the treadmill [see Fig. 9(j)]. In
addition, the removal of many gait cycles for this subject resulted in a reduction of the number of estimated values. Overall,
the absolute errors by using 95% confidence intervals (CIs) are
17.9 ± 2.29 ms, 36.9 ± 3.84 ms, and 35.5 ± 3.99 ms for stride,
stance, and swing times, respectively. The relative errors (%)
are calculated using:

Fig. 12. Absolute error of gait parameters (in seconds) for each subject using
e-AR having the force data as the reference. The mean absolute error for each
subject is shown.

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

This paper proposes a new method for estimating gait parameters using an e-AR device. In this study, gait parameter
estimation is based on the combined use of SSA and LCSS.
Other gait features such as spatial features (signal amplitudes
for heel contacts events) are also derived. It should be noted that
Error% = |(e − AR) − (Force − plate)|/(Force − plate) × 100 the accuracy of the algorithm for gait parameter estimation is
(12) only validated using a force-plate instrumented treadmill using
for stride, stance, and swing times. The percentages of relative healthy subjects. The major advantage of the proposed platform
error using 95% of CI are 1.47 ± 0.12, 4.84 ± 0.48, and 8.03 ± is in its simplicity in terms of consistent sensor positioning. In
order to gauge the relative accuracy of the platform compared to
0.86, for stride, stance, and swing times, respectively.

JARCHI et al.: GAIT PARAMETER ESTIMATION FROM A MINIATURIZED EAR-WORN SENSOR USING SINGULAR SPECTRUM ANALYSIS

1271

TABLE II
REPORTED ERRORS AND STATISTICS OF MEASURED DURATIONS FOR TEMPORAL GAIT PARAMETERS

other parallel techniques and evaluate an acceptable level of accuracies for a few applications, a detailed discussion is provided
in the following paragraphs.
Table II lists four recent approaches published in the literature which cover different types of sensor platforms for analysis
and validation. The first two studies address the errors of temporal gait parameters and they are used to compare to the errors
obtained in this study.
In [32], gait analysis was performed using force-sensitive
resistor sensors located in different foot contact points and the
validation was performed by a GAITRite system. The relative
errors (%) for temporal parameters including gait cycle (stride),
stance, and swing times are listed in Table II, which are similar
to our results (1.47 ± 0.12, 4.84 ± 0.48, and 8.03 ± 0.86 for
stride, stance, and swing times, respectively, as mentioned in
Section III), although the accuracy of stride time is much more
accurate by using our proposed method. In [33], an average
absolute error of 5 ms has been obtained for stride and stance
times during training sessions of athletes. This study uses a 3-D
accelerometer and gyroscope (IMU) with a sampling frequency
of 200 Hz, which shows lower errors compared to our results
for stride and stance times.
In the work by Bergamini et al. [33], Lau and Tong [34],
and Rueterbories et al. [35], the measured durations of estimated parameters are represented as mean ± SD. More specifically, Bergamini et al. [33] used an IMU for both amateur and
elite athletes running in indoor and outdoor tracks, whereas Lau
and Tong [34] used a dual-axis accelerometer combined with
a single-axis gyroscope and Rueterbories et al. [35] used two
3-D accelerometers for comparing gait patterns of hemiparetic
patients to that of normals. For example, it can be seen from
Table II that the mean difference of the measured stride time is
about 300 ms between hemiparetic patients with dropped foot
and normal subjects. As mentioned in Section III, the overall
mean absolute error of the e-AR sensor for stride time is about
18 ms, suggesting an acceptable level of accuracy for this application. It is therefore worth noting that for some applications, the
proposed platform may not be ideal for discrimination of certain

patient/athlete groups (e.g., there is about 30 ms difference in
stride times for hemiparetic patients in [35]).
In addition to the applications listed in Table II, temporal
gait parameters have been used in several research studies to
assess the gait of patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD). In the
study by Bamberg et al. [5], longer stride times by 150 ms is
reported for PD patients, however, the stance phase is nearly
equivalent for normal and PD patients. In another study by Wu
and Krishnan [36], it is shown that there are no clear differences
in mean temporal values of gait parameters between the PD
patients and controls. They used a statistical analysis on the
standard deviation of temporal gait parameters, which shows
discrimination between the PD patients and healthy subjects
based on standard deviations. In fact, a number of research
studies have evaluated the analysis of gait variability which is
reflected on the standard deviation or coefficient of variation of
temporal gait parameters for assessing PD patients [36], patients
with lower-limb prosthesis [37], and community-dwelling older
adults with fall history [38]. This implies that even if a system
is not the most accurate, other parameters derived by the same
system can ensure its clinical value.
In summary, the range of errors produced by the e-AR sensor appears to be acceptable for most clinical/sport applications
when compared to the current state-of-the-art. Our ongoing and
future work involves the use of the proposed platform for longitudinal assessment of patient groups, e.g., the recovery process
for patients with lower-limb trauma after surgery. For such an
application, we are investigating the changes in gait patterns
(by using the enhanced gait cycles from all three axes of the eAR sensor) and step time asymmetry measurements at different
time points after surgery for a detailed validation of the recovery
monitoring system.
Depending on the clinical application and the purpose for
estimating gait parameters, there are several ways for further
validation of the proposed system in clinical settings:
1) Use of a pressure sensing platform to further validate
the proposed platform for pathological patients in a freewalking environment.

1272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

2) Establishing relevant parameters based on the detected
gait events or estimated gait parameters (e.g., coefficient
of variations of the estimated parameter) and correlating
them with clinical scores such as the Oxford knee or knee
injury and osteoarthritis outcome scores.
3) Performing test-retest reliability assessments and obtaining inter and intraclass correlation coefficients for gait
variables.
It is also worth noting that the current implementation of
the algorithm is not designed for real-time gait analysis as the
method relies on multiple gait cycles. There is, therefore, an
intrinsic delay of N cycles. Nevertheless, certain parts of the
algorithm can be implemented in real-time. For example, we
have developed an iterative formulation of the SSA algorithm
for online detection of heel contacts. Based on each new time
point of the acceleration data along the AP axis, the new time
point on the dominant oscillation can be estimated. For toeoff detection, however, real-time estimation is more difficult
and it is currently under investigation by the authors. In this
paper, we used LCSS for better estimation of toe-off events,
which requires the grouping of several gait cycles. For real-time
estimation, LCSS needs to be iteratively applied, requiring a
buffering matrix incorporating each new gait cycle data.
For gait analysis using wearable technologies, it is important
to reduce the number of sensors to ensure simplicity while maintaining reliability and accuracy of the system. This is particularly
relevant in clinical applications for long-term continuous monitoring of patients, as well as the elderly population. In this paper,
information from reference technologies such as a high-speed
camera and a force-plate instrumented treadmill has been used
to validate the estimated gait parameters derived from the e-AR
sensor. From the results derived, it is evident that the proposed
method in this paper for accelerometry based gait analysis has
the following advantages.
1) Use of a single light-weight ear worn sensor.
2) All processing can be performed on-node and therefore
significantly reduces wireless-transmission overhead.
3) Ergonomic design of the sensor to ensure long-term patient compliance.
Another important feature of the proposed algorithm is that
for the preprocessing step, there are no strong assumptions on
the statistics of the signals. In summary, we have developed a
practical gait analysis platform that is suitable for both laboratory and free-walking environments. The results derived demonstrate the practical clinical value of the method. The proposed
method in this paper can provide a framework for accelerometry based gait analysis using a single sensor to create clinically
reliable future monitoring systems which can be employed in
patients’ homes to provide clinicians with more relevant and
detailed information regarding recovery after surgery.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Parkka, M. Ermes, P. Korpipaa, J. Mantyjarvi, J. Peltola, and
I. Korhonen, “Activity classification using realistic data from wearable
sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 119–128,
Jan. 2006.

[2] M. Mojarradi, D. Binkley, B. Blalock, R. Andersen, N. Ulshoefer,
T. Johnson, and L. Del Castillo, “A miniaturized neuroprosthesis suitable for implantation into the brain,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 38–42, Mar. 2003.
[3] E. Jovanov, A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and P. C. de Groen, “A wireless body
area network of intelligent motion sensors for computer assisted physical
rehabilitation,” J Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 1, pp. 2–6, 2005.
[4] K. Aminian, P. Robert, E. Jequier, and Y. Schutz, “Incline, speed, and distance assessment during unconstrained walking,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 226–234, 1995.
[5] S. J. M. Bamberg, A. Y. Benbasat, D. M. Scarborough, D. E. Krebs, and
J. A. Paradiso, “Gait analysis using a shoe-integrated wireless sensor system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 413–423, Jul.
2008.
[6] W. Zijlstra and A. L. Hof, “Assessment of spatio-temporal gait parameters
from trunk accelerations during human walking,” Gait Posture, vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 1–10, 2003.
[7] R. Moe-Nilssen and J. L. Helbostad, “Estimation of gait cycle characteristics by trunk accelerometry,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 121–126,
2004.
[8] Y. Tochigi, N. A. Segal, T. Vaseenon, and T. D. Brown, “Entropy analysis
of tri-axial leg acceleration signal waveforms for measurement of decrease
of physiological variability in human gait,” J. Orthop. Res., vol. 30, no. 6,
pp. 897–904, 2012.
[9] A. T. Willemsen, F. Bloemhof, and H. B. K. Boom, “Automatic stanceswing phase detection from accelerometer data for peroneal nerve stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 1201–1208, Dec.
1990.
[10] J. M. Jasiewicz, J. H. Allum, J. W. Middleton, A. Barriskill, P. Condie,
B. Purcell, and R. C. Li, “Gait event detection using linear accelerometers
or angular velocity transducers in able-bodied and spinal-cord injured
individuals,” Gait Posture, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 502–509, 2006.
[11] R. W. Selles, M. A. G. Formanoy, J. B. J. Bussmann, P. J. Janssens, and
H. J. Stam, “Automated estimation of initial and terminal contact timing
using accelerometers; development and validation in transtibial amputees
and controls,” IEEE Trans. Neural. Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 81–88, Mar. 2005.
[12] F. Bugané, M. G. Benedetti, G. Casadio, S. Attala, F. Biagi, M. Manca,
and A. Leardini, “Estimation of spatial-temporal gait parameters in level
walking based on a single accelerometer: Validation on normal subjects
by standard gait analysis,” Gait Posture., vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 129–137,
2012.
[13] R. C. Gonzalez, A. M. Lopez, J. Rodriguez-Urı́a, D. Alvarez, and
J. C. Alvarez, “Real-time gait event detection for normal subjects from
lower trunk accelerations,” Gait Posture., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 322–325,
2010.
[14] S. Thiemjarus, B. Lo, and G. Z. Yang, “Feature selection for wireless
sensor networks,” in Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Wearable Implant. Body
Sens. Netw., 2004, pp. 1–2.
[15] L. Atallah, B. Lo, R. King, and G. Z. Yang, “Sensor positioning for activity recognition using wearable accelerometers,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 320–329, Aug. 2011.
[16] G. Z. Yang, Body Sensor Networks.. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag,
2006.
[17] L. Atallah, A. Wiik, G. G. Jones, B. Lo, J. P. Cobb, A. Amis, and
G. Z. Yang, “Validation of an ear-worn sensor for gait monitoring using a force-plate instrumented treadmill,” Gait Posture, vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 674–676, 2012.
[18] M. M. Skelly and H. J. Chizeck, “Real-time gait event detection for paraplegic FES walking,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 59–68, Mar. 2001.
[19] M. Iosa, T. Marro, S. Paolucci, and D. Morelli, “Stability and harmony
of gait in children with cerebral palsy,” Res. Dev. Disabil., vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 129–135, 2012.
[20] T. Doi, R. Yamaguchi, T. Asai, M. Komatsu, D. Makiura, M. Shimamura,
S. Hirata, H. Ando, and M. Kurosaka, “The effects of shoe fit on gait in
community-dwelling older adults,” Gait Posture., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 274–
278, 2010.
[21] A. Zijlstra, E. D. de Bruin, N. Bruins, and W. Zijlstra, “The step lengthfrequency relationship in physically active community-dwelling older
women,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 104, no. 3, pp. 427–434, 2008.
[22] K. Aminian, K. Rezakhanlou, E. De Andres, C. Fritsch, P. F. Leyvraz, and
P. Robert, “Temporal feature estimation during walking using miniature
accelerometers: An analysis of gait improvement after hip arthroplasty,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 686–691, 1999.

JARCHI et al.: GAIT PARAMETER ESTIMATION FROM A MINIATURIZED EAR-WORN SENSOR USING SINGULAR SPECTRUM ANALYSIS

[23] B. Lo, J. Pansiot, and G. Z. Yang, “Bayesian analysis of sub-plantar ground
reaction force with BSN,” in Proc. 6th Int. Worksh. Wearable Implant.
Body Sens. Netw., 2009, pp. 135–139.
[24] N. Golyandina, V. Nekrutkin, and A. Zhigljavsky, Analysis of Timeseries
Structure: SSA and Related Techniques.. Boca Raton, FL, USA: Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2001.
[25] S. Sanei, T. K. M. Lee, and V. Abolghasemi, “A new adaptive line enhancer
based on singular spectrum analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 2, pp. 428–434, Feb. 2012.
[26] F. Ghaderi, H. R. Mohseni, and S. Sanei, “Localizing heart sounds in respiratory signals using singular spectrum analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3360–3367, Dec. 2011.
[27] D. S. Hirschberg, “A linear space algorithm for computing maximal common subsequences,” Commun. ACM, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 341–343, 1975.
[28] G. Das, D. Gunopulos, and H. Mannila, “Finding similar time series,” in
Proc. Principl. Data Mining Knowl. Discov., 1997, pp. 88–100.
[29] M. Vlachos, M. Hadjieleftheriou, D. Gunopulos, and E. Keogh, “Indexing
multi-dimensional time-series with support for multiple distance measures,” in Proc. ACM Spec. Interest Group Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2003, pp. 216–225.
[30] D. Jarchi, L. Atallah, and G. Z. Yang, “Transition detection and activity
classification from wearable sensors using singular spectrum analysis,” in
Proc. 9th Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sens. Netw., 2012,
pp. 136–141.
[31] R. R. Torrealba, J. Cappelletto, L. Fermin-Leon, J. C. Grieco, and
G. Fernandez-Lopez, “Statistics-based technique for automated detection
of gait events from accelerometer signals,” Electron. Lett., vol. 46, no. 22,
pp. 1483–1485, 2010.
[32] P. Lopez-Meyer, G. D. Fulk, and E. S. Sazonov, “Automatic detection
of temporal gait parameters in poststroke individuals,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 594–601, Jul. 2011.
[33] E. Bergamini, P. Picerno, H. Pillet, F. Natta, P. Thoreux, and V. Camomilla,
“Estimation of temporal parameters during sprint running using a trunkmounted inertial measurement unit,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1123–
1126, 2012.
[34] H. Lau and K. Tong, “The reliability of using accelerometer and gyroscope
for gait event identification on persons with dropped foot,” Gait Posture,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 248–257, 2008.
[35] J. Rueterbories, E. G. Spaich, and O. K. Andersen, “Characterization of
gait pattern by 3D angular accelerations in hemiparetic and healthy gait,”
Gait Posture, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 183–189, 2013.
[36] Y. Wu and S. Krishnan, “Statistical analysis of gait rhythm in patients with
Parkinson’s disease,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 150–158, Apr. 2010.
[37] K. Parker, E. Hanada, and J. Adderson, “Gait variability and regularity of
people with transtibial amputations,” Gait Posture, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 269–
273, 2013.
[38] E. P. Doheny, B. R. Greene, T. Foran, C. Cunningham, C. W. Fan, and
R. A. Kenny, “Diurnal variations in the outcomes of instrumented gait
and quiet standing balance assessments and their association with falls
history,” Physiol Meas., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 361–373, 2012.

Delaram Jarchi received the B.Sc. degree in computer engineering from Iran University of Science and
Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2005, the M.Sc. degree
in artificial intelligence from Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical
signal processing from University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K., in 2011.
She is currently a Research Associate with the
Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College
London, London, U.K. Her research interests include
machine learning, biomedical signal processing, and
body sensor network.

1273

Charence Wong received the M.Eng. degree in computing from Imperial College London, London, U.K.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. student
degree at the Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery,
Imperial College London.
His research focuses upon motion reconstruction
for biomechanical analysis using ambient and wearable sensors. For the G-theme (Generalized Body
Sensor Networks) of the ESPRIT programme, he has
been working on sensor fusion and estimation techniques for motion reconstruction from sparse sensor
networks.

Richard Mark Kwasnicki received the B.Sc. degree
in surgery and anaesthesia, with honours, from Imperial College School of Medicine, London, U.K., in
2011, as part of the M.B.–Ph.D. programme. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in surgical
technology at the Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College
London, before reintegrating into the medical school
curriculum.
His research interest includes clinical applications
of body sensor networks, particularly in the perioperative setting.

Ben Heller received the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow, U.K.
He worked in Medical Physics at Sheffield Teaching Hospitals for 14 years where he specialized in
the design of medical instrumentation and the clinical measurement of movement. He is currently a
Principal Research Fellow in the Centre for Sports
Engineering Research (CSER) at Sheffield Hallam
University, Sheffield, U.K.

Garry A. Tew received the Ph.D. degree in clinical
exercise physiology from Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, U.K., in 2009. He is a BASES (British
Association of Sport and Exercise Sciences) Accredited Sport and Exercise Scientist. He is currently with
the York Trials Unit at the University of York, York,
U.K., where he coordinates multicentre clinical trials
in the fields of exercise rehabilitation, pharmacological therapy, and orthopaedic surgery.

Guang-Zhong Yang (S’90–M’91–SM’08–F’11) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Imperial College London, London, U.K.
He is the Director, Co-Founder, and currently
chairs the Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College London. His current research interests
include biomedical imaging, sensing, and robotics.
He is a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering, the Institution of Engineering and Technology,
and the American Institute for Medical Biological
Engineering.

