IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1887

Distributed, Signal Strength-Based Indoor
Localization Algorithm for Use
in Healthcare Environments
Jeroen Wyffels, Jos De Brabanter, Pieter Crombez, Member, IEEE, Piet Verhoeve, Senior Member, IEEE,
Bart Nauwelaers, Senior Member, IEEE, and Lieven De Strycker, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In current healthcare environments, a trend toward
mobile and personalized interactions between people and nurse
call systems is strongly noticeable. Therefore, it should be possible
to locate patients at all times and in all places throughout the care
facility. This paper aims at describing a method by which a mobile
node can locate itself indoors, based on signal strength measurements and a minimal amount of yes/no decisions. The algorithm
has been developed specifically for use in a healthcare environment.
With extensive testing and statistical support, we prove that our
algorithm can be used in a healthcare setting with an envisioned
level of localization accuracy up to room revel (or region level in a
corridor), while avoiding heavy investments since the hardware of
an existing nurse call network can be reused. The approach opted
for leads to very high scalability, since thousands of mobile nodes
can locate themselves. Network timing issues and localization update delays are avoided, which ensures that a patient can receive
the needed care in a time and resources efficient way.
Index Terms—Distributed indoor localization, low resources, received signal strength (RSS), scalability.

I. INTRODUCTION
YSTEMS capable in assisting medical staff efficiently are
highly valued in next generation nurse call systems. Current systems operate on a room-oriented basis: when a patient
launches a call for help, nurses are informed that in a certain
room assistance is required. Suppose a patient is wearing a mobile alarm button by which he or she can make the request for
assistance. Thus, nurses can be informed who needs the assistance, but since the patient is wearing a mobile node (i.e., a
wristband), the patient could be anywhere in the care facility.
If the call can be linked not only to the patient’s identity but

S

Manuscript received August 15, 2013; revised December 16, 2013; accepted
January 17, 2014. Date of publication January 27, 2014; date of current version
November 3, 2014. This work was supported by the IWT, the Flemish agency
for Innovation by Science and Technology (Baekel and mandate), and is a cooperation between Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (DraMCo Research Group)
and Televic NV.
J. Wyffels is with the Department of Electrical Engineering ESAT, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium, and also with Televic Healthcare,
8870 Izegem, Belgium (e-mail: jeroen.wyffels@kuleuven.be).
J. De Brabanter, B. Nauwelaers, and L. De Strycker are with
the Department of Electrical Engineering ESAT, Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium (e-mail: jos.debrabanter@kuleuven.be;
bart.nauwelaers@esat.kuleuven.be; lieven.destrycker@kuleuven.be).
P. Crombez is with Televic Healthcare, 8870 Izegem, Belgium (e-mail:
p.crombez@televic.com).
P. Verhoeve was with Televic Healthcare, 8870 Izegem, Belgium. He is
now with iMinds, 9050 Ghent-Ledeberg, Belgium (e-mail: piet.verhoeve@
iminds.be).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2302840

also to the place of the call’s origin, a wide range of possible
applications and opportunities arise. Therefore, indoor localization of mobile nodes is needed. Existing indoor localization
systems are all imparted by the necessary drawbacks, mostly
to be defined in terms of installation costs, maintenance costs,
scalability, robustness, or localization accuracy. In this paper, we
combine the advantages and avoid the disadvantages of some
of the existing systems. The proposed algorithm describes a
method in which a mobile node can locate itself based on signal strengths between RF beacons. The envisioned localization
accuracy is fine-tuned up to room level (or region level if the
mobile node is inside a corridor). Since all mobile nodes are
able to locate themselves, scalability issues are avoided. This
study is supported by a statistical analysis [support vector machines (SVMs)], and is presented as follows. Section II gives
an outline of existing systems for indoor localization in general.
In Section III, an overview of the developed indoor localization
technique is given, followed by Section IV in which the performance of the proposed localization technique under laboratory
conditions is given and analyzed. Section V elaborates on the
theoretical support for the developed indoor localization algorithm, after which a general conclusion about the performed
work is presented in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
For wireless indoor localization purposes, several techniques
can be applied which are typically based on received signal
strength (RSS), time of arrival, angle of arrival, or combinations of techniques which are well described by Goswami [1].
These techniques can be used with different technologies to obtain a location, i.e., infrared technology, ultrasound, RF waves,
magnetism, vision, etc. Each technology has its own advantages
and drawbacks. Systems purely based on RF waves are widely
used for indoor localization, since the localization accuracy can
be high, depending on the used technique and available resources. RSS-based systems are rather cheap systems since the
majority of RF chips have an on-board RSS block which determines the received power of the received signal. Mostly, these
RSS values are transformed into an estimated distance between
the two transceivers communicating with each other. Different
models for the relationship between the distance and received
power exist, but all conversion algorithms are subject to indoor
propagation effects (fading, scattering, absorption, reflection,
etc.), making the relationship between the distance and received
power both dubious and unreliable. The same remark applies for

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1888

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

numerous systems which try to perform indoor localization with
a limited amount of RF beacons, whether they are Wi-Fi based
or not. An extensive overview of indoor propagation effects is
given in the book by Barclay [2]. Avoiding indoor propagation
effects for indoor localization purposes can be done by making
use of radio maps/fingerprinting techniques. The localization accuracy of fingerprinting-based systems is subject to changes in
the environment where the localization procedure takes place.
For healthcare situations, with a lot of moving objects such
as beds, standard fingerprinting techniques are thus unusable.
Techniques for adapting the radio map to environmental changes
as proposed by Yin et al. [3] boast a limited number of RF beacons. These discussed techniques yield problems in determining
if a mobile node is just inside or just outside a room, which is the
main topic of research in this paper. Altintas and Serif describe
a method for RSS-based indoor localization, using a short-term
memory to filter out impossible localization outcomes due to the
limited moving speed of a person [4]. The proposed technique,
however, is based on Wi-Fi which uses a lot of energy, and the
achieved localization accuracy (±2m) is unacceptable since it
cannot be guaranteed that a mobile node inside a room would
not get localized in a corridor instead of inside the room. Several
systems which implement indoor localization in the application
field of the healthcare sector instead of generically applicable
systems, exist too. Shirehjini et al. presented a system using
RFID (radio frequency identification) for medical equipment
localization in healthcare facilities [5]. Although the proposed
system performs well in terms of indoor localization accuracy
using passive RFID tags, the system is susceptible to misalignment of the tags compared to the RFID readers which is exactly
what cannot be guaranteed when persons are wearing these
RFID tags. The nature of an RFID system implies high installation costs, since RFID readers as well as network connections to
these readers must be foreseen (the passive tags themselves are
rather cheap). All RFID readers should be able to send the ID
of the found tags in range to a central server, possibly causing
network timing and/or scalability issues. Ultrasound-based systems capable of locating people or assets in a healthcare facility
have also been the main topic of research, as well as systems using WIFI networks. However, the installation of such a system
requires the deployment of a standalone network besides the
existing nurse call networks, making it an expensive solution.
Moreover, these systems have problems in determining whether
a mobile node should be located just within or just outside a
patient room, resulting in a too low localization accuracy which
cannot be tolerated in possibly life-threatening situations. Chen
et al. described a patient-monitoring method using ZigBee, in
which the ZigBee mesh network is used for sending vital signs
to nurses as well as for the indoor localization part [6]. Such and
similar systems typically use broadcast or multicast schemes to
ensure the delivery of the location updates and/or the vital signs
of a patient, but the high network traffic caused by this approach
induces scalability and timing issues. More commercial systems
are discussed in the work of Gu et al. [7]. They concluded that
no currently available localization system is capable of ensuring
scalability and availability of location information at all times
at all places, and therefore, using several techniques or systems

Fig. 1. Indoor localization constraints and prerequisites for healthcare
facilities.

together may lead to an indoor localization system which works
in all cases. The need of a system which is optimized for this
typical field of application and copes with all aforementioned
challenges is clear.

III. PROPOSED INDOOR LOCALIZATION TECHNIQUE
A. Indoor Localization Constraints and Prerequisites
Indoor localization in healthcare facilities is subject to several
technological constraints and prerequisites which are visualized
in Fig. 1. Possibly, thousands of mobile nodes would need to
be located within a certain time frame. According to Ottoy
et al., this can result in scalability issues when trying to perform
localization of mobile nodes on a centralized server [8]. The
approach proposed in this paper excludes the aforementioned
setbacks by focusing on indoor localization on the mobile node
itself. The node communicates its position to the backbone only
when required, implying a good system scalability. Existing
nurse call systems have multiple access points in each room,
which makes it possible to have a lot of wireless connection
possibilities to the nurse call system backbone. To each of these
existing access points, an RF chip can be attached. (In this study,
the RF chip is a Bluetooth low energy (BLE) Texas Instruments
CC2540 SOC [9].) Since these chips have a built in the RSS
block, it is possible to get a quick indication of the position
of a mobile node relative to a nurse call system access point.
By using a high number of beacons per unit of surface on top
of the existing nurse call network, minimal infrastructure costs
are needed, while accurate indoor localization can be obtained
if an appropriate algorithm is used. From a practical point of
view, the target localization accuracy is up to a room level for
a nurse call originating in a room. If the call originated in a
corridor, any localization attempt should result in the correct
region within that corridor from where the call originated. To
conclude, a 100% guarantee must be obtained that the withdrawn
localization result actually complies with the real location of
the mobile node, even if a lot of movements around the mobile
node are happening, if the mobile node gets covered (system
robustness), or if other wireless systems are installed on site.

WYFFELS et al.: DISTRIBUTED, SIGNAL STRENGTH-BASED INDOOR LOCALIZATION ALGORITHM

Fig. 3.

1889

Overall localization procedure.

C. Implemented Algorithm

Fig. 2.

Test setup.

B. Envisioned Method of Localization
Suppose all existing access points to the nurse call network
are equipped with a BLE chip. All RF beacons send advertising packets on the dedicated advertising channels (channel 37,
38, or 39) [10]. These packets are broadcasted within a certain
period T advEvent = advInterval + advDelay. In this study, an
advInterval of 20 ms is used, thus maximizing the advertising
frequency. AdvDelay is a pseudorandom delay between 0 and
10 ms; thus, on average 40 advertising packets per second can
be expected from each continuously broadcasting beacon. On
reception of an advertising packet, the receiver can determine
the MAC address of the sending beacon as well as the power
by which the advertising packet has been received and store
this information in a local database. A CC2540 has a primary
MAC address assigned by the manufacturer, and a secondary,
user assignable MAC address which has been used in this study.
Location information can be embedded in this secondary MAC
address [11]. The first three bytes of the secondary MAC address are reserved for future use, while the fourth byte indicates
the physical location of the beacon related to a room. This
fourth byte indicates near which type of nurse call access point
the BLE chip has been installed. In our system, five types of
RF beacons are used: 1) “AA”: inside a patient room near the
sanitary facilities, 2) “BB”: inside a patient room near the bed,
3) “CC”: in a corridor, above an entrance door to a patient room,
4) “DD”: in a patient room, near the entrance door, and 5) “EE”:
at the end of a corridor. These five types are denoted, respectively, as A, B, C, D, and E, in Fig. 2. The fifth and sixth bytes
determine the room itself: the building name, the floor level, and
the room number on that specific floor are indicated by these
numbers. For instance, when a mobile node receives an advertising packet from CC:EE:FF:CC:G3:78, this means that the
beacon is installed inside the corridor (“CC”) in building “G,”
floor 3 (“G3”), outside room 78 (“78”). Thus, a mobile node can
quickly gain knowledge about its position relative to all beacons
in range, by just analyzing their advertising packets. Since there
is no need for a connection to be established between beacons
and mobile nodes, nor a database to be accessed to link a MAC
address to a location, using this approach avoids scalability issues. To estimate its position from the captured information,
additional processing on the mobile node is needed which consequently should not require a lot of computing resources. This
procedure is explained in Section III-C.

1) Overall Localization Cycle: For the experiments, some
laboratories and a corridor of KU Leuven’s campus Ghent have
been used, since they compare to a healthcare facility. In Fig. 2, a
graphical overview of the test setup is given. A general overview
of the localization process is given in Fig. 3. Whenever the localization cycle is initiated, the mobile node starts with gathering
advertising packets during 1 s and put them in a local database.
After this, the momentary location gets determined as described
in Section III-C2. Out of the momentary localization procedure,
a location is withheld, which is added to a “shift register of locations” of size 7. The most occurring location in this shift register
is the final localization process outcome, which can be reported
to the nurse call system backbone. One can get an indication
of the stationariness of the mobile node. If the shift register is
filled with the same locations, meaning seven consecutive momentary localization procedures had the same outcome, we can
assume that the mobile node is stationary. If the most occurring
element in the shift register only occurs two or three times in the
shift register, we can expect that 1) the mobile node itself moves
around or 2) environmental changes around the mobile node
(people passing). The localization outcome may thus temporarily change. However, since these are only temporary effects,
the most occurring element in the shift register will remain the
same, and thus, the overall localization procedure will not return
a false location.
2) Momentary Localization Procedure: A decision tree as
can be found in Fig. 4 has been developed for the actual localization procedure, and can be seen as a sophisticated proximity
algorithm. All captured advertising data are stored and linked to
the respective beacons of origin. After this, a Winsorized mean
is calculated for all RSS values linked to the same beacon. The
Winsorized mean is a robust estimator of the mean RSS value
per beacon, which is relatively insensitive to outliers caused
by moving people, indoor propagation effects, etc. The k-times
Winsorized mean can be calculated as


n
−k −1
1
Xwk =
X(i) + (k + 1)X(n −k )
(k + 1)Xk +1 +
n
i=k +2

where n is the number of RSS values which can be related to
the same beacon. X(i) is the ith order statistic if the measurements are rearranged in an ascending order: X(1) ≤ X(2) ≤
· · · ≤ X(n ) [12]. In this study, the Winsorization procedure
incorporates the calculation of the (k = n5 )-times Winsorized
mean. The four highest mean RSS values are used for further
processing. These obtained values can be automatically related
to the four respective beacons, and knowledge about the four
accompanying beacon types is gained. We sort these beacons
from the beacon with the highest to the beacon with the fourth
highest mean Winsorized RSS value. Six possible cases are then

1890

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE I
DECISION TREE PERFORMANCE

Fig. 4.

Momentary localization procedure.

analyzed. If the two strongest received beacons out of the four
beacons can be related to two rooms situated opposite to each
other (corridor in between), the withdrawn location of the mobile node is in the corridor between the two entrance doors of
the respective rooms. Should this not be the case, it is possible
out of the four beacons, more than two (including or not including the strongest) can be related to the same room. In that case,
the algorithm concludes that the position of the mobile node is
inside or outside this room, but in all cases near the beacon with
the highest mean Winsorized RSS value. Whenever the previous
cases did not apply for the gathered set of RSS data, the algorithm checks if the two highest mean Winsorized RSS values are
related to one room. If the two strongest mean Winsorized RSS
values can be linked to the same room, the algorithm concludes
that the location of the mobile node is inside or outside this
room, taking into account that the final inside/outside decision
is made by the type of the strongest received beacon. This brings
us with the fourth possible case, when two or more of the four
highest Winsorized means can be related to two or more corridor beacons. A distinction has to be made here: in a corridor,
two types of beacons are present (“C” and “E” type). In case
one of the four strongest mean Winsorized RSS values can be
related to an end node, the algorithm decides that the mobile
node is located at the end of a corridor. Should this not be the
case, the concluded location is inside the corridor, between the
two strongest received corridor nodes. If also this fourth case
is not valid, still two more options are included in our decision
tree. If of the four strongest, two or more are door nodes and the
strongest is also of the door beacon type, the algorithm decides
that the mobile node can be located between the two doors which

have the strongest mean Winsorized RSS. This can be the case
when the mobile node is in between the doors of two oppositely
situated rooms inside a corridor. As a final typical case, two
or more of four strongest Winsorized mean RSS values could
be linked to bed-type beacons. In healthcare environments, it is
typical that a wall is dividing two rooms, with two beds symmetrically placed around this wall. In this case, possibly the
mentioned two bed beacons can be received very strong (the
two strongest), however, a wall is dividing both rooms. In this
case, the algorithm should decide that the mobile node is located
near the bed (and thus in the room) of the strongest received bed
beacon. If none of the aforementioned possibilities occur, we
have to fall back on the estimation of a distance between sender
and receiver, which is what we want to avoid in the proposed
algorithm. We optimized our decision tree as such it minimizes
the number of times this distance estimation has to be done, but
in some cases, there is no other way. The mobile node could
then locate itself by some triangulation algorithm which takes a
lot of time, or hand all available data during the 1-s interval to
the central backbone. The latter might induce scalability issues
on the central localization server, when too much mobile nodes
hand their data to this server at the same time. In the following section, an overview on the obtained localization results is
presented.
IV. RESULTS
In Table I, an overview of the performance of the decision
tree is given. RSS measurements were gathered during 150 s
at different sample points. In a room, measurements were gathered once at a distance of 1 m from a “B” beacon, and once at a
distance of 1 m from a “D” beacon. In a corridor, measurements
were taken at 1 m from each “C” beacon and from each “E” beacon. Also, in the middle between two consecutive “C” beacons,
measurements were gathered. This resulted in 23 sample points.
For each of the gather points and for each of the 150 sample
seconds, the localization procedure was initiated, resulting in a
determined location which was compared with the actual one.
The localization accuracy over these 150 s is averaged over all
similar locations (in a room/in a corridor). The envisioned localization accuracy is denoted with RLA [room level accuracy
(inside room)/region level accuracy (in corridor)]. The test has
been conducted in two separate environments: a full drywall
environment and a full brick environment. A full brick wall is
supposed to influence the RF signals to a higher extent compared to a drywall. (Thus, drywall environments are worst-case

WYFFELS et al.: DISTRIBUTED, SIGNAL STRENGTH-BASED INDOOR LOCALIZATION ALGORITHM

scenarios.) Also, the beacon level accuracy (BLA) is presented,
which is the result of letting the presented decision tree determine which is the nearest beacon to the mobile node, rather than
only decide in which room the mobile node is situated. Localization with BLA is not the envisioned topic of research, but it
can give an indication about the possibilities of using a decision
tree as proposed in this study, when beacon level localization
accuracy is needed. In Table I, it can be seen that the localization of a mobile node is possible on a distributed scale based
on the proposed decision tree. However, the influence of the
size of the shift register of locations (FilterWindowSize, FWS)
which is discussed in Section III-C becomes clear. When the
shift register functionality is not used (FWS = 1), we see that
the RLA performance is falling slightly compared to an FWS
starting from 3 on (odd numbers only). The larger the FWS, the
better the RLA becomes. In the envisioned field of application,
however, it may not take too long for an accurate location update
to be reported to the nurse call system. The larger the FWS size,
the slower the update rate of the localization outcome, since the
most occurring element in the shift register is withdrawn as the
location to report to the backbone. An update delay of maximum
5 s is acceptable from a user point of view, meaning the maximum allowable FWS is a shift register of nine locations. After
5 s, the most occurring element will then be the new location.
The gain in RLA when FWS>9 is marginal, indicating that a
location update delay of maximum 5 s is achievable. In neither
of the two environments, a 100% BLA can be obtained using
the decision tree as shown in Fig. 4, but the RLA reaches 100%
in both environments.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Theoretical Support
The adoption of the decision tree, being a sophisticated proximity localization technique, was motivated by the fact that RSSbased multilateration gives the bad performance for indoor localization. Sophisticated statistical algorithms, although having
the potential for excellent good localization, are too computationally intensive and too slow for a real-time implementation
on a mobile node with limited power and computational resources. The proposed decision tree structure is designed based
on the general knowledge of wave propagation. In the proposed
decision tree, several parameters have been used, namely 1) the
size of the shift register, 2) the number of RSS values to gather
before the momentary localization cycle can be initiated, 3) using only the four strongest mean Winsorized RSS values, and
4) the number of distinct yes/no decisions before initiating a
conventional localization algorithm. Although the used parameter settings lead to acceptable localization results with the given
prerequisites and constraints out of Fig. 1, the question remains
if these parameter settings are the best option. A discussion on
the size of the shift register has already been given. On the one
hand, it might be possible to further optimize the decision tree
structure and parameters. On the other, however, inherent physical limitations which are not a priori known have influence
on the attainable accuracy. Statistical algorithms can help here
in two ways. Suppose the localization result of a sophisticated

1891

statistical algorithm is the best achievable result. A comparison
between this golden standard and the localization result of the
decision tree can be made. This could give a general idea of
how much room for improvement is still left. Second, statistical
algorithms can give information on the optimal value of some
parameters. In the decision tree, for example, the four strongest
mean Winsorized RSS values are used. This cannot be changed
easily in the decision tree as its whole structure is based on it.
The estimation of the location as is done by the decision tree can
be seen as a classification algorithm: given a set of input data
(here, vector containing mean Winsorized RSS values), what
should be the output class (here, one of the possible locations)?
Classification problems may be solved by statistical means such
as SVMs applicable to a broad category of classification problems [13]. SVMs can cope with binary classification problems
(only two output classes possible), even though multiclass classification problems can be solved too as explained by Suykens
et al. [14]. In this paper, least-squares-support vector machines
(LS-SVM) are used.
1) Method LS-SVM [14]: In the case of a binary classification problem, we can explain the LS-SVM classification problem as follows. Given a training set defined as Dn = {(Xk , Yk ) :
Xk ∈ Rd , Yk ∈ {−1, +1}; k = 1, . . . , n}, where Xk is the kth
input pattern and Yk is the kth output pattern. In the primal
weight space, LS-SVM for classification is formulated as
n
1
γ 2
min Jc (w, e) = wT w +
e
w ,b,e
2
2 i=1 i
s.t. Yi [wT φ(Xi ) + b] = 1 − ei ,

i = 1, . . . , n

(1)

where φ : Rd → Rn h is the feature map to the high-dimensional
feature space (can be infinite dimensional); as in the standard
SVM case [15], w ∈ Rn h , b ∈ R, and γ ∈ R+
0 are the regularization parameters. On the target value, an error variable ei is
allowed such that misclassifications can be tolerated in the case
of overlapping distributions. By using Lagrange multipliers, the
solution of (1) can be obtained by taking the Karush–Kuhn–
Tucker (KKT) conditions for optimality [16]. The result is given
by the following linear system in the dual variables μ:
⎤
⎡
0
YT
   
0
⎥ b
⎢
1
⎣ Y
Ω(c) + In ⎦ μ = 1 ,
n
γ
with Y = (Y1 , . . . , Yn )T , 1n = (1, . . . , 1)T , μ = (μ1 , . . . ,
(c)
μn )T , and Ωil = Yi Yl φ(Xi )T φ(Xl ) = Yi Yl K(Xi , Xl ) for
i, l = 1, . . . , n with K(·, ·) being a positive-definite kernel. Such
a positive-definite kernel K guarantees the existence of the
feature map φ, but φ is often not explicitly known. Based on
Mercer’s theorem, the resulting LS-SVM model for classification in the dual space becomes

 n

μ̂i Yi K(x, Xi ) + b̂
ŷ(x) = sign
i=1

where K : R × R
√ → R. For example, the Gaussian kernel
K(Xi , Xj ) = (1/ 2π) exp(−Xi − Xj 22 /2h2 ) with bandwidth h >; 0.
d

d

1892

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE II
LS-SVM LOCALIZATION POSSIBILITIES

2) Simulation Results: The LS-SVM toolbox [17] is used to
support the parameter choices in the decision tree. All mean
Winsorized data gathered at different gathering points (which
comply with the position of the beacons mentioned in Fig. 2)
are put together in one large dataset containing 3450 different
sample points, resulting in a dataset of size 3450 × 23, with 23
being the number of possible RF beacons. For each of these 3450
rows, we label each one of them: these labels comply with one
of the 23 actual possible locations and thus a matrix of 3450 ×
1 labels is created. The dataset and the accompanying labels are
then split into two parts (2300 × 23 + 1150 × 23 and 2300 ×
1 + 1150 × 1 parts, respectively). We call the 2300 × 23 dataset
the training dataset, and the 1150 × 23 dataset the test dataset.
The toolbox builds an LS-SVM on the training dataset and
determines suitable tuning parameters. After the model has been
built, the performance of the Support Vector Machine can be
determined: we let the LS-SVM toolbox now use the test dataset
and the created model classify the data, checking afterwards if
the assigned label does or does not comply with the manually
assigned label. If the toolbox is capable of assigning the label
correctly, we assume that the classification process in practice
can be done, based on the training dataset. However, if the
toolbox is not capable of classifying the test dataset, this means
that there was not enough input data in the training dataset
to build a suitable model. By lowering the amount of input
data in the training set, an analysis is conducted on how much
input data is really needed to base a model on. Several test
cases were investigated, whose results can be found in Table II.
All of the tests have been repeated 100 times for statistical
relevance with shuffled training and test datasets. For each of
the 23 investigated locations, three different number of output
classes were researched.
1) 13 output classes. In this case, too much location abstraction is made. No distinction between inside or outside a
room (thus in corridor) can be made any more.
2) 17 output classes. This case complies with localization up
to the envisioned level of accuracy: a distinction between
in- and outside a room can be determined, as well as the
correct region within a corridor.
3) 23 output classes. This complies with localization up to
beacon level (which is not the envisioned level of localization accuracy in this paper).
For each iteration, the mean multiclass classification performance was calculated for each of the 23 locations. The mean
LS-SVM performance over the 100 iteration means (±standard
deviation) related to the same actual location and number of
output classes is also determined, and presented in Table II. The
influence of the amount of input data becomes clear. If data from
all beacons in range is used, the toolbox is able to determine

the location of all analyzed number of output classes in almost
every case. If we lower the amount of input data and only use
a number of highest mean Winsorized RSS values, we see that
the performance of the toolbox decreases slightly when less data
are used when building the model. When too few data are available (in our case, only the three highest mean Winsorized RSS
values), the toolbox fails to classify the test set: only when too
few output classes (13) are used, the toolbox can still classify
correctly. Since a statistical toolbox is unable to classify incoming data when less than the four strongest mean Winsorized
RSS values are used and 17 output classes are needed, using
the four strongest received beacons in our proposed algorithm
is advisable.
VI. CONCLUSION
A decision tree for distributed indoor localization based on
RSS for use in healthcare environments is presented. By exploiting the typical healthcare facility building topology, indoor
localization proved to be feasible on a distributed scale given
that a high number of beacons per unit of surface are in place.
In the proposed system, false localization results, scalability
issues, and heavyweight algorithms are avoided, while the existing nurse call network installations can be reused to reduce the
installation and maintenance costs. The proposed distributed indoor localization algorithm is based on simple yes/no decisions
to reduce the system complexity and location calculation time.
All fixed BLE beacons broadcast continuously location information. This enables the mobile nodes to quickly get an indication
about their location. By applying the proposed decision tree, the
mobile nodes can accurately locate themselves, thus avoiding
network scalability and timing issues. The envisioned level of
localization accuracy can be met when using these kinds of algorithms on the mobile node itself, when enough RF beacons
are installed in the care facility. A theoretical approach supporting our findings has also been presented. Performing indoor
localization based on RSS on a distributed scale has proven
to be feasible. A low-cost and low-resource localization system
can work accurately on a distributed and resource-efficient base,
whether people or expensive assets such as heart rate monitors
are tracked.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Goswami, Indoor Location Technologies. New York, NY, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 2013, pp. 83–103.
[2] L. W Barclay, in Propagation of Radiowaves, 2nd ed., L. Barclay, Ed.
Stevenage, U.K.: The Institution of Engineering and Technology, 2002.
[3] J. Yin, Q. Yang, and L. Ni, “Learning adaptive temporal radio maps for
signal-strength-based location estimation,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 869–883, Jul. 2008.

WYFFELS et al.: DISTRIBUTED, SIGNAL STRENGTH-BASED INDOOR LOCALIZATION ALGORITHM

[4] B. Altintas and T. Serif, “Indoor location detection with a RSS-based short
term memory technique (KNN-STM),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervas.
Comput. Commun. Workshop, 2012, pp. 794–798.
[5] A. Shirehjini, A. Yassine, and S. Shirmohammadi. (2012, Nov.). Equipment location in hospitals using RFID-based positioning system. IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. [Online]. 16(6), pp. 1058–1069. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=6328280
[6] S.-K. Chen, T. Kao, C.-T. Chan, C.-N. Huang, C.-Y. Chiang, C.-Y. Lai,
T.-H. Tung, and P.-C. Wang. (2012, Jan.). A reliable transmission protocol for Zigbee-based wireless patient monitoring. IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed. [Online]. 16(1), pp. 6–16. Available: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=6044716
[7] Y. Gu, A. Lo, and I. Niemegeers, “A survey of indoor positioning systems
for wireless personal networks,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 13–32, First Quarter 2009.
[8] G. Ottoy, A. Van Nieuwenhuyse, K. D’hoe, J.-P. Goemaere, and L. De
Strycker, “Improving the performance of a RSS-based location estimation system, study and evaluation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Position. ContextAwareness, 2009.
[9] Texas Instruments. (2010 Oct.). CC2540 datasheet. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc2540.pdf
[10] Bluetooth V4.0 and Bluetooth Low Energy. (2010). [Online]. Available:
https://www.bluetooth.org/Technical/Specifications/, Bluetooth SIG Std.
[11] J. Wyffels, J. P. Goemaere, P. Verhoeve, P. Crombez, B. Nauwelaers, and
L. De Strycker, “A novel indoor localization system for healthcare environments,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Comput.-Based Med. Syst., Jun. 2012,
pp. 1–6.
R
[12] Base SAS
9.2 Procedures Guide: Statistical Procedures, 3rd ed. SAS
Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA, 2010.
[13] S. Abe, Support Vector Machines for Pattern Classification, 2nd ed. New
York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[14] J. A. K. Suykens, T. Van Gestel, J. De Brabanter, B. De Moor, and J.
Vandewalle, Least Squares Support Vector Machines. Singapore World
Scientific, 2002.
[15] V. N. Vapnik, The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
[16] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming, 2nd ed. Belmont, MA, USA:
Athena Scientific, 1999.
[17] K. De Brabanter, P. Karsmakers, F. Ojeda, C. Alzate, J. De Brabanter,
K. Pelckmans, B. De Moor, J. Vandewalle, and J. A. K. Suykens, “LSSVMlab Toolbox User’s Guide—Version 1.8,” KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, Tech. Rep. 10-146, 2010.

Jeroen Wyffels received the M.Sc. degree in industrial engineering electronics—ICT, KAHO SintLieven, Ghent, Belgium, in 2008. In 2010, he started
the Ph.D. research in the field of indoor localization in a healthcare setting, at Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in close cooperation with
Televic Healthcare, Izegem, Belgium.
After his studies, he joined the DraMCo (wireless
and mobile communications) research group.

Jos De Brabanter received the degrees in electronical engineering (Association Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB,’90)), Safety Engineer (VUB,’92), Master
of Environment, Human Ecology (VUB,’93), Master
in Artificial Intelligence (KU Leuven, ’96), Master
of Statistics (KU Leuven, ’97) and a Ph.D. degree in
Applied Sciences (KU Leuven, ’04).
His research interests include non-parametric
statistics and kernel methods, areas in which he has
several research papers. He is also co-author of the
book Least Squares Support Vector Machines (Singapore: World Scientific, 2002). Since 2008, he has been an Associated Professor
with the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

1893

Pieter Crombez (M’04) received the Master in
electrical engineering, telecommunications from KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in 2005, and worked as
a Ph.D. researcher at the Wireless Group at IMEC,
Leuven, Belgium from 2005 to 2010.
He is currently a Senior R&D engineer in Televics healthcare communication division, where he is
responsible for the wireless research for next generation nurse call products. He is currently focusing
on localization techniques that meet the harsh specifications for the healthcare market. He was also a
Research Assistant at the ESAT-MICAS laboratory of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. He is (co)author of several publications.

Piet Verhoeve (SM’98) received the M.Sc. degree in
electrical mechanical engineering from Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in 1991, and
the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, in 1998.
He started as a Software Architect at Lernout &
Hauspie (a speech technology), before he joined Televic Healthcare, Izegem, Belgium, in 2001, to set up
the innovation process and research collaboration.
As of 2004, he explored the home care market and
eHealth technologies (such as localization, reasoning, context awareness). In 2007, he became Operational Business Lead for the
Healthcare business unit. In 2011, he was appointed the Director of Innovation
& Technology at Televic Group. In April 2013, he joined the iMinds research
institute to lead the interdisciplinary research collaboration program (ICON).
He is a Guest Professor at the Multimedia Lab research—Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium, and (co)author of several publications and patent applications.

Bart Nauwelaers (S’79–M’88–SM’99) received the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium, in 1981 and 1988, respectively. He also received the Master’s degree in design of telecommunication systems from ParisTech
Télécom, Paris, France.
Since 1981, he has been with the Department of
Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven, where he has
been involved in research on microwave antennas,
passive components, interconnects, microwave integrated circuits and MMICs, linear and nonlinear device modeling, MEMS, and
wireless communications. He teaches courses on microwave engineering, analog
and digital communications, wireless communications, and design in electronics and telecommunications. For the last 20 years, he has served education in
several functions, the last one being the Program Director for the Bachelor’s
and Master’s programs in electrical engineering.
Dr. Nauwelaers is the former chair of IEEE AP/MTT-Benelux and past chair
of URSI-Benelux.

Lieven De Strycker (M’01) received the Master’s
and Ph.D. degrees in electrotechnical engineering
from Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, in 1996 and
2001, respectively.
Since 2001, he has been the Professor with
the Catholic University College Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, where he founded, with his colleagues, the
DraMCo (wireless and mobile communications) research group. Since 2008, he has also been an Associated Professor with the Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

