IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

1305

Smart Tissue Anastomosis Robot (STAR):
A Vision-Guided Robotics System
for Laparoscopic Suturing
Simon Leonard, Kyle L. Wu, Yonjae Kim, Axel Krieger*, and Peter C.W. Kim

Abstract—This paper introduces the smart tissue anastomosis
robot (STAR). Currently, the STAR is a proof-of-concept for a
vision-guided robotic system featuring an actuated laparoscopic
suturing tool capable of executing running sutures from imagebased commands. The STAR tool is designed around a commercially available laparoscopic suturing tool that is attached to a
custom-made motor stage and the STAR supervisory control architecture that enables a surgeon to select and track incisions and
the placement of stitches. The STAR supervisory-control interface
provides two modes: A manual mode that enables a surgeon to
specify the placement of each stitch and an automatic mode that
automatically computes equally-spaced stitches based on an incision contour. Our experiments on planar phantoms demonstrate
that the STAR in either mode is more accurate, up to four times
more consistent and five times faster than surgeons using stateof-the-art robotic surgical system, four times faster than surgeons
R

using manual Endo360◦ , and nine times faster than surgeons
using manual laparoscopic tools.
Index Terms—Actuated laparoscopic suturing tool, roboticassisted surgery, vision-guided laparoscopic suturing.

I. INTRODUCTION
HANGING surgical paradigm from open to laparoscopic
approach has created significant mechanical, ergonomic,
and visual challenges both in the design of surgical technology and mechanics of surgical techniques. A simple technique
in open surgery such as suturing of surgical wound became
a time-consuming and inconsistent task depending on a surgeon’s experience in laparoscopic approach [1]. The replication
of human dexterity and ergonomics by robotically assisted surgeries (RAS) has not clearly demonstrated to improve efficiency
and effectiveness of surgical tasks correlating with improved
functional and clinical outcome as compared to laparoscopic
technology and techniques [2]–[4].
This paper introduces the smart tissue anastomosis robot
(STAR). The STAR aims to improve the quality, consistency,

C

Manuscript received May 9, 2013; revised August 12, 2013 and November
4, 2013; accepted January 12, 2014. Date of publication January 23, 2014; date
of current version March 17, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. Leonard,K. L. Wu, Y. Kim, and P. C. W. Kim are with the Sheikh
Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation at the Children National
Medical Center, Washington DC 20002 USA (e-mail: sleonard@jhu.edu;
KyWu@childrensnational.org; yokim@cnmc.org; pkim@cnmc.org).
∗ Axel Krieger is with the Sheikh Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation at the Children National Medical Center, Washington DC 20002 USA
(e-mail: akrieger@cnmc.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2302385

Fig. 1. (a) STAR hardware: A 7-DOF LWR mounted with an modified
Endo360◦ . (b) The actuated needle of the STAR. (a) STAR system. (b) Circular needle of the Endo360◦ .

and the effectiveness of laparoscopic suturing through the development of a specifically-designed robotic system. The focus
on laparoscopic suturing is motivated by the amount of time this
procedure consumes, even when using state-of-the-art robotic
assistance [5], by the desire to standardize and uniformize the
quality of suturing outcome [6], [7] and to enable a higher adoption rate of minimally invasive techniques.
The current components of the STAR [see Fig. 1(a)] are:
1) a robot arm equipped with an 2) actuated suturing tool and
3) a monocular colour camera to support vision-guidance and
supervisory control.
The STAR uses a seven degrees of freedom (DOF) light
weight robot (LWR) from KUKA (KUKA AG, Augsburg
Germany). The LWR is mounted with an actuated suturing tool
that is based on the commercially available Endo360◦ from EndoEvolution (North Chelmsford, MA, USA). We replaced the
Endo360◦ handle by two actuators: the first actuator drives a
circular needle and the other actuator drives a pitch axis located
46 mm above the tip as illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
The STAR aims to substitute human surgical suturing skills
much like automation has replaced many other human skills
on assembly lines. We combine specialized hardware and software to execute this specific task while a surgeon is able to use
his/her knowledge and experience to determine the parameters
of the task through a supervisory control interface [8]. This
shift in paradigm contrasts with several RAS systems that augment or complement human perception [9] or motor skills [10].
The STAR enables a manual mode and an automatic mode. In

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

manual mode, the surgeon selects the placement of each stitch,
whereas in automatic mode, he/she outlines the incision area and
the STAR determines the placement of each stitch at a specified
interval. Our main contributions are twofold; our first contribution consists of the development of an actuated laparoscopic
suturing tool that is mounted on a robot manipulator. Second,
we propose a vision-based supervisory control interface that
enables a surgeon to select and track stitch placements in the
camera images. In this paper, we demonstrate 1) suturing efficiency, accuracy, and consistency of STAR when compared to
R

surgeons using a da Vinci Surgical System or manual laparoscopic tools for suturing planar phantoms; 2) suturing accuracy
and efficiency of the STAR when stitch placement is computed
automatically compared to when stitch placement is selected
manually.
II. MOTIVATION AND PREVIOUS WORK
Suturing is an essential element of anatomic reconstruction
during all surgical procedures. Each year, over 100 million major surgical procedures are performed in the United States, and
it is conservatively estimated that over one million reconstructive anastomoses are performed in the United States alone for
visceral surgery such as gastrointestinal, urologic, and gynecologic operations [11]. Recent transition of surgery from open to
laparoscopic has clearly demonstrated the benefits of minimally
invasive surgical (MIS) approach in reducing collateral tissue
injury associated with open surgery [12], [13]. Despite the benefits of MIS, we identify three problems of MIS that we aim to
address with the STAR.
A. Motivation: Efficiency
Time is an important aspect to the success of any surgical procedure and for the efficient management of operating
rooms. Among one of the frequent findings of “laparoscopic
versus open surgeries” in the literature is that laparoscopic procedures take significantly longer operative times [14], [15] and
the range of operating times is also greater [16]. More specifically, suturing inefficiencies is a consideration in procedures
such as open kidney transplants where anastomosis time ranges
from 25 to 45 min and the risk of delayed graft function is
3.5 times higher for anastomosis lasting longer than 29 min [17].
For laparoscopic anastomoses, the duration of an anastomosis
alone can range from 90 min for intestinal [18], [19] to 50
mins for aorta [20] to 30 min for vesicourethral [21]. A study
demonstrated that using a manual suturing tool such as the
EndoStitchTM reduces total surgical costs and time, but developing proficiency with such tools requires time and practice [22].
Although RAS is credited to reduce the operating times of
certain procedures [23], the amount of time required to execute
an anastomosis can range from 30 to 90 min for intestinal [18],
[24] and 28 min for vascular [25].
B. Motivation: Consistency
Although clear advantages of MIS and RAS approach over
open surgery has been articulated, technical and clinical chal-

lenges associated with changes in tool design and procedural ergonomics of minimally invasive tools have not been addressed [26]. Intra and intersurgeon variations in procedural
techniques, decision making, and experience further complicate
any surgical task that requires precision, repetition, and maneuverability, such as suturing and anastomosis [27]–[29]. The
validated metrics of anastomosis such as accuracy and biomechanical parameters like bursting strength of anastomosis are
inferior and associated with significantly longer learning curve
with laparoscopic and RAS than open approaches [30]–[33].
This challenge is magnified in pediatric surgery where surgery
time with some MIS approaches is twice as long, associated with
higher anastomotic complication rates than an open approach.
In some instances, a moratorium has been imposed because the
early outcomes of laparoscopic approach have been inferior to
open surgery [34], [35]. Today, well-recognized clinical parameters of the complications of gastrointestinal anastomosis such
as leakage or stricture remain unchanged following the shift
from open to MIS [36]–[39]. A three to ten fold increase in
mortality and adverse long-term impact on function and quality
of life for affected patients associated with intestinal anastomosis complications are not addressed at all with both laparoscopic
and RAS [38], [39].

C. Motivation: Adoption
The conversion to and adoption of MIS approach has been
slow and remains low in fields such as gastrointestinal surgery
only about 30% to date [15], [40]–[43]. Both suturing and mechanical staplers are routinely used in open surgery for anastomosis [6], [7], but unchanged design and the lack of flexibility
and dexterity of mechanical staplers have not facilitated the
adoption of MIS approach [12], [13]. The use of next generation concept for anastomosis such as gluing is an embryonic
stage of development to date [44], [45]. Although staplers have
gained in popularity during the last two decades, they have not
demonstrated a clear clinical advantage beside reducing operation time (15.3 min for esophagogastric anastomosis [6] and
by 7.6 min for colorectal anastomosis [46]). Furthermore, intestinal anastomosis in children remains traditionally performed
manually [47].
The slow adoption of laparoscopic surgeries is attributed to
a number of critical challenges such as haptics, altered depth
perception, nonstereoscopic 2-D vision, counterintuitive movement, eye-hand coordination required for visual-spatial skills,
and small field of view and unnatural ergonomics [48]. The culminating clinical impact of these technical challenges has been
significantly longer average lengths of surgery, much longer and
steeper procedural learning curve, and variable adoption rates of
and patient access to complex laparoscopic and RAS. Although
RAS addresses some of these challenges by improving dexterity,
visualization, and ergonomics, it has not translated into a significant acceptance outside of urology for prostatectomies [4].
The current clinical adoption rates for RAS in gynecologic
and gastrointestinal surgery remain less than 10% and 3%,
respectively [49].

LEONARD et al.: SMART TISSUE ANASTOMOSIS ROBOT (STAR): A VISION-GUIDED ROBOTICS SYSTEM FOR LAPAROSCOPIC SUTURING

1307

Thus, the critical technologic advances that would address
the aforementioned motivations must include innovative smart
tool concepts with a superior control interface.
D. Previous RAS Suturing Systems
The field of RAS includes a broad range of applications including orthopedics, neurology, urology, ocular, and general
surgeries. In the case of suturing during MIS, one important
challenge is to provide a dexterous workspace within a small
volume under the constraints imposed by a tool insertion point.
The master–slave paradigm is an efficient solution to this problem and has been adopted by several RAS systems such as the da
Vinci surgical system [50], Raven [51], Telelap Alf-X [52], and
MiroSurge [53]. These MIS robots provide surgeons with adequate dexterity, improved visualization, and better ergonomy.
Although master–slave robots are able to enhance the skills
of surgeons, they do not fully or partially replace them. On
that front, interesting research has demonstrated the benefits
of augmenting master–slave robots with the capability of actively monitoring and modifying surgical motions to assist with
specific procedures. One example involves a system capable to
segment suturing motions [54] and to synchronize one or several
segments to a similar segment performed by an expert. A different approach consists of altering a surgical motion by using
virtual fixtures to either guide the motion or prevent the robot
from entering forbidden areas [55]. In the former case, the system is designed to guide the motion along a specific path within
the workspace [56], [57] whereas, in the latter case, the system
enables free motion while preventing the robot from entering
specific areas [58], [59].
Another paradigm for RAS consists of shifting a greater portion of autonomy on the robot system, sensor, and controllers.
In the area related to suturing, several efforts were made to develop laparoscopic tools for suturing and tying knots. In [60], the
authors present a hand-held robot system able to tie a knot and
suture in the confined laryngeal space. Other hand-held actuated
suturing laparoscopic tools were presented in [61]–[64]. Likewise, some master–slave architectures include helpful features
for suturing such as force feedback [65], [66], programmable
modes [67], [68], and virtual fixture for tool alignment [56].
None of these systems, however, are able to close a cut without
a surgeon in the loop. A pneumatic version of the EndoStitch
mounted on a robot arm is reported in [69], but no suturing
results are presented. Recently, a monocular camera with a single arm equipped with a standard laparoscopic needle holder
demonstrated it could insert a needle through a few markers
placed on a planar phantom [70]. Their results, however, do not
demonstrate improvements over state of the art RAS or manual
methods. In fact, the authors conclude that using a tool such
as the Endo360◦ would address their problem of unsafe suture
exhaustion and knot tying.
Given the evolving surgical approach and current state of laparoscopic and RAS instruments, there is a clear need to demonstrate superior attributes and clinical advantages of laparoscopic
and RAS tools. Our hypothesis is that a combination of a new actuated end effector that simplifies suturing tasks combined with

Fig. 2. Computer-aided design of the STAR tool. The STAR tool uses the
shaft, pitch, and needle of an Endo360◦ . We designed the motor stage to actuate
the pitch and needle.

vision-guided robotics that enables supervised control is more
efficient and consistent than manual laparoscopic or master–
slave RAS and will enable a greater adoption of laparoscopic
surgeries. The STAR proposes a supervised control approach
that shifts the burden of planning and executing the motion on
the robotic system, while maintaining the role of the surgeon
to decide where to place each suture. Although we acknowledge that the STAR is not yet able to perform anastomoses in
a surgical environment, we demonstrate that, within its current
limitations, it is significantly more efficient and consistent than
surgeons using either manual tools or master–slave RAS.
III. SMART TISSUE ANASTOMOSIS ROBOT
The STAR system integrates robot hardware, force and image
sensing, and processing. In this paper, our study of automated
suturing is limited to planar surfaces. Although this is a strong
assumption for clinical cases, several other RAS systems have
demonstrated their benefits by experimenting on planar phantoms [56], [62], [70]–[72]. Further discussions about the other
assumptions used in our experiments and proposed solutions to
address them are postponed to Sections IV and V. In this section,
we describe the design of the STAR system and its hardware
and software considerations.
For the sake of clarity, we define a running suture, often
referred as suture in the text, as the task of closing an incision
by using a single suture thread. A suture involves several stitches
and each stitch bites both sides of an incision to close.
A. STAR Suturing Tool
We designed and built a suturing tool featuring an actuated
pitch and needle by modifying a commercially available manual
suture tool Endo360◦ . Fig. 2 shows a computer aided design
drawing of the automated suturing tool design.
The commercially available manual Endo360◦ suture tool is
able to drive a disposable suture needle with attached 3–0 suture along a circular path, enabling single handed laparoscopic
suturing [see Fig.1(b)]. The manual handle of the Endo360◦
was removed and the tool head, tool shaft, and cables to actuate needle drive, and push–pull bar to actuate pitch were then

1308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

connected to a custom designed motor stage. The tool head and
shaft can be detached from the motor stage for cleaning, but this
procedure requires tools and several minutes. Two dc brush motors (Maxon Motors, Sachseln, Switzerland) drive the pitch and
needle through two bevel gears activating a cam drive for pitch
actuation and a bidirectional cable drive with pulley for needle actuation. Two turnbuckles allow for adjusting the tension
of the cables for the needle actuation. Epos 2 (Maxon Motors,
Sachseln, Switzerland) controllers are used for motor control of
the tool. The suturing tool is mounted on a 7-DOF LWR KUKA
robot through a 6-DOF force sensor (ATI Industrial Automation,
Apex, NC, USA).

B. Supervisory Control for Image-Based Suturing
Whereas several master–slave systems aim to replicate the
motion of a surgeon or share the control of a task, the STAR
is designed around the supervisory control paradigm which decouples the commands of the surgeon from the implementation
of the robot motion.
The supervisory control interface displays intraoperative images of the incision and the surgeon is limited to use his knowledge to either select stitch placements individually or to outline
the incision. In manual mode, the surgeon selects the placement
of each stitch by manually clicking at the desired position in the
image. In the automatic mode, the surgeon manually outlines the
contour of the incision in the image and the STAR automatically
computes the 3-D position of each stitch at a regular interval.
Given the interaction with intraoperative images, we outline the
geometric model used to convert image-based commands to the
robot space.
1) Geometry of Planar Suturing: The STAR vision system
is currently limited to a calibrated, static, color, and monocular
camera. This limitation restricts the geometry of incisions that
the STAR can suture because of depth ambiguities. The experiments we present in this paper focuses on planar incisions. This
assumption enables the STAR to transform image coordinates
to 3-D coordinates with a homography [73]. Thus, the homography between the incision plane and the image plane must be
computed prior to transforming image coordinates to 3-D points
in the camera frame.
Also, the transformation between the camera and the robot
must be known to transform camera coordinates in the robot
coordinate frame as described in Fig. 3.
Since the incision is assumed to be planar, the mapping between the image coordinates of a stitch and its 3-D coordinates
does not constrain the origin of the incision plane and it does
not constrain the orientation of the plane about its normal axis.
Thus, the orientation between the incision plane and the camera
plane only requires rotations about X and Y axes as illustrated
in Fig. 3.
The selection of each stitch placement defines the homogeneous coordinates of a 2-D image point p = [ x y 1 ]T
which is related to the coordinates of a 3-D point I P =
[ I X I Y 0 ]T on the incision plane by p ∼ H I P, where
H is a 3 × 3 homography that is defined up to scale.

Fig. 3. Schematic drawing of coordinate frames. X axes are in red, Y axes
are in green, and Z axes are in blue. R E C represents the rigid transformation
between the camera and the robot. The plane normal n corresponds to the Z
axis of the plane and d to the distance between the camera and the plane.

Let K define a camera projection matrix
⎤
⎡
fx 0 cx
⎥
⎢
K = ⎣ 0 fy cy ⎦
0

0

(1)

1

where fx = sx f and fy = sy f are the scaled focal lengths and
cx and cy are the coordinates of the optical center and let
	

r1 r2 r3 t
C
(2)
EI =
0 0 0 1
be the rigid transformation between the incision plane and the
camera frame as illustrated in Fig. 3, where r1 , r2 , and r3 are the
columns of a rotation matrix and t is the translation between the
coordinate frames. A point on the incision plane I P is projected
to the image coordinates p according to
⎡I ⎤
X
⎢I ⎥
p ∼ H⎣ Y ⎦
(3)
1
where H is defined up to a scale by
H = K[ r1

r2

t ].

(4)

If H is nonsingular, the coordinates I X and I Y
are
⎡ ⎤
⎡I ⎤
X
x
⎢ ⎥
⎥
⎢
w⎣ I Y ⎦ = H −1 ⎣ y ⎦
1
1

(5)

where w is the homogeneous scale factor. Furthermore, a point
in the image is transformed to a 3-D point in the coordinate
system of the camera by
C

P = C EI [ I X

I

Y

0

1 ]T .

(6)

Finally, we define the incision plane normal by n and the
distance between the origin of the camera frame and the incision
plane by d. Substituting (4), (5) in (6) (taking care of normalizing
the homogeneous coordinates), we obtain that the 3-D camera
coordinates of an image point p on the incision plane are given

LEONARD et al.: SMART TISSUE ANASTOMOSIS ROBOT (STAR): A VISION-GUIDED ROBOTICS SYSTEM FOR LAPAROSCOPIC SUTURING

1309

by
⎡

⎤
fy (cx − x)
d
⎢
⎥
C
f (c − y) ⎦.
P=
T ⎣ x y
T
n [ fy (x − cx ) fx (y − cy ) fx fy ]
−fx fy
(7)
Given that we constrain the orientation of the plane
with respect to the camera, we note that n = [sin(α) −
sin(α) cos(β) cos(α) cos(β)]T , where α and β are the rotation angles about X and Y , respectively.
C. Tracking of Incision and Stitches
To automate suturing the STAR is capable of operating in
two modes. The manual mode enables a surgeon to individually select the placement of each stitch. The automatic mode
enables a surgeon to outline the contour of an incision and to
evenly distribute the stitches along the incision. The distance
between stitches is specified by a single parameter that either
determines the number of stitches to close the incision or the
desired distance between stitches.
In our previous work [74], we presented results for the manual
mode where each placement was selected by a surgeon and
tracked with a monocular camera by using appearance tracking
based on Kanade–Lucas–Tomasi algorithm [75]. In this paper,
we further improve the supervisory control interface by shifting
the interaction from selecting stitches to selecting the contour
of the incision. Once the contour of the incision is determined
in the image, we transform the resulting 2-D contour to the 3-D
camera frame according to (7) and distribute the stitches evenly.
Furthermore, given that appearance based tracking is unreliable for surfaces exhibiting little texture in an environment
exhibiting variations of illumination, deformations and occlusions, we implemented an efficient contour tracking method
based on the multimodal tracking algorithm [76].
1) Incision Selection: The selection of the incision and its
contour is based on color segmentation. The method is analogous to the GIMP “Fuzzy Select” or Adobe Photoshop (San
Jose, CA, USA) “Magic Wand”. The incision is selected by using a mouse and an image of the incision. First, the user clicks
on a pixel within the incision and then, while holding the mouse
button, moves the mouse within the boundary of the incision.
During the selection, the surgeon samples a set of RGB pixels
S with average RGB color μ = [ μR μG μB ]T and RGB
covariance matrix Σ. Let F be a set of foreground pixels representing the inside of the incision, then an image of foreground
pixel candidates p is defined by
√
⎧
R(p) − μR  < ΣR R
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ 1 if G(p) − μ  < √Σ
G
GG
√
(8)
C(p) =
⎪
B(p)
−
μ

<
Σ
B
BB
⎪
⎪
⎩
0 otherwise
where R(), G(), and B() represents the RGB channels of a
pixel. Then, p ∈ F if it is connected to any pixels in S . Once
F is determined, its contour is used to determine the distribution
of stitches within the incision.

Fig. 4. Automated placement of stitches for a segmented incision. The outline
of the incision is tracked and illustrated by the blue contour. Nine placements are
computed according to the algorithm presented in Section III-C2 and illustrated
by green circles.

2) Distribution of Stitches: The contour of F defines a polygon in the image space which is used to initialize the placement
of each stitch. The first task is to transform the 2-D incision
contour to 3-D coordinates using (6).
From the 3-D coordinates, the straight skeleton of the polygon
is extracted [77].
The role of the skeleton is to extract the topological structure of the incision. Given an undirected graph representation
of the skeleton and, assuming a linear incision, we look for the
longest path between any two vertices in the graph to represent
the skeleton of the incision. This problem is also known as computing the diameter of a graph and is evaluated by computing all
the shortest paths using Floyd–Warshall algorithm [78] which
runs in O(V 3 ), where V is the set of vertices of the skeleton, and
then searching for the longest shortest path. Using the resulting
path, the stitches are evenly spaced by linearly interpolating the
coordinates along the path. A result of our algorithm computing
nine stitch placements on a training pad is illustrated in Fig. 4.
3) Incision Tracking: To track in real-time a contour under
illumination variations and deformations, we adapt the algorithm presented in [76]. The problem is formulated as determining if a pixel belongs to the foreground or background. This is
determined by combining three observations and evaluating if
each pixel should be assigned to the background or the foreground. As in [76], we use a 2-D oriented bounding box (OBB),
the color signature of the target and the contour of the target as
observations. Instead of formulating the problem as a sequence
of Bayesian filters and tracking the distributions by using particle filters and extended Kalman filters, we propose to compute
the foreground response f at time t of a pixel p to the current and
previous observations. The response ft (p) is based on distance
transforms according to
⎡

DOBB (p)

⎤

⎢
⎥
w3 ]⎣ DRGB (p) ⎦ + (1 − λ)ft−1 (p)
DEDG (p)
(9)
where DOBB (p), DRGB (p), and DEDG (p) are the distances
between the pixel p and the closest pixel on the boundary of the
OBB, color segment, and contour segments, respectively, wi is a
weight assigned to each of the three distances and 0 < λ < 1 is
a scalar that determines the weight of the previous observations
at time t − 1.
ft (p) = λ[ w1

w2

1310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 7. Contour tracking control points and search normals. Note that the sharp
extremities of the incision requires a dense distribution of control points.

Fig. 5. Example of distance transforms for each model and resulting contour.
(a) OBB distance transform (D O B B ). (b) RGB distance transform (D R G B ).
(c) Contour distance transform (D E D G ). Resulting contour.

Fig. 6. Tracking sequence with illumination variations, nonrigid deformations
and thread occlusion. (a) Nonrigid deformation and illumination variation. (b)
Thread occlusions.

The response ft (p) is locally averaged at each p and then
compared to a dynamic threshold that is determined from the
distribution of ft−1 (p) such that p ∈ F if |ft (p) − μt−1 | <
σt−1 , where μt−1 is the average distance of all foreground pixels
at time t − 1 and σt−1 is the standard deviation. Examples for
the three distance transforms and the resulting contours are
presented in Fig. 5 and the robustness of the tracking algorithm
is illustrated by the snapshots in Fig. 6.
a) Oriented bounding box: A 2-D OBB is used to bound
a coarse area defined by the foreground. Its purpose is to impose
a large penality on outlier pixels that are observed at significant
distances from the box. The OBB is also used to speed up image
processing by defining a region of interest around the target.
The parameters of the OBB are defined by o =
[ cx cy sx sy θ ]T , where cx and cy are the center of the
box, sx and sy are its width and height and θ its orientation.
Given a set of foreground pixels F , the OBB is determined by
first computing the convex hull of the contour and then estimating the eigenvectors to determine its orientation, width, and
height as described in the 3-D case [79].
b) Color Tracking: Given a set of foreground pixels F at
time t, a color model c = [μR μG μB σR σG σB ]T , where
μ and σ represent the mean and standard deviation of the color
distribution. Although several color tracking algorithms have

been proposed for tracking in the past [80], [81], their benefits
do not outweigh their computational costs for real-time tracking
(30 frames per seconds) of large areas. The STAR uses the color
model in (8) to obtain a segmented image from which only blobs
that are within the OBB are selected.
c) Contour Tracking: Given an initial contour, contour
tracking searches for edge displacements at regular intervals
along the contour. Our approach is based on classic active contour tracking found elsewhere in the literature [82], [83]. Given
a closed contour C defined by a sequence of line segments, we
distribute uniformly control points ei along C .
The spacing between control points is determined based on
the maximum curvature of the contour to ensure that sharp areas
of the contours, such as the extremities of an incision, will be
covered by at least one control point as illustrated in Fig. 7.
This is a key consideration for our application since otherwise
the contour does not “attach” itself to the extremities and tends
to shrink. At each control point ei , the normal direction of the
curve is locally estimated and used to search for the nearest edge
feature to ei .
D. Motion
Regardless of whether STAR operates in manual or automatic
mode, the motion of the robot follows the same workflow. The
motion sequence consists of executing one knot tying, followed
by a sequence of stitches. Initially, the system plans to pull a
sufficient amount of thread to execute the suture based on the
length of the incision, determined from the skeleton (see Section
III-C2) and the number of stitches. When operating in automatic
mode, the STAR is able to compute the width of the incision at
each placement and determine the bite position on either side
as illustrated in Fig. 8. The width of the incision cannot be
computed in manual mode and must be specified manually.
The motion of the STAR is constrained by a virtual remote
center of motion (RCM). Given that the STAR disposes of
8-DOF, the unconstrained nature of the suturing task in Cartesian space (6-DOF), and the extra 2-D constraints imposed by
the RCM, the motion of the STAR is determined by numerically
computing the solution to the minimum norm problem of a system with eight equations and eight variables. The STAR only
disposes of 2-DOF between the RCM and the tool control point
(TCP): the last joint of the LWR and Endo360◦ articulation as

LEONARD et al.: SMART TISSUE ANASTOMOSIS ROBOT (STAR): A VISION-GUIDED ROBOTICS SYSTEM FOR LAPAROSCOPIC SUTURING

1311

Fig. 8. In automatic mode, the STAR uses the measured width of the incision
at each placement, displayed by the yellow line, to determine the bite position
on both sides of the incision.

Fig. 10. Position of the needle and thread during looping around the thread.
The circular needle bites around the thread near its entry point into the tissue.
The thread must clear the surface beneath to prevent the needle from penetrating
other tissues.

Fig. 9. Nonholonomic constraint caused by a RCM. (a) Side view. (b) Front
view. The orientation of the TCP cannot be oriented about its Y axis.

illustrated in Fig. 9. Therefore, the TCP can be positioned at
an arbitrary XYZ coordinates beneath the RCM, but only rotations about the shaft of the tool and about the pitch axis of the
Endo360 are possible [see Fig. 9(b)]. This imposes a nonholonomic constraint on the orientation of the TCP which cannot be
oriented about its Y axis and this must be accounted for when
computing the STAR trajectories.
1) Knot Tying: At the first stitch placement, the STAR ties
a double overhand knot around one edge of the incision. The
first step of knot tying consists of biting one side of the incision
[see Fig. 11(a)], or both sides if they are sufficiently close, and
pulling a sufficient amount of thread to execute the suture. The
amount of thread L required for the suture is approximated by

(10)
L > 2T N + (N − 1) 2T 2 + d2
where T is the thickness of the tissue, N is the number of
stitches, and d is the distance between consecutive stitches.
In (10), the first term accounts for the amount of thread used
for N stitches composed of two lumens, each of thickness T .
The second term accounts for the (N − 1) diagonals between
stitches.
The first loop of the knot is executed by moving the TCP
where the thread enters the tissue and biting around the thread,
as illustrated in Figs. 10 and 11(b), followed by tensioning the
first loop during which a forcep is used to hold the loop down
[see Fig. 11(c)]. The second loop is executed in a similar way as
illustrated in Fig. 11(d) to (e). In order to bite around the thread,
the STAR assumes that the thread enters the tissue at a position
and orientation used for the initial bite of the tissue (see Fig. 10).
In automatic mode, this position and orientation is determined
from the width of the incision at the first placement and from
the thickness T of the tissue. The thread must also be above any

Fig. 11. STAR workflow. The steps for knot tying are from (a) to (e). For
each stitch, the STAR repeats step (g) and (h). (a) Bite the first lumen. (b) First
loop. (c) Tension of first loop (notice the forcep to hold down the loop). (d)
Second loop. (e) Tension of second loop. (f) Bite the second lumen (followed
by tension). (g) Bite the first lumen. (h) Bite the second lumen (followed by
tension).

surface near its entry point to enable the needle to loop around
the thread without penetrating tissues beneath the thread.
To avoid this situation, we manually lift the thread near its
entry point with a forcep to ensure it clears the surface. Furthermore, when STAR tightens up a loop, the loop must be
“pinched” with a forcep near the entry point of the thread to
prevent the loop from sliding and to force the loop to snug the
tissue.
2) Suture: After tying the knot, the STAR runs the sutures
by moving to all placements on both sides of the incision as
illustrated in Fig. 11(g) and (h). If the tissue is sufficiently thin
and the incision sufficiently narrow, it is possible for the STAR
to align the Endo360◦ and bite both sides of the incision simultaneously. Given that the width of the jaw of the Endo360◦

1312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

TABLE I
STAR EFFICIENCY: SUTURING EXECUTION TIME

only measures 5 mm, the conditions for this to succeed are
somewhat limited. In our experiments, we use the more common scenario where the STAR bites each side of the incision
separately, which requires the STAR to move a small amount
between biting each side [see Fig. 11(g) and (h)]. In automatic
mode, this small motion from one side of the incision to the
other is computed by using the width of the incision. After biting the second side, the STAR pulls on the thread to tension.
We use a force/torque sensor to measure a sufficient amount of
tension in the thread to avoid tearing the tissue. We determined
that the STAR performed well in practice when using 4 N as a
threshold. Although this amount of force depends on the type of
tissue, such knowledge can be provided by a surgeon before a
procedure. To decrease the time for tensioning, the STAR determines when the thread should tighten up by keeping track of the
length of thread available by using (10). If a sufficient amount of
thread is loose, the STAR pulls at a higher velocity but reduces
its velocity otherwise to measure more accurate forces.

IV. EXPERIMENTS
In our previous work [74], we compared the STAR in manual
mode to surgeons using manual laparoscopic tools, a da Vinci
surgical system and a standard Endo360◦ for a suturing task
consisting of placing one knot and nine stitches on a training
pad. We demonstrated that the STAR executed the task faster and
the sutures were more consistent than the other methods. In this
paper, we extend the experiments of [74] by using the automatic
mode where the placements are computed automatically and we
compare the consistency of the results to those in our previous
study. We also evaluate the accuracy of the automatic mode for
the task of closing an incision of a known length with a given
number of stitches by measuring how evenly distributed the
STAR computes the placements of the stitches and how evenly
distributed the STAR places them.
Our experiment consists of executing a running suture composed of one knot followed by nine stitches on a training pad
resting on a turntable. We selected a curved incision with a measured length of 55 mm. After the fourth stitch, the robot moved
the tool outside of the camera field of view and the turntable was
activated and deactivated with a manual ON/OFF switch such
that the pad rotated between 45◦ to 90◦ to mimic an intraoperative motion of the tissue. During the rotation, the STAR visually
tracked the incision and resumed the suturing once the rotation stopped. Given that our experiments required nine stitches,
the STAR creates ten equally spaced segments as illustrated in
Fig. 4. From the measured incision length of 55 mm, we conclude that the STAR should compute and execute stitches that
are 5.5 mm appart.

Fig. 12.
mode.

Results of suturing with the STAR. (a) Automatic mode. (b) Manual

The STAR executed four sutures in automatic mode and four
other sutures in manual mode. In manual mode, the stitches
were selected from nine consecutive mouse clicks in the image,
whereas the algorithms presented in Section III-C were used to
compute and track the placements in automatic mode. Results
from our experiments are presented in Tables I through V. As
a comparison basis, we also included relevant results from our
previous study [74], where four trained surgeons (n = 4) used
a da Vinci surgical system to perform the same task. Also, four
experienced MIS surgeons performed the same task using manual laparoscopic tools with a Fundamentals of Laparoscopic
Surgery Trainer System (VTi medical, Waltham, MA, USA).
Then, these four surgeons also executed the task by using a
manual Endo360◦ . All experiments used RCM constraints. The
results presented in [74] were obtained by performing the same
task (one knot and nine stitches with a turntable rotation after the fourth stitch) on the same phantom and by using the
measurement methodology presented throughout this section.
Throughout the experiments, we demonstrate the statistical significance of our results by reporting the p-values. The p-values
are computed by a two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum nonparametric test (MATLAB) that determines if two populations are the
same1 . Sample images for the automated and manual results are
illustrated in Fig. 12(a) and (b), respectively.
A. STAR Efficiency
We measure the efficiency of the STAR by the time used
to complete the suturing task. The STAR was programmed to
execute all suturing tasks in one minute regardless of the mode
used. This duration was selected based on the velocity limits
of the robot, the time to drive the needle twenty times2 , and

1 Several p-values in our experiments are p = 0.0286. This represents the
smallest p-value that Wilcoxon rank sum test can give for n = 4.
2 To drive the Endo360◦ needle, a full 360◦ requires two actuations of the
needle mechanism for a total measured time of about 0.75 s. Thus, about 20 s
of the total 60 s of suturing time is used to only actuate the needle.

LEONARD et al.: SMART TISSUE ANASTOMOSIS ROBOT (STAR): A VISION-GUIDED ROBOTICS SYSTEM FOR LAPAROSCOPIC SUTURING

1313

TABLE II
STAR ACCURACY AND CONSISTENCY: DISTANCES BETWEEN
SUTURES COMMANDS

our experience for manually keeping dangling thread out of the
suturing path3 .
The execution times of the suturing tasks are presented in
Table I. As explained in Section III-D2, suture tightness involves a small amount of force sensing at a reduced velocity
and that motion segment is mainly responsible for the execution
time greater than one minute. In manual mode, the average time
to select nine placements was 9.8 s, which is slightly longer
than one mouse click per second with a standard deviation of
0.88 s, while the average time to select the placements in automatic mode was 3.2 s with a standard deviation of 0.52 s.
Thus, efficiency of the STAR in either mode represents a five to
nine folds improvements over the da Vinci and the manual tools.
The STAR in automatic mode was also determined to be more
efficient than the STAR in manual mode (p = 0.0286) and this
result is largely imputable to the selection method. The STAR
was nine times faster than minimally invasive surgeons and four
times faster than surgeons using an Endo360◦ .
B. STAR Accuracy and Consistency
One important consideration in surgical suturing is the relationship between the distance between stitches and the distance
between a stitch and the edge of the incision (bite size). For example, the Jenkin’s rule states that the length of a suture should
be four times the length of an incision with sutures 1-cm apart
and with 1-cm bites. Although the STAR does not implement
Jenkin’s rule, it aims to provide greater accuracy and consistency for intrasuture spacing. We propose to evaluate the accuracy and consistency by measuring: 1) the commanded distances
between stitches specified by supervisory control commands in
manual and automatic modes; 2) the measured distances between stitches on the pad; 3) the measured bite sizes; and 4) the
measured suture tightness.
These measurements have been reported in the literature to
affect healing complications such as breaking and infections
[84]–[86].
1) Accuracy and Consistency of Suture Commands: The first
evaluation of the suturing accuracy of the STAR stems from
measuring the average command distance between consecutive
stitches. In manual mode, these commands are derived directly
from mouse clicks and reflect on the accuracy of the surgeon
to manually select equally distant points along a curve. Results
from the placement commands for both modes are presented in
Table II.

3 As mentioned in Section III-C, the STAR requires a small amount of manual
thread management during the knot tying and the suturing. We believe that this
level of assistance is comparable to the one used by surgeons during similar
procedures within the contexts of open, laparoscopic, or RAS.

Fig. 13.

Points and labels used to measure performances.

Given the measured incision length of 55 mm, the distance
between stitches should be 5.5 mm such that the average error
for automatic and manual modes are 0.144 and 0.29 mm, respectively. More importantly, we note that the consistency of
the automatic mode is about 33% higher than the manual mode.
The accuracy and consistency could be improved in manual
mode by selecting placements more carefully, but this would
likely increase the selection time which is already three times
longer.
2) Accuracy and Consistency of Suture Execution: The previous commands are then converted to paths and trajectories to
execute the knot and the stitches at the desired positions.
We measured the averagedistances between 
stitches on
1
( 9i=2 li − li−1 2 + 9i=2 ui −
the pad according to d¯ = 16
ui−1 2 ), where li , and ui are illustrated in Fig. 13.
Results for the manual and automatic mode are presented in
Table III. We note that although the average distance between
stitches is close to the average commanded distances reported
in Table II, the standard deviation almost doubles.
As a comparison, in our previous study [74], surgeons were
asked to execute the same task (one knot and nine stitches)
over the same incision and their performance is also reported in
Table III. Since surgeons were not explicitly instructed to close
the entire incision, we cannot compare the average distance
between stitches and the mean distances are reported as not
applicable in Table III. We can, however, compare the standard
deviation between stitches which is roughly twice as much as the
STAR in automatic mode. Furthermore, the STAR in automatic
mode was on average slightly more consistent than the STAR
in manual mode to distribute the stitches evenly (p = 0.0286).
In either mode, however, the STAR was significantly more consistent than the surgeons.
3) STAR Consistency (Stitch Bite Size): Another measurement to assess the quality of a suture is the bite size, which
is determined by the distance between the stitch and the
edge of the incision. As aforementioned in Section III-D2,
due to the Endo360◦ 5-mm jaw size, the STAR must bite
each side of the incision separetly. In automatic mode, the
amount of displacement between the edge of the incision and
the bite position is determined by the width of the incision
(see Fig. 8) to which 2.5 mm is added to compensate for
the half width of the Endo360◦ jaw. In manual mode, the

1314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

TABLE III
STAR ACCURACY AND CONSISTENCY: DISTANCES BETWEEN STITCHES

TABLE IV
STAR CONSISTENCY: BITE SIZES

TABLE V
STAR ACCURACY AND CONSISTENCY: STITCHES TIGHTNESS

magnitude of the displacement from the edge must be determined manually. Based on
Fig. 13, we measured
 this bite
1
( 9i=1 li − mi 2 + 9i=1 ui −
distance according to b̄ = 18
mi 2 )). Results are reported in Table IV and we compare them
to results of surgeons using a da Vinci surgical system or manual
tools. We observe that the STAR in automatic mode was more
consistent than the STAR in manual mode and surgeons. We
note, however, that the trainingpads are not flat and the incision
we selected bulges about 10-mm high by 5-mm wide, which
could fit in the 5-mm jaw of the Endo360◦ , larger bites might
not be possible due to the relatively small jaw of the Endo360◦ .
4) STAR Accuracy and Consistency (Stitches Tightness):
The STAR was instructed to pull on the thread up to measured
force of 4 N. This force magnitude was determined experimentally on various phantoms and tissues. We determine the
tightness of the stitches by measuring the thread displacement
by pulling with a small force on each stitch. We used a pull
spring scale and slid its hook under each stitch (points mi in
Fig. 13). We pulled on the scale to a measured force of 0.2 N
and then measured the gap, if any, between the lifted thread and
the tissue. Table V suggests that the STAR performs equally
well in either mode and the average deflection is smaller than
the surgeons by an order of magnitude.

V. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our experiments demonstrate that the STAR outperforms experienced surgeons for executing a laparoscopic suturing task
on a planar phantom. The STAR decreases the execution time
by about five folds over trained surgeons using a state of the art
master–slave surgical robot and about nine folds over experts
using manual laparoscopic tools. Likewise, the STAR demonstrated submillimeter relative accuracy for the same suturing

task and demonstrated more consistency in all aspects. Although
we acknowledge that our experiments did not involve a surgical environment, the same environment applied to surgeons
who performed the experiments. Thus, within its limitations, the
STAR was more efficient and more consistent than human surgeons. We believe that the gains demonstrated by the STAR can
extrapolate to significant improvements for more challenging
tasks such as end-to-end laparoscopic anastomosis in surgical
environments. Such procedures are known to require on average 45 to 60 min for manual laparoscopy [20], [87]. Thus, a
five to nine folds improvement for anastomoses could result in
a significant reduction of surgical time and complications.
Despite the positive results of the STAR, the scope of our
experiments demonstrates its current limitations. Perhaps, the
most obvious one is that the STAR is currently limited to execute
suture on planar phantoms. This limitation is a direct result of the
imaging used in the current version of the STAR and without 3-D
sensing, this limitation cannot be overcome. We note, however,
that several suturing systems that are reported in the literature
also suffer from the same planar limitation or have presented
results that are limited to planar phantoms similar to ours [56],
[60], [62], [70]–[72], [88]. Other suturing systems have used
one or a combination of 3-D sensors such as stereo cameras
[89], time of flight cameras, and structured light scanning [90].
We are currently addressing the problem of 3-D sensing by
using a light field camera and we expect that these cameras
will enable the STAR to sense 3-D point clouds and execute
3-D suturing in the near future. Light field cameras are able
to provide fully focused XYZ–RGB point clouds with several
frames per seconds. Furthermore, this technology will enhance
the supervisory control interface by enabling the surgeon to
interact with 3-D intraoperative data as opposed to the current
2-D images. Another advantage of using this technology is that
it is also compatible for laparoscopes.

LEONARD et al.: SMART TISSUE ANASTOMOSIS ROBOT (STAR): A VISION-GUIDED ROBOTICS SYSTEM FOR LAPAROSCOPIC SUTURING

The second main limitation of the STAR relates to tracking the
incision under realistic surgical conditions. These include difficult light conditions, occlusions, fast nonrigid deformations,
irregular incisions, and patient movements. Our proposed solution to address these problems in our related work consists
of marking the incision contour, or part thereof, with a fluorescent dye that can be detected by an infrared camera and easily
segmented by our tracking system [91]. The marking is executed by the surgeon by using a small device and will address
the problem of irregular incisions. Our current experiments in
that area involve indocyanine green (ICG) with near infrared
cameras and light sources. Another advantage of this approach
is the relatively good tissue penetration of near infrared light
(NIR) light (5–10mm) which addresses in part the problem of
occlusions [92]. We are currently experimenting with various
gluing agents and solvents to make ICG penetrate and stick to
the edges of lumens. This will enable stereo NIR cameras to
segment and track occluded edges of the lumens and provide
estimates of 3-D coordinates. Thus, by combining NIR cameras
with a light field camera, we expect to address the remaining
sensing challenges related to automated suturing.
Another assumption of the STAR involves the force used to
tighten the stitches. In our experiments, the STAR was instructed
to pull on the thread until it measured a 4N force. This value was
determined experimentally with various phantoms by pulling on
the thread and measuring the magnitude of the rupturing force.
The tear strength varies between tissues and there is no obvious
method to determine the amount of pulling force a tissue can
sustain other than building a lookup table for various tissues. But
even in these circumstances, damages caused to the tissue during
the surgical intervention can weaken its structure and affect its
resistance. Another possibility is to close a control loop around
NIR segmented images and pulling on the thread until the STAR
detects that points on opposite sides of the incision are touching
each other.
Furthermore, laparoscopies present an important challenge
for a single arm suturing device. For example, a common practice for surgeons during an anastomosis is to manually “flip” the
tubes during the procedure to expose the back side. While our
aim is to avoid similar interventions, we anticipate the need to
manually adjust the viewpoint of the cameras and to determine
the pose of the cameras by involving external tracking devices.
Finally, as with current anastomosis techniques, we also anticipate that executing a laparoscopic anastomosis will require an
amount of staging which will involve manually installing anchor
stitches to stabilize the tissues and restrict their motion.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper introduced the STAR system. The STAR is a new
surgical robot with the objective to improve the efficiency, accuracy and consistency of laparoscopic suturing. The STAR
combines the hardware of an actuated suturing tool, a robot
arm, a force sensor, and a camera with a software platform that
enables supervisory control, and vision-guided robotics. The supervisory control interface enables a surgeon to either manually
select the placement of each stitch or to outline the incision and

1315

let the system determine placements at a desired interval. The
incision and placements are tracked in the image enabling the
system to adjust its path during the procedure. Our experiments
demonstrate that the STAR is efficient by executing a planar
suturing task on average five times faster than surgeons using
a da Vinci surgical system, nine times faster than experienced
surgeons using manual laparoscopic tools, and four times faster
than surgeons using a manual Endo360◦ . The experiments also
demontrate that the STAR is on average more accurate and more
consistent than surgeons for placing tight and regular stitches.
We are currently upgrading the STAR with 3-D sensing and
tracking, stereoscopic multispectral imaging, and fluorescent
markers to improve its visual guidance and tracking. These
improvements will enable the STAR to execute more delicate
interventions, such as anastomosis, in more realistic conditions.
A new stapling tool is also being developed in parallel to add
greater flexibility and dexterity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank EndoEvolution for their support and the Design Resource Group (DRG) in Toronto, Canada,
for their contribution to the design of the suturing tool. We also
thank C. Cochenour for her support during the experiments.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Finkelstein, E. Eckersberger, H. Sadri, S. S. Taneja, H. Lepor, and
B. Djavan, “Open versus laparoscopic versus robot-assisted laparoscopic
prostatectomy: The European and US experience,” Rev. Urol., vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 35–43, 2010.
[2] J. Ruurda, I. Broeders, B. Pulles, F. Kappelhof, and C. van der Werken,
“Manual robot assisted endoscopic suturingtime-action analysis in an experimental model,” Surg. Endosc. Other Intervention Techn., vol. 18, no. 8,
pp. 1249–1252, Aug. 2004.
[3] G. Hubens, H. Coveliers, L. Balliu, M. Ruppert, and W. Vaneerdeweg,
“A performance study comparing manual and robotically assisted laparoscopic surgery using the da Vinci system,” Surg. Endosc. Other Intervention Techn., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 1595–1599, Oct. 2003.
[4] J. Wright, C. Ananth, S. Lewin, W. Burke, Y. Lu, A. Neugut, T. Herzog,
and D. Hershman, “Robotically assisted versus laparoscopic hysterectomy
among women with benign gynecologic disease,” J. Amer. Med. Assoc.,
vol. 309, no. 7, pp. 689–698, 2013.
[5] D. Nio, W. A. Bemelman, R. Balm, and D. A. Legemate, “Laparoscopic
vascular anastomoses: Does robotic (Zeus-Aesop) assistance help to overcome the learning curve?,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 19, pp. 1071–1076, 2005.
[6] M. Honda, A. Kuriyama, H. Noma, S. Nunobe, and T. A. Furukawa,
“Hand-sewn versus mechanical esophagogastric anastomosis after
esophagectomy: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Ann. Surg.,
vol. 257, no. 2, pp. 238–248, Feb. 2013.
[7] D. Korolija, “The current evidence on stapled versus hand-sewn anastomoses in the digestive tract,” Minimally Invas. Ther., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 151–154, 2008.
[8] T. B. Sheridan, Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control. Cambridge, MA, USA: The MIT Press, 1992.
[9] K. K. Badani, A. Bhandari, A. Tewari, and M. Menon, “Comparison
of two-dimensional and three-dimensional suturing: Is there a difference in a robotic surgery setting?,” J. Endourol., vol. 9, pp. 1212–1215,
Dec. 2005.
[10] D. Nio, R. Balm, S. Maartense, M. Guijt, and W. A. Bemelman, “The
efficacy of robot-assisted versus conventional laparoscopic vascular anastomoses in an experimental model,” Eur. J. Vasc. Endovasc. Surg., vol. 27,
pp. 283–286, 2004.
[11] T. G. Weiser, S. E. Regenbogen, K. D. Thompson, A. B. Haynes,
S. R. Lipsitz, W. R. Berry, and A. A. Gawande, “An estimation of the
global volume of surgery: A modelling strategy based on available data,”
Lancet, vol. 372, no. 9633, pp. 139–144, Jul. 2008.

1316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

[12] T. M. Fullum, J. A. Ladapo, and B. J. B. C. L. Gunnarsson, “Comparison of the clinical and economic outcomes between open and minimally invasive appendectomy and colectomy: Evidence from a large
commercial payer database,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 845–853,
Apr. 2010.
[13] J. K. Noel, K. Fahrbach, R. Estok, C. Cella, D. Frame, H. Linz, R. R. Cima,
E. J. Dozois, and A. J. Senagore, “Minimally invasive colorectal resection
outcomes: Short-term comparison with open procedures,” J. Amer. College
Surg., vol. 204, no. 2, pp. 291–307, Feb. 2007.
[14] N. Katkhouda, R. J. Mason, S. Towfigh, A. Gevorgyan, and R. Essani, “Laparoscopic versus open appendectomy a prospective randomized doubleblind study,” Ann. Surg., vol. 242, no. 3, pp. 439–450, 2005.
[15] T. C. O. of Surgical Therapy Study Group, “A comparison of laparoscopically assisted and open colectomy for colon cancer,” New Engl. J. Med.,
vol. 350, no. 20, pp. 2050–2059, May 2004.
[16] A. Shushan, H. Mohamed, and A. L. Magos, “How long does laparoscopic
surgery really take? Lessons learned from 1000 operative laparoscopies,”
Human Reproduct., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 39–43, 1999.
[17] K. Marzouk, J. Lawen, I. Alwayn, and B. A. Kiberd, “The impact of vascular anastomosis time on early kidney transplant outcomes,” Transplant.
Res., vol. 2, no. 8, 2013.
[18] C. M. Hollands, L. N. Dixey, and M. J. Torma, “Technical assessment of
porcine enteroenterostomy performed with ZEUS robotic technology,” J.
Pediatr. Surg., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1231–1233, Aug. 2001.
[19] S. Msika, A. Iannelli, A. Marano, G. Zeitoun, G. Deroide, R. Kianmanesh,
Y. Flamant, and J. Hay, “Anastomose manuelle intracorporelle sous
vidÃ©olaparoscopie au cours de la chirurgie colorectale,” Annales de
Chirurgie, vol. 125, no. 5, pp. 439–443, 2000.
[20] Y.-M. Dion, O. Hartung, C. Gracia, and C. Doillon, “Experimental laparoscopic aortobifemoral bypass with end-to-side aortic anastomosis,” Surg.
Laparosc. Endosc., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 35–38, 1999.
[21] A. Hoznek, L. Salomon, R. Rabii, M. B. Slama, A. Cicco, P. Antiphon,
and C. Abbou, “Vesicourethral anastomosis during laparoscopic radical
prostatectomy: The running suture method,” J. Endourol., vol. 14, no. 9,
pp. 749–753, 2000.
[22] L. Hashemi, S. Hart, S. Craig, D. Geraci, and E. Shatskih, “Effect of an
automated suturing device on cost and operating room time in laparoscopic
total abdominal hysterectomies,” J. Minimally Invas. Gynecol., vol. 18,
2011.
[23] K. K. Badani, S. Kaul, and M. Menon, “Evolution of robotic radical
prostatectomy assessment after 2766 procedures,” Cancer, vol. 110, no. 9,
pp. 1951–1958, 2007.
[24] J. P. Ruurda and I. A. M. J. Broeders, “Robot-assisted laparoscopic intestinal anastomosis an experimental study in pigs,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 17,
pp. 236–241, 2003.
[25] P. Štádler, L. Dvořáček, P. Vitásek, and P. Matouš, “The application of
robotic surgery in vascular medicine,” Innovations, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 247–
253, 2012.
[26] P. S. Kang and Y. Tabbakh, “Bridging the training gap in laparoscopic
colorectal surgery,” Brit. Med. J., vol. 345, Oct. 2012.
[27] K. L. Harold, B. D. Matthews, C. L. Backus, B. L. Pratt, and
B. T. Heniford, “Prospective randomized evaluation of surgical resident
proficiency with laparoscopic suturing after course instruction,” Surg. Endosc. Other Intervent. Techn., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 1729–1731, 2002.
[28] P. Joice, G. B. Hanna, and A. Cuschieri, “Ergonomic evaluation of laparoscopic bowel suturing,” Amer. J. Surg., vol. 176, no. 4, pp. 373–378, Oct.
1998.
[29] D. V. Martinec, P. Gatta, B. Zheng, P. M. Denk, and L. L. Swanstroöm,
“The trade-off between flexibility and maneuverability: Task performance
with articulating laparoscopic instruments,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 2697–2701, 2009.
[30] D. Masud, S. Undre, and A. Darzi, “Using manual dexterity to predict the
quality of the final product in the small bowel anastomosis after a period
of training,” Amer. J. Surg., vol. 203, no. 6, pp. 776–781, Jun. 2012.
[31] M. Waseda, N. Inaki, J. R. T. Bermudez, G. Manukyan, I. A. Gacek,
M. O. Schurr, M. Braun, and G. F. Buess, “Precision in stitches: Radius surgical system,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 2056–2062, Nov.
2007.
[32] S. Seki, “Accuracy of suture placement,” Brit. J. Surg., vol. 74, no. 3,
pp. 195–197, Mar. 1987.
[33] Z. Szabo, J. Hunter, G. Berci, J. Sackier, and A. Cuschieri, “Analysis of
surgical movements during suturing in laparoscopy,” Endosc. Surg. Allied
Technol., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 55–61, Feb. 1994.
[34] A. Yamataka, “Laparoscopic kasai portoenterostomy for biliary atresia,”
J. Hepato-Biliary-Pancreat. Sci., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 481–486, Jun. 2013.

[35] B. M. Ure, J. F. Kuebler, N. Schukfeh, C. Engelmann, J. Dingemann,
and C. Petersen, “Survival with the native liver after laparoscopic versus
conventional Kasai portoenterostomy in infants with biliary atresia,” Ann.
Surg., vol. 253, no. 4, pp. 826–830, Apr. 2011.
[36] H. Masoomi, B. Buchberg, B. Nguyen, V. Tung, M. J. Stamos, and S. Mills,
“Outcomes of laparoscopic versus open colectomy in elective surgery
for diverticulitis,” World J. Surg., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 2143–2148, Sep.
2011.
[37] T. Mbadiwe, A. C. Obirieze, E. E. C. III, P. Turner, and T. M. Fullum,
“Surgical management of complicated diverticulitis: A comparison of the
laparoscopic and open approaches,” J. Amer. College Surg., vol. 216, no. 4,
pp. 782–788, Apr. 2013.
[38] J. H. Ashburn, L. Stocchi, R. P. Kira, D. W. Dietz, and F. H. Remzi, “Consequences of anastomotic leak after restorative proctectomy for cancer:
Effect on long-term function and quality of life,” Diseases Colon Rectum,
vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 275–280, Mar. 2013.
[39] J. J. Luján, Z. H. Németh, P. A. Barratt-Stopper, R. Bustami,
V. P. Koshenkov, and R. H. Rolandelli, “Factors influencing the outcome
of intestinal anastomosis,” Amer. Surg., vol. 77, no. 9, pp. 1169–1175,
Sep. 2011.
[40] E. F. Taylor, J. D. Thomas, L. E. Whitehouse, P. Quirke, D. Jayne,
P. J. Finan, D. Forman, J. R. Wilkinson, and E. J. A. Morris, “Populationbased study of laparoscopic colorectal cancer surgery 2006–2008,” Brit.
J. Surg., vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 553–560, 2013.
[41] S. J. Moug, K. McCarthy, and C. Nesbitt, “Bridging the gap: How higher
surgical training programmes can produce consultant laparoscopic colorectal surgeons,” Colorectal Disease, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 911–913, 2013.
[42] S. S. Patel, M. S. Patel, S. Mahanti, A. Ortega, G. T. Ault, A. M. Kaiser,
and A. J. Senagore, “Laparoscopic versus open colon resections in california: A cross-sectional analysis,” Amer. Surg., vol. 78, no. 10, pp. 1063–
1065, Oct. 2012.
[43] B. P. Chan, T. Gomes, R. P. Musselman, R. C. Auer, H. Moloo,
M. Mamdani, M. Al-Omran, R. P. Boushey, and O. AlObeed, “Trends in
colon cancer surgery in ontario: 2002–2009,” Colorectal Disease, vol. 14,
pp. e708–e712, Oct. 2012.
[44] K. A. Vakalopoulos, F. Daams, Z. Wu, L. Timmermans, J. J. Jeekel,
G.-J. Kleinrensink, A. van der Ham, and J. F. Lange, “Tissue adhesives in
gastrointestinal anastomosis: A systematic review,” J. Surg. Res., vol. 180,
no. 2, pp. 290–300, Apr. 2013.
[45] J. W. Huh, H. R. Kim, and Y. J. Kim, “Anastomotic leakage after laparoscopic resection of rectal cancer: The impact of fibrin glue,” Amer. J. Surg.,
vol. 199, no. 4, pp. 435–441, Apr. 2010.
[46] C. B. Neutzling, S. A. Lustosa, I. M. Proenca, E. M. da Silva, and
D. Matos, “Stapled versus handsewn methods for colorectal anastomosis
surgery,” Cochrane Library. Cochrane Colorectal Cancer Group, vol. 15,
no. 2, Feb. 2012.
[47] I. C. Mitchell, R. Barber, A. C. Fischer, and D. T. Schindel, “Experience
performing 64 consecutive stapled intestinal anastomoses in small children
and infants,” J. Pediatr. Surg., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 128–130, Jan. 2011.
[48] V. K. Bansal, T. Tamang, M. C. Misra, P. Prakash, K. Rajan,
H. K. Bhattacharjee, S. Kumar, and A. Goswami, “Laparoscopic suturing skills acquisition: A comparison between laparoscopy-exposed and
laparoscopy-naive surgeons,” J. Soc. Laparoendosc. Surg., vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 623–631, 2012.
[49] W. J. Halabi, C. Y. Kang, M. D. Jafari, V. Q. Nguyen, J. C. Carmichael,
S. Mills, M. J. Stamos, and A. Pigazzi, “Robotic-assisted colorectal
surgery in the united states: A nationwide analysis of trends and outcomes,” World J. Surg., vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 2782–2790, Apr. 2013.
[50] G. T. Sung and I. S. Gill, “Robotic laparoscopic surgery: A comparison
of the Da Vinci and Zeus systems,” Urology, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 893–898,
Dec. 2001.
[51] J. Rosen and M. Hannaford, “Doc at a distance,” IEEE Spectr., vol. 43,
no. 10, pp. 34–39, Oct. 2006.
[52] S. Gidaro, M. Buscarini, E. Ruiz, A. Labruzzo, and M. Stark, “Telelap
alf-x: A novel telesurgical system for the 21st century,” Surg. Technol. Int.
XXII, pp. 20–25, Dec. 2012.
[53] U.
Hagn,
R.
Konietschke,
A.
Tobergte,
M.
Nickl,
S. JÃrg, B. KÃbler, G. Passig, M. GrÃger, F. FrÃhlich, U. Seibold,
L. Le-Tien, A. Albu-SchÃffer, A. Nothhelfer, F. Hacker, M. Grebenstein,
and G. Hirzinger, “DLR MiroSurge: A versatile system for research in
endoscopic telesurgery,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 5,
pp. 183–193, Mar. 2010.
[54] H. C. Lin, I. Shafran, D. Yuh, and G. D. Hager, “Towards automatic skill
evaluation: Detection and segmentation of robot-assisted surgical motions,” Comput. Aided Surg., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 220–230, 2006.

LEONARD et al.: SMART TISSUE ANASTOMOSIS ROBOT (STAR): A VISION-GUIDED ROBOTICS SYSTEM FOR LAPAROSCOPIC SUTURING

[55] J. J. Abbott, P. Marayong, and A. M. Okamura, “Haptic virtual fixtures
for robot-assisted manipulation,” Robot. Res., vol. 28, pp. 49–64, 2007.
[56] A. Kapoor, M. Li, and R. Taylor, “Spatial motion constraints for robot
assisted suturing using virtual fixtures,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput.
Comput.-Assist. Intervention), 2005, vol. 3750, pp. 89–96.
[57] P. Marayong, M. Li, A. Okamura, and G. Hager, “Spatial motion constraints: Theory and demonstrations for robot guidance using virtual fixtures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2003, pp. 1954–1959.
[58] L. B. Rosenberg, “Virtual fixtures: Perceptual tools for telerobotic manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE Virtual Reality Annu. Int. Symp., 1993, pp. 76–82.
[59] T. Xia, C. Baird, G. Jallo, K. Hayes, N. Nakajima, N. Hata, and
P. Kazanzides, “An integrated system for planning, navigation and robotic
assistance for skull base surgery,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist.
Surg., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 321–330, Dec. 2008.
[60] H. Wang, S. Wang, J. Ding, and H. Luo, “Suturing and tying knots assisted
by a surgical robot system in laryngeal mis,” Robotica, vol. 28, pp. 241–
252, Mar. 2010.
[61] B. Brehmer, C. Moll, A. Markis, R. Kirschner-Hermanis, R. Knüchel, and
G. Jakse, “Endosew(tm): A new device for laparoscopic running sutures,”
J. Endourol., vol. 22, pp. 307–311, Feb. 2008.
[62] T. Goöpel, F. Haärtl, A. Schneider, M. Buss, and H. Feussner, “Automation of a suturing device for minimally invasive surgery,” Surg. Endosc.,
vol. 25, pp. 2100–2104, Jul. 2011.
[63] S. R. Jernigan, A. V. Guillaume Chanoit and, S. B. Owen, M. Hilliard,
D. Cormier, B. Laffitte, and G. Buckner, “A laparoscopic knot-tying device
for minimally invasive cardiac surgery,” Eur. J. Cardio–Thorac. Surg.,
vol. 37, pp. 626–630, 2010.
[64] J. F. Kuniholm, G. D. Buckner, W. Nifong, and M. Orrico, “Automated
knot tying for fixation in minimally invasive, robot-assisted cardiac
surgery,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 127, pp. 1001–1008, 2005.
[65] R. Bauernschmitt, E. U. Schirmbeck, A. Knoll, H. Mayer, I. Nagy,
N. Wessel, S. M. Wildhirt, and R. Lange, “Towards robotic heart surgery:
Introduction of autonomous procedures into an experimental surgical telemanipulator system,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg., vol. 1,
pp. 74–79, 2005.
[66] M. Kitagawa, D. Dokko, A. M. Okamura, and D. D. Yuh, “Effect of sensory substitution on suture-manipulation forces for robotic surgical systems,” J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg., vol. 129, no. 1, pp. 151–158, Jan.
2005.
[67] H. Kang and J. T. Wen, “Autonomous suturing using minimally invasive
surgerical robots,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Contr. Appl., 2000, pp. 742–
747.
[68] H. Kang and J. T. Wen, “Endobot: A robotic assistant in minimally invasive
surgeries,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2001, pp. 2031–2036.
[69] K. Claes and H. Bruyninckx, “Endostitch automation using 2D and 3D
vision,”, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, Tech. Rep.
06PP160, 2006.
[70] S. Iyer, T. Looi, and J. Drake, “A single arm, single camera system for
automated suturing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. an d Autom., 2013,
pp. 239–244.
[71] C. Staub, T. Osa, A. Knoll, and R. Bauernschmitt, “Automation of tissue
piercing using circular needles and vision guidance for computer aided
laparoscopic surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. and Autom., 2010,
pp. 4585–4590.
[72] C. E. Reiley, E. Plaku, and G. D. Hager, “Motion generation of robotic
surgical tasks: Learning from expert demonstrations,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Sep. 2010, pp. 967–970.
[73] R. Hartley and A. Zisserman, Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[74] K. L. Wu, A. Krieger, S. Leonard, Y. Kim, C. Cochenour,
and P. C. W. Kim, “The future concept for surgical robotics:
A smart tissue anastomosis robot STAR and a proof-of-concept
demonstration,” in Proc. Int. Pediatric Endosurg. Group 22nd
Annu. Congr. Endosurg. Children, Jul. 2013, [Online]. Available:
http://www.ipeg.org/documents/IPEG2013_finalProgram.pdf.

1317

[75] J. Shi and C. Tomasi, “Good features to track,” in Proc. EEE Comput.
Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 1994, pp. 593–600.
[76] F. Moreno-Noguer, A. Sanfeliu, and D. Samaras, “Dependent multiple cue
integration for robust tracking,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 30, no. 4, Apr. 2008.
[77] O. Aichholzer, F. Aurenhammer, D. Alberts, and B. Gärtner, “A novel
type of skeleton for polygons,” J. Universal Comput. Sci., vol. 1, no. 12,
1995.
[78] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and R. L. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 1990.
[79] S. Gottschalk, M. C. Lin, and D. Manocha, “OBBtree: A hierarchical
structure for rapid interference detection,” in Proc. 23rd Annu. Conf.
Comput. Graph. Interact. Techn., 1996.
[80] F. Moreno-Noguer and A. Sanfeliu, “Integration of shape and a multihypotheses fisher color model for figure-ground segmentation in nonstationary environment,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit, vol. 4,
pp. 771–774.
[81] Y. Raja, S. J. McKenna, and S. Gong, “Colour model selection and adaptation in dynamic scenes,” in Proc. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. Comput. Vis.,
1998, vol. 1406.
[82] A. Blake and M. Isard, Active Contours: The Application of Techniques
from Graphics,Vision,Control Theory and Statistics to Visual Tracking of
Shapes in Motion. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[83] M. Kass, A. Witkin, and D. Terzopoulos, “Snakes: Active contour models,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 321–331, 1988.
[84] Y. Cengiz, P. Blomquist, and L. A. Israelsson, “Small tissue bites and
wound strengthan experimental study,” Arch. Surg., vol. 136, pp. 272–
275, Mar. 2001.
[85] D. Millbourn, Y. Cengiz, and L. A. Israelsson, “Effect of stitch length
on wound complications after closure of midline incisions,” Arch. Surg.,
vol. 144, no. 11, pp. 1056–1059, Nov. 2009.
[86] P. Månsson, X. W. Zhang, B. Jeppsson, and H. Thorlacius, “Anastomotic
healing in the rat colon: Comparison between a radiological method,
breaking strength and bursting pressure,” Int. J. Colorectal Disease,
vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 420–425, Nov. 2002.
[87] V. Lange, G. Meyer, H. Schardey, A. Holker, R. Lang, A. Nerlich, and
F. Schildberg, “Different techniques of laparoscopic end-to-end smallbowel anastomoses,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 82–87, Jan. 1995.
[88] H. Wakamatsu, A. Tsumaya, E. Arai, and S. Hirai, “Manipulation planning
for knotting/unknotting and tightly tying of deformable linear objects,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Apr. 2005, pp. 2505–2510.
[89] G. Zong, Y. Hu, D. Li, and X. Sun, “Visually servoed suturing for robotic
microsurgical keratoplasty,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., Oct. 2006, pp. 2358–2363.
[90] H. Mönnich, H. Wörn, and D. Stein, “Op sense—a robotic research platform for telemanipulated and automatic computer assisted surgery,” in
Proc. 12th IEEE Int. Worksh. Adv. Motion Contr., Mar. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[91] A. Shademan, M. F. Dumont, S. Leonard, A. Krieger, and P. C. W. Kim,
“Feasibility of near-infrared markers for guiding surgical robots,” in SPIE
Proc. Opt. Model. Perform. Predict. VI, vol. 8840, 2013.
[92] S. Kim, Y. T. Lim, E. G. Soltesz, A. M. D. Grand, J. Lee, A. Nakayama,
J. A. Parker, T. Mihaljevic, R. G. Laurence, D. M. Dor, L. H. Cohn,
M. G. Bawendi, and J. V. Frangioni, “Near-infrared fluorescent type ii
quantum dots for sentinel lymph node mapping,” Nature Biotechnol.,
vol. 22, pp. 93–97, 2004.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

