1400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Breast Cancer Histopathology Image Analysis:
A Review
Mitko Veta∗ , Josien P. W. Pluim, Paul J. van Diest, and Max A. Viergever

Abstract—This paper presents an overview of methods that have
been proposed for the analysis of breast cancer histopathology images. This research area has become particularly relevant with the
advent of whole slide imaging (WSI) scanners, which can perform
cost-effective and high-throughput histopathology slide digitization, and which aim at replacing the optical microscope as the primary tool used by pathologist. Breast cancer is the most prevalent
form of cancers among women, and image analysis methods that
target this disease have a huge potential to reduce the workload
in a typical pathology lab and to improve the quality of the interpretation. This paper is meant as an introduction for nonexperts.
It starts with an overview of the tissue preparation, staining and
slide digitization processes followed by a discussion of the different
image processing techniques and applications, ranging from analysis of tissue staining to computer-aided diagnosis, and prognosis
of breast cancer patients.
Index Terms—Breast cancer, computer-aided diagnosis, digital
pathology, histopathology, image analysis, object detection, object
segmentation.

I. INTRODUCTION
ATHOLOGY Labs are currently undergoing a transformation toward a fully digital workflow [1]. In addition to the
digital management of tissue samples, pathology orders, and
reports, this includes the digitization of histopathology slides
and use of computer monitors for viewing them, which aims
to replace the optical microscope as the primary tool used by
pathologists. This transformation has only recently been enabled by the introduction of cost and time efficient whole slide
imaging (WSI) scanners, as successors to microscope-mounted
digital cameras. This process of adoption of digital slide images
is somewhat analogous to the digitization of radiological imaging. However, a full analogy is difficult to establish because
in pathology the primary object of analysis is the tissue rather

P

Manuscript received October 16, 2013; revised December 17, 2013; accepted
January 19, 2014. Date of publication January 30, 2014; date of current version April 17, 2014. The work of M. Veta was financially supported by the
project Care4Me (Cooperative Advanced Research for Medical Efficiency) in
the framework of the EU research programme ITEA. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Veta is with the Image Sciences Institute, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht 3584 CX, The Netherlands (e-mail: mitko.veta@gmail.com).
J. P. W. Pluim and M. A. Viergever are with the Image Sciences Institute,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 3584 CX, The Netherlands (e-mail:
josien@isi.uu.nl; max@isi.uu.nl).
P. J. van Diest is with the Department of Pathology, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht 3584 CX, The Netherlands (e-mail: p.j.vandiest@
umcutrecht.nl).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2303852

than the image [2]. Adoption of a fully digital clinical workflow
in radiology benefitted from the ability to acquire radiological images digitally. By contrast, the barrier to entry is higher
for histology, which is a distinctly analog modality that must
always undergo an analog-to-digital conversion before computerized analysis.
A relatively large percentage of the samples that are analyzed
in pathology labs are from breast cancer patients, since this disease is the most prevalent form of cancer among women [3].
Analysis methods that are routinely performed by pathologists,
such as determination of the histological grade and the hormone
receptor status by immunohistochemistry (IHC), can be tedious
and are hampered by observer variability [4], [5]. The histological tumor grade is commonly determined according to the
modified Bloom–Richardson system, which consists of semiquantitative assessment of nuclear atypia, tubule formation, and
mitotic activity [6], [7]. The analysis of immunohistochemically
stained slides mainly involves the estimation of the number of
cells that are positive for a particular antigen and the degree of
positivity (staining intensity) [8], [9].
One of the main benefits of digital slides compared to conventional glass slides is that they enable the use of quantitative
automatic image analysis methods. These methods have the
potential to tackle the problems that stem from the subjective
interpretation by pathologists and, at the same time, reduce their
workload [10].
In this paper, we give an overview of image analysis methods
that have been proposed for breast cancer histopathology images. We focus on automatic image analysis of histopathology
tissue preparations imaged by brightfield microscopy, since this
covers the bulk of the work that is performed by pathologists
for this disease. However, some techniques developed for other
tissue types or microscopy modalities that are relevant for the
scope of our paper are mentioned throughout the text when appropriate. For a broader overview of digital pathology and the
use of automatic methods for analysis of histopathology slides,
we refer the reader to the recent reviews in [11]–[15].

II. TISSUE PREPARATION AND IMAGING
Before we proceed to discuss the different image analysis
algorithms and applications, we give an overview of the tissue
preparation and staining processes and digitization of histological slides. In the typical hospital workflow, breast tumor
excisions or biopsies are performed in the operating room after
which the material is sent for analysis to the pathology lab. The
first step of the tissue preparation process is formalin fixation
and embedding in paraffin. From the paraffin blocks, sections

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

VETA et al.: BREAST CANCER HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGE ANALYSIS: A REVIEW

1401

Fig. 1. Example histological stains. (a) Hematoxylin and eosin. (b) IHC staining for ER. The antibody is visualized with the DAB chromogen (3, 3’Diaminobenzidine) and the tissue is counterstained with hematoxylin. The nuclei that are dyed with the brown stain are considered to be positive. (c) IHC staining
fort HER2 with hematoxylin counterstaining. HER2 is expressed in the nuclear membranes.

with a thickness of 3–5 μm are cut using a microtome (a high
precision cutting instrument) and mounted on glass slides.
The structures of interest in the tissue, in most instances the
nuclei and cytoplasm, are not readily visible on the mounted
sections. They therefore need to be dyed with stains that highlight them. The standard staining protocol uses hematoxylin and
eosin [H&E, Fig. 1(a)]. In spite of the fact that this staining protocol has been in use for around a century, the diagnostic and
prognostic procedure for all patients still almost always starts by
staining the sections with H&E. Hematoxylin binds to DNA and
thereby dyes the nuclei blue/purple, and eosin binds to proteins
and dyes other structures (cytoplasm, stroma, etc.) pink.
IHC is a more advanced staining technique, which makes use
of antibodies to highlight specific antigens in the tissue [see
Fig. 1(b) and (c)]. In breast cancer, IHC is commonly used to
highlight the presence of estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), and
human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) receptors, as well as
to assess the proliferation of the tumor, for example, by highlighting the Ki-67 protein, which is associated with cell proliferation [8], [9], [16]. When performing IHC, the tissue is usually
counterstained with hematoxylin to identify the nuclei and to
visualize the tissue architecture (in case of nuclear antigens, visualize the nuclei in which the target antigen is absent). When
quantification is of primary interest, such as with the determination of the ER, PR, and HER2 receptor status for breast cancer
patients by IHC, the staining protocols need to be standardized
and quality controlled in order to obtain reproducible results,
which are comparable across different patients [17], [18].
Very often in breast cancer research, many different markers
highlighted by IHC from hundreds or thousands of patients need
to be considered. In order to achieve high-throughput analysis,
researchers resort to using tissue microarrays (TMAs) [19], [20].
TMAs are constructed by punching small core biopsies (usually
with a core diameter of 0.6 mm) from selected regions of the
paraffin blocks containing the tissue to be analyzed, and transferring them to a recipient paraffin block in a regular pattern.
The recipient paraffin block, which now contains tissue from
many different subjects, is then cut and stained in a standardized manner. Because with TMAs tissues from different patients
are stained under the same conditions, the resulting staining
variability is significantly lower than with routinely prepared

histopathology slides, which makes them more suitable for image analysis.
Currently, the typical pathology lab workflow is concluded by
staining and coverslipping of the glass slides, after which they
are sent to the pathologist for analysis. As digital pathology
becomes more commonplace, slide digitization is added as an
additional stage to this workflow [1]. The early slide digitization
systems were digital cameras mounted on standard microscopes,
which could capture still images. Present day WSI scanners,
which enable high throughput slide digitization at relatively low
cost, handle the entire scanning procedure automatically. This
includes loading of the slides on the scanning platform, detection of the relevant tissue regions and focus point selection,
image acquisition, compression, storing and registration on a
laboratory information system. Most of the WSI scanners that
are currently in use perform slide scanning at 20 × or 40 × magnification with a spatial resolution in the order of 0.50 μm/pixel
and 0.25 μm/pixel, respectively. Because of the large size, the
captured RGB image is compressed most commonly with JPEG
or JPEG 2000. For faster navigation, the images can be stored in
a pyramid structure with increasing magnification at each level
of the pyramid. This also facilitates multiscale image analysis.
The tissue preparation, staining, and slide digitization processes can have a significant impact on the tissue/image appearance, and insight into them may lead to a better design of image
analysis algorithms. The impact can be manifested in several
ways. For example, improper fixation can lead to changes in
tissue morphology and thus induce incorrect tissue morphometry by automatic image analysis. If sections are not properly
stained (i.e., over- or under-stained) and mounted, this may result in out-of-focus regions and/or missing parts. Even small
variations of the staining conditions can lead to variations in tissue appearance and cause problems for automatic image analysis
algorithms. This issue of staining/appearance variability will be
considered in more detail in the following sections.
III. STAINING ANALYSIS
When performing image analysis of histopathology images,
it is of interest to separate the histological stains that dye different tissue components. For instance, if the application is nuclei

1402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 2. Standardization of H&E stained histopathology image appearance. (a) Two raw images with notable difference in the staining appearance. (b) Same two
images with standardized appearance by a normalization method presented in [24].

detection in H&E stained sections, it can be beneficial to obtain
a hematoxylin only image since the eosin-only stained components can contribute toward false positives. One approach is to
perform clustering or supervised classification of the RGB pixel
values in order to obtain binary or probability maps for the different stains. These methods require labeled data or identification
of the cluster that corresponds to the stain of interest. Another
approach for staining separations is based on the fact that the image formation process in brightfield microscopy can be modeled
according to the Lambert–Beer law for light absorption. According to this law, the optical density (the logarithm of the intensity)
is proportional to the concentration of stain in the tissue. Given
that with RGB image sensors there are three detection channels,
linear decomposition can be performed to determine the concentration of up to three stains for each pixel location [21]. Once
the stain concentrations are determined, single-stain images can
be derived by an inverse approach. These techniques require
definition of characteristic absorption spectra for the stains that
need to be separated. However, there are blind techniques that
do not have this limitation [22].
It should be noted here that the commonly used DAB chromogen (3, 3’-Diaminobenzidine) is not a true light absorber,
but it exhibits light scattering behavior. Thus, the behavior
of DAB cannot be perfectly modeled by the Lambert–Beer
law. However, in practice, good unmixing results can still be
achieved [18].
One of the major difficulties in breast cancer histopathology image analysis, particularly of H&E stained sections, is
appearance variability. In part, this can be explained by the heterogeneity of the disease, but a large portion is a result of the
tissue preparation and staining processes. The color appearance
can significantly vary between different labs owing to differences in fixation and in staining protocols and reagents. Color
appearance may also vary between samples produced in the
same lab as a result of preanalytic features as fixation delays
and inconsistencies in the staining conditions. Finally, variability in appearance can be due to slide digitization conditions,
including notably differences in optics, light detectors, or light
sources used in the scanners.
Automatic image analysis methods can be significantly hampered by the variability of the tissue appearance. In addition,
methods that are developed and tested on data from a single

center often must be reevaluated and adjusted when used with
slides from external labs. It is desirable that histopathology image analysis methods are designed in a way that is robust to
appearance variability, such as in [23]. Alternatively, the image appearance can be standardized prior to further processing. One simple approach is to determine the concentrations of
the individual stains for each pixel with some of the staining
separation techniques mentioned before, normalize the staining
concentrations and then digitally mix the stains with common
characteristic absorption coefficients to obtain a standardized
image [24], [25]. This approach is illustrated in Fig. 2. In [26], a
method for color standardization was proposed based on unsupervised segmentation into tissue components. The tissue was
divided into four components: nuclei, stroma, epithelium, and
background and the RGB histograms for each component were
aligned to a template image.

IV. QUANTIFICATION OF IHC
In H&E stained slides, the features of the nuclei that are
of interest to pathologists are relatively complex—their size,
shape and texture, their spatial arrangement and organization
into tubules, interaction with the stroma, etc. In contrast with
this, most of the information that is of interest in IHC-stained
sections is contained in the color and the intensity of the staining,
which makes IHC-stained samples more open to design and
implementation of image processing algorithms. For example, a
useful and readily obtained characteristic of IHC digital slides is
the determination of the percentage of pixels that are positively
stained for a particular antigen.
In breast cancer patients, the ER, PR, and HER2 receptor
statuses can have a major influence on the planning of adjuvant
systemic treatment. Currently, the standard method of scoring
IHC stained slides is by visual examination under a microscope.
This procedure is prone to variability among pathologists even
when strict guidelines are followed. Recent recommendations
issued by the American Society of Clinical Oncology and the
College of American Pathologists for testing of the ER, PR, and
HER2 receptor status include encouragement of the use of quantitative image analysis techniques with the goal of improving the
consistency of the interpretation [8], [9].

VETA et al.: BREAST CANCER HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGE ANALYSIS: A REVIEW

The ER and PR receptor statuses are customarily determined
by counting the percentage of positively stained nuclei. If this
percentage is above a predefined threshold (10% in Europe and
1% in the USA) the tissue is defined positive. The automatic
quantification of the ER and PR status thus usually involves
the use of an automated nuclei detection or segmentation algorithm [27] (this topic will be covered in detail in the following section). As an alternative to this, the percentage of
positively stained nuclear area can be determined [28]. In [29],
a method which computes features that reflect the area of positively stained nuclei and the nuclear intensity was proposed.
These features were then mapped to an ordinal scale that is used
by pathologists.
In comparison with the ER and PR receptors, which are
expressed in the cell nuclei, the HER2 receptor is expressed
on the cell membranes. The tumors are scored positive when
more than 30% of the cell membranes show complete, uniform,
and intensive staining. Cases with complete but nonuniform
or weak staining in more than 10% of the cells are equivocal,
and cases with no staining or incomplete staining are defined
to be negative. Equivocal cases are further evaluated by other
methods [30].
The largest challenge in HER2 staining quantification lies
in correct membrane segmentation, which can be particularly
challenging in negative cases and cases with incomplete and
faint staining. A method for automated assessment of HER2
IHC is presented in [31]. In the first stage of this approach, all
image pixels are classified as belonging to epithelial nuclei or
cell membranes. The nuclear regions are further segmented into
individual nuclei by watershed segmentation and the cell membranes are determined by adaptive ellipse fitting. Slides are then
classified into one of the three scoring groups based on features
describing the membrane staining intensity and completeness.
In [32], following nuclei segmentation, approximate membrane
contours were determined by Voronoi tessellation. The approximate contours were then refined based on the membrane staining
intensity. Hall et al. [33] proposed a method where features for
HER2 quantification were extracted based on positive controls,
thus eliminating the variability in the staining between different
slides.
Most of the commercially available image analysis tools include algorithms for positive nuclei counting and membrane
staining quantification. A review of imaging solutions for quantitative IHC can be found in [34]. Two publicly available web
applications for ER/PR and HER2 quantifications are described
in [28] and [35]. In various recent studies, automatic scoring has
shown high agreement with expert scoring and other methods
(such as FISH for HER2 scoring) [36]–[44].
V. OBJECT DETECTION AND SEGMENTATION
A. Tissue and Tissue Components Segmentation
The typical histopathology slide contains a tissue area of
approximately 15 mm × 15 mm. At the resolutions at which
digital slides are captured, this will result in images with a
size of up to several gigapixels. Because processing of these
very large images might result in computational problems, it is

1403

common practice to identify the regions of the slides that are of
interest prior to performing more detailed image analysis.
Generally, large portions of the slides are empty, i.e., they
do not contain tissue. Most WSI scanners have the ability to
identify empty tiles in the slide during the scanning process and
avoid scanning them, which results in reduction of scanning
time. One such approach for supervised tissue localization was
proposed in [45].
When analysis of TMAs is performed, the individual TMA
cores need to be identified and segmented and their coordinates
on the TMA grid need to be assigned so they can be matched to
the donor paraffin block [46]–[48].
In general, large areas of the tissue are not relevant for the
problem at hand. For example, for computer-aided diagnosis
of breast cancer (classification into the classes benign or malignant) only the epithelial regions of the tissue are relevant.
When quantification of IHC or histological grading needs to be
performed, only the tumor tissue is of interest and nontumor
regions need to be excluded from the analysis. Furthermore,
epithelial and stromal regions of the tumor have different significance for prognosis. Segmentation of the tumor into these
components is often used as a preprocessing step when performing automatic morphometry and histological grading, or
for guidance when constructing TMAs [49]. In the majority of
the published studies on tissue segmentation, this kind of compartmentalization is achieved by supervised pixel-wise classification of small rectangular image regions based on color and
texture features [50]–[54], although unsupervised methods have
been proposed [55].
B. Nuclei Detection and Segmentation
The segmentation of nuclei in breast cancer histopathology
images can be considered a basic functional block in many different applications. Quantification of IHC nuclear staining has
already been mentioned in the previous section. Other applications include extraction of prognostically relevant morphometric features (size, shape, chromatin texture), automatic nuclear
pleomorphism grading as part of a computer-aided prognosis
system, detection of lymphocytic infiltration, and detection of
malignancy and tubule formation in a bottom-up manner.
Nuclei segmentation remains a very challenging problem,
particularly for routinely stained H&E sections, despite the numerous attempts to solve it. Many of the challenges arise from
the variability of the tissue appearance, which is in part due
to imperfections in the staining process. Furthermore, there is
an inherent diversity of the appearance of epithelial cancerous nuclei, which may vary from almost normal-like round to
highly irregularly shaped and enlarged nuclei with coarse and
marginalized chromatin and prominent nucleoli (small round
structures inside the nuclei). This is illustrated in Fig. 3. Different nucleus types, such as elongated fibroblasts and lymphocyte
nuclei, often appear together with epithelial nuclei, which can
decrease the specificity when only epithelial nuclei need to be
detected or segmented. Additionally, nuclei may be overlapping, clustered or tightly clumped, which makes them difficult
to separate. Lastly, hematoxylin-stained “junk” particles, which

1404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 3. Different nuclei appearances in breast cancer histopathology images (from left to right): small and round with relatively uniform chromatin, organized
into tubules, marginalized chromatin, and prominent nucleoli.

tend to appear in high-grade tumors, can hamper the nuclei
segmentation.
A large variety of approaches for segmentation of nuclei in
breast cancer histopathology images have been proposed. They
vary not only as concerns the segmentation method proper, but
also in the pre- and postprocessing steps that aim to improve
segmentation performance.
The most difficult aspect of nuclei segmentation in breast cancer histopathology images is the detection of individual nuclei,
especially when they are clustered closely together and overlap.
Some proposed methods try and identify the individual nuclei
prior to performing the segmentation procedure (marker extraction), whereas others first segment clumps of nuclei from the rest
of the tissue and then proceed to separate those into individual
nuclei. Methods such as the Hough transform [56] and voting
along the direction of the image gradient to infer the center of
the object [57], [58] have been used for both identification of
nucleus markers and separation of segmented clumps. Another
popular approach to separate clumps of nuclei is to split them
along points of high concavity [59], [60]. In [61], separation of
clustered nuclei is achieved by unsupervised Bayesian classification. Supervised methods for nuclei detection have also been
proposed, with good performance [62].
With regards to the core segmentation technique, active contours are among the more popular methods [56], [57], [63]. Their
objective is to find a minimum energy fit of moving contours
to the image, the energy being defined in such a way that the
contours are attracted to the boundaries of the objects of interest. The contours need to be seeded close to the target nuclei
locations, which is why the approach is usually paired with a
nuclei detection method. In [57], the level set active contours
segmentation includes a repulsion term to prevent the contours
of adjacent cells from overlapping. The active contour model for
nuclei and lymphocyte nuclei segmentation proposed in [63] incorporates boundary, region and shape prior terms, and performs
simultaneous segmentation of multiple objects in the image.
Several methods have been proposed that work by initially
defining a large number of candidate regions and then selecting
the ones that are likely to represent a correctly segmented object.
In [64], candidate regions are identified by the maximally stable extremal regions (MSER) detector. This detector produces
a large number of potentially overlapping regions. Each candidate region is evaluated with a statistical model, and dynamic

programming is used to select a set of nonoverlapping regions
that best fit the model. The authors of [59] proposed generating a very large number of candidate objects by identifying
all possible closed contours within the image by contour tracing. A set of nonoverlapping contours is obtained by defining
the objects that are most “fit” based on the contour gradient
strength. In [58], candidate regions are initially identified by
a marker-controlled watershed approach at multiple scales and
using multiple marker types, which yields a large number of
overlapping contours. Regions unlikely to represent valid nuclei are removed based on size, shape, boundary, and chromatin
distribution features. Local concurrences are resolved by greedy
selection of the contours most likely to represent nuclei, using
the solidity of the object as a fitness value.
Other recently proposed and promising methods for nuclei
segmentation in breast cancer histopathology are based on dictionaries of discriminative image patches [65] and marked point
processes [66], [67].
Detection and segmentation of lymphocyte nuclei and detection of lymphocytic infiltrations can be considered specials case
of nuclei detection/segmentation. In [68], region growing with
high sensitivity and low specificity is used to initially segment
lymphocyte nuclei and other objects. Then, maximum a posteriori estimation that incorporates size, luminance, and spatial
proximity information is used to improve the specificity of the
detector. Finally, the results from the lymphocyte nuclei detection are input to a classifier that discriminates between the
lymphocyte infiltration phenomenon and the baseline level of
lymphocytes. In [60], output from a Gaussian mixture clustering algorithm is used to initialize geodesic active contour
segmentation. The overlapping objects are resolved by splitting them along high concavity points. Lymphocyte nuclei are
distinguished from other objects by texture-based clustering.
The choice of the segmentation method is closely related
to the intended application and the available time and computational resources. For example, active contours may yield
superior nuclear segmentation, but at the cost of increased computational complexity, which limits their use for high throughput
applications. When such high throughput processing is needed,
a simple thresholding of the hematoxylin channel followed by
morphological operations and splitting of clusters along high
concavity points might be used, but at the cost of less accurate
segmentation results.

VETA et al.: BREAST CANCER HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGE ANALYSIS: A REVIEW

1405

Fig. 4. Mitotic figures in breast cancer histopathology images. a) Region from a PPH3 labeled section. This staining method is specific to cells in the M phase
which are clearly visible as dark brown objects (marked with green arrows). b) The same section stained with H&E. The corresponding four mitotic figures are
visible as hyperchromatic objects. However, many other similar objects appear which complicates mitosis counting.

So far we have only listed methods that specifically aim at
dealing with nuclei segmentation in breast cancer histopathology sections imaged with brightfield microscopy as an application. However, methods developed for other tissue types
(e.g., prostate) or microscopy modalities (e.g., fluorescence microscopy) can also be applied to this problem [69]–[77]. In order
to use these methods, some adaptation of some of the image processing steps will likely be needed, for example, modification
of the way a nuclear staining image is obtained.
C. Tubules Segmentation
Along with nuclear pleomorphism, the degree of structural
differentiation of the tissue is one of the earliest prognostic
factors for breast cancer patients that have been identified by
pathologists. Cancer disrupts the ability of the nuclei to communicate with each other and organize themselves into structures
such as tubules, making the lack of tubule formation an indicator for advanced malignancy. The tubules are generally round
or oval structures consisting of lumen surrounded by a layer of
epithelial cells. The major challenge in tubule segmentation is
the similar appearance of other structures, such as adipose tissue or tears formed during the tissue preparation process, which
only lack the outside layer of well-arranged epithelial nuclei.
A color gradient-based geodesic active contour model for
segmentation of the tubular lumen areas was proposed in [78].
The segmentation is initialized by weighted mean shift clustering and normalized cuts, and performs more favorably than the
Chan-Vese region-based active contour model. This study was
extended in [79] by incorporating domain knowledge to distinguish between tubules and other lumen-like areas. The authors
show that the segmentation result can be used to infer the degree of tubule formation as defined in the Bloom–Richardson
grading system. Although the literature for tubule segmentation
in breast cancer is not extensive, methods developed for segmentation of other related structures are also applicable to this
problem. A very closely related application is segmentation of
glands in prostate cancer histopathology images [70], [80]–[82].
The methods developed for this application might be used for
tubule segmentation in breast cancer with little adaptation. It
should also be mentioned that some of the features that can

be derived by performing segmentation of tubules, can also be
captured by computing features that describe the overall architecture of the tissue [83], [84].
D. Mitotic Figures Detection and Assessment of Proliferation
Of the three components that are part of histological grading
of breast cancer, the assessment of tumor proliferation is probably the most important and prognostically significant one [85].
The oldest and still most widely used form of assessment of
tumor proliferation is counting of mitotic figures in a predefined
tissue area (usually 2 mm2 ). The nuclei of the cells that are in
the M phase of the cell cycle have distinctive morphological
appearance in the H&E sections. Most commonly, mitotic figures manifest themselves as hyperchromatic objects without a
clear nuclear membrane, with “hairy” protrusions around the
edges and basophilia instead of eosinophilia in the surrounding
cytoplasm. However, these are more instructive than defining
features, and the bulk of the training of pathologists consists
of looking at specific examples of mitotic figures designated as
such by experts. The task of identifying mitotic figures is notoriously time-consuming and difficult, due to the fact that many
other objects such as apoptotic and necrotic nuclei may have
similar appearance, which renders it difficult even for trained
experts to make a distinction. Lymphocyte nuclei, compressed
nuclei, “junk” particles, and other artifacts from the tissue preparation process can also have a hyperchromatic appearance.
In addition to mitosis counting in H&E sections, there are
also IHC techniques that can be used for assessment of proliferation of breast cancer tumors. However, they are not routinely
used owing to increased cost and additional time delay. The
most widely used IHC technique is labeling of the Ki-67 antigen that is associated with cell proliferation and expressed in
all cell cycle phases except G0 [86]. Because Ki-67 labeling
is unspecific to the M phase, the assessment of the number of
mitotic figures is usually higher than by counting in H&E sections and it might not have the same significance. A proposed
alternative to Ki-67 is phosphohistone H3 (PPH3) that has the
advantage of targeting only nuclei in the M phase, and has been
shown to have prognostic significance [87]. An example region
labeled for PPH3 is shown in Fig. 4(a). In both of these staining

1406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

methods, the techniques for quantification of positively stained
nuclei discussed in Section III can be used.
The standard approach of assessing tumor proliferation in
pathology labs, however, still remains mitosis counting. Given
that this is the most tedious part of the Bloom–Richardson grading system, there is a large incentive to develop an automatic
mitosis detection algorithm that works with the routinely prepared H&E sections.
The earliest proposed approaches were unavoidably hampered by the limited image acquisition quality and computational power [88] and the need of specialized staining such as
Feulgen to better highlight the chromatin [89], [90]. Recently,
two publicly available datasets of H&E stained breast cancer
histopathology images with annotated mitotic figures were made
available [91], [92], which sparked further development of different mitosis detection approaches [93]–[102].
The majority of the proposed approaches work by first identifying candidate objects or locations that are then classified
as mitotic figures or other objects. By far, the most distinctive
feature of the mitotic figures is their hyperchromicity. In most
cases, the intensity of the staining of the mitotic figures is noticeably darker than normal epithelial nuclei and only comparable
to apoptotic, necrotic or compressed nuclei (artifact from the
tissue preparation) and lymphocyte nuclei. This is illustrated in
Fig. 4(b). The candidate extraction phase often may make use of
this distinctiveness by performing thresholding, local intensity
minima detection or pixel-wise classification followed by refining of the detected regions by morphological operations and/or
active contours segmentation. In the second stage, more specialized features designed to capture the specific morphology of
mitotic figures are used to train a classification model. However,
convolutional neural networks that operate on raw RGB image
patches appear to exhibit the best performance for this detection
task [93], [97], [98]. The approach that was proposed in [93]
is unique in the sense that it uses deep convolutional neural
networks and does not perform candidate detection as an initial
stage. Instead, it performs classification at every pixel location,
which achieves excellent results.
A limiting factor of automatic mitosis detection is that whole
slide images are typically scanned at a single focal plane. During mitosis counting, pathologists rely on “fine tuning” of the
focus—something that is missing in whole slide images at a
single focal plane. Digital slide scanners that perform image
acquisition at multiple focal planes are now becoming more
common; however, this feature is not widely used because of
the increased storage demands. We anticipate that in the future,
as storage costs go down and new image compression techniques
become available, this limitation will be removed.
VI. COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS AND PROGNOSIS
The objective of image analysis of digitized histopathology
slides is to facilitate, and preferably automate, computer-aided
diagnosis and prognosis (CAD and CAP) in pathology labs.
CAD is defined as the detection of cancer within the examined
tissue, whereas CAP addresses the more complex problem of
predicting the outcome for the patient based on the available

data. There are numerous challenges in achieving this objective,
including the large image sizes and the lack of representative
datasets with high quality annotations by multiple observers,
and with patient follow-up. On the other hand, the incentives for
developing CAD and CAP systems are overwhelming. Patients
that are suspected of having breast cancer undergo a biopsy that
is examined by a pathologist. Large numbers of cases are found
to be benign [103], often easily distinguishable from cancer,
which implies that a CAD system operating at high sensitivity
can significantly reduce the workload of the pathologist, even
if the specificity is moderate. This kind of system can also be
used for quality control and assurance, for example, to identify
positive cases that have been missed during the routine examination. Furthermore, the extraction of quantitative parameters
from tumor regions can go a long way toward reducing the interand intraobserver variability of breast cancer grading, which has
been well documented in the literature.
Some of the proposed breast cancer detection techniques operate by examining nuclear features, as cancer nuclei have a
distinct morphology—large size, coarse chromatin texture, and
irregular shape. In [56], ROIs from breast cancer histopathology slides are classified as benign or malignant based on two
features related to the nuclear size: the median nuclear area and
the number of large well-formed nuclei in the region. Nuclear
morphometric features are also used in [104] in combination
with texture and topology features for malignancy detection in
breast cancer histopathology. The extraction of nuclear morphometric features, in most cases, relies on a nuclei segmentation
procedure. The influence of the nuclei segmentation accuracy
on the subsequent feature extraction for classification into the
classes benign and malignant is examined in [105]. The conclusion of the authors was that perfect segmentation accuracy is
not needed as it does not necessarily guarantee optimal performance. In [84], cancer tissue is distinguished from noncancerous tissue based on Gabor texture features, without relying on
a nuclei segmentation algorithm.
In order to arrive at computer-aided prognosis of breast cancer patients, researchers have both developed image analysis
systems in the context of the currently employed grading systems, and aspired to discover novel imaging biomarkers from
histopathology images. In some cases, the output of the staining
quantification and object detection and segmentation techniques
discussed in the previous section can be directly used as part of
established clinical practice, provided their output is comparable to the performance of human experts. This, for example, is
the case with the quantification of positively stained nuclei and
the detection of mitotic figures. In most cases, however, these
techniques are used only as building blocks of more complex
systems. Some proposed methods aim at predicting the cancer
grade assigned by pathologists, most commonly according to the
Bloom and Richardson grading system, or one of its constituent
components such as the nuclear pleomorphism score [106].
Classifiers trained with features describing the tissue architecture in combination with nuclear features have been shown to
be successful in distinguishing between different breast cancer
grades [84], [107]. In [108], two features were identified that
can successfully discriminate between the three breast cancer

VETA et al.: BREAST CANCER HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGE ANALYSIS: A REVIEW

grades—the density of nuclei with irregular chromatin and the
density of tubules in the tissue.
It should be noted here that breast cancer grades can be seen as
estimates of patient outcome based on an expert opinion. In that
sense, CAP systems that aim at predicting the histological tumor
grade use this as an intermediate end-point for the prediction of
survival. The use of reliable intermediate end-points is crucial
in a situation where the actual patient survival is not known
or it is difficult to obtain. Besides the histological grade, other
intermediate end-points can be used, for example, the risk scores
from gene expression assays. Such work was presented in [109]
and [110], where tissue architecture features were used to predict
the Oncotype DX recurrence score with high accuracy, which
suggests that image analysis methods have the potential to be
used as a cheap alternative or supplement to gene expression
profiling.
When patient cohorts with known survival outcome are available, systems can be built that directly predict patient survival
based on the available data, both from imaging and from other
sources, thus avoiding the use of possibly unreliable intermediate end points. One such example can be found in [111],
where the mean nuclear area calculated by automatic nuclei
segmentation was shown to be prognostically relevant for male
breast cancer patients in addition to other histological and clinical features. The fractal dimension of the tissue, extracted from
invasive breast cancer TMAs stained with pan-cytokeratin (specific to epithelial components), which was previously associated with tumor grade [112], was also shown to have prognostic
value [113]. In [114], the authors proposed a system that successfully predicts patient outcome based on automatically extracted
quantitative features from histopathology images. In addition,
they identified three novel and previously unrecognized stromal
features that are significantly associated with patient survival.
An exciting and promising area of research is the integration
of imaging biomarkers from histopathology images with genomic data. Structural information about the tissue is lost when
preparing the molecular assays, hence imaging biomarkers may
be complementary to genomic data. In a recent study [115], the
authors used an image analysis approach to derive knowledge
about the tumor cellular composition (percentage of cancer, stromal and lymphocytic nuclei), which they used to correct copy
number data and more accurately estimate the HER2 amplification. In addition, they combined image features with genomic
information to train a predictor of survival of ER-negative breast
cancer patients. This predictor had a better performance in comparison with using image features or genomic information only.
In another study [116], the authors developed a workflow for
image analysis of histopathology images and integration of morphological features with genomic data for biomarker discovery.
Four of the morphological features were identified as biomarkers
that can separate patients into groups with different outcomes.
Many of the proposed methods for automatic breast cancer
detection, grading, and prognosis have been trained and evaluated only on relatively small regions from the image slides,
either digitized TMA slides or manually selected regions from
whole-slide images. Although these methods are useful in a
semiautomatic setting, it is necessary for a high throughput and

1407

automatic application to either produce an output for the entire
slide (or even, from a set of slides originating from one specimen), as in [107], where this is achieved by using a multifieldof-view framework, or to perform extraction of relevant ROIs
for the problem at hand and limit the analysis solely to those
regions [50], [54], [117].
VII. DISCUSSION
Over the past few years the interest in analysis of histopathology images has been steadily increasing, prompted by the introduction of WSI scanners into pathology labs and the imminent
acceptance of digital slides as a primary diagnostic modality.
The use of quantitative techniques is viewed as a solution
to the problem of observer variability of the interpretation of
histopathology slides, both by pathology professionals and image analysis experts. In the case of breast cancer, several applications for quantification of immunohistochemically stained
tissue have already gained approval from the United States Food
and Drug Administration (FDA). Methods that work with routinely prepared H&E stained slides have great potential to make
an impact on the pathology workflow. However, ensuring robustness is challenging owing to the complexity of the tissue
characteristics that need to be analyzed. Nevertheless, progress
has been made both in the development of basic image analysis tools for H&E stained sections (i.e., object detection and
segmentation methods) and in the development of systems that
predict patient outcome either directly or by use of intermediate endpoints such as the histological grade as assigned by
pathologists. Further improvements are needed in order to produce methods that have performance levels that are suitable for
clinical application.
At multiple points throughout the text we have mentioned that
the steps of tissue preparation, staining, and slide digitization
that precede image analysis can influence the results. The more
quantitative analysis of histopathology image data will become
part of routine pathology practice, the more optimization of
tissue preparation, staining, and slide digitization will be needed.
However, some variation in the appearance will still be present
even under closely monitored conditions, so analysis methods
will have to be developed in a way that is robust to such a
variation.
Perhaps the main obstacle in the development of new
histopathology image analysis methods lies in the lack of large
publicly available annotated datasets. While the advent of WSI
scanners has produced vast quantities of image data, it is difficult to obtain ground truth annotations in a form that can readily
be used for development and testing of image analysis methods,
even when this data is tied to the pathology reports. For example,
the tumor grade or the mitotic activity index that can be found in
pathology reports are often based on the analysis of a particular
region from a single slide viewed under a microscope, while
the slide itself has been selected from a set of slides originating
from the same sample. Information about the selected slide and
the region within that slide where analysis was performed is
not recorded and thus correspondence between the routine annotation and the image data is difficult to establish. In addition,

1408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

owing to the large observer variability, annotation by multiple observers is needed to produce high quality ground truths,
which is both time-consuming and expensive, particularly for
large datasets. Making annotated image datasets publicly available will provide a breeding ground for the development of new
image analysis algorithms and will enhance the objectivity of
method comparison and improve the quality of computer-aided
diagnosis and prognosis.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Stathonikos, M. Veta, A. Huisman, and P. J. van Diest, “Going fully
digital: Perspective of a Dutch academic pathology lab,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 4, Jun. 2013.
[2] J. D. Hipp, A. Fernandez, C. C. Compton, and U. J. Balis, “Why a pathology image should not be considered as a radiology image,” J. Pathol.
Inform., vol. 2, Jun. 2011.
[3] F. Bray, P. McCarron, and D. M. Parkin, “The changing global patterns
of female breast cancer incidence and mortality,” Breast Cancer Res.,
vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 229–239, 2004.
[4] J. S. Meyer, C. Alvarez, C. Milikowski, N. Olson, I. Russo, J. Russo,
A. Glass, B. A. Zehnbauer, K. Lister, and R. Parwaresch, “Breast carcinoma malignancy grading by bloom–richardson system vs proliferation
index: Reproducibility of grade and advantages of proliferation index,”
Mod. Pathol., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1067–1078, May 2005.
[5] E. A. Perez, V. J. Suman, N. E. Davidson, S. Martino, P. A. Kaufman,
W. L. Lingle, P. J. Flynn, J. N. Ingle, D. Visscher, and R. B. Jenkins,
“HER2 testing by local, central, and reference laboratories in specimens
from the north central cancer treatment group N9831 intergroup adjuvant
trial,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 24, no. 19, pp. 3032–3038, Jul. 2006.
[6] C. W. Elston and I. O. Ellis, “Pathological prognostic factors in breast
cancer. i. the value of histological grade in breast cancer: Experience
from a large study with long-term follow-up,” Histopathology, vol. 19,
no. 5, pp. 403–410, Nov. 1991.
[7] E. A. Rakha, J. S. Reis-Filho, F. Baehner, D. J. Dabbs, T. Decker,
V. Eusebi, S. B. Fox, S. Ichihara, J. Jacquemier, S. R. Lakhani,
J. Palacios, A. L. Richardson, S. J. Schnitt, F. C. Schmitt, P.-H. Tan,
G. M. Tse, S. Badve, and I. O. Ellis, “Breast cancer prognostic classification in the molecular era: The role of histological grade,” Breast
Cancer Res., vol. 12, no. 4, p. 207, 2010.
[8] A. C. Wolff, M. E. H. Hammond, J. N. Schwartz, K. L. Hagerty,
D. C. Allred, R. J. Cote, M. Dowsett, P. L. Fitzgibbons, W. M. Hanna,
A. Langer, L. M. McShane, S. Paik, M. D. Pegram, E. A. Perez,
M. F. Press, A. Rhodes, C. Sturgeon, S. E. Taube, R. Tubbs, G. H. Vance,
M. van de Vijver, T. M. Wheeler, D. F. Hayes, and American Society of
Clinical Oncology/College of American Pathologists, “American society
of clinical oncology/college of american pathologists guideline recommendations for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 testing in
breast cancer,” Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med., vol. 131, no. 1, pp. 18–43, 2007.
[9] M. E. H. Hammond, D. F. Hayes, A. C. Wolff, P. B. Mangu, and
S. Temin, “American society of clinical oncology/college of american
pathologists guideline recommendations for immunohistochemical testing of estrogen and progesterone receptors in breast cancer,” J. Oncol.
Pract., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 195–197, Jul. 2010.
[10] G. A. Meijer, J. A. Beliën, P. J. van Diest, and J. P. Baak, “Origins of . . .
image analysis in clinical pathology.,” J. Clin. Pathol., vol. 50, no. 5,
pp. 365–370, May 1997.
[11] M. N. Gurcan, L. E. Boucheron, A. Can, A. Madabhushi, N. M. Rajpoot,
and B. Yener, “Histopathological image analysis: A review,” IEEE Rev.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 2, pp. 147–171, 2009.
[12] T. J. Fuchs and J. M. Buhmann, “Computational pathology: Challenges
and promises for tissue analysis,” Comp. Med. Imag. Grap., vol. 35,
no. 7–8, pp. 515–530, Oct. 2011.
[13] S. Di Cataldo, E. Ficarra, and E. Macii, “Computer-aided techniques for
chromogenic immunohistochemistry: Status and directions,” Comput.
Biol. Med., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 1012–1025, Oct. 2012.
[14] S. Al-Janabi, A. Huisman, and P. J. Van Diest, “Digital pathology: Current status and future perspectives,” Histopathology, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 1–
9, 2011.
[15] F. Ghaznavi, A. Evans, A. Madabhushi, and M. Feldman, “Digital imaging in pathology: Whole-slide imaging and beyond,” Annu. Rev. Pathol.,
vol. 8, pp. 331–359, Jan. 2013.

[16] P. L. Fitzgibbons, D. L. Page, D. Weaver, A. D. Thor, D. C. Allred,
G. M. Clark, S. G. Ruby, F. O’Malley, J. F. Simpson, J. L. Connolly,
D. F. Hayes, S. B. Edge, A. Lichter, and S. J. Schnitt, “Prognostic factors in breast cancer. College of American pathologists consensus statement 1999,” Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med., vol. 124, no. 7, pp. 966–978, Jul.
2000.
[17] R. A. Walker, “Quantification of immunohistochemistry—Issues concerning methods, utility and semiquantitative assessment I,” Histopathology, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 406–410, 2006.
[18] C. R.
Taylor
and
R. M.
Levenson,
“Quantification
of
immunohistochemistry—Issues concerning methods, utility and
semiquantitative assessment II,” Histopathology, vol. 49, no. 4,
pp. 411–424, 2006.
[19] J. Kononen, L. Bubendorf, A. Kallioniemi, M. Bärlund, P. Schraml,
S. Leighton, J. Torhorst, M. J. Mihatsch, G. Sauter, and O. P. Kallioniemi,
“Tissue microarrays for high-throughput molecular profiling of tumor
specimens,” Nat. Med., vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 844–847, Jul. 1998.
[20] M. Skacel, B. Skilton, J. D. Pettay, and R. R. Tubbs, “Tissue microarrays:
A powerful tool for high-throughput analysis of clinical specimens: A
review of the method with validation data,” Appl. Immunohisto. M. M.,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Mar. 2002.
[21] A. C. Ruifrok and D. A. Johnston, “Quantification of histochemical staining by color deconvolution,” Anal. Quant. Cytol. Histol., vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 291–299, Aug. 2001.
[22] M. Gavrilovic, J. C. Azar, J. Lindblad, C. Wahlby, E. Bengtsson,
C. Busch, and I. B. Carlbom, “Blind color decomposition of histological
images,” IEEE T. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 983–994, 2013.
[23] J. Monaco, J. Hipp, D. Lucas, S. Smith, U. Balis, and A. Madabhushi,
“Image segmentation with implicit color standardization using spatially
constrained expectation maximization: Detection of nuclei,” in In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, N. Ayache,
H. Delingette, P. Golland, and K. Mori, Eds. Berlin Germany: Springer,
2012, pp. 365–372.
[24] M. Macenko, M. Niethammer, J. S. Marron, D. Borland, J. T. Woosley,
X. Guan, C. Schmitt, and N. E. Thomas, “A method for normalizing histology slides for quantitative analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed.
Imag., 2009, pp. 1107–1110.
[25] C. C. Bilgin, J. Rittscher, R. Filkins, and A. Can, “Digitally adjusting
chromogenic dye proportions in brightfield microscopy images,” J. Microsc., vol. 245, no. 3, pp. 319–330, 2012.
[26] A. Basavanhally and A. Madabhushi, “EM-based segmentation-driven
color standardization of digitized histopathology,” in Proc. SPIE Med.
Imag., 2013, pp. 86760G–86760G.
[27] E. Rexhepaj, D. J. Brennan, P. Holloway, E. W. Kay, A. H. McCann,
G. Landberg, M. J. Duffy, K. Jirstrom, and W. M. Gallagher, “Novel
image analysis approach for quantifying expression of nuclear proteins
assessed by immunohistochemistry: Application to measurement of oestrogen and progesterone receptor levels in breast cancer,” Breast Cancer
Res., vol. 10, no. 5, p. R89, 2008.
[28] V. J. Tuominen, S. Ruotoistenmäki, A. Viitanen, M. Jumppanen, and
J. Isola, “Immunoratio: A publicly available web application for quantitative image analysis of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor
(PR), and Ki-67,” Breast Cancer Res., vol. 12, no. 4, p. R56, 2010.
[29] T. Amaral, S. J. Mckenna, K. Robertson, and A. Thompson, “Classification and immunohistochemical scoring of breast tissue microarray
spots,” IEEE T. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2806–2814, Oct.
2013.
[30] C. B. Moelans, R. A. de Weger, M. T. M. van Blokland, C. Ezendam,
S. Elshof, M. G. J. Tilanus, and P. J. van Diest, “HER-2/neu amplification testing in breast cancer by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification in comparison with immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization,” Cell. Oncol., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2009.
[31] H. Masmoudi, S. M. Hewitt, N. Petrick, K. J. Myers, and
M. A. Gavrielides, “Automated quantitative assessment of HER-2/neu
immunohistochemical expression in breast cancer,” IEEE T. Med. Imag.,
vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 916–925, Jun. 2009.
[32] E. Ficarra, S. Di Cataldo, A. Acquaviva, and E. Macii, “Automated
segmentation of cells with IHC membrane staining,” IEEE T. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1421–1429, May 2011.
[33] B. H. Hall, M. Ianosi-Irimie, P. Javidian, W. Chen, S. Ganesan, and
D. J. Foran, “Computer-assisted assessment of the human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 immunohistochemical assay in imaged histologic sections using a membrane isolation algorithm and quantitative
analysis of positive controls,” BMC Med. Imag., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 11, Jun.
2008.

VETA et al.: BREAST CANCER HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGE ANALYSIS: A REVIEW

[34] M. Rojo, G. Bueno, and J. Slodkowska, “Review of imaging solutions
for integrated quantitative immunohistochemistry in the pathology daily
practice,” Folia Histochem. Cyto., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 349–354, Jan. 2009.
[35] V. J. Tuominen, T. T. Tolonen, and J. Isola, “ImmunoMembrane: A publicly available web application for digital image analysis of HER2 immunohistochemistry,” Histopathology, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 758–767, Apr.
2012.
[36] K. L. Bolton, M. Garcia-Closas, R. M. Pfeiffer, M. A. Duggan,
W. J. Howat, S. M. Hewitt, X. R. Yang, R. Cornelison, S. L. Anzick,
P. Meltzer, S. Davis, P. Lenz, J. D. Figueroa, P. D. P. Pharoah, and
M. E. Sherman, “Assessment of automated image analysis of breast
cancer tissue microarrays for epidemiologic studies,” Cancer Epidem.
Biomar., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 992–999, Apr. 2010.
[37] M. C. Lloyd, P. Allam-Nandyala, C. N. Purohit, N. Burke, D. Coppola,
and M. M. Bui, “Using image analysis as a tool for assessment of prognostic and predictive biomarkers for breast cancer: How reliable is it?,”
J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 1, Dec. 2010.
[38] D. M. Minot, J. Voss, S. Rademacher, T. Lwin, J. Orsulak, B. Caron,
R. Ketterling, A. Nassar, B. Chen, and A. Clayton, “Image analysis of
HER2 immunohistochemical staining reproducibility and concordance
with fluorescence in situ hybridization of a laboratory-validated scoring
technique,” Amer. J. Clin. Pathol., vol. 137, no. 2, pp. 270–276, Feb.
2012.
[39] M. A. Gavrielides, B. D. Gallas, P. Lenz, A. Badano, and S. M. Hewitt,
“Observer variability in the interpretation of HER2/neu immunohistochemical expression with unaided and computer-aided digital microscopy,” Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med., vol. 135, no. 2, pp. 233–242, Feb.
2011.
[40] A. Laurinaviciene, D. Dasevicius, V. Ostapenko, S. Jarmalaite,
J. Lazutka, and A. Laurinavicius, “Membrane connectivity estimated
by digital image analysis of HER2 immunohistochemistry is concordant
with visual scoring and fluorescence in situ hybridization results: Algorithm evaluation on breast cancer tissue microarrays,” Diagn. Pathol.,
vol. 6, no. 1, p. 87, Sep. 2011.
[41] A. Brügmann, M. Eld, G. Lelkaitis, S. Nielsen, M. Grunkin, J. D. Hansen,
N. T. Foged, and M. Vyberg, “Digital image analysis of membrane connectivity is a robust measure of HER2 immunostains,” Breast Cancer
Res. Treat., vol. 132, no. 1, pp. 41–49, Feb. 2012.
[42] G. Turashvili, S. Leung, D. Turbin, K. Montgomery, B. Gilks, R. West,
M. Carrier, D. Huntsman, and S. Aparicio, “Inter-observer reproducibility of HER2 immunohistochemical assessment and concordance with
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH): Pathologist assessment compared to quantitative image analysis,” BMC Cancer, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 165,
May 2009.
[43] A. Nassar, C. Cohen, S. S. Agersborg, W. Zhou, K. A. Lynch,
M. Albitar, E. A. Barker, B. L. Vanderbilt, J. Thompson, E. R. Heyman,
H. Lange, A. Olson, and M. T. Siddiqui, “Trainable immunohistochemical HER2/neu image analysis: A multisite performance study using
260 breast tissue specimens,” Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med., vol. 135, no. 7,
pp. 896–902, Jul. 2011.
[44] Z. M. A. Mohammed, J. J. Going, D. C. McMillan, C. Orange, E. Mallon,
J. C. Doughty, and J. Edwards, “Comparison of visual and automated
assessment of HER2 status and their impact on outcome in primary
operable invasive ductal breast cancer,” Histopathology, vol. 61, no. 4,
pp. 675–684, 2012.
[45] R. S. Alomari, R. Allen, B. Sabata, and V. Chaudhary, “Localization of
tissues in high-resolution digital anatomic pathology images,” in Proc.
SPIE Med. Imag., 2009, pp. 726016–726016.
[46] Y. Wang, K. Savage, C. Grills, A. McCavigan, J. A. James, D. A. Fennell,
and P. W. Hamilton, “A TMA de-arraying method for high throughput
biomarker discovery in tissue research,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 10,
p. e26007, Oct. 2011.
[47] B. Lahrmann, N. Halama, K. Westphal, C. Ernst, Z. Elsawaf, P. Sinn,
F. X. Bosch, H. Dickhaus, D. Jäger, P. Schirmacher, and N. Grabe, “Robust gridding of TMAs after whole-slide imaging using template matching,” Cytometry A, vol. 77, no. 12, pp. 1169–1176, Dec. 2010.
[48] D. J. Foran, L. Yang, W. Chen, J. Hu, L. A. Goodell, M. Reiss, F. Wang,
T. Kurc, T. Pan, A. Sharma, and J. H. Saltz, “ImageMiner: A software system for comparative analysis of tissue microarrays using content-based
image retrieval, high-performance computing, and grid technology,” J
Amer. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 403–415, Jul. 2011.
[49] B. Karaçali and A. Tözeren, “Automated detection of regions of interest
for tissue microarray experiments: An image texture analysis,” BMC
Med. Imag., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 2, Mar. 2007.

1409

[50] C. Bahlmann, A. Patel, J. Johnson, J. Ni, A. Chekkoury, P. Khurd,
A. Kamen, L. Grady, E. Krupinski, A. Graham, and R. Weinstein, “Automated detection of diagnostically relevant regions in H&E stained digital
pathology slides,” in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., 2012, pp. 831504–831504.
[51] N. Linder, J. Konsti, R. Turkki, E. Rahtu, M. Lundin, S. Nordling,
C. Haglund, T. Ahonen, M. Pietikäinen, and J. Lundin, “Identification of
tumor epithelium and stroma in tissue microarrays using texture analysis,” Diagn. Pathol., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 22, Mar. 2012.
[52] S. J. McKenna, T. Amaral, S. Akbar, L. Jordan, and A. Thompson, “Immunohistochemical analysis of breast tissue microarray images using
contextual classifiers,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 4, Mar. 2013.
[53] C.-W. Wang, D. Fennell, I. Paul, K. Savage, and P. Hamilton, “Robust automated tumour segmentation on histological and immunohistochemical
tissue images,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 2, p. e15818, Feb. 2011.
[54] M. Peikari, J. Zubovits, G. Clarke, and A. Martel, “A texture based approach to automated detection of diagnostically relevant regions in breast
digital pathology,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assisted Intervention — Workhop Breast Image Anal., 2013.
[55] A. M. Khan, H. El-Daly, E. Simmons, and N. M. Rajpoot, “HyMaP:
A hybrid magnitude-phase approach to unsupervised segmentation of
tumor areas in breast cancer histology images,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 4,
Mar. 2013.
[56] E. Cosatto, M. Miller, H. P. Graf, and J. S. Meyer, “Grading nuclear
pleomorphism on histological micrographs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern
Recog., 2008, pp. 1–4.
[57] X. Qi, F. Xing, D. J. Foran, and L. Yang, “Robust segmentation of overlapping cells in histopathology specimens using parallel seed detection
and repulsive level set,” IEEE T. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 754–
765, Mar. 2012.
[58] M. Veta, P. J. van Diest, R. Kornegoor, A. Huisman, M. A. Viergever, and
J. P. W. Pluim, “Automatic nuclei segmentation in H&E stained breast
cancer histopathology images,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 7, p. e70221, Jul.
2013.
[59] S. Wienert, D. Heim, K. Saeger, A. Stenzinger, M. Beil, P. Hufnagl,
M. Dietel, C. Denkert, and F. Klauschen, “Detection and segmentation of
cell nuclei in virtual microscopy images: A minimum-model approach,”
Sci. Rep., vol. 2, Jul. 2012.
[60] H. Fatakdawala, J. Xu, A. Basavanhally, G. Bhanot, S. Ganesan,
M. Feldman, J. E. Tomaszewski, and A. Madabhushi, “Expectationmaximization-driven geodesic active contour with overlap resolution
(EMaGACOR): Application to lymphocyte segmentation on breast cancer histopathology,” IEEE T. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1676–1689,
Jul. 2010.
[61] C. Jung, C. Kim, S. W. Chae, and S. Oh, “Unsupervised segmentation of
overlapped nuclei using bayesian classification,” IEEE T. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 2825–2832, Dec. 2010.
[62] J. P. Vink, M. B. Van Leeuwen, C. H. M. Van Deurzen, and G. De
Haan, “Efficient nucleus detector in histopathology images,” J. Microsc.,
vol. 249, no. 2, pp. 124–135, 2013.
[63] S. Ali and A. Madabhushi, “An integrated region-, boundary-, shapebased active contour for multiple object overlap resolution in histological
imagery,” IEEE T. Med. Imag., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1448–1460, Jul. 2012.
[64] C. Arteta, V. Lempitsky, J. A. Noble, and A. Zisserman, “Learning to detect cells using non-overlapping extremal regions,” in Proc. Med. Image
Comput. Comput-Assisted Intervention, 2012, pp. 348–356.
[65] A. Karsnas, A. L. Dahl, and R. Larsen, “Learning histopathological patterns,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 2, Jan. 2012.
[66] C. Avenel and M. S. Kulikova, “Marked point processes with simple and
complex shape objects for cell nuclei extraction from breast cancer H&E
images,” in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., 2013, pp. 86760Z–86760Z.
[67] M. Kulikova, A. Veillard, L. Roux, and D. Racoceanu, “Nuclei extraction
from histopathological images using a marked point process approach,”
in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., 2012, pp. 831428–831428.
[68] A. N. Basavanhally, S. Ganesan, S. Agner, J. P. Monaco, M. D. Feldman,
J. E. Tomaszewski, G. Bhanot, and A. Madabhushi, “Computerized
image-based detection and grading of lymphocytic infiltration in HER2+
breast cancer histopathology,” IEEE T. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 3,
pp. 642–653, 2010.
[69] G. Cong and B. Parvin, “Model-based segmentation of nuclei,” Pattern
Recog., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1383–1393, Aug. 2000.
[70] U. Adiga, R. Malladi, R. Fernandez-Gonzalez, and C. O. de Solorzano,
“High-throughput analysis of multispectral images of breast cancer tissue,” IEEE T. Image Process., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 2259–2268, Aug.
2006.

1410

[71] P. R. Gudla, K. Nandy, J. Collins, K. J. Meaburn, T. Misteli, and
S. J. Lockett, “A high-throughput system for segmenting nuclei using
multiscale techniques,” Cytometry A, vol. 73 A, no. 5, pp. 451–466, May
2008.
[72] G. Li, T. Liu, J. Nie, L. Guo, J. Chen, J. Zhu, W. Xia, A. Mara, S. Holley,
and S. T. C. Wong, “Segmentation of touching cell nuclei using gradient
flow tracking,” J. Microsc., vol. 231, no. 1, pp. 47–58, Jul. 2008.
[73] N. Malpica, C. O. de Solórzano, J. J. Vaquero, A. Santos, I. Vallcorba,
J. M. Garcı́a-Sagredo, and F. del Pozo, “Applying watershed algorithms
to the segmentation of clustered nuclei,” Cytometry, vol. 28, no. 4,
pp. 289–297, Aug. 1997.
[74] S. Naik, S. Doyle, S. Agner, A. Madabhushi, M. Feldman, and
J. Tomaszewski, “Automated gland and nuclei segmentation for grading of prostate and breast cancer histopathology,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Biomed. Imag., New York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 284–287.
[75] H. Kong, M. Gurcan, and K. Belkacem-Boussaid, “Partitioning
histopathological images: An integrated framework for supervised colortexture segmentation and cell splitting,” IEEE T. Med. Imag., vol. 30,
no. 9, pp. 1661–1677, Sep. 2011.
[76] C. Wahlby, I. M. Sintorn, F. Erlandsson, G. Borgefors, and E. Bengtsson,
“Combining intensity, edge and shape information for 2D and 3D segmentation of cell nuclei in tissue sections,” J. Microsc., vol. 215, pp. 67–
76, Jul. 2004.
[77] Y. Al-Kofahi, W. Lassoued, W. Lee, and B. Roysam, “Improved automatic detection and segmentation of cell nuclei in histopathology images,” IEEE T. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 841–852, Apr. 2010.
[78] J. Xu, A. Janowczyk, S. Chandran, and A. Madabhushi, “A weighted
mean shift, normalized cuts initialized color gradient based geodesic active contour model: Applications to histopathology image segmentation,”
in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., 2010, pp. 76230Y–76230Y.
[79] A. Basavanhally, E. Yu, J. Xu, S. Ganesan, M. Feldman, J. Tomaszewski,
and A. Madabhushi, “Incorporating domain knowledge for tubule detection in breast histopathology using o’callaghan neighborhoods,” in Proc.
SPIE Med. Imag., 2011, pp. 796310–796310.
[80] Y. Peng, Y. Jiang, L. Eisengart, M. A. Healy, F. H. Straus, and X. J. Yang,
“Segmentation of prostatic glands in histology images,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2011, pp. 2091–2094.
[81] J. Xu, J. P. Monaco, and A. Madabhushi, “Markov random field driven
region-based active contour model (MaRACel): Application to medical
image segmentation,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted
Intervention, 2010, pp. 197–204.
[82] K. Nguyen, A. Sarkar, and A. K. Jain, “Structure and context in prostatic
gland segmentation and classification,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput.
Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2012, pp. 115–123.
[83] P. J. van Diest, J. C. Fleege, and J. P. Baak, “Syntactic structure analysis in invasive breast cancer: Analysis of reproducibility, biologic background, and prognostic value,” Hum. Pathol., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 876–883,
Aug. 1992.
[84] S. Doyle, S. Agner, A. Madabhushi, M. Feldman, and J. Tomaszewski,
“Automated grading of breast cancer histopathology using spectral clustering with textural and architectural image features,” in Proc. 5th IEEE
Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2008, pp. 496–499.
[85] P. J. van Diest, E. van der Wall, and J. P. A. Baak, “Prognostic value
of proliferation in invasive breast cancer: A review,” J. Clin. Pathol.,
vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 675–681, Jul. 2004.
[86] M. Dowsett, T. O. Nielsen, R. A’Hern, J. Bartlett, R. C. Coombes,
J. Cuzick, M. Ellis, N. L. Henry, J. C. Hugh, T. Lively, L. McShane,
S. Paik, F. Penault-Llorca, L. Prudkin, M. Regan, J. Salter, C. Sotiriou,
I. E. Smith, G. Viale, J. A. Zujewski, and D. F. Hayes, “Assessment of
Ki67 in breast cancer: Recommendations from the international Ki67
in breast cancer working group,” J. Nat. Cancer I., vol. 103, no. 22,
pp. 1656–1664, Nov. 2011.
[87] I. Skaland, E. A. M. Janssen, E. Gudlaugsson, J. Klos, K. H. Kjellevold,
H. Søiland, and J. P. A. Baak, “Phosphohistone H3 expression has much
stronger prognostic value than classical prognosticators in invasive lymph
node-negative breast cancer patients less than 55 years of age,” Mod.
Pathol., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1307–1315, 2007.
[88] E. J. Kaman, A. W. M. Smeulders, P. W. Verbeek, I. T. Young, and
J. P. A. Baak, “Image processing for mitoses in sections of breast
cancer: A feasibility study,” Cytometry, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 244–249,
1984.
[89] T. K. ten Kate, J. A. M. Beliën, A. W. M. Smeulders, and J. P. A. Baak,
“Method for counting mitoses by image processing in Feulgen stained
breast cancer sections,” Cytometry, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 241–250,
1993.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

[90] J. A. Beliën, J. P. Baak, P. J. van Diest, and A. H. van Ginkel, “Counting
mitoses by image processing in feulgen stained breast cancer sections:
The influence of resolution,” Cytometry, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 135–140, Jun.
1997.
[91] R. Ludovic, R. Daniel, K. Maria, I. Humayun, K. Jacques, C. Frédérique,
G. Catherine, L. Gilles, L. Nicolas, and Ng. Metin, “Mitosis detection
in breast cancer histological images an ICPR 2012 contest,” J. Pathol.
Inform., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 8, 2013.
[92] “Assessment of mitosis detection algorithms 2013 (AMIDA13),” [Online]. Available: http://amida13.isi.uu.nl
[93] D. C. Ciresan, A. Giusti, L. M. Gambardella, and J. Schmidhuber, “Mitosis detection in breast cancer histology images with deep neural networks,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention,
2013, pp. 411–418.
[94] C.-H. Huang and H.-K. Lee, “Automated mitosis detection based on
eXclusive independent component analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern
Recog., 2012, pp. 1856–1859.
[95] H. Irshad, S. Jalali, L. Roux, D. Racoceanu, L. J. Hwee, G. L. Naour,
and F. Capron, “Automated mitosis detection using texture, SIFT features
and HMAX biologically inspired approach,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 4,
Mar. 2013.
[96] H. Irshad, “Automated mitosis detection in histopathology using morphological and multi-channel statistics features,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 4,
no. 1, p. 10, 2013.
[97] C. Malon and E. Cosatto, “Classification of mitotic figures with convolutional neural networks and seeded blob features,” J. Pathol. Inform.,
vol. 4, no. 1, p. 9, 2013.
[98] C. Malon, E. Brachtel, E. Cosatto, H. P. Graf, A. Kurata, M. Kuroda,
J. S. Meyer, A. Saito, S. Wu, and Y. Yagi, “Mitotic figure recognition:
Agreement among pathologists and computerized detector,” Anal. Cell.
Pathol., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 97–100, Jan. 2012.
[99] C. Sommer, L. Fiaschi, F. A. Hamprecht, and D. W. Gerlich, “Learningbased mitotic cell detection in histopathological images,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Pattern Recog., 2012, pp. 2306–2309.
[100] F. B. Tek, “Mitosis detection using generic features and an ensemble of cascade adaboosts,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 12,
2013.
[101] N. Rajpoot, H. ElDaly, and A. Khan, “A Gamma-Gaussian mixture
model for detection of mitotic cells in breast cancer histopathology images,” J. Pathol. Inform., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 11, 2013.
[102] M. Veta, P. J. van Diest, and J. P. W. Pluim, “Detecting mitotic figures in
breast cancer histopathology images,” in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., 2013,
vol. 8676, pp. 867607-1–867607-7.
[103] J. P. Bulte, L. Polman, M. Schlooz-Vries, A. Werner, R. Besselink,
K. Sessink, R. Mus, S. Lardenoije, M. Imhof-Tas, J. Bulten, A. C. H. van
Engen-van Grunsven, E. Schaafsma, L. J. A. Strobbe, P. Bult, and
J. H. W. De Wilt, “One-day core needle biopsy in a breast clinic: 4 years
experience,” Breast Cancer Res. Treat., vol. 137, no. 2, pp. 609–616,
Jan. 2013.
[104] A. Chekkoury, P. Khurd, J. Ni, C. Bahlmann, A. Kamen, A. Patel,
L. Grady, M. Singh, M. Groher, N. Navab, E. Krupinski, J. Johnson,
A. Graham, and R. Weinstein, “Automated malignancy detection in breast
histopathological images,” in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., 2012, vol. 8315,
pp. 831515-1–831515-13.
[105] L. E. Boucheron, B. S. Manjunath, and N. R. Harvey, “Use of imperfectly
segmented nuclei in the classification of histopathology images of breast
cancer,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2010,
pp. 666–669.
[106] J.-R. Dalle, W. K. Leow, D. Racoceanu, A. E. Tutac, and T. C. Putti,
“Automatic breast cancer grading of histopathological images,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, vol. 2008, pp. 3052–
3055.
[107] A. Basavanhally, S. Ganesan, M. Feldman, N. Shih, C. Mies,
J. Tomaszewski, and A. Madabhushi, “Multi-field-of-view framework for
distinguishing tumor grade in ER+ breast cancer from entire histopathology slides,”. (2013, Aug.). IEEE T. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 3052–
3055, 2013.
[108] S. Petushi, F. U. Garcia, M. M. Haber, C. Katsinis, and A. Tozeren,
“Large-scale computations on histology images reveal gradedifferentiating parameters for breast cancer,” BMC Med. Imag., vol. 6,
p. 14, Oct. 2006.
[109] A. Madabhushi, S. Agner, A. Basavanhally, S. Doyle, and G. Lee,
“Computer-aided prognosis: Predicting patient and disease outcome via
quantitative fusion of multi-scale, multi-modal data,” Comp. Med. Imag.
Grap., vol. 35, no. 7–8, pp. 506–514, Dec. 2011.

VETA et al.: BREAST CANCER HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGE ANALYSIS: A REVIEW

[110] A. Basavanhally, M. Feldman, N. Shih, C. Mies, J. Tomaszewski,
S. Ganesan, and A. Madabhushi, “Multi-field-of-view strategy for imagebased outcome prediction of multi-parametric estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer histopathology: Comparison to oncotype dx,” J. Pathol.
Inform., vol. 2, Jan. 2012.
[111] M. Veta, R. Kornegoor, A. Huisman, A. H. J. Verschuur-Maes,
M. A. Viergever, J. P. W. Pluim, and P. J. van Diest, “Prognostic value
of automatically extracted nuclear morphometric features in whole slide
images of male breast cancer,” Mod. Pathol., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1559–
1565, Dec. 2012.
[112] M. Tambasco and A. M. Magliocco, “Relationship between tumor grade
and computed architectural complexity in breast cancer specimens,”
Hum. Pathol., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 740–746, May 2008.
[113] M. Tambasco, M. Eliasziw, and A. M. Magliocco, “Morphologic complexity of epithelial architecture for predicting invasive breast cancer
survival,” J. Transl. Med., vol. 8, p. 140, Dec. 2010.
[114] A. H. Beck, A. R. Sangoi, S. Leung, R. J. Marinelli, T. O. Nielsen,
M. J. van de Vijver, R. B. West, M. van de Rijn, and D. Koller, “Systematic analysis of breast cancer morphology uncovers stromal features
associated with survival,” Sci. Trans. Med., vol. 3, no. 108, pp. 108ra113–
108ra113, Nov. 2011.

1411

[115] Y. Yuan, H. Failmezger, O. M. Rueda, H. R. Ali, S. Gräf, S.-F. Chin,
R. F. Schwarz, C. Curtis, M. J. Dunning, H. Bardwell, N. Johnson,
S. Doyle, G. Turashvili, E. Provenzano, S. Aparicio, C. Caldas, and
F. Markowetz, “Quantitative image analysis of cellular heterogeneity in
breast tumors complements genomic profiling,” Sci. Trans. Med., vol. 4,
no. 157, p. 157ra143, Oct. 2012.
[116] C. Wang, T. Pécot, D. L. Zynger, R. Machiraju, C. L. Shapiro, and
K. Huang, “Identifying survival associated morphological features of
triple negative breast cancer using multiple datasets,” J. Amer. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 680–687, Aug. 2013.
[117] C.-H. Huang, A. Veillard, L. Roux, N. Loménie, and D. Racoceanu,
“Time-efficient sparse analysis of histopathological whole slide images,”
Comp. Med. Imag. Grap., vol. 35, no. 7–8, pp. 579–591, Dec. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

