IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1865

Electrodermal Activity in Bipolar Patients during
Affective Elicitation
Alberto Greco, Student Member, IEEE, Gaetano Valenza, Member, IEEE, Antonio Lanata, Member, IEEE,
Giuseppina Rota, and Enzo Pasquale Scilingo, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Bipolar patients are characterized by a pathological
unpredictable behavior, resulting in fluctuations between states
of depression and episodes of mania or hypomania. In the current clinical practice, the psychiatric diagnosis is made through
clinician-administered rating scales and questionnaires, disregarding the potential contribution provided by physiological signs. The
aim of this paper is to investigate how changes in the autonomic nervous system activity can be correlated with clinical mood swings.
More specifically, a group of ten bipolar patients underwent an
emotional elicitation protocol to investigate the autonomic nervous system dynamics, through the electrodermal activity (EDA),
among different mood states. In addition, a control group of ten
healthy subjects were recruited and underwent the same protocol.
Physiological signals were analyzed by applying the deconvolutive
method to reconstruct EDA tonic and phasic components, from
which several significant features were extracted to quantify the
sympathetic activation. Experimental results performed on both
the healthy subjects and the bipolar patients supported the hypothesis of a relationship between autonomic dysfunctions and
pathological mood states.
Index Terms—Bipolar disorder, deconvolutive analysis, electrodermal activity (EDA), mood recognition.

I. INTRODUCTION
IPOLAR disorder is a chronic illness involving millions
of people in Europe and in the United States (see the epidemiological study in [1]). Patients experience mood swings
whose symptoms can be associated to one of the following
psychophysiological states: depressive, maniac, mixed, and euthymic. During depressive episodes, patients feel sad and, sometimes, desperate. Other neurovegetative symptoms including
loss of appetite and sleep are also present. Depressed patients
might also experience thoughts of ruin, guilt, or death including
suicidal thoughts that might lead to suicide attempts. During
manic episodes, patients are hyperactive, and often experience

B

Manuscript received July 26, 2013; revised November 5, 2013; accepted January 10, 2014. Date of publication February 4, 2014; date of current version
November 3, 2014. This work was partially supported by the EU Commission
under Contract ICT-247777 Psyche and Project No. 601165 WEARHAP.
A. Greco, G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo are with the Department of Information Engineering and Research Center “E. Piaggio”, Faculty of
Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa 16-56122, Italy (e-mail: alberto.
greco@centropiaggio.unipi.it; g.valenza@ieee.org; a.lanata@centropiaggio.
unipi.it; e.scilingo@centropiaggio.unipi.it).
G. Rota is with the Department of Surgical, Medical, Molecular, and Critical
Area Pathology, Section of Psychology, University of Pisa, Pisa 67-56100, Italy
(e-mail: g.rota@med.unipi.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2300940

a reduction of the need to sleep. Mixed states are characterized
by both depressive and hyperactivity symptoms. In the intervals
between these episodes, patients typically experience periods of
relatively good emotional balance (labeled as euthymia). Moreover, mood swings are also usually accompanied by anxiety,
which is associated with bipolar disorder either as a symptom
of the bipolar disorder itself or as a separate pathological condition [2].
In spite of the great impact on the population and healthcare
costs, current clinical practice still relies only on the physician
expertise, rating scales and questionnaires, such as the Bauer
Internal Mood Scale, the Hamilton Scale for Depression, and
the Young Mania scale [3]. Physiological parameters (e.g., biological markers, physiological signals, etc.) are not taken into
account for diagnosis or follow-up purposes [4]–[6]. As a matter
of fact, there is the need of more objective parameters for the
diagnosis of mental disorders. Mental disorders are long-term
illnesses and may remain undetected for years before they are
properly diagnosed and put under treatment. Moreover, patients
are extremely heterogeneous with respect to the phenomenology
and severity of symptoms, number, and duration of episodes, as
well as the time interval between them. Finally, other disorders
may also be present (i.e., comorbidity).
Previous research has shown a link between the autonomic nervous system (ANS) dysfunctions and bipolar disorder [7]–[12]. Specifically, studies on sleep [13], voice analysis [14], and circadian heart rate rhythms [15], [16] showed to be
sensitive to changes in the clinical state, suggesting that these parameters may be considered as markers of clinical change. Moreover, it is known that electrodermal hypoactivity is present during depression in both unipolar and bipolar patients [17], [18].
This condition is stable over time, and does not appear to depend
on experimental conditions or stimulus characteristics [19]. In a
recent study, we demonstrated that a single variable approach is
not a reliable method for characterizing mood swings in bipolar
patients while using heart rate variability and respiration activity
series [10], [12]. Nevertheless, a complete and comprehensive
ANS characterization should also rely on other physiological
signals that are strictly related to the sympathetic nerve activity
such as the electrodermal activity (EDA). In the present study,
we investigated EDA dynamics in bipolar patients during an
emotional stimulation paradigm. Since the changes on EDA are
directly related to the sympathetic activity [20], EDA analysis could serve as an effective ANS marker for characterizing
different mood states.
The stimulation protocol proposed in this paper is based
on displaying pictures selected from the international affective

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1866

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

picture system (IAPS) [21]) and pictures from the thematic apperception test (TAT) [22]. They were presented to the patients in
order to elicit emotional reactions. The IAPS database is widely
used for studies that assess emotional processing (e.g., see previous studies in [23]–[27]), and it is comprised of hundreds of
pictures which associated a specific emotional rating in terms of
arousal and valence. Arousal refers to the physiological activation that is elicited by an emotionally salient image resulting in a
subjective state of calmness or excitement. Valence refers to the
experience of pleasantness or unpleasantness induced by viewing the image. The TAT is a projective psychological test that
is supposed to reveal repressed aspects of personality. Such an
experimental protocol was administered to ten bipolar patients
as well as ten healthy subjects. Concerning the methodology
of signal processing, we used a deconvolutive approach [28] in
order to retain consecutive sympathetic responses which can be
overlapped whenever the interstimulus interval is shorter than
the previous one.
Similarly to our previous investigation [10], [12], the present
study was carried out in the frame of the European project
PSYCHE, which stands for personalized monitoring systems
for care in mental health. Within this project, a personalized,
pervasive, cost-effective, and multiparametric monitoring system based on textile platforms and portable sensing devices
was devised for the long-term and short-term analysis of mood
disorders [10], [12], [14], [29].
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Patient Recruitment and Experimental Protocol
Ten patients affected by bipolar disorder I or II were selected
for this study. None of them had suicidal tendencies, delusions,
or hallucinations. Patients were admitted to the psychiatric unit
of the hospital and periodically screened through a psychiatric
interview. Before each acquisition, a mood label among “euthymic”, “depressed”, “maniac”, and “mixed-state” was associated to each patient/acquisition. As a control group, a group of
healthy subjects were enrolled and participate to the study. In
particular, ten healthy subjects (five females, age ranged from
20 to 32), i.e., not suffering from both cardiovascular and evident mental pathologies, were asked to fill out the Patient Health
QuestionnaireTM . All participants showed scores lower than 5.
Such a cut-off value was chosen in order to avoid the presence
of either middle or severe personality disorders [30].
An ad hoc affective elicitation experimental was administered
to both the healthy and bipolar patients group. In particular,
such an experimental protocol, graphically shown in Fig. 1, was
structured as follows:
1) 5 min at rest with closed eyes;
2) 5 min at rest with open eyes;
3) 6-min slideshow of IAPS pictures with high arousal and
negative valence;
4) up to 4 min of pictures gathered from TAT.
As described previously, the protocol is split into two sessions: rest and emotional elicitation. The latter session is divided, in turn, into two stages, both of which are intended to
elicit a variation of the ANS response. Specifically, IAPS pic-

Fig. 1.

Block scheme of the experimental protocol.
TABLE I
CLINICAL EVALUATIONS OF THE PATIENTS

tures lasted for 2 s presenting negative emotional contents (high
arousal and negative valence). The same IAPS pictures were
presented to all patients and healthy subjects and nobody was
asked to score the elicited level of arousal and valence. The
images were chosen according to the following characteristics:
arousal score >6.7; valence <4.5. Afterwards, patients were
invited to tell a story based on the input coming from the TAT
pictures. However, in order to avoid biased results related to the
IAPS and TAT sequential order, the IAPS–TAT and TAT–IAPS
session orders were randomly interchanged. The hypothesis of
this study is that the ANS differentially reacts to such emotional stimuli upon different pathological mood states. During
the whole duration of the protocol, the EDA signal was acquired
using the BIOPAC MP150 system with a sampling frequency
of 1000 Hz. EDA sensors were placed on the distal phalanx of
the second and third finger of the nondominant hand, imposing
a dc voltage of 0.5 V. The protocol was run for a follow-up
period of up to 75 days. Patients repeated the protocol at each
mood change, whereas the healthy subjects repeated the experiment twice within two weeks in order to investigate possible
differences in the EDA pattern between repeated acquisitions
during no pathological mood states and swing. Of note, seven
patients (i.e., Pz01, Pz02, Pz04, Pz07, Pz08, Pz09, and Pz10)
were acquired twice, whereas Pz03, Pz05, and Pz06 carried out
a single acquisition. Details are shown in Table I.
B. Methodology of Signal Processing
The EDA decomposition process consisted in three different
steps: a preprocessing phase, in which the signal was filtered to
reduce the noise, a deconvolution process in order to obtain the
phasic and tonic driver, and an optimization stage to improve the
estimation of the parameters of the impulse response function.

GRECO et al.: ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS DURING AFFECTIVE ELICITATION

1867

Fig. 2. Electrodermal acquisition and decomposition process. The EDA is filtered to reduce the noise and then decomposed in tonic and phasic components by
means of a deconvolution with an IRF called the Bateman function.

The decomposition process was performed by means of Ledalab
3.2.2. software package for MATLAB [30].
1) Preprocessing: In the preprocessing stage, the detection
of movement artifacts was carried out by visual inspection.
Artifact-free signals exclusively were taken into account for
further analysis. In order to limit the frequency bandwidth of
the EDA signal, it was filtered with a low-pass zero-phase forward and reverse digital filter [31], [32] with a cutoff frequency
of 2 Hz, having Buttworth approximation.
2) EDA Deconvolution Analysis: EDA is produced by
changes in the skin conductivity as major effect of the sweat
glands activity. Specifically, sweat is released to the sweat duct,
passes to the stratum corneum, and finally is brought out of the
skin. Accordingly, the dynamics of the variation of concentration of sweat in the stratum corneum can be represented by a
two-compartment pharmacokinetic model in which the sweat
concentration is assumed to change only by diffusion [33], [34].
The first compartment represents the sweat duct and the second
compartment the stratum corneum. Due to the two compartments being different in dimension (i.e., the stratum corneum is
much larger than the sweat duct), the diffusion can be considered as a one-way diffusion. Solving the two coupled first-order
differential equations of each compartment, the solution is the
impulse response function IRF(t) which is also known as the
Bateman function [35]:
IRF(t) = (e− τ 1 − e− τ 2 ) · u(t).
t

t

(1)

The Bateman function is characterized by a steep onset and a
slow recovery. The steepness of onset and recovery is determined by the time constants τ1 and τ2 .
EDA can be divided into tonic (SCL: Skin Conductance
Level) and phasic components (SCR: Skin Conductance Response). The tonic electrodermal component represents the
baseline level of the signal, whereas the phasic component indicates a direct response to a specific stimulus. However, there
are often phasic parts of EDA which cannot be related to any
specific stimulus, and hence, they are called spontaneous or nonspecific SCRs [20]. Sometimes, when the time interval between
two consecutive stimuli is shorter than the recovery period of
SCR, the stimuli responses in the SCR are overlapped. In this
case, the typical shape of the SCR is lost and this could be one
of the main issues for the extraction of the correct information
from the electrodermal signal. In order to overcome this issue,
the EDA signal process is modeled as a convolution process
between the SudoMotor nerve activity (SMNA), as part of the
sympathetic nervous system, and IRF [28] under the hypothesis
that EDA is controlled by SMNA resulting in a sequence of distinct impulses which regulate the eccrine sweat glands dynamics
(see Fig. 2).

Fig. 3. Example of EDA signal and related components during euthymic state,
extracted through deconvolutive method of analysis. On the top panel, the black
signal representing the raw EDA signal along with the DRIVERto n ic (red) are
shown. On the lower panel, the DRIVERp h a sic is shown. Rest phases lasted for
the first 600 s. Afterwards, IAPS and TAT emotional stimulation is performed.

Formally, it is possible to write:
EDA = SMNA ⊗ IRF

(2)

where SMNA = (DRIVERtonic + DRIVERphasic ). In (2),
SMNA is unknown and it is evaluated by deconvolving the EDA
signal with the IRF. In order to decompose the obtained SMNA
signal into the DRIVERtonic and DRIVERphasic components,
several algorithmic steps have been processed. A smoothing
Gauss window of 200 ms is applied to SMNA, followed by a
peak detection algorithm in order to find the peaks over a threshold of 0.2 μS. All the points below the threshold were interpolated with a cubic spline fitting method giving the DRIVERtonic .
More details can be found in [28]. Finally, the DRIVERphasic
component, instead, is computed by subtracting the previously
estimated DRIVERtonic from the SMNA (see Fig. 3), under the
hypothesis that the tonic activity is observed in the absence of
any phasic activity [20].
Of note, the DRIVERphasic signal should have a zero baseline
intermitted by distinct peaks overcoming the issue of having
overlapped SCRs.
3) Optimization: Starting from fixed values, the parameter
set of the IRF (i.e., τ1 and τ2 ) was optimized according to criteria
evaluating the quality of the model, through the minimization of
a specific cost function given by the sum of the number of points
of the DRIVERphasic component that have a negative value and
the number of points above a predefined threshold (equal to
5% of the maximum of DRIVERphasic ). This procedure aims at

1868

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE II
LIST OF THE FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM THE EDA PHASIC AND TONIC
COMPONENTS

(a)

(b)

having a signal with a zero baseline peaks as distinguishable as
possible. More details can be again found in [28].
C. Feature Extraction
Features were extracted from the DRIVERtonic and
DRIVERphasic signals also studying the different effects of
the IAPS and TAT elicitation. Features extracted from the
DRIVERphasic signal were calculated into nonoverlapped time
windows of 5 s, according to the knowledge that SCRs arise
within 5 s after the stimulus onset [36], [37]. Nonoverlapped
time windows are justified by the fact that the deconvolution
algorithm misses overlapped responses lasting 4 s [28]. Therefore, despite the fact that IAPS stimuli were presented each 2 s, a
sort of refractory period at least equal to 4 s is assumed for computational reasons. Features extracted from the DRIVERtonic
component, instead, were calculated within nonoverlapped time
windows of 20 s, the upper cutoff frequency of the tonic component being about 0.05 Hz [38]. Afterwards, features belonging
either to IAPS or TAT elicitation were grouped accordingly. In
Table II, the features set is summarized along with the corresponding description. Each feature was normalized by subtracting its correspondent value at rest.
Statistical analysis: Both the IAPS-related features and the
TAT-related features extracted from several acquisitions were
compared by using statistical analysis. The statistical inference
analysis was performed by means of nonparametric tests due
to the nonGaussianity of the samples (p < 0.05 given by the
Kolmogor–Smirnov test with null hypothesis of Gaussian distributed samples). For each of the seven subjects (i.e., Pz01,
Pz02, Pz04, Pz07, Pz08, Pz09, and Pz10) who performed the
experiment twice, an intrasubject statistical analysis was performed. Each pair of acquisitions was compared by using a
Wilcoxon test for paired data [39]. Moreover, an inter-subject
analysis was performed in order to compare the acquisitions
associated to the same mood label. In this case, different mood
states (i.e., depression, mixed-state, and euthymia) were compared by means of a Kruskal–Wallis test to evaluate whether
they statistically belonged to the same population. In case of
rejection of the null hypothesis, the Mann–Whitney test for unpaired data [40] with a Bonferroni adjustment for every pair was
carried out.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, the experimental results performed on both
groups of healthy subjects and bipolar patients are shown in

Fig. 4. Pz01’s statistical analysis for IAPS elicitation. Results of Pz01’s area
under the curve (AUC) of (a) DRIVERp h a sic and (b) DRIVERto n ic features.

detail. Further statistical analyses pointing out differences between the IAPS and TAT sessions, for each EDA feature and
for each acquisition, as well as results on intra and intersubject
evaluations are given below.
Of note, the time constants τ1 and τ2 were independently
estimated for each patient and for each healthy subject. Here,
we report the following statistics calculated among all the 17
EDA series gathered from the ten bipolar patients: Median{on
τ1 = 0.81, on τ2 = 2.49}, Median Absolute Deviation{on τ1 =
0.16, on τ2 = 0.79}, Min{ on τ1 = 0.49, on τ2 = 1.54}, and
Max{ on τ1 = 1.24, on τ2 = 3.83}.
A. Study on Bipolar Patients
A summary of the clinical evaluations of the patients recruited
for this study, expressed as mood label, is shown in Table I.
For each acquisition, we first performed a statistical analysis
to test the null hypothesis of having no significant difference between the two affective elicitation sessions (i.e., IAPS and TAT
sessions). As the samples were comprised of several values for
each IAPS and TAT session (each feature value was computed
within a sliding window), and a perfect temporal match between
each sample cannot be ensured, the Mann–Whitney tests were
used to compute the p-values. For each acquisition, we found
significant differences (p < 0.03) for all of the considered EDA
features but the STD-Tonic.
1) IAPS Stimulation: Wilcoxon test for paired data was applied on patients with two acquisitions, i.e., Pz01, Pz02, Pz04,
Pz07, Pz08, Pz09, and Pz10. Statistical analysis results show
that all the phasic features resulted to be statistically different
for all subjects. Patients Pz02 and Pz04 showed a nonsignificant
tonic features set between the two acquisitions. More in detail,
patients Pz01, Pz07, Pz08, Pz09, and Pz10 exhibited significant
increase in the mean value, in the area under the curve and in the
maximum value of both DRIVERphasic and DRIVERtonic components during second acquisition (see an example in Fig. 4).
Pz02 showed no statistical difference in tonic features, but an

GRECO et al.: ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS DURING AFFECTIVE ELICITATION

1869

TABLE III
RESULTS FROM THE BIPOLAR PATIENTS DATASET EXPRESSED AS STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE FOR EACH EDA FEATURE

Samples are estimated during IAPS elicitation sessions of the two acquisition/mood states. p-values are from the Wilcoxon test.

TABLE IV
RESULTS FROM THE BIPOLAR PATIENTS DATASET EXPRESSED AS STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE FOR EACH EDA FEATURE

Samples are estimated during TAT elicitation sessions of the two acquisition/mood states. p-values are from the Wilcoxon test.

(a)

(a)

(b)
(b)

Fig. 6. IAPS stimulation: Intersubject statistical analysis. AUC of
(a) DRIVERp h a sic and (b) DRIVERto n ic features.
Fig. 5. Pz04’s statistical analysis for IAPS elicitation. Results of Pz04’s AUC
of (a) DRIVERp h a sic and (b) DRIVERto n ic features.

increasing significant trend of the phasic features was found.
As all of five patients clinically improved (i.e., change into
an euthymic state) their status, this results could be due to an
increased sympathetic activity during the emotional stimulation session [18]. On the contrary, Pz04 showed a significant
decrease for all phasic features in the second acquisition as
compared to the first one, whereas tonic features were not statistically different (see an example in Fig. 5). Yet, this result can
be interpreted as a reduction of sympathetic activity when moving from a mixed state, where hypomanic symptoms could be
present, to an euthymic condition [18]. The standard deviation
of both DRIVERtonic and DRIVERphasic components showed
a similar trend between the two acquisitions for all of the seven
patients having two observations. In particular, STD-Tonic and

STD-Phasic decreased in the second acquisition, i.e., euthymic
state.
Furthermore, an intersubject statistical analysis was performed including also the patients with one acquisition only.
Data were not considered as coming from a specific subject
but grouped following clinical classification. A Kruskal–Wallis
test was carried out among acquisitions classified as depressed,
mixed-state, and euthymic. The mean value and AUC of the
DRIVERphasic signal significantly discriminated the three mood
states (p < 10−6 ). In particular, these two features exhibited
the same trend, i.e., they increase from depression to euthymia
through mixed-state [see Fig. 6(a)]. The maximum value of
DRIVERphasic was able to distinguish the depressed mood states
from the group mixed-state plus euthymic state (p < 10−6 ). Instead, the mixed-state and the euthymic state did not show a
significative difference (p > 0.05).

1870

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

demonstrated that features extracted from both DRIVERtonic
and DRIVERphasic showed no significant differences among
mood states (p > 0.05).

(a)

B. Control Subjects
We performed statistical analyses based on the Wilcoxon test
for paired samples to investigate whether differences on the
EDA feature patterns of healthy subjects are statistically significant between multiple affective elicitation protocols over time.
Likewise, the analysis performed on the bipolar patient group,
the features reported in Table II were extracted from both the
DRIVERphasic and DRIVERtonic series. We report that the intersubject statistical analysis independently performed considering
the data from the IAPS and TAT sessions showed no statistically
significant differences between the two acquisitions on each of
the considered EDA features (p > 0.05).

(b)

Fig. 7. Pz01’s statistical analysis for TAT elicitation. Results of Pz01’s AUC
of (a) DRIVERp h a sic and (b) DRIVERto n ic features.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8. TAT stimulation: Intersubject statistical analysis. AUC of
(a) DRIVERp h a sic and (b) DRIVERto n ic features.

Concerning features extracted from DRIVERtonic [see
Fig. 6(b)], the Kruskal–Wallis test showed significant differences among the three different mood states (p < 10−6 ), despite the fact that the depression and mixed-state group and
the depression and euthymic group did not show a significant
difference (p > 0.8).
2) TAT Stimulation: Likewise, the analysis was performed
on signals gathered from the IAPS stimulation, statistical analyses were performed considering intra and intersubject evaluations. Concerning the intrasubject analysis, features extracted
from DRIVERphasic data of patients who underwent two acquisitions showed no significant difference between the two
acquisitions (see Fig. 7) except for the standard deviation of the
DRIVERphasic of Pz01 and Pz04. Instead, features extracted
from the DRIVERtonic data showed significant differences between the two acquisitions of Pz02, Pz08, Pz09, and Pz10.
Moreover, the intersubject statistical analysis was performed
by means of a Kruskal–Wallis test among acquisitions classified
as mixed-state, depressed, and euthymic, considering also the
patients with only one acquisition. The results [see Fig. 8(b)]

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, EDA analysis was performed in ten bipolar patients recruited in the frame of the European project
PSYCHE [10], [14], [29]. Each patient’s mood state was clinically evaluated as depressed, euthymic, or mixed. The patients
were asked to passively view a set of IAPS images and to describe TAT pictures. Novelties of this study are mainly related
to data, experimental protocol, and signal processing methodology. Comparative analyses on different emotional elicitations,
in fact, have never been considered in studying mental disorders
such as bipolar disorders, especially in patients experiencing
mixed-state symptoms. Moreover, the innovative application of
the EDA analysis through deconvolutive model allowed us to
effectively test the experimental hypothesis of having different sympathetic activations among different pathological mental
states. As a consequence, the proposed EDA feature set could
have a prognostic value on mental illness and can be evaluated
when the SMNA is estimated using a deconvolution model. A
deconvolution analysis was applied to the EDA signals in order to perform an effective separation of the EDA components
into tonic and phasic drivers. Several features were extracted in
order to quantify and characterize such components allowing
for intra and intersubject statistical analysis. On the basis of
the obtained results, we can formulate different conjectures. As
the IAPS stimulation provoked consistent changes in all of the
features of the phasic components, and with the phasic signals
being strongly stimulus-related, we can conclude that the IAPS
pictures elicited a much stronger emotional response than the
TAT stimuli. As a matter of fact, significant statistical differences were found in the whole EDA feature pattern between the
IAPS and TAT elicitation sessions. Moreover, the idea behind
this study is that when a patient is depressed, he/she reacts less
intensively to high arousing stimuli than while in mixed-state,
while sympathetic activity remarkably increases when the patient is in the euthymic state. This is confirmed by Fig. 6(a).
Accordingly, Table V shows how the phasic contribution increases or decreases during mood swings. The discordant trend
of Pz04 can be justified by the presence in the mixed-state of
maniac symptoms, even if the literature is quite poor on the

GRECO et al.: ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS DURING AFFECTIVE ELICITATION

1871

TABLE V
SPECIFICATION OF INCREASING OR DECREASING TRENDS OF EDA PHASIC COMPONENTS DURING CLINICAL MOOD SWINGS

Up-arrow and down-arrow intend an activity increase and decrease between the two acquisitions, respectively.

relationship between maniac states and EDA. Analysis of features extracted from the tonic signal (stimulus-unrelated component) during the IAPS stimulation revealed a significant difference in the acquisitions of all the patients except Pz02 and
Pz04. As a consequence, on the basis of the limits of the results,
no final conclusion can be drawn about a possible link of this
component and mood swings. TAT is meant to reveal underlying motives as well as the manner in which people interpret
social situations. In this task, only a few significant changes in
the tonic EDA were found over the different acquisitions. Features extracted from phasic drivers did not differ significantly
over mood swings. Statistical analyses were also intended as
intersubject evaluations and performed using the KruskalWallis nonparametric test. Accordingly, post-hoc analysis engaged
nonparametric Mann–Whitney tests considering the Bonferroni
adjustment of the statistical significance. Grouping the acquisition with the same label, the statistical analysis showed strong
differences among the three mood states under examination.
Specifically, for IAPS elicitation, phasic features well discriminated among depression, mixed state, and euthymia. An incremental trend of the signal was observed over these three states.
The depression condition is confirmed to lead to a severe decrease of the electrodermal response activity and, consequently,
of the ANS activity. During the mixed-state phase, the patients
exhibit a higher level in the phasic activity, i.e., a stronger response to the stimuli, which is, however, significantly lower than
that seen in the euthymic state, in which the subject feels like in
normal conditions.
Differently, the tonic features regarding IAPS stimuli showed
a strong separation between the euthymic and mixed-state,
which shows a strong tonic hypoactivity. The tonic component,
which is not directly connected to the stimuli but is related to the
state of the subject, showed an overlap between the depressive
and mixed-state and the depressive and euthymia. TAT stimuli
did not reveal any statistical differences among the three mood
states both for the tonic and phasic features. Therefore, TAT
was not able to elicit changes in the ANS activity of a bipolar
patient. This result can be due to the fact that pictures from TAT
were not as emotionally arousing as the IAPS pictures.
Finally, results performed on healthy subjects strongly support the hypothesis that the EDA signal processing provides a
viable decision support system for mental disorders. Healthy
subjects, in fact, showed no statistical difference on each of the
EDA feature pattern between multiple affective elicitation along
the time. Thus, it is reasonable that the coherent changes found
in the bipolar patients group can be considered as real biomarkers of pathological mood states. Tables VI summarize the results
gathered from all of the patients and healthy subjects. Values

TABLE VI
95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALS FOR THE EDA FEATURES IN HEALTHY SUBJECTS
AND BIPOLAR PATIENTS AMONG DIFFERENT MOOD STATES

Normalized IAPS and TAT values through baseline value subtraction.

of each elicitation session are normalized with respect to the
baseline ones and expressed as the intersubject 95% confidence
interval.
In conclusion, our results confirm the hypothesis of a link between changes in the EDA and mood states. Specifically, EDA
strongly changed in the different mood states in response to affective stimuli, showing a specific decrease in depressive phases.
On this basis, we conclude that EDA variations in phasic components may be suitable markers for discriminating mood states

1872

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

in bipolar patients. Future methodological works can be related
to the definition of novel features and, especially, a patientspecific threshold used for the identification of the EDA tonic
and phasic drivers. Moreover, experimental protocols involving
comfortable wearable EDA monitoring systems such as sensorized textile-based gloves [41], [42] can be taken into account
in order to study EDA dynamics also in a naturalistic environment, may be along with other ANS signs (e.g., eye-gaze and
pupil size variation [43]).
REFERENCES
[1] R. Kessler, K. McGonagle, S. Zhao, C. Nelson, M. Hughes, S. Eshleman,
H. Wittchen, and K. Kendler, “Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of dsmiii-r psychiatric disorders in the united states: Results from the national
comorbidity survey,” Arch. General Psychiatry, vol. 51, no. 1, p. 8,
1994.
[2] M. Kauer-Sant’Anna, F. Kapczinski, and E. Vieta, “Epidemiology and
management of anxiety in patients with bipolar disorder,” CNS Drugs,
vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 953–964, 2009.
[3] R. Young, J. Biggs, V. Ziegler, and D. Meyer, “A rating scale for mania:
Reliability, validity and sensitivity.,” Brit. J. Psychiatry, vol. 133, no. 5,
pp. 429–435, 1978.
[4] E. Vieta, M. Reinares, and A. Rosa, “Staging bipolar disorder,” Neurotoxicity Res., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 279–285, 2011.
[5] A. Andreazza, M. Kauer-Sant’Anna, B. Frey, D. Bond, F. Kapczinski,
L. Young, and L. Yatham, “Oxidative stress markers in bipolar disorder:
a meta-analysis,” J. Affect. Disorders, vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 135–144,
2008.
[6] M. Phillips and E. Vieta, “Identifying functional neuroimaging biomarkers
of bipolar disorder: Toward dsm-v,” Schizophrenia Bull., vol. 33, no. 4,
pp. 893–904, 2007.
[7] H. Cohen, Z. Kaplan, M. Kotler, I. Mittelman, Y. Osher, and Y. Bersudsky,
“Impaired heart rate variability in euthymic bipolar patients,” Bipolar
Disorders, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 138–143, 2003.
[8] B. L. Henry, A. Minassian, M. P. Paulus, M. A. Geyer, and W. Perry,
“Heart rate variability in bipolar mania and schizophrenia,” J. Psychiatr.
Res., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 168–176, 2010.
[9] B. Levy, “Autonomic nervous system arousal and cognitive functioning
in bipolar disorder,” Bipolar Disorders, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 70–79, 2013.
[10] G. Valenza, C. Gentili, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Mood recognition
in bipolar patients through the psyche platform: Preliminary evaluations
and perspectives,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 49–58, 2013.
[11] G. Valenza, M. Nardelli, A. Lanata, C. Gentili, G. Bertschy, R. Paradiso,
and E. Scilingo, “Wearable monitoring for mood recognition in bipolar
disorder based on history-dependent long-term heart rate variability analysis,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., in press
[12] G. Valenza and E. P. Scilingo, Eds., Autonomic nervous system dynamics
for mood and emotional-state recognition: Significant advances in data
acquisition, signal processing and classification. New York, NY, USA:
Springer, 2014.
[13] G. Iverson, M. Gaetz, E. Rzempoluck, P. McLean, W. Linden, and
R. Remick, “A new potential marker for abnormal cardiac physiology
in depression,” J. Behav. Med., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 507–511, 2005.
[14] N. Vanello, A. Guidi, C. Gentili, S. Werner, G. Bertschy, G. Valenza,
A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “Speech analysis for mood state characterization in bipolar patients,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2012, pp. 2104–2107.
[15] J. Taillard, P. Lemoine, P. Boule, M. Drogue, and J. Mouret, “Sleep and
heart rate circadian rhythm in depression: The necessity to separate,”
Chronobiol. Int., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 63–72, 1993.
[16] J. Taillard, P. Sanchez, P. Lemoine, and J. Mouret, “Heart rate orcadian
rhythm as a biological marker of desynchronization in major depression:
A methodological and preliminary report,” Chronobiol. Int., vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 305–316, 1990.
[17] W. G. Iacono and V. B. Tuason, “Bilateral electrodermal asymmetry in
euthymic patients with unipolar and bipolar affective disorders,” Biol.
Psychiatry, 1983.
[18] W. G. Iacono, D. T. Lykken, L. J. Peloquin, A. E. Lumry, R. H. Valentine,
and V. B. Tuason, “Electrodermal activity in euthymic unipolar and bipolar
affective disorders: A possible marker for depression,” Arch. General
Psychiatry, vol. 40, no. 5, p. 557, 1983.

[19] S. Sponheim, J. Allen, and W. Iacono, “Selected psychophysiological
measures in depression: The significance of electrodermal activity, electroencephalographic asymmetries, and contingent negative variation to
behavioral and neurobiological aspects of depression,” Behav. High Risk
Paradigm Psychopathol., pp. 222–249, 1995
[20] W. Boucsein, Ed., Electrodermal acitivity. New York, NY, USA:
Plenum, 1992.
[21] P. Lang, M. Bradley, and B. Cuthbert, “International affective picture
system (iaps): Digitized photographs, instruction manual, and affective
ratings,” Univ. Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, Tech. Rep. A-6., 2005
[22] H. Murray, Ed., Thematic apperception test. Cambridge, MA, USA:
Harvard Univ. Press, 1943.
[23] G. Valenza, P. Allegrini, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Dominant Lyapunov exponent and approximate entropy in heart rate variability during
emotional visual elicitation,” Front. Neuroeng., vol. 5, 2012.
[24] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “The role of nonlinear dynamics
in affective valence and arousal recognition,” IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput.,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 237–249, Apr.–Jun. 2012.
[25] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “Oscillations of heart rate and
respiration synchronize during affective visual stimulation,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 683–690, Jul. 2012.
[26] G. Valenza, A. Lanatá, and E. P. Scilingo, “Improving emotion recognition systems by embedding cardiorespiratory coupling,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 34, no. 4, p. 449, 2013.
[27] G. Valenza, L. Citi, A. Lanata, E. P. Scilingo, and R. Barbieri, “A nonlinear heartbeat dynamics model approach for personalized emotion recognition,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
pp. 2579–2582.
[28] M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “A continuous measure of phasic electrodermal activity,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 190, no. 1, pp. 80–91,
2010.
[29] A. Greco, A. Lanata, G. Valenza, G. Rota, N. Vanello, and E. Scilingo, “On
the deconvolution analysis of electrodermal activity in bipolar patients,”
in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 6691–
6694.
[30] K. Kroenke, R. L. Spitzer, and J. B. Williams, “The phq-9,” J. General
Internal Med., vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 606–613, 2001.
[31] F. Gustafsson, “Determining the initial states in forward-backward filtering,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 988–992, Apr.
1996.
[32] S. Mitra, Ed., Digital signal processing: A computer-based approach.
New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[33] R. Edelberg, “Electrodermal mechanisms: A critique of the two-effector
hypothesis and a proposed replacement,” in Progress in Electrodermal
Research. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1993, pp. 7–29.
[34] R. Schneider, “A mathematical model of human skin conductance,” Psychophysiology, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 610, 1987.
[35] E. Garrett, “The bateman function revisited: A critical reevaluation of the
quantitative expressions to characterize concentrations in the one compartment body model as a function of time with first-order invasion and
first-order elimination,” J. Pharmacokinet. Pharmacodyn., vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 103–128, 1994.
[36] M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “Decomposition of skin conductance data
by means of nonnegative deconvolution,” Psychophysiology, vol. 47, no. 4,
pp. 647–658, 2010.
[37] D. Levinson and R. Edelberg, “Scoring criteria for response latency and
habituation in electrodermal research: A critique,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 417–426, 1985.
[38] A. Ishchenko and P. Shev’ev, “Automated complex for multiparameter
analysis of the galvanic skin response signal,” Biomed. Eng., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 113–117, 1989.
[39] F. Wilcoxon, “Individual comparisons by ranking methods,” Biometr.
Bull., vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 80–83, 1945.
[40] S. Siegel, “The mann-whitney u test,” Nonparametr. Statist. Behav. Sci.,
pp. 116–127, 1956
[41] G. Valenza, A. Lanatà, E. P. Scilingo, and D. De Rossi, “Towards a smart
glove: Arousal recognition based on textile electrodermal response,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., 2010, pp. 3598–3601.
[42] A. Lanata, G. Valenza, and E. Scilingo, “A novel eda glove based on textileintegrated electrodes for affective computing,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
pp. 1–10, 2012
[43] A. Lanata, A. Armato, G. Valenza, and E. P. Scilingo, “Eye tracking
and pupil size variation as response to affective stimuli: A preliminary
study,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Pervas. Comput. Technol. Healthcare
(PervasiveHealth), 2011, pp. 78–84.

GRECO et al.: ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS DURING AFFECTIVE ELICITATION

Alberto Greco (S’13) received the Graduation degree in biomedical engineering from the University
of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2010. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of Pisa.
He currently works at the Research Center
“E. Piaggio”, University of Pisa. He pursued his research interest on wearable systems, high-level signal
processing for the electrodermal activity, and eyetracking systems.

Gaetano Valenza (S’10–M’12) received the Ph.D.
degree in automation, robotics, and bioengineering
from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2013.
Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Fellow with the
Department of Information Engineering and the Research Center “E. Piaggio”, University of Pisa. The
main topic of his research is biomedical signal processing, cardiovascular and neural modeling, and
wearable systems for physiological monitoring. He
is the author of tens of scientific papers in applicative fields such as affective computing, assessment of
mood disorders, and characterization of disorder of consciousness.

Antonio Lanata (M’12) received the Graduation degree in electronic engineering from the University of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2001. He received the Ph.D degree
in automation, robotics, and bioengineering from the
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2006.
His research interests include developing UWB
wearable systems for biomedical applications and
high-level signals processing. Currently, the main
fields of application are affective computing, mental, and consciousness disorders. He has published
numerous articles in international scientific journals
and author of several chapters of books.

1873

Giuseppina Rota received the Graduation degree in
clinical psychology from the University of Padova,
Padova, Italy, in 2002. She received the Ph.D. degree in cognitive neuroscience from the University of
Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, in 2007.
She currently works as a Postdoctoral Fellow in the
MOMILab, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. Her main
research interests include affective neuroscience and
concern emotion, decision making processes, and
moral judgment.

Enzo Pasquale Scilingo (M’10) received the Laurea
degree in electronic engineering from the University
of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, and the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the University of Milan, Milan, Italy, in
1995 and 1998, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
University of Pisa and carries out his research activity at the Department of Information Engineering, where he leads the laboratory Biolab and at the
Research Center “E. Piaggio”. He is currently coordinating a European project EC-FP7-ICT-247777
“PSYCHE-Personalised monitoring SYstems for Care in mental Health”.

