IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

799

Temporal and Spatial Patterns of Gene Profiles during
Chondrogenic Differentiation
G. Skreti, E. S. Bei, K. Kalantzaki, and M. Zervakis, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Clustering analysis based on temporal profile of genes
may provide new insights in particular biological processes or conditions. We report such an integrative clustering analysis which is
based on the expression patterns but is also influenced by temporal changes. The proposed platform is illustrated with a temporal
gene expression dataset comprised of pellet culture-conditioned
human primary chondrocytes and human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). We derived three clusters in each
cell type and compared the content of these classes in terms of
temporal changes. We further considered the induced biological
processes and the gene-interaction networks formed within each
cluster and discuss their biological significance. Our proposed
methodology provides a consistent tool that facilitates both the
statistical and biological validation of temporal profiles through
spatial gene network profiles.
Index Terms—Chondrogenic differentiation, gene networks,
mixed clustering, spatial profile, temporal profile.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE interest on temporal dynamics of gene expression increases dramatically with the development of methods to
deal with large-scale genomic data. The genetic progression of
an organism or a disease enables the study of complex biological
problems and facilitates the evaluation of therapeutic protocols
based on the consideration of the dynamics of molecular mechanisms and response to drugs. Therefore, the consideration of the
temporal profile of genes in a microarray experiment becomes of
particular importance and several research attempts have been
developed aiming to capture the temporal dynamics of gene
expression. In particular, the development of gene-clustering algorithms that also detect temporal profiles is becoming increasingly important. Regression fitting methods have been proposed
for describing the temporal profiles [1], [2] and statistical bootstrap methods have been developed for assigning genes to candidate profiles [3]. A ranked-based consideration of the temporal
profile has been proposed in [4], [5], where the time instances
are ranked on the basis of the corresponding expression values.

T

Manuscript received April 30, 2013; revised November 28, 2013, February
5, 2014 and February 7, 2014; accepted February 9, 2014. Date of publication
February 11, 2014; date of current version May 1, 2014. The initial results of
the paper were presented at the IEEE 2012 Annual International Conference of
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. This work is partly supported by
the “OASYS” and “OncoSeed” projects funded by the NSRF 2007–13 of the
Greek Ministry of Development.
The authors are with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete, Chania 73100, Greece (skreti@isc.tuc.gr,
abei@isc.tuc.gr, kkalantzaki@isc.tuc.gr, michalis@display.tuc.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2305770

Furthermore, biclustering methods have been developed to discover local expression patterns that are consistent in a subgroup
of conditions or time instances [6]–[8].
Most of the developed methods consider clustering criteria
based on some form of coded-shape behavior as opposed to the
traditional algorithms that are heavily based on gene-expression
patterns. In ranked-based methods, the candidate profiles capture only the shape by characterizing the type of temporal progression (increase or decrease) and the points of maximum or
minimum expression. In biclustering algorithms, the temporal behavior of genes is encoded by symbols and the coherent
expression patterns of subgroups of genes in specific time instances (biclusters) are characterized as strings of symbols. In
many biological processes (BPs), however, not only the temporal behavior but also the expression profile itself is important
for grouping genes as significant for a particular process or condition. Both the temporal shape and the expression profile must
be considered for the clustering of gene profiles [8].
In our study, we attempt to develop tools appropriate for such
purposes of clustering based on a dual criterion. More specifically, we develop a criterion based on expression profile, which
is also influenced by the coded-shape trend. Following the clustering process, we address two issues related to the comparison
of partitions that encode temporal trends. The first relates to
the derivation of correspondences in the two partitions, while
the second addresses the validity criterion for comparing the
compactness of clusters in these partitions. The methodology
expands on a brief version presented in [8]. In order to assess
the results of clustering, we focus on an enrichment analysis to
enable the study of major BPs involved in the derived clusters.
Through this analysis, we can consider biological similarities
and differences of matched clusters of MSC and chondrocyte
cells. We further consider the gene networks formed within
each cluster and discuss their biological significance. Gene networks enable the spatial representation of genes with specific
expression and temporal profiles. Using such gene networks, we
can follow the successive steps of gene/protein interactions that
occur in chondrocytes and MSCs during chondrogenic differentiation. The algorithmic tools of our development are presented
in Section II, whereas the experimental setup and results are
presented and discussed in Section III. Important conclusions
are summarized in Section IV.

II. METHODS AND PROCEDURES
A. Expression Profile and Coded-Shape Temporal Behavior
For each gene, the expression pattern over time is encoded in
a N dimensional vector x similar to [8], where N represents the

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

800

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

extent of the time course of interest. The graphical representation of expression values xi , i = 1, . . . ,N defines the temporal
profile of each gene. Furthermore, the difference of expressions
between two consecutive time points defines the shape of temporal changes of each gene. We utilize a coded form of this shape,
which encodes in a ternary form the changes from one to the
next time point. Let δi = xi+1 − xi ,i = 1, . . . ,N − 1. Then, by
binning the difference values in the set {−1, 0, 1} via a threshold Δ, we create the coded shape vector v of dimensionality
N −1. More specifically, we define the coding operator c{.}
that derives the coded-shape values:
⎧
⎫
⎨ −1 if δi ≤ −Δ
⎬
if − Δ ≤ δi ≤ +Δ .
vi = c {δi } = 0
(1)
⎩
⎭
+1 if δi ≥ +Δ
The coding procedure is similar to that in [9], [10], but is based
on thresholding around zero-levels; it also resembles the discretization process in [6], [7], with the difference that it employs ternary values instead of symbols. Thus, in our case, a
coded-shape string is composed of digits that can be used in an
arithmetic computations rather than symbols.
Suppose we aim at C clusters St , t = 1, . . . ,C, with the mean
vector of cluster St denoted as μt . The coded-shape of this vector is also derived
	 by the coding operator c{.} and is denoted
as mt = c μt . Let a member of St with expression pattern
xj ∈ St , which happens to have a coded-shape pattern vj . We
define the expression pattern of a member of St as wj ∈ St and
its coded-shape pattern as vj . The size N −1 of the shape patterns and the ternary discretization of values result in a limited
number of code vectors equal to M = 3N −1 . Thus, each cluster
may contain a number of coded-shape patterns, numbered from
1, . . . ,M [8]. The clustering process derives C clusters of expression vectors based on both expression and coded-shape values.
In our consideration, the compactness of a cluster depends on
the consistency of these coded patterns [8].
B. Clustering Methodology
The proposed methodology for clustering expression profiles
with the influence of their shape profiles is based on a modification of the self-organizing map (SOM) methodology composed
of three parts [8]. The first step derives a number of clusters
based on the SOM organization of the expression vectors into
a two-dimensional network of Q × Q nodes. Then, at a second
step, the nodal weight-patterns of SOM are organized into C
clusters, based on a K-means iterative approach with a criterion
that is influenced by shape. Finally, each sample is assigned to
one of C classes based on the distance of its expression vector
from the mean of each cluster. Our contribution to this methodology is the criterion used in the second step of organizing the
SOM nodes. More specifically, the first step derives a number
(Q × Q) of clusters based on the expression profiles. We proceed
in a second grouping that organizes nodes more closely, deriving a small number of clusters. At this point, we propose to use
information about the temporal trend in order to favor regrouping of clusters with similar performance [8]. This is graphically
depicted in Fig. 1, where a new pattern is to be classified in

Fig. 1. Strategy of influence through the shape profile; clusters that behave
different from the test pattern in the “shape” space are pushed further apart from
this pattern.

one of the existing two clusters. In this example, the expression
vector is two dimensional (two time points), giving only one
temporal difference. Thus, the shape factor is positive above the
diagonal and negative below. According to the proposed criterion, we attempt to positively influence the class on the same
side (C1) as the test pattern, or push the pattern away from a class
(such as C2) residing on the opposite side.
The overall clustering approach is summarized in the following:
1) First step: Self-Organizing Feature Map
a) Assign random weight values for each node in the
network, wij , i,j = 1, . . . ,Q.
b) Upon presenting an input pattern x, calculate the
distance between x and each neuron ij represented
by the weight vector, wij , identifying the winning
neuron as arg minj {||x − wij ||}, where . is the
Euclidean norm.
c) Adjust the weights of neighborhood of the
winner neuron by: wij (t + 1) = wij (t) + η (t)
K(i,j,t) {x − wij (t)}, where η(t) is the learning
rate at epoch t, and K(i,j,t) is a suitable neighborhood
function, in this case of a Gaussian nature.
d) Repeat steps 2–3 until convergence, when the absolute squared weight changes is smaller than 0.02
over 2500 epochs. (In our application, we use 10×10
= 100 nodes and an extra stopping criterion restricts the number of repetitions to 500 the number
of nodes, equal to 50000).
2) Second step: K-means Clustering of SOM Nodes
The K-means algorithm aims to further organize the
groups formed by SOM into C clusters based on the
minimization of a distance criterion between the samples (SOM nodes) and the cluster means, so as to
minimize the overall variance of each cluster. The
K-means scheme operates on an iterative form based
on the expectation-maximization (EM) solution. The proposed criterion in this step is defined as the overall l2 norm
of expression-vector differences:

Q=

C 



t=1 x j ∈S t

aj wj − μt 22

(2)

SKRETI et al.: TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL PATTERNS OF GENE PROFILES DURING CHONDROGENIC DIFFERENTIATION

where wj is a sample (expression vector of a SOM node)
in the class t with class mean μt and αj is a weighting
factor depending on the coded shape of wj compared to
that of the class mean μt .
1
More specifically, aj =
+ 1 is the logistic func1+e −6 ( r j −1 )
tion with range [1, 2] evaluated for rj . This factor reflects
the coded difference rj = vj − mt 1 as the l1 norm of
the coded-shape differences corresponding to the sample
and the class mean, where vj = c{wj } and mt = c{μt }.
Notice that rj ranges in [0, 2], with 0 and 2 being the
cases of no difference and max difference in all digits of
the code vector. In case of no difference, the shape factor
αj becomes 1, whereas in max difference in all digits this
factor becomes 2, thus increasing the expression-based
distance. Considering this criterion, the EM optimization
proceeds in discrete steps towards the evaluation of new
cluster means and the reassignment of samples in classes.
At each step, for certain samples assigned in a cluster, the
sample mean is recomputed as
1 

aj wj .
(3)
μt =
|St |

within and across clusters in each partition. For the purpose, we
may use the shape codes of genes as ternary strings of size N −1
numbered from 1 to M = 3N −1 . Finally, the clusters are biologically enhanced and validated by means of the gene networks
resulting from the clustered genes. We propose a method for
directed network construction based on kernels [8].
1) Cluster Matching Based on Shape Profile: Each cluster
Ci has been assigned a number Li of samples, each with a corresponding coded-shape vector. The distribution of these shape
vectors results in a code histogram for numbered codes 1, . . . ,M
with probabilities p [1], . . . ,p[M ]. The proposed similarity metric is based on the difference of code histograms. In the matching process, each cluster of one partition is mapped to the best
matching cluster of the other partition. Let two clusters, one
with code probabilities p [1], . . . ,p[M ] from one partition and
the other with q [1], . . . ,q[M ] from the second partition. The
similarity of the two clusters is the summed absolute distance
of the two probabilities [8]:

Dc =

x t ∈S t

Subsequently, samples are evaluated and reassigned based
on the minimum distance from the class means, i.e.,


mint a j,t wj − μ t 22 , with the recomputed shape factors
a

j,t for the sample j and the tested mean vector of the
class t [8].
The basic steps are as follows:
a) Set the number of clusters C.
b) Perform random assignment of samples in C classes
with initial shape factors aj,t = 1.
c) Compute the class means μt based on the shapeweighted average.
d) Compute the new shape factors a

j,t and reassign
samples in clusters based on the minimum weighted
distance for the class means.
e) Repeat steps 3–4 until convergence (max number of
iterations).
3) Third step: Assignment of initial expression values into
clusters
Notice that the second step organizes the nodes of the SOM
network; the initial expression vectors still need to be assigned
in one of the C clusters. This assignment is performed based on
the minimum l2 norm of the difference between each expression
vector xi and the class means μt computed from the second
step [8].
C. Criteria for Partition Evaluation
In computational biology, there is an often need to compare
two (or more) partitions. In our particular formulation utilizing
the temporal profiles of genes, we need to find correspondences
between the partitions, but also need to compare the quality of
each partition in terms of compactness and discrimination of its
clusters. For the first aspect, we need to compare one cluster
of the first partition with all clusters of the other partition. The
second task needs to consider the distribution of samples (genes)

801

M



|p [i] − q[i]| .

(4)

i=1

The matching of clusters from the two partitions is based on
the smaller distance criterion.
2) Validity Index Based on Shape Profile: The proposed index is based on the compactness of each code histogram as
well as the distance between pairs of histograms. Due to the
probability distribution and the weighted implications of the
histogram, the larger histogram bins play much more important
role in comparison than smaller bins. Consequently, we now
rank the probabilities in descending order to obtain the ranked
probabilities p1 , . . . ,pM . Note that ties in ranking are resolved
in favor of the minimum Hamming distance from the previous
string. Thus, we assign the following terminology [8]:
Numbered probabilities p [1] , p [2] , . . . ,p[M ]
Ranked probabilities p1 , p2 , . . . ,pM
p1 = max {p [i]} and pk = maxk {p [i]}
i

i

is the kth higher ranked probability.
Suppose we have two clusters C1 and C2 of size L1 and L2 ,
respectively. The first has ranked probabilities pi corresponding
to strings si , where the second has qi corresponding to strings
ti , i = 1, . . . ,M, respectively. In order to build an inner-cluster
compactness index, we will use the Hamming distance between
two strings in descending ranked order, weighted by the probability of the second string. This represents the distance between
two strings obtained from the most to least significant ones. The
within-cluster distance signified by the most significant string
is zero. Considering the next-ranked string, the code word distance introduced is the difference of codes in as many cases
as signified by the probability of this string. In general, for the
ith-ranked string, the distance introduced can be computed from
the code word distance from the previous string weighted by the
probability of the ith string. Thus, for within cluster distance,

802

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

we have
Q (C1 ) =

N
−1



d (si ,si+1 ) pi+1

(5)

d (ti ,ti+1 ) qi+1

(6)

i=1

Q (C2 ) =

N
−1


i=1

where d(.,.) signifies the Hamming distance between two strings.
In order to introduce across-cluster distances, we first consider the differences of clusters for each string. Thus, for each
numbered code, we calculate
Numbered probabilities r[i] = |p [i] − q[i]|
Ranked probabilities r1 ,r2 , . . . ,rN , where
r1 = max {r[i]} and rk = maxk {r[i]}
i

i

is the kth higher ranked probability. For possible comparisons of bounds, we note that r1 ≤ max{p1 ,q1 } and r1 ≥
max |p1 − q1 |. We have now defined a histogram of the difference or probability intersection of the two clusters C1 and
C2 , whose compactness index can be defined as before:
Q (C1 , C2 ) =

N
−1



d (zi , zi+1 ) ri+1 { ≥ 1 − r1 }.

(7)

i=1

These indexes reflect the distance of digitized code words
signified by their probabilities. Their values are within a range
[1, K] scaled by (1 − r1 ). The minimum value of the index is
zero and is obtained when the histogram has only one point
with probability one. The maximum value is attained when the
histogram involves two code words with probability 0.5 each
and distance equal to the maximum value of K. Thus, the ratio
of within cluster to across-cluster metrics signifies a relevant
validity index for each partition P of CP clusters referred to as
ranked shape index (RSI), which accounts for shape similarities,
as [8]:


Cp
Q (Ci )+Q (Cj )
1 

max
, i, j = 1, . . . , Cp .
Cp i=1 j = i
Q (Ci ,Cj )
(8)
3) Gene-Network Construction: Through the gene-interaction networks, we can examine common biological outcomes
implied by group of genes in each cluster and highlight those
genes and processes of particular interest. Network construction
approaches [11], [12] model the genetic associations between
molecules highlighting hub-genes of biological importance. In
the same context, biological networks [13]–[16] model directly
the associations between genes so as to reveal the pairwise relations encrypted in the experimental data. In this section, we
introduce an approach for modeling the direct genetic interactions based on kernel density estimation (KDE), as an attempt
to model the nonlinear effect of gene interactions.
KDE [17]–[20] is a nonparametric approach that estimates
the probability density function of a random variable. Assume
that a generic network is developed based on a limited genomic
independent identically distributed dataset X= (x1 ..xn ), where
xi denotes the sample i of gene X. KDE allows the estimation

RSI {P } =

of probability density f
h (X) of X as follows:


n
x − xi
1 


fh (X) =
K
nh i=1
h
−1

(9)

2

1
e 2 u is a vector of symmetric positive defiwhere K(u) = 2π
nite Gaussian function, n is dataset’s size of the gene X and h
> 0 is a smoothing parameter, the bandwidth that controls the
extent of the kernel [19].
Genes interacting with each other can be linked and organized in a network form. The gene expression over a population
provides valuable information on a gene’s activity, which can be
correlated with other genes as to provide a metric of organization in the network structure. Under the assumption that genes
and gene-products share similarities in datasets, the problem of
network construction is reduced to the examination of independence between nodes Xi and Xk , through the joint and marginal
probabilities [11]:

fh (Xi , Xk ) =fh (Xi ) · fh (Xk )

(10)

where fh indicates the probability density estimate of each gene
according to (9) and the right-hand side is computed by pointby-point multiplication. The comparison of the two parts of (10)
can be performed through the cross correlation test, where high
correlation indicates independence of the two nodes, thus low
connectivity. In contrast, small correlation indicates differences
between the two parts of (10) and dependence of the two nodes,
thus demonstrating high interaction between Xi and Xk . The
latter justifies the connection between candidate nodes since
they share common activity characteristics.
The determination of edge directionality in the aforementioned undirected networks is often based on the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) [21], [22]. For each node, the number
of connected edges is counted and all directly connected nodes
are forming a subnetwork. For each subnetwork, the BIC score
is computed on both possible orientations of the edge under examination. Finally, the edge is oriented in favor of the direction
with the lowest BIC value.
III. RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
We applied our platform on a dataset comprised of temporal gene expression patterns of pellet culture-conditioned human primary chondrocytes and human bone marrow-derived
MSCs introduced by Bernstein et al. in [23]. The microarray
dataset consists of human primary chondrocytes that were obtained from osteoarthritic knee joints during alloarthroplastic
procedures from five female patients, and MSCs that were isolated from iliac crest bone marrow from five healthy female
donors. After cultivation of both cell types in pellet culture
under chondrogenic conditions, gene expression analysis data
were obtained from one pooled sample (from all five patients)
of each group at four different time points (days 0, 3, 7, 14).
Gene expression values were compared between chondrocytes
and MSCs at various time points (days 0, 3, 7, 14).

SKRETI et al.: TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL PATTERNS OF GENE PROFILES DURING CHONDROGENIC DIFFERENTIATION

803

Fig. 2. Expression profiles in three classes for the cases of MSC (right part) and chondrocyte (CHD) (left part) tissue; proposed mixed-criterion clustering (upper
part), traditional expression-based clustering (lower part).

B. Implication of Clustering Schemes and Validity Indices
The appropriate number of clusters has been considered both
manually and using the concept of validity indices. In manual
consideration, we examined the shape of temporal profiles and
also the properties of clusters formed in terms of expression values and temporal changes of their samples (temporal profiles).
Using the proposed mixed clustering approach, the problem under consideration induces three types of gene trends (clusters),
which are illustrated by their temporal profiles in Fig. 2 (upper
part), for the cases of MSCs (right part) and chondrocytes (left
part). The plots in this figure illustrate the prominent shapes
of each cluster expressed by their code probabilities, which are
indicative of the overall trends in these clusters. More specifically, we plot the expression pattern over time (four days) for
the two most often appearing trends in each cluster (according to Fig. 3). In Fig. 2 (lower part), we similarly present the
clusters obtained from the expression profiles alone for MSCs
(right part) and chondrocytes (left part). The traditional valid-

ity indices, like Davis–Bouldin (DB) or Dunn’s index, fail to
provide a consistent argument regarding the preferred number
of clusters. In particular, for the mixed clustering scheme the
DB index, which somewhat resembles the philosophy of RSI at
the level of expressions alone, achieves the lowest value for two
clusters for both MSCs and chondrocyte tissue. For the rankedbased clustering, DB fluctuates and is minimized for quite large
numbers of clusters. Finally, for the clustering based on only
expression values, the DB index is minimized for three and four
classes in the case of MSCs and chondrocytes, respectively [8].
In contrast, the proposed RSI index shows robust performance and indicates an optimal number of three clusters in
most approaches considered. More specifically, for clustering
based on expression values and the proposed mixed clustering
influenced by shape, the RSI index is minimized at three classes
for both the MSCs and chondrocytes datasets. The situation is
slightly different for the ranked-based clustering, with the RSI
obtaining smaller values at two classes. In this case, the RSI index is slightly fluctuating for increasing number of classes and

804

Fig. 3.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Class histograms of coded strings, matched for the cases of chondrocytes (CHD) (upper part) and MSC (lower part).
TABLE I
RSI INDEX FOR VARIOUS APPROACHES AND TISSUE TYPES

is actually minimized at eight classes, where each prominent
coded-shape pattern appears separately in a single class. The
RSI index is illustrated in Table I, along with the corresponding
DB index (in parentheses) [8].
It is worth mentioning from Table I [8] that the RSI index
obtains smaller values for the combined clustering scheme,
whereas the DB index for the traditional clustering approach
based on expression values. By means of the prominent shapes

appearing in the clusters of the proposed methodology in Fig. 2
(upper part), we can visually conclude that the proposed method
results in more tight clusters than the traditional expressionbased clustering and this is better reflected on the RSI than the
DB index (with the RSI obtaining smaller values). In essence,
the traditional approach based on expression (Fig. 2-lower part)
operates on the basis of a symmetric distance function (l2 norm)
so that it is forced to include symmetric patterns as in the case of
cluster 2. On the other hand, the proposed approach engages the
temporal trend, so that it only favors similar-shape performance
over time. This issue of symmetry is also encoded into traditional
validity indices, such as the DB, through the use of symmetric
distances from the expression pattern of the class centroid. The
proposed approach manages to achieve the smallest RSI index
for both the MSCs and chondrocytes. The histograms of the
resulting clusters are illustrated in Fig. 3. Overall, the clusters
formed demonstrate compactness in both the patterns of expression profiles and the histograms of the shape-coded strings
(see Figs. 2 and 3, respectively). Elaborating on Fig. 3, each
cluster involves strings of similar shape, whereas each string
mostly appears in one cluster. With the aid of the shape codes,
the clustering algorithm manages to avoid splitting one shape
string into many clusters, while it also preserves the original
expression-based relations of samples. The matched clusters in
MSCs and chondrocytes not only have similar content in terms
of shape codes but also contain comparable numbers of samples
from each string.
C. Biological Comparison of MSC and Chondrocyte Clusters
It is interesting at this point to compare the clusters formed
for MSC and chondrocyte tissue using the proposed clustering

SKRETI et al.: TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL PATTERNS OF GENE PROFILES DURING CHONDROGENIC DIFFERENTIATION

Fig. 4.

805

Visualization of clusters in 2-D; MSC (right part) and chondrocytes (left part).

approach. A visual map of the three clusters based on the first
two principal directions of PCA, is depicted in Fig. 4. It appears
that the two human sample cultures induce similar concentrations of genes in their corresponding three clusters. The interference (mixing) of classes exists for both MSCs and chondrocytes,
even though it appears at different proportionality. Thus, our
study shows good similarity of classes in MSC and chondrocyte
data, which verifies the results of the original study in Bernstein
et al. [23]. Nevertheless, the cross-class samples need further
consideration, since class interference is quite heavy, beyond
the tolerance of errors due to measurement noise. In a further
attempt to compare the two cell types on a deeper biological
basis, we examine the temporal profiles of common genes of
MSCs and chondrocytes. In each pair of matched clusters, we
focus on common genes, whose temporal profile belongs to the
two most prominent code shapes in the respective class, from
Fig. 3. According to this process, the number of selected genes
becomes variable, i.e., 598 genes in cluster 1, 1402 in cluster 2,
and 260 genes in cluster 3 (see Appendix A). WebGestalt was
used for enrichment analysis of these gene sets and evaluation of
the most significant gene-ontology (GO) terms for the category
of BP, molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC)
(see Appendix C) as well as of the exploration of enriched terms
in regards to KEGG pathways, WikiPathways, TransFac, miR,
and cytogenetic analyses (Appendixes D, E, F, G, and H, respectively) [24]. WebGestalt performs the hypergeometric test for
the enrichment of aforementioned terms in the selected genes,
followed by the Benjamini & Hochberg method for multiple test
adjustment (adjP ).
The results from the GO analysis revealed enriched generic as
well as specific terms for each of the clusters (see Appendix C).
For instance, cluster 1 involves genes that participate in the
generic cellular macromolecule metabolic process/cellular nitrogen compound metabolic process and in the specific process of RNA splicing; in the generic cellular biosynthetic process/heterocycle biosynthetic process, and in the specific process of regulation of transcription, DNA-dependent. Similarly,

cluster 2 consists of genes with roles in the generic singleorganism process, cell–cell signaling, cell–cell adhesion, detection of stimulus and in the specific processes of G-protein
coupled receptor signaling pathway, regulation of inhibitory
postsynaptic membrane potential, ion transport, and synaptic
transmission. Cluster 3 involves genes that take part in generic
processes such as CC organization or biogenesis at cellular level,
cell cycle and in the specific processes of nuclear division, CC
disassembly involved in execution phase of apoptosis, and M
phase of mitotic cell cycle. In the category of MFs, the enriched
terms include RNA binding, ubiquitin binding, chromatin binding in cluster 1, and signaling receptor activity such as GABA-A
receptor activity and G-protein coupled receptor activity, as well
as sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity,
and voltage-gated ion channel activity in cluster 2. Finally, in
the category of CCs, the enriched terms involve intracellular
membrane-bounded organelle, nucleus, nuclear lumen, nucleolus, intracellular nonmembrane-bounded organelle, ribonucleoprotein complex, and histone deacetylase complex in cluster 1;
intrinsic to membrane, cell periphery, extracellular region,
synapse, and cation channel complex in cluster 2; intracellular organelle part, cytoplasm, kinetochore, organelle envelope,
chromosome, mitochondrion, and microtubule associated complex in cluster 3.
The KEGG analysis determined significant enriched terms
in cluster 1 (protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, endocytosis, Wnt signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway,
and apoptosis); in cluster 2 (metabolic pathways, cell adhesion
molecules, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, fatty acid metabolism,
PPAR signaling pathway, and regulation of actin cytoskeleton); and in cluster 3 [citrate cycle (TCA cycle), DNA replication, pyruvate metabolism, and cell cycle] (see Appendix D).
The Wikipathways enrichment analysis revealed also significant terms such as apoptosis, TGF beta signaling pathway,
senescence and autophagy, and mRNA processing for cluster 1;
GPCRs, Class A Rhodopsin-like, G protein signaling pathways, and neural crest differentiation for cluster 2; and Wnt

806

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Signaling pathway and pluripotency, mitochondrial LC-fatty
acid beta-oxidation, cholesterol biosynthesis, regulation of actin
cytoskeleton, and DNA damage response for cluster 3 (see
Appendix E).
Taken together, using the WebGestalt for the GO, KEGG,
and Wikipathways analyses, we found an enrichment in many
terms that are consistent with the findings reported in [23] (see
Appendixes C, D, and E). The detailed results of all three analyses and also of TransFac, miR, and Cytogenic band analyses can
be found in the Appendixes C–H. The latter analyses may add
important insights in our study, but they are not utilized here.
Following our findings for the first cluster, both MSCs and
chondrocytes involve enriched major BPs (see Appendix C),
such as metabolism (adjP = 6.31 × 10−11 ) and gene expression (adjP = 1.36 × 10−09 ). These BPs are evolving with time
in the dynamic multistage process of chondrogenesis [25], thus
explaining the changing performance of this class illustrated
in Fig. 2 (upper-left column), which is also supported by recent gene expression and proteomic studies using human bone
marrow derived MSCs [26], [27] and dedifferentiated human
articular chondrocytes [28]. Regarding the enrichment of the
second cluster, both MSCs and chondrocytes are involved in
signal transduction and cell–cell signaling. The major enriched
BP observed in this cluster is the G-protein coupled receptor
signaling (adjP = 7.02 × 10−10 ) (see Appendix C), which is
strongly associated to endochondral bone growth and remodeling and has been reported to activate in short time intervals
(minutes to hours) [29], [30]. This can partially explain the lack
of significant change over long time in the temporal profiles observed in Fig. 2 (upper-middle column). Finally, the third cluster involves CC organization (adjP = 0.0132), and cell cycle
(adjP = 0.0139) (see Appendix C), which have been associated
to chondrogenic differentiation [25], [31]. These two elements
are characterized from both active and quiescent periods and are
most responsible for the converging trend of the two cell types
observed in Fig. 2 (upper-right column). The evaluation of human MSCs cell-cycle and differentiation in micromass culture
has shown that cell cycle phases do not significantly change
after day 7, thus supporting our temporal profile for this cell
type [32].
Overall, the matched gene-clusters of the two cell types
(MSCs and chondrocytes) express similar temporal trends,
which can be explained by the enrichment analysis of the genes
responsible for this performance. Nevertheless, the interactions
of these genes in particular cellular processes during chondrogenic differentiation might be different in each cell type, as
demonstrated by the subsequent gene-network analysis.
D. Analysis of Biological Networks Within Clusters
In order to validate the biological properties of the extracted
MSC and chondrocyte clusters, we proceed with network construction to highlight genes of biological importance. In addition, we examine if the extracted network structure is consistent
with the expression profiles of Fig. 2, through a higher level of
process interpretation. Toward this direction, we focus on the
same a subset of common genes was isolated for each group of

TABLE II
NUMBER OF CONNECTIONS PER CLUSTER FOR STRONG INTERACTION

the MSC and chondrocyte genes for both cell types, as in the
previous enrichment analysis of the mixed clustering methodology; 598 genes for the first cluster, 1402 for the second, and 260
genes for the third cluster. The KDE algorithm was separately
applied on the gene expressions for each of the six clusters so
as to identify data-induced similarities and differences between
the MSC and chondrocyte genes in same and across separate
clusters, respectively.
The KDE approach as presented in Section II-C3 is based on
correlations of pairs of genes within each cluster. In our experimental problem, it derives many different genetic structures at
each correlation level. For each produced network per cluster,
we isolate only the strongest connections in order to focus on
significant gene interactions. This is achieved for small levels
of cross-correlation between the two members of (10), since
smaller values of correlation indicate stronger dependence between the genes. Therefore, for each of the six clusters, we consider only a range of correlation levels th, and Table II shows
the number of connections per cluster for strong interaction
(th ≤ 0.1), and somewhat weaker limits (0.3 ≤ th ≤ 0.7).
For correlation levels smaller than th = 0.1,we make the following observations pertaining to strong interactions. 1) The
subnetwork structures of MSCs and chondrocytes are similar.
2) Only a subset of the studied genes per cluster has strong
interconnections with other genes, with the prominent relations
observed in cluster 1 and 2 of MSCs, and in cluster 3 of both
chondrocytes and MSCs. 3) For the case of chondrocytes in
clusters 1 and 2, only few genes are strongly interconnected (in
fact, the genes in the first chondrocyte cluster do not interact
even at higher levels of correlation). 4) For both cell types in
cluster 2, the generated interactions are formed from a limited
number of interacting genes. Overall, these strong interactions
observed in MSC clusters are explained through the in vitro
chondrogenesis, which is expected in a pellet culture system
as described in the work of Bernstein et al. [23]. Furthermore,
the lack of strong interaction in chondrocytes likely implies that
they have already reached their differentiation state and remain
as persistent cartilage [25].
The subsequent consideration of gene interactions in the interval (0.3 ≤ th ≤ 0.7) from low to higher correlation levels,
where each cell type in each cluster tends to reach the total number of observed genes (i.e., cluster 1–598, cluster 2–1402, cluster

SKRETI et al.: TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL PATTERNS OF GENE PROFILES DURING CHONDROGENIC DIFFERENTIATION

807

Fig. 5. “Intersection genes” of MSCs and chondrocytes for cluster 1 (a), cluster 2 (b), and cluster 3 (c). In cluster 3, all common genes but four are included in
the intersection set.

3–260), may uncover valuable biological information regarding
the affected annotated genes. For example, the annotation according to GO terms reveal BPs such as signal transduction (Wnt
signaling network—an important regulator of chondrocyte development) in MSCs and response to stress in chondrocytes for
Cluster 1, while indicates discrete phases of cell cycle (e.g., mitosis) in MSCs and chondrocytes for Cluster 3 (see Appendix C).
Thus, the use of these networks at varying thresholds can unfold
detailed subprocesses during differentiation of both MSCs and
chondrocytes. At the level of many interactions, the networks
generated from all observed genes show a complex structure
that is unique for each cell type in each cluster (see Appendix
B). In this case, we observe that only in cluster 3, the MSC and
chondrocyte network structures have similar formations, with
many “intersection genes” (as explained in Appendix B).
In an attempt to further investigate the common network structures between the MSC and chondrocyte genes, we compute the
intersections between matched clusters. Fig. 5 presents the subnetwork intersections (at a level of weaker interactions as to
involve all genes) from the MSC and chondrocyte networks,

for the three cluster pairs. The intersections are presented in
groups of common network degree, which as a topology metric
reflects the number of links of each node with all other nodes
in the network. Especially in biological networks, the degree is
an important metric that highlights genes with high connectivity playing an important role in disease development [33]. We
summarize the following observations.
1) The intersection of MSCs and chondrocytes includes only
one pair of genes for cluster 1, eleven genes for cluster 2,
and almost all (256 from 260) genes for cluster 3 (see
Fig. 5).
2) Distinct “intersection genes” with high degree (hub genes)
play significant role in network structure in each cell type
of cluster 1 and 2:
a) in cluster 1, two transcription factors (ATF2activating transcription factor 2, HES4-hairy and
enhancer of split 4), and the EMC9 (ER membrane
protein complex subunit 9) appear to have many interactors in chondrocytes, whereas JMY (junction
mediating and regulatory protein, p53 cofactor) and

808

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TNFAIP8 (tumor necrosis factor, alpha induced protein 8) play important roles in MSCs,
b) in cluster 2, the GPR98 (G protein-coupled receptor
98) seems to be a crucial gene in MSCs, whereas a
similar role is assumed by FAM221A (family with
sequence similarity 221, member A) in chondrocytes. Both these molecules appear to be quite important and control the entire differentiation mechanisms of cluster 2. Recall that G protein-coupled
receptor signaling changes in small time intervals,
which cannot be captured by the sampling intervals
in our dataset, thus explaining the lack of significant
changes in cluster 2 for both MSCs and chondrocytes.
3) The large number of “intersection genes” in cluster 3 does
not actually imply similar interaction forms. The common
interactions of the two network structures in cluster 3 form
only the 1/5th of the total interactions. This observation
implies that the same generic cell-cycle operation (universal process according to Goldar et al. [34]) is achieved by
different gene interactions in the two cell types.
Based on the aforementioned observations, we illustrate that
a common number of genes via successive interconnections
achieves a complex structure for each cell type in each cluster,
which forms a specific spatial pattern for each cell type that
can support its temporal profile. Moreover, the same genes behave differently in each cell type despite their similar temporal
profiles, forming different interactions and generating different
spatial patterns, especially in clusters 1 and 2. The biological
analysis of “intersection genes” provides important information of their major functional roles in each cell type. In general, the matched network interconnections might give important hints about the affected signaling pathways in chondrocytes
and MSCs during differentiation. An important side effect of the
proposed clustering scheme based on both expression and temporal profiles is its potential in grouping similar gene network
structure of MSCs and chondrocytes, as in cluster 3 that summarizes the universal characteristics of cell cycle process [34].
Concluding, our proposed methodology allows monitoring of
the temporal trends of a specific number of genes and their spatial projection through their gene network structures. Applying
our methodology in Bernstein’s dataset [23], we demonstrate
temporal and spatial profiles that are specific for MSCs and
chondrocytes during chondrogenic differentiation in 3-D environment. As a final point, we notice that the proposed form of
coding the shape of time-varying profiles (in Section II-A) is not
unique. Other metrics could be explored within the same framework, which may further improve the clustering performance.
IV. CONCLUSION
Statistical evaluation of temporal profiles based on gene expression patterns play an important role in biological processes
or conditions. We introduce a clustering method for this purpose
which is based on the expression patterns but is also influenced
by temporal changes. We compared the results of our platform
with clustering based on expression profiles, or rank-based clus-

tering based solely on temporal changes. The proposed use of
temporal changes to guide the clustering of expression profiles
can better support the biological performance and can compare
the two cell types on the basis of their biological role. We derived three clusters in each cell type and compared the content of
these classes in terms of histograms explaining their individual
expression and temporal profiles. For statistical evaluation, we
introduce a validity measure that takes under consideration these
temporal changes. For biological validation, we performed an
enrichment analysis of prominent genes in each cluster. Through
this analysis, we verified the relevance of results from the perspective of biological processes and found genetic alterations
during chondrogenic differentiation for both cell types. The proposed methodology builds on the results of Bernstein et al. [23]
and enhances the validity of derived genes by including yet another characteristic concerning the temporal expression pattern.
Furthermore, we propose and implement a criterion for partition
evaluation that engages the temporal profile of clusters, which is
more appropriate for data with a consistent sequential progression in time. Through this approach, we derive compact clusters
with similar temporal trends. To support this point, we have
performed comparisons in both the statistical level (similarity
of the MSCs and chondrocytes) and the biological significance.
The wide range of enrichment analysis that was explored by
WebGestalt enhances the validity of biological interpretation
of the results, and can be eventually used as to guide wet-lab
experimentalists. Furthermore, following a biological network
approach, we established that despite the similar temporal and
biological behavior of genes in matched clusters of MSC and
chondrocyte cells, these genes may be forming different spatial interaction patterns (networks) in each cell type. Thus, even
though we may detect certain statistical similarities, these need
to be also consider from a deeper biological point of view as they
may be due to different biological processes or different molecular interactions. Our proposed platform provides a consistent
tool that facilitates both the statistical and biological validation
of temporal profiles, using statistical support, enrichment analysis, and validation through spatial gene-network structures.
APPENDIX
Please notice that color version of the figures are provided on the online version of the paper. With respect to
the implementations of algorithms, they are available upon
request. Appendixes A (gene lists), B (MSC and chondrocyte networks), and C (enriched GO terms for BP, MF and
CC), as well as Appendixes D–H (enriched terms of KEGG,
WikiPathways, TransFac, miR, and cytogenetic analyses), can
be found on http://www.display.tuc.gr/skret.temporal-spatialpatterns-study/.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Imoto and S. Miyano, “Statistical analysis o small set of time-ordered
gene expression data using linear splines,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 11,
pp. 1477–1485, Apr. 2002.
[2] H. Liu, S. Tarima, A. S. Borders, T. V Getchell, M. L. Getchell, and
A. J. Stromberg, “Quadratic regression analysis for gene discovery and

SKRETI et al.: TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL PATTERNS OF GENE PROFILES DURING CHONDROGENIC DIFFERENTIATION

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]

pattern recognition for non-cyclic short time-course microarray experiments,” BMC Bioinform., vol. 6, no. 106, pp. 1–69, Apr. 2005.
S. D. Peddada, E. K. Lobenhofer, L. Li, C. A. Afshari, C. R. Weinberg,
and D. M. Umbach, “Gene selection and clustering for time-course and
dose-response microarray experiments using order-restricted inference,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 834–841, Nov. 2003.
S. G. Yi, Y. J. Joo, and T. Park, “Rank-based analysis for the time-course
microarray data,” J. Bioinform. Comput. Biol., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 75–91,
Sep. 2009.
S. G. Yi, Y. J. Joo, and T. Park, “Rank-based clustering analysis for the
time-course microarray data,” J. Bioinform. Comput. Biol., vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 75–91, Aug. 2009.
S. C. Madeira, M. C. Teixeira, I. Sá-Correia, and A. L. Oliveira, “Identification of regulatory modules in time series gene expression data using
a linear time biclustering algorithm,” IEEE /ACM Trans. Comput. Biol.
Bioinform., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 153–165, Oct. 2007.
A. V. Carreiro, O. Anunciação, J. A. Carriço, and S. C. Madeira, “Prognostic prediction through biclustering-based classification of clinical gene
expression time series,” J. Integr. Bioinform., vol. 8, no. 3, no. 175, pp. 1–
17, Jan. 2011.
G. Skreti, E. S. Bei, and M. Zervakis, “Shape-influenced clustering of
dynamic patterns of gene profiles,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc
Conf., Jan. 2012, vol. 2012, pp. 1238–1241.
L. Ji and K. L. Tan, “Mining gene expression data for positive and negative
co-regulated gene clusters,” Bioinformatics, vol. 20, no. 16, pp. 2711–
2718, Apr. 2004.
L. Ji and K. L. Tan, “Identifying time-lagged gene clusters using gene
expression data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 509–516, Sep. 2005.
K. D. Kalantzaki, E. S. Bei, M. Garofalakis, and M. Zervakis, “Biological
interaction networks based on sparse temporal expansion of graphical
models,” in Proc. 12th IEEE Int. Conf. BioInform. BioEngineering, 2012,
pp. 460–465.
W. Jiang, X. Li, S. Rao, L. Wang, L. Du, C. Li, C. Wu, H. Wang, Y. Wang,
and B. Yang, “Constructing disease-specific gene networks using pairwise relevance metric: Application to colon cancer identifies interleukin
8, desmin, and enolase 1 as the central elements,” BMC Syst. Biol., vol. 2,
no. 72, pp. 1–15, Aug. 2008.
N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, and D. Pe’er, “Using Bayesian
networks to analyze expression data,” J. Comput. Biol., vol. 7, no. 3–4,
pp. 601–620, Jan. 2000.
J. Hu, J. Wan, L. Hackler, D. J. Zack, and J. Qian, “Computational analysis
of tissue-specific gene networks: Application to murine retinal functional
studies,” Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 18, pp. 2289–2297, Jul. 2010.
F. Browne, H. Wang, H. Zheng, and F. Azuaje, “A knowledge-driven
probabilistic framework for the prediction of protein-protein interaction
networks,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 306–317, Jan. 2010.
S. Bulashevska, A. Bulashevska, and R. Eils, “Bayesian statistical modelling of human protein interaction network incorporating protein disorder
information,” BMC Bioinform., vol. 11, no. 46, pp. 1–15, Jan. 2010.
C. C. Wu, S. Asgharzadeh, T. J. Triche, and D. Z. D’Argenio, “Prediction
of human functional genetic networks from heterogeneous data using
RVM-based ensemble learning,” Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 807–
813, Feb. 2010.
Y.-Q. Qiu, S. Zhang, X.-S. Zhang, and L. Chen, “Detecting disease associated modules and prioritizing active genes based on high throughput
data,” BMC Bioinform., vol. 11, no. 26, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2010.
H. Wang, D. Mirota, and G. D. Hager, “A generalized Kernel Consensusbased robust estimator,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 178–184, Jan. 2010.

809

[20] R. Boscolo, H. Pan, and V. P. Roychowdhury, “Independent component
analysis based on nonparametric density estimation,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. /a Publ. IEEE Neural Netw. Counc., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 55–65, Jan.
2004.
[21] E. C. Neto, C. T. Ferrara, A. D. Attie, and B. S. Yandell, “Inferring causal
phenotype networks from segregating populations,” Genetics, vol. 179,
no. 2, pp. 1089–1100, Apr. 2008.
[22] X. W. Chen, G. Anantha, and X. Wang, “An effective structure learning
method for constructing gene networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 11,
pp. 1367–1374, Mar. 2006.
[23] P. Bernstein, C. Sticht, A. Jacobi, C. Liebers, S. Manthey, and M. Stiehler,
“Expression pattern differences between osteoarthritic chondrocytes
and mesenchymal stem cells during chondrogenic differentiation,” Osteoarthritis Cartilage, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1596–1607, Sep. 2010.
[24] B. Zhang, S. Kirov, and J. Snoddy, “WebGestalt: an integrated system for
exploring gene sets in various biological contexts,” Nucleic Acids Res.,
vol. 33, pp. W741–W748, Apr. 2005.
[25] A. Woods, G. Wang, and F. Beier, “Regulation of chondrocyte differentiation by the actin cytoskeleton and adhesive interactions,” J. Cell. Physiol.,
vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Oct. 2007.
[26] B. Rocha, V. Calamia, J. Mateos, P. Fernández-Puente, F. J. Blanco, and
C. Ruiz-Romero, “Metabolic labeling of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells for the quantitative analysis of their chondrogenic differentiation,” J. Proteome Res., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 5350–5361, Sep. 2012.
[27] H. J. Yoo, S. S. Yoon, S. Y. Park, E. Y. Lee, E. B. Lee, J. H. Kim, and
Y. W. Song, “Gene expression profile during chondrogenesis in human
bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells using a cDNA microarray,”
J. Korean Med. Sci., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 851–858, Jul. 2011.
[28] M. M. J. Caron, P. J. Emans, M. M. E. Coolsen, L. Voss, D. A. M. Surtel,
A. Cremers, L. W. Van Rhijn, and T. J. M. Welting, “Redifferentiation of
dedifferentiated human articular chondrocytes: comparison of 2D and 3D
cultures,” Osteoarthritis Cartilage, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1170–1178, Oct.
2012.
[29] A. M. Newman, N. B. Gallo, L. S. Hancox, N. J. Miller, C. M. Radeke,
M. A. Maloney, J. B. Cooper, G. S. Hageman, D. H. Anderson,
L. V Johnson, and M. J. Radeke, “Systems-level analysis of age-related
macular degeneration reveals global biomarkers and phenotype-specific
functional networks,” Genome Med., vol. 4, no. 2, p. 16, Feb. 2012.
[30] J. J. Linderman, “Modeling of G-protein-coupled receptor signaling pathways,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 284, no. 9, pp. 5427–5431, Feb. 2009.
[31] P. S. Mathieu and E. G. Loboa, “Cytoskeletal and focal adhesion influences on mesenchymal stem cell shape, mechanical properties, and differentiation down osteogenic, adipogenic, and chondrogenic pathways,”
Tissue Eng. Part B Rev., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 436–444, Nov. 2012.
[32] J. W. Yang, N. De Isla, C. Huselstein, M. N. Sarda-Kolopp, Y. P. L. N. Li,
O. Y. Jing-Ping, J. F. Stoltz, and A. Eljaafari, “Evaluation of human MSCs
cell cycle, viability and differentiation in micromass culture,” Biorheology, vol. 43, no. 3–4, pp. 489–496, 2006.
[33] J. J. Cai, E. Borenstein, and D. A. Petrov, “Broker genes in human disease,” Genome Biol. Evol., vol. 2, pp. 815–825, Oct. 2010.
[34] A. Goldar, M. C. Marsolier-Kergoat, and O. Hyrien, “Universal temporal
profile of replication origin activation in eukaryotes,” PLoS One, vol. 4,
no. 6, p. e5899, Jan. 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

