1932

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

An Innovative Nonintrusive Driver Assistance
System for Vital Signal Monitoring
Ye Sun, Student Member, IEEE, and Xiong (Bill) Yu, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper describes an in-vehicle nonintrusive
biopotential measurement system for driver health monitoring and
fatigue detection. Previous research has found that the physiological signals including eye features, electrocardiography (ECG), electroencephalography (EEG) and their secondary parameters such
as heart rate and HR variability are good indicators of health state
as well as driver fatigue. A conventional biopotential measurement
system requires the electrodes to be in contact with human body.
This not only interferes with the driver operation, but also is not
feasible for long-term monitoring purpose. The driver assistance
system in this paper can remotely detect the biopotential signals
with no physical contact with human skin. With delicate sensor and
electronic design, ECG, EEG, and eye blinking can be measured.
Experiments were conducted on a high fidelity driving simulator
to validate the system performance. The system was found to be
able to detect the ECG/EEG signals through cloth or hair with
no contact with skin. Eye blinking activities can also be detected
at a distance of 10 cm. Digital signal processing algorithms were
developed to decimate the signal noise and extract the physiological features. The extracted features from the vital signals were
further analyzed to assess the potential criterion for alertness and
drowsiness determination.
Index Terms—Driver fatigue, electrocardiography (ECG), electroencephalography (EEG), eye blinking, health monitoring, intelligent vehicle, nonintrusive, road safety.

I. INTRODUCTION
ROWING aging population is a global phenomenon in
recent decades. The increasing number of elderly car
drivers and the prevalence of chronic diseases call for driver
assistance systems to monitor the health state of drivers. For
medical-assistance systems, the reliable measurement of vital
signals such as electroencephalography (EEG) and electrocardiography (ECG) is one of the most important features [1]. EEG,
the recording of electrical activity along the scalp, reflects the
brain activities and is widely used in the diagnosis of coma and
encephalopathy. ECG and the secondary parameters including
heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV) are key indicators of the cardiac health state. The stressful condition of driving
and the possible sudden scenarios on the road, e.g., fatal traffic

G

Manuscript received September 5, 2013; revised December 16, 2013, January
20, 2014, and January 29, 2014; accepted February 3, 2014. Date of publication
February 10, 2014; date of current version November 3, 2014.
Y. Sun is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA (e-mail:
yxs208@case.edu).
X. Yu is with the Department of Civil Engineering, Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science (courtesy), Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA (e-mail: xxy21@case.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2305403

accidents, may cause severe effects especially on the drivers with
chronic diseases [2]. Therefore, a driver assistance system that
can monitor the multiple vital signals during driving is highly
desirable for elderly drivers or drivers with chronic diseases.
For drivers at all ages, drowsiness is one of the most prevalent root causes of accidents. It leads to nearly 17% of all fatal
crashes in recent years based on the data published by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration [3]. In particular,
truck driver fatigue is a factor in 3%–6% of fatal crashes involving large trucks. The term driver fatigue is defined as decreased
mental alertness that impairs performance during some cognitive tasks such as driving [4]. The sustained mental or physical
fatigue can eventually result in sleepiness. Some studies considered sleepiness and fatigue as similar mental conditions [5], [6].
In this paper, we also used the general concept of sleepiness,
drowsiness, and fatigue.
A number of physiological parameters have been found to
indicate the state of fatigue. Eye activity [7], [8], EEG [9],
[10], ECG, and HRV [11], [12] are the major physiological
indicators used for assessment of sleepiness. Feature extraction
was developed based on different types of physiological signals
to classify drowsy versus awaken drivers. Therefore, the vital
signals (such as ECG, EEG, and eye blinking) are not only
indicators of the health state of drivers but also can be used to
detect the driver fatigue.
The conventional ECG and EEG systems use Ag/AgCl electrodes with a wet electrolyte. Skin preparation is required before placing the electrodes. For eye activity detection in driving
application, video cameras are commonly used to detect the
eye-related parameters such as PERCLOS [13] and reopening
time [7]. Image processing algorithms and related computation
processors are necessary to extract the features from video images. However, few other methods were explored to detect eye
activities.
In contrast to the conventional wet electrodes, capacitive
electrode (CE) provides an alternative way of surface potential
measurement without direct contact with skin. This nonintrusive electrode can sense the biopotentials outside the hair or
cloth [14]. It enables long-term monitoring without skin irritations. A number of devices using CE have been reported for
health care with sensors placed on bed [15], chairs [16] and
wheelchair [17], exercise assistance [18], and automobiles [1].
ECG or EEG signals can be detected from these systems.
In the automobile application, high interference environment
(e.g., when engine is on) and severe motion artifacts are unavoidable. Wet electrodes were commonly used to guarantee good
contact with skin and prevent relative motion. CEs were also
attempted by several groups for unobtrusive ECG measurement

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SUN AND YU: INNOVATIVE NONINTRUSIVE DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM FOR VITAL SIGNAL MONITORING

Fig. 1.

1933

Driver assistance system.

[1], [19]–[22]. Large-area metal plates were installed on the steer
or car seat as grounding or driven-right-leg (DRL) electrodes to
ensure stable signals.
In this study, we developed an innovative in-vehicle nonintrusive driver assistance system that can measure ECG, EEG,
and eye-blinking activities in one device (see Fig. 1). Unipolar
electrode was adopted to minimize the placement and enhance
the simplicity of installation and comfort of drivers. It also provides an easy way to detect the eye activities compared with
a video camera. The proposed noncontact vital signal monitoring system can not only monitor the health state of drivers, but
also detect driver fatigue. In this paper, details of technology
concept and system design were described. Experiments were
conducted on a high fidelity driving simulator. It was found that
EEG, ECG, and eye-activity signals can be reliably measured
by the system. From these, basic medical care functions such
as HR monitoring can be accomplished in real time. Moreover,
eye features, EEG spectrum, and HRV features from the subjects in alertness and sleepiness states were analyzed to explore
the potential algorithm for driver fatigue detection.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Skin–Electrode Interface
The biopotentials on the skin are generated by the bioelectric
activity of organs such as heart and brain, and conducted by
neurons. Between the surface biopotentials and the electrodes,
there are different layers including stratum corneum, cloth, insulation layer, and air gap. Each of these layers is equivalent to
an RC parallel component. The skin–electrode impedance can
be calculated by the equivalent model shown in Fig. 2(a). The
general total impedance of the skin–electrode interface is [14]
n


1
Ri ||
Zs = R +
jωC
i
i=1

Fig. 2. Equivalent models. (a) Equivalent skin–electrode interface of CEs.
(b) Equivalent circuit of the following analog front end.

tual interfaces between the skin and the electrode change with
motion. The impedance of skin–electrode interface is not stable, which will affect the reliability of signal acquisition. When
using a small-area electrode, the coupling capacitance during
motion can vary from 0.1 to 100 pF. This calls for ultrahigh
input impedance of the amplifier to ensure the high sensitivity.
The typical input impedance of commercial amplifiers can be
up to 1015 Ω/0.2 pF (i.e., INA116, Texas Instrument, Inc.). It
is sufficiently high to acquire the signal but cannot eliminate
the influence of the changes in the capacitance of interfaces.
One solution is bootstrapping to enhance the input impedance
which has been adopted by several groups for capacitive ECG
detection [14], [23].
Other than motion artifacts, high interference is also a challenge for application of noncontact physiological monitoring
system for automobile applications. During driving, the unscreened environment with high EM interference from vehicle and cellphone can easily immerse the physiological signals.
The displacement current induced by the EM field couples to the
body and generates both common-mode and differential-mode
voltages. DRL circuit and good grounding of body are usually
used to reduce the common-mode voltage [1], [22]. However, the
DRL circuit requires additional electrodes and wire connection.
High CMRR amplifiers and good shielding are also key issues
to eliminate the common-mode effects. For differential-mode
voltage, highly matched electrodes are required. High input
impedance is also desirable to lessen the differential noise [24].
In summary, delicate system design is necessary to implement
noncontact vital signal sensing for automobile application.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN

(1)

where R is the total resistance of the conductive layer in the
path which is negligible in the calculation; Ri and Ci represent
the resistance and capacitance, respectively, of a certain layer i;
and n is the number of layers.
B. Specification of In-Vehicle Application
During driving process, drivers keep adjusting the operation
of vehicles according to the changing environment. The ac-

A. System Architecture
Our proposed system adopts unipolar design to simplify the
system installation and increase the comfort of drivers. The
unipolar pattern was also adopted by Gargiulo et al. [25]. The
advantages and feasibility were approved by Meziane et al. [26].
In our design, a small conductive plate is used as the electrode
with the area of 4.5 × 2 cm2 . Another plate of the same material
and size is attached to the steer as the ground connection. The entire system is mainly composed of five components: electrodes,
bias current path, amplifier, multistage filter, and shielding.

1934

Fig. 3.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Block diagram and photos of the noncontact physiological detection sensor.

Fig. 3 shows the block diagram and the photo illustrations. The
circuit board is as small as a US quarter.
1) Electrode: In the proposed system, metal plates including stainless steel, soft copper tap and solder mask, are tested as
the electrode material. Besides the common metallic electrodes,
an appealing type is the conductive polymers which are organic
polymers with high electrical conductivity. It features the advantages of polymers to allow for flexible design of electrodes. The
electrons in this structure have high mobility when the material
is doped by oxidation which removes some of these delocalized
electrons. During doping, small fraction silicon atoms are replaced by electron-rich or electron-poor atoms to create n-type
and p-type semiconductors, respectively. In this paper, we evaluate four types of conductive polymers according to the dopants.
The conductive-polymer electrodes are flexible and biocompatible, and can be conveniently integrated with clothing.
2) Instrumentation Amplifier: To obtain high input impedance and low noise, an instrumentation amplifier INA116
(Texas Instrument, Inc.) was applied for amplification. The input impedance is 1015 Ω/0.2 pF. The CMRR is around 90 dB at
0–1 kHz with the gain of 10 V/V.
3) Bias Current Path: The instrumentation amplifier has the
input bias current with a typical value of 3 fA. The bias current
path provides an equivalent resistance for the bias current to
ground to avoid saturation. However, the equivalent parallel resistance can lower the input impedance if not larger than 100 TΩ.
Some studies used the reverse current of signal diodes to provide the bias current [35], [36]. In our design, we calculated the
input resistance and capacitance to the ground according to the
actual condition to form a bias path with impedance as 1014 Ω.
Then we made the layout dimension based on the calculation
strictly.
4) Filter: The frequency components of normal ECG signal ranges from 0.01 to 100 Hz with energy concentrating in
0.5–45 Hz. The major bands of EEG signal range in 0–30 Hz.
Therefore, a lowpass filter with cutoff frequency at 45 Hz is
designed to filter out the high-frequency noise including the
power line interference. A fourth-order Butterworth filer with
the multiple feedback topologies is chosen.

5) Shielding and Grounding: Comparing with the DRL
three-electrode circuit, the single-ended circuit has higher noise
level and less stability; however, it requires less attachment and
causes less distraction to drivers. One compensative method is
to reduce the common mode voltage by good shielding and
lessen the coupling capacitance between body and ground by
use of grounding electrodes. In the design, we found that a thick
copper shielding box could reduce the interference significantly.
The typical detected signals are shown in Section V.
B. Equivalent Circuit Model
The equivalent circuit model considering the skin–electrode
interface is shown in Fig. 2(b). The capacitance of each layer
can be computed as C = εr ε0 S/d, where S is the effective area
which is 4.5 × 2 cm2 , and d is the thickness of 0.2–1 mm for
the cotton layer (dominant layer). Therefore, the capacitance
of the skin–electrode interface is ranging from 8 to 40 pF. The
capacitance and the bias resistance form a high pass filer with
the cutoff frequency at around 0.08 Hz. The transfer function
for the circuit model can be expressed as
Vo
AZin
=
.
Vs
Zsb,sc + Zin + (1 − A)jωCf Zin Zsb,sc

(2)

The EM interference induced voltage can be calculated as
vn = id Ze [27], where id is the interference induced current
through circuit ground (0.1–1 nA [27]), and Ze is the electrode
impedance ranging from 1 to 10 kΩ. Therefore, the interference
induced voltage is around 0.1–10 μV which is within tolerant
range.
IV. EXPERIMENT
A. Equipment
The experiments were conducted on a high fidelity driving
simulator. The simulator consists of a vehicle body with dual
and rear view mirrors, six angled projection surfaces, audio
systems and master control systems, providing 360◦ vision to
the drivers. The scenarios and driving routes can be designed and

SUN AND YU: INNOVATIVE NONINTRUSIVE DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM FOR VITAL SIGNAL MONITORING

1935

Fig. 5. Typical scale results using continuous Wierwille and Ellsworth criteria.
1—class 1, 2—class 2, 3—class 3, 4—class 4, and 5—class 5. (a) Scale results
in the morning section. (b) Scale results in the afternoon section.
Fig. 4.

High fidelity driving simulator.

loaded into the simulator. Prior to the experiment, normal urban
and highway scenarios were developed for driving testing. The
driver assistance system was installed as Fig. 1. Fig. 4 shows
the driving simulator and a typical scenario.
The driving experience on the simulator was evaluated by a
survey. Thirty subjects (8 female and 22 male, age 20–30, average driving experience 4.11 years) participated in the survey
by driving the simulator for 15 min and answering a questionnaire. Nine questions were designed to estimate the similarity
between driving in the simulator and real environment in terms
of the entire driving experience and eight specific aspects such
as the feeling of accelerating, distance, collision, etc. The results
showed that the driving simulator reasonably well simulated the
realistic driving environment based on the feedbacks from the
survey.
B. Subjects and Experiment Protocol
Twelve volunteer drivers (nine male and three female) aged
24–30 (26 ± 2.12) years participated in the experiment on the
driving simulator. All the participants were recruited from the
university and selected as self-evaluated healthy and not addicted to drug or alcohol. Each subject was instructed to drive
with his/her normal driving behaviors. Since the driver assistance system can keep monitoring the health state by measuring
the vital signals, its performance was verified simultaneously
with the experiment of driver fatigue detection.
In the driving simulator, a copper strip detector was attached
to the safety handle from the roof, which hung to the side of
the driver’s head at a distance of around 10 cm. The detector remotely monitored the biopotentials associated with eye blinking
activities [see Fig. 6(a)]. For subjects wearing glasses, the electrode was also attached to the glasses frame. For EEG recording,
the electrodes were placed on top of the hair following the 10–
20 international standard of EEG electrode placement [28]. The
Fz and Oz channels were adopted as suggested by Khushaba
et al. and Santamaria and Chiappa [29], [30]. Neither hair was
removed, nor coupling gel applied. The electrodes were fixed
by a hairband. For ECG recording, the electrode was attached
on the chest of drivers through cloth.
The study involved two experimental sessions in the same
day. Each session took 15–20 min. One was conducted in the
morning when the subjects were self-evaluated as alert, and the
other was in the afternoon after lunch when the subjects were
more possibly drowsy. The ECG, EEG signal, and eye blinking
activities were detected in the experiments.

In the experiment, the face of the driver was also recorded
by a video camera for calibration. The level of drowsiness was
estimated based on the Wierwille and Ellsworth criteria [31]
which were also adopted for driver drowsiness evaluation by
Khushaba et al. [29]. The continuous scale included five descriptors: not drowsy (Class 1), slightly drowsy (Class 2), moderately drowsy (Class 3), very drowsy (Class 4), and extremely
drowsy (Class 5) [31]. One-minute segment was evaluated by
the scale as one of the five descriptors. In the evaluation process, two observers scored the drowsiness levels. The observers
strictly followed the description of drowsiness as suggested by
Wierwille and Ellsworth [31]. The full scale of the five descriptors was adopted, which means that one very alert segment
was defined to be Class 1 and one very drowsy was defined
to be Class 5. Most segments could reach an agreement. The
disagreement occurred between adjacent classes in few cases.
For example, one observer evaluated to be Class 1 and the other
considered it as Class 2. This case did not affect the results as
Classes 1 and 2 were both considered as alertness. Only in two
cases, the observers could not reach an agreement for Classes 3
and 4. These two segments were not used in further analysis. To
further avoid biasing judgment, we also used the “quantity” to
verify the observation results as [37]. In the observation, the slow
eyelid closures, rubbing the face or eyes, scratching, yawning,
and nodding, were counted as drowsiness countermeasures. The
number of the occurrence of the countermeasures determined
the level of drowsiness. The results were allied to each other. In
the test–retest examination, the results were similar. One segment considered as Class 5 was considered as Class 4. Another
two segments evaluated as Class 2 were then considered to be
Class 3. These Class 3 segments were removed for further analysis. Typical scoring results of morning and afternoon sessions
are shown in Fig. 5.
C. Signal Preprocessing
The measured biopotential signal is contaminated with several sources of noise, such as electromyography (EMG), power
line interference, electronic noise, and baseline drifts. The EMG
signal is caused by human motion and muscle contraction, which
typically ranges between 6 and 500 Hz [32]; the 60-Hz interference is due to the power line; and the drift is caused by the
movement of electrode and breathing. The noise is filtered partially by the hardware filtering. A digital bandpass filer was
introduced to further reduce the noise. The four major bands of
EEG signal ranges in 0–4, 4–8, 8–13, and 13–30 Hz, respectively. Therefore, the cutoff frequency of the digital filter was
designed to be changeable. The preprocessed signals were then
used in the subsequent analyses.

1936

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. Eye blinking detection. (a) Experiment protocol. (b) Typical signal
detected from the system. t1, t2 are the eye closing time and the reopening
time; t1+t2 is the overall blinking time; and t3 is the interval between blinking
activities.

V. RESULT AND ANALYSIS
A. Vital Signal Measurement
1) Eye Blinking Detection: A typical eye blinking signal is
shown in Fig. 6(b). The eye-blinking activities cause pulses in
the biopotential signals. Using peak identification algorithm developed in this paper, the occurrence of eye blinking can be
determined in real time. Comparison study was conducted between the recorded signals and the video record. When the eyes
started to close, a positive edge occurred immediately, whereas
during reopening, a negative edge followed. These formed a
sharp pulse for one blinking cycle. Several key parameters can
be analyzed from the measured eye blinking signal. In Fig. 6(b),
t1, t2 represent the eye closing time and the reopening time;
t1+t2 is the overall blinking time; whereas t3 is the interval
between blinking activities. Drowsy drivers typically have problems to control their eyes [13]. Physiologically this behaves as
rapid blinking at the on-set of drowsiness and slow blinking as
the drivers are deeply affected.
2) EEG Detection: Based on the raw EEG data detected
from the system, the fast Fourier transform algorithm was applied to decompose the signal into four frequency bands, i.e., β,
α, θ, and δ bands. The detected wave components were compared with the standard clinic signals in order to evaluate the
performance of the device. Fig. 7(a)–(c) compared α, θ, and δ
waves, respectively. In each figure, the lower trace is the signal
obtained from the nonintrusive system whereas the upper one
is the typical reference signals detected by a clinic EEG device.
The patterns of the two signals are allied to each other, which
verify that the brain waves associated with EEG can be detected
by the system.
3) ECG Detection: The nonintrusive ECG measurement
was verified by comparing with a clinic 12-lead ECG system.
The clinic system used Ag/AgCl wet electrodes and electrolyte
attached directly to the skin. Our electrode was placed right
above the clinic electrode outside the cloth to compare the performance. A typical ECG signal detected from chest by our
device is displayed as the lower trace in Fig. 8, whereas that
detected from the clinic chest lead is shown as the upper trace.
The two signals were detected simultaneously. In the capacitive
ECG signal, the R–R intervals and the QRS complexes are comparable to the clinic one. To detect HR and HRV automatically,

Fig. 7. EEG bands compared with clinic signals. (a) Alpha wave. (b) Theta
wave. (c) Delta wave. In each figure, the upper trace is the typical EEG band
signal and the lower one is that detected and computed by our system.

Fig. 8. ECG signal detection comparing with clinic devices. Upper trace-ECG
signal detected by clinic devices; and lower trace-ECG signal detected by the
proposed system.

an algorithm was developed to pick the QRS peak and calculate
the HR and HRV in real time. The HR and HRV parameters including both time-domain and frequency-domain measures can
be computed for further analysis.
B. System Stability in Driving Scenarios
During normal driving, drivers stay still in most of time;
however, at some time, the movements and friction between the
electrode and human body can cause severe motion artifacts

SUN AND YU: INNOVATIVE NONINTRUSIVE DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM FOR VITAL SIGNAL MONITORING

TABLE I
STABILITY OF THE PERFORMANCE DURING DIFFERENT SCENARIOS

1937

analysis and observed some scaling differences between sleep
deprived and nondeprived groups.

D. Feature Extraction

for CEs. Therefore, it is needed to analyze the feasibility of
applying the nonintrusive system in automobile applications.
From implementation perspective, however, it is not necessary
for a perfect signal at every second during driving [1]. For
example, for each 1-min segment, if the detected signal can be
stable for more than 15 s, this segment can be considered as
a successful one. The stability of the system is defined as the
number of successful segments over total number of segments.
The results from a typical subject are shown in Table I (total 20
segments were analyzed).
From Table I, it can be seen that the performance for HR and
HRV detection is reasonably stable, which qualifies the function for long-term application. The performance for eye activity
detection is unsatisfactory when the electrode is mounted on the
roof. The performance, however, is significantly improved when
placed on the glasses frame. In the data collection process, the
electrodes made of soft metal taps were placed/wrapped on the
frame of the eyeglasses. They could be bended and attached. It
is also found that in highway scenarios where drivers have less
motion, the system performance demonstrates high stability.
Under a traffic condition, where more motions are involved in
vehicle operation, the results are still acceptable in most cases.
It is also noticed during the experiments that when the drivers
were asked to reduce their motion, the recorded signals became
more stable.
C. Fatigue Detection Background
A few physiological parameters of drivers have been observed to be well connected to drowsiness. In the eye-activitybased assessment, one of the most widely used parameters is the
PERCLOS which refers to the duration of eye closure over 80%
of time [13]. Other parameters such as reopening time [7], the
intervals between eye blinks, and the speed of blinking [8] were
also studied by some researchers.
In EEG-based assessment, Lal et al. [9] developed an algorithm to assess driver drowsiness based on the changes in
EEG bands (α, θ, β, and δ bands). Lin et al. [10] estimated the
drowsiness level by independent component analysis (ICA) of
EEG and found the optimal locations to place EEG electrodes.
Jap et al. [33] compared four algorithms based on the four EEG
bands. The result showed that a slight decrease of alpha activity and a significant decrease of beta activity were associated
with fatigue. The ECG features are also extracted to analyze
sleepiness, including both time domain and frequency domain.
Yang et al. [34] classified sleep into wake, rapid eye movement
(REM) and non-REM stages using very low frequency (VLF),
low frequency (LF), high frequency (HF) and the LF/HF ratio
in HRV analysis. Roman et al. [8] used detrended fluctuation

In this study, we also extracted and analyzed the features from
the three types of vital signals. For eye activities, the blinking
frequency (blinking times per min), blink duration [t1+t2 in
Fig. 6(b)] were adopted as the measures of eye blinking activities. For EEG signals, first, two digital bandpass filters with the
pass band ranging in 8–13 Hz and 13–30 Hz were applied to the
data to extract the alpha wave and beta wave from the original
signals. Then power density of the two waves was calculated to
compare the alertness and sleepiness conditions of each subject.
For ECG signal, HRV and its selected measures in time domain
and frequency domain were selected and calculated as described
in Table II.
To differentiate driver states, Classes 1 and 2 were marked
as alertness and Classes 4 and 5 were marked as drowsiness
in the data analyses. One-way ANOVA was applied to test the
significance of each feature.

E. Result and Discussion for Fatigue Detection Application
1) Eye Blinking Results: In the alertness condition, the average blinking frequency of the 12 subjects was 7.0 ± 1.6 times
per minute; the average blinking duration was around 11.3 ms.
In the Class 4 drowsiness condition, two of the subjects blinked
faster than in the alertness condition; the rest were similar. The
average blinking frequency of the subjects was 8.2 ± 3.0 times
per minute. In the Class 5 drowsiness condition, the eyelid began
to close slowly acting as the duration of each blinking activities
becoming much longer. The blinking duration shows the significance between alertness and extremely drowsiness (p < 0.05).
All the results are illustrated in Table III.
2) EEG Results: Two of the EEG results were not feasible
for data analysis as the electrodes slipped away from the hair in
the experiment. The rest ten groups of data were used for feature
extraction. Comparing the EEG signals in alertness and fatigue
conditions of each subject, the alpha wave decreased slightly
while the beta wave remained relatively stable. This result is
analogous to that in [33]. However, the ANOVA analysis did
not show the significant linkage of either alpha or beta waves
with extent of drowsiness.
3) HRV Results: In the time domain, the SDNN and RMSSD
(described in Table II) are two main statistical measures of HRV.
From the results, little change can be found from the SDNN and
RMSSD, which means that the HR did not show significant
difference between the alertness and sleepiness conditions. In
the frequency domain, the spectral power density of LF, HF,
and the ratio of LF/HF were extracted from the HRV data. The
power density of LF component remained similar in the two
conditions, whereas the HF increased apparently from alertness
to drowsiness. The power density of HF and the ratio of LF/HF
are significant measures to distinguish alertness and drowsiness.
This result is similar to those observed in [12].

1938

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE II
SELECTED MEASURES OF HRV

TABLE III
RESULTS OF THE SELECTED MEASURES

VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed an innovative noninvasive driver
assistance system. The system features high sensitivity in the
measurement of biopotentials on human body and requires no
physical contact with skin. This method causes less mental or
physical loads to the drivers and is advantageous for long-term
driver monitoring purpose. The system can measure physiological signals such as eye blinking activity, EEG and ECG signals
in the real time, which are widely accepted vital signals for
health monitoring and drowsiness measures. The performance
of the system was verified on a high-fidelity driving simulator.
Experiments were conducted on subjects with different alertness and sleepiness conditions. The eye activity, EEG and ECG
features were recorded on the alert and drowsy drivers using the
nonintrusive system. Results showed that the blinking duration,
and the LF, HF components from HRV are significant physiological measures between alertness and drowsiness, which are
consistent with other studies. Our long-term goal is to develop
this technology into a robust in-vehicle driver diagnosis and
medical assistance system to improve the health and safety of
drivers.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Wartzek, B. Eilebrecht, J. Lem, H.-J. Lindner, S. Leonhardt, and
M. Walter, “ECG on the road: Robust and unobtrusive estimation of heart
rate,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3112–3120, Nov.
2011.
[2] A. H. Taylor and L. Dorn, “Stress, fatigue, health and risk of road traffic accidents among professional drivers: The contribution of physical
inactivity,” Annu. Rev. Public Health, vol. 27, pp. 371–391, 2006.
[3] L. Copeland, “Study: Sleepiness a factor in 17% of road deaths,” USA
Today, Nov. 8, 2010.
[4] A. M. Williamson, A. Feyer, and R. Friswell, “The impact of work practices on fatigue in long distance truck drivers,” Accident Anal. Prev.,
vol. 28, pp. 709–719, 1996.

[5] Y. Dong, Z. Hu, K. Uchimura, and N. Murayama, “Driver inattention
monitoring system for intelligent vehicles: A review,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 596–614, Jun. 2011.
[6] S. K. L. Lal and A. Craig, “A critical review of the psychophysiology of
driver fatigue,” Biol. Psychol., vol. 55, pp. 173–194, 2001.
[7] P. P. Caffier, U. Erdmann, and P. Ullsperger, “Experimental evaluation of
eye-blink parameters as a drowsiness measure,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 89, pp. 319–325, 2003.
[8] B. Roman, S. Pavel, P. Miroslav, V. Petr, and P. Lubomir, “Fatigue Indicators of drowsy drivers based on analysis of physiological signals,” in
Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Med. Data Anal., 2001, pp. 62–68.
[9] S. K. L. Lal, A. Craiga, P. Boorda, L. Kirkupb, and H. Nguyenc, “Development of an algorithm for an EEG-based driver fatigue countermeasure,”
J. Safety Res., vol. 34, pp. 321–328, 2003.
[10] C. T. Lin, R. C. Wu, S. F. Liang, W. H. Chao, Y.-J. Chen, and T.-P. Jung,
“EEG-based drowsiness estimation for safety driving using independent
component analysis,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 2726–2738, Dec. 2005.
[11] S. Redmond and C. Heneghan, “Electrocardiogram-based automatic sleep
staging in sleep disordered breathing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Comput. Cardiogram Conf., 2003, pp. 609–612.
[12] E. Michail, A. Kokonozi, and I. Chouvarda, “EEG and HRV markers of
sleepiness and loss of control during car driving,” in Proc. IEEE 30th
Annu. Int. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Vancouver, BC, Canada, Aug.
20–24, 2008, pp. 2566–2569.
[13] R. Grace and S. Steward, “Drowsy driver monitor and warning system,” in
Proc. 1st Int. Driving Symp. Human Factors Driver Assessment, Training
Vehicle Des., Aspen, CO, USA, Aug. 2001, pp. 64–69.
[14] Y. M. Chi, T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and noncontact
biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 3, pp. 106–119, 2010.
[15] Y. G. Lim, K. K. Kim, and K. S. Park, “ECG recording on a bed during
sleep without direct skin-contact,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54,
no. 4, pp. 718–725, Apr. 2007.
[16] A. Aleksandrowicz and S. Leonhardt, “Wireless and non-contact ECG
measurement system—The Aachen SmartChair,” Acta Polytechnica,
vol. 2, pp. 68–71, 2007.
[17] O. Postolache, P. Girão, J. Joaquim, and G. Postolache, “Unobstrusive
heart rate and respiration rate monitor embedded on a wheelchair,” in
Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Work. Med. Meas. Appl. Cetraro, 2009, pp. 83–
88.
[18] Y. D. Lee and W. Y. Chung, “Wireless sensor network based wearable
smart shirt for ubiquitous health and activity monitoring,” Sensor Actuator
B, vol. 140, pp. 390–395, 2009.

SUN AND YU: INNOVATIVE NONINTRUSIVE DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM FOR VITAL SIGNAL MONITORING

[19] S. Leonhardt and A. Aleksandrowicz, “Non-contact ECG monitoring for
automotive application,” in Proc. 5th Int. Summer School Symp. Med.
Devices Biosens., 2008, pp. 183–185.
[20] T. Matsuda and M. Makikawa, “ECG monitoring of a car driver using
capacitively-coupled electrodes,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Ann. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, pp. 1315–1318.
[21] T. Maruyama, M. Makikawa, N. Shiozawa, and Y. Fujiwara, “ECG measurement using capacitive coupling electrodes for man-machine emotional
communication,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Complex Med. Eng., 2007,
pp. 378–383.
[22] M. Walter, B. Eilebrecht, T. Wartzek, and S. Leonhardt, “The smart car
seat: Personalized monitoring of vital signals in automotive applications,”
Pers. Ubiquit. Comput., vol. 15, pp. 707–715, 2011.
[23] C. J. Harland, T. D. Clark, and R. J. Prance, “Electric potential probes—
New directions in the remote sensing of the human body,” Meas. Sci.
Technol., vol. 13, pp. 163–169, 2002.
[24] P. S. Luna-Lozano and R. Pallas-Areny, “Power-line interference in the
ECG obtained with capacitive electrodes,” in Proc. 5th Eur. Conf. Int. Fed.
Med. Biological Eng., 2011, pp. 910–913.
[25] G. D. Gargiulo, A. L. McEwan, P. Bifulco, M. Cesarelli, C. Jin, J. Tapson,
A. Thiagalingam, and A. Van Schaik, “Towards true unipolar bio-potential
recording: A preliminary result for ECG,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 34, pp. N1–
N7, 2013.
[26] N. Meziane, J. G. Webster, M. Attari, and A. J. Nimunkar, “Dry electrodes
for electrocardiography,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 34, pp. R47–R69, 2013.
[27] T. V. Thakor and J. G. Webster, “Ground-free ECG recording with two
electrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-27, no. 12, pp. 699–
704, Dec. 1980.
[28] H. H. Jasper, “The ten-twenty electrode system of the International Federation,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 10, pp. 371–375,
1958.
[29] R. N. Khushaba, S. Kodagoda, S. Lal, and G. Dissanayake, “Driver drowsiness classification using fuzzy wavelet-packet-based feature-extraction
algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 121–131, Jan.
2011.
[30] J. Santamaria and K. H. Chiappa, The EEG of Drowsiness. New York,
NY, USA: Demos Publication, 1978.
[31] W. W. Wierwille and L. A. Ellsworth, “Evaluation of driver drowsiness
by trained raters,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 571–581,
1994.
[32] A. B. Barreto, S. D. Scargle, and M. Adjouadi, “A practical EMG-based
human-computer interface for users with motor disabilities,” J. Rehabil.
Res. Dev., vol. 37, pp. 53–64, 2000.
[33] B. T. Jap, S. Lal, P. Fischer, and E. Bekiaris, “Using EEG spectral components to assess algorithms for detecting fatigue,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 36, pp. 2352–2359, 2009.
[34] G. Yang, Y. Lin, and P. Bhattacharya, “A driver fatigue recognition model
based on information fusion and dynamic Bayesian network,” Inform.
Sci., vol. 180, pp. 1942–1954, 2010.

1939

[35] R. J. Prance, T. D. Clark, H. Prance, and A. Clippingdale, “Non-contact
VLSI imaging using a scanning electric potential microscope,” Meas. Sci.
Technol., vol. 9, pp. 1229–1235, 1998.
[36] Y. M. Chi and G. Cauwenberghs, “Micropower non-contact EEG electrode with active common-mode noise suppression and input capacitance
cancellation,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Minneapolis, MN,
USA, Sep. 2009, pp. 4218–4221.
[37] J. A. Healey and R. W. Picard, “Detecting stress during real-word driving
tasks using physiological sensors,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 156–166, Jun. 2005.

Ye Sun (S’xx) received the B.S. degree in precise instrumentation of measurement and control from Tianjin University, China, in 2009. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA.
Since 2009, she has been with the Case Western Reserve University as a Research Assistant. Her
research interests include biomedical signal measurement, body sensor network, and personal state monitoring in transportation safety.

Xiong (Bill) Yu (M’03) received the B.S. degree in
hydraulic engineering and computer science and the
M.S. degree in civil engineering both from Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering and computer science and the Ph.D. degree in
civil engineering both from Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA, in 2002 and 2003, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Civil Engineering with secondary appointments in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA. His recent research activities include sensors and materials for sustainability, human health and environment.
Prof. Yu is a member of the ASCE, the ASME, and the SPIE.

