IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1923

Multiscale Roughness Approach for Assessing
Posterior Capsule Opacification
Aruna Vivekanand, Naoufel Werghi, Member, IEEE, and Hussain Al-Ahmad, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Posterior capsule opacification (PCO) is a common
complication in patients who have undergone cataract surgery, occurring in up to 50% of patients by two to three years after the
operation. Assessment of PCO has been mainly subjective, making it difficult to understand its progression over time or assess the
effectiveness of strategies used for the prevention of PCO. Fully automated PCO assessment systems developed so far offer objective
grades. However, they do not provide morphological PCO data useful for an effective analysis of scores. This paper proposes a novel
method based on multiscale roughness estimation to detect and
quantify the PCO areas. This method is also characterized by its
robustness against monotonic illumination variations. Extensive
experimentation showcases a distinctive analysis and assessment
power of our method compared to other competitive methods. The
results show a high correlation of 84.6% with respect to clinical
scores
Index Terms—Computer-aided detection, entropy, illumination
variation, multiscale roughness, posterior capsule opacification
(PCO), segmentation.

I. INTRODUCTION
OSTERIOR capsule opacification (PCO) is a common
complication of cataract surgery in patients who have undergone the extra capsular cataract extraction surgery. PCO is
caused by the growth of the lens epithelium cells (LECs) remaining in the posterior capsular area of the eye after the cataract
surgery. These cells develop as different types of PCO, namely,
pearls, fibrosis, and wrinkles as shown in Fig. 1. Severe PCO
causes blurry vision, which may be worse than it was before
cataract surgery. Though PCO can be corrected by Nd:YAG laser
capsulotomy, the treatment apart from being expensive is associated with increased risk of retinal detachment [1]. Considerable
research has been done to study the influence of surgical techniques, lens material, and design on the growth of PCO. However, the highly subjective clinical assessment of PCO makes it
difficult to assess the effectiveness of strategies suggested for
the prevention of PCO. Hence, there is a need for development
of a standard PCO quantification system, which ensures an objective and reliable assessment of PCO with minimal human
intervention.

P

Manuscript received August 12, 2013; revised November 23, 2013; accepted
January 29, 2014. Date of publication February 6, 2014; date of current
version November 3, 2014. This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation under Grant UIRCA 2012-21803.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Khalifa University of Science and Technology, Sharjah 573, UAE (e-mail:
aruna.vivekanand@gmail.com; naoufel.werghi@kustar.ac.ae; alahmad@
kustar.ac.ae).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2304965

Fig. 1. PCO image samples: (a) clear eye capsule, (b) pearls PCO, (c) fibrosis
PCO, and (d) wrinkles PCO.

Digital images captured using retroillumination and
Scheimpflug photography helped computerize the image analysis. The basic idea is to detect and classify the PCO areas
in the digital image and then quantify PCO from the number
of classified pixels. A number of digital image analysis techniques [2]–[4] have been proposed for the quantification of PCO.
However, these systems provide subjective scores due to human
involvement. PCO images demonstrate complex nondeterministic texture, and in many cases, PCO areas can have similar
intensity and texture compared to the clear areas, depending
on the severity of PCO and inherent uneven illumination conditions of retroillumination photography [5]. These factors further
increase the difficulty of segmentation of PCO images.
An ideal PCO quantification system should be capable of
handling a variety of PCO textures and provide morphological details along with the quantification of PCO without human
intervention. The system should also be robust to illumination
variations as the captured PCO images vary widely with respect
to background illumination. In order to address these issues, this
paper proposes a method that computes the multiscale roughness values for every pixel in the image. The roughness image
obtained is then clustered using histogram-based thresholding
technique. Finally, PCO percentage is computed from the number of pixels present in each cluster. The results obtained using
this method showed high correlation with respect to clinical
grading and other existing methods apart from being robust to
monotonic illumination variations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides the background to the existing methods of PCO assessment. Section III provides the details of the proposed method of
PCO assessment. Section IV comprises the experimental results
and comparison with the previous methods of PCO assessment.
The conclusions of our research work are presented in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND
Quantitative assessment of PCO has received the attention
of many researchers from both the medical and computer vision community. Tetz et al. [2] proposed an interactive system

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1924

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

called evaluation of PCO (EPCO) whereby the operator manually traces the boundaries of the textured areas in the image.
Then, the operator assigns a color code with a score between
0 and 4 to each textured area in the image based on the severity of PCO. A PCO grade is then calculated by summing the
scores weighted by the fractional area of each zone. Though the
scores are highly influenced by operator bias, this system has
been widely used as a standard in clinical comparison studies.
The intensity-based thresholding technique developed by Wang
and Woung [6] is very sensitive to illumination variations. The
intensity-based segmentation techniques like k-means, fuzzy Cmeans, and mean shift do not work for the segmentation of PCO
images as the PCO areas tend to exhibit intensity levels similar
to the clear areas. Hence, it becomes necessary to use texture
analysis for the segmentation of PCO images.
Searching for a particular pattern is not possible with the PCO
images, because they possess quite an un-deterministic nature.
Paplinski and Boyce [4] proposed that PCO areas in an image
are rich in texture. They calculated a set of conjugate images
from the original image using directional variance edge filters.
Gray-level co-occurrence matrices (GLCMs) are obtained from
the conjugate images. The thresholds obtained from the main diagonal of GLCM are used for the segmentation of PCO images.
However, the distribution of the gray levels in the image data is
very often not truly Gaussian; hence, it is not possible to find an
optimum threshold value automatically and best segmentation
results are observed when the thresholds are set manually [7].
Posterior Capsule Opacity (POCO) software [5] is based on the
same principle with a technique devised to find thresholds automatically. However, this software does not provide a measure
of severity of PCO; hence, it might result in high scores even
in some mild cases of PCO when a thin LEC membrane covers
most of the capsular area. Moreover the texture-based segmentation methods were only able to detect the borders of pearls and
incapable of detecting the interiors of pearls as severe PCO, because the interior areas exhibit smooth texture, which is similar
to the neighboring clear areas.
Based on the fact that PCO areas are characterized by randomness, statistical measures were used for the quantification of
PCO. Automated quantification of after cataract (AQUA) system [8] and open-access systematic capsule assessment (OSCA)
system [9] have used entropy for texture analysis as this feature
measures the randomness of gray-level distribution. AQUA system used entropy calculated from GLCM for texture analysis,
whereas OSCA system used local entropy calculated from the
intensity histogram of the region as a measure of randomness
of gray-level distribution. Additionally, OSCA system takes the
location of PCO areas into consideration when calculating PCO
scores, as the areas of PCO distant from the center of the visual
axis have a reduced effect on vision compared to PCO areas at
the center [10]. However, PCO scores based on entropy calculation are highly sensitive to illumination variations across the
image. It was proposed by Werghi et al. [11] that roughness can
be used as a texture measure to quantify PCO. They evaluated
the roughness using the concept of regions. Pixels are classified
into clusters based on their chromatic values and each class of
pixels is decomposed into regions. PCO score is computed from

the total number of regions. A limitation with this approach is
that the system might result in low PCO scores in some cases
of severe PCO when the PCO image exhibits a few number
of homogenous PCO regions but with large areas. Also, none
of these methods provide morphological details of PCO. The
morphological details of PCO are important for validating PCO
scores and identification of patients for an effective treatment
of PCO. Grewal et al. [12] introduced a new method for PCO
quantification using Pentacam, a rotating Scheimpflug imaging
system. However, unlike the retroillumination imaging system,
Scheimpflug system is not available at most ophthalmological
departments. Further the scatter light intensity measurements of
Scheimpflug system are influenced by the intraocular lens (IOL)
material as shown by Tanaka et al. [13], which would lead to
inaccuracies in PCO quantification results. Hence, this leaves
scope for further investigation of a method that can model the
complex texture of PCO.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
Our proposed method of PCO assessment consists of three
stages: preprocessing, estimation of multiscale roughness, and
classification.
A. Preprocessing
The images are obtained using the retroillumination photography. Since the central area of the capsule is considered to be
visually significant [14], the central 60% of the area is treated
as the region of interest and the remaining area is set with the
average intensity level, after which the images are converted to
gray scale. The images captured using retroillumination photography have characteristically uneven background illumination.
Hence, the background illumination is estimated by performing
morphological opening using a disk-shaped structuring element.
The size of the structuring element is chosen such that it does
not contain the details of the image. Finally, the preprocessed
image is obtained by subtracting the illumination estimate from
the original image.
B. Estimation of Point-Wise Multiscale Roughness
The proposed method uses roughness as a texture measure to
quantify PCO. It is based on the idea that a pixel in the interiors
of pearls may demonstrate smoothness in the immediate vicinity
but exhibit roughness when estimated over a larger area. Hence,
the multiscale roughness value for each pixel (x, y) in the image is derived from the roughness values estimated over different
concentric rings surrounding the pixel as shown in Fig. 2, in an
attempt to simulate the human ability to visualize the uniformity of a region at different scales. The bilinearly interpolated
neighboring pixel values are considered in the computation of
roughness values. The rings with larger radius contain larger
number of neighbors to capture a larger area.
This idea of multiscale descriptor has been inspired from the
Holder exponent representation, which is used as a regularity
descriptor to describe the salient features of an image. Holder
exponent is described by Liu and Li [15] using (1). α(x) is called

VIVEKANAND et al.: MULTISCALE ROUGHNESS APPROACH FOR ASSESSING POSTERIOR CAPSULE OPACIFICATION

1925

Fig. 3. Steps of proposed method: (a) original PCO image, (b) preprocessed
image, (c) complement of roughness image, (d) segmented image using Otsu
method, and (e) final segmented image after filling holes. (d) and (e) Blue, green,
cyan, and white colors, respectively, indicate severe, moderate, mild, and clear
areas of PCO. Colors are best seen in the softcopy version.

Fig. 2. Circular neighborhoods of pixel (x, y) at radius r = 1, 2, and 3. The
neighboring pixel values are bilinearly interpolated.

the Holder exponent on x for a predefined measure μ defined
on a compact set Ω, if
∀x ∈ Ω, ∃α(x), such that μ (Br (x)) ∼ rα , for small r

(1)

where Br (x) is the ball of radius r centered on x.
They proposed different predefined measures for the computation of Holder exponents through which different purposes
can be accomplished. Chakraborty et al. [16] have proposed a
new predefined measure for the segmentation of high-resolution
satellite images. They have estimated the intensity value for each
radius using linear regression analysis from the logarithmic plot
of neighboring pixel values against radius. The difference between the estimated intensity value and the actual neighboring
pixel intensity values for each radius is used as the predefined
measure. However, the same method cannot be applied to PCO
images, as linear regression analysis requires a data model that
is linear in the model coefficients that does not hold for PCO images. Hence, we used the measure of dispersion of neighboring
pixel intensity values on a particular ring from the mean value
as the predefined measure.
For a two-dimensional (2-D) image, let I(x, y) represent the
intensity value of the pixel (x, y) in the image. For each pixel
(x, y), R number of concentric rings of radius r, where r varies
from rm in to rm ax , are considered. The predefined measure μr k
is the amount of dispersion of kth interpolated neighboring pixel
value from the mean intensity value on a ring of radius r and is
given by
μr k = |Pr k − Mr |

(2)

where
Pr k is the kth interpolated neighboring pixel intensity value
on a ring of radius r,
Mr is the mean intensity value of the interpolated neighboring
pixels on a ring of radius r, and
μr k is the predefined measure.

Fig. 4. PCO percentage values obtained using Otsu and k-means segmentation
methods shown with line of equality.

The multiscale roughness value α of a pixel (x, y) in the image
is defined as
α=

rm a x 
nr
log μr k
1 
N r =r
log r
m in

(3)

k =1

where
nr is the number of interpolated neighboring pixels on a ring
of radius r and
N is the total number of interpolated neighboring pixels.
The choice of radius r used in the calculation of α is very
important. α calculated over large r captures the roughness of
large areas, but the details are neglected. When roughness values
are evaluated using small r, the interiors of the huge pearls could
not be detected as severe PCO.
The roughness image S is obtained from the point-wise
roughness values by normalizing the values to the range 0–255
using (4)
S (x, y) =

α (x, y) − αm in
× 255
αm ax − αm in

(4)

where αm in and αm ax are the minimum and maximum multiscale roughness values, respectively.
C. Classification
Once the original image has been transformed into roughness
image, the histogram-based thresholding method proposed by

1926

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. Roughness images computed using proposed method with different multiscale radius values. (a) PCO gray-scale image with region of interest selected
(b) r = 1–3, (c) r = 1–5, (d) r = 1–7, (e) r = 1–9, (f) r = 1–11, and (g) r = 1–13. For better visualization, the complement of roughness image is shown.
TABLE I
ASSESSING AGREEMENT BETWEEN EPCO METHOD AND PROPOSED METHOD FOR DIFFERENT MULTISCALE RADIUS VALUES USING BLAND–ALTMAN ANALYSIS

Otsu [17] is used to segment the roughness image into four
clusters of different PCO severity as clear (grade 0), mild (grade
1), moderate (grade 2), and severe (grade 3). The advantage of
this method is that optimal thresholds are found automatically
from the histogram by minimizing the intraclass variance of the
different classes. However, it is possible that the interiors of
some pearls may still not be classified as severe PCO because of
smooth texture, which is quite similar to clear areas. But since
the borders of the pearls tend to be rough, it is highly probable
that the pearl border pixels are classified as severe PCO. The
binary image corresponding to severe PCO pixels is obtained
and morphological opening is applied on this binary image along
with a set of logical operations to fill the small holes in the image
that correspond to the pearl interior areas. The clusters are then
updated accordingly.
PCO score is calculated from the number of pixels falling in
each cluster of the region of interest, multiplied by the severity
grade of that cluster
PCO Score =

3
i=0 pi ∗ i

3
i=0 pi

(5)

where pi is the pixel count with a grade i.
Since grade 3 is the highest grade, the PCO percentage is
obtained by multiplying the PCO score obtained in (5) with
100/3.
The intermediate results obtained at different steps of the
proposed method are shown in Fig. 3.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A series of experiments were conducted using 43 real PCO
images. The images are obtained using digital retroillumination
imaging system. The patient is asked to place chin on a chin
rest and look at the illumination light. The technician centers
the recording optics on the posterior capsule under direct vision
and acquires the image. The image is inspected and stored in
jpeg format. The images we used in our experiments are the raw

images initially saved by the technician without undergoing any
quality enhancement processing.
To evaluate the results from the proposed method, they are
compared with the following methods.
1) Clinical grading—This is a subjective and discrete grading performed by clinicians with grades given as 1, 2, 3,
or 4, depending on the severity of PCO. The clinician staff
involved in the evaluation comprises of three practicing
consultants having more than 8 years of postqualification experience and two senior consultants having more
than 25 years of experience. The scores related to the
43 PCO images were obtained as follows. The grading
was performed first by the three consultants in a doubleblind manner, meaning the grader neither knows the grades
given by other colleagues, nor the grades obtained in our
approach. The grading was performed in identical time
and space circumstances. Images that received grades with
disparities greater than 1 are examined by the two senior
consultants.
2) EPCO Software—This is a free software that is available
for download at [18] and has been used as a standard
in many PCO clinical comparison studies. This software
allows classification of PCO image into five areas of different PCO severity and the evaluated PCO scores are in
the range 0–4.
3) Global entropy method—AQUA software [8], which is
based on this method is also used in many clinical PCO
studies. The global entropy value of each preprocessed
image is computed from the GLCM of the preprocessed
image using (6) as defined in [19]

p (i, j) log (p (i, j))
(6)
Hg = −
i

j

where p (i, j) is the (i, j)th entry in a normalized GLCM.
4) Local entropy filtering method—The local entropy filter
as defined in [20] is applied on the preprocessed image
to evaluate irregularity around each pixel. The local entropy of the 2 m+1 by 2n+1 neighborhood is computed

VIVEKANAND et al.: MULTISCALE ROUGHNESS APPROACH FOR ASSESSING POSTERIOR CAPSULE OPACIFICATION

1927

Fig. 6. Comparison of segmented results of proposed method, segmentation by conjugate images method and local entropy filtering method with EPCO ground
truth. (b) Transparent, cyan, turquoise, light blue, and dark blue, respectively, indicate [0–4] regions of PCO severity. (c), (e), and (g) White, cyan, green, and blue,
respectively, indicate clear, mild, moderate, and severe PCO areas. Colors are best seen in the softcopy version.
TABLE II
PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS TO MEASURE THE CORRELATION BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT PCO ASSESSMENT METHODS

1928

Fig. 7.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Bland Altman plots to assess the agreement between (a) EPCO and proposed method and (b) global entropy and proposed method.

using (7)
H (i, j) = −

i+m


j
+n

p (I (u, v)) log(p (I (u, v))

u =i−m v =j −n

(7)
where I(u, v) is the intensity of the pixel (u, v) in the
image. p(I) is the probability mass function of the image
intensity within the local window. The chosen window
size is 9 × 9.
5) Number of regions method—PCO score is derived from
the number of regions computed in the image as proposed
in [11].
6) Segmentation by conjugate images—This texture-based
segmentation method, which is proposed by Paplinski
and Boyce [4], uses the GLCM derived from conjugate
images. However, this method does not yield automatic
thresholds and requires manual setting of thresholds.
Hence, it is only used for the sake of visual comparison
of segmented results where optimum thresholds are
chosen manually. Moreover, it is observed that the best
results are obtained when the images are subjected to the
preprocessing stage in Section III-A where background
illumination is eliminated.
The following aspects have been checked using the experiments:
A. Choice of Segmentation Method
The roughness image obtained in Section III-B is segmented
into four clusters using both k-means and Otsu methods and
PCO percentage values of the 43 images obtained are compared.
The results showed a high correlation of 97.86% as shown in
Fig. 4; hence, any of these methods can be used for the sake
of segmentation. In the following sections, we have used Otsu
method for the segmentation purpose. The mean shift method is
not tested because of the complexity of calculation and also it offers surplus regions. Also the results of mean shift segmentation
depend on the size of the window.

Fig. 8.

Artificial illumination pattern.

B. Optimum Value of R (Number of Concentric Rings)
to Compute Roughness Image
We have tested the proposed method for different R with
rm in = 1 and rm ax = 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and 13. The roughness images
for different values of R are demonstrated in Fig. 5. It can be
observed that as the number of scales increases, the vicinity
of irregularity becomes wider; however, less scales result in a
noisy image.
The measure of agreement between the computed PCO percentage values for different R and EPCO method is studied using Bland–Altman analysis by plotting the difference between
the scores from the two methods against the mean value of the
PCO scores. The biases, upper and lower limits of agreement
are shown in Table I. Based upon these results, rm ax = 9 is chosen as the optimum maximum radius to compute the roughness
image.
C. Visual Correlation of Segmented Results With Respect
to Original Image and Other Existing Methods
Segmented results obtained using EPCO, proposed method,
Segmentation by conjugate images method and Local entropy
filtering method are shown in Fig. 6. Since severe PCO areas have got significant weightage in the PCO percentage, the
contour of the detected severe PCO areas using the different

VIVEKANAND et al.: MULTISCALE ROUGHNESS APPROACH FOR ASSESSING POSTERIOR CAPSULE OPACIFICATION

1929

Fig. 9. Robustness of the proposed method and global entropy method against illumination changes, (a) proposed method without the elimination of background
illumination step, (b) proposed method with the elimination of background illumination step, (c) global entropy method without the elimination of background
illumination step, and (d) global entropy method with the elimination of background illumination step.

methods is also shown in Fig. 6. The first image in Fig. 6(a)
shows a clear eye without PCO, and thereby the segmented image using the proposed method shows the maximum portion
of the capsule in white indicating clear eye except for reflection artifacts, which gives a PCO percentage of about 4.7%. It
should be noted here that the main aim of this research work is
to find a method, which could effectively detect the PCO and
clear areas. The problem of reflection artifacts is not dealt here;
though, it could be addressed by capturing multiple images of
posterior capsule in different directions of gaze as discussed by
Findl et al. in [21]. From the results, it is clear that the proposed
method not only identifies the large pearls as severe PCO but
effectively classifies the PCO areas into different severity based
upon the roughness. Local entropy filtering method results in
oversegmentation and hence provides high PCO scores even for
mild cases of PCO as shown in Fig. 6(g). Segmentation by conjugate images method requires the optimum thresholds to be
selected manually.
D. Agreement of Proposed Method With the Clinician’s
Assessment and Other Methods
In order to assess the validity of PCO percentage values estimated by the proposed method, the results are compared with
clinicians’ grading and other existing methods. PCO scores
from all the methods except Segmentation by Conjugate im-

ages method are compared using Pearson correlation analysis.
This is the standard tool used for the evaluation of correlation
between different assessment methods. The Pearson coefficient
ranges from −1.0 to +1.0, where +1.0 indicates a strong positive relation, −1.0 indicates a strong negative relation, and 0
indicates no relation. To assess the statistical significance of the
correlation, the p-values are also computed along with Pearson
coefficient. If the p-value is low (<0.05), then the correlation
is statistically significant and the calculated Pearson coefficient
can be used for analysis. The Pearson correlation coefficients of
all the methods and their corresponding p values are presented
in Table II. EPCO and Global entropy methods are widely used
in PCO assessment and prevention research studies [22]–[24].
In order to assess the agreement between the proposed method
and these methods, we have used Bland–Altman analysis, where
the differences between the PCO scores from two methods are
plotted against the averages of the PCO scores. From the biases,
upper, and lower limits of agreement indicated in Fig. 7, it can
be seen that the proposed method shows good agreement with
these methods. Since clinical grading range is crisp and discrete,
Bland–Altman analysis between clinical grading and proposed
method is not shown.
The results presented in Table II demonstrate that the proposed method shows better correlation with clinical grading
compared to global entropy, number of regions, and local entropy filtering methods. Though EPCO method exhibited a

1930

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

little higher correlation with clinical grading compared to the
proposed method, it is to be noted that the proposed method is a
fully automated technique. EPCO system is manually operated,
which is time-consuming and provides biased results depending on the operator experience and illumination conditions under
which the images are acquired. Though global entropy method
provides an objective and quantitative score, it does not provide
the morphological details. Hence, the proposed method is better than the existing methods of PCO quantification and could
become a standardized grading system for communication between clinicians.
E. Robustness of Proposed Method Against Changes
in Illumination
When estimating the roughness around a pixel the measure
of dispersion at a particular ring is calculated with respect to the
mean value of the neighboring pixels. So for any monotonous
changes in illumination of the image, the value remains stable.
To understand the robustness of the method to illumination, the
images are brightened by adding an offset to pixel intensity
values and the resultant sum is fixed to be within the range
0–255. The offsets that are tested are 30, 60, and −30. These
result in application of monotonic illumination across the image.
In order to check the robustness of the proposed method with
respect to variable illumination, we have created an artificial
illumination pattern as shown in Fig. 8. The original images are
multiplied with this artificial illumination pattern to result in
variable illumination across the image, apart from the uneven
background illumination inherent of the image.
A comparison of PCO percentages of the original images
and the illuminated images is shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b). The
results are demonstrated with and without the elimination of
background illumination step mentioned in Section III-A. For
comparison, the illumination invariance of the global entropy
method is also tested against different illumination changes and
presented in Fig. 9(c) and (d). From Fig. 9(a), it can be observed
that the proposed method is stable against monotonic illumination variations but less stable in case of uneven illumination
changes across the image. Fig. 9(c) demonstrates the stability of
global entropy method with monotonic illumination variations
but highly sensitive nature of this method with variable illumination across the image. Fig. 9(b) and (d) demonstrates that
including the elimination of background illumination step in
the preprocessing stage results in more stable PCO percentage
values.
V. CONCLUSION
We proposed a novel method for PCO assessment introducing
the multiscale roughness concept. The PCO scores from the
proposed method compared well with that of clinicians’ grading
and other widely used methods like EPCO and global entropy.
The correlation between the proposed method and clinicians’
grading is 84.6%, which is high, considering the fact that the
clinicians employ a highly subjective grading range. In addition,
this method has addressed some key issues of PCO assessment
such as complete automatic detection and quantification of PCO

areas, ability to identify mild cases of PCO, and robustness
against illumination variations across the image.
The proposed software can be easily installed on any personal
computer running MATLAB. The system just requires digital
photographs obtained from the retroillumination imaging system, which is widely available in the majority of ophthalmological departments. As the grading process is completely automated, this method could be adopted as a standardized grading
system for communication between clinicians. The objectivity,
reproducibility and reliability of the grading of PCO by this
method will help in effective referral of patients from peripheral and remote centers to PCO expertise centers for treatment.
Availability of morphological data along with the PCO percentage will ensure proper identification of patients who need an
effective treatment for PCO. The proposed method is implemented in MATLAB on Windows 7 machine with Intel Xeon
E5-1607 processor. The average time required for the computation of PCO score of an image is 2.9 s, which permits the
clinician to conduct the PCO assessment in an acceptable interactive time. Efficiency can be further improved with a full C++
language implementation and can eventually be significantly
enhanced with a hardware implementation.
Since the proposed method is roughness based, it could not
effectively detect some regions in extreme PCO pearl cases
exhibiting very large pearl uniform areas. Another limitation
with this approach is that this method cannot handle images that
are severely corrupted by light artifacts. However, such images
can be rejected during the image acquisition. We plan to extend
the research to address these limitations as well as the detection
of type of PCO and computation of severity of PCO based on
its presence from the visual axis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. T. Aslam from the Manchester Eye Hospital, Dr. P. Bhatia, Dr. A. Rao, Dr. P. Warhekar, Dr.
K.H. Sathish, and Dr. B.S. Chidamber from the Ophthalmology
Department at Welcare Hospital, for their kind collaboration.
REFERENCES
[1] S. K. Powell and R. J. Olson, “Incidence of retinal detachment after
cataract surgery and neodymium: YAG laser capsulotomy,” J. Cataract
Refractive Surg., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 132–135, Mar. 1995.
[2] M. R. Tetz, G. U. Auffrath, M. Speaker, M. Blum, and H. E. Volcker,
“Photographic image analysis system of posterior capsule opacification,”
J. Cataract Refractive Surg., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1515–1520, Dec. 1997.
[3] L. Bender, D. J. Spalton, B. Uyanonvara, J. Boyce, C. Heatley, R. Jose,
and J. Khan, “POCOman: New system for quantifying posterior capsule
opacification,” J. Cataract Refractive Surg., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 2058–
2063, Oct. 2004.
[4] A. P. Paplinski and J. F. Boyce, “Computational aspects of segmentation of
a class of medical images using the concept of conjugate images,” Monash
Univ., Clayton, Vic., Australia, Tech. Rep., 1995.
[5] S. A. Barman, E. J. Hollick, J. F. Boyce, D.J. Spalton, B. Uyyanonvara,
G. Sanguinetti, and W. Meacock, “Quantification of posterior capsular
opacification in digital images after cataract surgery,” Investig. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3882–3892, Nov. 2000.
[6] M. C. Wang and L. C. Woung, “Digital retroilluminated photography to
analyze posterior capsule opacification in eyes with intraocular lenses,” J.
Cataract Refract. Surg., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 56–61, Jan. 2000.
[7] H. Siegl, “Quantification of posterior capsule opacification after cataract
surgery,” M.S. thesis, Graz Univ. Technol., Austria, 2000.

VIVEKANAND et al.: MULTISCALE ROUGHNESS APPROACH FOR ASSESSING POSTERIOR CAPSULE OPACIFICATION

[8] H. Siegl, A. Pinz, W. Buhl, M. Georgopoulos, O. Findl, and R. Menapace,
“Assessment of posterior capsule opacification after cataract surgery,” in
Proc. 12th Scandinavian Conf. Image Anal., Bergen, 2001, pp. 54–61.
[9] T. M. Aslam, N. Patton, and C. J. Rose, “OSCA: A comprehensive openaccess system of analysis of posterior capsular opacification,” BMC Ophthalmol., vol. 6, pp. 1–6, Aug. 2006.
[10] T. M. Aslam, N. Patton, and J. Graham, “A freely accessible, evidence
based, objective system of analysis of posterior capsular opacification:
Evidence for its validity and reliability,” BMC Ophthalmol., vol. 5, pp. 1–
10, Apr. 2005.
[11] N. Werghi, R. Sammouda, and F. AlKirbi, “An unsupervised learning
approach based on Hopfield-like network for assessing posterior capsule
opacification,” Pattern Anal. Appl., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 383–396, Nov. 2007.
[12] D. Grewal, R. Jain, G. S. Brar, and S. P. S. Grewal, “Pentacam tomograms:
A novel method for quantification of posterior capsule opacification,”
Investig. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci., vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 2004–2008, May
2008.
[13] Y. Tanaka, S. Kato, K. Miyata, M. Honbo, R. Nejima, S. Kitano, S.
Amano, and T. Oshika, “Limitation of Scheimpflug video photography
system in quantifying posterior capsule opacification after intraocular lens
implantation,” Amer. J. Ophthalmol., vol. 137, no. 4, pp. 732–735, Apr.
2004.
[14] T. M. Aslam, B. Dhillon, N. Werghi, A. Taguri, and A. Wadood, “Systems of analysis of posterior capsule opacification,” Brit. J. Ophthalmol.,
vol. 86, no. 10, pp. 1181–1186, 2002.
[15] Y. Liu and Y. Li, “New approaches of multifractal image analysis,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Inform., Commun. Signal Process., 1997, Singapore, pp. 970–
974.
[16] D. Chakraborty, G. K. Sen, and S. Hazra, “High-resolution satellite image
segmentation using Hölder exponents,” J. Earth Syst. Sci., vol. 118, no. 5,
pp. 609–617, Oct. 2009.
[17] N. Otsu, “A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms,” IEEE
Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. SMC-9, no. 1, pp. 62–66, Jan. 1979.
[18] M. R. Tetz. (2013, Jun.). EPCO2000: Software for the evaluation of posterior capsule opacification [Online]. Available: www.epco2000.de
[19] R. M. Haralick, K. Shanmugam, and I. Dinstein, “Textural features for
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man Cybern., vol. SMC-3, no. 6,
pp. 610–621, Nov. 1973.
[20] X. Gao, H. Li, J. H. Lim, and T. Y. Wong, “Computer-aided cataract detection using enhanced texture features on retro-illumination lens images,”
in Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., 2011, pp. 1565–1568.
[21] O. Findl, W. Buehl, H. Siegl, and A. Pinz, “Removal of reflections in the
photographic assessment of PCO by fusion of digital retroillumination
images,” Investig. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 275–280,
Jan. 2003.
[22] M. Vetrugno, F. Masselli, G. Greco, D. Sisto, A. Maino, S. Ficarelli, and
G. Sborgia, “The influence of posterior capsule opacification on scanning
laser polarimetry,” Eye, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 760–763, Jun. 2007.
[23] R. Zemaitiene, V. Jasinskas, V. Barzdziukas, and G. U. Auffarth, “Prevention of posterior capsule opacification using different intraocular lenses
(results of one-year clinical study),” Medicina (Kaunas), vol. 40, no. 8,
pp. 721–730, 2004.
[24] L. Vock, R. Menapace, E. Stifter, M. Georgopoulos, S. Sacu, and W. Buhl,
“Posterior capsule opacification and neodymium: YAG laser capsulotomy
rates with a round-edged silicone and a sharp-edged hydrophobic acrylic
intraocular lens 10 years after surgery,” J. Cataract Refractive Surg.,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 459–465, Mar. 2009.
Aruna Vivekanand received the B.Tech. degree
in electronics and communications from Jawaharlal
Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, India,
in 2003, the M.Tech. degree in communication systems from Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai, India, in 2006, and the M.Sc. degree in information technology-mobile communications from
Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh, UK, in 2011.
From 2006 to 2008, she worked as Assistant Systems Engineer at Tata Consultancy Services Ltd.,
Mumbai, India. She was a Lecturer in the Department of Information Technology, Thakur College of Engineering and Technology, Mumbai, India, from 2009 to 2010, and Emirates College of Management
and Information Technology, Dubai, in 2012. Since 2013, she has been a Research Assistant at Khalifa University of Science, Technology and Research,
Sharjah, UAE. Her current research interests include medical image analysis
and development of computer aided diagnostic procedures.

1931

Naoufel Werghi (M’00) received the Ph.D. degree in
computer vision from the University of Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France, and the M.Sc. degree in instrumentation and control from the University of Rouen,
Mont-Saint-Aignan, France.
He was a Research Fellow at the Division of
Informatics, University of Edinburgh; a Lecturer in
the Department of Computer Sciences, University of
Glasgow; an Assistant Professor in the College of Information technology, University of Dubai, where he
founded and headed the Intelligent Information System Research Group. He was a Visiting Professor in the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Louisville. He is currently an Associate Professor in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Khalifa
University of Science, Technology and Research, Sharjah, UAE. His current research interests include image analysis and interpretation. He has been leading
several funded projects in the areas of biometrics, medical imaging geometrical
reverse engineering, and intelligent systems. He has authored or coauthored
more than 80 journal and conference papers.
Dr. Naoufel received the Best Paper Award in the International Conference of
Computer Vision, Theory and Applications 2011, and the University-Industry
Research Award from the National Research Foundation, UAE in 2011 and 2013.
In 2012, he cofounded the Emirates Computational Intelligence and Vision Research Group. He is currently the Secretary Treasurer of the IEEE computer
chapter in UAE.

Hussain Al-Ahmad (S’78–M’83–SM’90) was born
in Iraq. He received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Basra, Basra, Iraq, in
1976, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic
engineering from the University of Leeds, Leeds, UK,
in 1979 and 1984, respectively.
He was with Portsmouth University, Leeds
Metropolitan University, Kuwaiti Faculty of Technological Studies, University of Bradford, and Etisalat
University College. He is currently a Full Professor of
electronic engineering at Khalifa University of Science and Technology, Sharjah, UAE. He is a Member of the VSAP Research
Lab. He is the author or coauthor of more than 90 journal articles and referred conference papers. His current research interests include signal and image
processing.
Prof. Al-Ahmad is a Fellow of the IET, a Chartered Engineer, a Member
of BCS, a Chartered IT Professional, and a Fellow of the Royal Photographic
Society. He is the Vice Chair of the IEEE UAE section. He was the Secretary
of the IEEE Kuwaiti section, the Chair of the IEEE UAE computer chapter,
and the Vice Chair of the IEEE UAE signal processing and communication
chapter. He was a Member of the Technical Program Committees of many IEEE
conferences such as ICECS, ICSPC, ISSPIT, and ICIP.

