1442

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Assessing Executive Function Using a
Computer Game: Computational Modeling
of Cognitive Processes
Stuart Hagler, Holly Brugge Jimison, Member, IEEE, and Misha Pavel, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Early and reliable detection of cognitive decline is
one of the most important challenges of current healthcare. In this
project, we developed an approach whereby a frequently played
computer game can be used to assess a variety of cognitive processes and estimate the results of the pen-and-paper trail making
test (TMT)—known to measure executive function, as well as visual pattern recognition, speed of processing, working memory,
and set-switching ability. We developed a computational model of
the TMT based on a decomposition of the test into several independent processes, each characterized by a set of parameters that
can be estimated from play of a computer game designed to resemble the TMT. An empirical evaluation of the model suggests
that it is possible to use the game data to estimate the parameters
of the underlying cognitive processes and using the values of the
parameters to estimate the TMT performance. Cognitive measures
and trends in these measures can be used to identify individuals
for further assessment, to provide a mechanism for improving the
early detection of neurological problems, and to provide feedback
and monitoring for cognitive interventions in the home.
Index Terms—Additive stages, computer game, executive function, Fitts’ law, neuropsychological test.

I. INTRODUCTION
UANTITATIVE assessment of cognitive function is an
important component of caring for the aging as well as
those with other dysfunctions such as traumatic brain injury and
many other conditions affecting cognitive functions. The goal
of this study is to find ways to assess and monitor subjects’
cognitive performance in the subjects’ home using information
technology. In this paper, we show how a simple computer
game in conjunction with computational model can be used for
sensitive assessment and monitoring of components of executive
function in individual subjects.
The computer game we consider in this paper bears a close
relationship to a commonly administered, neuropsychological

Q

Manuscript received April 1, 2013; revised August 16, 2013; accepted
December 20, 2013. Date of publication February 5, 2014; date of current
version June 30, 2014. This work was supported by the National Institute on
Standards and Technology’s Advanced Technology Projects, by the Intel Corporation, the Alzheimer’s Association, and the National Institutes of Health
(Grants P30AG024978 and ASMMI0116ST).
S. Hagler is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Oregon Health
& Science University, Portland, OR 97239 USA (e-mail: haglers@ohsu.edu).
H. B. Jimison and M. Pavel are with the College of Computer and Information Science and Bouvé College of Health Sciences, Northeastern University,
Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail: h.jimison@neu.edu; m.pavel@neu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2299793

test—the (pen-and-paper) trail making test (TMT). Typically
administered as one test in a larger battery of tests, TMT is
made up of two parts—TMT-A and TMT-B—each resembling
a child’s connect-the-dots puzzle. Each part, as with the puzzle,
is completed by drawing a single, continuous line through all
the “dots” in a specified order. The subject’s score on each part
of TMT is the time the subject took to draw the line to the
last “dot.” TMT is known to measure visuoperceptual ability,
working memory, and set-switching ability [1], [2].
Computer-based implementations of neuropsychological
tests, such as TMT, have potentially many advantages over traditional, pen-and-paper implementations, including: 1) uniformity
of administration across subjects; and 2) more consistent scoring
of performance. They also allow the possibility of decomposing
performance on the test into performance on individual parts of
the test. Researchers have examined the use of computer-based
neuropsychological testing [3]–[5] and have found them to be
promising for the cognitive assessment of older adults [4], [5].
In particular, computerized implementations of TMT have been
developed [6], [7]; however, differences between performance
on a computerized implementation of TMT and the standard
pen-and-paper TMT, as measured by the scores on TMT-A and
TMT-B, have been shown [7]. An alternative to simply implementing a computer-based TMT is to have the subject perform
the pen-and-paper TMT while the test administrator notes the
duration of the subject’s moves the pen to each “dot” by selecting a button on a computer GUI each time a “dot” is selected [8].
This approach allows the performance on TMT to be decomposed into performance on each movement to a “dot.”
Our approach is to focus on the time taken to make each
move to each “dot” rather than on the time taken to draw the
line through the whole set of “dots.” Given the information
about subject performance gained by examining all the individual moves to “dots,” we can then estimate the time the subject
would need to draw a line through a set of dots—such as those
given on TMT. To obtain sufficiently accurate estimates of the
underlying processes requires data for a large number of moves.
To acquire the needed move data, we have constructed a simple computer game in which the subject completes a series of
rounds each of which consists of a set of randomly placed “dots”
which the subject connects by using a computer mouse to select
the “dots” in a specified sequence.
We develop a model for each move to a “dot” assuming a
sequence of the three independent processes based on Donders’
additive stages [9], [10]: recall, search, and motor. The motor
stage, describing the movement of the pen or mouse from one

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HAGLER et al.: ASSESSING EXECUTIVE FUNCTION USING A COMPUTER GAME: COMPUTATIONAL MODELING OF COGNITIVE PROCESSES

1443

“dot” to the next, is based on Fitts’ law, characterizing rapid
movements into specified target regions [11]–[13].
II. OVERVIEW OF TWO CONNECT-THE-DOTS TASKS
TMT is a pen-and-paper neuropsychological test that measures a subject’s visuoperceptual ability (ability to interpret visual information), working memory (ability to hold items in
memory while completing a complex task), and set-switching
ability (ability transition from a task involving one class of objects to a task involving a different class) [1], [2]. Scavenger
Hunt (SH) is a point-and-click, mouse-driven computer game
with game mechanics designed to mimic the testing mechanics
of TMT and yet be both challenging and fun so that people are
willing to play it routinely over time in a home environment.
Both TMT and SH are built around the connect-the-dots task
that forms the basis of the child’s puzzle giving the task its
name. In this task, the subject must select a number of “dots” in
sequence by drawing a line through them. We used both TMT
and SH to validate our model of the connect-the-dots task given
in Section III. The following sections provide an overview of
TMT and SH.
We call the interval from the selection of one “dot” to the
selection of the next “dot” a move.
A. TMT
The pen-and-paper TMT is comprised of two separate tests:
TMT-A and TMT-B. TMT-A and TMT-B are printed on a standard 8.5 × 11 sheet of paper with 25 small (12 mm diameter)
circles, the targets, placed in a seemingly random pattern on the
sheet. All targets in both tests have the same diameter or width,
and contain a label which may be a letter or a number. In TMT-A,
a label is a number from 1 to 25, while in TMT-B a label is a
letter from A to L or a number from 1 to 13. Labels only appear
once on the test page. In addition, two targets on each test page
are indicated by the presence of the words “Begin” and “End”
near to (but outside of) these targets. TMT-A and TMT-B refer
to test pages each with a specific arrangement of targets, and
the same test pages are used every time TMT is administered.
Fig. 1 shows a portion of TMT-A.
Prior to beginning TMT-A or TMT-B, the test administrator
instructs the subject on how to correctly complete the test. This
is done by walking the subject through a shorter—eight target—
sample test.
TMT-A and TMT-B each start with the subject being given
the test page face down, the subject not having seen the test
page. The test begins when the test administrator instructs the
subject to start the test, and the subject turns over the test page
and begins. The subject completes each test by drawing a single
line, the trail, through all 25 targets in the specified order. In
TMT-A, the targets are selected in ascending numerical order of
the target labels (i.e., “1, 2, 3,. . .,24, 25”), while in TMT-B, the
order is ascending alphanumeric order of the target labels (i.e.,
“1, A, 2, B,. . .,L, 13”). “Begin” which is printed on the test page
lies near the first target of the sequence and “End” near the last.
The subject’s performance on TMT is given in the form of a
score on each of TMT-A and TMT-B, that is, the time taken to

Fig. 1. Section of the TMT-A neuropsychological test. Note the words “Begin”
and “End” indicating the locations of the first and last targets.

correctly draw a line through all targets on the test page in the
specified order beginning when the test administrator instructs
the subject to begin, and ending when the test administrator
notes that the subject has reached the last target.
The test administrator also makes sure that the subject completes the test correctly, interrupting the test whenever the subject is observed to make an incorrect target selection (i.e., selecting a target out of sequence), as soon as the test administrator notices the error. Whenever such an error occurs, the test
administrator instructs the subject to return to the last correctly
selected target. Timing is not suspended during this process, and
is included in the total time and thus in the test score, although,
the number of errors for TMT-A and TMT-B are recorded by
the test administrator. We call the sequence just outlined, the
process of recovering from the error.
Guidelines for the administration of TMT are provided in
[14]. TMT is normally administered in an office setting by a
neuropsychologist once every 6–12 months to reduce practice
effects associated with repeated completion of standardized tests
[15]–[17]. Normative data for subjects with education in the
range of the subject used in our study show TMT scores for
ages 75–79 of 42 s on TMT-A and 100 s on TMT-B, and for
ages 80–84 of 55 s on TMT-A and 130 s on TMT-B [18]. TMT is
one of the most clinically useful neuropsychological tests and is
routinely used in the diagnosis of many neurological conditions
(Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, and dementias, and general cognitive
decline) [19]. However, it is an expensive test and the infrequent
assessment leads to delays in the detection of cognitive issues.
B. SH
The point-and-click, mouse-driven SH computer game is intended to mimic the mechanics of TMT while presenting the
subject with arbitrary target configurations rather than the two
fixed target configurations present on TMT-A and TMT-B test
pages. SH was designed to be more engaging and fun, and
yet present cognitive tasks that would test cognitive functions

1444

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 2. Typical SH round. The board for a round of SH showing the time
remaining in the game (27.2 s), search string (“B2A1”), cumulative game score
(3269), targets (“1,” “2,” “A,” “B”), and distractors (“5,” “C,” “L”).

similar to those of TMT. We have been able to demonstrate that
older adults are able to learn the game and play it routinely on
computers in their homes [20].
The subject plays SH by completing a series of rounds each
being a single connect-the-dots task. SH rounds must be completed in 30 s (imposing a speed-accuracy tradeoff); if the subject
fails to do so, the round is lost and the game of SH ends. SH
play continues from round to round until either a round is lost,
or the subject elects to stop playing.
Fig. 2 shows a typical SH round. We call the large pane within
the GUI containing the words “SH” the board. The upper left
hand corner of the board shows the amount of time left in the
round. The upper right hand corner of the board shows the
cumulative score for all the rounds completed so far. The box in
the center of the upper center of the board contains the search
string “B, 2, A, 1.” The remainder of the board shows the array
of markers for this round. The set of markers includes both
targets: “1,” “2,” “A,” and “B,” and additional distractors: “5,”
“C,” and “L.” The number of markers on the board for the round
shown is 7. The subject would play this round of SH by using
the computer mouse to connect-the-dots by selecting targets the
targets “B,” “2,” “A,” “1,” in that order, by clicking on them.
The trail made by the subject in SH is path taken by the mouse
in the course of selecting the targets.
SH indicates correctly selected markers by coloring them
green for the remainder of the round; no line indicating a trail is
drawn. A subject makes an error when playing a round of SH by
selecting any marker other than the one currently being looked
for (i.e., the lowest unselected marker in the search string). SH
indicates that an error has occurred by drawing a red “X” over the
selected marker which remains until another marker is selected.
SH displays the subject’s cumulative score on the game board
for the rounds that have been completed. This score is used as
feedback and motivation for the subject and not used to infer
cognitive function or predict TMT scores. In this paper, we only
refer to TMT-A and TMT-B test scores.
Search strings in SH may be ascending or descending alphabetical sequences (e.g., “A, B, C,. . .” or “. . .,C, B, A”), ascending or descending numeric sequences (e.g., “1, 2, 3,. . .” or
“. . .,3, 2, 1”), ascending or descending alphanumeric sequences

(e.g., “1, A, 2, B,. . .” or “. . .,B, 2, A, 1”), and English language
words selected out of a fixed lexicon (e.g., “H, O, R, S, E”).
A marker in SH appears as a circle containing a single letter or
number. The centers of the markers are arranged on the board in
a 4 × 8 grid with a spacing of 80 pixels. We refer to the position
of all the markers on the board in this grid as the layout of the
markers. Markers may have a diameter of 63 pixels or 77 pixels.
At the normal viewing distance of about 25 cm, the markers
subtend approximately 3◦ of visual angle. This size assures
100% recognition for subjects with corrected vision to 20/20. In
any round, all the markers have the same width (diameter). SH
has two types of markers: 1) targets; and 2) distractors. Targets
are those markers containing a character that appears in the
search string and that the subject must select in the course of
completing the connect-the-dots task for the round. Distractors
are markers that contain characters not appearing in the search
string.
A SH round has a variable number of targets, typically about
4 to 10, as well as additional distractors. The board for each SH
round is generated at random. In order to track accurately the
subject’s performance over time, SH has a particular type of test
pattern that appears regularly and often to serve as a baseline
reference on a subject’s performance over time; these rounds
have the search string “1, 2, 3, 4,” and no distractors. These
rounds make up about one in four SH rounds.
SH was designed to try to make the repetition of a very simple task as interesting to the subject as possible. The use of a
smaller number of targets was believed to make the game faster,
and the variability of the number of targets together with additional distractors was believed to add more variety to the game.
Ascending numeric and alphanumeric sequences were included
to facilitate comparison to TMT, and descending numeric and
alphanumeric sequences as well as ascending and descending
alphabetic sequences and lexical sequences were included to
add further variety to the game.
C. Differences Between SH and TMT
While SH was designed to mimic TMT, the two tasks are
clearly not identical, with differences including: 1) SH is played
in-home at the subject’s leisure, while TMT is an in-clinic test;
2) SH is a computer game while TMT is a pen-and-paper test;
3) an SH round has a 30 s time limit while the subject is instructed to complete TMT-A or TMT-B as quickly as possible;
4) in SH the search string remains visible to the subject for
the duration of the round while in TMT the subject is told the
search string verbally before beginning the test; 5) the presence
of the words “Begin” and “End” on TMT; 6) that SH marks a
selected target by changing the color to green where TMT marks
a selected target by trail passing through it; 7) SH boards can
contain both targets and distractors while TMT contains only
targets; and 8) SH board typically contain about 4–10 markers
while TMT always contains 25. In Section III-A–III-D, we develop a model of the connect-the-dots task that is intended to
produce a set of performance measures for each subject based
on analysis of moves made by playing SH. It is expected that
these performance measures would be related to comparable

HAGLER et al.: ASSESSING EXECUTIVE FUNCTION USING A COMPUTER GAME: COMPUTATIONAL MODELING OF COGNITIVE PROCESSES

1445

measures based on analysis of moves made in TMT (were the
move data available). However, comparison of the resulting performance measures between SH and TMT is complicated by the
differences listed here. Instead of assuming that the performance
measures are the same in the two cases, we suppose that some
set of transformations exist relating each performance between
the cases of SH and TMT, and, for simplicity, that these transformations are the approximately the same for all subjects. These
transformations are developed in detail in Section III-E, and
given in (4).

III. CONNECT-THE-DOTS MODEL
The connect-the-dots task is completed by drawing a single
line through a sequence of “dots” in a specified order. On a high
level, performance on the connect-the-dots task can be characterized by the time taken to complete the entire task and the
number of errors made in the course of completing the task (as
is done in TMT); however, we choose to characterize subject
performance by characterizing the performance across each individual move the subject makes in the course of completing the
task.
The particular goal in this paper is to show that measuring
subject performance on moves observed in SH play can be used
to estimate the subject’s scores on TMT. The connect-the-dots
model we develop in this section describes each move in the
connect-the-dots task. By applying the model to the SH, we
can take all the observed moves from SH rounds and estimate
a set of parameters characterizing how a subject makes a move
in connect-the-dots tasks like those in SH. Conversely, given a
set of parameters characterizing how a subject makes a move
during TMT, we can construct an estimator of the TMT score
in the case where no errors are made.
For the sake of simplicity, the proposed model does not characterize errors or the process of recovering from errors; consequently, in our analysis, we ignore the small proportion of
rounds of SH in which the subject made any error. We ignore
whole rounds to avoid any affects of the error on other moves,
whether the error was due to something happening during an earlier move, or caused the subject to carry out subsequent moves
differently than they otherwise would. Unfortunately, subjects
do make errors on TMT, and we have to account for those errors
in the estimators of the TMT-A and TMT-B scores (see Section
VI for information on the numbers of errors made). We account
for the observed errors by estimating the time delays due to the
errors and including these in the prediction of the TMT-A and
TMT-B scores. This approach is useful in estimating the relative
contribution of the correctly executed moves and errors in the
final test scores.
The connect-the-dots model decomposes a move into a sequence of three statistically independent stages as shown in
Fig. 3: 1) the recall & update stage during which the subject
calls to mind the next target in the search string; 2) the search
stage during which the subject searches among the unselected
targets game board to locate the current target; and 3) the motor
stage during which the subject moves the mouse or pen to the

Fig. 3. Additive stages move model. The process of selecting the next target
in the sequence involves three sequential stages of 1) recalling the next target;
2) serially searching for the next target by considering the available targets one
after another; and 3) physically moving the mouse so that the cursor is on the
target and clicking.

located target to select it. The general methodology corresponds
to Donders’ additive stages [9], [10].
The statistical independence is based on the idea that each
stage is affected by different aspects of the task and that the
effect is limited to that stage. We expect that the duration of the
recall & update stage would vary with the type of the search
string (i.e., it should take a different amount of time to recall the
next target when the search string is purely alphabetic or numeric
as opposed to an alphanumeric search string). The duration of
the search stage should depend on the number of additional
distractors and unselected targets on the board, with the time
spent in search decreasing on average as the subject moves
to the end of the round [21]. Finally, the length of the motor
stage should depend only on the distance on the board from the
previously selected target to the new target—assuming that the
target size is constant.
We now describe the detailed characterization of the stages
of the model: recall & update, search, and motor.
A. Recall & Update Stage
The recall & update stage is characterized by the recall time
TR required by the subject to recall the next target in the search
string. The recall time is a random variable (RV) with expected
valueTR  = τR , and some standard deviation. We suppose that
the time TR spent by the subject recalling the next target in a
sequence may vary across the classes of search strings available
in SH (i.e., alphabetic, numeric, alphanumeric, and lexical), but
is assumed to be the same for all the targets in sequences of a
given class. We denote values for τR intended to estimate recall
for TMT-A-like connect-the-dots task by τRA , and for TMT-Blike tasks by τRB .
B. Search Stage
The search stage is characterized by the search time TS required by the subject to locate the next target in the search string
after it has been recalled. We treat search as a series of discrete
steps [21], where the total number of steps in any search is an RV.
In each step, the subject considers a different marker (a target
or a distractor) on the board. The subject compares the marker
being considered during that step to the target being searched

1446

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

for. If the subject decides that the marker being considered is the
same as the target they are searching for, they select the marker;
otherwise, the subject continues the search to another step and
considers another marker. Each step of search takes some fixed
time τS . We suppose that the time τS spent by the subject on
each step of search may vary across the classes of search strings
available in SH (i.e., alphabetic, numeric, alphanumeric, and
lexical), but is assumed to be the same for all the targets in
sequences of a given class. We denote values for τS intended to
estimate search step time for TMT-A-like connect-the-dots task
by τSA , and for TMT-B-like tasks by τSB .
The number of steps in a given search depends on the number
of markers remaining on the board (i.e., the initial number of
markers less the number of targets that have been selected thus
far). We suppose that the subject searches the remaining markers at random, with no memory of any of the remaining markers
from searches made in previous moves in the same round; we
further suppose that during the search stage, the subject has perfect memory and considers each marker only once (we discuss
the validity and utility of these assumptions in Section VII).
Let us consider an SH round with n targets and d distractors.
Suppose the subject is searching for the νth target. The subject
has already found ν − 1 targets, so there are n − ν + 1 targets
still on the board. The expected number of steps for the search
is (n − ν + d + 1) /2. The expected value for the total search
time TS for this target is given by
TS  = ((n − ν + d + 1) /2) τS .

(1)

The distribution of TS for a given value n − ν + d is uniform
on the discrete values τS ,. . ., (n − ν + d + 1) τS .
C. Motor Stage
The motor stage is characterized by the motor time TM , required by the subject move the mouse or pen from one target to
the next. We suppose it to be independent of the search string.
The movement made by the mouse or pen is a rapid movement
into a target area given by the size of the marker being selected,
and is expected to be consistent with Fitts’ law [11]–[13]. We
treat the motor time as a RV whose mean value satisfies Fitts’
law and has some standard deviation. Fitts’ law expresses the
relationship between the distance D from the initial position to
the center of the target, the target width W , and the expected
motor time, TM , required to complete the move. Defining Dν to
be center-to-center distance between the (ν − 1) th and νth targets, assuming a common width W for all targets, the expected
motor time taken to move from the (ν − 1) th to the νth target
is given by
TM  = a + b log2 (Dν /W + 1) .

D. Total Time
The expected time needed to complete an error-free connectthe-dots task with n targets and d distractors is simply the sum
of the expected times for all of the component moves (we use
the dot to distinguish multiplication a · (b) from the expression
of a functiona (b)):
T = n · (τR + a) + κ (n, d) τS
+ χ (D1 , · · · , Dν , W ) b,
n
((n − ν + d + 1) /2),
κ (n, d) =
ν =1
n
χ (D1 , . . . , Dν , W ) =
log2 (Dν /W + 1).
(3)
ν =1

We can see that the expected time required to complete a
connect-the-dots task is linear in the parameters characterizing
the subject’s cognitive and motor abilities: τR , τS , a, and b. We
call κ (n, d) and χ ({Dν } , W ) the search complexity, and the
motor complexity, respectively.
Due to the way in which τR and a appear in (3), their values
cannot not be estimated separately. Instead, the best we can do
is to estimate their sum τR + a.
E. Relating SH to TMT
Due to the differences between SH and TMT outline in
Section II-C, we do not expect the values τR , τS , a, and b to
relate trivially to their counterparts τR , τS , a , and b . Differences 7 and 8 from Section II-C, the presence of distractors and
the numbers of targets, have already been handled in the model
developed in this section. We suppose that the differences between SH and TMT do not affect the search or motor stages,
so difference 6 regarding how selected targets are indicated is
assumed not to affect search, and difference 2 regarding SH
being a computer game and TMT being a pen-and-paper test is
assumed not to effect movement from one target to the next. The
remaining differences—1, in-home versus in-clinic, 2, presence
of time limit, 4, visibility of the search string, and 5, the presence of the words “Begin” and “End”—are assumed to only
affect recall. We model the net effect of these differences on
recall using the linear transformation τR = α + βτR . However,
as a practical matter, we cannot separate the values τR and a,
but rather we must work with τR + a, so we use the approximate transformation τR + a ≈ α + β · (τR + a). The full set
of transformations is
τR + a ≈ α + β · (τR + a) ,
τS = τS ,
b = b.

(4)

(2)

The value log2 (D/W + 1) provides a measurement of the
amount of information the subject must process to complete
the movement as measured in bits; so the value b provides a
measure of how much time the subject spends processing each
bit of information.

This set of transformation is assumed to be the same for all
search strings (i.e., the values α and β are the same when relating
SH to TMT for TMT-A-like search string and for TMT-B-like
search strings). We also assume that our subject population is
sufficiently homogeneous that we can use the same transformation for every subject.

HAGLER et al.: ASSESSING EXECUTIVE FUNCTION USING A COMPUTER GAME: COMPUTATIONAL MODELING OF COGNITIVE PROCESSES

IV. ANALYZING SH PLAY
We validated the model of connect-the-dots tasks developed
in Section III by constructing an estimator of the subject’s scores
on the TMT-A and TMT-B using measurements taken from
that subject’s play of SH. We used SH data from rounds using
ascending and descending alphabetic and numeric search string
to construct the TMT-A estimator and data from rounds using
ascending and descending alphanumeric search string to construct the TMT-B estimator. We chose to combine round data in
this way so that more data would be available for each subject
and we would be able to retain as many subjects as possible for
analysis (see Section VI for more information).
We now consider how to estimate a subject’s cognitive and
motor parameters τRA + a, τRB + a, τSA , τSB , and busing the SH
move data which consist only of timestamps indicating when
buttons were selected by the subject and the relative positions
of the buttons on the board. We produce the estimates in a
two-step process. In the first step, we estimate the subject’s motor performance as described by Fitts’ law b parameter, from
the time and position data, using SH rounds with search string
“1, 2, 3, 4” and no distractors using the model developed in
Section III. In the second step, we use the estimated motor
performance from the first step to remove the effect of motor
performance from observed moves in SH rounds with alphabetic, numeric, and alphanumeric search strings (i.e., rounds
with search strings of the same classes as that in the TMT-A and
TMT-B, respectively), and then estimate the subject’s cognitive
recall and search parameters τRA + a, τRB + a, τSA , and τSB also
using the model developed in Section III.
A. Estimating Motor Parameters
The first step in our two step process of estimating a subject’s
cognitive and motor parameters is to estimate the subject’s Fitts’
law motor parameter b. We use a dataset consisting only of
moves from SH rounds with the search string “1, 2, 3, 4” and no
distractors. As there is some uncertainty in the position of the
mouse at the beginning of the round, we ignore the move to the
first target for each round.
For each move, we know the intertarget distances Di , target
widths Wi , observed move times ti , numbers of targets ni , and
the position of the target in the search string νi (so for the string
“1, 2, 3, 4,” the target “1” has ν = 1, the target “2” has ν = 2,
and so on). So, for a particular move, the expected total time
taken to move is

1447

We constrain the result so that c1 and c2 are nonnegative.
From this step, we only retain the estimated value b = |c2 |.
B. Estimating Cognitive Parameters
The first step in our two step process of estimating a subject’s
cognitive and motor parameters is to use the subject’s Fitts’ law
motor parameter bestimated in the first step to remove the motor
component of the move time and estimate the subject’s cognitive parameters τRA + a, τRB + a, τSA , and τSB . For estimation
of τRA + a and τSA , we use a dataset consisting only of moves
from SH rounds with the ascending or descending alphabetic or
numeric search strings excluding SH rounds with search string
“1, 2, 3, 4” and no distractors; and for estimation of τRB + a and
τSB , we use a dataset consisting only of moves from SH rounds
with ascending or descending alphanumeric search strings. As
there is some uncertainty in the position of the mouse at the
beginning of the round, we ignore the move to the first target
for each round.
As we did previously in (5), we estimate the expected time
taken for each move by summing the expected times for each
of the three additive stages. In this case, however, we must also
include values for the numbers of distractors di present for each
move, giving the expected move time
ti  = (τR + a) + ((ni − νi + di + 1) /2) τS
+ b log2 (Di /Wi + 1) .

(7)

As the values τR + a and τS are unknown at this point, we
have to fit both to the data. We can estimate their values by
finding the values c0 and c1 that minimize the total squared
error given by

ε=
(ti  − c0 − |c1 | ((ni − νi + di + 1) /2)
i

−b log2 (Di /Wi + 1))2 .

(8)

We constrain the result so that c1 is nonnegative. From this
step, we retain the estimated values τR + a = c0 and τS = |c1 |.
V. ESTIMATING TMT SCORES
Using the procedure given in Section IV, we can produce
estimates for the cognitive and motor parameters τRA + a, τRB +
a, τSA , τSB , and bfor each subject using data from play of SH. We
now use these estimates to produce estimators of performance
on TMT-A and TMT-B for each subject.

ti  = (τR + a) + ((ni − νi + 1) /2) τS
+ b log2 (Di /Wi + 1) .

(5)

As the values τR + a, τS , and b are unknown at this point, we
have to fit all three to the data. We can estimate their values by
finding the values c0 , c1 , and c2 that minimize the total squared
error given by

(ti  − c0 − |c1 |((ni − νi + 1)/2)
ε=
i

− |c2 | log2 (Di /Wi + 1))2 .

(6)

A. TMT Score Estimator
We begin our construction of the estimators for the performance on TMT by assuming we had the actual values of the cog



nitive and motor parameters τRA + a , τRB + a , τSA , τSB , and b
that describe the subject’s performance on TMT. Let us consider
first the time spent completing TMT-A or TMT-B after the first
target has been selected. The search complexity κ̃ for this portion of the test can be calculated from the definition in (3), while
the motor complexities χ̃A , and χ̃B for this portion of the test
can be found using the definition in (3) and direct measurement

1448

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

of the layout of the markers on the test page. Using the superscript X as a placeholder for either A or B, indicating whether
TMT-A or TMT-B is being considered, the expected total time
spent completing the test after the first target has been found
when no errors are made is

 
 X

= 24 τRX + a + κ̃τSX + χ̃X b .
T
(9)
One aspect of difference 2 in Section II-C is that the subject
begins the test by turning over the test page. This adds some
amount of amount T 0 to the final time. We suppose that T 0 is
the same for all subjects for both parts of TMT. In addition, the
move to the first target begins at some unknown position. We
suppose that the motor portion of the time taken to make the
move to the first target is about average for the motor times on
the test, or a + (1/24) χ̃X b . When the first move is included,
the search complexity is now κ as given in (3) for the full test
rather than κ̃. The expected total time spent completing the
entire test when no errors are made is

 
 X

T
= T 0 + 25 τRX + a + κτSX + (25/24) χ̃X b . (10)
We denote the number of errors the subject made on the
TMT-A and TMT-B, respectively, by N A and N B and treat
time required by the subject to make and recover from an error
as an RV with mean θ; we further assume that the RV is the
same for all subjects. Thus, the expected test score (or expected
total time spent completing the
 when
 errors
 are made) given
 test
expected numbers of errors N A and N B is

 
 X
 

S
= T X = T 0 + 25 τRX + a + κτSX


(11)
+ (25/24) χ̃X b + θ N X .
Finally, we must replace the cognitive and motor parameters


τRX + a , τSX , and b describing performance on TMT by their
counterparts that have been estimated from SH. Replacing the

TMT cognitive and motor parameters τRX + a , τSX  , and b by
their SH counterparts τRX + a, τSX , and b using the transformation between the two connect-the-dots tasks which is given in (4)
gives the estimator for expected scores on TMT given expected
numbers of errors
 X




S
= T 0 + 25α + 25β · τRX + a + κτSX


(12)
+ (25/24) χ̃X b + θ N X .
B. Estimating Global Parameters
The subject-specific cognitive and motor parameters τRA +
a, τRB + a, τSA , τSB , and b mentioned in (12) have been estimated
using SH move data. The global parameters T 0 + 25α, β, and
θ (assumed to be the same for all subjects) now need to be
estimated. We estimate the global parameters by finding the
values of T 0 + 25α, β, and θ that cause our estimators given in
(12) to have optimal performance combined for both TMT-A
and TMT-B across all subjects.
We index our subjects so that every subject has some index i
in the data related to TMT-A, and some index j in that related to
TMT-B.
we have measurements average test

 For each subject,
scores SiA and SjB , and the average numbers of errors made





in each part NiA and NjB . As the values T 0 + 25α, β, and
θ are unknown at this point, we have to fit all three to the data.
We can estimate their values by finding the values c0 , c1 , and c2
that minimize the total squared error given by
  


SiA − c0 − 25 |c1 | · τRA + a i
ε=
i

2

A
−κτS,i
− (25/24) χ̃A bi − |c2 | NiA
  


SjB − c0 − 25 |c1 | · τRB + a j
+
j

2

B
−κτS,j
− (25/24) χ̃B bj − |c2 | NjB
.

(13)

We constrain the result so that c1 and c2 are nonnegative.
We retain the estimated values T 0 + 25α = c0 , β = |c1 |, and
θ = |c2 |.
VI. EMPIRICAL STUDY
Thirty older adults (25 female and 5 male, average age 80 ±
6.0 years, average level of education 15 ± 2.7 years, MMSE =
28 ± 1.1, ADL = 0.071 ± 0.30) participated in a one year study
in which a set of computer games that included SH was placed
into their homes.
SH was developed along with eight other adaptive computer
games to measure cognitive performance of individuals on a
regular basis by monitoring their computer interactions during game play on their home computers [22], [23]. The set of
computer games, including SH, was placed in subjects’ homes
for a period of one year. Subjects were encouraged to play all
the games often, but were free to play the games as little as
they wanted. Play of the computer games by the subjects was
monitored, and the relevant information needed to reconstruct
a subject’s play in any of the games was recorded in a central
database in a format allowing us to reconstruct any round of
SH played. Subjects were given a battery of cognitive tests, including TMT, administered by trained clinical staff according
to standard administrations procedures, at the beginning of the
study, 6 months into the study and at the end of the study.
We restricted the analysis to those subjects for whom, when
only error-free rounds of SH with alphabetic, numeric, and alphanumeric search strings were considered, we could find at
least 25 moves total (across all such rounds) for rounds using
alphabetic or numeric and at least 25 moves total for rounds
using alphanumeric search strings. Data from SH rounds with
alphabetic and numeric search strings were combined in the
analysis. Rounds with search string “1, 2, 3, 4” and no distractors were excluded, as were the first moves within each round
for the purpose of determining whether a subject had enough
data. This restriction left a cohort of 23 older adults (20 female
and 3 male, average age 81 ± 6.8 years, average level of education 15 ± 2.9 years, MMSE = 28 ± 0.89, ADL = 0.058 ±
0.16).
The numbers of moves across the remaining cohort 23 subjects for SH rounds with the search string “1, 2, 3, 4” and no
distractors ranged from 24 to 1236 (median of 108), for rounds
with alphabetic or numeric search strings (not including moves

HAGLER et al.: ASSESSING EXECUTIVE FUNCTION USING A COMPUTER GAME: COMPUTATIONAL MODELING OF COGNITIVE PROCESSES

from rounds with search string “1, 2, 3, 4” and no distractors) the
numbers of moves ranged from 35 to 4618 (median of 259), and
for rounds with alphanumeric search string ranged from 43 to
4819 (median of 273). Data for rounds ascending and descending alphabetic or numeric search strings were pooled together
for estimating TMT-A performance as were data for ascending and descending alphanumeric search strings for estimating
TMT-B performance so that as many subjects as possible could
be retained for analysis.
Following the first step of our two-step procedure for estimating subject cognitive and motor parameters from SH data
given in Section IV, for each subject we estimated the value for
Fitts’ law parameter b [see (2)] by minimizing the total error
expressed in the model given in (6) using all observed error-free
SH rounds with search string “1, 2, 3, 4” and no distractors. The
observed means and standard deviations for the values of R2
and p for the fit of the model given in (6) across the 23 subjects
were R2 = 0.26 ± 0.11 and p = 0.0080 ± 0.028, and the mean
and standard deviation of the numbers of moves available for
each subject for the estimation was n = 590 ± 810. The observed mean and standard deviation of the estimated Fitts’ law
parameter b across the full cohort of 23 subjects was
b = 300 ± 110 ms/bit.

(14)

The SH rounds chosen for the estimation of Fitts’ law parameter b were intended to be those for which the motor component
would be strongest. The model fit all subjects at a significance
level of p < 0.05. The low R2 values are expected due to the
uniform distribution of the number of search steps given a number of unselected targets on the board described in Section III-B.
Our average value for b is close to the independently measured
value of 166 ms/bit measured for point-select methods of selecting icons in a computer interface [24], with the measured value
being about one deviation below our average b. We consider this
further in Section VII.
Continuing to the second step of our two step procedure for
estimating subject cognitive and motor parameters from SH
data, we estimated the recall and search performances τRA +
a, τRB + a, τSA , and τSB for each subject using the previously
estimated values of b by minimizing the total error expressed in
the model given in (8) using data from alphabetic and numeric
search strings to estimate τRA + a and τSA , and alphanumeric
search strings to estimate τRB + a and τSB . The observed means
and standard deviations for the values of R2 and p for the fit of
the model given in (8) across the 23 subjects for estimation of
the parameters τRA + a and τSA were R2 = 0.097 ± 0.061 and
p = 0.065 ± 0.17 with the number of moves available for use in
the estimation having mean and standard deviation being n =
670 ± 1200, and for estimation of the parameters τRB + a and
τSB were R2 = 0.087 ± 0.050 and p = 0.049 ± 0.12 with the
numbers of moves available for use in the estimation being n =
730 ± 1300. In the case of the estimation of τRA + a and τSA , four
of the subjects had fits with p > 0.05, and among these subjects
the numbers of moves available for estimation had means and
standard deviations of n = 52 ± 19; similarly for the case of
the estimation of τRB + a and τSB , four of the subjects had fits
with p > 0.05, and among these subjects the numbers of moves

1449

available for estimation had means and standard deviations of
n = 82 ± 38. Two subjects had fits with p > 0.05 in both cases.
Removing the appropriate four subjects with poor fits in the
each of the two cases gives, for the remaining 19 subjects, in the
former case R2 = 0.11 ± 0.057, p = 0.0032 ± 0.0077, and n =
800 ± 1300, and, for the remaining 19 subjects, in the latter case
R2 = 0.10 ± 0.043, p = 0.0039 ± 0.0095, and n = 830 ± 1300.
The observed means and standard deviations of the estimated
cognitive parameters across the full cohort of 23 subjects were
τRA + a = 380 ± 250 ms,
τRB + a = 660 ± 280 ms,
τSA = 96 ± 43 ms,
τSB = 110 ± 41 ms.

(15)

The model, again, fit most subjects to a statistical significance
level of p < 0.05, and the cases where this level of significance
was not met appear to be attributable to the smaller amount of
data available. Again, the low R2 values are expected due to the
uniform distribution of the number of search steps given a number of unselected targets and distractors on the board described
in Section III-B. Due to the fact that we are measuring combined
cognitive and motor values τRA + a and τRB + a rather than the
purely cognitive values τRA and τRB , we could not compare the
measured values to existing research. However, we could estimate the set-switching (the time needed for the subject to switch
from considering the sequence of numbers to considering the
sequence of letters and vice versa in TMT-B) by taking the
difference of τRA + a and τRB + a. The average estimated setswitching time of 280 ms compared well with independently
measured values of about 200 ms [25]. The average estimated
values for τSA and τSB for each step in visual search differed
from the independently measured value of 240 ms [26] by about
a factor of 2. We consider these further in Section VII.
The observed TMT-A and TMT-B scores and numbers of
errors across all the tests taken by the subjects being included in
this analysis and their standard deviations were S A = 45 ± 11 s
and N A = 0.0073 ± 0.14, and S B = 100 ± 28 s and N B =
1.0 ± 0.64. The observed scores are near to those given in
Section II-A [18] for subjects around the age and education of
those used in our study. The observed TMT test–retest reliability
for the test pairs: 1) beginning and 6 months; 2) beginning and
1 year; and 3) 6 months and 1 year, was observed to have R2 of
0.32, 0.20, and 0.13 for TMT-A, and R2 of 0.43, 0.30, and 0.59
for TMT-B. As we used the full year’s worth of data to estimate
subject performance, we characterized subject performance on
TMT using averages of the test scores over the year.
We next constructed estimators of the mean TMT scores given
the mean numbers of errors made on the tests using the procedure given in Section V. The motor complexities for the TMT-A
and TMT-B for all moves after the first target has been selected
were measured from the test pages using a ruler, giving χ̃A =
66 bits, and χ̃B = 74 bits. Using the values of the cognitive
and motor parameters τRA + a, τRB + a, τSA , τSB , and b that we
estimated for the 23 subjects [see (14) and (15)], we estimated
the global parameters T 0 + 25α, β, and θ by minimizing the

1450

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

was not. The results were close to those found by retaining tests
where errors were made in (16).
If the subject whose data give the outlier is removed from
the dataset, and the procedure repeated, the fit became R2 =
0.73 and p < 0.0001, and the global parameters were found to
be T 0 + 25α = −6.3 s, β = 2.0, and θ = 29 s, with β and θ
being statistically significant while T 0 + 25α was not. These
results were very close to those found when retaining the outlier
in (16), so we retained the outlier in our analysis. The linear
regression of the test scores on the number of errors had R2 =
0.51 and p < 0.0001. When we limited ourselves to error-free
administrations of the TMT, we were left with the same set of
16 subjects as in the previous paragraph.
VII. DISCUSSION

Fig. 4. Actual versus estimated TMT scores across subjects. Each of the
23 subjects has two values shown, one for TMT-A and one for TMT-B, each
representing the average of the three administrations of TMT. The model fit has
R 2 = 0.82 and p < 0.0001. A line with slope one passing through the origin
is shown for reference.

total error expressed in the model given in (13) using, for each
subject, the means of the three test scores and the means of the
numbers of errors made in the course of each test administration. The model was fit with R2 = 0.82 and p < 0.0001, and
the estimated global parameter values were
T 0 + 25α = −9.1 s,
β = 2.2,
θ = 30 s.

(16)

For comparison, we looked at the performance of a simple
linear regression of the test scores on the number of errors; the
fit in this case had R2 = 0.58 and p < 0.0001.
Inspection of the 95% confidence intervals for the coefficient
estimates showed that the estimates of β and θ were statistically
significant, while that of T 0 + 25α was not. The values in (16)
suggested that subjects required 30 s to recover from an error.
We consider this further in Section VII. In Fig. 4, we show how
the estimated average TMT-A and TMT-B test scores using these
values of the global parameters compared to the actual average
test scores for each subject.
It was of interest to see how the model developed in this
paper would perform in the case where no errors were made on
TMT. We restricted the analysis to only include administrations
of TMT in which both TMT-A and TMT-B had no errors. There
were 16 subjects who had at least one error-free administration
of TMT. We fitted a truncated version of our model in (13)
lacking the terms in θN A and θN B , and used the average of all
error-free TMT administrations for the test scores. The model fit
with R2 = 0.55 and p < 0.0001, and estimated global parameter
values of T 0 + 25α = −9.1 s and β = 3.1. Inspection of the
confidence intervals for the coefficient estimates showed that the
estimate of β was statistically significant while that of T 0 + 25α

The connect-the-dots model developed in this study is a very
simple model of the connect-the-dots task, and incorporates a
number of simplifying assumptions, particularly in the search
stage. Our simple model relating the measurements from SH to
the case of TMT using a single set of transformations taken to
be approximately the same for all subjects is based on the assumption of a relatively homogeneous set of subjects. A broader
range of subjects may need to be grouped into classes each with
a different set of transformations. A further limitation to our
analysis presented here is the exclusion of SH rounds with errors, possibly limiting our ability to collect data for (mildly)
cognitively impaired subjects.
We treated the time spent recalling the next target in the
sequence as a single RV that appears once in each move. Because
our empirical measurements did not allow separating the effects
of cognitive and motor segments, we were unable to estimate
the recall times τR , but had to measure a combined cognitive
and motor parameter τR + a. As a result, we could only average
estimated set-switching time of 280 ms measured by taking the
difference of τRA + a and τRB + a to independent measurements,
though they compared well to the independently measured value
of about 200 ms [25]. The model we developed to describe the
transformation from the SH case to the TMT case should have
taken the form τR = α + βτR , but, since we could only use
values τR + a, we had to make the approximation τR + a ≈
α + β · (τR + a) which causes the motor parameter a to change
value between the two cases. Even if this were not a problem, the
transformation τR = α + βτR causes the set-switching time to
change between the SH case and the TMT case, where it seems
reasonable that the set-switching time would not change.
The model we use for visual search is that of a serial search
that does not benefit from the memory from previous search
stages for previous “dots,” during any given round, but has
perfect memory within the search stage for the current “dot.”
Using this model, we estimated times spent on each step of
search of about 100 ms in both cases (τSA and τSB ). The natural
sequence of images produced by the eye during visual search has
been independently measured to be about 240 ms per image [26].
This suggests that our model overestimates the average number
of steps in the visual search for a given target by about a factor of
2. A more sophisticated model of search would include aspects

HAGLER et al.: ASSESSING EXECUTIVE FUNCTION USING A COMPUTER GAME: COMPUTATIONAL MODELING OF COGNITIVE PROCESSES

related to: 1) visual acuity and how much target information
the subject can take in at each search step; 2) the ability of the
subject to remember target locations from previous searches; 3)
the degree to which the subject becomes confused and considers
the same target multiple times during a single search; and 4)
the ability of the subject to ignore already selected targets and
whether they spend much time considering these targets in later
searches. What our simple model of search does capture is the
observation that the total search times for moves are, on average,
longer earlier in the connect-the-dots task than they are later in
the task [8].
We used Fitts’ law to describe the motor portion of a move.
An average value for Fitts’ law parameter of b ≈ 300 ms/bit
was measured across the subjects analyzed. We can compare
this value to independently measured values for Fitts’ law for
several methods of using a computer mouse to select a icon: 1)
a = 135 ms and b = 249 ms/bit for drag-select; 2) a = 230 ms
and b = 166 ms/bit for point-select; and 3) a = 135 ms and
b = 249 ms/bit for stroke-through [24]. Point-select should be
closest to the button selection process happening in SH, so our
average value of b is roughly twice as large of the independently
measured value (although that value is approximately one standard deviation below our average b).
We included the time spent recovering from an error as a
single global parameter with the same value for all subjects.
The estimated 30 s recovery time for each error is somewhat
long (we do not have data on the duration of errors during
the administrations of TMT). However, the average number of
errors on TMT-A was near zero and that on TMT-B near one, so
it is likely that the value estimated for θ largely reflects the time
needed to recover from errors during TMT-B. The value for θ
may well be inflated by a correlation where subjects making
more errors also require more time to recover from each one.
Alternatively, it is possible that, when taking the TMT, subjects
also made a number of “near errors” in which they came close to
selecting and incorrect “dot,” but corrected the error themselves.
If the number of these “near errors” is correlated to the number
of actual errors, then the large error recovery time may reflect
time taken up in a “near error” process as well.
Possibly related to variability in the numbers of errors between administrations of TMT and variability in the errorrecovery time is the low test–retest reliability observed in
Section VI. It appears from our results that errors can contribute
a large amount of time to the test scores, and errors are discrete
events, so differing numbers of errors from one test to another
appear to be able to result in substantially different scores from
one test to another.
Moving forward, it is important to better understand the process of making errors in the course of the connect-the-dots task,
and there are a variety of approaches to doing this. There are four
approaches one might take in considering the errors: 1) Look at
the rate at which errors are made in playing SH and see whether
this rate predicts the average number of errors made on TMT, or
allows us to produce good estimates of the average TMT score
without using the observed number of errors on TMT; 2) Look
at how observed errors in SH relate to moves made immediately
before and after. In our analysis, we have dropped all SH rounds

1451

in which any errors were made. The amount of data available,
particularly for (mildly) cognitively impaired subjects, would
be increased by dropping moves expected to be affected by observed errors from the dataset rather than whole rounds; 3) Look
at the moves in SH in which errors are made and see if the time
spent recovering from the error can be used to predict error recovery times in TMT; and 4) Look at outliers in the move times
and see if the frequency and average duration of these outliers
could be related to the number of errors or error recovery time
in SH or TMT, suggesting that the outliers may be “near errors.”
VIII. CONCLUSION
The key objective of this work included: 1) the development of techniques that would allow frequent assessment of
cognitive functions of individuals at risk, for example, associated with aging; and 2) the demonstration of the utility of
computational modeling in assessment of cognitive function.
The general approach was based on using computer games that
would enable neurophysiological assessments comparable to
those obtained with traditional neuropsychological tests such as
the TMT. In this study, we used a simple game that is similar to
the TMT and was developed for this purpose as a part of prior
study [20], [22], [23]. In addition to the estimation of the TMT
performance, the objective of using the game was to derive a
more refined assessment of the various cognitive components
recruited in the execution of TMT.
The potential benefit of our approach to modeling computer
interactions is that we can model cognitive performance over
time for individuals in the home in a more scalable and less expensive manner than current standard practice. Cognitive measures and trends in these measures can be used to identify individuals for further assessment, to provide a mechanism for
improving the early detection of neurological problems, and to
provide feedback and monitoring for cognitive interventions in
the home.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Sanchez-Cubillo, J. A. Perianez, D. Adrover-Roig, J. M. RodriguezSanchez, M. Rios-Lago, J. Tirapu, and F. Barcelo, “Construct validity of
the trail making test: Role of task-switching, working memory, inhibition/interference control, and visuomotor abilities,” J. Int. Neuropsychol.
Soc., vol. 15, pp. 438–450, 2009.
[2] T. A. Salthouse, “What cognitive abilities are involved in trail-making
performance?,” Intelligence, vol. 39, pp. 222–232, 2011.
[3] P. Schatz and J. Browndyke, “Applications of computer-based neuropsychological assessment,” J. Head Trauma Rehabil., vol. 17, pp. 395–410,
2002.
[4] K. Wild, D. Howieson, F. Webbe, A. Seelye, and J. Kaye, “The status of computerized cognitive testing in aging: A systematic review,”
Alzheimer’s Dementia, vol. 4, pp. 428–437, 2008.
[5] M. A. Espeland, J. A. Katula, J. Rushing, A. F. Kramer, J. M. Jennings,
K. M. Sink, N. K. Nadkarni, K. F. Reid, C. M. Castro, T. Church,
D. R. Kerwin, J. D. Williamson, R. A. Marottoll, S. Rushing, M. Marsiske,
and S. R. Rapp, “LIFE Study Group, Performance of a computer-based
assessment of cognitive function measures in two cohorts of seniors,” Int.
J. Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 28, pp. 1239–1250,2013.
[6] T. A. Salthouse and N. M. Fristoe, “Process analysis of adult age effects
on a computer-administered trail making test,” Neuropsychology, vol. 9,
pp. 518–528, 1995.
[7] C. E. Drapeau, M. Bastien-Toniazzo, C. Rous, and M. Carlier, “Nonequivalence of computerized and paper-and-pencil versions of trail making
test,” Perceptual Motor Skills, vol. 104, pp. 785–791, 2007.

1452

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

[8] A. Poreh, A. Miller, P. Dines, and J. Levin, “Decomposition of the trial
making test—Reliability and validity of a computer assisted method for
data collection,” Arch. Assessment Psychol., vol. 2, 2012.
[9] F. C. Donders, “On the speed of mental processes,” Acta Psychol., vol. 30,
pp. 412–431, 1869/1969.
[10] S. Sternberg, “The discovery of processing stages,” Acta Psychol., vol. 30,
pp. 276–315, 1969.
[11] P. M. Fitts, “The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement,” J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 121, pp. 262–
269, 1954/1992.
[12] P. M. Fitts and J. R. Peterson, “Information capacity of discrete motor
responses,” J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 67, pp. 103–112, 1964.
[13] I. S. MacKenzie, “A note on the information-theoretic basis for Fitts’ law,”
J. Motor Behav., vol. 21, pp. 323–330, 1989.
[14] C. R. Bowie and P. D. Harvey, “Administration and interpretation of the
trail making test,” Nature Protocols, vol. 1, pp. 2277–2281, 2006.
[15] R. H. B. Benedict and D. J. Zgaljardic, “Practice effects during repeated
administrations of memory tests with and without alternate forms,” J. Clin.
Exp. Neuropsychol., vol. 20, pp. 339–352, 1998.
[16] A. Collie, P. Maruff, D. G. Darby, and M. McStephen, “The effects of
practice on the cognitive test performance of neurologically normal individuals assessed at brief test-retest intervals,” J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc.,
vol. 9, pp. 419–428, 2003.
[17] C. M. Bird, K. Papadoboulou, P. Ricciardelli, M. N. Rossor, and
L. Cipolotti, “Monitoring cognitive changes: Psychometric properties of
six cognitive tests,” Brit. J. Clin. Psychol., vol. 43, pp. 197–210, 2004.
[18] T. N. Tombaugh, “Trail making test A and B: Normative data stratified
by age and education,” Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol., vol. 19, pp. 203–214,
2004.
[19] L. A. Rabin, W. B. Barr, and L. A. Burton, “Assessment practices of clinical neuropsychologists in the United States and Canada: A survey of INS,
NAN, and APA division 40 members,” Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol., vol. 20,
pp. 33–65, 2005.
[20] H. B. Jimison, J. McKanna, K. Ambert, S. Hagler, W. J. Hatt, and M. Pavel,
“Models of cognitive performance based on home monitoring data,” in
Proc. Annu. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 5234–5237.
[21] A. M. Treisman and G. Gelade, “A feature-integration theory of attention,”
Cognit. Psychol., vol. 12, pp. 97–136, 1980.
[22] H. Jimison, M. Pavel, J. McKanna, and J. Pavel, “Unobtrusive monitoring
of computer interactions to detect cognitive status in elders,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 248–252, Sep. 2004.
[23] H. B. Jimison, M. Pavel, P. Bissell, and J. McKanna, “A framework for
cognitive monitoring using computer game interactions,” Stud. Health
Technol. Inf., vol. 129, pp. 1073–1077, 2007.
[24] I. S. MacKenzie, “Movement time prediction in human-computer interfaces,” in Readings in Human Computer Interaction, R. M. Baecker,
W. A. S. Buxton, J. Grudin, and S. Greenberg, Eds., 2nd ed. Los Altos,
CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1995, pp. 483–493.
[25] S. Monsell, “Task switching,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 7, pp. 134–140,
2003.
[26] G. Sperling and M. J. Melchner, “Visual search and visual attention,” in
Proc. 4th Symp. Sens. Syst. Physiol. Inf. Process. Vis. Syst., 1976.

Stuart Hagler received the B.A. degree in philosophy, the B.S. degree in physics, and the M.S. degree in physics from the University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA, and is currently working toward
the Ph.D. in biomedical engineering at Oregon Health
& Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
He was a Software Engineer with Applied Materials, Inc., where he contributed to the development
of a laser mask lithography system. Subsequently,
he was a Research Associate with the Department
of Biomedical Engineering, Oregon Health & Science University, designing and implementing a wide variety of experimental
paradigms for the studies of sensory-motor control, gait, and cognitive functions
in aging population. His previous research work has focused on the unobtrusive
assessment of performance in older adults and the use of technology to assist
older adults. His current research interests include the computational modeling
of human cognitive and motor processes for practical applications.

Holly Brugge Jimison (M’12) is a Professor in the
College of Computer and Information Sciences and
the College of Health Sciences at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. Her research involves developing design principles for technology to enable
patients to be more active and engaged in their health
care. She currently serves as the Director of Northeastern’s Consortium on Technology for Proactive
Care with research projects on tailoring health interventions for older adults based on feedback from
in-home monitoring, as well as computer modeling
projects for assessing cognitive states using embedded metrics within adaptive
computer games.
Dr. Jimison recently served as a Technology Advisor and Health Scientist
with the Office of Behavioral & Social Sciences Research at the National Institutes of Health. Her NIH work focused on defining new research directions for
shared medical decision making and on “big data” initiatives related to developing clinically relevant behavioral markers based on the monitoring of health
behaviors in the home and environment.

Misha Pavel (SM’11) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute
of Brooklyn, Brooklyn, NY, USA, the M.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in experimental psychology from New York University, New
York, NY, USA.
He is a Professor of Practice jointly appointed between College of Computer and Information Sciences
and the Bouvé College of Health Sciences at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. He came to
Boston from a position of a Program Director of Smart and Connected Health
on a leave from Oregon Health and Science University where he was a Professor
in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, with a joint appointment in the
Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology. Previously, he
served as the Chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering (he founded
in 2001) and as the Director of the Point of Care Laboratory, which focuses on
unobtrusive monitoring, neurobehavioral assessment and computational modeling in support of healthcare, with a particular focus on chronic disease and
elder care. His earlier academic appointments included positions at New York
University and Stanford University. In addition to his academic career, he was a
member of the technical staff at Bell Laboratories in early 1970s, where his research included network analysis and modeling, and later at AT&T Laboratories
with focus on mobile and Internet-based technologies. His current fundamental
research is at the intersection of multilevel computational modeling of complex
behaviors of biological and cognitive systems, and augmented cognition. In
this line of research, he developed a number of quantitative and computational
models of perceptual and cognitive processes, eye movement control, and a
theoretical framework for knowledge representation; the resulting models have
been applied in a variety of areas, ranging from computer-assisted instruction
systems, to enhanced vision systems for aviation, to augmented cognition systems. His most recent efforts are focused on fundamental science and technology
that would enable the transformation of healthcare to be proactive, distributed,
and patient-centered.

