IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1747

Differentiating Between Psychogenic Nonepileptic
Seizures and Epilepsy Based on Common Spatial
Pattern of Weighted EEG Resting Networks
Peng Xu∗ , Xiuchun Xiong, Qing Xue, Peiyang Li, Rui Zhang, Zhenyu Wang,
Pedro A. Valdes-Sosa, Yuping Wang∗ , and Dezhong Yao∗

Abstract—Discriminating psychogenic nonepileptic seizures
(PNES) from epilepsy is challenging, and a reliable and automatic
classification remains elusive. In this study, we develop an approach
for discriminating between PNES and epilepsy using the common
spatial pattern extracted from the brain network topology (SPN).
The study reveals that 92% accuracy, 100% sensitivity, and 80%
specificity were reached for the classification between PNES and
focal epilepsy. The newly developed SPN of resting EEG may be
a promising tool to mine implicit information that can be used to
differentiate PNES from epilepsy.
Index Terms—Brain network, common spatial pattern of brain
network topology, psychogenic nonepileptic seizures (PNES), resting scalp EEG.

I. INTRODUCTION
HYCHOGENIC nonepileptic seizures (PNES) are paroxysmal episodes of altered behavior. PNES are different
from conventional epileptic seizures because they lack the
expected electroencephalographical epileptic changes and the
association with central nervous system dysfunction [1]–[3].
PNES are commonly mistaken for epileptic seizures (ES), re-

P

Manuscript received July 2, 2013; revised January 27, 2014; accepted January 29, 2014. Date of publication February 7, 2014; date of current version
May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by grants from the National
Nature Science Foundation of China (#61175117, #81330032, #91232725, and
#31100745), the 973 Program 2011CB707803, the program for New Century
Excellent Talents in University (#NCET-12-0089), the 111 Project (B12027),
and the 863 Project 2012AA011601. Asterisks indicate corresponding authors.
∗ P. Xu is with the Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of the Ministry of
Education, School of Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China (e-mail: xupeng@
uestc.edu.cn).
X. Xiong, P. Li, R. Zhang, Z. Wang, and ∗ D. Yao are with the Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of the Ministry of Education, School of Life Science
and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 610054, China (e-mail: xiongxiuchun@163.com; heimonu@163.
com; realzhang9@gmail.com; zyu44444@163.com; dyao@uestc.edu.cn).
P. A. Valdes-Sosa is with the Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of the
Ministry of Education, School of Life Science and Technology, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China, and
also with Cuban Neuroscience Center, Habana 6 CP 10600, Cuba (e-mail:
peter_valdes@yahoo.com).
Q. Xue and ∗ Y. Wang are with the Department of Neurology, Xuanwu
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100053, China, and also with
Beijing Key Laboratory of Neuromodulation, Beijing 100053, China (e-mail:
40209629@qq.com; mdwangyp@yahoo.com.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2305159

sulting in a diagnostic delay of 7–10 years, on average [4], [5].
The misclassification of PNES as ES imposes health and economic burdens at the individual and population levels. Misdiagnosed PNES patients are unnecessarily prescribed multiple
high-dose antiepileptic medications (AEDs) with the potential
for adverse effects and teratogenicity [5]–[9]. PNES is a complex disorder that remains poorly understood and poorly managed in clinical settings [1], [2], [4], [10], [11]. Early diagnosis
of PNES is critical to limit inappropriate and potentially harmful
treatments and to reduce unnecessary costs associated with the
illness [5]–[7], [12], [13].
Previous studies have increasingly focused on identifying
criteria that can differentiate PNES based on its phenomenology [3], [5], [8], [14]. By establishing phenomenological criteria for PNES in the nineteenth century, Charcot and Gowers
were the first clinicians to differentiate PNES from ES [15].
Recently, semiology, such as awareness during the ictal phase,
fluttering of the eyes, and the ability of bystanders to modulate
the intensity of the symptoms, has been used for the initial discrimination of PNES from epilepsy [2], [5]. In a prospective
study, six semiological features that can reliably differentiate
PNES from epilepsy were identified [5]. Another study, which
was based on video-EEG analysis and automatic clustering, reported five clinical subtypes that adequately represent the main
semiological characteristics of PNES [16]. Due to the complex
interaction of heterogeneous characteristics in the PNES population, computational methods have also been explored. For
example, using a self-assessment questionnaire in conjunction
with an artificial neural network, a sensitivity and a specificity
of 85% were observed [17]. Other diagnostic techniques have
been proposed, such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), physiological measures, single photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) scans, and symptoms
during the ictal and postictal states [2], [7]. However, the diagnostic success in terms of sensitivity and specificity varies
significantly across studies [2], [7].
The main reason that PNES cannot be sufficiently discriminated from epilepsy is that the neural mechanisms of PNES are
unclear [2]–[4], [9], [14], [18], [19]. Many MRI-based studies
have shown that the majority of epilepsies are associated with
brain network abnormalities [20], [21]. Compared to epilepsy,
few MRI related studies have been carried out for PNES. Using a broad analysis of neuroimaging studies, some researchers
have suggested that PNES arises from alterations in cognitiveemotional executive control and that an imbalance between

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

these functions permits the manifestation of predetermined tendencies [2], [10]. A recent study using resting-state functional
MRI (fMRI) on PNES patients and healthy controls found an
abnormal functional correlation between the precentral sulcus
and the insula [11]. Another study by Ding using both fMRI
and structural MRI (sMRI) found that PNES patients exhibited altered smallworldness in both the functional and structural
networks shifted toward a more regular (lattice-like) organization [22]. These studies revealed that PNES is also correlated
with the altered interactions among multiple brain areas and that
the network information may be a potential marker for PNES
differentiation.
The established PNES early diagnostic approaches require
detailed information, such as semiology, self-assessed scores
or long-recorded video-EEGs [2], [5]–[7], [13], [14], [17],
[23]–[25], and the collection of this information is very time
consuming. Moreover, the experience of the clinician leads to
the use of different criteria to define and select the necessary
information, ultimately influencing the diagnosis of PNES.
Because studies have indicated that both epilepsy and PNES
are correlated with a network abnormality in the brain, it is
possible to accurately diagnose PNES and epilepsy based on a
network analysis. In network analysis, properties such as local
information processing and global information efficiency can
be quantitatively represented by statistical measurements such
as clustering coefficients and the shortest path length [26]–[28];
these properties have been adopted as features for other early
disease diagnosis [29]–[31]. These statistical measurements are
determined by the network spatial topology; however, the complete spatial information of a network is significantly more complex than the adopted statistical measurements. Identifying the
essential spatial information of a network would be meaningful
for further improving the ability to differentiate between various
diseases.
In the early 1990s, the use of common spatial pattern analysis (CSP) was proposed to distinguish between normal and
abnormal EEGs and also to extract abnormal components from
EEGs [32], [33]. In this paper, we take advantage of the fact that
the weighted adjacency matrix of the brain network contains
the fundamental spatial information and that CSP may identify
the differentiating features in the weighted adjacency matrix.
We assume that the common spatial pattern extracted from the
brain network topology (SPN) may be helpful for distinguishing
between PNES and epilepsy.
Because scalp EEG is relatively inexpensive and easily
recorded, it is widely used for the diagnosis and classification
of epilepsy [34]–[36]. In this study, we evaluate the feasibility
of using resting scalp EEG to differentiate between PNES and
epilepsy based on the statistical properties and SPN of EEG
brain networks.
II. METHODS
A. Patients and Controls
Fifteen PNES subjects were recruited from the epilepsy outpatient and inpatient departments of Xuanwu Hospital; 15 ageand sex-matched healthy subjects were recruited from advertisements posted at Capital Medical University and on the In-

ternet from 2010 to 2012. An additional 10 subjects with focal
epilepsy participated in the study. All experimental protocols
were approved by the Ethics Committee of Xuanwu Hospital
of Capital Medical University. Informed consent was obtained
from all participants in accord with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The diagnoses were conducted by two senior epileptologists
with experience in diagnosing and treating epilepsy.
The PNES patients studied here satisfied the following inclusion criteria [37], [38]: 1) episode details described by witnesses lacked association with central nervous system dysfunction and were suspected by two senior epileptologists; 2) each
suspected subject underwent either an inpatient or outpatient
video-EEG recording for at least 12 h to record a minimum
of two spontaneous or provoked nonepileptic events that were
identified as nonepileptic seizures by two epileptologists. Moreover, witnesses familiar with the patient’s seizures agreed that
the recorded episodes were typical; 3) interictal 24-channel EEG
showed no abnormal epileptic discharge based on the review of
two EEG experts; 4) the ictal 24-channel EEG exhibited no
abnormality based on the review of two EEG experts.
Inclusion criteria for the local epilepsy group included the
following: 1) the epilepsy was identified by both MRI scanning and video-EEG; 2) interictal 24-channel EEG exhibited an
abnormality based on the review of two EEG experts.
Inclusion criteria for the healthy control (HC) group included:
1) no previous history of an episode and 2) interictal 24-channel
EEG showing no abnormality based on the review of two EEG
experts.
B. EEG Recording and Preprocessing
Each EEG was recorded continuously at 60 sites using electrodes set in an elastic cap (Greentek, Wuhan, China), which
was positioned according to the 10–10 international system, including references, ground, ECG and EOG. The reference was
placed at the CPz site between Cz and Pz, and the ground electrode was placed in front of Fpz. Horizontal and vertical eye
movements were detected by recording the electro-oculogram
(EOG) with the use of two additional electrodes, placed 1 cm
below (left side) and above (right side) the external canthus. The
data were recorded with an amplifier (Micromed, Italy) using a
band-pass filter of 0.5–70 Hz, a notch of 50 Hz, and a sampling
rate of 512 Hz.
The electrode-skin impedance was set at less than 5 kΩ. All
recordings were obtained in the morning when the subjects were
resting comfortably. An operator observed the subjects and the
EEG traces, alerting the subject on signs of behavioral and/or
EEG drowsiness to maintain the resting EEG as stable as possible. Each recording lasted approximately 2 min, during which
time the subject’s eyes were closed. 10-s-long EEG segments
free of artifacts, such as ocular and muscle movements, were
selected and down-sampled to 256 Hz for further analysis.
C. PNES Discrimination Based on the Common Spatial
Pattern of the Weighted Connectivity Network
The brain network can be used to describe the connectivity
among multiple regions [11], [27], [28], [39]. Various studies
using sMRI and fMRI have shown that patients with epilepsy

XU et al.: DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN PSYCHOGENIC NONEPILEPTIC SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY

1749

gamma (30–40 Hz), and the full band (4–60 Hz), were estimated by averaging the coherence strength within the relevant
frequency band. After calculating the paired coherence between
each pair of 21 electrodes, the 21 × 21 weighted adjacency (connectivity) matrix was constructed to denote interactions among
the 21 nodes in a certain frequency band.
2) Network Properties: The brain network was constructed
based on the 21 × 21 weighted adjacency (connectivity) matrix using the corresponding coherence as the edge linkage cij
between two nodes i and j. After constructing the weighted
network, the clustering coefficients and the shortest path length
were used to measure the local and global information processing ability of the brain, respectively. The (weighted) clustering
index of vertex i is defined as [27]:
 
cik cil ck l
Ci =

k = i l= i
l= k

 

k = i l= i
l= k

Fig. 1. Twenty-one 10–20 canonical electrode montage used for network
analysis.

have different connectivity than normal individuals [20], [21];
these alterations suggest the potential to classify patients with
epilepsy using brain network information. Considering that the
main challenge for PNES discrimination is that the differences
in network statistical properties between PNES and other types
of epilepsy are minor, we present a new method, SPN, to further
extract the implicit information contained in the spatial topology
of the brain network.
EEG-based network analysis is inevitably influenced by the
volume conduction and reference effect [39]–[42]. In this study,
to lower the non-zero reference effect, the data were first
transformed to the approximate zero reference using REST
(http://www.neuro.uestc.edu.cn/REST/) [39]. To lower the effect of volume conduction, the 21 canonical electrodes of the
10–20 system were selected from a total of 60 electrodes to
construct the brain network [39]. The montage of the 21 10–20
canonical electrodes used is shown in Fig. 1.
1) Linkage Strength of the Nodes: Coherence (Coh) is the
most commonly used method of analyzing the cooperative,
synchrony-defined cortical neuronal assemblies; this method
represents the linear relationship at a specific frequency between two signals x(t) and y(t) based on their cross-spectrum.
In this study, we adopted frequency-specific coherence to denote the linkage strength between two network nodes. Coh is
expressed as follows [43]:
CXY (f ) =

|PXY (f )|2
PXX (f )PYY (f )

(1)

where PXY (f ) is the cross-spectrum of x(t) and y(t) at frequency f , and PXX (f ) and PYY (f ) indicate the autospectra
at frequency f , estimated from the Welch-based spectrum at
0.1 Hz resolution. Based on the frequency-dependent coherence
CXY (f ), the edge linkages in the relevant frequency bands,
including theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz),

cik cil

(2)

where cij is the edge linkage strength between vertices i and
j obtained by (1). The mean clustering coefficient (C) of the
entire weighted network was then determined as follows:
C=

N
1 
Ci .
N i=1

(3)

Regarding the weighted network, the length of an edge between vertices i and j is the inverse of the aforementioned edge
weight [27],

1/cij ,
if cij = 0
Lij =
.
(4)
1,
if cij = 0
Therefore, the length of a weighted path between two vertices
is defined as the sum of the lengths of the edges of this path.
Similarly, the average weighted path length of the entire graph
(L) was computed as
L=

1
.
N 
N

(1/N (N − 1))
(1/Lij )

(5)

i=1 j = i

3) Network Analysis: The described network analysis procedure was performed for the 10-s-long segment of each subject,
resulting in one connectivity (adjacency) matrix with a dimension of 21 × 21 for each subject. Based on the connectivity
matrix, the network topology and properties were calculated for
each subject in different frequency bands. The differences in
network properties (the clustering coefficients and shortest path
length) between groups were evaluated using the two-sample
t test. The network properties and spatial topology were then
used in the following procedure to perform the corresponding
classification in different applications.
4) Common Spatial Pattern of the Weighted Connectivity
Network: Assuming that the inherent network characteristics
of PNES and epilepsy subjects may provide a potential mechanism to discern these disorders, we used the common SPN to
refine the inherent and implicit spatial information in the adjacency matrix to differentiate PNES from epilepsy. The basic

1750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

concept of SPN is to identify a group of spatial filters that maximize the variance of one class while minimizing that of another
class [32], [33], [44], [45]. The crucial goal of SPN is to identify
the common spatial pattern of various weighted brain network
topologies; thus, the spatial pattern extracted by SPN is in the
network space and not in the physical data space, as is the case
with canonical CSP.
Let φ1 and φ2 be the 21 × 21 adjacency matrices for PNES
and epilepsy subjects, respectively. The spatial filters are the
projections, the form of which is equivalent to maximizing the
following function:
J(w) =

wT Φ1 w
wT φT1 φ1 w
=
wT Φ2 w
wT φT2 φ2 w

(6)

where Φ1 and Φ2 are the covariance matrix of the adjacency
matrix for the two groups. Note that the scaling of the projection
w will have no effect on the object value; hence, (6) can be
transformed into a constrained optimization problem as follows:

arg max wT Φ1 w
w
.
(7)
subject to wT Φ2 w = 1
By introducing the Lagrange multiplier, the objective function
can be rewritten as
L(w; λ) = wT Φ1 w − λ(wT Φ2 w − 1).

(8)

By taking the derivative of (8) with respect to w under the
condition ∂∂ wL = 0, the objective projection w can be estimated
using the generalized eigenvalue equation,
Φ1 w = λΦ2 w

(9)

where λ denotes the eigenvalue of the generalized eigenvalue
equation and w is the corresponding eigenvector [46]. Regarding
the multiple m spatial filters, (9) can be solved as

W
(10)
Φ−1
2 Φ1 W =
−1
where
W is the matrix consisting of the eigenvectors of Φ2 Φ1
and
= diag(λ1 , λ2, ..., λm ), with λ being the corresponding singular values. For example, when the most discriminative three pairs of CSP filters are used, six-dimensional spatial features will be obtained [45], [47], [48]. Specifically,
the three pairs of discriminative CSP filters comprises a matrix Wcsp = [Filter1, Filter2, ..., Filter6], with each filter being a 21-length vector, i.e., Wcsp with a dimension of 21 × 6.
The differentiation
 abilities of the filters were denoted by the
eigenvalues in
, and the first and last filters corresponding
to the largest and smallest eigenvalues consist of the most
discriminative CSP filter pair [48]. For a 21 × 21 connectivity matrix φ, the corresponding CSP feature transformation is
T
φ)), which results in a vector of length 6.
Fcsp = log(var(Wcsp
In this study, we tested the classification performance using two,
four, and six SPN features.
The connectivity matrix constructed from the coherence is the
second-order measurement of the signal, and the corresponding
covariance matrix of the connectivity matrix is the fourth-order
measurement of the signal. Therefore, the common spatial pat-

tern extracted the fourth-order information of the EEG signal to
perform the classification.
5) PNES Differentiation Based on SPN: In the clinic, both
epilepsy and PNES patients can be reliably and accurately distinguished from a group of normal subjects based on their abnormal
behavior; therefore, we established the procedure based on SPN
to differentiate PNES and epilepsy. The detailed classification
procedure is depicted in Fig. 2.
Based on the 21 × 21 adjacency matrices derived from PNES
and epilepsy, several SPN filters were estimated according to
(6)–(9).
SPN filters were then applied to the training set to extract the
corresponding features. Fisher discriminate analysis (FDA) and
support vector machine (SVM) classifier with default parameters were trained by the extracted features for the classification.
The detailed default parameters used for SVM were 1.0 for C
and 1/k for the radial basis variance, with k being the number
of samples in the training set.
After the adjacency matrix was calculated based on the Resting EEG for classification, the SPN filters estimated in the training procedure were used to extract the spatial network topology information from the corresponding adjacency matrix [see
Fig. 2(b)]. Based on the SPN features, the trained classifier was
then used for the final differentiation.
6) Evaluation Indices: To evaluate the classification performance, the accuracy (Acc), sensitivity (Sen), and specificity
(Spe) were used, and the detailed calculations for the three metrics were as follows:
nPNES + nEpilepsy
× 100%
NPNES + NEpilepsy
nPNES
× 100%
Sen =
NPNES
nEpilepsy
× 100%
Spe =
NEpilepsy

Acc =

(11)

where NPNES and NEpilepsy are the actual number of PNES
and epilepsy patients, respectively (i.e., 15 and 10), and nPNES
and nEpilepsy are the correctly predicted number of PNES and
epilepsy patients, respectively.
III. RESULTS
The two network property values averaged across the subjects
for the PNES, epilepsy, and normal groups are shown in Tables I
and II.
As shown in Tables I and II, both the clustering coefficients
and the shortest path length were significantly different in the
gamma and full-frequency bands between the patients (PNES
and epilepsy) and the normal subjects. These two tables further reveal that the network properties between the PNES and
epilepsy groups were not significantly different. This finding
indicates the difficulty in classifying PNES and epilepsy based
only on network properties where a low classification performance is reported (see Table III). Considering that the current
dataset is relatively small, the leave-one-out strategy [31], [49]
was adopted to evaluate the classification performance.

XU et al.: DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN PSYCHOGENIC NONEPILEPTIC SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY

1751

TABLE I
CLUSTERING COEFFICIENTS AMONG THE THREE GROUPS

TABLE II
SHORTEST PATH LENGTH AMONG THE THREE GROUPS

Fig. 2. Training and classification procedure for differentiation between PNES
and epilepsy: (a) training; (b) classification.

The adjacency matrix contains the spatial information required to denote interactions between brain areas, and the implicit and inherent spatial information of the PNES and epilepsy
groups may be contained in the spatial patterns. We have provided the corresponding information for the SPN filter in the beta
frequency band as an example to show how SPN can extract the
discriminative spatial information in brain networks. SPNs in
other frequency bands have similar working mechanisms to that
in the beta band.
Fig. 3 shows the six most discriminative SPN filters identified
from the adjacency matrix of the PNES and epilepsy groups in
the beta frequency band.
The corresponding filter topology on the head surface for the
two most discriminative filters (Filters 1 and 6) are given in
Fig. 4(a), and the difference in the network topology between
the PNES and epilepsy groups is shown in Fig. 4(b), in which
the Kruskal-Wallis test [50] was used to evaluate the difference
for each edge and only those edges with a statistically significant
difference (p < 0.05) are shown.
Fig. 5 is a scatter plot of the two SPN features that are the
most discriminative between the PNES and epilepsy groups in
the beta frequency band.
Table IV lists the corresponding discrimination performance,
including the accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SEN), and specificity (SPE), for the PNES and epilepsy groups in different
frequency bands based on the SPN features extracted using 2, 4,
and 6 filters, respectively. Using the SPN spatial filters, the discrimination performance in all concerned frequency bands was
significantly improved compared to those listed in Table III,
i.e., those based on the network statistical properties. Table IV
also reveals that SPN filter number affected the classification
performance.

1752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE III
DIFFERENTIATION PERFORMANCE (%) BETWEEN THE PNES AND EPILEPSY GROUPS BASED ON NETWORK PROPERTIES

TABLE IV
DIFFERENTIATION PERFORMANCE FOR THE PNES AND EPILEPSY GROUPS IN VARIOUS FREQUENCY BANDS BASED ON SPN USING 2, 4, AND 6 FILTERS

IV. DISCUSSION
Tables I and II show that the PNES and epilepsy subjects had
decreased clustering coefficients and an increased shortest path
length compared to the normal subjects in the frequency bands of
interest; this may be an indicator of impaired local information
processing and global information integration in patients [26],
[28]. PNES has been shown to correlate with functional and

structural brain network alterations using MRI-related studies
[22]. Recent scalp EEG-based studies have also revealed that
PNES might lack a relatively long linkage in the brain network
topology, indicating the impairment of information transferring
and processing [51]. In practice, PNES and epilepsy patients
can be easily discerned from normal subjects based on their
abnormal behavior [5], [19], [25], [35]. The main challenge

XU et al.: DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN PSYCHOGENIC NONEPILEPTIC SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY

Fig. 3. Six most discriminative SPN filters in the beta band. Each column
represents one spatial filter, and the vertical axis is the node index. The colors
denote the different weights imposed on the different electrode nodes.

1753

Fig. 5. Scatter plot of the two SPN features that are the most discriminative
between the PNES and epilepsy groups in the beta frequency band.

Fig. 6. Two networks with different topology structures but the same network
property values.

Fig. 4. The scalp topologies for the most distinct SPN filters (Filters 1 and
6) and the topology difference in the network between the PNES and epilepsy
groups in the beta band. (a) The scalp topology of the two most distinct SPN
filters; (b) the network topology difference between the PNES and epilepsy
groups. The solid lines in (b) denote significantly increased linkage strength
(p < 0.05) between the PNES and epilepsy groups; the dashed lines denote
significantly decreased linkage strength (p < 0.05).

for PNES discrimination is the higher classification error of
misclassifying PNES as other epilepsies, which might affect
subsequent clinical intervention [2], [5], [6], [13], [17]. Tables I
and II also show that the network properties between PNES and
epilepsy are very close, which results in a very low classification
performance based on the network properties, as revealed in
Table III. Essentially, the network statistical properties are the
direct statistical measurements of the networks, and these cannot
encompass the entire information content related to the network
topology. As shown in Fig. 6, the two network topologies vary in
the bilateral hemisphere, whereas the network properties, such

as clustering coefficients and the shortest path length, are the
same for the two networks. Therefore, the network properties fail
to capture the spatial differentiation information in the networks.
In fact, PNES and epilepsy patients may be more readily discriminated in terms of network topology structure as shown in
Fig. 4(b). In previous studies [38], [52], researchers used structural MRI to reveal that PNES was less detected with brain
structural abnormalities in the frontal and temporal areas compared to epileptic subjects. The network topology difference in
Fig. 4(b) shows that subjects with PNES have stronger linkages between the frontal area and the temporal/occipital areas
than subjects in the epilepsy group, which is consistent with
the structural abnormality difference between the two groups.
Combining the topology differences in Fig. 4(b) and the statistical properties in Tables I and II, we see that although a clear
difference in spatial topology exists in Fig. 4(b), the statistical network properties did not reflect any significant difference.
Here, we successfully found that the SPN can extract the inherent spatial topology information in these two patient groups.

1754

As shown in Fig. 3, the SPN filters impose different weights
on the adjacency matrix to emphasize the electrode nodes exhibiting a significant difference with larger coefficients while
compressing the nodes without clear differences with smaller
coefficients between the two groups. The working mechanisms
of SPN are further revealed in Fig. 4, which shows that the SPN
filters capture the differentiating spatial network information in
the brain network. This result was accomplished by providing
larger weights to network nodes exhibiting significant linkage
differences between the PNES and epilepsy groups. Thus, the
nodes exhibiting large topology differences were those possessing significant SPN weights. Fig. 5 further reveals that after
SPN transformation, the two groups can be adequately discriminated based on the first two discriminative SPN features. The
classification performance in Table IV achieved for the various
SPN filter numbers is consistently better than the classification
performance in Table III, based on the network properties in
each frequency band. The highest classification performance
(92% accuracy, 100% sensitivity, and 80% specificity) can be
achieved when the six SPN features in the beta band are considered for classification. The use of six SPN features can capture more differentiating information than the use of two and
four SPN features, resulting in a more reliable classification, as
shown in other disciplines, such as BCI [45], [47], [48]. Therefore, in the actual application, we propose to use six SPN filters
to extract the spatial network topology information. Here, only
the network properties including clustering coefficients and the
shortest path length were tested for their ability to distinguish
between PNES and epilepsy, whereas other metrics, such as
the modularity and smallworldness that have previously been
demonstrated to correlate with PNES seizure frequency [53],
may provide more reliable classification. However, these statistical network properties, although essentially derived from the
network topology structure, still may miss the important spatial
information, but the spatial information contained in the topology structure may be more important for distinguishing between
PNES and epilepsy, as shown by the SPN results.
Essentially, SPN performs similarly to a sub-network-seeking
filter that has the ability to automatically select modules having clear spatial differences between PNES and epilepsy in the
brain network space by giving them a larger emphasis while
compressing other modules by providing them with smaller
coefficients. Therefore, the difference in spatial topology exhibited between PNES and epilepsy subjects can be adequately
extracted using such a band-pass-like filter, resulting in a more
reliable differentiation. Coherence is influenced by volume conduction; other techniques, such as coherency index [40] and current source density (CSD) [54], that are less influenced by the
volume conduction effect may be more meaningful for this type
of EEG-based network analysis. Irrespective of the technique
used for volume conduction reduction, SPN can still be used to
extract the spatial information contained in the brain’s network
structure.
The difficulty for classification between PNES and other
epileptic seizures is mainly due to the very limited knowledge regarding the underlying neural mechanism of PNES [2], [6], [38];
hence, more reliable recognition will require further research
on the related neural mechanism. This study is subject to sev-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

eral limitations; first, the number of subjects used was relatively
small, which is a common problem in most of the related studies
on PNES [2]. In future, we will expand the proposed approach to
a greater number of subjects exhibiting several types of epilepsies. Second, this paper did not consider the use of feature
selection criteria to combine the complementary information
in different frequency bands, which might further improve the
classification performance.
V. CONCLUSION
Based on the resting scalp EEG, the proposed classification can robustly and reliably differentiate between PNES and
epilepsy subjects. The differentiation was based on the common
SPN derived from the brain network space of the resting scalp
EEG. The newly developed SPN is a fourth-order measure of
the original resting scalp EEG data and can extract the inherent spatial information in the resting network, facilitating the
reliable recognition of PNES relative to local epilepsy subjects.
This method may be helpful for clinicians aiming to discover
implicit information during the diagnosis of PNES.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments, which have improved their work.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Bodde, J. Brooks, G. Baker, P. Boon, J. Hendriksen, O. Mulder,
and A. Aldenkamp, “Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures–definition, etiology, treatment and prognostic issues: A critical review,” Seizure: J. Brit.
Epilepsy Assoc., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 543–553, 2009.
[2] P. Dickinson and K. J. Looper, “Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures: A
current overview,” Epilepsia, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 1679–1689, 2012.
[3] J. Kuyk, F. Leijten, H. Meinardi, P. Spinhoven, and R. V. Dyck, “The diagnosis of psychogenic non-epileptic seizures: A review,” Seizure, vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 243–253, 1997.
[4] M. Reuber and C. E. Elger, “Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures: Review
and update,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 205–216, 2003.
[5] T. U. Syed, W. C. LaFrance, E. S. Kahriman, S. N. Hasan, V. Rajasekaran,
D. Gulati, S. Borad, A. Shahid, G. Fernandez-Baca, and N. Garcia,
“Can semiology predict psychogenic nonepileptic seizures? A prospective
study,” Ann. Neurol., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 997–1004, 2011.
[6] N. Bodde, J. Brooks, G. Baker, P. Boon, J. Hendriksen, and A. Aldenkamp,
“Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures—diagnostic issues: A critical review,” Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg., vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2009.
[7] F. M. Cuthill and C. A. Espie, “Sensitivity and specificity of procedures
for the differential diagnosis of epileptic and non-epileptic seizures: A
systematic review,” Seizure, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 293–303, 2005.
[8] S. W. Hill and S. D. Gale, “Predicting psychogenic nonepileptic seizures
with the personality assessment inventory and seizure variables,” Epilepsy
Behav., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 505–510, 2011.
[9] W. C. LaFrance and S. R. Benbadis, “Avoiding the costs of unrecognized
psychological nonepileptic seizures,” Neurology, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 1620–
1621, 2006.
[10] G. Baslet, “Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures: A model of their
pathogenic mechanism,” Seizure, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2011.
[11] S. J. van der Kruijs, N. M. Bodde, M. J. Vaessen, R. H. Lazeron, K. Vonck,
P. Boon, P. A. Hofman, W. H. Backes, A. P. Aldenkamp, and J. F. Jansen,
“Functional connectivity of dissociation in patients with psychogenic
non-epileptic seizures,” J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 83, no. 3,
pp. 239–247, 2012.
[12] A. Avbersek and S. Sisodiya, “Does the primary literature provide support
for clinical signs used to distinguish psychogenic nonepileptic seizures
from epileptic seizures?” J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 81, no. 7,
pp. 719–725, 2010.

XU et al.: DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN PSYCHOGENIC NONEPILEPTIC SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY

[13] N. Bodde, S. van der Kruijs, D. Ijff, R. Lazeron, K. Vonck, P. Boon,
and A. Aldenkamp, “Subgroup classification in patients with psychogenic
non-epileptic seizures,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 279–289, 2012.
[14] L. H. Goldstein and J. D. Mellers, “Recent developments in our understanding of the semiology and treatment of psychogenic nonepileptic
seizures,” Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 436–444, 2012.
[15] E. W. Massey and L. C. McHenry, Jr., “Hysteroepilepsy in the nineteenth
century: Charcot and Gowers,” Neurology, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 65–67, Jan.
1986.
[16] C. Hubsch, C. Baumann, C. Hingray, N. Gospodaru, J.-P. Vignal,
H. Vespignani, and L. Maillard, “Clinical classification of psychogenic
non-epileptic seizures based on video-EEG analysis and automatic clustering,” J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 82, no. 9, pp. 955–960,
2011.
[17] T. Syed, A. Arozullah, K. Loparo, R. Jamasebi, G. Suciu, C. Griffin,
R. Mani, I. Syed, T. Loddenkemper, and A. Alexopoulos, “A selfadministered screening instrument for psychogenic nonepileptic seizures,”
Neurology, vol. 72, no. 19, pp. 1646–1652, 2009.
[18] W. C. LaFrance and S. Plioplys, “Neuropsychiatric disorders: Does semiology of psychogenic nonepileptic seizures matter?” Nature Rev. Neurol.,
vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 302–303, 2012.
[19] J. A. Pillai and S. R. Haut, “Patients with epilepsy and psychogenic nonepileptic seizures: An inpatient video-EEG monitoring study,” Seizure,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 24–27, 2012.
[20] C. Luo, Q. Li, Y. Lai, Y. Xia, Y. Qin, W. Liao, S. Li, D. Zhou, D. Yao,
and Q. Gong, “Altered functional connectivity in default mode network
in absence epilepsy: A resting-state fMRI study,” Human Brain Mapp.,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 438–449, 2011.
[21] C. Luo, Q. Li, Y. Xia, X. Lei, K. Xue, Z. Yao, Y. Lai, W. Liao, D. Zhou,
and P. A. Valdes-Sosa, “Resting state basal ganglia network in idiopathic
generalized epilepsy,” Human Brain Mapp., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1279–1294,
2012.
[22] J. R. Ding, D. An, W. Liao, J. Li, G. R. Wu, Q. Xu, Z. Long, Q. Gong,
D. Zhou, O. Sporns, and H. Chen, “Altered functional and structural
connectivity networks in psychogenic non-epileptic seizures,” PloS one,
vol. 8, no. 5, p. e63850, 2013.
[23] R. Duncan and M. Oto, “Predictors of antecedent factors in psychogenic
nonepileptic attacks Multivariate analysis,” Neurology, vol. 71, no. 13,
pp. 1000–1005, 2008.
[24] K. A. McNally, B. K. Schefft, J. P. Szaflarski, S. R. Howe, H.-S. Yeh, and
M. D. Privitera, “Application of signal detection theory to verbal memory
testing to distinguish patients with psychogenic nonepileptic seizures from
patients with epileptic seizures,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 597–
603, 2009.
[25] B. Mostacci, F. Bisulli, L. Alvisi, L. Licchetta, A. Baruzzi, and P. Tinuper,
“Ictal characteristics of psychogenic nonepileptic seizures: What we have
learned from video/EEG recordings—A literature review,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 144–153, 2011.
[26] M. D. Fox and M. E. Raichle, “Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging,” Nature Rev.
Neurosci., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 700–711, 2007.
[27] C. Stam, W. De Haan, A. Daffertshofer, B. Jones, I. Manshanden,
A. M. C. van Walsum, T. Montez, J. Verbunt, J. De Munck, and B. Van
Dijk, “Graph theoretical analysis of magnetoencephalographic functional
connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease,” Brain, vol. 132, no. 1, pp. 213–224,
2009.
[28] C. Stam, Y. Van der Made, Y. Pijnenburg, and P. Scheltens, “EEG synchronization in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease,” Acta
Neurologica Scandinavica, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 90–96, 2003.
[29] L. Liu, L.-L. Zeng, Y. Li, Q. Ma, B. Li, H. Shen, and D. Hu, “Altered
cerebellar functional connectivity with intrinsic connectivity networks in
adults with major depressive disorder,” PloS One, vol. 7, no. 6, p. e39516,
2012.
[30] H. Shen, L. Wang, Y. Liu, and D. Hu, “Discriminative analysis of restingstate functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI,” Neuroimage, vol. 49, no. 4, p. 3110, 2010.
[31] L.-L. Zeng, H. Shen, L. Liu, L. Wang, B. Li, P. Fang, Z. Zhou, Y. Li,
and D. Hu, “Identifying major depression using whole-brain functional
connectivity: A multivariate pattern analysis,” Brain, vol. 135, no. 5,
pp. 1498–1507, 2012.
[32] Z. Koles, J. Lind, and P. Flor-Henry, “Spatial patterns in the background
EEG underlying mental disease in man,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 91, no. 5, p. 319, 1994.
[33] Z. J. Koles, M. S. Lazar, and S. Z. Zhou, “Spatial patterns underlying
population differences in the background EEG,” Brain Topogr., vol. 2,
no. 4, pp. 275–284, 1990.

1755

[34] E. Beghi, A. Carpio, L. Forsgren, D. C. Hesdorffer, K. Malmgren,
J. W. Sander, T. Tomson, and W. A. Hauser, “Recommendation for a definition of acute symptomatic seizure,” Epilepsia, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 671–
675, 2010.
[35] R. S. Fisher, W. V. E. Boas, W. Blume, C. Elger, P. Genton, P. Lee, and
J. Engel, “Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: Definitions proposed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau
for Epilepsy (IBE),” Epilepsia, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 470–472, 2005.
[36] T. R. Henry, “seizures and Epilepsy: Pathophysiology and principles of
diagnosis,” Hospital Phys. Epilepsy Board Rev. Manual, vol. 1, Part 1,
pp. 1–21, 2012.
[37] S. R. Benbadis, K. Siegrist, W. O. Tatum, L. Heriaud, and K. Anthony,
“Short-term outpatient EEG video with induction in the diagnosis of psychogenic seizures,” Neurology, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 1728–1730, Nov. 9,
2004.
[38] O. Devinsky, D. Gazzola, and W. C. LaFrance, “Differentiating between
nonepileptic and epileptic seizures,” Nature Rev. Neurol., vol. 7, pp. 210–
220, 2011.
[39] Y. Qin, P. Xu, and D. Yao, “A comparative study of different references
for EEG default mode network: The use of the infinity reference,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 121, no. 12, p. 1981, 2010.
[40] L. Marzetti, G. Nolte, M. Perrucci, G. Romani, and C. D. Gratta, “The use
of standardized infinity reference in EEG coherency studies,” Neuroimage,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 48–63, 2007.
[41] P. L. Nunez, R. B. Silberstein, Z. Shi, M. R. Carpenter, R. Srinivasan,
D. M. Tucker, S. M. Doran, P. J. Cadusch, and R. S. Wijesinghe, “EEG
coherency II: Experimental comparisons of multiple measures,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 469–486, Mar. 1999.
[42] C. J. Stam, Y. van der Made, Y. A. Pijnenburg, and P. Scheltens, “EEG
synchronization in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease,”
Acta Neurol. Scand., vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 90–96, Aug. 2003.
[43] L. H. Koopmans, The Spectral Analysis of Time Series. New York: Academic, 1995.
[44] B. Blankertz, R. Tomioka, S. Lemm, M. Kawanabe, and K. R. Muller,
“Optimizing spatial filters for robust EEG single-trial analysis,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 41–56, Jan. 2008.
[45] P. Xu, P. Yang, X. Lei, and D. Yao, “An enhanced probabilistic LDA for
multi-class brain computer interface,” PloS One, vol. 6, no. 1, p. e14634,
2011.
[46] B. Blankertz, G. Dornhege, M. Krauledat, K.-R. Müller, and G. Curio,
“The non-invasive Berlin Brain–Computer Interface: Fast acquisition of
effective performance in untrained subjects,” Neuroimage, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 539–550, 2007.
[47] B. Blankertz, G. Dornhege, M. Krauledat, K.-R. Müller, and G. Curio,
“The non-invasive Berlin Brain-Computer Interface: Fast acquisition of
effective performance in untrained subjects,” Neuroimage, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 539–550, 2007.
[48] B. Blankertz, R. Tomioka, S. Lemm, M. Kawanabe, and K.-R. Muller,
“Optimizing spatial filters for robust EEG single-trial analysis,” Signal
Process. Mag., IEEE, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 41–56, 2008.
[49] P. Xu, M. Kasprowicz, M. Bergsneider, and X. Hu, “Improved noninvasive
intracranial pressure assessment with nonlinear kernel regression,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 971–978, 2010.
[50] S. D. Shorvon, A. Löwenthal, D. Janz, E. Bielen, and P. Loiseau, “Multicenter double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of levetiracetam
as add-on therapy in patients with refractory partial seizures,” Epilepsia,
vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 1179–1186, 2000.
[51] Q. Xue, Z. Y. Wang, X. C. Xiong, C. Y. Tian, Y. P. Wang, and P. Xu,
“Altered brain connectivity in patients with psychogenic non-epileptic
seizures: A scalp electroencephalography study,” J. Int. Med. Res., vol. 41,
no. 5, pp. 1682–1690, Oct. 2013.
[52] M. Reuber, G. Fernandez, C. Helmstaedter, A. Qurishi, and C. E. Elger,
“Evidence of brain abnormality in patients with psychogenic nonepileptic
seizures,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 249–254, Jun. 2002.
[53] E. Barzegaran, A. Joudaki, M. Jalili, A. O. Rossetti, R. S. Frackowiak, and
M. G. Knyazeva, “Properties of functional brain networks correlate with
frequency of psychogenic non-epileptic seizures,” Front Hum. Neurosci.,
vol. 6, p. 335, 2012.
[54] J. Kayser and C. E. Tenke, “Principal components analysis of Laplacian
waveforms as a generic method for identifying ERP generator patterns:
I. Evaluation with auditory oddball tasks,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 117,
no. 2, pp. 348–368, 2006.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

