1328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Nonparametric Signal Processing Validation in
T-Wave Alternans Detection and Estimation
R. Goya-Esteban∗ , O. Barquero-Pérez, M. Blanco-Velasco, Senior Member, IEEE, A. J. Caamaño-Fernández,
A. Garcı́a-Alberola, and J. L. Rojo-Álvarez, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Although a number of methods have been proposed
for T-Wave Alternans (TWA) detection and estimation, their performance strongly depends on their signal processing stages and
on their free parameters tuning. The dependence of the system
quality with respect to the main signal processing stages in TWA
algorithms has not yet been studied. This study seeks to optimize
the final performance of the system by successive comparisons of
pairs of TWA analysis systems, with one single processing difference between them. For this purpose, a set of decision statistics
are proposed to evaluate the performance, and a nonparametric
hypothesis test (from Bootstrap resampling) is used to make systematic decisions. Both the temporal method (TM) and the spectral method (SM) are analyzed in this study. The experiments were
carried out in two datasets: first, in semisynthetic signals with
artificial alternant waves and added noise; second, in two public
Holter databases with different documented risk of sudden cardiac
death. For semisynthetic signals (SNR = 15 dB), after the optimization procedure, a reduction of 34.0% (TM) and 5.2% (SM) of the
power of TWA amplitude estimation errors was achieved, and the
power of error probability was reduced by 74.7% (SM). For Holter
databases, appropriate tuning of several processing blocks, led to
a larger intergroup separation between the two populations for
TWA amplitude estimation. Our proposal can be used as a systematic procedure for signal processing block optimization in TWA
algorithmic implementations.
Index Terms—Bootstrap resampling, electrocardiogram (ECG),
signal processing, T-wave alternans (TWA).

I. INTRODUCTION
-WAVE alternans (TWA) is a beat-to-beat fluctuation in
the amplitude, waveform, or duration of the ST-segment or
T-wave. TWA has been shown to be related to cardiac instability
and increased arrhythmogenicity [1], [2]. Clinical studies sug-

T

Manuscript received August 3, 2013; revised November 15, 2013 and January 7, 2014; accepted January 29, 2014. Date of publication February 4, 2014;
date of current version March 17, 2014. This work was supported by Research
Project TEC2010-19263. The work of O. Barquero-Pérez was supported by
FPU grant AP-2009-1726 from Spanish Government. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ R. Goya-Esteban is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, University Rey Juan Carlos, Fuenlabrada-28943, Madrid, Spain (e-mail:
rebeca.goyaesteban@urjc.es).
O. Barquero-Pérez, A. J. Caamaño-Fernández, and J. L. Rojo-Álvarez are with
the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, University Rey Juan
Carlos, Fuenlabrada-28943, Madrid, Spain (e-mail: oscar.barquero@urjc.es;
antonio.caamano@urjc.es; joseluis.rojo@urjc.es).
M. Blanco-Velasco is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, Universidad de Alcalá, 28801 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain (e-mail:
manuel.blanco@uah.es).
A. Garcı́a-Alberola is with the Arrhythmia Unit, Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca of Murcia, Murcia 30120, Spain (e-mail: arcadi@secardiologia.es).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2304565

gest that there is a patent relationship between large amplitude
microscopic TWA and the risk of sudden cardiac arrest [2], [3].
Therefore, TWA represents a strong marker of cardiac electrical
instability with relevant potential for arrhythmic risk stratification in adults [4]–[8], and it is also under research in fetus [9]. A
number of methods have been proposed for TWA analysis, some
of the most widely used are the spectral method (SM) [1], [2],
[10], the complex demodulation (CD) method [11], the correlation method (CM) [12], methods based on the Karhunen-Loéve
Transform [13], [14], the modified moving average (MMA)
method [15], the Laplacian likelihood ratio method (LLR) [16],
and the latest multilead analysis schemes [17].
An excellent taxonomy of the different approaches to TWA
analysis can be found in [18], which represents a state of art for
the vast amount of TWA algorithms proposed in the literature.
Moreover, several different processing techniques are used to
condition the signal before the TWA detection and estimation
stage [10], [12], [18], [19].
The comparison and validation of existing algorithms are
troublesome due to the lack of definition of a TWA clinical gold
standard. Moreover, the performance of the methods heavily
depends on their signal processing stages and parameter tuning,
which are usually not optimized, but rather ad hoc selected from
previous studies or experience [18]. To our best knowledge, a
constructive procedure to optimize the signal processing in TWA
analysis systems has not been proposed.
Therefore, this study aims to propose a systematic methodology for optimizing the global performance of TWA analysis
systems. For this purpose, we start from a TWA analysis system
composed of a set of signal processing blocks, and then, the
effect of a change in one single block (either inclusion vs exclusion, or free parameters tuning) is statistically quantified at the
system output. A complete set of decision statistics is proposed
to evaluate the performance of the system, in terms of central
tendency and dispersion of both detection and estimation quality. The successive comparison of these pairs of TWA system
implementations is then provided by means of nonparametric
hypothesis tests (based on Bootsrap resampling). As a result,
the significance of either the improvement or worsening of the
global performance of the system can be determined.
Two different TWA analysis methods are used to test the proposed system optimization methodology. First, a simple implementation for TWA amplitude estimation in the time domain,
which is referred to as the TM. Second, the widely used SM
applied to both detect and estimate TWA.
Experiments were conducted in two datasets. First, on
semisynthetic signals composed of real ECG segments with

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GOYA-ESTEBAN et al.: NONPARAMETRIC SIGNAL PROCESSING VALIDATION IN T-WAVE ALTERNANS DETECTION AND ESTIMATION

1329

Fig. 1. Block diagram for the generic signal processing stages on a TWA analysis system. The system is composed of several processing stages, some of them
divided into processing blocks with a certain role in terms of signal processing. Input and output signals are defined for each block in the scheme.

artificial alternant waves and added noise. In this case, the presence and amplitude of alternans are known; hence, a clear benchmark can be stated for TWA estimation and detection. Second,
experiments were also conducted on two Holter databases with
different documented risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD). Given
the lack of benchmark for these data, the intergroup separation
between the two databases for TWA amplitude estimation is
used as the system optimization criterion.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
summarizes the two TWA analysis methods used in this study,
and Section III presents with detail the proposed optimization
procedure and its statistical basis. The experiments and results
are presented in Sections IV and V, for semisynthetic and Holter
databases, respectively. Finally, the discussion and conclusions
are given in Section VI.
II. TWA ESTIMATION AND DETECTION METHODS
Fig. 1 depicts a diagram of a complete TWA analysis system
that operates over a sliding ECG window length (L) of 128
beats with 32 beats overlapping (D). Accordingly, s[n] denotes
an ECG signal window to be analyzed.
The ECG preprocessing stage consists of two filtering blocks.
First, high-frequency (HF) noise elimination with a coarse lowpass filter (CLPF) with zero-phase distortion and 50 Hz cutoff
frequency, yielding an output signal sCLPF [n], which can be expressed in terms of the mathematical operator ΓCLPF modifying
s[n],
sCLPF [n] = ΓCLPF {s[n]}

(1)

Second, baseline cancellation (BLC) accomplished through an
LPF that in combination with spline interpolation, generates
a trend signal to be subtracted from sCLPF [n]. In this block,
several design options are available. Let θbi denote the ith free
1
parameter to be tuned during the design of block b; then θBLC
2
accounts for the LPF type, and θBLC is the window length for
the time interval between consecutive spline nodes. The output
signal can be expressed using a mathematical transformation
with two free parameters,
1
2
, θBLC
}.
sBLC [n] = ΓBLC {sCLPF [n], θBLC

(2)

In the R-peak detection stage, R-peaks are detected on
sBLC [n] using three consecutive blocks. First, a band-pass filter
(BPF) is applied to preserve the spectral content of QRS complexes. The output signal of this block can be expressed in terms
of the operator ΓBPF that has two free parameters, the center
1
2
) and the bandwidth (θBPF
),
frequency (θBPF
1
2
sBPF [n] = ΓBPF {sBLC [n], θBPF
, θBPF
}.

(3)

Second, the time instants of QRS complexes are determined on
sBPF [n] by using an adaptive threshold, where a signal sample is
selected as QRS index whenever it is higher than a given absolute
amplitude after a specified refractory period. The result is the
set of QRS time instants, niqrs for i = 1, . . . , Q, where Q is the
number of QRS
 complexes.i The output signal can be expressed
as qrs[n] = Q
i=1 δ[n − nqrs ], where δ[n] is the Kronecker delta
function. Finally, R-peaks are determined on sBLC [n] by finding
i
,
the maximum amplitude in a time interval around
Q each nqrs
which yields the binary valued signal r[n] = i=1 δ[n − nir ],
with nir containing the temporal positions of R-peaks.
Nonvalid beats discarding stage: TWA has been found to be
related to heart rate (HR) [20]–[22], and accordingly, ECG beats
with HR outside the band 40–120 beats/min are discarded, as
well as those RR intervals differing more than 50% from the
previous or the next ones. For each discarded beat, the alternant phase is preserved by also discarding the next beat. Note
that this approach does not take into consideration any possible
change of phase of TWA, which would affect the estimation.
To obtain accurate estimates with changes of phase, methods to
estimate the phase of TWA should be implemented, as in [23].
In our implementation, an ECG segment s[n] is fully discarded
whenever any of the following conditions are hold: 1) more than
10 beats have been discarded and 2) the standard deviation of
RR intervals is larger than 10% of mean RR. The output signal
of this block is given by the set of valid temporal positions niv ,

i
for i = 1, . . . , M , with M ≤ Q, i.e., v[n] = M
i=1 δ[n − nv ].
Repolarization interval (ST-T) segmentation and synchronization stage: Repolarization intervals are segmented and conditioned by using four consecutive blocks. First, a fine LPF
(FLPF) is used to reject noise out of the TWA band (0.3–
15 Hz) [24], and the output signal is expressed in terms of the
1
as free parameter,
operator ΓFLPF with cutoff frequency θFLPF

1330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

i.e.,

Ms is obtained as the difference of each pair of rows of M,
⎤ ⎡
⎡
⎤ ⎡
⎤
vd1
A1 − B 1
−ε
⎥ ⎢
⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎥
B 1 − A2
⎢
⎥ ⎢ +ε ⎥ ⎢ vd2 ⎥
⎥ ⎢
⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥ ⎢ .. ⎥ ⎢ .. ⎥
..
Ms = ⎢
⎥ = ⎢ . ⎥ + ⎢ . ⎥ (9)
.
⎥ ⎢
⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎥
⎥ ⎢
⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎥
⎣ AM /2 − BM /2 ⎦ ⎣ −ε ⎦ ⎣ vdM −1 ⎦

1
}.
sFLPF [n] = ΓFLPF {sBLC [n], θFLPF

(4)

A subsequent block delineates each repolarization interval,
yielding the output M × N matrix T, where M is the number of valid beats in s[n], and N is the number of samples of
each segmented repolarization interval. The free parameter θT1
corresponds to the segmentation type,
T = ΓT {sFLPF [n], θT1 }.

(5)

Two different options are analyzed for θT1 . In option A, a fixed
segmentation is used, taking a 400 ms window after a 50 ms
gap following each R-wave. In option B, an RR-adjusted time
window based on [12] is used. Three different T-wave onsets are
defined, namely, 60, 100, and 150 ms after the R peak for RR
< 0.6, 0.6–1.1,
and >1.1 s, respectively. The window length is
obtained as 0.4 mean(RR).
Next, the effect of possible high amplitude remaining samples
from the R–S segment in matrix T can be alleviated using an
edge smoothing window (Tukey window with a ratio of taper to
constant section of 0.35) in each row of T. The output matrix
of this block can be expressed in terms of the mathematical
operator ΓW as follows:
Tw = ΓW {T}.

(6)

Most works use at this point some alignment strategy [18];
hence, the output matrix of the synchronization block can be
expressed in terms of the operator ΓSYN modifying Tw , with a
1
corresponding to the alignment strategy,
free parameter θSYN
1
}.
M = ΓSYN {Tw , θSYN

(7)

1
Two different options are tested for θSYN
. In option A, a
T-wave template, obtained as the median of 128 consecutive
T-waves, is used to align each wave by maximizing the cross
correlation, allowing a variation of ±30 ms from its initial position [12]. In option B, a normalization approach aims to align
the samples of each complex corresponding to the same cardiac
activation instant from consecutive heartbeats. For this purpose,
each segmented T-wave is normalized with respect to time, using an interpolation rate given by the length of the segment
divided by the length of the RR interval.
TWA detection and estimation stage: Now, M can be seen as
a successive pattern of row vectors, Ai and Bi , consisting of A
and B heartbeat patterns plus additive noise vi , as follows:

⎡

A1

⎤

⎡

A

⎤

⎡

v1

⎤

⎢ B ⎥ ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ v ⎥
⎢B⎥ ⎢ 2 ⎥
⎢
1 ⎥
⎢
⎥ ⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎥
⎢ .. ⎥ ⎢ .. ⎥ ⎢ .. ⎥
M = ⎢ . ⎥ = ⎢ . ⎥ + ⎢ . ⎥.
⎢
⎥ ⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥ ⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎥
A
A
v
⎣ M /2 ⎦ ⎣ ⎦ ⎣ M −1 ⎦
BM /2

B

vM

(8)

BM /2 − AM /2+1

+ε

vdM

where ε = A − B is the alternate wave, and vdi = vi − vi+1 .
Let mis be the ith row in Ms ; then the TM estimates the TWA
|), where mos dd =
amplitude as Valt = 12 max(|mos dd − meven
s
i
even
i
= Eieven (ms ) are the TWA templates
Eio dd (ms ) and ms
for odd and even alternans, respectively, and E is the expected
value, estimated as the sample average.
The Matrix Ms can also be columnwise analyzed in terms
of time series sj , with 1 ≤ j ≤ N . The SM [1], [10] analyzes TWA by means of the periodogram of each sj , given by
pj = M1 | FFT(sj )|2 , and the averaged power spectrum is obtained as p = Ej (pj ). Detection is made by means of the TWA
n o ise
, where p0.5 is
Ratio (TWAR), given by TWAR = p 0 . σ5 −μ
n o ise
the magnitude of p at 0.5 cpb (cycles per beat) frequency bin of
the spectrum, and μnoise (σnoise ) is the mean (standard deviation) of the spectral noise measured in a reference spectral window. In this study, this window was set to 0.33–0.48 cpb, other
works have used a narrower spectral window starting above
0.4 cpb [25], [26]. TWA is considered significant if TWAR > 3,
√
and TWA amplitude is estimated as Valt = p0.5 − μnoise .
III. HYPOTHESIS TESTS AND DECISION STATISTICS
In this section, the Bootstrap resampling technique is described for its use in two different scenarios: first, for performance analysis of TWA analysis systems on a semisynthetic
dataset with known TWA activity; and second, to measure the
intergroup separation between two real populations for TWA
amplitude estimation.
In our proposal, a set of successive comparisons is made for
block validation and optimization in a TWA analysis system.
The label Model represents a whole set of processing stages
used in a TWA analysis system, with a concrete selection of the
free parameters. We define two models, so-called Model 1 and
Model 2, with one single processing difference between them.
We need to decide whether the performance differences between
Model 1 and Model 2 are statistically significant in terms of a
given performance statistic. Our statistical hypothesis test will
contrast the null hypothesis (H0 ) that Model 1 and Model 2 have
the same performance, against the alternative hypothesis (H1 )
that they have different performance. Let uM 1 and uM 2 denote
the performance statistic obtained for each model, for example,
the mean of TWA amplitude estimation absolute errors. Then,
the hypothesis test can be stated as H0 : Δu = 0 versus H1 :
Δu = 0, with Δu = uM 2 − uM 1 .
In order to approximate the probability density function (pdf)
of uM 1 , uM 2 , and subsequently of Δu, we use the well-known
plug-in principle. In brief, let Z = {zj , j = 1, . . . , L} be a set
of L TWA amplitude estimation absolute errors, and let u be a
statistical magnitude estimated by using an operator O on the

GOYA-ESTEBAN et al.: NONPARAMETRIC SIGNAL PROCESSING VALIDATION IN T-WAVE ALTERNANS DETECTION AND ESTIMATION

Fig. 2. Histograms for the possible results of the hypothesis test: (a) Semisynthetic signals and (b) Holter databases.

observed set, i.e., u = O(Z). Since actual fZ (Z) is unknown,
only a finite number of samples are available, and operator O can
be complex, then fu (u) will be often impractical to compute.
Alternatively, we can approximate fZ (Z) for its plug-in empirical distribution. We build sets Z ∗ (b) (so-called resamples from
Z), by sampling with replacement up to L elements of Z. Now,
a replication of statistic u is obtained as u∗ (b) = O(Z ∗ (b)), and
it represents an estimate of this statistic. By repeating the resampling procedure
B for b = 1,∗. . . , B, an estimated pdf is given
by fˆu (u) = B1
b=1 δ(u − u (b)). An estimation of the confidence interval for Δu, can be readily obtained from ordered
statistics in Δu∗ (b) resamples [27]. Bootstrap tests were performed with B = 500. The test determines that the differences
between the two models are statistically relevant in terms of
statistic u when at least 97.5% of the B values are at one side
of the zero value.
Using both, central tendency and dispersion parameters, gives
a global statistical knowledge of the data being analyzed. In
this study, operator O stands for the mean (M ), the median
(M d), the standard deviation (SD), the confidence interval width
(CIW), and the power (P ), defined as P = E[Z 2 ] = (E[Z])2 +
Var(Z).
Regarding the analysis of the semisynthetic signal set with
known TWA activity, and for TWA estimation, Z stands for
the TWA amplitude estimation absolute errors (Ae), given
by, Aej = |aj − âj |, where aj and âj are the actual and the
estimated TWA amplitudes, respectively. Therefore, uM 1 =
O(Ae1j ) and uM 2 = O(Ae2j ), where Ae1j and Ae2j are the Aej
for Model 1 and for Model 2, respectively. Fig. 2(a) shows
the three possible results of the hypothesis test for Δu estimated from Δu∗ (b) resamples: H0 is accepted, none of the
Models is better in terms of u, since the zero value is overlapped and less than 97.5% of the B values are at one side
(top); H0 is rejected because Model 1 outperforms Model 2
in terms of u, all Δu∗ (b) values are positive meaning that for
every resample uM 2 is larger than uM 1 (medium); and H0
is rejected because Model 2 outperforms Model 1 in terms of
u statistic since all Δu∗ (b) values are negative (bottom). For
TWA detection, Z stands for the probability error (Pe), obtained as Pej = (FNj + FPj )/Lj , where Lj is the number of
semisynthetic signals used to obtain each Pej and FNj , FPj
stand for false negatives and false positives, respectively. Sim-

1331

ilarly, uM 1 = O(Pe1j ) and uM 2 = O(Pe2j ), where Pe1j and Pe2j
are the Pej for Model 1 and for Model 2, respectively.
To measure the intergroup separation between two real populations, Z stands for the TWA amplitude estimations âj ; therefore, uPMmn = O((âj )PMmn ), where (âj )PMmn are the âj for population m and Model n. In this case, we first study if Model 1 provides significantly higher TWA amplitude estimations for one
population (P 1) than for the other (P 2) or viceversa, δuM 1 =
uPM21 − uPM11 , and the same for Model 2, δuM 2 = uPM22 − uPM12 .
Furthermore, to test whether the intergroup separation between
the two populations is significantly higher with Model 1 or
with Model 2, the difference between the estimated distributions
δuM 1 and δuM 2 is obtained as Δu = δuM 2 − δuM 1 . Fig. 2(b)
shows an example of the δu∗M 1 (b) (top), δu∗M 2 (b) (medium),
and Δu∗ (b) (bottom) resamples. In this example, the confidence intervals for δuM 1 and δuM 2 indicate that both Model 1
and Model 2 provide significantly higher TWA amplitude estimations for P 2 than for P 1, since all δu∗M 1 (b) and δu∗M 2 (b)
values are positive. The estimated confidence interval for Δu
indicates that the intergroup statistical separation between the
two populations is significantly higher with Model 1, in terms
of statistic u, since all Δu∗ (b) values are negative.
Other nonparametric resampling test [28]–[30], and parametric statistical algorithms [31] have been previously used in TWA
studies.

IV. EXPERIMENTS WITH SEMISYNTHETIC SIGNALS
A. Semisynthetic Signals Database
A usual methodological problem when evaluating the performance of a TWA processing system is that the actual presence
of alternans is unknown in real signals. Hence, our first experimental step was to generate a set of ECG signals with artificial
alternant waves, in order to have a perfect knowledge of their
actual magnitude and presence.
To obtain signals as realistic as possible, 3-min records were
generated by adding noise and alternans to a set of 5 control ECG
signals from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database (fs = 360 Hz;
records 103, 112, 117, 121 and 123; first lead of each record)
[32]. These ECG signals were selected because 99% of their
beats were annotated as normal, and they were found with no
positive TWA presence in [10].
An alternant wave with 35-μV amplitude was added to every
other beat. Each realization had a random probability of alternans inclusion, i.e., some of the resulting semisynthetic signals
had alternans, and the others did not. The alternant waves were
estimated from an ECG with clear TWA recorded during a percutaneous coronary intervention, from the dataset used in [16].
These waves were smoothed and resampled to fit the control
ECGs with fs = 360 Hz. Fig. 3 shows a heartbeat from record
103, before and after alternant wave inclusion. Physiological
noise from the MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test Database [32] was
added from three noise sources, namely, muscular activity artifacts, electrode motion artifacts, and baseline wandering, for low
and high levels (15 and 25 dB) of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
In each realization, the noise segment was extracted beginning

1332

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 3. Representation of an original heartbeat from record 103 (dashed) and
the same heartbeat after the alternant wave inclusion (straight).

at a random position in the complete record and added to the
corresponding control ECG.
For TWA amplitude estimation, a set of L = 500 semisynthetic signals were obtained. For TWA detection, L = 50 sets
of Lj = 100 signals were used to obtain 50 Pe values.
B. Model Comparisons on Semisynthetic Signals
A set of successive comparisons for block validation and
optimization was conducted on the semisynthetic signal set.
In the Preprocessing Stage, the performance of the system
was tested in terms of CLPF, for inclusion/exclusion, BLC for
1
inclusion/exclusion, as well as for θBLC
= [mean filter, median
2
filter], and for θBLC = [600, 700, 800, 900, 1000] ms.
In the R-peak Detection Stage, the performance of the system
1
= [10, 15, 20] Hz (and
was tested in terms of the BPF, for θBPF
2
fixing θBPF = 10 Hz).
In the repolarization interval segmentation and synchronization stage, we first analyzed the FLPF for its relative position in
the system, either before repolarization interval segmentation, or
row-wise in the matrix M; then, for its inclusion/exclusion; and
1
= [12, 15, 17, 20, 22, 25] Hz. The segmentafinally, for θFLPF
tion block was tested in terms of option A and option B for
θT1 . The windowing block was tested for inclusion/exclusion.
Finally, the synchronization block was analyzed for inclu1
.
sion/exclusion, and in terms of option A and option B for θSYN
C. Results on Semisynthetic Signals
Results are summarized for TWA amplitude estimation with
TM (Table I) and with SM (Table II), as well as for TWA detection with SM (see Table III). Each table contains, first, the
values of each decision statistic for each SNR, for the Initial
configuration of the TWA system, and for the Final configuration after the system optimization procedure. The Initial
configuration consisted of the following blocks and free param1
2
= median filter and θBLC
= 700 ms),
eters: CLPF, BLC (θBLC
1
2
BPF (θBPF = 7.5 Hz, θBPF = 15 Hz), FLPF (ECG filtering and
1
= 15 Hz), repolarization interval segmentation (θT1 =
θFLPF
option A). The mean values of the estimated confidence intervals for ΔM d, ΔM , ΔCIW , ΔSD, ΔP are next presented for
each model comparison described in Section IV-B. For rejected
H0 , the mean value is shown in bold, a positive (negative) sign
indicating that Model 1 outperforms (underperforms) Model 2.
For each row in the tables, the model comparisons setup was in
CLPF, BLC-1, FLPF-2 and Windowing, Model 1, and Model
2 with and without the respective block; in BLC-2, Model 1

1
1
= median filter and Model 2 with θBLC
= mean
with θBLC
2
filter; in BLC-3, θBLC values were compared in pairs from the
lowest to the highest, the tables show the comparison Model 1
2
2
= 700 ms and Model 2 with θBLC
= 800 ms; in BPF,
with θBLC
1
θBPF values were compared in pairs from the lowest to the high1
= 10 Hz
est, tables show the comparison Model 1 with θBPF
1
and Model 2 with θBPF = 20 Hz; in FLPF-1, in Model 1 the
FLPF block before Repolarization Interval segmentation and in
1
Model 2 filtering row-wise in the matrix M; in FLPF-3, θFLPF
values were compared in pairs from the lowest to the highest,
1
= 15 Hz
the tables show the comparison Model 1 with θFLPF
1
and Model 2 with θFLPF = 17 Hz; in segmentation and synchronization, several comparisons were conducted combining
all the possibilities for segmentation and synchronization described in Section IV-B, the tables show the comparison of the
Models which outperformed the rest, Model 1 with θT1 = option
1
= option B, and Model 2 with θT1 = option B and
A and θSYN
1
θSYN = option A.
For TWA amplitude estimation with TM (Table I), from the
Initial configuration to the Final configuration, for both 25
and 15 dB, a reduction of TWA amplitude estimation errors
was achieved in terms of M , CIW , SD and P , only M d
showed an increase. The percentage of reduction and increase
of each statistic showed that dispersion parameters were more
sensible than central tendency parameters to the optimization
procedure.
In the Preprocessing Stage, the CLPF block inclusion improved the performance in terms of all statistics except for M d
(25 and 15 dB) and CIW (15 dB). The inclusion of the BLC
block was controversial, since M d and M indicated improvement without the block, and the other statistics showed either improvement or not significant differences with the block. Studying particular cases, we could notice that, in general, including
the BLC block yielded lower TWA amplitude estimations, which
improved the estimation when alternans were not present, but
1
=
worsened when they were present. In the same block, θBLC
median filter resulted clearly better compared to the mean filter,
2
, in terms of number of significant
and the best values for θBLC
favorable statistics, were 800 ms (25 dB), and 700 and 800 ms
1
= 10 Hz out(15 dB). In the R-peak Detection Stage, θBPF
1
performed both θBPF = 15 Hz and 20 Hz. In the repolarization
interval segmentation and synchronization stage, the position of
the FLPF block before ECG segmentation was better in terms
of most of the statistics. Also, most of the statistics indicated
improvement with the inclusion of the FLPF block, all of them
1
= 15 Hz was the best
for the lowest SNR. Parameter θFLPF
in terms of number of significant statistics. The inclusion of
the windowing block represented an improvement on the performance, in terms of M d, M , and P , and only SD (25 dB)
indicating the opposite. Finally, the combination θT1 = option
1
= option A was better, in terms of CIW , SD and
B and θSYN
P , only M d indicating the opposite.
For TWA amplitude estimation with SM (Table II), from the
initial configuration to the final configuration, for both 25 and
15 dB, a reduction of TWA amplitude estimation errors was
achieved in terms of M d, M , and P . Conversely, dispersion
statistics CIW and SD showed an increase.

GOYA-ESTEBAN et al.: NONPARAMETRIC SIGNAL PROCESSING VALIDATION IN T-WAVE ALTERNANS DETECTION AND ESTIMATION

1333

TABLE I
RESULTS ON SEMI-SYNTHETIC SIGNALS

TABLE II
RESULTS ON SEMISYNTHETIC SIGNALS

TABLE III
RESULTS ON SEMI-SYNTHETIC SIGNALS

In the preprocessing stage, and similarly to the TM, the CLPF
block inclusion improved the performance in terms of some
statistics. The inclusion of the BLC block was controversial, as
1
= median
with the TM, for the same reason. Also for SM, θBLC
2
filter resulted clearly better. Slightly different, θBLC = 800 ms

2
(25 dB) and θBLC
= 1000 ms (15 dB) were the best in terms
of number of significantly favorable statistics. In the R-peak de1
= 10 Hz outperformed
tection stage, similarly to the TM, θBPF
1
both θBPF = 15 Hz and 20 Hz. In the repolarization interval
segmentation and synchronization stage, and different from the

1334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

TM, the position of the FLPF block was significant in few cases,
and among them, mostly in favor of matrix M filtering. The inclusion of the FLPF block was mostly positive for 15 dB, but
1
comparison, the significant
negative for 25 dB. In each θFLPF
1
= 20 Hz.
statistics were in favor of the highest value until θFLPF
Similarly to the TM, the inclusion of the windowing block represented an improvement in terms of most statistics. Finally, the
1
= option A was better
combination θT1 = option B and θSYN
for all statistics, except for M d.
For TWA detection with SM (Table III), a pronounced reduction of the Pe was achieved in terms of all statistics, from the
Initial configuration to the Final configuration.
In the preprocessing stage, opposite to TWA estimation, the
CLPF block inclusion yielded no significant differences at all,
and the inclusion of the BLC block was mostly positive. As
1
= median filter resulted better than the
in estimation, θBLC
mean filter, but with less number of favorable statistics, and
2
2
= 700 ms and 800 ms (25 dB), together with θBLC
=
θBLC
800 ms (15 dB), were the best in terms of number of significant
favorable statistics. In the R-peak detection stage, similarly to
1
= 10 Hz outperformed the other options. In
estimation, θBPF
the repolarization interval segmentation and synchronization
stage, as in estimation, the FLPF block was significant in few
cases, but in contrast to estimation, they were in favor of filtering
before repolarization interval segmentation. The inclusion of the
FLPF block was positive in terms of M and P (25 and 15 dB)
and M d (15 dB). Also different from the estimation case, for
1
comparison, the significant statistics were always in
each θFLPF
1
favor of the lowest θFLPF
value. The windowing block had less
impact in detection, but it improved the performance for 15 dB
in terms of M d, M , and P . Finally, and also for detection, the
1
= option A was better in
combination θT1 = option B and θSYN
terms of all statistics, except for CIW.
D. Final Configurations
For TWA amplitude estimation with TM (Table I), the optimization procedure, i.e., the set of successive comparisons for
block validation and optimization, and the tradeoff between results for 25 and 15 dB, led to the final configuration, which con1
2
= median filter and θBLC
= 800 ms),
sists of CLPF, BLC (θBLC
1
1
= 15 Hz),
BPF (θBPF = 10 Hz), FLPF (ECG filtering and θFLPF
repolarization interval segmentation (θT1 = option B), window1
= option A).
ing and synchronization (θSYN
For the SM, the optimization procedure along with the tradeoff between the results for 15 and 25 dB and the results for
estimation and detection, yielded to the same final configuration as for the TM, except for the block FLPF, in which matrix
M filtering was selected.
V. EXPERIMENTS WITH HOLTER DATABASES
A. Holter Databases
We used two publicly available databases. On one hand, the
Normal Sinus Rhythm Database (NSRDB) [32], which consists
of 18-long-term ECG recordings (about 24 h long) of subjects
referred to the Arrhythmia Laboratory at Boston’s Beth Israel

Deaconess Medical Center, with no significant arrhythmias (5
men, 26–45 years; 13 women, 20–50 years). Recordings were
stored at 128 Hz and 12-bit resolution. On the other hand, the
Sudden Cardiac Death Database (SCDDB) [32], which consists
of 18 patients with sinus rhythm (5 with intermittent pacing), 1
continuously paced, and 4 with atrial fibrillation, all of them had
sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmia, and most had an actual
cardiac arrest. Only the recordings from 13 patients (from 4 to
24 hours long) with underlying sinus rhythm without pacing
were used in this study (8 men, 34–80 years; 4 women, 30–
82 years; 1 unknown). The recordings were stored at 250 Hz
and 12-bit resolution. In both databases, the first lead of every
record was used for the study.
B. Model Comparisons on Holter Databases
As the actual alternans amplitude and presence is unknown
in the current scenario, several model comparisons defined in
terms of free parameters tuning presented in Section IV-B were
hard to benchmark. Notice that in this experiment, the intergroup
separation between databases was analyzed. Hence, for some of
the blocks, only the inclusion/exclusion was compared. Finally,
we also studied with this real dataset the performance of the
system for the Discard Non Valid Beats Stage, in terms of DNVB
block inclusion/exclusion.
C. Results on Holter Databases
The initial configuration for the experiments in this section was composed of the following blocks and free parame1
2
= median filter and θBLC
= 800 ms),
ters: CLPF, BLC (θBLC
1
2
BPF (θBPF = 5 Hz, θBPF = 15 Hz), FLPF (ECG filtering
1
= 15 Hz), and repolarization interval segmentaand θFLPF
tion (θT1 = option A). In every model comparison described in
Section V-B, the estimated confidence intervals for δuM 1 and
δuM 2 allowed always to reject H0 . Both Model 1 and Model
2 provided always significantly higher TWA estimated amplitude for SCDDB than for the NSRDB, with the SM for all the
statistics, with the TM for all statistics except for M d, which
oppositely was always significantly lower for the SCDDB.
Table IV summarizes the results (mean values of the estimated confidence intervals for Δu) for the intergroup TWA
amplitude differences between the two databases, with the TM
and with the SM. For rejected H0 , the mean value is shown
in bold, a positive sign indicating that the intergroup separation is significantly higher with Model 2 than with Model 1,
and a negative sign indicating the opposite. For each row, the
model comparisons setup was in DNVB, CLPF, BLC, FLPF,
Windowing and Normalization, Model 1, and Model 2 with and
1
values were comwithout the respective block; in BPF, θBPF
pared in pairs from the lowest to the highest (Table IV shows
1
= 10 Hz, and Model 2 with
the comparison Model 1 with θBPF
1
θBPF = 20 Hz); in Synchronization, Model 1 with θT1 = option
A and without alignment, and Model 2 with θT1 = option B and
1
= option A; in segmentation and synchronization, Model
θSYN
1
= option B, and Model 2 with
1 with θT1 = option A and θSYN
1
1
θT = option B and θSYN = option A.

GOYA-ESTEBAN et al.: NONPARAMETRIC SIGNAL PROCESSING VALIDATION IN T-WAVE ALTERNANS DETECTION AND ESTIMATION

1335

TABLE IV
RESULTS ON HOLTER DATABASES

Fig. 4. TWA amplitude estimations and TWAR distributions obtained with the SM, for NSRDB and SCDDB: (a) with and without the DNVB block and (b) with
and without the BLC block.

In the discard nonvalid beats stage, the intergroup separation
between NSRDB and SCDDB was significantly higher without
the DNVB block in terms of all statistics. However, without
this block, we found that artifacts yielded to spurious amplitude
estimations, mainly in SCDDB, therefore, DNVB is a necessary
block and it was included in the remaining experiments in this
section. Fig. 4(a) shows TWA amplitude estimations distribution (SM) with and without the DNVB block, for NSRDB and
SCDDB. Given that the existing noise in the databases may affect the detection capability of the system, Fig. 4(a) also shows,
the variability results corresponding to the TWAR parameter,
which conveys information regarding noise variance. It can be
seen that the exclusion of the DNVB block also modifies the detection results, in the same way as the amplitude estimation. For
the sake of comparison, the vertical axis for both NSRDB and
SCDDB results have been equalized, though for the SCDDB,
the outliers of the box-plot representation extent to 987.21 μV
for TWA amplitude estimation, and to 3152 for TWAR.
In the preprocessing sage, the CLPF block did not involve
a substantial difference in the final performance of the system,
and only with the TM, and in terms of P , the intergroup separation between the databases was significantly higher without

the CLPF block. Fig. 5(a) shows the scatter plots for TWA amplitude estimations with the TM. Note that values close to the
diagonal represent no change when including (or not) the block,
whereas values below (above) the diagonal represent higher
(lower) amplitude estimates when including the block. With the
TM, including the BLC block in general led to lower TWA
amplitudes estimations. However, when strong baseline wandering was present in the recording, excluding the BLC block
resulted in misleading TWA amplitude estimations. This can
be inspected by estimating the signal to baseline noise ratio as
the power of sCLPF [n] divided by the power of the residual
signal after the BLC block, resBL [n] = sBLC [n] − sCLPF [n],
resulting in 109.5 ± 119.8 (mean ± std) for the NSRDB and
15.65 ± 27.38 for the SCDDB. With these values, we may see
that the SCDDB is more affected by baseline noise, and excluding the BLC block has a deeper impact in this database, which
leads to higher intergroup separation in terms of all statistics except for M d. For the SM, excluding the BLC block suppressed
most low amplitude detections, and only high amplitude detections remained, mainly for the SCDDB [see Fig. 4(b)], hence this
was the reason for the increased separation between databases
in terms of M d, M , and P .

1336

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

Fig. 6. TWA odd (straight line) and even (dashed) templates (m os d d and
m es ve n ) without (top) and with (bottom) Tukey windowing.

Fig. 5. Scatter plots of TWA amplitude estimations with the TM, for NSRDB
(left) and SCDDB (right). Amplitudes in the horizontal (vertical) axis obtained
including (excluding): (a) CLPF, (b) FLPF and (c) windowing blocks; (d) horizontal axis using normalization as alignment strategy, vertical axis without
any alignment strategy; (e) horizontal axis using RR-adjusted segmentation +
synchronization, vertical using fix segmentation + synchronization.
1
In the R-peak detection stage, the different θBPF
options did
not involve a substantial difference in the performance of the
system, and the intergroup separation was only significantly
1
= 10 Hz in terms of M with the TM.
higher with θBPF
In the T-wave segmentation and synchronization stage, we
estimated the signal to HF noise ratio as the power of SBLC [n]
divided by the power of the residual signal after the FLPF

block, resHF = SBLC [n] − SFLPF [n], resulting in 3.3 ± 2.88
for the NSRDB and 58.74 ± 110.6 for the SCDDB. Therefore,
the NSRDB is more affected by HF noise. With the TM, excluding the FLPF block led to higher estimated amplitudes, but
mainly for the NSRDB [see Fig. 5(b)]. For this reason, higher
inter-group separation between the databases was obtained with
its inclusion. Differently, with SM, when the FLPF block was excluded, some low amplitude detections disappeared, but mainly
for the SCDDB, and the databases separation became higher
in terms of P . With the TM, the intergroup separation between
databases was significantly higher, in terms of all statistics, when
including the windowing block. Fig. 5(c) shows that TWA amplitude estimations were often higher without Tukey windowing, mostly for the NSRDB. Fig. 6 presents an example showing
that without Tukey windowing, TWA amplitude estimation can
be distorted due to lasting R wave effect (for Fig. 6(top), Valt
was 19.28 μV, and for Fig. 6(bottom) 7.08 μV). This effect also
was present in the SM, but to a lesser extent, due to the power
spectrum averaging. The intergroup separation was significantly
higher when including the windowing block in terms of SD and
P.
The use of no alignment strategy can, in some cases, underestimate TWA amplitudes due to differences in RR interval
length inside an analysis window. Including the normalization
1
= option B) had strong impact, with both the
approach (θSYN
TM and the SM [see Fig. 5(d)], leading to significantly higher
separation between databases, for all statistics except for M d
with the TM. The variable segmentation together with the syn1
= option A)
chronization approach (θT1 = option B and θSYN
had the same effect, but mainly with the TM and for the NSRDB
[see Fig. 5(e)], resulting in a significantly higher intergroup separation in terms of all statistics only with the TM.
Comparing both alignment approaches (segmentation and
1
=
synchronization), the combination θT1 = option A and θSYN
option B provided higher amplitude estimations, mainly for the
SCDB, and led to significantly higher intergroup separation, for
all statistics (except M d with TM).
D. Final Configuration
Considering the intergroup separation as optimization criterion, but also taking into account the noise characteristics of
these particular databases, the final configuration was composed

GOYA-ESTEBAN et al.: NONPARAMETRIC SIGNAL PROCESSING VALIDATION IN T-WAVE ALTERNANS DETECTION AND ESTIMATION

1
of the following blocks and free parameters: BLC (θBLC
=
2
1
median filter and θBLC = 800 ms), BPF (θBPF = 10 Hz), FLPF
1
=15 Hz), Repolarization Interval Seg(ECG filtering and θFLPF
1
mentation (θT = option A), Windowing and Synchronization
1
= option B).
(θSYN

E. Effect of the Window Size
In our study, we fixed an analysis window length (L) of 128
beats with 32 beats overlapping (D), however different L values
are employed in the literature. To evaluate the effect of L, we
also simulated L = 64 (D = 16) and L = 32 (D = 8) beats to
analyze the Holter recordings.
For both the TM and the SM, and in contrast with L = 128,
for L = 64 and L = 32, we obtained either no significant differences, or significantly higher TWA estimated amplitudes for
the NSRDB than for the SCDDB in terms of most of the statistics. The intergroup separation between NSRDB and SCDDB
was significantly higher with L = 128 than with L = 64 and
L = 32, in terms of most of the statistics.
The differences obtained in the results when decreasing the
value of L can be due to the different noise levels in the two
databases. On one hand, in Section V-C we estimated higher
noise level for the NSRDB than for the SCDDB. On the other
hand, decreasing the value of L leads to a lower noise reduction
effect due to the averaging of less beats. Therefore, decreasing
L affects more to the NSRDB than to the SCDDB, yielding a
higher increase of TWA estimated amplitudes due to noise effects, and leading also to a lower inter-group separation between
the two databases.
VI. DISCUSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, we studied the dependence of TWA analysis systems output quality with respect to several widely used signal
processing stages. Our aim was to optimize the final performance of the system using a set of decision statistics and a
nonparametric hypothesis test. For this purpose, two scenarios
were chosen. First, a set of semisynthetic signals with known
TWA activity allowed a clear gold standard for benchmarking.
Second, the statistical intergroup separation was used as the optimization criterion in two publicly available Holter databases.
Results on semisynthetic signals showed that optimal free
parameters and block inclusion/exclusion differ for the TM and
for the SM, and also for detection and for estimation with the
SM. After the optimization procedure, the TWA amplitude estimation errors were significantly reduced in terms of most of the
decision statistics. This reduction was larger with the TM than
with the SM, and for TWA detection with the SM, the Pe was
largely reduced in terms of all of the statistics. With respect to
each analyzed block, the CLPF improved TWA amplitude estimation with both the TM and the SM, but it made no difference
in TWA detection. The BLC block provided unclear results
for estimation; however, its inclusion was mostly positive for
detection, and its tuning made important differences on the performance of the system. The FLPF block relative position was
also significantly influential. Its inclusion was mainly positive
for estimation and detection (except for estimation with SM for

1337

high SNR). Finally, appropriate tuning of T-wave segmentation
and synchronization also improved the final performance of the
system.
Results on Holter databases showed that caution has to be
taken when designing a system to be used in different sets of
recordings, since their signal characteristics may be rather different (due to noise level and type, amount of artifacts, and
others), and this has noticeable impact on the global performance. In addition, appropriate tuning of some of the processing
blocks, namely, windowing, segmentation, and synchronization,
yielded to a larger statistical separation between two patient populations with different documented risk of SCD, and the results
from these block configurations were mostly in agreement with
the ones on semisynthetic signals. Note that the statistical intergroup separation is often used in the trials for risk stratification
analysis, and this has been the reason to have chosen this parameter as optimization criterion in this study. In order to be
sure that the statistical differences pointed out by the test are not
due to artifacts or noise conditions, but rather due to actual differences on the TWA phenomena between the two populations,
special caution has to be taken when evaluating the blocks that
specifically deal with noise. In this study, the SNR for different
noise types has been estimated in order to explain the results
according to the noise content.
Our objective was to present a global system optimization
procedure, which can be used for scrutinizing and tuning any
TWA analysis system from a digital signal processing point of
view, and to have a set of tests for measuring the impact of
different signal processing blocks depending on the designer’s
purpose. Our efforts were not directed to propose any improvement to the several blocks that form the whole TWA analysis
system. Therefore, some important aspects such as, for example, the change of the phase of TWA [26] are not fully treated
in this study due to its complexity, so its study falls beyond the
scope of the present study.
The widespread research in the development of TWA signal
processing methods has led to a wide amount of algorithms with
different signal processing options. However, there is no clear
evidence on which is the best algorithm to be used on clinical
applications. A straightforward clinical implication is to take
into account that, when conducting clinical trials, given a specific TWA analysis method for a specific type of application
(Holter recordings, stress test recordings,. . .), a previous signal
processing optimization, to condition the signals, may substantially improve the performance of the system. The methodology
developed in this study aims to be a useful tool for this purpose.
REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Smith, E. A. Clancy, C. R. Valeri, J. N. Ruskin, and R. J. Cohen,
“Electrical alternans and cardiac electrical instability,” Circulation,
vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 110–121, 1988.
[2] D. S. Rosenbaum, L. E. Jackson, J. M. Smith, H. Garan, J. N. Ruskin,
and R. J. Cohen, “Electrical alternans and vulnerability to ventricular
arrhythmias,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 330, no. 4, pp. 235–241, 1994.
[3] N. M. Estes III, G. Michaud, D. P. Zipes, N. El-Sherif, F. J. Venditti,
D. S. Rosenbaum, P. Albrecht, P. J. Wang, and R. J. Cohen, “Electrical
alternans during rest and exercise as predictors of vulnerability to ventricular arrhythmias,” Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 80, no. 10, pp. 1314–1318,
1997.

1338

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014

[4] D. S. Rosenbaum, P. Albrecht, and R. J. Cohen, “Predicting sudden cardiac death From T wave alternans of the surface electrocardiogram,” J.
Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 1095–1111, 1996.
[5] P. K. Stein, D. Sanghavi, P. P. Domitrovich, R. A. Mackey, and
P. Deedwania, “Ambulatory ecg-based t-wave alternans predicts sudden
cardiac death in high-risk post-MI patients with left ventricular dysfunction in the ephesus study,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 19, no. 10,
pp. 1037–1042, 2008.
[6] M. R. Gold, J. H. Ip, O. Costantini, J. E. Poole, S. McNulty, D. B. Mark,
K. L. Lee, and G. H. Bardy, “Role of microvolt t-wave alternans in assessment of arrhythmia vulnerability among patients with heart failure
and systolic dysfunction primary results from the t-wave alternans sudden
cardiac death in heart failure trial substudy,” Circulation, vol. 118, no. 20,
pp. 2022–2028, 2008.
[7] R. L. Verrier, T. Klingenheben, M. Malik, N. El-Sherif, D. V. Exner,
S. H. Hohnloser, T. Ikeda, J. P. Martı́nez, S. M. Narayan, T. Nieminen,
and D. S. Rosenbaum, “Microvolt T-wave alternans physiological basis,
methods of measurement, and clinical utility? Consensus guideline by
International Society for Holter and Noninvasive Electrocardiology,” J.
Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 58, no. 13, pp. 1309–1324, 2011.
[8] F. M. Merchant, O. Sayadi, K. Moazzami, D. Puppala, and
A. A. Armoundas, “T-wave alternans as an arrhythmic risk stratifier: State
of the art,” Curr. Cardiol. Rep., vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1–9, 2013.
[9] S. Yu, B. D. Van Veen, and R. T. Wakai, “Detection of t-wave alternans
in fetal magnetocardiography using the generalized likelihood ratio test,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2393–2400, Sep. 2013.
[10] M. Blanco-Velasco, F. Cruz-Roldán, J. I. Godino-Llorente, and
K. E. Barner, “Nonlinear trend estimation of the ventricular repolarization segment for T-wave alternans detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2402–2412, Oct. 2010.
[11] B. D. Nearing, A. H. Huang, and R. L. Verrier, “Dynamic tracking of
cardiac vulnerability by complex demodulation of the T wave,” Science,
vol. 252, no. 5004, pp. 437–440, 1991.
[12] L. Burattini, W. Zareba, and A. J. Moss, “Correlation method for detection
of transient T-wave alternans in digital holter ECG recordings,” Ann.
Noninvas. Electrocardiol., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 416–424, 1999.
[13] P. Laguna, M. Ruiz, G. Moody, and R. Mark, “Repolarization Alternans
detection using the KL transform and the beatquency spectrum,” Comput.
Cardiol., vol. 23, pp. 673–676, 1996.
[14] J. P. Martı́nez, S. Olmos, and P. Laguna, “Simulation study and performance evaluation of T-wave alternans detectors,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2000, vol. 3, pp. 2291–2297.
[15] B. D. Nearing and R. L. Verrier, “Modified moving average analysis of
T-wave alternans to predict ventricular fibrillation with high accuracy,” J.
Appl. Physiol., vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 541–549, 2002.
[16] J. Martı́nez, S. Olmos, G. Wagner, and P. Laguna, “Characterization of repolarization alternans during ischemia: Time-course and spatial analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 701–711, Apr. 2006.
[17] V. Monasterio, G. D. Clifford, P. Laguna, and J. P. Martı́nez, “A multilead scheme based on periodic component analysis for T-wave alternans
analysis in the ECG,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 2532–2541,
2010.
[18] J. P. Martı́nez and S. Olmos, “Methodological principles of T wave alternans analysis: A unified framework,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 599–613, Apr. 2005.

[19] H. Naseri, H. Pourkhajeh, and M. Homaeinezhad, “A unified procedure
for detecting, quantifying, and validating electrocardiogram t-wave alternans,” Med. Biolog. Eng. Comput., vol. 51, pp. 1–12, 2013.
[20] N. G. Kavesh, S. R. Shorofsky, S. E. Sarang, and M. R. Gold, “Effect of
heart rate on t wave alternans,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 9,
no. 7, pp. 703–708, 1998.
[21] E. S. Kaufman, J. A. Mackall, B. Julka, C. Drabek, and D. S. Rosenbaum,
“Influence of heart rate and sympathetic stimulation on arrhythmogenic
t wave alternans,” Amer. J. Physiol.-Heart Circulat. Physiol., vol. 279,
no. 3, pp. H1248–H1255, 2000.
[22] K. Tanno, S. Ryu, N. Watanabe, Y. Minoura, M. Kawamura, T. Asano,
Y. Kobayashi, and T. Katagiri, “Microvolt t-wave alternans as a predictor
of ventricular tachyarrhythmias a prospective study using atrial pacing,”
Circulation, vol. 109, no. 15, pp. 1854–1858, 2004.
[23] O. Sayadi, F. M. Merchant, D. Puppala, T. Mela, J. P. Singh, E. K. Heist,
C. Owen, and A. A. Armoundas, “A novel method for determining the
phase of t-wave alternans diagnostic and therapeutic implications,” Circulat.: Arrhythmia Electrophysiol., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 818–826, 2013.
[24] B. D. Hearing, P. H. Stone, and R. L. Verrier, “Frequency response characteristics required for detection of T-Wave alternans during ambulatory
ECG monitoring,” Ann. Noninvas. Electrocardiol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 103–
112, 1996.
[25] D. M. Bloomfield, S. H. Hohnloser, and R. J. Cohen, “Interpretation and
classification of microvolt t wave alternans tests,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 502–512, 2002.
[26] A. A. Armoundas, T. Mela, and F. M. Merchant, “On the estimation of
t-wave alternans using the spectral fast Fourier transform method,” Heart
Rhythm, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 449–456, 2012.
[27] B. Efron and R. Tibshirani, An Introduction to the Bootstrap. New York,
NY, USA: Chapman & Hall, 1993.
[28] J. Rojo-Álvarez, O. Barquero-Pérez, I. Mora-Jiménez, R. Goya-Esteban,
J. Gimeno-Blanes, and A. Garcı́a Alberola, “Detection and estimation of
T wave alternans with matched filter and nonparametric Bootstrap test,”
Comput. Cardiol., vol. 35, pp. 617–620, 2008.
[29] R. Goya-Esteban, I. Mora-Jiménez, M. Blanco-Velasco, O. BarqueroPérez, A. Caamaño Fernández, J. Rojo-Álvarez, and A. Garcı́a Alberola,
“Signal processing subsystem validation for T-wave alternans estimation,”
Comput. Cardiol., vol. 37, pp. 1035–1038, 2010.
[30] S. Nemati, O. Abdala, V. Monasterio, S. Yim-Yeh, A. Malhotra, and
G. D. Clifford, “A nonparametric surrogate-based test of significance for
T-wave alternans detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 5,
pp. 1356–1364, May 2011.
[31] S. Iravanian, U. B. Kanu, and D. J. Christini, “A class of monte-carlobased statistical algorithms for efficient detection of repolarization alternans,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1882–1891, Jul.
2012.
[32] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. N. Amaral, L. Glass, J. M. Hausdorff,
P. C. Ivanov, R. G. Mark, J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C.-K. Peng, and
H. E. Stanley, “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components
of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,” Circulation,
vol. 101, no. 23, pp. 215–220, 2000.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

