978

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

A Novel MRI Tracer-Based Method for Measuring
Water Diffusion in the Extracellular Space
of the Rat Brain
Hongbin Han, Chunyan Shi, Yu Fu, Long Zuo, Kejia Lee, Qingyuan He, and Haojun Han

Abstract—We proposed a novel MRI tracer-based method for
the determination of water diffusion in the brain extracellular
space (ECS). The measuring system was validated in 32 Sprague
Dawley rats. The rats were randomly divided into four groups
with different injection sites: 1) caudate nucleus (Cn.); 2) thalamus
(T.); 3) cortex (Cor.); and 4) substantia nigra (Sn.). The spin-lattice
relaxation time of hydrogen nuclei in water molecules were shortened, which presented as high signal on MRI after the injection of
gadolinium-diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA) into
the rat brain ECS. The enhancement on MRI decreased over time
due to the water diffusion and clearance process within the brain
ECS. The process was dynamically recorded on a series of magnetic resonance (MR) images. As the increment in signal intensity
(ΔSI) could be converted to local Gd-DTPA concentration, the
water diffusion parameters were further calculated voxel by voxel
based on a modified diffusion model. The most tortuous ECS (λ
= 1.77 ± 0.71) was found in Sn. with D∗S n of (2.06 ± 1.01) ×
10−4 mm2 ·s−1 (P < 0.05). No statistical difference was demonstrated among D∗C n , D∗T ., and D∗C o r . with an average D∗ values
of (3.28 ± 0.88) × 10−4 mm2 ·s−1 (F = 0.18, P > 0.05). By using
the tracer-based MRI method, the local diffusion parameters of
the brain ECS can be quantitatively measured. The different distribution territories and clearance rates of the tracer in four brain
areas indicated that the brain ECS is a physiologically partitioned
system.
Index Terms—Brain interstitial fluid, extracellular space (ECS),
gadolinium-diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), water diffusion.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

WARENESS of molecular diffusion throughout the
brain’s extracellular space (ECS) has increased because

Manuscript received September 29, 2013; revised December 29, 2013 and
February 17, 2014; accepted February 19, 2014. Date of publication February
25, 2014; date of current version May 1, 2014. This work was supported in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 81171080,
National Key Scientific Apparatus Development of Special Item under Grant
2011YQ030114-10, and the Twelfth Five-year Plan for the National Science
and Technology of China Grant 2012BAI15B009.
H. Han, C. Shi, L. Zuo, and Q. He are with the Department of Radiology and Beijing MRI Technology Research Laboratory, Peking University
Third Hospital, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: hanhongbin@bjmu.edu.cn;
scy0518@bjmu.edu.cn; zuolonglotus@163.com; heqingyuan@bjmu.edu.cn).
Y. Fu is with the Department of Neurology, Peking University Third Hospital,
Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: lilac_fu@sina.com).
K. Lee is with the Kavli Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Peking
university, Beijing, 100871, China (e-mail: kjlee007@gmail.com).
H. Han is with the Department of BME and Beijing MRI Technology Research Laboratory, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100191,
China (e-mail: haojunhan123@sina.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2308279

Fig. 1. Procedures for measuring diffusion parameter within the rat brain ECS
with the MRI tracer-based system. Step A: Phantom experiments was performed
to determine the effective concentration of Gd-DPTA by measuring the linearity
between ΔSI and the concentration of Gd-DTPA; Step B: Intraparenchymal
microinjection of the tracer Gd-DTPA into the rat brain to enhance the water
molecular within brain ECS; Step C: MR Imaging and postprocessing; Step D:
computation and data analysis.

of its potential role as a mediator of volume transmission or
extrasynaptic communication. Biological compounds of various molecular weights can be correlated with changes in cerebral pathology during the process of maturation and senility,
and thus, are being extensively studied for therapeutic purposes [1]–[4]. The local brain drug delivery via brain ECS has
been recently verified to be more efficient than the routine drug
administration [1], [5], the knowledge of brain ECS is, therefore,
crucial to make a realistic prediction regarding the migration of
such molecules or drugs.
The desire for measuring diffusion properties of the
brain ECS has led to the development of several techniques, including radiotracers, real-time iontophoresis (RTI)tetramethylammonium (TMA+ ), and integrative optical imaging (IOI) [6], [7]. To date, the most commonly used approach
is the RTI-TMA+ method, which uses ion-selective microelectrodes to measure the concentration of probe ions [8]. In present
study, we used gadolinium-diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid
(Gd-DTPA) as probe to detect the diffusion of water molecules
in the brain ECS (see Fig. 1). Gd-DTPA retains mainly in the
ECS [9], and the spin-lattice relaxation time of hydrogen nuclei
in water molecular within the brain ECS can be shortened and
presents as high signal on MRI under the effect of Gd-DTPA

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HAN et al.: NOVEL MRI TRACER-BASED METHOD FOR MEASURING WATER DIFFUSION IN THE EXTRACELLULAR SPACE

979

sion in the rat brain ECS was briefly introduced as two steps: 1)
calculation of the free diffusion parameters D: MRI scans were
performed before and after the Gd-DTPA solution was introduced into the agarose gel, the scans after were performed with
a time interval of 0.5 hour until 3 hours. With a self-developed
software, the dynamic changes of the MRI signal on the substracted images was converted to Gd-DTPA concentration on
MRI, and the free diffusion parameters D was calculated according to the modified diffusion equation. 2) Calculation of the
diffusion parameters D∗ in the brain ECS: The same procedure
was performed in the rat brain, MRI scans were continued until
no enhancement could be demonstrated on the subtracted MR
images. (Aforementioned steps were illustrated in Fig. 1.)The
protocols in each step were described in detail as follows.
A. Gd-DTPA Solution and Agarose Gel Phantom Preparation

Fig. 2. Left pictures illustrate the water molecules with and without Gd-DTPA
in the brain ECS, and the right is its corresponding appearance on MRI. A):
Water molecules and MRI before Gd-DTPA is introduced into the brain ECS. B)
Injected Gd-DTPA shortens the spin-lattice relaxation time of hydrogen nuclei
in water molecules of the brain ISF, and causes a lightening effect on water
molecules, which presented as high signal on MRI at 1 h after the injection of
Gd-DTPA. C) Enhancement on MRI attenuated over time as the water diffusion
and clearance process of the Gd-DTPA. The average width between neurons
is 10–20 nm and the effective distance for Gd-DPTA to lighten the hydrogen
nuclei in water molecules ranges from 2.41 to 2.50 Å.

[10]. Furthermore, the increase in signal intensity (ΔSI) caused
by Gd-DTPA has been proved to be linearly related to its concentration (C) with a 3-D T1WI on 3.0 T MRI [11]. As the
“lightened” water molecules diffusing in the brain ECS, the
concentrated Gd-DTPA is diluted and the signal intensity decreases gradually, which presents as the attenuation of the signal
enhancement on a series of MR images (see Fig. 2). Therefore,
according to the classical diffusion equation [12], [13], the effective diffusion coefficient can then be extracted from the ΔSItime profile in any region of interest on MRI. Based upon the
aforementioned findings and basic knowledge, we developed a
new method to measure the water diffusion parameters of the
brain ECS. Four regions in the rat brain were chosen to validate the measuring system: Caudate nucleus (Cn.), thalamus
(T.), occipital cortex (Cor.) and substantia nigra (Sn.), where are
vulnerable to stroke or Parkinson’s disease [14], [15]. The local brain drug treatment for those diseases would become more
practical once the local brain ECS were fully understood. The
basic principle and the protocols were introduced in detail, the
local water diffusion parameters of the brain ECS in these four
areas were calculated and compared.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The study was conducted in accordance with the national
guidelines for the use of experimental animals, and the protocols
were approved by the Ethics Committee of Peking University
Health Center. The Procedures for measuring the water diffu-

Gadolium-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA;
Mag-nevist; Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany) was
diluted to 10 mmol/L with 0.9% (w/v) sodium chloride solution.
The free diffusion coefficient (D) measurement was performed
on a 0.3%(w/v) agarose gel phantom at 37 ◦ C. Agarose powder
(0.3 g) was dissolved in 100 mL saline solution (0.9%), and the
mixture was heated in a water bath until the powder dissolved.
The solution was then solidified into a gel upon cooling to room
temperature.
B. MRI Scan Protocols, Phantom Study, and
the Measurement of Free Diffusion Parameter
1) MRI Scan Protocols: A 3.0-T MRI system (Magnetom
Trio, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) with
an eight-channel wrist coil was used to obtain rat brain images by running a T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapidacquisition with gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequence. The acquisition parameters are as follows: echo time = 3.7 ms, repetition time = 1500 ms, flip angle = 12◦ , inversion time =
900 ms, field of view = 267 mm, voxel = 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm
× 0.5 mm, matrix = 512 × 512, number of averages = 2, and
phase encoding steps = 96. The acquisition time of each rat was
290 s.
2) Phantom Study: The MP-RAGE sequence was performed
before Gd-DTPA injection. A volume of 2 μL Gd-DTPA solution (10 mmol/L) was injected into the center of gel phantom
over 10 min, followed by a 5-min waiting time for preventing
reflux. Repeated MRI scanning was performed at every 30 min
postinjection.
3) Injection of Gd-DTPA in Agarose Gel to Measure the
Free Diffusion Parameter: Agarose gel phantom as a standard
surrogate of a biological porous tissue, the diffusion for the
tracer is regarded as the free diffusion. A series MRI at the time
interval of 0.5 h was performed to record the diffusion process
in the gel after the injection of the tracer of Gd-DTPA.
C. Animal Experiments
1) Experimental Animals: A total of 32 mature age-matched
male Sprague Dawley rats weighing 250–300 g were used in

980

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TABLE I
INJECTION SITES ON STEREOTACTIC COORDINATES OF RAT BRAIN

the experiment. The animal protocols were approved by the
Ethics Committee of Peking University Health Science Center
(Approval No. LA 2009-008). The rats were randomly divided
into four groups with different injection sites (see Table I): 1)
caudate nucleus (n = 8); 2) thalamus (n = 8); 3) cortex (n =
8); and 4) substantia nigra (n = 8).
2) MR Prescanning: Rats were anesthetized by an intraperitoneal injection of a combination of pentobarbital sodium,
ethanol, chloral hydrate, magnesium sulphate, and propylene
glycol (0.3 ml/kg); anesthesia was maintained with additional
injections during the operation (∼0.2 ml/kg/h). Core temperature was monitored with a rectal thermometer and maintained
with a heating pad at (38 ± 0.5) ◦ C during the examination. The
rat was placed in a prone position and scanned with the MRI
protocals. MRI was performed to acquire the basic reference
image and to confirm the puncture position [16].
3) Injection of Gd-DTPA in Rat Brain to Measure the Diffusion Parameter of the Brain ECS: All the four injection sites
are listed in Table I [17]. To ensure the puncture position, MRI
scanning before the injection was used to design the injection
route and depth. The skin overlying the calvaria of the rat was
shaved and disinfected with iodated alcohol. An incision was
made in the scalp along the sagittal suture, from the interaural
area to the interocular area. The membranes and muscle attachments were dissected free of the skull bone and the bregma
suture exposed. The rats were fixed in a stereotactic coordinate system (Lab Standard Stereotaxic-Single, Stoelting Co, IL,
USA) and a small trephine hole made according to stereotactic
coordinates of four groups (see Table I). A 10-μL microsyringe
(Hamilton, Bonaduz AG, Switzerland) was stereotaxically positioned (depth 4.5 mm) and a Gd-DTPA solution of 10 mmol/L
was manually infused into different injection sites (see Table I)
of four groups over a period of 10 min at a rate of 0.2 μL/min,
followed by a 5-min waiting period to avoid the dorsal reflux
along the needle track. The rat was then quickly placed in the
scanner, after the injection site of each subject was reconfirmed,
a series of MR scans were performed.
4) MR Scanning and Postprocessing of MR Images: For
each subject, repeated scanning with a T1-weighted MP-RAGE
sequence was performed at 15 and 30 min and each hour
postinjection after the introduction of Gd-DTPA. The imaging
sequence and parameters were the same as described in MRI
scan protocals. A MATLAB-based software was developed (unpublished) to coregister the MR images of the same rat before
and after the injection. All the postscanned images were automatically subjected to rigid transformation, similarity measurements, high-order interpolation, and an adaptive stochastic

gradient descent optimization, and then, were subtracted from
the prescanned images [16]. The acquired “bright areas” which
was achieved by setting up a seed point and a threshold in the
ROI was assumed to be related to the presence of the tracer.
A new set of the postprocessing MR images in the horizontal,
sagittal, and coronal planes, with a slice thickness of 1 mm was
generated by the software. After the coregistration and subtraction processes, the signal intensity within the target area of the
processed MR images was measured and denoted by ΔSI, which
was used in the following calculation of the diffusion parameter
in the rat brain ECS.
D. Calculation of the Diffusion Parameters of the Brain ECS
Based on the modified diffusion (1) and a standard leastsquare fitting technique (2), a program (unpublished) was employed in the computation of the diffusion parameters [13]:
Q
f (CECS )
∂CECS
= D∗ ∇2 CECS + − v · ∇CECS −
(1)
∂t
α
α
where, CECS is the actual concentration in the ECS, and is a
function of time (t) and position. The signs ∇ and ∇2 symbolize, respectively, the first and second spatial derivatives in
the appropriate coordinate system. The volume fraction α is
defined as the volume fraction of ECS in the whole brain tissue. Tortuosity is defined as λ = (D/D∗)1/2 , where D∗ is the
effective diffusion coefficient of a given molecule in the brain
ECS and D is the diffusion coefficient of the same molecule
in a free medium. λ is the hindrance to diffusion imposed by
local structure of the ECS and Q is the source that is released
into the ECS. In the following text, the term “source” refers to
the initial concentration available for diffusion or, in the case of
an exogenous tracer such as Gd-DTPA, it refers to the site of
the injection. Because there is no constant input to the system,
Gd-DTPA is assumed to have been administered at the original
time point, the source Q can be ignored in present study. v represents the flow rate of the interstitial fluid in the ECS in mm/s.
We set the ROI as close to the injection point as possible (2 mm
to the original point), and bulk flow is supposed to have little
influence on diffusion and is neglected, the interstitial fluid in
the local ECS is also supposed to be nondirectional.
It was further deduced as the following equation to facilitate
the computation of the diffusion parameters:
N  r0

(ΔSI (ti , r; D∗ , β) − ΔSI,m (ti , r))2 d
(2)
χ=
i=1

0

whereΔSI,m (ti , r) represents the measured radial profile at
time ti : as a series of MR images are captured at predetermined
time intervals, ti (i = 1, 2, . . ., n), the radial profile along a
given radial path for each MR image can be measured. The
diffusion parameters D∗ and β, can be measured by matching
the model and measured profiles at time points ti . In present
study, the “matching” processes are performed by using the
standard least-square fitting technique, the function variable χ
was minimized to find D∗ and β, where the error of the measured
profile was assumed to be the same for all data points. In the
computation of χ, the integration over radius r was replaced by a

HAN et al.: NOVEL MRI TRACER-BASED METHOD FOR MEASURING WATER DIFFUSION IN THE EXTRACELLULAR SPACE

981

TABLE II
DIFFUSION PARAMETERS OF THE RAT BRAIN ECS (MEAN ± SD, n = 8)

summation along a given path, which was a particular axis along
which the measurements were made from the injection site. A
simplex-downhill method was used to perform the numerical
minimization.
The 3-D MR series of images were imported to the program
after postprocessing. It was essential to choose a target point
as the origin of diffusion, which was generally set in the center
of the distribution zone of Gd-DTPA on MR images. Then, the
parameters were automatically computed for each pixel located
2 mm from the selected original site within the distribution area
of Gd-DTPA labeling on MR images. The results were shown
pixel-by-pixel on the converted images. Both the directions parallel and opposite to three perpendicular axes (the x-axis defined
in the mediolateral direction, the y-axis as ventrodorsal, and the
z-axis as rostrocaudal) were selected to present the diffusion
parameters. The direction along + y-axis was excluded due to
the interference caused by the needle track. All the parameters
in the other five directions were expressed as mean ± SD (n =
8). For each direction, the diffusion parameters were designed
to be from the voxel situated in the midpoint of the metrical
radius (i.e., 2 mm from the original point). It should be noted
that any direction can be used in the analysis but we have chosen
the standard atlas directions to present the values of parameters.
E. Statistical Analysis
The diffusion parameters were presented as mean ± SD (n
= 8). Statistical analysis was performed by SPSS 13.0. Oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by least significant
difference (LSD) test was used for the comparison of data among
four animal groups. P < 0.05 indicated statistical significance
III. RESULTS
A. Water Diffusion Parameters in the Rat Brain ECS
The free water diffusion coefficient (D) was calculated as
5.18 × 10−4 mm2 /s in 0.3% agar gel at 37◦ . The water diffusion
parameters within the brain ECS in four groups are given in
Table II and Fig. 4(E). The effective diffusion coefficient (D∗)
in substantia nigra was less than that in the other three areas
(caudate nucleus, thalamus and cortex) (LSD test, t = 3.19,
2.90, 2.83, P < 0.05). No significant difference was found
among the other three areas (one way ANOVA, F = 0.18, P =
0.84 > 0.05) [see Table II, Fig. 4(E)]. Accordingly, the tortuosity
in substantia nigra was greater than those in the other three areas
(λ, F = 4.27, P < 0.05) (see Table II, Fig. 4(E)).

Fig. 3. Coronal views of the MRI appearances of the rat brain before and after
the Gd-DTPA injection. The enhancement after the injection was presented since
0.5 h, the enhancement extended to different extent, and the signal intensity was
decreased over time. A) caudate nucleus; B) thalamus; C) cortex; D)substantia
nigra.

B. Final Distribution and the Clearance Process
of the Traced Brain Interstitial Fluid
The local brain tissue after the injection of the concentrated
Gd-DTPA presented as a hyperintensed spot around the injection site. As the water diffuses within the brain ECS, the enhancement region extends to some extent, and the concentrated
Gd-DTPA is diluted, which presented as the signal attenuation
over time (see Fig. 3). Among the four areas, the Cn. has the
most extensive distribution from the injection points to the ipsilateral frontal and temporal cortices. The traced brain interstitial
fluid (ISF) in Cor. extended horizontally to its adjacent cortex,
and no centripetal flow toward deep brain was demonstrated.
In contrast, the enhancement localized within their anatomical
divisions in thalamus and substantia nigra and did not distribute
outside. Concentration–time curve was acquired in each voxel
from the sequential MR scans, and both the diffusion parameters
and clearance rate were derived from the Gd-DTPA concentration time courses using the modified diffusion equation as described in a previous study [13]. The local clearance parameter
β of thalamus and cortex were greater than that of the other two
areas. (F = 19.60, P < 0.05) [see Table II. Fig. 4(E)].
IV. DISCUSSION
MR measurement has been tried in previous study by employing water as an endogenous probe molecule, but the dynamic
exchange of water between the intracellular and extracellular
compartments obscured the ability to make inferences about
diffusion in the two compartments. Therefore, the routine MRI
examination without the aid of Gd-DTPA failed to discriminate
the water diffusion within brain ECS [19]–[21].
According to our results, with Gd-DTPA as the probe, this
MRI tracer-based method provides not only an effective measurement of water diffusion properties in an extensive domain on
a time scale of hours, but also the visualization of the dynamic
process of the brain ISF drainage. In contrast, the previously
developed methods, like RTI-TMA+ or IOI method can only
evaluate the diffusion over a limited distance or depth [8]. The
RTI-TMA+ technique principally depends on an iontophoresis
microelectrode to release the TMA+ and an ion-selective microelectrode for the detection at the distance of ∼100 μm [18].

982

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF THE DIFFUSION PARAMETER RESULTS
BY USING DIFFERENT METHODS

Fig. 4. Typical diffusion parameter maps (upper row :D ∗ map, lower row :β
map)in the rat brain: sagittal, coronal, and transaxial view of spatial map for each
parameter. A) caudate nucleus; B) thalamus; C) cortex; D) substantia nigra. E)
comparison of diffusion parameters between four brain regions; 1–3, effective
diffusion coefficient (D ∗ );4–6, clearance rate (β) Diffusion parameters were
analyzed in all voxels located 2 mm from the injection site (represented by the
red decussation). The scales in the right of the figure show the relation between
the intervals of parameter values (D ∗ , β) and the colors used for visualization.

For the IOI method [22], fluorescent probe is released from a
micropipette by a pressure pulse, and images are captured by a
cooled charge-coupled device camera through an open cranial
window. The detection depth is within 200 μm of gray matter
in brain or brain slice where an epifluorescent image can be
obtained without appreciable light-scattering [8].
In present study, a single injection of Gd-DTPA solution followed by MRI scans can realize a 3-D visualization of the process of water diffusion and the drainage of the traced brain ISF.
Multipoint measurements of diffusion parameters along any
direction near the injection site can be successfully achieved.
Theoretically, there are two ways to calculate the diffusion parameters of the brain ECS, the more feasible one is to measure
the dynamic changes of the extension area or the distance along
any directions of the enhanced area on the series MR images.
By quantitatively measuring the extension process of the traced
brain ISF, the calculation of the pharmacokinetic parameters,
like Vdmax or half life time is also available. The other way is
to calculate the local diffusion parameters based on the modified

diffusion equation. In this study, we focus on introducing the
latter method to calculate the local diffusion parameters of the
brain ECS. The ROI was set very close to the injection points
(2 mm to the original points) to fulfill the basic requirement of
the modified diffusion equation.
The λ results by using the MRI tracer-based method are found
to be similar with those previous studies by using other tracer
(see Table III). The effect of those probes on the brain ECS
structure is not clear. Dextran (70000 Da) has been reported to
hinder the diffusion with the brain ECS and resulted in a greater
tortuosity λ in Cn. (1.63–2.25).While by using the Gd-DTPA
(938 Da), we got a similar λ with TMA+ (74 Da) as 1.27 ±
0.16. Therefore, we can deduce that Gd-DTPA in water solution
has the same effect on the structure of the brain ECS as that of
TMA+ . The result implies that both probes in water solution
can diffuse freely in the scale of 20 nm of the brain ECS. We
also verified that the brain ECS is not a homogenous system, the
brain ECS in Sn. area is more tortuous with λ of 1.77, while λ in
other three areas ranged from 1.28–1.37. Meanwhile, the other
important finding is the different final maximal distribution of
the traced brain ISF from different starting points.
People believed that the brain ISF system was an intercontinuous channel system as a whole, i.e., the brain ECS was highly
connected so that from any given point in the brain ECS, another
location may be reached by multiple pathways [8], [23]. While,
our results demonstrated that the brain ECS is physiologically
partitioned system, each division is characterized with its unique
ISF distribution territory and drainage speed. The traced brain
ISF in Cn. and Cor. distribute more extensively, the tracer of the
brain ISF in T. and Sn. was clear out locally within their anatomical divisions (see Fig. 3). This location-dependent property of
the ISF drainage system will not only improve our understanding of the microenvironment in live brain, but provides a useful
reference to optimize the technique for local brain delivery of
drugs [5], [24].
In conclusion, the newly developed method is introduced to
measure the water diffusion parameter of the local brain ECS,
and a real-time visualization of the brain ISF drainage in whole
live brain is now available. The different diffusion properties and
the final maximal distribution territories of the traced brain ISF
in four regions indicate that the brain ECS is physiologically a

HAN et al.: NOVEL MRI TRACER-BASED METHOD FOR MEASURING WATER DIFFUSION IN THE EXTRACELLULAR SPACE

partitioned channel system. Therefore, any further investigation
of the local brain drug treatment should be designed, respectively, for each division, as both the drug’s distribution territory
and speed depend on their location or starting points.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Han, Z. Xia, H. Chen, C. Hou, and W. Li, “Simple diffusion delivery via
brain interstitial route for the treatment of cerebral ischemia,” Sci. China
Life Sci., vol. 54, pp. 235–239, Mar. 2011.
[2] R. M. Richardson, A. P. Kells, A. J. Martin, P. S. Larson, P. A. Starr,
P. G. Piferi, G. Bates, L. Tansey, K. H. Rosenbluth, J. H. Bringas,
M. S. Berger, and K. S. Bankiewicz, “Novel platform for MRI-guided
convection-enhanced delivery of therapeutics: Preclinical validation in
nonhuman primate brain,” Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg., vol. 89, pp. 141–
151, 2011.
[3] D. Yin, F. E. Valles, M. S. Fiandaca, J. Bringas, F. Gimenez, M. S. Berger,
J. Forsayeth, and K. S. Bankiewicz, “Optimal region of the putamen for
image-guided convection-enhanced delivery of therapeutics in human and
non-human primates,” Neuroimage, vol. 54, pp. S196–S203, Jan. 2011.
[4] L. Tao and C. Nicholson, “Diffusion of albumins in rat cortical slices and
relevance to volume transmission,” Neuroscience, vol. 75, pp. 839–847,
Dec. 1996.
[5] C. Guerin, A. Olivi, J. D. Weingart, H. C. Lawson, and H. Brem, “Recent
advances in brain tumor therapy: Local intracerebral drug delivery by
polymers,” Invest. New Drugs, vol. 22, pp. 27–37, Jan. 2004.
[6] C. Nicholson and L. Tao, “Hindered diffusion of high molecular weight
compounds in brain extracellular microenvironment measured with integrative optical imaging,” Biophys. J., vol. 65, pp. 2277–2290, Dec. 1993.
[7] M. E. Rice and C. Nicholson, “Diffusion characteristics and extracellular
volume fraction during normoxia and hypoxia in slices of rat neostriatum,”
J. Neurophysiol., vol. 65, pp. 264–272, Feb. 1991.
[8] E. Sykova and C. Nicholson, “Diffusion in brain extracellular space,”
Physiol. Rev., vol. 88, pp. 1277–1340, Oct. 2008.
[9] P. Caravan, J. J. Ellison, T. J. McMurry, and R. B. Lauffer, “Gadolinium(III) Chelates as MRI contrast agents: Structure, dynamics, and applications,” Chem Rev., vol. 99, pp. 2293–2352, Sep. 8, 1999.
[10] H. Han, K. Li, J. Yan, K. Zhu, and Y. Fu, “An in vivo study with an MRI
tracer method reveals the biophysical properties of interstitial fluid in the
rat brain,” Sci. China Life Sci., vol. 55, pp. 782–787, Sep. 2012.
[11] F. Xu, H. Han, H. Zhang, J. Pi, and Y. Fu, “Quantification of Gd-DTPA concentration in neuroimaging using T(1)3D MP-RAGE sequence at 3.0 T,”
Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 29, pp. 827–834, Jul. 2011.
[12] H. B. Han, “In vivo quantitative measurement of diffusion parameters in
brain extracellular space of rat by using magnetic resonance imaging,”
Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao, vol. 44, pp. 770–775, Oct. 18, 2012.
[13] K. Li, H. Han, K. Zhu, K. Lee, B. Liu, F. Zhou, Y. Fu, and Q. Y. He,
“Real-time magnetic resonance imaging visualization and quantitative
assessment of diffusion in the cerebral extracellular space of C6 gliomabearing rats,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 543, pp. 84–89, May 24, 2013.
[14] R. G. Gonzalez, “Current state of acute stroke imaging,” Stroke, vol. 44,
pp. 3260–3264, Nov. 2013.
[15] T. Foltynie and J. Kahan, “Parkinson’s disease: An update on pathogenesis
and treatment,” J. Neurol., vol. 260, pp. 1433–1440, May 2013.
[16] B. Liu, X. Z. Bai, F. G. Zhou, H. B. Han, and C. Hou, “Mutual information based three-dimensional registration of rat brain magnetic resonance
imaging time-series,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 39, pp. 1473–1484, Jul.
2013.
[17] G. Paxinos and C. Watson, The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates:
Hard Cover Edition: Elsevier, 2006.
[18] T. Mazel, F. Richter, L. Vargová, and E. Syková, “Changes in extracellular
space volume and geometry induced by cortical spreading depression in
immature and adult rats,” Physiol. Res., vol. 51, pp. S85–S93, 2002.
[19] C. D. Kroenke and J. J. Neil, “Use of magnetic resonance to measure
molecular diffusion within the brain extracellular space,” Neurochem.
Int., vol. 45, pp. 561–568, Sep. 2004.
[20] G. Kaur, S. Hrabetova, D. N. Guilfoyle, C. Nicholson, and J. Hrabe, “Characterizing molecular probes for diffusion measurements in the brain,” J.
Neurosci. Methods, vol. 171, pp. 218–225, Jun. 30, 2008.

983

[21] T. Q. Duong, J. V. Sehy, D. A. Yablonskiy, B. J. Snider, J. J. Ackerman,
and J. J. Neil, “Extracellular apparent diffusion in rat brain,” Magn. Reson.
Med., vol. 45, pp. 801–810, May 2001.
[22] R. G. Thorne and C. Nicholson, “In vivo diffusion analysis with quantum
dots and dextrans predicts the width of brain extracellular space,” Proc
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 103, pp. 5567–5572, Apr. 4, 2006.
[23] S. W. Kuffler and D. D. Potter, “Glia in the Leech central nervous system:
Physiological properties and neuron-glia relationship,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 27, pp. 290–320, Mar. 1964.
[24] K. Gulati, M. S. Aw, and D. Losic, “Nanoengineered drug-releasing Ti
wires as an alternative for local delivery of chemotherapeutics in the
brain,” Int. J. Nanomed., vol. 7, pp. 2069–2076, 2012.

Hongbin Han received the Undergraduate and Graduate degrees in clinical medicine from Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China, in 1996, and the Doctor
of Radiology degree from Peking University Health
Center, Beijing, China, in1998.
He completed the radiology residency at the
Peking University Health Center, joined the faculty
of the Department of Radiology at Peking University
Third Hospital in 1998, and is currently the Professor
of the Radiology Department. He has established the
Beijing MRI Technology Research Laboratory and
severed as the Director since 2010. He has authored three books, more than
100 peer-reviewed publications. His research has resulted in 11 patents. He
organized the first society of MRI equipment and technology in China, and
served as Vice Chairman and General Secretary of the society since 2011. His
research interests include the development and application of advanced MRI
techniques for diagnosis and therapy of human brain diseases. Since 2008, he
and his group at Peking University have been working on the development of
the new techniques for in vivo imaging the extracellular space and the interstitial
fluid drainage.
Dr. Han received the New Century Excellent Talents of University in 2005
and received the China Youth Sci-Tech Awards in 2011.

Chunyan Shi photograph and biography not available at the time of publication

Yu Fu photograph and biography not available at the time of publication

Long Zuo photograph and biography not available at the time of publication

Kejia Lee photograph and biography not available at the time of publication

Qingyuan He photograph and biography not available at the time of publication

Haojan Han photograph and biography not available at the time of publication

