1844

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Catheter-Induced Errors in Pressure Measurements
in Vessels: An In-Vitro and Numerical Study
Adelaide de Vecchi, Rachel E. Clough, Nicholas R. Gaddum, Marcel C. M. Rutten, Pablo Lamata, Tobias Schaeffter,
David A. Nordsletten, and Nicolas P. Smith∗

Abstract—Accurate measurement of blood pressure is important
because it is a biomarker for cardiovascular disease. Diagnostic
catheterization is routinely used for pressure acquisition in vessels
despite being subject to significant measurement errors. To investigate these errors, this study compares pressure measurement
using two different techniques in vitro and numerical simulations.
Pressure was acquired in a pulsatile flow phantom using a 6F fluidfilled catheter and a 0.014 pressure wire, which is considered the
current gold standard. Numerical simulations of the experimental
set-up with and without a catheter were also performed. Despite
the low catheter-to-vessel radius ratio, the catheter traces showed
a 24% peak systolic pressure overestimation compared to the wire.
The numerical models replicated this difference and indicated the
cause for overestimation was the increased flow resistance due to
the presence of the catheter. Further, the higher frequency pressure
oscillations observed in the wire and numerical data were absent
in the catheter, resulting in an overestimation of the pulse wave
velocity with the latter modality. These results show that catheter
geometry produces significant measurement bias in both the peak
pressure and the waveform shape even with radius ratios considered acceptable in clinical practice. The wire allows for more
accurate pressure quantification, in agreement with the numerical
model without a catheter.
Index Terms—Arterial blood pressure, catheterization, computational fluid dynamics, in vitro, medical signal detection, pressure
measurement, pulse wave analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

CCURATE measurement of blood pressure in the cardiovascular system provides essential information to classify

Manuscript received October 25, 2013; revised February 18, 2014; accepted
February 21, 2014. Date of publication February 26, 2014; date of current
version May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by the EPSRC
(EP/G007527/2), in part by the Intelligent Imaging Program (EP/H046410/1),
in part by the Centre of Excellence in Medical Engineering funded by the
Wellcome Trust and the EPSRC (WT 088641/Z/09/Z), in part by the European
Commission funded euHeart project (FP7-ICT-2007-224495:euHeart), and in
part by the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS
Trust, and King’s College London.
A. de Vecchi, R. E. Clough, N. R. Gaddum, P. Lamata, T. Schaeffter, and
D. A. Nordsletten are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and
Imaging Sciences Division, King’s College London, St. Thomas’ Hospital,
London SE1 7EH, U.K. (e-mail: adelaide.de_vecchi@kcl.ac.uk; rachel.
clough@kcl.ac.uk; nicholas.gaddum@kcl.ac.uk; pablo.lamata@kcl.ac.uk;
tobias.schaeffter@kcl.ac.uk; david.nordsletten@kcl.ac.uk).
M. C. M. Rutten is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
(e-mail: m.rutten@tue.nl).
∗ N. P. Smith is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging
Sciences Division, King’s College London, St. Thomas’ Hospital, London SE1
7EH, U.K. (e-mail: nicolas.smith@kcl.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2308594

the severity of a variety of diseases. Despite recent advances in
noninvasive techniques, catheterization remains the most common method for pressure acquisition; however, the measurement
accuracy of fluid-filled catheters can be affected by technical
limitations, including the reflection of the pressure wave at the
tip and its distortion inside the probe [1], [2]. This latter effect
is due to the column of fluid that fills the catheter, which is necessary to transmit the pressure to an external transducer [3], [4]:
this design can give rise to inertial artifacts that alter the shape
of the recorded waveform as it travels downstream inside the
probe. The dynamic response of the catheter–transducer system
required to reproduce the pressure waveform faithfully is still
a matter of concern in clinical applications [5]. The catheter
typically acts as a low-pass filter that attenuates all frequencies
above the natural frequency. Further, as the signal frequency
approaches the natural frequency, the system tends to resonate
causing large errors. The catheter must, therefore, have a correct
combination of length, diameter, and compliance of the material to maximize the accuracy in the signal, as these parameters
dictate the amount of damping of the system and its natural
frequency. The properties and dimensions of catheters should
be chosen to provide the highest possible natural frequency and
thus maximize the flat frequency response necessary to produce
a high-fidelity measurement [6]–[8]. In general, stiffer catheters
increase the accuracy of the measurement; however, more compliant materials are necessary for better navigation in complex
anatomies. Another source of disturbance impairing the dynamic response is the presence of air bubbles in the lumen,
which can appear if the catheter is too compliant or too long, or
with too small a diameter [5].
The signal distortion has significant potential to compromise
important clinical markers that can be derived from waveform
shape analysis, such as the pulse wave velocity (PWV) and
the ratio of the stroke volume to the pulse pressure (defined
as the difference between the peak systolic and diastolic pressure, Ps − Pd ). The PWV is the speed at which a pressure wave
travels along the artery and is measured by recording pressure
transients at two different locations separated by a known distance Δx: the transit time Δt can then be obtained by aligning
the foot of the waveforms (foot-to-foot methods), which is calculated based on the shape of the systolic upstroke [9]. The
x
PWV, expressed as Δ
Δ t , is directly related to the square root
of the artery stiffness. These parameters have been shown to
be independent predictors of adverse cardiovascular events in
pathologies related to arterial stiffening and subsequent hypertensive pressures, increased ventricular afterload and higher myocardial oxygen demand [10]–[12]. Abnormal pulse pressure,

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DE VECCHI et al.: CATHETER-INDUCED ERRORS IN PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS IN VESSELS: AN In-Vitro AND NUMERICAL STUDY

waveform shape, and PWV are also factors that can predispose
patients with repaired aortic coarctation to increased cardiovascular risk [13].
Another potential source of measurement bias is related to a
high value of the ratio between the catheter and the vessel radius (radius ratio), i.e., a relatively large catheter compared to the
vessel size. This can generate partial obstruction of the lumen,
resulting in pressure overestimation in relatively smaller vessels
including coronary arteries, peripheral circulation, and pediatric
cases [14], [15]. Analytical flow models of a straight catheterized tube have shown that, for radius ratios ranging from 0.3 to
0.7, partial blockage can induce an increase in the flow resistance
by a factor of 3–33 [16]. In the patient context, such artifacts
can produce significant discrepancies in the disease evaluation
based on catheter data. Pressure measurements are also used for
risk stratifications in pulmonary hypertension patients waiting
for heart transplant, where pulmonary vascular resistance, pulmonary artery systolic pressure, and transpulmonary pressure
gradient are key markers for preoperative assessment [17], [18].
Errors in the measurement of these parameters have important
diagnostic implications associated with both cost and treatment
options.
Pressure wires can, to a significant extent, overcome these
drawbacks: the transducer is placed directly at the tip and the
wire thickness is negligible compared to that of a fluid-filled
catheter. This leads to a significant reduction of both the inertial effects and the obstruction artifacts, making this technique
the current gold standard for invasive measurements [19], [20].
However, despite these results, pressure wires remain less commonly applied clinically due to technical complications (i.e.,
kinking, entangling with other intravascular equipment), increased cost and a higher degree of operator training [21].
To understand and quantify the causes of measurement errors, this study compares the performance of a 0.014 pressure
wire to that of a 6F fluid-filled catheter, which is routinely
used in the clinic for aortic pressure measurement, during pressure acquisition in a pulsatile flow phantom. The in vitro setup provides a range of physiological systolic pressures without
adding confounding factors typical of the patient context, such as
beat-to-beat variability and localized changes in wall stiffness. This allows a close control of the fluid-dynamic conditions, which can be accurately modeled using computer simulations to provide a physical interpretation of the observed
discrepancies.
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. Experimental Set-Up
The pulsatile flow phantom was built to simulate a working
ventricle with simplified pulmonary and systemic vessels. The
different parts forming the experimental rig are shown in Fig. 1.
The piston pump (1) ejected the fluid contained in a cylindrical
chamber (2) through a trileaflet polyurethane valve (3) into a
straight silicone tube (7). At the opposite end, a Windkessel
system consisting of an adjustable resistance screw (10) and a
compliance chamber (11) provided the desired afterload. The
working fluid was then redirected to the ventricle via a venous

Fig. 1.

1845

Diagram of the pulsatile flow phantom.

channel (8) and reservoir (6). The systemic vessel (silicone
“aorta”) had an inner radius Ri = 8 mm and an outer radius
Ro = 9.5 mm. The pressure measurements were collected over
200 mm toward the distal end. More details on the flow phantom
setup can be found in [22].
A pulsatile flow with 1-Hz frequency (corresponding to 60
beats per minute) was supplied by the pump using water at
room temperature with viscosity μ = 0.001002 Pa·s and density
ρf = 998 kg/m3 , respectively. Pulsatile flows can be defined by
the Reynolds and the Womersley number, two dimensionless
parameters that express the ratio of inertial to viscous force and
the pulse frequency in relation to viscous effects, respectively:
2Ri U ρf
,
Re =
μ


α = Ri

2πf ρf
μ

 12
.

(1)

In this experiment, the Reynolds number based on the mean
flow velocity U was 1308 and the Womersley number 20, hence
in the physiological range for a normal aorta [23], [24].
The flow phantom was designed to be compatible with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In addition to direct pressure
measurements, phase-contrast MRI (PC-MRI) data were acquired in the same catheter configuration of the numerical model
in a 3T MR Scanner (Achieva, Philips Medical Systems, Best,
The Netherlands) using a flow-sensitive gradient echo sequence
(field of view: 120 × 120 × 64 mm3 ; voxel size: 0.94 ×
0.94 × 8 mm3 ; flip angle: 10◦ ; velocity encoding: 60 cm/s;
ratio of repetition time to echo time, TR/TE: 3.59/2.74 ms).
B. Direct Pressure Measurement In Vitro
Pressure data was acquired using a 6F Swan Ganz catheter
(Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) with two lumens, a total
length l of 800 mm and an external radius Rc of 1 mm. Since
the shape of the fluid-filled lumen was not circular, an internal
radius R of 0.32 mm was calculated based on the estimated internal area. A Young’s modulus, Ecath , of 32 Mpa was obtained
from torsional and flexural tests carried out at our institution on
an MR-compatible catheter similar to the one used in the experiment [25]. The undamped natural frequency fn and the damping
coefficient ζ can be derived from the equations describing the

1846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

behavior of a mass-spring system and are expressed as:

4μl
πR2 dP
1

,
ζ=
fn =
2π
ρl dV
R3 lπ dP

(2)

dV

where μ and ρ are the viscosity and density of the fluid that
fills the lumen, respectively. The inverse of the compliance,
dP/dV, can be related to Young’s modulus by the following
equation [26]:

2dP V 3
(3)
Ecath =
dV t πl
where P is the pressure necessary to displace a volume of fluid
V and t is the thickness of the catheter annulus enclosing the
lumen. The catheter used in the experiment had a natural frequency of 40 Hz and a damping coefficient of 0.15.
The catheter was inserted in the tube facing the flow direction,
resulting in a radius ratio (Rc /Ri ) of 0.125. It was then progressively pulled back to gauge the pressure at 10 axial positions
with 20 mm intervals. Additional recordings were subsequently
performed at the same locations using a 0.014 PressureWire
Certus (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA), which corresponds to a radius of 0.18 mm and to a radius ratio of 0.0225.
The analog signals from the transducers were acquired at 100 Hz
via a data acquisition card (USB-6009, National Instruments,
Austin, TX, USA). The pressure wire was interfaced to the acquisition card via a Radi Analyser Xpress (St. Jude Medical,
St. Paul, MN, USA). Atmospheric pressure in the catheter was
set to zero using in-house software and the calibration followed
a standard procedure using a saline filled sheath. To avoid the
appearance of air bubbles the device was carefully flushed. Klee
et al. [27] presented a method based on the mathematical concept of curvature of a signal (defined as the rate at which a
curve recedes from its tangent) to detect the distortion of the
pressure waveform due to air bubbles: a threshold value for the
sum of the curvatures of 3.85 was found to separate severely
distorted signals from controls. When this method was applied
to our signals, the sum of the curvatures was between 6 and 8.7,
hence above of this threshold value. The signals were, therefore,
considered to be free from air bubbles.
C. Numerical Models
Two numerical models of the systemic vessel were generated
to investigate the differences between the two sets of experimental measurements. The first one consisted of just the elastic
vessel without any measuring probe inserted (catheter or wire).
This configuration was compared to the vessel with the pressure
wire inserted, as this device has a negligible radius ratio and
thus causes minimal disturbance in the flow field. The second
one included a coaxial rigid body with the same radius of the
catheter and sought to reproduce the flow dynamics inside the
catheterized vessel. This scenario replicated the in vitro configuration with the catheter tip at z = 140 mm, as shown in Fig. 2.
The fluid–structure domain consisted of a tetrahedral mesh with
approximately 128 000 elements for the fluid, coupled to a hexahedral mesh with 440 elements for the solid (see Fig. 3). In

Fig. 2. Catheter position in the numerical model. The flow is aligned with the
positive z-axis.

Fig. 3. Tetrahedral mesh (fluid domain) and hexahedral mesh (solid domain)
in the numerical FSI model with a catheter.

both cases, the silicone tube was modeled as an isotropic neoHookean material with Young’s modulus Es = 384 kPa and
density ρs = 1250 kg/m3 .
D. Numerical Study
The numerical study has been set up to match the experimental conditions as close as possible. Numerical simulations of
fluid–structure interaction (FSI) were performed on both models using the finite element software CHeart, which has been
previously applied and validated in cases of nonlinear FSI in
physiological flows [28], [29]. The solver is based on a coupled
fluid–solid algorithm: the solid mechanics is modeled using the
quasi-static incompressible finite elasticity equations, while the
arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian formulation of the full incompressible Navier–Stokes system is used to solve the fluid problem. These sets of equations, combined with the corresponding constraints imposed on the boundaries, are discretized and
solved using a Galerkin technique. A boundary condition based
on the pressure wire data was applied to the outlet of the model
without a catheter. When the catheter was included, the outflow
pressure boundary condition was based on the catheter traces in
the outlet. This was dictated by the necessity to take into account
the increased resistance due to the reduction of the area that occurs when the catheter is inserted. The velocity profile at the
inlet of the model with a catheter was derived from the PC-MRI
data acquired in a 2-D slice in the corresponding location. This
same inflow boundary condition was used for the model without
a catheter, since the inlet is sufficiently distant from the tip of
the catheter to be considered unaffected by blockage effects.
Three pulsatile cycles were simulated with a time step of 2 ms,
necessary to ensure the numerical stability of the model.
III. RESULTS
A. Peak Pressure Overestimation
The peak systolic pressures from the catheter and the two numerical models are compared to the wire data in the bar graph
of Fig. 4(a). The black bar on the left-hand side shows that a
peak pressure overestimation of 24% is observed in the catheter
data relative to the wire. This discrepancy is replicated by the

DE VECCHI et al.: CATHETER-INDUCED ERRORS IN PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS IN VESSELS: AN In-Vitro AND NUMERICAL STUDY

1847

Fig. 4. (a) Percentage difference in the measured peak systolic pressure between wire and catheter in vitro, and wire and FSI models. Pressure isocontrours in a
cross-section of the FSI model without (b) and with a catheter (c).

catheterized FSI model, which predicted a peak pressure 29%
larger than the corresponding wire measurement (see Fig. 4(a),
gray bar). The FSI model without a catheter successfully reproduces the wire data, with a maximum discrepancy of only 1.5%
(see Fig. 4(a), white bar). The FSI results also show that, in the
absence of the catheter, the pressure in an axial cross-section
perpendicular to the flow direction is approximately constant:
in the cross-section highlighted in Fig. 4(b) the pressure at peak
systole is 106.4 mmHg, with minor fluctuations of ±0.1 mmHg.
When the catheter is accounted for in the numerical model, the
systolic pressure spatially averaged in a cross-section at the
same location (now corresponding to the tip of the catheter) is
135.5 mmHg as shown in Fig. 4(c). A region of higher pressure
forms around the tip: however, the maximum pressure difference between the center and the periphery of the cross-section
is not significant (1 mmHg), suggesting that this localized disturbance due to the impact of the flow against an “obstacle” is
not the main factor in the peak pressure overestimation. The
pulse pressure, Ps − Pd , at this location is 100.86, 132.29, and
101.62 mmHg calculated from the wire, the catheter, and the
numerical results, respectively. The values from the wire and
the numerical simulations are, therefore, approximately 76% of
the corresponding catheter result.
B. Waveform Shape Analysis and PWV
The temporal transients of pressure from experimental measurements and numerical simulations in two cross-sections, at
z = 100 mm and z = 140 mm, respectively, are reported in
Fig. 5(a) and (b). The waveforms from the FSI model without
a catheter and the wire are in agreement; similarly, the curves
from the FSI model with a catheter replicate the catheter data
collected in vitro. In both cases, the maximum discrepancy between the experimental measurements and the corresponding
numerical models is below 5%.
A fast Fourier transform analysis of the pressure waveforms
reveals a main frequency peak of 1 Hz, corresponding to the
pulse value of 60 beats per minute [see Fig. 5(c) and (d)]. A second, higher frequency is also present in the signals. To increase
the resolution of this frequency mode, the waveforms have been

interpolated using a standard zero-padding technique: the plots
with magnified axes show that the second peak corresponds
to a frequency of 5.4 Hz and has similar magnitude in the data
from the wire and both the numerical models, but is significantly
damped in catheter measurements. This frequency value is compatible with the oscillation that gives rise to the dicrotic notch
in the descending part of the pressure waveform observed in
Fig. 5(a) and (b). As a result of the higher frequencies damping,
the dicrotic notch is absent in the signal recorded by the catheter.
To better understand the consequences of this frequency damping, the PWV is derived from the direct in vitro measurements
(wire and catheter), from the PC-MRI data acquired in the scanner and, finally, from the numerical FSI simulations with and
without a catheter (see Fig. 6). An algorithm based on the footto-foot method [9] has been used to calculate the transit time
of the waveform, Δt, between two locations separated by a distance Δx of 80, 100, and 120 mm. The resulting PWV for each
axial length is the average of three values corresponding to different locations along the tube of the distance Δx considered.
The PWV calculated from the catheter data is approximately
3.5 times higher than that obtained from wire and PC-MRI data,
and FSI simulations. On the longer distance of 120 mm, where
the relative error in the transit time calculation is lower, the FSI
model without a catheter, the wire and the PC-MRI data indicate
a range of PWV of 6.7–7.2; the PWV in the FSI model with
a catheter is approximately 5.4, hence in approximate agreement with the values obtained from these modalities. However,
this value is considerably lower than that of 19 from the in
vitro catheter traces, despite the similar value of peak systolic
pressure in the two cases [see Fig. 5(a) and (b)].
IV. DISCUSSION
This study shows that: 1) catheter measurements can significantly overestimate peak pressure even with a moderate radius
ratio of 0.125; 2) numerical results reproduced this pressure
overestimation without the frequency damping of the catheter
in vitro; and 3) the suppression of higher frequencies of pressure
in the catheter data results in a PWV significantly higher than
that from the wire, PC-MRI and numerical data.

1848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 5. Pressure waveforms from catheter, wire and FSI simulations in two cross-sections at (a) z = 100 mm and (b) z =140 mm. Single-sided amplitude
spectrum of the frequencies in the pressure signals at (c) z =100 mm and (d) z =140 mm.

Fluid-dynamic principles provide physical explanations for
the pressure overestimation in the catheter measurements. When
the catheter is inserted, the same rate of fluid must flow through
a narrower duct (annulus). The flow resistance downstream of
the tip is, thus, higher than that of a noncatheterized vessel with
the same radius. If this increased resistance is taken into account
in the FSI model, the numerical results reproduce the pressure
overestimation observed in vitro. Further, the model shows that
the radial pressure change in the cross-section at the catheter
tip is not significant [see Fig. 4(c)]. This suggests that, for this
value of radius ratio, the major determinant of the pressure overestimation is the increased flow resistance in the annular region,
rather than the artifacts around the tip. An increment in the mean
flow resistance by a factor of 3 has been reported in analytical
flow models with a radius ratio of 0.3 as a consequence of partial blockage [16]. The present experiment demonstrates that
the measurement error is significant even with a lower radius
ratio of 0.125, which is routinely used in the clinic. This is of
particular significance in the evaluation of pulmonary hypertensive patients waiting for heart transplant based on pulmonary
artery pressures and vascular resistance, as right heart catheterization typically results in radius ratios similar to that of the
present study [17]. Elevated systolic pressures in the pulmonary
artery are associated with high postoperative mortality in this
cohort [18] and thus an error of over 20% can potentially bias
the assessment of the disease severity.
Another consequence of the measurement inaccuracy using fluid-filled catheters that could influence clinical decisions
comes from the slow dynamic response of this type of probe.

Fig. 6. PWV from wire, catheter, PC-MRI, and numerical signals over three
distances Δx.

As described earlier, the column of fluid in the catheter lumen
dampens higher frequencies in the signal as it travels along the
probe toward the external transducer: the system acts consequently as a low-pass filter. The catheter traces recorded in vitro
showed a distinct absence of higher frequency modes, which
were instead present in the wire and in both FSI models [see
Fig. 5(c) and (d)]. This frequency damping clearly affects
the shape of the measured pressure waveforms. Despite being qualitatively similar, the traces from the in vitro catheter
and from the FSI model with a catheter result in a considerable

DE VECCHI et al.: CATHETER-INDUCED ERRORS IN PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS IN VESSELS: AN In-Vitro AND NUMERICAL STUDY

discrepancy in the position of the foot of the waveform and
hence in the PWV. The main difference between the experimental catheter and the corresponding numerical model is the
absence of the internal column of fluid in the latter, which is
responsible for the attenuation of the higher frequencies of pressure. Consistently, this frequency damping is only observed in
the in vitro catheter traces and is not replicated in the numerical
model. The subsequent bias in the calculation of the PWV is
not negligible and can, therefore, be a confounding factor for
disease diagnosis in pathologies related to arterial stiffening.
Similarly, the absence of the dicrotic notch in the catheter signal also has clinical relevance as this parameter is correlated
with isolated systolic hypertension, which exposes patients to a
stroke risk two to four times higher than in normotensive subjects [30]. It should, however, be noted that frequency damping
is not the only factor that may affect the accuracy of the PWV
computation. The impedance mismatch due to the insertion of
the catheter and the increased downstream resistance also play
an important role in the wave propagation by inducing a discontinuity of conditions. As mentioned previously, the presence
of the catheter causes an obstruction leading to a decrease of
the cross-sectional area. In PWV analysis, this corresponds to
a reflection point, which generates an additional reflected wave
that is not present in the PC-MRI or wire data. This wave, as
well as the transmitted wave, is reflected back and forth by the
inlet and outlet boundary condition and interferes with the original waveform. These additional reflections can alter the shape
of the measured signal and consequently the PWV, resulting in
a less accurate estimate of its value. However, the numerical
results from the model with a catheter suggest that the error in
the PWV is mainly related to the frequency damping from the
internal fluid rather than to the wave reflections.
The optimal level of damping is related to the shape of the
waveform and to the heart rate, with higher rates and steeper
upstrokes requiring higher natural frequencies and damping to
avoid the risk of resonance during measurement. In clinical applications this level of damping is, however, rarely achieved due
to constraints in the length and internal radius of the lumen. Underdamping in fluid-filled catheters can result in overestimation
of systolic pressure [7]. High natural frequencies can nonetheless limit this artifact [3]: in a case presented by [5], the arterial
pressure measured in a patient using an underdamped system
with fn = 15 Hz and ζ = 0.15 resulted in approximately an 8%
overestimation of the systolic pressure compared to the highfidelity signal measured by a catheter tipped pressure transducer.
When the natural frequency was increased to 24 Hz, however,
the high-fidelity pressure waveform could be reproduced with
minimal distortion. The catheter used in this experiment has
the same damping coefficient but a higher natural frequency of
40 Hz: it is, thus, reasonable to expect that the lumen size and the
material properties of the catheter have a more limited influence
on the observed pressure overestimation of 24%.
Finally, although the experimental and numerical simulations
were set up to achieve realistic systolic pressure and waveform
shape, some limitations should be mentioned. The diastolic pressure value is lower than the physiological range and the pulse
pressure is consequently higher than normal. This is due to a

1849

technical constraint in the experimental set-up. As the systemic
and venous vessel are parallel to each other, the pressure in the
compliance chamber had to reduce the velocity of the flow to
zero and then accelerate it in the opposite direction down the
venous return. This posed a restriction on the minimum value
of the impedance that could be achieved: the diastolic pressure
had thus to be lowered to obtain a physiological flow profile.
However, this scaling of the pressure waveform does not affect the PWV calculation, which is only based on the shape
of the wave, nor the validity of the comparison between the
measurement accuracy of the catheter and the wire in the same
conditions. Further, the flow phantom did not include peripheral vessels and side branches, whose impedance is, thus, not
accounted for. The use of a single straight tube instead of a more
realistic aortic geometry is motivated by the necessity to avoid
reproducing anatomical features that can introduce more complex fluid dynamics effects and thus hinder the identification of
the causes of error in the measurements. A major difference between the simulations and the in vitro study is that the catheter
in the FSI model is rigid and fixed coaxially to the aorta, while
in the experiment it is flexible, free to fluctuate and therefore
not concentric. In the controlled settings of the experiment, the
oscillations experienced by the catheter were nonetheless small
and the tip did not touch the wall during measurement. Generating a flexible, free to move and fluid-filled FSI model for
the catheter was not thought necessary since the agreement between the pressures waveforms in the FSI simulations and in
the in vitro experiment was strong. In this context, it should
also be stressed that, although considered the gold standard for
invasive measurement, the pressure wire is more flexible than
the catheter and is thus prone to experience larger fluctuations
that might affect the reproducibility of the measurements. As for
the catheter, however, this is more likely to happen in complex
anatomies and physiological conditions. In this in vitro study,
pressure traces were recorded twice at each location and showed
negligible variability.
In conclusion, the choice of the most suitable catheter should
be based upon considerations of the radius ratio and the frequency response. Decreasing the diameter size to avoid excessive blockage of the vessel can affect the natural frequency of
the system; similarly, the use of stiffer materials to achieve a
high dynamic response can compromise the navigation properties and the conformability to complex anatomies. Pressure
wires can minimize errors in peak systolic pressure and PWV,
and provide more accurate measurement in small vasculature.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Kanai, M. Iizuka, and K. Sakamoto, “One of the problems in the
measurement of blood pressure by catheter-insertion: Wave reflection at
the tip of the catheter,” Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 483–496, 1970.
[2] N. Pijls and M. Kern, “Practice and potential pitfalls of coronary pressure
measurement,” Catheter. Cardiovasc. Interv., vol. 49, pp. 1–16, 2000.
[3] H. L. Falsetti, R. E. Mates, R. J. Carroll, R. L. Gupta, and A. C. Bell,
“Analysis and correction of pressure wave distortion in fluid-filled catheter
systems,” Circulation, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 165–172, Jan. 1974.
[4] L. J. Krovetz, R. B. Jennings, and S. D. Goldbloom, “Limitation of correction of frequency dependent artefact in pressure recordings using harmonic
analysis,” Circulation, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 992–997, Nov. 1974.

1850

[5] R. M. Gardner, “Direct arterial pressure monitoring,” Curr. Anaesth. Crit.
Care, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 239–246, Sep. 1990.
[6] J. Li, A. van Brummelen, and A. Noordergraaf, “Fluid-filled blood pressure measurement systems,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 839–843,
May 1976.
[7] M. Allan and W. Gray, “Measurement of arterial pressure using cathetertransducer systems,” Br. J. Anaesth., vol. 60, pp. 413–418, 1988.
[8] B. Taylor and F. Donovan, “Hydraulic resistance and damping in cathetertransducer systems,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 72–78, Dec.
1992.
[9] N. R. Gaddum, J. Alastruey, P. Beerbaum, P. Chowienczyk, and
T. Schaeffter, “A technical assessment of pulse wave velocity algorithms
applied to non-invasive arterial waveforms,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 11,
pp. 2617–2629, Jul. 2013.
[10] W. Nichols and B. Singh, “Augmentation index as a measure of peripheral
vascular disease state,” Curr. Opin. Cardiol., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 543–551,
2002.
[11] R. Kelly, C. Hayward, A. Avolio, and M. O’Rourke, “Noninvasive determination of age-related changes in the human arterial pulse,” Circulation,
vol. 80, no. 6, pp. 1652–1659, Dec. 1989.
[12] S. Laurent, J. Cockcroft, L. Van Bortel, P. Boutouyrie, C. Giannattasio,
D. Hayoz, B. Pannier, C. Vlachopoulos, I. Wilkinson, and H. StruijkerBoudier, “Expert consensus document on arterial stiffness: Methodological issues and clinical applications,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 27, no. 21,
pp. 2588–2605, Nov. 2006.
[13] D. Kenny, J. W. Polson, R. P. Martin, M. Caputo, D. G. Wilson,
J. R. Cockcroft, J. F. R. Paton, and A. R. Wolf, “Relationship of aortic
pulse wave velocity and baroreceptor reflex sensitivity to blood pressure
control in patients with repaired coarctation of the aorta,” Am. Heart J.,
vol. 162, no. 2, pp. 398–404, Aug. 2011.
[14] K. Iwasaki and S. Kusachi, “Coronary pressure measurement based decision making for percutaneous coronary intervention,” Curr. Cardiol. Rev.,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 323–333, Nov. 2009.
[15] L. Garcia and J. Carrozza, “Physiologic evaluation of translesion pressure
gradients in peripheral arteries: Comparison of pressure wire and catheterderived measurements,” J. Interv. Cardiol., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 63–65, Feb.
2007.
[16] L. H. Back, “Estimated mean flow resistance increase during coronary
artery catheterization,” J. Biomech., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 169–175, Feb.
1994.
[17] A. Costard-Jäckle and M. B. Fowler, “Influence of preoperative pulmonary
artery pressure on mortality after heart transplantation: Testing of potential
reversibility of pulmonary hypertension with nitroprusside is useful in
defining a high risk group,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 48–
54, Jan. 1992.
[18] N. R. Banner, R. S. Bonser, A. L. Clark, S. Clark, P. J. Cowburn,
R. S. Gardner, P. R. Kalra, T. McDonagh, C. A. Rogers, L. Swan,
J. Parameshwar, H. L. Thomas, and S. G. Williams, “UK guidelines for
referral and assessment of adults for heart transplantation,” Heart, vol. 97,
no. 18, pp. 1520–1527, Sep. 2011.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

[19] J. J. Cavendish, L. I. Carter, and S. Tsimikas, “Recent advances in hemodynamics: Noncoronary applications of a pressure sensor angioplasty
guidewire,” Catheter. Cardiovasc. Interv., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 748–758,
May 2008.
[20] L. J. Blows and S. R. Redwood, “The pressure wire in practice,” Heart,
vol. 93, no. 4, pp. 419–422, Apr. 2007.
[21] J. Bae, A. Lerman, E. Yang, and C. Rihal, “Feasibility of a pressure wire
and single arterial puncture for assessing aortic valve area in patients with
aortic stenosis,” J. Invasive Cardiol., vol. 122, no. 4, pp. 310–320, 2006.
[22] N. R. Gaddum, T. Schaeffter, M. Bührer, M. Rutten, L. Smith,
P. J. Chowienczyk, and P. B. J. Beerbaum, “Beat-to-beat variation in pulse
wave velocity during breathing maneuvers,” Magn. Reson. Med., pp. 1–9,
Jul. 2013, doi: 10.1002/mrm.24890.
[23] J. Peacock, T. Jones, C. Tock, and R. Lutz, “The onset of turbulence in
physiological pulsatile flow in a straight tube,” Exp. Fluids, vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 1–9, Jan. 1998.
[24] T. S. Lee and Z. D. Shi, “Effects of Reynolds number on physiologicaltype pulsatile flows in a pipe with ring-type constrictions,” Int. J. Numer.
Methods Fluids, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 743–761, Jul. 1999.
[25] W. Yao, T. Schaeffter, L. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Developing a
magnetic resonance-compatible catheter for cardiac catheterization,” J.
Med. Devices, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1–7, Oct. 2012.
[26] R. Roeder, J. Wolfe, N. Lianakis, T. Hinson, L. A. Geddes, and
J. Obermiller, “Compliance, elastic modulus, and burst-pressure of smallintestine submucosa (SIS) small-diameter vascular grafts,” J. Biomed.
Mater. Res., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 65–70, 1999.
[27] G. Klee, E. Ackerman, and A. Leonard, “Computer detection of distortion
in arterial pressure signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BE-21, no. 1,
pp. 73–75, Jan. 1974.
[28] D. Nordsletten, M. McCormick, P. Kilner, P. Hunter, D. Kay, and N. Smith,
“Fluid–solid coupling for the investigation of diastolic and systolic human
left ventricular function,” Int. J. Numer. Method. Biomed. Eng., vol. 27,
no. 7, pp. 1017–1039, 2011.
[29] A. de Vecchi, D. Nordsletten, E. W. Remme, H. Bellsham-Revell, G. Greil,
J. M. Simpson, R. Razavi, and N. P. Smith, “Inflow typology and ventricular geometry determine efficiency of filling in the hypoplastic left heart,”
Ann. Thorac. Surg., vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 1562–1569, Nov. 2012.
[30] W. B. Kannel, “Systolic blood pressure, arterial rigidity, and risk of stroke:
The framingham study,” JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc., vol. 245, no. 12,
pp. 1225–1229, Mar. 1981.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

