1756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Abnormal Dynamics of EEG Oscillations in
Schizophrenia Patients on Multiple Time Scales
Junfeng Sun, Member, IEEE, Yingying Tang, Kelvin O. Lim, Jijun Wang∗ , Shanbao Tong∗ , Senior Member, IEEE,
Hui Li, and Bin He, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Neuronal oscillations reflect the activity of neuronal
ensembles engaged in integrative cognition, and may serve as a
functional measure for the cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. This study aims to reveal the abnormal amplitude dynamics of
electroencephalogram (EEG) oscillations in schizophrenia patients
on multiple time scales. EEGs were recorded from schizophrenia patients (n = 19) and healthy controls (n = 16) while they
were at resting state with eyes closed, at resting state with eyes
open, and at watching video. Detrended fluctuation analysis and
measures of life-time and waiting-time were used to characterize the abnormal dynamics of EEG oscillations on both long
(1–20 s) and short (≤1 s) time scales. Abnormal dynamics of EEG
oscillations in alpha and beta bands were observed. In particular, compared with healthy controls, schizophrenia patients have
smaller DFA exponent (implying weaker long-range temporal correlation) in the left fronto-temporal area and smaller DFA exponent, smaller life-time (indicating shorter oscillation burst), and
smaller waiting-time in the occipital area in beta band at resting state with eyes open. In addition, schizophrenia patients have
larger DFA exponent, larger life-time, and larger waiting-time at
some clustered channels in the temporo-parietal area in alpha
band at watching video. The present results provide new insights
for cognitive deficits and the underlying neuronal dysfunction in
schizophrenia.
Index Terms—Detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA), electroencephalogram (EEG), life-time, schizophrenia, waiting-time.

Manuscript received September 9, 2013; revised December 29, 2013; accepted February 12, 2014. Date of publication February 14, 2014; date of current
version May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by National Key Clinical Disciplines at Shanghai Mental Health Center (Office of Medical Affairs,
Ministry of Health, 2011-873; OMA-MH, 2011-873); National Nature Science
Foundation of China (81171267, 61102020, and 81261120410); Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (11410708800 and 10411966400). The work
of J. Sun was supported in part by the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities, and in part by the Institute for Engineering in Medicine
of the University of Minnesota. J. Sun and Y. Tang contributed equally to this
study. Asterisks indicate corresponding authors.
J. Sun is with the School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: jfsun@sjtu.edu.cn).
Y. Tang and H. Li are with the Department of EEG Source Imaging, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: yytang0522@gmail.com;
lihui2010@gmail.com).
K. O. Lim is with the Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: kolim@umn.edu).
∗ J. Wang is with the Department of EEG Source Imaging, Shanghai Mental
Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200240, China (e-mail: jijunwang27@gmail.com).
∗ S. Tong is with the School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: stong@sjtu.edu.cn).
B. He is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Institute for
Engineering in Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
USA (e-mail: binhe@umn.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2306424

I. INTRODUCTION
CHIZOPHRENIA is a serious mental disorder, with which
patients can have cognitive impairment and symptoms
including auditory hallucinations, delusions, paranoia, and
thought disorder [1], [2]. Studies show that schizophrenia is
heterogeneous, and its contributory factors include genetics,
neurobiology, psychology, living environment, and social process. Presently, clinical outcome in schizophrenia is variable;
treatment for the cognitive impairment in schizophrenia has
not yet been well established [3]–[5]. In addition, no good
biomarker for diagnosing schizophrenia has been established.
As schizophrenia patients generally demonstrate cognitive and
behavioral deficits before the stage when the structural brain
abnormality can be reliably detected [6], functional biomarkers, which could characterize the underlying neuronal dynamics
related to cognition dysfunction, would be of great benefit to
explore more effective and targeted treatment in an early stage
for schizophrenia.
Studies based on neuroimaging or electrophysiological techniques have demonstrated that schizophrenia patients have evidence of abnormal neuronal activity [7] and aberrant functional brain connectivity, which mainly appear in the frontal,
parietal, and temporal brain regions [7]–[10]. The origin of abnormal neuronal activity and connectivity is not well understood. One hypothesis is that they may result from the “aberrant
maturation of the connectome during brain development” [11].
Among various techniques, event-related potentials are one possible functional measure for schizophrenia, but more studies
are needed to improve its sensitivity, selectivity, and predictive ability [12]–[15]. Neuronal oscillation, extracted from ongoing electroencephalogram (EEG) or magnetoencephalogram
(MEG), is another potential functional measure for the cognitive dysfunctions in schizophrenia [16]. Neuronal oscillations
reflect the activity of neuronal ensembles engaged in integrative
cognition and information processing in spatial and temporal
spaces [17]. In general, the inhibitory interneurons regulate the
membrane potentials of glutamatergic cortical pyramidal cells
and largely determine the spatiotemporal dynamics of neuronal
ensembles [18].
Spontaneous brain activity at resting-state have specific spatiotemporal structures on multiple scales [19]–[22], which may
play important roles in temporal cognitive integrity [23]. On
long time scale (seconds to tens of seconds), neuronal oscillations usually possess long-range temporal correlations (LRTCs)
in amplitude; that is, the autocorrelation of neuronal oscillation amplitude appears to follow power-law decay, which is a
much slower decrease than that of oscillation extracted from

S

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SUN et al.: ABNORMAL DYNAMICS OF EEG OSCILLATIONS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS ON MULTIPLE TIME SCALES

random process [24]. Detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) can
quantify the LRTC of neuronal oscillation amplitude on long
time scale [23]. In one DFA study on resting state EEGs (1433
subjects, age range from 5 to 71 years), the LRTCs of neuronal oscillation amplitudes exhibit pronounced increase from
childhood to adolescence, and even into age range of 25 years
old [25]. This result implies that the amplitude dynamics of neuronal oscillations may reflect the maturation of brain. With the
fact that schizophrenia mainly manifests during adolescence and
young adulthood when brain is still in development, the dynamics of neuronal oscillations in schizophrenia would be worthy
of investigation [6], [25].
On short time scales (≤1 s), the dynamics of neuronal oscillation could be investigated by the cumulative distribution
statistics of life-time and waiting-time [19], [24], which were
originally proposed to characterize the life-time and the size of
“neuronal avalanches” [26]. The probability distributions of lifetime and waiting-time of brain oscillations would decrease more
slowly (implying longer oscillation bursts) than those of temporally uncorrelated signals, and exhibit power-law decays [24].
In addition, one recent study demonstrated that human behavior (sequence of hits and misses) in a factorial audiovisual
threshold-stimulus detection task also possessed LRTC (quantified by the DFA exponent), and this behavioral LRTC, the
LRTCs of neuronal oscillations, and the avalanche dynamics
(by life-time and size of avalanches) of neuronal oscillations
extracted from the MEG/EEG signals recorded during task were
strongly correlated with each other [27].
Based on the previous considerations, we used three different
metrics (i.e., the DFA exponent, the statistics of life-time and
of waiting-time) to examine the dynamics of EEG oscillations
recorded from schizophrenia patients and healthy controls at
resting state with eyes closed, resting state with eyes open, and
the state of watching video on both long (1–20 s) and short (≤1 s)
time scales, respectively, in order to examine the abnormality of
neuronal dynamics in schizophrenia patients, and thus develop
new functional measures for schizophrenia.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

1757

cluded as controls. Both the schizophrenia patients and the
healthy controls were free of neurological diseases, mental retardation, alcohol or substance abuse or dependence, and any
physical illness that might affect their cognitive function. The
study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of SMHC, and informed consents were obtained from all the
subjects.
B. EEG Recording and Preprocessing
Participants were seated 1 m in front of the screen in a soundattenuated and electrically shielded chamber with dim illumination. Three EEG trials of 3–5 min were recorded, respectively,
when subjects were at resting state with eyes closed, resting
state with eyes open, and watching video of news with neutral contents. EEGs were recorded from 64-channel scalp electrodes mounted in an elastic cap (BrainCap, Brain Products, Inc.,
Bavaria, Germany) including two pairs of vertical and horizontal electrooculography (EOG) electrodes. The electrode-scalp
impedance was kept below 5 kΩ for each electrode. Data recording was referenced to the tip of nose and sampled at 1000 Hz. In
total, there are 59 EEG channels after excluding the EOG and
the reference channels.
The brain vision analyzer (1.05, Brain Products, Inc.) was
used for EEG preprocessing. Artifacts induced by vertical and
horizontal eyes movements and blinks were removed offline
by an ocular correction algorithm [31]. All the artifact-reduced
EEG data were rereferenced using the common average reference, band-pass filtered into 0.01–40 Hz using a zero phase-shift
IIR filter (24 dB/Oct), and further downsampled to 200 Hz. After
that, the broadband EEG signals were visually inspected from
segment to segment, and epochs containing artifacts were excluded using EEGLAB [32]. Finally, the length of the selected
EEG signals is 174.7 ± 26.9 s (mean ± standard deviation)
among 122.0–261.0 s across all subjects. After the preprocessing, the selected EEG signals were filtered into three classic
frequency bands, i.e., theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), and
beta (12–30 Hz) bands, respectively, using least-squares FIR
filters [32].

A. Subjects

C. Instantaneous Amplitude of EEG Oscillation

All subjects were recruited from outpatients at the
Shanghai Mental Health Center (SMHC). Nineteen schizophrenia subjects (24.5 ± 7.6 years, age range: 16–38 years) who fulfilled ICD-10 diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia (F20) were
included. Patient diagnosis was based on review of history and
symptoms and current interview using the mini-Structured Clinical Interview. A consensus of two psychiatrists filled out a
checklist of whether the patient met (ICD-10) the criteria for
schizophrenia. Diagnosis verification was made by a senior
psychiatrist at the rank of associate professor. Clinical symptoms were evaluated using the positive and negative syndrome
scale [28]. Anxiety and depression symptoms were also assessed by the Hamilton anxiety rating scale (14 items) [29]
and the Hamilton depression rating scale (24 items) [30]. Sixteen age-matched healthy subjects (27.4 ± 6.2 years, age range:
19–35 years) with no history of psychiatric disorder were in-

To examine the dynamics of EEG oscillation, the instantaneous amplitude of EEG oscillation should be first estimated. Let s (t) denote an EEG oscillation signal in one of
the three frequency bands. With its analytic signal defined as
z (t) = s (t) + js̃ (t) = A (t) ej φ(t) , the instantaneous amplitude of EEG oscillation s (t) can be defined as

1/2
A (t) = s2 (t) + s̃2 (t)
∞ s(ν )
where s̃(t) = π1 P.V. ∫−∞
t−ν dν is the Hilbert transform of
s (t) (here P.V. means that the integral is taken in the sense
of Cauchy principal value). Let s (n) denote the discrete observation of s (t) at instant nΔt, i.e., s (n) = s (nΔt), where
Δt is the sampling interval. Then, the instantaneous amplitude
{A (n)} of {s (n)} can be estimated by Fourier transform in
the frequency domain [33]. Fig. 1(a) demonstrates a segment

1758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

2) The series {y (n)} is divided into segments of length τ ,
and local linear fit is performed for each segment. Let
{yτ (n)}knτ=(k −1)τ +1 denote the local linear fit of the kth
segment {y (n)}knτ=(k −1)τ +1 , and the “detrended fluctuation” F (τ ) is defined as the mean-square-root residual of
{y (n)} after removing the linear fit in each segment, i.e.,
N
2 1/2
.
F (τ ) = { N1
n =1 [y (n) − yτ (n)] }
3) The DFA exponent is defined as the slope of the leastsquare fit [as the red line in Fig. 1(c)] of F (τ ) with respect
to segment length τ in a double logarithm (i.e., “log–log”)
plot.
F (τ ) quantifies the integrated dispersion of the residual after
removing local linear trend (i.e., the linear fit) in each segment
of length τ . If there is a power law scaling between F (τ )
and τ , i.e., F (τ ) = Cτ λ , then the DFA exponent will be λ,
as log [F (τ )] = λ log (τ ) + log (C), where C is a constant. A
larger DFA exponent in the range of 0.5–1 implies a stronger
LRTC in EEG oscillation amplitude, and a DFA exponent of 0.5
indicates that no temporal correlation exists in the oscillation
amplitude. In this study, we applied DFA to examine the LRTC
of EEG oscillation on the time scale of 1–20 s.

E. Life-Time and Waiting-Time
Fig. 1. Illustration of metrics for quantifying the dynamics of neuronal
oscillation. (a) Segment of EEG oscillation (blue curve) in theta band and
its instantaneous amplitude (red curve); (b) enlargement of one segment EEG
oscillation in (a), the duration of one continuous oscillation epoch (thick red
curve) with instantaneous amplitude greater than the preset threshold is defined
as the life-time of the epoch, and the duration of one continuous oscillation
epoch (thin red curve) with instantaneous amplitude smaller than the preset
threshold is defined as the waiting-time of the epoch respectively; thus, for a
long continuous EEG oscillation, there are many life-times and waiting-times
corresponding to different epochs; (c) DFA exponent is defined as the linear
slope of amplitude fluctuation F (τ ) with respect to segment length τ ; (d) time
length corresponding to the 95% percentile of empirical cumulative probability
distribution of life-times is used as a statistical metric to quantify the feature of
life-time for a given long continuous EEG oscillation.

of EEG oscillation (blue curve) and its instantaneous amplitude
(red curve).
D. DFA
DFA was originally proposed to quantify correlations in complex data [34]. As DFA requires less strict stationarity of signals
than the classical autocorrelation function or power spectral
analysis, it has been extensively applied to explore long range
correlation in various data (including neuronal signals) [24],
[27], [35]. Generally, DFA characterizes the power-law scaling
of the root-mean-square fluctuation of the cumulated signals after linearly detrending in each local segment with respect to the
segment length. In particular, the DFA exponent of EEG oscillation amplitude can be estimated by the following steps [34].
1) For the instantaneous amplitude {A (n)}N
n =1 with N samples, its cumulative sum {y (n)}
is estimated after removing its mean; that is, y (n) = ni=1 [A (i) − A], where
N
A = N1
i=1 A (i).

Life-time and waiting-time can characterize the dynamics of
neuronal oscillation on relative short time scale (≤1 s) [19],
[24]. For the estimated instantaneous amplitude of EEG oscillation, a threshold is first set, and then the duration of one
epoch with envelop above (below) the threshold is named the
life-time (waiting-time) of the epoch [see Fig. 1(b)]. The lifetimes and waiting-times for different EEG epochs may vary in
a certain range. The probability distributions of life-times and
waiting-times of brain oscillations decrease more slowly than
those of temporally uncorrelated signals, and exhibit powerlaw decays with respect to time length, respectively [24]. This
power-law decays of life-times and waiting-times reflect the dynamics of oscillation bursts on short time scale, and have been
shown to correlate to human behaviors [27]. With the empirical
cumulative probability distributions of life-times and waitingtimes estimated, their 95% percentiles can be used as metrics to
quantify the fat tails of the power-law decays of life-times and
waiting-times, respectively [see Fig. 1(d)]. The larger 95% percentiles would imply that neuronal oscillation has higher probability with longer life-times and waiting-times (i.e., longer oscillation bursts), respectively. For brevity, we hereafter use lifetime and waiting-time to denote the 95% percentiles of the cumulative probability distribution of life-times and waiting-times,
respectively.
As EEG oscillation amplitude would vary largely across different subjects at different channels, it is not suitable to adopt
the same absolute threshold to define life-time and waiting-time
for all channels of all subjects. The median of the oscillation amplitudes has been shown to be a suitable threshold for neuronal
oscillations [24]. In addition, thresholds of 25% above and below the median level have also been tested, and results showed
that the life-time and waiting-time of individual channel were

SUN et al.: ABNORMAL DYNAMICS OF EEG OSCILLATIONS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS ON MULTIPLE TIME SCALES

1759

affected by the change of threshold, but the topographic differences between the patients and the control subjects were similar
to each other under the three different thresholds tested [24].
Following the strategy in [24], this study took the median of the
EEG oscillation amplitude as the threshold to define life-time
and waiting-time.
F. Statistical Analysis
In each frequency band, 3 states (eyes closed, eyes open,
and watching video) × 2 groups (schizophrenia patients
and healthy controls) repeated-measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) were performed with SPSS (version 16.0) for
DFA exponent, life-time, and waiting-time, respectively. The
Greenhouse-Geisser approximation of ANOVA was adopted
when the hypothesis of sphericity was rejected. After that, for
each metric, we performed statistical comparison between two
groups separately for channel, frequency band and state. When
the metric value obeys a normal distribution (tested by JarqueBera test), two-sample t-test (for the case with equal variance)
or Satterthwaite’s approximation t-test (for the case with unequal variance) was applied. When the metric value does not
obey a normal distribution, a nonparametric statistical test (i.e.,
Wilcoxon rank sum test) was applied [36].

Fig. 2. Results of a 3 (states: eyes closed, eyes open, and watching video)
× 2 (groups: schizophrenia patients and healthy controls) repeated-measures
ANOVA for (a)–(c) DFA exponent, (d)–(f) life-time, and (g)–(i) waiting-time
of EEG oscillations in beta band. In each topography, the circles denote the
channels with p value less than 0.05.

III. RESULTS
A. Results of ANOVA Analysis
Two-way repeated-measures ANOVA shows that the three
metrics (i.e., the DFA exponent, life-time, and waiting-time)
have main group effect and/or main state effect at some channels
in alpha band and beta band. Specifically, in alpha band, the
three metrics have main state effects on most channels, with the
exception of DFA exponent at channels C4 and AF7, but no
main group effect on any channel, or state x group interaction
effect on most channels except DFA exponent at FT7, life-time
at C5, and waiting-time at C3. In beta band, the DFA exponent,
life-time, and waiting-time have state effect on some channels
in different areas [see Fig. 2(a), (d), and (g)]; the DFA exponent
has main group effect in the left fronto-temporal area and the
occipital area [see Fig. 2(b)], and life-time and waiting-time have
main group effect on some clustered channels in the occipital
area [see Fig. 2(e) and (h)].
B. Neuronal Dynamics in Alpha Band
To explore whether there is alternation of EEG oscillation
dynamics in schizophrenia patients, we further performed statistical tests between schizophrenia patients and healthy controls
for the three metrics in alpha band and beta band at each state,
respectively. In alpha band, compared with healthy controls,
schizophrenia patients have significantly larger DFA exponent,
larger life-time, and larger waiting-time at some clustered channels in the left temporo-parietal area at watching video [see
Fig. 3(c), (f), and (i)]. In Fig. 3(c), there are nine channels with
p < 0.05 by the DFA exponent, and the probability of no less
than nine channels (among all 59 channels) with p < 0.05 is
0.009 by binomial distribution [24]. In Fig. 3(f) and (i), there

Fig. 3. Topography of the three metrics in alpha band for schizophrenia (Sz)
patients and healthy controls (Ctrl) at resting state with eyes closed, resting
state with eyes open, and watching video. (a)–(c) Results of the DFA exponent.
(d)–(f) Results of life-time. (g)–(i) Results of waiting-time. Each pair of columns
correspond to the results at one kind of state. For each channel of each case,
the metric means of patients and of controls are encoded by color as indicated
by the corresponding color bar. For each pair of columns, the white filled circles
on the left (right) column denote that the metric means of patients (controls) are
greater (p < 0.05) than the metric means of controls (patients) at those channels.

are 15 and 14 channels with p < 0.05 by life-time and waitingtime, respectively, and the probabilities of no less than those
channels with p < 0.05 are 9.56e–7 and 5.62e–6, respectively,
by binomial distribution. These imply that the channels with
p < 0.05 in Fig. 3(c), (f), and (i) are with rather small likelihood to happen by chance.
For each metric in alpha band at watching video, we further
selected five clustered channels with p < 0.05 [i.e., C1, C3, CP1,
CP3, and CPz in Fig. 3(c) for DFA exponent; P1, P3, P5, CP1,
and CPz in Fig. 3(f) for life-time; P3, P5, CP1, CP3, and CPz
in Fig. 3(i) for waiting-time] in the left temporo-parietal area,
and examined the difference between two groups by the average
metric value of the five selected channels, respectively. Results

1760

Fig. 4. Illustration of the three metrics at five clustered channels at the state
of watching video in alpha band. (a) DFA exponents of channel CP1 and the
average DFA exponent of five channels (i.e., C1, C3, CP1, CP3, and CPz) with
p < 0.05 by DFA exponent. (b) Life-times of channel CP1 and the average
life-time of five channels (i.e., P1, P3, P5, CP1, and CPz) with p < 0.05 by
life-time. (c) Waiting-times of channel CP1 and the average waiting-time of five
channels (i.e., P3, P5, CP1, CP3, and CPz) with p < 0.05 by waiting-time. For
each subfigure, the value of corresponding metric for each subject is denoted
by one symbol, and the mean and the standard deviation of schizophrenia (Sz)
patients and healthy controls (Ctrl) are plotted by error bars. For each case, the
p value of statistical test is denoted by ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 5. Topography of different metrics in beta band for schizophrenia (Sz)
patients and healthy controls (Ctrl) at resting state with eyes closed, resting
state with eyes open, and watching video. (a)–(c) Results of the DFA exponents.
(d)–(f) Results of life-times. (g)–(i) Results of waiting-times. For each pair of
columns, the white filled circles on the left (right) column denote that the metric
means of patients (controls) are greater (p < 0.05) than the metric means of
controls (patients) at those channels.

show that schizophrenia patients have significantly larger DFA
exponent [see Fig. 4(a)], larger life-time [see Fig. 4(b)], and
larger waiting-time [see Fig. 4(c)] at the representative channel
CP1 and by the metric average of the five selected channels.

C. Neuronal Dynamics in Beta Band
In beta band, the DFA exponent has significant difference
at some clustered channels in the left fronto-temporal area and
in the right occipital area at resting state with eyes open [see
Fig. 5(b)], while life-time and waiting-time mainly have significant difference at several channels in the occipital area at the
three different states, respectively [see Fig. 5(e)–(i)]. By binomial distribution, in Fig. 5(b), the probability of no less than 15
channels (among 59 channels) with p < 0.05 is 9.56e–7, and in
Fig. 5(h), the probability of no less than eight channels (among
all 59 channels) with p < 0.05 is 0.027. We further examined
some clustered channels with p < 0.05 by the three metrics at
resting-state with eyes open. For the 11 clustered channels (i.e.,
F7, F5, FT7, FC5, FC3, FC1, T7, C5, C3, TP7, and CP5) in the
left fronto-temporal area [see Fig. 5(b)], the p-value is 0.003 by
the average DFA exponent of these 11 channels [see Fig. 6(a)].
Fig. 6(b) and (c) demonstrates the significant differences
between two groups at resting state with eyes open by lifetime and waiting-time of the representative channel Oz and by
the average life-time and the average waiting-time of the six
clustered channels (i.e., O1, O2, PO3, PO4, POz, and Oz) in the
occipital area, respectively.

Fig. 6. Illustration of the three metrics at some selected channels at resting
state with eyes open in beta band. (a) DFA exponents at channel FC5 and the
average of DFA exponents at 11 channels (i.e., F7, F5, FT7, FC5, FC3, FC1,
T7, C5, C3, TP7, and CP5) with p < 0.05 by DFA exponent. (b) Life-times
at channel Oz and the average of life-times at six channels (i.e., O1, O2, PO3,
PO4, POz, Oz) with p < 0.05 by life-time. (c) Waiting-times at channel Oz and
the average of waiting-times at six channels (i.e., O1, O2, PO3, PO4, POz, Oz)
with p < 0.05 by waiting-time. For each case, the p-value of statistical test is
denoted by ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.

D. Relationship Among the DFA Exponent, Life-Time, and
Waiting-Time
To examine the relationship among the three metrics, the
correlations between the topographies of the DFA exponent and
of life-time, of the DFA exponent and of waiting-time, and of
life-time and of waiting-time were calculated for each subject at
each state in both alpha band and beta band, respectively. Results
show that the correlations among the three metrics are generally
positive, and the correlation between life-time and waiting-time
is greater than the correlations between the DFA exponent and

SUN et al.: ABNORMAL DYNAMICS OF EEG OSCILLATIONS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS ON MULTIPLE TIME SCALES

Fig. 7. Correlations among the three metrics in alpha band and beta band.
(a)–(c) Correlations R (DFA, T life ) between the DFA exponent and life-time
at resting state with eyes closed, resting state with eyes open, and watching video. (d)–(f) Correlations R (DFA, T w a it ) between the DFA exponent
and waiting-time at the three states. (g)–(i) Correlations R (T life , T w a it ) between life-time and waiting-time at the three states, respectively. The results are
presented by mean and standard deviation across schizophrenia (Sz) patients
and across healthy controls (Ctrl), respectively. For each case, t-test is performed
for patients and controls, and p value is denoted by ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, and
∗∗∗ p < 0.001.

life-time, and between the DFA exponent and waiting-time (see
Fig. 7).
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, we utilized the DFA exponent, life-time, and
waiting-time to characterize the amplitude dynamics of EEG
oscillations for schizophrenia patients and healthy controls on
both long (1–20 s) and short time scales (≤1 s), respectively. We
observed abnormal dynamics of EEG oscillations in alpha and
beta bands, on both long and short time scales, providing new
evidence of neuronal oscillation dysfunction in schizophrenia
patients. In particular, compared with healthy controls, in alpha band, schizophrenia patients have larger DFA exponents
(implying greater LRTCs), larger life-time (indicating longer
oscillation bursts), and larger waiting time at some clustered
channels in the left temporo-parietal area at the state of watching video; in beta band, schizophrenia patients have smaller
DFA exponents at some clustered channels in the left frontotemporal area and in the right occipital area at resting state with
eyes open, and have smaller life-time and waiting-time at some
clustered channels in the occipital area at resting state with eyes
open.
As far as we know, only one previous study [35] has examined
the amplitude dynamics of neuronal oscillation of schizophrenia
patients by DFA with EEG signals recorded at resting state with
eyes closed, though some studies have reported abnormalities
of amplitude dynamics of neuronal oscillations in other brain

1761

related diseases like Alzheimer disease [24] and depression [37].
In alpha band, our results indicated that patients had smaller (but
not significant) average DFA exponents at almost all channels
compared with controls at resting state with eyes closed [see
Fig. 3(a)]; while in the study [35], patients were shown to have
significantly smaller DFA exponents at channels in the temporal
and occipital areas compared with controls. In beta band, we
found that patients had significantly smaller DFA exponents at
five prefrontal channels and four occipital channels at resting
state with eyes closed [see Fig. 5(a)]; while in the study [35],
patients had smaller DFA exponents at channels not only in the
left frontal and the occipital areas but also in some other areas.
In addition, our study shows that the DFA exponent in beta band
had significant difference at some clustered channels in the left
fronto-temporal area and the right occipital area at resting state
with eyes open [see Fig. 5(b)]. Our results are partially consistent
with the results reported in study [35].
A larger DFA exponent implies a stronger LRTC in EEG oscillation amplitude. Recently, studies revealed that the LRTCs
in eye-closed resting state EEG could exhibit pronounced increase from childhood to adolescence in both alpha band and
beta band [25], while schizophrenia patients would have decreased LRTCs compared with healthy controls at resting state
with eyes closed [35]. In our study, in beta band, compared
with controls, schizophrenia patients have significantly smaller
frontal and occipital LRTCs at resting state with eyes closed
[see Fig. 5(a)], and have significantly decreased LRTCs at some
left fronto-temporal and the right occipital channels at resting
state with eyes open [see Fig. 5(b)]. Therefore, we anticipate
that the decreased LRTCs in schizophrenia patients at resting
state may reflect the anormaly of neuronal oscillations during
the maturation of brain. Future investigations are needed to test
this hypothesis and reveal the underlying mechanisms.
On short time scale (≤1 s), schizophrenia patients have significantly increased life-time and waiting-time of EEG alpha
oscillation at some clustered channels in the temporo-parietal
area at watching video [see Fig. 3(f) and (i)]. This cortical area
has been shown to relate to mnemonic operations in healthy
subjects [24]. The increased life-time implies that patients have
larger probability of longer alpha oscillation bursts compared
with healthy controls, which may reflect a reduced cognitive
function in memory in schizophrenia patients. One study has
also reported altered life-time of alpha neuronal oscillations in
Alzheimer disease in the temporo-parietal area [24], while, so
far, no study on neuronal oscillation dynamics has been reported
for schizophrenia patients based on life-time and waiting-time.
ANOVA analysis shows that all three metrics have no significant group effect at any channel in alpha band, while DFA
exponent has main group effect in the left fronto-temporal area
and the right occipital area, and life-time and waiting-time have
significant main group effect in the occipital area in beta band.
Most of the channels with significant difference in beta band [see
Fig. 5(b), (e), and (h)] are consistent with those channels with
main group effect [see Fig. 2(b), (e), and (h)], which implies that
main group effect mainly contributed by the difference at resting
state with eyes open. Note that almost all channels have main
state effect in alpha band and many channels (no less than 16)

1762

have main state effect in beta band for the three metrics, which
may imply that neuronal dynamic difference between patients
and controls by the three metrics is dependent on subject’s state.
In addition, the correlations among the three metrics are
generally positive, and the correlation between life-time and
waiting-time is greater than the correlations between the DFA
exponent and life-time, and between the DFA exponent and
waiting-time (see Fig. 7). This is not surprising, as life-time and
waiting-time are defined by the same threshold and reflect the
amplitude dynamics of EEG oscillation on the same short time
scale, while the DFA exponent quantifies dynamics of EEG oscillation on the longer time scale. In addition, the correlations
vary in a relative large range across both schizophrenia patients
and normal controls, and the three metrics show significant difference between patients and controls at the state of watching
video [see Fig. 7(c), (f), and (i)] but no significant difference
at the other two states. Together with the main state effect in
alpha band and beta band revealed by ANOVA analysis, these
results imply that these three metrics reflect the dynamics of
EEG oscillation from different aspects on short and long time
scales.
We also observed altered amplitude dynamics of EEG theta
oscillation in the prefrontal area of schizophrenia patients on
both long and short time scales at both resting state with eyes
open and the state of watching video. In this study, the artifacts induced by vertical and horizontal eyes movements and
blinks have been removed offline by an ocular correction algorithm [31], and the epochs containing large ocular artifacts in
the preprocessed EEG signals were further excluded by visually inspection. However, the estimations of the DFA exponent,
life-time, and waiting-time require long continuous EEG oscillation; thus, EEG epochs with relative small artifacts may not
be excluded, so as to avoid too many small epochs in the final selected EEG data. Considering that ocular artifacts mainly
affect the delta and theta oscillations of EEG signals in the prefrontal area, the results in the prefrontal area in theta band may
be affected by ocular artifacts, and we would not present these
results here.
In this study, to deal with the potential problem of multiple comparisons, we evaluated the probability of no less than a
certain number of channels with p < 0.05 among all 59 channels by binomial distribution, following the strategy in studies [24], [35]. For example, in Fig. 5(b), the probability of no
less than 15 channels with p < 0.05 is 9.56e–7, implying rather
small likelihood to happen by chance. We also performed multiple comparisons correction by false discover rate (FDR). However, results show that only life-time and waiting-time have significant difference between patients and controls only at channel Oz in beta band at resting state with eyes open. It should be
noted that FDR-based significance threshold could be more rigid
in the case of a larger number of comparisons (59 channels in
this study), because it is inversely proportional to the number
of multiple comparisons [38]. By the strategy in [24] and [35],
we could infer that the clustered channels with p < 0.05 in
Figs. 3(c), (f), (i), and 5(b) and (h) are with small likelihood to
happen by chance, which is also supported by the significant

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

difference between the two groups by the means of the metric
at selected clustered channels.
Cumulative studies have reported power-law scaling in the
amplitude dynamics of neuronal oscillations or the population
size of neuronal activity, such as the scaling of detrended fluctuation F (τ ) ∝ τ λ to the length of local detrending window
τ [24], [27], [35], the scaling of probability distribution of neuronal avalanches to their time duration or size [19], [26], [27].
Recently, one neuronal network model has shown that powerlaw scaling of neuronal avalanches and oscillations can emerge
from balanced excitation/inhibition on multiple time scales [39].
In addition, human behavior in a cognitive task also demonstrated power-law scaling, which is correlated to the temporal
scaling (by the DFA exponent), and the avalanche dynamics (by
life-time and size) of neuronal oscillations extracted from the
corresponding MEG/EEG signals [27]. As power-law scaling
is a hallmark of critical state, these convergent findings support the viewpoint that the brain operates near a critical state.
Theoretically, a brain near a critical state may operate in a flexible and adaptive manner for information transfer, processing,
and storage [40], [41]. In this study, the means of the DFA exponents across patients and across controls at all channels are no
less than 0.59 [see Figs. 3(a)–(c) and 5(a)–(c)] at all three states,
which means that LRTCs of neuronal oscillations are preserved,
supporting that the brains of schizophrenia patients would still
operate near critical state.
Schizophrenia is heterogeneous, and its clinical outcome is
variable. Recently, studies have shown that specifically designed
cognitive training for schizophrenia patients could affect the
dynamics of brain oscillations [42], and improve a behavioral
deficit in reality monitoring and its underlying neuronal dysfunction [43], which suggest that the dynamics of neuronal oscillation merits further investigations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Tandon, M. S. Keshavan, and H. A. Nasrallah, “Schizophrenia, “just
the facts”: What we know in 2008: Part 1: overview,” Schizophrenia Res.,
vol. 100, pp. 4–19, Mar. 2008.
[2] R. Tandon, H. A. Nasrallah, and M. S. Keshavan, “Schizophrenia, “just
the facts” 4. Clinical features and conceptualization,” Schizophrenia Res.,
vol. 110, pp. 1–23, May 2009.
[3] M. J. Minzenberg and C. S. Carter, “Developing treatments for impaired
cognition in schizophrenia,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 16, pp. 35–42, Jan.
2012.
[4] A. Demirtas-Tatlidede, C. Freitas, J. R. Cromer, L. Safar, D. Ongur,
W. S. Stone, L. J. Seidman, J. D. Schmahmann, and A. Pascual-Leone,
“Safety and proof of principle study of cerebellar vermal theta burst stimulation in refractory schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia Res., vol. 124, pp. 91–
100, Dec. 2010.
[5] Y. Levkovitz, L. Rabany, E. V. Harel, and A. Zangen, “Deep transcranial magnetic stimulation add-on for treatment of negative symptoms and
cognitive deficits of schizophrenia: A feasibility study,” Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol., vol. 14, pp. 991–996, Aug. 2011.
[6] T. R. Insel, “Rethinking schizophrenia,” Nature, vol. 468, pp. 187–193,
Nov. 2010.
[7] P. J. Uhlhaas and W. Singer, “Neuronal dynamics and neuropsychiatric
disorders: Toward a translational paradigm for dysfunctional large-scale
networks,” Neuron, vol. 75, pp. 963–980, Sep. 2012.
[8] M. P. van den Heuvel, R. C. Mandl, C. J. Stam, R. S. Kahn, and
H. E. Hulshoff Pol, “Aberrant frontal and temporal complex network
structure in schizophrenia: A graph theoretical analysis,” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 30, pp. 15915–15926, Nov. 2010.

SUN et al.: ABNORMAL DYNAMICS OF EEG OSCILLATIONS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS ON MULTIPLE TIME SCALES

[9] M. E. Lynall, D. S. Bassett, R. Kerwin, P. J. McKenna, M. Kitzbichler,
U. Muller, and E. Bullmore, “Functional connectivity and brain networks
in schizophrenia,” J. Neurosci., vol. 30, pp. 9477–9487, Jul. 2010.
[10] G. Repovs, J. G. Csernansky, and D. M. Barch, “Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings,” Biol. Psychiatry,
vol. 69, pp. 967–973, May 2011.
[11] M. P. van den Heuvel and R. S. Kahn, “Abnormal brain wiring as a pathogenetic mechanism in schizophrenia,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 70, pp. 1107–
1108, Dec. 2011.
[12] S. J. Luck, D. H. Mathalon, B. F. O’Donnell, M. S. Hamalainen,
K. M. Spencer, D. C. Javitt, and P. J. Uhlhaas, “A roadmap for the development and validation of event-related potential biomarkers in schizophrenia
research,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 70, pp. 28–34, Jul. 2011.
[13] S. I. Dimitriadis, N. A. Laskaris, A. Tzelepi, and G. Economou, “Analyzing functional brain connectivity by means of commute times: A new
approach and its application to track event-related dynamics,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1302–1309, May 2012.
[14] A. C. De Silva, N. C. Sinclair, and D. Liley, “Limitations in the rapid
extraction of evoked potentials using parametric modeling,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1462–1471, May 2012.
[15] H. Wang and D. Xu, “Comprehensive common spatial patterns with temporal structure information of EEG data: Minimizing nontask related EEG
component,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2496–2505,
Sep. 2012.
[16] O. van der Stelt and A. Belger, “Application of electroencephalography to
the study of cognitive and brain functions in schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia
Bull., vol. 33, pp. 955–970, Jul. 2007.
[17] G. Buzsaki and A. Draguhn, “Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks,”
Science, vol. 304, pp. 1926–1929, Jun. 2004.
[18] M. A. Whittington, H. J. Faulkner, H. C. Doheny, and R. D. Traub, “Neuronal fast oscillations as a target site for psychoactive drugs,” Pharmacol.
Therapeutics, vol. 86, pp. 171–190, May 2000.
[19] D. Plenz and T. C. Thiagarajan, “The organizing principles of neuronal
avalanches: Cell assemblies in the cortex?” Trends Neurosci., vol. 30,
pp. 101–110, Mar. 2007.
[20] T. Petermann, T. C. Thiagarajan, M. A. Lebedev, M. A. Nicolelis,
D. R. Chialvo, and D. Plenz, “Spontaneous cortical activity in awake
monkeys composed of neuronal avalanches,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,
vol. 106, pp. 15921–15926, Sep. 2009.
[21] C. F. Latchoumane, I. H. Kim, H. Sohn, and J. Jeong, “Dynamical nonstationarity of resting EEGs in patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (AD/HD),” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 159–
163, Jan. 2013.
[22] B. Babadi, S. M. McKinney, V. Tarokh, and J. M. Ellenbogen, “DiBa: A
data-driven Bayesian algorithm for sleep spindle detection,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 483–493, Feb. 2012.
[23] K. Linkenkaer-Hansen, V. V. Nikouline, J. M. Palva, and R. J. Ilmoniemi,
“Long-range temporal correlations and scaling behavior in human
brain oscillations,” J. Neurosci., vol. 21, pp. 1370–1377, Feb.
2001.
[24] T. Montez, S. S. Poil, B. F. Jones, I. Manshanden, J. P. Verbunt, B. W.
van Dijk, A. B. Brussaard, A. van Ooyen, C. J. Stam, P. Scheltens, and K.
Linkenkaer-Hansen, “Altered temporal correlations in parietal alpha and
prefrontal theta oscillations in early-stage Alzheimer disease,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 106, pp. 1614–1619, Feb. 2009.
[25] D. J. Smit, E. J. de Geus, M. E. van de Nieuwenhuijzen, C. E. van
Beijsterveldt, G. C. van Baal, H. D. Mansvelder, D. I. Boomsma, and
K. Linkenkaer-Hansen, “Scale-free modulation of resting-state neuronal
oscillations reflects prolonged brain maturation in humans” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 31, pp. 13128–13136, Sep. 2011.
[26] J. M. Beggs and D. Plenz, “Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits,”
J. Neurosci., vol. 23, pp. 11167–11177, Dec. 2003.
[27] J. M. Palva, A. Zhigalov, J. Hirvonen, O. Korhonen, K. LinkenkaerHansen, and S. Palva, “Neuronal long-range temporal correlations and
avalanche dynamics are correlated with behavioral scaling laws,” Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 110, pp. 3585–3590, Feb. 2013.
[28] S. R. Kay, A. Fiszbein, and L. A. Opler, “The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia Bull., vol. 13,
pp. 261–276, 1987.
[29] M. Hamilton, “The assessment of anxiety states by rating,” Brit. J. Med.
Psychol., vol. 32, pp. 50–55, Mar. 1959.
[30] M. Hamilton, “The Hamilton rating scale for depression,” in Assessment
of Depression, N. Sartorius and T. Ban, Eds. Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer, 1986, pp. 143–152.

1763

[31] G. A. Miller, G. Gration, and C. M. Yee, “Generalized implementation
of an eye movement correction procedure,” Psychophysiology, vol. 25,
pp. 241–243, Mar. 1988.
[32] A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 134, pp. 9–21, Mar. 2004.
[33] J. Sun, X. Hong, and S. Tong, “Phase synchronization analysis of EEG signals: An evaluation based on surrogate tests,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2254–2263, Aug.
2012.
[34] C. K. Peng, S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Simons, H. E. Stanley, and
A. L. Goldberger, “Mosaic organization of DNA nucleotides,” Phys. Rev.
E, vol. 49, pp. 1685–1689, Feb. 1994.
[35] V. V. Nikulin, E. G. Jonsson, and T. Brismar, “Attenuation of long-range
temporal correlations in the amplitude dynamics of alpha and beta neuronal oscillations in patients with schizophrenia,” Neuroimage, vol. 61,
pp. 162–169, May 2012.
[36] M. Hollander and D. A. Wolfe, Nonparametric Statistical Methods, 2nd
ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1999.
[37] K. Linkenkaer-Hansen, S. Monto, H. Rytsala, K. Suominen, E. Isometsa,
and S. Kahkonen, “Breakdown of long-range temporal correlations in
theta oscillations in patients with major depressive disorder,” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 25, pp. 10131–10137, Nov. 2005.
[38] D. M. Groppe, T. P. Urbach, and M. Kutas, “Mass univariate analysis
of event-related brain potentials/fields I: A critical tutorial review,” Psychophysiology, vol. 48, pp. 1711–1725, Dec. 2011.
[39] S. S. Poil, R. Hardstone, H. D. Mansvelder, and K. Linkenkaer-Hansen,
“Critical-state dynamics of avalanches and oscillations jointly emerge
from balanced excitation/inhibition in neuronal networks,” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 32, pp. 9817–9823, Jul. 2012.
[40] J. M. Beggs and N. Timme, “Being critical of criticality in the brain,”
Front. Physiol., vol. 3, 163, Jun. 2012.
[41] D. R. Chialvo, “Emergent complex neural dynamics,” Nat. Phys., vol. 6,
pp. 744–750, Oct. 2010.
[42] T. Popov, B. Rockstroh, N. Weisz, T. Elbert, and G. A. Miller, “Adjusting
brain dynamics in schizophrenia by means of perceptual and cognitive
training,” PLoS One, vol. 7, e39051, 2012.
[43] K. Subramaniam, T. L. Luks, M. Fisher, G. V. Simpson, S. Nagarajan, and
S. Vinogradov, “Computerized cognitive training restores neural activity
within the reality monitoring network in schizophrenia,” Neuron, vol. 73,
pp. 842–853, Feb. 2012.

Junfeng Sun (M’10) received the B.S. degree in
electronic science and information systems and the
M.S. degree in acoustics from Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China, in 2002 and 2005, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in electronic and information engineering from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hung Hom, Hong Kong, in 2009.
He is an Assistant Professor of the Med-X Research Institute and School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China,
from March 2009 to present. His research interests include biomedical signal analysis and processing, neuroimaging, brain network
modeling, and their applications in stroke and mental disorder.

Yingying Tang received the B.S. degree and
the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in
2005 and 2010, respectively.
She was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, from 2011 to 2012 and in the University
of Nottingham in 2013. She is an Assistant Researcher of Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China. Her research interests include multimodality
neuroimaging fusion analysis and its applications in psychiatry disorders.

1764

Kelvin O. Lim, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

Jijun Wang received the B.S. degree of medicine
and meidcal doctor from Beijing University, Beijing,
China, in 1989, the M.S. degree of medicine from
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in
1994, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of the
Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan, in 2004.
He was a Visting Researcher in the University
of Nottingham and Massachusetts General Hospital from 2009 to 2010. He is currently a Psychiatric
Doctor at the rank of Professor in Shanghai Mental
Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine. He has pursued research in the fields of the neurobiological basis
and early intervention in early course schizophrenia for more than 20 years,
including electrophysiological techniques and repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulations.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Shanbao Tong (M’04–SM’10) received the B.S.
degree in radio technology from Xi’an Jiao Tong
University, Xi’an, China, in 1995, the M.S. degree
in turbine machine engineering, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 1998 and 2002,
respectively.
From 2000 to 2001, he was a Research Trainee in
the Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering Department, Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Biomedical Engineering Department, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, from 2002 to 2005. He is currently a Professor in
the School of Biomedical Engineering and Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University. His research interests include neural signal processing,
neurophysiology of brain injury, and cortical optical imaging.
Dr. Tong is an active Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, and a member of IEEE
EMBS Technical Committee on Neuroengineering.

Hui Li, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
Bin He (F’XX), photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.

