IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

1593

Dissecting Heart Failure Through the
Multiscale Approach of Systems Medicine
Linda Pattini∗ , Roberto Sassi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Sergio Cerutti, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Heart failure (HF) is a complex syndrome which can
be the exit of different etiologies which lead to a common clinical
picture. Treatment outcome is modest and new insights into pathophysiology are needed to improve effectively diagnosis, prognosis,
and therapy. As a complex disease, it can really benefit from the
new approach provided by molecular medicine where information
about the cell program can deeply change the patient management.
The comprehension of molecular mechanisms relies on new technologies which are able to provide data at the different levels of the
cell workflow. A proper processing of these data is as essential as
the generation of data itself, together with an integrative approach
able to exploit observations at different scales, starting from the
molecular levels up to an effective assessment of phenotype with
cardiovascular and systemic parameters. In this paper, evidences
concerning current understanding of HF, passing from one scale
to another, are reported, to underline how functional genomics
and systems biology perspective, fostered by the combination of
biotechnologies and bioinformatic methods, may transform the
concepts of diagnosis and, consequently, of treatment, toward the
fulfillment of the invoked patient-specific medicine.
Index Terms—Bioinformatics, biomedical signal processing,
functional genomics, heart failure (HF), multiscale data analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
EART failure (HF) is a complex syndrome consisting in
the inability of the heart to provide adequate blood flow
to meet the body’s metabolic needs, leading to clinical manifestations such as fatigue, breath shortness, diminished exercise
capacity, fluid retention.
In the U.S. more than 500 000 new HF cases are diagnosed
annually and lead approximately to 50 000 deaths per year. In
the western world, the prevalence of HF can be estimated at
1%–2% and, as concerns the cardiovascular field, it represents
the second most common diagnosis after hypertension [1], [2].
Moreover, with the greater longevity, prevalence, and incidence
are likely to increase.
Many different etiologies can lead to the onset of this syndrome which culminates in a common general clinical picture.

H

Manuscript received November 20, 2013; revised February 4, 2014; accepted
February 8, 2014. Date of publication February 24, 2014; date of current version
April 17, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ L. Pattini is with the Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, Milan 20133, Italy (e-mail: linda.pattini@
polimi.it).
R. Sassi is with the Department of Computer Science, Università degli Studi
di Milano, Crema 26013, Italy (e-mail: roberto.sassi@unimi.it).
S. Cerutti is with the Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, Milan 20133, Italy (e-mail: sergio.cerutti@polimi.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2307758

Fig. 1. Single gene mutations or cardiovascular diseases can trigger a
transcriptional reprogramming of cardiomyocytes which, although compensative, will lead to HF progression, from the asymptomatic stage to clinical
manifestations.

The essential cause of HF is attributed to a loss of function
of cardiomyocytes which reply to some stress and/or exceptional loading by reprogramming their gene expression, especially as concerns genes involved in metabolism, ions handling,
and the reuse of genes which are specific of the fetal development [3]. This physiological response may trigger a positive
feedback, overloading the cardiomyocytes leading eventually to
cardiac dysfunction, as outlined in Fig. 1. At the early stages
of disease progression, functional capacity of the patient is preserved through compensatory neurohormonal mechanisms as
the activation of the adrenergic nervous system, of the reninangiotensin-aldosterone system, the nonosmotic release of arginine vasopressin, the secretion of natriuretic peptides, endothelial hormones, nitric oxide, and cytokines [4], [5]. As a consequence, the myocardium develops hypertrophy and interstitial
fibrosis [6] due to alterations of the extracellular matrix, undergoing a remodeling process. The long-term activation of these
compensatory mechanisms, which initially are able to preserve
hemodynamic homeostasis, lead progressively to cardiac dilation and decrease of contractility till the “decompensated” stage
and the precipitation of HF symptoms.
Although the “neurohormonal model” can depict a convincing explanation of disease progression, a more detailed scenario
of the molecular landscape underlying HF is required to improve
the current therapeutic strategies.
The advent of molecular medicine can shed light on the fundamental mechanisms which lead to HF, exploiting the information
at the cellular level to understand the underlying mechanisms
of cardiomyopathy [7], [8], transforming the concepts of diagnosis and, consequently, of treatment, toward the so-called
personalized medicine. Indeed, the genomics and systems biology perspective fed by data produced by the new technologies
together with the development of adequate computational approaches, may provide new insights into HF pathophysiology
leading to new and more specific therapeutics.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

TABLE I
GENES LINKED TO INHERITED FORMS OF HEART FAILURE

II. GENETICS AND FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS
A. Inherited Forms of HF
Traditionally, genetic forms of HF are distinguished from the
so-called acquired forms. The former category encompasses familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
Genes whose mutations (see Table I) can cause these inherited
forms were found mainly by means of linkage analysis or candidate gene association studies on neurohormonal pathways and
encode proteins that have a role in generation and transmission
of contractile force (sarcomere proteins, cytoskeletal proteins,
desmosome proteins, lamin A/C protein, whose mutations are
the most frequent in DCM patients (with a percentage of 7.3%),
energy production (mitochondrial proteins), calcium handling,
transcription regulation [9].
However, it was observed that mutations in the same genes can
lead to different forms of familial cardiomyopathy [10], [11],
demonstrating that single mutations may be not specific and
completely explanatory of the phenotype and a more complex portrait is needed to characterize the triggered molecular
response.
B. Transcriptomics
What is apparent at a clinical level in the disease progression
(with signs as myocardium hypertrophy and interstitial fibrosis)
is actually the outcome of a reprogramming of gene expression, which represents the physiological response of myocytes

to stress conditions. So, a detailed analysis of the transcriptome
becomes of paramount importance to study and characterize the
myocardial tissue at the molecular level, unveiling genes and
pathways which are perturbed in inherited and acquired forms
of disease [12].
Starting from the beginning of the new century, gene expression studies have been presented aimed at the characterization of HF dysregulome [13], [14]. Tan et al. [15] compared
oligonucleotide microarrays-based profiles of eight failing (tissue extracted from the left-ventricle of explanted hearts of transplant recipients) and seven nonfailing (organ donors) human
hearts. The analysis allowed to identify a signature of differentially expressed genes in HF where atrial natriuretic factor
and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) were the most up-regulated
genes, consistently with the known biomarkers. And consistently with the known myocytes reversal to a fetal program,
α-actin was found down-regulated whereas myosin heavy
chain-β was found up-regulated. Due to the remodeling process, deregulation of genes encoding extra-cellular matrix
and cytoskeleton proteins, involving fibromudulin, t-plastin,
fibronectin and desmosome-associated, was reported together
with a significant increase of collagen types I and III responsible for myocardial tissue stiffness and deterioration. Moreover, genes involved in proteolysis and stress response, as
thrombospondin-4, were found up-regulated. Genes belonging
to metabolism pathways were differentially expressed, showing
an overall downregulation attributable to fatty acid metabolism
and an overexpression of genes involved in glucose metabolism.
Consistently with the known loss of cardiomyocytes in HF, a
downregulation of antiapoptotic genes emerged. Up-regulation
of two ligands of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 was
found significant; it is, indeed, considered a crucial regulator of
remodeling [6]; overexpression of TGF-β1 in transgenic mice
was shown to be causative of interstitial fibrosis and myocytes
hypertrophy.
Along with confirmations of known findings, gene expression
profiling improved the characterization of the genetic pathways
involved in the physiopathology, at least as the used experimental platform, which is now obsolete, allowed. Unsupervised
clustering techniques, specifically k-means algorithm, was used
to group gene expression profiles across the samples, based on
the assumption that genes that appear to be coregulated may
contribute to the same process and unveil novel relationships;
this allowed to override the univariate differential analysis and
group genes combining functional annotations and expression
patterns.
A hierarchical clustering algorithm was also applied to profiles across both the clinical samples and the genes identified
as significant in differential analysis, obtaining the reorganized
heatmap reported in Fig. 2, where healthy and pathological samples are correctly discriminated, confirming the informativeness
of the signature identified. Interestingly, the samples F3 and F5
which segregate away from the other pathological samples have
a different etiology: F5 was an inheritable form of HF and F3
cardiomyopathy was due to alcoholism.
Several studies on HF have been proposed based on gene
expression data of heart tissue but, due to obvious limitations,

PATTINI et al.: DISSECTING HEART FAILURE THROUGH THE MULTISCALE APPROACH OF SYSTEMS MEDICINE

1595

C. Genetics versus Genomics

Fig. 2. Gene expression profiles of nonfailing (NF) and failing (F) heart tissue
samples of the 103 differentially expressed genes identified. The color bar
indicates fold change [from Tan et al., 2000, ©PNAS].

murine models are widely used to characterize the physiopathology in terms of gene expression and regulation [16], [17]. Efforts
toward the integration of gene expression profiles with phenotypic information at the system level have been shown, for
example, with the identification of HF-associated genes correlated with clinical parameters such as pulmonary artery pressure
and ejection fraction [18]. As said, myocardial gene expression studies are very important to unveil the pathophysiology
mechanisms; on the other hand, for a disorder like HF, whose
nature is obviously systemic, peripheral blood transcriptomics
can provide important information, which can be applied at
different levels of patient management, from diagnosis, to prognosis, monitoring, and treatment personalization. Van Buren
et al. have recently identified a peripheral blood gene expression signature significantly associated with outcomes in HF
patients [19].
Still in peripheral blood, a signature of seven genes was recognized as a predictor of early stage (asymptomatic) HF, which can
be diagnosed only by echocardiography; such a result may represent a useful tool for large screening of population at risk [20].
Large-scale gene expression experiments are generally accomplished on samples representing a population of cells. Current approaches in transcriptomics (microarrays or RNA-seq)
rely on measurements of RNA molecules pooled from a large
number of cells. However, individual cells may exhibit a considerable heterogeneity in the expression of genes and their
protein products. Monitoring molecular abundances of many
distinct cells can unveil diversity of cell states and circuits and
inherent stochastic variation, improving our comprehension of
functional genomics both in physiology and in pathophysiology [21]. The acquisition of single cell spatial-temporal patterns has a great potential for data analytics and modeling and
offers great challenges on the technological side for developing
efficient experimental platforms along with adequate low-level
data processing [22]–[24].

Moving from genetics, with the analysis of the genomic sequences interindividual variability, to transcriptomics adds a
powerful layer of information. Processing expression data shows
that different initial events (as hypertension, myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease, single gene mutations) can lead to
a common response in terms of cell program and, at the same
time, can allow the identification of specific signatures able to
discriminate HF subtypes which would be indistinguishable at
the clinical level. Addressing the inherent heterogeneity of a
complex syndrome such as HF by means of molecular profiling
is an important challenge in molecular medicine. This approach,
for example, has already proven to be successful and is currently
widely applied in cancer genomics.
The study of the genomic program, with the characterization
of what the cell is really expressing and with the specification of
the molecular determinants involved in the disease progression,
is essential to reach a deep comprehension of the HF pathophysiology, allowing new target discovery and etiological (and
consequently therapeutic) subtypes identification.
Looking at sporadic HF as a complex disease, it can be
worth studying the contribution of genetic risk factors which
can modulate the risk of developing acquired HF [25]. Modern high throughput technologies (genomewide SNP detection
and deep sequencing platforms) allow to genotype subjects very
efficiently providing the data to derive associations between alleles and pathology at a genome-wide level. In this direction,
some studies have been presented. However, it can be observed
that many of these associations have not been replicated and
the ORs are rather low [26]. Moreover, sometimes the mutation
identified belongs to a genomic position which is not clearly
characterized from a functional point of view.
However, even if these mutations do not cause disease, they
may modulate HF risk (see Fig. 3), progression and therapeutics
responsiveness. Moreover, their identification can pinpoint the
different functional elements of the genome which are involved
in the myocardial response to overload, influencing the balance
between a compensatory response and a progressive limitation
of cardiac function.
Actually, genetic forms of HF, where single gene mutations
are able to trigger the development of the disease, and acquired
forms of HF (due, for example, to hypertension, myocardial
infarction, etc.) lead to the same cardiac response whose fate and
severity can be modulated by individual variability in genomic
sequences.
It is interesting to note that many genes whose mutations
are known causes of HF do not show deregulated expression
levels in failing hearts. This contraposition between genetics
and genomics might be solved hypothesizing that some genetic
factors may trigger the overload of the myocardium, whose response determines changes in the expression of different genes.
In this more comprehensive perspective, even the classification
in inherited and acquired forms could be overcome.
This has been already observed discussing the general lack
of overlap between genes harboring mutations and dysregulated
genes and its possible explanation in the gene network context,

1596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 3. Genomic position and gene region of variants which have been associated with the risk of incident heart failure [65], visualized through NCBI dbGaP
Data browser (NHGRI source).

arguing that mutated genes may be considered as upstream determinants while genes, whose expression is altered, are in general
downstream effectors in the economy of the perturbed pathway.
D. Opportunities for Gene Expression Regulation
As seen, the elicitation of the functional elements of the genomic cell program and their mutual interactions in a systems
biology perspective is indispensable. New technologies along
with adequate bioinformatic approaches are essential and may
help in redefining [27] HF in the postgenomic era. The study of
the genome along with progresses in transcriptomics revealed
that only a small portion of it is transcribed into protein coding mRNAs in vertebrates. However, the human transcriptome
involves almost the 90% of the genome due to many different
types of noncoding RNAs, whose classification is still unclear.
Thus, complexity of higher organisms must be searched for not
in the limited number of protein coding genes (about 22 000 for
humans, but more than 20 000 also for the nematode Caenorhabditis Elegans) but rather in their fine regulation in time and space
(different tissues) which noncoding RNAs and mechanisms of
transcript processing (alternative splicing) contribute to.
1) MicroRNAs (miRNAs): miRNAs are important gene expression regulatory elements and as such their role in the pathogenesis and progression of cardiac disease and HF has been
recently emerging [28]. MiRNAs are small noncoding RNAs
(about 22 nucleotides in length) that inhibit expression of target genes by sequence-specific binding to the 3 untranslated
region of messenger RNA, determining its degradation or translational repression. MiRNA genes may be intergenic or intronic
and are generally subject to the same transcriptional regulation
of protein coding genes. Their transcripts (pri-miRNAs) are
processed and folded in a 70–100 nucleotides long hairpin precursor (pre-miRNA), which is then exported to the cytoplasm
and cut to obtain two separate strands: the mature miRNA and
its complementary version which is often nonfunctional and led
to degradation. The nucleotides 2–8 at the 5 end of the mature

miRNAs are referred to as “seed,” as this portion of the sequence
is fundamental in target recognition (an example is reported in
Fig. 4). More than 2000 miRNAs are currently known in the
human genome (as shown in the public dedicated repository
miRBase) and are estimated to regulate more than half of protein coding genes. It is worth underlying that one transcript may
contain binding sites for different miRNAs which act in combination and one single miRNA may target hundreds of genes
influencing entire pathways.
The modulation of gene expression accomplished by miRNAs
has been revealed as fundamental in cell development and tissue
specification, indeed most targets belong to genes involved in
cell-specific processes and, conversely, housekeeping genes are
less subject to miRNAs action.
Differential expression of miRNAs can result in the consequent altered expression of direct (or indirect) targets, but it has
also been suggested that they can exert a “buffering” function
limiting excessive fluctuations of their targets (and conferring
robustness to the cellular program) thanks to ad hoc positions
in the gene circuitry.
Also the functional characterization of miRNAs within the
human genome requires the development and the application
of adequate bioinformatic approaches. The comprehension of
the rules for miRNA-directed targeting of mRNAs relies on
sequence analysis accomplished through pattern recognition
methods, comparative genomics to identify phylogenetically
conserved sites, structural accessibility analysis of the mRNA
molecule, but also on gene expression data integration and systems biology approaches to study interactions on small and large
scale. The development of target prediction strategies is still a
major challenge in bioinformatics and computational genomics.
Current predictors have a low level of accuracy and show a limited overlap in their results.
So far, many miRNAs (and many of their potential targets),
which are involved in cardiac disease and HF development have
been identified [28]. Experimental evidence of miRNA dysregulation was provided in relation to the different pathological

PATTINI et al.: DISSECTING HEART FAILURE THROUGH THE MULTISCALE APPROACH OF SYSTEMS MEDICINE

1597

Fig. 4. (a) Secondary structure of the miRNA-208 a precursor (as retrievable from the miRBase database) is reported as an example; the typical hairpin structure
is depicted, its processing leads to the formation of the mature form of the miRNA which is single strand; the seed is evidenced; (b) gene targets have a binding
site in their transcript, typically in the 3 UTR, which permits the binding through (partial and nonexact) sequence complementarity; the binding site is often
phylogenetically conserved, as shown for the gene CHD9, predicted target of miR-208 a, for which a multialignment across different species is reported.

Fig. 5. Epigenetic modifications of DNA influence gene expression. DNA methylation: methylated cytosines in CG dinucleotides correspond to regions which
are associated to transcriptional repression. Histone modifications (as methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, etc.) can affect gene transcription; exemplificative
schemas for condensed or relaxed, transcriptionally active DNA regions [from Baccarelli et al. 2012, reprinted with permission of Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab
Care].

processes characterizing HF, such as hypertrophy, fibrosis, remodeling, calcium handling changes.
For example, the first study reporting on miRNA expression
showed that the overexpression of a combination of miRNAs
upregulated in two murine models of HF was sufficient to induce
hypertrophy in cardiomyocytes [29].
MiR-208 represents another interesting example, it is expressed exclusively in cardiac tissue and its silencing in
MiR-208 knock-out mice resulted in a protective effect against
pressure overload-induced hypertrophy and, conversely, cardiac
specific overexpression of miR-208 determined a hypertrophic
response. Successively, the therapeutic silencing of miR-208 a
via subcutaneous delivery of a specific oligomer able to establish

specific binding was shown to be effective in rats, preventing
remodeling and myocyte functional degeneration [30]. This is
an important result showing the potential of miRNAs as novel
therapeutic targets for heart.
MiRNAs are present not only in the cytoplasm but also outside cells, in body fluids. The expression of miRNAs circulating in plasma, whose presence was demonstrated in a seminal
paper by Mitchell et al. [31], has been emerging as a potential source of biomarkers for cardiovascular disease [32], [33].
Indeed, they are likely to reflect cell activation and tissue injury
and, intriguingly, they could contribute to intercell signaling
through a selective release into the systemic circulation, but origin and function remains poorly understood. They are known

1598

to be shed into the extracellular environment in microvesicles
(exosomes, microparticles, apoptotic bodies), but the existence
of plasma miRNAs in the fraction devoid of microvesicles was
demonstrated and explored in several studies. In very recent
cardiovascular research, circulating miRNAs have been investigated to gain insights into pathological mechanisms of many
diseases as myocardial injury, coronary artery disease, diabetes,
and hypertension. As concerns HF, for example, the expression
of miR-423-5p [34] was found overexpressed in plasma of patients compared to controls subjects; and, successively, Goren
et al. [35] showed that the expression level of a combination of
four serum miRNAs could discriminate HF patients compared
with healthy subjects. This signature, consisting of upregulated
miRNAs with high statistical significance, even if with limited
fold change, was shown to correlate with clinical parameters
as serum BNP levels and QRS complex width, highlighting a
multiscale crosstalk.
2) Long ncRNAs: Among the noncoding RNAs, a novel
class of transcripts has been recently emerging for its potential in
gene expression regulation: long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs),
whose length is greater than 200 nucleotides, are able to interfere with gene expression through various mechanisms, which
still remain largely unknown, at pre- and posttranscriptional
level.
The recent transcriptomics studies, thanks to microarrays and
especially to next generation sequencing technologies, revealed
that lncRNAs are modulated during development and have a
key role in cell fate specification. Given their importance in
gene transcription program, lncRNAs may play a role in pathophysiology of cardiac disease and specifically in HF [36]. The
lncRNA Braveheart, for example, was shown very recently to
be essential for cardiovascular lineage commitment [37] and
it was found downregulated in plasma of mice in which HF
had been induced by isoproterenol infusion. This animal model,
which reproduces the cardiotoxic effects of chronic activation of
the sympathetic system, was used, indeed, in a recent transcriptome analysis that showed also a unique pattern of circulatory
lncRNAs. Specifically, dysregulated lncRNAs in plasma or
whole blood were almost double than in heart tissue; moreover,
the expression of lncRNAs in heart, whole blood and normal
plasma was anticorrelated with transcript length, as expected,
whereas this did not hold in HF plasma [38]. These results are
suggestive of a potential role of circulatory lncRNAs, as for circulatory miRNAs, in pathogenesis, development and prognosis
in HF. Then, a different murine model where pressure overload
was surgically (through transaortic constrinction) provoked to
induce hypertrophy and subsequently HF, showed the dysregulation of 15 heart tissue lncRNAs [17]. Another intriguing example of lncRNAs action is represented also by the transcript of
the gene Kcnq1, which encodes a potassium channel subunit: an
lncRNA is contained in one intron able to modulate the expression of the host gene, as demonstrated by Korostowski et al. [39].
3) Epigenomics: Opportunities of regulation are carried out
by the cell also at the level of DNA structural organization.
DNA of eukaryotic cells, indeed, is highly condensed in the
nucleus to arrange the entire genome sequence. DNA wraps

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

around nucleosomes, complexes of eight histone proteins, as a
wire around bobbins. This combination of DNA and proteins,
known as chromatin, can exhibit modulated condensation levels:
briefly, an open chromatin structure (euchromatin) corresponds
to a genomic region which contains expressed genes, whereas a
tightly packed conformation (heterochromatin) corresponds to
a genomic region which is transcriptionally inactive since it is
not exposed to the transcription factors (see Fig. 5).
DNA methylation at CpG dinucletotides and histone modifications are processes that influence the DNA structure and,
notably, they are also signals which can be acquired, thanks
to the new technologies, and processed to add a dimension to
the molecular profiling of regulatory mechanisms. These kind
of heritable phenomena which act on the genome, altering the
packaging but not the sequence, are referred to as epigenomics.
Recent studies show that epigenetic mechanisms may play a
role in cardiac hypertrophy and failure. For example, Movassagh et al. showed in their recent papers the existence of specific
patterns of DNA methylation in human HF which correlate with
the expression of genes involved in angiogenesis as PECAM1,
ARHGAP24, and AMOTL2 [40] and also found a significant
difference of trimethylation of lysine 36 in histone 3 in end-stage
HF compared to control subjects [41].
It has been demonstrated also that hypertrophy can be induced
by histone acetyltransferase activity that causes the overexpression of the transcription factor CREB and that it is influenced
also by the interference of hyston acetylation with sarcomeric
genes [42].
Very recently, two genes with differential DNA methylation
patterns between DCM patients and controls were identified.
They have been studied through silencing of their orthologous
in zebrafish; this led to a reduced ventricular contractility and
subsequent HF, validating the functional role of these genes in
the disease development [43].
III. PROTEOMICS AND METABOLOMICS
If functional genomics delineates the cell program fascinatingly and powerfully going to the upstream phenotype determinants, proteomics technologies must be applied to assess the
actual presence and the abundance of the gene products. They
allow to cope with the further level of complexity represented
by the proteome where co- and post-translational modification
events amplify dramatically the number of proteins compared
to the number of genes. Many studies concerning cardiac proteomics have been carried out using 2-D gel-based approaches
(2-DE) in which proteins are separated along two orthogonal
dimensions according to charge and to relative molecular mass
and spots of interest are identified by means of mass spectrometry (MS). These 2-D maps need dedicated software for
low-level quantification, differential analysis and classification
approaches [44]. Due to several limitations in terms of sensitivity and dynamics, gel-free, MS-based proteomics, with its different platforms, has become widely applied. Peptides obtained
through sample digestion are separated according to the m/z
ratio producing spectra (single-stage spectra for the so-called

PATTINI et al.: DISSECTING HEART FAILURE THROUGH THE MULTISCALE APPROACH OF SYSTEMS MEDICINE

1599

Fig. 6. Example of an LC–MS map: spectra obtained coupling MS (m/z
domain) with LC (retention time domain).

peptide mass fingerprinting or double-stage spectra for tandem
MS implementations) which require adequate computational
techniques, also exploiting signal processing methods [45],
which are in continuous evolution, to recover the protein content.
A Human Proteomics Organization project, through the effort
of an international consortium, has led to the identification, by
means of MS-based proteomics, of 3020 proteins annotated as
involved in cardiovascular functions; a subset of them (7%) represents a collection of potential marker for HF and cardiac tissue
remodeling [46], [47].
The protein expression profiling, performed through shotgun
proteomics [tandem MS coupled with liquid chromatography
(LC), see an example of LC-MS map in Fig. 6.], of a mouse
model of DCM, was proposed by Isserlin et al. [48] comparing cardiac tissue of wild type and transgenic mice at three
different times of disease progression [early-stage (8 wk), midstage (16 wk), and end-stage (24 wk)]. The time course experiment allowed to identify many proteins whose expression was
dysregulated with HF progression: apoptosis and the MAPK
(mitogen-activated protein kinase) cascade were the most significant perturbed pathways.
An interesting study based on 2-DE followed by LC–MS/MS
identification, comparing left ventricular tissue lysates of failing and nonfailing human hearts, showed a specific pattern in
membrane microdomains for failing hearts [49]; in Fig. 7, the
reference gel image is reported along with the indication of
differentially expressed spots.
A further complement to proteomic strategies is represented
by metabolomics which investigates the presence of metabolites as fingerprint of the reactions actually occurring in the
system. Also at this level of the information flow, there are evidences about the chance to identify novel biomarkers for HF.
In Fig. 8, two examples of NMR spectra from plasma samples
are reported, one for an HF patient and one for a control subject
along with the exit of OPLS-DA, which displays the level of
discrimination between affected and healthy subjects; the variable importance can then provide the indication about the more
discriminant metabolites [50].

Fig. 7. Analysis, through 2-D gels followed by LC–MS/MS identification, of
membrane microdomains isolated form left ventricular tissue of failing and
nonfailing hearts. Differentially expressed spots are evidenced (from Banfi
et al. 2006, reprinted with permission of Proetomics).

Fig. 8. Examples of NMR spectra are reported for plasma samples of a healthy
control and an HF subject; informativeness of metabolomic spectra assessed
through application of OPLS–DA to the collection of samples: score plots show
a clear discrimination of healthy (circles) and diseased subjects (squares) (from
Wang et al., 2013, reprinted with permission of Molecular Biosystems).

IV. HEART RATE VARIABILITY (HRV) AND HF
As concerns phenotype assessed at the system level, HRV is
a noninvasive quantitative marker of autonomic activity [51],
which is derived from the interbeats series in the ECG (RR series). Interestingly, the regulations of the two main branches
of the autonomic nervous system are reflected differently

1600

Fig. 9. HRV of a normal (panel a) and HF patient (b). The RR series (right)
clearly evidences an increased heart rate and a reduced variability. The power
spectral density (left) permits a finer analysis: HRV reduction is more pronounced in the low frequency range (LF) for this HF patient.

in the RR series [52]. The efferent vagal activity is a
major contributor to oscillations having period of about 3–8
beats (the so-called high-frequency range, HF), while sympathetic modulation acts on longer time scales of about 10–30
beats (the low-frequency range, LF). A quantitative assessment
through HRV analysis proved immediately effective [53]–[55]
and a general reduction of HRV was found in HF patients,
in apparent contradiction with the increased concentration of
norepinephrine in plasma (a measure of sympathetic activation) reported. Possibly, overexpression of tumor necrosis factor and its receptors, which is typical of HF patients, could
lead to a loss of adrenergic responsiveness and a subsequent
HRV reduction [56].
Of the several traditional time and frequency methods developed to study HRV [51], many are linked to all-cause mortality
(mostly pump failure) in HF patients, even when corrections
for other clinical factors are included. In particular, SDNN (the
standard deviation of all normal RR intervals [51]) and SDANN
(the standard deviation of the averages of normal RR intervals
in all 5-min segments of the entire recording [51]), which quantify global HRV variability, and the power in the ultra- and very
low frequency band (oscillations with frequency smaller than
0.04 Hz) were found to be independent predictor of mortality [57]. On the contrary, measures describing diminished vagal
modulation only, like the power in the high-frequency range,
pNN50 (the number of pairs of adjacent normal RR intervals
differing by more than 50 ms in the entire recording, divided by
the total number of normal RR intervals [51]) or RMSSD (the
square root of the mean of the sum of the squares of differences
between adjacent normal RR intervals [51]), were generally
found to bring no additional information.
More interestingly, while an increased sympathetic activity
would be expected to produce a relative predominance of LF os-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

cillations, both increased and reduced LF power were found to
be associated with an increased risk of cardiac death. However,
only a reduced LF power, derived from short-term measures,
was consistently found to be an independent predictor of sudden cardiac death in HF patients. In particular, the predictive
power was remarkable at night [58] or during controlled breathing [59], thus removing the potential confounding role of abnormal breathing patterns in the same frequency band. Therefore,
despite a significant sympathoexcitation, in HF patients HRV
variability is reduced, with low LF power (see Fig. 9), possibly due either to reduced responsiveness to chronic sympathetic
overactivity [59] or, to a parasympathetic withdrawal.
While LF content in controlled breathing conditions might
be the best contribution offered by traditional methods of HRV
analysis to sudden death risk stratification, more complex signal processing approaches led to further advances. Such techniques are often termed “nonlinear” either to distinguish them
from “linear” spectral analysis, but also as they drew largely
from nonlinear dynamical systems theory and nonstationary
stochastic processes analysis. Metrics influenced by variability’s changes over long time scales proved to be substantially
overlapping with clinical and functional risk factors, or with
traditional indexes [58], in the prediction of all-cause mortality [60]. On the contrary short-term HRV nonlinear indexes
indeed added prognostic information [57]. In particular, the
short-term scaling exponent, obtained from detrended fluctuation analysis, was shown to be an independent predictor of
cardiac mortality [61], more effective than traditional parameters. Also Poincaré (recurrence) plot analysis contributed in
providing a marker of increased risk of both all-cause and sudden death which was independent from norepinephrine plasma
concentration [62]. However, its computation was based on a
qualitative visual evaluation of the Poincaré plot, and further
quantitative analysis needs to be performed. Finally, heart rate
turbulence, a nonlinear metric of baroreflex sensitivity reflecting
the severity of HF [63], was also shown to be an independent
predictor of mortality in HF patients [64].
V. CONCLUSION
The huge amount of information provided by new highthroughput technologies at different scales requires the development of adequate analytical approaches to effectively exploit
the availability of ever more complex “omics” data. Appropriate computational methods are essential both for the lowlevel analysis, to correctly process raw data, and for data mining and modeling. HF can be investigated across different
levels of information from molecular profiling, disentangling
the networks of key functional elements, to clinical phenotype, assessed with proper indexes at the cardiovascular and
systemic level.
The integration of information from different ontologies is
essential to make sense of complexity. More holistic models
reconciling molecular biology with physiology in a systems
biology perspective could really improve HF diagnosis and therapeutic opportunities.

PATTINI et al.: DISSECTING HEART FAILURE THROUGH THE MULTISCALE APPROACH OF SYSTEMS MEDICINE

REFERENCES
[1] C.-C. Liew and V. J. Dzau, “Molecular genetics and genomics of heart
failure,” Nat. Rev. Genet., vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 811–825, Nov. 2004.
[2] A. Mosterd and A. W. Hoes, “Clinical epidemiology of heart failure,”
Heart, vol. 93, no. 9, pp. 1137–1146, Sep. 2007.
[3] E. E. Creemers, A. A. Wilde, and Y. M. Pinto, “Heart failure: Advances
through genomics,” Nat. Rev. Genet., vol. 12, pp. 357–362, 2011.
[4] D. N. Tziakas, G. K. Chalikias and D. I. Xatseras, “Neurohormonal hypothesis in heart failure,” Hellenic J. Cardiol., vol. 44, pp. 195–205, 2003.
[5] D. L. Mann and M. R. Bristow, “Mechanisms and models in heart failure:
The biomechanical model and beyond,” Circulation, vol. 111, no. 21,
pp. 2837–2849, May 2005.
[6] E. E. Creemers and Y. M. Pinto, “Molecular mechanisms that control
interstitial fibrosis in the pressure-overloaded heart,” Cardiovasc. Res.,
vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 265–272, Feb. 2011.
[7] J. O. Mudd and D. A. Kass, “Tackling heart failure in the twenty-first
century,” Nature, vol. 451, no. 7181, pp. 919–928, Feb. 2008.
[8] I. J. Benjamin and M. D. Schneider, “Learning from failure: Congestive
heart failure in the postgenomic age,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 115, no. 3,
pp. 495–499, 2005.
[9] H. Morita, J. Seidman, and C. E. Seidman, “Genetic causes of human
heart failure,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 518–526, 2005.
[10] E. Carniel, M. R. G. Taylor, G. Sinagra, A. Di Lenarda, L. Ku, P. R. Fain,
M. M. Boucek, J. Cavanaugh, S. Miocic, D. Slavov, S. L. Graw, J. Feiger,
X. Z. Zhu, D. Dao, D. A. Ferguson, M. R. Bristow, and L. Mestroni,
“Alpha-myosin heavy chain: A sarcomeric gene associated with dilated
and hypertrophic phenotypes of cardiomyopathy,” Circulation, vol. 112,
no. 1, pp. 54–59, Jul. 2005.
[11] P. A. van der Zwaag, “One mutation fits all: Phospholamban R14del causes
both dilated cardiomyopathy and arrithmogenic right ventricular cardyomyopathy/dysplasia,” Circulation, vol. 122, A17663, 2010.
[12] J. H. Phan, C. F. Quo, and M. D. Wang, “Cardiovascular genomics: A
biomarker identification pipeline,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 809–822, Sep. 2012.
[13] J. Yang, C. S. Moravec, M. A. Sussman, N. R. Dipaola, D. Fu,
L. Hawthorn, C. A. Mitchell, J. B. Young, G. S. Francis, M. Patrick,
M. Bond, and H. O. Arrays, “Decreased SLIM1 expression and increased
gelsolin expression in failing human hearts measured by,” Circulation,
vol. 19, pp. 3046–3052, 2000.
[14] J. D. Barrans, D. Stamatiou, and C.-C. Liew, “Construction of a human
cardiovascular cDNA microarray: Portrait of the failing heart,” Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 280, no. 4, pp. 964–969, 2001.
[15] F.-L. Tan, C. S. Moravec, J. Li, C. Apperson-Hansen, P. M. McCarthy,
J. B. Young, and M. Bond, “The gene expression fingerprint of human
heart failure,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 99, no. 17, pp. 11387–
11392, Aug. 2002.
[16] F. E. Dewey, M. V. Perez, M. T. Wheeler, C. Watt, J. Spin, P. Langfelder,
S. Horvath, S. Hannenhalli, T. P. Cappola, and E. A Ashley, “Gene
coexpression network topology of cardiac development, hypertrophy,
and failure,” Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 26–35, Feb.
2011.
[17] J.-H. Lee, C. Gao, G. Peng, C. Greer, S. Ren, Y. Wang, and X. Xiao, “Analysis of transcriptome complexity through RNA sequencing in normal and
failing murine hearts,” Circ. Res., vol. 109, no. 12, pp. 1332–1341, Dec.
2011.
[18] K.-D. Min, M. Asakura, Y. Liao, K. Nakamaru, H. Okazaki, T. Takahashi,
K. Fujimoto, S. Ito, A. Takahashi, H. Asanuma, S. Yamazaki, T. Minamino,
S. Sanada, O. Seguchi, A. Nakano, Y. Ando, T. Otsuka, H. Furukawa,
T. Isomura, S. Takashima, N. Mochizuki, and M. Kitakaze, “Identification
of genes related to heart failure using global gene expression profiling of
human failing myocardium,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 393,
no. 1, pp. 55–60, Feb. 2010.
[19] P. Vanburen, J. Ma, S. Chao, E. Mueller, D. J. Schneider, and C.-C. Liew,
“Blood gene expression signatures associate with heart failure outcomes,”
Physiol. Genomics, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 392–397, Apr. 2011.
[20] F. Smih, F. Desmoulin, M. Berry, A. Turkieh, R. Harmancey, J. Iacovoni,
C. Trouillet, C. Delmas, A. Pathak, O. Lairez, F. Koukoui, P. Massabuau,
J. Ferrieres, M. Galinier, and P. Rouet, “Blood signature of pre-heart
failure: A microarrays study,” PLoS One, vol. 6, no. 6, p. e20414, Jan.
2011.
[21] B. He, R. Baird, R. Butera, A. Datta, S. George, B. Hecht, A. Hero,
G. Lazzi, R. C. Lee, J. Liang, M. Neuman, G. C. Y. Peng, E. J. Perreault,
M. Ramasubramanian, M. D. Wang, J. Wikswo, G.-Z. Yang, and
Y.-T. Zhang, “Grand challenges in interfacing engineering with life sci-

[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

1601

ences and medicine,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 589–
598, Mar. 2013.
N. Battich, T. Stoeger, and L. Pelkmans, “Image-based transcriptomics
in thousands of single human cells at single-molecule resolution,” Nat.
Methods, vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 1127–1133, Nov. 2013.
L. Ng, S. D. Pathak, C. Kuan, C. Lau, H. Dong, A. Sodt, C. Dang,
B. Avants, P. Yushkevich, J. C. Gee, D. Haynor, E. Lein, A. Jones, and
M. Hawrylycz, “Neuroinformatics for genome-wide 3D gene expression
mapping in the mouse brain,” IEEE /ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 382–393, Jul.–Sep. 2007.
O. Rübel, G. H. Weber, M.-Y. Huang, E. W. Bethel, M. D. Biggin,
C. C. Fowlkes, C. L. Luengo Hendriks, S. V. E. Keränen, M. B. Eisen,
D. W. Knowles, J. Malik, H. Hagen, and B. Hamann, “Integrating data
clustering and visualization for the analysis of 3D gene expression data,”
IEEE /ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 64–79,
Jan.–Mar. 2008.
G. W. Dorn, “The genomic architecture of sporadic heart failure,” Circ.
Res., vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1270–1283, May 2011.
G. Medicine and E. G. Nabel, “Genomics of cardiovascular disease,” J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 21, pp. 2098–2109, 2011.
M. P. Donahue, D. A Marchuk, and H. A Rockman, “Redefining heart
failure: The utility of genomics,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 48, no. 7,
pp. 1289–1298, Oct. 2006.
V. Divakaran and D. L. Mann, “The emerging role of microRNAs in cardiac remodeling and heart failure,” Circ. Res., vol. 103, no. 10, pp. 1072–
1083, Nov. 2008.
E. van Rooij, L. B. Sutherland, N. Liu, A. H. Williams, J. McAnally,
R. D. Gerard, J. A Richardson, and E. N. Olson, “A signature pattern
of stress-responsive microRNAs that can evoke cardiac hypertrophy and
heart failure,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 103, no. 48, pp. 18255–
18260, Nov. 2006.
R. L. Montgomery, T. G. Hullinger, H. M. Semus, B. A Dickinson,
A. G. Seto, J. M. Lynch, C. Stack, P. A Latimer, E. N. Olson, and E. van
Rooij, “Therapeutic inhibition of miR-208 a improves cardiac function
and survival during heart failure,” Circulation, vol. 124, no. 14, pp. 1537–
1547, Oct. 2011.
P. S. Mitchell, R. K. Parkin, E. M. Kroh, B. R. Fritz, S. K. Wyman,
E. L. Pogosova-Agadjanyan, A. Peterson, J. Noteboom, K. C. O’Briant,
A. Allen, D. W. Lin, N. Urban, C. W. Drescher, B. S. Knudsen,
D. L. Stirewalt, R. Gentleman, R. L. Vessella, P. S. Nelson, D. B. Martin,
and M. Tewari, “Circulating microRNAs as stable blood-based markers for cancer detection,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 105, no. 30,
pp. 10513–10518, Jul. 2008.
G. Condorelli, M. V. G. Latronico, and G. W. Dorn, “microRNAs in heart
disease: Putative novel therapeutic targets?” Eur. Heart J., vol. 31, no. 6,
pp. 649–658, Mar. 2010.
I. Elzenaar, Y. M. Pinto, and R. J. van Oort, “MicroRNAs in heart failure:
New targets in disease management,” Clin. Pharmacol. Ther., vol. 94,
no. 4, pp. 480–489, 2013.
A. J. Tijsen, E. E. Creemers, P. D. Moerland, L. J. de Windt, A. C. van der
Wal, W. E. Kok, and Y. M. Pinto, “MiR423–5p as a circulating biomarker
for heart failure,” Circ. Res., vol. 106, no. 6, pp. 1035–1039, Apr. 2010.
Y. Goren, M. Kushnir, B. Zafrir, S. Tabak, B. S. Lewis, and O. Amir,
“Serum levels of microRNAs in patients with heart failure,” Eur. J. Heart
Fail., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 147–154, Feb. 2012.
R. Papait, P. Kunderfranco, G. G. Stirparo, M. V. G. Latronico, and
G. Condorelli, “Long noncoding RNA: A new player of heart failure?” J.
Cardiovasc. Transl. Res., vol. 6, pp. 786–883, 2013.
C. A. Klattenhoff, J. C. Scheuermann, L. E. Surface, R. K. Bradley,
P. A. Fields, M. L. Steinhauser, H. Ding, V. L. Butty, L. Torrey, S. Haas,
R. Abo, M. Tabebordbar, R. T. Lee, C. B. Burge, and L. A. Boyer, “Braveheart, a long noncoding RNA required for cardiovascular lineage commitment,” Cell, vol. 152, no. 3, pp. 570–583, Jan. 2013.
D. Li, G. Chen, J. Yang, X. Fan, Y. Gong, G. Xu, Q. Cui, and B. Geng,
“Transcriptome analysis reveals distinct patterns of long noncoding RNAs
in heart and plasma of mice with heart failure,” PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 10,
p. e77938, Jan. 2013.
L. Korostowski, N. Sedlak, and N. Engel, “The kcnq1ot1 long non-coding
RNA affects chromatin conformation and expression of kcnq1, but does
not regulate its imprinting in the developing heart,” PLoS Genet., vol. 8,
no. 9, p. e1002956, Sep. 2012.
M. Movassagh, M.-K. Choy, M. Goddard, M. R. Bennett, T. A. Down, and
R. S.-Y. Foo, “Differential DNA methylation correlates with differential
expression of angiogenic factors in human heart failure,” PLoS One, vol. 5,
no. 1, p. e8564, Jan. 2010.

1602

[41] M. Movassagh, M.-K. Choy, D. A. Knowles, L. Cordeddu, S. Haider,
T. Down, L. Siggens, A. Vujic, I. Simeoni, C. Penkett, M. Goddard,
P. Lio, M. R. Bennett, and R. S.-Y. Foo, “Distinct epigenomic features in
end-stage failing human hearts,” Circulation, vol. 124, no. 22, pp. 2411–
2422, Nov. 2011.
[42] B. Duygu, E. M. Poels, and P. A. da Costa Martins, “Genetics and epigenetics of arrhythmia and heart failure,” Front. Genet., vol. 4, no. 219,
pp. 1–15, 2013.
[43] J. Haas, K. S. Frese, Y. J. Park, A. Keller, B. Vogel, A. M. Lindroth,
D. Weichenhan, J. Franke, S. Fischer, A. Bauer, S. Marquart, F. SedaghatHamedani, E. Kayvanpour, D. Köhler, N. M. Wolf, S. Hassel, R. Nietsch,
T. Wieland, P. Ehlermann, J.-H. Schultz, A. Dösch, D. Mereles, S. Hardt,
J. Backs, J. D. Hoheisel, C. Plass, H. A. Katus, and B. Meder, “Alterations
in cardiac DNA methylation in human dilated cardiomyopathy,” EMBO
Mol. Med., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 413–429, Mar. 2013.
[44] L. Pattini, S. Mazzara, A. Conti, S. Iannaccone, S. Cerutti, and M. Alessio,
“An integrated strategy in two-dimensional electrophoresis analysis able
to identify discriminants between different clinical conditions,” Exp. Biol.
Med. (Maywood), vol. 233, no. 4, pp. 483–491, Apr. 2008.
[45] S. Cappadona, F. Levander, M. Jansson, P. James, S. Cerutti, and L. Pattini,
“Wavelet-based method for noise characterization and rejection in highperformance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry,” Anal.
Chem., vol. 80, no. 13, pp. 4960–4968, Jul. 2008.
[46] B. T. Berhane, C. Zong, D. A. Liem, A. Huang, S. Le, R. D. Edmondson,
R. C. Jones, X. Qiao, J. P. Whitelegge, P. Ping, and T. M. Vondriska,
“Cardiovascular-related proteins identified in human plasma by the HUPO
plasma proteome project pilot phase,” Proteomics, vol. 5, no. 13, pp. 3520–
3530, Aug. 2005.
[47] E. Dubois, M. Fertin, J. Burdese, P. Amouyel, C. Bauters, and F. Pinet,
“Cardiovascular proteomics: Translational studies to develop novel
biomarkers in heart failure and left ventricular remodeling,” Proteomics.
Clin. Appl., vol. 5, no. 1/2, pp. 57–66, Mar. 2011.
[48] R. Isserlin, D. Merico, R. Alikhani-Koupaei, A. Gramolini, G. D. Bader,
and A. Emili, “Pathway analysis of dilated cardiomyopathy using global
proteomic profiling and enrichment maps,” Proteomics, vol. 10, no. 6,
pp. 1316–1327, Mar. 2010.
[49] C. Banfi, M. Brioschi, R. Wait, S. Begum, E. Gianazza, P. Fratto,
G. Polvani, E. Vitali, A. Parolari, L. Mussoni, and E. Tremoli, “Proteomic analysis of membrane microdomains derived from both failing
and non-failing human hearts,” Proteomics, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1976–1988,
Mar. 2006.
[50] J. Wang, Z. Li, J. Chen, H. Zhao, L. Luo, C. Chen, X. Xu, W. Zhang,
K. Gao, B. Li, J. Zhang, and W. Wang, “Metabolomic identification of
diagnostic plasma biomarkers in humans with chronic heart failure,” Mol.
Biosyst., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2618–2626, Oct. 2013.
[51] Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American
Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology, “Heart rate variability standards
of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use,” Circulation, vol. 93, no. 5, pp. 1043–1065, Jan. 1996.
[52] M. Pagani, F. Lombardi, S. Guzzetti, O. Rimoldi, R. Furlan, P. Pizzinelli,
G. Sandrone, G. Malfatto, S. Dell’Orto, and E. Piccaluga, “Power spectral
analysis of heart rate and arterial pressure variabilities as a marker of
sympatho-vagal interaction in man and conscious dog,” Circ. Res., vol. 59,
no. 2, pp. 178–193, Aug. 1986.
[53] G. Pardi, E. Ferrazzi, I. Cetin, S. Rampello, G. Baselli, S. Cerutti, and
S. Civardi, “The clinical relevance of the abdominal fetal electrocardiogram,” J. Perinat. Med., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 371–377, 1986.
[54] J. P. Saul, Y. Arai, R. D. Berger, L. S. Lilly, W. S. Colucci, and R. J. Cohen,
“Assessment of autonomic regulation in chronic congestive heart failure
by heart rate spectral analysis,” Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 61, no. 15, pp. 1292–
1299, Jun. 1988.
[55] P. van de Borne, N. Montano, M. Pagani, R. Oren, and V. K. Somers,
“Absence of low-frequency variability of sympathetic nerve activity in
severe heart failure,” Circulation, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1449–1454, Mar.
1997.
[56] H. A. Malave, A. A. Taylor, J. Nattama, A. Deswal, and D. L. Mann,
“Circulating levels of tumor necrosis factor correlate with indexes of
depressed heart rate variability: A study in patients with mild-to-moderate
heart failure,” Chest, vol. 123, no. 3, pp. 716–724, Mar. 2003.
[57] G. R. H. Sandercock and D. A. Brodie, “The role of heart rate variability
in prognosis for different modes of death in chronic heart failure,” Pacing
Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 892–904, 2006.
[58] S. Guzzetti, M. T. La Rovere, G. D. Pinna, R. Maestri, E. Borroni, A. Porta,
A. Mortara, and A. Malliani, “Different spectral components of 24 h heart

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

rate variability are related to different modes of death in chronic heart
failure,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 357–362, Jan. 2005.
M. T. La Rovere, G. D. Pinna, R. Maestri, A. Mortara, S. Capomolla,
O. Febo, R. Ferrari, M. Franchini, M. Gnemmi, C. Opasich, P. G. Riccardi,
E. Traversi, and F. Cobelli, “Short-term heart rate variability strongly predicts sudden cardiac death in chronic heart failure patients,” Circulation,
vol. 107, no. 4, pp. 565–570, Apr. 2003.
R. Maestri, G. D. Pinna, A. Accardo, P. Allegrini, R. Balocchi, G. D’addio,
M. Ferrario, D. Menicucci, A. Porta, R. Sassi, M. G. Signorini, M. T. La
Rovere, and S. Cerutti, “Nonlinear indices of heart rate variability in
chronic heart failure patients: Redundancy and comparative clinical
value,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 425–433, 2007.
T. H. Mäkikallio, H. V Huikuri, U. Hintze, J. Videbæk, R. D. Mitrani,
A. Castellanos, R. J. Myerburg, and M. Møller, “Fractal analysis and timeand frequency-domain measures of heart rate variability as predictors of
mortality in patients with heart failure,” Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 87, no. 2,
pp. 178–182, Jan. 2001.
J. Brouwer, D. J. van Veldhuisen, A. J. Man In’t Veld, J. Haaksma,
W. A. Dijk, K. R. Visser, F. Boomsma, P. H. J. M. Dunselman, and
K. I. Lie, “Prognostic value of heart rate variability during long-term
follow-up in patients with mild to moderate heart failure,” J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1183–1189, Nov. 1996.
I. Cygankiewicz, W. Zareba, R. Vazquez, M. Vallverdu, J. Cino, J. Cinca,
J. Almendral, J. R. Gonzalez Juanatey, C. Macaya, M. Valdes, P. Caminal,
and A. Bayes de Luna, “Relation of heart rate turbulence to severity of
heart failure,” Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 98, no. 12, pp. 1635–1640, Dec. 2006.
I. Cygankiewicz, W. Zareba, R. Vazquez, A. Bayes-Genis, D. Pascual,
C. Macaya, J. Almendral, M. Fiol, A. Bardaji, J. R. Gonzalez-Juanatey,
V. Nieto, M. Valdes, J. Cinca, and A. B. de Luna, “Risk stratification of
mortality in patients with heart failure and left ventricular ejection fraction
>35%,” Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 103, no. 7, pp. 1003–1010, Apr. 2009.
N. L. Smith, J. F. Felix, A. C. Morrison, S. Demissie, N. L. Glazer,
L. R. Loehr, L. A. Cupples, A. Dehghan, T. Lumley, W. D. Rosamond,
W. Lieb, F. Rivadeneira, J. C. Bis, A. R. Folsom, E. Benjamin,
Y. S. Aulchenko, T. Haritunians, D. Couper, J. Murabito, Y. A. Wang,
B. H. Stricker, J. S. Gottdiener, P. P. Chang, T. J. Wang, K. M. Rice,
A. Hofman, S. R. Heckbert, E. R. Fox, C. J. O’Donnell, A. G. Uitterlinden,
J. I. Rotter, J. T. Willerson, D. Levy, C. M. van Duijn, B. M. Psaty,
J. C. M. Witteman, E. Boerwinkle, and R. S. Vasan, “Association of
genome-wide variation with the risk of incident heart failure in adults
of european and african ancestry: A prospective meta-analysis from the
cohorts for heart and aging research in genomic epidemiology (CHARGE)
consortium,” Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 256–266, Jun.
2010.

Linda Pattini received the Laurea (B.Sc. and M.Sc.)
and the Pd.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from
the Politecnico di Milano, Italy, in 1999 and 2003, respectively.
Nowadays, she is an Assistant Professor in the
Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering of the same university where she teaches
bioinformatics (Master degree in biomedical engineering) and she is an Adjunct Professor at the University Vita-Salute San Raffaele (Bachelor degree in
medical and pharmaceutical biotechnology). Her research activity concerns the development and the application of methods of
processing for integrative bioinformatics and functional genomics. Specifically,
her interests include the study of the signals involved in the functional specification of genomic sequences, gene expression data analysis for the study and
the modeling of interactions in a systems biology perspective, computational
approaches for data processing in the large-scale proteomics workflow and statistical genetics.

PATTINI et al.: DISSECTING HEART FAILURE THROUGH THE MULTISCALE APPROACH OF SYSTEMS MEDICINE

Roberto Sassi (M’06–SM’12) received the Laurea
degree (B.Sc. and M.Sc.) in electronic engineering,
and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering, both
from Politecnico di Milano, Italy, in 1996 and 2001,
respectively.
After graduation, he worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher at the University of California, Santa Cruz,
USA, in mathematical modeling of non-Newtonian
fluids and at Politecnico di Milano, in cooperation
with Ela Medical, Paris, France, on ECG signals and
atrial fibrillation. He is currently an Assistant Professor (“Ricercatore Confermato”) at the Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy.
He taught courses of digital signal and image processing, statistics and programming. His research interests include biomedical signal processing, linear
and nonlinear time series analysis, biometrics, with special emphasis on privacy
protection issues, and applied mathematics. He is author of several papers in
international scientific journals and conferences and he filed a patent on biometrics encryption.
Dr. Sassi is member of the AEIT and a 1999 WHOI-GFD fellow.

1603

Sergio Cerutti (M’81–SM’97–F’03) received the
Laurea degree (B.Sc. and M.Sc.) in electronic engineering, in 1971.
Currently, he is a Professor in biomedical engineering (BME) at the Department of Electronics,
Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, Italy. In 2000–2006, he has been the Chairman
of the Department of Bioengineering, and in 2010–
2012 the Chairman of BME Programs. His research
interests include mainly in biomedical signal processing, neurosciences, and cardiovascular modeling. In
his research activity, he has put emphasis on the integration of information at
different modalities, at different sources, and at different scales in various physiological systems. Since 1983, he has taught a course at graduate and doc levels
on biomedical signal processing and modeling at Engineering Faculties (Milano
and Roma) as well as at Specialisation Schools of Medical Faculties. He is the
Author of more than 500 international scientific contributions (more than 250
on indexed scientific journals).
Prof. Cerutti has been Elected Member of IEEE-EMBS AdCom (Region 8)
in 1993–1996 and 2011–2013. He is actually Fellow Member of the EAMBES,
the AIMBE and an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTION ON BIOMEDICAL
ENGINEERING. He is a member of the Steering Committee of the IEEE-EMBS
Summer School on Biomedical Signal Processing. He has been Visiting Professor at Harvard-MIT Division Health Science and Technology, Boston, USA,
for an overall period of one year as well as for a period of four months at
IST—Department of Physics, Lisbon, Portugal. In 2009, he received the IEEEEMBS Academic Career Achievement Award.

