IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

1317

A Comparative Study of Different Level
Interpolations for Improving Spatial Resolution
in Diffusion Tensor Imaging
Feng Yang, Yue-Min Zhu, Jian-Hua Luo, Marc Robini, Jie Liu, and Pierre Croisille

Abstract—This paper studies and evaluates the feasibility and
the performance of different level interpolations for improving
spatial resolution of diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging
(DT-MRI or DTI). In particular, the following techniques are investigated: anisotropic interpolation operating on scalar gray-level
images, log-Euclidean interpolation method, and the quaternion interpolation method, which operate on diffusion tensor fields. The
performance is evaluated both qualitatively and quantitatively using criteria such as tensor determinant, fractional anisotropy (FA),
mean diffusivity (MD), fiber length, etc. We conclude that tensor
field interpolations allow avoiding undesirable swelling effect in
DTI, which is not the case with scalar gray-level interpolation, and
that scalar gray-level image interpolation and log-Euclidean tensor
field interpolation suffer from decrease in FA and MD, which may
mislead the interpretation of the clinical parameters FA and MD.
In contrast, the quaternion tensor field interpolation avoids such
FA and MD decrease, which suggests its use for clinical applications.
Index Terms—Diffusion tensor imaging, diffusion-weighted
(DW) image, fiber tractography, interpolation, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), tensor field interpolation.

I. INTRODUCTION
IFFUSION tensor magnetic resonance imaging (DT-MRI
or DTI) [1] has gained considerable attention and importance in recent years in the field of medical imaging and clinic
researches. It provides a unique noninvasive in vivo imaging
technique to get insights into the biologically and clinically
relevant information by measuring the relative diffusion coefficient of water molecules in different directions. This information

D

Manuscript received April 9, 2013; revised December 16, 2013; accepted
February 7, 2014. Date of publication February 19, 2014; date of current version
June 30, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 2013JBZ014, the French ANR
under ANR-13-MONU-0009-01, the National Basic Research Program of China
under Grant 61301002, Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program
of Higher Education under Grant 20130009120039, the University Funds for
Talents under Grant 2012RC037, and the Chinese government funding under
Grant 30970777.
F. Yang and J. Liu are with the School of Computer and Information
Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China (e-mail:
fengyang@bjtu.edu.cn; jieliu@bjtu.edu.cn).
Y.-M. Zhu, M. Robini, and P. Croisille are with the CREATIS, CNRS
UMR 5220, Inserm U1044, INSA Lyon, University of Lyon, Villeurbanne
69100, France (e-mail: zhu@creatis.insa-lyon.fr; robini@creatis.insa-lyon.fr;
croisille@creatis.insa-lyon.fr).
J.-H. Luo is with the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: jhluo@sjtu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2306937

includes parameters that help characterize the tissue composition, physical properties of tissue constituents, tissue microstructure and its architectural organization. In DTI, the ultimate quantity to be calculated for each voxel is not a scalar, but a
tensor that describes local water diffusion and is expressed as a 3
× 3 symmetric positive-definite matrix (in this study, we adopted
the commonly used constraint of positive definiteness on a diffusion tensor, although the latter is, strictly speaking, symmetric
positive semidefinite) [2]. However, due to technical limitations
of MRI machines, DTI is sensitive to the difficult compromise
between spatial resolution and noise or artifacts [3], and the
data are often acquired with low resolution. To improve DTI
data resolution, interpolation provides an interesting software
solution. Interpolation in DTI can be dealt with at different levels. It can be performed at the level of diffusion-weighted (DW)
gray-level images or at the level of tensor fields or still at the
level of vector fields. Vector field level interpolations are desired
when one aims at fiber structure or when only vector field information is available [4]–[7]. In contrast, DW gray-level image
interpolation and tensor field interpolation provide more information such as fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity
(MD) parameters in addition to fiber orientation information. In
the following, we focus on the interpolations at the level of DW
gray-level images and tensor fields.
Although there exist only a few works on interpolation of
DW images, such interpolation still remains basically an issue
of scalar image interpolation. In this sense, this is a classical
image processing problem for which a variety of methods exist [8], [9], such as nearest interpolation, linear interpolation,
quadratic interpolation, B-spline interpolation, cubic interpolation, etc. The critical element of these interpolation techniques
is the interpolation kernel, which distinguishes different interpolation techniques and determines their performance. Detailed
comparisons of these methods are reported in [8] and [9] in
terms of spatial and Fourier analysis, computational complexity, and error determinations. Based on the work of Lehmann
et al. [8] and [9], the authors of [10] proposed an anisotropic
interpolation for DT-MRI data, which is space-variant and can
reduce noise without compromising the sharpness of boundaries. Other types of scalar image interpolation methods include
variational [11], [12] and partial differential equation (PDE)based [13] interpolations, which account for the local geometric structure of the image by efficiently reconstructing image
boundaries.
In contrast to the interpolation of scalar images, the interpolation of diffusion tensor fields is a relatively new problem in the

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1318

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

field of image processing, and there are only a few interpolation
techniques that are reported in the literature. Diffusion tensor
interpolation operates directly on tensors. The most straightforward method for interpolating diffusion tensors is the Euclidean
method that consists of interpolating each tensor component independently in Euclidean space [14]. However, tensor processing is difficult due to some limitations of standard Euclidean
calculus. Diffusion tensors do not form a vector space since
they are symmetric positive-definite matrices whose space is restricted to a convex half-cone [15]. Therefore, special care must
be taken in order not to reach the boundaries of the nonlinear
tensor space, which lead to null or negative eigenvalues. On the
purpose of maintaining the symmetric positive-definite property, anisotropic interpolation [14], PDE interpolation [16], tensor spline interpolation [17], and Cholesky factorization-based
interpolation [18] were proposed for diffusion tensors. However,
these methods exhibit the tensor swelling effect, which reflects
the fact that interpolating two tensors yields a tensor with a determinant larger than either of the original tensors [15], [19],
still due to the limitations of Euclidean space. To simultaneously eliminate the swelling effect and preserve the positivedefiniteness property of diffusion tensor, the authors of [20]
presented a geodesic interpolation and a rotational interpolation in the Riemannian matrix sense, while in [19] the PDEs
were studied within the affine-invariant framework for applications such as diffusion tensor field interpolation. Interpolation
methods in Riemannian space are computationally expensive
because of intensive use of logarithms, exponentials, inverses,
and square roots on matrices. To overcome the computational
limitation of Riemannian space, log-Euclidean metric [15] was
proposed that performs classical Euclidean computations after
taking the logarithm of the tensor matrix, while being a close
approximation of the Riemannian method. Log-Euclidean interpolation is rigorous in keeping the determinant of tensor vary
monotonically and preserving symmetric positive-definite property. In [21] and [22], a class of so-called interpolation paths
for tensors was proposed, called geodesic-loxodromes, in order
to preserve clinically important tensor attributes and measure
the difference in tensor shape and orientation. The geodesicloxodromes method can monotonically interpolate some tensor
attributes such as FA or MD. But it cannot avoid the swelling
effect. To simultaneously avoid the swelling effect and decrease
in FA and MD tensor attributes, a feature-based interpolation
method was proposed that consists of first decomposing a diffusion tensor into eigenvalues and orientation, then representing
the tensor orientation using quaternions [23], and finally interpolating the three eigenvalues in logarithm and the quaternion.
Since DTI yields systematically both scalar DW images and
tensor fields, a question arises whether interpolation should be
performed at the level of DW images or at that of tensor fields.
A preliminary work on such comparative study of different level
interpolations in DTI is reported in [24]. The aim of this work is
to give a systematic, quantitative, and detailed study about the
interpolations at different levels and to evaluate the feasibility
and the performance of different interpolation techniques. To
do that, we propose to consider the interpolation at different
levels. For the interpolation of scalar DW gray-level images, we

focus on the anisotropic interpolation method [14], and for that
of diffusion tensor fields, we use log-Euclidean interpolation
method [15] and the quaternion interpolation method [23]. The
evaluation is performed both qualitatively and quantitatively in
terms of tensor determinant, FA, MD, and fiber length.

II. STRATEGIES OF INTERPOLATION FOR DTI DATA
The raw data provided by DTI are the gray-level DW images,
from which tensor data are computed. So, a straightforward way
of interpolating DTI data would consist in interpolating the DW
images, from which the interpolated tensor data can be consequently obtained. Meanwhile, we can also directly interpolate
the diffusion tensor fields. Note that interpolation can also be
achieved at the level of tensor parameter maps such as FA or
MD, depending on the application in question. However, it is
DW images or tensors that contain the most complete information, based on which all other parameters (FA, MD, vector
field, fiber angles, fiber tractography, etc.) used in practices can
be calculated. That has led us to emphasize the DW image and
diffusion tensor field interpolations.

A. DW Image Interpolation
In DTI, the acquired DW images are used to calculate diffusion tensors according to the Stejskal–Tanner diffusion equations [25]: Si = S0 exp(−bgi DgT
i ), where S0 is the magnetic resonance measurement without diffusion sensitization,
Si , i = 1, . . . , N (N is the number of gradient directions and
must be greater than or equal to 6), is the image intensity measured after the application of the ith diffusion-sensitizing gradient, gi is the diffusion encoding gradient direction associated
with Si , b is the diffusion weighting factor, and D is the diffusion tensor. The product gi DgT
i represents the diffusivity in the
direction gi . For the interpolation of DW images, usual scalar
image interpolations can be directly applied to Si .
Interpolation essentially consists in finding a continuous image s(x, y) from its discrete samples s(k, l) with s, x, y ∈ R
and k, l ∈ N0 . It can be described formally as the convolution
of the discrete image samples with the continuous impulse response h(x, y) of a reconstruction filter. The crucial element of
any interpolation technique is the interpolation kernel, which
distinguishes different interpolation techniques and determines
their performance. The conventional interpolation kernels are
isotropic and space-invariant (kernel profiles are invariable with
respect to orientation and position) and therefore exhibit the
drawback of disregarding local image features, such as boundaries [13]. Based on this remark, the anisotropic interpolation
method with the sigmoid kernel was proposed for DTI data [10].
This method is space-variant and can suppress noise without
compromising the sharpness of boundaries.
The sigmoid kernel function in 1-D case is defined by
⎧
⎨
h(x) =

1
,
1 + exp(a(x − h))
⎩
0,

0<x<1
elsewhere

(1)

YANG et al.: COMPARATIVE STUDY OF DIFFERENT LEVEL INTERPOLATIONS FOR IMPROVING SPATIAL RESOLUTION

where a regulates the sharpness of h(x) (a larger a gives a
sharper h(x)), and h controls the position of the maximum
change in magnitude.
The 2-D or 3-D sigmoid kernel is calculated as the product
of symmetrical 1-D sigmoid kernels to reduce computational
complexity:
h(x, y) = h(x) × h(y).

(2)

For 2-D or 3-D scalar images, the sharpness of the sigmoid
kernel function is adapted to the local image intensity gradient in each spatial direction [10] using ai = am in + (am ax −
am in ) × |∇Ii /∇Im ax | with |∇Im ax | being the maximum intensity gradient of the image, and am ax and am in delimiting the
linear mapping between a and |∇I| so that a will fall into a
proper range. In this study, h is set to 0.5.
Take a 2-D image for example. Let R(x, y) represent the
original image, R(xx, yy) the interpolated image, and K the
interpolation factor. The algorithm of anisotropic DW interpolation can be described as follows.

Using the sigmoid kernel function, anisotropic interpolation
at DW level preserves a sharp edge of original DW image and
subsequently a sharp edge of corresponding tensor fields.

1319

B. Diffusion Tensor Field Interpolation
For the interpolation of diffusion tensors, anisotropic interpolation [10], [14], PDE interpolation [16], spline interpolation [17], Cholesky interpolation [18], Riemannian interpolation [20], [19], log-Euclidean interpolation [15] and Geodesicloxodrome interpolation [21], [22] were proposed. In this study,
we focus on the log-Euclidean interpolation [15], which reduces
the computational complexity of Riemannian calculation while
preserving the positive-definite property of diffusion tensors and
avoiding swelling effect, and the quaternion interpolation [23],
which preserves the advantage of the log-Euclidean method and
additionally avoids the FA/MD decrease.
1) Log-Euclidean Interpolation: To avoid the swelling effect in processing diffusion tensors, the authors of [15] proposed to work on the nature logarithm of the tensor matrix.
The log-Euclidean interpolation of diffusion tensors consists
of first performing the logarithm of the original tensors, then
interpolating between the logarithmical matrices, and finally reconstructing the interpolated tensors using matrix exponential.
The procedure of log-Euclidean interpolation can be described
as follows:
⎧
⎪
⎨ L0 = log(D0 ), L1 = log(D1 )
L(t) = (1 − t) log(L0 ) + t log(L1 )
(3)
⎪
⎩
D(t) = exp(L(t)).
Note that the log-Euclidean method interpolates by essence
each element of the transformed matrix (tensor matrix in
alogarithm).
2) Tensor Field Interpolation Using Quaternion: As mentioned before, log-Euclidean interpolation avoids the swelling
effect and preserves the positive-definite property of a diffusion
tensor. However, it interpolates matrix components independently and ignores the relationship between matrix elements.
In order to take into account the relationship between tensor
components, a new interpolation method using quaternion was
proposed, which decomposes a diffusion tensor into its two
features: tensor shape and size, and tensor orientation, with its
three eigenvalues representing the tensor shape and size and a
unit quaternion representing the tensor orientation. The details
about the implementation steps of quaternion tensor interpolation can be found in [23].
Instead of interpolating matrix elements, the quaternion interpolation interpolates the tensor features (eigenvalues and orientation), while the additional work is to obtain the unique
quaternion from 23 possibilities of rotational matrices for a diffusion tensor. Since the determinant of a rotation matrix should
equal +1, not all the eigenvector matrices constructed from
vi = [vi1 vi2 vi3 ]T and −vi = [−vi1 −vi2 −vi3 ]T are rotation matrices. Consequently, there are four possible eigenvector
matrices for choosing a rotation matrix. However, the quaternions q and −q representing the same rotation, these four eigenvector matrices correspond to eight quaternions. To obtain the
unique quaternion for Step 2 above, we first consider all the
pairs of quaternions for the two current tensors to be interpolated by computing their inner product which is calculated in the
same way as that for two vectors. The biggest inner product may

1320

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

B. Real DTI Data

Fig. 1. Synthetic tensor field and the corresponding DW images. (a) Original tensor field. (b) Corresponding DW image at the gradient direction of
[0 0.5 1]T .

correspond to more than one pair of quaternions. Then, by making use of neighborhood information, the final pair of quaternions corresponding to the current tensors is determined by
choosing the one that gives the biggest inner product between
each of the two current tensors and its neighboring tensors.
III. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
To evaluate the performance of different interpolation strategies for the improvement of spatial resolution of DTI and their
impact on the analysis of clinical parameters, both synthetic tensor data and real DTI data are used, and the interpolation results
are both qualitatively and quantitatively assessed. Note that all
the interpolations performed in the present experiments are 3-D.
But, they are visualized in 2-D for easier visual assessment.

The real DTI datasets were acquired in clinical conditions.
They concern the cardiac DW images and T2 images, which
were acquired from eight ex vivo human hearts on Siemens
1.5 T Magnetom Sonata with the following settings: TE = 98 ms,
TR = 8600 ms, FOV = 256 × 256 mm2 , slice thickness = 2 mm,
slice spacing = 2 mm, slice duration = 142.5 ms, number of
slices = 52, number of b = 0 slice images = 52, 128 × 128
pixels in each slice, diffusion sensitivity b = 1000 s/mm2 , and
gradient directions = 30 or 12 or 6. The acquisition time for a
3-D dataset with 30 directions and 1 average is 4.6 min. Each
heart was located in a plastic container and fixed by hydrophilic
gel to maintain a diastolic shape. This setup has a low dielectric
effect and also eliminates unwanted susceptibility artifacts near
the boundaries of the heart.
C. Performance Evaluation
The comparison of the different interpolation methods was
performed in a qualitative and quantitative manner, by means of
tensor fields, tensor parameter maps, and fiber tractography.
Tensor fields: In the case of tensor fields, we compare the
variation of tensor shape and tensor orientation.
Tensor parameter maps: When considering tensor parameter
maps, we compare the MD, FA, and determinant maps computed
from the interpolated tensor fields. MD indicates the mean diffusivity of water molecules, which reflects the redistribution of
intracellular and extracellular space volumes. FA is defined as

FA =

A. Synthetic Data
A diffusion tensor D is a 3 × 3 symmetric, positive-definite
matrix which can be decomposed as follows:
⎛

D11
D = ⎝ D21
D31

D12
D22
D32

⎞
⎛
λ1
D13
D23 ⎠ = R ⎝ 0
D33
0

0
λ2
0

⎞
0
0 ⎠ RT
λ3

(4)

where λ1 , λ2 , λ3 are eigenvalues of D and R is the eigenvector
matrix.
We generated a 20 × 20 synthetic tensor field containing four
different homogeneous regions separated by discontinuities of
different orientations of tensors [see Fig. 1(a)]. Tensors in the
four regions have the same eigenvalues [5 1 1], but different
eigenvector matrices:
⎡
1
⎣0
0

0
1
0

⎤ ⎡
0
1
0⎦ , ⎣1
1
0

⎤ ⎡
1 0
1
−1 0⎦ , ⎣1
0 1
0

⎤
⎡
−1 0
0
1 0⎦ and ⎣1
0 1
0

1
0
0

⎤
0
0⎦.
1

We used the Stejskal–Tanner diffusion equations to compute
the DW images [see Fig. 1(b)] from this synthetic tensor field.
The associated S0 image was chosen to be constant and we
considered the truncated octahedron encoding scheme (12 directions) to simulate the gradient directions.

3[(λ1 − λ)2 + (λ2 − λ)2 + (λ3 − λ)2 ]
2(λ21 + λ22 + λ23 )

1/2
(5)

where λ is the mean of the three eigenvalues of the diffusion
tensor λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , which represents in fact the MD. FA ranges
from 0 for isotropic diffusion to 1 for completely anisotropic
diffusion. More quantitative criteria have also been used that
concern the tensor determinant and the standard deviation (STD)
of FA or MD, which is calculated as



STD(X) = 

M 
N

1
(X(i, j) − X̄)2
M × N i=1 j =1

(6)

where X indicates the FA or MD value of the original or interpolated diffusion tensors, and X̄ the mean FA or MD value.
Tensor determinant is proportional to the volume of ellipsoid
and is calculated as
det(D) = λ1 λ2 λ3 .

(7)

Determinant maps were used to check whether the interpolation methods introduce swelling effect which should be avoided
by DTI processing [15], [19].
Fiber tractography: To illustrate the influence of different
interpolations on fiber tractography, quantitative comparisons
in terms of the number and length of fibers are given.

YANG et al.: COMPARATIVE STUDY OF DIFFERENT LEVEL INTERPOLATIONS FOR IMPROVING SPATIAL RESOLUTION

1321

Fig. 2. Original parameter maps from the tensor field. (a) FA map. (b) MD
map (unit: 10−4 ). (c) Determinant.

Fig. 4. Determinant maps from interpolations at the DW image and tensor
field levels. (a) Comparison of determinant profiles with different methods.
(b) Determinant map with anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images.
(c) Determinant map with log-Euclidean interpolation at the level of tensor
fields. (d) Determinant map with quaternion interpolation at the level of tensor
fields.

Fig. 3. Interpolated tensor fields obtained after performing interpolation
(a) at the level of DW image, (b) at the level of tensor field with the logEuclidean method, and (c) at the level of tensor field with quaternions.

D. Results
1) Synthetic Data: The anisotropic interpolation was applied to synthetic DW images and log-Euclidean interpolation
to the synthetic tensor fields [see Fig. 1(a)]. The original size of
20 × 20 was interpolated to the size of 153 × 153. To compare
the interpolation methods at different levels, tensor field and
parameter maps from tensor fields were calculated.
Fig. 1 shows the generated synthetic tensor field and the
corresponding DW images in 12 diffusion gradient directions,
while Fig. 2 indicates the parameter maps calculated from the
tensor field. It is to underline that the three original parameter
maps present three homogeneous regions.
Fig. 3 shows the interpolated tensor fields obtained using
anisotropic interpolations at the level of DW images and logEuclidean interpolation at the level of tensor fields. The color of
the ellipsoid is determined by the primary eigenvector direction
of the tensor. The tensor fields being too dense, we zoomed the
black-boxed regions. Compared with the original tensor field,
it is observed that tensors with different orientations or shapes
(vertical green line and/or its neighbors) have been introduced
by both DW interpolation and log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation although the original tensors all have the same shape,
whereas with the log-Euclidean interpolation at the level of tensor fields, sphere-like tensors were introduced not only on the
vertical green line but also in the two sides of the latter. Note that
on this extra green vertical line, the volume of tensors produced
by the anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images is
bigger than that interpolated by the log-Euclidean interpolation
at the level of tensor fields. On the other hand, for the same DW
interpolation, the interpolated tensors on and around the vertical

Fig. 5. FA maps interpolations at the DW image and tensor field levels.
(a) Comparison of FA profiles with different methods. (b) FA map with
anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images. (c) FA map with logEuclidean interpolation at the level of tensor fields. (d) FA map with quaternion
interpolation at the level of tensor fields.

green line have bigger volume than the rest of the tensors. This
swelling effect can also be clearly observed on the determinant
map in Fig. 4, by the presence of the vertical red line that divides
the green homogeneous region into two parts. More quantitatively, between two original tensors having a determinant of 20,
the DW interpolation generates two interpolated tensors having a determinant of 22 and a third interpolated tensor having
a determinant of 37. In contrast, log-Euclidean and quaternion
interpolations at the level of tensor fields preserved this homogeneous region present in the original determinant map (the tensor
determinant was kept 20). Also note that on the borders between
the blue and green regions, anisotropic interpolation at the level
of DW images produced sharper edges than log-Euclidean and
quaternion interpolations at the level of tensor fields.
In Fig. 5 are plotted the FA maps and FA profiles obtained
using anisotropic interpolations at the level of DW images and
log-Euclidean and quaternion interpolations at the level of tensor fields. As observed, both DW image interpolation and logEuclidean tensor field interpolation led to the FA collapse between two original homogeneous regions by the presence of the

1322

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 6. MD maps from interpolations at the DW image and tensor field levels.
(a) Comparison of MD profiles with different methods. (b) MD map with
anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images. (c) MD map with logEuclidean interpolation at the level of tensor fields. (d) MD map with quaternion
interpolation at the level of tensor field.

extra vertical lines (caused by the abrupt decrease of FA values) with sharp different colors. As in the case of determinant
maps, the DW image interpolation produced much sharper edges
than the log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation. In contrast, the
quaternion method at the tensor field level preserved FA values
during interpolation and therefore preserved the homogeneous
regions present in the original FA map.
Similar phenomenon is observed in the MD maps and profiles
(see Fig. 6), in which the decrease of MD values with DW interpolation and log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation occurred
between the two central regions where the tensors have the same
shape but different orientations. Note that the decreasing effect
introduced by log-Euclidean interpolation at the level of tensor
fields is much greater than that at the level of DW images.
2) Real Data: The interpolation methods at the two levels
were applied to the datasets acquired in clinical conditions.
We choose to illustrate the tenth slice of a human cardiac DTI
volume since it is near the heart base where both right and
left ventricles are visible. The initial slices of 128 × 128 were
interpolated to a size of 512 × 512.
Fig. 7 shows the FA map calculated from the original tensor
field of the tenth slice and the FA maps from the interpolated
tensor fields obtained using anisotropic interpolation at the level
of DW images and log-Euclidean and quaternion interpolations
at the level of tensor fields. The black pixels in the original
FA map indicate where the eigenvalues are negative because of
noise, and the subsequent FA values calculated are greater than
1. We observe that, with anisotropic interpolation at the level
of DW images, noisy areas are enlarged; namely, unreasonable
pixels (FA > 1) are interpolated. By contrast, with log-Euclidean
and quaternion interpolations at the level of tensor fields, noisy
pixels where FA values are greater than 1 have disappeared. To
better compare the three different methods, we plot in Fig. 8
the profiles (corresponding to the red line in the original FA
map in Fig. 7) of the FA maps. In the profile with anisotropic
interpolation at the DW level, there is a FA peak greater than 1,
which is incoherent. In the zoomed profiles, the circled points
represent the original data points. With both the anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images and the log-Euclidean

Fig. 7. FA maps calculated from the original tensor fields as well as the interpolated tensor fields using different interpolations, for real human cardiac DTI
data. (a) FA map of the original DTI slice. (b) FA map after anisotropic interpolation at the DW image level. (c) FA map from log-Euclidean interpolation at
the level of tensor fields. (d) FA maps from quaternion interpolation at the level
of tensor fields.

interpolation at the level of tensor fields, there is FA decreasing
effect (the interpolated FA values are smaller than the two original FA values). In addition, with the DW image interpolation,
the FA decreasing effect is more severe than with the tensor field
interpolation and the interpolated FA values vary in an irregular
manner. However, the quaternion interpolation at the level of
tensor fields interpolated FA values without decreasing effect or
sharp peak values of FA.
Concerning the MD values (see Fig. 9), both anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images and the two interpolation methods at the level of tensor fields introduced MD value
jumped at the borders, while in other regions, the anisotropic
interpolation at DW image level and the log-Euclidean interpolation at the tensor field level may induce MD decreasing effect
(the interpolated MD values are smaller than the two original
MD values), whereas the quaternion interpolation at the tensor
field level avoids the decrease in the interpolated MD values.
In order to further get insights into the influence of interpolation methods on FA and MD values, we divide the left
myocardium into six sectors, and then statistical analysis of FA
and MD values is performed in terms of mean value and STD
in three situations: 1) on different sectors of the same slice;
2) on the same sector but for different slices of the same heart;
and 3) on the same sector of the same slice of different hearts.
Fig. 10(a) shows the spatial distribution of the six sectors in
a slice, and Fig. 10(b) [or 10(c)] the variation of mean FA
(or MD) values as a function of sector number in the tenth slice
of a human heart. It is observed that the mean FA values obtained
using both anisotropic interpolation at the DW image level and
log-Euclidean interpolation at the tensor field level decrease,

YANG et al.: COMPARATIVE STUDY OF DIFFERENT LEVEL INTERPOLATIONS FOR IMPROVING SPATIAL RESOLUTION

Fig. 8. FA profiles corresponding to the dark red line in Fig. 7. The bottom
plot corresponds to the zoomed version of the boxed part in the top plot to better
visualize FA collapse effects caused by interpolation. The three curves in the
plots correspond to anisotropic interpolation at DW image level (blue line) and
log-Euclidean interpolation at the tensor field level (red line), and quaternion
interpolation at the tensor field level (black line), respectively. The pink circled
points represent the original data points.

compared to the mean FA values before interpolation, while the
mean FA values with log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation are
closer to those of the original tensor field. In contrast, the mean
FA values obtained using the quaternion interpolation is bigger than those before interpolation. Concerning the mean MD
curves, we can see that the mean MD values with anisotropic
DW interpolation are higher than the original ones, whereas the
mean MD values with log-Euclidean and the quaternion tensor field interpolation coincide most time with the original MD
curve with sometimes alternating greater and smaller value with
respect to the original mean MD values. These variations of FA
and MD are also observed from the FA and MD values calculated in the same sector but in different slices (see Fig. 11), and
from the FA and MD values calculated in the same sector of the
same slice for different human hearts (see Fig. 12).
In terms of STD of FA or MD, the obtained results showed
that the STDs of FA values before and after interpolation (at the
DW or tensor field level) are not very different, and that they
oscillate around 0.13. This is true for the three situations mentioned previously. With regard to STDs of MD values, they are
about 2 × 10−4 . Note, however, that the STDs of FA values obtained after interpolation (no matter whatever the interpolation
level is) are smaller than those before interpolation. In contrast,
the STDs of MD values exhibit somewhat irregular behavior
following the used interpolation. Using the log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation, the STDs of resulting MD values become

1323

Fig. 9. MD profiles corresponding to the dark red line in Fig. 7. The zoomed
version of the boxed part in the top plot is given in the bottom plot. The pink
arrows, one of which indicates a zoomed part to better visualize the slight MD
decreasing effects, indicate where there exist MD decreasing effects caused by
both anisotropic interpolation at the DW image level (blue line) or log-Euclidean
interpolation at the level of tensor fields (red line), but not by quaternion interpolation at the tensor field level (black line).

slightly smaller than those calculated from the original tensor
field, whereas, using anisotropic DW level interpolation, the
STDs of the obtained MD values become greater or smaller
than those of original MD values. The increasing of the STDs
of MD values after DW interpolation is due to the presence of
boundaries in the images, as can be observed in Fig. 9.
To describe more quantitatively the null or negative eigenvalues induced by the DW image interpolation, we define the
number of null or negative eigenvalues of tensors. Fig. 13 shows
the number of tensors presenting null or negative eigenvalues in
the original or interpolated tensor fields with different interpolation methods. Null or negative eigenvalues appear when there
exist noises or artifacts in the original data. After interpolation,
it is observed that neither of the three interpolation methods
introduced null or negative eigenvalues when there are no null
or negative eigenvalues in the original data. However, when null
or negative eigenvalues are present in the original data, DW
anisotropic interpolation produced more null or negative eigenvalues, from one to three times of the original data, whereas
log-Euclidean interpolation or quaternion interpolation did not
introduce any null or negative eigenvalues.
Fiber tractography is a technique allowing us to visualize the
fibers of the tissues under investigation. To evaluate the influence
of the interpolation methods on the fiber tractography, we used
in this study the streamline fiber tractography method (fourthorder Runge–Kutta integration) [26]. The original tensor fields
of 128 × 128 × 52 were interpolated to 512 × 512 × 52. During

1324

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

Fig. 11. Mean FA (a) and mean MD (b) curves of the original tensor field
(red line) and the tensor fields interpolated with DW interpolation (blue line),
log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation (black line), and quaternion tensor field
interpolation (green line) in Sector 1 of Fig. 10(a) for different slices of the same
heart.

in general, log-Euclidean and the quaternion interpolations at
the level of tensor fields produced more and longer fibers than
anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images, but with
insignificant difference in mean fiber length (the largest length
difference between the three methods is 2 or 3 voxels).
IV. DISCUSSION
Fig. 10. Comparison of FA and MD mean values in six uniformly distributed
sectors in the same slice (tenth slice) of a human heart. (a) Spatial distribution of
the six sectors distributed in the left ventricle. (b) FA and (c) MD mean curves
from the original tensor field (red line) and the tensor fields interpolated using
DW interpolation (blue line), log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation (black
line), and quaternion tensor field interpolation (green line).

fiber tracking using the streamline method, the minimum fiber
length was limited to 20 mm, and the FA threshold was set at 0.1.
The 3-D fiber tractography of the left heart of a healthy human
heart with different methods is displayed in Fig. 14, in which the
visualization results are shown in top and lateral views. All three
interpolation methods led to the similar spiral fiber architecture
of the myocardium. The pink arrows indicate where the fibers
produced by anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images
are denser than those obtained with log-Euclidean interpolation
at the level of tensor fields but are less dense than the quaternion
interpolation at the level of tensor fields, while the black arrows
show where the two interpolation methods at the level of tensor
fields produced denser fibers than the one at the level of DW
images. More quantitatively, comparison between the two level
interpolations in terms of the number of fibers, mean length,
and STD of fibers is demonstrated in Fig. 15. We observe that,

As mentioned for the interpolated tensor fields, anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images introduced less sphere-like
tensors than log-Euclidean interpolation at the level of tensor
fields. This is due to the fact that the DW image interpolation
is an anisotropic interpolation technique, which has the characteristic of keeping the sharpness of image edges. As a result,
anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images produces
tensor fields, FA and MD maps with sharp edges, which means
that the edges are closer to the original ones with the DW level
interpolation than with log-Euclidean tensor level interpolation.
However, DW image interpolation could introduce swelling effect and artifacts in the subsequent determinant map (extra vertical line in the determinant map). Nevertheless, compared to
log-Euclidean tensor interpolation, using anisotropic DW interpolation introduces less serious artifacts in FA and MD maps. In
contrast, the quaternion interpolation at the level of tensor fields
preserves tensor shape and consequently preserves the homogeneous regions present in the original tensor field, determinant,
FA and MD maps.
In the case of noisy DTI data such as real cardiac DTI data,
anisotropic interpolation at the level of DW images may amplify
the noise, and cannot guarantee the positive-definiteness properties of tensors. This explains the presence of enlarged black

YANG et al.: COMPARATIVE STUDY OF DIFFERENT LEVEL INTERPOLATIONS FOR IMPROVING SPATIAL RESOLUTION

1325

Fig. 12. Mean FA (a) and mean MD (b) curves of the original tensor field (red
line) and the tensor fields interpolated with DW image interpolation (blue line),
log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation (black line), and quaternion tensor field
interpolation (green line) in the same sector (Sector 1) of the same slice (tenth
slice) for different hearts.
Fig. 14. Fiber tractography from the tensor fields interpolated with the different methods, for real human cardiac DTI data. The first and second columns,
respectively, indicate lateral views and top view of left myocardial fiber architecture. (a) and (b) Interpolation at the DW image level. (c) and (d) Interpolation
at the level of tensor fields using log-Euclidean method. (e) and (f) Interpolation at the level of tensor fields using quaternion method. The color designates
the direction of the primary eigenvector (red: left/right; blue: anterior/posterior;
green: bottom/top).

Fig. 13. Number of null or negative eigenvalues of the original (red line)
and interpolated tensor fields using DW interpolation (blue line), log-Euclidean
tensor field interpolation (black line), and quaternion tensor field interpolation
(green line) in Sector 1 of Fig. 10(a) for different slices of the same heart.

areas presenting unreasonable FA values (see Fig. 7). In contrast, log-Euclidean and quaternion tensor interpolations do not
produce tensors with unreasonable FA values (or unreasonable
eigenvalues) since the positive-definite property of tensors is
ensured when taking the logarithm of tensors. Meantime, small
areas formed of a few pixels having different but close values
are preserved after log-Euclidean and quaternion interpolations,
demonstrating that they are loyal to the underlying data (isolated structures or not) while removing noisy points. This is,
however, difficult for DW image level interpolation since when
performed on DW images, interpolation does not guarantee the
positivity of the interpolated eigenvalues due to the nonlinear
process from DW images to a tensor. Similarly, for FA and MD
values, since after nonlinear equations from DW images to dif-

Fig. 15. Parameters of fibers passing through a given slice derived from the
fiber tractography of the whole heart in eight human datasets. The three upper
solid lines indicate the mean length and STD of fibers with DW image interpolation (in blue), log-Euclidean tensor interpolation (in green), and quaternion
tensor interpolation (in pink), while the three lower dotted lines indicate the
number of fibers with DW image interpolation (in blue), log-Euclidean tensor
interpolation (in green), and quaternion tensor interpolation (in pink).

fusion tensors, the interpolated tensor properties such as FA and
MD are unpredictable, which explains the irregular values of
FA and MD profiles (see Figs. 7 and 8). In contrast, even though
log-Euclidean interpolation at the level of tensor fields also introduced FA and MD decreasing effects, the interpolated tensor
values are readily deduced from its interpolation formula, from

1326

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 4, JULY 2014

which tensor properties can be consequently deduced. Based
on these deductions, it is possible to propose new methods to
avoid the drawbacks of tensor field interpolation. For example,
to avoid the decreasing effect of FA/MD values, quaternion interpolation at the tensor field level is proposed, which can be
observed from the FA profiles in Figs 10, 11, and 12. In addition, it should be noted that the number of noise points increases
when using DW image interpolation (see Fig. 13); that is, DW
interpolation introduces artifacts which is not proportional to
the interpolation factor.
The FA collapse with DW image interpolation or logEuclidean interpolation, which is observed in Fig. 8, implies that
the interpolated FA values with the two methods are smaller than
the smallest value of the original FA values whereas with the
quaternion tensor interpolation method, the interpolated value
is always greater than the smallest original FA value and smaller
than the greatest original FA value. That is an inherent property
of the three methods. However, the FA values in Figs. 10–12
show that the mean quaternion FA curve is above the original mean FA curve. This is because the mean of all FA values
including interpolated FA values is always greater than the original mean FA value with the quaternion tensor interpolation.
In short, the averaged FA value on a region becomes greater
than the original mean FA values when using quaternion tensor
interpolation while the average FA value becomes smaller than
the original mean FA value when using DW image interpolation
or log-Euclidean interpolation.
It is well known that the decrease in FA in the brain may be
due to diseases or crossing fibers [27], [28], and that the decrease
in FA in the heart is caused by infarction [29]. Therefore, the
abrupt decrease in FA (at a single point or averaged FA) induced
by the DW image interpolation or log-Euclidean tensor interpolation may mislead the interpretation of the clinical results.
Likewise, the effect of FA increasing due to region averaging in
the case of quaternion interpolation should also be considered
when interpreting the actual FA values.
The results of fiber tractography at the level of DW images
and tensor fields are globally similar, but with some small differences. The two tensor field interpolations generate more and
longer fibers than DW image interpolation, because the latter
amplifies the noise and produces more unreasonable FA values.
However, in terms of fiber tractography, the difference in mean
fiber length between the tensor field and DW image interpolations is very small. This is perhaps due to the fact that the
data points having unreasonable FA values are not sufficiently
numerous to significantly influence the fiber tractography. Indeed, in view of the fact that the myocytes in the myocardium
are 80 to 100 μm in length [30], [31], the difference between
the two different level interpolation methods represents a difference of three or four myocytes in length. So, we can say that the
difference between tensor field interpolations and DW image
interpolation is insignificant in terms of mean fiber length.
Another interesting approach for diffusion tensor interpolation is to use biquaternion [32] by first transforming a diffusion
tensor in log-Euclidean space to a biquaternion and then performing the interpolation on the corresponding biquaternion.
The biquaternion convert diffusion tensors from a manifold

space to a vector space, which gives the possibility to preserve
the properties of original tensors when performing calculations
in a vector space.
V. CONCLUSION
We have compared different level interpolation strategies for
DTI data and their impacts on clinical parameters such as FA
and MD. The results on both synthetic and real data showed
that interpolation is a feasible and effective way to improve the
spatial resolution of DTI data. However, the interpolation at the
level of DW gray-level images produces swelling effect which
can be avoided by the interpolation at the level of tensor fields.
Moreover, the interpolation of tensor fields generates more and
longer fibers than the interpolation of DW gray-level images. On
the other hand, both the anisotropic DW gray-level image interpolation and log-Euclidean tensor field interpolation introduce
FA and MD decrease. Therefore, in clinical analysis, the results
involving the use of DW image interpolation or log-Euclidean
tensor interpolation should be interpreted with precaution since
the abrupt decrease of FA values caused by these methods may
lead to the interpretation of the presence of diseases or fiber
crossing, whereas the quaternion tensor interpolation can allow
avoiding these misleading since it does not introduce decrease
in FA and MD values. More generally, with tensor interpolation, we can predict the attributes such as FA and MD of the
interpolated tensors and consequently preserve these attributes
during interpolation, which is difficult with the interpolation at
the level of DW gray-level images due to the nonlinear transformation form DW image to diffusion tensors. All these findings
would then suggest that tensor field interpolation would be more
convenient than scalar image interpolation for improving DTI.
REFERENCES
[1] P. J. Basser, J. Mattiello, and D. Le Bihan, “MR diffusion tensor spectroscopy and imaging,” Biophys. J., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 259–267, Jan.
1994.
[2] D. Le Bihan, J. F. Mangin, C. Poupon, C. A. Clark, S. Pappata, N. Molko,
and H. Chabriat, “Diffusion tensor imaging: Concepts and applications,”
Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 534–546, Mar. 2001.
[3] P. J. Basser and S. Pajevic, “Statistical artifacts in diffusion tensor MRI
(DT-MRI) caused by background noise,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 44,
no. 1, pp. 41–50, Jul. 2000.
[4] F. Yang, Y.-M. Zhu, S. Rapacchi, J.-H. Luo, M. Robini, and P. Croisille,
“Interpolation of vector fields from human cardiac DTI,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1415–1430, Mar. 2011.
[5] F. Yang, X. Song, S. Rapacchi, L. Fanton, P. Croisille, and Y.-M. Zhu,
“Noise-reduced TPS interpolation of primary vector fields for fiber tracking in human cardiac DTI,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Funct. Imag. Model.
Heart, Nice, France, 2009, pp. 78–86.
[6] F. Yang, Y.-M. Zhu, X. Song, J.-H. Luo, and P. Clarysse, “Interpolation
of human cardiac DTI data using polar coordinates,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Signal Process., Beijing, China, 2010, pp. 678–681.
[7] F. Yang, Y.-M. Zhu, X. Song, S. Rapacchi, P. Croisille, and M. Robini,
“Interpolation et débruitage du champ de vecteurs 3-D en IRM cardiaque
du tenseur de diffusion,” presented at the Symposium on Signal Processing
and Images, Dijon, France, 2009, p. 45.
[8] T. M. Lehmann, C. Gonner, and K. Spitzer, “Survey: Interpolation methods in medical image processing,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 18, no. 11,
pp. 1049–1075, Nov. 1999.
[9] T. M. Lehmann, C. Gonner, and K. S. Addendum, “B-spline interpolation
in medical image processing,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 20, no. 7,
pp. 660–665, Jul. 2001.

YANG et al.: COMPARATIVE STUDY OF DIFFERENT LEVEL INTERPOLATIONS FOR IMPROVING SPATIAL RESOLUTION

[10] A. Mishra, Y. G. Lu, J. J. Meng, A. W. Anderson, and Z. H. Ding, “Unified
framework for anisotropic interpolation and smoothing of diffusion tensor
images,” NeuroImage, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 1525–1535, Jul. 2006.
[11] F. Guichard and F. Malgouyres, “Total variation based interpolation,”
in Proc. Eur. Signal Process. Conf., Island of Rhodes, Greece, 1998,
pp. 1741–1744.
[12] F. Malgouyres and F. Guichard, “Edge direction preserving image zooming: A mathematical and numerical analysis,” SIAM J. Numer. Anal.,
vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–37, 2001.
[13] A. Belahmidi and F. Guichard, “A partial differential equation approach
to image zoom,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Process., Hong Kong, China,
2004, pp. 649–652.
[14] C. A. Castaño-Moraga, M. A. Rodrı́guez-Florido, L. Álvarez,
C.-F. Westin, and J. Ruiz-Alzola, “Anisotropic interpolation of DTI,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention
Conf., Rennes, France, 2004, pp. 343–350.
[15] V. Arsigny, P. Fillard, X. Pennec, and N. Ayache, “Log-Euclidean metrics
for fast and simple calculus on diffusion tensors,” Magn. Reson. Med.,
vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 411–421, Jun. 2006.
[16] J. Weickert and M. Welk, “Tensor field interpolation with PDEs,” in Visualization and Processing of Tensor Fields. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2006, pp. 315–325.
[17] A. Barmpoutis, B. C. Vemuri, T. M. Shepherd, and J. R Forder, “Tensor
splines for interpolation and approximation of DT-MRI with applications
to segmentation of isolated rat hippocamp,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1537–1546, Nov. 2007.
[18] Z. Wang, B. Vemuri, Y. Chen, and T. Mareci, “A constrained variational
principle for direct estimation and smoothing of the diffusion tensor field
from complex DWI,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 930–939,
Aug. 2004.
[19] X. Pennec, P. Fillard, and N. Ayache, “A Riemannian framework for tensor
computing,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 41–66, Jan. 2006.
[20] P. G. Batchelor, M. Moakher, D. Atkinson, F. Calamante, and A. Connelly,
“A rigorous framework for diffusion tensor calculus,” Magn. Reson. Med.,
vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 221–225, Jan. 2005.
[21] G. Kindlmann, R. S. J. Estepar, M. Niethammer, S. Haker, and
C.-F. Westin, “Geodesic-loxodromes for diffusion tensor interpolation
and difference measurement,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput.
Comput.-Assisted Intervention, Brisbane, Australia, 2007, pp. 1–9.
[22] G. Kindlmann, D. B. Ennis, R. T. Whitaker, and C.-F. Westin, “Diffusion tensor analysis with invariant gradients and rotation tangents,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1483–1499, Nov. 2007.

1327

[23] F. Yang, Y.-M. Zhu, I. E. Magnin, J.-H. Luo, P. Croisille, and
P. B. Kingsley, “Feature-based interpolation of diffusion tensor fields and
application to human cardiac DTI,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 459–481, Feb. 2012.
[24] F. Yang, Y.-M. Zhu, M. Robini, and P. Croisille, “DT-MRI interpolation:
At what level?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Signal Process., 2012, pp. 737–740.
[25] E. O. Stejskal and J. E. Tanner, “Spin diffusion measurements: Spin
echoes in the presence of a time-dependent field gradient,” J. Chem. Phys.,
vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 288–292, Dec. 1965.
[26] P. J. Basser, S. Pajevic, C. Pierpaoli, J. Duda, and A. Aldroubi, “In vivo
fiber tractography using DT-MRI data,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 44, no. 4,
pp. 625–632, Oct. 2000.
[27] A. Virta, A. Barnett, and C. Pierpaoli, “Visualizing and characterizing
white matter fiber structure and architecture in the human pyramidal tract
using diffusion tensor MRI,” Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1121–
1133, Oct. 1999.
[28] C. Pierpaoli and P. J. Basser, “Toward a quantitative assessment of diffusion anisotropy,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 893–906, Dec.
1996.
[29] M. Wu, W. I. Tseng, M. M. Su, C. Liu, K. Chiou, V. J. Wedeen,
T. G. Reese, and C. Yang, “Diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging mapping the fiber architecture remodeling in human myocardium
after infarction: Correlation with viability and wall motion,” Circulation,
vol. 114, no. 10, pp. 1036–1045, Aug. 2006.
[30] J. D. Humphrey, Cardiovascular Solid Mechanics: Cells, Tissues and Organs. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[31] P. J. Hunter, B. H. Smaill, P. M. F. Nielsen, and J. LeGrice, “Mathematical
model of the cardiac anatomy,” in Computational Biology of the Heart.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, ch. 6, 1996.
[32] K. K. Nand, G. Hamarneh, and R. Abugharbieh, “Diffusion tensor image
processing using biquaternions,” in Proc. 9th IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed.
Imag., 2012, pp. 538–541.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

