IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

783

Impact of Head Rotation on the Individualized
Common Carotid Flow and Carotid
Bifurcation Hemodynamics
Nicolas Aristokleous, Ioannis Seimenis, Georgios C. Georgiou, Yannis Papaharilaou, Brigitta C. Brott,
Andrew Nicolaides, and Andreas S. Anayiotos

Abstract—This paper aims at evaluating the changes that head
rotation poses on morphological and flow characteristics of the
carotid bifurcation (CB) and on the distribution of parameters
that are regarded as important in atherosclerosis development,
such as relative particle residence time (RRT), normalized oscillatory shear index (nOSI), and helicity (HL). Using a subject-specific
approach, six healthy volunteers were MR-scanned in two head
postures: supine neutral and prone with rightward head rotation.
Cross-sectional flow velocity distribution was obtained using phasecontrast MRI at the common carotid artery (CCA). Our results indicate that peak systolic flow rate is reduced at the prone position in
most cases for both CCAs. Morphological MR images are used to
segment and construct the CB models. Numerical simulations are
performed and areas exposed to high helicity or unfavorable hemodynamics are calculated. Head rotation affects the instantaneous
spatial extent of high helicity regions. Posture-related observed
differences in the distribution of nOSI and RRT suggest that inlet flow waveform tends to moderate geometry-induced changes
in the qualitative and quantitative distribution of atherosclerosissusceptible wall regions. Overall, presented results indicate that
an individualized approach is required to fully assess the postural
role in atherosclerosis development and in complications arising in
stenotic and stented vessels.
Index Terms—Atherosclerosis, carotid artery bifurcation,
imaged-based computational fluid dynamics (CFD), wall shear
stress.

I. INTRODUCTION

C

ARDIOVASCULAR disease (CVD) causes over 800
thousand deaths in the United States (US) and 1.9 million

Manuscript received April 30, 2013; revised December 30, 2013; accepted
February 1, 2014. Date of publication February 20, 2014; date of current version
May 1, 2014. This work was co-funded by the European Regional Development
Fund and the Republic of Cyprus through the Research Promotion Foundation
(Project YΓEIA/ΔYΓEIA/0609(BIE)/11).
N. Aristokleous and A. S. Anayiotos are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering, Cyprus University of
Technology, Limassol 3036, Cyprus (e-mail: n.aristokleous@cut.ac.cy; andreas.
anayiotos@cut.ac.cy)
I. Seimenis is with the Department of Medical School, Democritus University
of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, 68100, Greece (e-mail: iseimen@med.duth.gr).
G. C. Georgiou is with the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Cyprus, Nicosia 1678, Cyprus (e-mail: georgios@ucy.ac.cy).
Y. Papaharilaou is with IACM FORTH, Heraklion 70013, Greece (e-mail:
yannisp@iacm.forth.gr).
B. C. Brott is with the Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35233 USA (e-mail: bbrott@uab.edu).
A. Nicolaides is with the Vascular Screening and Diagnostic Center, Nicosia
70013, Cyprus (e-mail: anicolaides1@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2305575

in the European Union (EU) per year, amounting to 32% and
40% of all deaths, respectively [1], [2]. Additionally, stroke
accounted for around 137 thousand deaths in US and 460 thousand in EU in 2012. To approach the atherosclerosis disease
from the personalized medicine point of view, novel markers
associated with gene factors, environmental factors, and geneby-environment interactions must be validated [3]. This paper
falls within the general scope of assessing the ability of various hemodynamic markers, related to flow conditions in the
carotid, to provide a subject-specific estimation of the geometrydependent hemodynamic burden on the carotid wall.
Previous studies employing rigid and compliant models regard arterial bifurcations and curvature regions as regions of
low and oscillating wall shear stress (WSS) [4]–[10]. For that
reason, many researchers have suggested the use of a variety
of hemodynamic parameters, such as WSS, WSS temporal gradient (WSSTG), WSS spatial gradient (WSSSG), oscillatory
shear index (OSI), normalized OSI (nOSI), and relative residence time (RRT), as potential markers to quantify the blood
flow disturbance and indicate possible regions prone to atherogenesis [11]–[13]. Additionally, many geometric parameters,
or relevant independent factors [14], have been proposed for
describing the arterial geometry. This study focuses on the assessment of the impact that geometry poses on the local hemodynamics using accurate subject-specific models and inlet waveforms. Our approach is based on the accurate reconstruction of
the arterial geometry using morphological data acquired from
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and on velocity measurements obtained with phase-contrast MRI (PC-MRI). To accurately estimate the subject-specific hemodynamic environment
in vivo, an image-based computational fluid dynamics (CFD) approach is necessary. Steinman and Taylor reviewed the progress
achieved in the field of image-based CFD studies in the last
decade [14], [15]. The methodology employed in the present
work, from MR images to numerical simulations, has been
widely applied [15]–[19]. The combination of MRI with CFD
allows for more accurate and highly reproducible results, as
recently shown by Bijari et al. [20] and earlier by other researchers [16], [21]–[25]. Our previous studies in the healthy
carotid bifurcation (CB) focused on geometric changes due to
head rotation [26], and alterations of the hemodynamic features
as a result of that geometry change [27]. The present study
aims to evaluate, on a subject-specific basis, the effect of head
and neck rotation on: 1) the blood flow waveform and total
flow through the common carotid; 2) the local hemodynamics

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

784

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

combining the resulting arterial geometry changes with various
inlet boundary conditions; and 3) the regional distribution of
atherosclerotic burden.

face smoothing and to add cylindrical extensions on inflow and
outflow segments [29]. The CB models were clipped at CCA3,
ICA5, and ECA5 borders [26] for global comparison of the wall
area hemodynamic parameters.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Study Group
Six asymptomatic, presumably healthy male volunteers
(mean age of 30 years, range from 22 to 39 years) were MRscanned to obtain the three-dimensional (3-D) arterial models,
as well as the total velocity time history through the vessel cross
section, of both common carotid arteries (CCAs). Each subject
was imaged in two different scanning sessions corresponding to
the two investigated head postures: 1) the supine neutral head
position (S) and 2) the prone position with rightwards head rotation up to 80◦ (P). The study was approved by the Cyprus
bioethics committee (2011).
B. MR Imaging
All MRI data were acquired with a 3T system (Achieva,
Philips Medical Systems, Best, The Netherlands) using the builtin quadrature body coil for proton excitation. A phased array
head-neck coil and a phased array superficial coil were used
for signal detection in the supine and prone position, respectively. Anatomical data were obtained with a 3-D time-of-flight
(TOF) method. For each head posture, careful planning allowed
for the complete coverage of both the left and right CBs by
including parts of the CCA, the internal carotid artery (ICA)
and the external carotid artery (ECA). As a result, four arterial
models were obtained per volunteer: supine position left carotid
(SPLC), supine position right carotid (SPRC), prone position
left carotid (PPLC) and prone position right carotid (PPRC).
The employed gradient-echo pulse sequence (echo time (TE) =
3.5 ms, repetition time (TR) = 23 ms, flip angle (FA) = 20◦ ,
0.36 × 0.36 × 1.2 mm3 acquisition voxel) provided 100 axial, overlapping (by 50%) slices with a reconstruction voxel of
0.2 × 0.2 × 0.6 mm3 . Variable FA and gradient first moment
nulling techniques were employed to decrease saturation effects
of inflowing blood and reduce signal loss due to complex flow,
respectively. A peripheral pulse-triggered, two-dimensional
(2-D), phase-sensitive pulse sequence was employed to acquire
flow data spread in 20 phases over the cardiac cycle. The gradient echo sequence employed (TE = 13 ms, TR = 20 ms, FA =
10◦ , 0.35 × 0.35 × 5.0 mm3 acquisition/reconstruction voxel)
provided magnitude and phase-difference, velocity-encoded images using a view sharing reconstruction. An independent scan
was prescribed for each CCA in both head positions to ensure that the measurement slice was always perpendicular to
the flowing blood and at the level of approximately 3 diameters
(∼20 mm) below CB. Optimum encoding velocity per scan was
decided upon trial runs.
C. Surface Reconstruction
The 3-D surface models were constructed from the acquired
anatomical MR images using slice-by-slice manual segmentation performed with the ITK-Snap (PICSL, USA) software [28].
The vascular modeling toolkit (VMTK) was used for 3-D sur-

D. Computational Simulations
Our pilot work [27] on the influence of various head postures and varying degree of head rotation on both the geometric and hemodynamic characteristics of the CB suggested that
only significant geometric changes can influence the hemodynamic properties in an emphatic and reproducible way. In this
respect, two of the six volunteer model combinations (SPLC,
SPRC, PPLC, PPRC for Vol. I and Vol. II) were selected for the
computational simulations. Selection was based on the largest
differences in CB geometry found between the supine and prone
postures and specific criteria included: 1) bifurcation angle (Vol.
I, SPRC versus PPRC: 41.9◦ versus 56.1◦ , Vol. II, SPRC versus
PPRC: 30.5◦ versus 38.7◦ ); 2) ICA angle (Vol. I, SPRC versus
PPRC: 22.9◦ versus 35.6◦ , Vol. II, SPRC versus PPRC: 14.1◦
versus 14.6◦ ); and 3) bifurcation area ratio (Vol. I, SPRC versus PPRC: 1.34 versus 1.92, Vol. II, SPRC versus PPRC: 1.0
versus 1.12). The S and P posture inlet waveforms were used
for the corresponding left/right carotid model of each volunteer,
but also for the model of the second postural position for that
carotid. Therefore, a total of 16 computational simulations were
performed, 8 for each of the two selected volunteers. The CFD
simulations were based on various standard applied modeling
assumptions, i.e., blood was considered Newtonian with a density of 1050 kg/m3 and a viscosity of 3.5 cP, the artery wall
rigid, and the inlet flow fully developed and laminar. The impact of these assumptions in computed hemodynamics has been
discussed in [30]–[32].
1) Mesh Construction: The numerical solution of the governing equations of blood flow requires the spatial discretization
of the computational domain. A systematic time step and grid
size converge study has to be conducted for each patient-specific
model [33] to ensure grid and time step convergence. Since,
however, topology and flow features in all presented cases are
expected to be roughly similar we conducted a grid and time step
convergence study on a single case, and acquired results were
applied to all cases. ICEM-CFD v12.1 (Ansys Inc.) was used
to generate spatial discretizations of the computational domain
with increasing mesh density (coarse, medium, fine) and three
different time steps for the same carotid model (see Table I).
Three monitor points were placed inside the carotid bulb, where
the flow is characterized as complex. The results for the cycle averaged pressure (p) and velocity (u) at these points were
calculated at the third flow cycle. The percentage differences
between the computed p and u values became small (less than
11%) between medium to fine meshes and b and c time steps.
The results for the monitor points investigated are summarized
in Table I. Therefore a mesh size of ∼7.9 × 105 elements and
a time step of 1.97 × 10−4 s were considered sufficient and
were used in all models. A higher grid density (25% reduction
in element size) was only applied in the vicinity of the CB and
a refined viscous layer was added adjacent to the wall.

ARISTOKLEOUS et al.: IMPACT OF HEAD ROTATION ON THE INDIVIDUALIZED COMMON CAROTID FLOW AND CB HEMODYNAMICS

785

TABLE I
MESH CONSTRUCTION STUDY OF VELOCITY (m/s)/PRESSURE (mmHg) AT PEAK
SYSTOLE FOR THE THREE MONITOR POINTS (MP) PLACED IN CAROTID BULB

2) Flow Waveforms: The blood flow time history obtained
with PC-MRI by integrating the through-plane velocity over the
lumen cross-sectional area at every frame using Segment v1.9
R2178 [34]. The data were decomposed in 14 harmonics with
fast Fourier transform using MatlabR2012b (The MathWorks
Inc.). The resulting waveforms were used to compute the fully
developed inlet time-varying velocity profiles for each case.
Regarding outlet boundary conditions, a fixed flow division of
65/35 between ECA/ICA [35] and traction-free conditions were
applied.
3) Data Analysis: To compare blood flow rates (Q) at the
same heart rate (HR), all flow rates were scaled to a constant
heart rate of 60 beats per minute:


60
(1)
Qscaled = Qm easured
HRm easured
Statistical analysis was performed using the R language
v3.0.2 (the R project for statistical computing) and data are
presented as mean ± standard deviation (s.d.). The Wilcoxon
signed-rank test was used for comparisons between supine and
prone head postures. The value p < 0.05 was considered to indicate significance.
4) Flow Computations: Fluent v12.1 (Ansys Inc.) was used
to obtain numerical solutions. Actual recorded heart rates were
used in each case to obtain simulation time step for 4000 iterations per cycle. The Womersley number (α, based on inlet radius) was 4.72 ≤ α ≤ 5.35. A second-order upwind scheme was
applied for the discretization of the momentum equations and a
second-order interpolation scheme for pressure. The PressureImplicit with Splitting of Operators (PISO) algorithm was used
for pressure-velocity coupling. A time periodic solution was
achieved after three flow cycles. Data of the fourth and fifth cycle were used. Hemodynamic parameters, such as time-averaged
WSS (TAWSS), OSI, nOSI, RRT, helicity (HL), were computed.
OSI was first defined by Ku et al. [12] and was later modified
by Papaharilaou et al. as follows [36]:
T
w |τw · nm | dt
,
0 ≤ OSI ≤ 1/2
(2)
OSI = 0 T
0 |τw · nm | dt

 
τ
1 T
nm =
dt
(3)
T 0
τ 

Fig. 1. Blood flow index (BFI) through the (a) left and (b) right CCA for each
volunteer and for both head postures.

where T is the heart cycle period, τ is the instantaneous WSS
vector, nm is the mean shear direction, and w is defined according to:
w = 0.5(1 − cos α)

(4)

where α is the angle between τ and nm . An OSI value of 0
corresponds to unidirectional shear flow, while 0.5 corresponds
to a purely oscillatory shear. nOSI is calculated by dividing OSI
with the TAWSS magnitude normalized by the time-averaged
inlet Poiseuille flow. RRT was proposed by Himburg et al. [37]
and is defined as:
1
(5)
RRT =
(1 − 2 · OSI) × WSSPoiseuille
where WSSPoiseuille is the Poiseulle flow WSS at the inlet.
HL(t) was introduced by Moffat and Tsinober [38] and for a
fluid in a domain D is defined as


v(x, t) · ∇ × v(x, t)dV =
v(x, t) · ω(x, t)dV .
HL(t) =
D

D

(6)
Finally, the localized normalized helicity (LNH) used in this
study is defined in [39] as
LNH(x, t) =

v(x, t) · ω(x, t)
,
|v(x, t)| |ω(x, t)|

−1 ≤ LNH ≤ 1.

(7)

Positive values of helicity are related to clockwise blood rotation and negative ones to counterclockwise blood rotation.
III. RESULTS
The inlet blood flow histograms at CCA change with head
posture as illustrated in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the blood
flow index (BFI) for the six volunteers in the supine and prone
position for the left and the right carotid, respectively. The BFI

786

Fig. 2.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Inlet velocity waveforms (left) and lumen cross-sectional velocity distribution at peak systole (right) for (a) volunteer I and (b) volunteer II.

(8)

TABLE II
MEAN VALUES AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF THE PEAK BLOOD FLOW RATE
(Q, MEASURED AND SCALED) FOR THE SUPINE (S) AND THE PRONE (P) WITH
RIGHTWARD ROTATION POSTURES FOR BOTH CCAS

where Qsys is the blood flow at peak systole and Qdia the flow at
end diastole. It is evident that prone position is associated with
reduced BFI in most cases.
Fig. 2 represents the velocity waveforms used as inlet boundary conditions for volunteer I (a) and volunteer II (b). For each
case, the cross-sectional distribution of peak systolic velocities
is also shown. As observed, head rotation does not affect significantly the flow waveform but it reduces the peak systolic blood
velocity.
Table II lists the measured and scaled CCA flow rate (mean
± s.d.) from all six volunteers. The results indicate a notable
decrease of peak blood flow rate for the prone posture.
Fig. 3 shows the computed isosurfaces of LNH averaged over
the cardiac cycle (top) and the corresponding isosurfaces at peak
systole (middle) and end diastole (bottom). The isosurfaces of
LNH averaged over the cardiac cycle indicate a region of high
intensity helicity, where bidirectional helical structures are represented by blue (clockwise) and red (counterclockwise) tracts.
These flow structures originate at the bifurcation region and de-

velop into the ICA and ECA. These patterns were conserved for
both head postures in the left CB, but have shown variation in the
LNH direction and spatial extent in the right CB. The comparison of the instantaneous LNH at peak systole and end diastole
shows differences in direction and spatial extent for almost all
cases demonstrating that geometric changes combined with dynamic changes in the pressure distribution cause instantaneous
changes in the helical structure distribution.
Figs. 4 and 5 show the head posture related changes in the
exposure of the carotid wall to unfavorable hemodynamics. In
more detail, Fig. 4 shows contour plots of nOSI and the contour
line for the threshold value of nOSI = 1.125 to visualize the
atherosclerosis susceptibility areas (nOSI>1.125).

in this study is defined by
BFI =

Qsys
Qdia

ARISTOKLEOUS et al.: IMPACT OF HEAD ROTATION ON THE INDIVIDUALIZED COMMON CAROTID FLOW AND CB HEMODYNAMICS

Fig. 3. Localized normalized helicity (LNH) isosurfaces for the two investigated head postures: averaged throughout the cardiac cycle (top), instantaneous
at peak systole (middle) and instantaneous at end diastole. LNH = 0.8 indicates
clockwise blood rotation and LNH = –0.8 counterclockwise rotation.

To investigate the effects of geometry and inlet flow waveform
on the computed flow field, the contour plots are presented for
the corresponding inlet flow waveforms of each position as well
as for the alternative waveform, i.e., supine geometry-supine
inlet waveform, prone geometry-prone inlet waveform, supine
geometry-prone inlet waveform, prone geometry-supine inlet
waveform. This way, we attempt to distinguish and compare the
sensitivity of the flow field on both the geometry and inlet flow
waveform. Similarly, Fig. 5 shows the distribution of RRT. The
comparison of nOSI and RRT fields in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively,
depicts the discernible influence that posture-related geometry
and inlet flow waveform changes pose on these parameters.
The quantification of the impact of unfavorable hemodynamics on the arterial wall is presented in Table III. The definition
of unfavorable hemodynamics is based on threshold values. For
TAWSS the threshold adopted was 0.4 Pa as indicated by Malek
et al. [13]. For high values of OSI we selected three thresholds (0.145, 0.238 and 0.3). The first two values were proposed
by Lee at al. [40], while the third one was selected arbitrarily to assess the sensitivity of our results. The nOSI threshold
adopted (1.125) was calculated based on the respective thresholds for OSI and TAWSS and by normalizing TAWSS with
the average value of WSS in arteries of 1.5 Pa from the data of
Malek et al. [13]. The selected RRT thresholds (9.35, 5.29, 7.14)
were calculated from (4) and the corresponding OSI thresholds.
Presented data, manifest the role that inlet waveform plays in
highlighting the area exposed to unfavorable conditions. When a
nonmatching waveform is used, differences due to head posture
change are mitigated.
IV. DISCUSSION
This study, focused on the changes in the CCA flow and
important CB hemodynamic parameters caused by head and
neck rotation using patient-specific geometries and inlet velocity waveforms. The new information presented here, as demonstrated by Figs. 1 and 2, is the notable decrease in blood flow
rate at peak systole with rightward head rotation. For the left
CB, BFI was reduced in all cases, while a similar reduction

787

was seen for the right CB in 5 out of 6 volunteers (see Fig. 1).
This may be due to changes in the local resistance or downstream impedance with head rotation that could cause reduction
of peak systolic blood flow and it may also be related to slight alterations in the heart rate of volunteers between the two scanning
sessions. In addition, rightward head rotation seems to slightly
increase total CCA flow at end diastole, which in combination
with the reduced peak systolic flow results in the observed BFI
changes. Nevertheless, the shape of the flow waveform remains
unaffected as indicated in Fig. 2, which also indicates that head
posture affects the cross sectional distribution of peak systolic
velocities. Rightward rotation seems to extenuate the occurrence
of high velocities at the periphery of the lumen and accentuate
the velocity distribution skewness. Interestingly enough, CCA
flow velocity, as well as CCA diameter, seem to be associated
with ischemic stroke independently of carotid atherosclerosis
and CVD risk factors [41].
For two volunteers that have shown significant geometric alterations due to head rotation, we combined the CCA blood flow
waveforms measured for both head postures with CB-specific
geometries to independently compute relevant blood flow fields.
Significant hemodynamic changes were observed.
The general features of the flow field in terms of the localized
normalized helicity (LNH) are illustrated in Fig. 3 where the
isosurfaces of LNH are shown. We applied a threshold of 0.8
to highlight high helicity regions [39]. Overall, LNH revealed
a strong subject and vessel dependency. Head rotation does not
seem to favor clockwise or counterclockwise blood rotation, although it significantly affects the instantaneous spatial extent of
the LNH. As outlined by Gallo et al. [39], helicity of high intensity may suppress flow disturbances and, thus, prevent plaque
deposition [42].
The comparison of the flow field dependency on geometry
and inlet flow waveform shows that when the geometry is kept
constant and the inlet waveform changes (horizontal comparison
in Figs. 4 and 5), the pattern of the atherosclerosis susceptible
wall regions is very similar, although nOSI in particular, also
shows quantitative differences. This is in agreement with the results of Campell et al. [43], who investigated the effect of inlet
waveform on CFD simulations using blunt, parabolic, Womersley or the real subject profile, and those of Moyle et al. [30] who
found that geometric parameters influence the hemodynamic
features more significantly than the inlet waveform. Indeed,
when the inlet waveform is kept constant and the geometric
model is altered due to postural changes (diagonal comparison),
the atherosclerosis susceptible wall regions alter both qualitatively and quantitatively. However, when the realistic conditions are taken into account (vertical comparison between the
first pair in each category), it appears that the rotation-derived
changes in the “sensitive” carotid wall regions are extenuated.
This may indicate that the interrelation between geometry and
flow waveform tends to autoregulate disturbed flow fields and
moderate unfavorable conditions. These suggestions are quantitatively supported by data presented in Table III. As highlighted
by the difference in corresponding calculated wall regions
between the two head postures (grayed rows), the adoption of a
common inlet flow waveform can significantly differentiate the

788

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MAY 2014

Fig. 4. Contour plots of nOSI for the left (LC) and right carotid (RC) for volunteers I and II. The first row represents the supine normal head position and the
second row the prone position with rightward head rotation. S WAVE corresponds to CFD results obtained using the inlet waveform obtained from the supine
position, while P WAVE corresponds to CFD results using the prone position waveform. nOSI = 1.125 is shown as a white contour line.

Fig. 5. Contour plots of RRT for the left (LC) and right carotid (RC) for
volunteers I and II. The first row represents the supine normal head position
and the second row the prone position with rightwards head rotation. S WAVE
corresponds to CFD results obtained from the supine position, while P WAVE
corresponds to CFD results using the prone position waveform.

TABLE III
AREA EXPOSED TO UNFAVORABLE HEMODYNAMICS NORMALIZED BY THE
TOTAL SURFACE AREA BOUNDED BY CCA3, ECA5, AND ICA5
FOR THE TWO HEAD POSTURES

carotid wall region potentially prone to plaque development. It
is proposed, therefore, to use a posture-specific inlet waveform
in CFD simulations related to postural effects.
However, caution should be exercised in the interpretation of
the results of our study due to the small number of subjects used.
A large cohort is needed to ensure that the changes observed are
statistically significant to disambiguate definite trends in specific
geometric and hemodynamic parameters with posture change.
Inaccuracies in the identification of the arterial wall and arterial
lumen in each segment due to low signal to noise ratio and flow
voids has been a problem in this study and its importance has
been highlighted before [27], [28]. The rigid wall assumption
considered in this study is also a limitation. Nevertheless, the
findings of this study can be considered as complementary to
work presented in references 32 and 33 in associating a patient
specific CB geometry with disturbance indices and increased
risk of disease development.
V. CONCLUSION
Head rotation inflicts changes on the geometric characteristics of the CB, as well as on the CCA blood flow waveform.
These changes affect the developed flow fields and influence the
exposure of the carotid wall to unfavorable hemodynamics. The
prominent intersubject variability of these changes warrant an
individualized approach for the evaluation of the potential risks
that head posture may pose on plaque deposition and/or rupture
of existent vulnerable lesions as well as on potential fractures
of stents in stented vessels.
REFERENCES
[1] A. S. Go, D. Mozaffarian, V. L. Roger, E. J. Benjamin, J. D. Berry, W.
B. Borden, D. M. Bravata, S. Dai, E. S. Ford, C. S. Fox, S. Franco, H. J.
Fullerton, C. Gillespie, S. M. Hailpern, J. A. Heit, V. J. Howard, M. D.
Huffman, B. M. Kissela, S. J. Kittner, D. T. Lackland, J. H. Lichtman, L.
D. Lisabeth, D. Magid, G. M. Marcus, A. Marelli, D. B. Matchar, D. K.
McGuire, E. R. Mohler, C. S. Moy, M. E. Mussolino, G. Nichol, N. P.
Paynter, P. J. Schreiner, P. D. Sorlie, J. Stein, T. N. Turan, S. S. Virani, N.
D. Wong, D. Woo, M. B. Turner, C. American Heart Association Statistics,
and S. Stroke Statistics, “Executive summary: Heart disease and stroke
statistics—2013 update: A report from the American Heart Association,”
Circulation, vol. 127, pp. 143–52, Jan. 1, 2013.

ARISTOKLEOUS et al.: IMPACT OF HEAD ROTATION ON THE INDIVIDUALIZED COMMON CAROTID FLOW AND CB HEMODYNAMICS

[2] M. Nichols, N. Townsend, P. Scarborough, R. Luengo-Fernandez, J. Leal,
A. Gray, and M. Rayner, “European cardiovascular disease statistics
2012,” in European Heart Network. Brussels, Belgium: European Society of Cardiology, Sophia Antipolis, 2012.
[3] D. T. Miller, P. M. Ridker, P. Libby, and D. J. Kwiatkowski, “Atherosclerosis: The path from genomics to therapeutics,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol.,
vol. 49, pp. 1589–1599, Apr. 17, 2007.
[4] D. N. Ku, “Blood flow in arteries,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., vol. 29,
pp. 399–434, 1997.
[5] O. Araim, A. Chen, and B. Sumpio, “Hemodynamic forces effects on
atherosclerosis,” Eurekah Biosci., vol. 1, pp. 39–46, 2005.
[6] S. Z. Zhao, X. Y. Xu, A. D. Hughes, S. A. Thom, A. V. Stanton, B. Ariff,
and Q. Long, “Blood flow and vessel mechanics in a physiologically realistic model of a human carotid arterial bifurcation,” J. Biomech., vol. 33,
pp. 975–984, 2000.
[7] A. S. Anayiotos, S. A. Jones, D. P. Giddens, S. Glagov, and C. K. Zarins,
“Shear-stress at a compliant model of the human carotid bifurcation,” J.
Biomech. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 116, pp. 98–106, Feb. 1994.
[8] D. Martin, A. Zaman, J. Hacker, D. Mendelow, and D. Birchall, “Analysis
of haemodynamic factors involved in carotid atherosclerosis using computational fluid dynamics,” Brit. J. Radiol., vol. 82, no. 1, pp. S33–S38,
Jan. 2009.
[9] R. Ross, “Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease,” Amer. Heart J.,
vol. 138, pp. S419–S420, Nov. 1999.
[10] K. Perktold and G. Rappitsch, “Computer simulation of local blood flow
and vessel mechanics in a compliant carotid artery bifurcation model,” J.
Biomech., vol. 28, pp. 845–856, Jul. 1995.
[11] S. W. Lee, L. Antiga, and D. A. Steinman, “Correlations among indicators
of disturbed flow at the normal carotid bifurcation,” J. Biomech. Eng.,
vol. 131, p. 061013, Jun. 2009.
[12] D. N. Ku, D. P. Giddens, C. K. Zarins, and S. Glagov, “Pulsatile flow
and atherosclerosis in the human carotid bifurcation—Positive correlation
between plaque location and low and oscillating shear-stress,” Arteriosclerosis, vol. 5, pp. 293–302, 1985.
[13] A. M. Malek, S. L. Alper, and S. Izumo, “Hemodynamic shear stress and
its role in atherosclerosis,” JAMA, vol. 282, pp. 2035–2042, Dec. 1, 1999.
[14] D. A. Steinman and C. A. Taylor, “Flow imaging and computing: Large
artery hemodynamics,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, pp. 1704–1709, Dec.
2005.
[15] C. A. Taylor and D. A. Steinman, “Image-based modeling of blood flow
and vessel wall dynamics: Applications, methods and future directions:
Sixth International Bio-Fluid Mechanics Symposium and Workshop,
March 28–30, 2008 Pasadena, California,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38,
pp. 1188–1203, Mar. 2010.
[16] L. Antiga, M. Piccinelli, L. Botti, B. Ene-Iordache, A. Remuzzi, and
D. A. Steinman, “An image-based modeling framework for patientspecific computational hemodynamics,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 46,
pp. 1097–1112, Nov. 2008.
[17] Q. Long, X. Y. Xu, B. Ariff, S. A. Thom, A. D. Hughes, and A. V. Stanton,
“Reconstruction of blood flow patterns in a human carotid bifurcation: A
combined CFD and MRI study,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 11, pp. 299–
311, Mar. 2000.
[18] D. A. Steinman, J. B. Thomas, H. M. Ladak, J. S. Milner, B. K. Rutt,
and J. D. Spence, “Reconstruction of carotid bifurcation hemodynamics
and wall thickness using computational fluid dynamics and MRI,” Magn.
Reson. Med., vol. 47, pp. 149–159, Jan. 2002.
[19] M. R. Kaazempur-Mofrad, M. Bathe, H. Karcher, H. F. Younis, H. C.
Seong, E. B. Shim, R. C. Chan, D. P. Hinton, A. G. Isasi, A. Upadhyaya,
M. J. Powers, L. G. Griffith, and R. D. Kamm, “Role of simulation in
understanding biological systems,” Comput. Struct., vol. 81, pp. 715–726,
2003.
[20] P. B. Bijari, L. Antiga, B. A. Wasserman, and D. A. Steinman, “Scanrescan reproducibility of carotid bifurcation geometry from routine
contrast-enhanced MR angiography,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 33,
pp. 482–489, Feb. 2011.
[21] J. B. Thomas, J. S. Milner, B. K. Rutt, and D. A. Steinman, “Reproducibility of image-based computational fluid dynamics models of the human
carotid bifurcation,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 31, pp. 132–141, 2003.
[22] I. Marshall, S. Zhao, P. Papathanasopoulou, P. Hoskins, and Y. Xu, “MRI
and CFD studies of pulsatile flow in healthy and stenosed carotid bifurcation models,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, pp. 679–687, May 2004.
[23] J. R. Cebral, P. J. Yim, R. Löhner, O. Soto, and P. L. Choyke, “Blood flow
modeling in carotid arteries with computational fluid dynamics and MR
imaging,” Academic Radiol., vol. 9, pp. 1286–1299, 2002.
[24] L. Goubergrits, U. Kertzscher, B. Schoneberg, E. Wellnhofer, C. Petz, and
H. C. Hege, “CFD analysis in an anatomically realistic coronary artery
model based on non-invasive 3D imaging: Comparison of magnetic res-

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]
[37]

[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]

[42]
[43]

789

onance imaging with computed tomography,” Int. J. Cardiovasc Imag.,
vol. 24, pp. 411–421, Apr. 2008.
J. A. Moore, D. A. Steinman, D. W. Holdsworth, and C. R. Ethier, “Accuracy of computational hemodynamics in complex arterial eometries
reconstructed from magnetic resonance imaging,” Ann. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 27, pp. 32–41, Jan.-Feb. 1999.
N. Aristokleous, I. Seimenis, Y. Papaharilaou, G. C. Georgiou, B. C.
Brott, E. Eracleous, and A. S. Anayiotos, “Effect of posture change on
the geometric features of the healthy carotid bifurcation,” IEEE Trans Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 148–154, Jan. 2011.
Y. Papaharilaou, N. Aristokleous, I. Seimenis, M. I. Khozeymeh, G. C.
Georgiou, B. C. Brott, E. Eracleous, and A. S. Anayiotos, “Effect of head
posture on the healthy human carotid bifurcation hemodynamics,” Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 51, pp. 207–218, Feb. 2013.
P. A. Yushkevich, J. Piven, H. C. Hazlett, R. G. Smith, S. Ho, J. C. Gee,
and G. Gerig, “User-guided 3D active contour segmentation of anatomical
structures: Significantly improved efficiency and reliability,” Neuroimage,
vol. 31, pp. 1116–1128, Jul. 1, 2006.
L. Antiga and D. A. Steimman, “Robust and objective decompositionand
mapping of bifurcating vessels,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 23, no. 6,
pp. 704–713, Jun. 2004.
K. R. Moyle, L. Antiga, and D. A. Steinman, “Inlet conditions for imagebased CFD models of the carotid bifurcation: Is it reasonable to assume
fully developed flow?,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 128, pp. 371–179, Jun.
2006.
U. Morbiducci, D. Gallo, D. Massai, R. Ponzini, M. A. Deriu, L. Antiga, A.
Redaelli, and F. M. Montevecchi, “On the importance of blood rheology for
bulk flow in hemodynamic models of the carotid bifurcation,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 44, pp. 2427–2438, Sep. 2, 2011.
U. Morbiducci, D. Gallo, D. Massai, F. Consolo, R. Ponzini, L. Antiga, C.
Bignardi, M. A. Deriu, and A. Redaelli, “Outflow conditions for imagebased hemodynamic models of the carotid bifurcation: Implications for
indicators of abnormal flow,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 132, p. 091005, Sep.
2010.
S. Hodis, S. Uthamaraj, A. L. Smith, K. D. Dennis, D. F. Kallmes, and
D. Dragomir-Daescu, “Grid convergence errors in hemodynamic solution
of patient-specific cerebral aneurysms,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, pp. 2907–
2913, Nov. 15, 2012.
E. Heiberg, J. Sjogren, M. Ugander, M. Carlsson, H. Engblom, and
H. Arheden, “Design and validation of segment–freely available software
for cardiovascular image analysis,” BMC Med. Imag., vol. 10, p. 1, 2010.
H. C. Groen, L. Simons, Q. J. van den Bouwhuijsen, E. M. Bosboom, F.
J. Gijsen, A. G. van der Giessen, F. N. van de Vosse, A. Hofman, A. F.
van der Steen, J. C. Witteman, A. van der Lugt, and J. J. Wentzel, “MRIbased quantification of outflow boundary conditions for computational
fluid dynamics of stenosed human carotid arteries,” J. Biomech., vol. 43,
pp. 2332–2338, Aug. 26, 2010.
Y. Papaharilaou, D. J. Doorly, and S. J. Sherwin, “The influence of out-ofplane geometry on pulsatile flow within a distal end-to-side anastomosis,”
J. Biomech., vol. 35, pp. 1225–1239, Sep. 2002.
H. A. Himburg, D. M. Grzybowski, A. L. Hazel, J. A. LaMack, X. M. Li,
and M. H. Friedman, “Spatial comparison between wall shear stress measures and porcine arterial endothelial permeability,” Amer. J. Physiol.
Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 286, pp. H1916–H1922, May 2004.
H. K. Moffatt and A. Tsinober, “Helicity in laminar and turbulent-flow,”
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mechanics, vol. 24, pp. 281–312, 1992.
D. Gallo, D. A. Steinman, P. B. Bijari, and U. Morbiducci, “Helical flow
in carotid bifurcation as surrogate marker of exposure to disturbed shear,”
J. Biomech., vol. 45, pp. 2398–2404, Sep. 21, 2012.
S. W. Lee, L. Antiga, J. D. Spence, and D. A. Steinman, “Geometry of the
carotid bifurcation predicts its exposure to disturbed flow,” Stroke, vol. 39,
pp. 2341–2347, Aug. 2008.
C. H. Bai, J. R. Chen, H. C. Chiu, and W. H. Pan, “Lower blood flow
velocity, higher resistance index, and larger diameter of extracranial
carotid arteries are associated with ischemic stroke independently of
carotid atherosclerosis and cardiovascular risk factors,” J. Clin. Ultrasound, vol. 35, pp. 322–330, Jul.–Aug. 2007.
U. Morbiducci, R. Ponzini, M. Grigioni, and A. Redaelli, “Helical flow as
fluid dynamic signature for atherogenesis risk in aortocoronary bypass. A
numeric study,” J. Biomech., vol. 40, pp. 519–534, 2007.
I. C. Campbell, J. Ries, S. S. Dhawan, A. A. Quyyumi, W. R. Taylor,
and J. N. Oshinski, “Effect of inlet velocity profiles on patient-specific
computational fluid dynamics simulations of the carotid bifurcation,” J.
Biomech. Eng., vol. 134, p. 051001, May 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

