IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

309

Quantification of Wave Reflection Using Peripheral
Blood Pressure Waveforms
Chang-Sei Kim, Nima Fazeli, M. Sean McMurtry, Barry A. Finegan, and Jin-Oh Hahn, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a novel minimally invasive
method for quantifying blood pressure (BP) wave reflection in
the arterial tree. In this method, two peripheral BP waveforms
are analyzed to obtain an estimate of central aortic BP waveform,
which is used together with a peripheral BP waveform to compute forward and backward pressure waves. These forward and
backward waves are then used to quantify the strength of wave
reflection in the arterial tree. Two unique strengths of the proposed method are that 1) it replaces highly invasive central aortic
BP and flow waveforms required in many existing methods by less
invasive peripheral BP waveforms, and 2) it does not require estimation of characteristic impedance. The feasibility of the proposed
method was examined in an experimental swine subject under a
wide range of physiologic states and in 13 cardiac surgery patients.
In the swine subject, the method was comparable to the reference
method based on central aortic BP and flow. In cardiac surgery
patients, the method was able to estimate forward and backward
pressure waves in the absence of any central aortic waveforms: on
the average, the root-mean-squared error between actual versus
computed forward and backward pressure waves was less than
5 mmHg, and the error between actual versus computed reflection
index was less than 0.03.
Index Terms—Central aortic blood pressure (BP), system identification, tube-load model, wave reflection.

I. INTRODUCTION
N the arterial tree, pressure and flow waves can be divided into their respective forward and backward components [1]–[5]. It is well known that forward wave initiated by
the ejection of the heart travels to the peripheral sites (typically
the level of arterioles), where it is reflected due to a large mismatch between characteristic and terminal impedances to yield
backward wave [3], [6]. The amount of wave reflection (i.e.,

I

Manuscript received August 24, 2013; revised November 6, 2013 and December 24, 2013; accepted February 13, 2014. Date of publication February 20,
2014; date of current version December 30, 2014. This work was supported in
part by the Young Investigator Grant Award from the Korean-American Scientists and Engineers Association and the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada.
C.-S. Kim, N. Fazeli, and J.-O. Hahn are with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA (e-mail:
coriolis@naver.com; nfazeli@umd.edu; jhahn12@umd.edu).
M. S. McMurtry is with the Department of Medicine (Cardiology), University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2B7, Canada (e-mail: mcmurtry@
ualberta.ca).
B. A. Finegan is with the Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2B7, Canada (e-mail: bfinegan@
ualberta.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2307273

amplitude of backward wave relative to its forward counterpart)
serves as cardiovascular (CV) risk factor, because an increase in
wave reflection ultimately results in elevated central aortic blood
pressure (BP), thereby increasing the cardiac afterload [7]–[11].
Indeed, an increase in the amplitude of BP wave reflection is
a major determinant of age-dependent increase in systolic and
pulse pressures [12], [13]. The intensity of wave reflection was
also shown to be able to detect subjects with early vascular
aging due to its relationship to arterial stiffness [14]. In this
regard, wave reflection analysis has been considered as a viable
method to better understand CV function as well as to predict
and diagnose CV diseases (CVDs) [10], [15]–[17].
Several methods for quantification of wave reflection have
been reported in the literatures. Newman et al. [2] calculated
forward and backward pressure waves by measuring an arterial
BP waveform before and after occlusion of a distal artery.
Westerhof et al. [3] and Lee and Mark [18] used a tube-load
model to derive forward and backward BP waves from the
measurement of central aortic BP and flow waveforms. Burattini
and Campbell [19], [20] calculated forward and backward BP
waves based on the pulse transit time and reflection coefficient
parameters determined by fitting an arterial tree model to central
aortic BP and flow waveforms. More recently, efforts have been
made to eliminate the use of central aortic flow, measurement
of which involves highly invasive surgical procedures. For
example, Westerhof et al. [21] and Qasem and Avolio [22]
developed a method that works solely based on central aortic
BP, where central aortic BP was either directly measured [21]
or estimated from a peripheral BP [22] and central aortic flow
was approximated to a triangle. Swamy et al. [23] developed a
method that uses a pair of central aortic and peripheral circulatory waveforms to perform wave reflection analysis. Besides,
Edwards et al. [24] used an inflection point observed in the central aortic BP waveform to determine when backward wave starts
to augment its forward counterpart in order to quantify wave
reflection. In spite of all these efforts, however, these methods
are not widely used for routine monitoring and assessment
of CV function due to a number of limitations. First, all the
currently available methods rely on central aortic BP waveform
(which is difficult to measure directly). Second, early methods
based on central aortic BP and flow waveforms are susceptible
to errors in computation of characteristic impedance (see,
e.g., [5]). Third, approximating central aortic flow to a triangle
results in unacceptable wave reflection analysis [25]. Further,
subtle features such as inflection point in the central aortic BP
waveform are often very difficult to detect due to its dependence
on the fidelity of measurement as well as a variety of CV
factors.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

310

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

locations:
P0 (k) = Pf ,j (k + Δj ) + Pb,j (k − Δj )
Pj (k) = Pf ,j (k) + Pb,j (k)

Fig. 1.

Tube-load model of an arterial branch.

In an attempt to address the aforementioned limitations, we
developed a novel minimally invasive method for quantification of wave reflection that can potentially be deployed to real
clinical settings. In this method, two peripheral BP waveforms
are analyzed to obtain an estimate of central aortic BP waveform, which is used together with a peripheral BP waveform to
compute forward and backward pressure waves. These forward
and backward waves are then used to quantify the strength of
wave reflection in the arterial tree. Two unique strengths of the
proposed method are that 1) it replaces highly invasive central
aortic BP and flow waveforms required in many existing methods by less invasive peripheral BP waveforms, and 2) it does
not require estimation of characteristic impedance. The initial
feasibility of the proposed method was examined in an experimental swine subject under a wide range of physiologic states
and in thirteen cardiac surgery patients.

(1)

where P0 (k) and Pj (k) are BP waves at the inlet and the outlet
locations, respectively. It is well known that backward wave is
related to its forward counterpart via the reflection coefficient
Γj , which is a function of characteristic impedance Zc,j and
R
terminal load impedance ZL ,j (s) = Zc,j + 1+R T ,Tj ,Cj T , j s [27]:
Γj (s) =

ZL ,j (s) − Zc,j
Pb,j (s)
η2,j
=
=
Pf ,j (s)
ZL ,j (s) + Zc,j
s + η1,j

where s is the Laplace variable, η1,j =

2Z c , j +R T , j
2Z c , j R T , j C T , j

(2)

and η2,j =

RT ,j
2Z c , j R T , j C T , j

. Taking the Laplace transform of (1) and using (2)
yields the following relationship between central and peripheral
BP waves:
Gj (s) =

1 + Γj (s)
Pj (s)
= τj s
.
P0 (s)
e + e−τ j s Γj (s)

(3)

As we will demonstrate later in this section, (3) is the basis
for estimation of central aortic BP waveform from peripheral
BP waveforms, while (1) is the basis for quantification of wave
reflection.
B. Estimation of Central Aortic BP Waveform

II. QUANTIFICATION OF WAVE REFLECTION USING
PERIPHERAL BP WAVEFORMS
In the proposed method, wave reflection is quantified in two
steps: 1) central aortic BP waveform is estimated from two
peripheral BP waveform measurements, and 2) forward and
backward BP waves are computed from estimated central aortic
and measured peripheral BP waveforms. The method uses an
arterial tree model for this purpose. This section describes the
arterial tree model and the proposed method to calculate forward
and backward waves.
A. Mathematical Model
The arterial tree is approximated to a parallel connection
of two tube-load models [19], [20], [26]. Each tube-load model
represents a branch in the arterial tree, such as heart–arm branch
and heart–leg branch. Assuming that tubes are lossless, BP wave
at an arbitrary location in an arterial branch (say, jth branch) can
be formulated as a function of forward and backward waves (see
Fig. 1). Denote Pf ,j (k) and Pb,j (k) as forward and backward
BP waves at the distal outlet (i.e., reflection site) of the jth
branch at a discrete-time instant k. Since the branch is assumed
to be lossless, these forward and backward BP waves travel
through the branch without any distortion in morphology, and
therefore, forward and backward BP waves at the proximal inlet
of the branch can be written as Pf ,j (k + Δj ) and Pb,j (k − Δj ),
where Δj = τj Fs , Fs is the sampling frequency and τj is the
(continuous-time) pulse transit time. The resultant BP waves at
the central (inlet) and the peripheral (outlet) locations are given
by the sum of forward and backward BP waves at the respective

The central aortic BP waveform is estimated from two peripheral BP waveform measurements by exploiting the fact that
the former is the common source that creates the latters. This
way, central aortic BP waveform corresponding to the measured
peripheral BP waveforms can be estimated without any a priori
knowledge on the subject as illustrated below. Consider an arterial tree approximated by a parallel connection of two tube-load
models, each representing upper body (“1”) and lower body
(“2”) arterial branches [see Fig. 2(a)]. The arterial beds distal to
the tubes are modeled by respective terminal load impedances,
each of which consists of the peripheral resistance RT ,j and the
peripheral compliance CT ,j , j = 1, 2. From this model, central
aortic BP waveform is estimated based on the following steps.
1) A relationship between P1 and P2 that does not involve
central aortic BP P0 is obtained by first inverting the relationship between P0 and P1 , then inverting the relationship
between P0 and P2 , and then combining them to cancel
out P0 [see Fig. 2(b)]:
−1
G−1
1 (s) P1 (s) = G2 (s) P2 (s) .

(4)

2) The arterial branch models G1 (s) and G2 (s) are determined by fitting the relationship (4) to the measurements
of P1 and P2 . For this purpose, (4) is reformulated into
the following numerical optimization problem:
−1
Θ∗ = arg min G−1
1 (s, Θ) P1 (s) − G2 (s, Θ) P2 (s)
Θ

(5)
where Θ = {τ1 , τ2 , η1,1 , η1,2 , η2,1 , η2,2 } is the vector of
unknowns in G1 (s) and G2 (s) and Θ∗ is its optimal value
(note that only the aggregated parameters η1,j and η2,j , but

KIM et al.: QUANTIFICATION OF WAVE REFLECTION USING PERIPHERAL BLOOD PRESSURE WAVEFORMS

Fig. 2.

311

Estimation of central aortic BP waveform from two peripheral BP waveform measurements.

not the individual parameters RT ,j , CT ,j , and Zc,j , can be
determined [28]). In solving (5), the cost function · can
be easily computed in the time domain (see Rashedi et al.
[29] for the details of how (5) is solved in the time domain).
Thus, the arterial branch models can be determined solely
based on two peripheral BP waveforms without any a
priori knowledge on the subject. In a previous study, it
was demonstrated that these arterial branch models can be
uniquely determined if certain conditions are met [26].
3) The central aortic BP waveform is estimated by applying the inverse of the arterial branch models G−1
1 (s) and
G−1
2 (s), identified as the solution to (5), to P1 and P2 in
order to obtain the intermediate estimates P̂0,1 and P̂0,2 ,
and then calculating the weighted average of them to yield
the resultant estimate P̂0 [see Fig. 2(c)]:
−1
P̂0 (s) = σG−1
1 (s) P1 (s) + (1 − σ) G2 (s) P2 (s) (6)

where 0 < σ < 1 is a tunable weighting factor (σ = 0.5
was used in this study).
C. Computation of Forward and Backward Waves
Using estimated central aortic BP waveform and measured
peripheral BP waveforms, forward and backward BP waves are
computed based on (1) as follows. For a heartbeat consisting of
N data samples, (1) results in totally 2N equations, 2 for each
k = 1 · · · N:
P0 (k) = Pf ,j (k + Δj ) + Pb,j (k − Δj )
Pj (k) = Pf ,j (k) + Pb,j (k) .

(7)

Assuming that the underlying physiologic state is stable, we
have the following relationships:
Pf ,j (k + Δj ) = Pf ,j (k + Δj − N ) if k + Δj > N
Pb,j (k − Δj ) = Pb,j (k − Δj + N ) if k − Δj < 0


A2N ×2N =

A1
A2



⎡

IΔ j ×Δ j

⎢ 0(N −Δ j )×Δ j
⎢
=⎢
⎣ 0(N −Δ j )×Δ j
IΔ j ×Δ j

(8)

which essentially means that the morphology of forward and
backward BP waveforms remains the same over multiple heartbeats. Stacking the 2N equations obtained from (7) results in
the following matrix equation:
A2N ×2N X2N ×1 = B2N ×1

(9)

where X2N ×1 = [ Pf ,j (1) · · · Pf ,j (N )Pb,j (1) · · · Pb,j (N ) ]T ,
B2N ×1 = [ Pj (1) · · · Pj (N )P0 (1) · · · P0 (N ) ]T , the subscript
associated with each matrix denotes its dimension, and, (10)
as shown, at the bottom of the page, where A1 and A2 are
submatrices of A, both having a dimension of N × 2N , while I
and 0 are identity and zero matrices with dimensions denoted by
subscripts. It is noted that A is rank deficient, which arises from
the underlying assumption of the model (i.e., the tube is lossless)
that mean arterial BP is identical between central (P0 (k)) and
peripheral (Pj (k)) BPs: indeed, it can be easily shown that the
sum of row vectors of A1 is identical to the sum of row vectors
of A2 , and also that

N
N


A1,k X = U X =
Pj (k) = N P̄


k =1
N


k =1


A2,k

X = UX =

k =1

N


(11)
P0 (k) = N P̄

k =1

where Aj,k is the kth row of Aj , U1×2N = [1, . . . , 1] is a row
vector having 2N 1s as its elements, and P̄ is the mean arterial BP. Therefore, the rows of A are linearly dependent and
(9) cannot be solved to yield a unique solution. To address this
challenge, we propose to overconstrain the problem by imposing additional equations that are physiologically relevant. In
particular, we exploit the fact that central aortic flow is zero
during diastole. Noting that forward and backward flow waves
are obtained by dividing their BP counterparts by characteristic
impedance, and also that resultant flow wave results from subtracting backward flow wave from forward flow wave [27], the

0Δ j ×(N −Δ j )

IΔ j ×Δ j

I(N −Δ j )×(N −Δ j )

0(N −Δ j )×Δ j

I(N −Δ j )×(N −Δ j )
0Δ j ×(N −Δ j )

0Δ j ×(N −Δ j )
I(N −Δ j )×(N −Δ j )

0Δ j ×(N −Δ j )

⎤

I(N −Δ j )×(N −Δ j ) ⎥
⎥
⎥
IΔ j ×Δ j
⎦
0(N −Δ j )×Δ j

(10)

312

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

following extra equation holds for δN < k ≤ N :
Q0 (k) =

Pf ,j (k + Δj ) − Pb,j (k − Δj )
=0
Zc,j

(12)

where Q0 (k) , δN < k ≤ N corresponds to aortic flow during
diastole. Augmenting the (1 − δ) N equations from (12) to (9)
results in a set of overconstrained equations that can be solved
with standard solvers, e.g., least-squares method:




A(3−δ )N ×2N X2N ×1 = B (3−δ )N ×1

(13)



where
B (3−δ )N ×1 = [Pj (1) · · · Pj (N )
P0 (1) · · · P0 (N )
01×(1−δ )N ]T . The least-squares solution of (13) is given by
[30]:








X = [AT A]−1 AT B

(14)

Once X is determined, the time series sequences of forward
and backward BP waves can be obtained as the first N components and the last N components of X, respectively. The degree
of wave reflection is then quantified in terms of reflection magnitude (RM) and reflection index (RI), which are defined by:
RM =

|Pb,j |
|Pb,j |
, RI =
|Pf ,j |
|Pf ,j | + |Pb,j |

(15)

where |Pf ,j | and |Pb,j | are peak-to-trough amplitudes of forward
and backward BP waves, respectively.
III. METHODS
This section presents the details of how the experimental data
were collected, and how they were used to examine the initial
feasibility of the proposed method.
A. Experimental Protocol
1) Swine Subject: Under the experimental protocol #01-055
approved by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee of Animal Care, invasive BP and flow data were collected
from a swine subject under general anesthesia. BP waveforms
were recorded simultaneously from indwelling catheters placed
in radial and femoral arteries as well as the aorta, coupled via
rigid fluid-filled tubing to external BP transducers with its frequency response flat up to 100 Hz. In addition, aortic flow
waveform was measured using a flow meter placed around the
ascending aorta. In the course of experiment, physiologic state
of the swine subject was widely altered by a number of interventions, including: infusions of crystalloid volume, phenylephrine, dobutamine, isoproterenol, esmolol, nitroglycerine, and
progressive hemorrhage. The type of interventions and their durations were titrated so as to allow the swine subject to span a
broad range of physiologic states.
2) Cardiac Surgery Patients: After approval obtained from
the University of Alberta Health Research Ethics Board (ID
Pro00021889) and informed consent from the patients, invasive
central aortic, radial and femoral BP were collected simultaneously from 13 cardiac surgery patients. The data were collected
both before and after the surgery, since physiologic state before

and after surgery was deemed different due to hemodynamic
changes caused by prolonged anesthesia [31] and impaired ventricular performance after cardiac surgery. The BP data were
collected for the duration of 2 min, both before and after the
surgery. Thus, totally 26 data were obtained. The experimental
setup is described in detail in [29].

B. Data Processing and Analysis
We focused on wave reflection analysis in the lower body arterial branch. In theory, the proposed method is equally applicable
to both upper body and lower body circulations. However, its applicability to lower body arterial branch is of particular interest,
since clinical problems and diseases (e.g., peripheral vascular
disease due to atherosclerosis and arterial stenosis) associated
with increased peripheral resistance (and thus increased wave
reflection) is more commonly found in the lower body arterial
branch, such as femoral and tibial arteries [32]–[34].
From the data collected from the swine subject, 66 10-s-long
data segments were obtained. Each of the segments was then
analyzed as follows. First, a representative single beat waveform was extracted for central aortic, radial, and femoral BPs.
Second, peripheral BP waveform measurements were used to
determine the arterial tree model, i.e., G1 (s) and G2 (s), by
solving the optimization problem (5). Third, central aortic BP
waveform was estimated using (6). Then, forward and backward BP waves were found by solving (14), where measured
femoral and estimated central aortic BP waveforms were used

to construct B with δ = 0.5 [see (13)]. Finally, RM and RI were
computed using (15). As well, each of the 2-min-long cardiac
surgery patient data was analyzed in the same way to obtain forward and backward BP waves as well as RM and RI associated
with each data.
We evaluated the proposed method in two steps. First, we
compared the proposed method with an existing method based
on central aortic BP and flow (called the reference method) [35].
For this purpose, the animal data were analyzed by the reference
method. Then, the validity of the proposed method was assessed
via the accuracy of 1) forward and backward BP waves, 2) RM
and RI, 3) central aortic flow, and 4) characteristic impedance.
For each of the 66 10-s-long data segment, the accuracy of forward and backward BP waves was quantified by the root-meansquared error (RMSE) between reference versus estimated forward and backward BP waves, and the accuracy of RM and RI
were quantified by mean and standard deviation of the difference
between reference versus estimated RM and RI, as well as their
agreement in terms of the Bland–Altman statistics. The accuracy
of central aortic flow was assessed by RMSE between measured
versus estimated central aortic flow waveforms. During this assessment, the optimal characteristic impedance associated with
each data segment was also identified as follows. The “scaled”
central aortic flow (i.e., central aortic flow scaled by characteristic impedance Zc,j ) was computed by subtracting the estimated
backward BP wave from its forward counterpart. Then, the optimal estimate of characteristic impedance was determined by

KIM et al.: QUANTIFICATION OF WAVE REFLECTION USING PERIPHERAL BLOOD PRESSURE WAVEFORMS

313

TABLE I
PHYSIOLOGIC STATE SPANNED BY SWINE SUBJECT AND CARDIAC SURGERY PATIENTS [MAX/MIN (MEAN)]
HR
[bpm]

Mean BP
[mmHg]

CO
[lpm]

TPR
[mmHg/lpm]

AI

RM

RI

Animal

173/85 (110)

135/43 (88)

5.7/1.7 (3.5)

34/18 (26)

0.34/0.08 (0.20)

0.56/0.22 (0.37)

0.36/0.18 (0.27)

Human

91/47 (69)

105/53 (72)

-*

-*

0.44/0.06 (0.24)

0.93/0.27 (0.61)

0.48/0.21 (0.37)

The aortic flow was not measured in cardiac surgery patients.

TABLE II
TUBE-LOAD MODEL PARAMETERS DETERMINED FROM PERIPHERAL BP WAVEFORMS (MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION)

solving the following minimization problem:

Zc∗, 2

= arg min
Zc,2

N 




P̂f , 2 (k) − P̂b , 2 (k) − Zc , 2 Q0 (k)

2



k=1

(16)
where P̂f ,2 (k) and P̂b,2 (k) are estimated forward and backward
BP waves, respectively, whereas Q0 (k) is measured central aortic flow. RMSE was then determined as the minimum value of
the cost function in (16), whereas characteristic impedance cor∗
. It is
responding to the data segment was determined as Zc,2
known that characteristic impedance of an arterial branch is
a function of itsarterial compliance and inertance (i.e., blood

density): Zc = cl where l is inertance per unit length and c
is compliance per unit length [19]. Noting that arterial compliance is inversely proportional to arterial BP while blood density
can be regarded as constant, we examined how characteristic
impedance changed in comparison with arterial BP. In particular, we anticipated that the trend of change in characteristic
impedance would be positively proportional to that corresponding to BP. The correlation between characteristic impedance and
arterial BP was assessed using the following relationship, based
on the assumption that arterial compliance linearly depends
on mean arterial BP (which is a reasonable local approximation) [36]:


l ∼
ρ
(17)
Zc,2 =
=
c
λ1 P̄ + λ2

where P̄ is mean arterial
BP,
 and λ1 and λ2 were tuned to fit (17)

to the 66 pairs of Zc,2 , P̄ data. The coefficient of determination (r2 value) between 66 characteristic impedances estimated
from (16) and those regressed from (17) was used to quantify the
correlation between the two. To assess the relative physiologic
relevance of characteristic impedances obtained from the reference versus the proposed methods, the same correlation analysis
was performed on the characteristic impedances obtained from
the reference method.
Second, we used the human data to assess the method’s ability
to quantify BP wave reflection in the absence of direct central
aortic BP measurement. For this purpose, forward and backward BP waves as well as RM and RI computed from apply-

Fig. 3. Forward and backward BP waves in the swine subject computed by the
proposed method. (a) Nominal physiologic state (HR = 90 bpm, RM = 0.26).
(b) After infusion of dobutamine (HR = 140 bpm, RM = 0.41). The dotted
lines are waves computed by the reference method, while the crosses are waves
computed by the proposed method.

ing to (13)–(15) 1) measured central aortic and peripheral BP
waveforms (“computed”) versus 2) estimated central aortic and
measured peripheral BP waveforms (“estimated,” i.e., the proposed method) were compared with each other, in terms of the
waveform RMSE and the errors associated with RM and RI,
respectively.
IV. RESULTS
Table I summarizes the physiologic state spanned by the
swine subject and the cardiac surgery patients, and Table II
shows the parameter in the tube-load models determined from
peripheral BP waveforms. It is noted that both swine and human data show large variability in physiologic state (see Table I),
which in turn resulted in large variability in the tube-load model
parameter values.
In regards to the swine subject, Fig. 3 shows a representative
example of forward and backward BP waves estimated by the
proposed method in comparison with their reference counterparts. Fig. 4 shows the Bland–Altman plots produced for RM
and RI. Fig. 5 shows measured central aortic flow versus central
aortic flow derived from the estimated forward and backward
waves. Fig. 6 shows the correlation between BP and characteristic impedance. Table III summarizes RMSE associated with
forward and backward BP waves as well as central aortic flow,

314

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

V. DISCUSSION
A. Feasibility of Wave Reflection Analysis
with Peripheral Waveforms

Fig. 4.

Bland–Altman statistics for RM and RI in the swine subject.

Fig. 5. Measured versus estimated central aortic flow waveforms in the swine
subject. (a) Nominal physiologic state (HR = 92 bpm, RM = 0.28). (b) After
infusion of dobutamine (HR = 128 bpm, RM = 0.45).

Fig. 6. Correlation between arterial BP and estimated characteristic
impedance (Z c ) in the swine subject. In the left panel, “o” and “+” correspond to Z c obtained from reference and proposed methods, respectively. The
dashed and solid lines correspond to the regression equation (17) associated
with reference and proposed methods, respectively. In the right panel, measured
Z c was obtained from (16), whereas regressed Z c was obtained from (17). The
r 2 value between measured versus computed Z c was 0.79 and 0.31 for proposed
versus reference methods, respectively.

and the errors between measured versus estimated RM and RI
(in terms of mean and standard deviation).
In regards to the cardiac surgery patients, Table IV summarizes RMSE between computed versus estimated forward/backward BP waves as well as the errors between computed (i.e., measured central aortic and peripheral BP waveforms) versus estimated RM and RI. Compared with the errors
in RM and RI associated with the swine subject, the percentage
errors were comparable in, although the absolute errors were
larger in cardiac surgery patients due to their larger RM and RI
values (see Table I).

The results suggested that the proposed method was able to
provide high-fidelity waveforms of forward and backward BPs
with very small RMSEs (both in the swine subject and in the
cardiac surgery patients; see Fig. 3 and Tables III and IV). The
Bland–Altman analysis indicated that the accuracy of estimated
RM and RI was satisfactory in general. There were a few samples that exhibited large errors, which appeared to be due to the
fluctuations observed in the reference and/or estimated forward
and backward BP waveforms (see Section V.B for details). It is
also noted that the errors between measured versus computed
forward/backward waves and measured versus estimated forward/backward waves were similar (see Table III), indicating
that the central aortic BP was accurately estimated from two peripheral BP waveforms. As well, the close accordance between
computed versus reference forward/backward waves provided
a basis to use the computed waves as reasonable surrogates of
reference in the cardiac surgery patients in the absence of direct
aortic flow measurements.
The comparison of central aortic flow waveforms provided
additional evidence toward the feasibility of the proposed
method: Fig. 5 shows that forward and backward BP waves
computed from estimated central aortic and measured peripheral BP waveforms could accurately estimate central aortic flow,
which is not trivial because central aortic flow is not used in
the proposed method in estimating central aortic BP waveform (see Section II.B) as well as in computing forward and
backward BP waves (see Section II.C). The agreement between
measured versus computed central aortic flow waveforms, as
shown in Table III, validates the proposed method outlined in
Section II.C for computation of forward and backward waves
from a pair of central and peripheral BP waveforms, which is
unique in comparison with the existing techniques, including
those involving extreme interventions [2], those based on central aortic BP and flow waveforms [3], [21], [25], [37], [38]
and those others based on model-based signal processing [23].
In addition, the agreement between measured versus estimated
central aortic flows, as shown in Table III and Fig. 5, validates
the proposed method as a whole, the crux of which is to exploit
estimated rather than measured central aortic BP waveform in
computing forward and backward BP waves, thereby resulting
in a method for wave reflection analysis that is less invasive than
its existing counterparts.
Characteristic impedance values estimated from (16) in the
course of estimating central aortic flow was in good agreement
with the underlying systolic, mean arterial and diastolic BPs
in terms of their trends of change (see Fig. 6 for correlation
with mean arterial BP). Note that this also supports the fidelity
of forward and backward BP waves estimated from the proposed method, since it is evident from (16) that the fidelity of
characteristic impedance hinges upon the quality of forward
and backward BP waves. In performing the regression analysis
(17), we anticipated that λ1 < 0 and λ2 > 0 in order to satisfy the physiological relevance of the pressure dependence of

KIM et al.: QUANTIFICATION OF WAVE REFLECTION USING PERIPHERAL BLOOD PRESSURE WAVEFORMS

315

TABLE III
SWINE SUBJECT: ABSOLUTE AND NORMALIZED RMSES BETWEEN MEASURED VERSUS ESTIMATED WAVEFORMS AND ERRORS ASSOCIATED WITH RM AND RI
(MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION) (ESTIMATED BP: CALCULATED BASED ON ESTIMATED CENTRAL AORTIC AND MEASURED PERIPHERAL BP WAVEFORMS;
COMPUTED BP: CALCULATED BASED ON MEASURED CENTRAL AORTIC AND PERIPHERAL BP WAVEFORMS)

Estimated BP: Calculated based on estimated central aortic and measured peripheral BP waveforms; Computed BP: Calculated based on measured
central aortic and peripheral BP waveforms.

TABLE IV
CARDIAC SURGERY PATIENTS: ABSOLUTE AND NORMALIZED RMSES
BETWEEN COMPUTED VERSUS ESTIMATED WAVEFORMS AND ERRORS
ASSOCIATED WITH RM AND RI (MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION)

arterial compliance (i.e., it is positive but inversely proportional
to mean arterial BP). Indeed, our regression analysis yielded
λ1 = −134.5 and λ2 = 25550, and the correlation between estimated [i.e., (16)] versus regressed [i.e., (17)] characteristic
impedances was very high with r2 = 0.79. It is also noted that the
values of characteristic impedance estimated from (17) exhibited higher correlation to BP than those computed from the reference method (r2 = 0.31), suggesting that the proposed method
is perhaps more robust than the reference method in deriving
forward/backward BP waves and characteristic impedance. This
is in fact in accordance with the finding in a previous study in
which the characteristic impedance values calculated from central aortic BP and flow waveforms are susceptible to errors [5].
It is obvious that the remarkable performance of the proposed method arises from the method’s ability to estimate accurate central aortic BP waveform. In fact, it has been suggested
that it is possible to accurately estimate clinically useful CV
risk factors such as central aortic BP [26], [39]–[42], pulse
transit time [42], [43], and cardiac output [44] from peripheral
BP waveform(s) in an individual subject. Together with these
existing evidences, the results presented in this paper (which
suggests the feasibility of quantifying wave reflection characteristics from peripheral waveforms) strongly suggest the future
potential of minimally invasive and perhaps even noninvasive
measurement of CV risk factors.
B. Limitations
The numerical method to compute forward and backward BP
waves must be improved. It was observed that forward and backward BP waves (especially the reference ones) computed for a
small subset of the data exhibited fluctuations which did not
appear to be physiologic (see, for example, small fluctuations
in the backward BP wave in the left panel of Fig. 3; in some

data segments, these fluctuations were relatively large to possibly affect the computation of RM and/or RI values). In fact,
scrutinizing the overall experimental results revealed that many
of the large RM and/or RI errors were associated with artifacts
due to these fluctuations in the computed reference forward and
backward BP waves, whereas most data segments corresponding to small RM and/or RI errors were associated with relatively
smooth forward and backward BP waves. To estimate RM and
RI more accurately, additional considerations will need to be
incorporated in (13), such as constraints and postprocessing to
prevent large degradation in the smoothness of forward and
backward BP waveforms.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented and examined the initial proof-ofprinciple of a novel method for quantification of BP wave reflection in the arterial tree solely based upon peripheral circulatory
waveforms. Considering the relative ease in having access to
peripheral circulatory waveforms minimally invasively or even
noninvasively, the method has potential to be largely applicable to real clinical practice for early diagnosis of CVD. Our
future work will be the extension of the proposed method to
noninvasive measurement settings.
REFERENCES
[1] W. W. Nichols and M. F. O’Rourke, McDonald’s Blood Flow in Arteries:
Theoretical, Experimental, and Clinical Principles. Boca Raton, FL,
USA: CRC Press, 2011.
[2] D. L. Newman, S. E. Greenwald, and N. L. Bowden, “An in vivo study
of the total occlusion method for the analysis of forward and backward
pressure waves,” Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 13, pp. 595–600, 1979.
[3] N. Westerhof, P. Sipkema, G. C. Van Den Bos, and G. Elzinga, “Forward
and backward waves in the arterial system,” Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 6,
pp. 648–656, 1972.
[4] J. R. Womersley, “Oscillatory flow in arteries II: The reflection of the
pulse wave at junctions and rigid inserts in the arterial system,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 2, pp. 313–323, 1958.
[5] J. Li, “Time domain resolution of forward and reflected waves in the
aorta,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-33, no. 8, pp. 783–785, Aug.
1986.
[6] G. M. London and P. G. Alain, “Influence of arterial pulse and reflected
waves on blood pressure and cardiac function,” Am. Heart J., vol. 138,
pp. 220–224, 1999.
[7] F. N. Van De Vosse and N. Stergiopulos, “Pulse wave propagation in the
arterial tree,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., vol. 43, pp. 467–499, 2011.
[8] C. Manisty, J. Mayet, R. J. Tapp, K. H. Parker, P. Sever, N. H. Poulter,
A. M. T. Simon, and A. D. Hughes, “Wave reflection predicts cardiovascular events in hypertensive individuals independent of blood pressure and

316

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

other cardiovascular risk factors an ASCOT (Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac
Outcome Trial) substudy,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 56, pp. 24–30, 2010.
R. D. Latham, N. Westerhof, P. Sipkema, B. J. Rubal, P. Reuderink, and
J. P. Murgo, “Regional wave travel and reflections along the human aorta:
A study with six simultaneous micromanometric pressures,” Circulation,
vol. 72, pp. 1257–1269, 1985.
W. K. Laskey and W. G. Kussmaul, “Arterial wave reflection in heart
failure,” Circulation, vol. 75, pp. 711–722, 1987.
Y. Matsui, K. Kario, J. Ishikawa, K. Eguchi, S. Hoshide, and K. Shimada,
“Reproducibility of arterial stiffness indices (pulse wave velocity and
augmentation index) simultaneously assessed by automated pulse wave
analysis and their associated risk factors in essential hypertensive patients,” Hypertension Res.: Official J. Japanese Soc. Hypertension, vol. 27,
pp. 851–857, 2004.
G. F. Mitchell, H. Parise, E. J. Benjamin, M. G. Larson, M. J. Keyes, J.
A. Vita, R. S. Vasan, and D. Levy, “Changes in arterial stiffness and wave
reflection with advancing age in healthy men and women the framingham
heart study,” Hypertension, vol. 43, pp. 1239–1245, 2004.
P. Segers, E. R. Rietzschel, M. L. De Buyzere, S. J. Vermeersch, D.
De Bacquer, L. M. Van Bortel, G. D. Backer, T. C. Gillebert, and P. R.
Verdonck, “Noninvasive (input) impedance, pulse wave velocity, and wave
reflection in healthy middle-aged men and women,” Hypertension, vol. 49,
pp. 1248–1255, 2007.
K. L. Wang, H. M. Cheng, S. H. Sung, S. Y. Chuang, C. H. Li, H. A.
Spurgeon, C. T. Ting, S. S. Najjar, E. G. Lakatta, F. C. Yin, P. Chou, and
C. H. Chen, “Wave reflection and arterial stiffness in the prediction of 15year all-cause and cardiovascular mortalities a community-based study,”
Hypertension, vol. 55, pp. 799–805, 2010.
S. Laurent and P. Boutouyrie, “Recent advances in arterial stiffness and
wave reflection in human hypertension,” Hypertension, vol. 49, pp. 1202–
1206, 2007.
T. Weber, S. Wassertheurer, M. Rammer, A. Haiden, B. Hametner, and
B. Eber, “Wave reflections, assessed with a novel method for pulse wave
separation, are associated with end-organ damage and clinical outcomes,”
Hypertension, vol. 60, pp. 534–541, 2012.
B. Jani and C. Rajkumar, “Ageing and vascular ageing,” Postgraduate
Med. J., vol. 82, pp. 357–362, 2006.
C. C. Lee and R. G. Mark, “Analysis of arterial waves by the single-pulseresponse method,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 833–836,
Aug. 1993.
R. Burattini and K. B. Campbell, “Modified asymmetric T-tube model to
infer arterial wave reflection at the aortic root,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 805–814, Aug. 1989.
K. B. Campbell, R. Burattini, D. L. Bell, R. D. Kirkpatrick, and
G. G. Knowlen, “Time-domain formulation of asymmetric T-tube model
of arterial system,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 258, pp. H1761–H1774, 1990.
B. E. Westerhof, I. Guelen, N. Westerhof, J. M. Karemaker, and A. Avolio,
“Quantification of wave reflection in the human aorta from pressure alone
a proof of principle,” Hypertension, vol. 48, pp. 595–601, 2006.
A. Qasem and A. Avolio, “Determination of aortic pulse wave velocity from waveform decomposition of the central aortic pressure pulse,”
Hypertension, vol. 51, pp. 1–8, 2008.
G. Swamy, N. B. Oliver, and R. Mukkamala, “Calculation of forward and
backward arterial waves by analysis of two pressure waveforms,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 2833–2839, Dec. 2010.
D. G. Edwards, C. R. Mastin, and R. W. Kenefick, “Wave reflection and
central aortic pressure are increased in response to static and dynamic
muscle contraction at comparable workloads,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 104,
pp. 439–445, 2008.
J. G. Kips, E. R. Rietzschel, M. L. De Buyzere, B. E. Westerhof, T. C.
Gillebert, L. M. Van Bortel, and P. Segers, “Evaluation of noninvasive
methods to assess wave reflection and pulse transit time from the pressure
waveform alone,” Hypertension, vol. 53, pp. 142–149, 2009.
J. O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, and H. H. Asada, “Blind identification of 2channel IIR systems with application to central cardiovascular monitoring,” ASME J. Dynamic Syst., Meas. Control, vol. 131, pp. 051009-1–
051009-15, 2009.

[27] J. A. Kong, Eletromagnetic Wave Theory. Cambridge, MA, USA: EMW
Publishing, 2008.
[28] G. Zhang, J. O. Hahn, and R. Mukkamala, “Tube-load model parameter estimation for monitoring of arterial hemodynamics,” Front. Comput.
Physiol. Med., vol. 2, pp. 1–18, 2011.
[29] M. Rashedi, N. Fazeli, A. Chappell, S. Wang, R. MacArthur, M. S. McMurtry, B. A. Finegan, and J. O. Hahn, “Comparative study on tubeload modeling of arterial hemodynamics in humans,” ASME J. Biomech.,
vol. 135, pp. 031005-1–031005-9, 2013.
[30] L. Ljung, System Identification: Theory for the User. Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1999.
[31] M. R. El-Tahan, “Preoperative ephedrine counters hypotension with
propofol anesthesia during valve surgery: A dose dependent study,” Ann.
Card. Anesth., vol. 14, pp. 30–40, 2011.
[32] S. Chauhan, N. Saxena, S. Mehrotra, B. H. Rao, and M. Sahu, “Femoral
artery pressures are more reliable than radial artery pressures on initiation
of cardiopulmonary bypass,” J. Cardiothor. Vasc. Anesth., vol. 14, pp. 274–
276, 2000.
[33] C. Diehm, J. R. Allenberg, D. Pittrow, M. Mahn, G. Tepohl, R. L. Haberl,
H. Darius, I. Burghaus, and H. J. Trampisch, “Mortality and vascular morbidity in older adults with asymptomatic versus symptomatic peripheral
artery disease,” Circulation, vol. 120, pp. 2053–2061, 2009.
[34] M. H. Criqui, R. D. Langer, A. Fronek, H. S. Feigelson, M. R. Klauber,
T. J. McCann, and D. Browner, “Mortality over a period of 10 years in
patients with peripheral arterial disease,” New England J. Med., vol. 326,
pp. 381–386, 1992.
[35] D. S. Berger, J. K. J. Li, W. K. Laskey, and A. Noordergraff, “Repeated reflection of waves in the systemic arterial system,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 264,
pp. H269–H281, 1993.
[36] N. Fazeli and J. O. Hahn, “Estimation of cardiac output and peripheral resistance using square-wave-approximated aortic flow signal,” Front. Comput. Physiol. Med., vol. 3, pp. 1–10, 2012.
[37] K. H. Parker and C. J. H. Jones, “An introduction to wave intensity analysis,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 47, pp. 175–188, 2009.
[38] A. D. Hughes and K. H. Parker, “Forward and backward waves in the
arterial system: Impedance or wave intensity analysis?” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comp., vol. 47, pp. 207–210, 2009.
[39] G. Swamy, Q. Ling, T. Li, and R. Mukkamala, “Blind identification of
the aortic pressure waveform from multiple peripheral artery pressure
waveforms,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 292, pp. H2257–H2264, 2007.
[40] J. O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, and H. H. Asada, “Modeling and 2-sensor blind
identification of human cardiovascular system,” Control Eng. Practice,
vol. 17, pp. 1318–1328, 2009.
[41] G. Swamy, D. Xu, N. B. Olivier, and R. Mukkamala, “An adaptive transfer
function for deriving the aortic pressure waveform from a peripheral artery
pressure waveform,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 297, pp. H1956–H1963, 2009.
[42] J. O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, H. H. Asada, and F. A. Jaffer, “Subject-specific
estimation of central aortic blood pressure using an individualized transfer function: A preliminary feasibility study,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Inform., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 212–220, Mar. 2012.
[43] J. O. Hahn, A. T. Reisner, and H. H. Asada, “Estimation of pulse transit
time using two diametric blood pressure waveform measurements,” Med.
Eng. Phys., vol. 32, pp. 753–759, 2010.
[44] G. Swamy and R. Mukkamala, “Estimation of the aortic pressure waveform and beat-to-beat relative cardiac output changes from multiple peripheral artery pressure waveforms,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55,
no. 5, pp. 1521–1529, May 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

