IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

263

Characterization of Depressive States in Bipolar
Patients Using Wearable Textile Technology and
Instantaneous Heart Rate Variability Assessment
Gaetano Valenza, Member, IEEE, Luca Citi, Member, IEEE, Claudio Gentili, Antonio Lanatá, Member, IEEE,
Enzo Pasquale Scilingo, Member, IEEE, and Riccardo Barbieri, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The analysis of cognitive and autonomic responses to
emotionally relevant stimuli could provide a viable solution for the
automatic recognition of different mood states, both in normal and
pathological conditions. In this study, we present a methodological
application describing a novel system based on wearable textile
technology and instantaneous nonlinear heart rate variability assessment, able to characterize the autonomic status of bipolar patients by considering only electrocardiogram recordings. As a proof
of this concept, our study presents results obtained from eight bipolar patients during their normal daily activities and being elicited
according to a specific emotional protocol through the presentation of emotionally relevant pictures. Linear and nonlinear features were computed using a novel point-process-based nonlinear
autoregressive integrative model and compared with traditional
algorithmic methods. The estimated indices were used as the input of a multilayer perceptron to discriminate the depressive from
the euthymic status. Results show that our system achieves much
higher accuracy than the traditional techniques. Moreover, the inclusion of instantaneous higher order spectra features significantly
improves the accuracy in successfully recognizing depression from
euthymia.
Index Terms—Bipolar disorder, bispectrum, heart rate variability (HRV), high-order statistics, mood recognition, nonlinear

Manuscript received August 20, 2013; revised January 10, 2014; accepted
February 19, 2014. Date of publication February 21, 2014; date of current
version December 30, 2014. This work was supported in part by EU Commission under Contract ICT-247777 Psyche and by the Department of Anesthesia,
Critical Care & Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
G. Valenza is with the Research Center E. Piaggio and also with the
Department of Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, and
also with the Neuroscience Statistics Research Laboratory, Harvard Medical
School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114 USA, and also
with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
(e-mail: g.valenza@ieee.org).
L. Citi is with the Neuroscience Statistics Research Laboratory, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 USA, and also
with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
and also with the School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, Colchester, CO4 3SQ, U.K. (e-mail: lciti@neurostat.mit.edu).
C. Gentili is with the Department of Surgical, Medical, Molecular, and Critical Area Pathology, Section of Psychology, University of Pisa, 56100 Pisa, Italy
(e-mail: claudio.gentili@med.unipi.it).
A. Lanatá and E. P. Scilingo are with the Research Center E. Piaggio
and also with the Department of Information Engineering, University of
Pisa, 56100 Pisa, Italy (e-mail: a.lanata@centropiaggio.unipi.it; e.scilingo@
centropiaggio.unipi.it).
R. Barbieri is with the Neuroscience Statistics Research Laboratory, Harvard
Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 USA, and
also with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
USA (e-mail: barbieri@neurostat.mit.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2307584

analysis, point process, wearable systems, wearable textile monitoring, Wiener–Volterra model.

I. INTRODUCTION
A. Bipolar Disorder
Bipolar disorder is one of the most diffuse psychiatric disorders in the western world. It has been demonstrated that more
than two million Americans have been diagnosed with such a
mood alteration [1] and, in 2005, about 27% of the adult European population, from 18 to 65 years of age, is or has been
affected by at least one mental disorder [2]. In general, bipolar
patients can experience different types of mood alterations, generally defined as episodes, typically limited over defined time
intervals and subjected to spontaneous remissions or relapses.
Four possible episodes are generally described: depression, mania, hypomania, (a less severe form of mania) and mixed state.
When the subject undergoes a remission phase, clinicians refer
to his condition as euthymia.
During depressive episodes, sadness and desperation are often the most prominent symptoms, although different other
complain are present, including cognitive complaints, suicidal
thoughts, or somatic symptoms like gastrointestinal pain, sexual, and urogenital disorders. Neurovegetative symptoms such
as loss of appetite and insomnia may be present as well. Patients
might also experience pathological ideas of self-pity and guilt,
which might grow toward delusional states. During mania (and
hypomania), a pathologically increased physical and mental activity causes loss of attention, reduction of the necessity to sleep,
and an increased speed of the stream of thoughts that eventually leads to incoherence. Thus, the subject is often hyperactive
but often without specific purposes. Moreover, (hypo)mania is
often dominated by a feeling of an excited mood with the idea
of grandiosity and hypertrophic self-esteem. In mania (but not
in hypomania), such feelings might become delusional with a
progressive detachment from the objective evaluation of the
external world. Mixed state is characterized by the contemporary presence of depressive and maniac or hypomaniac symptoms (e.g., patients can have delusions of grandiosity but also
have thoughts of guilt, can have motor retardation but increased
speed of their thoughts). Generally, a diagnosis of the mixed
state is made if the patient fulfills at the same time the criteria for (hypo)maniac and for depressive episode. In between
these episodes, patients typically experience periods of relatively good affective balance (euthymia). Although remissions

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

264

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

happen in the natural history of bipolar disorders, this condition is often fostered by treatments (both pharmacological and
nonpharmacological).
Bipolar disorder is a chronic disease: Even if a period of remission could occur, bipolar patients manifest episodes of mood
alteration for decades. Despite its prevalence and high cost of
treatment [1], this disease may go undetected for years before
diagnosed and treated. Patients with mood disorders might experience a heterogeneous pattern of symptoms which might be
present even during euthymic periods as subthreshold mood
alterations. Moreover, the phenomenology and severity of the
symptoms, the number and duration of the episodes, as well as
the time interval between them are often not consistent among
subjects. Another open issue in diagnosing bipolar disorders as
well as the great majority of mental disorders is that symptoms
are assessed by rating scales both administered by clinicians
and self-completed by patients. So far, neither biological markers nor physiological correlates were found to be specific and
sensitive enough to be used for clinical purposes [3], [4]. In this
preliminary study, five patients were monitored over a period
of up to 90 days and experienced only depressive and euthymic
episodes. Our goal, therefore, at least within this early acquisition phase, is to discriminate depression from euthymia. In
the next section, we will describe a novel system able to robustly distinguish depressive from euthymic episodes in bipolar
patients by using wearable textile technology and taking inspiration from the mathematical theory of the nonlinear (NL)
dynamical system.
B. Analysis of Cardiovascular Dynamics in Bipolarism
Previous studies on bipolar disorders highlighted changes
in several physiological systems including sleep (as evaluated
both with EEG and behaviorally) [5]–[7], circadian heart rate
rhythms [8], [9], cortisol dynamics [10]–[12], as well as the
autonomic nervous system (ANS) functionality [13], [14]. One
important criterion for the inclusion of bipolar patients in studies involving ANS monitoring is their full compliance with the
required recording procedures. There are also sensitive issues
in trying to avoid any possible stigmatization due to participation. For these reasons, wearable, comfortable, and unobtrusive
systems, e.g., sensorized t-shirts [15]–[22] or gloves [23], [24],
are strongly recommended.
Mood has been defined as a long-lasting, diffuse affective
state that is not associated with a specific trigger [25]. In turn,
emotions are considered transient, acute, and arousing responses
to specific stimuli. It is well known, however, that mood status affects the normal emotional response, and for this reason,
a possible assessment approach is to study the physiological
variations provoked by external affective cues (e.g., [26]–[33]).
Specifically, paradigms based on emotional reactions have been
proven to be widely able to differentiate among different mood
states both in normal [34] and pathological conditions [35],
[36]. Therefore, in this study, we focus on the ANS changes
induced by emotion-related tasks in bipolar patients. According
to the previous psychophysiological considerations, it is reasonable to represent the cardiovascular system as a NL dynamical

system and study it by means of “perturbation” analysis, meaning that the analysis will take into account observations during
initial stable conditions (i.e., during rest) and after fast perturbations (i.e., emotional elicitation). Hypothesizing that the
ANS responds with different time-varying heartbeat dynamics
according to the patient’s mood state, computational tools able
to discern rapid dynamic changes with high-time resolution are
the best candidates for providing optimal assessments. For this
purpose, standard heart rate variability (HRV) analysis is not
recommended, since it would require relatively long-time intervals of electrocardiogram (ECG) acquisitions [37], [38] and
would be unable to detect instantaneous variations. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel stochastic model of
heartbeat dynamics based on point-process theory that is able to
instantaneously assess the patient’s mood state. To our knowledge, this approach provides a novel paradigm in the literature
of psychiatric disorders. The core of the model is the definition of the interbeat probability function to predict the waiting
time of the next heartbeat, i.e., the R-wave event, given a linear
(L) and NL combination of the previous events.
The use of the point process theory allows for a fully parametric structure analytically defined at each moment in time, thus allowing to estimate instantaneous measures [27], [39]–[45] without using any interpolation method. It has been demonstrated
that the inverse-Gaussian (IG) distribution well characterizes the
interbeat probability function [39] and, in particular, a L [39]
and NL [27], [42], [43], [45] combination of the past events has
been previously taken into account. These methods have been
demonstrated to provide a faster and more accurate time-varying
assessment than other sliding window beat-to-beat-based methods [40]. In this study, we propose an improvement of the model
by defining a NL combination of the derivative series of past
events. The resulting quadratic nonlinear autoregressive integrative (NARI) model improves the achievement of stationarity [46] and consequently improves system identification. This
powerful approach further considers an equivalent third-order
input–output Wiener–Volterra model, allowing for the instantaneous estimation of the high-order polyspectra [47], such as
bispectrum and trispectrum [48]. Along with mathematical and
modeling reasons, such a NL model is also physiologically justified. Cardiovascular control mainly refers to the signaling of the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves controlling the pacemaker cells in a NL way [49].
In this study, we validate the engagement of the NL terms of
the model by performing a comparative analysis demonstrating
how the inclusion of instantaneous higher order spectra (HOS)
features indeed improves the accuracy and reduces the uncertainty (variance) in recognizing ANS depressive patterns. We
further compare results from standard analysis with those obtained using the novel model proposed here. Data were collected
within the European funded project PSYCHE whose goal is to
discover possible correlations between the patterns of physiological/behavioral signs and mood fluctuations over short- and
long-term monitoring (see details in Section II-A). This project
proposes a novel approach for bipolar disease management
based on the paradigm that a quasi-continuous monitoring in
a natural environment provides parameters, indices, and trends

VALENZA et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF DEPRESSIVE STATES IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS

Fig. 1.

Prototype of the PSYCHE wearable platform.

that will be used to assess mood status, support patients, predict and anticipate treatment response in its early phase, prevent
relapse, and to alert physicians in case of a critical event.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. PSYCHE Project and the Wearable Monitoring Platform
Data used in this study were collected within the European
project PSYCHE (Personaliz ed monitoring SYstems for Care
in mental HEalth), which is funded in the Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7). The PSYCHE system [15]–[18] comprised
a personal, pervasive, cost-effective, and multiparametric monitoring system based on textile electrodes and portable sensing
devices for the long-term and short-term acquisition of data
from an homogeneous class of patients affected by mood disorders. Currently, several physiological signals as well as behavioral parameters are taken into account as part of the PSYCHE
project (e.g., ANS-related signs, voice, activity index, sleep pattern alteration, electrodermal response, biochemical markers).
The core sensing system of the project, the PSYCHE platform
developed by Smartex S.r.l., consists of a comfortable textilebased sensorized t-shirt that is embedded with fabric-based electrodes and acquires ECG, respiration signals, and body activity
(accelerometers). Fig. 1 shows the wearable system prototype
that employs textile electrodes to detect the ECG and piezoresistive sensors to acquire the respiration signal. In addition, a
three-axial accelerometer embedded into the system tracks the
movement. The PSYCHE platform is able to continuously acquire physiological data, stored in a Micro SD card for up to
24 h, using a lithium battery. The ECG is acquired by using a
single lead configuration, 250 Hz of sampling rate and 16 bits of
analog-to-digital conversion resolution. A user-friendly device
such as a smartphone for monitoring environmental information
such as light, temperature, and noise completes the PSYCHE
platform.
Another novelty of the PSYCHE platform is the number
of features estimated by a wide range of signal processing
techniques, as opposed to previous studies carried out on this

265

topic [5]–[9] where only a few parameters were included. Extracted from L and NL methods, these features will be investigated for finding possible relationships between physiological
signs and mental disorders. This approach increases the sensitivity and the specificity of the system functionality and, as a
consequence, the success rate. In this study, we focus on novel L
and NL features of heartbeat dynamics which are crucial for the
assessment of the depressive status in bipolar disorder. The reliability of the PSYCHE wearable platform, evaluated through
the analysis of data gathered from the sensorized t-shirt, has
been verified in our previous studies [16]–[19]. However, it is
worthwhile mentioning that more than 90% of HRV and respiration activity signals recorded during long-term monitoring
(about 18 h) were artifact free [17]. Such a high reliability
is achieved through specific manufacturing choices. In particular, the use of dry textile-based electrodes provides comfort
and reduces the rate of evaporation reaching electrochemical
equilibrium between the skin and electrodes after a couple of
minutes. Therefore, the signal quality is remarkably improved
and kept as constant as possible. If the contact with the skin is
not good due to size, the quality of the signals cannot be adequate for obtaining meaningful values. To avoid this problem,
a preliminary check on the quality of the data is done using
available shirts with different sizes before giving the system
to the patients. The shirt was designed for females and males
and was made of elastic fibers that allow for tight adhesion to
the user’s body, piezoresistive fibers to monitor fabric stretching (and consequently respiration activity), and metallic fibers
knitted to create fabric electrodes to monitor the ECG.
B. Autoregressive Integrative Identification System
Instantaneous NL heartbeat dynamics can be predicted taking
inspiration from the NL system identification theory, and in our
case through the following NARI form:
E[y(k)] = y(k − 1) + γ0 +

M


γ1 (i) Δy(k − i)

i=1

+

M
∞ 

n =2 i 1 =1

···

M

i n =1

γn (i1 , . . . , in )

n


Δy(k − ij )

j =1

(1)
where Δy(k − i) = y(k − i) − y(k − i − 1) and Δy(k − j) =
y(k − j) − y(k − j − 1), n is the degree of nonlinearity and M
is the order, i.e., the number of past samples taken by each term.
The autoregressive structure of (1) allows for the system identification with only exact knowledge of the output data and with
only few assumptions about the input data. Here, we represent the NL physiological system by using NL kernels up to
the second order, i.e., γ0 , γ1 (i), and γ2 (i, j). This choice of
a second-order NARI system retains an important part of the
nonlinearity of the system. In order to complete the NL system identification, it is necessary to link the NARI model to
a general input–output form. By defining the extended kernels

266

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

γ1 (i) and γ2 (i, j) as

1,
if i = 0
γ1 (i) =
(2)
−γ1 (i), if 1 ≤ i ≤ M

0,
if ij = 0 ∧ i + j ≤ M
γ2 (i, j) =
(3)
−γ2 (i, j), if 1 ≤ i ≤ M ∧ 1 ≤ j ≤ M
it is possible to map a quadratic NARI model to an nth-order
input–output model [47]. After the input–output transformation of the kernels, the choice of a second-order autoregressive
model allows evaluating all the high-order statistics (HOS) of the
system, such as the dynamic bispectrum and trispectrum [50],
[51]. In the following sections, we report the definition of the
point-process framework of the heartbeat dynamics, as well as
mathematical details on the derivation of the NL kernels and of
the HOS tools.
C. NARI-Based Point-Process Models
To mathematically explain the point process framework, the
following definitions are needed:
1) t ∈ (0, T ]: the observation interval.
2) 0 ≤ u1 < · · · < uk < uk +1 < · · · < uK ≤ T : the times
of the R-wave events.
3) N (t) = max{k : uk ≤ t}: the sample path of the {uj }Jj=1
counting process.
4) dN (t): differential of N (t). dN (t) = 1 in case of heartbeat event, dN (t) = 0 otherwise.
 (t) = limτ → t − N (τ ) = max{k : uk < t}: left continu5) N
ous sample path of N (t).
6) RRj = uj − uj −1 > 0: the jth R-R interval.
Given such definitions, and assuming that RRj = f (RRj −1 ,
RRj −2 , . . . , RRj −n ) (history dependence), the probability distribution of the waiting time t − uj until the next R-wave event
follows an IG model [39]:

 12
ξ0 (t)
f (t|Ht , ξ(t)) =
2π(t − uj )3


1 ξ0 (t)[t − uj − μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t))]2
×exp −
2
μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t))2 (t − uj )
(4)
 (t) as the index of the previous R-wave event bewith j = N
fore time t, Ht = (uj , RRj , RRj −1 , . . . , RRj −M +1 ), ξ(t) the
vector of the time-varing parameters, μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t)) the firstmoment statistic (mean) of the distribution, and ξ0 (t) > 0 the
shape parameter of the IG distribution. Since f (t|Ht , ξ(t)) indicates the probability of having a beat at time t given that a
previous beat has occurred at uj , μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t)) can be interpreted as the most probable moment when the next beat could
occur. The use of an IG distribution f (t|Ht , ξ(t)), characterized
at each moment in time, is motivated both physiologically (the
integrate-and-fire initiating the cardiac contraction [39]) and by
goodness-of-fit comparisons [41]. In previous works [40], [41],
the instantaneous mean μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t)) was expressed as a
L combination of present and past R-R intervals (in terms of
an AR model) and as a quadratic NL coupling of the heartbeat

dynamics, based on a NL Volterra–Wiener expansion [42]. Here,
we propose the novel NARI formulation based on (1) that allows
us to define the instantaneous R-R mean as
μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t))
= RRN (t) + γ0 +

p




	
γ1 (i, t) RRN (t)−i − RRN (t)−i−1

i=1

+

q 
q




	
γ2 (i, j, t) RRN (t)−i − RRN (t)−i−1

i=1 j =1



	
× RRN (t)−j − RRN (t)−j −1

(5)

considering that the derivative R-R interval series improves the
achievement of stationarity within the moving time window
W (in this study, we have chosen W = 70 s) [46], [52]. Since
μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t)) is defined in continuous time, we can obtain an
instantaneous R-R mean estimate at a very fine timescale (with
an arbitrarily small bin size Δ), which requires no interpolation
between heartbeat arrival times. Given the proposed parametric
model, the NL indices of HRV will be defined as a time-varying
function of the parameters ξ(t) = [ξ0 (t), g0 (t), g1 (0, t), . . . ,
g1 (p, t), g2 (0, 0, t), . . . , g2 (i, j, t)]. The unknown time-varying
parameter vector ξ(t) is estimated by means of a local maximum
likelihood method [39], [53]. Briefly, given a local observation
interval (t − l, t] of duration l, we consider a subset Um :n of the
R-wave events, where m = N (t − l) + 1 and n = N (t) and, at
each time t, we find the unknown time-varying parameter vector
ξ(t) that maximizes the following local log-likelihood:
L(ξ(t) | Um :n ) =

n −1


w(t − uk +1 )

k =m +P −1

× log[f (uk +1 | Hu k + 1 , ξ(t))]
 ∞
f (τ | Hu n , ξ(t))dτ
+ log

(6)

t−u n

where w(τ ) = e τ is an exponential weighting function for
the local likelihood. We use a Newton–Raphson procedure to
maximize the local log-likelihood in (6) and compute the local
maximum-likelihood estimate of ξ(t) [53]. Because there is significant overlap between adjacent local likelihood intervals, we
start the Newton–Raphson procedure at t with the previous local
maximum-likelihood estimate at time t − Δ, where Δ defines
the time interval shift to compute the next parameter update. The
model goodness-of-fit is based on the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
(KS) test and associated KS statistics (see details in [39]).
Moreover, autocorrelation plots are considered to test the independence of the model-transformed intervals [39]. Once the
order {p, q} is determined, the initial NARI coefficients are
estimated by the method of least squares. In order to provide
reliable results, the HRV processing techniques require uninterrupted series of R-R intervals. Nevertheless, peak-detection
errors and ectopic beats often determine abrupt changes in the
R-R interval series that may result in substantial deviations of the
HRV indices, especially in changes in the dynamics. In addition,
they could potentially bias the statistical outcomes. Therefore,

VALENZA et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF DEPRESSIVE STATES IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS

we preprocessed all the actual heartbeat data with a previously
developed algorithm [54], also based on point process statistics, able to perform a real-time R-R interval error detection and
correction.
D. Instantaneous Cardiovascular Assessment:
Quantitative Tools
Our framework allows for three levels of quantitative characterization of heartbeat dynamics: instantaneous time-domain
estimation, L power spectrum estimation, and HOS representation. The time-domain characterization is based on the first
and the second-order moments of the underlying probability
structure. Namely, given the time-varying parameter set ξ(t),
the instantaneous estimates of mean R-R, R-R interval standard
deviation, mean heart rate, and heart rate standard deviation can
be extracted at each moment in time [39]. From ξ(t), it is also
possible to derive instantaneous quantitative tools such as the
nth-order spectral representations. To summarize, the necessary
steps are the following:
1) From the NL kernels γn (. . .) find the extended kernels
γn (. . .).
2) Compute the Fourier transforms Γn (. . .) of the kernels
γn (. . .).
3) Compute the input–output Volterra kernels Hk (. . .) from
the Γn (. . .) of the autoregressive model.
4) Estimate the nth-order spectra such as the instantaneous
spectrum Q(f, t) and bispectrum Bis(f1 , f2 , t).
Estimation of the Input–Output Volterra Kernels: As mentioned previously, the model quantitative tools are defined by
means of the traditional input–output Wiener–Volterra coefficients. They are related to the Volterra series expansion and
the Volterra theorem [55]. In functional analysis, a Volterra
series denotes a functional expansion of a dynamic, NL, and
time-invariant function and has been widely used in NL physiological modeling [56], [57]. The quadratic NARI model can be
linked to the traditional input–output Volterra models by using
a specific relationship [47] between the Fourier transforms of
the Volterra kernels of order p, Hp (f1 , . . . , fn ), and the Fourier
transforms of the extended NAR kernels, Γ1 (f1 ) and Γ2 (f1 , f2 ).
In general, a second-order NARI model must be mapped in an
infinite-order input–output Volterra model [47]:
ρ




Γ2 (f1 , f2 )

Γ1 (f1 )Γ1 (f2 )

H1 (f1 + f2 )

	


1  Γ2 fσ 3 (1) , fσ 3 (2)
	


	


H3 (f1 , f2 , f3 ) = −
6 σ Γ1 fσ 3 (1) Γ1 fσ 3 (2)
3
	


× H2 fσ 3 (1) + fσ 3 (2) , fσ 3 (3) .

(8)

(9)

Instantaneous Spectral and Bispectral Analysis: The L power
spectrum estimation reveals the L mechanisms governing the
heartbeat dynamics in the frequency domain. In particular, given
the input–output Volterra kernels of the NARI model for the instantaneous R-R interval mean μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t)), we can compute the time-varying parametric (L) autospectrum [46] of the
R-R intervals:
Q(f, t) = 2(1 − cos(ω))Sxx (f, t)H1 (f, t)H1 (−f, t)

3
−
(10)
H3 (f, f2 , −f2 , t)Sxx (f2 , t)df2
2π
2
where Sxx (f, t) = σRR
. By integrating the (10) in each frequency band, we can compute the indexes within the very low
frequency (VLF = 0.01–0.04 Hz), low frequency (LF = 0.04–
0.15 Hz), and high frequency (HF = 0.15–0.4 Hz) ranges.
The HOS representation allows for the consideration of statistics beyond the second order, and phase relations between frequency components otherwise suppressed [48], [58]. Higher
order spectra (HOS), also known as polyspectra, are spectral
representations of higher order statistics, i.e., moments and cumulants to the third order and beyond. HOS can detect deviations from linearity, stationarity, or Gaussianity. Particular
cases of HOS is the third-order spectrum (Bispectrum), i.e., the
Fourier transform of the third-order cumulant sequence [58].
As detailed next, Bispectrum is defined from the Volterra kernel coefficients estimated within the point process framework.
Let H1 (f ) and H2 (f1 , f2 , t) denote the Fourier transform of
the first- and second-order Volterra kernel coefficients, respectively. The analytical solution for the bispectrum of a NL system
response subject to stationary, zero-mean Gaussian input is [59]

Bis(f1 , f2 , t) = 2H2 (f1 + f2 , −f2 , t)H1 (−f1 − f2 , t)H1 (f2 , t)
× H1 (−f1 − f2 , t)H1 (f1 , t)Sxx (f1 + f2 , t)Sxx (f1 , t)

k =m id(ρ) σ ∈σ ρ

Γ1 (fσ (1) ) · · · Γ1 (fσ (r ) )

+ fσ (r +2) , . . . , fσ (ρ−1) + fσ (ρ) ) ×
	


	


× Γ2 fσ (r +1) , fσ (r +2) · · · Γ2 fσ (ρ−1) , fσ (ρ) = 0

+ 2H2 (−f1 , −f2 , t)H1 (f1 , t)H1 (f2 , t)
× Sxx (f1 , t)Sxx (f2 , t).

where ρ is a given integer representing the kernel order,
mid(ρ) = ρ/2	, r = 2k − ρ, and σρ is the permutation set
of Nρ . Obviously, there is the need to truncate the series to a
reasonable order for actual application. In this study, we chose
to model the cardiovascular activity with a cubic input–output
Volterra by means of the following relationships with the NARI:
1
Γ1 (f )

H2 (f1 , f2 ) = −

× Sxx (f1 + f2 , t)Sxx (f2 , t) + 2H2 (f1 + f2 , −f1 , t)

Hk (fσ (1) , . . . , fσ (r ) , ωσ (r +1)

H1 (f ) =

267

(7)

(11)

The dynamic bispectrum is an important tool for evaluating the
instantaneous presence of nonlinearity in time series [48], [60],
[61]. Since the bispectrum presents several symmetry properties [58] dividing the (f1 , f2 ) plane in eight symmetric zones,
for a real signal it is uniquely defined by its values in the triangular region of computation Ω, 0 ≤ f1 ≤ f2 ≤ f1 + f2 ≤ 1.
The sympatho-vagal L effects on the HRV are mainly characterized by the LF and HF spectral powers [37], [38]. Through

268

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

bispectral analysis, it is possible to further evaluate the nonlinear sympatho-vagal interactions by integrating |B(f1 , f2 )| in
the appropriate frequency bands. In particular, three bispectral
measures, LL(t), LH(t), and HH(t), can be defined as:
 0.15  0.15
Bis(f1 , f2 , t)df1 df2
(12)
LL(t) =
0.04



0.04

0.15



0.4

LH(t) =
0.04



0.4



(13)

Bis(f1 , f2 , t)df1 df2 .

(14)

ID
BP1
BP2
BP3
BP4
BP5
BP6
BP7
BP8

ACQ. 1
Euth
Depr
Depr
Depr
Depr
Depr
Depr
Depr

ACQ. 2

ACQ. 3

ACQ. 4

ACQ. 5

Euth
Depr
Depr
Depr
Euth
Euth

Depr
Euth

Depr

Euth

0.4

HH(t) =
0.15

Bis(f1 , f2 , t)df1 df2
0.15

TABLE I
CLINICAL LABELS ASSOCIATED TO EACH PATIENT DURING EACH ACQUISITION

0.15

Equations (12) and (13) can be interpreted as indices of NL
interaction between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic
system, whereas (14) can be exclusively attributed to NL vagal
dynamics.
E. Classification
The performance of the recognition of depressive and euthymic patterns was evaluated using a confusion matrix [62].
The generic element rij of the confusion matrix indicates the
percentage of times a pattern belonging to the class i is classified
as belonging to the class j. The training phase was carried out
on 80% of the feature dataset, i.e., using no less than 16 min for
each acquisition, while the testing phase was on the remaining
20%, i.e., using no less than 4 min for each acquisition. 4 min
for each acquisition, with the constrain that each acquisition can
be either considered as belonging to the training or test set. We
performed a 40-fold cross-validation procedure [63]. In particular, for each of the 40 validation steps, the examples associated
to the training and testing set are randomly chosen among all the
available examples and results are described as mean and standard deviation among the 40 confusion matrices obtained. This
procedure allows to obtain unbiased results on the recognition
accuracy.
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP): We adopted the multilayer perceptron [64] with the integrate-and-fire neuron model for the
representation of the relations between input and output values.
We trained it by implementing a supervised learning method,
i.e., input and output values are specified and the relations between them learnt. Specifically, in the training phase, for each
data record, each activation function of the artificial neurons is
calculated. The weight wij of a generic neuron i at the time
T , for the input vector fnk = fnk1 , . . . , fnkF is modified on the
basis of the well-established back propagation of the resulting
error between the input and the output values. The response
of the MLP is a boolean vector; each element represents the
activation function of an output neuron. In this study, we implemented a MLP having three layers of neurons: input, hidden,
and output layers. The input layer was formed by seven neurons,
one for each of the feature space dimension. The hidden layer
was constituted by an empirically estimated number of neurons.
Specifically, we chose this number as the upper limit of the half
difference between the number of the input and output neurons,
i.e., 5. The output layer was formed by two neurons, one for
each of the considered classes to be recognized.

III. EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOLS
A. Recruitment of Eligible Subjects
Bipolar patients eligible for this study were chosen according
to the following criteria: age 18–65, diagnosis of bipolar disorder (I or II), absence of suicidal tendencies, absence of delusions
or hallucinations at the moment of recruitment, and absence of
relevant somatic or neurological conditions. Details on patient
acquisitions and associated mood states are reported in Table I.
Patients were studied with an average frequency of two times
a month. Each patient was evaluated and monitored from the
day of the hospital admission toward remission, i.e., until the
reaching of an euthymic state as long as such a condition was
presented within three months after the first visit. All clinical
states were evaluated by clinicians according to DSM-IV-TR
criteria [65]. In this way, four possible clinical mood labels
(depression, hypomania, mixed state, and euthymic state) were
assigned. The mood label associated with each patients evaluation was assigned independently with respect to the previous
ones. Euthymic state, i.e., clinical remission was defined by
having a score below threshold on a quantitative psychopathological rating scale (for depressive symptoms, score below 8
on the 16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology
Clinician Rating and for manic symptoms score below 6 on
the Young Mania Rating Scale). The same thresholds were also
used to define a change in mood state. No data selection criteria
were used to choose the time window. A physician presented
the study to each patient. Before entering the study, each patient
signed an informed consent approved by the ethical committee
of the University of Pisa. Once enrolled, the patients were administered a set of questionnaires and rating scales in order to
assess the current mood. Clinicians associated a mood label in
agreement with one of the five possible defined mood states:
euthymia, depression, mania, hypomania, and mixed state.
B. Affective Elicitation Protocol
Patients BP1, BP2, BP3, BP4, and BP5 underwent a dedicated affective elicitation protocol which started with two, 5-min
phases in resting state with eyes closed and open. Subsequently,
passive (international affective picture system (IAPS) [66]), lasting for 6 min, and active (thematic apperception test (TAT) [67]),
lasting for at least 2 min, visual stimuli were administered. Finally, in order to provide a common point of reference, patients
were asked to recite a paragraph from the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights lasting two more minutes. The IAPS database

VALENZA et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF DEPRESSIVE STATES IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS

269

We considered the median values over the estimated instantaneous time series according to the protocol timeline. All ranges
reported in this study are expressed as median and its respective
absolute deviation (i.e., for a feature X, we report Median(X) ±
MAD(X) where MAD(X) = Median(|X − Median(X)|)).

Fig. 2.

Timeline of the affective elicitation protocol.

consists of hundreds of pictures tagged by specific emotional ratings in terms of valence, arousal, and dominance. The protocol
implies a slideshow of pictures having two classes of arousal,
either minimum or maximum, and random valence, ranging
from unpleasant to pleasant. After IAPS elicitation, the patients
were asked to describe several TAT images. The TAT, a projective psychological test, is supposed to tap the subject’s subconscious and reveal repressed aspects of personality, motives
and needs for achievement, power and intimacy, and problemsolving skills. However, in this protocol, the pictures were only
used to elicit spontaneous comments from the patients. Of note,
as there is no standardization of the use of the texts/pictures according to the subjects’ clinical state, text/picture stimuli were
always proposed in the same order. A schematic timeline of the
experimental protocol is shown in Fig. 2.

C. Unstructured Activity
In order to study the capability of the proposed NARI methodology in generalizing the recognition of depressive and euthymic
patterns of bipolar patients on the experimental protocol, we further studied three bipolar patients (i.e., BP6, BP7, and BP8) who
were asked to wear the PSYCHE wearable monitoring platform
at all times until the battery ran out, i.e., approximately 18 h.
Therefore, there was no need of particular experimental conditions as the patient was free to perform normal activities. Here,
we analyzed a smaller part of these long-term acquisitions in
order to study the same amount of data with respect to the first
affective elicitation protocol. Therefore, no less than 20 min
of heartbeat dynamics gathered during unknown (unstructured)
activities were taken into account.

D. Analysis Overview
We analyzed eight bipolar patients having depressive and
euthymic states. ECG was acquired by using the PSYCHE platform and R-R interval series were extracted and analyzed by the
NARI model to obtain the cardiovascular indices. Then, a set of
features extracted from the L and the NL kernels was used to
implement the automatic mood-tracking system. Experimental
results are shown in terms of statistical inference and confusion
matrices [62]. A comparative study considering the same features extracted using standard signal processing techniques was
further performed. Classification performances encompass both
experimental protocols.

IV. RESULTS
For each subject, the NARI model was applied to the
R-R series detected from the recorded ECG. The optimal model
order was chosen by means of the Akaike information criterion (AIC) [39] applied to the first 5-min R-R recordings.
The AIC analysis indicated 6 ≤ p ≤ 8 and 1 ≤ q ≤ 2 as optimal orders. All the KS distances were <0.06 and no less than
97% of the autocorrelation points were inside the boundaries.
The L and NL indices, described in Section II-B, were evaluated for all available recordings. The instantaneous identification (5-ms resolution) was averaged within a time window
of 1 s. Representative tracking results are shown in Fig. 3
for BP1 (euthymic phase, top) and BP2 (depressive phase,
bottom).
A preliminary statistical analysis was performed in order to
evaluate the intrasubject contribution of each feature. Statistical
inferences were performed to test the null hypothesis of no significative differences occurring among different mood states. Such
analyses were performed on patients undergoing the affective
elicitation protocol and having more than one acquisition, i.e.,
BP3, BP4, and BP5. First, the whole feature pattern (L and NL)
was treated as multivariate distribution and tested by means of
nonparametric multivariate analysis of variance (npMANOVA).
Such a test revealed statistical differences among acquisitions
for all the three patients (BP3: p < 10−6 ; BP4: p < 0.005; BP5:
p < 10−6 ). No significant conclusions can be drawn from this
analysis, which is therefore insufficient for an effective discriminative task. As a consequence, further monovariate statistical analyses were performed to evaluate the difference among
acquisitions for each of the extracted features. Nonparametric
Kruskal–Wallis and Rank-Sum tests were used to investigate
the intersubject variability among the five acquisitions of BP5
and the two acquisitions of BP3 and BP4, respectively. These
results are summarized in Tables II, III, and IV. All of the features coming from the L and NL coefficients were taken into
account. We obtained significative p-values in all cases but the
LF/HF ratio of BP4. Remarkably, this is the only patient having
more than one acquisition with the same mood label. Moreover, an intersubject analysis was performed to reveal the mood
pattern, which would be in common among patients. Discrimination of the mood states was performed using the well-known
MLP neural network [64]. All results are expressed in the form
of confusion matrix, after 40-fold cross validation.
For each experimental protocol (affective elicitation and
unstructured activity), we compared the MLP accuracy by
creating two feature sets. The first set, α, is composed by
μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t)), σRR , and the spectral indices LF, HF, and
LF/HF. In other words, the feature set α comes from the L
terms of the model. The second set, β, includes the NL LL,

270

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE II
RESULTS FOR THE INTRASUBJECT EUTHYMIA-DEPRESSION DISCRIMINATION

TABLE III
RESULTS FOR THE INTRASUBJECT EUTHYMIA-DEPRESSION DISCRIMINATION

P-values are obtained from the Rank-Sum test.

TABLE IV
RESULTS FOR THE INTRASUBJECT EUTHYMIA-DEPRESSION DISCRIMINATION

LH, and HH indices which will be joined to the α set for future
evaluations.
A. Affective Elicitation Protocol

Fig. 3. Instantaneous HRV statistics computed from Subject 1 (top) and Subject 2 (bottom) during the euthymic and depressive state, respectively. The
estimated μ R R (t, Ht , ξ(t)) is superimposed on the recorded R-R series. Following next, the instantaneous heartbeat standard deviation, the instantaneous
heartbeat spectral LF, and HF powers and their ratio. Finally, bottom rows report
on the three bispectral statistics.

In this section, the results of the classification using data gathered from patients undergoing the affective elicitation protocol
(i.e., BP1, BP2, BP3, BP4, and BP5), are reported. In order to
take into account the imbalanced number of available examples
per class, two different learning rates were considered in the
MLP training phases giving the euthymic examples three times
more penalty with respect to the depressive examples. The MLP
results using the NARI model are summarized in Table V. It
shows the recognition accuracy by considering all five patients.
Using dataset α, correct recognition of the euthymic state is
below 75%, whereas accuracy increases up to 99% using dataset
α + β. To further justify the instantaneous point-process NARI
approach, we estimated the L and NL features of the α and
β sets by means of standard AR models [68] and then tested
the MLP capability of mood discrimination. The relative confusion matrices are shown in Table VI. In this case, neither using

VALENZA et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF DEPRESSIVE STATES IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS

271

TABLE V
RESULTS FOR THE INTERSUBJECT EUTHYMIA-DEPRESSION DISCRIMINATION
IN PATIENTS BP1, BP2, BP3, BP4, AND BP5 USING
THE POINT PROCESS NARI MODEL

TABLE VIII
RESULTS FOR THE INTERSUBJECT EUTHYMIA-DEPRESSION DISCRIMINATION
ON ALL EIGHT PATIENTS USING THE POINT PROCESS NARI MODEL

TABLE VI
RESULTS FOR THE INTERSUBJECT EUTHYMIA-DEPRESSION DISCRIMINATION IN
PATIENTS BP1, BP2, BP3, BP4, AND BP5 USING STANDARD BIOSIGNAL
PROCESSING TECHNIQUES

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

TABLE VII
RESULTS FOR THE INTERSUBJECT EUTHYMIA-DEPRESSION DISCRIMINATION IN
PATIENTS BP6, BP7, AND BP8 USING THE POINT PROCESS NARI MODEL

MLP-3 Patients
Euthymia
Depression

Dataset
α
α+β
α
α+β

Euthymia
60.36 ± 18.35
82.38 ± 14.97
39.64 ± 18.35
17.60 ± 14.99

Depression
14.34 ± 7.80
13.88 ± 10.99
85.66 ± 7.80
86.12 ± 10.99

Bold indicates the best classification accuracy for each class.

the α feature set nor using the joined α + β set, a sufficient
satisfactory recognition was reached.
B. Unstructured Activity
In this section, the results of the classification using data
gathered from patients performing unstructured activity (i.e.,
BP6, BP7, and BP8), are reported. MLP results using the NARI
model are summarized in Table VII. It shows the recognition
accuracy by considering all three patients. Using dataset α,
correct recognition of the euthymic state is below 61%, whereas
accuracy increases up to 82.38% using the feature set α + β,
i.e., considering the instantaneous NL cardiovascular dynamics.
C. Joined Dataset
In order to investigate whether common patterns of heartbeat L and NL dynamics exist between euthymia and depressive states regardless of the experimental protocol/elicitation,
we performed the intersubject euthymia-depression classification using data gathered from all patients. The two datasets
representing instantaneous cardiovascular dynamics in bipolar
patients during affective elicitation protocol and unstructured
activity were joined. The classification results are shown in
Table VIII, which also confirms the crucial role of heartbeat
NL dynamics in pathological mood states. When processing
the feature set α + β, in fact, the recognition accuracy dramatically increases, and the corresponding average accuracy is
beyond 90%.

In both normal psychology and psychopathology, mood is
considered quite a stable characteristic of the individual affective
dimension, while emotions are considered transient, acute, and
arousing responses to specific environmental stimuli. However,
it is very well documented both in clinical experience and in research studies that mood affects emotions, emotional regulation,
and emotional response. For this reason, a possible approach to
investigate mood recognition is to explore emotional changes
provoked by external stimuli. Accordingly, along the conceptual rationale behind the PSYCHE project, we have proposed
a novel system along with an experimental/methodological approach for the assessment of instantaneous ANS patterns of
depression in bipolar patients. The use of ANS dynamics represents a reasonable way to explore neurobiological and psychophysiological correlates of mood disorders. The feasibility
of this approach has been documented in other research articles both for depression and bipolar disorders [15]–[18], [69],
[70]. For instance, Levy [71] showed a higher ANS activation
in bipolar patients as compared to controls and linked chronic
ANS arousal to neurodegeneration and toxiticty. It is also well
known that emotional modulation techniques (used in the psychotherapy of mental disorders) modulates ANS activity [72],
[73]. Finally, vagal nerve stimulation is currently used as treatment for refractory depression [74] based on the fact that a
boost of parasympathetic activity can modulate positive mood.
All of these research points to a link between ANS dynamics
and bipolar disorders, i.e., links the peripheral nervous system
to a disorder of the central nervous system. In-depth psychophysiological reasons of such a link are still debated, although
few hypotheses can be drawn. In particular, it is important to note
that the ANS is indirectly affected by central nervous system
activity: Anxiety, fear, disgust, and the other primary emotions
have both central and peripheral correlates. For instance, the
central activity of some brain structures such as amygdala, anterior cingulate, hypothalamus, ventromedial prefrontal cortex
can directly affect ANS discharge through the modulation of
sympathetic and vagal nuclei of the brain stem [75], [76]. We
believe that since this modulation is present in healthy subjects, it is also present in an anomalous way in patients with
mood disorders and dysfunctions of emotion expressions and
regulations [77].
The proposed approach allows the mathematical representation of the cardiovascular system as a NL dynamical system
characterized by means of a “perturbation” analysis, i.e, analysis before and after short-time emotional elicitation. In order to
show a preliminary validation of the proposed methodologies,

272

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

we analyzed data coming from five patients experiencing depressive and euthymic episodes, and enrolled them to participate in dedicated affective elicitation protocol. Furthermore,
data from three bipolar patients while performing unlabeled and
unstructured normal activities were taken into account. In both
cases, a comfortable, textile-based sensorized t-shirt (namely
the PSYCHE platform) was used to perform noninvasive
recordings of physiological variables, and a novel point-process
NARI model was implemented and applied to the R-R series
derived from the ECG in order to produce novel instantaneous
features. In particular, standard features in both the time (i.e.,
μRR (t, Ht , ξ(t)) and σRR ), and frequency domain (i.e., LF, HF,
and LF/HF) along with higher order NL features, i.e., LL, LH,
and HH, were extracted from the processed R-R series. The
NARI model was used to characterize the mean of an IG distribution representing the interbeat probability function. Such
an approach allows for the instantaneous estimation of all HRV
measures without any interpolation method [39]. The method is
also personalized, fully parametric, and able to improve nonstationary identification [46].
All of the mentioned features coming from the NARI representation of the heartbeat dynamics were investigated by using
statistical inference and pattern recognition methods in intraand intersubject analyses, respectively. Multivariate statistical
analysis by using an npMANOVA approach on patients undergoing the affective elicitation protocol revealed significant
within subject differences among different mood states, whereas
monovariate analyses pointed out that only the LF/HF is statistically similar between two depressive phases. Pattern recognition
algorithms (MLP) were then applied to the estimated features
to classify the mood state of the patients (i.e., “euthymia” or
“depression”), and two feature sets were compared. The first
set, α, was comprised of only the standard feature set, whereas
the NL indices were added to the second set, β. We performed a
comparative classification analysis in order to evaluate the role
of the NL dynamics on the intersubject variability. Considering
the dataset comprised of data coming from the five patients emotionally elicited, a classification accuracy of up to about 74% for
the α (L) set, and up to about 99% for the α + β (L and NL) set
was achieved for the euthymic class (see Table V). Therefore,
it is clear that the high-intersubject variability strongly affects
the information given by the L contribution (set α) of the model
whereas it does not affect the NL one (set α + β). A further comparison analysis using traditional signal processing techniques
revealed that noninstantaneous information was not sufficient
for a reliable assessment (see Table VI). The crucial role of NL
dynamics for the characterization of depressive states in bipolar
patients was also confirmed when testing the capability of the
proposed methodology with data gathered from unstructured
activities (see Tables VII and VIII).
Our results demonstrate that a common pattern of instantaneous heartbeat features can be found despite the intersubject
variability and experimental protocol undertaken. Our results
also show that the inclusion of NL indices gives improved results
and smaller variance with respect to the classification performed
by only using the standard features. The results obtained using
data gathered during the affective elicitation protocol (99.56%

accuracy) went beyond expectations, also considering that the
few misclassified samples can be easily interpreted as either algorithmic/mathematical artifacts or physiological outliers, i.e.,
events not related to mood markers for whatever reason. On
the other hand, we expected a lower classification accuracy
using data coming from unstructured activity. Moreover, it is
possible to hypothesize that the altered ANS dynamics related
to pathological mental states, modulated by the central functional structures of the brain, can be revealed without particular
experimental conditions and using NARI point-process models. However, structured emotional relevant experimental conditions can contribute in increasing the accuracy of the system.
It is worthwhile mentioning that the chosen affective elicitation
protocol does not strictly require a wearable monitoring system to acquire ANS data. However, a comfortable monitoring
system dramatically increases the patient’s compliance and improves the reliability of the physiological variations, which are
instantaneously detected by the proposed NARI model. Such an
experimental procedure is part of a more comprehensive study
involving long-term monitoring of bipolar patients in naturalistic environments [15]–[18], [78], i.e., the unstructured activity
analysis.
The presented point-process NL analysis represents a pioneering study in the field of mood assessment in bipolar patients. In
our approach, we consider the acquisition paradigm (including
high and low arousing IAPS and TAT) as a whole, without subdividing the protocol in separate epochs. More than a limitation,
we consider that the overall results give additional strength to
our approach. Indeed, it is not a matter of specific emotional response but, more in general, the central issue is the reactivity of
the ANS to be affected in bipolar disorders. The fact that we were
able to detect changes in ANS during the protocol as compared
to a resting state baseline is enough to say that we are studying
ANS reactions despite subjective measurements of emotional
arousal or valence related to the cues we used. Future studies
will progress to increasing the number of patients enrolled in
order to confirm the reliability of the proposed approach. We
will also explore additional aspects of the L and NL identification as related to depression and other pathological states of the
bipolar disorder. Moreover, we will carefully explore the physiological meaning of the dynamic autonomic signatures both
in the context of the underlying mood state and as a result of
the different stimuli administered within the dedicated protocol.
Our approach will be also further extended within the PSYCHE
project, including several other available variables (e.g., voice,
activity index, sleep pattern alteration, electrodermal response,
and biochemical markers).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to L. Maley for carefully reviewing
the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. C. Kessler, K. A. McGonagle, S. Zhao, C. B. Nelson, M. Hughes,
S. Eshleman, H. Wittchen, and K. S. Kendler, “Lifetime and 12-month
prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the united states: results

VALENZA et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF DEPRESSIVE STATES IN BIPOLAR PATIENTS

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

from the national comorbidity survey,” Archives Gen. Psychiatry, vol. 51,
no. 1, pp. 8–19, 1994.
H. Wittchen and F. Jacobi, “Size and burden of mental disorders in europe–
a critical review and appraisal of 27 studies,” Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 357–376, 2005.
E. Vieta, M. Reinares, and A. Rosa, “Staging bipolar disorder,” Neurotoxicity Res., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 279–285, 2011.
A. Andreazza, M. Kauer-Sant’Anna, B. Frey, D. Bond, F. Kapczinski,
L. Young, and L. Yatham, “Oxidative stress markers in bipolar disorder: a
meta-analysis,” J. Affective Disorders, vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 135–144, 2008.
H. Stampfer, “The relationship between psychiatric illness and the circadian pattern of heart rate,” Australasian Psychiatry, vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 187–198, 1998.
G. Iverson, H. Stampfer, and M. Gaetz, “Reliability of circadian heart
pattern analysis in psychiatry,” Psychiatric Quart., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 195–
203, 2002.
G. Iverson, M. Gaetz, E. Rzempoluck, P. McLean, W. Linden, and
R. Remick, “A new potential marker for abnormal cardiac physiology
in depression,” J. Behavioral Med., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 507–511, 2005.
J. Taillard, P. Sanchez, P. Lemoine, and J. Mouret, “Heart rate orcadian
rhythm as a biological marker of desynchronization in major depression:
A methodological and preliminary report,” Chronobiol. Int., vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 305–316, 1990.
J. Taillard et al., “Sleep and heart rate circadian rhythm in depression:
The necessity to separate,” Chronobiol. Int., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 63–72,
1993.
R. Carney, K. Freedland, M. Rich, and A. Jaffe, “Depression as a risk
factor for cardiac events in established coronary heart disease: A review
of possible mechanisms,” Ann. Behavioral Med., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 142–
149, 1995.
A. Glassman, “Depression, cardiac death, and the central nervous system,”
Neuropsychobiology, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 80–83, 1998.
L. Watkins, J. Blumenthal, and R. Carney, “Association of anxiety with
reduced baroreflex cardiac control in patients after acute myocardial infarction,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 143, no. 3, pp. 460–466, 2002.
A. Fagiolini, K. Chengappa, I. Soreca, and J. Chang, “Bipolar disorder
and the metabolic syndrome: Causal factors, psychiatric outcomes and
economic burden,” CNS Drugs, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 655–669, 2008.
K. Latalova, J. Prasko, T. Diveky, A. Grambal, D. Kamaradova,
H. Velartova, J. Salinger, and J. Opavsky, “Autonomic nervous system
in euthymic patients with bipolar affective disorder,” Neuro Endocrinol.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 829–836, 2010.
G. Valenza, M. Nardelli, A. Lanata, C. Gentili, G. Bertschy, R. Paradiso,
and E. Scilingo, “Wearable monitoring for mood recognition in bipolar
disorder based on history-dependent long-term heart rate variability analysis,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., to be published.
A. Greco, G. Valenza, A. Lanata, G. Rota, and E. Scilingo, “Electrodermal
activity in bipolar patients during affective elicitation,” IEEE J. Biomed.
Health Informat., to be published.
G. Valenza, C. Gentili, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Mood recognition in bipolar patients through the psyche platform: Preliminary evaluations and perspectives,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 49–58,
2013.
N. Vanello, A. Guidi, C. Gentili, S. Werner, G. Bertschy, G. Valenza,
A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “Speech analysis for mood state characterization in bipolar patients,” in Proc. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 2104–2107.
E. Scilingo, A. Gemignani, R. Paradiso, N. Taccini, B. Ghelarducci, and
D. De Rossi, “Performance evaluation of sensing fabrics for monitoring
physiological and biomechanical variables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 345–352, Sep. 2005.
M. Di Rienzo, P. Meriggi, F. Rizzo, P. Castiglioni, C. Lombardi,
M. Ferratini, and G. Parati, “Textile technology for the vital signs monitoring in telemedicine and extreme environments,” IEEE Trans., Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 711–717, May 2010.
E. Jovanov, A. O’Donnel, A. Morgan, B. Priddy, and R. Hormigo, “Prolonged telemetric monitoring of heart rate variability using wireless intelligent sensors and a mobile gateway,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Biol. Med.
Conf., 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1875–1876.
P. Bonato, “Wearable sensors/systems and their impact on biomedical
engineering,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 18–20,
May/Jun. 2003.
A. Lanata, G. Valenza, and E. Scilingo, “A novel EDA glove based on
textile-integrated electrodes for affective computing,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 50, pp. 1–10, 2012.

273

[24] G. Valenza, A. Lanatà, E. P. Scilingo, and D. De Rossi, “Towards a smart
glove: Arousal recognition based on textile electrodermal response,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Biol. Med. Conf., 2010, pp. 3598–3601.
[25] S. Johnson, J. Gruber, and L. Eisner, “Emotion and bipolar disorder” 2007.
[26] G. Valenza, A. Lanatá, and E. P. Scilingo, “Improving emotion recognition systems by embedding cardiorespiratory coupling,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 449–464, 2013.
[27] G. Valenza, L. Citi, A. Lanata, E. P. Scilingo, and R. Barbieri, “A nonlinear heartbeat dynamics model approach for personalized emotion recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Biol. Med. Conf., 2013, pp. 2579–2582.
[28] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “Oscillations of heart rate and
respiration synchronize during affective visual stimulation,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 683–690, Jul. 2012.
[29] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “The role of nonlinear dynamics in affective valence and arousal recognition,” IEEE Trans. Affective
Comput., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 237–249, Apr./Jun. 2012.
[30] M. Swangnetr and D. B. Kaber, “Emotional state classification in patient–
robot interaction using wavelet analysis and statistics-based feature selection,” IEEE Trans. Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 63–75, Jan.
2013.
[31] G. Valenza, P. Allegrini, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Dominant Lyapunov exponent and approximate entropy in heart rate variability during
emotional visual elicitation,” Frontiers Neuroeng., vol. 5, pp. 1–7, 2012.
[32] R. A. Calvo and S. D’Mello, “Affect detection: An interdisciplinary review of models, methods, and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Affective
Comput., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 18–37, Jan. 2010.
[33] M. Orini, R. Bailón, R. Enk, S. Koelsch, L. Mainardi, and P. Laguna,
“A method for continuously assessing the autonomic response to musicinduced emotions through HRV analysis,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 423–433, 2010.
[34] L. Wang, K. LaBar, and G. McCarthy, “Mood alters amygdala activation
to sad distractors during an attentional task,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 60,
no. 10, pp. 1139–1146, 2006.
[35] D. Radaelli, S. Poletti, S. Dallaspezia, C. Colombo, E. Smeraldi, and
F. Benedetti, “Neural responses to emotional stimuli in comorbid borderline personality disorder and bipolar depression,” Psychiatry Res.,
vol. 203, pp. 61–66, 2012.
[36] A. Greco, A. Lanata, G. Valenza, G. Rota, N. Vanello, and E. Scilingo, “On
the deconvolution analysis of electrodermal activity in bipolar patients,”
in Proc. IEEE Eng. Biol. Med. Conf., 2012, pp. 6691–6694.
[37] T. F. of the European Society of Cardiology, the North American Society
of Pacing, and Electrophysiology, “Heart rate variability: Standards of
measurement, physiological interpretation and clinical use,” Circulation,
vol. 93, no. 5, pp. 1043–65, 1996.
[38] U. Rajendra Acharya, K. Paul Joseph, N. Kannathal, C. Lim, and J. Suri,
“Heart rate variability: A review,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 44, no. 12,
pp. 1031–1051, 2006.
[39] R. Barbieri, E. C. Matten, A. A. Alabi, and E. N. Brown, “A point-process
model of human heartbeat intervals: new definitions of heart rate and heart
rate variability,” Amer. J. Physiol.-Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 288, no. 1,
pp. H424–H435, 2005.
[40] R. Barbieri and E. Brown, “Analysis of heartbeat dynamics by point
process adaptive filtering,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 1,
pp. 4–12, Jan. 2006.
[41] Z. Chen, E. Brown, and R. Barbieri, “Assessment of autonomic control and
respiratory sinus arrhythmia using point process models of human heart
beat dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1791–1802,
Jul. 2009.
[42] Z. Chen, E. Brown, and R. Barbieri, “Characterizing nonlinear heartbeat
dynamics within a point process framework,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1335–1347, Jun. 2010.
[43] G. Valenza, L. Citi, E. Scilingo, and R. Barbieri, “Point-process nonlinear
models with Laguerre and Volterra expansions: Instantaneous assessment
of heartbeat dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 11,
pp. 2914–2926, Jun. 2013.
[44] G. Valenza, L. Citi, E. Scilingo, and R. Barbieri, “Instantaneous bispectral
characterization of the autonomic nervous system through a point-process
nonlinear model,” in World Congress on Medical Physics and Biomedical
Engineering. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2013, pp. 530–533.
[45] G. Valenza, L. Citi, and R. Barbieri, “Instantaneous nonlinear assessment
of complex cardiovascular dynamics by Laguerre-Volterra point process
models,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Biol. Med. Conf., 2013, pp. 6131–6134.
[46] C. W. J. Granger and R. Joyeux, “An introduction to long-memory time
series models and fractional differencing,” J. Time Series Anal., vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 15–29, 1980.

274

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[47] J. Le Caillec and R. Garello, “Nonlinear system identification using autoregressive quadratic models,” Signal Process., vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 357–379,
2001.
[48] C. Nikias and J. Mendel, “Signal processing with higher-order spectra,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 10–37, Jul. 1993.
[49] K. Sunagawa, T. Kawada, and T. Nakahara, “Dynamic nonlinear Vagosympathetic interaction in regulating heart rate,” Heart Vessels, vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 157–174, 1998.
[50] J. Mendel, “Tutorial on higher-order statistics (spectra) in signal processing and system theory: Theoretical results and some applications,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 278–305, Mar. 1991.
[51] C. Nikias, Higher-order Spectral Analysis: A Nonlinear Signal Processing
Framework. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1993.
[52] Z. Chen, P. Purdon, E. Brown, and R. Barbieri, “A differential autoregressive modeling approach within a point process framework for nonstationary heartbeat intervals analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Biol. Med.
Conf., 2010, pp. 3567–3570.
[53] C. Loader, Local Regression and Likelihood. New York, NY, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 1999.
[54] L. Citi, E. Brown, and R. Barbieri, “A real-time automated point process
method for detection and correction of erroneous and ectopic heartbeats,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2828–2837, Oct. 2012.
[55] S. Billings, “Identification of nonlinear system—A survey,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 127, no. 6, pp. 272–285, Nov. 1980.
[56] M. Akay, Nonlinear Biomedical Signal Processing Vol. II: Dynamic Analysis and Modeling. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2000.
[57] V. Marmarelis, “Modeling of neuronal systems,” in Nonlinear Dynamic
Modeling of Physiological Systems. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2012,
pp. 407–465.
[58] C. Nikias and M. Raghuveer, “Bispectrum estimation: A digital signal
processing framework,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 75, no. 7, pp. 869–891, Jul.
1987.
[59] J. M. Nichols, C. C. Olson, J. V. Michalowicz, and F. Bucholtz, “The
bispectrum and bicoherence for quadratically nonlinear systems subject
to non-Gaussian inputs,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 57, no. 10,
pp. 3879–3890, Oct. 2009.
[60] A. Lanata, G. Valenza, C. Mancuso, and E. P. Scilingo, “Robust multiple
cardiac arrhythmia detection through bispectrum analysis,” Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 6798–6804, 2011.
[61] A. Barnett and R. Wolff, “A time-domain test for some types of nonlinearity,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 26–33, Jan.
2005.
[62] R. Kohavi and F. Provost, “Glossary of terms,” Mach. Learn., vol. 30,
no. Jun., pp. 271–274, 1998.
[63] R. Kohavi, “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 1137–1145, 1995.
[64] W. KinneBrock, Neural Networks. Munich, Germany: Oldenburg
Verlag, 1992.
[65] A. P. Association, A. P. A. T. F. on DSM-IV., Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-IV. Arlington, VA, USA: Amer.
Psychiatric Pub. Inc., 1994.

[66] P. Lang, M. Bradley, and B. Cuthbert, International affective picture system
(IAPS): Technical manual and affective ratings, NIMH Center for the
Study of Emotion and Attention, Univ. Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA,
1999.
[67] A. Conklin and D. Westen, “Thematic apperception test,” in Understanding Psychological Assessment. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2001,
pp. 107–133.
[68] J. P. Burg, “A new analysis technique for time series data,” presented at
the NATO Adv. Study Inst. Signal Process., Enschede, Netherlands, 1968,
vol. 32.
[69] J. S. Chang, C. S. Yoo, S. H. Yi, J. Y. Her, H. M. Choi, T. H. Ha, T. Park,
and K. Ha, “An integrative assessment of the psychophysiologic alterations in young women with recurrent major depressive disorder,”
Psychosomatic Med., vol. 74, no. 5, pp. 495–500, 2012.
[70] J. Gruber, A. G. Harvey, and A. Purcell, “What goes up can come down?
a preliminary investigation of emotion reactivity and emotion recovery
in bipolar disorder,” J. Affective Disorders, vol. 133, no. 3, pp. 457–466,
2011.
[71] B. Levy, “Autonomic nervous system arousal and cognitive functioning
in bipolar disorder,” Bipolar Disorders, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 70–79, 2013.
[72] M. Di Simplicio, G. Costoloni, D. Western, B. Hanson, P. Taggart, and
C. Harmer, “Decreased heart rate variability during emotion regulation
in subjects at risk for psychopathology,” Psychol. Med., vol. 42, no. 8,
pp. 1775–1783, 2012.
[73] C. Vögele, S. Sorg, M. Studtmann, and H. Weber, “Cardiac autonomic
regulation and anger coping in adolescents,” Biol. Psychol., vol. 85, no. 3,
pp. 465–471, 2010.
[74] J. Martin and E. Martin-Sanchez, “Systematic review and meta-analysis
of vagus nerve stimulation in the treatment of depression: variable results
based on study designs,” Eur. Psychiatry, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 147–155,
2012.
[75] C. Chang, C. D. Metzger, G. H. Glover, J. H. Duyn, H.-J. Heinze, and
M. Walter, “Association between heart rate variability and fluctuations in
resting-state functional connectivity,” Neuroimage, vol. 68, pp. 93–104,
2013.
[76] J. F. Thayer, F. Åhs, M. Fredrikson, J. J. Sollers III, and T. D. Wager, “A
meta-analysis of heart rate variability and neuroimaging studies: Implications for heart rate variability as a marker of stress and health,” Neurosci.
Biobehavioral Rev., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 747–756, 2012.
[77] A. R. Brunoni, M. Lopes, and F. Fregni, “A systematic review and
meta-analysis of clinical studies on major depression and bdnf levels: Implications for the role of neuroplasticity in depression,” Int. J.
Neuropsychopharmacol., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1169–1180, 2008.
[78] G. Valenza and E. P. Scilingo, “Autonomic nervous system dynamics
for mood emotional-state recognition,” in Significant Advances in Data
Acquisition, Signal Processing and Classification. New York, NY, USA:
Springer, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

