1822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy as a
Novel Proximity Sensor for Atraumatic
Cochlear Implant Insertion
H. Watanabe∗ , J. Velmurugan, M. V. Mirkin, M. A. Svirsky, A. K. Lalwani, and R. R. Llinas

Abstract—A growing number of minimally invasive surgical and
diagnostic procedures require the insertion of an optical, mechanical, or electronic device in narrow spaces inside a human body.
In such procedures, precise motion control is essential to avoid
damage to the patient’s tissues and/or the device itself. A typical
example is the insertion of a cochlear implant which should ideally
be done with minimum physical contact between the moving device and the cochlear canal walls or the basilar membrane. Because
optical monitoring is not possible, alternative techniques for sub
millimeter-scale distance control can be very useful for such procedures. The first requirement for distance control is distance sensing.
We developed a novel approach to distance sensing based on the
principles of scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM). The
SECM signal, i.e., the diffusion current to a microelectrode, is very
sensitive to the distance between the probe surface and any electrically insulating object present in its proximity. With several amperometric microprobes fabricated on the surface of an insertable
device, one can monitor the distances between different parts of the
moving implant and the surrounding tissues. Unlike typical SECM
experiments, in which a disk-shaped tip approaches a relatively
smooth sample, complex geometries of the mobile device and its
surroundings make distance sensing challenging. Additional issues
include the possibility of electrode surface contamination in biological fluids and the requirement for a biologically compatible redox
mediator.
Index Terms—Cochlear implants, inverse problems, noninvasive
treatments, scanning probe microscopy, sensor systems.

Manuscript received May 24, 2013; revised August 16, 2013, November 24,
2013, and January 30, 2014; accepted February 9, 2014. Date of publication
February 26, 2014; date of current version May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Cornell NanoScale Facility, a member of the National
Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, which is supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant ECS-0335765, and in part by the Center for
Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is supported
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract DE-AC02–98CH10886. The work of MVM was supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant CHE-0957313. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ H. Watanabe is with the NYU Langone Medical Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016 USA (e-mail: hw2420@
columbia.edu).
M. A. Svirsky is with the New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016 USA (e-mail: Mario.Svirsky@NYUMC.ORG).
J. Velmurugan and M. V. Mirkin are with the Queens College, Flushing, NY
11367 USA (e-mail: vjeyvel@yahoo.com; mmirkin@qc.cuny.edu).
R. R. Llinas is with the NYU Langone Medical Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016 USA (e-mail: rodolfo.llinas@
nyumc.org).
A. K. Lalwani is with the Department of Otolaryngology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA (e-mail: akl2144@cumc.
columbia.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2308058

I. INTRODUCTION
OCHLEAR implants (CIs) are devices to evoke hearing
sensation by electrical stimulation in patients with severe,
profound, or total hearing loss. The surgical procedure involves
manual drilling of the temporal bone to access the inner ear,
either through the round window or via a cochleostomy. The
CI electrode is inserted into the spirally coiled inner ear space
where noble metal electrodes stimulate spiral ganglion neurons.
The inner ear is compartmentalized into three spaces [scala
tympani (ST), scala media, and scala vestibuli (SV)] by two
membranes that extend longitudinally through the cochlea: the
basilar membrane and Reissner’s membrane. The ST is the ideal
canal in which a CI can be inserted minimally invasively to
preserve most of the intricate inner ear structure, especially the
basilar membrane in which auditory sensory receptors reside.
However, during the insertion, the CI can be dislocated from the
ST into the SV breaking the basilar membrane and resulting in
complete loss of any residual acoustic hearing.
Recently, as implantation criteria have expanded to the patients with more residual hearing, studies have shown the potential of residual hearing preservation. Increased hearing preservation may help improve hearing performance by both electrical
and acoustic stimulation using the combination of a CI and a
hearing aid in the same ear [1]. One difficulty is that basilar
membrane penetration during the insertion of a CI electrode is
regarded as significant physical trauma which is likely to affect preservation of residual hearing [2], [3]. One of the most
successful strategies to avoid basilar membrane penetration is
the use of a short CI which does not reach the first turn of
the cochlear canal. This approach can provide “electroacoustic”
stimulation to the implanted ear by providing electrical stimulation to neurons close to the base of the cochlea and acoustic
stimulation to neurons closer to the apex of the cochlea [1]. The
success of hearing preservation surgery has stimulated further
study to evaluate the positive correlation between electroacoustic stimulation and the improvement of hearing performance [4].
Two important factors make it difficult to achieve atraumatic
insertion of CIs. First, surgeons have to insert a CI into a tightly
curled canal without any visual nor positional information. Optical endoscopy is too invasive and fluoroscopy requires more
improvement on the temporal/spatial resolution for intraoperative guidance [5]–[9]. Currently, CI designers aim at optimizing the mechanical properties of CIs for atraumatic insertion
to be as easy as possible for surgeons [10]. Second, the narrowly coiled ST space imposes a strict constraint on the design of CIs when the engineers and researchers keep improving

C

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WATANABE et al.: SCANNING ELECTROCHEMICAL MICROSCOPY AS A NOVEL PROXIMITY SENSOR

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the SECM feedback mode with a disk-shaped
tip electrode. (a) The redox mediator diffusion is shown by arrows. An approach
curve, (i: current, d: distance, and r: radius,) is shown schematically in (b) and
topographical scan (c). (d) A simplified image of a CI with an eight-channel
proximity sensor array in a ST. Arrows indicate the diffusion of redox mediators
in confined (purple) or open (red) space.

the mechanical properties and, more dramatically, try to invent
intelligent and active CIs with the incorporation of actuators
or sensors [11]–[13]. A high-resolution sensor with miniaturization capability can be a breakthrough toward the complete
atraumatic insertion of CIs.
Here, we propose the implementation of the scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) as a proximity sensor to detect
ST walls and basilar membrane without physical contact. The
implementation of SECM features real-time, compact size, and
high sensitivity. One of the ultimate goals is to estimate and/or
control the trajectory of the CI to avoid any contact of the CI to
the ST walls.

II. APPLICATION OF SECM TO CI
SECM is an electrochemical scanning probe microscopic
technique, which has been widely used to observe local physical/chemical processes in solution and on various surfaces [14].
The tip potential is controlled versus the reference electrode,
and the current flowing at the tip is determined by the rate of the
diffusion of redox species to its surface. When the tip is brought
close (i.e., within a few tip radii) to an insulating substrate the
current decreases because the insulator blocks the diffusion of
redox species to the microelectrode surface (negative feedback).
The negative feedback mode of the SECM operation can be used
to amperometrically image the topography of an insulative substrate by scanning a microelectrode (“tip”) above its surface in
an aqueous solution containing a redox mediator (see Fig. 1).
Similarly, if a CI is equipped with microelectrodes, the insulative biological tissues such as bone and basilar membrane
[15] can be detected by change in the measured current [see
Fig. 1(d)]. Because the microdisk electrode is made of a noble metal, it is essentially no different from a CI stimulation

1823

electrode except for its size, shape, and voltage application regimen for a specific redox mediator.
To apply SECM to atraumatic CI insertion, the size of a
noble metal disk electrode and a suitable redox mediator must
be selected. The size of the electrode determines the proximity
range, i.e., the maximum distance at which the proximity sensor
can detect an object. A typical current/distance characteristic
(approach curve) for SECM with a disk-shaped tip approaching
a flat insulating sample [see Fig. 1(a)] is shown schematically in
Fig. 1(b). The current shows clear decrease when the distance
becomes less than ∼10 tip radii. The radius of about 50 μm is
suitable to have an appropriate range to detect the proximity of
the ST wall whose cross-sectional size is less than 3 mm. The
redox mediator has to be present in the body abundantly and the
electrochemical reaction must be safe for body tissues.
Oxygen (O2 ) is an endogenous key molecule involved in
the metabolism to sustain a life. Since the discovery in 1897,
electrochemical reduction of O2 has been used to measure the
concentration of O2 in a solution using platinum (Pt) electrode
via the reactions [16], [17],
O2 + 2H2 O + 4e− → 4OH− and O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2 O.
Bare type electrodes directly immersed in bodily fluid have
been used widely in acute experiments which have aimed at
determining the oxygen tension in the brain of freely moving
animals, or in the perilymph solution of guinea pigs [18]–[21].
In these studies including histology, the oxygen sensor performance degraded before emergence of any issues with biocompatibility. For the chronic sensing of O2 reduction up to one year,
research efforts have been dedicated to overcome the loss of accessing the dissolved O2 cased by the adsorption of impurities
such as proteins on the electrode surface [22], [23]. Since 1953,
Clark electrode, which employs an oxygen permeable coating
encapsulating the Pt electrode and isolated operating solution
from the body tissues has been used to measure blood oxyR

gen tension [24]. One of the Clark type electrodes is Licox ,
which is a human implant to monitor the brain oxygen tension
in traumatic brain injury [25]–[27].
The history of the development of oxygen sensors in the
human or animal body suggests that the primary challenge is
that the duration necessary for the Pt electrode to operate to
detect the wall of ST has to be longer than the time which
allows the Pt electrode surface to foul. The secondary issue is the
biocompatibility of the reduction of oxygen. The pH elevation
from the hydroxide formation and hydronium ion consumption
should be considered from the amplitude and duration of the
reduction current.
In this paper, we present a feasibility study of implementation of SECM as a proximity sensor for atraumatic CI insertion; specifically, 1) a design of a novel distance sensor electrode based on the SECM feedback mode and current CI designs, 2) use of O2 as an endogenous distance sensing mediator,
3) demonstration of proximity sensing within the geometry of
the human inner ear, 4) estimation of a possible trajectory based
on the analysis and the interpretation of the proximity sensing
using SECM, 5) time-dependent effects on proximity sensing,

1824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 2. Polyimide carrier with a proximity sensor used in the experiment is
shown. From the right, the yellow tube is a 4-cm long 400-micron diameter
polyimide tube. The Pt disk electrode is located 1 mm from the tip of the polyimide tube. The black paint from 1 cm from the tip indicates the direction which
the electrode faces. The platinum wire was structurally fixed and electrically
insulated with epoxy glue to the polyimide tube from the tip located at the right
and the wire was electrically connected with a fuse wire inserted from the left
tip. The left tip of the polyimide tube and the fuse wire was also fixed and
secured with enough amount of epoxy to stabilize the structural and electrical
connection. The direction of the disk face is also painted on the epoxy glue. The
wire was soldered to a pin on the leftmost side.

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the fabrication of a proximity sensor. The hole
in the wall of a polyimide tube was made with a YAG laser to insert a single Pt
wire. The Pt wire was fixed with epoxy glue, introduced from the tip of the tube
and electrically connected to a fuse wire. The tip of the Pt wire was grinded
roughly and polished to make the surface continuous.

and seal the hole. The Pt wire was cut roughly and polished with
a drill followed by a cotton applicator immersed with distilled
water and 50-nm alumina under a binocular microscope. The Pt
wire was polished until the wire surface and the polyimide tube
surface were continuous. Before use in SECM, the electrode
was polished again with alumina and washed by distilled water.
B. Electrochemical Characterization

Fig. 3. Platinum wire (center circle) is embedded in a polyimide tube. This
picture was taken with an optical microscope in Brookhaven National Laboratory. The disk electrode surface is flush with the surrounding polyimide surface.

and 6) an indication of the biocompatibility of the distance
sensor.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Distance Sensor Design and Fabrication
A polyimide tube was selected as an electrode carrier to reduce vibration during proximity sensing experiments and to
facilitate fabrication (see Fig. 2). A 75-μm diameter Pt wire
(A-M Systems, Carlsborg, WA, USA) was selected to allow for
a proximity range of ∼100 μm (see Fig. 3). The wire was embedded in a polyimide tube carrier, which was designed so that
the proposed technology could be easily employed in current
CI designs by replacing its Pt stimulation electrode with the
electrode presented here.
Fig. 4 shows the schematic diagram of the fabrication of a
Pt microelectrode in a polyimide tube. A 28-gauge polyimide
tube was purchased from Small parts (Logansport, IN). An
80-μm-diameter hole was created on the wall of the polyimide
tube by a YAG laser. The Pt wire was inserted through the 80-μm
hole and pulled toward one end. From the other end, epoxy glue
(Devcon 2 Ton Epoxy) was introduced to fix the wire to the tube

To characterize the electrochemical behavior of the prototyped electrode, linear ramp cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in ferrocenemethanol (FeMeOH) solution as a control
and phosphate buffer solution (PBS) as a biological standard. All
chemicals used were of analytical grade unless mentioned otherwise, and deionized water was used (Milli-Q, Millipore Co.) to
prepare solutions. FeMeOH, selected here as a redox mediator to
calibrate a prototyped electrode has been widely used in SECM
experiments because its one-electron oxidation/reduction yields
nearly perfect electrochemical response [28]. PBS was prepared
to contain an ionic composition equivalent to the perilymph solution in human ST [29]. The pH buffer was modified from
carbonate to phosphate. The contents were NaCl 137 mM, KCl
2.7 mM, NaH2 PO4 -H2 O 8.1 mM, Na2 HPO4 1.76 mM pH
7.4. KNO3 0.1 M, and KCl 0.1 M (≥99%, Aldrich) were used
as supporting electrolytes for FeMeOH 1 mM. To remove O2
in the saline solution, the solutions were purged with highpurity nitrogen before and during the experiments as a negative
control. Either an EI-400 bipotentiostat (Ensman Instruments,
Bloomington, IN, USA) or a BAS-100 B electrochemical analyzer (Bioanalytical Systems, West Lafayette, IN, USA) was
used to obtain CVs. All experiments were performed at room
temperature (23 ± 2 ◦ C) inside a Faraday cage. The scan speed
was 50 mV/sec. The voltage windows to characterize FeMeOH
oxidation and O2 reduction were from –100 to 500 mV and from
1100 to −700 mV, respectively. A two-electrode configuration
was employed using a 0.3-mm diameter Ag wire coated with
AgCl as a reference electrode. More than 10 mm of the wire
was always immersed in the solution to make the surface area
of the reference electrode always thousand times bigger than
that of the working electrode. The concentration of O2 under

WATANABE et al.: SCANNING ELECTROCHEMICAL MICROSCOPY AS A NOVEL PROXIMITY SENSOR

1825

atmospheric pressure (Pat ) with the oxygen partial pressure
(PO 2 ) of 159 mm Hg is 0.262 mM.

C. Proximity Sensing Demonstration
The demonstration of the feasibility of proximity sensing using SECM was performed with the previously described homebuilt SECM instrument [30]. As a control experiment to analyze
the voltage effect in reducing oxygen in the artificial perilymph
solution during proximity sensing, a standard SECM was performed with a Pt disk electrode (50 μm in diameter) embedded
in a glass capillary as a working electrode such that the difference from this experiment and the following experiment is the
geometry of the working electrode and the scanned substrate.
Approach curves with varied voltage (0∼−800 mV, 50-mV interval) were obtained. The electrode tip was lowered to a glass
plate until the electrode made contact. The contact point was
confirmed by an abrupt change in the approach curve. Current
versus distance relationships were recorded by departing the
glass capillary electrode from the contact point at the speed of
4 μm/sec.
An acrylic ST model (Advanced Bionics, Valencia, CA, USA)
was used as a substrate which approximated the physical size
of the human ST [31]. The polyimide carrier was inserted into
the canal filled with FeMeOH solution or PBS. These solutions
were instilled from the apex end of the canal that was located on
the back of the ST model. Before PBS instillation, the solution
was exposed to air for enough time to attain equilibrium under
Pat . This procedure ensured the saturation of the solution with
O2 and the elimination of bubbles that can be formed in the
canal during the proximity sensing experiments. The FeMeOH
solution was first instilled and then replaced with PBS in the
canal without changing the position of the ST model, in order
to preserve the spatial conditions between the scans using FeMeOH solution and PBS. After the FeMeOH solution removal,
the canal was flushed with the PBS three times. This protocol
enabled us to compare proximity sensing with two different
mediators, i.e., FeMeOH and O2 .
The polyimide carrier was inserted into and retracted from
the ST model by a piezoelectric actuator. The relative angle between the electrode insertion path and the acrylic ST model was
adjusted with a stage angle adjustment so that the carrier almost
contacted the wall during the course of the movements. The inward and outward movements were repeated six times at a speed
of 20 μm/s. The sampling rate was 40 Hz, the displacement in
each direction was 6 mm, and number of data points was 12 000
at each inward and outward movement. The voltage of either
400 mV or −700 mV versus Ag/AgCl was applied to the proximity sensor in the FeMeOH solution and PBS, respectively.
The movements were recorded using a digital camera (Power
Shot SD800 IS, Cannon, Japan) [see Fig. 5(a)] at 30 frames/sec.
The beginning and the end of the scan were identified in the
recording with the start and the cessation of the clicking sound
produced by the movement of the piezoelectric actuator. In each
frame, the tip of the polyimide tube was located in the pixel
map using a custom-made program written in MATLAB. The

Fig. 5. Polyimide carrier insertion into a ST model. Figure (a) shows video
frames of the insertion of the electrode into the canal of the acrylic model.
Red arrows indicate the position of the microdisk electrode. Their insertion
depths are indicated below. Figure (b) shows three locations of the reconstructed
electrode insertion model based on the optical recording. Red arrows indicate
the position of the disc electrode. Orange broken arrows represent the length
of the movement in each one of the three sections indicated below. (a) Optical
recording. (b) Reconstructed insertion.

polyimide carrier was confirmed to be in the proximity of the
inner curvature of the canal wall at the first turn of the ST model.
D. MATLAB Insertion Model for Virtual Visualization
and Three-Dimensional (3-D) Numerical Analysis
A virtual insertion model was developed numerically using
MATLAB to visualize the insertion of the polyimide carrier into
the acrylic ST model in 3-D and analyze the spatial relationship
among the polyimide carrier, proximity sensor and ST acrylic
canal in 3-D.
In the MATLAB model, the 3-D geometry of the ST canal was
reconstructed from the geometric measurement of the acrylic
ST model using micro computed tomography (μCT) (Scanco
medical 40, Switzerland) at the NYU College of Dentistry Department of Biomaterials and Biomimetics. The voxel size was
12.5 μm. To enhance the radioactive signal, 1 mM of radiocontrast agent: sodium diatrizoate hydrate (≥99%, Sigma-Aldrich)
was instilled into the ST acrylic canal. The slice data were converted to DICOM format for further processing to reconstruct
the canal structure in the MATLAB model.
The position of the polyimide carrier in a 2-D coordinate plane
(i.e., the xy plane in Figs. 5 and 6) was confirmed approximately
based on the digital camera images and the other orthogonal
coordinate (i.e., z-coordinate) was set in the MATLAB model
arbitrarily. The image data (see Fig. 5 top) was not used directly
because of the image distortion by the lens effect of the spherical
acrylic ST model. The trajectories of the electrode were assumed
to be straight and without any contact to the wall.
The position of the proximity sensor was determined relative
to the polyimide carrier in the MATLAB model. The direction of
the proximity sensor was confirmed to face the inner curvature

1826

Fig. 6. Magnified view of the MATLAB reconstruction image. The three
colored arrows show the vectors used to calculate the distance between the
center of the sensor to the wall of the ST model. All three vectors are in the plane
perpendicular to the polyimide tube. The center (red) vector is perpendicular to
the electrode surface and to the center line of the tube (dashed black line). The
other two vectors are 45◦ away from the center vector.

of the first turn of the ST model before the experiment and
always laid within the xy plane. The distance of the center of the
disk Pt electrode from the tip of the polyimide tube was 1 mm.
E. Inverse Problem for Trajectory Estimation
Given the current measured with the SECM proximity sensing, estimation of the position of a CI carrier is qualitatively
equivalent to a challenging nonlinear inverse problem, which
this study ultimately aims at solving. In this paper, the experiment was designed to simplify the trajectory of the proximity
sensor in 2-D to detect the first turn, and, the single channel
proximity sensor was intended to provide enough information,
in addition to the insertion depth recorded with a piezoelectric
actuator, to determine the solution uniquely within the 2-D space
that was confirmed with the digital camera images. To explain
any potential disagreements between the SECM data (see Fig. 9)
and the digital camera images, we consider the effects of the 3-D
structure of the ST acrylic model, the lack of the third orthognal
dimensional information in the digital camera images and the
near-isotropic sensitivity of the proximity sensor because the
characteristics depend on the diffusion of redox mediators.
We hypothesized that the proximity sensor could be found
close to the wall of the ST acrylic model in the departing section
when we see it in an xz plane. Because the proximity sensor
contains 3-D information, the experimental data were used as
constraints to estimate the position of the proximity sensor in
the z-coordinate, in addition to the constraints determined from
the digital camera images. By estimating the z-coordinate in the
3-D trajectry of the proximity sensor using the constraints, we
intended to explain the disagreement with the existence of one
trajectory which agrees with both digital camera images and the
SECM current data.
Thus, using the MATLAB insertion model as a 3-D function
whose input is the trajectory of the polyimide carrier and whose
output is the distance between the proximity sensor and the wall
of ST canal, a numerical analysis was conducted to estimate
one possible trajectory of the polyimide carrier by comparing
the output, i.e., distances, and the SECM current data. Variable
trajectories were used to calculate the distances iteratively until

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 7. CVs obtained with the prototyped electrode. (a) The CV of FeMeOH
solution. (b) CV of the artificial perilymph solution indicating O2 reduction
under atmospheric pressure (red line). As a negative control, the solution was
purged from O2 with nitrogen flow (green line).

the experimental SECM current data agreed well with the output
distance.
First, the 2-D images taken by the digital camera determined
the trajectory of the polyimide carrier in an xy plane and the
distance in the center vector (see Fig. 6) which is in the perpendicular direction from the proximity sensor and always in an xy
plane. The constraints were 1) in the approaching section, the
distance is far, 2) in the proximity section, the proximity sensor
should be close to or almost touching the wall, and 3) in the
departing section, the proximity sensor should be far from the
wall in the direction of the center vector.
The output distances were compared with the SECM data as
follows. From the analysis of the SECM data presented in Fig. 9,
the following two constraints were added; 1) in the departing
section, the wall was far in all directions, and 2), in the departing
section, the proximity sensor must be close to the wall in a
direction other than in the direction of the center vector.
In addition to the center vector, two other vectors shown in
Fig. 6 were used to calculate the distances between the proximity
sensor and the wall of ST acrylic model in the MATLAB insertion model. The distances in three directions from the proximity
sensor to the wall of the ST model were calculated iteratively until these distances satisfied the constraints described previously
to solve the inverse problem to estimate the trajectory in the
physically conducted experiment. By confirming the existence
of a trajectory that meets all the constraints, the disagreement in
the experimental data can be explained.
IV. RESULTS
A. Cyclic Voltammetry
Fig. 7 shows typical CVs obtained with the Pt electrode immersed in the FeMeOH solution and the artificial perilymph
solution before the proximity sensing. The plateau current of
the FeMeOH oxidation [10.5 nA in Fig. 7(a)] is the diffusion
limiting current in the bulk solution. Fig. 7(b) shows the CV
obtained in the artificial perilymph solution under Pat (red line)
and the same solution purged with nitrogen (green line). The red
line shows a typical O2 reduction wave and the green line represents the background current at the Pt electrode in PBS without
O2 . The red line shows a plateau from −500 to −700 mV

WATANABE et al.: SCANNING ELECTROCHEMICAL MICROSCOPY AS A NOVEL PROXIMITY SENSOR

1827

Fig. 9. Detection of the proximity of the canal wall with SECM. Left and right
columns show the average of 6 inward and outward scans respectively. The error
bars are shown at the reduced interval of 100 μm for clarity. Top and bottom
rows show the scans with FeMeOH and O2 , respectively. The broken green and
blue lines in vertical axis indicate the approaching and departing sections. The
broken lines in horizontal axis indicate the deviation from the average of the
each sections.
Fig. 8. Approach curves obtained with a Pt disk electrode embedded in a
glass capillary. (a) The relationship between cathodic currents and distance
obtained with voltages from 0 to −800 mV. Curves below −200 mV show
clear distance dependence. −800 mV line shows large bias current. (b) The
plateau and proximity currents are shown to indicate the dynamic ranges of the
proximity sensing at varied voltages. The averages and standard deviations of
the cathodic currents from 100 to 200 μm are shown as plateau currents. The
average cathodic currents from 0 to 10 μm are shown as proximity currents.
Minimum and maximum currents of the proximity currents are also shown.

indicating the diffusion limited current. Abrupt increase of current caused by hydrogen gas evolution was observed at more
negative voltages (data not shown). In the CV [see Fig. 7(b)],
the voltage window did not include the range of the gas evolution
to keep the electrode in a pristine condition for the proximity
sensing. The relatively rectangular shape of the green line indicates that the background current was consumed mostly to
charge double-layer capacitance. By background subtraction of
the capacitative current, the maximum diffusion limiting current
of O2 reduction was determined to be −18.7 nA (82% of the
total current) at −700 mV.
CV of FeMeOH was used to check the cleanliness of the electrode surface. When the electrode surface was contaminated,
the plateau current exhibited an upward tilt. Typically, insufficient cure of the epoxy and the presence of other impurities
affected the CV shape unless the surface was well polished using
alumina.
B. Distance Sensing Demonstration
Fig. 8(a) shows the approach curves obtained with varied
voltages (0 to −800 mV at 100 mV interval). The approach
curves denoted (−200 to −700 mV) shows clear increase of the
cathodic currents from 0 to 50 μm. From 100 to 200 μm, all
the curves show plateaus with slight increase. These increases

were not present in cases that the electrode was being lowered
toward the glass substrate instead of being departed (data not
shown). Fig. 8(b) shows the average, minimum, and maximum
cathodic currents from 0 to 10 μm (proximity). The average
currents from 100 to 200 μm (plateau) are also shown. Standard
deviations of the plateau currents were less than 2% except for
that of 0 mV.
The plateau currents at −600, −650, and −700 mV did not
show significant differences indicating that the electrochemical
reactions were diffusion limited. Together with the CV which
showed a nearly plateau current below −500 mV, these results
suggest that SECM using oxygen as a redox mediator should
be performed within this voltage range. The approach curves
obtained with the voltages above −500 up to −200 mV also
showed enough distance dependence, i.e., the difference between the plateau and proximity currents, indicating that this
voltage range can be also used for the proximity sensing. Below
−750 mV, both the plateau and proximity currents increased
due to the hydrogen evolution current and the dynamic range
was compromised.
Fig. 9 shows the average and standard deviation of the current
amplitudes at each insertion depth in six laps. The mediators
were FeMeOH (upper row) and O2 (lower row) respectively.
The directions of the movements were inward in the left column
and outward in the right column.
The trajectory of the tube was divided into three sections,
approaching, proximity, and departing [see Figs. 5(b) and 9]. In
the approaching section from 0 mm to 3.0 mm in depth, when
the electrode is not close enough to the wall, the currents in both
mediators are relatively stable close to the maximum current of
7.97 and 20.6 nA, respectively. In the proximity section around
a depth of 4.5 mm, when the electrode is almost touching the
wall, both types of scans showed clear and significant decrease

1828

Fig. 10. Six consecutive inward SECM scans (left columns). Obtained with
FcMeOH (top) and oxygen (bottom) redox mediators. The scan numbers for
both FeMeOH and O2 are color-coded according to the inset in the top-left
graph. The right column show the deviation from the average of six laps for
FeMeOH (top) and O2 (bottom) scans, respectively. The deviation from the
average in the whole, approaching, and proximity sections are shown as red,
blue, and green bars respectively.

of the current down to 3.32 to 8.51 nA, respectively. In the
departing section, from 5.0 mm to the end of the scan, after the
electrode passed the first turn of the canal, the current increased
and reached a local maximal value at 5.6 mm deep. However,
the green and blue lines in all four graphs indicated that theses
current values were significantly smaller than the corresponding
ones in the bulk solution.
Scan-to-scan comparison shows that the variation in the current value at each insertion depth among six scans is attributable
to time-dependent changes, and the detection of the wall was not
affected significantly (see Fig. 10,left). The first inward scans
with FeMeOH and O2 mediators produced significantly larger
current than other scans did (see Fig. 10, right). Furthermore,
FeMeOH scans showed slight increases of the average current
after the second scan and O2 scans showed that current kept
decreasing steadily.
C. Numerical Analysis Using Virtual Insertion Model
A series of images in Fig. 5 (bottom) show a reconstructed
insertion of the polyimide carrier and proximity sensor into the
ST canal in the MATLAB insertion model.
Fig. 11 shows the comparison of the results of the three calculated distance versus insertion depth (solid color lines) and the
normalized current (broken line) from the inward O2 scan. All
constraints were satisfied accordingly. As the polyimide carrier
was being inserted down to the depth of 4.5 mm, the distances
decreased in the center direction (red line) and other directions,
45◦ from the center (blue and green). In two directions (red and
green lines), after the local minimum, the distance increased
steeply. However, in the blue line, the distance decreased again
almost to zero at the insertion depth of 6 mm. These distances

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 11. Dependences of the distance between the sensor and the wall of ST
model in three directions from Fig. 6 on the insertion depth (solid color lines;
left axis) along one of the trajectories reconstructed using MATLAB insertion
model. These distances were estimated using the MATLAB insertion model,
as the polyimide tube was inserted 6 mm into the model following a straight
line. The black dashed line shows the corresponding normalized current at each
moment in time (right axis).

calculated from a trajectory are in good accordance with the
data obtained from the SECM measurement. In turn, this trajectory can be used as an estimate of the polyimide carrier and the
proximity sensor positions.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Design and Fabrication
The use of a noble metal microdisk electrode demonstrates
that a proximity sensor using SECM negative feedback mode
can be easily implemented in current CIs. The current CI electrodes for stimulation of neurons are band electrodes made of
Pt as the interface exposed and delivering electrical current to
the perilymph. In both stimulation electrodes and proximity sensors, Pt is selected to minimize any unnecessary electrochemical
reaction and to maximize biocompatibility. Therefore, the proximity sensor proposed in this study satisfies some of the most
important requirements of CIs for biocompatibility.
The mechanical property of the polyimide tube and the wire
inside increased the bending stiffness to be high enough to reduce the amplitude of the vibration during insertion and also
reduce noise. However, the high bending stiffness prevents insertion deeper than the first turn of the ST model. Current CI
carriers are made of PDMS and wires are designed to reduce the
bending stiffness to be able to be bent to fit the tight ST canal
with sufficient depth. The use of a PDMS carrier is appropriate
to reduce the bending stiffness for a deeper insertion. Possible challenges with a PDMS carrier are effects of the vibration
caused by the insertion traction force and the contact between
the carrier and the wall.
B. O2 as an Endogenous Redox Species
O2 is an endogenous reducible mediator abundantly found in
the human perilymph solution supplied from the middle ear [19].

WATANABE et al.: SCANNING ELECTROCHEMICAL MICROSCOPY AS A NOVEL PROXIMITY SENSOR

The average PO2 is 55 mm Hg in the inner ear, which is one third
of that under Pat . Therefore, we can expect that the current level
will be lower than the value obtained in this study. The decrease
in the signal level is not likely to compromise the signal to
noise ratio to the level at which feasibility of the method might
come into question. The values found in the literature vary,
but the report on spatial and temporal variation of the PO 2 in
in vivo guinea pig is encouraging. The PO 2 near the basilar
membrane (10–44 mm Hg) is significantly smaller than the
average (55 mm Hg). This spatial variation is encouraging to
our demonstrated technology. Because the PO 2 was measured
using an electrochemical O2 sensor, the smaller current can be
caused by 1) actual PO 2 level, 2) hindered O2 diffusion, or 3)
both of them. In any of these cases, the detection of the basilar
membrane will be possible. The temporal variation in PO 2 is
expected to be within a few percent (close to 10%) over a 60 min
interval. Such a slow change in the overall ST PO 2 would not
affect detection of the cochlear walls.
C. O2 Reduction in Perilymph Solution with Pt
Disk Electrodes
CV indicated that the voltage should be between −500 and
−700 mV to perform SECM with the prototyped electrode using
O2 as redox mediator. Approach curves obtained with a glass
capillary electrode indicated that −600 to −700 mV should
be better to ensure the diffusion current in the bulk solution.
The dynamic range of the proximity sensing reached maximum
at −600 mV. While the plateau current did not change from
−600 to −700 mV, the increase in proximity current reduced
the dynamic range from 49.5% to 36.9%. Since the proximity
sensing demonstration in the acrylic cochlea model was performed at the voltage of −700 mV, the current in the proximity
section could be smaller if the demonstration was performed at
−600 mV. To determine the optimal voltage for the proximity
sensing via reduction of oxygen, it is necessary to investigate
the physical and electrochemical variables of the system. The
physical variables are the geometries of the electrode and the
substrate, the direction and speed of the electrode movement,
and the time-sensitive factors such as capacitance current and
mass-transport. Electrochemical variables are the presence or
absence of oxygen or biochemical redox mediators, electrode
materials, and pH.
D. Proximity Sensor Performance
Detecting the proximity of the electrode to the ST model
was repeatable and robust for at least two hours regardless of
the utilized redox mediator, the direction of the movement, and
time-dependent changes in the electrochemical response. The
difference in the current profiles between the two mediators are
most likely due to slight changes in the actual trajectory of the
polyimide carrier after the solution was replaced. The steadystate concentration profiles should be similar for FeMeOH and
O2 despite their different diffusion coefficients [14], [20]. The
effect of the direction of movement was also small, suggesting
that the speed employed in this demonstration is appropriate.

1829

At the speed of 20 μm/sec, the duration of the full insertion
of a standard CI (approximately 20 mm) is 1000 seconds. This
insertion speed is much slower than that of the manual insertion
performed by a surgeon [32], [33]. This slow insertion speed
should not be a problem but may be beneficial because 1) improving the duration of the entire surgery (more than 2 hours) is
considered to be more beneficial than that of the insertion alone,
and 2) slower insertion speed (250 μm/sec versus 1 mm/sec)
may be preferred for the preservation of residual hearing [34].
The total duration of the experiment was more than two hours
and the current change in the proximity section was always
distinguishable. This result suggests that the time-dependent
effects should not be a problem during the implantation surgery,
which would take 16 min for the full insertion of a CI at the
speed of 20 μm/sec. In this study, the observed decrease in the
oxygen current was caused by oxidation of the Pt surface [35].
This effect was clearly significant for the slow, inner-sphere
oxygen reduction process but not for the rapid outer-sphere
oxidation of FeMeOH [27]. On the other hand, the increase
of the current observed during FeMeOH scan laps was most
likely caused by the evaporation and consequent increase of
FeMeOH condensation. In case of O2 scans, the concentration
of O2 was constant despite the evaporation of water because the
solution was saturated with oxygen under atmospheric pressure.
Further experiments are desirable to determine the effect of
the adsorption of biological molecules in a solution containing
amino acids or in the perilymph of animals.

E. Biocompatibility
The oxygen reduction reaction states that pH elevation is the
primary biocompatibility concern. In the human inner ear, this
pH elevation can be deduced not to be a problem as follows. The
flux and the total dosage of hydroxide or hydronium ions can be
estimated from the cathodic current (20 nA). The CV indicates
that more than 80% of the cathodic current was consumed by the
oxygen reduction ( = 16 nA). Here, the production of hydrogen
peroxide on Pt electrode can be ignored [36]. Because the PO 2
levels in the inner ear is one third of that under Pat , the oxygen
reduction current is expected to be 5.3 nA [19], [20]. From the
Faraday constant, the flux of the monovalent hydroxide ions
is 55 fmol/sec. If a full CI insertion (20 mm) is performed at
the speed of 20 μm/sec, 55 pmole of hydroxide ions will be
released into the perilymph solution in 1,000 sec. Since the
source of hydroxide ions will be continuously moving along the
insertion of the CI carrier, we can assume that hydroxide ions
will be homogenously distributed in the human ST. The volume
of the human ST is about 150 μl. Thus, the increase of hydroxide
ions in concentration can be estimated as 0.34 mM. The human
perilymph solution contains a carbonate buffer and the speed
of a carbonate buffer is on the order of a few seconds. Using
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation, the perilymph pH increase
can be calculated from 7.31 to 7.44 [37]. The inner ear neurons
exhibits amazing capability to resist perilymphatic alkalosis (up
to pH 10) for 30 min [38]–[41]. Therefore, macroscopic pH
increase can be ignored.

1830

The local and transient pH elevation within the vicinity of
the proximity sensor is theoretically high but the inner ear is
equipped with a swift defense mechanism against alkalosis.
Experimentally, the local pH elevation should be quantified
using antimony or iridium oxide electrode. The transient pH
elevation cannot be alleviated by the slow carbonic buffer system [42]–[44]. However, tissues in the inner ear including hair
cells produce carbonic anhydrate which catalyzes the buffer reaction at the speed up to 106 . This speed is likely to protect
the hair cells from alkalosis effectively [45], [46]. Finally, the
anodic reaction will not cause any problems because the anode
can be placed outside of the ST to isolate the reaction at the
Ag/AgCl electrode from the ST solution.
Via neural prostheses such as CI, the net dc current has to
be minimized or eliminated completely from the amperostatic
electrical stimulation because the excessive net dc current is
harmful. First of all, the dc current of 100 nA was observed in
an inner ear as a byproduct of routine stimulation via a commercially available and FDA-approved CI [47]. Again, the oxygen
reduction has been widely applied as chronic electrochemical
oxygen sensors implanted in human brains, hearts and in vivo
animals. Therefore, the maximum current of 20 nA observed in
this report is encouraging regarding the biocompatibility of the
SECM in the inner ear.
Furthermore, there is a huge scientific difference between the
amperostatic electrical stimulation via standard neural prostheses and the potentiostatic electrochemical oxygen reduction.
Amperostatic charging of electrons on the capacitive neural
membrane is adequate to control the membrane potentials of
neurons, to raise them above the threshold potentials constantly,
and to elicit action potentials robustly [48]. However, the current
to elicit neural responses (>1 mA) requires the voltage across
the electrode-solution interface to be about 10 V because of the
resistance between the implanted electrodes (∼10 kΩ), which
surpasses by far any electrolysis potentials, [47], [49]. Since
dc is the sum of any Faradic reactions, Lily et al introduced
biphasic charge balanced electrical stimulation to cancel out the
net-dc and demonstrated the biocompatibility [50]. A caveat is
that the biphasic stimulation can minimize the Faradic reaction so long as the anodic and cathodic reactions are reversible
with each other. To remove Faradic reactions completely from
the amperostatic biphasic stimulation, it is effective to restrict
the charge transfer within the realm of electrical double layer
formation at the electrode solution interface or submonolayer
electrodeposition of H+ at the electrode-solution interface [51],
[52]. Since capacitive accumulation of ions precedes any Faradic
reaction, limiting the pulse duration and current density can remove the nonspecific Faradic reaction. Conversely, the oxygen
sensor utilizes potentiostatic voltage application. The Nernst
equation states that any Faradic reactions harmful against body
tissues grow exponentially as a function of voltage. Potentiostatic voltage control is suitable to control the Faradic reactions.
The anodic reaction on the electrode surface is controlled directly such that the causality of the biocompatibility is clearer.
Therefore, the criteria as to the biocompatibility have to be determined differently for these two technology types.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

F. Toward Trajectory Estimation/Implementation
The MATLAB insertion model demonstrated that the interpretation of the SECM results can be well explained in a 3-D
analysis and used as a predictor of the trajectory of the proximity sensor by taking advantage of the isotropic proximity sensor
characteristics. To develop a system to guide CI insertion in order to avoid contact to ST tissues without any other visualization
method during insertion, this MATLAB insertion model can be
further developed.
The SECM proximity sensing system should be expanded
from single- to multichannel to near-uniquely determine the estimated trajectory. The isotropic characteristic of the proximity
sensor does not guarantee the direction in which the wall is close
except for the case in which the sensor is almost touching the
wall. Two additional proximity sensors placed on the both sides
of one proximity sensor will be able to determine the direction
of the wall in 3-D. The density of the proximity sensor array
necessary in one CI carrier can be estimated and designed using
the MATLAB model.
More quantitative characterization and demonstration will
complement the study. Ideally, trajectory validation should be
performed by simultaneous monitoring using two optical methods with a cochlea model without light distortion or with light
pathway calibration. In case of in vitro or in vivo experiments,
the position of the electrode has to be visualized fluoroscopically. We have gained some confidence in the detectability of
biological tissues such as bone and basilar membrane using
the proposed methods in the other preliminary studies. Another
possible line of analysis to further quantitatively characterize
the relation between SECM data and trajectory is to use the
MATLAB 3-D model for a numerical modeling of diffusion
and convection.
Currently, preoperative CT scan is becoming a standard procedure in clinics. Robotic insertion of the CI is also on the
horizon. By combining these technologies, electrode trajectory
estimation during CI surgery is an exciting goal.

VI. CONCLUSION
We demonstrated the feasibility to apply SECM as a novel
proximity sensor to help achieve atraumatic insertion of a CI
electrode. The design and fabrication of the Pt proximity sensor
is similar to those of the CI stimulation electrode, so the proximity sensor can be easily implemented. O2 was a desirable
choice as an endogenous and biocompatible redox mediator.
The proximity sensing was successfully demonstrated using the
prototyped Pt microelectrode and O2 mediator in an acrylic
scala tympani model under atmospheric pressure. By developing a numerical insertion model in conjunction with the μCT
scan of the ST model, we showed that the proximity sensor can
be useful for estimating the trajectory of the CI carrier. The dc
current measured in the proximity sensor was well below those
flowing in existing clinical devices. Taken together, these conclusions strongly support further investigation of the proposed
technology.

WATANABE et al.: SCANNING ELECTROCHEMICAL MICROSCOPY AS A NOVEL PROXIMITY SENSOR

REFERENCES
[1] E. A. Woodson, L. A. Reiss, C. W. Turner, K. Gfeller, and B. J. Gantz,
“The hybrid cochlear implant: A review,” Adv. Otorhinolaryngol, vol. 67,
pp. 125–134, 2010.
[2] D. R. Friedland and C. Runge-Samuelson, “Soft cochlear implantation:
Rationale for the surgical approach,” Trends Amplif., vol. 13, pp. 124–
138, 2009.
[3] R. J. Briggs, M. Tykocinski, E. Saunders, W. Hellier, M. Dahm, B. Pyman,
and G. M. Clark, “Surgical implications of perimodiolar cochlear implant
electrode design: Avoiding intracochlear damage and scala vestibuli insertion,” Cochlear. Implants Int., vol. 2, pp. 135–149, 2001.
[4] C. W. Turner, L. A. Reiss, and B. J. Gantz, “Combined acoustic and electric hearing: Preserving residual acoustic hearing,” Hear Res., vol. 242,
pp. 164–171, 2008.
[5] J. Xu, S. A. Xu, L. T. Cohen, and G. M. Clark, “Cochlear view: Postoperative radiography for cochlear implantation,” Am. J. Otol., vol. 21,
pp. 49–56, 2000.
[6] W. J. Kong, H. M. Cheng, H. Ma, Y. J. Wang, and P. Han, “Evaluation
of the implanted cochlear implant electrode by CT scanning with threedimensional reconstruction,” Acta. Otolaryngol., vol. 132, pp. 116–122,
2012.
[7] A. P. Campbell, T. A. Suberman, C. A. Buchman, D. C. Fitzpatrick, and
O. F. Adunka, “Flexible cochlear microendoscopy in the gerbil,” Laryngoscope, vol. 120, pp. 1619–1624, 2010.
[8] B. Carelsen, W. Grolman, R. Tange, G. J. Streekstra, P. van Kemenade, R. J. Jansen, N. J. Freling, M. White, B. Maat, and W. J. Fokkens,
“Cochlear implant electrode array insertion monitoring with intraoperative 3D rotational X-ray,” Clin. Otolaryngol, vol. 32, pp. 46–50,
2007.
[9] A. J. Fishman, J. T. Roland, Jr., G. Alexiades, J. Mierzwinski, and
N. L. Cohen, “Fluoroscopically assisted cochlear implantation,” Otol.
Neurotol., vol. 24, pp. 882–886, 2003.
[10] I. A. Bruce, J. E. Bates, C. Melling, D. Mawman, and K. M. Green,
“Hearing preservation via a cochleostomy approach and deep insertion
of a standard length cochlear implant electrode,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 32,
pp. 1444–1447, 2011.
[11] W. Jianbai and K. D. Wise, “A thin-film cochlear electrode array with
integrated position sensing,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 18, pp. 385–
395, 2009.
[12] D. Schurzig, R. F. Labadie, A. Hussong, T. S. Rau, and R. J. Webster, “A
force sensing automated insertion tool for cochlear electrode implantation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2010, pp. 3674–3679.
[13] J. Zhang, K. Xu, N. Simaan, and S. Manolidis, “A pilot study of
robot-assisted cochlear implant surgery using steerable electrode arrays,”
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention - Miccai 2006, Pt 1,
vol. 4190, pp. 33–40, 2006.
[14] P. Sun, F. O. Laforge, and M. V. Mirkin, “Scanning electrochemical microscopy in the 21st century,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., vol. 9, pp. 802–
823, 2007.
[15] J. H. Goldwyn, S. M. Bierer, and J. A. Bierer, “Modeling the electrodeneuron interface of cochlear implants: Effects of neural survival, electrode
placement, and the partial tripolar configuration,” Hear Res., vol. 268,
pp. 93–104, 2010.
[16] H. L. Danneel, “Uber den durch diffundierende gase hervorgerufenen restrom,” Zeitschrift Elektrochem., vol. 4, pp. 227–242, 1897.
[17] W. Schmickler and E. Santos, “Inner sphere and ion-transfer reactions,” in
Interfacial Electrochemistry, Berlin, Germany Springer, 2010, pp. 145–
162.
[18] S. B. McHugh, M. Fillenz, J. P. Lowry, J. N. Rawlins, and
D. M. Bannerman, “Brain tissue oxygen amperometry in behaving rats
demonstrates functional dissociation of dorsal and ventral hippocampus
during spatial processing and anxiety,” Eur. J. Neurosci., vol. 33, pp. 322–
337, 2011.
[19] H. Haupt, F. Scheibe, C. Ludwig, and D. Petzold, “Measurements of
perilymphatic oxygen tension in guinea pigs exposed to loud sound,” Eur.
Arch. Otorhinolaryngol, vol. 248, pp. 413–416, 1991.
[20] F. Scheibe, H. Haupt, and C. Ludwig, “Intensity-dependent changes in
oxygenation of cochlear perilymph during acoustic exposure,” Hear Res.,
vol. 63, pp. 19–25, 1992.
[21] G. Bazzu, G. G. Puggioni, S. Dedola, G. Calia, G. Rocchitta, R. Migheli,
M. S. Desole, J. P. Lowry, R. D. O’Neill, and P. A. Serra, “Real-time monitoring of brain tissue oxygen using a miniaturized biotelemetric device
implanted in freely moving rats,” Anal. Chem., vol. 81, pp. 2235–2241,
2009.

1831

[22] N. Holmstrom, P. Nilsson, J. Carlsten, and S. Bowald, “Long-term in vivo
experience of an electrochemical sensor using the potential step technique
for measurement of mixed venous oxygen pressure,” Biosens Bioelectron.,
vol. 13, pp. 1287–1295, 1998.
[23] D. A. Gough, L. S. Kumosa, T. L. Routh, J. T. Lin, and J. Y. Lucisano,
“Function of an implanted tissue glucose sensor for more than 1 year in
animals,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 2, pp. 42–53, 2010.
[24] L. C. Clark, Jr., R. Wolf, D. Granger, and Z. Taylor, “Continuous recording
of blood oxygen tensions by polarography,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 6,
pp. 189–193, 1953.
[25] J. Dings, J. Meixensberger, A. Jager, and K. Roosen, “Clinical experience
with 118 brain tissue oxygen partial pressure catheter probes,” Neurosurgery, vol. 43, pp. 1082–1095, 1998.
[26] S. Keddie and L. Rohman, “Reviewing the reliability, effectiveness and
applications of licox in traumatic brain injury,” Nurs. Crit. Care, vol. 17,
pp. 204–212, 2012.
[27] H. van Santbrink, A. I. Maas, and C. J. Avezaat, “Continuous monitoring
of partial pressure of brain tissue oxygen in patients with severe head
injury,” Neurosurgery, vol. 38, pp. 21–31, 1996.
[28] J. Kwak and A. J. Bard, “Scanning electrochemical microscopy. theory of
the feedback mode,” Anal. Chem., vol. 61, pp. 1221–1227, 1989.
[29] P. Wangemann and J. Schacht, “Homeostatic mechanisms in the cochlea,”
in The Cochlea. Springer Handbook of Auditory Research. New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, vol. 8, 1996, pp. 130–185.
[30] P. Sun and M. V. Mirkin, “Kinetics of electron-transfer reactions at nanoelectrodes,” Anal. Chem., vol. 78, pp. 6526–6534, 2006.
[31] J. R. Clark, F. M. Warren, and J. J. Abbott, “A scalable model for human scala-tympani phantoms,” J. Med. Devices, vol. 5, p. 014501,
2011.
[32] G. Kontorinis, T. Lenarz, T. Stover, and G. Paasche, “Impact of the insertion speed of cochlear implant electrodes on the insertion forces,” Otol.
Neurotol., vol. 32, pp. 565–570, 2011.
[33] C. A. Todd, F. Naghdy, and M. J. Svehla, “Force application during
cochlear implant insertion: An analysis for improvement of surgeon technique,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1247–1255, Jul.
2007.
[34] G. P. Rajan, G. Kontorinis, and J. Kuthubutheen, “The effects of insertion
speed on inner ear function during cochlear implantation: A comparison
study,” Audiol. Neurootol., vol. 18, pp. 17–22, 2013.
[35] D. B. Hibbert, K. Weitzner, and P. Carter, “Voltammetry of platinum in
artificial perilymph solution,” J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 148, pp. E1–E7,
2001.
[36] O. Antoine and R. Durand, “RRDE study of oxygen reduction on Pt
R
nanoparticles inside nafion
: H2 O2 production in PEMFC cathode conditions,” J. Appl. Electrochem., vol. 30, pp. 839–844, 2000.
[37] E. Magid and B. O. Turbeck, “The rates of the spontaneous hydration
of CO2 and the reciprocal reaction in neutral aqueous solutions between
0◦ and 38◦ ,” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)—General Subjects,
vol. 165, pp. 515–524, 1968.
[38] W. Kuijpers and S. L. Bonting, “The cochlear potentials. II. the nature of
the cochlear endolymphatic resting potential,” Pflugers Arch., vol. 320,
pp. 359–372, 1970.
[39] E. Arakawa, D. C. Marcus, and R. Thalmann, “Dependence of endocochlear potential on vascular pH,” Hear Res., vol. 31, pp. 1–7, Nov.
1987.
[40] S. Wakizono, S. Komune, and T. Uemura, “Susceptibility of the endocochlear potential to pH and osmolarity changes in the perilymph of the
cochlea in the guinea pig,” Eur. Arch. Otorhinolaryngol, vol. 247, pp. 97–
99, 1990.
[41] Y. Nimura, Y. Mori, T. Inui, Y. Sohma, H. Takenaka, and T. Kubota,
“Effects of CO2 /HCO3− in perilymph on the endocochlear potential in guinea pigs,” J. Physiol. Sci., vol. 57, pp. 15–22, Feb.
2007.
[42] B. R. Horrocks, M. V. Mirkin, D. T. Pierce, A. J. Bard, G. Nagy,
and K. Toth, “Scanning electrochemical microscopy. 19. ion-selective
potentiometric microscopy,” Anal. Chem., vol. 65, pp. 1213–1224,
1993.
[43] C. L. Ballestrasse, R. T. Ruggeri, and T. R. Beck, “Calculations of the pH
changes produced in body tissue by a spherical stimulation electrode,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 405–424, 1985.
[44] J. Li, Y. Du, and C. Fang, “Developing an iridium oxide film modified microelectrode for microscale measurement of pH,” Electroanalysis, vol. 19,
pp. 608–611, 2007.
[45] S. Lindskog, “Structure and mechanism of carbonic anhydrase,” Pharmacol. Ther., vol. 74, pp. 1–20, 1997.

1832

[46] H. O. Okamura, N. Sugai, K. Suzuki, and I. Ohtani, “Enzymehistochemical localization of carbonic anhydrase in the inner ear of the
guinea pig and several improvements of the technique,” Histochem. Cell
Biol., vol. 106, pp. 425–430, Oct. 1996.
[47] C. Q. Huang, R. K. Shepherd, P. M. Carter, P. M. Seligman, and B. Tabor,
“Electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve: Direct current measurement
in vivo,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 461–470, Apr.
1999.
[48] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, “A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve,”
J. Physiol., vol. 117, pp. 500–544, Aug. 1952.
[49] C. T. Tan, M. Svirsky, A. Anwar, S. Kumar, B. Caessens, P. Carter,
C. Treaba, and J. T. Roland, Jr., “Real-time measurement of electrode impedance during intracochlear electrode insertion,” Laryngoscope,
vol. 123, pp. 1028–1032, Apr. 2013.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

[50] J. C. Lilly, J. R. Hughes, E. C. Alvord, Jr., and T. W. Galkin, “Brief, noninjurious electric waveform for stimulation of the brain,” Science, vol. 121,
pp. 468–479, 1955.
[51] W. Schmickler and E. Santos, “The metal-solution interface,” in Interfacial Electrochemistry. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 39–50.
[52] S. B. Brummer and M. J. Turner, “Electrochemical considerations for safe
electrical stimulation of the nervous system with platinum electrodes,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 59–63, Jan. 1977.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

