IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1809

Design and Evaluation of a Quasi-Passive
Knee Exoskeleton for Investigation of
Motor Adaptation in Lower Extremity Joints
Kamran Shamaei∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Massimo Cenciarini, Member, IEEE, Albert A. Adams,
Karen N. Gregorczyk, Jeffrey M. Schiffman, and Aaron M. Dollar, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this study, we describe the mechanical design and
control scheme of a quasi-passive knee exoskeleton intended to
investigate the biomechanical behavior of the knee joint during interaction with externally applied impedances. As the human knee
behaves much like a linear spring during the stance phase of normal walking gait, the exoskeleton implements a spring across the
knee in the weight acceptance (WA) phase of the gait while allowing free motion throughout the rest of the gait cycle, accomplished via an electromechanical clutch. The stiffness of the device
is able to be varied by swapping springs, and the timing of engagement/disengagement changed to accommodate different loading
profiles. After describing the design and control, we validate the
mechanical performance and reliability of the exoskeleton through
cyclic testing on a mechanical knee simulator. We then describe
a preliminary experiment on three healthy adults to evaluate the
functionality of the device on both left and right legs. The kinetic
and kinematic analyses of these subjects show that the exoskeleton assistance can partially/fully replace the function of the knee
joint and obtain nearly invariant moment and angle profiles for
the hip and ankle joints, and the overall knee joint and exoskeleton complex under the applied moments of the exoskeleton versus
the control condition, implying that the subjects undergo a considerable amount of motor adaptation in their lower extremities to
the exoskeletal impedances, and encouraging more in-depth future
experiments with the device.

Fig. 1. Quasi-passive knee exoskeletons worn on a volunteer. The control unit
is mounted on a belt and wirelessly transfers the data to a host computer. The
exoskeletons and controller are supported by a harness from the shoulder.

Index Terms—Knee biomechanics, lower extremity exoskeleton,
quasi-passive mechanism, variable-stiffness.

I. INTRODUCTION
OWER-EXTREMITY exoskeletons have been actively investigated in the past few decades, with a number of impressive and substantial undertakings (e.g., see [1] for a thorough
review). These devices generally intend to augment the locomotion performance of able-bodied users in terms of metabolic
cost, load carrying capacity, fatigue, and muscle force generation (in contrast to oftentimes similar lower-limb orthoses
intended for impaired subjects [2], [3]). While development efforts have been extensive, lower-limb exoskeleton devices have
demonstrated limited success in achieving their augmentation
goals [1], [4]–[6], highlighting the challenges in developing artificial systems that can augment the performance of the human
body, which is generally substantially more efficient than engineered systems. The lack of successful device development has
prompted a number of research efforts intended to investigate
basic science questions related to the interaction between lower
extremities and wearable robotic devices (e.g., [5], [7]–[11]), including the work described in this paper. In order to examine a
portion of the many questions related to that interaction, we propose a knee exoskeletal device that can replicate the spring-like
behavior of the joint during stance through an external spring

L
Manuscript received November 14, 2013; revised January 16, 2014;
accepted February 12, 2014. Date of publication February 24, 2014; date of
current version May 15, 2014. This work was supported by the US Army
Natick Soldier Research Development and Engineering Center under Contract
W911NF-07-D-0001. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ K. Shamaei is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511 USA (e-mail: kamran.
shamaei@yale.edu).
M. Cenciarini is with Neurologische Universitätsklinik Freiburg Breisacher
Freiburg D-79106, Germany (e-mail: massimo.cenciarini@uniklinikfreiburg.de).
A. A. Adams, K. N. Gregorczyk, and J. M. Schiffman are with the
US Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center, Natick, MA 01760 USA (e-mail: albert.a.adams16.civ@mail.mil;
karen.n.gregorczyk.civ@mail.mil; jeffrey.m.schiffman.civ@mail.mil).
A. M. Dollar is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and
Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511 USA (e-mail:
aaron.dollar@yale.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2307698

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1810

and clutch system that activates and releases via a controller
informed by an insole-based footswitch (see Fig. 1). While this
device allows for the investigation of how variation in passive
impedances affects the gait behavior of the wearer, we believe
the approach of carefully tuned external stiffness may eventually
prove functional as a performance-augmenting strategy; noting
that similar approaches have been proposed and implemented
by others [6], [12], [13].
In terms of technical approaches to developing augmenting
exoskeletons, engineers have implemented a spectrum of assistance strategies. This includes “sensitivity amplification” [14],
“get out of the way” [1], “moment of inertia compensation” [15],
pneumatic actuation [16], [17] in fully articulated exoskeletons
at one end of the spectrum, and “gravity compensation” in a
passive system at the other end [18]. More closely related to
the work described in this paper, recent design efforts have focused on replication of the function of lower extremity joints by
quasi-passive systems that mostly rely on energy storage/recoil
using spring-clutch systems [2], [3], [6], [9], [13], [19]. This approach was inspired by spring-type behavior observed in lower
extremity joints during walking and running and proved to lead
to lower weight and more functional exoskeletons [11].
In terms of efforts to examine basic science questions related
to how a user interacts with a wearable robotic exoskeleton
device, a smaller but increasing number of studies have been
undertaken to investigate physiological and biomechanical performance of lower extremity joints that interactively function in
close proximity to exoskeletal devices [10], [20]–[24]. To this
end, researchers have begun to exploit the considerable potential of exoskeletal systems to study the human motor adaptation
to external perturbations/assistance to the ankle [8]–[10], [17],
[25]–[28], and to a lesser extent to the knee [13], [19], and
the hip joints [29]. To date, these studies have mostly focused
on performance augmentation using exoskeletal assistance and
how human gait patterns adapt to the external perturbations.
Differing from the design and experimental efforts described
previously, we have developed a left and right similar quasipassive knee exoskeletons that allow us to investigate the performance of the knee joint in interaction with varying passive
external impedances (stiffnesses) that we hypothesize will allow users to reduce their muscle forces and joint moments while
retaining the overall kinematic and kinetic patterns of the gait.
The device implements a spring in parallel with the knee joint
in the WA phase of the gait and releases it throughout the rest
of the gait cycle, shown in Fig. 2.
We chose to investigate the knee joint because among lower
extremity joints, it demonstrates several major functions in
walking: supporting the weight of the body, absorbing shocks resulting from heel strikes in the stance phase of the gait, flexing in
the swing phase to enable foot clearance and obstacle avoidance,
among others [21], [23]. Furthermore, the knee demonstrates the
most “spring-like” behavior of the three leg joints during normal
walking [21], [23], leading researchers to develop exoskeletons
that semipassively implement a spring in parallel with the knee
to assist this joint in the stance phase [6], [13].
The spring-like behavior of the knee joint in the stance phase
emerges from complicated interaction of the underlying biolog-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 2. (Top) Exoskeleton implements a high-stiffness spring in the weight
acceptance phase of the gait and a low-stiffness spring throughout the rest of
the gait cycle. (Bottom) Exoskeleton implements a spring stiffness equivalent
to estimated knee quasi-stiffnesses of the volunteers.

ical mechanisms [23], [30], but can be suitably characterized by
the concept of quasi-stiffness, which is the slope of the linear fit
to the moment-angle graph of the knee joint in the stance phase,
as well as joint excursion in the stance phase [21], [23], [31].
This emergent spring-like behavior is studied here in interaction with externally implemented parallel springs which behave
similarly to the knee joint. One should differentiate joint quasistiffness from joint stiffness; in that the former refers to the
overall moment-angle behavior of a joint in a locomotion task
and the latter refers to static/dynamic stiffness of a joint at a
certain configuration [22], [23], [30], [32].
We begin the next portion of this paper by describing the
mechanical design and control scheme of the devices. We continue with the moment-angle characterization of the exoskeletons and a theoretical model of the devices in interaction with
the human limbs. We then describe preliminary experiments on
three healthy adults and present intersubject mean and standard
deviation (SD) of the angle and moment profiles of the lower
extremity joints in the sagittal plane. The preliminary results
of this study show that the exoskeletons can apply substantial
torques to the knee joint in the WA phase of the gait without
notably affecting the kinetic and kinematic profiles of the lower
extremity joints, implying motor adaptation by the wearers.
II. EXOSKELETON DESIGN
A. Background and General Approach
A gait cycle is defined as the period between two consecutive
heel strikes of the same foot with the ground, and is composed
of a stance phase where the foot is on the ground and a swing
phase where the foot is off the ground, as schematically shown

SHAMAEI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A QUASI-PASSIVE KNEE EXOSKELETON

1811

Fig. 3. (Left) Quasi-passive knee exoskeleton is composed of a SCM that is assembled on the thigh segment of the exoskeleton, and a pulley on the shank
segment. The shank segment is coupled to the SCM through a steel tendon. (Right) SCM employs a friction-based latching mechanism to engage/disengage an
assistance spring. The directions of movement of the motor and worm-gear set for engagement and disengagement are illustrated. Particularly, the motor spins
counterclockwise, and the cam and friction lever downward to engage and vice versa to disengage.

in Fig. 2(top). The stance phase comprises a WA (first ∼40%, as
depicted in Fig. 2 points a to c) and a terminal stance (∼40–63%,
as shown in Fig. 2 points c to d) subphases [21], [23], [33]–[35].
The human knee demonstrates a linear flexion stage (points a
to b in Fig. 2) and a linear extension stage (points b to c in
Fig. 2) in the WA phase of the gait for normal, level-ground
walking [21], [23].
Researchers have recently proposed the concept of quasistiffness, as the slope of a linear fit to the moment-angle data of
a lower extremity joint in a period of the gait, to approximate the
behavior of that joint within that period [31], [32], [36]–[39].
Previous research shows that the knee quasi-stiffnesses in the
flexion and extension stages of the WA phase tend to be identical
at the preferred gait speed, implying that the knee behaves close
to a linear torsional spring at the preferred gait speed [21], [23].
The spring-like moment-angle behavior of the knee joint in the
WA phase of walking has led researchers to incorporate springs
in the design of exoskeletons to attempt to replace the function
of the assisted joints [3], [6], [11], [13], [19].
The spring-like moment-angle behavior of the knee joint
does not reveal substantial information about the function of
the underlying mechanisms responsible for that behavior and
the performance of the human joints in interaction with external stiffnesses [22], [23], [30]. Researchers have explored the
adaptation of the human lower limbs in interaction with serial
impedances [40], [41]. However, limited effort has been directed
toward investigation of the interaction between the human limbs
and parallel impedances.
In this study, we intend to investigate the kinetic and kinematic
behavior as well as the motor adaptation of the knee joint assisted
by external parallel springs in the WA phase of the gait. More
specifically, we hypothesize that an exoskeletal torsional spring
in parallel with the knee joint can fully/partially replace the
spring-type behavior of the knee and unload the corresponding
muscles in the WA phase of the gait without large variation in
overall gait kinematics and kinetics.

B. Design Overview
The quasi-passive knee exoskeletons can demonstrate two
levels of stiffness in parallel with the knee joint using a frictionbased latching mechanism shown in Fig. 1 and in detail in Fig. 3.
Each of the exoskeletons primarily comprises of a thigh segment
including a stiffness control module (SCM) and a thigh cuff, and
a shank segment including a pulley, a rotary potentiometer, and
a shank cuff, as shown in Fig. 3. The SCM includes a shaft that
is attached to the pulley by a steel tendon and can slide upward
and downward as a result of knee movement. The SCM includes
a return spring that remains engaged at all times and pushes the
SCM shaft upward throughout the gait cycle. The return spring
has a relatively low stiffness and it primarily returns the shaft to
its original position (most proximal) during the knee extension.
The left and right exoskeletons were similarly designed and
made.
The SCM employs a friction-based latching mechanism to
engage and disengage the assistance spring and act on the shaft.
A shaft movement due to knee flexion always compresses the
return spring, whereas a shaft movement due to flexion only
compresses the assistance spring when the latching mechanism
has engaged it. As such, the linear stiffness of the SCM acting
on the shaft would be the summation of the stiffnesses of the assistance and return springs when the assistance spring is latched,
and only the stiffness of the return spring when the assistance
spring is unlatched (see Fig. 6 for a schematic representation of
this behavior).
The tendon connected to the SCM shaft wraps around a pulley that rotates together with the knee joint and pulls the shaft of
the SCM that, in turn, transforms the linear stiffness of the SCM
springs to a torsional stiffness around the knee joint. Fig. 3(right)
illustrates the design of the exoskeletons latching mechanism
that is composed of a friction lever, shaft, bearing block, dc motor, worm-gear, cam, spring-loaded push button, and retreat push
button, and additional structural components. We have reported

1812

additional details on the latching mechanism in our previous
paper on the design of a compliant stance control orthosis that
employs a similar mechanism [3].
The exoskeletons have been implemented on two adjustable
knee braces (SPL2 from Fillauer LLC) that can fit on a wide
range of subjects with heights of 1.50–1.85 m (as suggested by
the manufacturer). To minimize the effect of soft tissues and to
help the exoskeletons withstand the anticipated loads, we reinforced the brace by using 1) a bracket that pressed against the
quadriceps femoris tendon and was located ∼5 cm superior to
the center of the patella, 2) a bracket that pressed against the tibial tuberosity and was located ∼6 cm inferior to the center of the
patella, 3) a solid pad that was placed posterior to the thigh and
under the strap of the knee brace thigh cuff, and 4) a suspension
harness strap that vertically supported the exoskeletons from the
shoulder and avoided downward migration of the brace.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 4. (Top) The statuses of the knee angular velocity (+ for flexion and—for
extension), foot contact with the ground (heel and toe sensors of the instrumented
shoe insole), and friction lever in a gait cycle. (Bottom) Knee angle profile of a
volunteer walking at 1.25 m/s. The exoskeleton assists the knee in the weight
acceptance phase of the gait and allows free motion in the rest. The shades
roughly show the timing of state changes.

C. Friction-Based Latching Mechanism
The latching mechanism employs a motor to manipulate a
friction lever to initiate or release a friction-based latch. The
latching mechanism includes a worm-gear set that transforms
motor rotation to a linear motion at the friction lever. To engage
the assistance spring, the motor spins the worm gear counterclockwise to retreat the cam from the friction lever and make
∼2 mm clearance under it, as shown in Fig. 3(right). This movement continues until the cam presses the retreat button that sends
a feedback signal to the controller. Upon the retreat of the gear,
the spring loaded push button presses the friction lever down and
against the shaft to initiate a friction-based latch. The latching
grip of the friction lever occurs when the shaft moves downward
(as a result of a knee flexion) and the interaction force between
the bearing block and the friction lever induces higher normal
forces between the friction lever and the shaft. As such, the
bearing block moves along with the shaft and compresses the
assistance spring. An upward movement of the shaft (mainly
caused by the return spring during the knee extension) relaxes
the friction forces on the friction lever at the contact points and
releases the latching grip when the assistance spring is totally
unloaded. Therefore, the latch only initiates in the flexion direction and it is maintained during extension only if the assistance
spring is engaged and loaded.
To disengage the assistance spring, the motor rotates the worm
clockwise to move the cam upward and toward the friction lever.
The cam lifts the friction lever and releases the latching grip.
The upward movement of the lever terminates when the springloaded push button is pressed and a feedback signal is sent to
the controller to stop the motor. Upon the disengagement of
the lever, the shaft freely slides inside the bearing block and
friction lever without any force being transferred to the assistance spring. Accordingly, a downward force (e.g., resulting
from knee flexion in the swing phase) on the shaft only compresses the return spring. To allow free rotation in the swing
phase, we chose a highly compliant return spring (5 Nm/rad),
which primarily returns the shaft to its most proximal location
after the swing phase without applying a considerable moment

Fig. 5. Diagram of the finite state machine that the exoskeleton controller uses
to engage/disengage the assistance spring. The states include weight acceptance
(WA), terminal stance (TS), and swing (SW) and are identified using a foot
sensor. The diagram also indicates the engagement status of the friction lever
and stiffness of the module.

to the knee. A more detailed explanation of the friction-based
latching mechanism can be found elsewhere [3].
D. Control Scheme
The control unit implements a finite-state machine for the
engagement of the assistance spring during walking. The assistance spring has to be engaged during the WA phase of the
gait and allow free rotation throughout the rest of the gait, as
schematically shown in Fig. 2(top). The controller identifies the
states using an instrumented shoe insole that indicates the heel
and toe contacts with the ground. Fig. 4(top) shows the status
of the heel and toe sensors of the insole, the sign of the knee velocity (positive for flexion) measured by a rotary potentiometer
that is embedded in the exoskeleton pulleys, as well as the status
of the friction lever within a gait cycle. Fig. 4(bottom) shows
the knee angle profile for a volunteer walking at 1.25 m.s−1 on
a level ground and the period where the assistance spring is intended to be engaged and loaded. Fig. 5 describes the finite-state
machine that consists of the following states.
1) Weight Acceptance (WA): The heel sensor is on and toe
sensor is off. The controller engages the assistance spring.

SHAMAEI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A QUASI-PASSIVE KNEE EXOSKELETON

Fig. 6. (Left) The moment-angle characterization of the exoskeleton. K a is
the stiffness of the assistance spring, K r is the stiffness of the return spring,
ϕ r is the angle of engagement, M is the exoskeleton moment, ϕ is the exoskeleton angle, and ϕ 0 is the angle at which the assistance spring is engaged.
(Right) Schematic model of the exoskeleton. A clutch mechanism engages/disengages the assistance spring.

1813

Fig. 7. Schematic model of the knee complex comprising the knee equivalent
spring, exoskeleton spring, and the compliance of the biological soft tissues of
the leg and exoskeleton cuffs. The assistance condition includes modulation of
K E , whereas we primarily intend to investigate the effect of external parallel
spring on the spring-type behavior of the knee joint.

E. Moment-Angle Characterization
2) Terminal Stance (TS): The toe sensor is on and heel sensor is off, or both toe sensor and heel sensor are on. The
controller disengages the assistance spring after a period
of time (T = 60 ms, measured on a knee simulator as
explained later in this text) dictated by the latching mechanism latency plus an adjusted period of time that nearly
coincides with the end of the weight acceptance phase.
3) Swing (SW): The toe and heel sensors are off. The controller monitors the knee velocity direction during the
swing phase to identify whether the knee is flexing or
extending. The controller unlatches the friction lever during the flexion period of the swing phase and latches it
during the extension period, as a precautionary measure
against the latching mechanism latency. Because engagement of the assistance spring can only initiate in the flexion
direction (positive sign of knee velocity, see also Fig. 4),
latching of the friction lever in the extension period of the
swing phase does not result in engagement and loading of
the assistance spring and impeding knee joint motion.
We developed two finite-state machines, one for each exoskeleton, on a microcontroller MPC5534 from Freescale
Semiconductor Company (MPC5534EVBE). The controller
measured the knee angle using a rotary potentiometer that is
integrated inside the exoskeletons pulleys and the knee velocity
by differentiating the potentiometer signal. We used an instrumented shoe insole from B & L Engineering Co., a Faulhaber
2224 dc motor (4.05 W), a rotary potentiometers from Vishay
Co. model 357 for each exoskeleton, a dual H-Bridge circuit
from Solarobotics Company, and a battery pack with a capacity
of 2500 mAh. The controller transfers the signal from the springloaded push button to identify if the friction lever is disengaged,
and the signal from the retreat push button to identify if the
friction lever is engaged. We used a serial-to-Bluetooth adapter
(Wireless RS232, Willies Computer Software Co.) to wirelessly
transfer the data to a host LabView module implemented on a
computer for data collection. The data include the left and right
exoskeletons joint angles and status of engagement of the lever
based on which we calculated the exoskeleton moments.

In the previous section, we explained that the linear stiffness
of the exoskeleton (KL ) transforms to a rotational stiffness
around the knee joint (KE ) through a tendon that connects the
SCM shaft to the exoskeleton pulley. Fig. 6(right) schematically
shows the function of the exoskeleton. In our previous work, we
showed KL and KE are related as [3]:
KE = KL · R 2

(1)

where R = 5 cm is the radius of the exoskeleton pulleys, KL is
the stiffness of the return spring when the friction lever is disengaged, and the sum of the stiffness of the assistance spring (Ka )
and return spring (Kr ) when the assistance spring is engaged:

Kr + Ka engaged
(2)
KL =
disengaged.
Kr
Combining (1) and (2), the exoskeletal rotational stiffness can
be expressed as

(Kr + Ka ) · R2 engaged
KE =
(3)
disengaged.
Kr · R 2
Therefore, the exoskeleton assistive moment is related to the
knee joint angle (ϕ) as follows:

Kr · R2 · ϕ + Ka · R2 · (ϕ − ϕo ) engaged
ME =
disengaged.
Kr · R 2 · ϕ
(4)
Here, ϕ is the knee angle and ϕo is the angle at which the assistance spring is engaged. Fig. 6(left) schematically shows the
moment-angle performance of the exoskeleton. The exoskeleton
controller records ϕ and ϕo from the potentiometer, and status
of the spring engagement for both left and right exoskeletons
from the push buttons incorporated in the SCM, and wirelessly
transfers them to a host computer. We combined the controller
data with the exoskeleton spring stiffnesses and obtained the
exoskeleton moments.
The exoskeletons compliantly interface with the human limbs
as a result of compliance in the biological soft tissues and exoskeleton cuffs and attachments. We approximate this by an

1814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

additional spring between the assistance spring and the thigh.
Fig. 7 schematically shows the configuration of the three springs
of the knee complex that represent the knee joint, exoskeleton,
and soft tissue behavior in the weight acceptance phase of the
gait. This theoretical model suggests
K C = KK + K X

(5)

where KC is the quasi-stiffness of the knee complex, KK is the
quasi-stiffness of the knee joint, and KX is the external parallel
stiffness that is equal to
KX =

KE KS
KS + KE

(6)

where KE is the exoskeleton stiffness and KS is the interface
stiffness. In fact, KX is the externally applied parallel stiffness
that is being perceived by the anatomical knee joint. We also
define θC as the excursion of the knee complex, θK the excursion
of the knee joint, θE the excursion of the exoskeleton, and θS
the excursion of the interface in the weight acceptance phase.
One should note that θE is the range of changes of ϕ in the
weight acceptance phase.
III. MECHANICAL AND FUNCTIONAL EVALUATION
A. Mechanical Evaluation
We tested the reliability of the exoskeleton and measured the
latency of the SCM using a knee joint simulator prior to the
human trials, as schematically shown in Fig. 8(top). In testing
the reliability of the exoskeleton we conducted, extensive testing
to ensure that the exoskeleton can withstand the dynamic loads it
would encounter in walking, and to ensure that the exoskeleton
can undergo the number of gait cycles that we expect during the
experiments on human volunteers.
The knee simulator primarily consists of a large four-bar
linkage driven by a three-phase servomotor and servo controller (SGMAV-10A3A61 from Yaskawa and SGDV120AE
from Omron Companies) [42]. The servomotor emulates the
kinematic profile of the knee joint and sends a digital signal
to the SCM to engage the support spring during the simulated
stance phase and disengage during the rest of the gait, as shown
in Fig. 8(bottom). The simulator records the actual instances
of engagement/disengagement using the feedback signals from
the push buttons embedded in the SCM. We estimate the engagement/disengagement latency by measuring the time period
between the command and feedback signals. The latencies could
alternatively be approximated by the properties of the dc motor
and worm-gear set of the engagement mechanism; a method
that was ignored because friction and other imperfection in the
mechanism could not be characterized. We fabricated a prototype of the SCM and tested it on the knee joint simulator as
schematically shown in Fig. 8(top).
The prototype successfully underwent ∼30 000 gait cycles
(with maximum moment of 60 Nm/rad) on the knee simulator
without any failure in the mechanical components and engagement occurrence. The average latencies for both engagement and
disengagement were also measured using the test machine and
were found to be T = ∼60 ms. We explained earlier that the ex-

Fig. 8. (Top) SCM mechanically tested on a knee simulator. The simulator is
primarily a four-bar linkage mechanism driven by a servo motor. The SCM is
mounted on the simulator and undergoes numerous working cycles to endure
the reliability and functionality of the module and measure the mechanical latency of engagement/disengagement. (Bottom) The simulator controller sends
an engagement command signal to the compliance control module and receives
the feedback from the push buttons embedded in the module. The time differences between these signals indicate the mechanism engagement/disengagement
latency.

oskeleton transferred the engagement signal to a host computer
to calculate the exoskeleton moment profiles. The engagement
signal was extended by 60 ms to capture the effect of the disengagement mechanism latency. The disengagement latency (T )
was also used in the design of the state machine of Fig. 5. One
should note that the engagement latency was not used because
the exoskeletons engage the spring in the extension period of
the swing phase and prior to the heel contact with the ground.
The mechanical function of the exoskeletons was also monitored using a high-speed camera to visually inspect the mechanism function in additional detail. The video analysis confirmed
that the engagement mechanism functioned as desired throughout the experiments.
B. Experimental Protocol and Instrumentation
The testing protocol included two experimental conditions of
treadmill walking, which are described as follows.
1) Control Condition (CTRL): included the volunteers walking on a treadmill without wearing the exoskeletons.
2) Assistance Condition (ASSIST): included the volunteers walking with the exoskeletons with assistance
spring stiffness equivalent to the quasi-stiffness of the
anatomical knee, which requires knowledge of the knee

SHAMAEI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A QUASI-PASSIVE KNEE EXOSKELETON

TABLE I
DEMOGRAPHIC DATA OF THE PARTICIPANTS AS WELL AS THE STIFFNESS OF
THE EXOSKELETON SPRING

quasi-stiffness in walking on the level ground. This information was not known prior to the experiments; therefore,
we used the statistical models we developed and tested in
a previous study to estimate each volunteer’s knee quasistiffness in the weight acceptance phase of the gait according to the following expression [23]:
√
√
KE = 5.21 W H 3 −7.50 W H −5.83 WH +11.64 W −6

(7)
where W (kg) is weight and H (m) is height of the volunteer. We chose a spring stiffness that is commercially
available and with stiffness close to the estimated values,
as reported in Table I. This model was shown to be accurate with a 9% error of estimation and was established
for volunteers with a wide range of weight (from 67.7 to
94.0 kg) and height (from 1.43 to 1.86 m) [23].
The study protocol was approved by Yale University Institutional Review Board, Human Use Review Committee of United
States Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Army Human Research Protections Office, and Battelle Institutional Review Board. We recruited three healthy adult volunteers
from the US Army Soldiers assigned to Headquarters, Research,
and Development Detachment of Natick Soldier System Center.
We ensured that the volunteer heights and weights are within
the range recommended by the manufacturer (1.50 to 1.85 m
for the height and below 130 kg for the weight). Table I lists
the demographics of the volunteers, including the means and
standard deviations of weight, height, gait speed, and age, as
well as the stiffness of the assistance spring of the exoskeleton
for each volunteer.
The experimental protocol included a total of three visits
including two initial orientation sessions and the actual experimental visit as last. The three visits took place in one week with
one to two day(s) in between to provide rest and prevent any fatigue effect that could affect the results. Volunteers’ weight and
height were measured on the first visit to also size the assistance
spring stiffness for the assistance conditions.
Orientation Sessions: Two orientation sessions prior the main
experiment were included to allow the volunteers to familiarize
to walking with the exoskeletons. The participants wore Army
Physical Fitness Uniforms including shorts, t-shirts, socks, and
their own athletic shoes. To become familiar with walking on a
treadmill, the participants walked on the treadmill for 3 min at
4.83 km/h, after which they were given a 3–5 min rest break.
We then instructed each participant to walk on the treadmill and
slowly increased the speed from the zero state up to the self-

1815

selected comfortable pace. We used this pace as the preferred
gait speed throughout the experiments.
We fitted the exoskeletons on the volunteers while they were
sitting and ensured that the left and right exoskeleton joints and
knee joints were aligned. The suspension harness straps were
also put on the volunteer and fastened on the controller belt,
which was strapped around the shoulders. Finally, we adjusted
the tension of suspension straps to prevent vertical migration of
the exoskeletons as the volunteer slowly stood up. On the first
orientation visit, the volunteers were asked to walk overground
wearing the exoskeletons for the assistance condition but not
for the control condition. For each condition, they walked overground for about 640 m at their own pace, covering a distance
approximately equivalent to the distance covered in 8 mins of
treadmill walking. A 5-min seated rest break was given to the
volunteers before they walked on the treadmill in the same condition for 8 min at their preferred gait speed. The order of the
conditions for the first session was kept the same and not randomized across volunteers. The second orientation day included
trials of 10-min treadmill walking only and the order of the two
experimental conditions were randomized for each volunteer.
The order of the conditions was the same as the one followed
during the data collection session. To summarize, volunteers
walked a total 18 min on the treadmill and 10 min overground
for each of the two conditions during the first two orientation
sessions.
Data Collection Sessions: The participants wore tight t-shirts,
spandex performance shorts, and their own athletic shoes. Reflective markers were placed on body landmarks according to
convention previously described in [43], with the slight difference in that we placed four-marker clusters on the shank and
the thigh such that the exoskeleton cuffs could fit on the limbs
without blocking their visibility from the cameras. Additionally, a four-marker cluster was placed on the chest to track the
trunk and pelvis as a single segment. The same randomized order of the experimental condition used in the second orientation
session was also used in this session with 8–10 min trials of
treadmill walking. Within each trial, a 30-s long data recording
was taken after 4 min from the start of the trial.
Data collection took place at Center for Military Biomechanics Research at the US Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center, Natick, MA, USA. The experimental conditions included walking on a custom-made force
plate treadmill (fabricated by AMTI, Watertown, MA, USA).
The treadmill comprises two synchronized treadmill belts positioned side by side, each on a separate force platform with a gap
smaller than 1 cm. We used a ten camera motion capture system
(Qualysis, Gothenberg, Sweden) and Qualisys Track Manager
Software to track lower limb markers and calculate kinematic
profiles. The exoskeletons simultaneously transferred data of
right and left exoskeleton joint angles, heel and toe sensors
status, and feedback signal from the spring-loaded and retreat
push buttons as indicators of the status of the friction lever
engagement to a host computer. The exoskeleton also sent a
synchronization signal to the Qualisys camera system that allowed us to synchronize the data from the two data acquisition
systems.

1816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE II
MASS PROPERTIES OF THE EXOSKELETON

C. Kinematic and Kinetic Profiles
We used visual 3-D software (C-Motion, Gaithersburg, MD,
USA) to calculate the lower extremity joints kinematic and kinetic profiles. To obtain the moment profiles for the conditions
that included a device, we first calculated the mass and moment
of inertia and the center of mass of the exoskeleton thigh and
shank segments in SolidWorks, as listed in Table II. We accordingly updated the mass, center of mass, and moment of inertia
of the shank, thigh, and trunk segments and conducted inverse
dynamics analysis to obtain the moment and power profiles in
the sagittal plane. To approximate the moment of the knee joint
in the sagittal plane, we subtracted the synchronized moment of
the exoskeleton from the moment of the complex assuming that
the axis of exoskeleton joint is perfectly aligned with the knee
joint axis.
D. Profile Comparison Measures
We identified the gait cycles by the right heel strikes. We
found that at least four consecutive gait cycles (four left strides
and four right strides similar to the approach of others [4]) for
each trial had proper force plate signals. Therefore, we obtained
the intrasubject average angle, moment, power, and force profiles of four consecutive cycles for each trial to be consistent
among the trials. We normalized the intrasubject mean angle
profiles with respect to the standing configuration and moment
profile by dividing by the body mass. The intersubject mean and
SD profiles were obtained from the intrasubject mean profiles.
The coefficient of variability (CV described elsewhere [34]) was
also calculated for each profile using the mean and SD profiles.
As suggested by other researchers [17], we compared the kinematic and kinetic profiles of the CTRL and ASSIST conditions
using linear regression between the intersubject mean profiles
under these two conditions. The R2 value of the regression indicates the degree of similarity of the patterns, while the slope
refers to the scaling factor. For example, a profile identical to
the control profile would have an R2 and a scale of 1, whereas a
down scaled profile (i.e., smaller range of values) with identical
pattern would have R2 = 1 and slope <1. One should note that
the scale is not very meaningful when R2 is relatively low.
E. Moment-Angle Analysis
As mentioned earlier, the knee joint moment-angle data were
obtained by subtracting the exoskeleton moment from the overall knee complex data obtained from the inverse dynamic analysis. To obtain KC and KK , linear polynomials were respectively
regressed on the moment-angle data of the knee complex and
knee joint in the weight acceptance phase of the gait (points a

to c in Fig. 2). The slopes of the corresponding linear fits represent KC and KK , and the coefficient of determination (R2 )
indicates the goodness of the fit representative of the linearity of
the behavior of the knee complex and knee joint in the weight
acceptance phase. We subtracted the minimum angle from maximum angle of the knee complex in the weight acceptance phase
to calculate the knee complex excursion (θC ) and similarly for
the knee joint excursion (θK ). We similarly calculated θE by
subtracting the minimum angle from the maximum angle of the
exoskeleton in the weight acceptance phase and θS by subtracting θE from θC .
IV. RESULTS
A. Kinematic and Kinetic Profiles
Fig. 9 shows the joint angle and moment profiles for CTRL
condition (dashed gray) and ASSIST condition (solid black).
The first row corresponds to the ankle joint, second row the
knee complex, and third row the hip joint in the graphs of each
parameter. The left and right columns correspond to the left and
right sides, respectively. The thick solid lines indicate the intersubject mean profiles and the thin lines ±1 SD boundaries. The
gait cycles were identified by the right heel strikes. The legends
of each graph indicate the CV of each profile in parentheses followed by the R2 /Scale. The values of R2 /Scale for the ASSIST
condition are with respect to CTRL condition.
The intersubject average angle and moment profiles shown in
Fig. 9 indicate that the exoskeleton assistance does not appear to
have a considerable effect on the pattern of angle and moment
profiles of all the lower extremity joints in the sagittal plane.
In particular, the average angle profiles between the CTRL and
ASSIST conditions appear to be very close or overlapping in
the stance phase of the gait cycle where the assistance spring
is engaged, while more separation between the profiles of the
two conditions is noticeable during the swing phase of the gait
cycle. This behavior appears to hold true across all joint profiles
in the swing phase and may likely be attributable to the mass of
the exoskeletons (2.63 kg for the left and 2.45 kg for the right
exoskeleton). To quantify the previous qualitative observations,
Fig. 9 reports the values of R2 /Scale for ASSIST condition with
respect to the CTRL condition. The high R2 values reported
in Fig. 9 support the observation that the external assistance
does not have a considerable effect on the pattern of angle and
moment profiles of the lower extremity joints in the sagittal
plane. We can observe a slight downscale in the knee and ankle
angle profiles, and both upscale and downscale in hip angle
profile in the sagittal plane. All joint moment profiles in the
sagittal plane exhibit an upscale in the range of values, except
for the right knee which shows a downscale.
Fig. 10(top) shows the intersubject mean angle profiles for
the knee joint (black) and exoskeleton (dashed gray). Here we
observe that the exoskeleton flexion in the weight acceptance
phase (as distinguished by light gray dashed stripes) is considerably smaller than the knee joint, implying that the interface
between the exoskeleton and the leg undesirably compresses
under the effect of the interface force between the exoskeleton and the limbs. Fig. 10(middle) shows the mean intersubject
moment profiles for the knee joint (black), exoskeleton (dashed

SHAMAEI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A QUASI-PASSIVE KNEE EXOSKELETON

1817

Fig. 9. Inter-subject angle and moment mean and ±1 SD profiles of lower extremity joints in the sagittal plane. The left and right columns correspond to the left
and right joints, respectively. The first, second, and third rows, respectively, correspond to the ankle joint, knee complex of anatomical knee joint and exoskeleton,
and hip joint in the top and bottom sets of graphs. The dashed gray and solid black colors respectively correspond to CTRL and ASSIST conditions. The legends
include the coefficient of variability in the parentheses that are followed by the R 2 /Scale of the regression between the ASSIST and CTRL mean profiles, where a
Scale >1 means that ASSIST profile is scaled up (i.e., greater range of values) with respect to the CTRL condition. The assistance period is indicated by a shaded
area.

gray), and knee joint complex (light dashed gray). We observe
that both left and right exoskeletons have been able to engage
the assistance spring and apply substantial moments to the knee
joint in the weight acceptance phase, and that the knee angle
profile is largely maintained in the presence of this loading.
Fig. 10(bottom) shows the mean intersubject power profiles for
the knee joint (black), exoskeleton (dashed gray), and knee joint
complex (light dashed gray). The graphs show that the right exoskeleton resulted in higher peak power values for the right knee
joint and smaller peak power values for the left knee joint in the
weight acceptance phase.
B. Effective Parallel Stiffness
Fig. 11 shows a sample moment-angle graph for the first subject. The graph includes the moment-angle graph of the knee
complex, knee joint, and exoskeleton for ASSIST condition,

and the moment-angle graph of the knee joint for CTRL condition. The linear fits associated with the quasi-stiffness values are also shown in this figure. The first to third rows of
Fig. 12, respectively, show the quasi-stiffness, excursion, and
R2 values of the knee complex for the CTRL and ASSIST
conditions. The left and right columns respectively indicate the
left and right knee complexes. The first row illustrates the intersubject mean knee complex and knee joint quasi-stiffnesses
and exoskeleton stiffness for the left and right side. We observe that K̄X = 0.78 Nm/kg.rad (SDK̄ X = 0.39 Nm/kg.rad)
for the left exoskeleton and K̄X = 1.72 Nm/kg.rad (SDK̄ X =
0.32 Nm/kg.rad) for the right exoskeleton. Considering the
series arrangement of the exoskeleton spring and interface compliance, the effect of the interface stiffness on the performance
of the left exoskeleton is substantially higher than the right
exoskeleton. In fact, we observe that the excursion of the interface between the left exoskeleton and the leg (θ̄S = 8.0◦

1818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 10. (Top) Inter-subject angle mean and ±1 SD profiles of the knee complex and exoskeleton in the sagittal plane. (Middle) Inter-subject moment mean and
±1 SD profiles of the knee complex, anatomical knee joint, and exoskeleton in the sagittal plane. The knee joint moment profile is obtained by subtracting the
exoskeleton moment from the knee complex moment. (Bottom) Inter-subject power mean and ±1 SD profiles of the knee complex and exoskeleton in the sagittal
plane. The solid black and dashed gray colors respectively indicate the knee and exoskeleton profiles. The black dashed lines show the profiles of the knee joint.
The exoskeleton provides assistance in the weight acceptance phase, which is illustrated by the shaded area on each graph.

Fig. 11. Sample moment-angle graph for the first subject. Two gait cycles
are included: 1. Control condition (light gray circles), 2. Assistance condition
(shown by crosses) that includes the graph of the knee complex, knee joint, and
exoskeleton. The graph also includes the quasi-stiffness of the knee complex
(K C ) and knee joint (K K ) in the weight acceptance phase as well as the
stiffness of the exoskeleton (K E ).

and SDθ̄ S = 2.2◦ ) is substantially higher than that of the right
interface tissues (θ̄S = 5.5◦ and SDθ̄ S = 1.7◦ ), as shown in
the second row of the figure. Table III lists the values of the
interface rotational stiffnesses for the left and right side indicating that the stiffness of the left side (K̄S = 81 Nm/rad and
SDK̄ S = 12 Nm/rad) is substantially smaller than that of the
right side (K̄S = 304 Nm/rad and SDK̄ S = 102 Nm/rad). Ta-

Fig. 12. Inter-subject moment-angle analysis of the knee complex, joint, and
exoskeleton in the sagittal plane. The left and right columns correspond to the
left and right knee, respectively. The first to third rows are respectively the
quasi-stiffness, excursion, and R 2 values in the weight acceptance phase. Note
that K c is the knee complex and K K is the knee joint quasi-stiffness, and K X
is the external stiffness in parallel to the knee joint, which is a series combination
of the exoskeleton stiffness (K E ) and soft interface stiffness (K S ).

ble III also includes the exoskeleton stiffness for comparison.
Considering the consistency of the difference among all the subjects, we can attribute this behavior to structural differences in
the exoskeleton cuffs and attachments.

SHAMAEI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A QUASI-PASSIVE KNEE EXOSKELETON

TABLE III
INTRASUBJECT MEAN STIFFNESS OF COMPLIANT INTERFACE BETWEEN
EXOSKELETON AND LIMBS

The R2 values of the third row of the figure indicate that the
overall moment-angle behavior of the knee complex remains
relatively linear, whereas the knee joint behavior becomes less
linear under the effect of exoskeleton assistance. This finding
may imply that the human prefers to exhibit an overall linear
behavior in the knee complex similar to what the human knee
joint exhibits in normal walking on level grounds [21], [23].
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we described a quasi-passive knee exoskeleton that implements a spring with a desired stiffness in parallel
with the knee joint in the weight acceptance phase of the gait
cycle. We conducted a series of preliminary experiments involving human subjects and found that the knee joint demonstrated
a considerable level of motor adaptation to retain relatively
invariant kinematic and kinetic profiles; a finding that coincides with the observations of other researchers for the ankle
joint [17]. We also found that the patterns of kinetic and kinematic profiles of the hip joint, knee complex (i.e., complex of
knee and exoskeleton), and ankle joint in the sagittal plane remained mostly invariant under the effect of the exoskeleton
assistance. We also observed that for the three volunteers the
exoskeletons was able to engage the assistance spring during
the desired period of the gait, providing substantial assistive
moments to the knee joint in the weight acceptance phase of the
gait.
The reported experiments included one assistance condition
with the assistance spring stiffness identical to the estimated
quasi-stiffness of the knee joint in normal walking. The experiments also involved a control condition in which the volunteers
walked without any device. We found that the exoskeletal assistance only slightly suppresses angle profiles of the joints in
the sagittal plane; except, the left hip joint that shows a slight
upscale in the range of values. We found that the exoskeleton
function and mass resulted in slightly greater moment values
in the sagittal plane; except the right knee complex that shows
a downscaled profile. We also observed that the interface between the exoskeleton and the leg (comprising of the biological
soft tissues of the thigh and shank and the compliant components of the exoskeleton) can excurse more than the exoskeleton
joint and dominate the performance of the exoskeleton, negating
or obscuring the effect of exoskeletal assistance, depending on
the relative stiffnesses of the device and interface. In fact, the
moment-angle analysis of the knee complex revealed that the
right exoskeleton was able to apply parallel stiffnesses (KX )
comparable to the mean quasi-stiffness of the knee in the con-

1819

trol condition, whereas the left exoskeleton was only able to
provide parallel stiffness (KX ) of ∼33% of the mean quasistiffness of the knee in the control condition, implying that the
performance of the left exoskeleton was substantially obscured
by the interface compliance. The moment-angle analysis also
showed that, although the performance of the knee joint becomes less linear under the exoskeletal assistance, the overall
performance of the knee complex tends to remain linear. This
suggests that there is a preference for the linear performance of
the knee joint in the weight acceptance phase of the gait, which
could be attributed to higher rate of energy recovery in this phase
[21], [23].
The current study necessitated several assumptions, which
should be considered in the interpretation of the results. The
reflective markers of the study were mounted on the skin of the
volunteer; hence, the kinematic profiles of the knee complex
and anatomical joint are assumed to be identical. Additionally,
we utilized a suspension harnesses between the exoskeleton
and shoulders to minimize vertical migration of the exoskeleton
between gait cycles. While the tension on the suspension was
only present when the leg was straight, this may have affected
the kinetic and kinematic behavior of the joints. Moreover, we
calculated the exoskeletons moments by (4). Alternatively, a
load cell in the exoskeleton would have allowed for a more
direct measurement of the exoskeleton moment, but would have
substantially increased the complexity and mass of the device
(including the necessary electronics hardware).
To carry out the inverse dynamics analysis, we made several assumptions. We considered the knee joint and exoskeleton
as one single joint. Despite the independence of the inverse
dynamics analysis of the morphology of the joints, this assumption can have nuisance effects on the joint center estimations
and the calculations of the kinetic profiles. We also obtained
the exoskeleton moment of inertia and center of mass from a
computer-aided design model of the exoskeleton. Therefore, we
have ignored the effect of small movements of the exoskeleton with respect to limbs and slight differences between the
actual device and the computer models. Our estimation of the
knee joint quasi-stiffness using the models we developed in our
previous work could impose additional confined effects on the
intersubject means and SD calculations [3], [23].
The findings of this research can give insight to the design of
exoskeleton for the lower extremity joints (especially the knee
joint).
1) We found that replication of the behavior of the knee joint
in the stance phase with an external device can provide
substantial assistance to this joint and may be a viable
assistance strategy for knee exoskeletal devices.
2) The compliance of the biological soft tissues of the leg
and the exoskeleton cuffs might neutralize the assistance
of an exoskeleton unless it is explicitly accounted for. This
is especially true for exoskeletons attached to the thighs,
due to the large amount of soft tissue located in those
segments. Therefore, the design of exoskeletons should
minimize the effect of the soft tissues with additional considerations such as larger pads and more carefully chosen
strap locations.

1820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

The moment profiles of Fig. 10 indicate that the exoskeleton
and knee joint moments had opposite directions in certain periods of the stance phase (at the onset and end of the weight
acceptance phase), suggesting that the exoskeleton could impede the knee joint movement in those periods. We also see
that the peak power values for the right knee joint increased in
the weight acceptance phase whereas that of the left knee joint
decreased. Current study includes only three volunteers, which
makes the profiles very sensitive to differences between individuals. In future, we intend to study this aspect of the performance
of the exoskeleton by examining EMG activities of the underlying muscles across a larger group of volunteers to identify
what/if muscles are being assisted or additionally loaded.
All together, the findings of this research suggest that the
quasi-passive knee exoskeleton developed here can be used to
study the behavior of the knee joint in interaction with external
impedances. The preliminary results of this study also suggest
that the quasi-passive assistance of the exoskeleton can help reduce the moment profile of the human knee joint in the sagittal
plane. It should be pointed out, however, that the participants
that were recruited were of similar age, height, and weight and
the same exoskeleton stiffness setting was applied to all participants, thus experimental results ought to be conservatively
interpreted. However, current results are intended to only show
that the exoskeleton functioned as intended and to provide preliminary evidence that the lower extremities demonstrated a
level of adaptation. Future research will recruit a larger sample
size of participants and investigate the EMG activities of the
muscles adjacent to the knee joint and analyze the performance
of muscles in interaction with the exoskeletons, as well as investigating the effect of the exoskeleton on the metabolic cost
of movement through VO2 measurement.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the contributions of M.
Coyne, S. Corner, and L. Hasselquist in the collection of the
data for this study.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Dollar and H. Herr, “Lower extremity exoskeletons and active orthoses: Challenges and state-of-the-art,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24,
no. 1, pp. 144–158, Feb. 2008.
[2] A. Dollar, H. Herr, R. Chatila, A. Kelly, and J. Merlet, “Design of a quasipassive knee exoskeleton to assist running,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Robots Intell. Syst., 2008, pp. 747–754.
[3] K. Shamaei, P. Napolitano, and A. Dollar, “A quasi-passive compliant
stance control knee-ankle-foot orthosis,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf.
Rehabil. Robot., Seattle, WA, USA, 2013.
[4] K. Gregorczyk, L. Hasselquist, J. Schiffman, C. Bensel, J. Obusek, and
D. Gutekunst, “Effects of a lower-body exoskeleton device on metabolic
cost and gait biomechanics during load carriage,” Ergonomics, vol. 53,
no. 10, pp. 1263–1275, 2010.
[5] R. Ronsse, T. Lenzi, N. Vitiello, B. Koopman, E. Van Asseldonk, S. De
Rossi, J. Van den Kieboom, H. Van Der Kooij, M. Carrozza, and
A. Ijspeert, “Oscillator-based assistance of cyclical movements: Modelbased and model-free approaches,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 49,
no. 10, pp. 1173–1185, 2011.
[6] C. Walsh, K. Endo, and H. Herr, “A quasi-passive leg exoskeleton for loadcarrying augmentation,” Int. J. Humanoid Robot., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 487–
506, Sep. 2007.

[7] G. Sawicki, A. Domingo, and D. Ferris, “The effects of powered anklefoot orthoses on joint kinematics and muscle activation during walking
in individuals with incomplete spinal cord injury,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil.,
vol. 3, pp. 1–17, Feb. 28, 2006.
[8] D. Ferris, Z. Bohra, J. Lukos, and C. Kinnaird, “Neuromechanical adaptation to hopping with an elastic ankle-foot orthosis,” J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 163–170, Jan. 2006.
[9] D. Farris and G. Sawicki, “Linking the mechanics and energetics of hopping with elastic ankle exoskeletons,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 113, no. 12,
pp. 1862–1872, Oct. 2012.
[10] A. Roy, H. Krebs, D. Williams, C. Bever, L. Forrester, R. Macko, and
N. Hogan, “Robot-aided neurorehabilitation: A novel robot for ankle rehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 569–582, Jun. 2009.
[11] A. Grabowski and H. Herr, “Leg exoskeleton reduces the metabolic cost
of human hopping,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 670–678, Sep.
2009.
[12] R. Gregg, T. Bretl, and M. Spong, “A control theoretic approach to robotassisted locomotor therapy,” in Proc. 49th IEEE Conf. Decision Control,
2010, pp. 1679–1686.
[13] M. Cherry, D. Choi, K. Deng, S. Kota, and D. Ferris, “Design and fabrication of an elastic knee orthosis: Preliminary results,” in Proc. IDETC /CIE
ASME 2006 Int. Design Eng. Tech. Conf. Comput. Inform. Eng. Conf.,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2006, pp. 567–573.
[14] H. Kazerooni, R. Steger, and L. Huang, “Hybrid control of the Berkeley
lower extremity exoskeleton (BLEEX),” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 25, no.
5–6, pp. 561–573, May /Jun. 2006.
[15] G. Aguirre-Ollinger, J. Colgate, M. Peshkin, and A. Goswami, “Design
of an active one-degree-of-freedom lower-limb exoskeleton with inertia
compensation,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 486–499, Apr. 2011.
[16] M. Wehner, B. Quinlivan, P. Aubin, E. Martinez-Villalpando,
M. Baumann, L. Stirling, K. Holt, R. Wood, and C. Walsh, “A lightweight
soft exosuit for gait assistance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2013, pp. 3362–3369.
[17] P. Kao, C. Lewis, and D. Ferris, “Invariant ankle moment patterns when
walking with and without a robotic ankle exoskeleton,” J. Biomechanics,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 203–209, Jan. 19, 2010.
[18] S. Agrawal, S. Banala, A. Fattah, V. Sangwan, V. Krishnamoorthy,
J. Scholz, and W. Hsu, “Assessment of motion of a swing leg and gait
rehabilitation with a gravity balancing exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 410–420, Sep. 2007.
[19] G. Elliott, G. Sawicki, A. Marecki, and H. Herr, “The biomechanics and
energetics of human running using an elastic knee exoskeleton,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Rehabil. Robot., Seattle, WA, USA, 2013.
[20] K. Shamaei, M. Cenciarini, and A. Dollar, “On the mechanics of the ankle
in the stance phase of the gait,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Boston, MA, USA, 2011, pp. 8135–8140.
[21] K. Shamaei and A. Dollar, “On the mechanics of the knee during the
stance phase of the gait,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., Zurich,
Switzerland, 2011, pp. 1–7.
[22] K. Shamaei, G. Sawicki, and A. Dollar, “Estimation of quasi-stiffness and
propulsive work of the human ankle in the stance phase of walking,” PLoS
One, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1–12, 2013.
[23] K. Shamaei, G. Sawicki, and A. Dollar, “Estimation of quasi-stiffness of
the human knee in the stance phase of walking,” PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 1–10, 2013.
[24] M. Cenciarini and A. Dollar, “Biomechanical considerations in the design
of lower limb exoskeletons,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot.,
Zurich, Switzerland, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[25] P. Kao, C. Lewis, and D. Ferris, “Short-term locomotor adaptation to a
robotic ankle exoskeleton does not alter soleus Hoffmann reflex amplitude,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2010.
[26] J. Sulzer, R. Roiz, M. Peshkin, and J. Patton, “A highly backdrivable,
lightweight knee actuator for investigating gait in stroke,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 539–548, Jun. 2009.
[27] M. Noel, K. Fortin, and L. Bouyer, “Using an electrohydraulic ankle foot
orthosis to study modifications in feedforward control during locomotor
adaptation to force fields applied in stance,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2009.
[28] A. Roy, H. Krebs, S. Patterson, T. Judkins, I. Khanna, L. Forrester,
R. Macko, and N. Hogan, “Measurement of human ankle stiffness using the anklebot,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2007,
pp. 356–363.
[29] T. Lenzi, M. Carrozza, and S. Agrawal, “Powered hip exoskeletons can
reduce the user’s hip and ankle muscle activations during walking,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 938–948, Nov. 2013.

SHAMAEI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A QUASI-PASSIVE KNEE EXOSKELETON

[30] E. Rouse, R. Gregg, L. Hargrove, and J. Sensinger, “The difference between stiffness and quasi-stiffness in the context of biomechanical modeling,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 562–568, 2013.
[31] C. Frigo, P. Crenna, and L. Jensen, “Moment-angle relationship at lower
limb joints during human walking at different velocities,” J. Electromyography Kinesiology, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 177–190, Sep. 1996.
[32] K. Shamaei, G. S. Sawicki, and A. M. Dollar, “Estimation of quasistiffness of the human hip in the stance phase of walking,” PLoS One,
vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1–11, 2013.
[33] J. Rose and J. Gamble, Human Walking. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Williams & Wilkins, 2006.
[34] D. Winter, The Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Gait: Normal,
Elderly and Pathological. 2nd ed., Waterloo, ON, Canada: Univ. Waterloo
Press, 1991.
[35] J. Perry, Gait Analysis : Normal and Pathological Function. Thorofare,
NJ, USA: Slack, 1992.
[36] R. Davis and P. DeLuca, “Gait characterization via dynamic joint stiffness,” Gait Posture, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 224–231, 1996.
[37] D. Stefanyshyn and B. Nigg, “Dynamic angular stiffness of the ankle
joint during running and sprinting,” J. Appl. Biomechanics, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 292–299, Aug. 1998.
[38] P. Crenna and C. Frigo, “Dynamics of the ankle joint analyzed through
moment-angle loops during human walking: gender and age effects,”
Human Movement Sci., vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 1185–1198, 2011.
[39] S. Lark, J. Buckley, S. Bennett, D. Jones, and A. Sargeant, “Joint torques
and dynamic joint stiffness in elderly and young men during stepping
down,” Clin. Biomechanics, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 848–855, Nov. 2003.
[40] D. Ferris and C. Farley, “Interaction of leg stiffness and surface stiffness
during human hopping,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 15–22, Jan.
1997.
[41] C. Farley, H. Houdijk, C. Van Strien, and M. Louie, “Mechanism of leg
stiffness adjustment for hopping on surfaces of different stiffnesses,” J.
Appl. Physiol., vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 1044–1055, Sep. 1998.
[42] G. Tatarliev, “Design of a knee simulator for testing orthoses under unlimited gait cycles,” School of Engineering and Applied Science, New Haven,
CT, USA: Yale Univ., 2011.
[43] I. McClay and K. Manal, “Three-dimensional kinetic analysis of running:
Significance of secondary planes of motion,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise,
vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1629–1637, Nov. 1999.
Kamran Shamaei (S’11) received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering
from the Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2005, the
M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from ETH, Zurich, Switzerland, in 2009.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree from the School of Engineering
and Applied Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
His current research interests include design and development of orthoses
and prostheses, medical robotics, and surgical technologies.

Massimo Cenciarini (S’09–M’11) received the Laurea degree in biomedical
and electronic engineering from the University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, in
2001, and the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 2010.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Scientist in the Neurologische Universitätsklinik Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, since May 2013. He was a Postdoctoral
Associate with Dr. A. Dollar at Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA, working
on lower limbs exoskeleton, orthosis, and leg biomechanics from November
2010–April 2013. His current research interests include modeling of human
balance and locomotion with emphasis on identifying and characterize factors
such as gender, aging, and neurological disorders to the control of balance.

1821

Albert A. Adams received the Bachelor’s degree in biomedical engineering from The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, USA, where
he worked with the National Rehabilitation Hospital to design rehabilitation
robotics that aid stroke patients in recovering hand function. The M.S. degree
in biomedical engineering from Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester,
MA, USA, he investigated how extremity armor affected Soldiers’ physical
performance.
Working for the U.S. Army since 2004, he has conducted biomechanics
research ranging from the use of nonlinear mathematics to quantify the effects
of prolonged load carriage to evaluating the effects of exoskeletons on gait.

Karen N. Gregorczyk received the B.A. degree in physics at the College of the
Holy Cross, Worcester, MA, USA, and the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester.
She is a Research Biomechanist and Principal Investigator at the Center for
Military Biomechanics Research, U.S. Army Natick Soldier Research, Engineering, and Development Center. She has led and contributed to several key
efforts and programs spanning from basic to applied research that focus on
the biomechanical implications of wearing soldier equipment and exoskeletons
designed to augment the soldier.

Jeffrey M. Schiffman received the Doctoral degree in biomechanics from the
Department of Health, Sports, and Exercise Science, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS, USA, in 1999.
Since 2010, he has been a Supervisory Research Physiologist at Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center (NSRDEC), Natick, MA,
USA. He currently leads the Biomechanics Team research activities, which
includes a portfolio representing basic and applied research that focus on optimizing biomechanical and physiological aspects of Soldier performance and
load carriage.

Aaron M. Dollar (SM’13) received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering
from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA, the S.M.
and Ph.D. degrees in engineering sciences from Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA.
He conducted two years of Postdoctoral Research at the MIT Media Lab. He
is the John J. Lee Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Materials
Science at Yale. His research interests include human and robotic grasping and
dexterous manipulation, mechanisms and machine design, and assistive and
rehabilitation devices including upper-limb prosthetics and lower-limb orthoses.
Dr. Dollar received the 2013 DARPA Young Faculty Award, 2011 AFOSR
Young Investigator Award, the 2010 Technology Review TR35 Young Innovator
Award, and the 2010 NSF CAREER Award.

