256

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Enhancing the Pulse Contour Analysis-Based Arterial
Stiffness Estimation Using a Novel
Photoplethysmographic Parameter
Dae-Geun Jang, Seung-Hun Park, and Minsoo Hahn

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a novel method for enhancing pulse contour analysis-based arterial stiffness estimation using
a simple and low-complexity photoplethysmographic parameter
(P2Ocd). The method first eliminates baseline wanders in the digital volume pulse (DVP) by applying a simple morphological filter. The filtered DVP signal is then transformed into a slope sum
function signal to simplify the pulse peak detection process by enhancing the upslope of the DVP signal while suppressing its downslope. An adaptive thresholding scheme is applied to detect pulse
peaks from the transformed signal. Pulse onsets are then identified as the minimum values between consecutive pulse peaks. The
P2Ocd is finally calculated by dividing the time interval between
the pulse peak and the pulse onset by the pulse length. In order to
assess the agreement of the P2Ocd with an established technique,
brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity, we performed Bland–Altman
and correlation analyses. Furthermore, we evaluated the P2Ocdbased arterial stiffness estimation in terms of prediction accuracy
(% error rate) and repeatability (coefficient of variation). The results show that the proposed measurement agrees well with the
established technique and shows a high repeatability; it also has a
better predictive accuracy than that of conventional methods. In
addition, we show that the proposed parameter further improves
the predictive accuracy by combining it with age. The proposed
method is therefore highly applicable to small ubiquitous healthcare applications.
Index Terms—Arterial stiffness, cardiovascular disease, digital
volume pulse (DVP), pulse wave velocity (PWV).

I. INTRODUCTION
RTERIAL stiffness is a growing epidemic associated with
increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, dementia, and
death [1]. In particular, arterial stiffness is strongly associated
with atherosclerosis at various sites in the vascular tree and
thus can be used as an independent indicator of atherosclerosis
[2], [3]. Several transesophageal echocardiographic studies have

A

Manuscript received July 23, 2013; revised November 25, 2013 and February
1, 2014; accepted February 9, 2014. Date of publication February 17, 2014;
date of current version December 30, 2014. This work was supported by the
Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning), Korea, under the Information
Technology Research Center support program supervised by the National IT
Industry Promotion Agency [NIPA-2013-(H0301-13-2001)].
D. G. Jang and M. Hahn are with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea
(e-mail: jangdg85@kaist.ac.kr; mshahn@ee.kaist.ac.kr).
S. H. Park is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Kyung Hee
University, Suwon 446-701, Korea (e-mail: parksh@khu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2306679

demonstrated that advanced atherosclerosis in the ascending
aorta can be considered as a possible source of cerebral emboli
and an independent risk factor of ischemic stroke [4], [5]. In
addition, some other studies have proved that arterial stiffness
can be a strong indicator of all-cause and of mainly cardiac
mortality in subjects with end-stage renal disease [6], [7].
In recent years, various methods to noninvasively measure
arterial stiffness have become available and are relatively easier
to perform in clinical situations [2]. The measurement of pulse
wave velocity (PWV), which is the velocity of arterial pulses
moving along vessel walls, has been developed as an indicator
of arterial elasticity. The PWV is highly reproducible [7] and
has a strong positive correlation with cardiovascular events [8].
Recently, PWV has been recognized by the European Society of
Hypertension as an early indicator of large arterial stiffening [9].
Another method is to consider the change in the diameter (or
area) of a number of arteries, such as the carotid, brachial,
radial, and aorta; such measurement can be used to make an
arterial stiffness estimation [10], [11]. The most frequently used
technique to detect changes in the diameter of the arteries is
ultrasound [10]. In this approach, arterial stiffness is assessed by
using indices such as the Young’s modulus, the elastic modulus,
and the arterial compliance [11].
Although these methods show high predictive accuracy, they
are expensive due to the need for well-trained experts to operate the test equipment. Furthermore, the methods have poor
usability partly due to restrictions on the testing place and testing time [12], [13]. In order to cope with these problems, a
pulse contour analysis (PCA)-based arterial stiffness estimation technique has been proposed [7], [14], [15]. However, the
PCA-based method also has a defect originating from the calculation of the predictive parameters. That is, most of the conventional parameters necessarily require the extraction of reflected
wave or incisura and thus are prone to performance degradation
in indistinct pulse waveforms [12], which are generally known
to appear in the elderly. Therefore, a new predictive parameter that agrees well with the established technique and shows
a better predictive accuracy than conventional measurements is
required.
In this paper, we propose a novel photoplethysmographic parameter of arterial stiffness that enhances the predictive accuracy
compared to conventional ones but is much simpler to derive;
we further propose a morphological method for the reliable extraction of this parameter in baseline wandering DVP signals.
We also look at a way to further improve the predictive accuracy
by combining the parameter with other factors.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JANG et al.: ENHANCING THE PULSE CONTOUR ANALYSIS-BASED ARTERIAL STIFFNESS ESTIMATION

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

As another parameter of arterial stiffness estimation, the stiffness index (SI) was proposed by Millasseau et al. and is defined
by [15]

A. Database
We utilized the Health Improvement and Management System database [12] to compare the new predictive parameter with
the established brachial-ankle PWV (baPWV). The baPWV was
chosen as the established measure of arterial stiffness because
it is highly associated with the gold standard estimate of arterial stiffness (carotid-femoral PWV; cfPWV) [16] and correlates
better with left ventricle mass, diastolic function, and other arterial indices than does cfPWV [17].
The data acquisition protocol included collection of DVPs
and baPWV using HUBI-Brain (TheHIMS Inc., Korea) and
VP-1000 (OMRON Inc. Japan), respectively. To acquire cardiovascular stability, subjects were requested to maintain supine
posture for 10 min before the acquisition of data.
For the acquisition of baPWV, subjects were required to remain in supine position [18], while four blood pressure cuffs
(left and right arm; left and right ankle), two ECG sensors (inner
sides of left and right wrists), and the phonocardiogram sensor
(left of the sternum, second intercostal space) were attached to
the subjects. The baPWV obtained from VP-1000 were measured twice to reduce the white coat effect and to increase the
reliability.
For the acquisition of the DVP signal, subjects were required
to maintain a sitting posture [18], while holding the HUBI-Brain
apparatus in a natural way. The HUBI-Brain used a red LED with
a wavelength of 660 nm as a light source to detect blood volume
changes in the microvascular bed of tissues. Furthermore, it
adopts a reflection mode in which a photodetector senses the
reflected light from the pulsatile arterial blood flow and from
other static signals such as tissue signals. The HUBI-Brain itself
is designed to be strong on motion artifacts and is detailed in
[19]. DVP signals were sampled at 512 Hz, with 6-bit resolution
and obtained for 1 min from the left index finger.
The DVP and baPWV data from 123 subjects (54 male,
69 female, age range 18–88, test time 1 min.) were incorporated
into the database. All the characteristic points (pulse onsets,
pulse peaks, incisura, and reflected waves) in the DVP signals
were manually annotated by two biomedical engineers.
B. Conventional Predictive Parameters
A considerable number of studies have suggested pulse
parameters for the estimation of arterial stiffness. The augmentation index (AI) is the most frequently used parameter
in PCA-based arterial stiffness estimation [10], [20], [21]. The
AI is given by [21]


Ar
Af − Ar
=± 1−
AI = ±
Af
Af

257

(1)

where Af and Ar indicate the height of the forward wave and
the reflected wave, respectively. From early studies, it has been
proved that the AI is highly correlated with left ventricular mass
[22], coronary heart disease [23], coronary atherosclerosis [24],
and cardiovascular outcomes [25].

SI =

h
ΔTDVP

(2)

where h and ΔTDVP represent the body height and the reflected wave arrival time (a time interval between the pulse
peak and reflected wave), respectively. Millasseau et al. showed
that the SI is independently correlated with the PWV [15], [26].
Alty et al. also proved that the SI can be used as a prognostic
factor of arterial stiffness in young subjects [27].
In addition, Westerhof et al. used reflection index (RI) as a
quantification of wave reflection in the human aorta [28]. The
RI is defined as
Ar
= 1 − AI.
(3)
RI =
Af
Equation (3) indicates that since the AI and the RI have a
perfect negative linear relationship with each other, their predictive accuracy and statistical properties are the same. Because
of this, we will only describe the AI, instead of the RI, later in
this section.
C. Physiologically Motivated Parameter
Although many PCA-based measurements such as the AI
have been proposed and verified, they have several defects when
used to estimate arterial stiffness [29], [30]. Cheng et al. showed
that the AI might not be a sensitive surrogate for a change in
central pressure waveforms and thus that it may have a limitation
when used in arterial stiffness estimation [29]. In addition, since
the PCA-based arterial stiffness estimation is highly dependent
on the accuracy of the pulse parameters, either a noise robust
predictive parameter or a noise robust feature extraction algorithm is required to improve the predictive accuracy of arterial
stiffness measurements [12].
In order to cope with these problems, a novel predictive parameter determined from the formulation of the reflected wave
has been proposed. The parameter is defined as the time interval
between the pulse peak and the following pulse onset (P2O).
In pulse wave angiology, the first peak, referred to as the pulse
peak, is formed mainly by the blood volume transmitted along
a direct path from the left ventricle to the finger [15]. The second peak, referred to as the reflected wave, is formed in part by
the blood volume transmitted along the aorta and large arteries
to sites of impedance mismatch in the lower body, where it is
reflected back up the aorta [15]. The P2O can thus be used to
infer the wave reflection, which is highly correlated with arterial
compliance [31]. The P2O and its physiological correlation with
the wave reflection are depicted in Fig. 1.
From Fig. 1, we can intuitively note that the P2O is approximately the same as the size of the wave reflection, and thus
can be used to estimate arterial stiffness. This indicates that the
greater the length of the wave reflection (P2O) is, the greater
will be the arterial stiffness [24], [31].
In general, time-related pulse parameters including the P2O
are inversely correlated with the heart rate [12]. That is,

258

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 1. Proposed pulse parameter, P2O, for the estimation of arterial stiffness:
(a) definition of P2O, and (b) a relation between P2O and a length of wave
reflection.

decreases in heart rates result in lengthening of time-related
pulse parameters [12]. Since the proposed parameter is also
time related and varies with the heart rate, it has to be normalized by the heart rate to guarantee the reproducibility. To this
end, we simply divided the P2O by the pulse length (PL), which
is defined as the time interval between two consecutive pulse
onsets.

In order to extract the P2O from the baseline wandering DVP
signal, we first used a simple morphological filter to eliminate
baseline wandering components with minimum signal distortion. Pulse peaks are then identified using a slope sum function
(SSF) from the baseline-removed DVP signal [32].
For baseline wander removal, the DVP signal is first opened
using a structuring element (k), which is a line segment of
zero amplitude to remove the peaks in the signal. The resulting
waveform with pits is then removed by a closing operation
using the other structuring element. The opening and the closing
operations are defined as follows:
f ◦k =f k⊕k

(4)

f •k =f ⊕kk

(5)

where f (n), {n = 0,1, . . . , N – 1} denotes a discrete signal
consisting of N points, and k(m), {m = 0,1, . . . , M – 1} is
a symmetric structuring element of M points. Generally, it is
assumed that N > M [33]. In (4) and (5), the erosion of the
function f by the structuring element k, denoted asf  k, is
defined as
min

n =0,...,M −1

f (m + n) − k(n)
for m = 0, . . . , N − M.

(6)

The dilation of f by k, f ⊕ k, is defined as
(f ⊕ k)(m) =

where ko and kc are the opening and closing structuring elements, respectively. Finally, the baseline-removed DVP signal,
fy , is obtained by subtracting the baseline wandering signal fb
from the original DVP signal fo as follows:
fr = fo − fb .

D. Parameter Detection

(f  k)(m) =

Fig. 2. Conversion from the DVP signal to the SSF signal and their relationship: (a) DVP signal and (b) SSF signal.

max

n =m −M +1,...,m

f (n) + k(m − n)

for m = M − 1, M, . . . , N − 1.

(7)

In this study, the lengths of the opening (Lo ) and the closing
(Lc ) structuring elements are experimentally selected as typical
human pulse duration of 1 s and 0.2 Lo , respectively [32]. The
baseline wandering signal, fb , is then estimated as [33]
fb = fo ◦ ko • kc

(8)

(9)

To extract the pulse peaks and pulse onsets from the baselineremoved DVP signal, we used the SSF with an adaptive thresholding scheme [34]. The SSF enhances the upslope of the DVP
signal and suppresses the remaining part of the signal. The windowed and weighted SSF at time i, SSFi , is defined as

i

Δxk : Δxk > 0
Δuk , Δuk =
SSFi =
(10)
0:
Δxk ≤ 0
k =i−w

where w is the length of the analyzing window;
1 + w ≤ i ≤ N, N is the total number of DVP samples in the
record; Δxk = xk − xk −1 , and xk is the recorded DVP sample.
To maximize the SSF, w is chosen to be approximately equal
to the typical duration (128 ms) of the upslope of the DVP signal [35]. The relationship between the DVP and the SSF signals
is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2 shows that the SSF onset completely coincides with
the pulse onset because the SSF signal can only rise when the
DVP signal rises. Furthermore, because of its definition in (10),
we can notice that the pulse peak has surely appeared between
the SSF onset and the SSF offset.
To detect pulse peaks and pulse onsets using the SSF signal,
we first identified the SSF onset using the adaptive thresholding
scheme. This scheme first calculates an offset from the SSF
signal, because small-valued SSF variations can cause erratic
detection of the subsequent pulse peak. The offset value was
experimentally determined at 15% of the smaller value of the
two local maxima calculated from the first and the last 3-s
intervals in the DVP record. The initial threshold was determined
at 70% of the maximum of the offset-subtracted SSF signal in
the first 3-s interval. The threshold is then adaptively updated
every time the SSF peak is estimated. Any peak larger than
the threshold is considered as an SSF peak. The SSF onset and
offset are then found by selecting the zero points preceding and
following the SSF peak, respectively. The pulse peak is finally
extracted by picking the maximum DVP peak between the SSF
onset and the SSF offset.

JANG et al.: ENHANCING THE PULSE CONTOUR ANALYSIS-BASED ARTERIAL STIFFNESS ESTIMATION

TABLE I
REGRESSION EQUATIONS FOR ARTERIAL STIFFNESS ESTIMATION

In order to cope with overdetected and missed pulse features,
we utilized knowledge-based rules as previously proposed in
[12]. The rules basically utilize the fact that the DVP is a slowly
time-varying signal and the difference between two consecutive
DVP pulses cannot go beyond a certain range. In this study, we
first estimated the missed pulse peaks and then eliminated the
overdetected ones [12].
The P2Ocd is finally obtained by dividing the time interval
between the pulse peak and the following pulse onset by the
interval between consecutive pulse onsets.
E. Arterial Stiffness Estimation
For the PCA-based arterial stiffness estimation, conventional
measures have utilized not only the pulse peak and pulse onset
but also either reflected wave or incisura; on the other hand, the
proposed P2Ocd parameter uses only the pulse peak and pulse
onset. Two consecutive pulse onsets are first used for the PL
calculation. The P2O is then calculated as the time interval between the pulse peak and the following pulse onset. The P2Ocd
is finally calculated by dividing P2O by PL. To reduce the effect of cycle-to-cycle variation on arterial stiffness estimation,
we calculated the average P2Ocd using ten randomly selected
P2Ocd values; these were used as a predictor of arterial stiffness.
In order to estimate the arterial stiffness using the average
P2Ocd, we calculated the linear prediction equations using simple linear regression analysis. The equations were separately
estimated with respect to the subject’s sex. Finally, the baPWVs
were simply estimated as −3611.396 × P2Ocd + 4268.082 for
males and −3677.143 × P2Ocd + 4064.595 for females.
F. Statistical Analysis
In order to assess the agreement of PCA-based methods with
the actual baPWV, we adopted the Bland–Altman and correlation analyses [36], [37]. Here, we set the values of baPWV
obtained from VP-1000 as the “gold standard” measure of arterial stiffness and those estimated by the AI, the SI, and the
P2Ocd as the predicted values of arterial stiffness. The estimated values of baPWV were calculated from the regression
equations shown in Table I.
In the Bland–Altman analysis, we examined two plots: the
plot of identity and the Bland–Altman plot. Two different methods of measurement were measured on the same variable at the
same scale [36], [37]. In the plot of identity, the real baPWV
was plotted along the Y -axis and the estimated baPWVs were
plotted along the X-axis. The identity line is also depicted as a

259

reference in order to allow a comparison of the two sets of data,
which are expected to be identical under ideal conditions [36].
In the Bland–Altman plot, two new variables are first created:
the average between the real and the estimated baPWVs, and
the difference between the two measurements. The difference
is plotted along the Y -axis and the average is plotted along
the X-axis. Furthermore, we draw approximate 95% limits of
agreement for each comparison (average difference ± 2 SD)
[36]–[38].
Moreover, to evaluate the strength of the relation between the
two measurements, we adopted the correlation analysis. In the
correlation analysis, the Pearson’s product-moment correlation
coefficient, which is typically denoted by r, is used [12]. In
general, the correlation r is a positive number if Y tends to
increase as X increases; r is negative if Y tends to decrease as X
increases; finally, r is zero if there is either no relation between
changes in X and Y, or if there is a nonlinear relation [12].
For the correlation analysis, all the measurement values were
represented as numeric (quantitative) variables and the pairs of
data were independently collected [37].
In this study, we utilized the Statistical Package for the Social
Science, USA Ver. 21 [37] for the statistical analysis.
G. Accuracy and Repeatability
The prediction accuracy and the repeatability of the measurements were assessed using the percentage of error rate (% ER)
and the coefficient of variation (CoV), as [39]
%ER =

|baPWVreal − baPWVestim ated |
× 100(%)
baPWVreal

(11)

where baPWVreal and baPWVestim ated are the real baPWV and
the estimated baPWV, respectively,
SD
× 100(%)
(12)
M
where SD and M are the standard deviation and the mean,
respectively. Smaller % ER and CoV values indicate better prediction accuracy and repeatability, respectively. In general, a
measurement with a value of CoV less than 10% is considered
to have high repeatability; a CoV less than 5% is regarded as
indicating a very high repeatability [40].
The prediction accuracy and the repeatability were evaluated
with two rules: one evaluates the proposed measurement, in
which the arterial stiffness is estimated by the average P2Ocd
(Rule 1); and the other evaluates the cycle-to-cycle variation of
the measurement (Rule 2). For Rule 1, baPWVs collected from
123 subjects and those estimated using the average P2Ocd were
used. Furthermore, the P2Ocd measurement was compared with
the conventional measurements in terms of prediction accuracy.
For Rule 2, baPWVs collected from 47 subjects and those estimated using P2Ocd values of each cardiac cycle were used.
CoV =

III. RESULTS
A. Measuring Agreement (Bland–Altman Analysis)
The Bland–Altman analysis was used to assess the level of
agreement between the proposed P2Ocd-based technique and

260

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE II
RESULTS OF CORRELATION ANALYSIS (STRENGTH OF LINEAR RELATIONSHIP)

Fig. 3. Plots of identity for the two measurements: (a) real baPWV versus
baPWV estimated by AI, (b) real baPWV versus baPWV estimated by SI, and
(c) real baPWV versus baPWV estimated by P2Ocd.

Fig. 5. Plots of identity for the two measurements: (a) real baPWV versus
baPWV estimated by P2Ocd only and (b) real baPWV versus baPWV estimated
by age and P2Ocd.

is a significant linear relationship between the real baPWV and
the baPWV estimated by P2Ocd (Male: r = −0.765, p < 0.001,
Female: r = −0.675, p < 0.001). It should also be noted that the
P2Ocd-based estimated baPWV showed a stronger correlation
than did the AI- and SI-based ones. It can therefore be concluded that the P2Ocd-based arterial stiffness estimation should
be preferred over other conventional PCA-based arterial stiffness estimation.
C. Prediction Accuracy and Repeatability

Fig. 4.

Comparison of the Bland–Altman plots: (a) AI, (b) SI, and (c) P2Ocd.

the established one. Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the plot of identity
and the Bland–Altman plot, respectively. Fig. 3 shows that the
points in (c) line up closely to the line y = x, compared to
the points shown in (a) and (b). This means that the value of
baPWV estimated using the proposed parameter, P2Ocd, represents a higher level of agreement than does the value of baPWV
estimated using the AI and SI parameters. In the Bland–Altman
plot (see Fig. 4), although not all of the parameters show sufficient agreement to allow them to be used interchangeably, the
value of baPWV estimated using the proposed parameter shows
better agreement than do the other parameters.
B. Strength of Linear Relationship (Correlation Analysis)
An evaluation of the linear relationship between the predictive
parameters and the baPWV was made using Pearson’s correlation coefficient (see Table II). The results indicate that there

In cases in which average P2Ocd (Rule 1) is used, we obtained
an average % ER of 7.53%, which indicates high prediction accuracy, and a CoV of 0.27%, which indicates very high repeatability (CoV < 5%) [40]. The corresponding standard deviations
are 5.37% and 0.60%, respectively.
In cases that showed cycle-to-cycle variation (Rule 2), we
obtained an average % ER of 3.22%, which indicates very high
prediction accuracy, and a CoV of 2.52%, which indicates very
high repeatability (CoV < 5%) [40]. The corresponding standard deviations are 1.47% and 1.67%, respectively.
These results indicate that the P2Ocd is simple to derive
(it requires only pulse peak and pulse onset), better to predict
(low% ER), and robust for repeatability (very low CoV).
D. Further Improvement of the Predictive Accuracy
To investigate the feasibility of the P2Ocd, we combined it
with the subject’s age and performed the Bland–Altman and
the correlation analyses repeatedly. The reason we used age
information is that arterial stiffness is highly correlated with
hypertension, and hypertension is highly correlated with the
age [1], [15], [20]. The Bland–Altman analysis results indicate
that the two methods (real baPWV and baPWV estimated by the
age and P2Ocd) consistently provide similar measures because

JANG et al.: ENHANCING THE PULSE CONTOUR ANALYSIS-BASED ARTERIAL STIFFNESS ESTIMATION

Fig. 6. Comparison of the Bland–Altman plots: (a) P2Ocd only and (b) age
and P2Ocd.
TABLE III
RESULTS OF MULTIPLE LINEAR REGRESSION ANALYSIS

all the points in Fig. 5(b) line up closely with the identity line and
the limit lines of agreement in Fig. 6(b) are narrower than those
in Fig. 6(a). Furthermore, we have found that the estimation of
baPWV using the combination of age and P2Ocd provides an
improved linear relationship with the real baPWV (Male: r =
0.899, p < 0.001, Female: r = 0.775, p < 0.001), compared
to the case of using only the P2Ocd (see Tables II and III).
These results show that in terms of the predictive accuracy and
complexity, the proposed method outperforms the one used in
our previous study, which utilized age and the reflected wave
arrival time corrected by Fridericia’s formula [12].
IV. CONCLUSION
In this study, we have proposed a novel predictive parameter, the normalized time interval between the pulse peak and
the following pulse onset; we have also proposed this parameter’s reliable detection method to enhance PCA-based arterial
stiffness estimation. To investigate the efficacy of the proposed
parameter, we have compared it with commonly used conventional parameters: the AI and the SI. In order to assess the
agreement with the established technique, we performed the
Bland–Altman and correlation analyses. As a result, we conclude that the proposed parameter is preferable for estimation
of arterial stiffness because it shows a higher Pearson’s correlation coefficient and narrower limit lines of agreement in the
Bland–Altman plot. In addition, since all the points in the plot
of identity line up closely to the line y = x, we can state that the
newly proposed predictive parameter is more appropriate than
conventional parameters to estimate arterial stiffness.
In order to enhance the level of agreement between the
baPWV estimated using the proposed parameter and the real
baPWV, we have combined the new parameter with the subject’s age. As a result, we can see that all the points in the plot of
identity line up more closely to the line y = x than do points in
the plot of identity line for the other parameters. Therefore, we
conclude that the level of agreement of the proposed parameter

261

is improved by combining it with the subject’s age information.
Furthermore, we arrive at the conclusion that baPWV estimated
by age and P2Ocd can be used as a surrogate in place of directly measured baPWV due to the high correlation and strong
agreement between these two values.
The efficacy of the proposed parameter can also be found in
its extraction from the DVP. Conventional parameters such as
the AI and the SI require either a double-humped pulse waveform, which has two peaks in the waveform, or a triple-humped
pulse waveform, which has three peaks in the waveform, to extract the reflected wave accurately. However, most of the pulse
waveforms measured from aged people show an indistinct pulse
contour, which includes an attenuated reflected wave; this may
cause a degradation of the predictive accuracy. In contrast to
conventional parameters, the proposed parameter requires only
extraction of the pulse peak and the pulse onset. Since all the
pulse waveforms contain distinct pulse peaks and pulse onsets,
no degradation caused by the extraction of predictive parameters
is possible. In addition, since the pulse peak and the pulse onset
are relatively easier to detect from the DVP, this method carries an additional advantage over the conventional PCA-based
approach for estimating arterial stiffness using P2Ocd and age.
Because of these advantages and the clinical importance of
this process, the proposed parameter combined with the subject’s age and this parameter’s reliable detection method can be
widely used for PCA-based arterial stiffness estimation. Furthermore, since the proposed method requires only pulse peaks
and pulse onsets, it is highly applicable to small ubiquitous and
home healthcare applications. In addition, we expect that the
predictive accuracy can be further improved by finding more
optimum combinations with the proposed parameter.

REFERENCES
[1] S. J. Zieman, V. Melenovsky, and D. A. Kass, “Mechanisms, pathophysiology, and therapy of arterial stiffness,” Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.,
vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 932–943, May 2005.
[2] N. M. van Popele, D. E. Grobbee, M. L. Bots, R. Asmar, J. Topouchian, R.
S. Reneman, A. P. G. Hoeks, D. A. M. van der Kuip, A. Hofman, and J. C.
M. Witteman, “Association between arterial stiffness and atherosclerosis:
The Rotterdam study,” Stroke, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 454–460, Feb. 2001.
[3] D. A. Duprez and J. N. Cohn, “Arterial stiffness as a risk factor for coronary atherosclerosis,” Curr. Atheroscler. Rep., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 139–144,
Aug. 2007.
[4] E. D. Lehmann, K. D. Hopkins, R. L. Jones, A. G. Rudd, and
R. G. Gosling, “Aortic distensibility in patients with cerebrovascular disease,” Clin. Sci., vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 247–253, Sep. 1995.
[5] J. Blacher, B. Pannier, A. P. Guerin, S. J. Marchais, M. E. Safar, and
G. M. London, “Carotid arterial stiffness as a predictor of cardiovascular
and all-cause mortality in end-stage renal disease,” Hypertension, vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 570–574, Sep. 1998.
[6] J. Blacher, B. Pannier, A. P. Guerin, S. J. Marchais, M. E. Safar, and
G. M. London, “Impact of aortic stiffness on survival in end-stage renal
disease,” Circulation, vol. 99, no. 18, pp. 2434–2439, May 1999.
[7] I. B. Wilkinson, S. A. Fuchs, I. M. Jansen, J. C. Spratt, G. D. Murray, J.
R. Cockcroft, and D. J. Webb, “Reproducibility of pulse wave velocity
and augmentation index measured by pulse wave analysis,” J. Hypertens.,
vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2079–2084, Dec. 1998.
[8] K. Cruickshank, L. Riste, S. G. Anderson, J. S. Wright, G. Dunn, and
G. G. Gosling, “Aortic pulse-wave velocity and its relationship to mortality in diabetes and glucose intolerance: An integrated index of vascular
function?,” Circulation, vol. 106, no. 16, pp. 2085–2090, Oct. 2002.
[9] The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of
Cardiology (ESC), “2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for the management of

262

[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

arterial hypertension,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 34, no. 28, pp. 2159–2219, Jun.
2013.
J. J. Oliver and D. J. Webb, “Noninvasive assessment of arterial stiffness and risk of atherosclerotic events,” Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 554–566, Apr. 2003.
I. S. Mackenzie, I. B. Wilkinson, and J. R. Cockcroft, “Assessment of
arterial stiffness in clinical practice,” Q. J. Med., vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 67–74,
Feb. 2002.
D. G. Jang, U. Farooq, S. H. Park, C. W. Goh, and M. Hahn, “A
knowledge-based approach to arterial stiffness estimation using the digital volume pulse,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 366–374, Aug. 2012.
D. G. Jang, S. H. Park, and M. Hahn, “A framework for automatic delineation of the second derivative of photoplethysmogram: A knowledgebased approach,” J. Med. Biol. Eng., to be published.
J. R. Cockcroft and I. B. Silkinson, “Arterial stiffness and pulse contour
analysis: An age old concept revisited,” Clin. Sci., vol. 103, no. 4, pp. 379–
380, Oct. 2002.
S. C. Millasseau, R. P. Kelly, J. M. Ritter, and P. J. Chowienczyk, “Determination of age-related increases in large artery stiffness by digital pulse
contour analysis,” Clin. Sci., vol. 103, no. 4, pp. 371–377, Oct. 2002.
H. Tanaka, M. Munakata, Y. Kawano, M. Ohishi, T. Shoji, J. Sugawara,
H. Tomiyama, A. Yamashina, H. Yasuda, T. Sawayama, and T. Ozawa,
“Comparison between carotid-femoral and brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity as measures of arterial stiffness,” J. Hypertens., vol. 27, no. 10,
pp. 2022–2027, Oct. 2009.
W. G. Yu, S. Y. Chuang, Y. P. Lin, and C. H. Chen, “Brachial-ankle vs
carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity as a determinant of cardiovascular
structure and function,” J. Human Hypertens., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 24–31,
Jan. 2008.
J. Nürnberger, R. Michalski, T. R. Türk, A. O. Saez, O. Witzke, and
A. Kribben, “Can arterial stiffness parameters be measured in the sitting
position?,” Hypertens. Res., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 202–208, Feb. 2011.
D. G. Jang, J. H. Park, U. Farooq, D. H. Son, S. H. Park, and M. Hahn,
“A computer-aided design of photoplethysmography for managing cardiovascular diseases in home healthcare environments,” in Proc. 7th Int.
Conf. u-Healthcare, 2010, pp. 68–69.
M. E. Safar, “Pulse pressure, arterial stiffness and wave reflections (augmentation index) as cardiovascular risk factors in hypertension,” Ther.
Adv. Cardiovasc. Dis., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 13–24, Feb. 2008.
P. Segers, A. Qasem, T. de Backer, S. Carlier, P. Verdonck, and A. Avolio,
“Peripheral “oscillatory” compliance is associated with aortic augmentation index,” Hypertension, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1434–1439, Jun. 2001.
P. S. Saba, M. J. Roman, R. Pini, M. Spitzer, A. Ganau, and
R. B. Devereux, “Relation of arterial pressure waveform to left ventricular
and carotid anatomy in normotensive subjects,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol.,
vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 1873–1880, Dec. 1993.
C. D. Gatzka, J. D. Cameron, B. A. Kingwell, and A. M. Dart, “Relation
between coronary artery disease, aortic stiffness, and left ventricular structure in a population sample,” Hypertension, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 575–578,
Sep. 1998.
T. Weber, J. Auer, M. F. O’Rourke, E. Kvas, E. Lassnig, R. Berent, and B.
Eber, “Arterial stiffness, wave reflections, and the risk of coronary artery
disease,” Circulation, vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 184–189, Jan. 2004.
J. Numberger, A. Keflioglu-Scheiber, A. M. Opazo Saez, R. R. Wenzel,
T. Philipp, and R. F. Schafers, “Augmentation index is associated with
cardiovascular risk,” J. Hypertens., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2407–2414, Dec.
2002.
S. C. Millasseau, J. M. Ritter, K. Takazawa, and P. J. Chowienczyk, “Contour analysis of the photoplethysmographic pulse measured at the finger,”
J. Hypertens., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1449–1456, Aug. 2006.
S. R. Alty, N. Angarita-Jaimes, S. C. Millasseau, and P. J. Chowienczyk,
“Predicting arterial stiffness from the digital volume pulse waveform,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2268–2275, Aug. 2006.
B. E. Westerhof, I. Guelen, N. Westerhof, J. M. Karemaker, and A. Avolio,
“Quantification of wave reflection in the human aorta from pressure alone:
A proof of principle,” Hypertension, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 595–601, Oct. 2006.
L. T. Cheng, L. J. Tang, L. Cheng, H. Y. Huang, and T. Wang, “Limitation
of the augmentation index for evaluating arterial stiffness,” Hypertens.
Res., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 713–722, Aug. 2007.
G. Schillachi and G. Parati, “Ambulatory arterial stiffness index: Merits
and limitations of a simple surrogate measure of arterial compliance,”
J. Hypertens., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 182–185, Feb. 2008.
G. F. Mitchell, H. Parise, E. J. Benjamin, M. G. Larson, M. J. Keyes et al.,
“Changes in arterial stiffness and wave reflection with advancing age in
healthy men and women: The Framingham heart study,” Hypertension,
vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1239–1245, Jun. 2004.

[32] D. G. Jang, U. Farooq, S. H. Park, and M. Hahn, “A robust method for
pulse peak determination in a digital volume pulse with a wandering
baseline,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., to be published.
[33] C. H. H. Chu and E. J. Delp, “Impulsive noise suppression and background normalization of electrocardiogram signals using morphological
operators,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 262–273, Feb.
1989.
[34] D. G. Jang, U. Farooq, J. H. Park, S. H. Park, and M. Hahn, “An adaptive
SSF-based pulse peak detection algorithm for heart rate variability analysis
in home healthcare environments,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. u-Healthcare,
2010, pp. 70–71.
[35] W. Zong, T. Heldt, G. B. Moody, and R. G. Mark, “An open-source algorithm to detect onset of arterial blood pressure pulses,” in Proc. Comput.
Cardiol., Thessaloniki, Greece, 2003, pp. 259–262.
[36] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 327,
no. 8476, pp. 307–310, Feb. 1986.
[37] A. C. Elliott and W. A. Woodward, Statistical Analysis Quick Reference
Guidebook: With SPSS Examples. New York, NY, USA: Sage, 2007,
pp. 107–111.
[38] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Applying the right statistics: Analyses
of measurement studies,” Ultrasound Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 85–93, Jul. 2003.
[39] F. Fujimura, K. Kamiya, K. Fujiwara, N. Shoji, and K. Shimizu, “Repeatability and reproducibility of measurements using a NT-530P noncontact
tono/pachymeter and correlation of central corneal thickness with intraocular pressure,” BioMed. Res. Int., vol. 2013, pp. 370592-1–370592-5,
2013.
[40] V. Pueyo, V. Polo, J. M. Larrosa, F. Mayoral, A. Ferreras, and
F. M. Honrubia, “Reproducibility of optic nerve head and retinal nerve
fiber layer thickness measurements using optical coherence tomography,”
Arch. Soc. Esp. Oftalmol., vol. 81, no. 4, pp. 205–211, Apr. 2006.

Dae-Geun Jang received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Kyunghee University, Suwon,
Korea, in 2008, and the M.S. degree in information
and communications engineering from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
Korea, in 2010, where he is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include biological signal
processing, u-healthcare systems, and home health
management systems.

Seung-Hun Park received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electrical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1981 and 1984, respectively.
He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA, in 1990.
Since 2000, he has been a Full Professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Kyunghee University, Suwon, Korea. His research interests include
u-healthcare systems, rehabilitation and wellness devices and systems, and biological signal processing.

Minsoo Hahn received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electrical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1979 and 1981, respectively.
He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, in
1989.
Since 1998, he has been a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Director of
Digital Media Laboratory, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea. His research interests include speech, audio, and biological
signal processing, speech synthesis, and noise reduction.

