1798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Time-Variant, Frequency-Selective, Linear and
Nonlinear Analysis of Heart Rate Variability
in Children With Temporal Lobe Epilepsy
Karin Schiecke*, Matthias Wacker, Diana Piper, Franz Benninger, Martha Feucht,
and Herbert Witte, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The major aim of our study is to demonstrate that a
concerted combination of time-variant, frequency-selective, linear
and nonlinear analysis approaches can be beneficially used for the
analysis of heart rate variability (HRV) in epileptic patients to reveal premonitory information regarding an imminent seizure and
to provide more information on the mechanisms leading to changes
of the autonomic nervous system. The quest is to demonstrate that
the combined approach gains new insights into specific short-term
patterns in HRV during preictal, ictal, and postictal periods in
epileptic children. The continuous Morlet-wavelet transform was
used to explore the time-frequency characteristics of the HRV using spectrogram, phase-locking, band-power and quadratic phase
coupling analyses. These results are completed by time-variant
characteristics derived from a signal-adaptive approach. Advanced
empirical mode decomposition was utilized to separate out certain HRV components, in particular blood-pressure-related Mayer
waves (≈0.1 Hz) and respiratory sinus arrhythmia (≈0.3 Hz).
Their time-variant nonlinear predictability was analyzed using local estimations of the largest Lyapunov exponent (point prediction
error). Approximately 80–100 s before the seizure onset timing
and coordination of both HRV components can be observed. A
higher degree of synchronization is found and with it a higher
predictability of the HRV. All investigated linear and nonlinear
analyses contribute with a specific importance to these results.
Index Terms—Epilepsy, heart rate variability (HRV), nonlinear
analysis, signal-adaptive decomposition, time-frequency analysis.

Manuscript received April 26, 2013; revised January 28, 2014; accepted
February 3, 2014. Date of publication February 20, 2014; date of current version May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by the DFG under Grant Wi
1166/10-2 and partly by Wi 1166/9-2/Wi 1166/12-1 (EMD analysis) and in part
by the Romanian Ministry of Labour, Family and Social Protection through the
Financial Agreement POSDRU/107/1.5/S/76903 (D. Piper). Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ K. Schiecke is with the Institute of Medical Statistics, Computer Sciences
and Documentation, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University
Jena, Jena 07740, Germany (e-mail: karin.schiecke@med.uni-jena.de).
M. Wacker and H. Witte are with the Institute of Medical Statistics, Computer
Sciences and Documentation, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena 07740, Germany (e-mail: matthias.wacker@mti.uni-jena.de;
herbert.witte@med.uni-jena.de).
D. Piper is with the Department of Applied Electronics and Information Engineering, Politehnica University of Bucharest, Bucharest 060042, Romania
(e-mail: diana.piper@med.uni-jena.de).
F. Benninger and M. Feucht are with the Epilepsy Monitoring Unit,
Department of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, University Hospital Vienna, Wien 1090, Austria (e-mail: franz.benninger@meduniwien.ac.at;
martha.feucht@meduniwien.ac.at).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2307481

NOMENCLATURE
CEMD

Complete ensemble empirical mode decomposition with adaptive noise.
ECG
Electrocardiogram.
EEG
Electroencephalogram.
EEMD
Ensemble empirical mode decomposition.
EMD
Empirical mode decomposition.
FFT
Fast Fourier transform.
HF
High frequency.
HFP (HFPN ) Time course of the HF power (normalized
HFPN ) derived from PS.
Time course of the HF power derived from
HFPP L
PSP L .
HR
Heart rate.
HRV
Heart rate variability.
IMF
Intrinsic mode function.
LF
Low frequency.
LFP (LFPN ) Time course of the LF power (normalized
LFPN ) derived from PS.
Time course of the LF power derived from
LFPP L
PSP L .
LPFES
Low-pass filtered event series.
mBA
Mean biamplitude in the ROI.
mBC
Mean bicoherence in the ROI.
MWT
Continuous Morlet wavelet transform.
PLI
Phase-locking index.
PPE
Point prediction error.
PR
Time course of the power ratio.
PS
Power spectrogram (time-variant power
spectrum).
Power spectrogram; phase locked.
PSP L
QPC
Quadratic phase coupling.
QRS
Q-, R-, and S −ECG-waves.
ROI
Region of interest.
RSA
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
SUDEP
Sudden unexpected death in epileptic patients.
TLE
Temporal lobe epilepsy.
I. INTRODUCTION
HE analysis of heart rate variability (HRV) is frequently
used for insight into cardiovascular regulatory mechanisms controlled by the autonomic nervous system in human
health and disease. HRV analysis in epilepsy is carried out with
two major clinical objectives. One important aim is to reveal

T

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SCHIECKE et al.: TIME-VARIANT, FREQUENCY-SELECTIVE, LINEAR AND NONLINEAR ANALYSIS OF HEART RATE VARIABILITY

the causes for the sudden unexpected death in epileptic patients [1], [2]. Here, the autonomic instability of the patients, in
particular, the impaired baroreflex function [3], is a major focus.
Another framework with regard to epilepsy in which the HRV
analysis is involved is automatic seizure prediction and detection [4]. Reviews concerning cardiac changes and autonomic alteration in epilepsy have been provided by Jansen and Lagae [5]
and Sevcencu and Struijk [6]. Delamont and Walker [7] compiled the results for the analysis of preictal autonomic changes.
A first metaanalysis investigating HRV in epilepsy was recently
published [8]. The preictal, ictal, and postictal HRV courses
have been investigated by using time- and/or frequency-domain
features. Features of the time–frequency domain have received
much less attention. This is also true for HRV analysis in general (for an overview see [9]). Delamont and Walker [7] reported that a good time resolution is needed to identify any
potentially short-duration changes that may be occurring preictally. Nonlinear HRV analyses are frequently applied also in
epileptic patients. Nonlinear parameters have shown a better reliability across repeated measurements in comparison to linear
parameters. However, the methods are usually time-invariant
(for stationary signals) and not frequency-selective. As a rule,
the estimation of most nonlinear indices requires stationarity
over minutes and their physiological meaning is less clear than
linear indices [10].
The major aim of our study is to demonstrate that a concerted combination of time-variant, frequency-selective, linear
and nonlinear analysis approaches can be beneficially used for
HRV analysis in epileptic patients to reveal premonitory information regarding an imminent seizure and to provide more information on the mechanisms leading to changes of the autonomic
nervous system. Each of these approaches is optimally suited in
order to quantify certain signal characteristics, i.e., each is specialized to extract a specific type of information from the HRV.
We will show that our analysis strategy reveals new insights into
the specific timing and grouping characteristics of HRV rhythms
before, during and after an epileptic seizure. Two rhythms
are of particular interest: The HRV-related Traube–Hering–
Mayer waves (Mayer waves) in the low-frequency (LF) range
0.04–0.15 Hz and the high-frequency (HF) range 0.15–0.4 Hz, in
which respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) occurs. Our working
hypothesis is that phase properties of and between HRV components react sensitively before an EEG epileptic seizure occurs.
This hypothesis is based on our findings with regard to patterns
characteristic of EEG burst activity which are accompanied by
strong phase coupling reactions in HRV [11].
We used HRV data derived from a previous clinical study
in which HRV abnormalities in children and adolescents with
temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) were investigated [12]. The continuous Morlet-wavelet transform (MWT) is used as basis algorithms to compute frequency-selective time courses of both
linear [power courses, phase-locking index (PLI)] and nonlinear indices (time-variant biamplitude and bicoherence). MWT
offers the possibility of time-variant and frequency-selective investigations which can be interpreted in context to classical parameters of HR analysis [13]. Such time-variant HRV analyses
in epileptic patients are very rare. Novak et al. [14] performed

1799

a time frequency HRV analysis (Wigner–Ville distribution) of
adult patients with TLE and they extracted two frequency bands,
a nonrespiratory and a respiratory band. The authors concluded
that “time-frequency analysis revealed that autonomic activation hallmarks clinical seizure onset for several minutes.” However, Wigner–Ville distribution does not provide instantaneous
phase information which we have utilized for our phase analyses. Kerem and Geva [15] have not found differences in mean
group LF power, HF power and PR in preictal period compared
with the period just before it. They investigated HRV records of
TLE patients.
Additionally, complete ensemble empirical mode decomposition with adaptive noise (CEMD) [16] is used to compute
signal components [intrinsic mode functions (IMFs)] which
are analyzed by the time-variant point prediction error (PPE)
[17], which is a local estimation of the largest Lyapunov
exponent. In this way, complementary amplitude-dependent
as well as amplitude-independent linear and nonlinear
characteristics of the heart rate (HR) signal can be analyzed in
a time-variant, frequency-selective mode. Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) operates as a filter bank by remaining nonlinearity of the components. EMD was used in nonlinear HRV
analysis [10], [18]. EMD as well as EMD-based approaches
like Hilbert–Huang transform were successfully adapted for the
assessment of cardiovascular autonomic control [19] and for
analysis of HRV in cardiac health [20]. A problem of EMD
procedure is the occurrence of “mode mixing.” Mode mixing
corresponds to the alternative presence of several components
of the signal of interest on the same IMF [21] and is frequently
caused by the intermittency of segments with different signal
properties, in particular different frequency characteristics. Advanced approaches like ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD) and CEMD solve the problem of mode-mixing and
provide a better spectral separation of the modes. Therefore, the
combined application of CEMD and PPE to HR is the logical
consequence. A comparison of different EMD-based methods
and multivariate EMD in the analysis of EEG for the depth of
anesthesia—in this approach, the nonlinear sample entropy was
used—can be found in [22].
Using our approach of combined linear and nonlinear methods, profiles of timing and grouping characteristics for both
rhythmic HRV components starting 5 min before and lasting
5 min after the seizure onset can be observed. These methodological results should be seen as a starting point for further
studies including not only HRV but other vegetative parameters
as well as EEG.
II. DATA MATERIAL AND SUBJECTS
Presurgical evaluation was performed at the Vienna pediatric epilepsy center following a standard protocol. EEG was
recorded referentially from gold disc electrodes placed according to the extended 10–20 system with additional temporal
electrodes. One-channel ECG was recorded from an electrode
placed under the left clavicle. EEG and ECG data were recorded
referentially against CPZ , filtered (1–70 Hz), converted from
analog to digital (sampling frequency 256 Hz, 12 bit), and

1800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

stored digitally for further data analysis. Video recordings of
each seizure were reviewed to classify seizure type. Complex
partial seizures were included, but not auras or generalized tonicclonic seizures. Seizure onset and termination in the EEG were
determined independently by two neurologists experienced in
the field of epilepsy and clinical electrophysiology (coauthor
Prof. Martha Feucht and another physician of the Epilepsy
Monitoring Unit, University Hospital Vienna, Austria). In case
of different annotations, the results were discussed between both
reviewers. EEG and ECG recordings including 10 min epochs
(5 min before (preictal state) and 5 min after the seizure onset
(seizure and postictal state)) were stored for each seizure.
QRS detection was performed after band-pass filtering
(10–50 Hz) and interpolation by cubic splines (interpolated
sampling frequency 1024 Hz) to detect the time point of the
maximum amplitude of each R-wave and the resulting series of
events was used for the HR computation. The low-pass filtered
event series (LPFES) was computed by applying the French–
Holden algorithm [23]. The final HRV representation was obtained from the LPFES via multiplication with the sampling rate
and with 60 beats per minute (bpm) and down sampled to 8 Hz.
An artifact rejection was performed manually to minimize the
influence of false QRS triggering.
The HR data were analyzed in a previous study (visual analysis of heart rate) and the results were published by Mayer
et al. [12]. From the group of 20 patients only those were selected who had at least one seizure with a recording time of
10 min (at least 5 min before and after seizure onset). Four children were added to the patients group to achieve comparable
numbers of male/female patients and right/left focused seizures
as in [12]. This resulted in a group of 18 children who had one
seizure recording of at least 10 min (K = 18 seizures; median age 9 years 4 months, range 6 years 6 months to 18 years
0 months; median seizure length 88 s, range 52–177 s). All results were achieved by grand mean analysis over 18 seizures
(=18 children).
III. METHODS
A. Analysis Framework
The entire analysis framework is represented in Fig. 1 and
consists of two complementary processing strands: the time–
frequency MWT-based analysis and the signal-adaptive EMDbased analysis.
In a first strand, we used the MWT characterized by a
frequency-dependent time–frequency resolution for the computation of time-varying power spectrogram (PS) and the
phase-locked power spectrogram (PSP L ) which is able to depict phase-locking (=time-locking) characteristics of the HRV
components. The time-varying PSP L captures clusters of repetitive waves of HRV components, i.e., the timing and the grouping of their occurrence, by using a phase-remaining averaging.
The repetitive occurrence of waves results in high values of the
PSP L . This is an advantage in comparison to the PS which maps
the power without consideration of phase locking. In addition,
MWT is used for the computation of time-varying measures
of band power derived from PS as well as PSP L in frequency

Fig. 1. Design of processing scheme. MWT as well as EMD-based strands of
analysis are depicted.

ranges (LF and HF) which are chosen according to the standards of the task force “heart rate variability” [13]. The PLI
based on MWT was used to identify time ranges in which the
phase-locking characteristics are significant. This thresholding
(α = 10%) is carried out by using the Rayleigh test. To study the
time-variant coupling between HRV components, a time-variant
bispectrum estimation was applied by which the time-variant
quadratic phase coupling (QPC) between two HRV components
can be detected and quantified. QPC is a nonlinear coupling
phenomenon and we developed several time-variant bispectral
approaches to analyze HRV [24], [25]. Our QPC implementation is based on MWT.
In a second strand, the CEMD as an advanced EMD-based
method was applied to HRV. The CEMD is a time-variant,
signal-adaptive method which can be used for the analysis of
nonstationary, nonlinear signals. It provides monocomponent
signals (IMFs) by preserving nonlinear properties within the
signals. The IMFs can be interpreted with regards to contents
(physically, physiologically, etc.) and their band-pass distances
(midfrequency) can be approximately described by a dyadic
scaling [26]. The approximately dyadic distances of the IMFs’
pass-band midfrequencies agree rather well with frequency distances which are of interest in the analysis of HRV [13]. Accordingly, the IMFs can be seen as individually and adaptively
filtered HRV components and thus the CEMD as the frequencyselective method. Finally, the PPE was estimated both with and
without component selection via CEMD. The nonlinear PPEs
characterize the time course of the predictability and with it the
stability of the signal components.

B. Morlet Transform and Derived Time-Variant Parameters
The mother wavelet of the MWT was adapted so that the
sigma parameter of its Gaussian envelope equals one cycle for
every frequency. The time-frequency resolution of the MWT is
frequency-dependent. Higher frequencies lead to a better time

SCHIECKE et al.: TIME-VARIANT, FREQUENCY-SELECTIVE, LINEAR AND NONLINEAR ANALYSIS OF HEART RATE VARIABILITY

resolution to the disadvantage of frequency resolution (concrete
time- and frequency resolution values: see Section IV-D).
The frequency-dependent complex analytic signal y k (t, fn )
of the HRV (xk (t)) is computed using MWT (see [27]), where k
(k = 1,. . . , K) designates the seizure recordings of our children
(K = 18). The time-variant power spectrum P S k (t, fn ) and
phase ϕk (t, fn ) can be calculated on the basis of the complex
analytic signal for each recording k by

2
PSk (t, fn ) = y k (t, fn )
(1)
and
ϕk (t, fn ) = arg y k (t, fn ) .

(2)

By ensemble averaging the representative time-variant power
spectrum (spectrogram) PS can be estimated
PS (t, fn ) =

K
2
1   k
y (t, fn ) .
K

(3)

k =1

The time-variant PS quantifies the averaged spectral characteristics of our 18 recordings of the HRV in a time-frequency
map representation. The ensemble averaging of the complex valued analytic signal leads to the estimation of the phase-locked
power spectrogram PSP L

2
K
1 



k
PSP L (t, fn ) = 
y (t, fn )  .
(4)
K

k =1

This procedure results in a phase-preserving average of the
complex spectra of the 18 recordings of the HRV before calculating the spectrogram. Time-variant phase locking describes
the stability of the phase ϕk (t, fn ) (decrease of phase jitter)
of the frequency component fn for all 18 signal realizations
at time point t. In this way, systematic phase-locked spectral
components can be separated from phase “noise” [28].
From the PSk (t, fn ) according to (1) and from PSP L (t, fn )
according to (4) the mean band power for each sampling
point was computed for the frequency bands 0.04–0.15 Hz
(LF) and 0.15–0.4 Hz (HF). In this way, time-variant
power courses (LFP—low frequency power, HFP—high
frequency power) were computed (grand mean of
18 children). The band limits correspond with those
which have been recommended for HRV analysis by the
task force “heart rate variability” [13]. The LF and HF
courses were normalized by LFPN = LFP/ (LFP + HFP) and
HFPN = HFP/ (LFP + HFP). Additionally, the time course of
the power ratio PR = LFPN /HFPN = LFP/HFP was used as
a parameter. These abbreviations are expanded by the index
“–PL” when the power parameters are derived from PSP L .
The LFPN and LFPN -P L parameters can be seen as indicators
for sympathetic and vagal modulation, whereas the HFPN
and HFPN -P L parameters can be considered mainly (but not
only) as parameters for respiratory vagal activity. The power
ratios are computed as parameters of the sympathico-vagal
balance.
The phase-locking effect can be analyzed either by including the amplitude information (amplitude-dependent) using the

1801

time-variant phase-locked spectrogram PSP L (t, fn ) or by excluding the amplitude information (amplitude independent) using the phase-locking index PLI (t, fn ). The PLI is defined by


K
1 
 k
 

(5)
PLI (t, fn ) = 
exp jϕ (t, fn )  .
K

k =1

The PLI represents the circular statistics for instantaneous
phases for a certain set of trials (K = 18 recordings) and ranges
between zero and one [29].
Additionally, the time-variant QPC between the frequency
bands given above can be computed using time-variant biamplitude and bicoherence. QPC is a phase effect, that occurs, e.g.,
in the presence of amplitude modulations. If three rhythmic frequency components fm , fn , and fn + fm exist (fn  fm ) and
their phases are of the same type (ϕ (t, fn + fm ) = ϕ (t, fn ) +
ϕ (t, fm )), then high biamplitude and bicoherence values indicate a QPC between fm and fn , i.e., a trace in the time-variant
bispectral representation(s) at the coordinates fm , fn can be obtained. In the case of amplitude modulation, fm is the frequency
of the modulating component (Mayer waves), fn is the frequency (carrier frequency) of the modulated component (RSA),
and fn + fm is the frequency of the upper side band. Additionally, a second trace in the bispectral representation occurs at the
coordinates fm , fn − fm because both components and a component of the combination frequency fm + (fn − fm ) = fn
(=RSA) are present.
For each seizure (k = 1,. . .,K), the following triple product
can be calculated for every frequency pair (fm , fn ) and at each
point in time
B k (t, fm , fn ) = y k (t, fm) · y k (t, fn) · y k ∗ (t, fm +fn ) . (6)
Here, ·∗ denotes the complex conjugate. The ensemble averaging of B k (t, fm , fn ) yields an estimation of the time-variant
bispectrum B̂ (t, fm , fn ).
The time-variant bispectrum depends on the amplitudes of the
frequency components (fm , fn , fn + fm ). For detecting phase
couplings, the estimation of the time-variant bicoherence is used
as an amplitude independent measure
Γ̂ (t, fm , fn )





B̂ (t, fm , fn )
= 
.
 k
2
1
k (t, f ) · y k (t, f )|2 ·
|y
(t,
f
+
f
)|
|y
m
n
m
n
K
(7)

To reduce the three dimensions of the time-variant bispectral measures resulting from (6) and (7) the mean biamplitude
(mBA) and the mean bicoherence (mBC) were computed in
regions of interest (ROI) F1 × F2 according to
mB̂ (t) = mean mean B̂ (t, fm , fn )
F1

F2

mΓ̂ (t) = mean mean Γ̂ (t, fm , fn ) .
F1

F2

(8)

Regarding to the main rhythms of HRV, we calculated timevariant bispectral measures in two different ROIs. First, we

1802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

investigated QPC between the Mayer wave related LF component and the RSA-related HF component in the HRV, i.e., the
ROI1 was set to F1 = [0.075 Hz, 0.15 Hz] and F2 = [0.25 Hz,
0.35 Hz]. Second, QPC between lower LF component and again
the RSA-related HF component was analyzed, i.e., the ROI2 was
set to F1 = [0.04 Hz, 0.075 Hz] and F2 = [0.25 Hz, 0.35 Hz].
C. Signal-Adaptive HRV Decomposition and the PPE
The standard EMD separates the HRV into IMFs. The computation of an IMF by the iterative EMD algorithm [30] can be
summarized as follows.
1) Identification of all local extrema.
2) Interpolation (cubic splines) between the maxima and between the minima which provides two envelope courses
E (t)m ax and E (t)m in .
3) Calculation of the mean envelope and the difference between the mean envelope and the signal.
4) Iterate on the residuals until the criteria for the IMF is
fulfilled.
5) The residuum is used instead of the signal to compute the
next IMF.
6) The steps 1– 5 are repeated for each following IMF until
the stopping criteria.
The EEMD which relies on averaging the modes obtained
by EMD applied to several realizations of Gaussian white noise
added to the original signals solves the EMD mode mixing
problem [31]. The CEMD provides a better spectral separation
of the modes by adding a particular noise at each stage of the
decomposition [16]. Therefore, we used CEMD to separate the
HRV into IMFs.
The IMFs of the HRV preserve nonlinear properties thereby
allowing the introduction of a new concept, the combination of
CEMD of the HRV with a time-dependent nonlinear measure,
i.e., with the estimation of the PPE. Based on the approach of
Takens [32] a 1-D signal x(t) is transformed into a multidimensional phase space by means of a time delay according to
T (t) = {x (t) , x (t − τ ) , . . . , x(t − (De − 1) · τ }

(9)

where τ is the time delay, De is the embedding dimension, and
T (t) is the trajectory in the phase space. A time delay of τ = 5
and an embedding dimension of De = 8 were used for our
analysis. The false nearest neighbor approach [33] was used
to set a sufficient embedding dimension. The time delay was
estimated depending on the mutual information [34].
The stability analysis is based on the approach of Wolf
et al. [35] for the estimation of the largest Lyapunov exponent,
but measures the local exponential divergence of trajectories in
the phase space similar to the approach of Gao and Zheng [36]
who evaluated moving windows. In our approach, the nearest
Euclidean neighbor must be searched for each point on a trajectory in the phase space. Changes in the distance between these
points are evaluated after evolving a specific time step by
PPE (t) =

D (t + i)
fs
log2
i
D (t)

(10)

where t is the actual time point, D (t) the Euclidian distance to
the next neighbor in the phase space at the time point t, D (t + i)
the evolved distance at time point t + i, i the evolved time steps,
fs the sampling frequency, and PPE(t) is the resulting sequence
of locally estimated PPEs. Equation (10) reflects the degree of
stability of any time point in relation to its initial condition (for
theoretical details see [17]).
The averaged time courses of the PPE were calculated.
A positive PPE is equivalent to a divergence of neighboring
points in the phase space and indicates a low predictability, a
negative or vanishing PPE describes a quasi-periodic/periodic
process or convergence in the phase space and indicates a high
predictability.
D. Statistical Measures
The noncorrected Rayleigh test was used to create a trigger
threshold for the detection of time segments of strong phase
locking in a PLI time-frequency map. The null hypothesis is
that the phases are uniformly distributed. Under this hypothesis,
the PLI tends to zero. The application of the statistical threshold
results in binary PLI-maps (0 = below the threshold or 1 =
above the threshold). In this study, the significance level was
α = 10%.
In order to estimate confidence tubes of the mean time courses
of the extracted parameters time courses without any particular
distribution assumption, a bootstrap approach was used. One
thousand bootstrap samples of size 18 (each sample element
contains 4800 values/600 s) were drawn by a case resampling
with replacement. With it 1000 bootstrap replications of each
extracted parameters were computed. Based on these replications, the lower limit (the 2.5% quantile) defined the lower
bound, and the upper limit (the 97.5% quantile) defined the
upper bound of the confidence tube. Significant differences between extracted parameters at different time points were determined by using the Wilcoxon signed rank test (significance
level 0.05). The phase-remaining averaging procedure provides
only one mean-value course PSP L (t, fn ). Therefore, statistics
are not available.
IV. RESULTS
A. Ensemble Averaging of the HR Courses
In Fig. 2(a) and (b), the HR courses of all 18 seizures as
well as the averaged HR course (bold black line) are depicted.
Distinctive time points were determined and depicted in the
simplified mean HR course [see Fig. 2(c)] and the preictal, ictal,
and postictal periods are defined. The colored “bar code” of the
sequence of time points was adapted to all other figures to define
the distinct time points of our analysis.
The averaged HR course [see Fig. 2(c)] is characterized by
an approximately constant preictal HR course from 0 to 240 s
around 85 bpm. In the following 60 s the HR slowly increases.
After the EEG seizure onset (=300 s) the mean HR accelerates
within 40 s to the maximum value of 135 bpm (=340 s). Thereafter a fast deceleration can be observed between 340 and 420 s
and a slow, approximately linear decrease follows until the end

SCHIECKE et al.: TIME-VARIANT, FREQUENCY-SELECTIVE, LINEAR AND NONLINEAR ANALYSIS OF HEART RATE VARIABILITY

Fig. 2. Presentation of HR courses. In (a) the original and in (b) the centered
HR course of all 18 seizures in gray, averaged HR course as a bold black line is
depicted. Preictal, ictal, and postictal periods as well as distinctive time points
in the HR course of seizure were determined and depicted in a simplified mean
HR course [see Fig. 1(c)]. Bold black line determines the EEG seizure onset
(300 s; end of preictal, beginning of ictal period), bold dashed black line the end
of seizure (390 s; end of ictal, beginning of postictal period). Red line designates
the onset of the preonset acceleration (240 s), blue line the maximum of the
acceleration and begin of deceleration (340 s), and green line the end of the
fast deceleration and begin of recuperation (420 s). The “bar code” of these
distinct time points was transferred to Figs. 3–5 and Fig. 7. In (d) a zoom in
(100 s before seizure onset) to the averaged HR course (bold black line) and the
averaged filtered HR course (bold gray line, 0.1–0.15 Hz) is presented.

of our analysis interval (600 s; 96 bpm), i.e., the value of the
averaged preictal HR has not been achieved. Fig. 2(d) depicts a
zooming of the averaged HR course during the preictal period
(between 200 and 320 s). Starting at 220 s (80 s before seizure
onset), the occurrence of a strong Mayer wave related LF component in all investigated seizures is apparent. An increasing LF
component occurs in all patients, however, a strong synchronization with regard to the seizure’s onset can be observed in
50% of the seizures. To emphasize this, the HR courses of all
seizures were filtered [fast Fourier transform (FFT) filter; 0.1–
0.15 Hz], and the original averaged HR course (bold black line)
was overlayed by the averaged filtered HR course (bold gray
line). The averaged filtered HR course clearly depicts the start
of strong LF components at 220 s.
B. Time-Frequency Related PS, PSP L , and PLI Analysis
The results of the MWT-analyses depict the interval between
0 and 600 s, where the seizure onset is at 300 s [see Fig. 3(a)]. In
Fig. 3(b)–(d), the results of the PS, PSP L , and PLI grand mean
analyses (18 seizures) are shown.

1803

Fig. 3. Grand-mean results (K = 18) of time-frequency related PS, PSP L ,
and PLI analysis (MWT based). In (a) the centered HR course [see Fig. 2(b)] is
shown. In (b) the results of the PS analysis are depicted and overlayed by the
averaged filtered HR course [black line; see overlay in Fig. 2(d)], (c) shows the
results of the PSP L analysis and (d) the results of the PLI statistics analysis
[color bar for (b) and (c): in bpm2 ; color code for (d): significant values in
black].

The PS [see Fig. 3(b)] provides a clear separation of the
Mayer-wave-related LF (around 0.1 Hz) and the RSA-related
HF (around 0.3 Hz) range before the seizure onset (300 s). Both
components are distinguishable between 0 to 100 s, become
most apparent between 200 and 300 s (100 s before seizure onset) and collapse with the onset of seizure (when normal breathing changed dramatically; occurrence of ictal bradypnea [37]).
Additionally, a lower LF component (around 0.05 Hz) is present
in parallel to the Mayer wave related LF component. Approximately 90 s after the seizure onset (390 s; median duration of
seizures) the LF and HF ranges recur with strong power disturbances (390–480 s) and become less pronounced at the end
of our analysis interval (500–600 s). Phase-locked power PSP L
[see Fig. 3(c)] is a part of the total power PS and can be observed
in a similar time-pattern as PS (but with different characteristics) around 0.05 Hz (lower LF), between 0.1 and 0.2 Hz (Mayer
wave related LF and higher) and around 0.3 to 0.4 Hz (RSA related HF and higher). Only the lower LF component and the
higher frequencies of the phase-locked Mayer wave related LF
as well as higher frequencies of the phase-locked RSA related
HF are characterized by significant PLI [see Fig. 3(d)], and

1804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

parison to the mean course of the preictal period. However,
the preictal and the postictal courses do not differ significantly.
For the normalized LF and HF courses significant differences
between the ictal courses and both the pre- and postictal time
courses exist. The PR is characterized by a peak before the onset
of seizure, i.e., during the interval in which the HR is already
accelerating (around 270 s), the PR is increasing due to the
dynamics of the LFP increase and the HFP decrease. At the beginning of the postictal period short peaks exist indicating that
the sympathico-vagal balance is still not achieved. Thereafter,
the stabilization proceeds.
The PSP L -based power band courses cannot be quantified
statistically [grand mean analysis; see Fig. 4(b)]. However, they
can be utilized to detect time segments in which phase locking is
dominant. For the LF frequency range an increase of the LFPP L
(and LFPN -P L ) occurs before (240 s) and at (300 s) seizure
onset as well as at the end of the seizure (390 s). In particular,
the HFPN -P L bands show high phase locking during the preictal
period and after the ictal period which indicates a strong time
locking to the onset of normal breathing. The time course of the
PRP L does not show essential differences in comparison to the
time course of the PR course. Sharp peaks are a result (caused
by division) of temporary low HFPP L values.
D. Time-Variant QPC Analysis

Fig. 4. Results (K = 18) of the time-variant band power courses (MWT
based). In (a) the mean nonphase-locked (PS) and in (b) the grand-mean phase
locked (PSP L ) LF and HF power courses (LFP, HFP, LFPP L , HFPP L ) as well
as their normalized values (LFPN , HFPN , LFPN -P L , HFPN -P L ) are shown.

especially the LF component related peaks in the PLI occur
more often between 200 and 300 s.
C. Time-Variant Band Power Analysis
The mean nonphase-locked [PS; see Fig. 4(a)] and phaselocked [PSP L ; see Fig. 4(b)] LF and HF power courses (LFP,
HFP, LFPP L , HFPP L ) as well as their normalized values
(LFPN , HFPN , LFPN -P L , HFPN -P L ) are depicted as instantaneous parameter courses (black lines) over the whole analysis
interval in Fig. 4. Additionally, the time courses of the power
ratios PR and PRP L were computed. Significant differences between time segments of the LF band cannot be observed for the
whole time range. The HF parameter courses collapse after the
seizure onset (when breathing changes dramatically). The HFP
values during the seizure differ significantly in comparison to
the whole preictal course and differ only partially to the postictal course. The mean postictal HF course shows higher power
values and a higher variation (broader confidence tube) in com-

Bispectral analysis was performed on the base of MWT. For
PS, PSP L , PLI analysis and band power time courses, the mother
wavelet was adapted so that the sigma parameter of its Gaussian envelope equals one cycle for every frequency. The resulting time-frequency resolution is essential to analyze the time
pattern of linear activity but inadequate for bispectral analysis
(frequency resolution is too low; missing “side bands of frequencies”; for reference see [38]); therefore, the mother wavelet had
to be readapted to the situation. We used the standard deviation
of the Gauss envelope in the time domain and the standard deviation of the Gauss curve in the frequency domain as measure for
the time and frequency resolution [38]. For Fig. 5, the following
time and frequency resolutions result for the RSA and the Mayer
waves: time/frequency resolution in Fig. 5(a) = 5 s/0.2 Hz for
0.3 Hz (“RSA”) and = 15 s/0.06 Hz for 0.1 Hz (“Mayer waves”);
time-/frequency resolution in Fig. 5(b) = 12 s/0.08 Hz for 0.3 Hz
(“RSA”) and =36 s/0.02 Hz for 0.1 Hz (“Mayer waves”).
The grand mean results of the time-variant mean biamplitude
(mBA) and bicoherence (mBC) in the ROI between the Mayer
wave related LF (at about 0.1 Hz) and HF range (ROI1 ) as well
as between lower LF (at about 0.05 Hz) and HF range (ROI2 )
are depicted in Fig. 5(c) and (d).
The time courses provide information about the QPC from
two different viewpoints: amplitude-dependent and amplitudeindependent. The mBA and mBC courses depict mainly the
same time pattern for both investigated ROIs [see Fig. 5(c) and
(d)]. The mBA shows lower values during the preictal period
(100–220 s) and rises with a peak at the beginning of the preonset acceleration (240 s) and at seizure onset (300 s). Thereafter
the values drop down until end of seizure (300–390 s). The
termination of seizures is accompanied by a rise of mBA up

SCHIECKE et al.: TIME-VARIANT, FREQUENCY-SELECTIVE, LINEAR AND NONLINEAR ANALYSIS OF HEART RATE VARIABILITY

1805

Fig. 6. FFT-based mean spectra (K = 18) of original HRV and EMD-based
components IMF1 and IMF5 –IMF8 . The color code of the different IMFs is
shared with Fig. 7.

RSA). These findings indicate that modulation of the RSA by
both LF components seems to be the source for the QPC.
E. Time-Variant Nonlinear EMD-Based PPE Analysis

Fig. 5. Grand-mean results (K = 18) of the time-variant QPC analysis (MWT
based). In (a) the time-frequency related PS with a frequency resolution as in
Fig. 3(b) is shown, in (b) the time-frequency related PS with a frequency resolution appropriate for bispectral analysis is presented (color bar for (a) and (b): in
bpm2 ). White lines indicate the carrier frequencies (solid) and side frequencies
(dashed) for the amplitude modulation of the RSA by the 0.05 Hz wave before
and after the seizure, i.e., such a constellation of frequency components most
probably causes the high bispectral values in ROI2 . In (c) resulting mBA and
in (d) resulting mBC courses are shown for investigated ROI1 : (0.075–0.15 Hz
⇔0.25–0.35 Hz; blue lines) and for ROI2 : (0.04–0.075 Hz ⇔0.25–0.35 Hz; red
lines).

to peak at the beginning of the recuperation of averaged HR
(420 s) and is followed by a decrease of mBA up to the end
of the evaluation period. The amplitude-independent observations of QPC provided by the mBC courses [see Fig. 5(d)]
allows similar conclusions with regard to the preictal, ictal as
well as the recuperation periods validating the suggestion that
the revealed effect of QPC is not caused only by changes of
amplitude.
Time courses of mBA and mBC increase and decrease is following the patterns of phase-locked components of the LF and
HF ranges. This can be understood by means of the spectrogram
with higher frequency resolution [see Fig. 5(b)]. With the identification of the carrier frequency (RSA), side frequencies may
be determined (e.g., for ROI2 : ≈0.32 ± 0.05 Hz; designation by
white lines in Fig. 5(b) before seizure onset). Side frequencies
can also be detected at ≈0.32 ± 0.1 Hz (Mayer waves modulate

CEMD was used to decompose the HRV into IMFs. FFTbased spectra of the HRV and IMFs were computed to define
the components of interest. The fifth to eighths IMFs agreed
rather well with frequency distances which are of interest in the
analysis of HRV. First IMF was analyzed as a reference outside
the frequencies of interest.
FFT-based spectral analyses of the IMFs (see Fig. 6) show that
IMF1 is mainly related to “noise,” IMF5 to the HF component
(RSA, ≈0.3 Hz), IMF6 to the upper part of the LF component
(≈0.15 Hz), IMF7 to the blood pressure related Mayer waves
(≈0.1 Hz); and IMF8 to the lower part of the LF component
(≈0.05 Hz).
In Fig. 7, the averaged PPE time courses as well as confidence
tubes are shown for the unprocessed HRV signals (a) and for
the five IMFs analyzed (b–f).
The averaged PPE of the HRV signals [see Fig. 7(a)] starts to
decrease around 250 s [50 s before seizure onset) After seizure
onset the PPE further decreases (minima at 320 s; significant
difference to all other time points)] indicating that the HRV
signal is more stable (tachycardia after the onset and up to the
maximum of acceleration of HR during seizure; almost no other
frequency components). The mean PPE values of the preictal
and the postictal periods show significant differences which
indicate an incomplete recuperation process. The PPE values of
the postictal period are lower and are characterized by smaller
confidence tubes, both indicating a more regular behavior of
HRV pattern.
The IMF1 -related averaged PPE fluctuates between values of
0.6 to 0.7 indicating the expected poor predictability (“noise”)
of the IMF1 over the whole analysis interval [see Fig. 7(b)]
and no significant differences between preictal, ictal, and postictal period. The averaged PPE of the remaining IMFs [see
Fig. 7(c)–(f)] are all characterized by a better predictability (PPE
values of 0.1 to 0.4 for the preictal period). Their predictability
starts to increases around 220 s for IMF5 (80 s before seizure

1806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 7. Results of time-variant nonlinear PPE analysis (EMD based). Timecourses of the mean PPE and their confidence tubes (95%) are presented (K =
18). Mean PPE was calculated for the original HR signal (a) and for IMF1 and
IMF5 –IMF8 (b)–(f).

onset; “RSA”), around 200 s for IMF6 (100 s before seizure
onset; “upper LF”), around 220 s for IMF7 (80 s before seizure
onset; “Mayer waves”) and around 270 s for IMF8 (30 s before
seizure onset; “lower LF”). The minima of the further decrease
of the PPE (increase of predictability) and the significant difference to all other time points can be found at 320 s for IMF5
to IMF8 , but time pattern of these processes differ between the
IMFs. The significant differences of the mean PPE values of the
preictal and the postictal periods indicating the incomplete recuperation process appears (besides the unprocessed HRV signals)
only for IMF5 (“RSA”) and IMF7 (“Mayer waves”).
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Our methodological study demonstrates the possibilities and advantages of a combination of time-variant,
frequency-selective analysis methods by which specific linear
and nonlinear HRV properties can be revealed. MWT-based and
EMD-based methods were combined to achieve a better interpretability of acute changes in the HR in the preictal, ictal and
postictal period of the seizure.

We did not find premonitory information regarding an imminent seizure by means of time-variant power analysis. The
nonlinear bispectral analysis describes the QPC between the LF
and HF components and was used, e.g., by Chen et al. [39] in
HR analyses. As shown in neonatal heart rate analysis the QPC
is caused by an amplitude modulation of the HF components by
the LF components (Mayer waves modulate the amplitude of
RSA [24]). Thus, the time-variant QPC approach complements
linear time-variant frequency-selective analyses. The usefulness
of the integration of nonlinear time/frequency-based methods
and nonlinear stability/causality-based methods was shown by
a combined use of time-variant QPC and PPE analysis to characterize nonlinear properties of the electrocorticogram [17]. The
PPE is a local estimation of the largest Lyapunov defining the
theoretical nonlinear predictability and thus stability of a signal.
The contribution of our approach is to achieve the frequency selectivity of the nonlinear PPE by its application to IMFs being
the result of the EMD which separates signal components from
the whole signal.
By means of our advanced time-variant and frequencyselective processing scheme characteristics of the HR before,
during and after TLE seizure in children were investigated and
quantified. The epileptic seizure is a time-dependent process and
HR analysis of the preictal state may provide information with
regard to coupling mechanisms between the involved cortical
structures and the autonomic nervous system. A possible goal
is to detect HR changes which signal the developing seizure
and/or give new physiological insights to the periods before the
seizure onset.
A result which has been confirmed by many studies is that
an increase of the HR precedes the EEG seizure onset by up to
about 50 s (mean difference 13.7 s) in 75%–80% of TLE patients
[40], this effect is more pronounced in mesial TLE. With regard
of the time-consuming EMD-based and time-variant nonlinear
methods seizure prediction is not the focus of our approach.
We used HR data from a clinical monitoring protocol without
any coregistration of respiratory movements, blood pressure and
other vegetative parameters. Therefore, the physiological interpretation of our findings is limited. Nevertheless, we have found
several new physiological phenomena and we have quantified
the dynamics of known effects. Both can be used to develop
advanced working hypotheses for more in-depth studies.
It could be suggested that the phase-locking characteristics
of the LF component, approximately 1 min before onset, is attributed to a transient influence of developing neural seizure
activity on the autonomic nervous system. This phase locking
leads to a peak in PRP L which suggests for a transient disturbance of the sympathico-vagal balance. The mean HR [see
Fig. 1(c)] is characterized by LF waves starting at the time point
150 s and lasting until the seizure onset. This time interval is
also characterized by a biamplitude peak which indicates a coordination between LF and HF components (Mayer waves and
RSA, [24]). We have described a quasi-rhythmic QPC in the
HRV of neonates during quiet sleep [24]. It may be possible that
the QPC peak is part of a spontaneous long-term QPC fluctuation. To study this phenomenon in detail, the preictal analysis interval must be extended and respiration as well as blood pressure

SCHIECKE et al.: TIME-VARIANT, FREQUENCY-SELECTIVE, LINEAR AND NONLINEAR ANALYSIS OF HEART RATE VARIABILITY

should be recorded simultaneously. Furthermore, these investigations can be complemented by investigations of coordination
between HRV and EEG [11].
The phase locking of the HF component shortly before seizure
onset and before normal breathing changed can be interpreted as
a possible influence of the developing central ictal activity on the
brainstem reticular networks. Hypopnea and apnea with oxygen
desaturation have been observed with partial seizures [41]. The
compensatory respiratory reaction resulting from oxygen desaturation is indirectly indicated by a higher mean HFP (deeper
breathing) at slower frequencies before the end of the ictal and
during the postictal period. This could minimize the cardiac
workload; experimental modeling has shown that the cardiac
workload is minimized for RSA-like HR functions, most significantly with slow and deep breathing [42]. The PPE values
of the IMF5 of the postictal period [see Fig. 7(c)] remain lower
than the values of the preictal state, this perpetuated stability of
the RSA points to long-term compensatory mechanisms after
the seizure. A causal analysis of these interesting HRV characteristics could only be performed by long-term recordings of
cardiovascular–cardiorespiratory parameters.
Our methodological investigation demonstrates that the use
of advanced HRV analysis methods adds to an improved understanding of how epilepsy affects the autonomic nervous system
and may have the potential for a better detection and interpretation of the dynamic influences of the central nervous system on
the autonomic nervous system in general. Advanced HRV analysis can be applied to any other time-dependent process with
known physiological meaning of different frequency characteristics. Our approach serves as a starting point for further studies
including not only HRV but other autonomic parameters. The
importance of the investigation of autonomic functions in patients with epilepsy in clinical practice was highlighted recently
by a meta analysis of HRV in epilepsy [8].
REFERENCES
[1] B. Moseley, L. Bateman, J. J. Millichap, E. Wirrell, and
C. P. Panayiotopoulos, “Autonomic epileptic seizures, autonomic effects
of seizures, and SUDEP,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 26, pp. 375–385, 2013.
[2] S. Shorvon and T. Tomson, “Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy,”
Lancet, vol. 378, pp. 2028–2038, 2011.
[3] M. Dutsch, M. J. Hilz, and O. Devinsky, “Impaired baroreflex function in
temporal lobe epilepsy,” J. Neurol., vol. 253, pp. 1300–1308, 2006.
[4] O. M. Doyle, A. Temko, W. Marnane, G. Lightbody, and G. B. Boylan,
“Heart rate based automatic seizure detection in the newborn,” Med. Eng.
Phys., vol. 32, pp. 829–839, 2010.
[5] K. Jansen and L. Lagae, “Cardiac changes in epilepsy,” Seizure, vol. 19,
pp. 455–460, 2010.
[6] C. Sevcencu and J. J. Struijk, “Autonomic alterations and cardiac changes
in epilepsy,” Epilepsia, vol. 51, pp. 725–737, 2010.
[7] R. S. Delamont and M. C. Walker, “Pre-ictal autonomic changes,”
Epilepsy Res., vol. 97, pp. 267–272, 2011.
[8] P. A. Lotufo, L. Valiengo, I. M. Bensenor, and A. R. Brunoni, “A systematic review and meta-analysis of heart rate variability in epilepsy and
antiepileptic drugs,” Epilepsia, vol. 53, pp. 272–282, 2012.
[9] U. Rajendra Acharya, K. Paul Joseph, N. Kannathal, C. M. Lim, and
J. S. Suri, “Heart rate variability: A review,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 44, pp. 1031–1051, 2006.
[10] R. Maestri, G. D. Pinna, A. Porta, R. Balocchi, R. Sassi, M. G. Signorini,
M. Dudziak, and G. Raczak, “Assessing nonlinear properties of heart rate
variability from short-term recordings: Are these measurements reliable?”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, pp. 1067–1077, 2007.

1807

[11] K. Schwab, H. Skupin, M. Eiselt, M. Walther, A. Voss, and H. Witte,
“Coordination of the EEG and the heart rate of preterm neonates during
quiet sleep,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 465, pp. 252–256, 2009.
[12] H. Mayer, F. Benninger, L. Urak, B. Plattner, J. Geldner, and M. Feucht,
“EKG abnormalities in children and adolescents with symptomatic temporal lobe epilepsy,” Neurology, vol. 63, pp. 324–328, 2004.
[13] Task-Force, “Heart rate variability. Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 17, pp. 354–381,
Mar. 1996.
[14] V. V. Novak, L. A. Reeves, P. Novak, A. P. Low, and W. F. Sharbrough,
“Time-frequency mapping of R–R interval during complex partial seizures
of temporal lobe origin,” J. Auton. Nerv. Syst., vol. 77, pp. 195–202, 1999.
[15] D. H. Kerem and A. B. Geva, “Forecasting epilepsy from the heart rate
signal,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 43, pp. 230–239, 2005.
[16] M. E. Torres, M. A. Colominas, G. Schlotthauer, and P. Flandrin, “A
complete ensemble empirical mode decomposition with adaptive noise,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Prague, CZ,
2011, pp. 4144–4147.
[17] K. Schwab, T. Groh, M. Schwab, and H. Witte, “Nonlinear analysis and
modeling of cortical activation and deactivation patterns in the immature
fetal electrocorticogram,” Chaos, vol. 19, pp. 015111-1–015111-8, 2009.
[18] J. R. Yeh, W. Z. Sun, J. S. Shieh, and N. E. Huang, “Investigating fractal
property and respiratory modulation of human heartbeat time series using
empirical mode decomposition,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 32, pp. 490–496,
2010.
[19] E. P. Souza Neto, M. A. Custaud, J. C. Cejka, P. Abry, J. Frutoso,
C. Gharib, and P. Flandrin, “Assessment of cardiovascular autonomic control by the empirical mode decomposition,” Methods Inf. Med., vol. 43,
pp. 60–65, 2004.
[20] H. Li, S. Kwong, L. Yang, D. Huang, and D. Xiao, “Hilbert-huang transform for analysis of heart rate variability in cardiac health,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 1557–1567, 2011.
[21] J. Terrine, C. Marque, and B. Karlsson, “Automatic detection of mode
mixing in empirical mode decomposition using non-stationarity detection:
Application to select IMFs of interest and denoising,” EURASIP J. Adv.
Signal Process., vol. 37, pp. 1–8, 2011.
[22] Q. Wei, Q. Liu, S.-Z. Fan, C.-W. Lu, T.-Y. Lin, M. F. Abbod, and
J.-S. Shieh, “Analysis of EEG via multivariate empirical mode decompostion for depth of anesthesia on sample entropy,” Entropy, vol. 15,
pp. 3458–3470, 2013.
[23] A. S. French and A. V. Holden, “Alias-free sampling of neuronal spike
trains,” Kybernetik, vol. 8, p. 165-171, 1971.
[24] K. Schwab, M. Eiselt, P. Putsche, M. Helbig, and H. Witte, “Time-variant
parametric estimation of transient quadratic phase couplings between heart
rate components in healthy neonates,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 44,
pp. 1077–1083, 2006.
[25] H. Witte, P. Putsche, M. Eiselt, M. Arnold, K. Schmidt, and B. Schack,
“Technique for the quantification of transient quadratic phase couplings
between heart rate components,” Biomedizinische Technik. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 46, pp. 42–49, Mar. 2001.
[26] P. Flandrin, G. Rilling, and P. Goncalves, “Empirical mode decomposition
as a filter bank,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 112–114,
Feb. 2004.
[27] H. Witte, P. Putsche, C. Hemmelmann, C. Schelenz, and L. Leistritz,
“Analysis and modeling of time-variant amplitude-frequency couplings of
and between oscillations of EEG bursts,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 99, pp. 139–
157, Aug. 2008.
[28] B. Schack and S. Weiss, “Quantification of phase synchronization phenomena and their importance for verbal memory processes,” Biol. Cybern.,
vol. 92, pp. 275–287, Apr. 2005.
[29] H. Witte, P. Putsche, M. Eiselt, K. Schwab, M. Wacker, and L. Leistritz,
“Time-variant analysis of phase couplings and amplitude-frequency dependencies of and between frequency components of EEG burst patterns
in full-term newborns,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, pp. 253–266, 2011.
[30] N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shih, Q. Zheng,
N.-C. Yen, C. C. Tung, and H. H. Liu, “The empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time
series analysis,” Proc. Roy. Soc. London Series A—Math. Phys. Eng. Sci.,
vol. 454, pp. 903–995, 1998.
[31] Z. Wu and N. E. Huang, “Ensemble empirical mode decomposition: A
noise-assisted data analysis method,” Advances Adaptive Data Anal.,
vol. 1, pp. 1–41, 2009.
[32] F. Takens, “Detecting strange attractors in turbulence,” in Dynamical
Systems in Turbulence, D. Rand and L. S. Young, Eds. New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 1981, pp. 366–381.

1808

[33] W. Liebert, K. Pawelzik, and H. G. Schuster, “Optimal embeddings of
chaotic attractors from topological considerations,” Europhysics Lett.,
vol. 14, pp. 521–526, 1991.
[34] A. M. Fraser and H. L. Swinney, “Independent coordinates for strange
attractors from mutual information,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 33, pp. 1134–1140,
1986.
[35] A. Wolf, J. B. Swift, H. L. Swinney, and J. A. Vastano, “Determining
lyapunov-exponent from a time series,” Physica D, vol. 16, pp. 287–317,
1985.
[36] J. Gao and Z. Zheng, “Direct dynamical test for deterministic chaos and optimal embedding of a chaotic time series,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 49, pp. 3807–
3814, 1994.
[37] K. Jansen, C. Varon, S. Van Huffel, and L. Lagae, “Ictal and interictal
respiratory changes in temporal lobe and absence epilepsy in childhood,”
Epilepsy Res., vol. 106, pp. 410–416, 2013.
[38] M. Wacker and H. Witte, “Time-frequency techniques in biomedical signal
analysis a tutorial review of similarities and differences,” Methods Inf.
Med., vol. 52, pp. 279–296, 2013.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

[39] Z. Chen, E. N. Brown, and R. Barbieri, “Characterizing nonlinear heartbeat dynamics within a point process framework,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1335–1347, 2010.
[40] F. Leutmezer, C. Schernthaner, S. Lurger, K. Potzelberger, and
C. Baumgartner, “Electrocardiographic changes at the onset of epileptic seizures,” Epilepsia, vol. 44, pp. 348–354, 2003.
[41] A. S. Blum, “Respiratory physiology of seizures,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 26, pp. 309–315, 2009.
[42] A. Ben-Tal, S. S. Shamailov, and J. F. Paton, “Evaluating the physiological
significance of respiratory sinus arrhythmia: looking beyond ventilationperfusion efficiency,” J. Physiol., vol. 590, pp. 1989–2008, Apr. 15,
2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

