1894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Design and Evaluation of a 1.1-GHz Surface Coil
Resonator for Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance-Based Tooth Dosimetry
Hirotaka Sugawara, Hiroshi Hirata∗ , Sergey Petryakov, Piotr Lesniewski, Benjamin B. Williams,
Ann Barry Flood, and Harold M. Swartz

Abstract—This paper describes an optimized design of a surface coil resonator for in vivo electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR)-based tooth dosimetry. Using the optimized resonator, dose
estimates with the standard error of the mean of approximately
0.5 Gy were achieved with irradiated human teeth. The product of
the quality factor and the filling factor of the resonator was computed as an index of relative signal intensity in EPR tooth dosimetry
by the use of 3-D electromagnetic wave simulator and radio frequency circuit design environment (ANSYS HFSS and Designer).
To verify the simulated results of the signal intensity in our numerical model of the resonator and a tooth sample, we experimentally
measured the radiation-induced signals from an irradiated tooth
with an optimally designed resonator. In addition to the optimization of the resonator design, we demonstrated the improvement of
the stability of EPR spectra by decontamination of the surface coil
resonator using an HCl solution, confirming that contamination of
small magnetic particles on the silver wire of the surface coil had
degraded the stability of the EPR spectral baseline.
Index Terms—Design optimization, dosimetry, electromagnetic
modeling, in vivo, spectroscopy.

the use of triage centers placed on the borders of the disaster
area to screen the population who may have been exposed to
significant radiation and prioritize them to receive care for acute
symptoms, while triaging out those who do not need care. The
lethal dose LD50/60 , the whole body dose at which 50% of
the victims will die within 60 days without vigorous medical
management, is approximately 3.5–4 gray (Gy) [4]. At clinically
significant doses starting at about 2 Gy, victims experience acute
radiation syndrome (ARS) and can benefit from urgent medical treatment. However, the general populations around nuclear
power plants or the epicenter of a nuclear device will not be
equipped with film badge dosimeters or other external dosimetry devices to monitor exposure. Recently, a portable dosimeter
to rapidly measure each individual at risk of significant radiation
exposure using in vivo electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
tooth dosimetry is under development in a federal effort in the
United States [5], [6]. This paper seeks to advance this effort by
developing an improved resonator that can be used under such
emergency conditions.

I. INTRODUCTION
OLLOWING a radiologic emergency situation such as a
terrorist attack using a nuclear weapon or a catastrophic
accident of nuclear power plants, radiation exposure is a major
concern and a factor that could lead to loss of life [1]–[5]. In such
a circumstance, established emergency response plans describe

F

A. Rationale for Using In Vivo EPR Tooth Dosimetry for
Large-Scale Events

Manuscript received December 10, 2013; revised February 3, 2014; accepted
March 4, 2014. Date of publication March 6, 2014; date of current version May
15, 2014. This work was performed as part of contract HHSO201100024C with
the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA),
within the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
H. Sugawara is with the Division of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo 060–0814, Japan (e-mail: sugawara_h@ist.hokudai.ac.jp).
∗ H. Hirata is with the Division of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo 060–0814, Japan (e-mail: hhirata@ist.hokudai.ac.jp).
S. Petryakov, P. Lesniewski, B. B. Williams, A. B. Flood, and H. M.
Swartz are with the EPR Center for the Study of Viable Systems, Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03766, USA (e-mail: sergey.
petryakov@dartmouth.edu; Piotr.N.Lesniewski@dartmouth.edu; Benjamin.
B.Williams@dartmouth.edu;
Ann.B.Flood@dartmouth.edu;
Harold.M.
Swartz@dartmouth.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2310217

Estimation of absorbed doses of radiation for individuals after
exposure is not achievable using existing conventional physical
dosimetry methods. Conventional methods involving the use of
Geiger–Müller counters and whole-body counters were used for
people evacuated from the area around the Fukushima Daiichi
nuclear power plant in Japan to measure the radioactive materials in human bodies or on the surface of their bodies [7], [8].
However, these instruments are sensitive only to radioactive materials that are present at the time of measurement and are not
sensitive to prior exposure to ionizing radiation. Thus, the accumulated doses for individuals due to external radiation exposure
are not clear even with Geiger–Müller counters and whole-body
counters.
To fill this gap, there have been vigorous efforts to develop
robust methods of biodosimetry, where the impact of radiation exposure on the intrinsic tissues and fluids of the body
are assessed to estimate the level of exposure. For example,
radiation-induced chromosomal aberrations in human cells have
been investigated as biomarkers to quantify individual radiation
doses [9]. However, it currently takes up to several days to obtain such estimates and requires specialized laboratories to analyze the samples. Thus, current biodosimetry methods do not

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SUGAWARA et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A 1.1-GHZ SURFACE COIL RESONATOR

1895

yet meet the demand of the triage process under emergency
circumstances involving large populations. Issues of sample
processing time and specificity to radiation exposure also affect
the applicability of other biodosimetry methods based on biological processes, such as gene expression, lymphocyte counting,
and time to emesis [10].
An alternate, physically-based biodosimetric approach to
meet the aforementioned demand is EPR spectroscopy to detect
free radicals (CO2− ) generated in the tooth enamel (an impurity
in hydroxyapatite CO2−
3 ) during radiation exposure [11], [12].
In EPR tooth dosimetry, human teeth, measured in vivo and
noninvasively, are used to estimate cumulative dose to an individual, similar to the use of a film badge. Because our dosimetry
measurements are under in vivo condition, measurements need
to be minimal risk and so L-band (1–2 GHz) frequencies are
used to avoid excess heat deposition during the measurement.
The free radicals generated in the tooth enamel are extremely
stable, such that absorbed dose over the lifetime of the tooth can
be measured. For the assessment of an individual’s risk of ARS,
the dose from the acute exposure would overwhelm the much
smaller cumulative doses resulting from background radiation.
B. Improving EPR Dose Estimates by Modifying the Resonator
During EPR measurements, a surface coil, which is a part of
a radio frequency (RF) resonator, is placed in close proximity
to an intact upper incisor to measure signals from free radicals in the enamel. One of the important technical challenges
in in vivo EPR-based tooth dosimetry is the reproducibility and
precision of dose estimates using a surface coil in vivo. A practical problem degrading the reproducibility of EPR-based tooth
dosimetry is the instability of baseline of EPR spectra, referred
to as “baseline distortion” (BLD) [13].
The goal of this study was to improve the accuracy of the radiation dose estimation in EPR tooth dosimetry by reducing BLD
and maximizing the EPR signal. We took two independent approaches to solve the problem. One approach was to maximize
the EPR sensitivity of the resonator by using numerical modeling of the electromagnetic fields and the circuit components in
the surface coil resonator. The other was to systematically avoid
or remove magnetic contamination on the surface coil of the
resonator. Contamination of the silver wire with ferromagnetic
particles could impact BLD during magnetic field scanning in
continuous-wave (CW) EPR spectroscopy. In this paper, we
describe the optimized resonator design and the experimental
investigation to establish whether baseline stability in EPR tooth
dosimetry was thereby improved.
II. SIGNAL INTENSITY MAXIMIZATION OF THE SURFACE
COIL RESONATOR
A. Design Strategy
To maximize the signal intensity in CW-EPR spectroscopy
for tooth dosimetry, we tried to find the parameters that provide
the maximum index of relative signal intensity, using extracted
human incisors as the samples. Although several parameters of
the resonator affect the RF magnetic energy in the resonator,

Fig. 1. Schematic of a 1.1-GHz surface coil resonator. (a) diagram of a
1.1-GHz surface coil resonator used for EPR tooth dosimetry, (b) a singleturn coil and definitions of the outer radius ro u t and the thickness of wire t, and
(c) the cross section of the parallel transmission line used for the resonator. Inner and outer conductors of the parallel transmission line were made of copper,
and the space in the conductors was filled with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE,
dielectric constant 2.1).

which is a key factor for signal intensity; we focused mainly on
the radius of the surface coil in our optimization process. This is
because the radius of the surface coil has a direct impact on the
energy distribution in a sample tooth. In addition to the radius
of the surface coil, we also took the energy transfer between the
transmission line and the surface coil into account to maximize
the stored RF magnetic energy in the surface coil. In practice, we
used the product of the quality factor Q and the filling factor η of
the resonator as the index of relative resonator sensitivity [14].
While EPR signal intensity also depends on the microwave
power applied to the resonator and degree of saturation for
the spin system being measured [15], we considered only the
relative sensitivity of the resonator itself in our optimization
process for the resonator. The details of the resonator design and
the process of the signal-intensity maximization are described
below. We also took mechanical robustness of the materials in
the resonator into account in addition to simulated results of
relative signal intensity.
B. Resonator Structure
The configuration of a 1.1-GHz surface coil resonator was
already reported elsewhere [16], [17]. To briefly explain the
principle of the resonator, Fig. 1(a) shows the structure of the
surface coil resonator optimized in this paper. A single-turn loop
called a surface coil [see Fig. 1(b)] was connected in parallel
with a capacitor [a copper-laminated dielectric substrate (76-μm
thick), CuFlon CF-A-03-7-7, Polyflon Company, Norwalk, CT,

1896

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Whole resonator modeling in ANSYS Designer and HFSS 3-D full-wave microwave field simulator.

USA]. This LC-resonant circuit dominantly determines the resonance frequency of the resonator. The LC-resonant circuit was
connected to the parallel transmission line (outer diameter
6.4 mm, 70-Ω characteristic impedance, CL635/10-(2.165 mm),
COAX Corp., Yokohama, Japan) through the capacitors in a
serial connection. The parallel transmission line was a quarterwavelength of the electromagnetic wave in the line. The cross
section of the line is illustrated in Fig. 1(c). The serial capacitors were used to improve the energy transfer between the
parallel transmission line and the LC-resonant circuit. The other
end of the parallel transmission line was excited by a halfwave line balun formed by a 50-Ω coaxial line (SC-219/50-SC,
COAX Corp., Yokohama, Japan). Also, two varactors (1SV239,
Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan) connected in series between the ends of
the parallel transmission line can adjust the impedance matching
of the resonator to the 50-Ω semiridged coaxial feeding line (SC358/50-SC, COAX Corp., Yokohama, Japan). This resonator has
no functionality to adjust the resonant frequency. However, the
RF frequency of the signal source can be adjusted to the resonant frequency of the resonator with an automatic frequency
control system in the RF bridge.
C. Modeling of the Resonator
To maximize the EPR signal intensity, the quality factor and
the filling factor of the resonator were computed using a numerical model of the resonator. EPR signal intensity S is proportional
to the product of the quality factor Q and the filling factor η of
the resonator [14]. The filling factor η is determined by a ratio of
the RF magnetic energy contributing to the EPR phenomenon
in the sample and the whole RF magnetic energy stored in the
resonator system

sam ple
η=

H t · B t dV

Resonator

H · BdV

,

(1)

where H t and B t are vectors of the magnetic field and magnetic
flux density orthogonal to the static magnetic field B 0 polarizing electron spins, respectively. Also, H and B are vectors of
the magnetic field and magnetic flux density in the resonator,
respectively. To find the peak of relative signal intensity S, we
varied the surface coil diameter (rout ) and the thickness of wire

Fig. 3.

Finite-element modeling of a surface coil and a sample tooth.

(t) used for the single-turn loop, based on the numerical models
of the components in the resonator described below.
Fig. 2 presents the whole simulation model of the resonator in
ANSYS Designer environment (version 6.1.0). Electromagnetic
fields around the surface coil were calculated using ANSYS
HFSS 3-D full-wave microwave field simulator (version 13.0.0).
The space of 200 mm × 200 mm × 200 mm was modeled with a
radiation boundary condition. The surface coil was placed at the
center of the space. A 3-D model of a human incisor was placed
against the surface coil as shown in Fig. 3. The incisor model was
divided into three main components of teeth: enamel, dentin,
and pulp. This model was created based on an X-ray microCT scan of an isolated human incisor [18]. The elements in
the calculated space were automatically generated, with 50 180
total elements (30 617 elements in the air, 7852 elements in the
dentin, 6697 elements in the enamel, 1490 elements in the pulp,
and 3524 elements in a coil). The parallel transmission line,
the coaxial lines for a balun, and a capacitor made by a CuFlon
substrate were modeled by HFSS, and a feeding coaxial line was
modeled by the use of ANSYS Q3D Extractor (version 10.0.0).
Also, the printed circuit board for the implementation of the
varactors and other components was modeled with PlanerEM
in the Designer. Finally, the obtained circuit parameters were
used in the circuit simulator environment (Designer) to obtain
the scattering-matrix parameter S11 , the quality factor Q, and
the filling factor η of the resonator.

SUGAWARA et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A 1.1-GHZ SURFACE COIL RESONATOR

1897

remove contamination that occurred during fabrication such as
iron particles on the surface of materials.
To verify the effect of cleaning to remove magnetic materials on the surface coil, we obtained EPR spectra on extracted
teeth using the newly designed resonator with and without initial
HCl cleaning. First, we fabricated the resonator without initial
cleaning and measured EPR spectra from a nonirradiated and
a 30-Gy irradiated tooth. Then, we disassembled the surface
coil and the capacitors connected to the surface coil from the
resonator. Second, we fabricated the resonator again, in conjunction with performing the initial cleaning process described
previously, and measured the same sample teeth to examine the
effect of the initial HCl cleaning on EPR spectra.

Fig. 4. Photographs of (a) a developed surface coil resonator and (b) an
irradiated sample tooth. A sample tooth was molded by dental resin to make
sample positioning easier.

D. Verification of Numerical Modeling and Its Characteristics
Signal intensities were measured as a function of the radius
rout of the surface coil with physically implemented resonators
[see Fig. 4(a)] to compare with the simulated relative signal
intensity. A simulated scattering-matrix parameter S11 , which
is the reflection characteristics of the resonator, was then compared to the measured one. We used a vector network analyzer
(E5071C, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to measure parameter S11 as a function of the frequency. The quality
factor Q was estimated from the S11 characteristics of the resonator. While the filling factor η for a given sample can be
calculated, its direct measurement is not an easy task. However,
as an index of the resonator sensitivity (the RF magnetic fieldgeneration efficiency), we measured the RF magnetic field B1 at
the center of the surface coil by the use of the perturbing metal
sphere method [19].

III. CLEANING OF MAGNETIC CONTAMINATION
The purpose of an initial cleaning of the resonator was to
remove ferromagnetic materials, such as iron particles, from the
surface coil. To clean the silver wire stock that was used for
the surface coil, a piece of silver wire was immersed in an HCl
solution (18 vol% in water) for one day. After fabricating the
resonator using the prepared silver wire to make the surface
coil, the coil and the part of the parallel transmission line and
the capacitors near the surface coil were immersed in the HCl
solution for 15 min. Then, the surface coil resonator was allowed
to dry for at least one day. This cleaning process was performed
once when the resonator was fabricated.
Nonmagnetic materials were used for fabricating the resonator, because magnetic materials under the polarizing magnetic field in EPR spectroscopy disturb EPR signal detection.
Thus, we used a silver wire that is considered to be a nonmagnetic material and 99.99% pure. While we could not remove any
contamination in the inside of the silver wire, HCl cleaning can

IV. RADIATION DOSE MEASUREMENTS OF
THE IRRADIATED TOOTH
A. Irradiated Tooth
To evaluate the reproducibility of EPR tooth dosimetry using these devices and procedures, we measured the radiationinduced signal (RIS) of three isolated human teeth, one without
irradiation and the others with doses of 5 and 30 Gy. Fig. 4(b)
shows a photograph of a sample tooth that was placed in a dental
putty mold for ease of handling. The dental putty (EXAFINE:
vinyl polysiloxane impression material) does not contribute significantly to the EPR signal.
B. CW-EPR Spectrometer
To perform EPR tooth dosimetry with the optimized resonator, we used an 1150-MHz EPR spectrometer developed
at Hokkaido University. The details of the RF bridge in an
L-band EPR spectrometer have been reported elsewhere [20].
We briefly outline the experimental setup of the 1.1-GHz CWEPR spectrometer in Hokkaido University. An analog signal
generator (E8257D, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA,
USA) was used as an RF source of the spectrometer. An ironcore resistive magnet (polarizing magnetic field 41 mT, gap
of pole caps 64 mm) was used with a dc power supply. The
surface coil resonator was placed between the pole caps and
was fed at 1150 MHz. We used a reflection-type EPR bridge
with a reference arm and an RF Schottky barrier diode detector (HSMS-2820-BLK, Agilent technologies, Santa Clara, CA,
USA). Electromagnetic waves reflected at the resonator due to
EPR absorption was detected in conjunction with magnetic field
modulation and phase-sensitive detection (LI5640, NF Corp.,
Yokohama, Japan). For magnetic field scanning of EPR spectral
data acquisition, dc magnetic fields were controlled with a bipolar power supply (PBX20–5, Kikusui Electronics, Yokohama,
Japan). Spectral data acquisition and instrument controls were
performed by LabVIEW-based software running on a MacPro
computer (MacOS X 10.6 Apple, Cupertino, CA, USA). The
measurement parameters of EPR spectroscopy for the irradiated tooth were as follows: microwave power 10 mW, duration
of field scanning 3 s, amplitude of field modulation 0.4 mT,
modulation frequency 90 kHz, time constant of lock-in detection 5 ms, and number of averages 20. The number of data points

1898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

in each recorded spectrum was 1024. In preliminary tests of the
resonator, we obtained the properties of EPR signal saturation,
i.e., the dependence of EPR signals on the microwave power
applied to the resonator (data not shown). This enabled us to
know that our measurements for RISs in the tooth enamel were
performed with the microwave power close to the saturation
level of the EPR signals.
C. Reproducibility Estimation
We recorded six sets of EPR spectra from each sample tooth to
obtain the mean of RIS. To average the BLD, which varies each
time the resonator is positioned, we repositioned the resonator
for several sets of spectral data acquisition, which averaged out
the BLD by the repositionings. Each spectrum was obtained by
taking the average of 20 spectra within each set. The acquisition
time for each set was 60 s. For each resulting spectrum, we applied spectral fitting based on Robinson’s model [21] to estimate
the amplitudes of RIS and a reference signal from a plastic tube
containing a solution of 4-oxo-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidined16 -1-15 N-1-oxyl (Perdeuterated Tempone, referred to as PDT
in this paper, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO,
USA) at a higher magnetic field. The signal amplitudes of EPR
spectra from the PDT reference standards were not expected to
be equal due to differences in the samples and geometries of
the single-turn loops of the resonators. This spectral fitting can
remove high-frequency noise and distortion of the spectra.
After obtaining fitted spectral data, the mean values of the
RIS amplitudes obtained from the six spectra were calculated.
To investigate the reproducibility of RIS measurements with the
developed resonator, we repeated the described measurements
a total of five times for each sample tooth and computed the
standard error of the mean (SEM) across these repetitions. The
RIS amplitudes are converted to estimates of absorbed dose by
the slope constant of linear regression of them
RIS = 0.0228x + 0.0487

(2)

where x is the absorbed dose in the units of Gy. In practice,
the slope and the intercept of linear regression need to be obtained with the experimental setup used with several samples
that have known doses, because the values in (2) are dependent
on parameters of the resonator and the spectrometer. This linear
equation was used to estimate the RIS and the SEM for our
dataset. Since there is a background signal in the tooth enamel,
there is a nonzero intercept in (2). The SEM in units of Gy is
calculated from the standard deviation of the mean of the dose
estimates for each sample as follows:

N
2
1
i=1 (Di − Daverage )
σ
N −1
√
(3)
SEM = √ =
N
N
where σ is standard deviation of the mean values of N sets of
dose estimates, N is the number of dose estimates (N = 5 in this
case), Di is the dose estimated in the ith dataset, and Daverage
is the average of N sets of dose estimates. This SEM characterizes the reproducibility of EPR tooth dosimetry measurements
as they are envisioned to be used for individual dose estimation. In this study, we used SEM to evaluate the reproducibility

Fig. 5. Simulated and measured scattering-matrix parameter S 1 1 of the surface coil resonator. Solid line denotes the simulated response for S 1 1 and
dashed line denotes the measured response for S 1 1 of the developed surface
coil resonator.

of RIS measurements. This reproducibility affects the overall
precision of dose estimation, whose estimation must also incorporate the impact of interpersonal variations and may include
the use of geometric correction factors. Overall precision may
be characterized by calculation of the standard error of inverse
dose prediction based on measurements of an appropriate set of
teeth [22].
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Experimental Verification of Modeling
To experimentally verify the model of the resonator, we measured the scattering matrix parameter S11 of the resonator. Fig. 5
shows the measured and simulated scattering-matrix parameter S11 . Solid lines indicate the measured characteristics, and
dashed lines indicate the simulated response of S11 as a function of the RF frequency. Both traces agreed well around the
resonance at 1150 MHz. The quality factor of the resonator can
be computed from the response of S11 . The simulated and measured quality factors were 536 and 464, respectively. Based on
these comparisons, the resonator model appears to be valid and
appropriate for use in the optimization of the resonator in terms
of the signal intensity. There was no statistically significant effect or variation across three teeth in the impact of the teeth on
the quality factor and the resonance frequency of the surface
coil resonator.
B. Energy Transfer to the Surface Coil
In order to maximize RF magnetic energy stored in the surface coil, we considered the influence of impedance matching
between the surface coil and the transmission line on the energy
transfer to the coil. Fig. 6 shows the simulated RF stored energy
in the surface coil as a function of capacitance of the capacitors (C2 and C3 ) between the surface coil and the transmission
line. In the simulation, we set the RF input power of 10 mW
to the resonator. Since the parallel-resonant circuit formed by
the surface coil and a capacitor C1 has high impedance at their
resonance, serially connected capacitors can help to improve the
impedance matching between the parallel resonant circuit and
the transmission line. As shown in Fig. 6, smaller capacitance

SUGAWARA et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A 1.1-GHZ SURFACE COIL RESONATOR

1899

Fig. 6. Stored RF magnetic energy in the surface coil as a function of capacitance of C 2 and C 3 . In this simulation, we set the RF input power 10 mW to
the resonator.

Fig. 8. Improvement of the baseline stability by HCl cleaning of the resonator.
(a) EPR spectra of 0 Gy (black) and 30 Gy (red) irradiated sample teeth before
HCL cleaning, and (b) EPR spectra of the same teeth after HCl cleaning of the
resonator.

However, the tolerance of such a capacitor is 50%. The parasitic capacitance for capacitive connection in the surface coil
is not negligibly small compared to such small capacitance, in
general. Also, mechanical robustness of capacitors is a practical
consideration.
C. Optimal Radius and Parameters of the Surface Coil

Fig. 7. Comparison of simulated and measured EPR signal intensities.
(a) Simulated relative signal intensity (the product of the quality factor Q and
the filling factor η) as a function of the radius of the surface coil. Lines approximating calculated results were obtained by degree 4 polynomial functions.
(b) Comparison between the simulated, relative signal intensities (open circle),
and the measured signal intensities (closed rectangular). The simulated and measured results with parameters t = 1.5 mm and C 2 , C 3 = 0.3 pF were plotted.
The scales of both results were adjusted to match the profiles of both data to
easily compare both plots.

of the capacitors connected in series can help to increase the
stored RF magnetic energy in the coil. This is enabled by improvement of the impedance matching between the coil and the
transmission line. However, very small capacitance cannot be
obtained due to stray capacitance and tolerance of commercially
available tip capacitors in practice. The practical lower limit of
commercially available nonmagnetic tip capacitor(s) is 0.1 pF.

Fig. 7(a) shows the relative signal intensity as a function of
the radius of the surface coil with several sets of parameters.
At rout = 4.0 mm with the thickness t = 1.5 mm, the signal
intensity reached the maximum of the calculated results. After
physical fabrication of the resonators with various radii of the
surface coils of the resonators, the signal intensities were measured and plotted on the same chart in Fig. 7(b). The vertical axis
of simulated, relative signal intensity was adjusted to compare
the profiles of the measured signal intensities and simulated
ones. The profiles of the signal intensities agree in Fig. 7(b).
Therefore, we relied on modeling and simulation of the signal
intensities in our optimization of the resonator design.
In our effort to optimize the design, we chose the values
of capacitors in the resonator design: C1 = 1.5 pF (a CuFlon
substrate, 2 × 3 mm, 76-μm thick), C2 and C3 = 0.3 pF (nonmagnetic tip capacitors, Voltronics Inc., Salisbury, MD, USA).
These values provide the peak signal intensity with the coil radius rout = 4.0 mm and the wire thickness t = 1.5 mm. This
choice of this relatively large wire thickness was driven by

1900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 9. EPR measurements of the RIS with irradiated teeth. (a) Six spectra measured from a 0 Gy irradiated tooth measured with the optimized resonator,
(b) six spectra measured from a 5 Gy irradiated tooth, (c) six spectra measured from a 30 Gy irradiated tooth, and (d) summary of dose measurements of 0, 5,
and 30 Gy irradiated teeth with the optimized resonator. The mean values were obtained from five datasets for each sample. Error bars show standard deviations
(± one standard deviation) obtained from five datasets for each sample.

considerations of mechanical robustness; a surface coil made up
of a 1.0-mm-thick silver wire was less stiff and easy to be bent.
The optimized resonator had the RF magnetic field-generation
efficiency of 370 μT/W1/2 at the center of the surface coil. When
compared to an efficiency of 130 μT/W1/2 for a previously reported resonator for tooth dosimetry [17], a 2.8-fold higher efficiency was achieved in the optimized resonator. In the previous
resonator design reported in [17], the capacitors did not have a
serial connection such as (C2 and C3 ) in Fig. 2. This difference
had an impact on the RF magnetic field-generation efficiency
of the resonator. In addition to the optimization of the resonator
parameters in Fig. 7, an improvement in the energy transfer to
the surface coil, due to the use of serial capacitors, contributed
to a 2.8-fold higher efficiency.

D. Decontamination of the Surface Coil
To compare the baseline stability, Fig. 8(a) shows an example
of EPR spectra measured by using the surface coil without initial cleaning. In addition to EPR absorption peaks of RIS, there
were some additional spurious peaks, which distort the baseline.
Fig. 8(b) shows EPR spectra obtained after HCl cleaning of the
surface coil. The baseline stability was drastically improved.
This evidence suggests that HCl cleaning can reduce BLD, possibly through the removal of contamination with ferromagnetic
materials on the surface coil. A substantial decrease of BLD can

lead to a smaller variation of the computed signal intensities
of EPR spectra with repeated measurements and among samples, resulting in a smaller observed SEM. Before this study,
we could not reproduce the extent of the BLD in different versions of similar resonators. The results reported here suggest
that our previous difficulties were due to contamination of magnetic materials on the surface coil, varying with the conditions
of fabrication of each resonator.

E. SEM of Means of RIS Amplitudes
Fig. 9(a)–(c) show one dataset of 6 EPR spectra measured
with the developed surface coil resonator on a 0-Gy, 5 Gy, and
30 Gy tooth respectively. Each RIS spectrum was gathered with
repositioning of the resonator between data acquisition, using
the cleaned developed resonator. The SEM of the mean values
of five datasets of six RIS spectra were calculated to evaluate the
reproducibility of dose estimates, and converted to units of Gy
using the linear regression coefficient. The values of SEM from
repeated measurements (N = 5) were 0.44, 0.31, and 0.53 Gy
for 0, 5, and 30 Gy irradiated teeth, respectively. In our previous
report, the SEM of 1.1 Gy was achieved experimentally with a 10
Gy irradiated tooth [17], thus providing evidence of significant
improvement in the reproducibility of the developed resonator.

SUGAWARA et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A 1.1-GHZ SURFACE COIL RESONATOR

VI. CONCLUSION
Based on the simulation model of the surface coil resonator,
we could maximize the signal intensity of EPR detection for
an irradiated incisor tooth. Improved baseline stability was
achieved through decontamination of the surface coil using
an HCl solution. These developments combined to provide reproducibility of EPR measurements with SEM values of approximately 0.5 Gy. The increased reproducibility that can be
achieved with the developments demonstrated in this paper will
significantly enhance the capability of EPR-based dosimeters
for use following events where large populations may have been
exposed to significant amounts of ionizing radiation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. Rychert, EPR Center
for the Study of Viable Systems, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, for his assistance in data processing of the RIS for
irradiated teeth.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Marshall, “Preliminary report on three mile island,” Science, vol. 204,
no. 4390, pp. 280–281, 1979.
[2] M. Peplow, “Chernobyl’s legacy,” Nature, vol. 471, no. 7340, pp. 562–
565, 2011.
[3] M. Hosoda, S. Tokonami, A. Sorimachi, S. Monzen, M. Osanai,
M. Yamada, I. Kashiwakura, and S. Akiba, “The time variation of dose rate
artificially increased by the Fukushima nuclear crisis,” Sci. Rep., vol. 1
pp. 87-1–87-5, 2011.
[4] National Security Staff Interagency Policy Coordination Subcommittee for Preparedness and Response to Radiological and Nuclear
Threats. (2010). Planning Guidance for Reaction to a Nuclear
Detonation (2nd ed.) [Online]. Washington, DC, USA: US Executive Office of the President, p. 83. Available: http://hps.org/homeland/
documents/Planning_Guidance_for_Response_to_a_Nuclear_Detonation2nd_Edition_FINAL.pdf
[5] H. M. Swartz, B. B. Williams, R. J. Nicolalde, E. Demidenko, and
A. B. Flood, “Overview of biodosimetry for management of unplanned
exposure to ionizing radiation,” Radiat. Meas., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 742–748,
2011.
[6] B. B. Williams, R. Dong, A. B. Flood, O. Grinberg, M. Kmiec,
P. N. Lesniewski, T. P. Matthews, R. J. Nicolalde, T. Raynolds,
I. K. Salikhov, and H. M. Swartz, “A deployable in vivo EPR tooth dosimeter for triage after a radiation event involving large populations,” Radiat.
Meas., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 772–777, 2011.
[7] S. Monzen, M. Hosoda, S. Tokonami, M. Osanai, H. Yoshino,
Y. Hosokawa, M. A. Yoshida, M. Yamada, Y. Asari, K. Satoh, and
I. Kashiwakura, “Individual radiation exposure dose due to support activities at safe shelters in Fukushima prefecture,” PLoS One, vol. 6, pp.
e27761-1–e27761-4, 2011.
[8] M. Tsubokura, S. Gilmour, K. Takahashi, T. Oikawa, and Y. Kanazawa,
“Internal radiation exposure after the fukushima nuclear power plant disaster,” J. Amer. Med. Assoc., vol. 308, no. 7, pp. 669–670, 2012.

1901

[9] E. A. Ainsbury, E. Bakhanova, J. F. Barquinero, M. Brai, V. Chumak,
V. Correcher, F. Darroudi, P. Fattibene, G. Gruel, I. Guclu, S. Horn,
A. Jaworska, U. Kulka, C. Lindholm, D. Lloyd, A. Longo, M. Marrale,
G. O. Monteiro, U. Oestreicher, J. Pajic, B. Rakic, H. Romm, F. Trompier,
I. Veronese, P. Voisin, A. Vral, C. A. Whitehouse, A. Wieser, C. Woda,
A. Wojcik, and K. Rothkamm, “Review of retrospective dosimetry techniques for external ionising radiation exposures,” Radiat. Prot. Dosimetry,
vol. 147, no. 4, pp. 573–592, 2011.
[10] A. B. Flood, R. J. Nicolalde, B. B. Williams, E. Demidenko, J. Evans, M. A.
Greene, and H. M. Swartz. (Oct. 2012). “Comparative evaluation of dosimetric methods for triage in large-scale radiation events,” in Proc. STOMP-HFM-223: NATO Symp. Biological Effects Ionizing Radiation Exposure Countermeasures: Current Status Future Perspectives, Ljubljana,
Slovenia, Paper 34: MP-HFM-223–34, 1–16, (2012). Accessed September
12, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.cso.nato.int/abstracts.aspx.
[11] H. M. Swartz, G. Burke, M. Coey, E. Demidenko, R. Dong, O. Grinberg,
J. Hilton, A. Iwasaki, P. Lesniewski, M. Kmiec, K.-M. Lo, R. J. Nicolalde,
A. Ruuge, Y. Sakata, A. Sucheta, T. Walczak, B. B. Williams,
C. A. Mitchell, A. Romanyukha, and D. A. Schauer, “In vivo EPR for
dosimetry,” Radat. Meas., vol. 42, no. 6–7, pp. 1075–1084, 2007.
[12] M. Ikeya, H. Sumitomo, C. Yamanaka, D. C. Lloyd, and A. A. Edwards,
“ESR dosimetry of a deceased radiation worker,” Appl. Radiat. Isot.,
vol. 47, pp. 1341–1344, 1996.
[13] A. Iwasaki, O. Gringerg, T. Walczak, and H. M. Swartz, “In vivo measurements of EPR signals in whole human teeth,” Appl. Radiat. Isot., vol. 62,
no. 2, pp. 187–190, 2005.
[14] G. Feher, “Sensitivity considerations in microwave paramagnetic resonance absorption techniques,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 449–
484, 1957.
[15] G. R. Eaton, S. S. Eaton, D. P. Barr, and R. T. Weber, Quantitative EPR.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2010, pp. 45–48.
[16] H. Hirata, G. He, Y. Deng, I. Salikhov, S. Petryakov, and J. L. Zweier, “A
loop resonator for slice-selective in vivo EPR imaging in rats,” J. Magn.
Reson., vol. 190, no. 1, pp. 124–134, 2008.
[17] T. Haga, H. Hirata, P. Lesniwski, K. M. Rychert, B. B. Williams,
A. B. Flood, and H. M. Swartz, “L-band surface-coil resonator with
voltage-control impedance-matching for EPR tooth dosimetry,” Concepts
Magn. Reson. Part B, vol. 43B, no. 1, pp. 32–40, 2013.
[18] J. D. Pollock, B. B. Williams, J. W. Sidabras, O. Grinberg, I. Salikhov,
P. Lesniewski, M. Kmiec, and H. M. Swartz, “Surface loop resonator
design for in vivo EPR tooth dosimetry using finite element analysis,”
Health Phys., vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 339–344, 2010.
[19] J. H. Freed, D. S. Leniart, and J. S. Hyde, “Theory of saturation and double
resonance effects in ESR Spectra. III. rf coherence and line shapes,” J.
Chem. Phys., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 2762–2773, 1967.
[20] T. Walczak, P. Lesniewski, I. Salikov, A. Sucheta, K. Szybinski, and
H. M. Swartz, “L-band electron paramagnetic resonance spectrometer for
use in vivo and in studies of aqueous biological samples,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 76, pp. 013107-1–013107-6, 2005.
[21] B. H. Robinson, C. Mailer, and A. W. Reese, “Linewidth analysis of spin
labels in liquids,” J. Magn. Reson., vol. 138, no. 2, pp. 199–209, 1999.
[22] E. Demidenko, B. B. Williams, A. B. Flood, and H. M. Swartz, “Standard
error of inverse prediction for dose-response relationship: approximate
and exact statistical inference,” Stat. Med., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2048–
2061, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

