IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1863

Novel Electrodes for Underwater ECG Monitoring
Bersain A. Reyes, Student Member, IEEE, Hugo F. Posada-Quintero, Student Member, IEEE, Justin R. Bales,
Amanda L. Clement, George D. Pins, Albert Swiston, Jarno Riistama, John P. Florian, Barbara Shykoff, Michael Qin,
and Ki H. Chon∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We have developed hydrophobic electrodes that provide all morphological waveforms without distortion of an ECG
signal for both dry and water-immersed conditions. Our electrode
is comprised of a mixture of carbon black powder (CB) and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). For feasibility testing of the CB/PDMS
electrodes, various tests were performed. One of the tests included
evaluation of the electrode-to-skin contact impedance for different
diameters, thicknesses, and different pressure levels. As expected,
the larger the diameter of the electrodes, the lower the impedance
and the difference between the large sized CB/PDMS and the
similarly-sized Ag/AgCl hydrogel electrodes was at most 200 kΩ,
in favor of the latter. Performance comparison of CB/PDMS
electrodes to Ag/AgCl hydrogel electrodes was carried out in
three different scenarios: a dry surface, water immersion, and
postwater immersion conditions. In the dry condition, no statistical differences were found for both the temporal and spectral indices of the heart rate variability analysis between the
CB/PDMS and Ag/AgCl hydrogel (p > 0.05) electrodes. During
water immersion, there was significant ECG amplitude reduction with CB/PDMS electrodes when compared to wet Ag/AgCl
electrodes kept dry by their waterproof adhesive tape, but the
reduction was not severe enough to obscure the readability of
the recordings, and all morphological waveforms of the ECG
signal were discernible even when motion artifacts were introduced. When water did not penetrate tape-wrapped Ag/AgCl electrodes, high fidelity ECG signals were observed. However, when
water penetrated the Ag/AgCl electrodes, the signal quality degraded to the point where ECG morphological waveforms were not
discernible.

Manuscript received October 3, 2013; revised January 9, 2014 and February
24, 2014; accepted February 27, 2014. Date of publication March 6, 2014; date
of current version May 15, 2014. This work was supported by the Office of
Naval Research work unit N00014-12-1-0171. The Lincoln Laboratory portion
of this work was sponsored by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research
& Engineering under Air Force Contract FA8721-05-C-0002. Opinions, interpretations, conclusions and recommendations are those of the authors and are
not necessarily endorsed by the United States Government. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
B. A. Reyes, H. F. Posada-Quintero, J. R. Bales, and A. L. Clement, and
G. D. Pins are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609 USA (e-mail: bareyes@wpi.edu;
hposadaquintero@wpi.edu; justin.r.bales@wpi.edu; ablackwood@wpi.edu;
gpins@wpi.edu).
A. Swiston is with MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, MA 02421 USA
(e-mail: albert.swiston@ll.mit.edu).
J. Riistama is with Philips Research, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands
(e-mail: jarno.riistama@philips.com).
J. P. Florian and B. Shykoff are with the Navy Experimental Diving
Unit, Panama City, FL 32407 USA (e-mail: john.florian@navy.mil;
barbara.shykoff.ca@navy.mil).
M. Qin is with the Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory, New
London, CT 06349 USA (e-mail: Michael.Qin@med.navy.mil).
∗ K. H. Chon is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609 USA (e-mail: kichon@wpi.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309293

Index Terms—Carbon black-PDMS, ECG electrode, ECG
monitoring, heart rate variability (HRV), reusable, underwater,
waterproof.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE heart rate (HR) derived from an electrocardiogram
(ECG) measurement is widely used and accepted as one
of the key vital signs [1]. Certainly, much important physiological information can be deduced from both HRs and morphological changes in the ECG waveforms. In nonwater immersed
conditions, the benefits of ECG recordings for assessing cardiovascular and physiological health have been well documented.
We surmise that similar invaluable information can be garnered
when a subject is fully immersed in water but the evidence is
scant since ECG electrodes that can operate in water-submersed
environments at hyperbaric depths for prolonged periods have
not yet been developed.
The significant hyperbaric pressure and cold temperatures associated with increasing depth underwater are known to cause
severe challenges to the human physiological control systems
[2]. When the control systems break down due to prolonged hyperbaric exposures, humans are more susceptible to detrimental conditions such as hypothermia, hypoxia, and many neurological and cardiovascular problems including decompression
sickness (DCS) [3]–[7]. For the aforementioned hazardous conditions, early detection is crucial for taking prompt corrective
actions. Beyond the HR, information derived from morphological changes in the ECG waveform can be used to diagnose
cardiac ischemia, injury, and malignant arrhythmias [8], [9].
Recently, our research group has shown that early detection
of DCS can be made from HR variability (HRV) analysis [6].
Specifically, it was found that for neurological DCS, which is
the most severe form of DCS, there was significant depression
of the sympathetic and parasympathetic tones as determined
by the HRV analysis [6]. For cardiopulmonary DCS, we found
elevated parasympathetic but reduced sympathetic tone [10].
Hence, a diving monitor that can measure ECG signals so that
HRV analysis can be performed is needed if early detection
of DCS and the proper counter measures can be developed
to prevent injuries due to prolonged exposure to a hyperbaric
environment.
A fully functional and reliable underwater ECG monitoring
system, capable of recording ECG waveforms even with water
infiltration, does not currently exist to support either shallow
or deep diving medical research. Recently, a device that has
potential for long-term ECG monitoring has been trialed, but it
relies on using Ag/AgCl electrodes that are held in place with

T

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1864

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

water-resistant tape [11], [12]. Good adhesion to skin after
adequate skin preparation makes the standard wet Ag/AgCl
electrodes the universal option for clinical and research application [13]. However, some limitations of the wet Ag/AgCl
electrodes include skin irritation, bacterial growth especially
for long-term recordings, gel dehydration over time, and signal
degradation with sweat [14]. In addition, unopened Ag/AgCl
electrode packages have expiration dates that complicate inventory management. Both their obsolescence and disposability
increases costs. For these and other reasons, it is difficult to
incorporate Ag/AgCl electrodes into a neoprene protective wetsuit, especially because the electrodes’ functioning falters in
underwater condition. A moleskin tape, which is taped over a
waterproof tape, is often used to further preclude water penetration [15]. However, the consequence is severe skin irritation
due to the tape and peeling off the moleskin can often lead to
tearing of the skin. Donning a dry suit is an option to prevent
water penetration but it is expensive compared to a wet suit and
it is limited to cold water applications.
Dry electrodes have been considered as an alternative to
replace conventional wet Ag/AgCl electrodes for long-term
ECG recordings, particularly because they do not require an
electrolyte layer [16]–[18]. Recently, use of carbon nanotubePolydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) based dry electrodes was proposed for ECG and electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings [14], [19]. In particular, ECG carbon nanotube/PDMS dry
electrodes exhibited superior performance to other dry electrodes and were found to be robust even when subjects perspired [14]. However, the fabrication process is expensive and
complicated. In addition, no studies were conducted to analyze
the performance of these carbon nanotube-based electrodes during full water immersion.
Given the lack of electrodes that are fully functional in water immersion without the use of waterproof adhesive tape, we
will illustrate in this paper the development of a novel carbon black powder/PDMS (CB/PDMS) composite electrode for
ECG monitoring. In this paper, we describe 1) the fabrication
process of the electrodes, 2) determination of the optimal size
of the electrodes with respect to their impedance values, 3) cytotoxicity tests, and 4) evaluation of CB/PDMS electrodes for
ECG data collection during both dry and full water immersion conditions. All experiments and data analyses to determine ECG signal fidelity compare the CB/PDMS electrodes
to the Ag/AgCl electrodes as the latter are the standard in
practice.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Fabrication of CB/PDMS Electrodes
Electrodes were fabricated of a conductive element comprising CB and PDMS based on previous studies [20], [21]. Electrodes were fabricated using the following steps:
1) Conductive CB powder (CB Super P Conductive, Alfa
Aesar; Ward Hill, MA, USA) is used as the conductive
material. PDMS (Sylgard 184, Dow Corning; Auburn, MI,
USA) was used as the insulating matrix.

TABLE I
DIMENSIONS OF THE CB/PDMS ELECTRODES FABRICATED

2) The CB/PDMS mixture was then mixed with the PDMS
curing agent according to a previous study and manufacturing recommendations [22].
3) The CB/PDMS/curing agent mixture was poured and leveled with a straight metal edge into wells of the electrode
molds, forming disks.
4) The mixture was applied to the reverse side of nickel plated
snap fasteners appropriately sized for conventional ECG
monitor connection.
5) All components were degassed in a vacuum chamber to
remove air bubbles.
6) The fasteners were affixed to the molded CB/PDMS/
curing agent mixture with gentle pressure without causing
major rippling.
7) The filled mold assembly was then placed in a curing oven.
8) The molds were disassembled and the electrodes removed.
Plates containing circular molds of different sizes were designed using Inventor 3D CAD software (Autodesk Inc.; San
Rafael, CA, USA) and 3-D printed in Acrylonitrile–Butadiene–
Styrene plastic. Mold sizes were designed to produce CB/PDMS
electrodes of three different dimensions (diameter and thickness) as shown in Table I.
A total of 14 electrodes of each size were produced for
impedance characterization and ECG data collection. To observe the topographical information of the CB/PDMS electrodes, scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were obtained in high vacuum at different magnifications.
B. Impedance Characterization
The electrode-skin contact impedance was analyzed for the
three different sizes of CB/PDMS electrodes. For each electrode
size, seven pairs of electrodes were selected. The impedance was
measured using an impedance analyzer (IM3570, Hioki E.E.
Corporation; Cranbury, NJ, USA) by averaging 20 measurements at each of 25 logarithmically equally-spaced frequencies ranging from 4 to 100 kHz. For each measurement, two
CB/PDMS electrodes of the same dimensions were placed on
anterior forearm skin 2 cm apart from each other. While ECG
power is mostly below 40 Hz, selection of the measurement frequency range to 100 kHz and the location of the electrodes for
impedance measurements were chosen so that our results can be
compared to previous other studies [14], [16]. An elastic compression bandage was used to fix them to the skin. Prior to each
measurement, the skin area was cleaned with 70% isopropyl alcohol but shaving or scrubbing of the surface area was not done.
Three different pressure levels were applied to the electrodes to
fix them to the skin: 1) low pressure level, 2) medium pressure
level, and 3) high pressure level; the low pressure was defined as

REYES et al.: NOVEL ELECTRODES FOR UNDERWATER ECG MONITORING

the minimal contact force needed to adhere the electrodes to the
skin, and the high pressure as the maximal force comfortable
for the subject. To allow all electrodes an equal time to stabilize on the skin surface, measurements were started 30 s after
fixation. All measurements were performed on the same day to
keep skin properties as constant as possible [16]. Finally, baseline impedance of the measurement device itself was measured
and it was found to have a maximum value of 315 mΩ.
C. Cytotoxicity Test
Cell Culture: Direct contact cytotoxicity assays were
performed on confluent monolayers of L929 mouse connective
tissue fibroblasts (CCL-1; ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA)
or pooled neonatal normal human epidermal keratinocytes
(NHEK; Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA). L929 cells were
cultured in high glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium
(DMEM; Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% characterized fetal bovine serum (FBS;
Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA) and 100 U-mL/100 mg-mL/2 mM
penicillin/streptomycin/L-glutamine
(Life
Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cultures were maintained in a 37
◦
C incubator at 5% CO2 and passaged according to ATCC
recommendations at 80%–90% confluence. For cytotoxicity
experiments, L929 cells were seeded at a density of 27 000
cells/cm2 in six well plates and grown to confluence. NHEKs
were cultured in KGM-Gold medium (NHEK; Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA) at 37 ◦ C and 5% CO2 . NHEKs were
subcultured according to Lonza recommendations between
80%–90% confluence. For cytotoxicity experiments, NHEKs
were seeded at a density of 10 000 cells/cm2 in six well plates
and grown to confluence. Experiments were performed on
NHEKs between passages two and four.
Direct Contact Cytotoxicity Assay: To assess the cytotoxicity of the electrodes, direct contact cell culture evaluation
was carried out per ASTM F813-07. Small-thin CB/PDMS
electrodes (2-cm diameter × 2-mm thickness), positive control latex disks (19 mm diameter × 1.6 mm; McMaster-Carr,
Princeton, NJ, USA), and negative control high density
polyethylene disks (HDPE; 19 mm in diameter × 2.4 mm
in; McMaster-Carr, Princeton, NJ, USA) were sterilized by
overnight incubation in an antibiotic cocktail containing
100 U/mL-100 μg/ml penicillin-streptomycin, 2.5 μg/mL amphotericin B, 10 pg/mL ciproflaxin, and 100 μg/mL gentamycin.
Alternatively, electrodes were sterilized by autoclaving. Antibiotic sterilized samples were rinsed in three washes of culture
medium prior to testing. Culture medium was aspirated, material samples were placed in the center of the confluent cell
monolayers, and fresh medium was added. Additional HDPE
was used to weigh down electrodes and latex to minimize sample movement, as per ASTM F813-07. Cells were incubated
with material for 24 h, and the morphology of cells was assessed by phase contrast microscopy. Wells with no cells and no
added material were used as background controls.
MTT Assay: Cell viability was assessed using an MTT
reduction assay to measure cell metabolic activity. Samples
were removed from wells and cultures were rinsed once with

1865

Versene solution (Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA) to remove
nonadherent cells. Cultures were incubated in medium supplemented with 1 mg/mL 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,
5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT; Sigma, St. Louis, MO,
USA). After 2 h at 37 ◦ C, unreacted MTT was aspirated and
wells were imaged. The formazan product was solubilized with
1 mL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) per well and the supernatant
was diluted 1:4 with DMSO. The optical density (OD) was
measured in duplicate in a microplate (100 μl/well) at 540 nm
using a SpectraMax 250 plate reader. Data for each sample was
normalized between experiments using the following equation:
%Cellular activity =

ODsam ple − ODno cells
ODno m aterial

× 100

(1)

where ODno cells is the average OD reading of MTT incubated
in wells containing no cells and ODno m aterial is the average
OD reading of MTT incubated in wells containing cells but no
added sample material.
Statistical Analysis: Cytotoxicity experiments were conducted three times with samples in triplicate. Statistical differences for cytotoxicity studies were evaluated using SigmaPlot
Version 11.0 (Systat Software, Inc.). One Way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with Holm–Sidak posthoc analysis was performed. Because the NHEK data was heteroscedastic, ANOVA
with Holm–Sidak was also performed on base ten logarithmically transformed data to ensure statistical robustness; results
were unchanged. A significant difference between groups was
indicated by a p value <0.05.
D. ECG Data Collection
Subjects: Twelve healthy male volunteers of ages ranging
from 20 to 51 years (mean ± standard deviation 29.50 ± 8.93),
weight 74.80 ± 8.93 kg, and height 174.90 ± 5.34 cm, were
enrolled in this study. The group consisted of students and staff
members from Worcester Polytechnic Institute, MA, USA. The
study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of WPI and all volunteers consented to be subjects for the
experiment.
Equipment: Three Holter recorders were simultaneously used
to acquire ECG signals from volunteers (RZ153+, Rozinn Electronics, Glendale, NY, USA) with three different electrodes as
detailed below in the Protocol section. These Holter recorders
provide a frequency response between 0.05 to 60 Hz at −3 dB
and a sampling frequency of 180 Hz. Acquired signals were
saved in CompactFlash Card Readers for subsequent offline
data analysis.
Protocol: Simultaneous ECG signals were acquired using conductive adhesive gel electrodes (Cleartrace 1700,
CONMED, Utica, NY, USA), small-thin CB/PDMS, and large
CB/PDMS. The conductive adhesive gel electrodes used had an
active circular area of 2 cm in diameter and will be referred to as
wet Ag/AgCl. All sets of electrodes were contiguously placed
to create a one-channel ECG recording. Electrodes were placed:
on xiphoid process (ground), center of the manubrium (1−), and
under the left pectoral near V6 electrode position (1+). This configuration mimics the traditional Lead II ECG [23]. The three

1866

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

ECG data acquisition protocol involving dry, immersed, and wet conditions. The elastic band removal was performed for only three subjects.

sets of electrodes were randomly placed on all subjects around
the selected locations. Randomization of the Holter recorders
was also done. Note that the CB/PDMS electrodes were reused
throughout the two weeks of underwater data collection. After
cleaning the skin sites with 70% isopropyl alcohol, CB/PDMS
electrodes were placed with a regular surgical tape (Transpore, 3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) while wet Ag/AgCl electrodes
were directly placed on the skin as their surface is completely
adhesive.
To ensure all electrodes were well adhered to the body and
minimize the penetration of water to the Ag/AgCl gel, the thoracic area was wrapped with an elastic compression band. A
reliable ECG signal from Ag/AgCl electrodes was needed so
that the signal from the CB/PDMS electrodes could be compared to it. Once the first three protocols of the experiment were
completed (see below), the elastic compression band was removed from all electrodes to determine the full hydrophobicity
of both the Ag/AgCl and CB/PDMS electrodes.
Each experiment was of 20 min in duration and was divided
into four periods (see Fig. 1) as follows:
1) 5 min in standing position outside the bathtub (dry
condition).
2) 10 min in seated position inside the water-filled bathtub
(immersed condition).
3) 5 min in standing position outside the bathtub (wet
condition).
4) For three subjects, the elastic compression band was removed and an additional 5 min recording was acquired
with the subjects standing outside the bathtub (1 min),
seated inside the bathtub without any movement (2 min,
moving their torsos side-to-side inside the bathtub (1 min),
and moving their torsos up-and-down inside the bathtub
(1 min).
All recordings were collected at the WPI Sports Center. Bathtub water temperature was controlled (mean ± standard deviation 33.3 ± 1.34 ◦ C). This facility is equipped with bathtubs
for athletes’ training and rehabilitation. During the first period,
subjects were asked to remain relaxed in standing position outside the bathtub; the electrodes at this point were completely dry.
During the immersed condition, subjects were asked to be seated
inside the bathtub with the water coming up to their neck so that

all electrodes were fully immersed. Finally, the subjects were
asked to exit the bathtub and remain relaxed in standing position
with the wet electrodes still applied to their skin. For three subjects, the elastic compression band was removed and the subjects
were re-immersed in the water in a sitting position. Data were
recorded for 2 min with subjects performing up-and-down and
side-to-side movements. The aim for this portion of the experiment was to compare hydrophobicity of the two types of electrodes during body movements in water immersed condition.
Signal processing: Acquired ECG data were first filtered with
a 4th order Butterworth filter with a pass-band between 0.05 to
40 Hz and applied in forward and reverse scheme to produce
zero-phase distortion and minimize the start and end transients.
As recently proposed for ECG signal denoising [24], a second
filtering step was applied by using a nonlocal mean filtering
algorithm in order to minimize the white Gaussian noise observed in the collected data [25].
After filtering, simultaneous ECG recordings from different
Holter monitors were aligned by using the cross-correlation
function; 20 s of acquisition were extracted from each recording
to compute the cross-correlation sequence and then the sample
lag which provides the maximum cross-correlation value was
used to align the ECG recordings by shifting the corresponding
recording by that amount of samples. Data containing motion
and noise artifacts were omitted for further data analysis. For
each condition, a segment of at least two consecutive minutes
was manually extracted from the simultaneous Holter recordings
and then aligned. The data inclusion criterion was that ECG signals from the three Holter recorders all had to contain relatively
noise-free measurements. Our choice of requiring data duration
of at least 2 min was so that spectral dynamics associated with
the HRV analysis could be obtained [8].
R-wave peak detection was performed on all selected ECG
segments by using a robust QRS complex detection algorithm [26], [27]. Manual correction of R-wave peak locations
was performed when necessary and subsequently RR interval
time series were calculated. A sampling frequency of 4 Hz was
used on the RR intervals by cubic spline interpolation. The
power spectral densities of the interpolated RR time series were
computed with Welch’s modified periodogram method with
50% overlap, NFFT = 1024 (frequency resolution of 0.0039 Hz)

REYES et al.: NOVEL ELECTRODES FOR UNDERWATER ECG MONITORING

and a Hamming window was used to compute the power spectral
density.
ECG templates were computed for each selected ECG segment by creating an ensemble matrix with the corresponding
ECG cycles aligned with respect to their R-peak locations and
finally averaged at each time instant.
Performance Evaluation: CB/PDMS electrode performance
was tested by extracting temporal and spectral parameters
from the RR intervals as defined in the literature [8]. Signals
acquired with wet Ag/AgCl electrodes with subjects in dry
conditions were used as reference, and for our short-duration
experiments, the elastic compression band wrapped over the
electrodes provided even stronger adhesive bonding to the skin
that water did not penetrate. We used HRV analysis as a quantitative performance measure since most previous hyperbaric
studies [4], [6], [10], [28] were concerned with changes in the
dynamics of the autonomic nervous system, and our recent work
has shown a promising approach for early detection of DCS in
swine by tracking changes in the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous tones via the HRV [6], [10].
Temporal measures of HRV considered in this study were
1) mean RR interval (millisecond units), 2) SDNN (standard
deviation of all RR intervals, millisecond units), 3) RMSSD
(square root of the mean of the sum of the squares of differences
between adjacent RR intervals, millisecond units), and 4) NN50
count (number of pairs of adjacent RR intervals differing by
more than 50 ms in the entire recording, unitless).
Spectral measures of HRV from short-term recordings considered were 1) LF (power in low frequency band from 0.04–
0.15 Hz, squared millisecond units), 2) HF (power in high frequency band from 0.15–0.4 Hz, squared millisecond units),
3) the total power (squared millisecond units), and 4) HF/LF
ratio (unitless).
Peak-to-peak amplitude of ECG templates was used to quantify the amplitude reduction of the ECG signals when electrodes
were immersed in water. The cross-correlation coefficient between the ECG templates obtained with CB/PDMS electrodes
and with wet Ag/AgCl electrodes was used to quantify the signal
distortion as defined by
N
i=1 ECGAg/AgCl · ECGCB/PDM S
ρ = 

2 N 
2 (2)
N
ECG
·
ECG
Ag/AgCl
CB/PDM
S
i=1
i=1
where ECGx represents the ECG template obtained with the
corresponding electrodes, and N is the length of the ECG
templates. Finally, temporal and spectral measures of HRV,
and peak-to-peak amplitude of ECG templates, obtained from
recordings with large and small-thin CB/PDMS electrodes were
compared with those obtained with wet AG/AgCl electrodes using the paired t-test with p < 0.05 considered as significant.
III. RESULTS
A. CB/PDMS Electrodes
Circular ECG electrodes were fabricated by using a
CB/PDMS mixture. The dimensions (diameter and thickness)
of the electrodes were controlled via 3-D printed molds. Fig. 2

1867

Fig. 2. CB/PDMS electrodes. Left to right: (a) small-thin electrode, (b) smallthick electrode, (c) large electrode. Rules scale in cm.

Fig. 3. High-vacuum SEM image of CB/PDMS electrodes. Scale bar =
1000 nm.

shows an example of each size of fabricated CB/PDMS electrodes. Microstructure of CB/PDMS electrodes was observed
via high-vacuum SEM micrographs after freeze-fracture as
shown in Fig. 3. Deposition and well-distributed CB particles
inside the elastomeric matrix is seen.
B. Impedance Characterization
CB/PDMS electrode-skin contact impedance was measured
for the three different dimensions at three pressure levels. For
reference, the results are compared to wet Ag/AgCl electrodeskin impedance at the same position; the reported impedance
magnitude |Z| values were plotted versus frequency in Fig. 4
and are in agreement with previously-reported studies [16].
For all electrode sizes, the impedance was dependent on the
applied pressure and its value decreased with increasing frequency. For all pressure levels, the impedance was lower for the
large electrodes (3 cm × 2 mm) compared to either the thick
or thin small electrodes (2 cm diameter); among these small
electrodes, the impedance was lower for the thin (2 mm) than
for the thick electrodes (3 mm). For the two thinner electrodes
(2 mm thickness) there was only a slight difference between
medium and high pressure levels. The wet Ag/AgCl electrodes
were not affected by the difference in the applied pressure. Measurements of the CB/PDMS electrode-skin impedance obtained
at 33 Hz for the different applied pressure levels is shown in
Table II. This table summarizes the findings of the electrodeskin impedance results at a representative frequency of the ECG
spectrum. For reference, the wet Ag/AgCl electrodes had an
electrode-skin impedance around 80 kΩ at 33 Hz. Measurements of CB/PDMS electrode-skin impedance were performed
on an additional subject several days after and the results are

1868

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE II
ELECTRODE-SKIN IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS AT 33 HZ FOR THE CB/PDMS
ELECTRODES AT DIFFERENT PRESSURE LEVELS

recording experiments outside and inside the water-filled bathtub, all large and small-thin CB/PDMS electrodes were fixed
to the body by applying medium pressure with a stretchable
compression band.
C. Cytotoxicity Test

Fig. 4. Impedance of different CB/PDMS electrode sizes at same pressure
level. (a) Low pressure. (b) Medium pressure. (c) High pressure.

similar to the findings of Fig. 4. For example, the observations
of the pressure dependence of the CB/PDMS-skin impedance
and lower impedance of the large electrodes when compared to
the small ones remained intact.
Given that large CB/PDMS electrodes with a medium or high
pressure level showed lower electrode-skin impedance magnitude followed by the small-thin CB/PDMS electrodes, we used
these two configurations for measuring human ECG recordings during dry, water immersion, and wet conditions. For the

The cytotoxicity of the electrodes was evaluated by placing
the materials in direct contact with connective tissue cells (L929
cells) and primary human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEKs).
Results were similar for each cell line. Microscopic analyses
showed minimal cell death in monolayer cell cultures in contact
with both autoclaved and antibiotic-sterilized electrodes (see
Figs. 5 and 6). L929 cells cultured with electrodes [see Figs. 5(b)
and (c)] remained adhered to the tissue culture plate and were
morphologically consistent with cells cultured in the presence of
the negative control material (HDPE) [see Fig. 5(a)] and without
added material [see Fig. 5(e)]. Many of the cells appeared to be
proliferating and confluence increased during the 24 h analysis
period. Some cell death was observed immediately adjacent and
under the electrode as well as the HDPE samples; however, the
lack of a zone of inhibition extending beyond the margins of the
sample suggests that this was due to cell death from compression and removal due to shear forces from sample micromotion
associated with plate handling. In contrast, L929 monolayers
cultured with latex positive controls were completely disrupted.
The small number of L929 cells that remained were rounded
and not well attached [see Fig. 5(d)]. Quantification of cellular viability using MTT solubilized with DMSO showed that
metabolic activity of both cell types is not significantly altered
by contact with electrodes compared to HDPE controls.
Cellular viability, as measured by average MTT reduction,
of L929 cells cultured with HDPE was 31.0% lower than cell
culture (no material) controls [see Fig. 5(f)]. The area of the
HDPE sample occupies 30% of the growth area of a six well,
suggesting that the loss of cell viability in these wells is primarily due to mechanical compression of the cells by the sample
material. MTT reduction by L929 cells cultured with electrodes
is not statistically different than by cells cultured with HDPE.
MTT reduction by L929 cells cultured with latex is 84.4% lower
than cell culture (no material) controls. These results suggest
that the electrodes are not cytotoxic to L929 cells. Similarly,
NHEK cells cultured in the presence of autoclaved or antibioticsterilized electrodes remained spread and maintained cell-cell
contact [see Figs. 6(b) and (c)]. Morphologically, NHEK monolayers cultured with electrodes resembled monolayers cultured
with HDPE negative controls [see Fig. 6(a)] and cell culture
controls [see Fig. 6(e)]. NHEKs cultured with latex remained

REYES et al.: NOVEL ELECTRODES FOR UNDERWATER ECG MONITORING

1869

Fig. 5. Cytotoxic effect of electrodes on L929 cells. Phase contrast images of L929 cells after 24 h incubation with (a) HDPE, (b) antibiotic-sterilized electrode,
(c) autoclaved electrode, (d) latex, or (e) no material. Material interface is visible at the right side of the images. Scale bars = 250 μm. (f) Cellular activity
as determined by MTT assay (normalized to the no material control) is presented as mean + standard deviation. ∗ Indicates statistical difference from all other
materials (p < 0.05).

Fig. 6. Cytotoxic effect of electrodes on NHEK cells. Phase contrast images of NHEK cells after 24 h incubation with (a) HDPE, (b) antibiotic-sterilized
electrode, (c) autoclaved electrode, (d) latex, or (e) no material. Material interface is visible at the right side of the images. Scale bars = 250 μm. (f) Cellular
activity as determined by MTT assay (normalized to the no material control) is presented as mean + standard deviation. ∗ Indicates statistical difference from all
other materials (p < 0.05).

attached but exhibited rounded morphology and lacked cell-cell
contact indicating cell death [see Fig. 6(d)]. Staining with MTT
revealed that these cells were not metabolically active.
Since the electrodes are designed for skin contact, their
cytotoxicity against NHEKs was also assessed [see Fig. 6(f)].

MTT reduction by NHEKs cultured with HDPE was 6.0% lower
than by cells cultured with no material controls. There was no
statistical difference between MTT reduction by NHEKs cultured with electrodes sterilized by either method and NHEKs
cultured with HDPE. MTT reduction by cells cultured with

1870

Fig. 7. Example of ECG signals for each experimental condition. (a) Initial
outside period (dry condition). (b) Inside period (immersed condition). (c) Final
outside period (wet condition). ECG signals acquired with wet Ag/AgCl electrodes (blue line), large CB/PDMS electrodes (red dashed line), and small-thin
CB/PDMS electrodes (green dotted line).

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 8. Example of ECG templates for each experimental condition. (a) Initial
outside period (dry condition). (b) Inside period (immersed condition). (c) Final
outside period (wet condition). ECG signals acquired with wet Ag/AgCl electrodes (blue line), large CB/PDMS electrodes (red dashed line), and small-thin
CB/PDMS electrodes (green dotted line).

D. ECG Signal Quality
latex was almost completely ablated (98.6%). These results
demonstrate that the electrodes are not cytotoxic to NHEKs
and in conjunction with the results on L929 cells suggest that the electrodes are not cytotoxic for epidermal
applications.

1) Performance Evaluation of CB/PDMS Electrodes: ECG
signals were simultaneously acquired with wet Ag/AgCl electrodes and large and small-thin CB/PDMS electrodes during
three different conditions representing dry, full immersion, and
postimmersion in which all electrodes were saturated with water but not fully immersed. The CB/PDMS electrodes were able

REYES et al.: NOVEL ELECTRODES FOR UNDERWATER ECG MONITORING

Fig. 9. Peak-to-peak amplitude of ECG templates for each condition.
∗ indicates higher amplitudes versus Wet Ag/AgCl electrode (p < 0.05).
∗ indicates lower amplitudes versus Wet Ag/AgCl electrode (p < 0.05).

to acquire ECG signals highly correlated with those from traditional wet Ag/AgCl electrodes during all conditions. Fig. 7
shows an example of filtered ECG signals recorded during each
experimental condition with each type of CB/PDMS electrode
as well as with wet Ag/AgCl. Fig. 8 shows an example of the
ECG templates computed for each experimental condition with
all tested electrodes. Both sizes of CB/PDMS electrodes were
able to capture all morphological components of ECG signals
during the dry, immersed, and wet conditions, and a decrease
in amplitude especially for the small-thin CB/PDMS electrodes
was only observed during the water immersed condition.
Statistical results of temporal and spectral HRV indices, peakto-peak amplitudes, and cross-correlation coefficients obtained
for the wet Ag/AgCl, large and small-thin CB/PDMS electrodes
are summarized in Tables III, IV, and V, for the dry, immersed,
and wet conditions, respectively. For all experimental conditions, no significant differences (p > 0.05) were found for all
the temporal and spectral measures of HRV obtained with the
CB/PDMS electrodes when compared to those obtained with
the wet Ag/AgCl electrodes.
Waveform distortion of the ECG templates seems to be low
as indicated by the high cross-correlation coefficient values for
both CB/PDMS electrode sizes in comparison to the ECG templates obtained with wet Ag/AgCl electrodes during the dry,
immersed, and wet conditions despite the amplitude differences.
Fig. 9 shows a boxplot with the results obtained for the peakto-peak amplitude for each type of electrode during each experimental condition. The amplitude obtained with the large
CB/PDMS electrode was found to be significantly higher compared to the wet Ag/AgCl amplitude (p < 0.05) during the dry
condition. Both sizes of CB/PDMS electrodes produced lower
amplitudes of ECG templates than the wet Ag/AgCl electrode
during the immersed condition (p < 0.05). For the wet (postimmersion) condition, similar statistical results to the dry condition were obtained.
For the immersion and postimmersion conditions, amplitude
attenuation/gain of ECG templates with respect to the initial

1871

preimmersion period was computed by dividing the peak-topeak amplitude of the ECG template of the nondry conditions
by the corresponding amplitude obtained during the dry condition with the same type of electrode. Table VI summarizes the
amplitude attenuation/gain results for each type of electrode during immersion and postimmersion conditions relative to the dry
condition. Amplitude reduction/gain results from CB/PDMS
electrodes were compared to those from wet Ag/AgCl electrodes, and significantly lower reduction was found for both
sizes of CB/PDMS when compared to the wet Ag/AgCl during the immersion condition (p < 0.05); for the wet condition,
significantly higher gain was found for the small-thin CB/PDMS
electrodes when compared to the wet Ag/AgCl (p < 0.05).
2) Without an Elastic Compression Band to Test True
Hydrophobicity of Electrodes: To fully compare the hydrophobicity of the large carbon/PDMS and Ag/AgCl of electrodes,
the elastic band was removed so that both sets of electrodes remained attached to the body only with their respective adhesive
tapes [see Fig. 10(a), arrow]. The subjects were then fully immersed in a sitting position and were instructed to sit quietly [see
Fig. 10(c)] for 1 min followed by moving their torso up-anddown [see Fig. 10(d)] and side-to-side [see Fig. 10(e)]. Fig. 11
shows representative recordings from two additional subjects.
As shown in Figs. 10(c), the Ag/AgCl electrodes’ ECG signals
were immediately compromised even during a quiet sitting position, whereas for the CB/PDMS electrodes, high fidelity data
can be seen. The Ag/AgCl electrodes’ signal quality becomes
saturated and consequently all morphological waveforms of the
ECG are not discernible with both up-and-down and side-toside movements as shown in Fig. 10(d), (e) and (a)–(d). Consequently, HR calculations cannot be performed. However, even
with significant motion artifacts, the CB/PDMS electrodes are
able to resolve QRS complexes throughout the data collection
with body movements. There are visible low frequency oscillations which are due to cyclical body movements but they can be
filtered to reveal all morphological waveforms of the ECG.
The average HR computed via an automatic R-peak detection
algorithm is presented in Table VII for both types of electrodes
for the ECG signal showed in Fig. 10. For the side-to-side torso
movements, the mean HR value from the Ag/AgCl electrodes
is about half the value of the CB/PDMS’s. For the up-and-down
torso movements, HR calculations cannot be determined for the
Ag/AgCl electrodes since we obtain saturated values throughout
the recording. For CB/PDMS electrodes, we obtain similar HR
values as those at other conditions including the at rest period.
IV. DISCUSSION
CB/PDMS electrodes of three different dimensions were fabricated (diameter × thickness: 2 cm × 2 mm, 2 cm × 3 mm,
and 3 cm × 2 mm) as detailed in Section II. The SEM results indicated that the CB powders were fully dispersed inside the PDMS elastomeric matrix. Connectivity of CB/PDMS
electrodes to conventional ECG and Holter monitors is made
possible by using a snap connector attached to the electrodes
during the fabrication process without compromising the structural integrity of the electrodes. The fabrication procedures can

1872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE III
ECG SIGNAL QUALITY INDICES—INITIAL PERIOD OUTSIDE WATER (DRY CONDITION)

TABLE IV
ECG SIGNAL QUALITY INDICES—PERIOD INSIDE WATER (IMMERSED CONDITION)

TABLE V
ECG SIGNAL QUALITY INDICES—FINAL PERIOD OUTSIDE WATER (WET CONDITION)

TABLE VI
AMPLITUDE ATTENUATION OF ECG TEMPLATES WITH RESPECT TO SAME ELECTRODE DURING DRY CONDITION

be easily modified and optimized for large-scale production
where the low cost of the carbon composite components will
result in the CB/PDMS electrodes being fabricated economically. Certainly, the cost associated with the production of the
CB/PDMS should be cheaper than Ag/AgCl since the cost of
silver has significantly risen in the past few years. More impor-

tantly, while the Ag/AgCl electrodes are designed for a single
use, our CB/PDMS electrodes may be reused hence resulting
in significant cost savings. Furthermore, unlike Ag/AgCl electrodes, our CB/PDMS electrodes do not have a finite shelf life.
It is well known that even when Ag/AgCl electrodes are contained in a sealed package, if they are not used within a certain

REYES et al.: NOVEL ELECTRODES FOR UNDERWATER ECG MONITORING

1873

Fig. 10. ECG recording on surface and underwater with wet Ag/AgCl and CB/PDMS electrodes during different conditions. (a) Full recording with aligned
and filtered ECG signals. Dry condition: subject outside water, standing. Immersed condition: subject inside water, seated. Wet condition: subject outside water,
standing. (b) OW-BR segment: subject outside water without elastic band, standing. (c) IW-BR segment: subject inside water without elastic band, seated.
(d) IW-DM segment: torso movement inside water without elastic band, seated. (e) IW-UDM: up and down movement inside water without elastic band, seated.
Dry, immersed, and wet conditions were further explored in this letter.

time limit (usually 1 year), the hydrogels dry out resulting in
low-fidelity ECG signals.
Impedance of skin-CB/PDMS electrodes was investigated as
a function of electrode dimensions. Impedance values of the
CB/PDMS electrodes varied according to their sizes with the

largest electrodes (3 cm × 2 mm) having the lowest impedance,
which is in accordance with the classical resistance law in terms
of the material resistivity and electrode dimensions [29]. Influence of the pressure level applied to the electrode against
the recording site was also studied and was found to be

1874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 11. Examples of ECG recordings underwater with wet Ag/AgCl and CB/PDMS electrodes during movement conditions. (a) and (c) Torso movement inside
water without elastic band, seated. (b) and (d) Up and down movement inside water without elastic band, seated.
TABLE VII
AVERAGE HR COMPARED FOR THE DIFFERENT CONDITIONS OF THE RECORDING SHOWN IN FIG. 10

dependent on the applied pressure, in agreement with a previous study [16]. For the same electrode size, skin-electrode
impedance decreased as the pressure level increased. It was
found that for thinner CB/PDMS electrodes the decrement in
skin-CB/PDMS electrode impedance was markedly less for a
medium and a high pressure level when compared to thicker
electrodes. This could be explained by taking into account the
elastic properties of PDMS elastomer and the conductive network formation through PDMS by the CB contents. As the
CB concentration increases when the electrode is compressed
against the skin, the distance between particles decreases and
facilitates the transport of electrons through connected particles by a tunneling effect [20], [30], [31]. However, as seen in
Figs. 4(b) and (c), the impedance values do not significantly decrease even when higher-than-medium pressure is applied since
after a certain pressure threshold, CB conductive elements do

not compress further and, hence, no further conductive pathways are formed. Since lower impedance leads to better signal
conduction in dry condition, the large and small-thin CB/PDMS
electrodes were selected for underwater ECG testing.
Cytotoxicity of CB/PDMS electrodes was evaluated with connective tissue cells and primary human epidermal keratinocytes.
Similar results were found for each cell line and demonstrate
that the electrodes are not cytotoxic for epidermal applications.
Although motion artifacts were not fully explored in this paper, we expect that due to their flexibility, CB/PDMS electrodes
adapt better to skin topography than rigid dry electrodes which
are prone to shifting against skin during body movement [16].
While there have been other carbon-based ECG electrode developments [14], we are not aware of their capacity to function
in full water immersion. The use of PDMS polymers is popular due to their simple and inexpensive fabrication process, but

REYES et al.: NOVEL ELECTRODES FOR UNDERWATER ECG MONITORING

the most attractive features are the superior elasticity and flexibility, nontoxicity to cells, high-permeability to oxygen, and
impermeability to water [22], [32], [33]. Obtaining conductive
materials with low resistivity by introducing CB in a polymer
matrix has been previously performed [34]. However, in contrast
to carbon nanotubes where the homogenous dispersal in thick
PDMS is challenging, CB particles have been found to be easy
to mix with PDMS gel and they distribute uniformly [35]. The
conductivity of CB/PDMS composites has been found to increase rapidly beyond a threshold concentration (circa 10 wt%)
[36]. While these studies have characterized basic properties of
combining PDMS and carbon powder, fabrication of electrodes
for application to ECG recordings has not been done.
To this end, we tested the CB/PDMS electrodes during full
immersion followed by post-immersion and compared their performance against the wet (i.e., gel-filled) Ag/AgCl electrodes.
It is well known that water is a good electric conductor with
respect to skin-electrode impedance, but it acts as a short-circuit
for poorly insulated electrodes, hence recording of biopotentials
requires sufficient electrical insulation [12], [15]. Our results
show that the morphologies of the ECG waveforms obtained
were comparable to that of the wet Ag/AgCl electrodes and that
all ECG morphologies were captured even during full water
immersion.
Quantification of the fidelity of the CB/PDMS electrodes
was achieved by using HRV analysis for dry and water immersion and post-water immersion conditions. Note that during
these procedures, a nonwaterproof elastic compression band was
wrapped over all electrodes to ensure that electrodes adhered
tightly to the skin. While the R-wave amplitude was significantly
reduced during immersion when compared to the dry conditions,
the reduction was small. Hence, Ag/AgCl electrodes benefited
from water not fully penetrating the hydrogels, allowing us to
record good ECG signals even during full water immersion. The
reason for using an elastic compression band was to obtain nonwater contaminated ECG signals from the Ag/AgCl electrodes
so that we can make direct comparison to the CB/PDMS electrodes. For all conditions, we found nonsignificant differences
in both time- and frequency-domain parameters for both sizes of
CB/PDMS electrodes when compared to the wet Ag/AgCl electrodes. During the initial surface period, i.e., dry condition, ECG
amplitudes obtained with large CB/PDMS electrodes were significant higher than those from the wet Ag/AgCl electrodes. The
same results were obtained during the postimmersion period. We
surmise that the increase of ECG amplitudes seen during postwater immersion with CB/PDMS electrodes can be attributed
to the fact that some remnant water on the electrodes facilitated
better electrical signal conduction than dry condition. Note that
water is a good conductor, hence, its impedance is lower than
skin. Therefore, when CB/PDMS electrodes are fully water immersed, electrical biopotentials will follow the path of least
resistance and especially for those currents near the edges of the
electrode will flow through water rather than skin. We believe
this is why reduction in the amplitudes of the ECG R-wave peak
is observed during immersion. As salt water is an even better
conductor (the resistance may drop to as low as 10 Ω ) than nonsalt water, we expect further degradation of R-wave amplitudes

1875

with the CB/PDMS during immersion in ocean water. In our
study, we also noted significant R-wave amplitude reduction
during immersion and postimmersion when compared to the
dry condition for the Ag/AgCl electrodes. This is also expected
since the typical Ag/AgCl electrode-skin-electrode impedance
is on the order of kilo ohms as shown in Fig. 4, whereas water electrode-skin-electrode impedance is on the order of several hundred ohms. On average, there was a reduction of 40%
for the large CB/PDMS electrodes and 65% for the small-thin
CB/PDMS, and 12% for the Ag/AgCl electrodes.
For the next set of experiments, we removed the elastic compression band and recorded ECG signals from both CB/PDMS
and Ag/AgCl electrodes. The goal was to examine how these
electrodes perform after being exposed to more than 30 min of
water immersion and with body movements but without the
elastic compression band. No new tape was applied to the
CB/PDMS electrodes or to the Ag/AgCl electrodes. As shown
in Figs. 10 and 11, we observe that when water penetrates the
Ag/AgCl electrodes due to body movements, we often observe
saturated ECG signals resulting in nondiscernible ECG waveform morphologies. For the CB/PDMS electrodes, while they
are affected by the low-frequency body movements, all morphological waveforms were discernible. Clearly, this is the key
desired feature of our CB/PDMS electrodes.
Other applications of CB/PDMS electrodes may include EEG
and electromyogram (EMG) studies. In particular, underwater
EMG recording is widely used for research, exercise training,
and rehabilitation treatments using swimming pools [37], [38].
V. CONCLUSION
The CB/PDMS electrodes were fabricated and tested in both
dry and water immersion conditions. All morphological ECG
waveforms were acquired with the CB/PDMS electrodes for
both conditions albeit the R-wave amplitude was significantly
reduced when the electrodes including Ag/AgCl were exposed
to water. Body movements during water immersion caused
water penetration to Ag/AgCl electrodes and, consequently,
no discernible ECG waveforms were seen. However, for the
CB/PDMS electrodes, despite full water exposure and severe
body movements, all morphological waveforms of ECG signals
were resolved. For nonwater immersed conditions, we found no
statistical difference in the HRV time- and frequency-domain
parameters when compared to Ag/AgCl electrodes.
The use of CB/PDMS electrodes together with advanced waterproof diving instruments may open up new research areas
including hyperbaric physiology and may lead to wide use as
vital sign monitoring devices for SCUBA divers. Early detection of conditions that could lead to decompression sickness is
another area where an ECG dive monitor could have a positive
impact on recreational and military SCUBA divers.
REFERENCES
[1] C. W. Mundt, K. N. Montgomery, U. E. Udoh, V. N. Barker,
G. C. Thonier, A. M. Tellier, R. D. Ricks, B. B. Darling, Y. D. Cagle,
N. A. Cabrol, S. J. Ruoss, J. L. Swain, J. W. Hines, and G. T. A. Kovacs,
“A multiparameter wearable physiologic monitoring system for space and

1876

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

terrestrial applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 382–391, Sep. 2005.
G. Bosco, G. D. Tano, V. Zanon, and G. Fanò, “Breath-hold diving: A
point of view,” Sport Sci. Health, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 47–54, Dec. 2007.
J. Hansel, I. Solleder, W. Gfroerer, C. M. Muth, K. Paulat, P. Simon,
H. C. Heitkamp, A. Niess, and K. Tetzlaff, “Hypoxia and cardiac arrhythmias in breath-hold divers during voluntary immersed breath-holds,” Eur.
J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 105, no. 5, pp. 673–678, Mar. 2009.
K. Hirayanagi, K. Nakabayashi, K. Okonogi, and H. Ohiwa, “Autonomic
nervous activity and stress hormones induced by hyperbaric saturation
diving,” Undersea Hyperb. Med., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 46–54, 2003.
A. Kurita, H. Nagayoshi, Y. Okamoto, B. Takase, T. Ishizuka, and H. Oiwa,
“Effects of severe hyperbaric pressure on autonomic nerve functions,” Mil.
Med., vol. 167, no. 11, pp. 934–938, Nov. 2002.
Y. Bai, R. T. Mahon, J. C. White, P. R. Brink, and K. H. Chon, “Impairment of the autonomic nervous function during decompression sickness
in swine,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 1004–1009, Mar. 2009.
J. P. Florian, “Repeated 6-h oxygen dives diminish dynamic and static
exercise performance,” Undersea Hyperb Med, vol. 37, p. 335, 2010.
“Heart rate variability. standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use. task force of the european society of cardiology
and the North American society of pacing and electrophysiology,” Eur.
Heart J., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 354–381, Mar. 1996.
P. Lindholm and C. E. Lundgren, “The physiology and pathophysiology of
human breath-hold diving,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 284–292,
Jan. 2009.
Y. Bai, N. Selvaraj, K. Petersen, R. Mahon, W. A. Cronin, J. White,
P. R. Brink, and K. H. Chon, “The autonomic effects of cardiopulmonary
decompression sickness in swine using principal dynamic mode analysis,”
Amer. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., vol. 305, no. 7, pp. R748–
758, Oct. 2013.
W. I. Sternberger and S. A. Goemmer, “Advanced dive monitoring system,” Life Support Biosphere Sci. Int. J. Earth Space, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 251–
258, 1999.
A. Sieber, A. L’Abbate, B. Kuch, M. Wagner, A. Benassi, M. Passera,
and R. Bedini, “Advanced instrumentation for research in diving and
hyperbaric medicine,” Undersea Hyperb Med., vol. 37, pp. 259–269, 2010.
Y. M. Chi, T. P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and noncontact
biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,” Biomed. Eng. IEEE Rev.,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 106–119, Oct. 2010.
H. C. Jung, J. H. Moon, D. H. Baek, J. H. Lee, Y. Y. Choi, J. S. Hong, and
S. H. Lee, “CNT/PDMS composite flexible dry electrodes for long-term
ECG monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1472–
1479, May 2012.
P. F. Hoar, H. C. Langworthy, W. H. Mints, W. E. Long, and
L. W. Raymond, “Technique for electrocardiographic monitoring of working divers,” Aviat. Space Environ. Med., vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 667–671, Jun.
1976.
A. Gruetzmann, S. Hansen, and J. Müller, “Novel dry electrodes for ECG
monitoring,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, no. 11, p. 1375, Nov. 2007.
J. Y. Baek, J. H. An, J. M. Choi, K. S. Park, and S. H. Lee, “Flexible
polymeric dry electrodes for the long-term monitoring of ECG,” Sens.
Actuators Phys., vol. 143, no. 2, pp. 423–429, May 2008.
G. Ruffini, S. Dunne, L. Fuentemilla, C. Grau, E. Farrés, J. Marco-Pallarés,
P. C. P. Watts, and S. R. P. Silva, “First human trials of a dry electrophysiology sensor using a carbon nanotube array interface,” Sens. Actuators
Phys., vol. 144, no. 2, pp. 275–279, Jun. 2008.
L. F. Wang, J. Q. Liu, B. Yang, and C. S. Yang, “PDMS-based low cost
flexible dry electrode for long-term EEG measurement,” IEEE Sens. J.,
vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 2898–2904, Sep. 2012.
M. L. Homer, J. R. Lim, K. Manatt, A. Kisor, A. M. Manfreda, L. Lara,
A. D. Jewell, S. P. S. Yen, H. Zhou, A. V. Shevade, and M. A. Ryan,
“Temperature effects on polymer-carbon composite sensors: evaluating
the role of polymer molecular weight and carbon loading,” in Proc. IEEE
Sensors, 2003, vol. 2, pp. 877–881.

[21] M. Leboeuf, N. Ghamri, B. Brulé, T. Coupez, and B. Vergnes, “Influence
of mixing conditions on rheological behavior and electrical conductivity
of polyamides filled with carbon black,” Rheol. Acta, vol. 47, no. 2,
pp. 201–212, Mar. 2008.
[22] H. Cong and T. Pan, “Photopatternable conductive PDMS materials for
microfabrication,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 18, no. 13, pp. 1912–1921,
2008.
[23] M. K. Delano and C. G. Sodini, “A long-term wearable electrocardiogram
measurement system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Body Sensor Netw., 2013,
pp. 1–6.
[24] B. H. Tracey and E. L. Miller, “Nonlocal means denoising of ECG signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2383–2386, Sep.
2012.
[25] A. Buades, B. Coll, and J. M. Morel, “A review of image denoising algorithms, with a new one,” Simul, vol. 4, pp. 490–530, 2005.
[26] V. X. Afonso, W. J. Tompkins, T. Q. Nguyen, and S. Luo, “ECG beat
detection using filter banks,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 2,
pp. 192–202, Feb. 1999.
[27] C. Vidaurre, T. H. Sander, and A. Schlögl, “BioSig: The free and open
source software library for biomedical signal processing,” Comput. Intell.
Neurosci., vol. 2011, pp. 1–12, Mar. 2011.
[28] A. D. Flouris and J. M. Scott, “Heart rate variability responses to a psychologically challenging scuba dive,” J. Sports Med. Phys. Fitness, vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 382–386, Dec. 2009.
[29] J. G. Webster, Medical Instrumentation: Application and Design. New
York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1998.
[30] S. Kohjiya, A. Katoh, J. Shimanuki, T. Hasegawa, and Y. Ikeda, “Nanostructural observation of carbon black dispersion in natural rubber matrix
by three-dimensional transmission electron microscopy,” J. Mater. Sci.,
vol. 40, no. 9–10, pp. 2553–2555, May 2005.
[31] S. P. Rwei, F. H. Ku, and K. C. Cheng, “Dispersion of carbon black in
a continuous phase: Electrical, rheological, and morphological studies,”
Colloid Polym. Sci., vol. 280, no. 12, pp. 1110–1115, Dec. 2002.
[32] S. K. Sia and G. M. Whitesides, “Microfluidic devices fabricated in
Poly(dimethylsiloxane) for biological studies,” Electrophoresis, vol. 24,
no. 21, pp. 3563–3576, 2003.
[33] J. Zhou, A. V. Ellis, and N. H. Voelcker, “Recent developments in PDMS
surface modification for microfluidic devices,” Electrophoresis, vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 2–16, 2010.
[34] E. K. Sichel Carbon Black-Polymer Composites: The Physics Of Electrically Conducting Composites. M. Dekker Ed., Adelaide, Australia Science
1982.
[35] X. Z. Niu, S. L. Peng, L. Y. Liu, W. J. Wen, and P. Sheng, “Characterizing and patterning of PDMS-based conducting composites,” Adv. Mater.,
vol. 19, no. 18, pp. 2682–2686, 2007.
[36] M. A. Unger, H. P. Chou, T. Thorsen, A. Scherer, and S. R. Quake, “Monolithic microfabricated valves and pumps by multilayer soft lithography,”
Science, vol. 288, no. 5463, pp. 113–116, Apr. 2000.
[37] A. Rainoldi, C. Cescon, A. Bottin, R. Casale, and I. Caruso, “Surface EMG
alterations induced by underwater recording,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 325–331, Jun. 2004.
[38] W. M. Silvers and D. G. Dolny, “Comparison and reproducibility of sEMG
during manual muscle testing on land and in water,” J. Electromyogr.
Kinesiol., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 95–101, Feb. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

