1538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Unobtrusive Sensing and Wearable Devices
for Health Informatics
Ya-Li Zheng, Student Member, IEEE, Xiao-Rong Ding, Carmen Chung Yan Poon, Benny Ping Lai Lo, Heye Zhang,
Xiao-Lin Zhou, Guang-Zhong Yang, Fellow, IEEE, Ni Zhao, and Yuan-Ting Zhang*, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The aging population, prevalence of chronic diseases,
and outbreaks of infectious diseases are some of the major challenges of our present-day society. To address these unmet healthcare needs, especially for the early prediction and treatment of
major diseases, health informatics, which deals with the acquisition, transmission, processing, storage, retrieval, and use of health
information, has emerged as an active area of interdisciplinary research. In particular, acquisition of health-related information by
unobtrusive sensing and wearable technologies is considered as a
cornerstone in health informatics. Sensors can be weaved or integrated into clothing, accessories, and the living environment, such
that health information can be acquired seamlessly and pervasively
in daily living. Sensors can even be designed as stick-on electronic
tattoos or directly printed onto human skin to enable long-term
health monitoring. This paper aims to provide an overview of four
emerging unobtrusive and wearable technologies, which are essential to the realization of pervasive health information acquisition, including: 1) unobtrusive sensing methods, 2) smart textile technology, 3) flexible-stretchable-printable electronics, and
4) sensor fusion, and then to identify some future directions of
research.
Index Terms—Body sensor network, flexible and stretchable
electronics, health informatics, sensor fusion, unobtrusive sensing,
wearable devices.

Manuscript received October 15, 2013; revised January 11, 2014 and February 14, 2014; accepted February 18, 2014. Date of publication March 5, 2014;
date of current version April 17, 2014. This work was supported in part by
the National Basic Research Program 973 (Grant 2010CB732606), the Guangdong Innovation Research Team Fund for Low-cost Healthcare Technologies in
China, the External Cooperation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
(Grant GJHZ1212), the Key Lab for Health Informatics of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
81101120). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Y.-L. Zheng and X.-R. Ding are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Joint Research Centre for Biomedical Engineering, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: ylzheng@ee.cuhk.edu.cn; xrding@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
C. C. Y. Poon is with the Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: cpoon@surgery.cuhk.edu.hk).
B. P. L. Lo and G.-Z. Yang are with the Department of Computing, Imperial
College London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: benny.lo@imperial.ac.uk;
g.z.yang@imperial.ac.uk).
H. Zhang and X.-L. Zhou are with the Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), SIAT, Shenzhen, China, and also
with the Key Laboratory for Health Informatics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (HICAS), SIAT, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: hy.zhang@siat.ac.cn;
xl.zhou@siat.ac.cn).
N. Zhao is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: nzhao@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
∗ Y.-T. Zhang is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Joint Research Centre for Biomedical Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, and also with the Key Laboratory for Health Informatics
of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (HICAS), SIAT, Shenzhen 518055, China
(e-mail: ytzhang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309951

I. INTRODUCTION
LOBAL healthcare systems are struggling with aging
population, prevalence of chronic diseases, and the accompanying rising costs [1]. In response to these challenges,
researchers have been actively seeking for innovative solutions and new technologies that could improve the quality
of patient care meanwhile reduce the cost of care through
early detection/intervention and more effective disease/patient
management. It is envisaged that the future healthcare system
should be preventive, predictive, preemptive, personalized, pervasive, participatory, patient-centered, and precise, i.e., p-health
system.
Health informatics, which is an emerging interdisciplinary
area to advance p-health, mainly deals with the acquisition,
transmission, processing, storage, retrieval, and use of different types of health and biomedical information [2]. The two
main acquisition technologies of health information are sensing
and imaging. This paper focuses only on sensing technologies
and reviews the latest developments in unobtrusive sensing and
wearable devices for continuous health monitoring. Looking
back in history, it is not surprised to notice that innovation in
this area is closely coupled with the advancements in electronics.
Using electrocardiogram (ECG) device as an example, Fig. 1
illustrates the evolution of sensing technologies, where the core
technologies of these devices have evolved from water buckets
and bulky vacuum tubes, bench-top, and portable devices with
discrete transistors, to the recent clothing and small gadgets
based wearable devices with integrated circuits [3]. In the future, it may evolve into flexible and stretchable wearable devices
with carbon nanotube (CNT)/graphene/organic electronics [4].
There is a clear trend that the devices are getting smaller, lighter,
and less obtrusive and more comfortable to wear.
Although physiological measurement devices have been
widely used in clinical settings for many years, some unique
features of unobtrusive and wearable devices due to the recent advances in sensing, networking and data fusion have
transformed the way that they were used in. First, with their
wireless connectivity together with the widely available internet infrastructure, the devices can provide real-time information and facilitate timely remote intervention to acute events
such as stroke, epilepsy and heart attack, particularly in rural
or otherwise underserved areas where expert treatment may be
unavailable. In addition, for healthy population, unobtrusive and
wearable monitoring can provide detailed information regarding their health and fitness, e.g., via mobile phone or flexible
displays, such that they can closely track their wellbeing, which
will not only promote active and healthy lifestyle, but also allow

G

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

Fig. 1.

1539

Timelines of medical devices for ECG measurement with the evolution of electronic technology.

detection of any health risk and facilitate the implementation of
preventive measures at an earlier stage.
The objectives of this paper are to provide an overview of
unobtrusive sensing and wearable systems with particular focus on emerging technologies, and also to identify the major
challenges related to this area of research. The rest of this
paper is organised as follows: Section II will discuss unobtrusive sensing methods and systems. Section III will present
the recent advances and core technologies of wearable devices and will also highlight the latest developments in smart
textile technology and flexible-stretchable electronics. Section
IV will discuss data fusion methods for sensing informatics
as well as the impacts of big data in healthcare. Section V
will conclude the paper with promising directions for future
research.
II. UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING METHODS AND SYSTEMS
The main objective of unobtrusive sensing is to enable continuous monitoring of physical activities and behaviors, as well
as physiological and biochemical parameters during the daily
life of the subject. The most commonly measured vital signs
include: ECG, ballistocardiogram (BCG), heart rate, blood
pressure (BP), blood oxygen saturation (SpO2 ), core/surface
body temperature, posture, and physical activities. A conceptual model of unobtrusive physiological monitoring in a home
setting is shown in Fig. 2 [5]. Unobtrusive sensing can be
implemented in two ways: 1) sensors are worn by the subject,
e.g., in the form of shoes, eyeglasses, ear-ring, clothing, gloves
and watch, or 2) sensors are embedded into the ambient environment or as smart objects interacting with the subjects, e.g.,
a chair [6], [7], car seat [8], mattress [9], mirror [10], steering

wheel [11], mouse [12], toilet seat [13], and bathroom scale [14].
Fig. 3 shows some prototypes of the unobtrusive sensing systems developed by different research groups. Information can
be collected by a smartphone and transmitted wirelessly to a
remote center for storage and analysis. In the following section, we will discuss some unobtrusive sensing methods for the
acquisition of vital signs.
A. Capacitive Sensing Method
Capacitance-coupled sensing method is commonly used for
measuring biopotentials such as ECG, electroencephalogram
(EEG) and electromyogram (EMG) [7], [15]. For this method,
the skin and the electrode form the two layers of a capacitor. Without direct contact with the body, some issues, such
as skin infection and signal deterioration, brought about by
adhesive electrodes in long term monitoring can be avoided.
Some typical implementations of capacitive ECG sensing are
summarized in Table I. In addition, capacitive sensing can
also be used for other applications such as respiratory measurement, e.g., using a capacitive textile force sensor weaved
into clothing [16], or a capacitive electrical field sensor array
placed under a sleeping mattress [17]. The major challenges
in designing these noncontact electrodes lie in the high contact impedance due to the indirect contact and the capacitive
mismatch caused by motion artifacts [15]. It may cause low
signal to noise ratio and thus lead to challenges in the frontend analog circuit design. The input impedance of the amplifier
has to be extremely large (>1 TΩ) to reduce the shunt effect
formed by the capacitor and the input impedance. Moreover,
motion artifacts may become more significant in noncontact
sensing. Some methods have recently been proposed to over-

1540

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Illustration of unobtrusive physiological measurements in a home environment [5].

TABLE I
DIFFERENT IMPLEMENTATIONS OF CAPACITIVE ECG SENSORS

Fig. 3. Unobtrusive sensing devices with sensors embedded in daily objects,
such as mirror [10], sleeping bed [9], chair [6], steering wheel [11], and toilet
seat [13].

come these problems to achieve robust measurement in practical situations. For instance, the gradiometric measurement technique introduced by Pang et al. can considerably reduce motion
artifacts [24].
B. Photoplethysmographic Sensing Method
Photoplethysmographic (PPG) sensing, which involves a light
source to emit light into tissue and a photo-detector to collect
light reflected from or transmitted through the tissue, has been
widely used for the measurement of many vital signs, such as
SpO2 , heart rate, respiration rate, and BP. The signal measured
by this method represents the pulsatile blood volume changes of
peripheral microvasculature induced by pressure pulse within
each cardiac cycle. Traditionally, the sensing unit is in direct
contact with skin. Recent research has shown that sensors can be
integrated into daily living accessories or gadgets like ear-ring,
glove and hat, to achieve unobtrusive measurement. Various

types of PPG measuring devices at different sites of the body
are summarized in Table II.
Recently, Jae et al. [25] proposed an indirect-contact sensor for PPG measurement over clothing. A control circuit was
adopted to adaptively adjust the light intensity for various types
of clothings. On the other hand, Poh et al. [26] showed that

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

TABLE II
PPG MEASURING DEVICES AT DIFFERENT SITES OF THE BODY

Devices
PPG ring [27]
Pulsear [28]
Forehead mounted
sensor [29]
e-AR [30]
IN-MONIT system
[31]
Glove and hat
based PPG sensor
[32]

Location of Sensor
/Operation mode
Finger
/Reflective
External ear cartilage
/Reflective
Forehead
/Reflective
Posterior, inferior and
anterior auricular
/Reflective
Auditory canal
/Reflective
Finger and forehead
/Reflective

Ear-worn PPG
sensor [38]

Superior Auricular,
superior Tragus and
Posterior Auricular
/Reflective
Ear lobe
/Transmissive
Auditory canal
/Reflective
Ear-lobe
/Reflective
Nose bridge
/Reflective
Ear lobe
/Reflective

Smartphone [39]

Finger /Reflective

Ear-worn monitor
[33]
Headset [34]
Heartphone [35]
Magnetic earring
sensor [36]
Eyeglasses [37]

Measured
Parameters
Heart rate and its
variability, SpO2
Heart rate
SpO2
Heart rate
Heart activity and
heart rate
Heart rate and
pulse wave transit
time
Heart rate
Heart rate
Heart rate
Heart rate
Heart rate and
pulse transit time
Heart rate
Heart rate

heart rate and respiration rate can be derived from PPG that
was remotely captured from a subject’s face using a simple
digital camera. However, the temporal resolution of the blood
volume detected by this method is restricted by the sample rate
of the camera (up to 30 frames per second), thus affecting its
accuracy.
C. Model-Based Cuffless BP Measurement
Sphygmomanometer, which has been used over a century
for BP measurement, is operated based on an inflatable cuff.
Conventional methods such as auscultatory, oscillometric, and
volume clamp are not suitable for unobtrusive BP measurement. Pulse wave propagation method is a promising technique
for unobtrusive BP measurement. It is based on the relationship
between pulse wave velocity (PWV) and arterial pressure according to Moens-Korteweg equation. Pulse transit time (PTT),
the reciprocal of PWV can be readily derived from PPG and
ECG in an unobtrusive way. Various linear and nonlinear models that expressed BP in terms of PTT have been developed

1541

for cuffless BP estimation. The subject-dependent parameters
in BP-PTT model should be determined first when using this
approach for BP estimation. A very simple way to implement individual calibration is to use the hydrostatic pressure approach,
where the subjects are required to elevate their hands to specific heights above/below the heart level [40]. A theoretical
relationship between PTT, BP, and height can be written in (1),
as shown at the bottom of the page, where b is the subjectdependent parameter characterizing the artery properties, L is
the distance traveled by the pulse, Ph is the hydrostatic pressure ρgh, and Pi is the internal pressure. Using the proposed
model, the individualized parameters in BP-PTT model can be
determined from some simple movements. This model-based
cuffless BP measurement method can be implemented in a variety of platforms for unobtrusive monitoring, such as the bed
cushion and chair, as shown in Fig. 3.
Although the accuracy of this method has been validated in
many recent studies [41], there are concerns over the use of
PTT as a surrogate measurement of BP. It has been recognized
that the major confounding factors in the present relationship of
BP and PTT are vasomotor tone and pre-ejection period [42].
New models should be developed to include these confounding
factors in order to explore the potential of PTT-based method
for unobtrusive BP measurement in future.
D. Other Unobtrusive Sensing Methods
Strain sensors are commonly used to measure body motion
such as respiration, heart sound and BCG. Piezoelectric cable
sensor, whose sensing element is piezoelectric polymer, has
been used for respiration rate monitoring [43]. Flexible and thin
sensors, such as piezoresistive fabric sensors [44] and film-type
sensors like polyvinylidenefluoride film (PVDF) and electromechanical film (EMFi) based sensors [45] have been widely used
for cardiopulmonary applications due to the easiness of being
embedded into clothing or daily objects like chair or bed. Comparative study has been conducted to evaluate the performances
of the two different strain sensors in the measurement of body
motion [46]. They have shown that only small differences were
found in heart rate measured by PVDF-based and EMFi-based
sensors especially at supine posture, which was possibly caused
by their different sensitivities to different force components.
Inductive/impedance plethysmography is another widely
used method for respiratory measurement and has been developed in the forms of clothing and textile belt [47], [48]. Two
sinusoid wire coils located at rib cage and the abdomen are
driven by a current source that generates high-frequency sinusoidal current. The movement of the chest during respiration
causes changes of the inductance of the coils and thus modulates the amplitude of the sinusoidal current, from which the

√
⎧
L ρb
⎪
⎪
;
⎪
⎨ 1 + exp(bPi )


PTT =
 exp[b(P − P )] + exp(−bP ) − exp(−bP ) 
⎪
2L

i
h
h
h 
⎪
⎪

ln 
;
⎩√

ρbgh 
exp[b(Pi − Ph )]+1−1

h=0
(1)
h = 0

1542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

respiratory signal can be demodulated. A recent study compared the performances of four different methods for wearable respiration measurement, including inductive plethysmography, impedance plethysmography, piezoresistive pneumography, and piezoelectric pneumography piezoelectric, and showed
that piezoelectric pneumography provided the best robustness
to motion artifacts for respiratory rate measurement [43].
Optical fibers have also been adopted for unobtrusive monitoring by embedding them into daily objects or clothes. In
contrast to electronic sensors, they are immune to the electromagnetic interference. Recently, fiber Bragg grating has been
proposed as a vibration sensor for BCG measurement, based on
the fact that the Bragg wavelength is correlated with the grating
period in response to the body vibration caused by breathing
and cardiac contractions [49]. A pneumatic cushion based on
this method has been developed to monitor the physiological
conditions of pilots and drivers [49]. D’Angelo developed an
optical fiber sensor embedded into a shirt for respiratory motion
detection [50].
Other remote sensing methods have also been proposed
for unobtrusive physiological measurement, such as frequency
modulated continuous wave Doppler radar for BCG measurement [51] and radiometric sensing for body temperature measurement [52].
III. WEARABLE DEVICES
In this section, an overview on the state-of-the-art of wearable
systems is presented. Several key enabling technologies for the
development of these wearable devices, such as miniaturization,
intelligence, networking, digitalization and standardization,
security, unobtrusiveness, personalization, energy efficiency,
and robustness will be discussed. Sensor embodiments based
on textile sensing, flexible and stretchable electronics are also
introduced.
A. Overview of Unobtrusive Wearable Devices
A variety of unobtrusive wearable devices have been developed by different research teams as shown in Fig. 4: the watchtype BP device [3], clip-free eyeglasses-based device for heart
rate and PTT measurement [37], shoe-mounted system for the
assessment of foot and ankle dynamics [53], ECG necklace for
long-term cardiac activity monitoring [54], h-Shirt for heart rate
and BP measurement [55], an ear-worn activity and gait monitoring device [56], glove-based photonic textiles as wearable
pulse oximeter [57], a strain sensor assembled on stocking for
motion monitoring [58], and a ring-type device for heart rate and
temperature measurement [59]. These embodiments are capable of providing measurements ubiquitously and unobtrusively.
Many of them already have a variety of applications in healthcare
as well as wellness and fitness training. For example, posture
and activity monitoring of the elderly and the disabled, longterm monitoring of patients with chronic diseases like epilepsy,
cardiopulmonary diseases, and neurological rehabilitation.
Implantable sensors: It is worth noting that sensing devices
should not be limited to those designed to be worn on the body.
There are increasing numbers and varieties of implantable sen-

Fig. 4. Unobtrusive wearable devices for various physiological measurement
developed by different groups: watch-type BP device [3], PPG sensors mounted
on eyeglasses [37], motion assessment with sensors mounted on shoes [53],
wireless ECG necklace for ambulatory cardiac monitoring (courtesy of IMEC,
Netherlands) [54], h-Shirt for BP and cardiac measurements [55], ear-worn
activity recognition sensor [60], glove-type pulse oximeter [57], strain sensors
mounted on stocking for motion monitoring [58], and ring-type device for pulse
rate and SpO2 measurement [59].

sors have been introduced, which are designed to be implanted
inside the human body. For example, CardioMEMS recently developed a wireless implantable haemodynamic monitoring system, which can provide long-term measurement of pulmonary
arterial pressure of patients with heart failure [61]. A recent clinical study was conducted to validate the safety and effectiveness
of this device, and the results showed that the heart-failurerelated hospitalization can be significantly reduced in the group
with the implant compared to the control group [61]. Another
example is the wireless capsule device that can be pinned on the
esophageal to measure pH level over a 48-hour period for better diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease [62]. However,
the sensor is difficult to be securely attached for the complete
sensing periods in some subjects, and premature losing of the
capsule has been reported quite often. Other technologies such
as the development of mucosal adhesive patches could be a potential solution in this regard. Another important application for
mucosal adhesive patches is to design them as drug delivery systems. By placing these devices inside the gastrointestinal tract
and with feedback mechanisms installed, the release of drug
can be better controlled. This is anticipated to be helpful to the
better management of many chronic diseases, such as diabetes
and hypertension.
B. Key Wearable Technologies
In addition to unobtrusive sensing methods mentioned in the
last section, some key technologies should also be developed
to implement unobtrusive wearable devices for practical use.

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

Zhang’s research group summarized these key technologies as
“MINDS” (Miniaturization, Intelligence, Networking, Digitalization, Standardization) [63]. The recent development of these
technologies will be elaborated as follows together with some
other important issues such as unobtrusiveness, security, energyefficiency, robustness, and personalization.
1) Miniaturization and Unobtrusiveness can enhance the
comfortness of using wearable devices, and thus increasing the
compliance for long-term and continuous monitoring. Thanks to
the rapid development of integrated circuit technologies and microelectromechanical technologies, the size of processing electronics and inertial measurement units (IMUs) has been significantly reduced for wearable applications. For instance, Brigante
et al. recently developed a highly compact and lightweight wearable system for motion caption by careful selection of IMUs and
optimized layout design [64]. A highly integrated microsystem was designed for cardiac electrical and mechanical activity
monitoring, which assembled the multisensor module, signal
processing electronics, and powering unit into a single platform with a flexible substrate [65]. In addition to the integrated
design and compact packaging, the development of new measuring principle is another way to achieve miniaturization. The
aforementioned PTT-based cuffless BP measuring method is a
promising substitute for the widely used cuff-based methods in
this regard. Further miniaturization can be achieved by using
other technologies such as inductive powering where the sensor
can be powered partly or completely by RF powering, and the
battery can be removed [66].
As mentioned, capacitive coupling sensing is one commonly
used method for unobtrusive capturing of bioelectrical signals, like ECG and EEG. Textile sensing is another unobtrusive method for continuously monitoring physiological parameters. A textile-integrated active electrode was presented in [67]
for wearable ECG monitoring, which could maintain signal integrity after a five-cycle washing test. In addition, PPG offers
a good way for unobtrusive cardiovascular assessment, such as
noninvasive measurement of BP based on PTT.
2) Networking and Security: Networking is an integral part
of wearable devices to deliver high-efficiency and high-quality
healthcare services from the m-health perspective [68]. The term
“BSN”—body sensor network—was coined to harness several
allied technologies that underpin the development of pervasive
sensing for healthcare, wellbeing, sports, and other applications
that require “ubiquitous” and “pervasive” monitoring of physical, physiological, and biochemical parameters in any environment and without activity restriction and behavior modification.
BSN can be wired (e.g., interconnect with smart fabric) or wireless (making use of common wireless sensor networks and standards, e.g., BAN, WPAN (IEEE 802.15.6), Bluetooth/Bluetooth
Low Energy (BLE or Bluetooth Smart), and ZigBee). BSN is
presently a very popular research topic and extensive progresses
have been made in the past decades. Related to networking, technical challenges include user mobility, network security, multiple sensor fusion, optimization of the network topology, and
communication protocols for energy-efficient transmission [69].
In a broader sense, networking for sensing can also include
wireless personal area network (WPAN), wireless local area net-

1543

work (WLAN) and cellular networks (3G/4G network, GPRS,
GSM) or wireless wide area network (WWAN), which are used
to send all the acquired data from wearable devices to data
servers for storage and postprocessing. The most critical issue
in WPAN/WLAN technologies is to guarantee the quality of
service (QoS), which contains latency, transmission power, reliability (i.e., error control) and bandwidth reservation. While for
healthcare applications, these issues become more challenging
because all the specifications should be satisfied simultaneously.
For example, monitoring ECG requires a data rate of tens to
hundreds of kilobit/s, end-to-end delay within 2 s and bit error
rate of below 10−4 [70]. Under some life-critical situations, the
compromise between reliability and latency constraint of data
transmission is even more prominent. Effective error control
schemes have been proposed to address this issue, such as the
combined use of feed-forward error control (FEC) and block
interleaving in data-link layer [71]. For bandwidth demanding
applications, such as two-dimensional (2-D) mode of echocardiograph and ultrasound video transmission, to transmit the data
with minimal loss of diagnostic information and in real time,
the protocol should be designed to optimize the transmission
rate, minimize the latency and maximize the reliability. Various
enhanced protocols on rate control have been proposed for these
applications, such as a hybrid solution either using retransmission or retransmission combined with FEC techniques depending on the channel conditions [72], adapting the sending rate of
source encoder according to the mobile link throughput [73].
Security is a critical issue of networking, especially for medical applications. Without adequate security, the transmitted
information is vulnerable to potential threats, such as eavesdropping, tampering, denial of service, which are caused by unauthorized access. The challenging issues to guarantee security lie
in three aspects: how to prevent the disclosure of patient’s data,
who have the right to access the system, and how to protect the
privacy of the user [74]. Securing the data transmission between
wearable sensors should be the first step. To secure inter-sensor
communications, the most important issue is to design a key
agreement for encryption. Identity-based symmetric cryptography and asymmetric key cryptography based on elliptic curve
have been adopted for BSN [75], [76]. Another novel method
is based on biometrics traits. Since the human body contains
its own transmission system such as blood circulation system,
it is believed that the information from the system itself can be
used to secure the information communication between sensors.
Meanwhile, since wearable sensors are already there to capture
physiological signals, it is convenient to implement encryption
schemes using physiological signals in the key agreement. Poon
et al. firstly proposed to use the interpulse intervals (IPIs) as
the biometric traits to encrypt the symmetric key, as shown in
Fig. 5 [77]. The results showed that a minimum half total error
rate of 2.58% was achieved when the signals were sampled at
1000 Hz and then coded into 128-bit binary sequences. Subsequently, other similar approaches have been proposed [78]. For
example, Venkatasubramanian et al. proposed using frequency
domain features of PPG as the basis of key agreement [79].
Furthermore, the complexity of the security scheme should also
be considered due to the constraints on the energy budget and

1544

Fig. 5. Illustration of using biometrics approach to secure inter-sensors communication for wearable health monitoring applications [77].

Fig. 6. (a) High-sensitivity photo-transistor based on organic bulk heterojunction; (b) PPG signal detected by this photo-transistor [84].

computational power of the wearable sensor. Various potential
solutions have been developed, such as the data confidential and
user authentication schemes with low complexity realized by
minimizing the shared keys [80], and mutual authentication and
access control scheme based on elliptic curve cryptography with
the advantage of energy-efficient [81].
3) Energy-Efficiency and Digitalization: Energy-efficiency is
a crucial element of a wearable device that directly affects the
design and usability of the device, especially for long-term monitoring applications. There are mainly three strategies to achieve
energy-efficient design. The first one is to improve the energy
efficiency of the existing energy storage technologies, lithiumion batteries and supercapacitors. Liu et al. designed a novel
structure of ZnCo2 O4 -urchins-on-carbon-fibers matrix to fabricate energy storage device that exhibits a reversible lithium
storage capacity of 1180 mAh/g even after 100 cycles [82]. Fu
et al. first adopted commercial pen ink as an active material
for supercapacitors. With simple fabrication, the flexible fiber
supercapacitors can achieve areal capacitance of 11.9–19.5 mF
cm−2 and power density of up to 9.07 mW cm−2 [83]. The second is energy-aware design of wearable system. For example, a
high-sensitivity near-infrared photo-transistor was recently developed based on an organic bulk heterojunction as shown in
Fig. 6(a) [84]. The results showed that the responsivity of this
device can achieve 105 A W−1 . It has been successfully used
for PPG measurement as shown in Fig. 6(b) [84]. With the high
responsivity, this device allows the use of a low-power light

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

source, and thus reducing the power consumption of the sensor. Power management approaches, such as dynamic voltage
scaling, battery energy optimal techniques and system energy
management techniques have also been proposed [85]. Last but
not the least is to scavenge energy from the environment or
human activities, such as the lower-limb motion and vibration,
body heat and respiration, which have great potential to become sustainable power sources for wearable sensors. The MIT
Media Lab [86] has realized an unobtrusive device that scavenged energy from heel-strike of the user with shoe-mounted
piezoelectric transducer. Recently, Leonov [87] has developed
a hidden thermoelectric energy harvester of human body heat.
It was integrated into clothing as a reliable powering source.
For implantable devices, the preferred power solution is wireless powering. Kim et al. have derived the theoretical bound
of wireless energy transmit efficiency through tissue. By optimizing the source density, the peak efficiency can achieve 4 ×
10−5 at around 2.6 GHz, which is 4 times larger than that of the
conventional near-field coil-based designs [88].
Digitalization is necessary to enable data analysis and storage
after acquiring the analog signals from the body with wearable
devices. Due to the rigorous power constraints of wearable devices, the sampling rate should be minimized to save power
whilst not compromising the diagnostic accuracy. For example,
the sampling rate for ECG should be no less than 125 Hz; otherwise, it will affect the accuracy of measurements [89]. Recently,
novel nonuniformly sampling methods have been investigated
to compress the representation of ECG signal in which the relevant information is localized in small intervals. One example
is the integrate-and-fire sampler that integrates the input signal
against an averaging function and the result is compared to a
positive or negative threshold as shown in (2),
 tk + 1
x(t)eα (t−t k + 1 ) dt; θk ∈ {θp , θn } .
(2)
θk =
tk + τ

A pulse will be generated when either of the thresholds is
reached. The original signal thus can be represented by a nonuniformly spaced pulse train from the output of the integrate and
fire model [90]. This sampler can be implemented by effective
hardware to save power and facilitate sensor miniaturization.
However, the tradeoff is that exact reconstruction of the original
signal is impossible [90]. Nonetheless, some critical information for accurate diagnosis can be preserved. Without reconstruction, a time-based integrate and fire encoding scheme can
achieve 93.6% classification rate between normal heartbeats and
arrhythmias, which is comparable to other methods [91].
4) Standardization and Personalization: Standardization is
a crucial component of any commercial exploitation of wearable devices, as it ensures the quality of the devices and enables interoperability among devices. However, the process of
standardization is often very complicated and time consuming, especially in standardizing healthcare devices. Health information can be very different ranging from physiological
(ECG, body temperature, oxygen saturation, etc.) to physical (posture, activity, etc.). Manufacturers tend to define their
own proprietary formats and communication protocols. Interoperability therefore becomes a major obstacle in integrating

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

devices into healthcare systems. To resolve this issue, standard protocols such as the HL7 reference information model
have been proposed for the integration of different sensing
modalities. For instance, Loh and Lee proposed the use of
an Oracle Healthcare Transaction Base (HTB) system as the
platform for integrating different information into a healthcare
system [92]. ISO/IEEE 11073 (X73), initially intended for the
implementation of Point-of-Care devices, is now extended to
Personal Health Devices (PHD) to address the interoperability problem. This standard provides the communication functionality for a variety of wearable devices (i.e., pulse oximeter,
heart rate monitor, BP monitor, thermometer, etc.) and standardizes the format of information for plug-and-play interoperability [93]. A recent study has validated the feasibility to apply this
standard to wearable and wireless systems in home settings [94].
To meet the needs of some scenarios with limited processing
abilities, some amendments have been made based on this standard, such as the adapted data model proposed in [95] and a
new method to implement X73PHD in a microcontroller-based
platform with low-voltage and low-power constraints [96].
However, very few standards are available for evaluating the
accuracy of wearable devices, albeit the necessity of standards to
guarantee the reliability of these devices. For example, there are
three well-known standards for assessing the accuracy of cuffbased BP measurement devices, i.e., the American Association
for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI), the
British Hypertension Society (BHS), and the European Society
of Hypertension (ESH). On the other hand, Zhang’s team has
been spear-headed a standard for cuffless BP devices [97]. In
this work, a new distribution model of the measuring difference
between the test and the reference device was proposed. The cumulative percentages (CP) of absolute differences between the
test device and the reference derived by integrating the probability density function over the required range of limits (L)
for normal and general t distribution are shown in (3) and (4),
respectively:
L
CPgL (u, d, L) =
−L

1
p(x|u, d)dx = √
d 2π

L
e

−( x −u ) 2
2d2

dx

(3)

−L

L
CPtL (u, d, v, L) =

p(t|u, d, v)dt

−L

d−1 Γ( v +1 )
= v  2
Γ( 2 ) (v − 2)π

L

−L

(1 +

(t − u)2 − v + 1
) 2 dt
d2 (v − 2)
(4)

where u, d, and v denote mean, standard deviation, and degree
of freedom, respectively. It was found that the agreement between the evaluation results of 40 cuff-based devices by AAMI
and BHS protocols was better for the proposed t distribution
(82.5%) than normal distribution (50%). The proposed error
distribution model was further validated by the goodness-of-fit
of 999 datasets obtained from 85 subjects by a PTT-based cuffless BP estimation method to the hypothesized distribution. In

1545

addition, this study also proposed new evaluation scales under
general t distribution to assess the accuracy of cuffless BP devices, including: mean absolute difference (MAD), root mean
square difference (RMSD) and mean absolute percentage difference (MAPD) as shown in (5) and (6) [97]
	


− v −1
2
v Γ((v + 1)/2)
u2
1+ 2
MAD = 2s
π Γ(v/2)(v − 1)
s v





v
v 1
+ |u| × 1 − I
; ,
v + (u/s)2 2 2
RMSD = u2 + d2

(5)
(6)



where s is the scale and equals to d × (v − 2)/π(v > 2).
Based on (3) and (4), a mapping chart to relate the proposed
scales with the AAMI, BHS, and ESH evaluation criteria under
t4 distribution was developed.
On the other hand, personalization of wearable devices is also
important. Apart from personalizing the design of the devices,
it can be referred to personalizing the sensor calibration, disease
detection, medicine, and treatments. Taking BP as an example:
individualized BP calibration procedure is required for the PTT
based unobtrusive BP measurement to ensure the accuracy. The
calibration can be implemented through body movement such
as hand elevation [40]. On the other hand, from the perspective
of personalized medicine, since BP can be very diverse among
individuals, it is necessary to track a person’s BP in long-term
by wearable devices to establish an individual database for personalized BP management. This can lead to a more precise
diagnosis and treatment.
5) Artificial Intelligence and Robustness: Artificial intelligence enables autonomic functions of wearable devices, such
as sending out alerts and supporting decision making. Artificial
intelligence may also refer to as context-awareness and useradaption [98]. Various classification methods such as hidden
Markov model, artificial neural networks, support vector machines, random forests, and neuro-fuzzy inference system have
been extensively applied for various healthcare applications.
The need of individualized training data, the lack of large scale
studies in real-world situations, and the high rate of false alarms
are some of the major obstacles that hinder the widespread
adoption of sensing technologies in clinical applications.
One of the major problems for wearable sensors is motion
artifacts. The reduction of motion artifact is still a challenging
problem for the development of wearable system due to the
overlapping of its frequency band with the desired signal. Several methods have been proposed for motion artifacts reduction.
For instance, Chung et al. [99] presented a patient-specific adaptive neuro-fuzzy interference system (ANFIS) motion artifacts
cancellation for ECG collected by a wearable health shirt. With
ANFIS, it was able to remove motion artifacts for ECG in real
time. Adaptive filtering is another commonly used method for
motion artifacts removal, and algorithms based on it have been
applied for various applications. Ko et al. [100] proposed an
adaptive filtering method based on half cell potential monitoring to reduce the artifacts on ECG without additional sensors.
Poh et al. [36] embedded an accelerometer in an earring PPG

1546

Fig. 7. Various wearable garments for physiological and activity monitoring.
(a) Georgia Tech Wearable Motherboard (Smart Shirt) for the measurement of
ECG, heart rate, body temperature, and respiration rate [105]; (b) the EKG Shirt
system that used interconnection technology based on embroidery of conductive
yarn for heart rate [106]; (c) the LifeShirt system for the measurement of
ECG, heart rate, posture and activity, respiration parameters, BP (peripheral is
needed), temperature, SpO2 [107]; (d) the ProTEX garment for the measurement
of heart rate, breathing rate, body temperature, SpO2 , position, activity, and
posture [108]; (e) the WEALTHY system with knitted integrated sensors for
the measurement of ECG, heart rate, respiration, and activity monitoring [44];
(f) the VTAMN system for the measurement of heart rate, breathing rate, body
temperature, and activity [109]; (g) the h-Shirt system for the measurement of
ECG, PPG, heart rate, and BP [55].

sensor to obtain motion reference for adaptive noise cancellation. Although adaptive filtering has shown to be an effective
method, it requires extensive processing time, which hinders its
real-time applications. Yan and Zhang [101] developed a robust algorithm, called minimum correlation discrete saturation
transform, which is more time efficient than discrete saturation
transform that used adaptive filter. Other methods, like independent component analysis and least mean square based active
noise cancellation, have also been used to remove motion artifacts.
In summary, the main issues to be addressed for the ubiquitous use of wearable technologies can be summarized as
“SUPER MINDS” (i.e., Security, Unobtrusiveness, Personalization, Energy efficiency, Robustness, Miniaturization, Intelligence, Network, Digitalization, and Standardization). More
attentions should be paid to these aspects for the future development of wearable devices.
C. Textile Wearable Devices
Smart textile technology is a promising approach for wearable health monitoring, since it provides a viable solution to
integrate wearable sensors/actuators, energy sources, processing, and communication elements within the garment. Some
representative garment-based systems have been developed as
shown in Fig. 7.
Despite extensive progresses been made in wearable devices
for physiological monitoring, little attention has been paid on
the other health information such as biochemical and autonomic
information that can provide a more comprehensive picture of

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 8. Flexible and stretchable wearable devices for health care applications
developed by different groups: (a) multifunctional epidermal electronic device
for electrophysiological, temperature, and strain monitoring [4]; (b) a flexible
capacitive pressure sensor for radial artery pressure pulse measurement [112];
(c) e-skin with pressure and thermal sensors [113]; (d) a bandage strain sensor
for breathing monitoring [58]; (e) electrochemical tattoo biosensors for real-time
noninvasive lactate monitoring in human perspiration [116].

the subject’s health state. At this point, textile technology provides feasible solutions to the unobtrusive measurement of these
new parameters. For instance, a textile-based sweat rate sensor
has recently been developed, which measures the water-vapor
pressure gradient by two humidity sensors at different distances
from skin [102]. Textile-based pH sensor was also proposed
using a colormetric approach with pH sensitive dyes and optoelectronics [102]. In addition, Poh et al. developed conductive
fabric electrodes for unobtrusive measurement of electrodermal activity (EDA), which can be used for long-term assessment of autonomic nerve activities during daily activities [103].
This textile sensor has been designed into a wrist-worn device
that can provide ambulatory monitoring of autonomic parameters for patients with refractory epilepsy. The strong correlation
between EDA amplitude and postictal generalized EEG suppression (PGES) duration, an autonomic biomarker of seizure
intensity, indicates that EDA can be used as a surrogate measurement of PGES for ambulatory monitoring of epilepsy and
thus provides opportunity for the identification of sudden death
in epilepsy [104].
D. Flexible, Stretchable, and Printable Devices
Flexible electronics, where electronic circuits are manufactured or printed onto flexible substrates such as paper, cloth fabrics and directly on human body to provide sensing, powering,
and interconnecting functions, have a broad range of biomedical
applications. They have enabled the development of wearable
devices to be thinner, lighter and flexible. The most common
methods to fabricate these flexible sensors and other functional
circuits on flexible substrates include: inkjet-printing, screen
printing, transfer printing [4], low temperature deposition, etc.
Flexible electronics for health monitoring: Fig. 8(b) to (e)
shows some cutting-edge flexible wearable systems for health
monitoring applications. For example, Bao’s team developed a
high-sensitivity flexible capacitive pressure sensor with polydimethylsiloxane as the dielectric layer [111]. By microstructuring the dielectric layer and integrating it in a thin-film polymer transistor, it is able to achieve very high sensitivity when

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

driving the flexible pressure-sensitive transistor in the subthreshold regime. This device has been applied to measure a human radial artery pulse wave with high-fidelity as shown in
Fig. 8(b) [112]. Other examples include the e-skin with pressure and thermal sensors, and the flexible strain-gauge sensor for
breathing monitoring as shown in Fig. 8(c) and (d) [58], [113].
Some recent studies have proposed the fabrication of flexible
photo-transistor [114], which can be used to build PPG sensors.
These advances will effectively pave the way for unobtrusive
physiological measurements in the future. In addition to the
applications in physiological and physical monitoring, flexible
electronic technology also begins to play a key role in biochemical sensing. A flexible “nano-electronic nose” was developed
by Michael et al. by transferring hundreds of prealigned silicon
nanowires onto plastic substrate. It would open up new opportunities for wearable or implantable chemical and biological
sensing [115]. Another example is the electrochemical tattoo
biosensor recently developed by the research team from University of California San Diego, as shown in Fig. 8(e) [116]. It
can be easily worn on body for lactate monitoring during aerobic
exercise. The performance of this tattoo sensor was evaluated
in terms of its selectivity for lactate measurement, the ability
of adhering to epidermal surface, and the robustness when exposed to mechanical stretching and bending. The results have
showed its potential for unobtrusive and continuous monitoring
of lactate during exercise [116].
Flexible sensors with inorganic, organic, and hybrid materials: A variety of organic and inorganic materials have been
adopted for the development of flexible sensors. CNT is a very
promising carbon based material for the design of flexible devices due to its unique mechanical and electrical properties. A
flexible film strain sensor based on CNT has been designed and
integrated into fabrics for human motion monitoring [58]. It can
endure strain up to 280% and achieve high durability of 10 000
cycles at 150% strain as well as fast response of 14 ms, which
might be used for breath monitoring for the early detection of
sudden infant death syndrome in sleeping infants. On the other
hand, the printable feature and relative ease of fabrication process make organic materials suitable for the implementation of
flexible wearable devices. Flexible organic sensors employing
thin-film transistor structure for skin temperature measurement
and pressure sensing [117], [118] have been proposed.
Due to the complementary benefits of inorganic and organic
materials in terms of electrical conductivity, mechanical properties, and low-cost fabrication process, inorganic and organic
hybrid materials have great potential for the development of
high-performance flexible wearable devices. For example, a
high-performance inorganic and organic hybrid photo detector based on P3HT and nanowire was fabricated on a printing
paper, which has high flexibility and electrical stability [119].
Lee’s team fabricated a flexible organic light emitting diode
with modified graphene anode to achieve extremely high efficiency [120]. Xu et al. developed an organic bulk heterojunction
based near-infrared photo-transistor [84], which can be modified to a flexible device in the future. This device showed great
potential for the design of low power PPG sensor due to its ultrahigh responsivity. Pang et al. developed a flexible and highly

1547

sensitive strain-gauge sensor that is based on two interlocked arrays of high-aspect-ratio Pt-coated polymeric nanofibres [121].
This device is featured by its simple fabrication process as well
as the ability of measuring different types of mechanical forces
with high sensitivity and wide dynamic range. The assembled
device has been used to measure the physical force of heart
beat by attaching it directly above the artery of the wrist under
normal and exercise conditions.
In addition to the aforementioned advances in the design of
flexible sensors, flexible technologies also enable other functional circuits such as an inkjet-printed flexible antenna for
wireless communication [122], flexible batteries with wireless
charger [123], flexible supercapacitors on graphene paper [124]
and cloth fabrics [125] for wearable energy storage, etc.
Although significant advances have been made in flexible
electronics, only limited applications in unobtrusive health monitoring have been explored until now. Some key challenges still
hinder the application of these systems in real life situations for
wearable health monitoring, such as engineering new structural
constructs from established and new materials to achieve higher
flexibility, improving the durability of sensors and interconnects
that are frequently exposed to mechanical load, integrating wireless data transmission and powering electronics with the flexible
sensors, etc.
Stretchable electronics for health monitoring: Flexible electronics already offers great opportunities in the applications
of wearable health monitoring, but is not enough to ensure
the conformal integration of the devices with arbitrary curved
surfaces. Stretchability, which enables the devices bend to extremely small radius and accommodate much higher strain while
maintaining the electronic performance, is a more challenging
characteristic and renders wider application possibilities. Some
stretchable systems for health monitoring applications have been
proposed. One example is the epidermal electronic system developed by Rogers’ research group for measuring electrophysiological signals (ECG and EMG), temperature, and strain, as
shown in Fig. 8(a). The system consists of multifunctional
sensors, processing unit, wireless transmission and powering,
which are all mounted on an elastic polymer backing layer. The
polymer sheet can be dissolved away, leaving only the circuits
adhere to the skin via van der forces [4]. One problem of this
device is that it can easily fall off during bathing or exercise.
Therefore, they recently developed a new epidermal electronic
system that has a total thickness of 0.8 m and can be directly
printed onto the skin without the polymer backing. A commercially available spray-on bandage is then adopted as adhesives
and encapsulants [110]. Other stretchable systems for biomedical applications have also been reported, such as the CNT-based
strain sensor for human motion monitoring [58], electronic skin
[113], and other as reviewed in [126].
A number of methods have been proposed for the fabrication
of stretchable electronics, such as LED, conductors, electrodes,
and thin-film transistors, and can be classified into two groups:
exploring innovative structures and engineering new materials.
Rogers and coworkers [127] configured the structures into wavy
shapes supported by elastomeric substrate. The structure can
accommodate up to 20%–30% compressive and tensile strain

1548

by changing the wave amplitudes and wavelengths. This buckling approach has also been adopted to fabricate graphene ribbons on stretchable elastomers [128]. Rogers and coworkers
also proposed a noncoplanar mesh design with active device
islands connected by thin polymer bridges on elastomeric substrates to achieve 140% level of strain [129]. Recently, White
et al. [130] demonstrated an ultrathin, flexible and stretchable
polymer-based light emitting diode (PLED), which can be fabricated with very simple processing method. By pressed onto
a prestrained elastomer, the ultrathin PLED formed a random
network of folds when releasing the strain on the elastomer. The
experiment showed that the ultrathin PLED can be stretched
up to 100% tensile strain. Meng et al. [131] designed and fabricated the assembled fiber supercapacitors composed of two
intertwined graphene electrodes that showed highly compressible (strain of 50%) and stretchable (strain of 200%) properties, and can be easily woven into textile for wearable applications. New materials can also provide stretchability for
electronics. Someya’s group fabricated a composite film by
uniformly dispersing single-walled CNTs in polymer matrices [132]. Other stretchable electronics based on nanocomposites such as gold nanoparticle-polyurethane composite as
conductor [133], graphene oxide nanosheet-conducting polymer as electrode [134] have also been proposed recently. These
nanocomposites achieved both good electronic performance and
mechanical robustness. These recent advancements in stretchable electronics will facilitate the adoption of these technologies
in healthcare applications.
To summarize, with the advances in material, textile, power
scavenging, sensing and wireless communications, there has
been a rapid increase in the number of new wearable sensing
devices launched in the consumer market for sports, wellbeing
and healthcare applications. Considering the growing interests
in these research areas, the number and variety of sensors will
continue to grow in a very rapid rate. In addition, following the
current trend of sensing development, new type of implantable
sensors, such as transient and zero-power implants, could soon
become reality. Standards have been emerged aiming to standardize these devices as well as the wireless communication and
the exchange of information among devices and systems.
IV. SENSING INFORMATICS: DATA FUSION AND BIG DATA
The development of sensing technology has largely increased
the capability of sensor to acquire data, and multiple sensors are
expected to provide different viewpoints of the health status of
the patients. However, multisensor data fusion is one great challenge because heterogeneous data need to be processed in order
to generate unified and meaningful conclusion for clinical diagnosis and treatment [135]. The fusion of sensing data with other
health data such as imaging, bio-markers and gene sequencing
and so on is even more challenging. The definitions of data fusion are different in the literature. In [136], data fusion is defined
as a “multilevel, multifaceted process handling the automatic detection, association, correlation, estimation, and combination of
data and information from several sources". A comprehensive
review and discussion of data fusion definitions are presented

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

in [137]. We propose the definition of data fusion as: “to develop efficient methods for automatically or semi-automatically
translating the information from multiple sources into a structured representation so that human or automated decision can be
made accurately". Data fusion is definitely a multidisciplinary
research area, which has integrated many techniques, such as
signal processing, information theory, statistical estimation and
inference, and artificial intelligence. In this section, we will discuss multisensor fusion methods and the fusion of sensing data
with other types of health data for clinical decision support. At
the end of this section, we will provide a critical on the impact
of big data in the healthcare area.
A. Data Fusion
Since most of health data are accompanied with a large number of noisy, irrelevant and redundant information, which may
give spurious signals in clinical decision support, it is therefore
necessary to filter the data before fusion. To address this issue,
ranked lists of events or attributes clearly relevant to clinical
decision-making should be created [138]. Temporal reasoning
method has been suggested for detecting associations between
clinical entities [139]. More sophisticated methods such as contextual filters [140], statistical shrinkage towards the null hypothesis of no association [141] were also proposed. How to filter information is definitely clinically meaningful, and it would
become more and more important but challenging due to the
ever-increasing data types and volumes.
Multisensor fusion: A number of algorithms have been proposed in the literature for multisensor data fusion. Due to heterogeneous nature of the data that need to be combined, different
data fusion algorithms have been designed for different applications. These algorithms can utilize different techniques from
a wide range of areas, including artificial intelligence, pattern
recognition, statistical estimation, and other areas. Health informatics has naturally benefited from these abundant literature.
For instance, these fusion algorithms can be categorized into
the following groups:
1) Statistical approach: weighted combination, multivariate
statistical analysis and its most state-of-the-art data mining
algorithm [142]. Among all the statistical algorithms, the
arithmetic mean approach is considered as the simplest
implementation for data fusion. However, the statistical
approach might not be suitable when the data is not exchangeable or when estimators/classifiers have dissimilar
performances [143].
2) Probabilistic approach: Maximum likelihood methods
and Kalman filter [144], probability theory [145], evidential reasoning and more specifically evidence theory
are widely used for multisensor data fusion. Kalman filter
is considered as the most popular probabilistic fusion algorithm because of its simplicity, ease of implementation,
and optimality in a mean-squared error sense. However,
Kalman filter is inappropriate for applications whose error
characteristics are not readily parameterized.
3) Artificial intelligence: artificial cognition including
genetic algorithms and neural networks. In many

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

applications, the later approach serves both as a tool to
derive classifiers or estimators and as a fusion framework
of classifiers/estimators [142], [143].
Fusion of sensing data with other health data: It is of vital
importance to integrate sensing data with other health data, including genetic, medication, laboratory test, imaging data and
narrative reports that provide context information for clinical
diagnosis. Electronic health record (EHR) reposits these health
data in a computer-readable form, which can be used for clinical
decision support [146]. The heterogeneous contents and huge
size of EHR bring great challenges for the fusion of these data.
Bayesian network, neural networks, association rules, pattern
recognition and logistic regression have been used to extract
knowledge from EHR for patient stratification and predictive
purposes in the past years. These methods offer significant advantages to traditional statistical methods because they are able
to identify more complex relationships among variables. A comparison has been made among the three different classification
methods in terms of their performance in predicting coronary
artery disease [147]. It was found that the multilayer perceptron
based neural network method showed the best performance in
prediction [147].
Although these studies have shown promising results about
the effectiveness of these computerized methods to be a complementary tool of the present statistical models for medical
decision support, these methods still suffer from some problems, such as over fitting, computationally expensive, and some
of them are difficult to be interpreted by experts. Unlike these
completely data-driven approaches, fuzzy cognitive map (FCM)
is a logical-rule-based method constructed from human experts’
knowledge. It models the decision system as a collection of concepts and causal relationships among these concepts using fuzzy
logic and neural networks [148]. It, therefore, can be interpreted
by experts and provides transparent information to the experts.
However, it could be subjective and may not be reliable by solely
relying on experts’ knowledge to generate the rules. A new FCM
framework was proposed recently [149], which extracts fuzzy
rules from both experts’ knowledge and data using rule extraction methods. This novel framework for FCM system has been
used in the radiation therapy for prostate cancer.
The early prediction of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) has
been a very popular yet challenging research topic, and many
fusion works have been conducted in this area. For instance,
in an European Commission funded project, euHeart Project, a
probabilistic fusion framework was developed to assimilate different health data across scales (e.g., protein level ion channels
flux and whole organ deformation) and functions (e.g., mechanical contraction and electrical activation), into a personalized
multiphysics cardiac model by minimizing on the discrepancy
between the measurements and the estimating derived from the
computational model and then to discover new knowledge using the personalized model [150]. By integrating continuous and
real-time sensing data from unobtrusive/wearable devices with
the existing health data, the real-time prediction of acute CVD
events may become possible. Zhang’s team has proposed a personalized framework for quantitative assessment of the risk of
acute CVD events based on vulnerable plaque rupturing mechanism as shown in Fig. 9 [151]. This framework does not only

1549

take traditional risk factors, sensitive biomarkers, blood biochemistry, vascular morphology, plaque information, and functional image information as inputs of the prediction model, but
also gathers physiological information continuously from unobtrusive devices and body sensor networks as the trigger factors
targeting for real-time risk assessment of acute cardiovascular
events.
B. Impact of Big Health Data
With the increasing number of sensing modalities and low
cost sensing devices becoming more accessible to wider populations, the amount and variety of health data have increased
rapidly, health data are therefore considered as big data. For
example, if we collect the health data related to cardiovascular system, including ECG, PPG, BP waveform, BCG, EEG,
EMG, PTT, cardiac output, SpO2 , body temperature, and imaging information from computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound imaging and so on, the size of data
collected from all the people in the Southern China, from all
the people in the China, and from all over the world, are over
4 zettabytes, 40 zettabyes, and over 200 zettabytes per year, respectively. As of year 2012, the size of data sets that are feasible
to process in a reasonable amount of time were in the order of
exabytes, which means the size of health data is over one thousand times larger than the current limits. Based on the “4 V”
definition of big data by Gartner, i.e., volume, velocity, variety
and value, the characteristics of health data can be summarized
as “6 V”: vast, volume, velocity, variety, value, variation. Vast
is the core feature of health data, i.e., the volume, velocity, variety, value and variation are vast. Volume refers to the size of
the information. Because health data are collected from over a
huge amount of people simultaneously, the velocity of the collection of health data can be extremely high. A variety of health
data from genetic or molecular level like gene sequences and
biomarkers to system levels such as physiological parameters
and medical imaging data are now available. If we can build up
a systematic analysis framework, we can definitely mine knowledge of great value from the health data. Since the biological
system of the human being is dynamic and evolving, the health
data must be variational.
Due to the ongoing developments of network, mobile computing and computer storage, the storage and retrieval of big
health data have attracted great attentions. With the increasing
use of various kinds of long-term monitoring devices, there is
an urgent demand for the intelligent management of big health
data. A large number of cloud-based storage and retrieval systems are emerging in recent years. Through outsourcing the big
health data, storage-as-a-service is an emerging solution to alleviate the burden and high cost of large local data storage. Some
new storage strategies have been proposed, such as storage consolidation and virtualization to optimize the tradeoff between
computation and storage capacity [152]. Retrieving specific information from the cloud-based health data is also very challenging. Query accuracy and time efficiency are two important
metrics to evaluate the performance of the retrieval system.
Extensive efforts have been made on optimizing the query complexity and expansion strategies to improve the performance of

1550

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

The framework for the quantitative assessment of the risk of acute cardiovascular events. Reproduced from [151].

the retrieval systems [153], [154]. Recently, a standards-based
model has been proposed to provide a feasible solution for the
management (i.e., collection, storage, retrieval and sharing) of
patient-generated personal health data in EHR [155]. This model
described the required components and minimal requirements
for data collection and storage, as well as the method for the
exchange of health data between patients and EHR providers.
Up to date, a number of healthcare applications based on
cloud computing technology have been reported, such as storage and management of EHRs [156], automatic health data collection in health care institutions [157], intelligent emergency
health care [158], radiotherapy, etc. It will further provide opportunities in clinical decision support (particularly for chronic
diseases), public health management (e.g., controlling of infectious diseases), development of new drugs, etc [159], [160].
Although many cloud-based storage and retrieval systems
have recently been proposed, fusion techniques for analyzing
big health data are still in the conceptual stage, we believe that
with the advances of computing power as well as the increasing
availability of more and more interoperable electronic health
records in the healthcare ecosystems, the intelligent utilization
of big health data will eventually become feasible in the near
future.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
In this paper, an overview of unobtrusive sensing platforms
either in wearable form or integrated into environments is presented. Although significant progresses in developing these systems for healthcare applications have been made in the past
decades, most of them are still in their prototype stages. Issues
such as user acceptance, reduction of motion artifact, low power
design, on-node processing, and distributed interference in wireless networks still need to be addressed to enhance the usability
and functions of these devices for practical use. Due to the mul-

tidisciplinary nature of this research topic, future development
will greatly rely on the advances in a number of different areas
such as materials, sensing, energy harvesting, electronics and
information technologies for data transmission and analysis. In
the following, we put forward some promising directions on
the development of unobtrusive and wearable devices for future
research:
1) To develop flexible, stretchable and printable devices for
unobtrusive physiological and biochemical monitoring:
Research on a variety of semiconductor materials, including small-molecule organics and polymers, inorganic
semiconducting materials of different nanostructures, like
nanotube, nanowire, and nanoribbons and hybrid composite materials, could prosper the design of flexible and
stretchable sensors with high optical, mechanical and
electrical performance. With the development of flexible, stretchable and printable electronics, wearable devices would evolve to be multifunctional electronic skins
or skin-attachable devices, which are very comfortable
to wear. Meanwhile, other applications of flexible and
stretchable devices in wearable health monitoring should
be explored.
2) To develop wearable physiological imaging platforms, especially unobtrusive ones: Physiological information provided by the present wearable systems are generally in
one-dimensional (1-D) format. The extension from 1-D
to 2-D by including spatial information would be desirable to provide more local information. Compared to the
existing noninvasive imaging modalities (e.g., magnetic
resonance imaging, computed tomography, ultrasound,
etc.), wearable physiological imaging devices would be
much faster to achieve high temporal resolution images, which is expected to provide additional clinical and
health information for early diagnosis and treatment of
diseases.

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

3) To develop wearable devices for disease intervention: The
existing wearable devices are mainly designed for the continuous monitoring of a person’s physiological or physical
status. For future development, wearable devices should
also play a role in disease intervention through integration
with actuators that are implanted inside/on the body. One
well-known example is the wearable artificial endocrine
pancreas for diabetes management, which is a close-loop
system formed by a wearable glucose monitor and an implanted insulin pump. Wearable drug delivery systems for
BP management can also be developed in the future.
4) To develop systematic data fusion framework: To integrate
the multimodal and multiscale big health data from sensing, blood testing, bio-marker detection, structural and
functional imaging for the quantitative risk assessment
and the early prediction of chronic diseases.
It is believed that with these future developments, unobtrusive and wearable devices could advance health informatics and
lead to fundamental changes of how healthcare is provided and
reform the underfunded and overstretched healthcare systems.
REFERENCES
[1] D. E. Bloom, E. T. Cafiero, E. Jané-Llopis, S. Abrahams-Gessel,
L. R. Bloom, S. Fathima, A. B. Feigl, T. Gaziano, M. Mowafi,
A. Pandya, K. Prettner, L. Rosenberg, B. Seligman, A. Z. Stein, and
C. Weinstein, The Global Economic Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases. Geneva, Switzerland: World Economic Forum, Jul. 2011.
[2] Y. T. Zhang and C. C. Y. Poon, “Editorial note on the processing, storage,
transmission, acquisition, and retrieval (P-STAR) of bio, medical, and
health information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 4,
pp. 895–896, Jul. 2010.
[3] C. C. Y. Poon, Y. M. Wong, and Y.-T. Zhang, “M-Health: The development of cuff-less and wearable blood pressure meters for use in body
sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE/NLM Life Sci. Syst. Appl. Workshop,
Bethesda, MD, 2006, pp. 1–2.
[4] D. H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y. S. Kim, R. H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu,
S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T.-i. Kim, R. Chowdhury,
M. Ying, L. Z. Xu, M. Li, H. J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, P. Liu,
Y. W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. G. Huang, T. Coleman, and J. A. Rogers,
“Epidermal electronics,” Science, vol. 333, no. 6044, pp. 838–843, Aug.
2011.
[5] Y. T. Zhang and C. C. Y. Poon, “Health informatics: Unobtrusive physiological measurement technologies,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
vol. 17, no. 5, p. 893, Sep. 2013.
[6] K. F. Wu, C. H. Chan, and Y. T. Zhang, “Contactless and cuffless monitoring of blood pressure on a chair using e-textile materials,” in Proc. 3rd
IEEE/EMBS Int. Summer School Med. Devices Biosensors, Cambridge,
MA, 2006, pp. 98–100.
[7] H. Baek, G. Chung, K. Kim, and K. Park, “A smart health monitoring
chair for nonintrusive measurement of biological signals,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 150–158, Jan. 2012.
[8] M. Walter, B. Eilebrecht, T. Wartzek, and S. Leonhardt, “The smart car
seat: Personalized monitoring of vital signs in automotive applications,”
Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 707–715, Oct. 2011.
[9] W. B. Gu, C. C. Y. Poon, H. K. Leung, M. Y. Sy, M. Y. M. Wong, and
Y. T. Zhang, “A novel method for the contactless and continuous measurement of arterial blood pressure on a sleeping bed,” in Proc. Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 6084–6086.
[10] M. Z. Poh, D. McDuff, and R. Picard, “A medical mirror for non-contact
health monitoring,” in Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Emerging Technol.,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2011, pp. 1–1.
[11] J. Gomez-Clapers and R. Casanella, “A fast and easy-to-use ECG acquisition and heart rate monitoring system using a wireless steering wheel,”
IEEE Sens. J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 610–616, Mar. 2012.
[12] Y. Lin, “A natural contact sensor paradigm for nonintrusive and realtime sensing of biosignals in human-machine interactions,” IEEE Sens.
J., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 522–529, Mar. 2011.

1551

[13] K. Ko Keun, L. Yong Kyu, and P. Kwang-Suk, “The electrically noncontacting ECG measurement on the toilet seat using the capacitivelycoupled insulated electrodes,” in Proc. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2004, pp. 2375–2378.
[14] O. T. Inan, D. Park, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. A. Kovacs, “Noninvasive
measurement of physiological signals on a modified home bathroom
scale,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2137–2143, Aug.
2012.
[15] Y. M. Chi, S. R. Deiss, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Non-contact low power
EEG/ECG electrode for high density wearable biopotential sensor networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sensor
Netw., Berkeley, CA, 2009, pp. 246–250.
[16] T. Hoffmann, B. Eilebrecht, and S. Leonhardt, “Respiratory monitoring
system on the basis of capacitive textile force sensors,” IEEE Sens. J.,
vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 1112–1119, 2011.
[17] T. Wartzek, S. Weyer, and S. Leonhardt, “A differential capacitive electrical field sensor array for contactless measurement of respiratory rate,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1575–1590, Oct. 2011.
[18] P. Chulsung, P. H. Chou, B. Ying, R. Matthews, and A. Hibbs, “An ultrawearable, wireless, low power ECG monitoring system,” in Proc. IEEE
Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf., London, U.K., 2006, pp. 241–244.
[19] A. Aleksandrowicz and S. Leonhardt, “Wireless and non-contact ECG
measurement system—The Aachen smartchair,” Acta Polytechnica,
vol. 2, pp. 68–71, 2007.
[20] Y. Yama, A. Ueno, and Y. Uchikawa, “Development of a wireless capacitive sensor for ambulatory ECG monitoring over clothes,” in Proc.
29th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Lyon, France, 2007,
pp. 5727–5730.
[21] S. Fuhrhop, S. Lamparth, and S. Heuer, “A textile integrated longterm ECG monitor with capacitively coupled electrodes,” in Proc. IEEE
Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf., Beijing, China, 2009, pp. 21–24.
[22] Y. M. Chi and G. Cauwenberghs, “Wireless non-contact EEG/ECG electrodes for body sensor networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Body Sensor Netw.,
2010, Singapore, pp. 297–301.
[23] E. Nemati, M. J. Deen, and T. Mondal, “A wireless wearable ECG sensor
for long-term applications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 36–
43, Jan. 2012.
[24] P. GuoChen and M. F. Bocko, “Non-contact ECG sensing employing gradiometer electrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 179–
183, Jan. 2013.
[25] B. H. Jae, C. G. Sung, K. K. Keun, K. J. Soo, and P. K. Suk, “Photoplethysmogram measurement without direct skin-to-sensor contact using an adaptive light source intensity control,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1085–1088, Nov. 2009.
[26] M. Z. Poh, D. J. McDuff, and R. W. Picard, “Advancements in noncontact, multiparameter physiological measurements using a webcam,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 7–11, Jan. 2011.
[27] H. H. Asada, P. Shaltis, A. Reisner, R. Sokwoo, and R. C. Hutchinson,
“Mobile monitoring with wearable photoplethysmographic biosensors,”
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 28–40, 2003.
[28] P. Celka, C. Verjus, R. Vetter, P. Renevey, and V. Neuman, “Motion
resistant earphone located infrared based heart rate measurement device,”
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng., Innsbruck, Austria, 2004, pp. 582–
585.
[29] Y. Mendelson, R. J. Duckworth, and G. Comtois, “A wearable reflectance
pulse oximeter for remote physiological monitoring,” in Proc. 28th Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., New York, NY, 2006, pp. 912–
915.
[30] W. Lei, B. Lo, and G.-Z. Yang, “Multichannel reflective PPG earpiece
sensor with passive motion cancellation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 235–241, Dec. 2007.
[31] S. Vogel, M. Hulsbusch, T. Hennig, V. Blazek, and S. Leonhardt, “In-ear
vital signs monitoring using a novel microoptic reflective sensor,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 882–889, Nov. 2009.
[32] J. Spigulis, R. Erts, V. Nikiforovs, and E. Kviesis-Kipge, “Wearable
wireless photoplethysmography sensors,” in Proc. Photon. Eur., 2008,
pp. 69912O1–69912O7.
[33] J. A. C. Patterson, D. G. McIlwraith, and G.-Z. Yang, “A flexible, low
noise reflective PPG sensor platform for ear-worn heart rate monitoring,”
in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sensor Netw.,
Berkeley, CA, 2009, pp. 286–291.
[34] K. Shin, Y. Kim, S. Bae, K. Park, and S. Kim, “A novel headset with
a transmissive PPG sensor for heart rate measurement,” in Proc. 13th
Intl. Conf. Biomed. Engineering, vol. 23, C. Lim and J. H. Goh, Eds.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2009, pp. 519–522.

1552

[35] M.-Z. Poh, K. Kim, A. Goessling, N. Swenson, and R. Picard, “Cardiovascular monitoring using earphones and a mobile device,” IEEE
Pervasive Comput., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 18–26, Oct.–Dec. 2012.
[36] M. Z. Poh, N. C. Swenson, and R. W. Picard, “Motion-tolerant magnetic
earring sensor and wireless earpiece for wearable photoplethysmography,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 786–794,
May 2010.
[37] Y. L. Zheng, B. Leung, S. Sy, Y. T. Zhang, and C. C. Y. Poon, “A clipfree eyeglasses-based wearable monitoring device for measuring photoplethysmograhic signals,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., San Diego, CA, 2012, pp. 5022–5025.
[38] Y. H. Lin, C. F. Lin, H. Z. You et al., “A driver’s physiological monitoring system based on a wearable PPG sensor and a smartphone,”
in Security-Enriched Urban Computing and Smart Grid, vol. 223,
R.-S. Chang, T.-H. Kim, and S.-L. Peng, Eds.
Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2011, pp. 326–335.
[39] F. Lamonaca, Y. Kurylyak, D. Grimaldi, and V. Spagnuolo, “Reliable
pulse rate evaluation by smartphone,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Med.
Measurements Appl. Proc., Budapest, Hungary, 2012, pp. 1–4.
[40] C. C. Poon, Y.-T. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Modeling of pulse transit time
under the effects of hydrostatic pressure for cuffless blood pressure measurements,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE/EMBS Int. Summer School Med. Devices
Biosensors, 2006, pp. 65–68.
[41] C. C. Y. Poon and Y. T. Zhang, “Cuff-less and noninvasive measurements
of arterial blood pressure by pulse transit time,” in Proc. 27th Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Shanghai, China, 2005, pp. 5877–5880.
[42] R. Payne, C. Symeonides, D. Webb, and S. Maxwell, “Pulse transit time
measured from the ECG: An unreliable marker of beat-to-beat blood
pressure,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 100, no. 1, p. 136, 2006.
[43] A. Lanata, E. P. Scilingo, E. Nardini, G. Loriga, R. Paradiso, and D. DeRossi, “Comparative evaluation of susceptibility to motion artifact in
different wearable systems for monitoring respiratory rate,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 378–386, Mar. 2010.
[44] R. Paradiso, G. Loriga, and N. Taccini, “A wearable health care system
based on knitted integrated sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 337–344, Sep. 2005.
[45] S. Rajala and J. Lekkala, “Film-type sensor materials PVDF and EMFi
in measurement of cardiorespiratory signals: A review,” IEEE Sens. J.,
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 439–446, Mar. 2012.
[46] S. Karki and J. Lekkala, “A new method to measure heart rate with EMFi
and PVDF materials,” J. Med. Eng. Technol., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 551–558,
2009.
[47] Z. B. Zhang, Y. H. Shen, W. D. Wang, B. Q. Wang, and J. W. Zheng,
“Design and implementation of sensing shirt for ambulatory cardiopulmonary monitoring,” J. Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 207–215,
2011.
[48] A. Lanata, E. P. Scilingo, and D. De Rossi, “A multimodal transducer for
cardiopulmonary activity monitoring in emergency,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 817–825, May 2010.
[49] L. Dziuda, F. W. Skibniewski, M. Krej, and J. Lewandowski, “Monitoring
respiration and cardiac activity using fiber bragg grating-based sensor,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1934–1942, Jul. 2012.
[50] L. T. D’Angelo, S. Weber, Y. Honda, T. Thiel, F. Narbonneau, and
T. C. Lüth, “A system for respiratory motion detection using optical
fibers embedded into textiles,” in Proc. 30th Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2008, pp. 3694–3697.
[51] O. Postolache, P. S. Girao, R. N. Madeira, and G. Postolache, “Microwave FMCW Doppler radar implementation for in-house pervasive
health care system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Med. Measurements
Appl.,, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2010, pp. 47–52.
[52] Q. Bonds, J. Gerig, T. M. Weller, and P. Herzig, “Towards core body temperature measurement via close proximity radiometric sensing,” IEEE
Sens. J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 519–526, Mar. 2012.
[53] H. M. Schepers, H. F. J. M. Koopman, and P. H. Veltink, “Ambulatory
assessment of ankle and foot dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 895–902, May 2007.
[54] J. Penders, J. van de Molengraft, M. Altini, F. Yazicioglu, and C. Van
Hoof, “A low-power wireless ECG necklace for reliable cardiac activity
monitoring on-the-move,” in Proc. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2011, pp. 1–4.
[55] W. B. Gu, C. C. Y. Poon, M. Y. Sy, H. K. Leung, Y. P. Liang, and
Y. T. Zhang, “A h-shirt-based body sensor network for cuffless calibration and estimation of arterial blood pressure,” in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop
Wearable Implantable Body Sensor Netw., Berkeley, CA, 2009, pp. 151–
155.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

[56] B. Lo, G.-Z. Yang, and J. Pansiot, “Bayesian analysis of sub-plantar
ground reaction force with BSN,” in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sensor Netw., Berkeley, CA, 2009, pp. 133–
137.
[57] M. Rothmaier, B. Selm, S. Spichtig, D. Haensse, and M. Wolf, “Photonic
textiles for pulse oximetry,” Opt. Exp., vol. 16, no. 17, pp. 12973–12986,
Aug. 2008.
[58] T. Yamada, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Yomogida, A. IzadiNajafabadi, D. N. Futaba, and K. Hata, “A stretchable carbon nanotube
strain sensor for human-motion detection,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 6,
no. 5, pp. 296–301, May 2011.
[59] Y. C. Wu, C. S. Chang, Y. Sawaguchi, W. C. Yu, M. J. Chen, J. Y. Lin,
S. M. Liu, C. C. Han, and W. Liang, “A mobile-phone-based health management system,” in Health Management—Different Approaches and
Solutions, K. Śmigórski, Ed.: Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2011.
[60] L. Atallah, B. Lo, R. King, and G.-Z. Yang, “Sensor positioning for activity recognition using wearable accelerometers,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 320–329, Aug. 2011.
[61] P. B. Adamson, W. T. Abraham, M. Aaron, J. M. Aranda, Jr.,
R. C. Bourge, A. Smith, L. W. Stevenson, J. G. Bauman, and J. S. Yadav,
“CHAMPION trial rationale and design: The long-term safety and clinical efficacy of a wireless pulmonary artery pressure monitoring system,”
J. Card. Fail., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 3–10, 2011.
[62] J. E. Pandolfino, J. E. Richter, T. Ours, J. M. Guardino, J. Chapman,
and P. J. Kahrilas, “Ambulatory esophageal pH monitoring using a
wireless system,” Am. J. Gastroenterol., vol. 98, no. 4, pp. 740–749,
2003.
[63] C. C. Y. Poon and Y. T. Zhang, “Perspectives on high technologies for
low-cost healthcare,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 42–47,
Oct. 2008.
[64] C. M. N. Brigante, N. Abbate, A. Basile, A. C. Faulisi, and S. Sessa,
“Towards miniaturization of a MEMS-based wearable motion capture
system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 3234–3241, Aug.
2011.
[65] Y. Chuo, M. Marzencki, B. Hung, C. Jaggernauth, K. Tavakolian, P. Lin,
and B. Kaminska, “Mechanically flexible wireless multisensor platform
for human physical activity and vitals monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 281–294, Oct. 2010.
[66] S. Mandal, L. Turicchia, and R. Sarpeshkar, “A low-power, battery-free
tag for body sensor networks,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 71–77, Mar. 2010.
[67] C. R. Merritt, H. T. Nagle, and E. Grant, “Fabric-based active electrode
design and fabrication for health monitoring clothing,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 274–280, Mar. 2009.
[68] R. S. H. Istepanian, E. Jovanov, and Y. T. Zhang, “Guest editorial introduction to the special section on m-Health: Beyond seamless mobility
and global wireless health-care connectivity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 405–414, Dec. 2004.
[69] G. Z. Yang, Body Sensor Networks. London, U.K.: Springer, 2006.
[70] N. Golmie, D. Cypher, and O. Rébala, “Performance analysis of low
rate wireless technologies for medical applications,” Comput. Commun.,
vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1266–1275, 2005.
[71] K. Kang, J. Ryu, J. Hur, and L. Sha, “Design and QoS of a wireless system for real-time remote electrocardiography,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 745–755, May 2013.
[72] E. Cavero, A. Alesanco, and J. Garcia, “Enhanced protocol for
real-time transmission of echocardiograms over wireless channels,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3212–3220, Nov.
2012.
[73] R. S. H. Istepanian, N. Y. Philip, and M. G. Martini, “Medical QoS provision based on reinforcement learning in ultrasound streaming over
3.5G wireless systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 566–574, May 2009.
[74] Y. Ren, R. W. N. Pazzi, and A. Boukerche, “Monitoring patients via a
secure and mobile healthcare system,” IEEE Wirel. Commun., vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 59–65, Feb. 2010.
[75] K. Malhotra, S. Gardner, and R. Patz, “Implementation of elliptic-curve
cryptography on mobile healthcare devices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Netw., Sens. Control, London, U.K., 2007, pp. 239–244.
[76] C. C. Tan, H. Wang, S. Zhong, and Q. Li, “Body sensor network security:
an identity-based cryptography approach,” presented at the 1st ACM
Conf. Wireless Netw. Security, Alexandria, VA, USA, 2008.
[77] C. C. Poon, Y. T. Zhang, and S. D. Bao, “A novel biometrics method
to secure wireless body area sensor networks for telemedicine and mhealth,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 73–81, Apr. 2006.

ZHENG et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE SENSING AND WEARABLE DEVICES FOR HEALTH INFORMATICS

[78] K. K. Venkatasubramanian, A. Banerjee, and S. K. S. Gupta, “PSKA:
Usable and secure key agreement scheme for body area networks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 60–68, Jan. 2010.
[79] K. K. Venkatasubramanian, A. Banerjee, and S. K. S. Gupta,
“Plethysmogram-based secure inter-sensor communication in body area
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf., San Diego, CA, 2008,
pp. 1–7.
[80] P. K. Sahoo, “Efficient security mechanisms for mHealth applications
using wireless body sensor networks,” Sensors, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 12606–
12633, 2012.
[81] X. H. Le, R. Sankar, M. Khalid, and S. Lee, “Public key cryptographybased security scheme for wireless sensor networks in healthcare,” in
Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Uniquitous Informat. Manage. Commun., 2010, p. 5.
[82] B. Liu, X. F. Wang, B. Y. Liu, Q. F. Wang, D. S. Tan, W. F. Song,
X. J. Hou, D. Chen, and G. Z. Shen, “Advanced rechargeable lithiumion batteries based on bendable ZnCo2O4-urchins-on-carbon-fibers electrodes,” Nano Res., vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 525–534, Jul. 2013.
[83] Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu, and D. Zou, “Fiber
supercapacitors utilizing pen ink for flexible/wearable energy storage,”
Adv. Mater., vol. 24, no. 42, pp. 5713–5718, 2012.
[84] H. Xu, J. Li, B. H. K. Leung, C. C. Y. Poon, B. S. Ong, Y. Zhang, and
N. Zhao, “A high-sensitivity near-infrared phototransistor based on organic bulk heterojunction,” Nanoscale, vol. 5, no. 23, pp. 11850–11855,
2013.
[85] A. A. Abidi, G. J. Pottie, and W. J. Kaiser, “Power-conscious design of
wireless circuits and systems,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 88, no. 10, pp. 1528–
1545, Oct. 2000.
[86] N. S. Shenck and J. A. Paradiso, “Energy scavenging with shoe-mounted
piezoelectrics,” IEEE Micro., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 30–42, May–Jun. 2001.
[87] V. Leonov, “Thermoelectric energy harvesting of human body heat for
wearable sensors,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 2284–2291, Jun.
2013.
[88] S. Kim, J. S. Ho, and A. S. Y. Poon, “Midfield wireless powering of
subwavelength autonomous devices,” PhRvL, vol. 110, no. 20, p. 203905,
2013.
[89] G. P. Pizzuti, S. Cifaldi, and G. Nolfe, “Digital sampling rate and ECG
analysis,” J. Biomed. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 247–250, 1985.
[90] H. Feichtinger, J. Prı́ncipe, J. Romero, A. Singh Alvarado, and
G. Velasco, “Approximate reconstruction of bandlimited functions for
the integrate and fire sampler,” Adv. Comput. Math., vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 67–78, 2012.
[91] A. S. Alvarado, C. Lakshminarayan, and J. C. Principe, “Time-based
compression and classification of heartbeats,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1641–1648, Jun. 2012.
[92] P. K. K. Loh and L. Allan, “Medical informatics system with wireless
sensor network-enabled for hospitals,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Sensors,
Sensor Netw. Inf. Process. Conf., 2005, pp. 265–270.
[93] Health Informatics Personal Health Device Communication, IEEE Standard P11073, 2007
[94] J. Yao and S. Warren, “Applying the ISO/IEEE 11073 standards to wearable home health monitoring systems,” J. Clin. Monitor. Comp., vol. 19,
no. 6, pp. 427–436, Dec. 2005.
[95] M. Damas, H. Pomares, S. Gonzalez, A. Olivares, and I. Rojas, “Ambient assisted living devices interoperability based on OSGi and the X73
standard,” Telemed. E-Health, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 54–60, 2013.
[96] M. Mart´ınez-Espronceda, I. Mart´ınez, L. Serrano, S. Led, J. U. D. Trigo,
A. Marzo, J. Escayola, and J. E. Garc´ıa, “Implementation methodology
for interoperable personal health devices with low-voltage low-power
constraints,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 398–
408, 2011.
[97] I. R. Yan, C. C. Y. Poon, and Y. T. Zhang, “Evaluation scale to assess the
accuracy of cuff-less blood pressure measuring devices,” Blood Press
Monit., vol. 14, no. 6, p. 257, 2009.
[98] F. Buttussi and L. Chittaro, “MOPET: A context-aware and user-adaptive
wearable system for fitness training,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 42, no. 2,
pp. 153–163, Feb. 2008.
[99] S. L. Koay, T. H. Kwon, and W. Y. Chung, “Motion artifacts cancellation
by adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system for wearable health shirts,”
Sens. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 399–403, Feb. 2011.
[100] B. H. Ko, T. Lee, C. Choi, Y. H. Kim, G. Park, K. Kang, S. K. Bae,
and K. Shin, “Motion artifact reduction in electrocardiogram using
adaptive filtering based on half cell potential monitoring,” in Proc.
2012 Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 1590–
1593.

1553

[101] Y. S. Yan and Y. T. Zhang, “An efficient motion-resistant method for
wearable pulse oximeter,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12,
no. 3, pp. 399–405, May 2008.
[102] S. Coyle, K. T. Lau, N. Moyna, D. O’Gorman, D. Diamond, F. Di
Francesco, D. Costanzo, P. Salvo, M. G. Trivella, D. E. De Rossi,
N. Taccini, R. Paradiso, J. A. Porchet, A. Ridolfi, J. Luprano, C. Chuzel,
T. Lanier, F. Revol-Cavalier, S. Schoumacker, V. Mourier, I. Chartier,
R. Convert, H. De-Moncuit, and C. Bini, “BIOTEX-biosensing textiles
for personalised healthcare management,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 364–370, May 2010.
[103] M. Z. Poh, T. Loddenkemper, C. Reinsberger, N. C. Swenson, S. Goyal,
J. R. Madsen, and R. W. Picard, “Autonomic changes with seizures correlate with postictal EEG suppression,” Neurology, vol. 78, no. 23,
pp. 1868–1876, Jun. 2012.
[104] M.-Z. Poh, N. C. Swenson, and R. W. Picard, “A wearable sensor for unobtrusive, long-term assessment of electrodermal activity,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1243–1252, May
2010.
[105] B. Firoozbakhsh, N. Jayant, S. Park, and S. Jayaraman, “Wireless communication of vital signs using the georgia tech wearable motherboard,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo, New York, 2000, pp. 1253–
1256.
[106] T. Linz, C. Kallmayer, R. Aschenbrenner, and H. Reichl, “Fully untegrated EKG shirt based on embroidered electrical interconnections with
conductive yarn and miniaturized flexible electronics,” presented at Int.
Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sensor Netw., Cambridge, MA,
2006.
[107] P. Grossman, “The lifeshirt: A multi-function ambulatory system monitoring health, disease, and medical intervention in the real world,” in
Wearable Ehealth Systems for Personalised Health Management: State
of the Art and Future Challenges, A. Lymberis and D. E. D. Rossi, Eds.
Headington, U.K.: IOS Press, 2004, pp. 133–141.
[108] D. Curone, E. L. Secco, A. Tognetti, G. Loriga, G. Dudnik, M. Risatti,
R. Whyte, A. Bonfiglio, and G. Magenes, “Smart garments for emergency operators: The proetex project,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 694–701, May 2010.
[109] N. Noury, A. Dittmar, C. Corroy, R. Baghai, J. L. Weber, D. Blanc,
F. Klefstat, A. Blinovska, S. Vaysse, and B. Comet, “VTAMN - A smart
clothe for ambulatory remote monitoring of physiological parameters
and activity,” in Proc. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
San Francisco, CA, 2004, pp. 3266–3269.
[110] W.-H. Yeo, Y.-S. Kim, J. Lee, A. Ameen, L. Shi, M. Li, S. Wang, R. Ma,
S. H. Jin, Z. Kang, Y. Huang, and J. A. Rogers, “Multifunctional epidermal electronics printed directly onto the skin,” Adv. Mater., vol. 25,
no. 20, pp. 2773–2778, 2013.
[111] S. C. Mannsfeld, B. C. Tee, R. M. Stoltenberg, C. V. H. Chen, S. Barman,
B. V. Muir, A. N. Sokolov, C. Reese, and Z. Bao, “Highly sensitive
flexible pressure sensors with microstructured rubber dielectric layers,”
Nat. Mater., vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 859–864, 2010.
[112] G. Schwartz, B. C.-K. Tee, J. Mei, A. L. Appleton, H. Wang, and Z. Bao,
“Flexible polymer transistors with high pressure sensitivity for application in electronic skin and health monitoring,” Nat. Commun., vol. 4,
p. 1859, 2013.
[113] T. Someya, “Building bionic skin,” IEEE Spectrum, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 50–
56, Sep. 2013.
[114] H. X. Chang, Z. H. Sun, M. Saito, Q. H. Yuan, H. Zhang, J. H. Li,
Z. C. Wang, T. Fujita, F. Ding, Z. J. Zheng, F. Yan, H. K. Wu, M. W. Chen,
and Y. Ikuhara, “Regulating infrared photoresponses in reduced graphene
oxide phototransistors by defect and atomic structure control,” Acs Nano,
vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6310–6320, Jul. 2013.
[115] M. C. McAlpine, H. Ahmad, D. W. Wang, and J. R. Heath, “Highly
ordered nanowire arrays on plastic substrates for ultrasensitive flexible chemical sensors,” Nat. Mater., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 379–384, May
2007.
[116] W. Jia, A. J. Bandodkar, G. Valdés-Ramı́rez, J. R. Windmiller, Z. Yang,
J. Ramı́rez, G. Chan, and J. Wang, “Electrochemical tattoo biosensors for
real-time noninvasive lactate monitoring in human perspiration,” Anal.
Chem., vol. 85, no. 14, pp. 6553–6560, Jul. 2013.
[117] I. Manunza and A. Bonfiglio, “Pressure sensing using a completely flexible organic transistor,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2775–
2779, Jun. 2007.
[118] H. T. Yi, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, and V. Podzorov, “Ultraflexible solution-processed organic field-effect transistors,” Nat. Commun., vol. 3, pp. 1259–1266, Dec. 2012.

1554

[119] X. Wang, W. Song, B. Liu, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou, and G. Shen,
“High-performance organic-inorganic hybrid photodetectors based on
P3HT:CdSe nanowire heterojunctions on rigid and flexible substrates,”
Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1202–1209, 2013.
[120] T.-H. Han, Y. Lee, M.-R. Choi, S.-H. Woo, S.-H. Bae, B. H. Hong,
J.-H. Ahn, and T.-W. Lee, “Extremely efficient flexible organic lightemitting diodes with modified graphene anode,” Nat. Photon., vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 105–110, 2012.
[121] C. Pang, G. Y. Lee, T. i. Kim, S. M. Kim, H. N. Kim, S. H. Ahn, and
K. Y. Suh, “A flexible and highly sensitive strain-gauge sensor using
reversible interlocking of nanofibres,” Nat. Mater., vol. 11, pp. 795–801,
2012.
[122] V. Lakafosis, A. Rida, R. Vyas, Y. Li, S. Nikolaou, and M. M. Tentzeris,
“Progress towards the first wireless sensor networks consisting of inkjetprinted, paper-based RFID-enabled sensor tags,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 98,
no. 9, pp. 1601–1609, Sep. 2010.
[123] S. Xu, Y. H. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. W. Su,
J. Su, H. G. Zhang, H. Y. Cheng, B. W. Lu, C. J. Yu, C. Chuang, T. I. Kim,
T. Song, K. Shigeta, S. Kang, C. Dagdeviren, I. Petrov, P. V. Braun,
Y. G. Huang, U. Paik, and J. A. Rogers, “Stretchable batteries with selfsimilar serpentine interconnects and integrated wireless recharging systems,” Nat. Commun., vol. 4, pp. 1543–1551, Feb. 2013.
[124] H. Gwon, H. S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D. H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y. S. Lee,
B. T. Ahn, and K. Kang, “Flexible energy storage devices based on
graphene paper,” Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1277–1283, Apr.
2011.
[125] P. C. Chen, H. T. Chen, J. Qiu, and C. W. Zhou, “Inkjet printing of singlewalled carbon nanotube/ruO2 nanowire supercapacitors on cloth fabrics
and flexible substrates,” Nano. Res., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 594–603, Aug.
2010.
[126] D.-H. Kim, R. Ghaffari, N. Lu, and J. A. Rogers, “Flexible and stretchable
electronics for biointegrated devices,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 113–128, 2012.
[127] D. Y. Khang, H. Q. Jiang, Y. Huang, and J. A. Rogers, “A stretchable
form of single-crystal silicon for high-performance electronics on rubber
substrates,” Science, vol. 311, no. 5758, pp. 208–212, Jan. 2006.
[128] Y. Wang, R. Yang, Z. W. Shi, L. C. Zhang, D. X. Shi, E. Wang, and
G. Y. Zhang, “Super-elastic graphene ripples for flexible strain sensors,”
ACS Nano, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3645–3650, May 2011.
[129] J. Song, Y. Huang, J. Xiao, S. Wang, K. C. Hwang, H. C. Ko, D. H. Kim,
M. P. Stoykovich, and J. A. Rogers, “Mechanics of noncoplanar mesh
design for stretchable electronic circuits,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 105, no. 12,
pp. 123516-1–123516-6, Jun. 2009.
[130] M. S. White, M. Kaltenbrunner, E. D. Glowacki, K. Gutnichenko,
G. Kettlgruber, I. Graz, S. Aazou, C. Ulbricht, D. A. M. Egbe,
M. C. Miron, Z. Major, M. C. Scharber, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, S. Bauer,
and N. S. Sariciftci, “Ultrathin, highly flexible and stretchable PLEDs,”
Nat. Photon., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 811–816, Oct. 2013.
[131] Y. N. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. P. Zhang,
G. Q. Shi, and L. T. Qu, “All-graphene core-sheath microfibers for allsolid-state, stretchable fibriform supercapacitors and wearable electronic
textiles,” Adv. Mater., vol. 25, no. 16, pp. 2326–2331, Apr. 2013.
[132] T. Sekitani, Y. Noguchi, K. Hata, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, and T. Someya,
“A rubberlike stretchable active matrix using elastic conductors,” Science, vol. 321, no. 5895, pp. 1468–1472, Sep. 2008.
[133] Y. Kim, J. Zhu, B. Yeom, M. Di Prima, X. L. Su, J. G. Kim, S. J. Yoo,
C. Uher, and N. A. Kotov, “Stretchable nanoparticle conductors with selforganized conductive pathways,” Nature, vol. 500, no. 7460, pp. U59–
U77, Aug. 2013.
[134] Y. G. Seol, T. Q. Trung, O. J. Yoon, I. Y. Sohn, and N. E. Lee, “Nanocomposites of reduced graphene oxide nanosheets and conducting polymer for stretchable transparent conducting electrodes,” J. Mater. Chem.,
vol. 22, no. 45, pp. 23759–23766, Dec. 2012.
[135] B. Khaleghi, A. Khamis, F. O. Karray, and S. N. Razavi, “Multisensor
data fusion: A review of the state-of-the-art,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 14, no. 1,
pp. 28–44, 2013.
[136] F. E. White, Data Fusion Lexicon. San Diego, CA, USA: Joint Directors
of Laboratories, Technical Panel for C3, Data Fusion Sub-Panel, Naval
Ocean Systems Center, 1991.
[137] H. Boström, S. F. Andler, M. Brohede, R. Johansson, A. Karlsson, J.
van Laere, L. Niklasson, M. Nilsson, A. Persson, and T. Ziemke, On
the definition of information fusion as a field of research. in Technical
Report, Skovde, Sweden: University of Skövde, School of Humanities
and Informatics, 2007.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

[138] Y. Huang, P. McCullagh, N. Black, and R. Harper, “Feature selection
and classification model construction on type 2 diabetic patients’ data,”
Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 251–262, Nov. 2007.
[139] M. J. O’Connor, R. D. Shankar, D. B. Parrish, and A. K. Das,
“Knowledge-data integration for temporal reasoning in a clinical trial
system,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 78, no. 1, pp. S77–S85, 2009.
[140] X. Wang, H. Chase, M. Markatou, G. Hripcsak, and C. Friedman, “Selecting information in electronic health records for knowledge acquisition,”
J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 595–601, 2010.
[141] G. N. Noren, J. Hopstadius, A. Bate, K. Star, and I. R. Edwards, “Temporal pattern discovery in longitudinal electronic patient records,” Data
Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 361–387, May 2010.
[142] J. Han and J. Kember, Data Mining Concepts and Techniques. San
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.
[143] S. Hashem, “Optimal linear combinations of neural networks,” Neural
Netw., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 599–614, Jun. 1997.
[144] D. Huang and H. Leung, “An expectation-maximization-based interacting multiple model approach for cooperative driving systems,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 206–228, Jun. 2005.
[145] D. Dubois and H. Prade, Possibility Theory. New York, NY: Plenum
Press,, 1988.
[146] P. B. Jensen, L. J. Jensen, and S. Brunak, “Mining electronic health
records: Towards better research applications and clinical care,” Nat.
Rev. Genet., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 395–405, Jun. 2012.
[147] I. Kurt, M. Ture, and A. T. Kurum, “Comparing performances of logistic
regression, classification and regression tree, and neural networks for
predicting coronary artery disease,” Expert. Syst. Appl., vol. 34, no. 1,
pp. 366–374, 2008.
[148] R. Taber, “Knowledge processing with fuzzy cognitive maps,” Expert.
Syst. Appl., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 83–87, 1991.
[149] E. I. Papageorgiou, “A new methodology for decisions in medical informatics using fuzzy cognitive maps based on fuzzy rule-extraction
techniques,” Appl. Soft. Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 500–513, 2011.
[150] Euheart. (2008). Euheart—Matters of the heart [Online]. Available:
http://www.euheart.eu/index.php?id=euheart-home, accessed in Dec.
2013.
[151] H. Gao, C. C. Y. Poon, P. Yang, and Y. T. Zhang, “Risk prediction of
cardiovascular disease,” presented at the 7th Int. School Symp. Med.
Devices Biosensors Conjunction 6th Int. School Symp. Biomed. Health
Eng., Hongkong and Shenzhen, China, 2010.
[152] Y. Dong, Y. Yun, L. Xiao, L. Wenhao, C. Lizhen, X. Meng, and C.
Jinjun, “A highly practical approach toward achieving minimum data
sets storage cost in the cloud,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol.
24, no. 6, pp. 1234–1244, Jun. 2013.
[153] X. Mu and K. Lu, “Towards effective genomic information retrieval: The
impact of query complexity and expansion strategies,” J. Inf. Sci., vol. 36,
no. 2, pp. 194–208, 2010.
[154] K. Natarajan, D. Stein, S. Jain, and N. Elhadad, “An analysis of clinical
queries in an electronic health record search utility,” Int. J. Med. Inform.,
vol. 79, no. 7, pp. 515–522, 2010.
[155] ]. Sujansky and Associates, LLC, “A standards-based model for
the sharing of patient-generated health information with electronic health records,” in Technical Report, 2013. Available:
http://www.projecthealthdesign.org/. accessed in Jan. 2014.
[156] L. Coles-Kemp, J. Reddington, and P. A. H. Williams, “Looking at clouds
from both sides: The advantages and disadvantages of placing personal
narratives in the cloud,” Inf. Security Tech. Rep., vol. 16, no. 3–4, pp. 115–
122, 2011.
[157] C. O. Rolim, F. L. Koch, C. B. Westphall, J. Werner, A. Fracalossi, and
G. S. Salvador, A Cloud Computing Solution for Patient’s Data Collection in Health Care Institutions. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2010.
[158] M. Poulymenopoulou, F. Malamateniou, and G. Vassilacopoulos, “Emergency healthcare process automation using mobile computing and cloud
services,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 3233–3241, Oct. 2012.
[159] E. AbuKhousa, N. Mohamed, and J. Al-Jaroodi, “e-Health cloud: Opportunities and challenges,” Future Internet, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 621–645,
2012.
[160] B. E. Dixon, L. Simonaitis, H. S. Goldberg, M. D. Paterno, M. Schaeffer,
T. Hongsermeier, A. Wright, and B. Middleton, “A pilot study of distributed knowledge management and clinical decision support in the
cloud,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 45–53, Sep. 2013.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

