IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1877

Feasibility of Long-Term Monitoring
of Multifrequency and Multisegment Body
Impedance by Portable Devices
Federica Villa, Alessandro Magnani, Giampiero Merati, and Paolo Castiglioni∗

Abstract—Available devices for multisegment bioelectric
impedance spectroscopy (BIS) do not allow monitoring the body
composition without interfering with the subject’s activities. In this
study, we evaluated the feasibility of unobtrusive multisegment BIS
with small portable devices by presenting and testing a DSP-based
prototype specifically designed to minimize weight, size, and power
consumption of BIS systems. The prototype consists in 1) a tetrapolar electrodes setup; 2) an analog board with a transconductance
amplifier which injects the stimulation current and an instrumentation amplifier which senses the associated voltage drop; and 3)
a digital board with a digital signal processor for data processing, for system calibration and for generation of the stimulating
waveforms. To optimize the design, the prototype employs squarewave stimulating waveforms, easier to be generated compared to
sinusoids. The performances of the prototype were tested by monitoring BIS in the arm, trunk, and leg on a group of 20 volunteers
(ten males and ten females) during a 40-min experimental protocol which included postural changes. Results demonstrated the
capability of our prototype to follow impedance changes due to the
redistribution of fluids after postural changes and to detect gender
differences likely associated to the diverse composition and size of
body segments in males and females.
Index Terms—Bioimpedance, extracellular water volume, gender, posture, stray capacitance.

I. INTRODUCTION
IOELECTRICAL impedance spectroscopy (BIS) provides
a fast, noninvasive, cheap, and reliable way to assess the
composition of individual segments of the body [1]. The method
is based on the measure of the voltage drop across body segments crossed by an injected current, and in the calculation of
magnitude and phase of the corresponding electrical impedance
over a broad range of frequencies. So far, BIS has been applied
to study a variety of physiological and clinical conditions. In

B

Manuscript received December 13, 2013; revised February 25, 2014; accepted February 25, 2014. Date of publication March 5, 2014; date of current
version May 15, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
F. Villa and A. Magnani are with the Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, at Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy
(e-mail: federica.villa86@gmail.com; alessandro.magnani86@gmail.com).
G. Merati is with the Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health,
Università degli Studi di Milano, 20122 Milano, Italy (e-mail: giampiero.
merati@unimi.it).
∗ P. Castiglioni is with the IRCCS Fondazione Don C. Gnocchi, I-20148
Milano, Italy (e-mail: pcastiglioni@dongnocchi.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309983

particular, it may help to quantify the level of hydration [2]
or the ratio between fat and lean masses [3]; to diagnose muscle disorders, monitoring the muscle health during rehabilitation
programs [4], [5]; and to detect in advance pulmonary edema [6]
or lymphedema in legs and arms [7].
BIS studies, however, have been limited to laboratory or clinical settings. In fact, available instrumentation consists in bulky
systems which cannot be used in freely moving subjects for
long periods of time. This limit could be overcome by a proper
miniaturization of the devices. Actually, small portable systems
able to measure the body impedance unobtrusively for several
hours would open the use of BIS to many new applications.
For instance, they would make it possible monitoring the hydration level over the 24 h in subjects with an altered control
of thirst, as in elderly people, or in workers and endurance athletes undergoing extreme physical activities; they would allow
to quantify changes in the distribution of body fluids following
gravitational stresses in fighter pilots or astronauts; in studies of
occupational medicine, they could be employed for assessing
impedance variations in specific muscular districts during the
everyday working activities.
The fulfilment of such devices requires the design of circuits
with an optimized number of components to minimize weight,
size, and power consumption. In this regard, the use of a digital
signal processor (DSP) appears the best solution for generating stimulation currents and for elaborating the sensed signals.
Therefore, the aim of this study is to evaluate the feasibility of
a DSP-based approach in order to design portable devices for
segmental BIS without significantly interfering with the subjects
activities. For this aim, we present a prototype that implements
the main features required for a portable BIS system. In particular, our prototype employs a small DSP board with very-low
power consumption, which provides magnitude and phase of
body impedance over a broad range of frequencies. This goal
is achieved by employing square-wave stimulating waveforms
that, compared to sinusoids, are easier to be generated with digital components and do not require high speed digital to analog
converters. At the best of our knowledge, this is the first use of
square-wave stimulations in BIS (a preliminary version of the
device was presented at the PRIME 2012 Conference in Aachen,
Germany [8]).
In this study, we also present the results of experimental tests
performed with our prototype on a group of male and female volunteers. BIS of different body segments was assessed according
to an experimental protocol, which included postural changes.
These experimental data allow us to evaluate the capability of

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE I
TYPICAL POSITIONS OF INJECTING AND SENSING ELECTRODES
FOR EACH BODY SEGMENT

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the overall system composed by a digital
processing board, an analog board and a tetrapolar setup.

our BIS system 1) to follow impedance changes due to the redistribution of fluids after postural changes, and 2) to detect gender
differences likely associated to the diverse composition and size
of body segments in males and females.
II. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
Our prototype is composed by a digital board and an analog
board connected to a tetrapolar electrodes setup (see Fig. 1). The
tetrapolar setup consists in a couple of stimulation electrodes
(I1 and I2) and in a couple of sensing electrodes (S1 and S2).
The analog board includes a transconductance amplifier that
injects the stimulation current, and an instrumentation amplifier
(INA) that senses the voltage drop across the body. The analog
board receives a stimulation voltage from the digital board, to
which it sends back the measured voltage drop. The digital board
includes a DSP. The DSP generates the stimulation waveforms,
processes the measured data, and includes an ADC to digitize
the sensed voltage. Details of the system follow.
A. Tetrapolar Electrodes Setup
If the same two electrodes are used for stimulation and sensing, electrodes with a large area (band electrodes) are required
to reduce the current constrictional effects, which characterizes
small disk electrodes. In addition, sensing electrodes may influence the measure with their own impedance if crossed by the
injected current and we showed that the contribution of small
disk electrodes to whole body impedance at 10 kHz is not negligible if bipolar or tripolar electrode setup are employed [8]. By
contrast, a tetrapolar setup provides impedance measures less
dependent on the skin–electrode interface [4], [8], allowing the
use of small disk electrodes, as the pregelled electrodes of most
ECG Holter recordings. Small disk electrodes are particularly
suitable for portable multisegment BIS systems, because they
are easier to place and interfere less with the subject movements.
Moreover, pregelled ECG electrodes appear able to provide stable impedance measures over several hours [8].
Therefore, in our prototype a tetrapolar setup with ECG disk
electrodes is used. A periodic current, with zero mean, is injected
into the body through the I1 and I2 electrodes. The voltage drop
generated by the injected current is measured by the S1 and S2
sensing electrodes. The position of the four electrodes depends
on the specific segment of the body to be measured. Typical
locations of I1 and I2 are the ipsilateral foot and hand. The most

Fig. 2. Transconductance amplifier driven by the DSP. The square wave stimulation voltage reaches the amplifier after a low-pass filtering by CL P and
R L P ; the current is injected only during the measurement (“enable” signal
ON). R L P = R T = 1.65 kΩ; CL P = 100 pF; R = 10 kΩ; Vdd = +3.3 V.

common positions of S1 and S2 are showed in Table I, together
with the corresponding body segment of which the impedance
is measured. The anatomic positions of S1 and S2 refer to the
same side of the body. More complex dispositions can be also
employed. For instance, the system will measure the impedance
of the right leg with I1 and I2 on the right foot and hand and S1
and S2 on the right and left ankles [3].
The amplitude ratio between the harmonics at frequency f
of the S1–S2 dropout and of the injected current provides the
impedance magnitude, whereas the difference between their
phases provides the impedance phase at f .
B. Analog Board
The analog board is designed to minimize the number of
components, and consequently, its overall dimension and power
consumption. It is powered with a single supply at +3.3 V generated with an on-board dc–dc converter either from the +5 V of
the USB connection on the DSP board or from an external battery. The same quad-operational amplifier (MCP654) has been
used for the transconductance amplifier and for the INA.
The transconductance amplifier (see Fig. 2) receives the
stimulating voltage waveform from the DSP and generates a
proportional current. Once the measure is completed the transimpedance amplifier is disabled by a dedicated DSP output, interrupting the current flow in the body. The resistance RL P and
capacitance CL P actuate an antialiasing prefiltering at 1 MHz.
The INA requires a relative high bandwidth (about 1 MHz),
and a single low-voltage power supply to fulfill the low power
consumption specification of the overall system. Since commercial INAs do not satisfy both these constrains, the INA has
been custom designed using three operational amplifiers with

VILLA et al.: FEASIBILITY OF LONG-TERM MONITORING OF MULTIFREQUENCY AND MULTISEGMENT BODY IMPEDANCE

Fig. 3. Scheme of INA, with second-order antialiasing filtering. R F = 10 kΩ;
R G = 20 kΩ; CL P = 16 pF; R O = 10 kΩ; CO = 16 pF.

and zero mean, to avoid injecting a dc component. In order
to cover the frequency range of interest with a low number
of stimulation waveforms, seven square waves are generated.
Six square waves have their first harmonic equispaced on a
log-frequency scale and the considered frequencies are: 18, 36,
72, 144, 288, and 576 kHz. The seventh waveform has its first
harmonic at 50 kHz, because this frequency is employed in most
monofrequency body impedance systems. The duration of each
train of square waves is 5 ms, given by the sum of the ADC
acquisition time (0.5 ms) and the FFT process time (4.5 ms).
Since seven waveforms are generated, the overall measure time
is 35 ms.
The sampling frequency has been fixed at 2.3 MHz, multiple
of each stimulation frequency to avoid bin leakage. In this way,
only one bin of the FFT is excited. The 12-bit ADC acquires
1024 samples for each stimulation frequency in real time. The
DSP computes the 1024-points FFT and provides magnitude
and phase of the first harmonic of the INA’s output voltage.
Magnitude and phase of the body impedance at the frequency f
are
|Vb o dy (f )|
|Is (f )|

(1)

∠Zb o dy (f ) = ∠ |Vb o dy (f )| − ∠ |Is (f )|

(2)

|Zb o dy (f )| =

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the digital board and its functionalities.
Main component is a Texas Instruments DSP with internal 12-bit ADC.

5 MHz gain-bandwidth product (see Fig. 3). Considering a maximal body impedance of 1.5 kΩ and a stimulation current of
±500 μA, the differential voltage at the input of the INA falls
within the ±0.75 V range. The INA theoretical gain at 0 Hz is
(1+2·RF /RG ). Setting this gain to 2, the full scale range of the
ADC (0.3 V) is covered without saturating any internal node.
An offset to the output voltage acting on noninverting terminal
of the third OpAmp (I3 in Fig. 3) matches the input differential swing (positive and negative) with the output single-ended
swing (only positive). The CL P and Co capacitances introduce
a second-order antialiasing low-pass filter at 1 MHz.
C. Digital Board
The digital board is the core of the system (Fig. 4). It generates the stimulation waveforms, converts digitally the sensed
voltage, computes the fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the signals, calculates magnitude and phase of the body impedance
and performs the calibration procedure.
The DSP is a Texas Instrument C2000 “Piccolo family,” with
80 MHz clock, internal 12-bit ADC (up to 3 Msps) and an USB
interface. Selection criteria for the choice of the DSP were high
operation speed, good performances of the ADC, and above all,
the compactness of the evaluation board. Stimulus generation
and data acquisition are implemented as two parallel and synchronous processes generated by the same clock not to introduce
phase errors.
The stimulation waveform is a square wave, much easier to
generate with the DSP than a pure sinusoid. The square wave
drives an alternate current (±500 μA) with 50% duty cycle

1879

with Vb o dy the Fourier transform of the voltage drop between
sensing electrodes and Is the Fourier transform of the stimulation current. However, neither Vb o dy nor Is are directly measured. The output of the INA, VINA , differs from Vb o dy because
VINA (f ) = Vb o dy (f ) · GINA (f )

(3)

with GINA the gain of INA. This gain includes the dc gain
and accounts for singularities, components tolerances and parasitisms of the INA. Moreover, the relation between stimulation
voltage, Vs , and Is is
Vs (f ) = RTA (f ) · IS (f )

(4)

with RTA (f), the transfer function of the transconductance amplifier, which accounts for its singularities, parasitisms, and
components tolerances. This gives the relation
Vb o dy (f )
RTA (f )
VINA (f )
=
×
Is (f )
GINA (f )
Vs (f )

(5)

where only VINA (f ) and Vs (f ) are known quantities. To identify RTA (f)/GINA (f), the system is calibrated by connecting
a known resistance to the four electrodes, and by measuring
VINA (f) at each stimulation frequency of Vs (f). In this way,
once the RTA (f)/GINA (f) complex ratio is known, we obtain the
impedance magnitude and phase as


 RTA (f )  |VINA (f )|
×
|Zb o dy (f )| = 
(6)
GINA (f ) 
|Vs (f )|
∠Zb o dy (f ) = ∠

RTA (f )
+ ∠ |VINA (f )| − ∠ |Vs (f )| . (7)
GINA (f )

The computation of RTA (f)/GINA (f) is performed by the DSP
at the end of the calibration procedure.

1880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 5. Left: the prototype with the lower digital board connected to a USB
for data downloading, and the upper analog board for interfacing injecting and
sensing electrodes. Right: the prototype connected to the electrodes.
TABLE II
ANTHROPOMETRIC CHARACTERISTICS OF VOLUNTEERS AS MEAN (STANDARD
DEVIATION) OVER THE GROUPS

anterior iliac spine (SB ), shoulder (SC ), and wrist (SD ) and
connected in succession to the electronic board as the S1 and
S2 sensing electrodes. First, the SA and SD electrodes were
employed as sensing electrodes to measure the “whole body”
impedance. Then, the SA –SB , SB –SC , and SC –SD couples
were used in succession as sensing electrodes to measure the
impedance of “leg,” “trunk” and “arm.” During the experiment,
the arm was supported with a scarf in the dependent position.
Experimental Protocol: Each subject was asked to rest in
supine position for 20 min. Baseline impedance measures (BAS)
of “arm,” “trunk,” “leg,” and “whole body” segments were taken
at the end of this period. Then, the subject was asked to stand
up and maintain the standing position for 10 min. BIS measures
were taken immediately after the change of posture (early standing, EST) and at the end of standing (late standing, LST). The
subject was finally asked to lie supine for an additional period
of 10 min and measures were repeated immediately after the
change of posture from standing to supine (early supine, ESU)
and at the end of the period (late supine, LSU).
Normality test: Before statistical analysis, the normality of the
distributions were tested at each frequency (Shapiro Wilks test).
The hypothesis of normality was rejected for the impedance
phases only. Therefore, the impedance magnitudes were plotted
as group mean ± standard error of the mean and compared by
parametric statistical tests, the impedance phases were plotted
as median with first–third quartiles and compared by nonparametric statistics.
A. Posture and Impedance

D. Complete System
The complete system is shown in Fig. 5. The size of the
electronic boards is 5.5 cm × 2.4 cm × 2 cm, the weight is less
than 50 g (battery and electrodes excluded). The total power
consumption is lower than 100 mW during each measurement.
A sequences of measures can be performed consecutively and
averaged to increase the precision. We choose to perform 50
consecutive measures for each frequency. In this way, a set of
measurements (seven frequencies) is computed in less than 2 s.

Impedance differences between standing and supine were assessed by comparing LST with LSU. The modulus of “whole
body” impedance was lower in standing, with significant differences at all the frequencies (see Fig. 6, upper panel). The
impedance phase was slightly lower in supine position at frequencies ≤36 kHz (see Fig. 6, lower panel). Posture affected
differently each body segment (see Fig. 7). During standing the
impedance magnitude of the leg was lower at all the frequencies, while the impedance phase was higher at f <100 kHz.
By contrast, no differences were found in |Z(f)| of the arm and
trunk.
B. Gender and Impedance

III. VALIDATION WITH EXPERIMENTAL DATA
We tested the performances of our prototype in a group of
volunteers. Aim was to evaluate whether our system 1) tracks
the variations of impedance which follow changes of posture,
and 2) identifies gender differences in impedance possibly due
to differences between males and females in size, geometry, and
composition of specific body segments.
Subjects and Data Collection: We enrolled 20 healthy volunteers (ten males and ten females) ageing between 20 and
25 years. Average anthropometric characteristics are summarized in Table II. Six disposable pregelled ECG electrodes were
placed on each subject. Two electrodes were placed on the dorsal
surface of the left hand and foot as I2 and I1 injecting electrodes.
Four electrodes were placed on the left malleolus (SA ), upper

The main gender differences in impedance (see Fig. 8) regard
the trunk, that in males has a lower magnitude at all the frequencies. Also, the impedance magnitude of the arm is significantly
lower in males at all the frequencies. Impedance phases of arm
and leg tend to be higher in males, while the phases of the trunk
are higher in females.
C. Body Fluids Dynamics and Posture Changes
Individual body segments are often modeled as cylinders of
different tissues arranged in parallel [1]. The electric resistance
R of each cylinder is
R=ρ

L
A

(8)

VILLA et al.: FEASIBILITY OF LONG-TERM MONITORING OF MULTIFREQUENCY AND MULTISEGMENT BODY IMPEDANCE

1881

through the five steps of the experiment for arm and leg, with
similar profiles in males and females. In particular, post hoc
analysis indicated a significant reduction of impedance at early
and late standing compared to baseline and that the recovery
was completed in late supine for the leg segment only.
As to the trunk, the interaction between factors reached the
statistical significance (see Table III), indicating that the effects
of the change of posture were different in males and females.
Actually, Fig. 9 suggests opposite trends for males and females;
in particular, RE increased significantly from baseline to late
standing only in males.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 6. “Whole body” impedance magnitude (upper panel, mean ±standard
error) and phase (lower panel, median and first–third quartiles) in 20 volunteers
during late standing (LST) and late supine (LSU) conditions. The “∗” and “∗∗”
indicate differences statistically significant with p<0.05 and p<0.01 (paired
t-test for the modulus, Wilcoxon test for the phase).

with L length, A cross-sectional area, and ρ resistivity of the
cylinder. The resistivity at 1 kHz is similar to that of plasma
because at this frequency the conductivity is much higher for
plasma than for muscle tissues, bones, or fat [9], [10]. Therefore,
the impedance magnitude at 1 kHz, RE , is representative of
the extracellular water volume in the body segment, with RE
increasing when the extracellular volume decreases.
In our study, impedance magnitudes of each body segment
are linearly related to the logarithm of the frequency f when
f < 100 kHz. This is true both in supine and standing position
(see Fig. 7) and in males and females separately (see Fig. 8). RE
was, therefore, estimated as the intercept of the linear regression
between |Z(f)| and log (f) for f <100 kHz (in a log f scale with f
in kHz, the intercept corresponds to the value at f = 1 kHz). RE
was calculated in baseline, in early and late standing, in early and
late supine position. Differences between genders and among
the five experimental conditions were assessed separately in
the arm, trunk, and leg by a two-factor (posture and gender)
analysis of variance (ANOVA). When the factor “Posture” or
the interaction between factors were statistically significant at
α = 0.05, baseline was compared with the other conditions by
Fisher least significant difference post hoc procedure.
Fig. 9 shows RE values and Table III reports factors significances. Gender was a statistically significant factor for the arm
and the trunk, and Fig. 9 shows RE profiles clearly higher in
females both in the arm and in the trunk. Gender was not significant for the leg, and Fig. 9 shows overlapping RE profiles in
the leg. Posture was a significant factor for the arm and the leg,
not for the trunk, and Fig. 9 also shows clear modulations of RE

Experimental data indicate that our system provides
impedance measures over a wide range of physiological values, from several hundred of ohms (whole body impedance) to
few tens of ohms (trunk impedance). Results are coherent with
measures reported in literature and may contribute to better understand some critical issues in BIS. In this regard, the following
points should be considered.
BIS between genders and body segments: We measured a
much lower impedance in the trunk than in the limbs, indicating that the trunk contributes only modestly to the whole body
impedance. In a previous study, monofrequency impedance
measures at 50 kHz were obtained in a large population of
healthy subjects in supine posture [3]. This previous study reported values for the impedance modulus in the arm, trunk, and
leg equal to 194, 37.5, and 229 Ω in men, and to 281, 51.2,
and 268 Ω in women. These values and their differences among
body segments and between genders testify for the overall quality of our measures because they are similar to the |Z(f)| values
at f = 50 kHz we showed in Fig. 8.
Differences among body segments and between genders can
be in part explained by (8), if we assume the simplified model
that represents each body segment as cylinder of resistivity ρ. In
this case, the L/A ratios of Table II (lower in the trunk than in
the limbs and higher in women than in men) provide a possible
explanation, because they imply a lower electric resistance in
the trunk than in the limbs, and in males than in females.
Extracellular volume and body posture: We found significant
RE variations in the arm and leg following changes of posture
(see Fig. 9). These variations match the variations of extracellular volume reported in a previous study where segmental
BIS was measured in six male volunteers who changed from
a standing to a supine position [11]. Therefore, our system appears able to track the change of the distribution of body fluids
following changes of posture. Moreover, it allowed us to statistically demonstrate a faster dynamics for the leg than for the
arm after postural changes, a result which was only anecdotally
suggested in [11].
Furthermore, the same previous study (that only considered
male individuals) reported a small but significant decrease of
extracellular volume in the trunk segment changing posture
from standing to supine [11]. We observed the same significant
change in RE but only in the male group, indicating that gender
differences should characterize not only the absolute impedance

1882

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 7. Comparison between late supine (LSU) and late standing (LST) conditions of impedance magnitude (upper panels, mean ± standard error) and phase
(lower panels, median and first-third quartiles) in three body segments for the whole group (N = 20) of volunteers. The symbols “∗” and “∗∗” indicate differences
between postures significant at the p<0.05 and p<0.01 statistical levels (paired t-test for the magnitude, Wilcoxon test for the phase).

Fig. 8. Comparison between males (M, N = 10) and females (F, N = 10) of impedance magnitude (upper panels, mean ± standard error) and phase (lower
panels, median and first-third quartiles) in three body segments: measures obtained in LSU condition. The symbols “∗” and “∗∗” indicate gender differences
significant at the p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 statistical levels (unpaired t-test for the magnitude, Mann Whitney U test for the phase).

values of the trunk, but also the dynamics of impedance changes
after a change of posture.
Positive impedance phases: The electric properties of biological tissues can be modeled by the electric resistance of extracellular fluids in parallel to RC elements, the latter describing
the resistance of the intracellular fluids and the capacitance of
cell membranes [4]. Accordingly, positive phases should not
appear in Z(f) of body tissues. This is approximately true in the
“whole body” and leg impedance (see Fig. 6 and 7), while positive phases appear clearly in the arm segment at f >100 kHz
(see Fig. 7).

Discrepancies at the higher frequencies from the resistive–
capacitive model have been repeatedly reported in the past
[12], [13]. It has been suggested that they may arise from
the time delay due to the conductor length, which produces
significant phase errors at the higher frequencies [14]. However, since the same hardware was used in the same experimental setup and positive phases appeared in the arm but
not in the leg (two body segments with similar electric resistance), it is unlikely that the conductor delay may explain the positive phase appearing in the arm but not in the
leg.

VILLA et al.: FEASIBILITY OF LONG-TERM MONITORING OF MULTIFREQUENCY AND MULTISEGMENT BODY IMPEDANCE

Fig. 9. R E as mean ±standard error in males (open circles) and females (solid
circles) under the five experimental conditions. The symbols ∗ and ∗∗ in males
and # and ## in females indicate differences with BAS significant at p < 0.05
and p < 0.01.
TABLE III
INFLUENCE OF SEX AND BODY POSTURE ON R E : SIGNIFICANCE p OF THE
FACTORS GENDER, POSTURE AND OF THEIR INTERACTIONS AFTER ANOVA

Possible causes for positive impedance phases in biomaterials were investigated by Grimnes and Martinsen [15] who
suggest two contributions that may play a role in our case. One
is the presence of different current paths in parallel. The existence of more than one current path cannot be excluded because
body segments are composed by inhomogeneous tissues with
different current densities. A second possible source of positive phases is the self-inductance of the tissue. Self-inductance
is expected to provide a significant addition at the highest frequencies when the impedance modulus is relatively low [15],
as in the trunk. Therefore, it is possible that also phenomena
of tissue self-inductance may have contributed to increase the
impedance phase at frequencies higher than 100 kHz, but it
remains unclear why different current paths or self-inductance
should produce more inductive effects in the arm than in the leg.
A known source of artifacts in body impedance has been identified in stray capacitances between body segments and earth and
between the device signal and ground [12], [16]. In particular, it
has been recently shown that stray capacitances between body
and earth may generate a resonance above 10 MHz, which looks
like an inductive effect at lower frequencies [17]. It might appear
unlikely that stray capacitance are responsible for the positive

1883

Fig. 10. Impedance modulus and phase of arm and leg segments in one standing subject with standard disposition of injecting electrodes (see Table I, closed
circles) and after having inverted the injecting electrodes (I1 on hand, I2 on foot,
open circles).

phases that we observed in the arm and not in the leg, because
the calibration should have cleared their artifactual contributions and because the same hardware was used for all the body
segments. However, it should be considered the distributed nature of body stray capacitances and that in multisegment BIS
the relative position of sensing electrodes with respect to injecting electrodes (and therefore, to the virtual ground of the
device) depends on the selected segment. In the appendix, we
show theoretically and with a circuit simulation that, among the
stray capacitances distributed between the injecting electrodes,
the major role in generating inductive effects is played by those
located upstream the sensing electrodes (between I1 and S2).
Thus, this analysis may explain why we observed inductive effects in the arm and not in the leg. If the theoretical analysis
reported in appendix describes correctly the phenomenon, we
should observe inductive effects in the leg and not in the arm
just by exchanging the injecting electrodes. We verified this conjecture by measuring arm and leg impedance in an additional
volunteer first by employing the standard electrodes configuration, then by exchanging the injecting electrodes (I1 on the
hand and I2 on the foot). Results (see Fig. 10) show that when
the injecting electrodes are inverted, the inductive effects disappear in the arm and appear in the leg segments, thus, supporting
experimentally the theoretical analysis in appendix.
V. CONCLUSION
We showed that it is possible to design small portable systems based on low-power DSPs for measuring BIS of different
body segments. This class of devices may allow monitoring the
electric impedance for long periods, interfering minimally with

1884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 11. Simplified schematic of BIS setup, with impedances of two body segments modeled by the R A and R B resistances and stray capacitances modeled
by CA B .

the subjects’ activities. In particular, the prototype we presented
permits to perform measures over the broad range of frequencies
required in even sophisticated BIS studies. A complete multisegment, portable BIS system can be easily realized from our
prototype by including an automatic switch among couples of
sensing electrodes and by including local data storage, with only
a small increase in weight and power consumption.
Our results pointed out a contribution of stray capacitances
that produce inductive effects above 100 kHz. However, theoretical analysis and experimental data also suggested that switching
the two injecting electrodes may effectively remove this artifactual contribution, at least from the external (limbs) segments.
The future availability of such portable and unobtrusive BIS
systems may open the way to different new applications of electrical impedance in sports and occupational medicine, in health
monitoring of the elderly and patients, and in rehabilitation
medicine.

Fig. 12. Schematic of BIS setup for three body segments (A, B and C ) with
stray capacitances between body and ground (C A B and C B C ) and between
ground and coaxial sensing (C S A , CS A B and C S B ) or injecting (C I 1 and
C I 2 ) cables.

measured voltages are VA and VB , respectively, and the Fourier
transform of the injected current is Iin . The impedance of the
segment A is ZA = VA / Iin . Since VA = IA ·RA , then
ZA =

IA · RA
= RA
Iin

because IA = Iin upstream the stray capacitance. Thus, inductive effects do not appear upstream the stray capacitance. Downstream the stray capacitance, IB differs from Iin because the
current IA B flows through CA B
IA B =

VA
= sCA B RA IA .
1/sCA B

BIS setups may show inductive effects in contrast with the
traditional model of body impedance consisting in resistive and
capacitive components only. Some authors suggested that stray
capacitances between body and ground or between the device
components and ground may be responsible for inductive effects [16], [17]. Oddly, in our study, we observed inductive
effects (i.e., an increase of Z magnitude and positive Z phases at
f > 100 kHz) in the arm and trunk segments but not in the leg
segments, even if we used the same hardware in the same experimental condition to monitor each body segment. This appendix
demonstrates with a theoretical analysis and a circuit simulation
that the phenomenon can be explained considering the different effects produced by stray capacitances located upstream or
downstream the body segment to be measured.
The circuit of Fig. 11 illustrates theoretically that inductive
effects are produced only by stray capacitances located downstream the body segment. For simplicity, only two body segments are considered, A and B, with their impedance modeled
by the resistances RA and RB . The Fourier transform of the

(A2)

Since IB = IA +IA B , then
IB = Iin (1 + sRA CA B )

APPENDIX
INDUCTIVE COMPONENTS IN SEGMENTAL BIS FROM
STRAY CAPACITANCES

(A1)

(A3)

and finally
ZB =

VB
= RB (1 + sRA CA B ).
Iin

(A4)

Equation (A4) shows that the stray capacitance adds an inductive component to RB .
A more realistic model is shown in Fig. 12. The body consists in three segments, representing the arm (segment C), the
trunk (segment B), and the leg (segment A), with resistances
RA = RC = 250 Ω, and RB = 50 Ω. Stray capacitances between body and ground and between device components and
ground are modeled separately. The capacitance between body
and ground depends on the position of the subject and may range
from 10 to 100 pF [18]. In this analysis, we set CA B = CB C =
10 pF. Coaxial cables, necessary to reduce the effect of external
disturbances, give an important contribution to stray capacitances to ground, ranging between 100 and 500 pF/m. In our
model, we set the stray capacitances CS A , CS A B , CS B C , and
CS C of sensing cables and the stray capacitance CI 1 and CI 2
of injecting cables equal to 300 pF. It should be noted that CI 1
and CS A do not influence the measures because fixed at virtual
ground and their current flows are zero; and that even if currents

VILLA et al.: FEASIBILITY OF LONG-TERM MONITORING OF MULTIFREQUENCY AND MULTISEGMENT BODY IMPEDANCE

Fig. 13. Impedance magnitude and phase of the three segments of Fig.12;
Z C simulates the arm impedance, Z B the trunk impedance and Z A the leg
impedance.

flow through CI 2 and CS C , these capacitances do not influence
VA , VB , and VC because they are directly driven by the amplifier output. ZA , ZB , and ZC were calculated with a circuital
simulator (OrCAD Capture CIS 16.6, 2011, Cadence Design
Systems Inc, San Jose, CA, USA) between 20 and 600 kHz. Results (see Fig. 13) confirm that the measured impedance of body
segment A is not affected by stray capacitances while measures
of segments B and C show inductive effects.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Stahn, E. Terblanche, and H. C. Gunga, “Use of bioelectrical
impedance: General principles and overview,” in Handbook of Anthropometry: Physical Measures of Human Form in Health and Disease,
V. R. Preedy, Ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2012, pp. 49–90.
[2] M. Y. Jaffrin and H. Morel, “Body fluid volumes measurements
by impedance: A review of bioimpedance spectroscopy (BIS) and
bioimpedance analysis (BIA) methods,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 30, no. 10,
pp. 1257–1269, Dec. 2008.
[3] L. W. Organ, G. B. Bradham, D. T. Gore, and S. L. Lozier, “Segmental
bioelectrical impedance analysis: Theory and application of a new technique,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 98–112, Jul. 1994.
[4] G. Sverre and G. M. Ørjan, Bioimpedance and Bioelectricity Basics, 2nd
ed. Oxford, U.K.: Elsevier Academic Press, 2008.
[5] S. B. Rutkove, “Electrical impedance myography: Background, current
state, and future directions,” Muscle Nerve, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 936–946,
Dec. 2009.
[6] E. Raaijmakers, T. J. Faes, J. M. Meijer, P. W. Kunst, J. Bakker,
H. G. Goovaerts, and R. M. Heethaar, “Estimation of non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema using dual-frequency electrical impedance,” Med. Biol.
Eng. Comput., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 461–466, Jul. 1998.
[7] L. C. Ward, “Bioelectrical impedance analysis: Proven utility in lymphedema risk assessment and therapeutic monitoring,” Lymphat. Res.
Biol., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 51–56, 2006.
[8] F. Villa, A. Magnani, and P. Castiglioni, “Portable body impedance system
for long-term monitoring of body hydration,” in Proc. 8th Conf. Ph.D. Res.
Microelectron. Electron., 2012, pp. 229–232.

1885

[9] H. P. Schwan and C. F. Kay, “The conductivity of living tissues,” Ann. N.
Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 1007–1013, Aug. 1957.
[10] L. A. Geddes and L. E. Baker, “The specific resistance of biological
material–A compendium of data for the biomedical engineer and physiologist,” Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 271–293, May 1967.
[11] F. Zhu, D. Schneditz, E. Wang, and N. W. Levin, “Dynamics of segmental
extracellular volumes during changes in body position by bioimpedance
analysis,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 497–504, Aug. 1998.
[12] M. P. Bolton, L. C. Ward, A. Khan, I. Campbell, P. Nightingale, O. Dewit,
and M. Elia, “Sources of error in bioimpedance spectroscopy,” Physiol.
Meas., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 235–245, May 1998.
[13] W. D. van Marken Lichtenbelt, K. R. Westerterp, L. Wouters, and
S. C. Luijendijk, “Validation of bioelectrical-impedance measurements
as a method to estimate body-water compartments,” Amer. J. Clin. Nutr.,
vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 159–166, Aug. 1994.
[14] A. De Lorenzo, A. Andreoli, J. Matthie, and P. Withers, “Predicting body
cell mass with bioimpedance by using theoretical methods: A technological review,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 82, no. 5, pp. 1542–1558, May
1997.
[15] S. Grimnes and O. G. Martinsen, “Sources of error in tetrapolar impedance
measurements on biomaterials and other ionic conductors” 40 ed. 2007,
pp. 9–14.
[16] H. Scharfetter, P. Hartinger, H. Hinghofer-Szalkay, and H. Hutten, “A
model of artefacts produced by stray capacitance during whole body or
segmental bioimpedance spectroscopy,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 247–261, May 1998.
[17] C. Aliau-Bonet and R. Pallas-Areny, “On the effect of body capacitance to
ground in tetrapolar bioimpedance measurements,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 3405–3411, Dec. 2012.
[18] A. Salceanu, O. Neacsu, V. David, and E. Lunca, “Measurements upon
human body capacitance: Theory and experimental setup,” in Proc. 15th
Symp. Novelties Elect. Measurements Instrum. Parallel With 12th Workshop ADC Modelling Testing, Iasi, Romania, 2007.

Federica Villa received the Bachelor degree in
biomedical engineering in 2008 and the M.S. degree
in electronic engineering in 2010 defending the thesis “Design of an Integrated Circuit for Fast-Gating
and Active Quenching of a Single Photon Avalanche
Diode (SPAD),” both from Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy. Since 2011, she has been working toward
the Ph. D. degree in electronic engineering at Politecnico di Milano.
In 2010, she interned in the Biochemistry Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA. Her present main research interests include designing a SPAD array for
3-D imaging with time of flight method. She is also interested in electronics for
biomedical applications.

Alessandro Magnani was born in 1986 in Italy. In
2010, he received the M.Sc. in electronic engineering from Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy with
specialization in electronic system. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree, working on new
optical instrumentation devices based on self-mixing
interferometry for dimensional measurements, such
as vibration and absolute distance. He works also in
projects related to other electronics measure instruments for different companies.

1886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Giampiero Merati received the Degree in Medicine
in 1991 from the University of Milan, Milan, Italy,
where he received specialization in biochemistry in
1995 and the specialization in sports medicine in 1999
from the University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
Since 2005, he is an Associate Professor at the
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, and a Scientific Consultant for the Don C. Gnocchi Foundation, Milan. His
primary research interests include autonomic cardiovascular control in health and disease and exercise
physiology.
Dr. Merati is an ordinary member of the Italian Society for Chaos and Complexity (SICC) and of the Italian Sports Medicine Federation (FMSI).

Paolo Castiglioni received the M.Sc. degree in electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical
engineering from the Politecnico di Milano University, Milan, Italy, in 1987 and 1993, respectively.
From 1989 to 2007, he was a Researcher in the Department of Bioengineering, Don C.Gnocchi Foundation, Milan, where since 2007, he is Research Coordinator of the Biosignal Analysis Area at the Department of Biomedical Technology. His current research
interests include the analysis of biological signals,
physiological mechanisms for cardiovascular control
and gravitational physiology.

