IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1851

Novel Noninvasive Approach for Detecting
Arteriovenous Fistula Stenosis
Hsien-Yi Wang, Cho-Han Wu, Chien-Yue Chen, and Bor-Shyh Lin∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Hemodialysis is the most common treatment for patients with end-stage renal disease. For hemodialysis, consistently
functional vascular access must be surgically created with an anastomosis of artery and vein, referred to as an arteriovenous fistula
(AVF). However, AVF dysfunction may occur over time. Angiography and Doppler ultrasound are usually used to detect the flow
or the diameter of the AVF. But they require well-trained operators and are expensive, and even angiography is invasive. In this
study, a noninvasive approach based on stethoscope auscultation
for monitoring AVF stenosis was proposed. Here, a wireless blood
flow sound recorder was designed to record blood flow sounds wirelessly. In order to effectively extract the varying feature of blood
flow sounds for AVF stenosis, the 2-D feature pattern built from
S-transform was also proposed as the feature in the AVF stenosis
detecting algorithm. Different from other frequency-related coefficients, the feature pattern can contain the information of blood
flow sounds in time and frequency domains simultaneously. Preliminary findings showed that the proposed approach can provide
high-quality estimation of AVF stenosis (positive predictive value =
87.84% and sensitivity = 89.24%).
Index Terms—Arteriovenous fistula (AVF), blood flow sounds,
hemodialysis, stethoscope auscultation, S-transform.

I. INTRODUCTION
ND-stage renal disease (ESRD), a chronic renal disease,
is the progressive loss of renal function over time. For
patients with ESRD, the kidneys cannot excrete the products
of protein metabolism, such as urea, creatinine, etc., which
results in uremic syndrome. In 2012, about 600 000 patients
with ESRD underwent dialysis and renal transplantations in the
United States. According to the 2012 annual report of United
States renal data system (USRDS), the worldwide incidence and
prevalence of patients with ESRD increases annually [1].

E

Manuscript received November 1, 2013; revised January 8, 2014; accepted
February 24, 2014. Date of publication March 3, 2014; date of current version
May 15, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
H.-Yi Wang is with the Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan 710, Taiwan (e-mail: why8@
ms61.hinet.net).
C.-H. Wu is with the Institute of Imaging and Biomedical Photonics, National Chiao-Tung University, Tainan 71150, Taiwan (e-mail:
s9201024@yahoo.com.tw).
C.-Y. Chen is with the Electronic Engineering, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Douliu 640, Taiwan (e-mail: chencyue@
yuntech.edu.tw).
∗ B.-S. Lin is with the Institute of Imaging and Biomedical Photonics, National Chiao-Tung University, Tainan 71150, Taiwan (e-mail: borshyhlin@
gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2308906

The major treatments for patients with ESRD include
hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and renal transplantation. Until now, hemodialysis has been the most common treatment. In
hemodialysis treatment, the blood is passed through a permeable membrane to quickly and efficiently remove the creatinine,
urea, other waste products, and free water from the blood. For
hemodialysis, a continuously functional vascular access must be
surgically created with a cardiovascular anastomosis of artery
and vein, referred to as an arteriovenous fistula (AVF) or arteriovenous graft [2]. The anastomosis is usually near the patient’s
wrist or elbow. However, the life cycle of an AVF is not long,
and vascular thrombosis or stenosis may occur over time and
cause the fistula to dysfunction. AVF stenosis is also a cause of
the loss of performance, abnormal pressure, turbulence, or vascular calcification in hemodialysis [3], [4]. A higher percent of
patients developed AVF stenosis or thrombosis [5]. Therefore,
how to detect AVF stenosis early is important [6], [7].
The level of clinical vascular stenosis can be evaluated using angiography [8]. The disadvantage of angiography is that
it is invasive and requires surgery. Doppler ultrasound is also
used to evaluate the diameters of an AVF [9]. However, both
methods and their equipment are costly and require experienced
and sophisticated operators. The acoustic characteristics of AVF
stenosis can also be roughly evaluated at the patient’s bedside by
physicians or nurses with clinical experience using stethoscope
auscultation or palpation. However, up to now, most of results
for stethoscope auscultation or palpation were not quantifiable.
Recently, some studies attempted to quantify and evaluate
AVF stenosis by using stethoscope auscultation. In 1994, Akay
et al. evaluated the effects of vasodilator drugs on femoral artery
stenosis by using auscultation. Blood flow sounds measured
from femoral artery were analyzed by using short-term Fourier
(STFT) and wavelet transform (WT) methods [10]. They also
indicated that isolated sounds caused by occlusions contained
more energy between 200 and 800 Hz than the background
sounds recorded from vessels without occlusions. In 2005,
Mansy et al. attempted to identify acoustic parameters related to
changes in vascular access patency [11]. They indicated that the
blood flow sound intensity tends to increase with stenosis, and
the source of this acoustic energy is associated with turbulence
produced by partially occluded blood vessels. In 2006, Sato used
WT analysis to investigate the relationship between shunt murmurs and assessing vascular access function [12]. Vesquez et al.
used wavelet and empirical mode decomposition coefficients to
analyze the blood flow sounds of AVF stenosis [13]–[15]. In
2011, Wang used the higher-frequency spectra (700–800 Hz) of
blood flow sounds, reconstructed by WT, to detect AVF stenosis [16]. However, the frequency feature of blood flow sounds

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 2. Ultrasonographic illustration for definition of radiocephalic AVF stenosis. Fistula stenosis is defined as ratio of narrowest distance and adjacent widest
distance is less than 50%.
Fig. 1. (a) Basic scheme and (b) photography of proposed wireless blood flow
sound recorder.

related to AVF stenosis is complex due to the structure of AVF,
and may be overlapped by other frequency features contributed
from the friction between normal vessels and pumped flood flow
during heart systole. And it may also vary with time due to the
variation of blood flow rate in the cardiac cycle. Therefore, evaluating AVF stenosis by simple frequency-related coefficients
may be not practicable.
In this study, a novel noninvasive approach based on stethoscope auscultation was proposed to detect AVF stenosis. Here, a
2-D feature pattern built from S-transform [17] is used as the feature in the proposed AVF stenosis detecting algorithm. The 2-D
feature pattern contains the information of blood flow sounds in
time and frequency domains simultaneously. Therefore, it can
provide better capability of detecting the varying frequency feature of AVF stenosis than other frequency-related coefficients
used in the aforementioned methods. In the proposed algorithm,
radial basis function (RBF) neural network was also used to
classify the feature patterns of blood flow sounds. In addition,
the results of AVF stenosis examined by Doppler ultrasound
were compared with the results of those examined by using the
proposed method.
II. METHODS
A. Wireless Blood Flow Sound Recorder
The proposed wireless sound recorder is designed to monitor
and record the sound of the blood flow through an AVF. The basic scheme and photograph of the proposed recorder are shown
in Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. The proposed recorder consists primarily of the ball of a stethoscope, an acoustic sensor,
a sensor-loading circuit, a front-end amplifier circuit, a data acquisition circuit, a microprocessor, and a wireless transmission
circuit. The ball of the stethoscope is used to collect blood flow
sounds in the AVF. The collected blood flow sound will then
be transformed into electrical signals by the acoustic sensor.
The sensor-loading circuit is designed to provide a stable reference voltage to the acoustic sensor to eliminate noise caused
by variations of reference voltage. The front-end amplifier circuit is a bandpass amplifier designed to amplify and filter the

sound signal. After the blood flow signal has been amplified
and filtered, it is digitized by the data acquisition circuit with
sampling rate of 2048 Hz, which contains a sample-and-hold
circuit and a 12-bit analog-to-digital converter. A microprocessor (MSP430, Texas Instruments), which contains advantages
of ultralow power consumption, 16-bit reduced instruction set
computing (RISC) architecture, 125-ns instruction cycle time,
five power saving modes, and diversification of peripheral communication interface, controls the data acquisition circuit to obtain, preprocess, and transmit the blood flow sound data to the
wireless transmission circuit, which then wirelessly transmits it
to the backend host system. The wireless transmission circuit
contains a printed circuit board antenna and a Bluetooth module
that is fully compliant with the Bluetooth v2.0 + enhanced data
rate specification. By using this Bluetooth module, it can provide sufficient transmission rate and can easily communicate
with the host system built on commercial electronic devices,
such as laptops and mobile phones.
B. Experiment for Detecting Fistula Stenosis
In this study, 74 participants from the division of dialysis centers at Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan, were enrolled.
All the patients more than 20 years old and had undergone
hemodialysis three times a week for more than three months.
The site of the arteriovenous surgical anastomosis was usually
located near the patient’s wrist or elbow on the right or left
hand. Patients who had undergone major surgery or who had
been hospitalized for any reason within one month before enrollment were excluded. The Institutional Review Board of Chi
Mei Medical Center approved this study, and all patients signed
informed consents.
A single operator performed the Doppler ultrasonography
to measure the vessel diameters. An early investigation [18]
reported that ultrasonic detection of significant stenosis of fistula
when the ratio of the narrowest distance to the adjacent widest
distance on any part of vessel is less than the 50%. Fig. 2
illustrated the definition of AVF stenosis in this study. It showed
a traditional radiocephalic AVF, which was created by surgical
anastomosis with radial artery and cephalic vein. Anastomotic
site is near the wrist, distal to the heart. The proximal end of

WANG et al.: NOVEL NONINVASIVE APPROACH FOR DETECTING ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULA STENOSIS

1853

1) Preprocessing the Blood Flow Sound: Before extracting
the feature pattern of blood flow sounds, the raw sound signal is
preprocessed to segment the cycle of blood flow sounds. First,
the raw blood flow sound is filtered using a bandpass filter with
the frequency band of 100–1000 Hz to keep the meaningful features related to the state of AVF stenosis. Next, the filtered blood
flow sound is rectified and integrated to obtain the envelope of
the blood flow sound. The derivation of the integrated blood
flow sound can then be calculated, and its peaks can be detected
at the minimum value of the derivation. Finally, the cycle period
of the blood flow sound can be obtained from the term between
two peaks of the integrated blood flow sound.
2) Feature Extraction: After segmenting the cycle period of
the blood flow sound, S-transform is used to extract the feature pattern of blood flow sounds in time–frequency domain.
S-transform is a method of time–frequency analysis that uses a
progressive analytic skill similar to WT to improve the performance of STFT [17]. But, different from WT, it provides precise
phase information to the Fourier spectrum.
S-transform window ω(t) can be defined as a normalized
Gaussian window function, and is given using the following:
ω(t) =

Fig. 3.

Procedure of AVF stenosis detecting algorithm.

the AVF is proximal to the heart. Therefore, patients in whom
the luminal diameter in the AVF was reduced > = 50% were
assigned to the study group, but for patients for whom this was
not the case were assigned to the control group. The blood flow
sound at the anastomosis of the AVF over the patient’s wrist
or elbow was collected using the proposed wireless blood flow
sound recorder. Each sound of interest was recorded for 60 s.
During this study period, the patients’ treatment plans, dialysis
protocol, and medications were not changed.
C. AVF Stenosis Detecting Algorithm
The pulsatile pitch of blood flow sounds through stenotic AVF
are at a significantly higher frequency than that of non-stenosed
AVF [10], [11], [19] and can be distinguished by experienced
physicians and nurses using stethoscope auscultation. Based on
these blood-flow sounds, we developed an algorithm to detect
AVF stenosis, and its procedure is shown in Fig. 3. First, the
raw blood flow sound is preprocessed to remove environmental
noises. Next, a one-cycle blood flow sound is detected and segmented. To analyze the blood flow sound, the feature pattern of
blood flow sounds in time–frequency domain is extracted by using S-transform. Finally, RBF neural network is used to classify
whether or not the AVF is stenosed.

t2
1
√ e− 2 α 2
α 2π

(1)

where t is the translation of the Gaussian function, and α is the
window width, which is usually related to the frequency f of the
spectral, and can be defined as |f1 | . Therefore, the S-transform
value S(τ, f ) of the blood flow sound x(t) can be given using
the following:
 +∞
( τ −t ) 2 f 2
|f |
S(τ, f ) =
x(t) √ e− 2 e−i2π f t dt
(2)
2π
−∞
where τ and f denote the time-location and the frequency of
S-transform, respectively. Next, the S-transform value of a onecycle blood flow sound in time and frequency domains is downsampled to build a 50 × 10 feature pattern. Because the time
interval of blood flow sound cycle may vary, the S-transform
values of one-cycle blood flow sound in the time domain is
equidistantly sampled at ten intervals and that in the frequency
domain is also equidistantly sampled at 50 intervals to build
a normalized feature pattern. Next, if the value in the feature
pattern is larger than the average of the spectrum amplitude, it
is set to one; otherwise, it is set to zero. Fig. 4(a) and (b) shows
the time–frequency analysis using S-transform for the stenosis
and non-stenosis states and for their feature patterns, respectively. By using the feature pattern built from S-transform, the
varying frequency feature of AVF stenosis can be efficiently and
completely reserved.
3) Classification: Radial basis function neural network is
used to classify and discriminate feature patterns in this study.
RBF network is usually trained to map a vector (input data)
into the other vector (supervised output data), and this mapping
can be viewed as a function approximation problem. It has been
efficiently and successfully applied for classifications of various
biomedical signals [20]. The output of the network is a linear
combination of RBFs of the inputs and neuron parameters (the

1854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

generated by the Gaussian basis function. For the kth hidden
node, φk can be given using the following:


P − Ck 2
(4)
φk = exp −
2σ 2
where P denotes the feature pattern, and is used as the input of
the RBF neural network. Here, σ is the estimated variance of
the feature patterns, and Ck denotes the center matrix in the kth
hidden node. • denotes the Euclidean norm.
In this study, the k-means clustering algorithm [21], [22],
which is a self-organized learning procedure, is used for adapting the center matrices. The center matrices at the iteration t can
then be adapted using the following:
⎧
⎨ Ci (t) = Ci (t − 1) + μc [P − Ci (t − 1)],
(5)
i = arg min[P − Cj (t − 1) , 1 ≤ j ≤ N1 ]
⎩
Ck (t) = Ck (t − 1), 1 ≤ k ≤ N1 and k = i
where μc denotes the learning rate for adapting the center matrices. The normalized least mean square algorithm is also used
to adapt the weight vector W . The weight vector at the iteration
t can then be adapted using the following:
μw
Φ(D − Y )
(6)
W (t) = W (t − 1) +
(1 + ΦT Φ)

Fig. 4. (a) Time–frequency analysis by using S-transform for stenotic and
non-stenotic AVF, and (b) their feature patterns.

where μw denotes the learning rate for adapting the weight
vector. Here, D denotes the desired signal: 1 when the state of
the AVF is stenosis; 0 when the state of the AVF is non-stenosis.
Finally, the optimal threshold for discriminating the state of the
AVF was found. If the output of the RBF network is larger than
the optimal threshold, the estimated state of the AVF is stenosis;
otherwise, if the output of the RBF network is smaller than the
optimal threshold, the estimated state of the AVF is non-stenosis.
III. RESULTS
A. Feature Extraction of Blood Flow Sound

Fig. 5.

Basic scheme of RBF network.

output of RBF). Therefore, it provides the advantages of extremely fast training and requirement of fewer training samples.
The basic scheme of the RBF neural network commonly
contains three layers: input, hidden, and output, as shown in
Fig. 5. Let N0 and N1 denote the number of the input layer and
the hidden layer, respectively. The output Y of the RBF neural
network can be calculated using the following:
Y = ΦT W

(3)

where W = [w1 , w2 , . . . , wN 1 ]T denotes the weight vector connecting the hidden and output layers, and Φ =
[φ1 ,φ2 , . . . ,φN 1 ]T denotes the node outputs in the hidden layer,

Short-time Fourier transform and continuous wavelet transform (CWT) were used to analyze the feature of the blood-flow
sounds in time–frequency domain for stenotic and non-stenotic
AVF, and their results are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively. For all of STFT, CWT, and S-transform [see Fig. 4(a)],
the spectra of blood flow sounds under non-stenotic AVF significantly distributed from 200 to 600 Hz during 0.1–0.3 s. And
after 0.3 s, the spectral amplitudes of blood flow sounds rapidly
decayed.
Compared with the results of non-stenotic AVF cases, the
spectra of blood flow sounds under stenotic AVF presented significantly narrower and higher spectral features. And the spectra
of background blood flow sound, which is complex and is similar to that of non-stenotic AVF, can also be observed, but are
more unapparent in this case. These narrow spectral features
varied from 800 to 200 Hz during 0.1–0.3 s, and became stable
at about 200 Hz after 0.3 s. Moreover, from the aforementioned
results, both CWT and S-transform provided better resolution
in time–frequency domain. In particular, S-transform provided
more accurate phase information for the spectrum feature of
AVF blood flow sound than that of CWT.

WANG et al.: NOVEL NONINVASIVE APPROACH FOR DETECTING ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULA STENOSIS

1855

Fig. 7. Sensitivity, PPV, and F -measure value corresponding to different
thresholds.
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE TEST FOR DETECTING AVF STENOSIS BY USING PROPOSED
METHOD AND CWT-BASED METHOD

Fig. 6. Time–frequency analysis by using (a) STFT and (b) CWT for stenotic
and non-stenotic AVF.

B. Performance Evaluation of Detecting AVF Stenosis
Before evaluating the performance of detecting AVF stenosis, the optimal threshold used in the AVF stenosis-detecting
algorithm has to first be determined. Here, the value of the
F -measure is used to determine the optimal threshold. The
F -measure is the harmonic mean of precision (positive predictive value, PPV) and recall (sensitivity); its value can be
calculated using (7):
F =2×

precision × recall
precision + recall

(7)

In order to calculate the PPV and sensitivity, several parameters of binary classification test were defined: True-Positive (the
stenotic AVF is correctly identified as stenotic), False-Positive
(the non-stenotic AVF is incorrectly identified as stenotic), TrueNegative (the non-stenotic AVF is correctly identified as nonstenotic), and False-Negative (the stenotic AVF is incorrectly
identified as non-stenotic). In the training phase, the numbers
of the input nodes and hidden nodes in the RBF neural network were set to 500 and 16, respectively, and the range of the
threshold value was set from 0.1 to 0.9. A total of 207 trials for
non-stenotic AVF and 192 trials for stenotic AVF recorded in
Chi Mei Medical Center dialysis center were used for training.
The F-measure, PPV, and sensitivity corresponding to different
threshold values are shown in Fig. 7. The value of the F -measure
was distributed between about 75.41% and 98.98%, and the op-

timal value of the F -measure was 98.98% (PPV = 99.13% and
sensitivity = 99.28%) when the threshold value was set to 0.3.
Next, the performance of detecting AVF stenosis using the
proposed algorithm was evaluated. A total of 228 trials for nonstenotic AVF and 251 for stenotic AVF are used for test. The
binary classification test for detecting stenotic AVF is shown in
Table I. It showed the value of F -measure was 88.54% (PPV =
87.84% and sensitivity = 89.24%). The experimental result for
test presented the excellent performance of the proposed method
for detecting AVF stenosis.
The performance of CWT-based method for detecting AVF
stenosis was also investigated. The same testing trials were
used for test and the result is also shown in Table I. Here,
the feature patterns were extracted by using CWT. It showed the
value of F -measure was 79.48% (PPV = 74.74% and sensitivity
= 84.86%). Therefore, using the feature patterns extracted by
S-transform to detect AVF stenosis is exactly superior to that of
CWT.
IV. DISCUSSIONS
For non-stenotic AVF, the spectra of blood flow sound are
complex and are mainly distributed from 200 to 600 Hz during
0.1–0.3 s. This may be explained by that the friction between
normal vessels and a great deal of pumped flood during heart systole produces a complex blood flow sound, and contributes the
spectra of blood flow sounds with many different frequencies.

1856

When the heart systole ends, the pumped blood flow rapidly
reduced and this also results in the spectra amplitudes of blood
flow sounds rapidly decayed after 0.3 s.
For stenotic AVF, the spectra of blood flow sounds for AVF
stenosis presents significantly narrower feature at a higher frequency during 0.1–0.3 s. This significant feature is called seagull murmur, generated by turbulence in the narrow vessel [23].
During normal cardiac cycle, systolic phase with large amount
of blood flow was transmitted rapidly through the arteriovenous
anastomotic site with murmur and turbulence formation. The
frequency of the murmurs correlated with the fistula diameter.
The narrower site of fistula created higher pitch of the murmur
than the wider [10]–[12]. The observed phenomenon also fits
that the blood flow sound intensity at higher frequency tends to
increase with stenosis. In the result of Fig. 4(a), the narrower
spectral feature of AVF stenosis varied from 800 to 200 Hz after
about 0.3 s. This may be explained by a great deal of pumped
blood during the heart systole (0.1–0.3 s) increased turbulence
at the location of AVF stenosis, and resulted in obviously higher
spectral feature (about 600–800 Hz) of blood flow sound. In
this case, the complex spectra of background blood flow during
heart systole is still vaguely seen, but is also inhibited by the
more significant feature of AVF stenosis. When the heart systole
ends, the pumped blood flow reduced and this also reduced the
spectral amplitude of the background blood flow sound. And
the turbulence caused from the remained blood flow at the location of AVF stenosis maintains the significant spectral feature
at about 200 Hz.
From the aforementioned results, S-transform provided a
more accurate resolution in the time–frequency spectrum than
that of STFT and CWT. STFT is one of the most commonly
time–frequency analysis methods. However, its disadvantage
is that, because of the limitations of its fixed window width,
it cannot track the signal dynamics properly for nonstationary biosignals. S-transform uses a scalable localizing Gaussian
window for dilations and translations to represent the bloodflow signal [24]. Therefore, like CWT, S-transform is excellent
for extracting information from both the time and the frequency
domains. However, different from the mother wavelet used in
CWT, which can be separated into two parts (the slowly varying envelope that localizes in time, and the oscillatory exponential kernel that selects the frequency being localized [24]),
the scalable Gaussian window used in S-transform provides
more accurate phase information. Finally, both S-transform and
CWT are used to extract the feature patterns of AVF stenosis.
Using the feature patterns extracted by S-transform exactly provides better performance of detecting AVF stenosis than that of
CWT.
Vesquez et al. used wavelet and empirical mode decomposition coefficients to analyze the blood flow sound, and the accuracy for detecting AVF stenosis is about 83% ∼ 85% [13]–[15].
Wang used the higher frequency spectra of the wavelet reconstructed blood flow sound to detect AVF stenosis, and its accuracy is also about 85% [16]. However, from our experimental
results, the frequency feature of blood flow sounds related to
AVF stenosis is complex, and may also vary with time due to
the variation of blood flow rate in the cardiac cycle. The pro-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

posed method exactly provides better performance for detecting
AVF stenosis than the aforementioned methods.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, a noninvasive approach based on auscultation
was proposed for monitoring the AVF function. Here, a wireless
blood flow sound recorder was also designed to collect blood
flow sounds wirelessly. By using the technique of S-transform,
the feature pattern of blood flow sounds for the normal and
stenosis states can be effectively extracted and discriminated.
And from the experimental results, the proposed AVF stenosis detecting algorithm can exactly provide high efficiency for
identifying the stenosis of AVF from blood flow sounds analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Collins et al., “United States Renal Data System 2011 Annual Data
Report: Atlas of chronic kidney disease & end-stage renal disease in the
United States,” American J. Kidney Diseases, vol. 59, pp. 1–420, 2012.
[2] M. J. Brescia, J. E. Cimino, K. Appel, and B. J. Hurwich, “Chronic
hemodialysis using venipuncture and a surgically created arteriovenous
fistula,” New England J. Med., vol. 275, pp. 1089–1092, 1966.
[3] R. L. Kirkeeide, D. F. Young, and N. R. Cholvin, “Wall vibrations induced
by flow through simulated stenoses in models and arteries,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 10, pp. 431–441, 1977.
[4] J. J. Fredberg, “Origin and character of vascular murmurs: Model studies,”
J. Acoustical Soc. Amer., vol. 61, pp. 1077–1085, 1977.
[5] D. N. Churchill, N. Muirhead, M. Goldstein, G. Posen, W. Fay,
M. L. Beecroft, J. Gorman, and D. W. Taylor, “Probability of thrombosis
of vascular access among hemodialysis patients treated with recombinant
human erythropoietin,” J. Am. Soc. Nephrology, vol. 4, pp. 1809–1813,
1994.
[6] D. Pagano, M. Green, M. Henderson, W. Kmiot, and M. Goldman,
“Surveillance policy for early detection of failing arteriovenous fistulae for
haemodialysis,” Nephrol. Dialysis Transplantation, vol. 9, pp. 277–279,
1994.
[7] S. Sivanesan, T. V. How, and A. Bakran, “Sites of stenosis in AV fistulae
for haemodialysis access,” Nephrol. Dialysis Transplantation, vol. 14,
pp. 118–120, 1999.
[8] S. Bash, J. P. Villablanca, R. Jahan, G. Duckwiler, M. Tillis, C. Kidwell,
J. Saver, and J. Sayre, “Intracranial vascular stenosis and occlusive disease:
evaluation with CT angiography, MR angiography, and digital subtraction
angiography,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 26, pp. 1012–1021, 2005.
[9] N. Tessitore, V. Bedogna, L. Gammaro, G. Lipari, A. Poli, E. Baggio,
M. Firpo, G. Morana, G. Mansueto, and G. Maschio, “Diagnostic accuracy
of ultrasound dilution access blood flow measurement in detecting stenosis
and predicting thrombosis in native forearm arteriovenous fistulae for
hemodialysis,” Amer. J. Kidney Diseases, vol. 42, pp. 331–341, 2003.
[10] M. Akay, Y. M. Akay, W. Welkowitz, and S. Lewkowicz, “Investigating
the effects of vasodilator drugs on the turbulent sound caused by femoral
artery stenosis using short-term Fourier and wavelet transform methods,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 921–928, Oct. 1994.
[11] H. A. Mansy, S. J. Hoxie, N. H. Patel, and R. H. Sandler, “Computerised analysis of auscultatory sounds associated with vascular patency
of haemodialysis access,” Med. Biolog. Eng. Comput., vol. 43, pp. 56–62,
2005.
[12] T. Sato, K. Tsuji, N. Kawashima, T. Agishi, and H. Toma, “Evaluation of
blood access dysfunction based on a wavelet transform analysis of shunt
murmurs,” J. Artif. Organs, vol. 9, pp. 97–104, 2006.
[13] P. Vesquez, M. M. Marco, and B. Mandersson, “Arteriovenous fistula
stenosis detection using wavelets and support vector machines,” in Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2009, pp. 1298–1301.
[14] P. Vasquez, M. M. Marco, E. Mattsson, and B. Mandersson, “Application
of the empirical mode decomposition in the study of murmurs from arteriovenous fistula stenosis,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
2010, pp. 947–950.
[15] M. M. Munguı́a and B. Mandersson, “Analysis of the vascular sounds of
the arteriovenous fistula’s anastomosis,” in Proc. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. Conf., 2011, pp. 3784–3787.

WANG et al.: NOVEL NONINVASIVE APPROACH FOR DETECTING ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULA STENOSIS

1857

[16] Y.-N. Wang, C.-Y. Chan, and S.-J. Chou, “The detection of arteriovenous
fistula stenosis for hemodialysis based on wavelet transform,” Int. J. Adv.
Comput. Sci., vol. 1, pp. 16–22, 2011.
[17] R. G. Stockwell, L. Mansinha, and R. P. Lowe, “Localization of the complex spectrum: The S transform,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 44,
no. 4, pp. 998–1001, Apr. 1996.
[18] A. Asif, F. N. Gadalean, D. Merrill, G. Cherla, C. D. Cipleu, D. L. Epstein,
and D. Roth, “Inflow stenosis in arteriovenous fistulas and grafts: A multicenter, prospective study,” Kidney Int., vol. 67, pp. 1986–1992, 2005.
[19] J. Z. Wang, B. Tie, W. Welkowitz, J. L. Semmlow, and J. B. Kostis,
“Modeling sound generation in stenosed coronary arteries,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 1087–1094, Nov. 1990.
[20] M. Akay, “Nonlinear Biomedical Signal Processing: Fuzzy Logic, Neural
Networks, and New Algorithms. vol. 1. New York, NY, USA: WileyIEEE Press, 2000.
[21] C. Sheng, B. Mulgrew, and P. M. Grant, “A clustering technique for digital communications channel equalization using radial basis function networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 570–590, Jul. 1993.
[22] J. C. Bezdek, Pattern Recognition With Fuzzy Objective Function Algorithms. Norwell, MA, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1981.
[23] C. S. Hayek, W. R. Thompson, C. Tuchinda, R. A. Wojcik, and
J. S. Lombardo, “Wavelet processing of systolic murmurs to assist with
clinical diagnosis of heart disease,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol., vol. 37,
pp. 263–270, 2003.
[24] S. Ventosa, C. Simon, M. Schimmel, J. J. Danobeitia, and A. Manuel, “The
S-transform from a wavelet point of view,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 56, pp. 2771–2780, 2008.

Cho-Han Wu received the B.S. degree in electrical
engineering from Fu Jen Catholic University, Taipei,
Taiwan, in 2010, and the M.S. degree from the Institute of Imaging and Biomedical Photonics, National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2013.
His current research interests include biomedical
signal processing.

Hsien-Yi Wang received the B.S. degree from Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1995 and the
M.S. degree in executive master of business administration from National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan, in 2013.
He is currently an Assistant Professor of the Department of Sport Management, Chia Nan University
of Pharmacy, Tainan and a Physician of Division of
Nephrology, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan. His research interests include the areas of biological fluid
proteomics, dialysis, and chronic kidney diseases.

Bor-Shyh Lin (M’02) received the B.S. degree from
National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu,
Taiwan, in 1997, the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan, in 1999 and 2006,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor of the Institute of Imaging and Biomedical Photonics, NCTU,
Taiwan. His research interests include the areas of
biomedical circuits and systems, biomedical signal
processing, and biosensor.

Chien-Yue Chen received the B.S. degree in physics
from Soochow University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1992,
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in space science and optical science individually, both from National Central
University in 1994 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently a Professor at the Department of
Electronics Engineering, National Yunlin University
of Science and Technology, Douliu, Taiwan.

