IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

1957

Active Adjoint Modeling Method in
Microwave Induced Thermoacoustic Tomography
for Breast Tumor
Xiaozhang Zhu, Student Member, IEEE, Zhiqin Zhao∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, Jinguo Wang, Guoping Chen,
and Qing Huo Liu, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—To improve the model-based inversion performance
of microwave induced thermoacoustic tomography for breast tumor imaging, an active adjoint modeling (AAM) method is proposed. It aims to provide a more realistic breast acoustic model
used for tumor inversion as the background by actively measuring
and reconstructing the structural heterogeneity of human breast
environment. It utilizes the reciprocity of acoustic sensors, and
adapts the adjoint tomography method from seismic exploration.
With the reconstructed acoustic model of breast environment, the
performance of model-based inversion method such as time reversal mirror is improved significantly both in contrast and accuracy.
To prove the advantage of AAM, a checkerboard pattern model
and anatomical realistic breast models have been used in full wave
numerical simulations.
Index Terms—Acoustic modeling, adjoint method, breast tumor,
medical imaging, microwave induced thermoacoustic tomography
(MITAT).

I. INTRODUCTION
ECAUSE the stage of breast cancer has a greater effect
on the prognosis than the other considerations, detection
of early stage breast cancer is most important [1]. A number of
screening tests have been employed, including clinical and selfbreast exams, mammography, genetic screening, ultrasound, and
magnetic resonance imaging. Till now, X-ray mammography is
the most widely used modality for breast tumor screening in
high risk groups, but it also results in unnecessary surgery and
anxiety, along with the risks of more frequent X-ray exposure
causing a small but significant increase in breast cancer induced

B

Manuscript received October 3, 2013; revised January 10, 2014 and March
1, 2014; accepted March 2, 2014. Date of publication March 5, 2014; date of
current version June 14, 2014. This work was supported in part by the NSFC
(Nos. 60927002 and 60771042), and in part by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities of China (No. ZYGX2011YB012 and No.
2672013ZYGX2013Z002). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
X. Zhu, J. Wang, and G. Chen are with the School of Electronic Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731,
Sichuan, P.R. China (e-mail: zhuxiaozhang@gmail.com; wangjinguo09@
gmail.com; chengp@cqupt.edu.cn).
∗ Z. Zhao is with the School of Electronic Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, Sichuan, P.R. China
(e-mail: zqzhao@uestc.edu.cn).
Q. H. Liu is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 USA (e-mail: qhliu@duke.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309912

by ionizing radiation [2]–[4]. MRI provides the good tissue
structure imaging in detail but still cannot provide electromagnetic parameters or acoustic parameters distribution of breast
environment, beside its unacceptable cost for screening purpose.
Ultrasound tomography (UT) of breast provides the acoustic velocity contrast of tissues, but the velocity varies within 10% between tumor tissue and normal fat tissue which cannot provide
enough contrast to distinguish them [5]. The electromagnetic
parameter contrast between tumor tissue and background tissue
is much higher than acoustic parameters [6], [7], and this fact
has resulted in some microwave imaging methods [8]–[12]. But
due to the long wavelength of microwave, the low imaging resolution has always been a major shortage of current microwave
imaging methods. Other methods such as MRE, EIS, and NIS
are focused on either elastic or electromagnetic parameters only,
not on both [13]. Yet another innovative technique known as
microwave induced thermoacoustic tomography (MITAT) has
been proposed [14], [15] to take both advantages of high contrast from electromagnetic parameters and high resolution from
ultrasound wavelength.
MITAT employs modulated microwave pulses (no ionizing
radiation) to irradiate biologic tissues [16]. In 1984, Guo et al.
introduced thermodynamical process [17]. Due to the contrast
in the absorption coefficient between tumor and background
medium, the consequent thermal expansion caused by heating effect induces an acoustic wave at the position of the
tumor [6], [7], [14]. A microwave pulse is used as an irradiating
signal which provides high contrast. The induced acoustic pulse
from high blood ratio tissue (i.e., tumors) is acquired from multiple viewing angles, which guarantees the spatial resolution as
acoustic tomography does. The high-quality image of the tissue
absorption properties can be reconstructed from the recorded
thermoacoustic signals. Lin and Chan built a prototype of 2-D
imaging system for biological tissue [16], [18], [19]. Kruger
et al. performed the thermoacoustic tomography with 434-MHz
microwave in five patients with documented breast cancer to
show the contrast enhancement of tumors [15]. Zhao et al. built
a prototype system for breast tumor tomography at prone position [20], [21]. Lou et al. recently proposed a new approach
of ultrashort microwave source to enhance the induced acoustic signal, which is shown to be very helpful to increase the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of MITAT applications [22].
Because the tumors play as acoustic sources in MITAT,
imaging methods of MITAT actually solve the source inversion problem. Most of the currently researched methods are

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1958

model-based inversions. Xu and Wang proposed a filtered
back projection (BP) imaging method [23]. In 2004, Xu and
Wang applied time reversal imaging method on MITAT [24].
Liu proposed a forward modeling method of MITAT based on
the pseudospectral time domain (PSTD) algorithm [25] and the
spectrum element method [26]. Time reversal mirror (TRM)
imaging method with PSTD also proves to have much better
contrast than the BP method [27]. Liu et al. extended the MITAT
technique into brain tomography application and also indicated
that the time reversal-based RTM imaging method has better velocity variance and imaging quality than the Kirchhoff migration
method [28]. To further reduce the scanning time and the microwave absorption during scanning, Zhu et al. proposed a compressive sensing-based data acquisition and imaging method [5].
The problem of model-based inversion is the model. Even
the compressive sensing method [5] also relies on the acoustic model to build the dictionary. It is easy to understand that
the imaging quality of model-based inversion is highly dependent on the accuracy of the model. Without a detailed model
of the identical breast being diagnosed, current methods usually use a homogenous or randomly heterogeneous model as
the background. TRM imaging method has some advantages
in a heterogeneous background compared with BP, because the
small-scale heterogeneity can be compensated by TRM [29]
based on its self-averaging properties [30]. But for large-scale
heterogeneities, also called structural heterogeneity, the TRM
method cannot easily compensate the phase distortions (errors
in time-of-flight) [31]. Simulations shows that the constraint
between wavelength, propagation path length, and correlation
distance of medium heterogeneity [30] is usually hard to be
satisfied in structural heterogeneity situation, especially in the
low-frequency MITA signal around 100–800 KHz, because of
its much longer wavelength than 3–12 MHz UT band. This
fact will degrade the imaging quality of the model-based inversion method, i.e., TRM. To deal with this situation, modeling
of breast environment should be considered as an important
preprocedure of tumor source inversion.
Aiming to improve the performance of the model-based inversion and imaging method in MITAT, an active adjoint modeling
(AAM) method is proposed. It utilizes the physical reciprocity
of acoustic receiving sensors in MITA system by using them
to transmit probing pulses in MITA band. The transmission
happens just before the microwave pulse being emitted by the
electromagnetic antenna. The propagation time of probing pulse
inside a typical breast area is less than 100 ms, thus by adding
this tiny probing time before each MITAT scanning position, the
multiviewing angle transmission information can be recorded by
the rest of receiving sensors in order to rebuild and improve the
model.
The AAM method combines active probing operation and
iterative adjoint field method [32], [33] together to acquire and
extract the distribution information of dense tissues, and iteratively update the acoustic breast model, providing a significantly
more accurate model for inversion and imaging algorithms. In
the active probing phase, some of the acoustic sensors (supposed to be receivers-only during typical MITAT system) in the
circular array shown in Fig. 1 will be used as transmitters to

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 1.

Schematic of MITAT system for breast tumor imaging.

transmit MITA band pulses to actively probing the breast environment. All other sensors in the array will perform as receivers
to get the propagation results which include the structural heterogeneous distribution information of breast tissues. Then, the
adjoint method is used to extract the information, construct and
update the breast model in an iterative manor. After the convergence of iterations, the updated model will be used in the
model-based inversion imaging methods.
It is important to point out that the goal of AAM is not to
reconstruct the detailed acoustic velocity image of breast tissue
at millimeter level resolution, but rather to estimate the structural heterogeneity of acoustic velocity distribution. It aims at
providing an updated model for the model-based source (tumor)
inversion method. Based on this destination, the performance of
the AAM method is evaluated by the imaging quality under the
updated model. Numerical results show the AAM method significantly increases the imaging quality of TRM by providing a
more accurate model than the homogenous background.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the idea of AAM is described, including the model
misfit function, the gradient of misfit function, the acoustic approximation computation scheme of velocity kernels and the
conjugate gradient iteration procedures to update the model. In
Section III, numerical simulations under a checkerboard model
and realistic breast models are given to demonstrate the effectiveness of the AAM method. Conclusions are drawn in the final
section.
II. THEORY FOR AAM
A. Framework of AAM in MITAT
There are some methods doing acoustic breast modeling. For
example, the UT based on transmission waves [34] or reflections, the fast marching (FM) method [35]–[37], and the Born
iteration full wave inversion method [38]. Some of current modeling methods are based on existing ultrasound transducer arrays or commercial UT equipment. Incorporating such kind
of modeling procedure into the scanning procedure of MITAT
will increase the complexity of scanning strategy and extend
the data acquisition time dramatically, but still cannot provide
the proper propagation characterization of acoustic signals in
MITA band other than UT band. The FM method uses the tumor
source as the illumination and iteratively updates the acoustic
velocity model to minimize the time-of-flight misfit between
the synthesized tumor signal and the observed tumor signal.
But the spatial sparsity of early stage tumor results in the lack

ZHU et al.: ACTIVE ADJOINT MODELING METHOD IN MICROWAVE INDUCED THERMOACOUSTIC TOMOGRAPHY FOR BREAST TUMOR

Fig. 2.

MITAT workflow with AAM.

of viewing angles. The shape of heterogeneity area is easily to
be reconstructed as fan-shaped, instead of the original shape of
breast structure. The simulations in Section III including the FM
modeling results confirm this conclusion. The proposed AAM
method well utilizes the common structure of current published
MITAT systems and can provides the valuable information about
the acoustic breast environment.
Fig. 1 is the schematic of scanning setup of one typical MITAT
system for detecting breast tumors [15], [20], [21], [23]. The
sketch of MITAT procedure added with AAM is shown in Fig. 2,
in which the blocks with gray background are the newly added
AAM blocks, compared the one with the white background of
the original MITAT blocks [14], [20], [39].
MITAT with the AAM procedure is divided into two parts.
One is the scanning process with active probing, and the other
is the imaging process with adjoint modeling.
During the scanning process, acoustic sensors are positioned
in a circle. With the active probing block added, after the sensors
arrive at the current scanning position, one sensor will perform
as transmitter to transmit an acoustic pulse within the same
frequency band of MITA signals. The other sensors perform as
receivers to record the propagation results of the probing pulse
in the breast environment. Then the normal MITAT procedure
begins. The high power EM pulse will be emitted to induce the
thermal-acoustic signals. All the sensors perform as receivers at
this stage to record the MITA signals generated by tumors and
other liquid dense tissues. Then the sensors can move on to the
next position and redo the aforementioned process. This is the
active probing part of the proposed AAM method. After all data
from all viewing angles have been acquired, adjoint modeling
and TRM imaging will be performed.
The sketch of adjoint modeling part of AAM is shown in
Fig. 3.
The input of adjoint modeling method is a set of observed signals generated by the active probing part. It is the propagation results of probing pulses observed by receivers. The main iteration
cycle of the adjoint method includes two full wave simulations.
Both start with an initial model, i.e., the homogeneous background. The synthesized signal under the initial model will be
used to generate the adjoint field source. The adjoint source will

Fig. 3.

1959

Workflow of adjoint modeling part of AAM.

be time reversal propagated in the same model which forward
simulation uses. By doing timeframe cross-correlating between
the field of forward simulation and time reversal simulation the
sensitivity kernels of misfit functions with regards to the desired
model parameters can be built to calculate the gradient of misfit
function. Some gradient optimization method, i.e., the conjugate gradient iteration, can be used to generate the perturbation
on model parameters. Update the model with the perturbation
and repeat the whole process until the misfit function is convergent. Till then, the desired model parameters have been updated
close enough with the real situation to make the misfit between
the observed signals and the synthesized signals minimized in
a certain norm definition. Because of the linear approximation
for small acoustic signals in breast tissue, the traveltime misfit
function is chosen to estimate the velocity parameters in the
MITAT application.
B. AAM by Traveltime Misfit Function
Define Trobs as the traveltime of one active probing pulse from
one transmitter x to the rth receiver xr as observed in breast
which is the ground truth, and Tr (m) as in the predicted model
m. The traveltime misfit function can be defined as
2
1 
1
Tr (m) − Trobs =
[ΔTr ]2 .
2 r =1
2 r =1
N

χ (m) =

N

(1)

The gradient of (1) is
δχ =

N


[ΔTr ]δTr

(2)

r =1

where δTr is the Fréchet derivative of the traveltime Tr written
as the cross-correlation between the synthetic and the observed
waveforms [40]–[42]:
 T
1
wr (t) ∂t si (xr , t) δsi (xr , t) dt
(3)
δTr =
Nr 0
where wr is the time window function determined by the varying
range of model parameters to ensure a stable cross-correlation.
For example, the highest and lowest possible acoustic velocity
can determine the shortest and longest traveltime window. Nr

1960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

is the normalization factor defined as
 T
wr (t) si (xr , t) ∂t2 si (xr , t) dt
Nr =

(4)

0

and δsi is perturbation of synthetic waveform caused by model
perturbation δm. Substitute the Born approximation form of
δsi [43], [44] into (3) and (2) gives out
 t
 T
N
1 
δχ = −
ΔTr
wr (t)∂t si (xr , t)
()d3 x dt dt
Nr r =1
0
0 V


δρ (x ) Gij (xr , x ; t − t ) ∂t2 sj (x , t )
(5)
=
+δcj k lm (x ) ∂k Gij (xr , x ; t − t ) ∂l sm (x , t )
with the reciprocity of Green’s tensor [45], [46]








Gij (xr , x ; t − t ) = Gj i (x , xr ; t − t )

(6)

sj (x , t ) in (5) can be represented by time reversed propagating
si (xr , t), because si (xr , t) is the signal that can be observed or
simulated by the receivers. The propagation progress of time reversed source forms the adjoint field of the forward propagation
of probing pulses, defined as [47]
 T −t  
N
1
†

[ΔTr ] wr (T − t)
sj (x, T − t ) =
Nr 0
r =1
× Gj i (x, xr , T − t − t ) ∂t si (xr , T − t ) dt.

and these can be computed by the summation of crosscorrelation of each time frames in forward field and adjoint
field, mentioned in Fig. 3.
Another assumption is that the density contrast between tumor
and normal tissue is not a dominant parameter in the physical
process of MITAT. The density parameter is usually considered
as a priori or homogenous distributed. According to the aim
of AAM method, which is to roughly estimate the velocity distribution inside the imaging area, the compression wave speed
kernel can be expressed by bulk modulus kernel Kκ as

	
κ + 4μ/3
Kα (x) = 2
(13)
Kκ (x) = 2Kκ (x) .
κ
Now the simplified δχ can be given as

−1


[Kκ (x) δ ln κ (x)]d3 x, κ (x) = ρα (x)2
. (14)
δχ =
V

Now, the connection between perturbation on acoustic velocity α (x) and the Fréchet derivative of traveltime misfit function
has been established. By repeating this probing and kernel computation process with different positions of transmitters, it is
easy to generate a summation of δχ from different viewing angles including more model information. The next procedure is to
use regular gradient optimization method to minimize the misfit function, and eventually find the optimized acoustic velocity
distribution.

(7)
So the traveltime adjoint source to create (7) can be defined as
N
1 
fj† (x, t) =
[ΔTr ] wr (T − t)
Nr r =1
(8)
× ∂t si (xr , T − t) δ (x − xr ) .
According to the relationship between isotropic model parameters:
cj k lm = (κ − 2μ/3) δj k δlm + μ (δj l δk m + δj m δk l )

(9)

where κ is the bulk modulus and μ is the shear modulus. Because
the source inversion methods of MITAT is usually performed
under acoustic approximation, which means the shear moduli
μ (x) will be omitted as zero in future derivations.
Substitute (9) to (5), now the perturbation of misfit function
can be expressed by misfit kernels with respect to density and
bulk modulus as

[Kρ (x) δ ln ρ (x) + Kκ (x) δ ln κ (x)]d3 x. (10)
δχ =
V

The misfit kernels Kρ and Kκ are given as:
 T
N

ΔTr
ρ (x) s† (x, xr , T − t)
Kρ (x) = −
r =1

0

· ∂t2 s (x, xr , t) dt
 T
N

ΔTr
κ (x)
Kκ (x) = −
r =1

(11)

0

× [∇ · s† (x, xr , T − t)][∇ · s (x, xr , t)]dt (12)

C. Conjugate Gradient Iterative Optimization
A nonlinear conjugate gradient algorithm is applied in this
paper to iteratively update the model.
It starts with an initial homogeneous model m0 . The simulated probing signals numerically propagate in m0 and generate
the synthesized signals. By (1), the initial misfit function χ0
can be calculated. The traveltime adjoint sources can be calculated by (8). Back propagate the adjoint sources with time
reversal simulation. Now, the sensitivity kernel of gradient of
misfit function Kκ can be calculated by (12). Define the summation of initial Kκ from each probing signal position as g0 , the
initial gradient of misfit. Define the initial perturbation search
direction p0 = −g0 , and start the (k+1)th (k = 0,1,2,3,4. . .)
iteration to update model as

(15)
mk +1 = mk + v k pk , v k = −2χ̃k g̃ k
where χ̃k and g̃ k is the scale of χk and gk . Calculate χk +1 and
gk +1 with the updated model mk +1 by forward field simulation
and adjoint field simulation. The perturbation search direction
for this round will be updated as
pk +1 = −gk +1 + β k +1 pk , β k +1
 k k 

g · g . (16)
= gk +1 · gk +1 − gk


The iteration between (15) and (16) goes on until pk +1  <
ε. The scale of misfit function χ̃k can also be considered
 as
an indicator of convergence, for example, χ̃k +1 − χ̃k  < ε.
After that, the final model mﬁnal can be used as the background
of TRM imaging.

ZHU et al.: ACTIVE ADJOINT MODELING METHOD IN MICROWAVE INDUCED THERMOACOUSTIC TOMOGRAPHY FOR BREAST TUMOR

Fig. 4.

Sketch of numerical simulation setup.

D. Imaging Quality Evaluation
In order to evaluate the performance of model-based TRM
imaging quality, peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) is used as a
performance indicator, which is given as [48]:


max{I}
PSNR = 20 log10 
2
P Q 
1
ˆ q)
q)
−
I(p,
I(p,
p=1
q =1
PQ
(17)
where I and Iˆ denote the original image and the recovered
image, max{I} is the peak value of I, and I(p, q) is the value at
pixel (p, q) under Cartesian coordinates. Higher PSNR means
the more energy is refocused back to the tumor position. If the
model is not correct, the refocus of tumor MITA signal energy
will be worse and will output a significantly lower PSNR.
III. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS
A. Checkerboard Pattern Model Simulation
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed AAM
method, numerical simulations are performed. Fig. 4 shows the
sketch map of a checkerboard pattern model simulation setup.
To test the ability of acquiring and extracting velocity distribution of breast environment, checkerboard pattern distributed
high/low speed areas are placed in the homogeneous coronal
breast slice. The reason why coronal slicing is chosen is to better simulate the spatial configuration of actual MITAT systems.
Usually they are coronal sliced to avoid the electromagnetic
pulse interferences from EM antenna to the acoustic sensors
and also to provide as equal EM energy distribution as possible. One acoustic source, playing as one small early stage
tumor is placed in the center. There are 200 ultrasound sensors
uniformly distributed around a circle with 150-mm diameter,
which are used to receive MITA signals from tumors and other
breast tissues. The gray dotted line inside the sensor array is the
shape of coronal slice of breast which is the interested imaging
area. Immersion oil is used as coupling medium between the
breast slice and the sensors. The microwave pulse used to induce the thermoacoustic signal of tumor has 0.5-μs duration and

1961

8–10 kW peak power based on an MITA prototype system [20],
and the induced thermoacoustic tumor source can be precalculated based on the SAR contrast by Stephan et al. [49], so the
simulations start from the acoustic field. The MITA signal is
a Gaussian pulse signal with bandwidth from dc to 150 KHz.
The probing pulses share the same frequency spectrum with the
MITA signal because they share the same sensor array. The full
wave simulations in forward and backward manner are done by
PSTD numerical method [25], [50], [51]. Each full wave simulation will cost around 1 min in 250 × 250 mesh grids on Intel
Xeon E5645 workstation and approximately 15 min for each
iteration. Once again our goal of AAM is to provide an updated
velocity model to increase the imaging performance of modelbased inversion. The quality of reconstructed velocity model is
not used as a performance indicator but the quality of tumor
image is.
At first, the tumor transmits a MITA signal and all the sensors
play as receivers to receive the propagated MITA signal. This
is the forward simulation of microwave induced thermoacoustic
signal of tumors. The received signals can be used to reconstruct
the tumor, but without the model information, the image result
is not satisfactory. To get the information of the background
model, the AAM method begins. To better reconstruct the tumor
source, the checkerboard pattern model should be reconstructed
first. The proposed AAM method utilizes acoustic sensors to
transmit external probing pulses to probe and reconstruct the
model. Then the unknown tumor source can be imaged under
the reconstructed model.
In AAM method, first, ten sensors are chosen to play as transmitters (shown as stars in Fig. 4). They will transmit the active
probing pulses, impulse signals from dc to 150 KHz spectrum.
The probing pulses are transmitted into the checkerboard pattern
model one by one in ten forward simulations. All the received
signals are stored as observed signals. This is the active probing
part of the proposed AAM method. Then the adjoint modeling
part of AAM begins with an initial homogeneous model. The
work flow of adjoint modeling is shown in Fig. 3. After each
iteration, the model is updated. The synthetic signals will be
generated by forward simulations under the updated model and
be used to recalculate the kernels by (14) and the adjoint sources
by (8). The traveltime misfit function between the observed signal and updated synthesized signal is also recorded and scaled
to indicate the convergence of the iterations.
Fig. 5(a) shows the updated model after 12 iterations. For
comparison, Fig. 5(b) shows the reconstructed model by the
FM method [37]. Although the AAM and the FM method are
both targeted on minimizing the time-of-flight misfit between
the synthesized signal and the observed signal, it is very obvious
that the AAM method has well reconstructed the four high/low
speed areas, as the checkerboard pattern. For the FM method,
since it uses the tumor source as the only illuminating source,
which leads to the lack of viewing angles and also because of the
ray trace approximation used in FM, it can easily reconstruct the
shape of heterogeneous area as fan-shaped shown in Fig. 5(b),
instead of the original shape of breast structure. Fig. 5(c) shows
the history of scaled misfit function in AAM method. After four
or six iterations, the scale of misfit function has dropped 92%

1962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 5. Checkerboard pattern model reconstruct results: (a) updated model
after 12 iterations; (b) model by FM method [37]; and (c) convergence of scaled
traveltime misfit function.
Fig. 7. Evaluation of AAM under different SNR: (a) convergence of scaled
traveltime misfit function versus SNR; (b) TRM image under final model with
SNR = 14 dB; and (c) TRM image under final model with infinite SNR.

Fig. 6. Comparison of imaging results under different models. (a) TRM image
with a homogeneous model, PSNR = 29.8 dB. (b) TRM imaging image with
an updated model, PSNR = 44.9 dB.

which indicates the proposed AAM method has high efficiency
under the checkerboard pattern setup. The comparison proves
the advantages of AAM method compared with FM.
Fig. 6 shows the comparison between the updated model in
Fig. 5(a) and the initial homogeneous model by TRM imaging results of the tumor source. In Fig. 6(a), the point source
image is crossed shape due to the lack of structural heterogeneity, and the PSNR is only 29.8 dB. Because structural heterogeneity cannot be simply emulated by random distributed
heterogeneous medium, the self-averaging advantage of TRM
method cannot avoid the misfocusing results. But with the updated model, Fig. 6(b) shows a significantly improved imaging
result by 15 dB in PSNR.
To verify the noise robustness of the proposed method, the
checkerboard pattern simulation has been repeated with different SNR. As mentioned in Section II, the receivers of active
probing part are the same set of sensors used to receive MITA

signals, which means the noise floor of received probing signals should be the same as MITA signals by sharing the same
sensors, same cables, same preamplifiers and the same digitizers. Usually for MITAT systems published recently, the SNR
of MITA signal is about 14–18 dB [20], [21], [23]. Considering
the power of active probing signal is significantly larger than the
thermal-acoustic signal, the SNR situation of received probing
signals will be far better than MITA signals. For example, the
Olympus V314-SU sensor can take 20–80 mW average power
input during pulse transmission, providing hundreds of times
larger compression wave in the medium than thermoacoustic
sources. Considering the transmission losses and the linearity
of high gain preamplifiers, the range of SNR in AAM simulations is set from 17 dB to infinity (no noise) to cover possible
scenarios. For further reference with even lower SNR, the 14
and 11 dB cases are also simulated. Fig. 7(a) shows the convergence of scaled misfit function under different input SNR
of probing signals. Indeed, the final scale of misfit in 14 dB
cannot be as low as in the ideal noise-free scenario. But by
comparing Fig. 7(b) with Fig. 7(c), the updated model in 14-dB
scenario has already provided enough structural heterogeneity
information to provide similar imaging results as the ideal scenario does. For 11 dB and even lower SNR cases, the residual
of travel time misfit remains much higher after enough iterations, and sometimes they do not converge. The reason is that
the travel time is calculated by a simple peak detecting method
without any noise filter. Here the simulations are focused on the

ZHU et al.: ACTIVE ADJOINT MODELING METHOD IN MICROWAVE INDUCED THERMOACOUSTIC TOMOGRAPHY FOR BREAST TUMOR

1963

Fig. 8. Raw data of anatomically realistic breast model #12204: (a) tissue type
dataset; and (b) p-value dataset.
TABLE I
ACOUSTIC PARAMETERS

Fig. 9.

performance of modeling method, so the travel time calculation
method is not further investigated. More complicated travel time
estimation method such as AIC [52] may provide more robustness for lower SNR cases. However, for the published MITA
systems until now, 17-dB SNR is low enough for evaluating the
AAM method in breast modeling applications [20], [21], [23].

Fig. 10.

Sagittal slice of the acoustic breast model #12204.

Specimens and setup of the experiment.

B. Realistic Breast Models
To further verify the advantage of AAM method, the anatomically realistic numerical breast phantom is used to provide
precise structural heterogeneous models built from MRIs of
prone patient #12204 [53]. The raw data of 3-D breast phantoms from [53] are provided in two datasets. First, the tissue type
dataset indicates the roughly distribution of predefined ten types
of tissues. Fig. 8(a) shows the tissue type distribution inside the
breast of patient #12204. Second, the p-value dataset indicates
the detailed parameter value inside each tissue types [53]. The
original p-value is used to calculate the dielectric properties of
each voxel by the experimental upper and lower bounds on each
of types of breast tissues. By replacing the bounds of dielectric
properties into bounds of acoustic properties according to the
tissue types, the anatomically realistic acoustic velocity model
of breast #12204 can be obtained. Table I lists the experimental
results of acoustic velocity bounds from [54]. Because of the
coronal slice setup of MITAT, chest muscle tissues are not used
in the following simulations.
After the remapping of tissue types into acoustic velocity,
Fig. 9 shows the sagittal slice of model #12204, and also indicates the positions of two coronal slices that will be used to test
the AAM method.

To better evaluate the imaging quality, besides the one small
tumor used in the checkerboard pattern model, two different
shaped tumor sources are added as shown in Fig. 10. The crossing shaped source will better indicate the focusing performance
in both axis. The peanut shaped tumor will test the side lode
blurring performance by recognizing the waist of peanut. Based
on previous simulations in Fig. 7, the SNR for probing signals
are set at 20 dB.
Fig. 11 shows the simulation results for Coronal Slice A in
Fig. 9. Fig. 11(a) is the original acoustic model. Adjoint modeling iteration starts with a homogeneous background and after
ten iterations the reconstructed model is shown in Fig. 11(b).
Two major and several small high velocity areas are recovered.
Based on the updated model, the three tumor sources can be imaged at 30.2-dB PSNR as shown in Fig. 11(c). For comparison,
the TRM imaging method is also performed without the updated
model and the result is shown in Fig. 11(d) with 25.3-dB PSNR.
With a random heterogeneous background, because of the absence of structural heterogeneity, the imaging result will be
similar to that of a homogeneous background. Fig. 12 shows the
simulation results for Coronal Slice B. Because of a larger dynamic range of velocity, the three tumor sources have significant

1964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

IV. CONCLUSION

Fig. 11. Adjoint modeling and tumor imaging results: (a) ground truth velocity
model of coronal A; (b) AAM updated model after ten iterations; (c) TRM
imaging results with updated model, PSNR = 30.2 dB; and (d) TRM imaging
results with homogeneous model, PSNR = 25.3 dB.

Aiming to improve the imaging quality of model-based inversion and imaging method for MITAT, an AAM method is
proposed. The main idea of the method is to apply active probing and adjoint modeling method into the scanning and imaging
strategy of MITAT. This method fully utilizes the reciprocity of
acoustic receivers and incorporates the adjoint modeling method
idea into the inversion and imaging procedure. The feasibility
and effectiveness of the method has been demonstrated through
some numerical simulations with a checkerboard pattern model
and anatomical realistic breast models. Numerical simulations
show that the AAM method significantly improves the imaging quality of TRM imaging method by providing models with
structural heterogeneity of breast environment. The robustness
of the AAM method at different SNRs has also been studied.
Compared with the result of model without structural heterogeneity, the AAM has dominant advantage on reconstructing
the shape of tumor sources without extra modeling data from
UT or MRI results. This research results can also be considered
as preresearch to our further studies by experimental MITAT
system [20], [21] combined with artificial phantoms of breast
with structural heterogeneity of acoustic velocity.
REFERENCES

Fig. 12. Adjoint modeling and tumor imaging results of coronal slice B:
(a) ground truth velocity model; (b) AAM updated model after ten iterations;
(c) TRM imaging results with updated model, PSNR = 29.9 dB; and (d) TRM
imaging results with homogeneous model, PSNR = 24.4 dB.

ghosts while the imaging results with AAM updated model remain high PSNR and precise tumor positions and shapes.
These simulations with anatomically realistic breast models prove that the proposed AAM method for MITAT application provides a valuable model with structural heterogeneity
for model-based inversion method, which results in significant
imaging quality improvement in TRM imaging method. These
modeling advantages can be acquired by one additional procedure based on the existing MITAT equipment without extra data
from UT or MRI results.

[1] J. P. Kosters and P. C. Gotzsche, “Regular self-examination or clinical examination for early detection of breast cancer,” Cochrane
Database Syst. Rev., vol. 2, no. 2, p. CD003373, 2003. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12804462.
[2] P. C. Gotzsche and M. Nielsen, “Screening for breast cancer with mammography,” Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., vol. 4, no. 4, p. CD001877,
2009. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23737396.
[3] “Screening for breast cancer,” Topic Page. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, (Jul. 2010). [Online]. Available: http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspsbrca.htm
[4] B. Friedenson, “Is mammography indicated for women with defective BRCA genes? Implications of recent scientific advances
for the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of hereditary breast
cancer,” MedGenMed: Medscape Gen. Med., vol. 2, no. 1,
p. E9, 2000. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11104455
http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/408048.
[5] X. Zhu, Z. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Song, and Q. H. Liu, “Microwave-induced
thermal acoustic tomography for breast tumor based on compressive sensing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1298–1307, May
2013.
[6] M. Lazebnik, L. McCartney, D. Popovic, C. B. Watkins, M. J. Lindstrom,
J. Harter, S. Sewall, A. Magliocco, J. H. Booske, and M. Okoniewski, “A
large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave dielectric properties of
normal breast tissue obtained from reduction surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 2637–2656, 2007.
[7] M. Lazebnik, D. Popovic, L. McCartney, C. B. Watkins, M. J. Lindstrom,
J. Harter, S. Sewall, T. Ogilvie, A. Magliocco, and T. M. Breslin, “A
large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave dielectric properties of
normal, benign and malignant breast tissues obtained from cancer surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, no. 20, pp. 6093–6115, 2007.
[8] M. Donelli, I. J. Craddock, D. Gibbins, and M. Sarafianou, “A threedimensional time domain microwave imaging method for breast cancer
detection based on an evolutionary algorithm,” Progress Electromagn.
Res. M, vol. 18, pp. 179–195, 2011.
[9] Q. H. Liu, Z. Q. Zhang, T. T. Wang, J. A. Bryan, G. A. Ybarra,
L. W. Nolte, and W. T. Joines, “Active microwave imaging: I. 2-D forward and inverse scattering methods,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn.,
vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 123–133, Jan. 2002.
[10] T. Moriyama, Z. Meng, and T. Takenaka, “Forward–backward timestepping method combined with genetic algorithm applied to breast cancer
detection,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 438–442, 2011.
[11] P. M. Meaney, M. W. Fanning, T. Raynolds, C. J. Fox, Q. Fang,
C. A. Kogel, S. P. Poplack, and K. D. Paulsen, “Initial clinical experience

ZHU et al.: ACTIVE ADJOINT MODELING METHOD IN MICROWAVE INDUCED THERMOACOUSTIC TOMOGRAPHY FOR BREAST TUMOR

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]

with microwave breast imaging in women with normal mammography,”
Acad. Radiol., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 207–218, Feb. 2007.
D. W. Winters, J. D. Shea, P. Kosmas, B. D. Van Veen, and S. C. Hagness,
“Three-dimensional microwave breast imaging: Dispersive dielectric
properties estimation using patient-specific basis functions,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 969–981, Jul. 2009.
K. D. Paulsen, P. M. Meaney, and L. C. Gilman, Alternative Breast Imaging: Four Model-Based Approaches. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2005.
M. Xu and L. Wang, “RF-induced thermoacoustic tomography,” in Proc.
24th Annu. Conf. Annu. Fall Meet. Biomed. Eng. Soc. EMBS/BMES Conf.,
2002, pp. 1211–1212.
R. A. Kruger, K. D. Miller, H. E. Reynolds, W. L. Kiser, D. R. Reinecke,
and G. A. Kruger, “Breast cancer in vivo: Contrast enhancement with
thermoacoustic CT at 434 MHz—feasibility study1,” Radiology, vol. 216,
no. 1, pp. 279–283, 2000.
K. H. Chan and J. C. Lin, “Microwave-induced thermoelastic tissue imaging,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Bio. Soc., 1988, pp. 445–
446.
T. C. Guo, W. W. Guo, and L. E. Larsen, “Microwave-induced thermoacoustic effect in dielectrics and its coupling to external medium—
A thermodynamical formulation,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn.,
vol. MTT-32, no. 8, pp. 835–843, Aug. 1984.
J. C. Lin and K. H. Chan, “Microwave thermoelastic tissue imaging—
System design,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. MTT-32, no. 8,
pp. 854–860, Aug. 1984.
J. C. Lin, “The microwave auditory phenomenon,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 68,
no. 1, pp. 67–73, Jan. 1980.
X. Zhu, Z. Zhao, K. Yang, Z. Nie, and Q. H. Liu, “A prototype system
of microwave induced thermo-acoustic tomography for breast tumor,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 464–467.
Z. Q. Zhao, J. Song, X. Z. Zhu, J. G. Wang, J. N. Wu, Y. L. Liu, Z. P. Nie,
and Q. H. Liu, “System development of microwave induced thermoacoustic tomography and experiments on breast tumor,” Progress Electromagn. Res.-Pier, vol. 134, pp. 323–336, 2013.
C. Lou, S. Yang, Z. Ji, Q. Chen, and D. Xing, “Ultrashort microwaveinduced thermoacoustic imaging: A breakthrough in excitation efficiency
and spatial resolution,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 109, no. 21, pp. 218101-1–
218101-5, 2012.
M. Xu and L. V. Wang, “Pulsed-microwave-induced thermoacoustic tomography: Filtered backprojection in a circular measurement configuration,” Med. Phys., vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1661–1169, Aug. 2002.
Y. Xu and L. Wang, “Time reversal and its application to tomography
with diffracting sources,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 033902-1–
033902-4, 2004.
Q. H. Liu, “Large-scale simulations of electromagnetic and acoustic measurements using the pseudospectral time-domain (PSTD) algorithm,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 917–926, Mar.
1999.
K. H. Lim, J.-H. Lee, and Q. H. Liu, “Thermoacoustic tomography forward modeling with the spectral element method,” Med. Phys., vol. 35,
no. 1, pp. 4–12, 2008.
G. Chen, Z. Zhao, Z. Nie, and Q. H. Liu, “Computational study of time
reversal mirror technique for microwave-induced thermo-acoustic tomography,” J. Electromagn. Waves Appl., vol. 22, no. 16, pp. 2191–2204, Jan.
1, 2008.
Z. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Xu, and L. V. Wang, “Transcranial thermoacoustic
tomography: A comparison of two imaging algorithms,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 289–294, Feb. 2013.
B. T. Cox and B. E. Treeby, “Artifact trapping during time reversal photoacoustic imaging for acoustically heterogeneous media,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 387–396, Feb. 2010.
G. Bal, G. Papanicolaou, and L. Ryzhik, “Self-averaging in time reversal
for the parabolic wave equation,” Stochastics Dyn., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 507–
531, 2002.
X. Yuan and L. V. Wang, “Effects of acoustic heterogeneity in breast
thermoacoustic tomography,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 1134–1146, Sep. 2003.
J. Tromp, C. Tape, and Q. Liu, “Seismic tomography, adjoint methods,
time reversal and banana-doughnut kernels,” Geophysical J. Int., vol. 160,
no. 1, pp. 195–216, 2005.
A. Fichtner, H. P. Bunge, and H. Igel, “The adjoint method in seismology:
I. Theory,” Phys. Earth Planetary Interiors, vol. 157, no. 1/2, pp. 86–104,
Aug. 14, 2006.
F. Denis, O. Basset, and G. Gimenez, “Ultrasonic transmission tomography in refracting media: Reduction of refraction artifacts by curved-ray

[35]
[36]

[37]

[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]

[54]

1965

techniques,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 173–188, Mar.
1995.
S. Li, K. Mueller, M. Jackowski, D. P. Dione, and L. H. Staib, “Fast marching method to correct for refraction in ultrasound computed tomography,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2006, pp. 896–899.
S. Li, M. Jackowski, D. P. Dione, T. Varslot, L. H. Staib, and K. Mueller,
“Refraction corrected transmission ultrasound computed tomography for
application in breast imaging,” Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 2233–2246,
2010.
J. G. Wang, Z. Q. Zhao, J. Song, X. Z. Zhu, Z. P. Nie, and Q. H. Liu, “Reconstruction of microwave absorption properties in heterogeneous tissue
for microwave-induced thermo-acoustic tomography,” Progress Electromagn. Res.-Pier, vol. 130, pp. 225–240, 2012.
M. Haynes and M. Moghaddam, “Large domain, low-contrast acoustic
inverse scattering for ultrasound breast imaging,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 2712–2722, Nov. 2010.
W. Xiong, D. R. Bauer, R. Witte, and X. Hao, “Microwave-induced thermoacoustic imaging model for potential breast cancer detection,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2782–2791, Oct. 2012.
Y. Luo and G. T. Schuster, “Wave-equation traveltime inversion,” Geophysics, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 645–653, 1991.
H. Marquering, F. Dahlen, and G. Nolet, “Three-dimensional sensitivity
kernels for finite-frequency traveltimes: The banana-doughnut paradox,”
Geophys. J. Int., vol. 137, no. 3, pp. 805–815, 1999.
F. Dahlen, S. H. Hung, and G. Nolet, “Fréchet kernels for finite-frequency
traveltimes—I. Theory,” Geophys. J. Int., vol. 141, no. 1, pp. 157–174,
2000.
J. A. Hudson and J. R. Heritage, “The use of the Born approximation in
seismic scattering problems,” Geophys. J. Roy. Astron. Soc., vol. 66, no. 1,
pp. 221–240, 1981.
R. Wu and K. Aki, “Scattering characteristics of elastic waves by an elastic
heterogeneity,” Geophysics, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 582–595, 1985.
K. Aki and P. G. Richards, Quantitative Seismology: Theory and Methods.
Suasalito, CA, USA: University Science Books, 2002.
F. Dahlen and J. Tromp, Theoretical Global Seismology. Princeton, NJ,
USA: Princeton Univ. Press, 1998.
Q. Liu and J. Tromp, “Finite-frequency sensitivity kernels for global seismic wave propagation based upon adjoint methods,” Geophys. J. Int.,
vol. 174, no. 1, pp. 265–286, 2008.
Q. Huynh-Thu and M. Ghanbari, “Scope of validity of PSNR in image/video quality assessment,” Electron. Lett., vol. 44, no. 13, pp. 800–
801, 2008.
K. Stephan, H. Amir, R. Daniel, and N. Vasilis, “Near-field thermoacoustic
tomography of small animals,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 3433–
3444, 2011.
Q. H. Liu, “The pseudospectral time-domain (PSTD) algorithm for acoustic waves in absorptive media,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1044–1055, Jul. 1998.
B. E. Treeby and B. T. Cox, “k-wave: MATLAB toolbox for the simulation
and reconstruction of photoacoustic wave fields,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 021314-1–021314-12, 2010.
C. Li, L. Huang, N. Duric, H. Zhang, and C. Rowe, “An improved automatic time-of-flight picker for medical ultrasound tomography,” Ultrasonics, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 61–72, Jan. 2009.
E. Zastrow, S. K. Davis, M. Lazebnik, F. Kelcz, B. D. Van Veen, and
S. C. Hagness, “Development of anatomically realistic numerical breast
phantoms with accurate dielectric properties for modeling microwave interactions with the human breast,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55,
no. 12, pp. 2792–2800, Dec. 2008.
S. Sanei, “Characterisation of fat and malignancy in transmissive ultrasound breast tomographs applying fuzzy logic,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1998, vol. 3, pp. 1367–1370.

Xiaozhang Zhu (S’10) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electronic engineering from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
(UESTC), Chengdu, China, in 2006 and 2009, respectively, where he is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in the School of Electronic Engineering, UESTC.
Since November 2012, he has been a Visiting
Researcher in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA, under the financial support from the China
Scholarship Council. His research interests include inversion and imaging algorithm.

1966

Zhiqin Zhao (SM’05) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electronic engineering from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
(UESTC), Chengdu, China, and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering from Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, USA, in 1990, 1993, and 2002,
respectively.
From 1996 to 1999, he was with the Department of
Electronic Engineering, UESTC. From 2000 to 2002,
he researched rough surface scattering as a Research
Assistant with the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Oklahoma State University. From 2003, he was a Research Associate with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA. In 2006, he became a Full Professor with the
School of Electronic Engineering, UESTC. His current research interests include computational electromagnetics and signal processing.
Dr. Zhao is a member of Phi Kappa Phi Honor Society.

Jinguo Wang was born in Shandong, China, in 1986. He received the B.S.
degree from Wuhan Polytechnic University, China, in 2009. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Sichuan, China.
His current research interests include medical imaging and signal processing.

Guoping Chen received the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from the
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in
2009.
Now, he is working as an Associate Professor in Chongqing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China. His current research interests include medical imaging, signal processing, and short distance microwave
communications.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Qing Huo Liu (S’88–M’89–SM’94–F’05) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees in physics from Xiamen
University, Fujian Province, China, in 1983 and 1986,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, USA, in 1989.
He was with the Electromagnetics Laboratory,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, as a Research Assistant from September 1986 to December
1988, and as a Postdoctoral Research Associate from
January 1989 to February 1990. He was a Research
Scientist and Program Leader with Schlumberger-Doll Research, Ridgefield CT,
from 1990 to 1995. From 1996 to May 1999, he was an Associate Professor
with New Mexico State University. Since June 1999, he was been with Duke
University where he is now a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering.
He is also a Visiting Professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China. His research interests include computational
electromagnetics and acoustics, inverse problems, geophysical subsurface sensing, biomedical imaging, electronic packaging, and the simulation of photonic
and nanodevices. He has published more than 350 papers in refereed journals
and conference proceedings.
Dr. Liu is a Fellow of the Acoustical Society of America, a member of Phi
Kappa Phi, Tau Beta Pi, a full member of the U.S. National Committee of URSI
Commissions B and F. Currently, he serves as an Associate Editor for Radio Science, and for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING,
for which he also served as a Guest Editor for a Special Issue on Computational
Methods. He received the 1996 Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists
and Engineers from the White House, the 1996 Early Career Research Award
from the Environmental Protection Agency, and the 1997 CAREER Award from
the National Science Foundation.

