IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

1947

Real-Time Simulation of Three-Dimensional
Shoulder Girdle and Arm Dynamics
Edward K. Chadwick∗ , Dimitra Blana, Robert F. Kirsch, Member, IEEE, and Antonie J. van den Bogert

Abstract—Electrical stimulation is a promising technology for
the restoration of arm function in paralyzed individuals. Control
of the paralyzed arm under electrical stimulation, however, is a
challenging problem that requires advanced controllers and command interfaces for the user. A real-time model describing the
complex dynamics of the arm would allow user-in-the-loop type
experiments where the command interface and controller could
be assessed. Real-time models of the arm previously described
have not included the ability to model the independently controlled
scapula and clavicle, limiting their utility for clinical applications
of this nature. The goal of this study therefore was to evaluate
the performance and mechanical behavior of a real-time, dynamic
model of the arm and shoulder girdle. The model comprises seven
segments linked by eleven degrees of freedom and actuated by 138
muscle elements. Polynomials were generated to describe the muscle lines of action to reduce computation time, and an implicit,
first-order Rosenbrock formulation of the equations of motion was
used to increase simulation step-size. The model simulated flexion of the arm faster than real time, simulation time being 92%
of actual movement time on standard desktop hardware. Modeled maximum isometric torque values agreed well with values
from the literature, showing that the model simulates the momentgenerating behavior of a real human arm. The speed of the model
enables experiments where the user controls the virtual arm and
receives visual feedback in real time. The ability to optimize potential solutions in simulation greatly reduces the burden on the user
during development.
Index Terms—Biomechanics, forward dynamics, musculoskeletal modeling, shoulder.

I. INTRODUCTION
number of recent publications have shown significant and
promising advances in the ability of brain–computer interfaces (BCI) to control prosthetic and robotics-based devices
[1], [2] to assist people with seriously impaired movement. In

A

Manuscript received July 31, 2013; revised December 3, 2013; February 3,
2014; accepted February 22, 2014. Date of publication March 4, 2014; date
of current version June 14, 2014. This work was supported by the National
Institutes of Health under Contract N01-HD-5-3403. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ E. K. Chadwick is with the Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine,
Keele University, Staffordshire ST5 5BG, U.K. (e-mail: e.k.j.chadwick@
keele.ac.uk).
D. Blana is with the Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele
University, Staffordshire ST5 5BG, U.K. (e-mail: dimitra.blana@gmail.com).
R. F. Kirsch is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA (e-mail: rfk3@case.edu).
A. J. van den Bogert is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH 44115 USA (e-mail:
a.vandenbogert@csuohio.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309727

order to achieve the goal of restoring natural control of movement to people with spinal cord injury, such high levels of control must be extended to reanimated limbs where movement is
achieved under the power of the user’s own muscles.
We have previously shown the feasibility of such an approach
by demonstrating direct cortical control of simulated arm reaching by a person with tetraplegia [3]. The simulated arm was realized using a forward-dynamic model describing the complex
dynamics of muscle activation and contraction, muscle nonlinearities, and muscle skeleton coupling.
In forward dynamics, we specify the muscle activations or
neural excitations, and mathematically describe how those translate into movements. Fig. 1 shows the essential components in
a forward-dynamic musculoskeletal model. The muscle model
(block 1) describes the transfer from neural excitation to muscle
force for each muscle part, the muscle–skeleton model (block 2)
describes the transition from muscle forces to joint torques, and
the segment inertial model (block 3) describes the effect of
joint torques on segment accelerations. Integration of the state
variables over time results in the simulation of a movement trajectory based on a series of inputs describing neural excitation.
In our application, the neural excitation values are calculated by
a controller whose inputs are the desired movements decoded
from the BCI.
By creating a dynamic simulation of muscle-driven movement, we are able to optimize design parameters and BCI decoding methods, and test different control schemes for the user
in a safe but accelerated way. However, in our initial demonstration of direct cortical control [3], the simulated arm was limited
to planar movements of the shoulder and elbow, and did not
include the additional control requirements of a mobile scapula
and clavicle.
The addition of an independently-controlled shoulder girdle
allows us to model the complex muscle control requirements
needed to ensure appropriate positioning and stabilization of
the scapula during movement. This is an essential feature of any
neuroprosthesis control algorithm that claims to enable natural
control of the whole arm. In musculoskeletal dynamics, however, differential equations describing the model are typically
very stiff and nonlinear.
A model including the shoulder girdle suffers particularly
from high stiffness due to the low-mass rigid bodies of the
scapula and clavicle being actuated by high-stiffness muscles.
As a result, forward dynamic simulations using explicit numerical methods require very small time steps and are much slower
than real time [4]. This precludes their use in the “user-in-theloop” type experiments necessary for development and testing
of control algorithms that is the focus of our study.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 1. Block diagram showing the simulation phases of a musculoskeletal
model. u: vector of neural inputs; F : muscle forces; L: muscle lengths; T : joint
torques; θ̈: joint accelerations.

Previously, we overcame this problem by using SD/FAST to
generate equations of motion, and running simulations using
a fixed-step solver on a dedicated, real-time operating system
[5]. In addition, in order to achieve real-time simulations, we
restricted the motion of the shoulder girdle, and only modeled
glenohumeral (GH) and elbow motions.
The goal of this project, therefore, was to create a “virtual
arm” that can simulate the complex musculoskeletal dynamics
of the whole shoulder girdle in real time, given a set of neural
inputs derived from a controller. We achieved this by using
an implicit method based on a first-order Rosenbrock formula,
resulting in simulation times faster than real time, with the same
accuracy as a much slower variable-step explicit method.
In the current paper, we describe the resulting model of the
shoulder and elbow that includes independent control of the
clavicle and scapula, demonstrate its ability to run simulations
in real time, and show the validity of the resulting simulations by
comparison with the published literature on torque-angle curves
for the shoulder and elbow.
II. METHODS
A. SIMM Model
The model was initially built in SIMM (MusculoGraphics,
Inc.), using anatomical data from cadaver studies performed by
Klein-Breteler et al. [6]. These data are available on SimTK.org
(https://simtk.org/home/dsem). The model was later imported
into Opensim [7], from where the muscle moment arm and
length functions are generated. Simulation of the model is subsequently performed using MATLAB and custom C-code, as
outlined in Section II-B9. It consists of seven body segments
(thorax, clavicle, scapula, humerus, ulna, radius, and hand),
and eleven degrees of freedom (three orthogonal hinges at the
sterno-clavicular, acromio-clavicular and GH joints, and elbow
flexion-extension and forearm pronation-supination). It contains
138 muscle elements. Details of the original SIMM model and
its evaluation using inverse dynamic simulations can be found
in [8].
B. Musculoskeletal Dynamics
1) Activation Dynamics: The active state a is controlled by
neural excitation u, and this process is modeled as a first-order
differential equation according to [9]:
da
=
dt



u
1−u
+
Tact
Tdeact


(u − a).

(1)

Fig. 2. Three-element Hill muscle model, showing the contractile element
CE, parallel elastic element PEE, and series elastic element SEE. L C E is the
CE length, L M is the muscle length, and φ is the pennation angle.

The values for the activation and deactivation time constants
(Tact and Tdeact ) were derived from the proportions of fast and
slow twitch fibers in the muscle (from [10]).
2) Muscle Contraction Dynamics: The muscle model is a
three-element Hill-type model (see Fig. 2). The contractile element (CE) represents the muscle fibers, the parallel elastic element (PEE) represents the passive properties of muscle fibers
and surrounding tissue, and the series elastic element (SEE)
represents the tendon and any elastic tissue in the muscle itself
that is arranged in series with the muscle fibers.
The state equation for muscle contraction represents the force
balance between the elements of the muscle model:
(Factive + fPEE (LCE )) cosφ = fSEE (LM − LCE cosφ) (2)
where LCE is the CE length, LM is the muscle length, φ is
the pennation angle, and Factive , fPEE , and fSEE are the forces
in CE, PEE, and SEE, respectively. The equations describing
these forces are included in Appendix A. To avoid singularities
relating to pennation, the state variable used for the muscle
contraction differential equation is s = LCE cosφ [4].
3) Muscle–Skeleton Coupling: Moment arms were exported
from Opensim for a large number of combinations of joint angles. These data were used to generate polynomial regression
models for muscle length as a function of joint angles:
LM (q) =

N

i=1

ci

M


e

qj i j

(3)

j =1

where N is the number of polynomial terms, and q1 ,
q2 , . . . qM are the angles of the joints crossed by the muscle. The
moment arm with respect to joint angle k (where 1 ≤ k ≤ M )
is obtained by partial differentiation with respect to the kth joint
angle (i.e., the ratio between muscle–tendon shortening velocity
and joint angular velocity). This definition is consistent with the
use of generalized forces and virtual work in Kane’s equations
that were used for simulation of the system [11].
The polynomial coefficients c were found by minimizing
the error in moment arms and the error in muscle length of
the polynomial model, relative to the Opensim results. To make
sure that all moment arms are accurately represented by the
polynomial model, all terms were normalized to the largest moment arm for each muscle.

CHADWICK et al.: REAL-TIME SIMULATION OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL SHOULDER GIRDLE AND ARM DYNAMICS

4) Passive Joint Torques: Passive joint torques M are modeled as a sum of damping and stiffness terms:
⎧
−bq̇ − k1 (q − qm id ) + k2 (q − qm in )2 , if q < qm in
⎪
⎨
M = −bq̇ − k1 (q − qm id ), if qm in ≤ q ≤ qm ax
⎪
⎩
−bq̇ − k1 (q − qm id ) − k2 (q − qm ax )2 , if q > qm ax
(4)
where b is a small damping coefficient (1 Nms/rad), k1 is the
stiffness within the joint limits that tends to push the joints
towards the middle of the range of motion (where q = qm id )
and is also small (5 Nm/rad), and k2 is the stiffness that only
occurs outside the range of motion and is large enough to prevent
the joints from going too far out of the limits (5000 Nm/rad2 ).
5) Conoid Ligament: The conoid ligament restricts the axial
rotation of the clavicle. It is modeled as a nonlinear spring:


k

(5)
d + d2 + 2
F =−
2
where d is the displacement from the conoid slack length, k is
the stiffness, and  is a small parameter that eliminates negative
displacements (i.e., allows the ligament to pull but not push).
The conoid slack length is 17.4 mm and the other parameters,
stiffness (80 N/mm) and  (1 mm), were chosen so that the
force–displacement curve best matches the experimental curve
from [12].
6) Scapula–Thorax Contact: Scapulo–thoracic contact was
modeled as deformable, rather than a hard constraint as is typically used in inverse-dynamic models. Stiffness is high when
the scapula goes inside the thorax (modeled as an ellipsoid),
and zero (or low) when it is outside the thorax. This allows a
“winging” scapula to be simulated by the model. The equation
for the scapula–thorax contact force and its derivation are shown
in Appendix B.
7) Equations of Motion: The multibody model has 22 state
variables: the 11 angles q and 11 angular velocities q̇. The equations of motion are
M (q).q̈ + B(q, q̇) + C(q).τ = 0.

(6)

The first term represents inertial effects, with M being an
11 × 11 mass matrix. The second term includes effects of
centrifugal and coriolis forces, gravity, ligaments, and contact
forces. The last term is the effect of joint moments τ via an
11 × 11 coefficient matrix C. τ is the summation of the passive
joint moments (4), muscle moments, conoid ligament moment,
and scapula–thorax contact moment. The muscle moments are
calculated by multiplying the muscle moment arms, which are
the derivatives of (3), by the simulated muscle forces. The conoid
ligament force and scapula–thorax contact force are calculated
in Autolev (see Section II-B9 on “Implementation”), which also
computes the moment arms using partial velocities.
8) System Dynamics: If the equations of motion are combined with the muscle dynamics, the model can be described
with an implicit first-order differential equation:
f (x, ẋ, u) = 0.

(7)

The state vector x contains 298 variables: 11 angles q, 11 angular velocities q̇, 138 muscle contraction state variables s, and

1949

138 muscle active states a. The function f has 298 equations,
and consists of four parts:
d
(x(1 : 11)) = xdot(1 : 11);
1) 11 identities dt
2) 11 multibody equations of motion (6);
3) 138 muscle activation dynamics equations (1);
4) 138 muscle contraction dynamics equations (2).
9) Implementation: Equations of motion for the model were
derived using Autolev (Online Dynamics Inc., Sunnyvale, CA).
Muscle dynamics were implemented using custom C code. The
dynamic residuals f and the Jacobians are calculated in a MATLAB MEX function.
C. Forward Dynamic Simulation
Forward dynamic simulation of a musculoskeletal system
model involves solving the state trajectory x(t), given an initial
state x(0) and controls u as functions of time and/or state. Due
to the implicit formulation of the system equation f , and the
fact that all functions used (e.g., the conoid ligament force,
the muscle contractile force, etc.) are continually differentiable,
we can calculate exact analytical Jacobians ∂∂ fx , ∂∂ fẋ and ∂∂ uf . This
allows efficient simulation with an L-stable implicit Rosenbrock
method based on the backwards Euler discretization:

−1
∂f
1 ∂f
+
Δx =
∂x h ∂ ẋ


∂f
∂f
ẋn − f (xn , ẋn , un ) −
(un +1 − un )
∂ ẋ
∂u
xn +1 = xn + Δx
Δx
.
(8)
h
For the derivation of the aforementioned equation, see the
appendix in [4].
The accuracy of the implicit method has been demonstrated
in [4], where the same simulation was performed using two
solvers: the implicit Rosenbrock method, and a second-order
explicit Runge–Kutta method. For that simulation, the timestep
used by the implicit method was 3 ms, resulting in a faster-thanrealtime speed, while the average timestep used by the explicit
method was 2 μs. In spite of using a timestep 1500 times larger
than the Runge–Kutta method, the implicit method showed an
RMS error in the resulting joint angles of just 0.11◦ .
In the same study, to investigate the effect of the timestep on
the accuracy of the implicit solver, the simulation was run with
various timesteps ranging from 0.05 to 6 ms, when the method
became unstable. It was shown that the RMS error between
the implicit method and the Runge–Kutta increased with larger
timesteps, but remained below 0.2◦ (see Fig. 5(b) in [4]).
ẋn +1 =

D. GH Joint Stability
A polynomial modeling procedure was also used to approximate the lines of action of the muscles crossing the GH joint,
in order to estimate the resultant joint force, and subsequently
assess GH stability. One polynomial model, similar to (3), was
needed for each orthogonal component (x, y, and z) of the muscle line of action, as described in [5]. The contribution of the

1950

muscles to the GH joint force is then found using the amplitude
of the muscle forces and the polynomial approximation of the
lines of action. This is added to the force due to the weight and
acceleration of the arm segments to calculate the resultant GH
joint reaction force. The direction of this vector can be used to
assess GH stability: if it points inside the glenoid cavity, the
joint is stable; if not, the force vector tends to dislocate the
joint [5], [13].
The stability value is defined as
 2  2
θ
φ
+
−1
(9)
GHstab =
θa
φa
where θ and φ are the angles of the vector away from the normal
to the glenoid along the major and minor axes of the ellipse
representing the glenoid fossa, and θa and φa are the angles of
that vector at the rim of the glenoid. GHstab is −1 at the center
of the glenoid fossa, and approaches 0 as the vector approaches
the edge of the fossa.
During simulation, this stability value could be used to simply monitor the effect of the applied muscle excitations on the
GH joint, or used by a real-time controller to modify the muscle
excitations to ensure GH stability. The direction as well as the
magnitude of any potential instability can be monitored by generating a polar plot of the reaction force in an ellipse representing
the glenoid, using the angles θ and φ.
E. Example Real-Time Simulation
To demonstrate the speed of the model and its ability to produce a standard movement, a simulation was run generating
forward flexion of the arm. Since this model at its current state
can only run forward-dynamic simulations, the muscle excitation patterns for the arm flexion movement were based on an
inverse-dynamic simulation performed using the Delft Shoulder
and Elbow model (described in [13], [14]). The input motion
used to generate the neural excitation set was averaged from
measured motions taken from approximately 20 subjects. Neural inputs were estimated every 50 ms throughout the movement.
During the forward-dynamic simulation, the joint angles, velocities, and muscle states were recorded. In addition, GH force
was recorded to monitor GH stability, and scapular contact
forces were recorded to monitor scapular stability. To achieve
real-time speed with these computations, a 4-ms timestep was
used, slightly higher than the 3 ms used in [4], but with minimal
impact on accuracy, as discussed in Section II-C.
F. Model Evaluation Using Maximum Isometric Moments
The implicit formulation has been shown to be as accurate
as commonly used explicit methods, but the accuracy of the
model itself also needs to be assessed against experimental data.
To do this, maximum isometric joint moments estimated using the model were compared with experimental data reported
in the literature [15]–[20]. This provides a robust assessment of
the mechanical behavior of the model, reducing the sensitivity
of the output to computational factors such as the exact choice
of cost function. This is also the method that has been used by

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

other authors for the evaluation of upper limb models (e.g., [21])
as data for comparison can be found in the literature.
Measured arm joint moments usually include three
thoraco-humeral moments (shoulder flexion/extension, abduction/adduction, and internal/external rotation), elbow flexion/extension, and forearm pronation/supination. Experimental
data do not typically include measurements of clavicular and
scapular angles, so the model itself needs to find the optimal
shoulder angles that result in maximum arm moments. Moreover, to find a maximum joint moment, it is not sufficient to
simply fully activate all muscles that contribute to this moment,
since GH stability and scapular positioning need to be taken
into account: the muscle forces around the GH joint need to
keep the joint stable and avoid dislocation, and muscle forces
acting on the scapula need to keep it pressed against the thorax,
to avoid winging. We therefore need to perform an optimization
procedure to obtain the maximum isometric joint moments.
With the addition of external moments, the system dynamics
(7) becomes
f (x, ẋ, u, M ) = 0

(10)

where M is the vector of the five externally applied moments.
Additionally, note that ẋ = 0 because static equilibrium is required, and u does not matter because activation dynamics can
be ignored in the steady state. The system dynamics can then be
written as
f ∗ (x, 0, 0, M ) = 0

(11)

with f ∗ being only the elements of f without activation
dynamics.
The optimization problem is then to find the state vector x and
five external moments M such that (11) is satisfied and M (i) is
maximized, where i is the degree of freedom whose moment is
to be maximized. This is done for each posture (three thoracohumeral angles, two elbow angles) for which the maximum
isometric joint moments are sought.
Additional constraints to the optimization are given by the
need to constrain the reaction force vector to lie within the
glenoid ellipse (GHstab ) ≤ 0), and by requiring the scapular
points Trigonum Spinae and Angulus Inferior to lie on the surface of the thorax ellipsoid to prevent scapular winging, similar
to [13]. Finally, the muscle active states must lie between 0 and 1.
This procedure was implemented in MATLAB using the function FMINCON, a gradient-based method that seeks the minimum of a constrained, nonlinear, multivariable function.
III. RESULTS
A. Example Real-Time Simulation
The model was tested on an Intel i5 processor running at
2.67 GHz. The simulated movement was 1.3 s long, and using
a 4-ms time-step, the simulation was completed in 1.2 s, which
is faster than real time. Fig. 3 shows the arm angles produced
during the forward dynamic simulation. The muscle excitation
patterns used as inputs were taken from a forward flexion movement, and as it can be seen from the output plane of elevation,

CHADWICK et al.: REAL-TIME SIMULATION OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL SHOULDER GIRDLE AND ARM DYNAMICS

Fig. 3. Results of a forward dynamic simulation. The 1.3-s long forward
flexion movement was simulated in 1.2 s. Shown are the angles between thorax
and clavicle (panel A), clavicle and scapula (panel B), and thorax and humerus
(panel C). The inset in panel C shows the direction of the GH joint reaction
force with respect to the glenoid fossa represented by an ellipse. During the
simulation, the GH force direction moves from “Start” to “Finish”.

which is about 50◦ , the simulated movement is indeed forward
flexion. The arm elevation goes from about 10 to 80◦ .
The inset in panel C shows the polar plot of the GH joint
reaction force in an ellipse representing the glenoid, as described
in Section II-D. During the simulation, the GH force moves from
a superior position in the glenoid (labeled “Start”) towards the
center (labeled “Finish”). Throughout the movement, the GH
force vector remains within the glenoid cavity, which means
that the GH joint is stable.

B. Model Evaluation Using Maximum Isometric Moments
Figs. 4, 5, and 6 show the maximum isometric moments
(Panel A) generated by the model, and equivalent values from
the literature, for shoulder flexion and extension, abduction and
adduction, and internal and external rotation respectively. In
each case, the maximum isometric moment is shown for each
elevation angle from 10 to 80◦ . The model-predicted moments
are plotted alongside values obtained from the literature, where
these were available. Where variability in the data from the
literature was given in the reported study, these values are also
shown. Panels B and C of these same figures show the scapular
and clavicular angles adopted by the model during the exertion
of maximum moments in each arm position.

1951

Fig. 4. Panel A shows the maximum isometric shoulder flexion moments (red
lines) and extension moments (black lines). The model estimates (thick solid
lines) are compared to experimental data from Winters and Kleweno [18] (thin
solid lines), Garner and Pandy [15] (dashed lines), and Otis et al. [16] (dotted
lines). In all cases, elevation is in the sagittal plane, with the arm externally
rotated, the elbow is at sixty degrees of flexion, and the forearm is at neutral
pronation/supination. Panels B and C show the clavicular and scapular angles
assumed by the model for each maximum moment trial, red for shoulder flexion
and black for shoulder extension.

Figs. 7 and 8 show maximum isometric moments for elbow
flexion/extension and forearm pronation/supination against the
relevant angle. Similarly, Panel A shows the moments, and Panels B and C show the scapular and clavicular angles.
IV. DISCUSSION
The forward-dynamic simulation results demonstrate that our
model runs comfortably in real time on normal desktop hardware, and produces the movement expected from the given neural inputs, i.e., forward flexion of the arm. The maximum isometric moment simulations show that the model reliably simulates
the moment-generating behavior of a real human arm under a
range of conditions.
The method of evaluation performed in the current study is
similar to that reported by [21], but with an important difference in the model: our model contains a fully described shoulder girdle. That is, the scapula and clavicle are independently
controlled by muscle forces, rather than being kinematicallycontrolled either by measured motions or by regression equations describing the scapulo–humeral rhythm.
The combination of real-time performance and the ability to
control the shoulder girdle by simulated muscle forces allows
the model to be used in “user-in-the-loop” type experiments,

1952

Fig. 5. Panel A shows the maximum isometric shoulder abduction moments
(red lines) and adduction moments (black lines). The model estimates (thick
solid lines) are compared to experimental data from Garner and Pandy [15]
(dashed lines), and Otis et al. [16] (dotted lines). In all cases, arm elevation is in
the scapular plane, the elbow is at sixty degrees of flexion, and the forearm is at
neutral pronation/supination. Panels B and C show the clavicular and scapular
angles assumed by the model for each maximum moment trial, red for shoulder
abduction, and black for shoulder adduction.

where the virtual arm is under the control of a potential neuroprosthesis user. This enables the development and testing of
neuroprosthetic devices that control whole arm movement including the positioning of the scapula and clavicle.
For the majority of the simulations, there is general agreement
between the model-predicted maximum isometric moments and
those reported in the literature, both in the shape of the torqueangle curves, and in the magnitudes of the maximum moments
reported. The conditions for which agreement is less good are
discussed further below.
For elevation of the arm, shoulder flexion and scapular abduction moments agreed well with the experimental data throughout
the range of motion. For extension moments, however, the model
values were lower than the literature, while for adduction, they
were higher. In addition, the model predicted increasing strength
up to 90◦ of abduction, while the experimental data show a slight
decrease at higher elevation angles (above 70◦ ). The same behavior was shown by the model of [21], and can be explained by
the increasing moment arms of the shoulder adductors through
this range. The lack of agreement with the experimental data
may be caused by differences in the expression of the forcelength curve or by overestimated passive forces in the model.
For shoulder internal rotation moments, the model data show
the same shape as the experimental data with the maximum

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 6. Panel A shows the maximum isometric shoulder internal rotation
moments (red lines) and external rotation moments (black lines). The model
estimates (thick solid lines) are compared to experimental data from Garner
and Pandy [15] (dashed lines), Otis et al. [16] (dotted lines) and Engin and
Kaleps [17] (thin solid lines). In all cases, the shoulder is at sixty degrees of
abduction in the scapular plane, the elbow is at sixty degrees of flexion, and the
forearm is at neutral pronation/supination. Panels B and C show the clavicular
and scapular angles assumed by the model for each maximum moment trial, red
for internal rotation, and black for external rotation.

torques decreasing slightly at both ends of the range of motion.
In addition, the values agree very well with those of Otis [16]
and Engin [17], but are significantly lower than those found by
Garner [15]. It should be noted that the model data we use here
are taken from a single cadaver source and not scaled in any
way, so we might expect significant deviation from values taken
from other small populations. In external rotation efforts, the
model exhibits good agreement with the torques found in the
literature.
Elbow flexion torques fall within the range of measured values, and show the correct shape, having a maximum value in the
middle of the range of motion and decreasing at the extremes.
Elbow extension is similar, but this time, the model overestimates measured torques somewhat. Pronation and supination
torques agree well with measured values throughout the range
of motion.
A further check on the integrity of the model is provided by the
analysis of the scapular and clavicular positions reached by the
model during the exertion of maximum moments. These angles
were not specified as inputs, but were optimized along with the
neural excitations required to produce the maximum moments.
Since we are attempting to simulate normal kinematics, the
scapula was constrained to lie on the surface of the thorax to

CHADWICK et al.: REAL-TIME SIMULATION OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL SHOULDER GIRDLE AND ARM DYNAMICS

Fig. 7. Panel A shows the maximum isometric elbow flexion moments
(red lines) and extension moments (black lines). The model estimates (thick
solid lines) are compared to experimental data from Buchanan et al. [20] (thin
solid lines), and Amis et al. [19] (dotted lines). In all cases, the shoulder is at
ninety degrees of abduction in the coronal plane, and the forearm is at a neutral
pronation/supination angle. Panels B and C show the clavicular and scapular
angles assumed by the model for each maximum moment trial, red for elbow
flexion, and black for elbow extension.

prevent scapular winging, and the GH joint reaction force was
constrained to be inside the glenoid to maintain the stability of
the GH joint.
No data on shoulder girdle kinematics were reported by the
studies we used to compare maximum moments of the model
with measured data, so the resulting model kinematics have been
assessed by comparison with studies that have reported shoulder girdle kinematics for comparable arm positions [22], [23].
The difficulty of accurately measuring scapular and clavicular
kinematics during maximal effort tasks may explain the lack of
data in this area.
In general, shoulder girdle kinematics adopted by the model
were within the expected ranges, did not reach the limits of
motion, and followed normal patterns with arm elevation. However, there were a number of differences during elevation of the
humerus in both the sagittal and scapular planes:
1) Clavicle retraction was fairly constant at approximately
40◦ during arm elevation in forward flexion and, after an
initial increase remained approximately constant at 50◦ in
scapular plane abduction. Previous work by de Groot [23]
has shown that it increases from 25◦ to 40◦ with increasing
elevation angle on average.

1953

Fig. 8. Panel A shows the maximum isometric forearm pronation moments
(red lines) and supination moments (black lines). The model estimates (thick
solid lines) are compared to experimental data from Winters and Kleweno [18]
(thin solid lines), and Garner and Pandy [15] (dashed lines). In all cases, the
shoulder is at the side of the torso, and the elbow is at a ninety degrees of flexion.
Panels B and C show the clavicular and scapular angles assumed by the model
for each maximum moment trial, red for pronation, and black for supination.

2) Axial rotation of the clavicle in scapular plane abduction
would normally be expected to increase from approximately 0◦ to 50◦ at 90◦ humeral elevation, but appears
to be suppressed in the case of the maximal abduction
moment.
3) Scapular lateral rotation appears to be lower than normal
by about 20◦ during a maximal abduction moment, but
normal during an adduction moment.
For shoulder axial rotation, there are large differences in
scapular and clavicular orientation between the maximal internal and external moment conditions, although the normal
(unloaded) range of values according to [23] lies between the
two.
For elbow flexion and extension, the humerus was in a fixed
position with respect to the thorax, with the arm elevated at 90◦ .
Nonetheless, considerable differences were seen in shoulder girdle angles for the different loading conditions. In particular, axial
rotation of the clavicle is low at low elbow flexion angles during
a flexion effort, and protraction of the scapula changes significantly with flexion angle during the same effort. For pronation
and supination moments, scapular protraction angle is lower
than expected.
In general, scapular protraction and lateral rotation tend to
be low, and axial rotation of the clavicle is also suppressed in

1954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

some cases. The scapulo–thoracic constraint during the maximum moment simulations requires that the medial border of
the scapula stays a fixed distance away from the thorax, which
might not be true for all shoulder positions (for example, during
forward flexion). The rigidity of this constraint may therefore
be a significant factor affecting the model-predicted shoulder
kinematics and may restrict the scapula and clavicle from taking up more normal positions. This constraint could be made
more flexible, as proposed recently by Bolsterlee et al. [24].
V. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated a comprehensive musculoskeletal
model of the shoulder and arm, including the additional degrees
of freedom introduced by the scapula and clavicle, that can run
forward-dynamic simulations in real time. This was achieved
using an implicit formulation of system dynamics and an implicit solver, allowing the use of a much larger step-size than in
previous work. With this method, we achieved speeds 1.1 times
faster than real time, using an ordinary personal computer and no
specialized hardware. We have shown that the model can replicate the behavior of a real human arm in terms of torque-angle
curves over all degrees of freedom, and that the independentlycontrolled scapula and clavicle adopt realistic postures during
maximal effort tasks.
Integrated with a 3-D visualization environment, this model
will provide an invaluable tool for applications that require realtime simulation of arm movements including realistic muscle
and limb dynamics. The methods presented here can be applied
equally well to other musculoskeletal models, and to offline simulations where simulation speed has always been a bottleneck.
APPENDIX A
THE MUSCLE MODEL
The active force in the CE is
Factive = α.Fm ax .fFL (LCE ).fFV (L̇CE )

(12)

where:
a is the active state
Fm ax is the maximum isometric force, estimated for each
muscle using the physiological cross-sectional area measured
in the cadaver studies in [6], multiplied by a specific tension of
100 N/cm2 . This value is higher than that typically found in in
vivo studies, but is within the range reported in the literature for
cadaver studies [25], and used in other modeling studies [21].
fFL (LCE ) is the isometric force-length relationship of the
CE, approximated by a Gaussian curve:


2
−

fFL (LCE ) = e

L C E −L C E opt
W .L CEopt

.

(13)

LCE is CE length, LCEopt is the CE optimal length (values from
the cadaver studies of Klein-Breteler [6]), and W is the width
parameter of the force-length curve, set to 0.56.
The values of the pennation angle at optimal fiber length are
taken from the same cadaver study, and based on those values,
the pennation angle at any fiber length can be calculated using

the constant volume assumption [26]:
LCE sin(φ) = constant = LCEopt sin(φopt )

(14)

where φ is the pennation angle and φopt is the pennation angle
at optimal length.
fFV (L̇CE ) is the force–velocity relationship of the CE, approximated using two hyperbolic equations (from [27]):
⎧V
m ax + VCE
⎪
,
if VCE ≤ 0
⎪
VC E
⎨V
m ax − A
fFV (VCE ) =
(15)
⎪
⎪
⎩ gm ax .VCE + c3 , if VCE > 0.
VCE + c3
VCE is the CE velocity. The Hill curve parameter A is assumed
to have a value of 0.25 [28], and the maximal shortening velocity
at full activation Vm ax is assumed to have a value of 10.LCEopt
per second [28]. The parameter gm ax , the maximal normalized
eccentric muscle force, was assumed to be 1.5 [27]. The constant
c3 is set to a value that produces a continuous first derivative at
VCE = 0:
c3 =

Vm ax A(gm ax − 1)
.
A+1

(16)

The passive elastic elements (PEE and SEE) are modeled as
nonlinear springs:

k1 (L − Lslack ),
if L ≤ Lslack
F (L) =
2
k1 (L − Lslack ) + k2 (L − Lslack ) , if L > Lslack .
The k1 term is small (10 N/m) but is needed to ensure that
stiffness is never zero, which could cause singularity in the
Jacobian of the implicit system dynamics at zero activation.
The stiffness parameter k2 for SEE is chosen for each muscle
such that when the SEE elongation is 4%, the SEE force equals
the maximum isometric force. The k2 parameter for PEE is
chosen such that when the CE is stretched to its maximal length
for active force production (=W.LCEopt ), the PEE force equals
the maximum isometric force (from [27]). Lslack for the SEE
is approximated by the tendon slack length measured in the
cadaver studies, while Lslack for the PEE is set to equal LCEopt ,
except for a few muscle elements for which this resulted in very
high passive forces. Those values are shown in Table V in [5].
APPENDIX B
MODELING THE SCAPULA–THORAX CONTACT
The scapula-thorax contact is modeled using two points on
the scapula: TS (trigonum spinae) and AI (angulus inferior), and
an ellipsoid representing the thorax, with center (mx , my , mz )
and axes αx , αy , αz (from [13]):

2 
2
x − mx
y − my
F (x, y, z) =
+
αx
αy

2
z − mz
+
− 1 = 0.
(17)
αz
We model the contact force as being the result of an elastic potential energy that is zero on the surface and increases quadratically

CHADWICK et al.: REAL-TIME SIMULATION OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL SHOULDER GIRDLE AND ARM DYNAMICS

when moving away from the surface:

1 
V (x, y, z) = k a2x + a2y + a2z F 2 (x, y, z).
(18)
4
Parameter k is used to calculate the contact stiffness and is
set to 20 kN/m. The stiffness of the contact is not the same
everywhere on the contact surface, but the exact value is not
important for our application, as long as it is large enough to
prevent penetration into the surface. To represent the contact
with a constant stiffness, the force would need to be a function
of distance from the surface. This is not easily calculated, and
also has singularities which we need to avoid for our numerical
methods to work. The a2 factor is introduced to give V the
dimension of energy.
The contact force is the negative gradient of the potential
energy:
Fx = −k(x − mx )

αx2 + αy2 + αz2
.F (x, y, z)
αx2

(19)

Fy = −k(y − my )

αx2 + αy2 + αz2
.F (x, y, z)
αy2

(20)

Fz = −k(z − mz )

αx2 + αy2 + αz2
.F (x, y, z).
αz2

(21)

We modify these equations to make the force go to zero when
the point x, y, z is outside the surface, where F > 0:
Fx = −k(x − mx )

αx2 + αy2 + αz2 −
.F (x, y, z)
αx2

(22)

Fy = −k(y − my )

αx2 + αy2 + αz2 −
.F (x, y, z)
αy2

(23)

Fz = −k(z − mz )

αx2 + αy2 + αz2 −
.F (x, y, z)
αz2

(24)

where F − is a continuous function that attenuates positive values
but leaves negative values unchanged:


1

(25)
F − F 2 + 2 .
F − (x, y, z) =
2
The parameter  (set to 0.01) determines the transition region
between linear stiffness (inside) and zero stiffness (outside).
REFERENCES
[1] J. L. Collinger, B. Wodlinger, J. E. Downey, W. Wang, E. C. TylerKabara, D. J. Weber, A. J. McMorland, M. Velliste, M. L. Boninger, and
A. B. Schwartz, “High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia,” Lancet, vol. 6736, no. 12, pp. 1–8, Dec. 2012.
[2] L. R. Hochberg, D. Bacher, B. Jarosiewicz, N. Y. Masse, J. D. Simeral,
J. Vogel, S. Haddadin, J. Liu, S. S. Cash, P. van der Smagt, and
J. P. Donoghue, “Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a
neurally controlled robotic arm,” Nature, vol. 485, no. 7398, pp. 372–375,
May 2012.
[3] E. K. Chadwick and D. Blana, “Continuous neuronal ensemble control
of simulated arm reaching by a human with tetraplegia,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 8, no. 3, p. 034003, 2011.
[4] A. J. van den Bogert, D. Blana, and D. Heinrich, “Implicit methods
for efficient musculoskeletal simulation and optimal control,” Procedia
IUTAM, vol. 2, pp. 297–316, 2011.
[5] E. Chadwick, D. Blana, A. van den Bogert, and R. Kirsch, “A Real-Time,
3D musculoskeletal model for dynamic simulation of arm movements,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 941–948, Apr. 2009.

1955

[6] M. D. Klein-Breteler, C. W. Spoor, and F. C. Van der Helm, “Measuring muscle and joint geometry parameters of a shoulder for modeling purposes.,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1191–1197, Nov.
1999.
[7] S. L. Delp, F. C. Anderson, A. S. Arnold, P. Loan, A. Habib, C. T. John,
E. Guendelman, and D. G. Thelen, “OpenSim: open-source software to
create and analyze dynamic simulations of movement,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 1940–1950, Nov. 2007.
[8] D. Blana, J. G. Hincapie, E. K. Chadwick, and R. F. Kirsch, “A musculoskeletal model of the upper extremity for use in the development of
neuroprosthetic systems,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1714–1721,
Jan. 2008.
[9] J. He, W. Levine, and G. Loeb, “Feedback gains for correcting small
perturbations to standing posture,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 36,
no. 3, pp. 322–332, Mar. 1991.
[10] J. M. Winters and L. Stark, “Analysis of fundamental human movement
patterns through the use of in-depth antagonistic muscle models,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 826–839, Oct. 1985.
[11] K. N. An, K. Takahashi, T. P. Harrigan, and E. Y. Chao, “Determination of
muscle orientations and moment arms,” J. Biomechanical Eng., vol. 106,
no. 3, pp. 280–282, Aug. 1984.
[12] R. I. Harris, A. L. Wallace, G. D. Harper, J. A. Goldberg,
D. H. Sonnabend, and W. R. Walsh, “Structural properties of the
intact and the reconstructed coracoclavicular ligament complex,” Am. J.
Sports Med., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 103–108, 2000.
[13] F. C. T. van Der Helm, “A finite element musculoskeletal model of the
shoulder mechanism,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 551–569,
1994.
[14] A. A. Nikooyan, H. E. J. Veeger, E. K. J. Chadwick, M. Praagman, and
F. C. T. V. D. Helm, “Development of a comprehensive musculoskeletal
model of the shoulder and elbow,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 49,
no. 12, pp. 1425–1435, Dec. 2011.
[15] B. A. Garner and M. G. Pandy, “Musculoskeletal model of the upper limb
based on the visible human male dataset,” Comput. Methods Biomechanics
Biomed. Eng., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 93–126, Feb. 2001.
[16] J. C. Otis, R. F. Warren, S. I. Backus, T. J. Santner, and J. D. Mabrey,
“Torque production in the shoulder of the normal young adult male. The
interaction of function, dominance, joint angle, and angular velocity,” Am,
J. Sports Med., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 119–123, 1990.
[17] A. E. Engin and I. Kaleps, “Active muscle torques about long-bone axes
of major human joints,” Aviation, Space, Environ. Med., vol. 51, no. 6,
pp. 551–555, Jun. 1980.
[18] J. M. Winters and D. G. Kleweno, “Effect of initial upper-limb alignment
on muscle contributions to isometric strength curves,” J. Biomechanics,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 143–153, Feb. 1993.
[19] A. A. Amis, D. Dowson, and V. Wright, “Analysis of elbow forces due
to high-speed forearm movements,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 13, no. 10,
pp. 825–831, Jan. 1980.
[20] T. S. Buchanan, S. L. Delp, and J. A. Solbeck, “Muscular resistance to
varus and valgus loads at the elbow,” J. Biomechanical Eng., vol. 120,
no. 5, pp. 634–639, Oct. 1998.
[21] K. R. S. Holzbaur, W. M. Murray, and S. L. Delp, “A model of the upper extremity for simulating musculoskeletal surgery and analyzing neuromuscular control,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 829–840,
Jun. 2005.
[22] P. M. Ludewig, V. Phadke, J. P. Braman, D. R. Hassett, C. J. Cieminski,
and R. F. LaPrade, “Motion of the shoulder complex during multiplanar
humeral elevation,” J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. volume, vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 378–
389, Feb. 2009.
[23] J. H. De Groot, “The variability of shoulder motions recorded by means
of palpation,” Clin. Biomechanics, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 461–472, 1997.
[24] B. Bolsterlee, H. E. J. Veeger, and F. C. T. van der Helm, “Modelling
clavicular and scapular kinematics: From measurement to simulation,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 283–291, Mar. 2013.
[25] T. S. Buchanan, “Evidence that maximum muscle stress is not a constant:
differences in specific tension in elbow flexors and extensors,” Med. Eng.
Phys., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 529–536, Oct. 1995.
[26] E. Otten, “Concepts and models of functional architecture in skeletal
muscle,” Exercise Sport Sci. Rev., vol. 16, pp. 89–137, Jan. 1988.
[27] S. G. McLean, A. Su, and A. J. van den Bogert, “Development and
validation of a 3-D model to predict knee joint loading during dynamic movement,” J. Biomechanical Eng., vol. 125, no. 6, p. 864,
2003.
[28] W. Herzog, “Muscle,” in Biomechanics of the Musculo-Skeletal System,
2nd ed., B. M. Nigg and W. Herzog, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
Aug. 1999, Vol. 195, no. 2, pp. 148–188.

1956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Edward Chadwick received the B.Eng. degree in
mechanical engineering from The University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, U.K., in 1993, and the
Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the University
of Strathclyde, Strathclyde, U.K., in 1999.
After receiving the Ph.D. degree, he went on to
complete postdoctoral positions in the area of shoulder biomechanics at the Technical University of Delft,
Delft, the Netherlands, and the Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA. He is currently a
Lecturer in the Institute for Science and Technology
in Medicine, Keele University, Staffordshire, U.K. His research interests include
biomechanical modeling of the upper limb and the application of modeling and
simulation to rehabilitation in people with neuromuscular deficit.

Robert Kirsch (M’82) received the B.S. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, in 1982, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering
from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA,
in 1986 and 1990, respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, McGill University,
Montréal, QC, Canada, from 1990 to 1993. He is currently a Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, and Executive Director of the Cleveland VA FES Center. His research interests include
restoring movement to disabled individuals using functional electrical stimulation (FES) and controlling FES actions via natural neural commands.

Dimitra Blana received the B.S. degree in electrical
and computer engineering from the National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece, in 2001.
She then received the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering and the Ph.D. degree from the Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA, in 2003
and 2008, respectively.
She is currently working as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele University, Staffordshire,
U.K. Her research interests include biomechanical
modeling and controller design for upper extremity neuroprostheses.

Antonie (Ton) van den Bogert received the B.S. degree and M.S. degree in 1983, both in physics and
applied mathematics at the University of Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands, and, in 1989, the Ph.D. degree in veterinary sciences from the same university
for computational modeling of locomotion in horses.
After Postdoctoral work in sports biomechanics at
the University of Calgary, he became a Faculty Member in Kinesiology in 1993. He moved to Cleveland,
OH, USA, in 1998, to take up positions in the Lerner
Research Institute of the Cleveland Clinic, and the
Case Western Reserve University. He is currently a Professor of human motion
and control at the Cleveland State University. His current research interest is
in human biomechanics and motor control, with applications in the prevention
and rehabilitation of musculoskeletal injuries and the development of assistive
technology for persons with disabilities. He is a Founding Member of the Technical Group Computer Simulation (TGCS) and the President of the International
Society of Biomechanics from 2011 to 2013.

