1902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Patient-Specific Coronary Stenoses Can Be Modeled
Using a Combination of OCT and Flow Velocities to
Accurately Predict Hyperemic Pressure Gradients
C. A. Kousera∗ , S. Nijjer, R. Torii, R. Petraco, S. Sen, N. Foin, A. D. Hughes, D. P. P. Francis,
X. Y. Xu, and J. E. Davies

Abstract—Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is increasingly
being developed for the diagnostics of arterial diseases. Imaging
methods such as computed tomography (CT) and angiography
are commonly used. However, these have limited spatial resolution and are subject to movement artifact. This study developed
a new approach to generate CFD models by combining highfidelity, patient-specific coronary anatomy models derived from
optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging with patient-specific
pressure and velocity phasic data. Additionally, we used a new
technique which does not require the catheter to be used to determine the centerline of the vessel. The CFD data were then
compared with invasively measured pressure and velocity. Angiography imaging data of 21 vessels collected from 19 patients
were fused with OCT visualizations of the same vessels using an
algorithm that produces reconstructions inheriting the in-plane
(10 μm) and longitudinal (0.2 mm) resolution of OCT. Proximal
pressure and distal velocity waveforms ensemble averaged from
invasively measured data were used as inlet and outlet boundary conditions, respectively, in CFD simulations. The resulting
distal pressure waveform was compared against the measured
waveform to test the model. The results followed the shape of
the measured waveforms closely (cross-correlation coefficient =
0.898 ± 0.005, p < 0.01), indicating realistic modeling of flow
resistance, the mean of differences between measured and simulated results was −3. 5 mmHg, standard deviation of differences
(SDD) = 8.2 mmHg over the cycle and −9.8 mmHg, SDD =
16.4 mmHg at peak flow. Models incorporating phasic velocity
in patient-specific models of coronary anatomy derived from high-

Manuscript received August 21, 2013; revised December 19, 2013, February
10, 2014, and February 27, 2014; accepted February 28, 2014. Date of
publication March 11, 2014; date of current version May 15, 2014. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ C. A. Kousera is with the International Centre for Circulatory
Health, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail:
chryssa.kousera09@imperial.ac.uk).
S. Nijjer, R. Petraco, S. Sen, D. P. P. Francis, and J. E. Davies are
with the International Centre for Circulatory Health, Imperial College
London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: s.nijjer@imperial.ac.uk;
r.petraco@imperial.ac.uk; sayan.sen@imperial.ac.uk; d.francis@imperial.
ac.uk; justin.davies@imperial.ac.uk).
N. Foin was with the International Centre for Circulatory Health, Imperial
College London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. He is now with the National Heart
Centre Singapore, Singapore (e-mail: nicolas.foin@nhcs.com.sg).
A. D Hughes was with the International Centre for Circulatory Health,
Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. He is now with the Institute
of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, U.K. (e-mail:
alun.hughes@ucl.ac.uk).
R. Torii is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University
College London, London, WC1E 6BT, U.K. (e-mail: r.torii@ucl.ac.uk).
X. Y. Xu is with the Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College
London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: yun.xu@imperial.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2310954

resolution OCT images show a good correlation with the measured pressure waveforms in all cases, indicating that the model
results may be an accurate representation of the measured flow
conditions.
Index Terms—Angiographic imaging, coronary arteries, finiteelement modeling, optical coherence tomography (OCT).

I. INTRODUCTION
OMPUTATIONAL fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling is
used to understand and predict complex blood flow in
large human arteries, such as the aorta, the renal, or the carotid
arteries [1]–[3]. While coupling CFD with imaging modalities
such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) have allowed modeling of patient-specific human anatomy [4], [5], they have at present limited utility in
modeling small vessels, such as the coronary arteries. Not only
are the imaging scans technically more challenging but the resolution available means that models can be anatomically less
accurate.
The use of angiographic images to create three-dimensional
(3-D) coronary reconstructions has been demonstrated to be accurate in calculating minimal luminal area and other anatomical
parameters [6], [7], and commercial software such as CAAS
QCA3D and CardioOp-B enable the evaluation of anatomical coronary stenosis severity in clinical practice. However,
these models assume circular or elliptical cross-sections, artificially smoothing the vessel lumen surface with unknown
impact upon flow models. More recently, angiographic reconstruction has been improved with the introduction of 3-D deformable models [8], [9], which result in higher fidelity reconstructions, though no CFD studies using this later model are yet
available.
In contrast, intravascular imaging techniques such as intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) provide highly detailed patient-specific
anatomical data that can be coupled to CFD [7]. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) provides a dramatically improved
resolution of 10 μm, allowing highly credible vessel reconstructions [10], [11].
In this manuscript, we present a fully patient-specific numerical (CFD) study of human coronary arteries, combining the
highly accurate reconstruction method of fusing OCT reconstructions with angiography with patient-specific pressure and
velocity waveforms.

C

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KOUSERA et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORONARY STENOSES CAN BE MODELED USING A COMBINATION OF OCT AND FLOW VELOCITIES

1903

TABLE I
DEMOGRAPHIC DATA FOR PATIENT GROUP (n = 19) AND
STENOSES DATA (n = 21)

Fig. 1. (a) Original OCT scan imported as a grayscale image into MATLAB
software. (b) Same image with dots indicating the points of maximum brightness
as found in the first stage of the algorithm. (c) The dots represent the same points
after deleting outliers and smoothing. The circle near the center is drawn around
the centroid of the points cluster and serves as the initial spline of the active
contour algorithm. (d) Segmentation of the lumen (bold line) is achieved using
an active contour algorithm.

II. METHODS
A. Patient Data
1) Patient Demographics: Nineteen patients (age 65.9 ±
10.8; 14 (73.7) male) with 21 stenoses (of which 13 are located at
the left anterior descending artery, 5 at the right coronary artery,
and 3 at the left circumflex artery) scheduled for invasive coronary angiography and pressure wire assessment were formally
enrolled into the study. This study was approved by the ethics
review board (Ethics approval number 09/H0712/102). Patients
with significant aortic stenosis and mitral regurgitation were
excluded to avoid confounding coronary flow velocity patterns.
Patients with significant renal impairment limiting angiographic
dye use were also excluded since OCT imaging was a prerequisite of the study. Table I provides the demographic data for the
patients.
2) Invasive Data Acquisition: Angiographic images were
acquired using a 6F guiding catheter via a 6 French sheath engaged into the left main stem for left coronary system stenoses
or the ostial right coronary artery. Fluoroscopic angiography
was performed using a Toshiba system (Infinix) and archived
into a McKesson Medcon system (McKesson, San Francisco,
CA, USA).
Simultaneous pressure and Doppler flow velocity measurements were made in the target vessel using a Combowire XT
(Volcano Corporation, San Diego, CA). Intracoronary glyceryl
trinitrate (300 mcg) was administered prior to wire insertion. The
Combowire pressure measurement was equalized with the aortic pressure at the coronary ostia. Simultaneous proximal aortic
pressure (Pa) and distal coronary pressure (Pd) and flow velocity data were acquired during resting and hyperemic conditions,

induced by intravenous adenosine infusion [140 mcg/(kg·min)]
given via the right femoral vein using a 6F sheath. Initial measurements were made at the ostium, prior to making further measurements proximal and distal to the coronary stenosis. Great
care was taken to ensure a high-density Doppler envelope was
recorded to ensure accurate tracking by the digitization system. At the end of each recording, the pressure sensor was
returned to the catheter tip to ensure there was no pressure drift.
Where drift was identified the measurements were repeated.
Electrocardiogram (ECG), pressures, and flow velocities were
archived to the device console (ComboMap, Volcano Corporation) for off-line analysis.
OCT was performed using the C7 Dragonfly intravascular
imaging catheter and Ilumien console (St Jude Medical, Minnesota). The 2.7F OCT imaging catheter was advanced over an
intracoronary angioplasty wire across the coronary stenosis and
image acquisition was performed after automated injection of
contrast media given at the rate of 4 milliliters for 4 s to permit
imaging of the vessel lumen at high resolution. Care was taken
to ensure stenosis and vessels were imaged with good quality.
Data were archived upon the Ilumien and exported as DICOM
and TIFF format for off-line analysis.
B. Imaging Methods
1) Angiography: Angiograms were obtained so that there
were at least two unobstructed views of the vessel segment
of interest with a sufficient angle between the views to allow
for a good-quality reconstruction. DICOM files were imported
into CAAS QCA3D (Pie Medical Imaging BV, Maastricht, The
Netherlands) and the centerline of the vessel was traced manually in both views. An anatomical feature evident on both views
was used as a fiducial point to aid the reconstruction (see Fig. 1).
The reconstructed vessel was stored in the STL file format [12].

1904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 2. (a) Outline of a right coronary artery lumen in an anterior oblique view tilted 27◦ to the right. (b) Outline of the same vessel lumen from an anterior
oblique view tilted 30◦ to the left. The mark indicates a common location in the two images, while the angle between them given the same cranial angle of zero is
57◦ . (c) The vessel reconstructed using CAAS QCA3D software based on the data from (a) and (b). (d) The surface points were imported into MATLAB and the
centerline was calculated and smoothed.

2) Optical Coherence Tomography: A total of 271 images
of the vessel segment were acquired for each OCT acquisition with a slice interval of 0.2 mm (i.e., 54.2 mm length). In
six cases, incomplete expulsion of blood by contrast led to a
swirling pattern reducing the quality of the images, resulting in
the necessity to exclude slices from the analysis, typically 50
slices (10 mm) at the end of the pullback run where the lumen
could not be reliably estimated. The smallest vessel segment
reconstructed was 29 mm long. In one case, two overlapping
OCT scans were performed in an attempt to image a longer
vessel segment where diffuse disease was present, and so the
longest vessel reconstruction in this dataset was 65 mm long.
Most of the stenoses studied were of intermediate severity
based on anatomical assessment; maximum cross-sectional area
obstruction ranged from 49% to 82%, with a mean of 68%. Further geometrical information about the reconstructed segments,
including anatomical stenosis features such as mean and minimum diameter are shown in Table I.
Reference points for the matching of the two methods were
provided by visual identification of the OCT catheter on the
coronary angiogram at its distal-most location in the vessel
(when the pullback begins). The location of branches and other
geometrical features, such as the catheter or the lesion itself
were also used to assist matching. Since the starting point and
the length of the pullback were clearly defined, it is easy to
locate the proximal end of the segment to be reconstructed.

C. 3-D Reconstruction Algorithm
The data collected were analyzed off-line using a custom software package designed in a MATLAB environment (MATLAB
R2012a, Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA). The reconstruction process is described later.
1) Segmenting the Lumen Contours from the OCT Slices:
The OCT scan slices (1024 × 1024 pixels, resolution
10 μm/pixel) were imported into MATLAB [see Fig. 1(a)]. The
guide wire and OCT catheter were masked automatically prior

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of the 3-D rotation of the lumen contours.
(a) Top: The contours originally lie on the XY plane, withẑ as plane normal.
Bottom: The vessel centerline provides the unit vector which becomes the
rotation axis. Applying the rotation matrix on the original contour coordinates,
the coordinates of the rotated geometry can be calculated. Finally, the oriented
contours are translated into position. (b) Example of a complete reconstruction.

to segmentation, to avoid errors in the algorithm. The algorithm
scans each prepared slice radially for the points of maximum
brightness, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Points lying outside 1.5 standard deviations either side of the mean distance from the cluster
centroid were removed and the remaining points were smoothed
using a moving average filter with a span of 11 points either side
[see Fig. 1(c)]. Thresholding was used to aid the algorithm. The
brightness threshold used was optimized for each slice such that
noise and other undesirable features (such as minor swirling)
were removed automatically. The lumen contours were then
traced using an active contour algorithm, a process (MATLAB
function Snake2D, copyright 2010, Dirk-Jan Kroon) utilizing a
deformable spline that outlines object contours using gradient

KOUSERA et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORONARY STENOSES CAN BE MODELED USING A COMBINATION OF OCT AND FLOW VELOCITIES

1905

Fig. 4. Comparison of (a) the angiography-based QCA3D reconstruction and (b) the angiography with OCT reconstruction methods applied to the same vessel
segment. In the QCA3D method, lumen contours are represented as ellipsoids giving a smoothed appearance. Whereas the lumen contours from the OCT images
provide a much closer representation of the vessel characteristics, including, surface irregularities and the lesion shape.

vector flow [13], [14]. The initial spline in each frame was defined as a circle around the centroid of the cluster points [see
Fig. 1(c)]. Once the contours were traced they were located on
the XY (Z = 0) plane of Cartesian coordinates, with the centroid placed on the origin. The normal unit vector for the surface
defined by the contour was, therefore, ẑ = (0, 0, 1) (see Fig. 3).
2) Calculating the Centerline of the Vessel from Angiography: The anatomy reconstruction provided by QCA3D was imported into MATLAB as a set of vertices in Cartesian coordinates. For each few millimeters segment of vessel that typically
contains three to four vertices in longitudinal direction, vertex
coordinates are averaged to obtain the coordinate of the segment’s centroid. The spline formed by the calculated centroids
was then smoothed using a least squares interpolation method.
The smoothing parameter was set to 0.9, close to the neutral
value of 1, so that the smoothed spline points remained close to
the original data.
3) Combining Contour and Centerline Data to Obtain Reconstructed Geometry: The calculated centerline provides the
“spine” onto which the lumen contours will be mapped. It is
first divided into vectors 0.2 mm in length, equal to the slice
thickness; these vectors form the surface normal vectors of the
plane onto which each lumen contour will be placed. The angle
θ between the normal vector of the XY plane and the centerline
vectors is calculated as follows:


ẑ · (destination surface normal)
(1)
ϑ = arccos
|ẑ| |destination surface normal|
where angle θ is the angle of rotation, while the unit vector
corresponding to the cross product of the vectors forms the axis
of rotation. These parameters are used in a 3-D rotation matrix,
which is applied to each contour. The process is schematically
represented in Fig. 3.
Once the contours had been rotated to the desired orientation,
the distance between their current and intended location was
calculated and a translation was applied, placing the contours in
their final location.
The reconstruction was complete when the contours were
exported in the form of 3-D Cartesian coordinates into a customdeveloped FORTRAN routine that combined the data into a
.stl file. An example of the resulting geometry is presented in
Fig. 3(b).
Each vessel was reconstructed using the 3-D angiographybased reconstruction technique before adding the OCT con-

Fig. 5. (a) Averaged proximal pressure (Pa), distal pressure (Pd) and distal
velocity waveforms based on five to seven beats measured in the catheter lab.
(b) Mathematical description of the waveform as a series of trigonometric polynomials. Components α n and bn are calculated using Fourier decomposition.
(c) The original waveform reproduced by plotting the equation form.

tours. The results of the two different methods applied to the
same vessel segment are compared in Fig. 4, where the added
fidelity from the OCT images over the more smoothed 3-D angiography images is apparent. The OCT-based reconstruction
appears considerably more irregular as would be expected in
vivo, while the shape of the lesion also looks considerably different, though the calculated minimal luminal area (MLA) is
similar. These differences are due to the QCA3D software representing the vessel contours as ellipses, whereas the OCT-based
methodology more closely represents the true lumen contours
segmented from the OCT scans. This results in a more realistic
reconstruction that requires no smoothing of the contour shape
and minimal smoothing of the centerline. The reconstructed
segments of all 21 arteries studied can be seen in Fig. 6.
D. Simulation Setup
This new improved reconstructed anatomy was used in CFD
simulations to allow more realistic modeling of patient-specific
data. We ran simulations using 21 patient specific cases of reconstructed coronary anatomy combined with the respective
patients’ pressure and flow velocity.
1) Volume Rendering and Meshing: Each of the reconstructed vessel lumen segments was treated as a surface surrounding the flow domain, which was discretized into an unstructured hexahedral mesh of 120–150,000 elements using
ANSYS ICEM CFD 13 (AN SYS Inc., Cannonsburg, PA). The

1906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 6. Twenty-one artery segments reconstructed with the combined OCT and angiography 3-D reconstruction technique; “P” denotes the proximal end of the
vessel, while “D” denotes the distal end.

optimal mesh resolution was determined by performing a mesh
size independence test on one of the geometries. The mesh resolution near the wall was locally refined, achieving a thickness
of about 0.2% of the vessel diameter for the elements adjacent to the wall. The high resolution near the wall significantly
improved convergence of the computation.
2) Patient-Specific Boundary Conditions and Simulation Parameters: Transient pulsatile simulations were set up using Ansys CFX preprocessing software (ANSYS UK). The boundary
conditions were provided by the patient-specific pressure and
flow velocity waveforms. The proximal pressure, distal pressure, and distal velocity waveforms were ensemble averaged
over five to seven beats using the peak R wave as a fiducial
marker to improve the signal to noise ratio while preserving
the characteristic features, such as the anacrotic and dicrotic
notch [see Fig. 5(a)]. The averaged waveforms were then decomposed into the first 15 frequency harmonics using Fourier
decomposition, and the resulting components were recombined
into a series of trigonometric polynomials [see Fig. 5(b) and
(c)]. This process provided a representation of the waveforms
in convenient equation form that could be input directly into the
simulation setup.
The inlet boundary condition was defined as the aortic (proximal) pressure waveform. The distal velocity waveform was
chosen as the outlet boundary condition, opting for a flat spatial profile, as this provided the best agreement with normal
volumetric flow rate values [15].

This combination of pressure and velocity boundary conditions means that downstream (microvascular) resistance to
the flow is implicitly incorporated. The coronary circulation is
unique since blood flow is predominantly diastolic and not systolic. During systolic myocardial contraction, the microvasculature is compressed meaning that microvascular resistance rises
significantly. In contrast, during diastole and active myocardial relaxation, the microvascular resistance falls dramatically,
leading to an acceleration of flow. Resistance is not constant
during the cardiac cycle but varies dramatically and only phasic
analysis allows determination of instantaneous resistance at any
given point in the cycle. The fluid dynamics inside the coronaries are greatly affected by this variation [16], [17] and using
zero-pressure or other unrealistic boundary condition results in
unrealistic pressure and wall shear stress values.
The vessel wall was modeled as rigid and immobile, while
blood was modeled as Newtonian (midrange viscosity of
0.00334 Pa·s) and incompressible (density 1060 kg/m3 ). Motion
of the coronary arteries was neglected for reasons of simplicity, as calculations are not likely to be affected much by the
domain vessel motion [15]. Rigidity has also been shown to
be a reasonable assumption for CFD simulations of blood flow;
though arteries are compliant and can be modeled so, it has been
shown that the increased numerical accuracy provided by fluid–
structure interaction (FSI) models is not significant enough to
justify the increased computational costs of FSI [18], [19]. Also,
coronary arteries are less compliant than larger arteries, further
justifying the rigid wall assumption.

KOUSERA et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORONARY STENOSES CAN BE MODELED USING A COMBINATION OF OCT AND FLOW VELOCITIES

1907

Fig. 7. Comparison of the measured (gray line) and calculated (dashed line) distal pressure waveform for all patients (the proximal pressure is shown in black).
The model-predicted distal pressure correlates well with the measured pressure.

The maximum Reynolds number observed was low (<400),
meaning that flow is laminar throughout the cycle, with observed
disturbances caused by the presence of geometry irregularities.
The system of the continuity and Navier–Stokes equations were
solved iteratively for each element of the mesh in ANSYS CFX
Solver 13. A strict root-mean-square error of less than 10e−6
was specified as the convergence target, and a maximum of 25
iterations per time step was set in order to reach the desired
convergence. The time step was chosen at 0.001 s, based on
previously conducted time-independence tests, not shown in
this paper.
III. RESULTS
A. Comparison of Calculated and Measured Distal
Pressure Waveforms
The distal pressure waveform calculated by the CFD simulation was compared to the measured distal pressure waveform
(see Fig. 5) and the cross-correlation coefficient test was used
as a measure of similarity between the two. The results are visualized in Fig. 7. The mean cross-correlation coefficient for
the total of 21 cases was 0.898 ± 0.005 (p < 0.01), while the
mean of the differences between measured and simulated results
was −3.5 mmHg (4.4% of the measured mean pressure), with
a standard deviation of difference of 8.2 mmHg. This indicates
that any source of error can be attributed to random factors affecting the result in both directions equally, such as the error
introduced when estimating volumetric flow rate from Doppler
velocity data. The differences in mean pressure for each individual patient are shown in Table II, while a Bland–Altman plot
shown in Fig. 8indicates that there is only a small bias between
the simulated and measured mean distal pressure. After establishing that both the measured and CFD-derived distal pressure
data follow a normal distribution using the Shapiro–Wilk test for
normality, a paired t-test analysis on the means of differences
yielded a p value of 0.09, suggesting no significant difference
between the simulated and measured mean pressures. Previously
published data have not applied this test to the agreement between CFD-calculated and invasively measured distal coronary
pressure, meaning no comparison is available to evaluate this

Fig. 8. Bland–Altman plot of the differences between the mean distal pressure
calculated by the CFD model and the measured values. A bias of less than
4 mmHg was found, and the limits of agreement were found to be between
−24.6 and 16.4 mmHg.

Fig. 9. Bland–Altman plot of the differences between the distal pressure at
peak flow calculated by the CFD model and the measured values. A bias of
9.8 mmHg was found, and the limits of agreement were found to be between
22.38 and −42.067 mmHg.

1908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE II
MEAN OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CFD-CALCULATED AND MEASURED DISTAL PRESSURE

result. The pressure differences at the time of peak flow are also
shown in Table II, with the corresponding Bland–Altman diagram shown in Fig. 9. An underestimation by 12% of the CFDcalculated distal pressure at peak flow compared to the measured
values was found, and this result was significant (p < 0.01).
This difference is attributed to the larger uncertainties in the
estimation of peak volumetric flow rate from the invasively
measured data, which is described in detail in Section IV. The
trans-stenotic pressure drop derived from the CFD results compared against the measured values is shown in Fig. 10 (r = 0.52,
p < 0.01), and the corresponding Bland–Altman plot is shown
in Fig. 11.
Patient-specific models based on the new reconstruction
method can be used to predict the pressure conditions in the
artery with great accuracy, indicating that, even after assumptions of wall rigidity and not simulating domain vessel motion,
the model can predict the pressure field fairly well.

Fig. 10. CFD-derived trans-stenotic pressure drop versus invasively measured
trans-stenotic pressure drop. A positive correlation (r = 0.52) was found between the CFD-derived and the measured data (r = 0.52, p < 0.01).

IV. DISCUSSION
This study assessed patients with truly moderate anatomical and physiological disease and demonstrates the following
findings
1) It is feasible to combine OCT invasive imaging with conventional coronary angiography to produce credible coronary vessel reconstructions.

2) These reconstructions can be used to model phasic coronary pressure and flow velocity which have a close relationship with that measured invasively.
3) Such a model could be used to study the impact of vessel
geometry upon coronary pressure and flow velocity patterns to aid diagnosis and guide treatment interventions.

KOUSERA et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORONARY STENOSES CAN BE MODELED USING A COMBINATION OF OCT AND FLOW VELOCITIES

Fig. 11. Bland–Altman plot of the differences between the trans-stenotic pressure drop calculated by the CFD model and the measured values. A negative bias
of 1 mmHg was found, and the limits of agreement were found to be between
12.1 and −14.5 mmHg.

A. OCT Provides High Resolution
OCT is an increasingly utilized imaging tool that achieves
considerably higher in plane resolution than IVUS [10], [11],
[20]. It allows the representation of all the geometrical features
of the anatomy, including macroscopic roughness and jagged,
calcified edges, which contribute to increased wall shear stress
and the hemodynamic effects of stenoses, but cannot easily be
imaged using other commonly used methods [21]–[23]. The
OCT methodology has a significant advantage to reconstruction
methods such as the angiography and IVUS (ANGUS) technique [24]: it obviates the need to trace a “spine” from the
catheter as in ANGUS, rather the vessel centerline is calculated from a 3-D angiographic reconstruction, which is then
used as the skeleton onto which the OCT-derived lumen contours are mapped to produce a volume rendering of the anatomy
that is minimally smoothed. The centerline-based reconstruction method has been used successfully by Athanasiou et al. [10]
and Tu et al. [11], who also provided validation for the method’s
accuracy.
B. Fusion of OCT With Angiography Overcomes Coronary
Reconstruction Challenges
The accurate reconstruction of coronary anatomy has proven
a great challenge. MR imaging of coronary arteries is rarely
used in clinical practice, involves sophisticated methods [25]
and long image acquisition time [26], [27]. CT angiography is
more promising, achieving a typical slice thickness of typically
0.3–0.5 mm [28], [29] but surface smoothing is required, which
introduces errors. Quantitative analysis of coronary anatomy
(2D QCA) is possible using angiography data [30]. The twodimensional (2-D) approach based on uniplanar angiography,
however, does not account for foreshortening, or for the fact
that the same stenosis severity can be graded differently in different angiographic views [31]. This limitation has been addressed by using 3-D coronary artery reconstruction based on
two orthogonal angiography views. This method, supported by
software such as CAAS QCA3D [32] or CardioOp-B [33] pro-

1909

duces a reconstructed vessel volume consisting of circular or
elliptical lumen contours, avoiding many of the pitfalls associated with 2-D analysis [7], [34]. Other angiography techniques
such as rotational angiography (RoCA), or combinations of CT
and angiography have been used to produce reconstructions
that are corrected for heart movement and unreliable ECG gating [27], [35]. RoCA has been used in a proof-of-concept attempt to computationally predict pressure drop across coronary
artery stenoses [36]. However, in those cases, the lumen contours are still assumed to be circular or elliptic, which offers
no information about the real geometry of the lumen. The fusion of ANGUS method [24] utilizes the actual contour of the
lumen from IVUS pullback imaging with in plane and longitudinal resolutions of ∼0.1 mm (100 μm) and ∼0.5 mm, respectively. IVUS scans only provide the local coordinates of the
lumen contours, and therefore the contours are mapped onto an
angiography-based model to obtain the final reconstructed geometry. This requires knowledge of the exact path of the IVUS
wire, adding additional time to the patient scan.
This study adds to previous studies mentioned above, trying
to improve our understanding of coronary disease by: 1) increasing the accuracy of the contour tracing by using OCT and 2)
calculating and comparing phasic pressure and velocity results
using patient-specific data. The proposed method makes use of
data collected from routine catheter laboratory procedures as
input, with no additional information required and no extra time
per scan. The reconstruction algorithm developed is reliable,
robust, and requires minimal user input and can be applied to
any clinical dataset. The resulting reconstruction inherits the
high resolution of OCT while being equally easy and practical
to perform as angiography-based reconstruction.

C. Patient-Specific Phasic Flow Analysis
Patient-specific coronary artery CFD studies are scarce compared to other large vessels, such as the aorta, since high-quality
anatomical and velocity data are difficult to acquire. Previous
models have been limited to models based on postmortem vessel
casts with steady flow as boundary conditions [37], or generic
combinations of idealized or patient geometry and velocity
waveforms [38]–[40]. To date, there is only a limited number of
fully patient-specific simulations of coronary flow in the literature; one involves very long image acquisition time not suitable
for clinical applications, while another uses aortic pressure and
flow data to implicitly calculate flow in the coronary tree by
simulating a larger part of the cardiac anatomy [15], [41].
Furthermore, the majority of the literature focuses upon mean
pressure and velocity values. However, mean flow is not representative of true phasic flow due to nature of the coronary circulation. Extrinsic compression by the myocardium in systole
means that flow velocity is much less during systole, while active relaxation and decompression of the microcirculation means
greatly accelerated flow in diastole. Therefore, our approach is
to model patient-specific data for the entirety of the cardiac cycle, calculating phasic pressure waveforms and comparing with
measured data.

1910

D. Limitations of the Proposed Model
Patient specific data allows mathematical models to be compared against in-vivo measurements. While this provides the
opportunity to test the reliability of the models, it should be
recognized that human in-vivo measurements using state-ofthe-art technology are themselves limited by well-recognized
measurement variability. Thus, where algorithmic predictions
differ from the measured variable, there are several sources of
potential error. These include limitations of the algorithm, and
the measured haemodynamic parameters. The coronary flow
velocity provides the largest source of measurement variability
and is the most likely potential contributor to error in this study.
Invasive intracoronary measurements require simultaneous
pressure and Doppler wire assessment. This wire requires training in its use and does not yet handle like a typical angioplasty
wire. Therefore for technical reasons it may not be possible to
acquire flow velocity data in all vessels and across all lesions.
Others have estimated coronary flow by using thermodilution
techniques. However, these approaches cannot generate a flow
waveform which can be co-registered with the electrocardiogram and pressure wave forms. Furthermore, thermodilution
techniques can be affected by the volume of the injectant, the
length of the vessel and the number of side branches.
Volumetric flow rate can only be estimated in vivo in humans. Open-chested animal models have previously allowed
estimation of volumetric flow rate based upon isolated arteries with measuring tools inserted into the vessel with careful
measurement of vessel diameter [42]. This technique is not possible in humans. We chose to estimate volumetric flow rate
using measured flow velocity with the assumption of an idealized spatial flow profile and combined this with highly accurate
cross-sectional areas measured with OCT. All methods to assess
vessel diameter are inherently limited as all coronary vessels can
show quite marked change in caliber dependent upon endothelial function, the flow volume, and the intracoronary pressure
generated by flow [43]. As such, our estimation is not biased to
over or under estimation and follows the current state of the art
in this field.
A further limitation is that we can only model resistance based
upon flow velocity and measured pressure. The true impedance
also relies upon modeling vessel wall elasticity which remains
a limitation of most CFD approaches to date.
Other practical limitations of this approach and model include
the approach to imaging the vessel. Simultaneous biplane angiographic imaging was not available in all cases due to the technical limitation of the availability of these labs. Instead, repeated
multiview angiography using isocentered imaging equipment
was used. Theoretically the use of biplane imaging should lead
to improved 3-D angiographic reconstructions and better modeling, though previous work on OCT–angiography fusion have
used monoplane angiography with success [11]. Our model too
performed well without it and future studies using our model
and biplane imaging may achieve better results. While biplane
imaging is increasingly common, it is expensive, not in routine
use for all patients; the use of single plane imaging means it is
readily applicable to the majority of patients.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

OCT contour tracing and reconstruction is limited by the
shadow cast by the intracoronary wire upon which the OCT
catheter runs and requires interpolation. This limitation is inherent to OCT technology and is overcome by the use of specialized interpolation functions in the active contour algorithm.
Another limitation of OCT, and all intravascular methods, is
the inability to visualize more than one vessel at a time. This
limits CFD modeling to simulations of a single vessel, omitting the bifurcations, the runoff to branches, or the collateral
flow from other vessels. This puts into question the assumption
of the conservation of mass within the control volume which
is inherent to any CFD flow analysis. This can have a marked
effect in CFD studies of the wall shear stress distribution [44].
Apart from an older study measuring coronary flow distribution
in dogs with artificially induced occlusions [45] no studies were
found that directly measure flow distribution in the branches
of the coronary arterial tree. Apart from the limitations posed
by the measurement methods, flow distribution is controlled by
downstream resistance to the flow, which is variable among vessels in the presence of progressing disease. One way to bypass
the problem is to calculate the contribution of a stenosis in the
overall resistance by estimating microvascular resistance based
on the radii of the branches [46]. This has been shown to work
well in an analytical model of pressure drop estimation, but only
in a small study where no CFD simulations were involved.
A key limitation, consistent with all CFD techniques, is that
this approach is not fully automated and cannot currently produce an output within the time frame of performing a live intracoronary procedure. The CFD component requires an average
of 48 h of computer processing using a conventional desktop
workstation and a parallel four-core run. Increase in computer
processing power and optimization of the algorithms will improve this in the future.
This being the first study to run fully patient-specific, phasic
CFD simulations to determine hyperemic pressure drop, there
has been no opportunity to directly compare the results of using
this reconstruction method to other methods, such as coupling
CFD with angiography-based reconstructions. This should be
the subject of further analysis and will be the focus of future
work to determine whether the high resolution provided by intracoronary imaging is necessary to the success of the method.

E. Human Patient-Specific Model Developed and Tested
in Humans
This paper has focused upon developing a patient-specific
model of coronary artery disease and has tested it against in
vivo results from human patients. Unlike in the peripheral circulation such as the aorta or renal vessels, coronary blood flow
is pulsatile and predominantly diastolic. Compression of the
coronary microcirculation during systole impedes significant
systolic blood flow, while active relaxation in diastole causes
marked acceleration of blood flow. Furthermore, while adenosine is used to minimize microcirculatory resistance, it does
not achieve the same level of resistance in all patients and
so cannot be modeled using a phantom approach. Vascular

KOUSERA et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORONARY STENOSES CAN BE MODELED USING A COMBINATION OF OCT AND FLOW VELOCITIES

resistance changes throughout the cardiac cycle and this remains
impossible to model in a phantom model.
Assessment in animal models was not performed as generating realistic human-like coronary lesions is difficult. Typical
animal models have used external constrictors to narrow the
lumen, but this leaves a smooth intima, which does not disrupt
coronary flow in the same manner as a true atherosclerotic lesion. Furthermore, animal models do not have diffuse disease
nor the microcirculatory disease common in humans, which
further reduces their applicability to man.
F. Potential Applications for the Future
By modeling the haemodynamics of specific coronary lesions
it is possible to assess and predict the physiological pressure
gradients imposed by a given lesion. Treatment using such pressure based techniques (such as FFR) have been shown to improve clinical outcomes [47]. Using a combination of imaging
modalities combined with derived pressures and velocities may
be beneficial for both current clinical practice and on-going
work attempting to further understand the relations between
shear stress and likelihood of stenosis rupture or occlusion. By
accurately modeling phasic pressure changes in the distal vessel,
this model may allow greater understanding of how a coronary
stenosis impacts coronary physiology throughout the cardiac
cycle, rather than averaged across the cycle. As evidenced in
Figs. 10 and 11, the results also demonstrate the capability of
CFD to predict the trans-stenotic pressure gradient. An additional feature, previously unperformed as far as we are aware, is
the use of patient-specific flow velocity data, which was further
coupled with simultaneously acquired pressure data, to create a
fully patient specific study of the transient resistance phenomena
observed in the coronary circulation.
While this paper looks at pressure measurements derived from
OCT 3-D reconstruction, in future papers it may be good to make
comparisons between different reconstruction methodologies to
establish the diagnostic power of each technique.
G. Applicability to Catheter-Lab Populations
Finally, an important feature of this study is the inclusion
of many moderate stenoses (13 out of 21 stenoses with maximum anatomical area obstruction of 60%–75%, 11 out of 21
stenoses with functional FFR assessment ratio between 0.75
and 0.85). In clinical practice, it is precisely these stenoses
that require detailed assessment to aid clinical decision making,
with more severe stenoses generally being revascularized when
technically feasible and more mild stenoses being managed conservatively. Indeed, the assessment of moderate or intermediate
lesions can be problematic, as functional and anatomical assessment of these lesions can often give contradictory indications for
treatment. In previous studies attempting to measure pressure
gradients using CFD [48], [49] the lesions studied are mostly
clearly mild or severe, both anatomically and functionally, while
moderate lesions where assessment can be more ambiguous
comprise only a small percentage of the stenoses studied, if
present at all. This deficiency is not unique to CFD studies but
also applies to the initial validation studies of FFR which had
few truly moderate lesions [50]. While such approaches may

1911

help develop techniques, for them to be clinically useful they
should be assessed in the cohort in which they will be applied.
This dataset therefore provides a unique test of the ability of
CFD to accurately model pressure gradients, and help better
evaluate the potential of the use of CFD as a clinical tool for
coronary artery disease assessment in the future.
V. CONCLUSION
A new method for the 3-D reconstruction of coronary arteries has been developed using OCT scans in conjunction with
coronary angiography for use in CFD simulations. The new reconstruction has been used in patient-specific simulations, the
calculated distal pressure waveform (Pd) provided by the model
was compared with the actual measured Pd. The simulation results showed a good correlation with the measured distal pressure waveforms in all cases, indicating that the model results
can be an acceptably accurate representation of the flow conditions in the actual vessel. Further development could make the
algorithm faster (real time) and fully automated.
REFERENCES
[1] C. V. Riga, Z. Cheng, N. B. Wood, X. Y. Xu, F. P. P. Tan, C. D. Bicknell,
M. S. Hamady, and R. G. J. Gibbs, “Analysis of flow patterns in a patientspecific aortic dissection model,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 132, no. 5,
p. 051007, 2010.
[2] G. C. Kagadis, K. Katsanos, D. Karnabatidis, G. Loudos,
G. C. Nikiforidis, and W. R. Hendee, “Computational representation and hemodynamic characterization of in vivo acquired severe stenotic
renal artery geometries using turbulence modeling,” Med. Eng. Phys.,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 647–660, 2008.
[3] S. Bashford, N. B. Wood, S. Thom, F. P. Tan, X. Y. Xu, G. Soloperto,
and A. Hughes, “Analysis of flow disturbance in a stenosed carotid artery
bifurcation using two-equation transitional and turbulence models,” J.
Biomech. Eng., vol. 130, no. 6, p. 061008, 2008.
[4] D. A. Steinman, J. B. Thomas, H. M. Ladak, J. S. Milner, B. K. Rutt,
and J. D. Spence, “Reconstruction of carotid bifurcation hemodynamics
and wall thickness using computational fluid dynamics and MRI,” Magn.
Reson. Med., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 149–159, 2002.
[5] F. P. P. Tan, A. Borghi, R. H. Mohiaddin, N. B. Wood, S. Thom, and
X. Y. Xu, “Analysis of flow patterns in a patient-specific thoracic aortic
aneurysm model,” Comput. Struct., vol. 87, no. 11–12, pp. 680–690, 2009.
[6] D. B. Spoon, R. Rubinshtein, P. J. Psaltis, G. S. Sandhu, R. Lennon,
C. S. Rihal, and A. Lerman, “Comparison between three-dimensional angiographic reconstruction and intravascular ultrasound: imaging of the left
main coronary artery,” Catheter Cardiovasc. Intervention, vol. 81, no. 7,
pp. 1156–1161, 2013.
[7] J. C. H. Schuurbiers, N. G. Lopez, J. Ligthart, F. J. H. Gijsen, J. Dijkstra,
P. W. Serruys, A. F. Van der Steen, and J. J. Wentzel, “In vivo validation of
CAAS QCA-3D coronary reconstruction using fusion of angiography and
intravascular ultrasound (ANGUS),” Catheter Cardiovasc. Intervention,
vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 620–626, 2009.
[8] R. Liao, D. Luc, Y. Sun, and K. Kirchberg, “3-D reconstruction of the coronary artery tree from multiple views of a rotational X-ray angiography,”
Int. J. Cardiovasc. Imag., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 733–749, 2010.
[9] W. Cong, J. Yang, Y. Liu, and Y. Wang, “Energy back-projective composition for 3-D coronary artery reconstruction,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, vol. 2013, pp. 5151–5154.
[10] L. S. Athanasiou, C. V. Bourantas, P. K. Siogkas, A. I. Sakellarios,
T. P. Exarchos, K. K. Naka, M. I. Papafaklis, L. K. Michalis, F. Prati, and
D. I. Fotiadis, “3D reconstruction of coronary arteries using frequency
domain optical coherence tomography images and biplane angiography,”
in Proc. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, vol. 2012, pp. 2647–2650.
[11] S. Tu, N. R. Holm, G. Koning, Z. Huang, and J. H. C. Reiber, “Fusion
of 3D QCA and IVUS/OCT,” Int. J. Cardiovasc. Imag., vol. 27, no. 2,
pp. 197–207, 2011.
[12] C. K. Chua, J. G. K. Gan, and M. Tong, “Interface between CAD and
Rapid Prototyping systems .1. A study of existing interfaces,” Int. J. Adv.
Manuf. Technol., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 566–570, 1997.

1912

[13] C. Y. Xu and J. L. Prince, “Gradient vector flow: A new external force
for snakes,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern
Recogn., Proc., 1997, pp. 66–71.
[14] C. Y. Xu and J. L. Prince, “Snakes, shapes, and gradient vector flow,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 359–369, Mar 1998.
[15] R. Torii, J. Keegan, N. B. Wood, A. W. Dowsey, A. D. Hughes, G.-Z. Yang,
D. N. Firmin, S. A. McG. Thom, and X. Y. Xu, “MR image-based geometric and hemodynamic investigation of the right coronary artery with
dynamic vessel motion,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 2606–2620,
2010.
[16] I. E. Vignon-Clementel et al., “Outflow boundary conditions for 3D simulations of non-periodic blood flow and pressure fields in deformable arteries,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Engin, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 625–
640, 2010.
[17] S. Sen et al., “Development and validation of a new adenosine-independent
index of stenosis severity from coronary wave-intensity analysis: results of
the ADVISE (ADenosine Vasodilator Independent Stenosis Evaluation)
study,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 59, no. 15, pp. 1392–1402, 2012.
[18] F. P. P. Tan et al., “Fluid–structure interaction analysis of wall stress and
flow patterns in a thoracic aortic aneurysm,” Int. J. Appl. Mech., vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 179–199, 2009.
[19] R. Torii et al., “Fluid–structure interaction analysis of a patient-specific
right coronary artery with physiological velocity and pressure waveforms,” Commun. Numerical Methods Eng., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 565–580,
2009.
[20] M. Cilingiroglu, A. Hakeem, M. Feldman, and M. Wholey, “Optical coherence tomography imaging in asymptomatic patients with carotid artery
stenosis,”. (2012). Cardiovasc. Revasc Med., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 53–56,
2012.
[21] D. L. Bark, Jr. and D. N. Ku, “Wall shear over high degree stenoses pertinent to atherothrombosis,” J. Biomech, vol. 43, no. 15, pp. 2970–2977,
2010.
[22] S.-J. Park, S.-J. Kang, J.-M. Ahn, E. B. Shim, Y.-T. Kim, S.-C. Yun,
H. Song, J.-Y. Lee, W.-J. Kim, D.-W. Park, S.-W. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, C. W.
Lee, G. S. Mintz, and S.-W. Park, “Visual-functional mismatch between
coronary angiography and fractional flow reserve,” JACC Cardiovasc.
Intervention, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 1029–1036, 2012.
[23] N. B. de Cesare, G. E. Stephen , R. W. Paula , F. D. Scott, P. B. John,
and G. B. Mancini, “Early reocclusion after successful thrombolysis is
related to lesion length and roughness,” Coron. Artery Dis., vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 159–166, 1993.
[24] C. J. Slager, J. J. Wentzel, J. C. H. Schuurbiers, J. A. F. Oomen, J. Kloet,
R. Krams, C. von Birgelen, W. J. van der Giessen, P. W. Serruys, and
P. J. de Feyter, “True 3-dimensional reconstruction of coronary arteries in
patients by fusion of angiography and IVUS (ANGUS) and its quantitative
validation,” Circulation, vol. 102, no. 5, pp. 511–516, 2000.
[25] J. Keegan, P. D. Gatehouse, G.-Z. Yang, and D. N. Firmin, “Spiral phase
velocity mapping of left and right coronary artery blood flow: correction
for through-plane motion using selective fat-only excitation,” J. Magn.
Reson. Imag., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 953–960, 2004.
[26] R. Torii, J. Keegan, N. B. Wood, A. W. Dowsey, A. D. Hughes, G.-Z. Yang,
D. N. Firmin, S. A. Mcg Thom, and X. Y. Xu, “The effect of dynamic
vessel motion on haemodynamic parameters in the right coronary artery:
a combined MR and CFD study,” Br. J. Radiol, vol. 82, Spec. No. 1,
pp. S24–S32, 2009.
[27] R. Cárdenes, J. Luis Dı́ez, I. Larrabide, H. Bogunovic, and A. F. Frangi,
“3D Modeling of coronary artery bifurcations from CTA and conventional
coronary angiography,” Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention III, vol. 6893, pp. 395–402, 2011.
[28] T. Schlosser, T. Scheuermann, S. Ulzheimer, O. K. Mohrs, M. Kühling,
P. E. Albrecht, T. Voigtländer, J. Barkhausen, and A. Schmermund, “Invitro evaluation of coronary stents and 64-detector-row computed tomography using a newly developed model of coronary artery stenosis,” Acta
Radiol., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 56–64, 2008.
[29] G. L. Raff, M. J. Gallagher, W. W. O’Neill, and J. A. Goldstein, “Diagnostic accuracy of noninvasive coronary angiography using 64-slice spiral
computed tomography,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 552–
557, 2005.
[30] C. Girasis, J. C. H. Schuurbiers, Y. Onuma, J.-P. Aben, B. Weijers,
E. Boersma, J. J. Wentzel, and P. W. Serruys, “Two-dimensional quantitative coronary angiographic models for bifurcation segmental analysis: in
vitro validation of CAAS against precision manufactured plexiglas phantoms,” Catheter Cardiovasc. Intervention, vol. 77, no. 6, pp. 830–839,
2011.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

[31] C. Seiler, “Aiming at a disorder’s concept by 3D QCA vs. FFR: A
case of advanced ballistics,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 261–263,
2011.
[32] E. Gronenschild, J. Janssen, and F. Tijdens, “CAAS. II: A second generation system for off-line and on-line quantitative coronary angiography,”
Cathet Cardiovasc. Diagn., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 61–75, 1994.
[33] D. Meerkin, H. Marom, O. Cohen-Biton, and S. Einav, “Threedimensional vessel analyses provide more accurate length estimations
than the gold standard QCA,” J. Intervention Cardiol., vol. 23, no. 2,
pp. 152–159, 2010.
[34] S. Ramcharitar, J. Daeman, M. Patterson, R. Jan van Guens, E. Boersma,
P. W. Serruys, and W. J. van der Giessen, “First direct in vivo comparison
of two commercially available three-dimensional quantitative coronary
angiography systems,” Catheter Cardiovasc. Intervention, vol. 71, no. 1,
pp. 44–50, 2008.
[35] Cardenes, “R. 3D Reconstruction of coronary arteries from rotational
X-ray angiography,” presented at the 9th IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag.,
Barcelona, Spain, 2012.
[36] P. D. Morris, D. R. Ryan, R. Lycett, A. C. Morton, P. V. Lawford,
D. R. Hose, and J. Gunn, “Computer modelled coronary physiology and
“Virtual” fractional flow reserve from rotational angiography,” Heart,
vol. 98, pp. A14–A14, 2012.
[37] L. Goubergrits, E. Wellnhofer, U. Kertzscher, K. Affeld, C. Petz, and
H.-C. Hege, “Coronary artery WSS profiling using a geometry reconstruction based on biplane angiography,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37,
no. 4, pp. 682–691, 2009.
[38] J. F. LaDisa Jr., L. E. Olson, H. A. Douglas, D. C. Warltier, J. R. Kersten,
and P. S. Pagel, “Alterations in regional vascular geometry produced by
theoretical stent implantation influence distributions of wall shear stress:
Analysis of a curved coronary artery using 3D computational fluid dynamics modeling,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 5, p. 40, 2006.
[39] W. Yin, S. K. Shanmugavelayudam, and D. A. Rubenstein, “3D numerical simulation of coronary blood flow and its effect on endothelial cell
activation,” in Proc. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, vol. 2009,
pp. 4003–4006.
[40] A. Yakhot, L. Grinberg, and N. Nikitin, “Modeling rough stenoses by an
immersed-boundary method,” J. Biomech., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 1115–1127,
2005.
[41] O. Hajati, K. Zarrabi, R. Karimi, and A. Hajati, “CFD simulation of
hemodynamics in sequential and individual coronary bypass grafts based
on multislice CT scan datasets,” in Proc. Anuu. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2012, vol. 2012, pp. 641–644.
[42] K. L. Gould and K. O. Kelley, “Physiological significance of coronary
flow velocity and changing stenosis geometry during coronary vasodilation in awake dogs,” Circ Res, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 695–704, 1982.
[43] O. Muller et al., “Pressure–diameter relationship in human coronary arteries,” Circ. Cardiovasc. Intervention, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 791–796, 2012.
[44] E. Wellnhofer, J. Osman, U. Kertzscher, K. Affeld, E. Fleck, and
L. Goubergrits, “Flow simulation studies in coronary arteries—Impact
of side-branches,” Atherosclerosis, vol. 213, no. 2, pp. 475–481, 2010.
[45] H. Schuhlen, N. L. Eigler, and J. S. Whiting, “Grading the angiographic
extent of collateral filling. Comparison with coronary flow, collateral flow,
and regional coronary flow distribution measurements,” Int. J. Card. Imag.,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 25–33, 1994.
[46] G. Guagliumi, V. Sirbu, C. Petroff, D. Capodanno, G. Musumeci,
H. Yamamoto, A. Elbasiony, C. Brushett, A. Matiashvili,
N. Lortkipanidze, O. Valsecchi, H. G. Bezerra, and J. M. Schmitt,
“Volumetric assessment of lesion severity with optical coherence
tomography: relationship with fractional flow,” EuroIntervention, vol. 8,
no. 10, pp. 1172–1181, 2013.
[47] B. De Bruyne, N. H. J. Pijls, B. Kalesan, E. Barbato, P. A. L. Tonino,
Z. Piroth, N. Jagic, S. Möbius-Winkler, G. Rioufol, M. D. N. Witt,
P. Kala, P. MacCarthy, T. Engström, K. G. Oldroyd, K. Mavromatis,
G. Manoharan, P. Verlee, O. Frobert, N. Curzen, J. B. Johnson,
R. N. P. Jüni, and W. F. Fearon, “Fractional flow reserve-guided PCI versus
medical therapy in stable coronary disease,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 367,
no. 11, pp. 991–1001, 2012.
[48] P. D. Morris, D. Ryan, A. C. Morton, R. Lycett, P. V. Lawford, D. R. Hose,
and J. P. Gunn, “Virtual fractional flow reserve from coronary angiography: modeling the significance of coronary lesions: results from the
VIRTU-1 (VIRTUal Fractional Flow Reserve From Coronary Angiography) study,” JACC Cardiovasc. Intervention, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 149–157,
2013.

KOUSERA et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORONARY STENOSES CAN BE MODELED USING A COMBINATION OF OCT AND FLOW VELOCITIES

[49] P. K. Siogkas, M. I. Papafaklis, A. I. Sakellarios, K. A. Stefanou,
C. V. Bourantas, L. M. Athanasiou, C. V. Bellos, T .P. Exarchos,
K. K. Naka, L.K. Michalis, O. Parodi, and D. I. Fotiadis, “Computational
assessment of the fractional flow reserve from intravascular ultrasound
and coronary angiography data: A pilot study,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, vol. 2013, pp. 3885–3888.

1913

[50] R. Petraco, J. Escaned, S. Sen, S. Nijjer, K. N. Asrress, M. EchavarriaPinto, T. Lockie, M. Z. Khawaja, C. Cuevas, N. Foin, C. Broyd,
R. A. Foale, N. Hadjiloizou, I. S. Malik, G. W. Mikhail, A. Sethi,
R. Kaprielian, C. S. Baker, D. Lefroy, M. Bellamy, M. Al-Bustami,
M. A. Khan, A. D. Hughes, D. P. Francis, J. Mayet, C. Di Mario,
S. Redwood, and J. E. Davies, “Classification performance of instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) and fractional flow reserve in a clinical population of intermediate coronary stenoses: results of the ADVISE registry,”
EuroIntervention, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 91–101, 2013.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

