IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

2245

An Optimal Decisional Space for the Classification of
Alzheimer’s Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment
Qi Zhou, Mohammed Goryawala, Mercedes Cabrerizo, Jin Wang, Warren Barker, David A. Loewenstein,
Ranjan Duara, and Malek Adjouadi∗

Abstract—This paper proposes to combine MRI data with a
neuropsychological test, mini-mental state examination (MMSE),
as input to a multi-dimensional space for the classification of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and it’s prodromal stages—mild cognitive impairment (MCI) including amnestic MCI (aMCI) and
nonamnestic MCI (naMCI). The decisional space is constructed
using those features deemed statistically significant through an
elaborate feature selection and ranking mechanism. FreeSurfer
was used to calculate 55 volumetric variables, which were then
adjusted for intracranial volume, age and education. The classification results obtained using support vector machines are based on
twofold cross validation of 50 independent and randomized runs.
The study included 59 AD, 67 aMCI, 56 naMCI, and 127 cognitively normal (CN) subjects. The study shows that MMSE scores
contain the most discriminative power of AD, aMCI, and naMCI.
For AD versus CN, the two most discriminative volumetric variables (right hippocampus and left inferior lateral ventricle), when
combined with MMSE scores, provided an average accuracy of
92.4% (sensitivity: 84.0%; specificity: 96.1%). MMSE scores are
found to improve all classifications with accuracy increments of
8.2% and 12% for aMCI versus CN and naMCI versus CN, respectively. Results also show that brain atrophy is almost evenly
seen on both sides of the brain for AD subjects, which is different
from right-side dominance for aMCI and left-side dominance for
naMCI. Furthermore, hippocampal atrophy is seen to be the most
significant for aMCI, while Accumbens area and ventricle are most
significant for naMCI.
Index Terms—Alzheimer’s disease (AD), brain atrophy, mild
cognitive impairment (MCI), mini-mental state examination
(MMSE), neuropsychological test.

I. INTRODUCTION

E

STIMATES from the Alzheimer Association (alz.org) as
of March 2012 indicate that 5.4 million Americans are di-

Manuscript received May 30, 2013; revised February 7, 2014; accepted March
3, 2014. Date of publication March 11, 2014; date of current version July 15,
2014. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under grants
CNS-0959985, HRD-0833093, CNS-1042341, IIP-1338922, and IIP-1230661.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Q. Zhou, M. Goryawala, M. Cabrerizo, and J. Wang are with the Department
of Electrical Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33174
USA (e-mail: qzhou003@fiu.edu; mgory001@fiu.edu; cabreriz@fiu.edu;
jwang006@fiu.edu).
W. Barker, D. A. Loewenstein, and R. Duara are with the Wien Center
for Alzheimer’s Disease and Memory Disorders, Mount Sinai Medical Center,
Miami Beach, FL 33140 USA (e-mail: warren.barker@msmc.com; DLoewenstein@med.miami.edu; ranjan.duara@msmc.com).
∗ M. Adjouadi is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33174 USA (e-mail: adjouadi@fiu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2310709

agnosed with Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and over 95% of this
population are 65 years of age or older. This estimate of AD
population is expected to reach 16 million by 2050, a disturbing
prospect. Also, nearly half of the population over 85 years of
age is affected by AD [1]. Characterized as a neurodegenerative
disease, AD is thought to be the cause of the majority of dementia cases [2]. Although a cure remains a long-term endeavor,
early and reliable diagnosis of AD and its prodromal stages
(i.e., mild cognitive impairment (MCI)) is essential in search of
prospective early intervention and treatments.
Multiple modalities of biomarkers identifying AD (or MCI)
have been found to be effective, including structural MRI
[3]–[7], functional imaging modalities like single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) [8], positron emission
tomography (PET) [11], synchronous neural interactions obtained using magnetoencephalography [9], central spinal fluid
(CSF) [6] and electroencephalographic (EEG) rhythms [10],
[11]. These biomarkers have been widely used to guide clinicians for planning a course of action. Moreover, combinations
of two or more biomarkers have also been explored more recently to improve the results of the diagnosis [4]–[7], [12]. For
example, combination of MRI and CSF is reported to yield a
better accuracy than when using either alone [4]–[7]. In these
studies, Fan et al. combined MRI and PET biomarkers [5]. Walhovd et al. and Zhang et al. reported that combination of MRI,
PET, and CSF biomarkers yields the most suitable and complementary indicators for the diagnosis of AD (or MCI) [4], [12].
Other studies in the literature combined neuropsychological
tests with medical imaging modalities. Among them, Ewers
et al. combined the primary MRI and CSF biomarkers with
neuropsychological tests to predict conversion from MCI to
AD [13]. With a population of 81 AD patients and 101 elderly
control subjects, they determined that single-predictor models
yielded comparable accuracies as multipredictor models, with
a prediction accuracy ranging from the mid-1960s to a high of
68.5% when the entorhinal cortex is used as the single predictor.
Gomar et al. investigated in a two-year longitudinal study the
usefulness of combining different variables drawn from a series
of biomarkers with the inclusion of cognitive markers and other
risk factors to likewise predict conversion from MCI to AD [14].
Their study involved the use of brain volumes, CFS, along with
other cognitive markers. Their findings suggest that cognitive
markers at baseline are better suited as predictors for the conversion than the temporal neurobiological markers. Furthermore,
they also suggest that sharp decline in functional ability is a
better predictor for the conversion than the biomarkers. These
findings add credence to the results obtained in this study, in

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

that with the inclusion of neuropsychological data, accuracy in
delineating AD from controls is shown to increase to over 90%.
It is noted that in both of these studies, which focus more on
the conversion from MCI to AD, the volumetric measures of
the different brain regions were selected manually, and both
studies relied on the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) public database. As such, the proposed study
which provides an automated approach at ranking the neurobiological variables will augment and complement such findings,
as reported in both of these studies, to reflect more globally
patterns of structural and physiological abnormalities in their
entirety [5], and with statistical context for a more meaningful
choice of the different variables.
In this study, subgroups of MCI: amnestic MCI (aMCI) and
nonamnestic MCI (naMCI) are studied separately as early findings suggest that these two different types of MCI have their
own distinctive features that could delineate them [15], [16].
More specifically, this could help in predicting the conversion
of MCI as has been reported by Ferman et al. that naMCIs were
more likely to develop dementia with Lewy body while patients
with aMCI are more likely to convert to AD [17].
This study investigates the classification of AD, aMCI, and
naMCI by combining subcortical volumes of MRI with a neuropsychological test (mini-mental state examination (MMSE)),
which is most often administered to screen patients for cognitive
impairment and dementia. This study demonstrates the merits
of MMSE and extends its use to the discrimination of different
stages of AD when used in conjunction with select volumetric variables. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the
first that investigates the impact of combining MRI at baseline
with MMSE for the detection of AD, aMCI, and naMCI using
support vector machine (SVM) methodology. Another important contribution of this study is the development of a fully
automated feature extraction technique, which in its initial step
associates equal weights to each of the measured volumes, and
yet as its outcome is a ranking of the volumes that can be used
as variables in a multidimensional decisional space for optimal
classification.
II. METHODOLOGY
The general structure of the proposed approach is presented
in Fig. 1 showing the main steps of the whole process from
acquisition of the MRI scans, through the sorting and selection of variables or features that will constitute the decisional
space for the classification process using the well-established
SVM classifier. The proposed approach is also open to the use
of other alternative classification algorithms such as artificial
neural networks, optimal discriminant analysis, and so on. This
study opted for SVM only for its implementation simplicity.
A. Subjects
In this study, a total of 309 participants were recruited from
Wien Center for Alzheimer’s Disease and Memory Disorders,
Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, FL as shown in
Table I between 2005 and 2008. All participants have taken the
Folstein MMSE [18] with a minimum score of 15. The study

Fig. 1.

General structure of the classification approach.

was approved by the Mount Sinai Medical Center Institutional
Review Board with informed consent provided by the subjects
or legal representatives.
All subjects had: 1) a neurological and medical evaluation by
a physician; 2) MMSE; 3) a structural volumetrically acquired
MRI scan of the brain. MMSE was used as the index of cognitive
ability and sum of boxes from the Clinical Dementia Rating
Scale (CDR-sb) was used clinically as the index of functional
ability.
The cognitive diagnosis was made using a combination of
the physician’s diagnosis and the neuropsychological diagnosis, as described previously [19]. The etiological diagnosis was
made by the examining physician. The diagnosis of cognitive
normal (CN) required that the physician’s diagnosis was CN
and no cognitive test scores were ≥1.5 S.D. below age and
education-corrected means. A probable AD diagnosis required
a dementia syndrome and the National Institute of Neurological
and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer’s Disease
and Related Disorders Association criteria for AD [20].
The diagnosis of aMCI was rendered by a clinical impression by the examining physician of a history of MCI but no
significant functional impairment and did not meet Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder-4th edition (DSMIV) criteria [21] for dementia. This diagnosis was confirmed by
a neuropsychological evaluation in which one or more tests of
memory had to fall 1.5 S.D. or more below expected normative
values.
The diagnosis of naMCI was rendered by a clinical impression
by the examining physician of a history of MCI but no significant functional impairment and did not meet DSM-IV criteria
for dementia. This diagnosis was confirmed by a neuropsychological evaluation in which one or more tests of nonmemory
function (e.g., Trails B, Similarities, and Category Fluency) had

ZHOU et al.: OPTIMAL DECISIONAL SPACE FOR THE CLASSIFICATION OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT

2247

TABLE I
PARTICIPANT DEMOGRAPHICS AND CHARACTERISTICS IN THIS STUDY

to fall 1.5 S.D. or more below expected normative values but all
tests of memory scored within normal limits.
B. Imaging Protocol
MRI scans were acquired on a 1.5-T machine (Siemen’s
Symphony, Iselin, NJ, USA, or General Electric, HDX, Milwaukee, Wisc., USA) using a proprietary 3-D-magnetizationprepared rapid-acquisition gradient echo (3-D MPRAGE) or 3D spoiled gradient echo sequences (FSPGR). Specifications for
3-D MPRAGE include coronal sections with a 1.5-mm gap in
thickness; section interval, 0.75 mm; TR, 2190 ms; TE, 4.38 ms;
TI, 1100 ms; FA, 15◦ ; NEX, 1; matrix, 256 × 256; FOV,
260 mm; bandwidth, 130 Hz/pixel; acquisition time, 9 min.;
phase-encoding direction, right to left. Specifications for 3-D
FSPGR were the following: 140 contiguous coronal sections
of 1.2-mm thickness; contiguous images with no section interval; TR, 7.8 ms; TE, 3.0 ms; inversion recovery preparation
time, 450 ms; flip angle, 12◦ ; NEX, 1; matrix, 256 × 256; FOV,
240 mm; bandwidth, 31.25 Hz/pixel; acquisition time, 6–7 min.;
phase-encoding direction, right to left.
C. Image Analysis
FreeSurfer pipeline (version 5.1.0) was applied to the MRI
scans to produce 55 volumetric variables, including 45 subcortical regions (e.g., left lateral ventricle, corpus callosum anterior, right hippocampus, etc.) and 10 morphometric statistics
(e.g., left hemisphere gray matter volume, total cortical volume,
etc.). Out of the 45 volumetric variables, four of them, namely
left white-matter-hypointensities (WMH), right WMH, left nonWMH, and right non-WMH were excluded since they were all
characterized by zero values. Therefore, each MRI scan includes
41 regional and 10 morphometric volumes. It was determined
that MRI scans from the two scanner machines did not change
the variance of volume difference when comparing subcortical
volumes (FreeSurfer segmentation) from the test–retest scans
acquired in a fixed machine [22], [23], thus no correction is
needed for scanner difference.

regions of interest (ROIs) that define the pattern of atrophy may
help delineate AD and MCI from normal controls. To this end, a
rigorous blind feature selection technique is proposed, where no
prior assumptions of ROIs are assumed and with equal weights
assigned to each of the volumetric measures so as to eliminate
any bias. The outcome of this selection process is the determination of those statistically significant features that form an
optimal decisional space bound to yield accurate classification
results of AD, MCI (aMCI, naMCI), and controls.
All volumetric variables, but for intracranial (ICV), were adjusted for ICV, age, and education as per (1), as they were found
to be significant factors as demonstrated in Table I:
Va = Vu a − GICV · (VsICV − Vm ICV )
− GEDU · (Es − Em ) − GAGE · (As − Am )

(1)

where Va is the adjusted volume, Vu a is the unadjusted volume, VsICV , Es , and As are the subject ICV, years of education,
and age (years), respectively; Vm ICV , Em , and Am are the corresponding means for all the control subjects. The gradients
GICV , GEDU , and GAGE were derived by a region specific regression against subject ICV, years of education, and age of all
the participants so that the regression is fully blinded to the classifications. As per Chiang et al. [25], the above regression also
has the advantage that the regressing order of the three factors
does not affect the results.
The adjusted volumes and ICV of the 51 volumetric variables
are then combined with the MMSE score to generate a 52variable vector discriminator for each subject. A Student’s t-test
is carried out on each of the 52 variables between AD (or MCI)
and CN to determine the significance of each variable in the
classification outcome and only those with a p-value lower than
significance level (α) of 0.05 are selected and ranked.
It should also be noted that even though atrophy is what
is generally sought, statistical testing in this study considers
both cases of atrophy and enlargement of brain regions, since
volumetric enlargement (i.e., ventricles filled with cerebrospinal
fluid) is also shown to be an important predictor of AD [26].
E. Variable Selection Using Incremental Error Analysis

D. Feature Extraction and Statistical Significance
AD patients suffer from cerebral atrophy, which can be distinguished from normal aging [3], and specific regions are more atrophied along the progression of AD. For example, studies have
shown that hippocampal atrophy is more significant as disease
progresses [24]. Determination of the key atrophied/enlarged

Rank of the statistically significant variables provides an overall view of the discriminative power of each variable for each
classification type. Selection of these optimal variables can be
viewed as a dimensionality reduction problem, which is performed using an incremental error analysis. The result of this
analysis is the determination of how many of these top-ranked

2248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

TABLE II
SIGNIFICANT VARIABLES FOR naMCI VERSUS CN AND aMCI VERSUS CN

variables ought to be included in the classifier to yield the best
classification performance. The proposed error analysis, which
begins with the initial phase of using only the first top-ranked
variable, is employed whereby an additional next-ranked variable is introduced in the SVM classifier at each subsequent phase
and the corresponding classifier statistics (accuracy, sensitivity,
specificity) are recorded each time.
F. SVM-Based Classification Experiment
SVM classifier is shown to be an effective classification tool of
AD and MCI [27]–[29]. The SVM as implemented in this study
uses a sequential minimal optimization scheme to implement a
L1 soft-margin SVM classifier. SVM maps the original features
via a kernel function to construct a maximum margin classifier
in a high-dimensional feature space. The kernel function used
in this study is the Gaussian Radial Basis Function kernel with
an empirical scaling factor of 3.
In this study, all experiments were based on twofold cross
validation, meaning half of the subjects data are used as training
set and the other half as testing set. The training and testing sets
were randomly assigned while the number of subjects with AD
(or MCI) and CN in each set remain fixed. To limit the potential
data partitioning error introduced by random data assignment
and cross validation, the same experiment with random data
assignment was run 50 times and the average performance was
recorded.
III. RESULTS
A. Rank of Variables
Based on the methodology described in Section II-D, a Student’s t-test was performed for AD versus CN, aMCI versus
CN, and naMCI versus CN using the ICV-, education-, and ageadjusted 52-variable vector discriminator. The variables found
at significance level of 0.05 for MCI versus CN and AD versus
CN were ranked and are given in Tables II and III, respectively,
which show the importance of each variable in potentially discriminating different stages of AD. The anatomical distribution
of these ROIs is shown in Fig. 2.
From Tables II and III, it can be observed that MMSE as a cognitive measure ranks first for all classification types. Moreover,
in comparison to MCI, the AD group is shown to have many
more significant variables than the naMCI and aMCI groups,
indicating atrophy is more serious and widely spread in the

AD group. Table II also shows that hippocampus atrophy is
dominant in aMCI subjects as both left and right hippocampus
regions rank as the second and third only after MMSE. This
finding is consistent with the fact that one main characteristic of
aMCI subjects is memory problem, which the hippocampus is
found to be responsible for [34]. Whereas hippocampus region
does not show as significant in naMCI group, Accumbens and
ventricle regions do instead. The distinctive symptom of aMCI
and naMCI (memory) is consistent with the regional atrophy in
these preliminary results.
Anatomical visualization of all the significant ROIs (excluding morphometric variables) as shown in Fig. 2 provides a general view of how the ROIs are distributed within the brain. The
figure shows that atrophy for the AD group is widely seen for a
number of regions on both hemispheres, while for aMCI atrophy
is more dominant on the right side and for naMCI all significant atrophy is seen on the left side. This finding implies the
difference of atrophy in terms of its extension and hemisphere
dominance at different stages of AD.
A closer inspection of the results shows that the top-ranked
significant volumetric variables, e.g., hippocampus [30]–[32],
ventricular [26], [33], cortical [30], [32], [34] and amygdala
[33], [35] are all regions that have been proven to be effective
predictors of AD and/or MCI by other research groups. The
convergence of these findings comes in support of the merits
and usability of the ranking system developed in this study.
B. Best Variable Set Based on Incremental Error Analysis
The incremental error analysis aims to determine how many
top-ranked variables should be included in order to produce the
best classification results. The classification of AD, Amci, and
naMCI was performed starting from the first-ranked variable,
and incrementally adding the next best ranked variable until all
significant variables were considered. The accuracy with error
bars depicting the standard deviation (S.D.) of the 50 repetition
runs is plotted in Fig. 3, with the horizontal axis indicating at
each step the number of top-ranked variables that were considered.
The classification accuracy curve based on the proposed
incremental error analysis displays a trend on how accuracy
changes as more variables (one at a time) are included. For AD
versus CN, as shown in Fig. 3(a), the increasing trend of the
curve stops when the first three variables (MMSE score, right
hippocampus, and left inferior lateral ventricle) are included,
yielding a peak accuracy of 92.4%. As can be seen in Fig. 3(b),
the accuracy peaks for the classification of naMCI when the
top 2-ranked variables (MMSE and right hippocampus) are included with a peak accuracy of 74.9%; as for aMCI, the upward
trend in accuracy is sustained up to the three significant variables (MMSE, right Accumbens area, and right inferior lateral
ventricle) reaching a peak accuracy of 74.1%.
The features that make up the optimal decisional space and,
hence, produce the best classification results are summarized
in Table IV, with and without the inclusion of the MMSE
score. It can be observed that with MMSE the performance improved significantly for all classification types with an accuracy

ZHOU et al.: OPTIMAL DECISIONAL SPACE FOR THE CLASSIFICATION OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT

2249

TABLE III
SIGNIFICANT VARIABLES FOR AD VERSUS CN

detailed parameters of classification experiment for better comparison of the performance.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 2. Representation of all significant ROIs (excluding morphometric variables and MMSE) using different colors for (a) AD versus CN, (b) aMCI versus
CN, and (c) naMCI versus CN.

increment of 14.2% for AD versus CN, 8.2% for aMCI versus
CN, and 12.0% for naMCI versus CN. Such outcomes support
the fact that the cognitive measure as determined from MMSE
test is rather important in this type of classification. This difference in the accuracy could not otherwise be overcome with the
inclusion of additional MRI-based volumetric measures.
To have an anatomical view of these optimal decisional
spaces, the brain regions associated with the top-ranked volumetric features for each classification pair are plotted in Fig. 4,
which suggests that different brain regions could be linked to
the different stages of AD.
C. Reliability of Rank and Sample Size
To evaluate the rank reliability of the variables, which might
be dependent on the dataset size, a test was performed by randomly reducing the dataset to 80% and 50% of its original size.
Then, the ranks of each variable in 100 repetitions of the random experiment were summed and averaged to get the rank
expectation. The final rank was determined by sorting the rank
expectation of all variables from low to high and top three variables were recorded as shown in Table V.
D. Comparative Analysis
A comparison of classification performance with recent studies in literature is provided in Table VI, which also shows the

The rank of the variables derived using the proposed feature selection process adds credence to the merits of combining
structural MRI measures with the cognitive measure of MMSE
for classifying AD, aMCI, and non-aMCI from CN. Moreover,
on the basis of the incremental error analysis, the top-ranked
features as determined define the optimal decisional space on
which group classifications (AD versus CN, aMCI versus CN,
and naMCI versus CN) are carried out. It may be argued that
the rank as derived in this study may vary as the size of the
dataset under consideration is changed. A test trying to rerun
the ranking of the variables by reducing the dataset size was
done and recorded in Table V demonstrating that the rank does
not change even when the dataset size is reduced by 50%. This
indicates that the combination of variables found in this study
is reliable, reproducible, and statistically meaningful even under
a smaller subset of the data.
It can also be argued that incremental error analysis does not
cover all the possible combinations of the significant variables as
indicated in Tables II and III; thus, there might be a combination
that was not considered in the analysis that could have produced
a better result. For AD versus CN, there are 28 significant variables. All possible combinations are in the form of Ckn (where
n means the 28 significant variables, which could be combined
two at a time, three at a time, etc., for different values of k,
yielding different multidimensional decisional spaces). Such an
exhaustive attempt at assessing all these combinations variables
is not only unyielding, but rather unnecessary in light of the
statistical meaningfulness that supports the proposed method of
ranking these variables.
As can be observed from Fig. 3, there were situations where
performance increases slightly as other lower-ranked variables
are considered. For example, when variable 8 is considered, the
accuracy increases from 90.2% to 90.5% by 0.3% indicating
that variable 8 does increase the classification performance and,
therefore, should be considered as an added dimension in the
decisional space. However, this could be due to the randomness
of the subjects during the cross-validation process using the

2250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

Fig. 3. Incremental error analysis performance of accuracy with S.D. indicated as error bar (a) AD versus CN, (b) naMCI versus CN and aMCI versus CN with
only one side S.D. shown to avoid overlapping. (For naMCI versus CN, though only three variables were shown as significant, the fourth ranked variable was
included to check if the accuracy continues to increase.)
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF BEST PERFORMANCE CASES BASED ON INCREMENTAL ERROR ANALYSIS

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF TOP RANK VARIABLES WITH VARYING DATASET SIZE

Fig. 4. Representation of the most significant regions that combines with
MMSE scores constitute the optimal decisional space for (a) AD versus CN, (b)
aMCI versus CN, and (c) naMCI versus CN.

SVM classifier. A slightly more favorable distribution of subjects can yield a relatively improved result. Consequently, the
random distribution of the subject data was the primary reason
for averaging the results of a large number of randomized runs
(50) of the program for each experiment. On the other hand,
the rank of the variable, especially lower-ranked variables, may
suffer much variation from one dataset to another as they may
intrinsically have very close mean differences identified by statistical test with close p-values between the two groups under
comparison. However, this does not affect the meaningfulness

of those very top-ranked variables. Furthermore, even though
ranking variability may be observed, the top three ranked variables do not change. It should also be noted that determining
the correct rank of the lower-ranked variables could be difficult
and in some cases impractical due to the high unpredictability
seen in these variables from one dataset to another.

ZHOU et al.: OPTIMAL DECISIONAL SPACE FOR THE CLASSIFICATION OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT

2251

TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS

classification of AD (or MCI) when used in conjunction with
MRI measures.
From Table VI, a previous study using MMSE showed an
accuracy of 92.3% for classifying AD from CN [40]. However,
this study lacked the analysis for the MCI group. Table VI
indicates that the proposed technique using MMSE and MRI
can yield competitive classification performance as those using
two or more imaging modalities or biomarkers.
V. CONCLUSION
Fig. 5. A specific case displaying the distribution of the half subject population of the testing set in the context of the first three principle variables. Out
of the 93 subjects shown and used for testing the SVM classifier only five misclassifications are seen that are shown by solid dots. This is a typical case of
classification approach for AD versus CN.

The projection of subjects in the testing set on a decisional
space based on the three aforementioned top-ranked variables
for AD versus CN is shown in Fig. 5. A total of five misclassifications were observed that included three CN and two AD
subjects. It can be seen that AD and CN groups are generally
separable as they form two clearly distinct clusters, especially
the CN group, which is a denser cluster. This clustering outcome adds further credence to the importance of these three
dimensions (variables).
Even though the use of MMSE score as a cognitive measure
is limited in the sense that individuals may experience decline
that is not captured, the preliminary results of this study suggest that MMSE improves classification results when combined
with MRI measures. This implies that other neuropsychological
tests such as verbal fluency test and delayed paragraph recall
test may also contain complimentary information for improving

The use of different biomarkers for clinical diagnosis of AD
and MCI is of great importance. This study has shown that volumetric MRI measures can better predict AD (aMCI or naMCI)
when combined with MMSE score. The MMSE score is found
to be the most statistically significant variable and one that
improves classification accuracy at any stage of the AD spectrum by over 10%. Particularly, MRI measures of right hippocampus and left inferior lateral ventricle when combined with
MMSE score yield a classification accuracy of 92.4% (sensitivity: 84.0%; specificity: 96.1%) for delineating AD patients from
CN, which is very competitive in comparison to results reported
in other recent studies. The approach considered for selecting
and then ranking MMSE and other MRI variables could be
useful at augmenting other classification methods reported in
the literature and could have broader impact in reevaluating the
different variables as predictive measures of AD.
In addition, the results show that AD atrophy is widely
spread and evenly seen on both sides, whereas aMCI and
naMCI subjects are left-side and right-side dominant, respectively, which indicates that at different stages of AD, there may
be hemisphere-dependent atrophy dominance. Also, hippocampus atrophy is found in this study to be one of the key factors
causing memory problems among subjects with aMCI as compared to naMCI, which builds a linkage between the distinctive

2252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

symptom of the two types of MCI and the brain atrophy, and
strongly suggests the use of hippocampus atrophy as the means
to separate aMCI from naMCI.
REFERENCES
[1] “2012 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures,” Alzheimers Dementia, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 131–168, 2012.
[2] S. Duchesne, A. Caroli, C. Geroldi, C. Barillot, G. B. Frisoni, and
D. L. Collins, “MRI-based automated computer classification of probable AD versus normal controls,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 509–20, Apr. 2008.
[3] N. C. Fox and J. M. Schott, “Imaging cerebral atrophy: Normal ageing to
Alzheimer’s disease,” Lancet, vol. 363, no. 9406, pp. 392–394, Jan. 31,
2004.
[4] K. B. Walhovd, A. M. Fjell, J. Brewer, L. K. McEvoy, C. FennemaNotestine, D. J. Hagler Jr., R. G. Jennings, D. Karow, and A. M. Dale,
“Combining MR imaging, positron-emission tomography, and CSF
biomarkers in the diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer disease,” AJNR
Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 347–354, Feb. 2010.
[5] Y. Fan, S. M. Resnick, X. Wu, and C. Davatzikos, “Structural and functional biomarkers of prodromal Alzheimer’s disease: A high-dimensional
pattern classification study,” Neuroimage, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 277–285,
Jun. 2008.
[6] E. Westman, J. Muehlboeck, and A. Simmons, “Combining MRI and CSF
measures for classification of Alzheimer’s disease and prediction of mild
cognitive impairment conversion,” Neuroimage, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 229–
238, 2012.
[7] P. Vemuri, H. J. Wiste, S. D. Weigand, L. M. Shaw, J. Q. Trojanowski,
M. W. Weiner, D. S. Knopman, R. C. Petersen, and C. R. Jack Jr., “MRI
and CSF biomarkers in normal, MCI, and AD subjects: Predicting future
clinical change,” Neurology, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 294–301, Jul. 28, 2009.
[8] K. A. Johnson, K. Jones, B. L. Holman, J. A. Becker, P. A. Spiers,
A. Satlin, and M. S. Albert, “Preclinical prediction of Alzheimer’s disease using SPECT,” Neurology, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1563–1571, Jun. 1998.
[9] R. Hornero, J. Escudero, A. Fernandez, J. Poza, and C. Gomez, “Spectral and nonlinear analyses of MEG background activity in patients with
Alzheimer’s disease,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1658–
1665, Jun. 2008.
[10] C. Huang, L. Wahlund, T. Dierks, P. Julin, B. Winblad, and V. Jelic,
“Discrimination of Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment
by equivalent EEG sources: A cross-sectional and longitudinal study,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 111, no. 11, pp. 1961–1967, Nov. 2000.
[11] G. Henderson, E. Ifeachor, N. Hudson, C. Goh, N. Outram,
S. Wimalaratna, C. Del Percio, and F. Vecchio, “Development and assessment of methods for detecting dementia using the human electroencephalogram,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1557–1568,
Aug. 2006.
[12] D. Q. Zhang, Y. P. Wang, L. P. Zhou, H. Yuan, D. G. Shen, and
A. D. N. Initia, “Multimodal classification of Alzheimer’s disease and
mild cognitive impairment,” Neuroimage, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 856–867,
Apr. 1, 2011.
[13] M. Ewers, C. Walsh, J. Q. Trojanowski, L. M. Shaw, R. C. Petersen,
C. R. Jack, H. H. Feldman, A. L. W. Bokde, G. E. Alexander,
P. Scheltens, B. Vellas, B. Dubois, M. Weiner, H. Hampel, and
N. A. A. S. D. Neuroimagin, “Prediction of conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s disease dementia based upon biomarkers and neuropsychological test performance,” Neurobiol. Aging, vol. 33,
no. 7, pp. 1203–1214, Jul. 2012.
[14] J. J. Gomar, M. T. Bobes-Bascaran, C. Conejero-Goldberg, P. Davies,
T. E. Goldberg, and A. S. D. Neuroimaging, “Utility of combinations
of biomarkers, cognitive markers, and risk factors to predict conversion
from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer disease in patients in the
Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative,” Archives Gen. Psychiatry,
vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 961–969, Sep. 2011.
[15] J. M. Ellison, D. G. Harper, Y. Berlow, and L. Zeranski, “Beyond the
‘C’ on MCI: Noncognitive symptoms in amnestic and non-amnestic mild
cognitive impairment,” Cns Spectrums, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 66–72, Jan.
2008.
[16] K. E. Nutter-Upham, A. J. Saykin, L. A. Rabin, R. M. Roth, H. A. Wishart,
N. Pare, and L. A. Flashman, “Verbal fluency performance in amnestic
MCI and older adults with cognitive complaints,” Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 229–241, May 2008.

[17] T. J. Ferman, G. E. Smith, K. Kantarci, B. F. Boeve, V. S. Pankratz,
D. W. Dickson, N. R. Graff-Radford, Z. Wszolek, J. Van Gerpen, R. Uitti,
O. Pedraza, M. E. Murray, J. Aakre, J. Parisi, D. S. Knopman, and
R. C. Petersen, “Nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment progresses to
dementia with Lewy bodies,” Neurology, vol. 81, pp. 2032–2038, Nov. 8
2013.
[18] M. F. Folstein, S. E. Folstein, and P. R. McHugh, “Mini-mental state: a
practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician,” J. Psychiatric Research, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 189–198, 1975.
[19] D. A. Loewenstein, W. W. Barker, D. G. Harwood, C. Luis, A. Acevedo,
I. Rodriguez, and R. Duara, “Utility of a modified mini-mental state examination with extended delayed recall in screening for mild cognitive
impairment and dementia among community dwelling elders,” in Proc.
Int. J. Geriatric Psychiatry, May 2000, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 434–440.
[20] G. McKhann, D. Drachman, M. Folstein, R. Katzman, D. Price, and
E. M. Stadlan, “Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: Report of
the NINCDS-ADRDA Work Group under the auspices of Department
of Health and Human Services Task Force on Alzheimer’s Disease,” Neurology, vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 939–944, Jul. 1984.
[21] A. P. Association, and A. P. A. T. F. O. DSM-IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV. Arligton, VA, USA: Amer.
Psychiatric Publishing, 1994.
[22] J. Jovicich, S. Czanner, X. Han, D. Salat, A. Van Der Kouwe, B. Quinn,
J. Pacheco, M. Albert, R. Killiany, and D. Blacker, “MRI-derived measurements of human subcortical, ventricular and intracranial brain volumes:
Reliability effects of scan sessions, acquisition sequences, data analyses, scanner upgrade, scanner vendors and field strengths,” Neuroimage,
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 177–192, 2009.
[23] X. Han, J. Jovicich, D. Salat, A. van der Kouwe, B. Quinn, S. Czanner,
E. Busa, J. Pacheco, M. Albert, and R. Killiany, “Reliability of MRIderived measurements of human cerebral cortical thickness: The effects
of field strength, scanner upgrade and manufacturer,” Neuroimage, vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 180–194, 2006.
[24] R. I. Scahill, J. M. Schott, J. M. Stevens, M. N. Rossor, and N. C. Fox,
“Mapping the evolution of regional atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease: Unbiased analysis of fluid-registered serial MRI,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,
vol. 99, no. 7, pp. 4703–4707, Apr. 2, 2002.
[25] G. C. Chiang, P. S. Insel, D. Tosun, N. Schuff, D. Truran-Sacrey,
S. Raptentsetsang, C. R. Jack, M. W. Weiner, and A. D. Neuroimaging,
“Identifying cognitively healthy elderly individuals with subsequent memory decline by using automated MR temporoparietal volumes,” Radiology,
vol. 259, no. 3, pp. 844–851, Jun. 2011.
[26] P. M. Thompson, K. M. Hayashi, G. I. De Zubicaray, A. L. Janke,
S. E. Rose, J. Semple, M. S. Hong, D. H. Herman, D. Gravano,
D. M. Doddrell, and A. W. Toga, “Mapping hippocampal and ventricular
change in Alzheimer disease,” Neuroimage, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1754–1766,
Aug. 2004.
[27] S. Kloppel, C. M. Stonnington, C. Chu, B. Draganski, R. I. Scahill,
J. D. Rohrer, N. C. Fox, C. R. Jack Jr., J. Ashburner, and R. S. Frackowiak,
“Automatic classification of MR scans in Alzheimer’s disease,” Brain,
vol. 131, no. Pt. 3, pp. 681–689, Mar. 2008.
[28] M. M. Lopez, J. Ramirez, J. M. Gorriz, I. Alvarez, D. Salas-Gonzalez,
F. Segovia, and R. Chaves, “SVM-based CAD system for early detection
of the Alzheimer’s disease using kernel PCA and LDA,” Neurosci. Lett.,
vol. 464, no. 3, pp. 233–238, Oct. 30, 2009.
[29] R. Chaves, J. Ramirez, J. M. Gorriz, M. Lopez, D. Salas-Gonzalez,
I. Alvarez, and F. Segovia, “SVM-based computer-aided diagnosis of
the Alzheimer’s disease using t-test NMSE feature selection with feature
correlation weighting,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 461, no. 3, pp. 293–297, Sep.
15, 2009.
[30] C. Pennanen, M. Kivipelto, S. Tuomainen, P. Hartikainen, T. Hanninen,
M. P. Laakso, M. Hallikainen, M. Vanhanen, A. Nissinen, E. L. Helkala,
P. Vainio, R. Vanninen, K. Partanen, and H. Soininen, “Hippocampus and
entorhinal cortex in mild cognitive impairment and early AD,” Neurobiol.
Aging, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 303–310, Mar. 2004.
[31] M. J. De Leon, A. E. George, L. A. Stylopoulos, G. Smith, and
D. C. Miller, “Early marker for Alzheimer’s disease: The atrophic hippocampus,” Lancet, vol. 2, no. 8664, pp. 672–673, Sep. 16, 1989.
[32] A. T. Du, N. Schuff, D. Amend, M. P. Laakso, Y. Y. Hsu, W. J. Jagust,
K. Yaffe, J. H. Kramer, B. Reed, D. Norman, H. C. Chui, and
M. W. Weiner, “Magnetic resonance imaging of the entorhinal cortex
and hippocampus in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease,”
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 441–447, Oct. 2001.
[33] S. M. Nestor, R. Rupsingh, M. Borrie, M. Smith, V. Accomazzi,
J. L. Wells, J. Fogarty, R. Bartha, and A. S. D. N. Initi, “Ventricular

ZHOU et al.: OPTIMAL DECISIONAL SPACE FOR THE CLASSIFICATION OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

enlargement as a possible measure of Alzheimers disease progression
validated using the Alzheimers disease neuroimaging initiative database,”
Brain, vol. 131, pp. 2443–2454, Sep. 2008.
K. Juottonen, M. P. Laakso, K. Partanen, and H. Soininen, “Comparative
MR analysis of the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus in diagnosing
Alzheimer disease,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 139–144,
Jan. 1999.
C. A. Cuenod, A. Denys, J. L. Michot, P. Jehenson, F. Forette, D. Kaplan,
A. Syrota, and F. Boller, “Amygdala atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease. An
in vivo magnetic resonance imaging study,” Arch. Neurol., vol. 50, no. 9,
pp. 941–945, Sep. 1993.
C. Hinrichs, V. Singh, G. F. Xu, S. C. Johnson, and A. D. Neuroimaging,
“Predictive markers for AD in a multi-modality framework: An analysis
of MCI progression in the ADNI population,” Neuroimage, vol. 55, no. 2,
pp. 574–589, Mar. 15 2011.
B. Magnin, L. Mesrob, S. Kinkingnehun, M. Pelegrini-Issac, O. Colliot,
M. Sarazin, B. Dubois, S. Lehericy, and H. Benali, “Support vector
machine-based classification of Alzheimer’s disease from whole-brain
anatomical MRI,” Neuroradiology, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 73–83, Feb. 2009.

2253

[38] K. B. Walhovd, A. M. Fjell, J. Brewer, L. K. McEvoy, C. FennemaNotestine, D. J. Hagler, R. G. Jennings, D. Karow, A. M. Dale, and
A. D. N. Initia, “Combining MR imaging, positron-emission tomography, and CSF biomarkers in the diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer
disease,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 347–354, Feb. 2010.
[39] R. Cuingnet, E. Gerardin, J. Tessieras, G. Auzias, S. Lehericy,
M. O. Habert, M. Chupin, H. Benali, O. Colliot, and A. D. Neuroimaging,
“Automatic classification of patients with Alzheimer’s disease from structural MRI: A comparison of ten methods using the ADNI database,”
Neuroimage, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 766–781, May 15, 2011.
[40] Q. Zhou, M. Goryawala, M. Cabrerizo, W. Barker, R. Duara, and
A. Adjouadi, “Significance of normalization on anatomical MRI measures in predicting Alzheimer’s disease,” Scientific World J., vol. 2014,
pp. 1–12, 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

