IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

227

Improvement of Force-Sensor-Based Heart Rate
Estimation Using Multichannel Data Fusion
Christoph Brüser, Student Member, IEEE, Juha M. Kortelainen, Stefan Winter, Mirja Tenhunen, Juha Pärkkä,
and Steffen Leonhardt, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The aim of this paper is to present and evaluate algorithms for heartbeat interval estimation from multiple spatially
distributed force sensors integrated into a bed. Moreover, the benefit of using multichannel systems as opposed to a single sensor is
investigated. While it might seem intuitive that multiple channels
are superior to a single channel, the main challenge lies in finding
suitable methods to actually leverage this potential. To this end, two
algorithms for heart rate estimation from multichannel vibration
signals are presented and compared against a single-channel sensing solution. The first method operates by analyzing the cepstrum
computed from the average spectra of the individual channels,
while the second method applies Bayesian fusion to three interval
estimators, such as the autocorrelation, which are applied to each
channel. This evaluation is based on 28 night-long sleep lab recordings during which an eight-channel polyvinylidene fluoride-based
sensor array was used to acquire cardiac vibration signals. The
recruited patients suffered from different sleep disorders of varying severity. From the sensor array data, a virtual single-channel
signal was also derived for comparison by averaging the channels.
The single-channel results achieved a beat-to-beat interval error
of 2.2% with a coverage (i.e., percentage of the recording which
could be analyzed) of 68.7%. In comparison, the best multichannel
results attained a mean error and coverage of 1.0% and 81.0%,
respectively. These results present statistically significant improvements of both metrics over the single-channel results (p < 0.05).
Index Terms—Ballistocardiography (BCG), heartbeat intervals,
mechanocardiograpy (MCG), multichannel fusion, seismocardiography (SCG).

I. INTRODUCTION
NOBTRUSIVE monitoring of cardiac activity at home
has increasingly been the focus of research activities for
the past decade [1]. Among the numerous technologies which
have been investigated for this purpose, methods based upon

U

Manuscript received December 16, 2013; revised February 19, 2014; accepted March 9, 2014; Date of publication March 13, 2014; date of current
version December 30, 2014.
C. Brüser and S. Leonhardt are with the Philips Chair for Medical Information Technology, RWTH Aachen University, 52062 Aachen, Germany (e-mail:
brueser@hia.rwth-aachen.de; leonhardt@hia.rwth-aachen.de).
J. M. Kortelainen and J. Pärkkä are with the VTT Technical Research Center of Finland, 02044 Tampere, Finland (e-mail: juha.m.kortelainen@vtt.fi;
juha.parkka@vtt.fi).
S. Winter is with Philips Technologie GmbH Innovative Technologies,
Research Laboratories, 52074 Aachen, Germany (e-mail: Stefan.Winter@
philips.com).
M. Tenhunen is with the Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Medical
Imaging Centre and Hospital Pharmacy, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, FI-33521
Tampere, Finland (e-mail: Mirja.Tenhunen@pshp.fi).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2311582

recording of cardiac-related motions of the entire body have
shown great promise [2]–[4]. These recordings of minute motions of the body caused by the mechanical activity of the
heart are known under a number of different names, such as
ballistocardiogram (BCG) [5], seismocardiogram (SCG) [6],
mechanocardiogram [7], or kinetocardiogram [8], which mostly
differ in whether the recoil of the entire body caused by the ejection of blood from the heart (e.g., BCG) or precordial vibrations
(e.g., SCG) represent the major signal components. Recording
these signals by means of unobtrusive mechanical sensors integrated into the bed-frame or mattress is an approach which has
been investigated by various research groups [9]–[18]. Commercial products based on this principle are becoming available, for
example, from companies such as Emfit Ltd. (Vaajakoski, Finland), Beddit (Espoo, Finland) [17], [18], and Hoana Medical
Inc. (Honolulu, HI, USA). These types of systems generally
do not require any electrodes or the like to be attached to the
patients body nor do they require any special user compliance
besides the act of lying in bed. Hence, they could enable numerous health-care applications in the areas of long-term monitoring or screening which are difficult to achieve with conventional measurement techniques. Examples include monitoring
of heart rate variability (HRV) [13], [19], sleep monitoring [18]
and staging [13], [14], or arrhythmia screening [20]. For many
of these applications, accurate knowledge of heartbeat intervals
is of great importance.
In the case of bed-mounted sensors, the recorded signals can
usually not be clearly distinguished as either BCG or SCG since
they often contain a superposition of circulatory reaction and
myocardial vibration components [21], [22]. Hence, we will
refer to the signals recorded by these bed-mounted sensors by
the more general term cardiac vibration signals.
Most of the aforementioned systems are based on a single
sensing element, which typically measures an integration of
forces acting on its sensitive surface [9]–[11], [15]. Based on
the individual vibration signals, heart rates are estimated. In
some cases, two sensors at different locations in bed have been
used [12], [16]. However, the resulting signals have also been
analyzed on an individual basis. Hence, we call these types of
system, which only consider individual channels, single-channel
systems. As an alternative approach, the use of multiple, spatially distributed sensing elements together with a signal processing approach which aims to exploit the available redundancy for improved beat-to-beat interval estimation has been
proposed [23]. In the context of this paper, we will refer to systems which try to actively use multiple sensors in such a way as
multichannel systems.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

228

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

The objective of this study is the quantitative comparison of
multichannel BCG fusion algorithms against the more conventional single-channel analysis approach with respect to their performance in heartbeat interval estimation. While both concepts
have been evaluated in their own right, there has not yet been
a direct comparison between single- and multichannel analysis based on an identical dataset. In particular, the question of
whether the added complexity of multichannel approaches actually produce measurable benefits has not yet been answered.
Even though the hypothesis that multichannel systems are superior to single-channel approaches may appear self-evident at
first glance, it so far remains simply a hypothesis. Moreover, we
address the question of how to actually fuse multiple channels
to obtain better results than when analyzing a single channel.
To this end, we analyze a dataset of 28 overnight sleep lab
recordings performed with a multichannel recording system
(BedS) consisting of an eight-channel sensor array based on
piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) film. The sensor
system was developed at VTT Technical Research Center of
Finland [13], [23]. On this dataset, we evaluated two different multichannel algorithms for combined data fusion and heart
rate estimation: 1) the cepstrum-based BedS method proposed
in [23], and 2) a multichannel extension of the continuous local
interval estimation (CLIE) approach introduced in [19].
To provide a single-channel sensor example against which
these multichannel approaches can be compared, we generated
a “virtual” single-channel signal from the recorded sensor array
data by summing up all channels. The resulting signal was then
processed by the CLIE method which has been shown to be
suitable for heart rate estimation from single-channel cardiac
vibration signals [19]. We took this approach instead of using
a second physical sensor in order to guarantee that all methods
operate on exactly the same data. Thus, we can ensure that
none of the differences between the methods are caused through
variations in the acquisition hardware or sensor positioning. All
performance differences can only be attributed to the way the
signals were processed by the different algorithms.
II. DATA ACQUISITION AND STUDY DESIGN
A. Data Acquisition System
The multichannel vibration recordings were acquired in the
Sleep Centre of Tampere University Hospital simultaneously
with polysomnography (PSG) references. The multichannel system used was the BedS system developed by VTT. Its mattress
sensor unit includes eight PVDF sensors acquired from Measurement Specialties Inc., with an electrode area of 19 mm ×
171 mm and a thickness of 52 μm. The PVDF sensors are
placed into four rows and two columns, thus covering an overall
measurement area of 64 cm × 64 cm (see Fig. 1). Two foamed
rubber sheets are used to sandwich the PVDF foils and signal
leads. The resulting mat is covered with hygienic fabrics and has
overall dimensions of 100 cm × 72 cm and 2-cm thickness when
not compressed. The eight BCG signal channels are acquired
with an acquisition unit using 50-Hz sampling rate. Even though
50 Hz might initially appear to be an insufficient sampling rate,
the severe low-pass characteristics of the mattress means that

Fig. 1.

BedS sensor unit dimensions and arrangement.
TABLE I
STUDY SUBJECTS (13 FEMALE, 15 MALE)

higher frequency vibrations are heavily damped before reaching
the sensors anyway. Hence, higher resolution sampling is unnecessary with regards to the signal’s frequency content. Even
concerning the resolution of resulting interbeat intervals (IBIs),
the sampling rate poses no problems since all applied algorithms
perform interpolation to achieve subsample resolution.
The safety assessment testing of the BedS prototype device
was approved according to the standard IEC-60601-1. A regular
mattress made of Tempur material with a thickness of about
15 cm was placed on top of the BedS sensor unit.
B. Subjects and Data Collection
Overnight recordings were made for 28 voluntary subjects
with different suspected sleep problems, including sleep disordered breathing, restless movements, insomnia, and daytime
sleepiness. Permission for the study was obtained from the ethics
board of the Tampere University Hospital.
Patients with different sleep disorders of varying severity
were recruited to ensure that we would get a challenging dataset
containing a broad range of different conditions, which could
be used to compare various algorithms against each other. The
reported background data of the patients are mainly intended to
demonstrate that. However, it is not our intention to investigate
the applicability of BCG to particular sleep pathologies, for
which a different study setup would be necessary.
Of the 28 subjects, 13 were female and 15 male. Table I gives
a summary of the subject demographics as well as their sleep
behavior according to the PSG analysis provided by the Sleep
Centre experts. The apnea/hypopnea index (AHI) was manually
analyzed according to AASM guidelines [24]: six subjects had
severe (AHI > 30), seven had moderate (15 ≤ AHI ≤ 30), and
four subjects had mild (5 ≤ AHI ≤ 15) sleep apnea-hypopnea

BRÜSER et al.: IMPROVEMENT OF FORCE-SENSOR-BASED HEART RATE ESTIMATION USING MULTICHANNEL DATA FUSION

syndrome (SAHS). Three subjects were previously diagnosed
SAHS patients and were using a continuous positive airway
pressure device during the recordings, and the remaining eight
subjects had normal breathing behavior during sleep. Due to
their sleep problems, subjects were likely to induce severe movement artifacts in the BCG signals which can impede the extraction of the heart rate. No patient information about previously
diagnosed heart and vascular diseases was checked for the study
group; however, one of the subjects was carrying a pacemaker.
The reference ECG R-R intervals (ECG RRi) were recorded
according to the standard Sleep Center PSG procedures, using ECG recordings, electrodes placed on lower left rib cage
and above the right collar bone, with 500 Hz sampling rate,
and calculating the ECG RRi sequence with the automatic procedure of the Somnologica software. The resulting RRi series
was verified using the Hamilton–Tompkins algorithms [25] and
manual checks. Some periods where the reference ECG RRi
were unusable were manually detected and removed from further comparison.
III. METHODS FOR BEAT-TO-BEAT HEART RATE ESTIMATION
In this section, we briefly cover the two different algorithms
for heartbeat interval estimation from single- and multichannel
bed-sensor signals used in this paper: 1) the cepstrum-based
BedS algorithm [23], and 2) the CLIE method [19] together
with its multichannel extension (xCLIE). Their description will
be kept to a minimum in this paper as more detailed information
on both algorithms can be found in the respective references.
A. BedS Algorithm
The BedS algorithm was developed at VTT Technical Research Center of Finland (Tampere, Finland) specifically for
processing the signals generated by the multichannel sensor
system of the same name [23]. It operates by estimating the
IBI in the recorded signals using a sliding window cepstrum
analysis. To this end, it extracts the heartbeat interval from the
cepstrum Cx of the window x, which is defined as the inverse
Fourier transform F −1 {·} of the logarithm of spectrum Sx [26]
Sx = F{x}


Cx = real F −1 {log(|Sx |)} .

(1)
(2)

The spectrum for the heartbeat signal is composed of peaks at the
harmonic frequencies of the fundamental heartbeat frequency.
This periodicity in the spectrum is shown as a peak value in
the cepstrum located at the corresponding IBI lag time value.
In order to take multiple sensors into account, the spectra Sx of
all available sensors are averaged and then the final cepstrum is
computed from this averaged spectrum according to (2). In this
approach, the individual signal channels are fused in Fourier
domain as shown in Fig. 2.

229

Fig. 2. Basic overview of the BedS cepstrum fusion method for each sliding window position (DFT: discrete Fourier transform, IDFT: inverse discrete
Fourier transform) [23].

estimate the IBI intervals. However, it uses three different timedomain methods to estimate the likelihood of each possible
IBI value being the correct one in the given window: adaptivewindow autocorrelation (Corr), adaptive-window average magnitude difference function (AMDF), and maximum amplitude
pairs (MAP) [19]. These three estimator outputs are then combined using a Bayesian fusion approach to obtain an overall
estimate.
Each estimator X ∈ {Corr, AMDF, MAP} provides a posterior probability density functions p(T |X), giving the “probability” of a possible interval T to be the true heartbeat interval.
Using the three estimators, the most likely interval length T is
given by
T = arg max p(N |Corr, AMDF, MAP)

(3)

T

where p(T |Corr, AMDF, MAP) denotes the conditional probability of T being the true interval length given the joint estimator
outputs. By applying Bayes’ theorem twice, under the assumptions that each estimator only depends on the true value of T ,
and by using an uninformed prior [19], the posterior probability
simplifies to
p(T |Corr, AMDF, MAP) ∝ p(T |Corr)
·p(T |AMDF) · p(T |MAP).

(4)

Hence, we can estimate the interval length T , by selecting the
value of T for which the product of the three-scaled estimator
outputs has its maximum.
While the method has only been validated for single-channel
signals, it lends itself to a direct extension to multichannel signal fusion as shown in Fig. 3. For this application, we simply
synchronously shift the analysis window across all simultaneously recorded channels and apply each of the three estimators
to each channel’s analysis window separately. Instead of obtaining three estimator outputs, this results in three outputs per
channels. Now, instead of combining just three estimators, we
can simply apply the same Bayesian fusion approach to 24 estimates. To differentiate the single-channel version from this
multichannel extension, we denote the multichannel version as
xCLIE.
C. Motivation for Algorithm Selection

B. (x)CLIE Algorithm
The second algorithm (CLIE) was initially developed to
operate on single-channel vibration signals [19]. Similar to
the cepstrum approach, it operates on a sliding window to

The BedS method was initially developed to analyze the signal of the BedS measurement system and is implemented for a
digital signal processor on-board the acquisition hardware. The
extracted IBI values were automatically stored on a memory

230

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Since all scenarios are based on the exact same recordings performed using identical measurement hardware, we can safely
conclude that all observed performance difference can be attributed to differences in the different algorithms. This is also
the intuition behind generating a single-channel signal through
the sample-wise sum of the individual measurement channels.
Through the summation, we aim to emulate the behavior of a
single sensor with the same overall area where the forces acting
on its surface are integrated over the total area. Of course, the
sum operation can also be viewed as a crude form of signal
fusion.
Fig. 3. Basic overview of the xCLIE fusion method for each sliding window position (Corr.: autocorrelation, MAP: maximum amplitude pairs, AMDF:
average magnitude difference function) [19].

Fig. 4. Three evaluated signal-algorithm combinations. The underlying data
for all three scenarios are identical.

card together with the raw sensor signals during each patient
recording [23]. Hence, its inclusion into this evaluation was a
natural choice. The BedS sensor board operates on exactly the
same data as the other methods which were implemented offline
on a personal computer.
On the other hand, the CLIE method has, unlike other algorithms [10], previously been validated on a large database of
single-channel vibration signals [19]. Therefore, we could use
it as a proven algorithm for this task. Moreover, its intuitive
extension to multiple channels supported its inclusion in this
analysis.
IV. METHOD COMPARISON
A. Evaluation Scenarios
Of the 28 recordings, only the time period between the lightsoff and lights-on events in the sleep lab were selected for the
analysis. Except the removal of epochs with missing reference
ECG RRi, no further manual preprocessing of the bed-sensor
signals, such as artifact removal, was performed.
Based on this dataset, we evaluated the performance of heartbeat interval estimation for three scenarios using different combinations of signals and heart rate estimation algorithms as
shown in Fig. 4. Since our goal was to evaluate the merits
of using multiple, spatially-distributed vibration sensors versus
a single larger sensor, one scenarios estimates heart rates using
only a single sensor signal, i.e., the “virtual” signal obtained
by sample-wise averaging across all BedS channels. IBIs were
estimated from these signals using the CLIE single-channel algorithm. The remaining two scenarios utilize all eight signal
channels individually and only differ in the choice of algorithm
(BedS or xCLIE) used for fusion and heart rate estimation.

B. Performance Metrics
The performance of each scenario was measured with respect
to the same series of gold-standard RR intervals obtained from
the simultaneously recorded ECG. Three metrics were used to
assess the accuracy and robustness of each approach. The mean
of the relative errors Erel between the estimated bed-sensor
IBIs Ti and the reference RR intervals Ti is used to quantify the
accuracy of the heart rate estimation
1  |Δi |
(5)
Erel =
N i Ti
with Δi = Ti − Ti and N denoting the number of intervals.
Moreover, the errors’ 90th percentile E90 provides a measure
of error spread

	
|Δi |
(6)
E90 = P90
Ti
where P90 (·) denotes the 90th percentile operator.
Since all algorithms will automatically discard signal segments which they consider to be corrupted by motion artifacts
or otherwise unreliable, it is important to always consider coverage and errors together, since they measure different aspects
of the real-life performance of the systems. At the same time,
the interaction between coverage and errors means that it can
be difficult to determine, for example, if a decrease in errors is
caused by an actual improvement to the interval estimation or
because more difficult heartbeats have simply been excluded.
V. RESULTS
A. Bland–Altman Plots
Fig. 5 shows one Bland–Altman plot for each of the three
scenarios. These plots were generated from the total of all IBI
estimates of all 28 subjects. Hence, each plots represents an
average of 6 00 000 heartbeat intervals. In all three plots, i.e.,
for the single-channel as well as both multichannel methods,
no noticeable bias is visible in the means of the differences.
However, the limits of agreement, given by the 1st and 99th
percentiles of the differences in this case, clearly differ among
the methods. Table II gives the detailed numerical values for
the bias (Δ̄) as well as the width of the limits of agreements
(P99 − P1 ) for each of the methods.
When comparing the single-channel CLIE method to the
Fourier-domain averaging performed by the multichannel BedS

BRÜSER et al.: IMPROVEMENT OF FORCE-SENSOR-BASED HEART RATE ESTIMATION USING MULTICHANNEL DATA FUSION

231

Fig. 6. Box plots visualizing the distribution of (a) coverages and (b) mean
relative heartbeat interval estimation errors among the 28 analyzed subjects.
(a) Distribution of coverages. (b) Distribution of relative errors.

Among the two multichannel algorithms (BedS and xCLIE),
the Bland–Altman plot of the xCLIE method shows even narrower limits of agreement with a width of only 37 ms as opposed
to 150 ms. In other words, 98% of the valid heartbeat interval
estimate errors lie in the range of -15 to 22 ms.
B. Coverage and Error Distribution

Fig. 5. Bland–Altman plots showing the agreement between the respective
method and the ECG reference based on the combined IBIs of all 28 subjects. In
addition to the mean difference (Δ̄), the limits of agreement are shown through
the 1st and 99th percentiles of the differences (P 1 and P 9 9 , respectively).
Thus, 98% of the estimates lie between those limits. (a) Single-channel (CLIE).
(b) Multichannel (BedS). (c) Multichannel (xCLIE).

TABLE II
VALUES OF THE BIAS (Δ̄) AND LIMITS OF AGREEMENT (P 1 AND P 9 9 ) FOR
EACH OF THE BLAND–ALTMAN PLOTS IN FIG. 5

cepstrum method, we can observe that the multichannel approach results in limits of agreement which are almost 100 ms
narrower. Moreover, the limits of the BedS method are symmetric around the means, whereas the single-channel’s limits are
skewed toward positive interval differences. This implies that
IBIs estimated from the single-channel bed sensor signals often
underestimate the true interval lengths. This is also reflected
by the bias of 3.5 ms for the CLIE method. Given that exactly
the same signals were analyzed, this shows that more sophisticated fusion than simple sample-wise averaging will noticeably
improve the number and severity of estimation errors.

So far, only the accuracy of the estimated IBIs has been
compared among the three scenarios. As discussed before, the
coverage is an equally relevant metric of overall algorithm
performance.
Hence, Fig. 6 shows the distribution of coverages among the
28 evaluated records for each of the three scenarios. It also
shows the distribution of the mean relative estimation errors.
With regards to the achieved coverages [see Fig. 6(a)], both
multichannel methods clearly provide higher mean coverages
as well as less spread among the individual subjects compared
to the single-channel results. When comparing only the two
multichannel methods, the medians of the coverages are similar, while the coverages for the subjects show a slightly wider
distribution for the xCLIE method.
When comparing the distribution of the mean relative errors
for the 28 subjects in Fig. 6(b), we can observe similar results
to what we saw previously in the Bland–Altman plots. While
the single-channel CLIE errors have a similar median to the
multichannel BedS, the spread of the errors among the subjects
is noticeably reduced for the multichannel method. The xCLIE
methods shows overall decreased error levels and an even tighter
spread.
C. Detailed Results and Statistical Significance
In order to analyze the statistical significance of these observed differences as well as for further discussion of individual
subjects, Table III shows the detailed performance metrics for
each subject and method. In addition to the coverage and mean
relative errors (Erel ), it includes the 90th percentile of the relative errors (E90 ) as a measure of error spread. The table also

232

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE III
ACCURACY OF HEARTBEAT INTERVAL ESTIMATION FROM SINGLE-CHANNEL BCGS

gives the means for these metrics across all subjects. The statistical significance of the differences of the means for each pair of
methods was tested using a one-sided paired-sample t-test with
unpooled variances. These tests were performed for all three
quality metrics. The corresponding p-values for each method
combination are given in Table III underneath the respective
means. Since the error metrics follow a log-normal distribution,
they were log-transformed prior to applying the t-test to compensate for their nonnormality. The significance of the differences
in the means is assumed for p < 0.05.
As we have seen so far, the mean coverage of the singlechannel approach (68.7%) is approximately 13% points less
than either of the multichannel methods which have nearly
identical mean coverages (81.8% and 81.0%). The difference
between the single- and the multichannel methods was found
to be statistically significant with p < 0.05. While the (minor)
difference between the multichannel methods is not statistically
significant.
The mean relative error of the CLIE method is 2.2%, while
BedS and xCLIE achieve mean errors of 1.6% and 1.0%, respectively. For these values, only the difference between xCLIE
and both CLIE and BedS could be shown to be statistically

significant. Corresponding results can be observed for the errors’ 90th percentiles.
D. Accuracy During Common Artifact-Free Epochs
In order to determine only the performance of the interval
estimation independent of the artifact detection strategies, we
also computed the heartbeat interval estimation errors selectively for the signal segments which were deemed to be usable
by all algorithms. This reduces the mean coverage to 64.4%.
Even when only these uncomplicated intervals are compared,
the mean error across all subjects for the single-channel CLIE is
the largest with 1.49%. The multichannel methods achieve lower
mean errors (BedS: 0.66%, xCLIE: 0.49%). These results mirror
the performance differences observed in the previous section.
Moreover, as in Table III, the differences between xCLIE and
both other methods are statistically significant with p < 0.05,
while the difference between CLIE and BedS is not (p = 0.09).
VI. DISCUSSION
Overall, the results suggest that if all eight spatially distributed
channels are combined in more sophisticated ways than by

BRÜSER et al.: IMPROVEMENT OF FORCE-SENSOR-BASED HEART RATE ESTIMATION USING MULTICHANNEL DATA FUSION

simple averaging in the time domain, coverages can be increased
by over 12% points. Furthermore, mean errors of the xCLIE
multichannel method are reduced down to less than a half of
the errors of the single-channel method. Even more noticeably,
the results show that the severity of estimation outliers, as measured in the Bland–Altman plots and by the E90 metric, can be
significantly reduced when utilizing multiple-channels.
A closer look at the performance of the individual subjects
reveals two recordings (S06 and S12) which have extremely high
error percentiles and very low coverages across all methods.
While a few other subjects also represent negative outliers, such
as S07, these are usually handled well by at least one of the three
methods. In the case of S06 and S12, however, all methods
seem to produce high E90 and very low coverage values. A
careful analysis of the underlying signals showed that these
recordings were almost entirely corrupted by severe motion
artifacts as reflected by the very low coverage values. It is well
known that bed-mounted vibration sensors are highly sensitive
to such motion artifacts whose magnitude typically destroys
the much smaller cardiac signal component. This is a general
limitation of the measurement principle. Since it is unlikely
that any algorithm can recover useful information from such
a distorted signal, these two recordings do not contribute to
the comparison of single- versus multichannel methods. Hence,
in addition to the means for all subjects, Table III also gives
the means and corresponding p-values for all subjects except
S06 and S12 in the bottommost rows. Comparing the means
of all subjects with those excluding S06 and S12 shows that
the relative ranking among the methods remains unaffected.
However, in the means which exclude S06 and S12, the benefit
of multichannel processing, especially with regard to the errors’
percentiles, can be seen even more clearly.
To summarize, both multichannel fusion methods were capable of significantly improving the mean coverage over the
single-channel approach. With respect to the error metrics, only
the xCLIE method could significantly reduce the mean error and
the error spread, even though also the BedS algorithm clearly
reduced the relevant error metrics.
When comparing the single-channel results to the two multichannel results, the exact same sensor signals were used. Since
everything else is identical, all observable improvements must
stem from the way the signals are processed. This leads to
the conclusion that advanced multichannel processing provides
measurable benefits. By considering channels separately and
combining them in different domains (frequency or lag, respectively), the available redundancy in the signals can apparently
be better exploited than by simple time-domain averaging. Furthermore, in multichannel recordings, minor motion artifacts,
such as snoring, do not affect all channels equally.
From a signal processing point of view, the benefit of the proposed multichannel methods can be understood by considering
the following. When applying Fourier transform (FT) methods
to calculate the lag time between consequent heartbeats, the
importance of using multiple signal channels is evident. The
cepstrum is defined through the magnitude of the FT, while
the autocorrelation is related to the inverse FT of the power
spectral density (PSD) [26]. Both methods rely on stationary

233

input signals. However, the cardiac signals can be considered
stationary only locally with strong constraints, and as our goal
is to measure the variable IBI, the stationary time window must
only include the corresponding pair of heartbeats. Normally, the
variance of PSD estimates can be reduced by averaging across
multiple consequent windows, which, however, in this case is
prevented by the instationarity of the signal. Instead, by averaging between multiple PSDs from K-independent and identically
distributed (IID) measurement channels, the variance of the averaged PSD shall be reduced by a factor of 1/K [26]. In practice,
the different measurement channels are not IID, but still, as our
results show, both robustness and accuracy of the heartbeat interval estimation can be improved by using a multichannel sensor
system.
Accurate heartbeat intervals are required to enable a number
of new applications in unobtrusive patient monitoring. These
may include monitoring sleep at home, screening for cardiac arrhythmias, managing the treatment of chronic cardiac diseases
patients (such as those suffering from congestive heart failure),
or detecting deteriorating conditions of patients in the general
wards of hospitals in a more timely manner. Of course, the reported improvements do not only positively affect the resulting
heart rates and coverages but also derived parameters such as
HRV, which are essential for such applications. Moreover, multichannel systems could provide similar benefits to the detection
of respiratory activity, e.g., for the detection of sleep-disordered
respiration movements [27].

VII. CONCLUSION
We have evaluated the benefits of using multiple spatially
distributed PVDF sensors for the nightly monitoring of heartbeat
intervals in bed. For this purpose, 28 recordings of subjects
during their overnight stay at a sleep lab were analyzed. The
recordings consisted of an eight-channel vibration signal as well
as a variant of single-channel signal which was derived from
the multichannel recordings by sample-wise averaging of the
multichannel signal. In order to estimate heartbeat intervals from
the eight-channel signals, two specific fusion algorithms were
introduced and compared to the single-channel approach.
This resulted in three different scenarios which were evaluated. Using the single-channel signals, a mean error of 2.2% as
well as a mean coverage of 68.7% were achieved. The multichannel methods could decrease the mean errors to 1.6% and
1.0%, while at the same time increasing the coverages to 81.8%
and 81.0%, respectively. When comparing the single channel
to the best multichannel option, this corresponds to a 55% decrease in relative errors and a 15% increase in coverages with
respect to the single-channel option. Even more importantly, the
multichannel methods produce significantly less outliers in the
estimated heartbeat intervals.
Our results support the assumption that multiple spatially distributed BCG sensors together with appropriate signal processing methods indeed improve the robustness of heartbeat interval
estimation over a single sensor. Both presented multichannel
algorithms improve the results compared to the single-channel

234

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

options. However, the xCLIE algorithm seems to slightly outperform the cepstrum-based BedS method on the given dataset.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. G. Lim, K. H. Hong, K. K. Kim, J. H. Shin, S. M. Lee, G. S. Chung,
H. J. Baek, D. U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Monitoring physiological signals
using nonintrusive sensors installed in daily life equipment,” Biomed. Eng.
Lett., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11–20, 2011.
[2] O. T. Inan, “Recent advances in cardiovascular monitoring using ballistocardiography,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
San Diego, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 5038–5041.
[3] O. T. Inan, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi, “Evaluating the lowerbody electromyogram signal acquired from the feet as a noise reference
for standing ballistocardiogram measurements,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1188–1196, Sep. 2010.
[4] O. T. Inan, D. Park, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. A. Kovacs, “Noninvasive measurement of physiological signals on a modified home bathroom
scale,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2137–2143, Aug.
2012.
[5] W. R. Scarborough, S. A. Talbot, J. R. Braunstein, M. B. Rappaport,
W. Dock, W. F. Hamilton, J. E. Smith, J. L. Nickerson, and I. Starr, “Proposals for ballistocardiographic nomenclature and conventions: Revised
and extended: Report of committee on ballistocardiographic terminology,”
Circulation, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 435–450, 1956.
[6] D. Salerno and J. Zanetti, “Seismocardiography for monitoring changes in
left ventricular function during ischemia,” Chest, vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 991–
993, 1991.
[7] K. Mohri, T. Jinnouchi, and K. Kawano, “Accurate mechanocardiogram
sensors using amorphous star-shaped core multivibrator combined with a
magnet,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. MAG-23, no. 5, pp. 2212–2214, Sep.
1987.
[8] E. E. Eddleman, K. Willis, T. J. Reeves, and T. R. Harrison, “The kinetocardiogram: I. Method of recording precordial movements,” Circulation,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 269–275, 1953.
[9] B. H. Jansen, B. H. Larson, and K. Shankar, “Monitoring of the ballistocardiogram with the static charge sensitive bed,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 748–751, Aug. 1991.
[10] C. Brüser, K. Stadlthanner, S. de Waele, and S. Leonhardt, “Adaptive
beat-to-beat heart rate estimation in ballistocardiograms,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 778–786, Sep. 2011.
[11] Y. Chee, J. Han, J. Youn, and K. Park, “Air mattress sensor system with
balancing tube for unconstrained measurement of respiration and heart
beat movements,” Phys. Meas., vol. 26, pp. 413–422, 2005.
[12] X. Zhu, W. Chen, T. Nemoto, Y. Kanemitsu, K. Kitamura, K. Yamakoshi,
and D. Wei, “Real-time monitoring of respiration rhythm and pulse rate
during sleep,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 2553–2563,
Dec. 2006.
[13] J. M. Kortelainen, M. O. Mendez, A. M. Bianchi, M. Matteucci, and
S. Cerutti, “Sleep staging based on signals acquired through bed sensor,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 776–785, May
2010.
[14] T. Watanabe and K. Watanabe, “Noncontact method for sleep stage estimation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1735–1748, Oct.
2004.
[15] S. Sprager and D. Zazula, “Heartbeat and respiration detection from optical
interferometric signals by using a multimethod approach,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2922–2929, Oct. 2012.
[16] D. C. Mack, J. T. Patrie, P. M. Suratt, R. A. Felder, and M. A. Alwan,
“Development and preliminary validation of heart rate and breathing rate
detection using a passive, ballistocardiography-based sleep monitoring
system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 111–120,
Jan. 2009.
[17] J. Paalasmaa, “A respiratory latent variable model for mechanically measured heartbeats,” Phys. Meas., vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 1331–1344, 2010.
[18] J. Paalasmaa, M. Waris, H. Toivonen, L. Leppäkorpi, and M. Partinen,
“Unobtrusive online monitoring of sleep at home,” in Proc. IEEE 34th
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 3784–3788.
[19] C. Brüser, S. Winter, and S. Leonhardt, “Robust inter-beat interval estimation in cardiac vibration signals,” Phys. Meas., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 123–138,
2013.
[20] C. Brüser, J. Diesel, M. D. H. Zink, S. Winter, P. Schauerte, and
S. Leonhardt, “Automatic detection of atrial fibrillation in cardiac vibration signals,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 162–171,
Jan. 2013.

[21] K. Tavakolian and B. Ngai, “Comparative analysis of infrasonic cardiac
signals,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 2009, pp. 757–760.
[22] K. Tavakolian, B. Ngai, A. P. Blaber, and B. Kaminska, “Infrasonic cardiac
signals: Complementary windows to cardiovascular dynamics,” in Proc.
IEEE 33rd Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Boston, MA, USA,
2011, vol. 6, pp. 4275–4278.
[23] J. M. Kortelainen and J. Virkkala, “FFT averaging of multichannel BCG
signals from bed mattress sensor to improve estimation of heart beat
interval,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Lyon,
France, 2007, pp. 6685–6688.
[24] American Academy of Sleep Medicine Task Force, “Sleep-related breathing disorders in adults: Recommendations for syndrome definition and
measurement techniques in clinical research” Sleep, vol. 22, no. 5, pp.667
689, 1999.
[25] P. S. Hamilton and W. J. Tompkins, “Quantitative investigation of QRS
detection rules using the MIT/BIH arrhythmia database,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-33, no. 12, pp. 1157–65, Dec. 1986.
[26] A. Oppenheim and R. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing, 1st ed.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1989.
[27] G. Guerrero, J. M. Kortelainen, E. Palacios, A. M. Bianchi, G. Tachino,
M. Tenhunen, M. O. Mendez, and M. van Gils, “Detection of sleepdisordered breathing with pressure bed sensor,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 1342–1345.

Christoph Brüser (S’05) was born in Troisdorf, Germany, in 1983. He received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in
computer engineering from RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, where he is currently working
toward the Dr.-Ing. (Ph.D.) degree at the Philips Chair
of Medical Information Technology.
He is also working as a Research Assistant at
the Philips Chair of Medical Information Technology, RWTH Aachen University. His research interests include biosignal processing and classification
as well as unobtrusive physiological measurement
techniques.

Juha M. Kortelainen was born in Savukoski, Finland, in 1964. He received the M.S. degree from
the Tampere University of Technology, Tampere,
Finland, in 1990.
He was a Research Scientist and Lecturer for measurement signal analysis at the Tampere University of
Technology from 1990 to 2000. In 2000, he joined
the Research Center of United Paper Mills, with applications on machine vision-based online analyzers
and process quality control. He joined VTT Technical
Research Centre, Tampere, Finland, in 2004, and his
current research interest in there includes medical image and signal processing.
His expert knowledge is sensor technology, multivariate signal analysis, image
processing and machine vision.

Stefan Winter was born in Regensburg, Germany,
in 1977. He received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from the University of ErlangenNuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
From 2002, he was with the Communication Science Laboratories, Research and Development division of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation
(NTT), Tokyo, Japan. In 2006, he joined the Personal
Health Solutions Group, Philips Research, Hamburg,
Germany. His research interests include sleep disorders, unobtrusive measurement techniques, biosignal
and audio processing.

BRÜSER et al.: IMPROVEMENT OF FORCE-SENSOR-BASED HEART RATE ESTIMATION USING MULTICHANNEL DATA FUSION

Mirja Tenhunen was born in Varkaus, Finland, in
1963. She received the M.Sc. and Ph.Lic. degrees in
medical physics from the University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland, in 1989 and 1997, respectively.
She has been a Medical Physicist at the Tampere
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, since 1996.
Her main interests and skills include clinical neurophysiology and sleep research.

Juha Pärkkä received the M.Sc. (Tech) and D.Sc.
(Tech) degrees in information technology (digital
signal processing) from the Tampere University of
Technology, Tampere, Finland, in 1997 and 2011,
respectively.
He is currently a Senior Scientist at VTT, Tampere,
Finland. His research interests include biomedical
signal processing and data analysis, software development, ubiquitous computing, and personal health
systems.

235

Steffen Leonhardt (SM’06) was born in Frankfurt,
Germany, in 1961. He received the M.S. degree in
computer engineering from SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA, the Dipl.-Ing. in electrical engineering
and the Dr.-Ing. degree in control engineering from
the Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt,
Germany, and the M.D. degree in medicine from J.
W. Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
He has five years of R&D management experience
in medical engineering industry and was appointed a
Full Professor and Head of the Philips endowed Chair
of Medical Information Technology at RWTH Aachen University, Germany, in
2003. His research interests include physiological measurement techniques, personal health care systems, and feedback control systems in medicine.

