IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

1979

Assessing Dynamic Spectral Causality by Lagged
Adaptive Directed Transfer Function and
Instantaneous Effect Factor
Haojie Xu, Yunfeng Lu, Shanan Zhu, and Bin He∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—It is of significance to assess the dynamic spectral
causality among physiological signals. Several practical estimators
adapted from spectral Granger causality have been exploited to
track dynamic causality based on the framework of time-varying
multivariate autoregressive (tvMVAR) models. The nonzero covariance of the model’s residuals has been used to describe the
instantaneous effect phenomenon in some causality estimators.
However, for the situations with Gaussian residuals in some autoregressive models, it is challenging to distinguish the directed instantaneous causality if the sufficient prior information about the
“causal ordering” is missing. Here, we propose a new algorithm to
assess the time-varying causal ordering of tvMVAR model under
the assumption that the signals follow the same acyclic causal ordering for all time lags and to estimate the instantaneous effect factor
(IEF) value in order to track the dynamic directed instantaneous
connectivity. The time-lagged adaptive directed transfer function
(ADTF) is also estimated to assess the lagged causality after removing the instantaneous effect. In this study, we first investigated
the performance of the causal-ordering estimation algorithm and
the accuracy of IEF value. Then, we presented the results of IEF
and time-lagged ADTF method by comparing with the conventional ADTF method through simulations of various propagation
models. Statistical analysis results suggest that the new algorithm
could accurately estimate the causal ordering and give a good estimation of the IEF values in the Gaussian residual conditions.
Meanwhile, the time-lagged ADTF approach is also more accurate
in estimating the time-lagged dynamic interactions in a complex
nervous system after extracting the instantaneous effect. In addition to the simulation studies, we applied the proposed method
to estimate the dynamic spectral causality on real visual evoked
potential (VEP) data in a human subject. Its usefulness in timevariant spectral causality assessment was demonstrated through
the mutual causality investigation of brain activity during the VEP
experiments.
Index Terms—Adaptive directed transfer function (ADTF),
causal ordering estimation, dynamic spectral causality, instanta-

Manuscript received October 27, 2013; revised January 12, 2014 and February
26, 2014; accepted March 5, 2014. Date of publication March 11, 2014; date
of current version June 14, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health under Grants RO1EB006433, RO1EY023101, and
U01HL117664, and in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant
CBET-1264782. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
H. Xu and S. Zhu are with the College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: haojiexu@zju.edu.cn; zsa@
zju.edu.cn).
Y. Lu is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: luxxx273@umn.edu).
∗ B. He is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Institute for
Engineering in Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
USA (e-mail: binhe@umn.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2311034

neous effect factor (IEF), time-lagged causality, visual evoked potentials (VEPs).

I. INTRODUCTION
N the field of neuroscience and many other fields of science and engineering, the connectivity or causality between
two observed signals in a multivariate system is of great interest [1]–[3]. As a kind of statistical methodology for time series
inference, Granger causality (GC) analysis made it possible to
uncover dynamic interactions in a complex nervous system from
a statistical point of view [4]. Wiener [5] originally conceived
the notion of relation between prediction error and its causality
in time series analysis. Granger proposed the idea to introduce
the multivariate autoregressive (MVAR) models of stochastic
processes and proposed the time-domain measurement [6]. As
the MVAR modeling is an efficient tool for locating the origins of
fluctuations in a variety of processes, most of the previous linear
causality analysis techniques have been based on MVAR models [7]–[12]. Since many measured electrophysiological signals
were usually characterized by their spectral properties, spectral
GC analysis approaches have received considerable attention
[13]–[20]. To extend its application to the nonstationary measured signals, some time-dependent causality analysis methods
have been proposed to track the dynamic causality and to unveil
the time-varying relationship between signals [21]–[27]. These
time-dependent causality analysis methods are mainly based on
the construction of time-dependent coefficients of time-varying
multivariate autoregressive (tvMVAR) models, which can be
used to describe a system where the signals can jointly explain
each other, and the dynamic interactions of the system could be
analyzed from the model structure.
In many cases, the nonzero covariance of model residuals
can be observed during the tvMVAR modeling, partially due
to the blurring of the neuronal activity with the sluggish latent
response. This phenomenon can be viewed as the presence of
the potential instantaneous effect or contemporaneous causality
in a sense. It has been shown that this zero-lag correlation does
“leak” into estimates of time-lagged causality [28]. Hence, Faes
et al. have proposed the utilization of an extended MVAR model
that combines the instantaneous and lagged effects to improve
the assessment of causality through Cholesky decomposition of
model’s residuals [29]–[31]. Meanwhile, Deshpande et al. have
introduced the method of calculating the correlation-purged GC,
which is also free of the zero-lag correlation effect [28]. It must
be noted that, for the aforementioned estimations of instantaneous effect, identification based on the directed acyclic graph

I

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

assumption such as Cholesky decomposition is appropriate only
if the direction of the instantaneous transfer pathways is known
in advance so that the measured signals can be arranged accordingly [32]. Unfortunately, the prior information is hardly available in many biomedical applications. To overcome this serious
problem, Hyvarinen et al. proposed alternative approaches in
non-Gaussianity pattern [33]–[35]. The idea of these alternative
approaches has been exploited for frequency domain connectivity analysis based on extended MVAR models in [36], and
they demonstrated that the non-Gaussian structural vector autoregressive model can be successfully identified without any
restrictions on the network structure [35].
The structural vector autoregressive model with nonGaussian assumption was proven to be working effective when
the residual terms are assumed to be independent [33]–[35];
however, it is still interesting and necessary to explore the situations when the residuals in tvMVAR model are Gaussian [36]. It
is believed that for the situation with Gaussian signals, there is no
way to clearly and completely distinguish the directed instantaneous causality if the prior information about the “causal ordering” is not available. Consequentially, a fitted directed acyclic
graph method which can find model’s dynamic causal ordering
is required in order to provide another solution to the correlated
Gaussian residuals in the tvMVAR models.
In the present study, we propose a new algorithm of estimating dynamic causal ordering and instantaneous effect factor
(IEF) for the tvMVAR model in Gaussian residuals. We also
examine their performance with different number of signal variables and model orders. The estimation of IEF values can be
used to track the dynamic instantaneously coupled strength between signals. The study also suggests applying the time-lagged
adaptive directed transfer function (ADTF) method to assess the
lagged spectral causality in addition to applying the conventional
ADTF method. Furthermore, we applied the proposed approach
to assess the dynamic spectral causality in real visual evoked
potentials (VEPs) data of one healthy subject.

Let X(n) denote the column vector of observed signals in
arbitrary ordering,
· · · xN (n) ] ,
T

(1)

where N is the number of signals and superscript T denotes
matrix transpose. If X(n) can be described as a tvMVAR model
with instantaneous effect and time-dependent coefficients, it can
be constructed as follows:
B0 (n)X(n) =

p


Ak (n)X(n − k) + E2 (n)

(3)

k =1

where Ak (n) is the lagged coefficient matrix, and E2 (n) is a correlated Gaussian noise that is different from E1 (n). In such situation, the unknown time-dependent coefficient matrices Ak (n)
and correlated Gaussian residuals E2 (n) can be estimated by
the well-known discrete Kalman filtering algorithm [39], [40].
By multiplying B0 (n) in (3) and comparing it with (2), we can
easily find the following existing relationships B0 (n)Ak (n) =
Bk (n) and B0 (n)E2 (n) = E1 (n).
In order to analyze the spectral properties of the investigated
process, the signals have to be transformed to the frequency
domain. Therefore, we can obtain the time variant spectral formulation as follows:
X(n, f ) = H(n, f )E2 (n, f )
where


H(n, f ) =

p


(4)
−1

−Ak (n)e−i2π f Δ tk

.

(5)

k =0

The function H(n, f ) is a time-varying transfer matrix at time
point n and at frequency f , and its element Hij (n, f ) represents
the directional connection from the jth to the ith signal of the
system; Δt is the sampling interval and A0 (n) = −IN .

It is apparent that normalized ADTF developed from the DTF
formulation can be defined as

A. Spectral tvMVAR Modeling With Instantaneous Effect

x2 (n)

X(n) =

p


B. Estimation of Dynamic IEF and Time-Lagged ADTF

II. METHODS

X(n) = [ x1 (n)

coefficient matrix of dimension N × N , and B0 (n) is a dynamic
directed acyclic matrix which describes the instantaneous causal
relationships between all variables and it might be a nonidentity
matrix when the instantaneous connectivity exists. However, it
is difficult to accurately obtain the matrix B0 (n) if the prior
information about model’s causal ordering is missing. Hence,
we proposed a new algorithm to estimate the instantaneous effect matrix B0 (n). First, we can build a conventional model as
follows:

Bk (n)X(n − k) + E1 (n)

(2)

k =1

where p is the order of this model and can be determined by
some criterions such as Schwarz Bayesian criterion (SBC) or
Akaike information criterion [37], [38]. E1 (n) is an N × 1
column vector of uncorrelated zero-mean residuals with instantaneous covariance matrix V1 (n). Bk (n) is the time-dependent

|Hij (n, f )|2
.
γ 2ij (n, f ) = N
2
k =1 |Hik (n, f )|

(6)

Here γij (n, f) is the estimated spectral causality value from the
jth signal to ith signal at the specific time point n and specific
frequency f . It is obvious that the ADTF method cannot measure
the instantaneous effect and the obtained ADTF values may only
represent the fused results from instantaneous effect and timelagged causality.
As we know, the instantaneous covariance matrix V2 (n) of
residuals E2 (n) is directly influenced by matrix B0 (n) on the
instantaneous covariance matrix V1 (n) of residuals E1 (n),
V2 (n) = B0−1 (n)V1 (n)B0−T (n).

(7)

However, the matrix B0 (n) is not unique when any additional
prior knowledge is not given. If the causal ordering of signals is

XU et al.: ASSESSING DYNAMIC SPECTRAL CAUSALITY BY LAGGED ADTF AND IEF

well identified in advance, we can easily find a certain solution
by performing an orthogonal decomposition. For the general
case with unknown causal ordering, we suggest to obtain B0 (n)
through traditional Cholesky decomposition after estimating the
dynamic causal ordering. The steps of the proposed estimation
process are described as follows.
1) Initialize the signals’ ordering arbitrarily as in (1) and calculate the mean value of γij (n, fband ) over the frequency
band fband at time point n.
2) For each signal i = 1,2,3,. . . , N –1, and for each signal
j = i+1, i+2, . . . , N , compare the value γij (n, fband )
and value γj i (n, fband ). If γij (n, fband ) is larger than
γj i (n, fband ), put the jth variable just in front of ith variable; if not, maintain the current ordering. This comparison procedure would repeat N (N –1)/2 times in total.
Here, we have the assumption that the connectivity information follows the same acyclic causal ordering for all
time lags, which means the instantaneous causality and all
the lagged causality shall share the same acyclic direction
when they exist between two signals.
3) Check the outcome ordering, and accordingly produce
the time-varying permutation matrix P (n). The original
signals X(n) will be arranged in the right causal ordering
at time point n after left-multiplying it with P (n).
4) After the time-dependent permutation matrix P (n) is determined, we can perform the Cholesky decomposition
on the reordered covariance matrix, P (n)V2 (n)P (n)T =
L(n)V3 (n)L(n)T , where L(n) is a lower triangular matrix and V3 (n) is a diagonal matrix, which also can be
transformed from another diagonal matrix V1 (n), V3 (n) =
P (n)V1 (n)P (n)T .
5) Consequentially, we can obtain the instantaneous directed
effect matrix B0 (n) = (P −1 (n)L(n)P (n))−1 .
This dynamic ordering estimation algorithm is based on the
assumption that the signals follow the same acyclic causal ordering for all time lags, in which case, the causal ordering is
not altered by the neglect of instantaneous effect [35]. As a
consequence, the estimations of ADTF value can be used to
obtain the appropriate time-varying causal ordering. The fband
can be determined by selecting the frequency band of interest
in the time–frequency representation of the signals. Here, we
simply select the frequency band as the overall band without
specifying any particular frequency band. But in general, specific frequency band can be used when the prior information of
interesting frequency band can be obtained.
After obtaining B0 (n), we can rewrite (4) by replacing the
E2 (n, f) with B0−1 (n)E1 (n, f),

X(n, f ) =

B0 (n) −

p


−1
Bk (n)e−i2π f Δ tk

E1 (n, f ).

k =1

(8)
The estimation of IEF is defined as follows:
IEFij (n) = −B0ij (n).

(9)

Its elements, IEFij (n), represent the instantaneous directed
connection from the jth to ith elements of the system for each

1981

time point n. Meanwhile, the normalization of time-lagged
ADTF value is presented,


H ij (n, f )2
2
γ ij (n, f ) = N 
(10)

H ik (n, f )2
k =1

where
H(n, f ) =


IN (n) −

p


−1
Bk (n)e−i2π f Δ tk

.

(11)

k =1

Here H(n, f) is considered as the time-dependent transfer matrix
in frequency domain after removing all the instantaneous effect
from the system.
C. Simulation Study
To investigate the performance of the proposed causal ordering estimation method, we first conducted simulations using
model 1 which consists of a series of simulations with different number of variables and orders. In model 1, we randomly
constructed the tvMVAR model in which the directed causal
connectivity between signals is concomitant, i.e., directions of
all the lagged effects and instantaneous effect are the same. Two
thousands of stochastic signals were generated according to different factors: different number of signals N = [2, 3, 5, 10],
and different model’s order p = [1, 2, 3]. To ensure model’s
stability and robustness, all the coefficients in lower triangular
matrices B0 (n) and Bk (n) are uniformly distributed between
−0.3 and 0.3. To test the confidence level of the proposed ordering estimation, we then randomly permuted the ordering of
the simulated causality among signals. In order to evaluate the
results of instantaneous effect direction by our ordering estimation algorithm, we defined an evaluating index correct ordering
ratio (COR) as the ratio between the number of correctly estimated instantaneous directed connectivity (Ne ) to the number
of model’s real instantaneous directed connectivity (Nr ),
COR =

Ne
.
Nr

(12)

We also used another evaluating index, i.e., relative error (RE)
to evaluate the precision of the estimated elements of B0 (n),
which is defined as follows:

N N
2
i=1
j =1 (B0ij − B̂0ij )

RE =
(13)
N N
2
(B
)
0ij
i=1
j =1
where B̂0ij is the estimation value of B0ij .
After evaluating the performance of the dynamic causal ordering estimation algorithm, we applied the IEF and time-lagged
ADTF method to assess the spectral causality in model 2, and
compared with the results obtained by the conventional ADTF
method. The model 2 was constructed with different levels of
instantaneous connectivity strength and the results were compared with the theoretical values of the simulation. This causal
model consisted of two nodes, in which the first signal caused
the second signal in both the time-lagged pattern and the zerolagged pattern. Mathematically, this model was described at a

1982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 1. Graphical illustration of the model 3. (a) During the first half of the time
(0–1 s), node 3 is the primary source. It propagates to node 4 in the time-lagged
pattern, propagates to node 1 in the zero-lagged pattern, and propagates to node
2 in the fused pattern. (b) During the later portion of the time (1–2 s), node 4
becomes the main source and causes the other nodes in different propagation
patterns. a i j is the time-dependent amplitude of the connection between ith and
jth node, τ i j denotes the constant delay in the propagation from the jth to the
ith node, and IEFi j is the instantaneous connectivity strength.

sampling rate of 200 Hz as follows:

x1 (n) = 0.55x1 (n − 4) − 0.81x1 (n − 8) + ε1 (n)
x2 (n) = αx1 (n) + 0.31x1 (n − 4) + ε2 (n)

(14)

where ε1 (n) and ε2 (n) are the uncorrelated Gaussian white
noise with constant variance. Five hundred sets of test signals
were generated in order to respect imposed α levels = [−0.8,
−0.6, −0.4, −0.2, 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8]. It should be noted that
when there is no instantaneous directed connectivity between
two signals, the COR is set as 1 if both of the estimated directed
IEF values are smaller than 0.05, and the COR is set as 0 if any
of the estimated IEF values is larger than 0.05.
To investigate the dynamic property of the IEF and timelagged ADTF method, analysis on a third time-varying model
was performed. The construction of the model 3 is shown in
Fig. 1. It consisted of four nodes and its sampling frequency
was 400 Hz. One thousand simulated signals were generated
in a dynamic pattern, in which the primary source signal was
a stochastic signal described as x(n) = 0.55x(n–4)−0.81x(n–
8)+ε(n). During the first half of the time (0–1 s), node 3 was
the primary source and generated a signal of a main frequency
band of 18–24 Hz. Node 4 was directly caused by node 3 in a
time-lagged pattern, node 1 was directly caused by node 3 in a
zero-lagged pattern, and node 2 was caused by node 3 in a fused
pattern with lagged and instantaneous effects [see Fig. 1(a)].
During the later portion of the time (1–2 s), node 4 became the
main source meanwhile there were a time-lagged propagation
from node 4 to node 3, a zero-lagged propagation from node 4
to node 2, and a fused propagation from node 4 to node 1 [see
Fig. 1(b)].
D. Statistical Significance Testing
Statistical analysis must be performed to the estimated causality values in order to test out the statistical significance of the
estimation. In other words, nonzero causality values can be obtained from arbitrary sets of time series, but these values are
meaningless unless they are statistically significant [4]. Thus,
all multivariate causality estimators require a level of significance in order to differentiate between true connections and the
connections caused by noise.

However, the dynamic spectral estimators such as time-lagged
ADTF and ADTF have a highly nonlinear relationship to the
time series from which they are derived. As such, the distribution
of their values under the null hypothesis of no connectivity is not
well established. Some nonparametric statistical tests have been
utilized to overcome this issue. The “surrogate data method”
and the “leave one out method” are two common numerical
methods to determine the significance of the particular causality
measure [41], [42]. In the present simulation model 2 and model
3, the “surrogate data method” at a significant level of 0.05
was used for the statistical test. In our surrogate data method,
the original time series were first transformed into the Fourier
space, and then their phases were randomly and independently
shuffled without changing the magnitude in order to produce a
new surrogate time series. It had been shown that this process
of phase shuffling preserved the spectral structure of the time
series but randomized the spectral causality between artificial
signals. Both the ADTF and time-lagged ADTF methods were
subject to the surrogate data analysis. The shuffling and causality
estimation procedures were repeated 200 times so that we could
build an empirical distribution of the causality measurement
values under the null hypothesis that no connectivity existed
between the signals. Only the causal values that were above
the significant level of 0.05 during the surrogate testing were
considered as statistically significant connectivity.
E. Experimental Evaluation in Human
We also applied our method to estimate the dynamic spectral
causality on real VEP data of a human subject. Experiments
were carried out by stimulating the lower left visual field of
the healthy subject. The visual stimulus consisted of circular
black-and-white checkerboards within the visual field on a homogenous gray background: the visual stimulus had a diameter
of 80 visual angles and was placed along a downward diagonal at 100 visual angles as measured from the central fixation
point to the center of each stimulus. The recordings were made
following the international 10/20 system from 62 electrodes
(Compumedics Neuroscan, El Paso, TX, USA) according to a
protocol approved by the IRB of the University of Minnesota.
EEG signals were digitized at 1000 Hz and the VEP data were
averaged from 300 trials with each trial 500 ms long. Artifact
rejections and linear detrending were performed before signal
averaging to discard epochs with eye blinks or other obvious
EEG noise. The scalp EEG is a mixture of activity from various
sources, which include cortical activations, background brain
activity, artifacts and measurement noise [43], [44]. Studies have
shown that the ADTF and time-lagged ADTF methods may be
immune to volume conduction; thus, we can directly perform
the connectivity analysis on the scalp EEG signals. Here, we
selected the waveforms from nine electrodes (P1, Pz, P2, PO3,
POz, PO4, O1, Oz, and O2) that are mainly belonging to the
parieto-occipital zone [as shown in Fig. 6(a)]. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the dynamic causality of these scalp
signals and the mutual influence between left and right cerebral
hemispheres during the brain activation of VEP signals. In the
experiment evaluation process, the “surrogate data method” at

XU et al.: ASSESSING DYNAMIC SPECTRAL CAUSALITY BY LAGGED ADTF AND IEF

1983

Fig. 2. Plots show the (a) COR and (b) RE with different number of variables
(N ) and model orders (p) from the causal ordering estimation algorithm in
simulated model 1.

a significant level of 0.01 was also performed for the statistical
test.
III. RESULTS
A. Simulation Study
Two thousands of sets of simulated data representing the
activations in three models were generated under different conditions. A series of fitted tvMVAR models were reconstructed
based on the discrete Kalman filtering algorithm and the model
orders were determined by SBC method. For such spectral tvMVAR models with instantaneous effect, we investigated the performance of dynamic causal ordering estimation algorithm, and
then calculated the IEF values and the dynamic spectral causality
values by using time-lagged ADTF method. We also compared
the causality values with the results obtained from the conventional ADTF method.
Fig. 2 shows the plots of COR and RE corresponding to
different number of variables and different number of model
orders in model 1. The averaged results from two thousand sets
of simulated stochastic signals are displayed. It can be noted that
the mean COR decreases as the number of variables increases.
For the same number of variables, the COR value is larger when
the order p is higher. The averaged RE also shows similar pattern
as the number of variables and orders changes [see Fig. 2(b)].
For the model 2, the plots of COR and RE corresponding to
instantaneous strength factor α can be seen in Fig. 3(a) and (b),
respectively. The plot of IEF21 values versus instantaneous connectivity strength factor α, estimated by our method is shown in
Fig. 3(c). As the factor α increases from −0.8 to 0.8, the estimation of IEF21 values matches well with the simulated instantaneous factor. In the fused pattern, including instantaneous effect
and time-lagged causality, the IEF21 values have been precisely
detected and presented. Fig. 3(d) shows the plots of means for
the causality values (x2 < −x1 ), averaging a frequency band of
9–14 Hz from the methods, compared with the theoretical timelagged causality values. It shows that the time-lagged causality
values obtained by the time-lagged ADTF method, in which the
instantaneous effect could be effectively removed, are more accurate and closer to theoretical values than the results obtained
by the ADTF method. It can be noted that when the factor α

Fig. 3. Results of the simulated model 2: The plot of COR (a), RE (b) and
the estimation of IEF2 1 (c) versus instantaneous connectivity strength factor α.
(d) Plot of means for the significant (p < 0.05) causality values (x1 -> x2 )
within the frequency band of 9–14 Hz. Black, gray, and red colors represent the
ADTF values, time-lagged ADTF values, and theoretical values, respectively.

Fig. 4. Estimation of the time-varying IEF values between all signals in model
3, averaged from 1000 trials.

is zero, which means there is no zero-lag interference between
the two signals, the time-lagged ADTF values are equal to the
ADTF values.
For the model 3, the plots of IEF estimations are shown in
Fig. 4, and a graphical illustration of significant (p < 0.05)
causality values between all signals is shown in Fig. 5. It can be
seen that during the first half of the time (0–1 s), IEF23 is close
to 0.4 and IEF13 is close to 0.6, while during the later portion
of the time (1–2 s), IEF13 and IEF23 decrease to zero, IEF14

1984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 5. Time–frequency distribution of the significant (p < 0.05) causality
values between all the signals in simulated model 3. (a) ADTF method results,
and (b) time-lagged ADTF method results.

increases to 0.6 and IEF24 changes to 0.4. In the process of
source switching from node 1 to node 2, the dynamic IEF values
are well captured. Fig. 5 shows the estimated time–frequency
distribution of the time-lagged ADTF values and ADTF values.
The different result of estimated causality values from node 3 to
node 1 and from node 4 to node 2 shows that time-lagged ADTF
can separate the pure zero-lag effect from time-lagged causality and successfully describe the dynamic spectral connectivity
between signals.
B. Experimental Evaluation in Human
The scalp EEG signals, evoked by stimulating the lower left
visual field, were subjected to a fitted tvMVAR model that was
estimated by the distribute Kalman filtering algorithm. After
generating the surrogate datasets 200 times, the dynamic IEF
values and time-lagged spectral causality for these nine signals
was computed at a significant level of 0.01. Fig. 6(b) shows
the main instantaneous effect structure and the estimation of
the dynamic IEF values, which shows that PO4 and O2 have
relatively large instantaneous effect to other signals. Fig. 6(c)
shows the main connectivity structure and the time–frequency
(1–30 Hz) distribution of significant dynamic spectral causality
obtained by the ADTF method. The main connectivity structure

Fig. 6. (a) Averaged VEP signals of the nine electrodes (P1, Pz, P2, PO3,
POz, PO4, O1, Oz, and O2) in lower left condition. (b) Main structure of
IEF and the plots of IEF values from PO4 and O2 to the other signals. (c) Main
connectivity structure and the time–frequency distribution of the significant (p <
0.01) causality values by the ADTF method. (d) Main connectivity structure and
the time–frequency distribution of the significant (p < 0.01) causality values
by the time-lagged ADTF method. The color of the arrows codes the averaged
strength of the absolute connectivity values over the time and the interesting
frequency band (1–30 Hz).

XU et al.: ASSESSING DYNAMIC SPECTRAL CAUSALITY BY LAGGED ADTF AND IEF

and significant dynamic spectral causality, obtained by the timelagged ADTF method, is shown in Fig. 6(d). The color of the
arrows in Fig. 6 codes the mean strength of absolute connectivity
values over the whole time and the interesting frequency band
(1–30 Hz).
The ADTF results show that the signals of PO4, O2, and Oz
are the main sources that cause the other signals. The time–
frequency distributions of significant dynamic spectral causality obtained by the ADTF method indicate that the contralateral
cortical activity is the primary causal source during the visual
stimulation. The IEF values and time-lagged ADTF method also
demonstrated this contralateral phenomenon, i.e., PO4, O2, and
Oz are the primary sources. Both the ADTF results and the
time-lagged ADTF results indicate that the visual cortex in the
right hemisphere becomes active first and then it drives the related zones in the left hemisphere. However, different from the
ADTF result, the time-lagged ADTF result reveals that the signal of PO4 might not be the main lagged causal source and the
spectral causality from PO4 to other signals measured by the
ADTF method is caused by the instantaneous effect [as shown
in Fig. 6(b)]. The time–frequency distribution of time-lagged
ADTF values [as shown in Fig. 6(d)] is relatively smaller than
the ADTF values [as shown in Fig. 6(c)], which is the result
after extracting the instantaneous effect. Due to the comparison
in simulations, we can infer that the time-lagged ADTF values reflect the lagged causality between signals after separating
the instantaneous effect while the ADTF values represent the
fused results from instantaneous effect and time-lagged causality. The advantage of combination of time-lagged ADTF and
IEF estimation is that they can separate the lagged causality
and instantaneous causality, which cannot be provided by the
conventional ADTF method.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, a new method of estimating IEF value is proposed to track the dynamic instantaneous effect from the fused
interactions between signals. It describes the possible zero-lag
influence for the contemporaneous measured data. The study
also suggests the usefulness of the time-lagged ADTF method
in addition to the ADTF method in assessing the time-lagged
spectral causality between signals.
For the tvMVAR model, it is convenient to observe whether
the instantaneous effect exists between two signals from the
covariance matrix of their residuals. The major problem in the
estimation of dynamic IEF value is how to determine the timedependent correct ordering of all the measured signals. Previous studies by Hyvarinen et al. have successfully tackled this
problem by using independent component analysis when the
model residuals are with non-Gaussian distribution [33]–[36].
Moreover, Hyvarinen et al. discussed how the coefficients of
the model are changed by taking into account the instantaneous
effects and definitely showed that the model’s causal ordering
will not be altered by the neglect of instantaneous effect in
case the signals share the same acyclic causal ordering for all
time lags [35]. In mathematic principle, if Ak (n)−1 and Bk (n)
can be transformed into two lower triangular matrices through

1985

a same permutation P (n), the conduct of these two matrices,
B0 (n), can be also transformed into a lower triangular matrix with the P (n). Therefore, it is reasonable to compare the
time lagged causality values to estimate the time-varying causal
ordering between signals when the model residuals are with
Gaussian distribution. The method seems to work well under
the assumption that the connectivity information flows the same
causal ordering for all time lags, which means the instantaneous causality and all the lagged causality shall share the same
acyclic direction when they exist between two signals. However,
the current method may not work effectively when the instantaneous effect could occur randomly. Future studies considering
more complicated random causal directions will be necessary
to further extend the instantaneous connectivity estimation in
more general cases. The time-lagged ADTF method, as well as
the ADTF method, is based on the spectral tvMVAR model,
which can be constructed by various algorithms. It is a linear
multivariate time series model, which characterizes the interregional dependences within data by considering the historical
influence of the variables. Hence, it is the first step to build
a fitted and robust spectral tvMVAR model that is consisted
of optimal model order and accurate time variant coefficients.
In order to avoid some of the constraints or limitations in the
model construction, non-normality tests and stability tests may
be necessary to improve the assessment. In addition to this linear time-varying model, the spectral causality measures also
can be studied in many other nonlinear time-varying models
[45], [46].
As the conventional ADTF method is based on the tvMVAR
model without considering instantaneous effect, it mistakenly
treated the zero-lag connectivity as time-lagged connectivity.
On the contrast, zero-lag effect within all signals can be well
detected and identified by estimating the IEF values. After the
instantaneous effect is removed from the model, the time-lagged
ADTF method could provide the pure lagged causality instead
of the fused causality.
In the present simulation study, three different models are simulated to study the performances of IEF and time-lagged ADTF
method. The model 1, constructed by randomly distributed coefficients with different number of signals and orders, is used
to investigate the performance of the IEF estimation method. It
can be observed that the COR is higher than 80% and the RE is
less than 10% in most conditions. In the model 2, the estimated
IEF results were compared with the theoretical IEF values in the
simulation setting. The simulation result shows that the timelagged ADTF values, distinguishing the time-lagged causality
from zero-lagged influence, are much closer to the theoretical
lagged causality values while the ADTF values are disturbed by
the signals’ instantaneous effect. During the source switching
process in model 3, the time-varying estimation of IEF values
can also be used to assess the variation of instantaneous effect
in a dynamic manner. It is worth noting that for a pure zero-lag
effect case, time-lag causality will be given by ADTF while
no such inaccurate causality could be found by the time-lagged
ADTF method. These results can be explained by the incomplete tvMVAR modeling in ADTF method and its ignorance of
the instantaneous effect.

1986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

There are previous studies about investigating the brain activations of the VEPs from scalp EEG [47]–[51]. Here, we study
the VEP signals that are mainly located in the parieto-occipital
area as these regions have most dominant evoked potentials
during the experiment. Both the ADTF method and time-lagged
ADTF method with IEF estimation are applied to the signals
generated by stimulating lower left visual field of the subject.
The results of comparison between these two analyses are shown
in Fig. 6. It can be noted that both the ADTF and time-lagged
ADTF results indicate that the contralateral cortical activity
is the primary causal source during the visual stimulation. In
the “lower left” condition, the visual cortex in the right hemisphere becomes active first and then it drives the left hemisphere. We studied the causal structures of the scalp recordings in lower left visual field stimuli condition by using ADTF
method and time-lagged ADTF method, which demonstrated
similar results as compared to the previous findings of the scalp
phenomenon in [49]. Russo et al. studied the VEP measurements and showed that the early C1 component was maximized
at the occipito-parietal midline area and the contralateral areas.
They also showed the later contralateral P1 component over
right occipital-temporal sites and ipsilateral component over the
left hemisphere. These results indicate the initial activation of
contralateral visual cortex and the later involvement of ipsilateral hemisphere, which are concordant with our findings of
causal analysis. The results of the connectivity analysis for VEP
data can help us understand the mutual influence between the
visual areas in the left and right cerebral hemispheres. Future
studies to better track the spatiotemporal functional connectivity of the human brain are still in demand to fully overcome
the grand challenges and to better understand the brain function
[52]–[66].
Similar to ADTF method, the time-lagged ADTF method is
not suitable for distinguishing the direct and indirect causality. Compared with the time variant partial directed coherence
method, the estimations by the ADTF and time-lagged ADTF
methods require the matrix inversion, which may reduce the stability of the model and take more time during the computation.
Nevertheless, they are still effective in estimating the dynamic
spectral causalities and can be used in studying the connectivity
analysis.
V. CONCLUSION
In summary, we have proposed a new causal ordering estimation algorithm which can handle the cases when there exist
correlated Gaussian residuals in the tvMVAR model, under the
assumption that the signals follow the same acyclic causal ordering for all time lags. The performance of the method is investigated in a series of simulations with different number of signal
variables and model orders. The dynamic estimation of IEF
value is also proposed to track the time-varying instantaneous
effect between signals. This study suggests the effectiveness of
applying the time-lagged ADTF method to describe the lagged
effect and to assess the lagged dynamic spectral causality between signals. Both computer simulation and human VEP data
analysis have been performed, and the results demonstrated their

usefulness in estimating the instantaneous interference and the
time-lagged causality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. L. Zhou and H. Shan for
helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] B. He, L. Yang, C. Wilke, and H. Yuan, “Electrophysiological imaging
of brain activity and connectivity–challenges and opportunities,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1918–1931, Jul. 2011.
[2] P. A. Valdes-Sosa, A. Roebroeck, J. Daunizeau, and K. Friston, “Effective
connectivity: Influence, causality and biophysical modeling,” NeuroImage, vol. 58, pp. 339–361, Apr. 2011.
[3] G. Deshpande, S. LaConte, G. A. James, S. Peltier, and X. Hu, “Multivariate Granger causality analysis of fMRI data,” Hum. Brain Mapp., vol. 30,
pp. 1361–1373, 2009.
[4] S. L. Bressler and A. K. Seth, “Wiener-Granger causality: A well established methodology,” NeuroImage, vol. 58, pp. 323–329, 2011.
[5] N. Wiener, “The theory of prediction,” in Modern Mathematics for the
Engineer, E. F. Beckenbach, Ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill,
1956.
[6] C. W. J. Granger, “Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods,” Econometrica, vol. 37, pp. 424–438,
1969.
[7] L. Astolfi, F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, C. Babiloni, F. Carducci, A. Basilisco,
P. M. Rossini, S. Salinari, L. Ding, Y. Ni, B. He, and F. Babiloni, “Assessing cortical functional connectivity by linear inverse estimation and
directed transfer function: Simulations and application to real data,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 116, no. 4, pp. 920–932, Apr. 2005.
[8] M. Eichler, “On the evaluation of information flow in multivariate systems
by the directed transfer function,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 94, pp. 469–482,
2006.
[9] J. R. Sato, D. Y. Takahashi, S. M. Arcuri, K. Sameshima, P. A. Morettin,
and L. A. Baccala, “Frequency domain connectivity identification: An
application of partial directed coherence in fMRI,” Human Brain Mapp.,
vol. 30, pp. 452–461, 2009.
[10] C. Wilke, W. Drongelen, M. Kohrman, and B. He, “Neocortical seizure foci
localization by means of a directed transfer function method,” Epilepsia,
vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 564–572, 2010.
[11] B. He, Y. Dai, L. Astolfi, F. Babiloni, H. Yuan, and L. Yang, “eConnectome: A MATLAB toolbox for mapping and imaging of brain functional
connectivity,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 195, pp. 261–269, 2011.
[12] Y. Lu, L. Yang, G. Worrell, and B. He, “Seizure source imaging by means
of FINE spatio-temporal dipole localization and directed transfer function in pediatric epilepsy patients,” Clin Neurophysiol., vol. 123, no. 7,
pp. 1275–1283, 2012.
[13] J. Geweke, “Measurement of linear dependence and feedback between
multiple time series,” J. Amer. Statistical Assoc., vol. 77, pp. 304–313,
1982.
[14] M. Kaminski and K. Blinowska, “A new method of the description of the
information flow in the brain structures,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 65, pp. 203–
210, 1991.
[15] M. Kaminski, M. Ding, W. A. Truccolo, and S. Bressler, “Evaluating
causal relations in neural systems: Granger causality, directed transfer
function and statistical assessment of significance,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 85,
pp. 145–157, 2001.
[16] L. A. Baccalà and K. Sameshima, “Partial directed coherence: A new
concept in neural structure determination,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 84, pp. 463–
474, 2001.
[17] L. Astolfi, F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, M. G. Marciani, L. Baccala, F. de Vico
Fallani, S. Salinari, M. Ursino, M. Zavaglia, and F. Babiloni, “Assessing
cortical functional connectivity by partial directed coherence simulations
and application to real data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 9,
pp. 1802–1812, Sep. 2006.
[18] M. Ding, Y. Chen, and S. L. Bressler, “Granger causality: Basic theory
and application to neuroscience,” in Handbook of Time Series Analysis:
Recent Theoretical Developments and Applications. Berlin, Germany:
Wiley-VCH, 2006, pp. 437–460.
[19] L. Astolfi, F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, M. G. Marciani, L. Baccala, F. de
Vico Fallani, S. Salinari, M. Ursino, M. Zavaglia, L. Ding, J. C. Edgar,

XU et al.: ASSESSING DYNAMIC SPECTRAL CAUSALITY BY LAGGED ADTF AND IEF

[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]

[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]

G. A. Miller, B. He, and F. Babiloni, “Comparison of different cortical connectivity estimators for high-resolution EEG recordings,” Human
Brain Mapp., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 143–157, Feb. 2007.
E. Florin, J. Gross, J. Pfeifer, G. R. Fink, and L. Timmermann, “Reliability
of multivariate causality measures for neural data,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 198, pp. 344–358, 2011.
C. Wilke, L. Ding, and B. He, “Estimation of time-varying connectivity
patter through the use of an adaptive directed transfer function,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2557–2564, Nov. 2008.
W. Hesse, E. Moller, M. Arnold, and B. Schack, “The use of time-variant
EEG Granger causality for inspecting directed interdependencies of neural
assemblies,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 124, pp. 27–44, 2003.
M. Arnold, W. H. R. Miltner, H. Witte, R. Bauer, and C. Braun, “Adaptive
AR modeling of nonstationary time series by means of kalman filtering,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 553–562, May 1998.
E. Moeller, B. Schack, M. Arnold, and H. Witte, “Instantaneous multivariate EEG coherence analysis by means of adaptive high-dimensional
autoregressive models,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 105, pp. 143–158,
2001.
C. Wilke, W. Van Drongelen, M. Kohrman, and B. He, “Identification of
epileptogenic foci from causal analysis of ECoG interictal spike activity,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 120, no. 8, pp. 1449–1456, Aug. 2009.
L. Astolfi, F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, F. de Vico Fallani, A. Tocci, A. Colosimo,
S. Salinari, M. G. Marciani, W. Hesse, H. Witte, M. Ursino, M. Zavaglia,
and F. Babiloni, “Tracking the time-varying cortical connectivity patterns
by adaptive multivariate estimators,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55,
no. 3, pp. 902–913, Mar. 2008.
T. Milde, L. Leistritz, L. Astolfi, W. H. R. Miltner, T. Weiss, F. Babiloni,
and H. Witte, “A new Kalman filter approach for the estimation of highdimensional time-variant multivariate AR models,” NeuroImage, vol. 50,
pp. 960–969, Jan. 2010.
G. Deshpande, K. Sathian, and X. Hu, “Assessing and compensating for
zero-lag correlation effects in time-lagged Granger causality analysis of
fMRI,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1446–1456, Jun.
2010.
L. Faes and G. Nollo, “Assessing frequency domain causality in cardiovascular time series with instantaneous interactions,” Methods Inf. Med.,
vol. 49, pp. 453–457, 2010.
S. Erla, L. Faes, E. Tranquillini, D. Orrico, and G. Nollo, “Multivariate
autoregressive model with instantaneous effects to improve brain connectivity estimation,” Int. J. Bioelectromagn., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 74–79,
2009.
L. Faes and G. Nollo, “Extended causal modeling to assess partial directed coherence in multiple time series with significant instantaneous
interactions,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 103, pp. 387–400, 2010.
K. D. Hoover, “Automatic inference of the contemporaneous causal order
of a system of equations,” Econometric Theory, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 69–77,
2005.
A. Hyvarinen and S. M. Smith, “Pairwise likelihood ratios for estimation
of non-Gaussian structural equation models,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 14,
pp. 111–152, 2013.
S. Shimizu, P. O. Hoyer, A. Hyvarinen, and A. Kerminen, “A linear nonGaussian acyclic model for causal discovery,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 7,
pp. 2003–2030, 2006.
A. Hyvarinen, K. Zhang, S. Shimizu, and P. O. Hoyer, “Estimation of a
structural vector autoregressive model using non-Gaussianity,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 11, pp. 1709–1731, 2010.
L. Faes, S. Erla, A. Porta, and G. Nollo, “A framework for assessing
frequency domain causality in physiological time series with instantaneous effects,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A, vol. 371, no. 1997, 2013, doi:
10.1098/rsta.2011.0618.
G. Schwarz, “Estimating the dimension of a model,” The Ann. Statist.,
vol. 6, pp. 461–464, 1978.
H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identification,” IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control, vol. AC-19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, Dec. 1974.
Y. M. Zhan and A. K. S. Jardine, “Adaptive autoregressive modeling of
non-stationary vibration signals under distinct gear states. Part 1: Modeling,” J. Sound Vibration, vol. 286, pp. 429–450, 2005.
G. Kitagawa and W. Gersch, “A smoothness priors time-varying AR coefficient modeling of nonstationary covariance time series,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control, vol. AC-30, no. 1, pp. 48–56, Jan. 1985.
L. Faes, S. Erla, A. Porta, and G. Nollo, “Testing frequency-domain causality in multivariate time series,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 8,
pp. 1897–1906, Aug. 2010.

1987

[42] A. Schlogl and G. Supp, “Analyzing event-related EEG data with
multivariate autoregressive parameters,” in Progress in Brain Research,
C. Neuper and W. Klimesch, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2006, pp. 135–147.
[43] Y. Lu, L. Yang, G. Worrell, B. Brinkmann, C. Nelson, and B. He, “Dynamic imaging of seizure activity in pediatric epilepsy patients,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 123, no. 11, pp. 2122–2129, 2012.
[44] Y. Lu, G. Worrell, H. C. Zhang, L. Yang, B. Brinkmann, C. Nelson, and
B. He, “Noninvasive imaging of the high frequency brain activity in focal epilepsy patients,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., to be published, doi:
10.1109/TBME.2013.2297332.
[45] S. A. Billings, Y. Zhao, H. Wei, and P. G. Sarrigiannis, “A parametric
method to measure time-varying linear and nonlinear causality with applications to EEG data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 11,
pp. 3141–3148, Nov. 2013.
[46] F. He, S. A. Billings, H. Wei, P. G. Sarrigiannis, and Y. Zhao, “Spectral
analysis for nonstationary and nonlinear systems: A discrete-time-modelbased approach,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2233–2241,
Aug. 2013.
[47] Z. Yan and X. Gao, “Functional connectivity analysis of steady-state visual
evoked potentials,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 499, pp. 199–203, 2011.
[48] D. A. Jeffreys and J. G. Axford, “Source locations of pattern-specific components of human visual evoked potentials. I. Component of striate cortical
origin,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 16, pp. 1–21, 1972.
[49] F. D. Russo, A. Martinez, M. I. Sereno, S. Pitzalis, and S. A. Hillyard,
“Cortical sources of the early components of the visual evoked potential,”
Human Brain Mapp., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 95–111, Feb. 2002.
[50] S. I. Dimitriadis, N. A. Laskaris, A. Tzelepi, and G. Economou, “Analyzing functional brain connectivity by means of commute times a new
approach and its application to track event-related dynamics,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1302–1309, May 2012.
[51] B. Fadlallah, S. Seth, A. Keil, and J. Principle, “Quantifying cognitive
state from EEG using dependence measures,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2773–2781, Oct. 2012.
[52] B. He, T. Coleman, G. M. Genin, G. Glover, X. Hu, N. Johnson, T. Liu,
S. Makeig, P. Sajda, and K. Ye, “Grand challenges in mapping the human
brain: NSF workshop report,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 11,
pp. 2983–2992, Nov. 2013.
[53] F. Babiloni, F. Cincotti, C. Babiloni, F. Carducci, A. Basilisco,
P. M. Rossini, D. Mattia, L. Astolfi, L. Ding, Y. Ni, K. Cheng, K. Christine,
J. Sweeney, and B. He, “Estimation of the cortical functional connectivity
with the multimodal integration of high resolution EEG and fMRI data by
directed transfer function,” Neuroimage, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 118–131, Jan.
2005.
[54] L. Astolfi, F. Cincotti, C. Babiloni, F. Carducci, A. Basilisco, P. M. Rossini,
S. Salinari, D. Mattia, S. Cerutti, D. B. Dayan, L. Ding, Y. Ni, B. He, and
F. Babiloni, “Estimation of the cortical connectivity by high-resolution
EEG and structural equation modeling: Simulations and application to
finger tapping data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 757–
768, May 2005.
[55] M. C. Spencer, J. H. Downes, D. Xydas, M. W. Hammond, V. M. Becerra,
K. Warwick, B. J. Whalley, and S. J. Nasuto, “Multiscale evolving complex network model of functional connectivity in neuronal cultures,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 30–34, Jan. 2012.
[56] B. L. P. Cheung, R. Nowak, H. C. Lee, W. Drongelen, and B. D. Veen,
“Cross validation for selection of cortical interaction models from scalp
EEG or MEG,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 504–514,
Feb. 2012.
[57] S. H. Wu, A. L. Swindlehurst, P. T. Wang, and Z. Nenadic, “Efficient
dipole parameter estimation in EEG systems with near-ML performance,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1339–1348, May 2012.
[58] Y. Zerouali, C. L. Herry, B. Jemel, and J. Lina, “Localization of synchronous cortical neural sources,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60,
no. 3, pp. 770–780, Mar. 2013.
[59] J. Sun, X. Hong, and S. Tong, “Phase synchronization analysis of EEG
signals: An evaluation based on surrogate tests,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2254–2263, Aug. 2012.
[60] K. Abuhassan, D. Coyle, and L. P. Maguire, “Investigating the neural
correlates of pathological cortical networks in Alzheimer’s disease using
heterogeneous neuronal models,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 3, pp. 890–896, Mar. 2012.
[61] F. Deng, D. Zhu, J. Lv, L. Guo, and T. Liu, “FMRI signal analysis using
empirical mean curve decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60,
no. 1, pp. 42–54, Jan. 2013.

1988

[62] C. Yang, R. Le Bouquin Jeannes, J. Bellanger, and H. Shu, “A new strategy
for model order identification and its application to transfer entropy for
EEG signals analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1318–
1327, May 2013.
[63] S. C. Wu, A. L. Swindlehurst, P. T. Wang, and Z. Nenadic, “Projection versus prewhitening for EEG interference suppression,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1329–1338, May 2012.
[64] M. Fukushima, O. Yamashita, A. Kanemura, S. Ishii, M. Kawato, and
M. Sato, “A state-space modeling approach for localization of focal current
sources from MEG,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1561–
1571, Jun. 2012.
[65] S. Saxena, M. H. Schieber, N. V. Thakor, and S. V. Sarma, “Aggregate
input-output models of neuronal populations,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 2030–2039, Jul. 2012.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

[66] A. Omidvarnia, G. Azemi, B. Boashash, J. M. O’Toole, P. B. Colditz, and
S. Vanhatalo, “Measuring time-varying information flow in scalp EEG
signals: Orthogonalized partial directed coherence,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 680–693, Mar. 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

