IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

275

Cluster-Based Analysis for Personalized Stress
Evaluation Using Physiological Signals
Qianli Xu, Member, IEEE, Tin Lay Nwe, Member, IEEE, and Cuntai Guan, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Technology development in wearable sensors and
biosignal processing has made it possible to detect human stress
from the physiological features. However, the intersubject difference in stress responses presents a major challenge for reliable and
accurate stress estimation. This research proposes a novel clusterbased analysis method to measure perceived stress using physiological signals, which accounts for the intersubject differences. The
physiological data are collected when human subjects undergo a
series of task-rest cycles, incurring varying levels of stress that is
indicated by an index of the State Trait Anxiety Inventory. Next,
a quantitative measurement of stress is developed by analyzing
the physiological features in two steps: 1) a k-means clustering
process to divide subjects into different categories (clusters), and
2) cluster-wise stress evaluation using the general regression neural
network. Experimental results show a significant improvement in
evaluation accuracy as compared to traditional methods without
clustering. The proposed method is useful in developing intelligent,
personalized products for human stress management.
Index Terms—Clustering, physiological signal processing, stress
evaluation.

I. INTRODUCTION
STIMATION of event-based stress is a fundamental issue
of stress management. As known in psycho-physiological
studies, a person’s physiological features are correlated with
his/her stress levels [1]–[3]. Therefore, they can be used to construct an objective measurement of the stress. Prior work in
stress measurement has been focusing on the collection and
analysis of physiological data and the identification of the correlation between perceived stress and multiple physiological
features [4], [5]. However, reliable and accurate estimation of
stress levels using physiological data is challenging due to the
complex, multivariate relationship between the stress and human physiology [6], [7]. This necessitates the identification of
appropriate physiological features, and the development of reliable methods for predicting stress levels based on these features.
Among the many barriers to reliable stress evaluation, the individual subjects’ differences in stress response (i.e., how a person’s physiology changes in response to stressful events) is one

E

Manuscript received October 3, 2013; revised January 8, 2014; accepted
March 1, 2014. Date of publication March 11, 2014; date of current version December 30, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Singapore A∗ STAR
SERC TSRP grant on Human Factors Engineering (#0921530095) and Neural
and Biomedical Technology Department, Institute for Infocomm Research.
The authors are with the Institute for Infocomm Research (A∗ STAR), Singapore (e-mail: qxu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg; tlnma@i2r.a-star.edu.sg; ctguan@i2r.
a-star.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2311044

that has not been effectively tackled [8], [9]. A common method
to deal with this issue is to calibrate the biosignals against a set
of baseline data, where a certain stress level (typically low or absence of stress) is induced in a stress-free environment [4], [9].
However, the usage of a baseline can be tricky depending on if
the baseline is built for individual users or for a group of users.
Collecting and utilizing the baseline data for an individual user
may improve the accuracy of stress evaluation for that particular
user, but not for the other users, whereas a baseline for the entire
population may not be adequate to deal with intersubject differences. Some research introduces person-specific parameters to
deal with variations in individual stress response [9]. However,
such a strategy relies on the training of models with respect to
individual users, which hampers its generalizability. Alternatively, to develop generic methods for pattern recognition, some
studies adopt a feature selection process to enhance the predictive accuracy [10]–[12]. Nonetheless, the feature selection
is usually carried out for the whole population. Therefore, they
had limited power in personalized stress evaluation.
The objective of this research is to accurately evaluate human
stress while accounting for the intersubject differences. Data
are collected in an experimental environment where subjects
underwent a series of task and rest cycles, incurring varying
levels of physical and emotional stress. This study adopts the
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI)-Form Y1 for annotating
the event-based temporary stress [13]. Next, a two-stage procedure for stress measurement is designed for data analysis.
1) A cluster analysis is carried out using a subset of data samples, so that individual subjects are assigned to one of a few
clusters. 2) Cluster-wise stress evaluation is performed using a
general regression neural network (GRNN). The novelty of this
research lies in the clustering process that assigns subjects into
subgroups, so as to exploit the inherent homogeneity of subjects’ stress response within the clusters (i.e., subjects within
the same cluster are expected to share similar patterns of stress
response). Thus, the intersubject differences are automatically
accommodated, and the overall accuracy of the stress evaluation is improved. The performance of cluster-based analysis is
evaluated using cross-validation methods. It is shown that the
method is effective in dealing with the intersubject differences.
To the best knowledge of the authors, this is the first attempt to
design and evaluate a cluster-based analysis method for dealing
with the intersubject difference in stress evaluation.
II. RELATED WORK
Under stressful conditions, measureable changes can be found
in human physiology, such as increased heart rate and blood
pressure, reduced skin resistance, enlarged pupil size, etc. This

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

276

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I
RELATED WORK

is the biological basis of stress measurement using physiological
signals, which is an alternative way to stress evaluation based
on subjective self-report. Along this line, many researchers develop the hardware and software solutions to stress measurement [1], [2], [4], [5], [14]–[16]. Hardware solutions are mainly
concerned with the development of wearable and robust sensors for biodata collection. Software development focuses on
the biosignal processing, i.e., to effectively extract meaningful
patterns from the collected data. Along this line, the evaluation
of the stress from the collected signal faces many challenges,
such as the establishment of reliable “ground truth” of stress levels [5], [6], and the individual differences in stress responses [5].
To examine the prevalent solutions to these challenges, the study
summarized related work in this field focusing on answers to
the following questions (see Table I).
1) What type of stress does the study address?
2) How is the stress incurred?
3) How is the stress annotated?
4) What type of physiological signals is used as the predictors
(i.e., the input feature)?
5) What is the data processing technique?
6) Does it consider the individual differences? If so, how?
As seen from the literature, while it has been widely recognized that individual difference is present in human’s stress

response, little has been done to mitigate such differences. A
few studies resort to a calibration process against the baseline
period [4], [5], [12], [15]. However, it makes the process complex and unpredictable especially outside a laboratory environment. A personalization parameter is used in the classification
algorithm based on a support-vector machine [9]. However, the
effectiveness of the method is not validated by performance evaluation. A self-organizing map is used in a stress study to form
local clusters by preserving the topological relationships [17].
It is suggested that larger grids lead to better performance since
they account for more patterns of stress responses. However,
the validity and generalizability of the method are not examined
because only three grid sizes are tested. In summary, existing
work lacks effective mechanisms to tackle intersubject differences using a generic model for stress evaluation. Moreover, it
usually involves a complicated calibration process that hampers
its applications.
III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
A. Experimental Procedure
A general experimental procedure includes three stages in
which a subject carries out the following main activities: 1) initial rest (5 min), 2) task load (5 or 20 min), and 3) recovery

XU et al.: CLUSTER-BASED ANALYSIS FOR PERSONALIZED STRESS EVALUATION USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS

277

procedure were labeled using time stamps. Physiological features that potentially correlate with physical/mental stress were
extracted from the raw data collected by the sensors.
IV. DATA ANALYSIS
A. Stress Indices
Fig. 1.

Experimental procedure.
TABLE II
EQUIPMENT FOR THE EXPERIMENT

rest (15 min) (see Fig. 1). In the experiment, a participant went
through one of two types of tasks, namely, physical or cognitive task. In the physical task, a subject did a squat-stand
exercise continuously for 5 min at a pace that was considered challenging to him/her. In the cognitive task, a subject
completed six computer-mediated tasks that involved different
types of cognitive workload, such as attention, calculation, and
memory. These tasks included go/no-go visual reaction time,
color reading interference (stroop), fast counting, PASAT speed
run, visual forward digit span, working memory test (n-back)
(http://cognitivefun.net/). Each task lasted for 3–4 min, such that
the total time of cognitive task was 20 min. During the task load
period, the experimenter constantly challenged the subjects to
achieve higher performance, so as to incur adequate stress.
The STAI form Y1 (state anxiety) was deployed immediately
after the rest or task load period, where the order of the questionnaire items were randomized for each stage. Finally, the STAI
form Y2 (trait anxiety) was deployed after the last Y1 form. A
total of 44 male subjects were recruited, who were healthy adults
without mental/emotional disorders, with no symptoms or history of cardiovascular or respiratory disorders. Subjects were
randomly assigned to the physical- and cognitive-task groups,
with equal number (22) in the each group. The mean age of the
subjects was 28.6 years, with a standard deviation of 7.2 years.
B. Equipment Configuration
A set of noninvasive, wireless sensors was used to collect a
subject’s physiological signals including, electrocardiography
(ECG), galvanic skin response (GSR), electroencephalography
(EEG), electromyography (EMG), and saturation of peripheral
oxygen (SpO2). A summary of the equipment configuration
is shown in Table II. The sensors were connected to a PC
via Bluetooth and data from different channels was synchronized. All events related to different stages of the experimental

The subjects’ stress levels were derived from the STAI-Y1
scores. Cronbach’s alpha for the three experiment stages are
0.923 (baseline), 0.899 (task load), and 0.904 (treatment), showing high internal consistency of the questionnaire items. Next,
the scores are checked for potential outliers by applying the following exclusion criterion. Let Sij (i = 1, 2,. . ., N ; j = 1,2,3)
denote the STAI-Y1 scores of subject i in three stages, namely,
baseline (j = 1), task load (j = 2), and treatment (j = 3); N is
the number of subjects. A record i is excluded if Si2 < Si1 and
Si2 < Si3 . This is because a subject is expected to feel more
stressful after the task load (Si2 ) than after the initial rest (Si1 )
and recovery (Si3 ) periods. Three (3) cases were excluded by
applying this criterion. Next, the normalized stress indices (sij )
for subject i is computed as
sij =

Sij − min (S)
max (S) − min (S)

(1)

where max(S) and min(S) refer to the largest and smallest STAI
scores of all subjects in three stages. Thus, the stress indices are
within the range of [0, 1].
B. Feature Extraction
Prior work has shown that a person’s perceived stress is correlated with various physiological features. In this research, 15
features were extracted for analysis.
1) Mean and standard deviation of GSR [4], [15], [21].
2) Mean SpO2.
3) Mean and standard deviation of EMG [4], [22], where
the raw EMG data is full-wave rectified, averaged with a
time interval of 0.1 s, and filtered using a band-pass of
5–300 Hz.
4) Mean heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV)
[2], [5], [23]. First, the interbeat interval was computed
from the raw ECG data. Next, five features were extracted
using the Kubios HRV (http://kubios.uku.fi/): 1) mean HR,
2) pNN50–the portion of normal sinus intervals exceeding
50 ms, 3) LF power (the power of the low frequency
band 0.04–0.15 Hz), 4) HF power (the power of the high
frequency band 0.15–0.4 Hz), 5) LF/HF, which is the ratio
of power in the low- and high-frequency bands.
5) Mean spectral power of EEG in four bands. These are
1) δ power (1–4 Hz), 2) Θ power (4–8 Hz), 3) α power
(8–13 Hz), and 4) β power (13–20 Hz). In addition, the
ratio of Θ and α is computed (Θ /α) [1]. To cancel out
the effect of ocular artifacts in the raw EEG signal, this
research adopted the wavelet transformation method [24].
Before computing these features, the raw signals were normalized against the baseline mean values of the respective features. Next, these 15 features were computed with respect to

278

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3.

Fig. 2. Sample features (GSR, EMG, HR, EEG) for a subject. Shaded areas
are time period from which the features are used for data analysis.

three experiment stages, namely: 1) the last 3 min of baseline
rest, 2) the last 3 min of the task load period, and 3) the last
5 min of recovery rest. Presumably, the first data segment characterized a baseline low stress state. The second segment was
related to a high stress state, and the third segment corresponded
to a low stress state, i.e., recovery from a high stress level. For
each data segment, the signal was divided into frames of 30 s
with 50% overlap. Each frame was multiplied by a Hamming
window to minimize signal discontinuities at the end of each
frame [21].
For each subject, there were 41 frames (baseline: 11, task
load: 11, and recovery: 19). Finally, for each frame of the feature,
it was labeled with the STAI stress index based on the activity
stage it belonged to (i.e., baseline, task load, and recovery rest).
Fig. 2 illustrates some of the features used for stress estimation.
Due to broken data during recording, two subjects were excluded
for further analysis. Therefore, 39 subjects were included in
subsequent analysis —21 belonging to the physical task group,
and 18 the cognitive task group.
C. Cluster-based Analysis
The idea of cluster-based analysis originates from the observation that different physiological features have varying predictive power in stress evaluation for individual subjects, and that a
few subjects may share certain similarity in their stress response.
For example, some subjects may have identical HRV change patterns, while others may exhibit similar GSR change patterns. It
follows that HRV might be a good predictor for the former, and
GSR for the latter. If a single model is built using the cohort
data of all subjects, which was the strategy adopted by most
legacy methods, an implicit assumption is that all the subjects
have homogeneous stress responses. Alternatively, if a model is
built for an individual subject, the stress prediction might be superior for that particular subject, but poor for the other subjects.
In addition, when individual models are used, one has to build

Principle of cluster-based analysis.

many models for each and every subject. Accordingly, it would
be difficult if not impossible to select an appropriate model for
unseen datasets, thus jeopardizing its predictive power.
To alleviate such a problem, a two-stage procedure is proposed in this research, where a clustering process is used to
divide subjects into a set of subgroups. The principle of the
cluster-based method is shown in Fig. 3. First, the collected feature data are divided into the training set and the testing set. The
former is used to build the model and the latter is used to test the
performance. For a training dataset, the feature data of the baseline stage is used to do the clustering. Let the baseline feature
1
2
n
vector be denoted as f (i,j ) = [f(i,j
) , f(i,j ) , . . . , f(i,j ) ], where
i(∈ 1, 2, . . . , N )) is the index of a subject, j(∈ 1, 2, . . . , m)
is the frame index (m = 11 in this case), and n is the number of
features (n = 15). The feature center of subject i is computed
as


C
f i = fi1 , fi2 , . . . , fin
C
 m 1
m
m
2
n
j = 1 f( i , j )
j = 1 f( i , j )
j = 1 f( i , j )
=
. (2)
,
, ...,
m
m
m
i
Next, a k-means clustering is carried out so that the subjects
are assigned to a subgroup based on the feature centers of the


C



C



C

respective subjects ( f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f N ), i.e., the feature center is
used as the coordinate of a subject. A subject i is assigned to
one of K clusters. Assuming a set of subjects i ∈ (1, 2, . . . , Nk )
belongs to the cluster k, the center of cluster k is computed as

N k 2
N k n 
Nk
1
f

i  =1 fi 
i  =1 fi 
Ck =
(3)
,
, . . . , i =1 i .
Nk
Nk
Nk
In the second stage, a regression analysis is carried out using
the GRNN with respect to individual clusters based on the training dataset belonging to the task load and recovery stages. This
leads to a set of K GRNN models that minimize the cluster-wise
error.
Once the GRNN models are built for all clusters, the stress
evaluation for a new subject is carried out as follows. The testing
dataset is considered as a dataset of new subjects. The input to
the model is a dataset consisting of a set of baseline features,
and nonbaseline features. The baseline feature center is computed using eq. (2). The Euclidian distances between the feature

XU et al.: CLUSTER-BASED ANALYSIS FOR PERSONALIZED STRESS EVALUATION USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS

Fig. 4.

Stress indices in three stages.

center and all K cluster centers are computed. The subject is
assigned to the cluster of minimum distance. In so doing, the
corresponding GRNN model is triggered to evaluate the stress
level of the nonbaseline features. The subject’s stress level can
be predicted using the selected GRNN model. The system performance is computed as the difference between the predicated
stress level and the stress indices captured by the normalized
STAI score.
V. RESULTS
A. Perceived Stress Level
The perceived stress effectively reflects the change of stress
due to task load and recovery rest (see Fig. 4). The paired t-test
showed a stress level after the task load stage was significantly
higher than after the baseline stage (t = 3.782; p < .001) and recovery stage (t = 3.989; p < .001). The mean stress indices for
the baseline and recovery stages were identical with t = 0.155
and p = .877. The mean trait anxiety was examined for the
physical and cognitive task load groups. No significant difference was found in the trait anxiety (t = .809 and p = .420).
This is desirable because it ruled out the influence of long-term
stress on the subjects’ responses.
B. Sensitivity Analysis
Since the number of clusters may influence the performance
of the stress evaluation, it is necessary to compare the system
performance with respect to the cluster numbers. The cluster
number that achieved optimal overall performance is used in
the final model. Sensitivity analysis is carried out by varying
the number of clusters. Note that when the number of cluster
is “1,” it means that all training data are assigned to the same
group, so that it is equivalent to doing a GRNN over all data
frames without clustering. Moreover, the procedure is repeated
with respect to three datasets differentiated by the task type:
1) the physical task (21 subjects), 2) the cognitive task (18), and
3) both tasks (39). The population-wise performance is tested
using a leave-one-out cross validation. That is, for each trainingtesting round, feature data belonging to one subject was used
for testing, and the rest was used for training.

Fig. 5.

279

Sensitivity analysis—task type and the number of clusters.

Fig. 5 shows the accuracy of stress evaluation with respect
to the three datasets and different number of clusters. Let R be
the mean difference between the predicted stress level and the
normalized stress indices associated with the feature vectors.
The accuracy was computed as 1−R. As seen from the result,
the optimal performance was 0.852, which was achieved when
all subjects (both task groups) were included for training, and
when there were 2 clusters. The performance was reasonably
good if only 1 cluster was used. This was especially true when
data belonging to a single-task type was used, such that the
performance of 1-cluster and 2-cluster was identical. This can
be attributed to a more powerful GRNN model that enjoyed a
larger dataset for training (Note that the GRNN models were
built cluster-wise). When there were more than 3 clusters, the
performance plummeted, irrespective of the task type.
C. Effect of Clustering
Although the overall performance was improved due to the
clustering procedure, it is necessary to find out whether such
an improvement was facilitated by the homogeneity of subjects
within the clusters, which in turn contributes to better predictive
power of the cluster-wise GRNN model. Note that in the testing
stage, only one GRNN model was selected depending on which
cluster center was closest to the subject’s baseline feature center.
It was expected that the performance of the selected GRNN
model was better than the other GRNN models (referred to as
alternative models). To verify this, the accuracy of the selected
GRNN model was compared against the alternative models. In
this study, only the 2-cluster case was investigated. The testing
process was designed so that both GRNN models were used to
predict the stress level of the testing dataset.
When all data were used (both physical and cognitive tasks),
the mean accuracy of the selected model was 0.852 (std = .08)
and that of the alternative model was 0.732 (std = .11). The
paired t-test showed significant difference in the accuracy of
the selected model and alternative model (t = 29.4; p < .001).
Moreover, the test procedure was carried out for data belonging to individual task types (i.e., physical or cognitive task); it
was observed that the selected model consistently outperformed
the alternative model with p < .001. Therefore, the clustering

280

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

such as emotional intelligence affect a person’s endurance to
stressors. In this study, this is partially alleviated by controlling
the task difficulty during the experiment to suit the subjects’
potentials.
Finally, for feature extraction, this study used 30-s window, which is a bit narrow especially for computing the lowfrequency power of HRV. The choice of the time window has
considered 1) the limited length of high-quality data for all task
stages, 2) the desire to have more data points within the period of data collection, and 3) extraction of meaningful features
for all signal channels. Despite the limitation, in case the lowfrequency HRV power is unstable and unreliable, the GRNN
model will reduce its weightage. Therefore, it will not have a
significant effect on the final result.
Fig. 6.
model.

Performance comparison of the selected model versus alternative

process indeed contributed to better system performance. The
comparative result is shown in Fig. 6.
VI. DISCUSSIONS
The proposed method was validated under conditions of both
physical and cognitive stressors. To do so, the study included
separated analysis for the physical and cognitive task conditions,
as well as the combined conditions (see Fig. 5). Due to the small
sample size, the significance of the method in the separated task
conditions was not as obvious as in the combined condition.
This is because cluster analysis improves system performance
at the expense of reducing the predictive power of individual
GRNN models, i.e., these models are built on a smaller dataset
than if all samples are assigned into the same cluster. Therefore,
one needs to ensure that sufficient samples are collected for each
cluster. In the study, it is seen that despite the reduced sample
sizes in the separated conditions, the clustering does not result
in worse performance per se.
The performance of the model is dependent on the number
of clusters. Thus, sensitivity analysis is needed to determine an
appropriate number of clusters. Based on the analysis, it was
shown that the number of clusters was typically small (in this
case 2 clusters) in order to achieve optimal performance. So,
it is advisable to test the system performance by restricting the
number of clusters to a small value. However, the current result
was based on a small dataset. For a large dataset with sufficient
samples, one may test out more cluster numbers.
One limitation of the study is the naive strategy of clustering. The baseline features used for the clustering were collected
when subjects were in a relaxed state. An alternative strategy
is to trigger certain stress change in the baseline and use the
change of physiological features to do the clustering. Nevertheless, this research proposes to use the relaxed state baseline
data for clustering because it greatly simplifies the calibration
process. In fact, it would be tedious and costly to include an
additional stress-inducing period that is difficult to be replicated
outside a laboratory. In this sense, the proposed method has
greater application potentials.
Another limitation is related to the control of task difficulty
for inducing stress. It is suspected that personal characteristics,

VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a stress evaluation method that employs
a novel clustering procedure to accommodate the individual
differences. Effective evaluation of the stress level is a useful
step toward computational intelligence where computers can
“understand” users in an unobtrusive way. Unlike traditional
methods that either built a single model using the cohort data
from all subjects, or constructed specific models for individual subjects, the proposed method exploits the homogeneity of
subjects in the change of their physiological features due to
stress. The effectiveness of the system is examined through the
sensitivity analysis. It is found that a small number of clusters
represented a good balance between within-cluster homogeneity
and between-cluster heterogeneity. The study conducted empirical validation on the effect of clustering—the model selection
does improve the system performance. The method paves the
way toward building customized models for sensor-based better
human stress evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1] S. H. Fairclough and L. Venables, “Prediction of subjective states from
psychophysiology: A multivariate approach,” Biol. Psychol., vol. 71, no. 1,
pp. 100–110, 2006.
[2] P. Rani, N. Sarkar, and J. Adams, “Anxiety-based affective communication
for implicit human-machine interaction,” Adv. Eng. Inform., vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 323–334, 2007.
[3] S. D. Kreibig, “Automatic nervous system activity in emotion: A review,”
Biol. Psychol., vol. 84, no. 3, pp. 394–421, 2010.
[4] J. A. Healey and R. W. Picard, “Detecting stress during real-world driving
tasks using physiological sensors,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 156–166, Jun. 2005.
[5] K. Plarre, A. Raij, S. M. Hossain, A. A. Ali, M. Nakajima, M. al’ Absi,
E. Ertin, T. Kamarck, S. Kumar, M. Scott, D. Siewiorek, A. Smailagic,
and L. E. Wittmers, “Continuous inference of psychological stress from
sensory measurements collected in the natural environment,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Information Process. Sens. Netw., Chicago, IL, USA, 2011,
pp. 97–108.
[6] S. H. Fairclough, “Fundamentals of physiological computing,” Interact.
Comput., vol. 21, no. 1–2, pp. 133–145, 2009.
[7] Y. Hasegawa, T. Ootsuka, T. Fukuda, F. Arai, and M. Kawaguchi, “A relaxation system adapting to user’s condition-identification of relationship
between massage intensity and heart rate variability,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot., Seoul, Korea, 2001, pp. 3195–3200.
[8] J. Pärkkä, J. Merilahti, E. M. Mattila, E. Malm, K. Antila, M. T. Tuomisto,
A. V. Saarinen, M. van Gils, and I. Korhonen, “Relationship of
psychological and physiological variables in long-term self-monitored
data during work ability rehabilitation program,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. B., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 141–151, Mar. 2009.

XU et al.: CLUSTER-BASED ANALYSIS FOR PERSONALIZED STRESS EVALUATION USING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS

[9] Y. Shi, M. H. Nguyen, P. Blitz, B. French, and S. Fish, “Personalized stress
detection from physiological measurements,” presented at the Int. Symp.
Quality Life Tech., Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2010.
[10] Y. Saeys, I. Inza, and P. Larranaga, “A review of feature selection techniques in bioinformatics,” Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 19, pp. 2507–2517,
2007.
[11] H. Liu and L. Yu, “Toward integrating feature selection algorithms for
classification and clustering,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 491–502, Apr. 2005.
[12] B. Cinaz, B. Arnrich, R. La Marca, and G. Tröster, “Monitoring of mental workload levels during an everyday life office-work scenario,” Pers.
Ubiquit. Comput., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 229–239, 2013.
[13] C. D. Spielberger, State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Adults, 2nd ed. Palo
Alto, CA, USA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1989.
[14] J. Choi, B. Ahmed, and R. Gutierrez-Osuna, “Development and evaluation
of an ambulatory stress monitor based on wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. B., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 279–286, Mar. 2012.
[15] C. Setz, B. Arnrich, J. Schumm, R. La Marca, G. Tröster, and U. Ehlert,
“Discriminating stress from cognitive load using a wearable eda device,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. B., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 410–417, Mar. 2010.
[16] E. Jovanov, A. O. Lords, D. Raskovic, P. G. Cox, R. Adhami, and
F. Andrasik, “Stress monitoring using a distributed wireless intelligent
sensor system,,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 49–55, May/
Jun. 2003.
[17] B. Arnrich, C. Setz, R. La Marca, G. Tröster, and U. Ehlert, “What does
your chair know about your stress level?,” IEEE Trans Inf. Technol. B.,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 207–214, Mar. 2010.
[18] P. Rani, J. Sims, R. Brackin, and N. Sarkar, “Online stress detection
using psychophysiological signal for implicit human-robot cooperation,”
Robotica, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 673–686, 2002.
[19] L. Salahuddin and D. Kim, “Detection of acute stress by heart rate variability using a prototype mobile ecg sensor,” in Proc. 2006 Int. Conf.
Hybrid Inf. Tech., 2006, pp. 453–459.
[20] L. M. Hirshfield, E. T. Solovey, A. Girouard, A. Kebinger, R. J. K. Jacob,
A. Sassaroli, and S. Fantini, “Brain measurement for usability testing and
adaptive interfaces: an example of uncovering syntactic workload with
functional near infrared spectroscopy,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Human
Factors Comput. Syst., Boston, MA, USA, 2009, pp. 2185–2194.
[21] M.-Z. Poh, N. C. Swenson, and R. W. Picard, “A wearable sensor for
unobtrusive, long-term assessment of electrodermal activity,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. B., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1243–1252, May 2010.
[22] U. Lundberg, R. Kadefors, B. Melin, G. Palmerud, P. Hassmén,
M. Engström, and I. Dohns, “Psychophysilogical stress and emg activity
of the trapezius muscle,” Int. J. Behav. Med., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 354–370,
1994.
[23] R. L. Mandryk and M. S. Atkins, “A fuzzy physiological approach for continuously modeling emotion during interaction with play technologies,”
Int. J. Human–Comput. Studies, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 329–347, 2007.
[24] V. Krishnaveni, S. Jayaraman, S. Aravind, V. Hariharasudhan, and
K. Ramadoss, “Automatic identification and removal of ocular artifacts
from EEG using wavelet transform,” Meas. Sci. Rev., vol. 6.2, no. 4,
pp. 45–57, 2006.

281

Qianli Xu (M’07) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 1999
and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from
the National University of Singapore, Singapore, in
2007.
He is a scientist with the Visual Computing Department, Institute for Infocomm Research,
Singapore. His research interests include design
for human factors, healthcare systems, intelligent
products and services. His publications appear in
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND
CYBERNETICS—PART A:, ACM SIGCHI, Design Studies, etc.

Tin Lay Nwe (M’13) received the B.E. degree in
electronics from the Yangon Institute of Technology,
Myanmar, in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
and computer engineering from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2004.
She is currently a Scientist with Human Language
Technology Department, Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore. Her research interests include robust speech recognition, paralinguistic information
processing of speech, music information retrieval,
and rich transcription.

Cuntai Guan (S’91–M’92–SM’03) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineering
from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1993.
He is the Principal Scientist and Department Head
at the Institute for Infocomm Research, A∗STAR,
Singapore. He is the A∗STAR MedTech Programme
Leader of neuro-technology. His research interests include neural and biomedical signal processing, machine learning and pattern recognition, neural and
cognitive process and its clinical applications, and
brain–computer interfaces.
Dr. Guan is an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL
ENGINEERING (2010–2013), IEEE ACCESS (2012–2015), Journal of Brain Computer Interface, Australasian Medical Journal, Frontiers in Neuroprosthetics,
and A∗STAR Research Publication.

