IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

1967

High-Definition Transcranial Direct Current
Stimulation Induces Both Acute and Persistent
Changes in Broadband Cortical Synchronization:
A Simultaneous tDCS–EEG Study
Abhrajeet Roy, Bryan Baxter, and Bin He∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The goal of this study was to develop methods for
simultaneously acquiring electrophysiological data during highdefinition transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) using
high-resolution electroencephalography (EEG). Previous studies
have pointed to the after-effects of tDCS on both motor and cognitive performance, and there appears to be potential for using
tDCS in a variety of clinical applications. However, little is known
about the real-time effects of tDCS on rhythmic cortical activity
in humans due to the technical challenges of simultaneously obtaining electrophysiological data during ongoing stimulation. Furthermore, the mechanisms of action of tDCS in humans are not
well understood. We have conducted a simultaneous tDCS–EEG
study in a group of healthy human subjects. Significant acute and
persistent changes in spontaneous neural activity and event-related
synchronization (ERS) were observed during and after the application of high-definition tDCS over the left sensorimotor cortex. Both
anodal and cathodal stimulation resulted in acute global changes
in broadband cortical activity which were significantly different
than the changes observed in response to sham stimulation. For
the group of eight subjects studied, broadband individual changes
in spontaneous activity during stimulation were apparent both locally and globally. In addition, we found that high-definition tDCS
of the left sensorimotor cortex can induce significant ipsilateral and
contralateral changes in event-related desynchronization and ERS
during motor imagination following the end of the stimulation period. Overall, our results demonstrate the feasibility of acquiring
high-resolution EEG during high-definition tDCS and provide evidence that tDCS in humans directly modulates rhythmic cortical
synchronization during and after its administration.
Index Terms—Electroencephalography (EEG), event-related
desynchronization (ERD), event-related synchronization (ERS),
neuromodulation, transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS).

Manuscript received September 15, 2013; revised November 3, 2013,
January 12, 2014, and February 28, 2014; accepted February 28, 2014. Date of
publication March 11, 2014; date of current version June 14, 2014. This work
was supported in part by National Science Foundation under Grants CBET1264782 and DGE-1069104, in part by National Institutes of Health under
Grants R01EB006433 and T32EB008389, and in part by Office of Naval Research under Grant N000141110690. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Roy and B. Baxter are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA (e-mail:
abhrajeetroy@gmail.com; baxte144@umn.edu).
∗ B. He is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Institute for
Engineering in Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
USA (e-mail: binhe@umn.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2311071

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTRICAL stimulation of the human brain has long
been of interest to the scientific and medical communities.
In particular, transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) has
emerged as an effective method for noninvasively modulating
human brain activity in recent years. Although neural stimulation using direct current has been investigated in animal studies
as early as 1956 [1], the application of tDCS in humans was
only first reported in 2000 [2]. In this early study, the investigators reported that applying small amounts of electrical current
across the scalp surface was able to induce changes in cortical excitability in a group of healthy human subjects, based on
post-stimulation assessments of motor evoked potential values
elicited by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) [2]. Importantly, anodal stimulation was found to be excitatory while
cathodal stimulation was generally inhibitory. Since the initial
investigation of tDCS in humans many groups have attempted to
further delineate its physiological mechanisms of action and it
has been suggested that the primary effects of tDCS are due to its
ability to change the resting membrane potentials of pyramidal
neurons in layer 5 cortex orthogonal to the scalp surface [3]–[5].
In addition, tDCS is able to induce long lasting after-effects on
cortical plasticity through modification of N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor efficiency and modification of synaptic plasticity across
cortical networks [6], [7].
Behavioral studies have since revealed potential therapeutic
applications of tDCS for a wide variety of disorders, including Parkinson’s, stroke, depression, schizophrenia, and addiction [3], [4], [8], [9]. Electroencephalography (EEG) recordings
following tDCS stimulation periods have revealed changes in
resting state oscillatory neural activity, functional connectivity,
and event-related activity during cognitive tasks. There is also
evidence that tDCS of the motor cortex is able to induce changes
in event-related desynchronization/synchronization (ERD/ERS)
during motor imagery (MI) tasks following the stimulation period [10]–[12]. These ERD/ERS signals represent time-locked
changes in the synchronized firing of large populations of pyramidal neurons during the imagination of movements and often
show deficits in conditions such as stroke, paralysis, and other
movement disorders. Thus, further optimization of tDCS methods could significantly improve clinical outcomes for motor
rehabilitation, which utilizes ERD/ERS biomarkers. Furthermore, given the widespread use of such sensorimotor cortical

E

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

rhythms as control signals for EEG-based brain–computer interfaces (BCIs), the potential of tDCS for aiding in BCI training through the modulation of MI ERD/ERS should be further
explored.
Although initial reports of modulating cortical activity using tDCS are promising, very few studies have investigated
in vivo changes in local and global brain electrical activity during the actual administration of tDCS in humans [13]–[16]. Most
previous studies have not been able to adequately address the immediate effects of tDCS on cortical synchronization and relate
them to the subsequent after-effects, but instead have focused
on the after-effects. For these reasons, there is a need to better
understand the mechanisms and effects of tDCS in real time in
order to cater treatment protocols in a patient-specific manner,
especially considering the potential future applications of tDCS
for both fundamental neuroscience and clinical research.
To date, the majority of tDCS studies have utilized large,
saline soaked sponge electrodes for stimulation, ranging between 25 and 35 cm2 in surface area [9]. In this traditional
configuration, one electrode is used as an anode and the other as
a cathode. The use of large sponge electrodes makes it especially
difficult to acquire simultaneous EEG data during stimulation
as they directly obstruct the signal for EEG channels overlaying
the stimulation electrodes [17]. These large electrodes are also
ill-suited for focal targeting of tDCS due to the broad spatial
distribution of the electric field induced during stimulation. In
contrast to traditional saline soaked sponge electrodes, several
studies have investigated the use of high-definition stimulation
electrodes for tDCS [18]–[22]. These electrodes are approximately the same size as a standard EEG electrode and allow for
significantly increased current density during the application of
tDCS [23]. For this reason, high-definition tDCS systems may
be far more useful than traditional methods of tDCS for combination with EEG recording methods. High-definition tDCS also
offers increased spatial specificity of stimulation, which could
lead to more effective targeting of cortical regions.
The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of
recording high-resolution EEG during high-definition tDCS of
the sensorimotor cortex (SMC). We hypothesized that tDCS
would result in localized, polarity-specific changes in oscillatory EEG rhythms due to subthreshold changes in neuronal
resting potentials underlying the stimulation region. We further
hypothesized that the effects of tDCS on cortical excitability
would persist following the end of the stimulation period, as
indicated by changes in motor imagination ERD/ERS in SMC.
In this way, we were able to link the acute effects of tDCS with
its persistent after-effects on synchronous neural activity.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Subjects
This study was conducted according to a protocol approved
by the IRB of the University of Minnesota. Eight healthy human subjects participated in the study (range: 21–34 years old
{mean: 25, standard deviation: 5.24}, 5 females). All subjects
were high school graduates with some level of college education.
No subjects had any history of neurological or psychological

disorders. In addition, subjects had no history of substance
abuse, brain lesions or metal implants. Each subject participated in three different experimental sessions: anodal, cathodal,
and sham stimulation. Experimental sessions were separated by
a period of at least one week. Given the relatively long period of
time between experimental sessions, we assumed no carry-over
effects of tDCS from one session to the next. Subjects were
informed of all aspects of the experiment including the possibility of minor adverse effects related to tDCS, such as transient
sensations of itching, burning, and prickling on the scalp, and
all subjects gave informed consent at the beginning of each
session. All subjects were naı̈ve to tDCS and the aims of the
study. Each subject initially came in for two experimental sessions (anodal and sham stimulation) to assess tDCS tolerability
and feasibility of the overall procedure. The order of these first
two stimulation sessions was randomized by computer. After
the initial sessions and establishing subject tolerability of tDCS,
subjects were asked to participate in a third session during which
cathodal stimulation was administered. A cognitive assessment
test (mini-mental states examination) was performed on each
subject at the beginning and end of each experimental session to
ensure cognitive normality following tDCS. Additionally, subject perception of the tDCS was assessed for each stimulation
condition.
B. Simultaneous tDCS–EEG Protocol
High-definition tDCS was applied using a 4 × 1 ring electrode
configuration in all experiments. For the anodal stimulation condition, one stimulation electrode was used as the anode while
the other four electrodes were collectively used as the cathode.
In contrast, for the cathodal stimulation condition, one stimulation electrode was used as the cathode while the other four were
collectively used as the anode. In each case, the primary electrode was placed between the C3 and CP3 electrode locations
on a 64 channel EEG cap (BrainProducts, GMBH, Germany)
while the remaining four electrodes of opposite polarity were
placed in the cap in a radial fashion (radius = 4.5 cm) around
the central stimulation electrode (see Fig. 1). DC current was
generated using a 1 × 1 DC stimulator (Soterix Medical, New
York City) and then split into the five high density Ag/AgCl sintered ring electrodes (Stens Corporation, San Rafael, CA) using
a 4 × 1 high-definition adaptor (Soterix Medical, New York
City). The sham stimulation condition consisted of the same
positioning of the five stimulation electrodes; however, current
was only applied at the very beginning and very end of the usual
stimulation period. In this way, subjects experienced the same
sensations related to the ramping up and down of the dc in the
sham condition as in the real stimulation conditions. A current
intensity of 1.0 mA was applied for a total duration of 10 min
over the left SMC during real stimulation sessions.
In each experimental session, the tDCS block was approximately 20 min long, with EEG being recorded continuously
before, during, and after the stimulation, including ramping up
and down periods (see Fig. 2). Subjects were comfortably seated
in an office chair facing an LCD computer monitor, where visual stimuli/cues were presented throughout the course of the

ROY et al.: HIGH-DEFINITION TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION INDUCES BOTH ACUTE AND PERSISTENT CHANGES

1969

C. Motor Imagination Task

Fig. 1. Experimental setup for simultaneous high-definition tDCS and EEG.
Left: Placement of tDCS ring electrodes over left SMC in a 4 × 1 configuration.
For anodal stimulation, the anode was placed between EEG electrodes C3
and CP3 with the four collective cathodes oriented in a radial fashion (radius =
4.5 cm) around it. Electrode polarities were inverted during cathodal stimulation.
Right: High-definition ring electrodes integrated into the EEG cap prior to
lowering impedances using gels. The red circle indicates the target region for
stimulation (left SMC).

Fig. 2. Experimental paradigm. Top: Block diagram of the experimental protocol for a single tDCS–EEG session. Subjects performed a series of MI tasks
before and after the stimulation block in each session. The ramping up and down
periods for the tDCS block were 60 and 90 s for the real and sham stimulation
configurations, respectively. During real stimulation, either anodal or cathodal
tDCS was administered for 10 min using a constant current intensity of 1.0 mA.
For sham sessions, the stimulator only administered current during the ramp
up and down blocks, with no current being administered during the 10 min of
resting EEG. Bottom: MI task description. Thirty trials each of left and right
hand motor imagination were performed both before and after each stimulation
period. Each trial was 10 s long and contained a rest period, cue period, and task
period.

experiment. Eyes open resting EEG was acquired using a
5000 Hz sampling frequency and a 64 channel MR compatible
cap and amplifier system (BrainProducts, GMBH, Germany)
while the subject fixated on a central fixation cross on the computer monitor. After 3 min, the tDCS was turned ON and ramped
up to 1.0 mA (ramping times varied due to differences in scalp
impedances across different days). Following the ramping period, the tDCS was held at a constant current of 1.0 mA for
10 min, while the subject continued fixation. After the tDCS
period, the current was ramped down and resting EEG was
recorded for an additional 3 min.

Subjects were also instructed to engage in a motor imagination task before and after each stimulation period in order
to evaluate the after-effects of each tDCS configuration on MI
ERD/ERS in bilateral SMC (see Fig. 2). Each subject engaged
in three blocks of the MI task both before and after tDCS. Within
each MI block, the subject was presented with 20 trials during
which they were instructed to imagine continuously clenching
either their right or left hand. Each trial type was presented in
an alternating fashion, starting with the presentation of a cue
(GET READY) for 2 s, followed by the trial event (RIGHT or
LEFT) for 5 s, during which subjects continuously imagined
movement of the target hand. Each trial ended with a 3 s rest
period (REST), resulting in a total time of 10 s for each trial.
Subjects rested for approximately 1 min between MI blocks.
EEG was continuously recorded during all MI blocks and saved
for offline analysis.
D. EEG Data Analysis
All EEG data were processed in MATLAB (The Mathworks,
Inc., Natick, MA, USA) and SPSS (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).
Resting state EEG data collected during tDCS were first preprocessed by downsampling to 250 Hz and bandpass filtering
between 2 and 50 Hz. Lower frequencies between 0 and 2 Hz
were omitted during analysis due to the presence of large tDCSrelated drift artifacts under 2 Hz. In order to optimize the detection and removal of artifacts related to ongoing tDCS using
independent component analysis (ICA), tDCS voltage ramping
up and down epochs were first zeroed out due to the presence of very large artifacts during these periods. Additional
noisy epochs were also zeroed out before concatenation of the
remaining good epochs for the entire tDCS–EEG scan. Consistently noisy channels were also omitted from the analysis,
resulting in 57 good channels for each subject. ICA was then
utilized to identify and remove additional eye-blink, muscle, and
tDCS-related artifacts. tDCS-related artifacts were identified as
high amplitude, random fluctuations in broadband EEG activity
localized in electrodes directly adjacent to the tDCS stimulation electrodes and showed similar characteristics in both the
phantom and human experiments. Low frequency random oscillations were particularly characteristic of the tDCS artifacts.
Additional low frequency tDCS-related artifacts related to voltage changes driven by the dc stimulator were also identified by
ICA for removal in the human experiments.
Following preprocessing, time–frequency analysis was used
to determine real-time changes in cortical activity induced by
tDCS during each experimental session. For each channel, a
spectrogram was calculated for the 20 min resting tDCS–EEG
session. Percent changes in individual band powers during the
stimulation and post-stimulation blocks were calculated with
respect to the pre-stimulation baseline (30 s period before the
ramping up of the tDCS) for all anodal, cathodal, and sham
sessions. Next, for each frequency band, a three-way (timeblock{stimulation, post-stimulation}; condition {anodal, cathodal, sham}; channel {all good channels}) repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) analysis was carried out to

1970

assess variances in band power changes across the three experimental configurations. In addition, Mauchly’s test of sphericity was evaluated for each frequency band to assess variability across subject responses. A Greenhouse–Geisser correction
was applied to all significant ANOVA effects based on the corresponding epsilon value calculated for the frequency band of
interest. For frequency bands with a significant three-way (timeblock∗condition∗channel) interaction, we followed up the threeway ANOVA analysis with a two-way (condition∗channel) repeated measures ANOVA for each level of the time-block factor
(stimulation, post-stimulation) to delineate the overall global
effects of tDCS, based on the main effect of “condition.” The
results of these ANOVAs were also corrected for non-sphericity
as before. Post-hoc multiple comparisons tests (alpha = 0.05,
Bonferroni corrected) were subsequently carried out to determine statistically significant differences in global responses to
the three different tDCS conditions for the stimulation and poststimulation time-blocks.
Event-related time-spectral analysis was utilized for assessment of changes in MI-related ERD/ERS following each stimulation configuration. MI EEG data were preprocessed similar to
the resting EEG data, being downsampled to 250 Hz and bandpass filtered between 2 and 50 Hz. All MI trials for each experimental session were epoched and spectrograms were calculated
for channels C3, CP3, C4 and CP4 for the left and right imagery
conditions. These channels were chosen for evaluation a priori
as it is well established that they show robust changes in synchronization across multiple frequency bands during left and right
MI across subjects. Thus, we hypothesized that the real stimulation conditions would result in significantly different ERD/ERS
changes in these channels compared to changes following sham
stimulation due to tDCS-related effects on cortical synchronization. Bad imagery trials were automatically rejected based on
six different statistical factors of the signal power in each channel: maximum, mean, median, standard deviation, skewness,
and kurtosis. For each band, ERD and ERS were calculated and
averaged across trials by subtracting the average band power
during the 5 s MI period from the average band power during
the 1 s baseline period preceding the GET READY cue. Positive percent change values indicated ERS while negative values
indicated ERD. Overall changes in ERD/ERS due to tDCS were
calculated by subtracting the average ERD/ERS values for MI
trials before the stimulation block from the average ERD/ERS
values for MI trials after the stimulation block for each channel
and stimulation condition. These values were then pooled to
obtain average percent change values for two regions of interest
(ROIs): left SMC (channels C3, CP3) and right SMC (channels C4, CP4). For each imagery direction and frequency band,
planned contrasts were evaluated between the real stimulation
(anodal, cathodal) ERD/ERS changes and the sham ERD/ERS
changes for each ROI. Since two non-orthogonal contrasts were
evaluated for each ROI at each level combination, we utilized
a Bonferroni corrected alpha of 0.025 (0.05/2) for all comparisons. The family-wise mean square error for each planned
contrast was obtained from a corresponding one-way (condition
{anodal, cathodal, sham}) repeated measures ANOVA for the
given ROI, imagery direction, and frequency band. A critical t

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

value of 2.0796 (two-tailed, df = 21, alpha = 0.025) was used
to determine significant t-statistics calculated for all contrasts.
Planned contrasts were evaluated independently for each combination of ROI and imagery direction for several main reasons.
First, a greater degree of noise was expected in the left SMC
channels (C3, CP3) due to their proximity to the tDCS electrodes throughout each experimental session. Second, a greater
change in ERD/ERS was anticipated for the right imagery condition given that the left SMC was targeted using tDCS. Finally,
individuals often have a “preferred” or “dominant” MI direction
which results in a large variance in bilateral ERD/ERS responses
for each imagery direction at the group level. Given that the goal
of this part of the study was to delineate potentially subtle, localized group level effects of tDCS on MI using a relatively small
sample size, statistical analyses combining the already variable
elements of ROI and imagery direction was not appropriate.
E. Phantom Experiments
The simultaneous tDCS–EEG protocol was first run using
a phantom head model (garden melon) in order to make preliminary assessments regarding the characteristics of the tDCSrelated artifacts and the overall feasibility of the experimental
procedure. It was particularly important to optimize methods for
removal of the tDCS-related artifacts during acute stimulation in
order to reliably delineate the actual neural responses to ongoing dc stimulation. Conductive EEG gel was smeared across the
entirety of the phantom prior to placement of the EEG cap. Individual EEG channel and tDCS electrode impedances were then
lowered using additional conductive gel. As in the human experiments, 1.0 mA tDCS was then applied for 10 min using the anodal, cathodal, and sham configurations, respectively. Following
experimentation, changes in the global field power (GFP) were
calculated throughout the course of each session to determine
if tDCS artifacts induced any changes in overall signal power
during different periods of tDCS. Time–frequency analysis was
also performed to determine specific noise effects of tDCS in
different frequency bands in the absence of neural activity. ICA
was then utilized to identify the spatiotemporal characteristics
of artifacts induced by the 4 × 1 high-definition tDCS for each
experimental configuration. These noise components were removed from the continuous data and time–frequency analysis
was again used to assess ongoing changes in band power during
tDCS in the clean data. The phantom experiments allowed us to
more confidently utilize ICA for tDCS-related artifact removal
in the subsequent human experiments.
III. RESULTS
A. Phantom Experiments and Removal of tDCS-Related EEG
Artifacts
One of the major goals of this study was to evaluate the feasibility and technical challenges of simultaneous tDCS–EEG.
To this extent, all EEG data were manually assessed throughout the various stages of preprocessing in order to ensure
data quality. We performed a series of phantom experiments
to first evaluate the feasibility of our tDCS–EEG protocol and

ROY et al.: HIGH-DEFINITION TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION INDUCES BOTH ACUTE AND PERSISTENT CHANGES

1971

Fig. 3. Artifactual independent components related to ongoing tDCS. Rows 1 (phantom-session) and 2 (human-session) show examples of Type I artifactual
components due to random drifting of the ongoing tDCS current in EEG electrodes directly adjacent to tDCS stimulation electrodes. Row 3 (human-session) shows
one example of a Type II artifactual component related to ongoing small shifts in voltage due to the dc stimulator maintaining a constant current of 1.0 mA. Low
frequency dominated power spectral densities and spectrograms are characteristic of both artifact types.

delineate the characteristics of artifactual EEG components arising from ongoing dc stimulation using the 4 × 1 high-definition
ring electrode configuration. We observed a number of EEG artifacts related to the tDCS in these initial phantom experiments.
The most prominent artifacts were observed during the ramping up and down of the stimulation current, during which large
voltage fluctuations appeared not only in channels adjacent to
the five high density tDCS electrodes but also globally across
both sides of the EEG cap. These ramping up and down periods
were zeroed out prior to ICA in order to focus on analysis of the
EEG during the “ramped up” period when the tDCS was held
constant at 1.0 mA. However, prior to zeroing out these periods,
the average signal power and its standard deviation were calculated for each channel to determine electrodes significantly
affected during the tDCS procedure in each experimental session. Identification of these electrodes allowed for more careful
evaluation of artifactual ICs related to tDCS in subsequent preprocessing stages, given the variations in head size, shape, and
conductivity at the subject level. Additional large low frequency
drift artifacts (<2 Hz) due to tDCS were also observed in EEG
electrodes adjacent to tDCS electrodes throughout the entire
tDCS period. For this reason, we chose to ultimately filter the
data between 2 and 50 Hz as this minimized the prevalence of
the more prominent low frequency drift artifacts prior to ICA
for removal of residual drift artifacts.
No significant changes in GFP were observed during the
phantom tDCS–EEG session between the pre-stimulation baseline, stimulation period, and post-stimulation baseline before
ICA-based noise removal. Thus, time–frequency analysis was
utilized to investigate frequency specific changes in phantom
EEG activity due to ongoing tDCS during the ramped up period. We found that the tDCS device induced localized, broadband EEG noise only during active stimulation (no noise was
observed simply due to the tDCS–EEG experimental setup).
The ongoing tDCS strongly contaminated the raw EEG signal
in channels C3 and CP3 (adjacent to the central tDCS stimulation electrodes) as well as additional EEG channels adjacent to

the four surrounding tDCS electrodes, particularly in low frequency bands (Type I artifacts). Using ICA, we were able to
effectively identify and remove these channel artifacts due to
ongoing tDCS, which appeared to be a result of tDCS currents
drifting across the phantom surface and effecting subsequent
electrical potential readings in EEG channels in close proximity (see Fig. 3). Broadband noise observed in channels directly
adjacent to the main stimulation electrode (C3, CP3) was effectively removed with this ICA procedure. Following cleaning of
the phantom data using ICA, we still observed some global fluctuations in individual frequency band powers relative to baseline
during and after the stimulation period. However, these changes
were extremely small in magnitude and not spatially correlated
with the locations of the tDCS electrodes. Such fluctuations
were similarly observed using the sham stimulation configuration on the phantom model, further suggesting that they are
due to random noise and not the tDCS itself. Importantly, band
power values for the phantom experiment were several orders of
magnitude smaller than those observed in human experiments,
making these ongoing, residual fluctuations in band power negligible during later analysis of the human data.
tDCS-related artifacts observed during human experiments
were generally identical to those observed during the phantom
experiments, allowing for consistent manual identification and
removal of bad ICs across subjects before further data analysis
(see Fig. 3). Interestingly, additional channel artifacts due to the
tDCS stimulator maintaining a constant current were also observed in nearly all human experiments (Type II artifacts). This
additional artifact appeared to be due to a regularized low frequency voltage fluctuation induced by the tDCS device itself,
in order to maintain a constant stimulation current (1.0 mA).
Furthermore, these artifacts often increased steadily in signal
strength over the course of the 10 min of stimulation, potentially
indicating a gradual increase in tDCS electrode impedance and
subsequent increase in the voltage gradient required to maintain the constant current. The signal profile of this artifact type
was also identical to that of the artifacts related to the tDCS

1972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

sensation was most consistently described as a burning/prickling
sensation on the scalp directly underlying the central tDCS electrode. Sensation was most pronounced during the ramping up
and down periods, though minor sensations were transiently felt
during the ramped up stimulation period in some cases.
C. Group-Level Responses to Ongoing tDCS

Fig. 4. Individual subject percent changes in CP3 band power relative to
baseline during anodal stimulation. Broadband increases in band power synchronization were consistently seen during tDCS across subjects. Several subjects showed a sustained increase in CP3 synchronization following the end
of the stimulation (S1) while other subjects showed only temporarily elevated
synchronization following the end of the stimulation (S2). Blue blocks are bad
epochs which were removed prior to ICA-based artifact removal.

stimulator ramping up and down the voltage, further reiterating
the need for its removal prior to assessing changes in actual
neural activity related to tDCS.
B. Subject-Specific Responses to Ongoing tDCS
Following development of our pre-processing procedures, we
investigated subject-specific changes in spontaneous cortical activity during and after tDCS. First, the GFP of the continuous
EEG data was averaged across three different time windows for
each experimental session: 30 s pre-ramp-up baseline, 10 min
stimulation period, 30 s post-ramp-down baseline. No significant changes in the average GFP relative to baseline were observed during or after stimulation for any of the three experimental conditions, as in the phantom experiments. Given the absence
of overall changes in global EEG power due to tDCS, we utilized
time–frequency analysis to delineate subject-specific changes in
neural activity in different frequency bands. This allowed us to
look at changes in spontaneous cortical synchronization relative to the pre-stimulation baseline during and after both anodal
and cathodal tDCS. Subjects showed large local and global increases in cortical synchrony relative to the position of the tDCS
electrodes during anodal stimulation (see Figs. 4 and 5). Local
effects in channel CP3 were most apparent, although the breadth
of frequency bands affected varied across subjects. Additionally,
most subjects only showed large increases in activity during
anodal stimulation versus after. Cathodal stimulation similarly
resulted in acute, local increases in activity with respect to the
stimulation ROI, in addition to decreases in broadband frontal
activity in five of the eight subjects (see Fig. 5). Interestingly,
large variations in spontaneous cortical activity were also seen
during the sham condition, although significant, focal changes in
band power relative to the stimulation ROI were not consistently
seen as in the real-tDCS conditions.
Subject perception of stimulation was also assessed in each
experiment in order to ensure comfort and safety of the overall
experimental protocol. No significant adverse effects to stimulation were reported by any of the subjects and we found no decrease in cognitive indices in any subjects following stimulation
based on our mini-mental states examination. The stimulation

Group-level responses to high-definition tDCS and sham
stimulation of the left SMC were investigated to determine
the generalized acute effects of stimulation. Overall percent
changes in band power relative to the pre-stimulation baseline
were evaluated for the stimulation and post-stimulation blocks
for each experimental condition (anodal, cathodal, sham) across
all frequency bands of interest. A three-way repeated measures
ANOVA analysis was subsequently carried out for each frequency band. Separate Mauchly’s tests of sphericity revealed
non-sphericity for all frequency bands of interest (see Table I).
Greenhouse–Geisser epsilon values were also calculated for
each frequency band in order to adjust the results of the corresponding three-way ANOVAs. Following these corrections,
a significant three-way (time-block∗condition∗channel) interaction effect was found for the delta, theta, and alpha bands
(see Table II). No significant three-way interaction was found
for the beta band, although significant two-way interactions of
condition∗channel (F (53,374) = 1.616, p = 0.006) and timeblock∗channel (F (26,187) = 3.584, p < 0.001) were apparent.
No significant main level or interaction effects were found for
the gamma band.
In order to further interpret the significant three-way interactions found for the delta, theta, and alpha bands, we followed up each three-way ANOVA with a two-way (condition {anodal, cathodal, sham}, channel {all good channels})
repeated measures ANOVA for each level of the time-block
factor (stimulation, post-stimulation). Two-way ANOVAs were
corrected for non-sphericity as before. A significant main effect of “condition” was found for the delta, theta, and alpha
bands for the stimulation block. For the post-stimulation block,
a significant main effect of “condition” was only found for
the delta and alpha bands (see Table III). For all two-way
ANOVAs showing a significant main effect of “condition,” we
carried out post-hoc multiple comparisons tests (alpha = 0.05,
Bonferroni corrected) to determine significant stimulation and
post-stimulation differences in the global effects of tDCS between the three experimental conditions (see Fig. 6). Cathodal
stimulation resulted in a significantly smaller delta band response (+22%) during the stimulation block compared to both
the anodal (+64%) and sham (+55%) conditions. Similarly,
cathodal stimulation showed a smaller post-stimulation effect
in the delta band (+44%) compared to the anodal (99%) and
sham (+109%) conditions. For the theta band, anodal stimulation resulted in a significantly greater response (+53%)
during the stimulation block compared to both the cathodal
(+19%) and sham (+31%) conditions, with the cathodal response also being significantly less than the sham response.
The alpha band response to anodal stimulation was significantly higher during the stimulation block (+93%) compared

ROY et al.: HIGH-DEFINITION TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION INDUCES BOTH ACUTE AND PERSISTENT CHANGES

1973

Fig. 5. Individual subject percent changes in average band power relative to baseline during HD-tDCS using a 4 × 1 ring configuration. Left: Typical subject
responses to anodal stimulation—broadband increases in spontaneous activity were observed across subjects, generally localized to the left SMC under the anode
tDCS electrode. Right: Typical subject responses to cathodal stimulation—increases in activity were observed near anodal tDCS electrode positions while decreases
in activity were observed in bilateral frontal regions.
TABLE I
RESULTS OF SPHERICITY TESTS FOR EACH FREQUENCY BAND

to both the cathodal (+43%) and sham (+70%) conditions,
with the cathodal response also being significantly less than
the sham response. However, the sham condition had a significantly greater post-stimulation effect on alpha power (+88%)
compared to both the anodal (+49%) and cathodal (+55%)
conditions.
D. Group-Level Changes in MI ERD/ERS Following tDCS
In addition to investigating the acute effects of tDCS on spontaneous cortical activity, we also evaluated changes in ERS in
the SMC following the stimulation period for each experimental
condition. In order to achieve this, we investigated changes in

TABLE II
RESULTS OF THREE-WAY ANOVAS FOR EACH FREQUENCY BAND

TABLE III
RESULTS OF TWO-WAY ANOVAS

1974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

ing sham stimulation (−7%) compared to cathodal stimulation
(+8%) during right MI. No significant changes in ERD/ERS
were found for the left MI condition for either ROI.

IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 6. Global percent changes in band power relative to the pre-stimulation
baseline for the stimulation and post-stimulation blocks. Global responses to
anodal stimulation during the stimulation block were significantly higher than
those observed for the sham condition for the theta and alpha bands. In contrast,
global responses to cathodal stimulation during the stimulation block were
significantly lower than those observed for the sham condition for the delta, theta,
and alpha bands. Significant differences between stimulation conditions were
identified using post-hoc multiple comparisons tests for all two-way ANOVAs
of interest (∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.001, Bonferroni corrected). (a) Stimulation
block. (b) Post-stimulation block.

ERD/ERS during left and right motor imagination of the hand
before and after the simultaneous tDCS–EEG resting state period. Trials related to left and right MI were extracted using a
10 s window centered on the respective onset of the visual cue
for imagination (–4:6 s) for channels C3, CP3, C4, and CP4.
The relative change in ERD/ERS during MI before and after the
stimulation period was calculated for each channel across frequency bands. For each subject, percent change values for each
frequency band and imagery direction were averaged across
channels C3 and CP3 to obtain a single percent change value
for the left SMC while values across channels C4 and CP4 were
averaged to obtain a single percent change value for the right
SMC.
Planned comparisons between the anodal and sham conditions and cathodal and sham conditions were evaluated for both
ROIs (left and right SMC) for each combination of imagery direction and frequency band. A Bonferroni corrected alpha value
of 0.025 (0.05/2) was used for each planned contrast to account
for the two non-orthogonal comparisons that were evaluated for
each ROI. Significant differences for the right MI condition were
found for the theta, beta, and gamma bands (see Fig. 7). Theta
band synchronization in right SMC significantly decreased following sham stimulation (−12%) compared to anodal stimulation (+13%) during right MI. Beta band synchronization in
left SMC significantly decreased following sham stimulation
(−15%) compared to anodal stimulation (+12%) during right
MI. Beta band synchronization in right SMC also significantly
decreased following sham stimulation (−11%) compared to anodal stimulation (+13%) during right MI. Finally, gamma band
synchronization in left SMC significantly decreased follow-

This study evaluated both the real-time and post-stimulation
effects of high-definition tDCS over the left SMC on spontaneous cortical activity and event-related cortical synchronization in a group of healthy human subjects. In particular, we
demonstrated the feasibility of simultaneously recording EEG
during tDCS for assessment of acute group level responses to
stimulation. To our knowledge, this is the first study to directly
investigate the in vivo acute effects of high-definition 4 × 1
tDCS on spontaneous cortical rhythms in humans using highresolution EEG obtained during active stimulation and relate
them to the persistent after-effects of tDCS on MI ERD/ERS.
Previous studies using simultaneous tDCS–EEG methods have
been very limited in scope, generally only recording EEG from
a single electrode during stimulation [15], [24], [25]. Overall,
we found significant global differences in spontaneous cortical
activity across multiple frequency bands using both anodal and
cathodal stimulation configurations with respect to the sham
stimulation condition. Furthermore, we observed significant
changes in bilateral MI ERD/ERS across multiple frequency
bands following tDCS.
Our results reiterate early findings of animal studies of transcranial dc polarization which reported polarity specific changes
in spontaneous neural firing during stimulation [1], [26]–[29].
Importantly, these early animal studies found that changes in
cortical excitability were not frequency specific and persisted
following the end of the stimulation period for up to several hours if dc was applied for an appropriately long duration [26], [27]. Early studies of tDCS in humans added support
to the notion that tDCS could in fact induce long lasting changes
in cortical excitability and functional connectivity, despite the
relatively small amount of electrical energy being transferred
to the brain [2], [6], [7]. Furthermore, the primary effects of
tDCS have been hypothesized to be due to tonic depolarization/hyperpolarization of large populations of pyramidal cells
oriented orthogonal to the cortical surface [3], [30], resulting
in increased or decreased spontaneous firing activity, respectively. Our results support this assertion, given that we found
significant polarity specific changes in spontaneous cortical activity during tDCS using EEG, a direct measure of electrical
activity being produced by the synchronization of pyramidal
cells. Specifically, we found differing global effects of tDCS on
resting EEG activity depending on the polarity of stimulation.
Anodal stimulation generally resulted in significantly greater
global synchronization across frequency bands when compared
to the cathodal and sham conditions. In contrast, cathodal stimulation resulted in significantly lower global synchronization
across frequency bands when compared to the anodal and sham
conditions. These results are well in line with previous studies
that have shown that anodal stimulation is generally excitatory
while cathodal stimulation is generally inhibitory [2].

ROY et al.: HIGH-DEFINITION TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION INDUCES BOTH ACUTE AND PERSISTENT CHANGES

1975

Fig. 7. Group-level percent changes in MI ERD/ERS following anodal, cathodal, and sham tDCS. Left two columns: overall changes in left and right SMC
ERD/ERS during left MI for the theta, beta, and gamma bands. Right two columns: overall changes in left and right SMC ERD/ERS during right MI for the theta,
beta, and gamma bands. Two planned comparisons were evaluated for each SMC ROI at each combination of frequency band and MI direction (∗ p < 0.025,
Bonferroni corrected). (a) Left motor imagery. (b) Right motor imagery.

We further investigated the effects of different tDCS configurations on MI ERD/ERS across different frequency bands
following the stimulation period. It is well established that planning or imagining hand movements leads to a desynchronization (ERD) in the alpha (8–13 Hz) and beta (13–30 Hz) bands
in the region of the motor cortex contralateral to the imagined
hand while concurrently increasing synchronization (ERS) in
these frequency bands in the ipsilateral motor cortex [31]–[33].
This sensorimotor EEG response in the alpha and beta bands
during MI is well established for use in BCIs for motor rehabilitation [34]–[36]. However, subjects substantially vary in their
ability to elicit consistent MI responses in the EEG, often resulting in a significant bottleneck toward mastery of the BCI.
tDCS of the motor cortex has previously been shown to improve motor learning, suggesting it could potentially be used to
improve subject mastery of sensorimotor-based BCIs [37]. Our
results demonstrate that tDCS can significantly modulate theta,
beta, and gamma band synchronization during motor imagination ERD/ERS. Anodal stimulation of the left SMC significantly increased contralateral ERS in the theta band during right
MI. Anodal stimulation also significantly reduced ipsilateral
beta band ERD while significantly increasing contralateral beta
band ERS during right MI. Collectively, these results suggest

that anodal stimulation of one hemisphere can increase bilateral
cortical synchronization in the beta band, possibly due in part
to intrahemispheric connections. In contrast, cathodal stimulation of the left SMC significantly increased ipsilateral gamma
band ERS during right MI. These results further demonstrate
the polarity-dependent effects of tDCS. Future work should aim
to make a preliminary assessment of subject-specific ERD/ERS
responses during MI and tailor the subsequent tDCS protocol
based on this initial assessment. Our findings make it difficult to
assess the potential of using tDCS specifically for training subjects to use sensorimotor rhythm-based BCIs. However, such
effects on cortical excitability could be of use for rehabilitation
of neural disorders which exhibit significantly reduced or altered network synchronization in various frequency bands, such
as stroke, paralysis, schizophrenia, and depression [4], [8], [38].
Our results could help to explain the large variation in reports of the effects of tDCS on cortical activity in the literature
and add to the growing body of work utilizing functional neuroimaging methods for investigating the effects of tDCS. We
observed global and local changes in both spontaneous and
event-related EEG activity during and after tDCS, respectively.
Since we found that tDCS does not affect cortical rhythms in
a strictly frequency specific manner, its subsequent effects on

1976

cognitive and motor processing could be due to modulation of
a broad range of oscillatory neural activity involved in such
tasks. Many other groups have similarly reported changes in
cortical synchrony across frequency bands following traditional
tDCS using saline soaked sponge electrodes. In general, these
studies assessed electrophysiological activity using EEG before
and after a period of stimulation of the ROI [17], [39]–[42], or
EEG recordings interleaved between short periods of stimulation [43], [44]. tDCS over the left motor cortex has previously
been shown to induce changes in motor imagination ERD/ERS
in a polarity dependent manner, although reports of the polarity
specific effects vary [11], [45], [46]. These results emphasize
that MI is a complex cognitive process and its origins are not
entirely understood. However, similar to our results, reduced
ERD following anodal stimulation and increased ERD following cathodal stimulation has been reported [45]. Thus, tonic cortical depolarization/hyperpolarization using tDCS could modulate ERD/ERS through effects on both cortical excitability and
subcortical network activity. For instance, increasing excitability could increase spontaneous neural activity and noise, resulting in reduced ERD, while the opposite effects could arise from
decreasing spontaneous excitability. Anodal tDCS of left M1
has also been shown to induce broadband changes in both ipsilateral and contralateral EEG functional connectivity during MI
following stimulation [41]. Such changes in global functional
connectivity could help explain the global effects of tDCS on
broadband synchronization we observed here. Modulation of oscillatory EEG activity in specific frequency bands has also been
achieved following frequency specific tDCS (oscillatory tDCS)
and transcranial alternating current stimulation [43], [47]–[50].
Elevated band power in the delta, theta, and alpha bands were
reported in such studies [16].
Functional magnetic resonance imaging has also been used to
investigate the real-time effects of tDCS on hemodynamic activity [51]–[55]. Although the BOLD signal is an indirect measure
of neural activity, it is well established that the BOLD signal
changes relative to large changes in synchronized neural activity which may be directly recorded using EEG [56]–[59]. MRI
studies have revealed that both anodal and cathodal stimulation
of the motor cortex can increase regional cerebral blood flow
and the BOLD signal [52], [54], [60]. In addition, widespread
ipsilateral and contralateral changes in resting state network
functional connectivity can be observed following M1 tDCS,
particularly within motor, premotor and supplementary motor
areas [12], [61]. Our EEG results are well in line with these findings, given that we observed acute and persistent global changes
in neural synchronization for both the anodal and cathodal conditions. Magnetoencephalography (MEG) may also be a method
for assessing the real-time electrophysiological effects of tDCS.
Soekadar et al. recently established the feasibility of collecting MEG recordings during tDCS with large electrodes (6 ×
4 cm) in a small group of healthy subjects [13]. They reported
broadband MEG artifacts related to tDCS during the stimulation period which were similar to those we observed in the EEG.
However, this study did not include a sham condition and did not
report any significant group level effects of tDCS. Furthermore,
the use of large, flat electrodes likely resulted in substantially

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

different current flows over the scalp than those induced by our
high-definition tDCS configurations.
This study establishes the feasibility of simultaneous tDCS–
EEG in healthy human subjects using high-resolution recording
and stimulation electrodes. Given the promise of this technique,
further work is needed to optimize the data acquisition and
analyses procedures. ICA proved to be effective for identification and removal of artifacts related to ongoing tDCS. Faria
et al. recently similarly evaluated the feasibility of simultaneous
tDCS–EEG for the study of spike-wave discharges during slow
wave sleep in human epilepsy, although they did not report any
specific results regarding changes in cortical synchronization
related to tDCS [14]. ICA was successfully utilized offline in
order to remove tDCS artifacts caused by the dc stimulator, as
we demonstrated in our methods as well. Future studies should
utilize a more automated procedure for ICA-based detection
and removal of tDCS-related EEG artifacts. Although we were
able to remove the majority of the tDCS artifacts using linear
(ICA) methods, there is the possibility that some residual artifacts remain in the signal due to broadband Brownian noise
induced near the stimulation electrodes. However, the effects of
this noise seem negligible at the group level given the differing global effects of anodal and cathodal stimulation we report
here and the lack of such noise in the ICA-cleaned phantom
data. Regardless, artifact removal using a combined linear and
non-linear approach may further improve EEG resolution in
evaluating the acute local effects of tDCS. The development
of algorithms for real-time removal of tDCS-related EEG artifacts would also be of significant value for future applications of
tDCS in BCI training, sleep studies, and studies of epilepsy [62].
Our study did not investigate real-time changes in event-related
potentials induced during tDCS but instead observed changes in
event-related synchronous activity following the tDCS period.
Future work with simultaneous tDCS–EEG will need to investigate changes in both evoked and spontaneous brain activity
during stimulation. This study did not investigate changes in
EEG activity during the ramping up and down of the tDCS current; due to the presence of large artifacts, these sections were
zeroed out prior to ICA removal of residual tDCS-related artifacts. Developing methods for removing these ramping artifacts
would allow for the investigation of tDCS-related brain activity
changes with full time resolution. Finally, neither stimulation
configuration used in this study was truly unipolar. In reality,
each configuration was a combination of anodal and cathodal
stimulation points which likely resulted in complex local current flows and contributed to the wide range of subject-specific
changes seen in response to the tDCS. Future studies of tDCS–
EEG will need to integrate computational modeling, anatomical
MRI scans, and stereoscopic targeting to optimize tDCS treatment protocols for individual subjects, similar to recent TMS,
deep brain stimulation, and transcranial ultrasound stimulation
studies [63]–[68].
V. CONCLUSION
Our results have significant implications for applications of
tDCS in both fundamental neuroscience and clinical research.

ROY et al.: HIGH-DEFINITION TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION INDUCES BOTH ACUTE AND PERSISTENT CHANGES

This is, to our knowledge, the first study to directly investigate
the acute effects of 4 × 1 high-definition tDCS in humans using high-resolution EEG and relate them to the subsequent after
effects of stimulation. Importantly, we found significant global
EEG changes in spontaneous cortical synchronization across
the delta, theta, and alpha bands in response to high-definition
tDCS. Persistent effects of tDCS on theta, beta, and gamma
band synchronization were also apparent during motor imagination following stimulation. Both anodal and cathodal stimulation appeared to have both ipsilateral and contralateral effects
on cortical activity. Collectively, these results reiterate the hypothesized mechanisms of action of tDCS in humans and add
further evidence that tDCS is able to modulate wide-scale neural
networks noninvasively. Further exploration using tDCS–EEG
techniques could significantly advance our capability to target
specific cortical regions for modulation in order to advance various clinical rehabilitation procedures and perhaps ultimately
enhance cognition in healthy humans.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank faculty and students at the
Biomedical Functional Imaging and Neuroengineering Laboratory and Center for Neuroengineering at the University of
Minnesota for helpful comments and discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] C. A. Terzuolo and T. H. Bullock, “Measurement of imposed voltage gradient adequate to modulate neuronal firing,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,
vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 687–694, Sep. 1956.
[2] M. A. Nitsche and W. Paulus, “Excitability changes induced in the human
motor cortex by weak transcranial direct current stimulation,” J. Physiol.,
vol. 527, no. 3, pp. 633–639, Sep. 2000.
[3] M. D. Johnson, H. H. Lim, T. I. Netoff, A. T. Connolly, N. Johnson,
A. Roy, A. Holt, K. O. Lim, J. R. Carey, J. L. Vitek, and B. He, “Neuromodulation for brain disorders: Challenges and opportunities,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 610–624, Mar. 2013.
[4] A. R. Brunoni, F. Fregni, and R. L. Pagano, “Translational research in
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS): A systematic review of
studies in animals,” Rev. Neurosci., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 471–481, 2011.
[5] A. Rahman, D. Reato, M. Arlotti, F. Gasca, A. Datta, L. C. Parra, and
M. Bikson, “Cellular effects of acute direct current stimulation: Somatic
and synaptic terminal effects,” J. Physiol., vol. 591, no. Pt. 10, pp. 2563–
2578, May 2013.
[6] M. A. Nitsche, D. Liebetanz, N. Lang, A. Antal, F. Tergau, and W. Paulus,
“Safety criteria for transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) in humans,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 114, no. 11, pp. 2220–2222, Nov. 2003.
[7] M. Nitsche, K. Fricke, U. Henschke, A. Schlitterlau, D. Liebetanz,
N. Lang, S. Henning, F. Terga, and W. Paulus, “Pharmacological modulation of cortical excitability shifts induced by transcranial direct current
stimulation in humans,” J. Physiol., vol. 533, no. 1, pp. 293–301, Nov.
2003.
[8] M. T. Berlim, F. Van den Eynde, and Z. J. Daskalakis, “Clinical utility of
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for treating major depression: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind
and sham-controlled trials,” J. Psychiatric Res., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 1–7,
2013.
[9] M. A. Nitsche, L. G. Cohen, E. M. Wassermann, A. Priori, N. Lang,
A. Antal, W. Paulus, F. Hummel, P. S. Boggio, F. Fregni, and A. PascualLeone, “Transcranial direct current stimulation: State of the art 2008,”
Brain Stimulation, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 206–223, Jul. 2008.
[10] Y. Kasashima, T. Fujiwara, Y. Matsushika, T. Tsuji, K. Hase, J. Ushiyama,
J. Ushiba, and M. Liu, “Modulation of event-related desynchronization
during motor imagery with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
in patients with chronic hemiparetic stroke,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 221,
no. 3, pp. 263–268, 2012.

1977

[11] J. Matsumoto, T. Fujiwara, O. Takahashi, M. Liu, A. Kimura, and
J. Ushiba, “Modulation of mu rhythm desynchronization during motor
imagery by transcranial direct current stimulation,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 7, no. 27, 5 pp., Jun. 2010.
[12] C. Peña-Gómez, R. Sala-Lonch, C. Junqué, I. C. Clemente, D. Vidal,
N. Bargalló, C. Falcón, J. Valls-Solé, Á. Pascual-Leone, and D. BartrésFaz, “Modulation of large-scale brain networks by transcranial direct current stimulation evidenced by resting-state functional MRI,” Brain Stimulation, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 252–263, Jul. 2012.
[13] S. R. Soekadar, M. Witkowski, E. G. Cossio, N. Birbaumer,
S. E. Robinson, and L. G. Cohen, “In vivo assessment of human brain
oscillations during application of transcranial electric currents,” Nature
Commun., vol. 4, no. 2032, 10 pp., Jun. 2013.
[14] P. Faria, F. Fregni, F. Sebastião, A. I. Dias, and A. Leal, “Feasibility
of focal transcranial DC polarization with simultaneous EEG recording:
Preliminary assessment in healthy subjects and human epilepsy,” Epilepsy
Behavior, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 417–425, Nov. 2012.
[15] C. Miniussi, D. Brignani, and M. C. Pellicciari, “Combining transcranial electrical stimulation with electroencephalography: A multimodal
approach,” Clin. EEG Neurosci., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 184–191, Apr.
2012.
[16] C. S. Herrmann, S. Rach, T. Neuling, and D. Strüber, “Transcranial alternating current stimulation: A review of the underlying mechanisms and
modulation of cognitive processes,” Frontiers Human Neurosci., vol. 7,
no. 279, 13 pp., 2013.
[17] G. F. Spitoni, R. L. Cimmino, C. Bozzacchi, L. Pizzamiglio, and F. Di
Russo, “Modulation of spontaneous alpha brain rhythms using lowintensity transcranial direct-current stimulation,” Frontiers Human Neurosci., vol. 7, no. 529, 9 pp., 2013.
[18] J. J. Borckardt, M. Bikson, H. Frohman, S. T. Reeves, A. Datta, V. Bansal,
A. Madan, K. Barth, and M. S. George, “A pilot study of the tolerability and effects of high-definition transcranial direct current stimulation
(HD-tDCS) on pain perception,” J. Pain, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 112–120, Feb.
2012.
[19] A. Datta, V. Bansal, J. Diaz, J. Patel, D. Reato, and M. Bikson, “Gyriprecise head model of transcranial direct current stimulation: Improved
spatial focality using a ring electrode versus conventional rectangular
pad,” Brain Stimulation, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 201–207, Oct. 2009.
[20] M. Bikson, A. Rahman, and A. Datta, “Computational models of transcranial direct current stimulation,” Clin. EEG Neurosci., vol. 43, no. 3,
pp. 176–183, Jul. 2012.
[21] J. P. Dmochowski, A. Datta, M. Bikson, Y. Su, and L. C. Parra, “Optimized
multi-electrode stimulation increases focality and intensity at target,” J.
Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, 046011, 16 pp., Aug. 2011.
[22] D. Edwards, M. Cortes, A. Datta, P. Minhas, E. M. Wassermann, and
M. Bikson, “Physiological and modeling evidence for focal transcranial
electrical brain stimulation in humans: A basis for high-definition tDCS,”
Neuroimage, vol. 74, pp. 266–275, 2013.
[23] M. F. Villamar, M. S. Volz, M. Bikson, A. Datta, A. F. DaSilva, and
F. Fregni, “Technique and considerations in the use of 4×1 ring highdefinition transcranial direct current stimulation (HD-tDCS),” J. Vis. Exp.,
no. 77, e50309, 15 pp., Jul. 2013.
[24] N. Accornero, P. Li Voti, M. La Riccia, and B. Gregori, “Visual evoked
potentials modulation during direct current cortical polarization,” Exp.
Brain Res., vol. 178, no. 2, pp. 261–266, Oct. 2006.
[25] M. Schroeder and R. Barr, “Quantitative analysis of the electroencephalogram during cranial electrotherapy stimulation,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 112, no. 11, pp. 2075–2083, Nov. 2001.
[26] L. J. Bindman, O. C. J. Lippold, and J. W. T. Redfearn, “Long-lasting
changes in the level of the electrical activity of the cerebral cortex produced by polarizing currents,” Nature, vol. 196, no. 4854, pp. 584–585,
Nov. 1962.
[27] L. J. Bindman, O. C. J. Lippold, and J. W. T. Redfearn, “The action of
brief polarizing currents on the cerebral cortex of the rat (1) during current
flow and (2) in the production of long-lasting after-effects,” J. Physiol.,
vol. 172, no. 3, pp. 369–382, Aug. 1964.
[28] D. P. Purpura and J. G. McMurtry, “Intracellular activities and evoked
potential changes during polarization of motor cortex,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 166–185, Jan. 1965.
[29] G. V. Goddard, D. C. McIntyre, and C. K. Leech, “A permanent change in
brain function resulting from daily electrical stimulation,” Exp. Neurol.,
vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 295–330, Nov. 1969.
[30] C. J. Stagg and M. A. Nitsche, “Physiological basis of transcranial direct current stimulation,” Neuroscientist, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 37–53, Feb.
2011.

1978

[31] H. Yuan, T. Liu, R. Szarkowski, C. Rios, J. Ashe, and B. He, “Negative
covariation between task-related responses in alpha/beta-band activity and
BOLD in human sensorimotor cortex: An EEG and fMRI study of motor
imagery and movements,” Neuroimage, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 2596–2606,
Feb. 2010.
[32] T. Wang, J. Deng, and B. He, “Classifying EEG-based motor imagery
tasks by means of time–frequency synthesized spatial patterns,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 115, no. 12, pp. 2744–2753, Dec. 2004.
[33] L. Qin and B. He, “A wavelet-based time–frequency analysis approach
for classification of motor imagery for brain–computer interface applications,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 65–72, Dec. 2005.
[34] A. J. Doud, J. P. Lucas, M. T. Pisansky, and B. He, “Continuous threedimensional control of a virtual helicopter using a motor imagery based
brain–computer interface,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 10, e26322, 10 pp., Oct.
2011.
[35] A. S. Royer, M. L. Rose, and B. He, “Goal selection versus process control
while learning to use a brain–computer interface,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8,
no. 3, 036012, 20 pp., Jun. 2011.
[36] K. LaFleur, K. Cassady, A. Doud, K. Shades, E. Rogin, and B. He,
“Quadcopter control in three-dimensional space using a noninvasive motor
imagery-based brain–computer interface,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, no. 4,
e046003, 15 pp., Aug. 2013.
[37] J. Reis, E. M. Robertson, J. W. Krakauer, J. Rothwell, L. Marshall,
C. Gerloff, E. M. Wassermann, A. Pascual-Leone, F. Hummel,
P. A. Celnik, J. Classen, A. Floel, U. Ziemann, W. Paulus, H. R. Siebner,
J. Born, and L. G. Cohen, “Consensus: Can transcranial direct current
stimulation and transcranial magnetic stimulation enhance motor learning
and memory formation?,” Brain Stimulation, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 363–369,
Oct. 2008.
[38] P. H. Peckham and K. L. Kilgore, “Challenges and opportunities in restoring function after paralysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3,
pp. 602–609, Mar. 2013.
[39] L. Jacobson, A. Ezra, U. Berger, and M. Lavidor, “Modulating oscillatory
brain activity correlates of behavioral inhibition using transcranial direct
current stimulation,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 123, no. 5, pp. 979–984,
May 2012.
[40] D. Keeser, F. Padberg, E. Reisinger, O. Pogarell, V. Kirsch, U. Palm,
S. Karch, H.-J. Möller, M. A. Nitsche, and C. Mulert, “Prefrontal direct
current stimulation modulates resting EEG and event-related potentials in
healthy subjects: A standardized low resolution tomography (sLORETA)
study,” Neuroimage, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 644–657, Mar. 2011.
[41] R. Polanı́a, M. A. Nitsche, and W. Paulus, “Modulating functional connectivity patterns and topological functional organization of the human
brain with transcranial direct current stimulation,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1236–1249, 2011.
[42] T. Zaehle, “Behavioral and electrophysiological effects of transcranial
direct current stimulation of the parietal cortex in a visuo-spatial working
memory task,” Frontiers Psychiatry, vol. 3, no. 56, 10 pp., 2012.
[43] L. Marshall, R. Kirov, J. Brade, M. Mölle, and J. Born, “Transcranial
electrical currents to probe EEG brain rhythms and memory consolidation
during sleep in humans,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 2, e16905, 10 pp., Feb.
2011.
[44] L. Marshall, M. Mölle, M. Hallschmid, and J. Born, “Transcranial direct current stimulation during sleep improves declarative memory,” J.
Neurosci., vol. 24, no. 44, pp. 9985–9992, Nov. 2004.
[45] O. M. Lapenta, L. Minati, F. Fregni, and P. S. Boggio, “Je pense donc je
fais: Transcranial direct current stimulation modulates brain oscillations
associated with motor imagery and movement observation,” Frontiers
Human Neurosci., vol. 7, no. 256, 9 pp., Jun. 2013.
[46] T. Tohyama, T. Fujiwara, J. Matsumoto, K. Honaga, J. Ushiba, T. Tsuji,
K. Hase, and M. Liu, “Modulation of event-related desynchronization
during motor imagery with transcranial direct current stimulation in a
patient with severe hemiparetic stroke: A case report,” Keio J. Med.,
vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 114–118, 2011.
[47] T. Zaehle, S. Rach, and C. S. Herrmann, “Transcranial alternating current
stimulation enhances individual alpha activity in human EEG,” PLoS
ONE, vol. 5, no. 11, e13766, 7 pp., Nov. 2010.
[48] T. Neuling, S. Rach, S. Wagner, C. H. Wolters, and C. S. Herrmann, “Good
vibrations: Oscillatory phase shapes perception,” Neuroimage, vol. 63,
pp. 771–778, Nov. 2012.
[49] L. Marshall, H. Helgadóttir, M. Mölle, and J. Born, “Boosting slow oscillations during sleep potentiates memory,” Nature, vol. 444, no. 7119,
pp. 610–613, Nov. 2006.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

[50] D. Reato, F. Gasca, A. Datta, M. Bikson, L. Marshall, and L. C. Parra,
“Transcranial electrical stimulation accelerates human sleep homeostasis,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 9, no. 2, e1002898, 13 pp., Feb. 2013.
[51] G. Alon, S. R. Roys, R. P. Gullapalli, and J. D. Greenspan, “Non-invasive
electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) modifies the resting-state network
connectivity of the primary motor cortex: A proof of concept fMRI study,”
Brain Res., vol. 1403, pp. 37–44, Jul. 2011.
[52] A. Antal, R. Polania, C. Schmidt-Samoa, P. Dechent, and W. Paulus,
“Transcranial direct current stimulation over the primary motor cortex
during fMRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 590–596, Mar. 2011.
[53] A. Antal, M. Bikson, A. Datta, B. Lafon, P. Dechent, L. C. Parra, and
W. Paulus, “Imaging artifacts induced by electrical stimulation during
conventional fMRI of the brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 85, pp. 1040–1047,
2014.
[54] A. Antal, G. Kovács, L. Chaieb, C. Cziraki, W. Paulus, and
M. W. Greenlee, “Cathodal stimulation of human MT+ leads to elevated
fMRI signal: A tDCS-fMRI study,” Restor. Neurol. Neurosci., vol. 30,
no. 3, pp. 255–263, Jan. 2012.
[55] R. Polanı́a, W. Paulus, and M. A. Nitsche, “Reorganizing the intrinsic
functional architecture of the human primary motor cortex during rest
with non-invasive cortical stimulation,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7, no. 1, e30971,
10 pp., Jan. 2012.
[56] Z. Liu and B. He, “fMRI-EEG integrated cortical source imaging by use
of time-variant spatial constraints,” Neuroimage, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1198–
1214, Feb. 2008.
[57] Z. Liu, L. Ding, and B. He, “Integration of EEG/MEG with MRI and fMRI
in functional neuroimaging,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 46–53, Jul./Aug. 2006.
[58] B. He and Z. Liu, “Multimodal functional neuroimaging: Integrating functional MRI and EEG/MEG,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 1, no. 2008,
pp. 23–40, Nov. 2008.
[59] B. He, T. Coleman, G. M. Genin, G. Glover, X. Hu, N. Johnson, T. Liu,
S. Makeig, P. Sajda, and K. Ye, “Grand challenges in mapping the human
brain: NSF workshop report,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 11,
pp. 2983–2992, Nov. 2013.
[60] X. Zheng, D. C. Alsop, and G. Schlaug, “Effects of transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS) on human regional cerebral blood flow,” NeuroImage, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 26–33, Sep. 2011.
[61] H. Kirimoto, K. Ogata, H. Onishi, M. Oyama, Y. Goto, and S. Tobimatsu,
“Transcranial direct current stimulation over the motor association cortex
induces plastic changes in ipsilateral primary motor and somatosensory
cortices,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, no. 4, pp. 777–783, Apr. 2011.
[62] L. L. Chen, R. Madhavan, B. I. Rapoport, and W. S. Anderson, “Real-time
brain oscillation detection and phase-locked stimulation using autoregressive spectral estimation and time-series forward prediction,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 753–762, Mar. 2013.
[63] L. Zorn, P. Renaud, B. Bayle, L. Goffin, C. Lebosse, M. de Mathelin, and
J. Foucher, “Design and evaluation of a robotic system for transcranial
magnetic stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 805–
815, Mar. 2012.
[64] J. Song, A. Pulkkinen, Y. Huang, and K. Hynynen, “Investigation of
standing-wave formation in a human skull for a clinical prototype of a
large-aperture, transcranial MR-guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS)
phased array: An experimental and simulation study,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 435–444, Feb. 2012.
[65] N. Gattinger, G. Mossnang, and B. Gleich, “flexTMS-A novel repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation device with freely programmable stimulus currents,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1962–1970,
Jul. 2012.
[66] C. Schmidt and U. van Rienen, “Modeling the field distribution in deep
brain stimulation: The influence of anisotropy of brain tissue,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1583–1592, Jun. 2012.
[67] C. Schmidt, P. Grant, M. Lowery, and U. van Rienen, “Influence of uncertainties in the material properties of brain tissue on the probabilistic
volume of tissue activated,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 5,
pp. 1378–1387, May 2013.
[68] X. Zhang, D. Yan, S. Zhu, and B. He, “Noninvasive imaging of headbrain conductivity profiles,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 27, no. 5,
pp. 78–83, Sep. 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

