IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

1887

MRI Induced Torque and Demagnetization in
Retention Magnets for a Bone Conduction Implant
Karl-Johan Fredén Jansson∗ , Bo Håkansson, Sabine Reinfeldt, Hamidreza Taghavi, and Måns Eeg-Olofsson

Abstract—Performing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations in patients who use implantable medical devices involve safety risks both for the patient and the implant. Hearing
implants often use two permanent magnets, one implanted and
one external, for the retention of the external transmitter coil to
the implanted receiver coil to achieve an optimal signal transmission. The implanted magnet is subjected to both demagnetization
and torque, magnetically induced by the MRI scanner. In this paper, demagnetization and a comparison between measured and
simulated induced torque is studied for the retention magnet used
in a bone conduction implant (BCI) system. The torque was measured and simulated in a uniform static magnetic field of 1.5 T. The
magnetic field was generated by a dipole electromagnet and permanent magnets with two different types of coercive fields were tested.
Demagnetization and maximum torque for the high coercive field
magnets was 7.7% ± 2.5% and 0.20 ± 0.01 Nm, respectively and
71.4% ± 19.1% and 0.18 ± 0.01 Nm for the low coercive field magnets, respectively. The simulated maximum torque was 0.34 Nm,
deviating from the measured torque in terms of amplitude, mainly
related to an insufficient magnet model. The BCI implant with high
coercive field magnets is believed to be magnetic resonance (MR)
conditional up to 1.5 T if a compression band is used around the
skull to fix the implant. This is not approved and requires further
investigations, and if removal of the implant is needed, the surgical
operation is expected to be simple.
Index Terms—Bone conduction implant (BCI), demagnetization,
magnetic resonance (MR) safety, magnetic torque, retention magnets.

I. INTRODUCTION
AGNETIC resonance imaging (MRI) is a noninvasive
medical technique to visualize internal structures of the
human body. It is used in clinics and hospitals all over the world
as a rapidly increasing diagnostic imaging modality. Compared

M

Manuscript received September 12, 2013; revised December 4, 2013; accepted February 25, 2014. Date of publication March 11, 2014; date of current
version May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by the VR, the Swedish
Research Council. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ K.-J. Fredén Jansson is with the Division of Signal Processing and Biomedical Engineering, Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of
Technology, Gothenburg 41296, Sweden (e-mail: karljohf@chalmers.se).
B. Håkansson, S. Reinfeldt, and H. Taghavi are with the Division of Signal Processing and Biomedical Engineering, Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg 41296, Sweden (e-mail:
boh@chalmers.se; sabine.reinfeldt@chalmers.se; taghavi@chalmers.se).
M. Eeg-Olofsson is with the ENT Department, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg 41345, Sweden (e-mail:
mans.eeg-olofsson@vgregion.se).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309978

Fig. 1. Illustration of the transcutaneous BCI system. One retention magnet is
positioned in the transmitter coil of the audio processor and one in the receiver
coil of the implanted bridging bone conductor.

to computed tomography, MRI has no radiation dose, since
it does not use ionizing radiation. However, it involves other
safety aspects like interactions between ferromagnetic materials and the magnetic fields in the MRI environment. One such
interaction is that a torque is magnetically induced for medically
implanted devices that use permanent magnets. This torque can
be high enough to dislocate the implant and injure the patient
with tissue damage [1]. Over 400 million people have been
scanned in MRI so far [2] and young people today are expected
to undergo an MRI at least once in a lifetime [3]. This includes
patients with implanted medical devices such as bone conduction implants (BCIs) [4]–[7]. Between 50% and 75% of all
pacemaker users need an MRI examination, which is assumed
to be the same for patients with hearing implants [8]. Therefore,
the need of safety investigations of implantable medical devices
in the MRI environment is important.
Patients undergoing MRI are exposed to magnetic fields from
the scanner that easily can interfere electromagnetically with
magnetic materials in their implant. In an MRI scanner, both
static and time-varying magnetic fields are used to measure
the response signal from hydrogen nuclei in the body. These
hydrogen nuclei have been affected by the magnetic fields and
in MRI this information is used to reconstruct an image [9]. The
static field is uniform inside the bore of the scanner with the
magnetic flux density of typically 1.5 and 3 T, but also scanners
with up to 9.4 T exists [10]. The middle of the region inside the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

bore, where the static field is uniform, is called the isocenter.
This is where to center the body part to be scanned. Hydrogen
nuclei in the body tend to align with the uniform field due to
their magnetic moment and quantum spin [9]. The alignment
results in a net magnetization over the body that can be flipped
and excited with radio frequency (RF) magnetic fields. The
scanner knows where in the body the signal is measured by
applying switched gradient fields. A fringe field, usually called
the spatial gradient field, exists around the scanner outside of
the uniform field region. This is a static spatial gradient field that
is of no use for image generation and should not be confused
with the time-varying switched gradient field [11].
The interactions and safety aspects are different from static
and time-varying fields. The uniform field is static and can
induce torque, but its fringe field might induce both torque
and a displacement force. The RF and the gradient fields are
time-varying fields that can induce heat due to induced currents
[12]. Even if the uniform field and the spatial gradient field are
static fields, time-varying effects like induced eddy currents in
electrically conductive parts of the implant can arise when the
patient is moving in the static field [13]. The implant can also
distort the image and cause unwanted artifacts [14].
The American society for testing materials (ASTM) has developed standard test methods for evaluation of the magnetic
resonance (MR) safety of medically implantable devices. These
standards deals with torque [15], displacement force [16], image artifacts [14], RF induced heat [17], and labeling [18]. This
paper is restricted to MR safety related to magnetically induced
torque and demagnetization of retention magnets used in the
BCI.
The BCI system consists of an externally worn audio processor and an implanted unit called the bridging bone conductor,
see Fig. 1. Two magnets are used for retention of a transmission
coil in the audio processor over an implanted receiver coil in the
implant to achieve optimal transcutaneous signal transmission.
Each magnet is positioned in the center of these coils. The audio
processor is magnetically connected to the patient’s head and
easily removed prior to MRI, while a surgical incision is needed
for removal of the bridging bone conductor. The main reason
for considering only the MR safety of the implanted retention
magnet in detail is that most of the magnetically torque induced
in the implant is due to this magnet.
A. Aim of Study
The aim of this study is to investigate the static magnetically
induced torque on implanted retention magnets used in the BCI
when subjected to MRI by experimental measurements using
an electromagnet and by computer simulations. The extent of
demagnetization of the magnets in the experiments will also be
investigated in the experimental part of the study.
II. THEORY
A. Static Magnetically Induced Torque
Static torque can be magnetically induced on magnets wherever the magnetic field in the MRI environment is static. Mag-

netic forces will turn the magnet until it aligns its magnetization
direction in the direction of the static field [19]. In this paper,
only the standard F2213 associated with magnetically induced
torque is considered [15]. The restriction on maximum induced
torque given in the ASTM standard F2213 is that it must not exceed the maximum torque of gravity acting on the implant during
most of the daily activities. This maximum torque of gravity is
calculated by multiplying the gravitational force on the implant
by its longest dimensional length. If the magnetically induced
torque exceeds this value, it must be proven that the torque can
be compensated for by modifications of the implant [20].
B. MR Conditional Hearing Implants
Hearing implant solutions such as cochlear implants also use
retention magnets in the center of the transmitter and receiver
coils for transcutaneous signal transmission. Without any further
consideration to safety than that the magnetic flux density of the
static field of the MRI scanner is 0.2 T, most of those implants
can be scanned without any risk of causing tissue damage to the
patient or damaging the implant [2]. For higher field strengths,
many hearing implants can no longer be used in MRI scanners
and some only under certain conditions [21]. The condition for
allowing MRI scanning can be removal of the internal retention magnet or that the scanning should be performed with the
use of a compression band around the skull. The band creates
a pressure on the implant, preventing it from dislocation. Another way is to design the implant with retention magnets that
are free to rotate in the static field, changing the magnetization
direction to neutralize the induced force and torque [22], [23].
When the implant has been approved to be scanned only under certain conditions, it is approved as MR conditional. The
only implantable bone conduction hearing devices that are approved as MR conditional in 1.5 T MRI without removal of
the implanted retention magnet are the BONEBRIDGE (MedEl
Corporation, Innsbruck, Austria) [22] and the Sophono Alpha
1 and 2 (Sophono, Inc., Denver, USA) of which the Sophono
implants also are cleared as MR conditional up to 3 T MRI [24].
C. Demagnetization and Retention Force
An external magnetic field applied to a permanent magnet
has the ability to change the magnetization of the magnet. The
impact of the field will depend on the intensity and direction of
the applied field, but also on how resistive the magnet is against
demagnetization [23], [25], [26]. Resistance against demagnetization is given by the intrinsic coercive field and is a magnetic
field denoted Hci . It is the magnetic field needed to be applied
in opposite direction to the magnetic field from the magnet to
fully and permanently remove its magnetization. The unit is
often given in A/m and Oe [27], but here it is given in Tesla
to simplify for comparisons with the flux density of the static
magnetic field B0 , which also is given in Tesla.
A permanent demagnetization of retention magnets would
result in a permanent loss of retention force. Permanent magnets are also required in electromagnetic transducers in bone
conduction devices [28] and demagnetization of those magnets
might impair the transducer performance.

FREDÉN JANSSON et al.: MRI INDUCED TORQUE AND DEMAGNETIZATION IN RETENTION MAGNETS FOR A BONE CONDUCTION IMPLANT

1889

multiplying the measured force by disc radius. According to the
standard (F2213) [15], the torque for medical implants should
be measured from 0◦ to 360◦ with a step of 10◦ . In this study, it
is only necessary to measure 18 points between 0◦ and 180◦ due
to symmetry in the measurement setup. Friction of turning the
rod in the measurement setup was compensated by measuring
the peak force (0.74 ± 0.01 N) over a full lap of turning it 360◦
with the electromagnet switched off. The friction force was
then subtracted from the force measured with the electromagnet
switched on.
B. Magnets

Fig. 2. (a) Side-view of the measurement setup for magnetically induced
torque in a dipole electromagnet. The electromagnet is the two coils together
with soft iron poles south (S) and north (N) that produces a uniform magnetic
field in which the permanent magnet was positioned. (b) Cross section of the
pole gap in axial-view of the measurement setup. The retention magnet was
positioned on the rod in the center of the gap and rotated with the angle α.

III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Torque Measurement Setup
In the experiments on magnetically induced torque, a dipole
electromagnet from GMW Associates, Inc., CA, USA, type
5403 was used. This electromagnet can produce a uniform magnetic field with flux density up to 2.3 T between two poles of
soft iron. The magnetic flux density was set by varying the pole
gap and supply current to the coils and 1.5 T required a current of 50 A for a pole gap of 20 mm, where the magnet was
positioned. In the setup for torque measurements, the retention
magnet was mounted onto a long nonmagnetic cylindrical rod
that could rotate along its circular axis, see Fig. 2(a).
The rod was connected to an angular potentiometer at one
end to measure the rotation angle α, which is the angle between
the magnetic field direction of the magnet and the direction of
the magnetic field from the electromagnet, see Fig. 2(b). On the
other end, it was stabilized by a plastic low friction support. A
force gauge was attached to a cylindrical wheel on the rod via
a silicon string winded around the wheel, see Fig. 2(a). Then
the force was measured when the rod was turning. The wheel
had a radius of 6 mm with the purpose of scaling the torque not
to exceed the measurable range of the force gauge. The force
gauge was a model FG-5005 from Lutron Electronic Enterprise
Co., Ltd., Taiwan, China, with the measurable range from 0 to
50 N and resolution of ± 0.01 N. The torque was calculated by

Only the MR safety of the implanted magnet is investigated,
since the audio processor with the external magnet easily can
be removed prior to an MRI. The retention magnets in the BCI
are disc shaped, axially magnetized and made of a composition
of samarium and cobalt (Sm-Co). The dimensions of the implanted magnet are 2.4 and 12 mm in thickness and diameter,
respectively. Torque was measured at 1.5 T for eight magnets
with high Hci (greater than 2.5 T) and four magnets with low
Hci (between 0.62 and 0.9 T). The purpose of using magnets
with different coercive field strengths was to see if this has any
impact on the demagnetization or on the torque. Twice as many
magnets with high Hci as with low Hci were used because not
all of the low Hci magnets reached stationary torque values for
all angles and were, therefore, excluded from the results.
C. Demagnetization Measurement Method
The demagnetization was calculated as the percentage loss of
retention force. The retention force for each tested magnet was
measured before and after exposure to the field from the dipole
electromagnet. The measurement was made for every exposed
magnet at 7-mm distance from an unexposed magnet. The 7-mm
test distance represents a typical skin thickness of 5 mm plus
2 mm extra thickness from the magnet casings.
D. Simulations
The simulated static magnetically induced torque was computed with the software COMSOL Multiphysics 4.2 (COMSOL
AB, Stockholm, Sweden). It can approximate solutions to electromagnetic problems by the use of the finite element method.
To model the uniform magnetic field, a sphere of air with a uniformly distributed magnetic field was created. The magnet was
a cylindrical disc inside the sphere where the static magnetic
flux density was set to 1.5 T. The magnet properties were given
by setting the remanent flux density Br to 1.08 T in the axial
direction, specifying its magnetic moment and with the relative
permeability μr = 1.05. The 1.5 T field was rotated around
the magnet with the angle α starting from 0◦ to 180◦ with a
step of 10◦ as in the experiments when the permanent magnets
were rotated in the electromagnet. The torque was calculated in
a parametric sweep with the angle α as parameter. The magnetic flux density can be measured in the air around a magnet
with a Gauss meter and assuming the magnet is considered to
be a magnetic dipole, the flux density can be calculated for a

1890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Fig. 3. Static magnetically induced torque on eight magnets with high H c i as
a function of the angle between the applied field and the field from the magnet.
The applied field is a uniform static magnetic field of 1.5 T generated from a
dipole electromagnet.

Fig. 4. Static magnetically induced torque on four magnets with low H c i as
a function of the angle between the applied field and the field from the magnet.
The applied field is a uniform static magnetic field of 1.5 T generated from a
dipole electromagnet.

cylindrical magnet at a distance R [12] by

μ0 M 

B(R)
=
R̂2 cos θ + θ̂ sin θ
3
4πR

(1)

which is given in spherical coordinates. R̂ and θ̂ are unit vectors
and θ the angle between the centers of the circular axis of the
magnet to a point at radial distance R. M is the magnitude of
the magnetization given in A/m. The size of the sphere needs to
have a radius Rsphere large enough to make the field from the
magnet as close to zero as possible at its boundary. This is to
make sure that the magnetic field around the magnet does not
propagate outside of this sphere, i.e., outside of the calculation
domain. Hence, the radial term of the right-hand side in (1) will
be equal to zero at the boundary as shown in (2), where Rsphere
is the radius of the sphere fulfilling the boundary condition:
 sphere ) = R̂ 2μ0 M cos θ = 0.
B(R
3
4πRsphere

(2)

Fig. 5. Result from the simulation in COMSOL multiphysics of the static
magnetic induced torque on a permanent magnet. A static uniform magnetic
field of 1.5 T was applied for angles between 0◦ and 180◦ .
TABLE I
LOSS IN RETENTION FORCE AND DEMAGNETIZATION

IV. RESULTS
A. Torque Measurements on Magnets With High Hci
The torque versus the angle α for the eight magnets with high
Hci are plotted in Fig. 3. It was found that the average maximum
torque was 0.20 Nm with a standard deviation of 0.01 Nm and
appeared in the interval of 90◦ ≤ α ≤ 110◦ .
B. Torque Measurements on Magnets With Low Hci
The torque versus the angle α for the four magnets with low
Hci had the maximum torques induced between 70◦ and 80◦ .
It was found that the average maximum torque was 0.18 Nm
with a standard deviation of 0.01 Nm. The results are shown in
Fig. 4.

α = 90◦ . Errors related to mesh and geometry was found to have
a negligible effect on the simulation results.

C. Torque Simulations

D. Demagnetization Measurements

In Fig. 5, the simulation results are shown for the interval
of 0◦ ≤ α ≤ 180◦ . Obviously, the result is similar to a sine
function with a maximum torque of 0.34 Nm occurring when

All results from the demagnetization measurements for each
magnet used in the experiments are shown in Table I. Due to
demagnetization, the average loss in retention force was found

FREDÉN JANSSON et al.: MRI INDUCED TORQUE AND DEMAGNETIZATION IN RETENTION MAGNETS FOR A BONE CONDUCTION IMPLANT

1891

magnetic moment in the material will depend on both the intensity [12] and direction [23], [25], [26] of the applied external
field. By neglecting these effects, there will be a deviation between the simulation and measurements as shown in Fig. 6,
where the maximum measured torque on the high Hci magnets
is only 58.7% ± 1.9% of the simulated torque.
B. Demagnetization

Fig. 6. Torque curves from simulation and measurements on magnets with
both low and high H c i in the same graph. The curves deviate from each other,
especially the simulated and the low H c i curves.

to be minor or 7.7% ± 2.5% for the eight high Hci magnets,
whereas as much as 71.4% ± 19.1% for the four low Hci magnets. It was important to move the low Hci magnets slowly in the
dipole field when changing the angle of measurement, in order
for time-varying effects not to increase the demagnetization. It
was also discovered during the measurements that the demagnetization increased the longer time the magnets were exposed
to the external field.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Experimental and Simulation Deviations
In Fig. 6, results from both the measurements and the simulation are shown, which indicate that there is a big discrepancy
between experiments and simulation as well as between low
and high Hci magnets. Commonly all curves followed more
or less the curve of a sine wave. One of the low Hci magnets
was demagnetized and lost 98.4% of its retention force. The
high Hci magnets were the ones most similar to the simulated
torque except a big deviation in magnitude. Even if the low Hci
magnets were significantly demagnetized, their maximum measured torque in average was as much as 90% (0.18 ± 0.01 Nm)
of the high Hci magnets. This means that a high torque can be
magnetically induced before the demagnetization occurs. The
difference between simulation and experimental results can be
explained by errors either in the experiment or the simulation
model or both. Errors in the experimental torque results are related to angle accuracy, friction, dipole electromagnet accuracy,
and individual magnet differences.
As the angle exceeded 90◦ the magnet swung back to its start
angle and aligned with the applied field. The swing is mentioned
in the ASTM standard F2213-06 [15] saying that an abrupt
change in deflection angle will occur and swing the device back
to equilibrium. The maximum torque was, therefore, measured
as close as possible to the swing back position.
In total, the accuracy in the experimental part is regarded as
reliable and the deviation between simulation and experiments
are assumed to come from the insufficient implementation of
necessary permanent magnet properties in the model. A correct
simulation model of a magnet should include that the induced

The loss in retention force is a result of permanent demagnetization of the implanted retention magnet. In order to prevent
the loss of retention force, a magnet with as high Hci as possible
should be used. There exist permanent magnet materials with
Hci up to 5 T [29]. The coercive field of the magnet material
should be higher than the strength of the magnetic fields of the
MRI scanner [27]. The retention magnet used in the BCI implant
is, therefore, Hci ≥ 2.5 T, which is considered sufficiently higher
than 1.5 T. To evaluate the effects of MRI in scanners with 3 T
or even stronger magnetic fields, the same torque and demagnetization measurements as used in this study might be used,
but the retention magnets should then have a higher coercive
field. Obviously, the torque will be reduced for a demagnetized
retention magnet, but so will the retention force.
If patients need follow up scans, the degree of demagnetization might further increase. However, if the internal retention
magnet is not totally demagnetized, the external retention magnet can be replaced by a stronger magnet with higher remanent
flux density to regain some of the lost retention force. The
strongest magnet available for BCI patients can regain a loss of
maximum 33%.
The retention magnet in the BCI implant is magnetized in axial direction, but magnets magnetized in directions more aligned
with the static magnetic field from the MRI scanner might be
a good choice. However, such retention magnets may not be
able to establish as high retention force as axially magnetized
magnets of same size.
C. Other MRI Aspects to Be Investigated
It is still not investigated if the transducer performance will
deteriorate after an MRI scan. The transducer vibrations are produced with a transducer design that requires permanent magnets [28]. If these magnets are demagnetized during MRI it
might have an impact on the transducer performance [8]. Fortunately, there are soft magnetic materials in the transducer that to
some extent might shield the magnets from demagnetization. In
a future study, demagnetization aspects of the transducer magnets will be investigated as well as magnetically induced torque
of the transducer and the entire implant.
RF magnetic fields from the MRI scanner may also heat the
implant, but this is less likely to occur for smaller devices, such
as the BCI implant, compared to larger implantable medical
devices, such as pacemakers [10], [17]. However, there may be
a risk that those magnetic fields induce currents in the electronic
circuits of the implant and damage electronic components.
Image artifacts will distort the image in the vicinity around
the implant [14]. An investigation of size and cause, but also
what can be done to reduce these artifacts, will be an important

1892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

future study useful for diagnostic imaging. For the Sophono and
BONEBRIDGE implants, the image is distorted in an area with a
diameter of approximately 10 [24] and 15 cm [22], respectively.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, it was experimentally found that the most appropriate type of retention magnet to use in implantable hearing
devices must be a magnet with high coercive field strength to
minimize demagnetization during MRI and to achieve adequate
retention force. Such a type of retention magnet is currently
used in the BCI implant. It was only demagnetized by 7.7% ±
2.5%, but since this magnet is magnetized in axial direction, it
will, therefore, also experience a magnetically induced torque.
The maximum value of this torque was found to be 0.20 ±
0.01 Nm as an average of eight magnets.
Based on these experimental results, the BCI implant is believed to be MR conditional up to 1.5 T MRI if a compression
band is used around the skull to avoid implant dislocation. This
is so far not approved and requires further investigations. If
removal of the implant is needed prior to MRI, the surgical
operation is expected to be simple, since it is secured to the
temporal bone with just a titanium wire over the transducer.
The simulation study showed higher maximum induced
torque of retention magnets during MRI (0.34 Nm) than the
experiments (0.20 Nm). This overestimation is mainly related
to the model of the retention magnet in the simulation program that is not valid for external magnetic fields as high as
in a 1.5T MRI scanner. A more extensive simulation model of
the retention magnet would make it possible to also study the
magnetically induced torque for fields higher than 1.5 T where
experimental results are even more difficult to measure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Ph.D. R. Dumas for his
contribution to the laboratory access and support. Also great
thanks to Assoc. Prof. T. Rylander and Ph.D. O. Talcoth for
their help with simulations.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Teissl, C. Kremer, E. S. Hochmair, J. Ingeborg, and D. Hochmair,
“Cochlear implants: In vitro investigation of electromagnetic interference
at MR imaging-compatibility and safety aspects,” Radiology, vol. 208,
pp. 700–708, 1998.
[2] F. G. Shellock, Reference Manual for Magnetic Resonance Safety, Implants and Devices. Los Angeles, CA, USA: Biomedical Research Publishing Group, 2012.
[3] Cochlear AG (2014, Mar.) Magnetic resonance imaging and
cochlear implants. [Online]. Available: http://www.medisan.no/wpcontent/uploads/2013/11/N35166F_ISS2_EN_MRI_White_Paper_lr.pdf
[4] B. Håkansson, M. Eeg-Olofsson, S. Reinfeldt, S. Stenfelt, and
G. Granström, “Percutaneous versus transcutaneous bone conduction implant system: A feasibility study on cadaver head,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 29,
pp. 1132–1139, 2008.
[5] B. Håkansson, S. Reinfeldt, H. Taghavi, M. Eeg-Olofsson, P. Östli,
J. Adler, J. Gabrielsson, S. Stenfelt, and G. Granström, “A novel bone
conduction implant (BCI): Engineering aspects and pre-clinical studies,”
Int. J. Audiol., vol. 49, pp. 203–215, 2010.
[6] H. Taghavi, B. Håkansson, and S. Reinfeldt, “Analysis and design of RF
power and data link using amplitude modulation of class-E for a novel
bone conduction implant,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 11,
pp. 3050–3059, Nov. 2012.

[7] M. Eeg-Olofsson, B. Håkansson, S. Reinfeldt, H. Taghavi, H. Lund, K.J. Fredén Jansson, E. Håkansson, and J. Stalfors, “The bone conduction
implant-first implantation, surgical and audiological aspects,” Otol. Neurotol., ahead of print, 2014.
[8] I. Todt, J. Wagner, R. Goetze, S. Scholz, R. Seidl, and A. Ernst, “MRI
scanning in patients implanted with a vibrant soundbridge,” Laryngoscope, vol. 121, pp. 1532–1535, 2011.
[9] M. H. Levitt, Spin Dynamics: Basics of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2008.
[10] F. G. Shellock, J. A. Nyenhuis, S. M. Park, R. Kamondetdacha, A. Amjad,
and A. Rezei, “MRI and implanted medical devices: Basic interactions
with an emphasis on heating,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 467–478, Sep. 2005.
[11] F. G. Shellock, E. Kanal, and T. Gilk, “Regarding the value reported for the
term ‘spatial gradient magnetic field’ and how this information is applied
to labeling of medical implants and devices,” Am. J. Roentgenol., vol. 196,
pp. 142–145, 2011.
[12] D. K. Cheng, Field and Wave Electromagnetics, 2nd ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall, 1989.
[13] H. Graf, U. A. Lauer, and F. Schick, “Eddy-current induction in extended
metallic parts as a source of considerable torsional moment,” J. Magn.
Reson. Imaging, vol. 23, pp. 585–590, 2006.
[14] Standard Test Method for Evaluation of MR Image Artifacts From Passive
Implants, F2119-01, ASTM International, 2012.
[15] Standard Test Method for Measurement of Magnetically induced Torque
on Medical Devices in the Magnetic Resonance Environment, F2213-06,
ASTM International, 2012.
[16] Standard Test Method for Measurement of Magnetically induced Displacement force on Medical Devices in the Magnetic Resonance Environment,
F2052-02, ASTM International, 2012.
[17] Standard Test Method for Measurement of Radio Frequency Induced Heating On or Near Passive Implants During Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
F2182-11a, ASTM International, 2012.
[18] Standard Practice for Marking Medical Devices and Other Items for Safety
in the Magnetic Resonance Environment, F2503-08, ASTM International,
2012.
[19] C. McComb, D. Allan, and B. Condon, “Evaluation of the translational and
rotational forces acting on a highly ferromagnetic orthopedic spinal implant in magnetic resonance imaging,” J. Mang. Reson. Imaging, vol. 29,
pp. 449–453, 2009.
[20] G. Schaefers, “Testing MR safety and compatibility: an overview of the
methods and current standards,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 27,
no. 3, pp. 23–27, May/Jun. 2008.
[21] Cochlear Implant Products and Services. (2013, May). “MRI for
R
Nucleus
Implant Recipients, Rediographer’s instructions,” [Online].
Available: http://www.cochlear.com/wps/wcm/connect/835bc774-fb5d4b43-97ff-4aee6ff65210/MRI_Radiographers_Instructions_2013.pdf?
MOD=AJPERES&CONVERT_TO=url&CACHEID=835bc774-fb5d4b43-97ff-4aee6ff65210
TM
Bone Conduc[22] MedEl Corp. (2013, May). “The BONEBRIDGE
tion Implant System, For Professionals,” [Online]. Available: http://
www.medel.com/data/downloadmanager/downloads/bonebridge_pro/enGB/BB_Brochure_EN_screen.pdf
[23] M. Zimmerling and B. Jamnig, “MRI-safe disc magnet for implants,” U.S.
Patent Application US 20110264172A1, Oct. 27, 2011.
[24] U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human Services. (2013, Apr. 8). “K123962, 510(k) Summary: Otomag
Bone Conduction Hearing System,” Retrieved August 5, 2013, from
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf12/K123962.pdf
[25] D. Givord, P. Tenaud, and T. Viadieu, “Coercivity mechanisms in ferrite
and rare earth transistion metal sintered magnets (SmCo5 ,Nd-Fe-B),”
IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1921–1923, Mar. 1988.
[26] B. Edwards and D. I. Paul, “Ferromagnetic coercivity and applied
field orientation,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 147, pp. 331–340,
1995.
[27] H. W. F. Sung and C. Rudowicz, “A closer look at the hysteresis loop
for ferromagnets—A survey of misconceptions and misinterpretations in
textbooks,” Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University
of Hong Kong, 2002.
[28] B. Håkansson, “The balanced electromagnetic separation transducer: A
new bone conduction transducer,” J. Acoust. Soc Am., vol. 113, pp. 818–
825, 2003.
[29] R. Grössinger, “Characterisation of hard magnetic materials,” J. Electr.
Eng., vol. 59, pp. 15–20, 2008.

FREDÉN JANSSON et al.: MRI INDUCED TORQUE AND DEMAGNETIZATION IN RETENTION MAGNETS FOR A BONE CONDUCTION IMPLANT

Karl-Johan Fredén Jansson received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering with specialization in
biomedical engineering from the Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, in 2012,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in developing a new bone conduction hearing
implant and investigating its MR safety. The research
is focused on magnetism and magnetic materials for
bone conduction implants.

Bo Håkansson received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, in 1977, where he also
received the Ph.D. degree in 1984 by defending the
thesis with title “The Bone Anchored Hearing Aid—
Engineering Aspects” in the Department of Applied
Electronics.
He is currently a Professor of biomedical engineering and Head of the Biomedical Signals and Systems
Research Group, Department of Signals and Systems,
Chalmers University of Technology. His research interest includes different applications of bone conduction hearing. Specifically,
his research is directed to implantable hearing devices, audiometric transducers, communication systems, and conventional hearing aids all based on bone
conduction.

Sabine Reinfeldt received the M.Sc. degree in engineering physics with focus on biomedical engineering from Chalmers University of Technology,
Gothenburg, Sweden, in 2003, where she also received the Ph.D. degree in 2009 by defending the
thesis with title “Bone Conduction Hearing in Human Communication-Sensitivity, Transmission, and
Applications” in the Department of Signals and
Systems.
After a postdoctoral period, she is currently an
Assistant Professor in bone conduction hearing at the
Department of Signals and Systems, where she performs research about a new
bone conduction implant system. Her research interests include bone conduction hearing, bone conduction devices, hearing implants, occlusion effect, bone
conduction transmission and sensitivity, human communication, and one’s own
voice.

1893

Hamidreza Taghavi received the M.Sc. degree in
biomedical engineering from Chalmers University of
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, in 2009, where he
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree on the
novel bone conduction implant system.
His research interests include hearing implants,
bone anchored hearing aids, bone conduction hearing implants, low-power integrated circuit design for
implantable medical devices, biomedical instrumentations, and integrated radio frequency circuits.

Måns Eeg-Olofsson received the Ph.D. degree from
the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Sweden, by defending his thesis “Transmission of
bone-conducted sound in the human skull based on
vibration and perceptual measures,” in 2012.
He became a Specialist in Otorhinolaryngology
in 2002 at Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. He is currently a Senior Oto-Surgeon,
and clinically responsible for the bone conduction
implant research with emphasis on surgical methods,
prestanda and subjective outcomes.

