IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2011

Temperature Increase in the Fetus Exposed to UHF
RFID Readers
Serena Fiocchi∗ , Marta Parazzini, Ilaria Liorni, Theodoros Samaras, and Paolo Ravazzani

Abstract—Exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs) has prominently increased during the last decades due to the rapid development of new technologies. Among the various devices emitting
EMFs, those based on Radio-frequency identification (RFID) technologies are used in all aspects of everyday life, and expose people
unselectively. This scenario could pose a potential risk for some
groups of the general population, such as pregnant women, who
are expected to be possibly more sensitive to the thermal effects produced by EMF exposure. This is the first paper that addresses the
estimation of temperature rise in two pregnant women models exposed to ultrahigh frequency RFID by computational techniques.
Results show that the maximum temperature increase of the fetus
and of the pregnancy-related tissues is relatively high (even about
0.7 ◦ C), not too far from the known threshold of biological effects.
However, this increase is confined to a small volume in the tissues.
Index Terms—Fetus, radio frequency identification (RFID),
temperature.

I. INTRODUCTION
N the last decades, the broad use of wireless systems and
the consequent increase in the number of wireless devices
have noticeably changed EMF exposure patterns, levels, and
scenarios. These changes include the increase of exposure levels,
the extension of that exposure to almost all societal classes, a
longer time of exposure, and the exposure to devices that operate
at frequencies at which the biological effect is still unexplored.
Among the countless number of wireless communication systems, one of the most promising and fast growing makes use of
the radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology. It is based
on the communication between a reader and a label (named
“tag”) which uniquely and fast identifies the target, either an

I

Manuscript received July 18, 2013; revised February 3, 2014 and February
28, 2014; accepted March 6, 2014. Date of publication March 14, 2014; date of
current version June 14, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ S. Fiocchi is with the Istituto di Elettronica e di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
e delle Telecomunicazioni, CNR Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 20133 Milan, Italy (e-mail: serena.fiocchi@ieiit.cnr.it).
M. Parazzini and P. Ravazzani are with the Istituto di Elettronica e di Ingegneria dell’Informazione e delle Telecomunicazioni, CNR Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, 20133 Milan, Italy (e-mail: marta.parazzini@ieiit.cnr.it;
paolo.ravazzani@ieiit.cnr.it ).
I. Liorni is with the Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, 20133, Milan, Italy, and also with the
Istituto di Elettronica e di Ingegneria dell’Informazione e delle Telecomunicazioni, CNR Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 20133 Milan, Italy (e-mail:
ilaria.liorni@polimi.it ).
T. Samaras is with the Department of Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece (e-mail: theosama@auth.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2312023

object or a subject [1]. RFID systems are used in many ubiquitous applications that can take advantage of automatic identification, such as asset tracking, supply chain management, payment
systems, security and access control, transport systems, electronic passports and ID cards, animal identification, medical
applications, and sports events. Among the different operating
frequencies of RFID systems, the ultrahigh frequency (UHF)
band (i.e., in the frequency range 870–915 MHz), is used in a
great range of applications that require long read ranges. Subjects who occasionally or accidentally find themselves close
to an RFID reader are exposed to RF radiation (note that of
the two components of an RFID system, the reader emits the
largest amount of EMF radiation, continuously according to the
set duty cycle). Among them, pregnant women and their fetuses
are considered more potentially susceptible to that exposure than
others [2]. This, therefore, makes urgent the estimation of the actual levels of EMF to which they are exposed. At the UHF band,
the known biological effect induced by EMF exposure is the
temperature increase in the tissues. The pattern of EMF energy
absorption is a complex function of several parameters, which
can produce a nonuniform heating of tissues, which represents a
challenge to the thermoregulatory system [3]. The International
Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP),
in a comprehensive review aimed at providing guidelines for
limiting exposure [4], concludes: “established biological and
health effects in the frequency range from 10 MHz to a few gigahertz are consistent with responses to a body temperature rise
of more than 1 ◦ C.” ICNIRP has proposed the specific absorption rate (SAR), which is the EMF power absorbed per mass by
a body/tissue, as the metric to quantify, eventually, the potential
heating of the body. Therefore, the most studies dealing with
the assessment of the RF exposure levels in pregnant women
and fetuses hold up to the SAR estimation (see, e.g., [5]–[10]),
but, as suggested by various authors [11]–[15], the link between
these two quantities is far from univocal. However, there are
studies [16]–[20] that went one step further by estimating the
increase in the fetal temperature due to RF exposure. In the
last years, this is usually performed by computational methods based on the application of the BioHeat equation (BHE)
introduced in [21] that takes into account the influence of the
thermoregulation system. This effect should be considered potentially even more significant in the case of fetuses, taking into
account the peculiarities of their physiology. The metabolic rate
of the fetus, i.e., its metabolic heat production, is higher than
that of a woman, and hence, its temperature remains 0.3–0.5 ◦ C
higher than that of the pregnant woman [22]. Consequently, the
heat is transferred from the fetus to the pregnant woman (heat
loss). If the heat production and the heat loss remain balanced,
the fetal temperature remains constant. Conversely, if the heat

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2012

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE I
RANGE OF VARIABILITY OF SOME REFERENCE [27] PRENATAL TYPICAL
MEASUREMENT AND REFERENCE [1] MASSES SET ACCORDING TO THE GA IN
COMPARISON WITH THE CORRESPONDENT MEASUREMENTS AND MASSES OF
THE FETAL MODELS

Fig. 1. Coronal (first raw) and sagittal (second raw) view of the Ella and the
seven months and nine months GA pregnant women models.

transfer toward the woman is disturbed for any reason, the temperature of the fetus may change. Many biological, chemical,
and physical agents can change the temperature of either the
fetus or the woman, and thus, they can disturb normal fetal thermoregulation. The prolonged exposure to RF radiation has been
suggested to be one of those agents [23].
In a recent paper [24], the assessment of exposure to UHF
RFID devices of pregnant and nonpregnant women resulted
in high levels of SAR values in some fetal and maternal tissues. The maximum peak of the SAR levels, as averaged over
10 g and normalized to 1-W radiated power of the reader antenna, were found close to the limit of 2 W/kg, proposed by
the ICNIRP guidelines [6]. However, a complete health risk
assessment needs additional information on the fetal temperature increase. This paper aims to close this gap of knowledge,
investigating the temperature increase in the same exposure scenarios as in [24], applying the classical approach based on the
numerical solution of the BHE.
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. Anatomical Models and Exposure Scenarios
The two pregnant woman models (seventh and ninth month of
gestational age, GA) were obtained from partial deformations of
the womb of the adult female model named “Ella” of the virtual
population [25], [26] (see Fig. 1). In particular, the seven-month
pregnant woman model was obtained by integrating in “Ella” the
segmented MR images of a pregnant woman abdomen, whereas
the ninth month is based on that of the seventh month, but the
fetus model was replaced by a model of a scaled newborn [26].
In addition to fetal tissues, the placenta and the amniotic fluid
(and the umbilical cord for the seven-month pregnant woman
only) were also integrated in the anatomical models to complete
the pregnant woman models. To sum up, the seven-month and

nine-month pregnant women models consist of 96 and 104 tissues, respectively. Table I shows the comparison between some
typical anthropometric parameters measured on the fetus models with respect to the range of the reference values of the same
parameters for fetuses at the same GA. This was done to verify
the accuracy of the models used here. In particular, the second
and the fourth column describe the range of variability of the
corresponding quantity shown in the first column as reported
in [27], while the third and the fifth ones show the magnitude
of the same quantity as in the voxel models used here. The
“Crown-rump length” is the measurement of the length of human fetuses from the top of the head (crown) to the bottom
of the buttocks (rump) with the fetus in the natural curled position. It is a typical anthropometric measurement determined
from ultrasound imagery and it is strictly correlated with the
GA. The “Biparietal diameter” is another common fetal measurement which serves as a measure of the growth of the head.
From that table, it is evident that both these lengths together
with the fetal mass, measured on the fetus models fall within
the range of the reference values for both models, indicating
that they are globally realistic. On the contrary, the discrepancy
among the fetal tissues’ masses and the reference values is to
suggest that the specific morphology of the organs of the models
is affected by some errors (due to MRI quality data and/or segmentation and 3-D reconstruction process) which could change
the reliability of the results. Therefore, the results variability
has been evaluated by estimating the uncertainty budget of the
maximum of the temperature increase of the fetal body due to
the variation of the mass of the fetal tissues. These latter have
been considered equal to the minimum, the maximum, and the
mean of the ranges as shown in Table I by adjusting the densities
of the corresponding fetal tissues.
The RFID reader, as described in [24], was modeled as a
circularly polarized patch antenna fed with a sinusoidal voltage source of 1-V amplitude, 50-Ω resistance at 870 MHz, the

FIOCCHI et al.: TEMPERATURE INCREASE IN THE FETUS EXPOSED TO UHF RFID READERS

2013

B. Thermal Model
Temperature increase inside the tissues exposed to EMF generated by the UHF RFID system was calculated using the
BHE [21] as implemented by the thermal solver of the simulation platform SEMCAD X (Schmid & Partner Engineering
AG, Zurich, Switzerland) [28]. This provides a finite different
solution of the BHE
ρc

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the whole reader system (i.e., antenna
plus radome) position with respect to the pregnant women models as in [24],
view from above. The center of the local coordinate systems was found through
the arithmetic mean of maximum and minimum x-, y-, and z-coordinates (of
the original reference system outside the body) of the pregnant women wombs,
while the x-,y-,and z-axis were kept parallel to the original reference system.
The center of the ground plane of the reader antenna was placed at z = 0 (local
coordinate systems) and at a distance of 10 cm from the skin of the model,
along the direction defined by the respective angle: R1 (−90◦ ), R2 (0◦ ), and R3
(–45◦ ) with respect to xy plane. The upper right panel shows the dimension of
the radome.
TABLE II
MAXIMUM SAR LEVELS (PSSAR1 0 g ) IN FETAL TISSUES DUE
TO UHF RFID EXPOSURE

typical frequency of the UHF RFID applications in Europe. The
temperature increases in fetal tissues were estimated for the exposure scenarios identified as the “worst-case” ones in terms
of SAR found in the previous paper [24], where, in particular,
the ground plane of the reader antenna is placed at 10 cm from
the pregnant and nonpregnant woman skin (see Fig. 2). Table II
shows the fetal corresponding SAR levels [24]. These are the
“worst-case” scenarios from a geometrical perspective because
the radome of the antenna system is placed as close as possible
to the abdomen skin. In other words, moving toward the skin
from the antenna ground plane, one can encounter for 2 cm the
radome, for 8 cm the cavity where the antenna is placed, and
again the radome for additional 2 cm. Hence, the minimum possible distance between the skin and the ground plane is 10 cm
(see Fig. 2). Although theoretically higher temperature increases
are expected for an antenna placed closer to the abdomen skin
(for an antenna in air and next to the skin, the temperature
rise decreases monotonically with the distance), the ones used
in this study represent realistic worst-case scenarios considering
commercial RFID readers (i.e., antenna plus radome). This consideration is in line with the behavior of SAR with the distance
of the RFID antenna from the skin as shown in [24].

∂T
= ∇ · (k∇T ) + ρQ + ρS − ρb cb ρω (T − Tb )
∂t

(1)

where T (◦ C) is the temperature of the tissue; t (seconds) is the
time; and ρ (kg/m3 ), c (J/kg·◦ C), and k (W/m·◦ C) are the density,
the specific heat, and the thermal conductivity of the tissues,
respectively. Q (W/kg) is the metabolic heat generation rate; S
(W/kg) is the SAR due to EMF exposure; ω (m3 /kg·s) is the
volumetric blood perfusion rate; and ρb (kg/m3 ), cb (J/kg·◦ C),
and Tb (◦ C) are the density, the specific heat, and the temperature
of blood, respectively.
When the goal of the simulation is to obtain the temperature
increase (Tincr ) due to SAR exposure and such increase is expected to be small (<1 ◦ C), some parameters and quantities can
be considered time and temperature independent. These consist of: the tissue parameters (ρ, c, k, ω, Q, Tb ), the parameters
necessary to define boundary conditions [i.e., the heat transfer coefficient, due to convection cooling through air contact
h (W/m2 ◦ C)], the temperature outside the boundary, and the
heat flux due to perspiration. Under this hypothesis, applying
(1) twice, i.e., once with the exposed condition with SAR distribution S and once for the unexposed condition (S = 0) and
subtracting one from the other, one can obtain common terms,
which cancel out. These include the term linked to metabolic
heat ρQ and the one linked to the fixed blood temperature Tb ,
ρb cb ωTb (for further details on this approximation see [13]).
Therefore, the previous equation in a more simplified version
becomes
ρc

∂T
= ∇ · (k∇T ) + ρQ + ρS − ρb cb ρω (T − Tb ) .
∂t

(2)

This formulation is applied in this study, assuming that the
temperature increase due to the SAR distributions generated by
the exposure to a UHF RFID antenna with 1-W output power
is expected to be less than 1 ◦ C, even for long time exposure.
This assumption is supported by extending the current case, on
a preliminary basis, the results of the studies [29]–[31], which
have evaluated the temperature increase in the head, due to the
exposure to a mobile phone antenna at 900 MHz.
Temperature rise was calculated for each exposure scenario
both at the steady state (by assuming that the derivative of Tincr
over the time equals to zero in (2)) and as a function of time
(considering a simulation time exposure of 3 h as suggested
in [12]) to get information about the transient effects during the
time of application of the exposure.
In the following, the exposure scenarios used in [24] will be
referred as “seven months” R1 (or R2 or R3) and “nine months”
R1 (or R2 or R3) for the seven months and nine months of
GA, respectively, where R1, R2, and R3 are shown in Fig. 2.
To allow the solution of (2), additional conditions have to be

2014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 3. T in c r distributions at the steady -state for “seven months” R1 exposure (left) and “nine months” R3 exposure” (right) on coronal (first row), sagittal
(second row), and transversal (third row) planes where maximum value of t T in c r in fetus was found. Scaling bars are clamped to the maximum found in the body
fetus in the corresponding exposure scenario (see Table II). In each slice, the fetus model is superimposed to allow the reader understand its body position with
respect to the temperature distributions.

considered at the boundaries of the simulation domain. Because
of the materials at the interfaces of the boundaries, three types
of boundary conditions were applied, as proposed by [13].
The first one is at the interfaces of tissues with air, where the
following mixed boundary conditions were applied:
∂Tincr
+ hTincr = 0
(3)
∂n
where h is the heat transfer coefficient, and the derivative of
Tincr along the unitary vector n is directed normally to surface
of the interface. h was set to hskin-air = 8 W/(m2 ·K) at the
interface between the maternal skin and the air, whereas between the maternal cornea and the air, it was set to hcornea-air
= 20 W/(m2 ·K); and between the lung and the internal air with
hlung-air = 50 W/(m2 ·K) [26].
The second one is the adiabatic Neumann boundary condition,
which was applied at the interface between maternal tissues
and some air-filled cavities (i.e., internal air, bronchi lumen,
esophagus lumen, pharynx, and trachea lumen)
k

∂Tincr
= 0.
∂n
The third one is the Dirichlet boundary condition
k

Tincr = 0

(4)

(5)

applied at the interface between blood (i.e., artery, veins, and
umbilical cord) and every tissue perfused by blood (all the

tissues except air tissues, maternal and fetal CSF, maternal and
fetal humor vitreous, amniotic fluid, teeth, stomach lumen, and
small intestine lumen).
The nonuniform mesh in the thermal and electromagnetic
simulations was kept the same as generated by the finitedifference time-domain (FDTD) algorithm [24], with a minimum step of 0.1 mm over the source and the skin thin layer and
a maximum step of 4 mm in the background.
C. Thermal Parameters
The dielectric properties and the density of the tissues of the
woman models are the same assigned in the previous paper [24].
However, the thermal simulations require estimation of the value
of the thermal parameters of the tissues under investigation (i.e.,
k, c, cb, ω). The thermal parameters of the tissues of the woman
are taken from [13], with the exception of the values of the amniotic fluid and of the placenta which were taken from [32], and
of the umbilical cord, whose properties are considered the same
as for the blood. Thermal properties of fetal tissues considered
here are equivalent to the ones used for the corresponding adult
tissues.
III. RESULTS
Fig. 3 shows some examples of the Tincr distributions for
both “seven months” R1 and “nine months” R3 cases on the

FIOCCHI et al.: TEMPERATURE INCREASE IN THE FETUS EXPOSED TO UHF RFID READERS

2015

TABLE III
MEAN AND MAXIMUM OF THE TEMPERATURE INCREASE DISTRIBUTION AT THE STEADY STATE CALCULATED OVER SOME MATERNAL TISSUES OF THE TWO
PREGNANT WOMEN IN COMPARISON WITH THE NONPREGNANT WOMAN IN THE SAME EXPOSURE SCENARIO

coronal (first row), sagittal (second row), and transversal (third
row) planes. The three views for each pregnant woman model
give information about the spatial distribution of Tincr in the
womb.
High values of Tincr are encountered not only in the fetus
body, but also in the amniotic fluid. This is particularly evident
in the “seven months” case, in the sagittal and transversal views.
Table III shows the Tincr in some tissues of the two pregnant
women wombs in comparison with the ones calculated over the
nonpregnant women for the same exposure conditions (R1 and
R3). Tissues in brackets in the last row represent the location
of the peak Tincr over the whole body. The most remarkable
differences in terms of maxima Tincr were found in the uterus
(few m ◦ C versus almost 0.7 ◦ C with respect to nonpregnant
and nine-month pregnant woman, respectively), which is also
the most deformed tissue. However, as expected, the pregnant
women tissues closest to the highly conductive and highly heated
fetus and the amniotic fluid (such as fat, subcutaneous adipose
tissue—SAT, skin) are more heated (see the columns of the
maxima Tincr ) than the corresponding tissues in the nonpregnant
women, whereas the tissues behind the womb (such as bone and
connective tissue) are less heated because of the major distance
from the source.
Table IV summarizes the Tincr calculated in the body of the
fetus and in two other tissues in contact with the fetus itself,
i.e., the amniotic fluid and the placenta. For the fetus and the
amniotic fluid, the maxima of the temperature increase were
found in the “nine months” R3 (maximum increase of about
0.7 ◦ C in the amniotic fluid and 0.65 ◦ C in the fetus).
Similar values, although slightly smaller, were found in the
“nine months” R1. On the contrary, the temperature increases
are lower (more than 50% lower) for the “nine months” R2
and “seven months” R1, R2, and R3 exposure scenarios. The
maximum Tincr in the placenta is negligible with respect to
the other two tissues, for both pregnant women and for all the
exposure scenarios. The mean values in the three tissues are
dramatically lower, with a maximum mean Tincr in the amniotic
fluid of 0.037 ◦ C for “nine months” R2. In the fetus, the mean
Tincr reaches a maximum value of 0.25 ◦ C for the “nine months”
R1.
Fig. 4 shows the histogram of the Tincr in the body of the fetus
for the two pregnant women and the three exposure scenarios, in
terms of the body volume fractions. In each panel, Tincr is shown

TABLE IV
MEAN AND MAXIMUM OF THE TEMPERATURE INCREASE DISTRIBUTION AT THE
STEADY STATE DUE TO THE THREE EXPOSURE SCENARIOS R1, R2, R3
CALCULATED OVER THE FETUS, AMNIOTIC FLUID, AND PLACENTA

as normalized with respect to its maximum in the corresponding
exposure scenario, as shown in Table IV. Most of the fetal body
volume is affected by a very low increase in temperature for both
pregnant women and for all the three exposure scenarios. Indeed,
at minimum, the 70% of the fetal body volume is affected by a
Tincr lower than one-tenth of its maximum in the tissues across
all the exposure scenarios and women models.
The uncertainty budget on the maximum Tincr in the body of
the fetus due to the variation of the mass of the fetal tissues was
equal to 0.2% for “seven months” R1 and 0.01% for the “nine
months” R3.
Tables V and VI show the mean and the maximum values of
Tincr distribution at the steady state for each fetal tissue of the
“seven months” and “nine months” models, respectively.
Disregarding the exposure scenario, the maxima Tincr are
located in superficial tissues (skin, SAT, fat), followed by the
muscle and the bone, for both seven- and nine-month GA models. However, one should note that the mean values per tissue are
extremely lower than the corresponding maxima. Fig. 5 shows
the temporal pattern of Tincr estimated at the point of the maximum at the steady state in the body of the fetus (see Tables V

2016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 4. Histograms of the T in c r distribution at the steady state in the body of the fetus for the two pregnant women and the three exposure scenarios, normalized
with respect to the maximum values found in the body fetus in the corresponding exposure scenario (see Table IV).
TABLE V
MEAN AND MAXIMUM OF THE TEMPERATURE INCREASE DISTRIBUTION AT THE
STEADY STATE CALCULATED OVER EACH FETAL TISSUE OF THE “SEVEN
MONTHS” FETUS EXPOSED TO THE UHF RFID

TABLE VI
MEAN AND MAXIMUM OF THE TEMPERATURE INCREASE DISTRIBUTION AT THE
STEADY STATE CALCULATED OVER EACH FETAL TISSUE OF THE “NINE
MONTHS” FETUS EXPOSED TO UHF RFID

and VI for the corresponding tissues). Considering Tincr as the
response of the biological system to the step input represented
by the electromagnetic field, one can consider the time constant
τ as the parameter characterizing the response itself. τ is typically defined as the time in which the system response reaches
about the 62% of its steady-state value. In general, τ is lower
for the seven-month GA cases than for the nine-month GA. In
Fig. 5, τ varies between 10 min (“seven months” R3) and 48 min
(“nine months” R2).
Additional quantitative information about the time course of
Tincr can be found in Table VII, showing the percentage of the
steady state reached by Tincr as a function of time. After 60 min
of exposure, Tincr reaches at least the 90% of its corresponding
value at the steady state for all the exposure scenarios, except

in the “nine months” R2. After 120 min, the steady-state value
is approximately achieved in all cases but in the “nine months”
R2.

FIOCCHI et al.: TEMPERATURE INCREASE IN THE FETUS EXPOSED TO UHF RFID READERS

Fig. 5. Maximum T in c r time courses over the whole fetus models for the six
exposure scenarios investigated.
TABLE VII
DIFFERENCE (IN TERMS OF PERCENTAGE) OF THE “MAXIMUM T in c r ”
CALCULATED IN THE FETUS AT DIFFERENT TIME (FIRST LEFT COLUMN), WITH
RESPECT TO THE “MAXIMUM T in c r ” AT THE STEADY STATE

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
As discussed in Section I, the limited capability of the fetus
to regulate its own temperature makes the fetal temperature
assessment an urgent topic to be addressed when the pregnant
woman is exposed to radio frequencies. This paper starts from a
previous assessment of electromagnetic power absorption [24]
due to UHF RFID reader. Some potentially crucial exposure
scenarios for the fetus exposed to a UHF RFID reader antenna
with 1-W output power were found there. To this purpose, this
study addresses the assessment of the temperature increase at
fetal tissue level in those scenarios.
Before entering in the discussion, one should bear in mind that
the results (as in [24]) are presented by considering a duty cycle
of 100% to account for the worst-case RFID practical transmission mode. Therefore, for different duty cycles, the maximum
temperature rise will be a fraction of the reported ones here.
Moreover, as mentioned before, the data presented here were
obtained considering the reader output power of 1 W, whereas
the typical UHF RFID output powers of the antenna usually are
in the range 25 mW–1.9 W [33], [34], while the maximum allowed ERP in Europe is of 2 W [35]. However, since the reader
output power is approximately linear with SAR and with temperature increase at the thermally steady state [36], [37], it is
possible to scale the values of the Tincr at the steady state found

2017

in this study to any output power, once known the one relative
to the device under investigation.
First of all, the “nine months” fetus shows higher temperature increase with respect to the “seven months” fetus. This is
certainly due to the higher psSAR10 g experienced by the “nine
months” fetus, according to [24] (see Table II). As an additional
explanation, one should take into account the presence of a
larger volume of the amniotic fluid (which has high electric and
thermal conductivities and, as shown in Table IV, even higher
temperature increase than the fetus itself) in the “nine months”
than in the “seven months” fetus. This study indicates that UHF
RFID exposure of the whole fetus results in localized heating of
the fetal tissues up to a maximum of 0.66 ◦ C at the steady state
in the nine-month fetus and of 0.20 ◦ C in the seven months one.
However, the largest increase is in the amniotic fluid, where it
reaches 0.72 ◦ C and 0.25 ◦ C, respectively. All these values are,
however, still lower than the threshold of 1 ◦ C indicated by the
ICNIRP guidelines [4] as limits for the temperature increase in
case of whole-body exposure and used by some authors [13] as
threshold for localized exposure.
On the contrary, the placenta is not affected by the exposure
in terms of tissue heating. The reader position R1 and R3 (in
front of and in the oblique direction with respect to the belly of
the pregnant woman, respectively) are the exposure scenarios
resulting in the highest increase of temperature for both mother
models. The most superficial tissues and/or those ones close to
the amniotic fluid (e.g., skin, SAT, fat, muscle, bone) experience
the highest increase in temperature. These maxima, however, are
highly localized (i.e., confined in a small volume) in the tissues,
especially in the fetus body, where between 70% and 90% of
the volume is experiencing an increase of the temperature of
about one-tenth of the maxima. The time to reach 90% of the
steady state of the temperature increase is about 60 min for all
cases but one exposure scenario of “nine months” fetus. This
indicates that the exposure should be continued for a long time
to result in a sensible increase of the temperature. However, this
cannot be “a priori” excluded in the case of exposure to a UHF
RFID reader addressed in this study, considering that, in many
practical applications, the device is set to emit continuously, in
search of an RFID tag.
As a final remark, the shortcomings and limitations intrinsic
in any simulation based on computational study should always
be considered in the interpretation of the results. These can be
essentially grouped into two main categories:
1) computational errors, such as discretization error, staircase
effect, choice of boundary condition, as well as of SAR
calculation algorithm;
2) modeling uncertainties, i.e., variations in results caused
by different choices, simplifications, and approximations
made according to the judgment of the user, or by the
solver software. They include: the accuracy of the human
body and source geometrical modeling, the choice of
dielectric and thermal properties, and the positioning of
the source.
Specifically, the issue of the discretization errors has been
investigated in the past [38]–[41]. Among these studies, a mesh
resolution smaller than 2 mm like the one used in this study has

2018

been demonstrated to change the results up to a maximum of
10% in both wbSAR and psSAR10 g for frequencies lower than
1 GHz.
The staircase effect could be of great impact at the outer
boundary of the pregnant women, but it is less important over the
(internal) fetal tissues [42]. The reflection error due to the perfectly matched layer absorbing boundary conditions was surely
avoided [43]–[45] by keeping a distance of more than one wavelength (more than 30 cm) between the source and the boundaries
of the computational domain. Again, the differences among different SAR calculation algorithms are generally under 5% for
frequency below 1 GHz [46].
As to the modeling uncertainty sources, the ones that most
affect the reliability of the results in case of near-field exposure
(handset sources) are the positioning of the source [47] and the
variability of the model [48]. These two issues have been widely
studied in terms of psSAR10 g variation in the previous work [24]
by varying the RFID reader position around the pregnant women
wombs and by comparing the exposure over different anatomical
models in the same exposure scenario.
Moreover, in this study, the reliability of the fetus model was
evaluated through a specific assessment. The uncertainty of the
maximum Tincr over the whole fetuses was found to be less than
1% in both cases of pregnant models, thus demonstrating that
the remarkable individual organ mass variations do not affect
the results discussed here.
In addition to that, the most remarkable limitations in the
body modeling not tackled here are:
1) To neglect the contribution given by the very thin vessels
(e.g., in the umbilical cord and the placenta) to the cooling of the fetal tissues. This should better mimic the real
heat exchange and would contribute to a more accurate
temperature increase estimation [32]. However, inclusion
of these vessels tends to decrease the temperature rise
estimate, thus assuring that the results discussed here represent a conservative estimate of the temperature increase;
2) To disregard the possible change in fetal position within
the uterus. This would affect the temperature distribution
both from a global and tissue level point of view, even if
the maximum levels as well as the average temperature
increase over the fetus would be minimally affected by
this issue.
As to the variation of dielectric and thermal properties, several
authors have shown that it is unlikely to have a significant impact on the whole-body SAR and maximum psSAR [49]–[55].
However, the influence of modeling parameters on the correlated standard uncertainty of the peak temperature increase was
discussed in [13], indicating that it is variable among different
scenarios, but remains within the range 15%–30%.
In conclusion, the exposure of a fetus to SAR levels generated
by an RFID UHF reader results in a temperature increase which
is not negligible, even though it is highly localized and is reached
after significant exposure times. The GA also plays a role, with
larger temperature increase for longer GA. This is confirmed
by comparison with most of the tissues of the nonpregnant
woman, particularly the uterus. As to possible effects on health,
a more detailed analysis should be performed on the tissues

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

involved and the relationship between their heating and the fetus
health.
However, the results discussed here, even if affected by the uncertainty intrinsic in any modeling problem, indicate that practical measures to avoid overexposure and reduce the RF heat
deposition of the fetus could be recommended. For the specific
exposure condition studied here, these measures could include:
1) to keep the reader antenna at least 20 cm away from the pregnant women womb and 2) to reduce as much as possible the
time of exposure.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook. Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and Identification, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, Jun. 2010.
[2] L. Kheifets, M. Repacholi, R. Saunders, and E. Van Deventer, “The sensitivity of children to electromagnetic fields,” Pediatrics, vol. 116, pp. e303–
e313, Aug. 2005.
[3] C. Polk and E. Postow, Handbook of Biological Effects of Electromagnetic
Fields, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, Dec. 1995.
[4] The International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection,
“Guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electric, magnetic, and
electromagnetic fields (up to 300 GHz),” Health Phys., vol. 74, pp. 494–
522, Apr. 1998.
[5] J. W. Hand, Y. Li, E. L. Thomas, M. A. Rutherford, and J. V. Hajnal,
“Prediction of specific absorption rate in mother and fetus associated
with MRI examinations during pregnancy,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 55,
pp. 883–893, Apr. 2006.
[6] M. Pediaditis, N. Leitgeb, and R. Cech, “RF-EMF exposure of fetus and
mother during magnetic resonance imaging,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53,
pp. 7187–7195, Dec. 2008.
[7] M. Murbach, E. Cabot, E. Neufeld, M.C. Gosselin, A. Christ,
K.P. Pruessmann, and N. Kuster, “Local SAR enhancements in anatomically correct children and adult models as a function of position within
1.5 T MR body coil,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., vol. 107, pp. 428–433,
Dec. 2011.
[8] W. Kainz, D. D. Chan, J. P. Casamento, and H. I. Bassen, “Calculation of
induced current densities and specific absorption rates (SAR) for pregnant
women exposed to hand-held metal detectors,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 48,
pp. 2551–2560, Aug. 2003.
[9] P. J. Dimbylow, “SAR in the mother and foetus for RF plane wave irradiation,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 3791–3802, Jul. 2007.
[10] T. Nagaoka, T. Togashi, K. Saito, M. Takahashi, K. Ito, and S. Watanabe,
“An anatomically realistic whole-body pregnant-woman model and specific absorption rates for pregnant-woman exposure to electromagnetic
plane waves from 10 MHz to 2 GHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 6731–
6745, Nov. 2007.
[11] C. M. Collins, W. Liu, J. Wang, R. Gruetter, J. T. Vaughan, K. Ugurbil,
and M. B. Smith, “Temperature and SAR calculations for a human head
within volume and surface coils at 64 and 300 MHz,” J. Mag. Reson.
Imag., vol. 19, pp. 650–656, May 2004.
[12] A. Hirata, T. Asano, and O. Fujiwara, “FDTD analysis of body-core temperature elevation in children and adults for whole-body exposure,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 53, pp. 5223–5238, Sep. 2008.
[13] J. F. Bakker, M. M. Paulides, E. Neufeld, A. Christ, N. Kuster, and
G. C. Van Rhoon, “Children and adults exposed to electromagnetic fields
at the ICNIRP reference levels: Theoretical assessment of the induced
peak temperature increase,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, pp. 4967–4989,
Aug. 2011.
[14] A. Hirata, I. Laakso, T. Oizumim, R. Hanatani, K. H Chan, and J. Wiart,
“The relationship between specific absorption rate and temperature elevation in anatomically based human body models for plane wave exposure
from 30 MHz to 6 GHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, pp. 903–921, Jan.
2013.
[15] D. A. Nelson, A. R. Curran, H. A. Nyberg, E. A. Martilla, P. A. Mason,
and J. M. Ziriax, “High-resolution simulations of the thermophysiological
effects of human exposure to 100 MHz RF energy,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 58, pp. 1947–1968, Mar. 2013.
[16] D. Wu, S. Shamsi, J. Chen, and W. Kainz, “Evaluations of specific absorption rate and temperature increase within pregnant female models in
magnetic resonance imaging birdcage coils,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Techn., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 4472–4478, Dec. 2006.

FIOCCHI et al.: TEMPERATURE INCREASE IN THE FETUS EXPOSED TO UHF RFID READERS

[17] J. W. Hand, Y. Li, and J. V. Hajnal, “Numerical study of RF exposure and
the resulting temperature rise in the foetus during a magnetic resonance
procedure,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, pp. 913–930, Feb. 2010.
[18] S. Kikuchi, K. Saito, M. Takahashi, and K. Ito, “Temperature elevation
in the fetus from electromagnetic exposure during magnetic resonance
imaging,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, pp. 2411–2426, Apr. 2010.
[19] H. J. Lee, J. S. Lee, J. K. Pack, H. D. Choi, N. Kim, S. H. Kim, and
Y. S. Lee, “Lack of teratogenicity after combined exposure of pregnant
mice to CDMA and WCDMA radiofrequency electromagnetic fields,”
Radiat. Res, vol. 172, pp. 648–652, Nov. 2009.
[20] R. L. McIntosh, L. Deppeler, M. Oliva, J. Parente, F. Tambuwala,
S. Turner, D. Winship, and A. W. Wood, “Comparison of radiofrequency
exposure of a mouse dam and foetuses at 900 MHz,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 55, pp. N111–N122, Feb. 2010.
[21] H. H. Pennes, “Analysis of tissue and arterial blood temperature in the
resting human forearm,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 1, pp. 93–122, Aug. 1948.
[22] H. Asakura, “Fetal and neonatal thermoregulation,” J. Nihon Med. Sch.,
vol. 71, pp. 360–370, Dec. 2004.
[23] M. C. Ziskin and J. Morrissey, “Thermal thresholds for teratogenicity,
reproduction, and development,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 27, pp. 374–
387, 2011.
[24] S. Fiocchi, I. A. Markakis, P. Ravazzani, and T. Samaras, “SAR Exposure from UHF RFID reader in adult, child, pregnant woman and fetus
anatomical models,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 34, pp. 443–452, 2013.
[25] A. Christ, W. Kainz, E. G. Hahn, K. Honegger, M. Zefferer, E. Neufeld,
W. Rascher, R. Janka, W. Bautz, J. Chen, B. Kiefer, P. Schmitt,
H. P. Hollenbach, J. Shen, M. Oberle, D. Szczerba, A. Kam, J. W. Guag,
and N. Kuster, “The Virtual Family—Development of surface-based
anatomical models of two adults and two children for dosimetric simulations,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, pp. N23–N38, Jan. 2010.
[26] A. Christ, R. Guldimann, B. Bühlmann, M. Zefferer, J. F. Bakker,
G. C. Van Rhoon, and N. Kuster, “Exposure of the human body to professional and domestic induction cooktops compared to the basic restrictions,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 33, pp. 695–705, Dec. 2012.
[27] International Commission on Radiological Protection, “Basic anatomical and physiological data for use in radiological protection: Reference
values,” Ann. ICRP, vol. 32, no. 3–4, pp. 31–52, 2002.
[28] SEMCAD X by SPEAG, version 14.4.0, Zurich, 2011. Available: www.
speag.com
[29] J. Wang and O. Fujiwara, “FDTD computation of temperature rise in the
human head for portable telephones,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn.,
vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1528–1534, Aug. 1999.
[30] P. Bernardi, M. Cavagnaro, S. Pisa, and E. Piuzzi, “Specific absorption
rate and temperature increases in the head of a cellular phone user,” IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 1118–1126, Jul. 2000.
[31] A. Ibrahiem, C. Dale, W. Tabbara, and J. Wiart, “Analysis of the temperature increase linked to the power induced by RF source,” Progress
Electromagn. Res., vol. 52, pp. 23–46, 2005.
[32] J. W. Hand, Y. Li, and J. V. Hajnal, “Numerical study of RF exposure and
the resulting temperature rise in the foetus during a magnetic resonance
procedure,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, pp. 913–930, Feb. 2010.
[33] Agence française de sécurité sanitaire de l’environnement et du travail,
“Les systems d’identification par radiofréquences (RFID) -Evaluation des
impacts sanitaires,” Saisine Afsset n 2005/013, 2009
[34] G. Schmid, R. Überbacher, S. Cecil, A. Escorihuela-Navarro, D. Sainitzer,
and A. Weinfurter “Bestimmung der exposition gegenüber elektromagnetischen feldern, die durch den einsatz von radio frequency identification
(RFID) technologien entstehen. abschlussbericht,” Ressortforschungsberichte zur kerntechnischen Sicherheit und zum Strahlenschutz, BfSRESFOR-65/12 urn:nbn:de:0221–201208089216, 2012
[35] (2013). SEAWIND—Sound Exposure & Risk Assessment of Wireless Network Devices. Final Summary Report. [Online]. Available:
http://seawind-fp7.eu/deliverables-and-publications/
[36] T. Joukou, J. Wang, and O. Fujiwara, “Dependence of temperature-rise in
the human head on antenna input power for portable telephones,” IEIC
Tech. Rep., vol. 98, no. 493, pp. 1–6, 1998.
[37] A. Hirata, M. Fujumoto, T. Asano, J. Wang, O. Fujiwara, and T. Shiozawa,
“Correlation between maximum temperature increase and peak SAR with
different averaging schemes and masses,” IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 569–578, Aug. 2006.

2019

[38] M. C. Gosselin, A. Christ, S. Kühn, and N. Kuster, “Dependence of the
occupational exposure to mobile phone base stations on the properties of
the antenna and the human body,” IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat.,
vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 227–223, May 2009.
[39] S. Kühn, W. Jennings, A. Christ, and N. Kuster, “Assessment of induced
radio-frequency electromagnetic fields in various anatomical human body
models,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 875–890, Feb. 2009.
[40] I. Laakso, “Assessment of computational uncertainty of temperature rise
and SAR in the eyes and brain under far-field exposure from1 to 10 GHz,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. 3393–3404, 2009.
[41] J. F. Bakker, M. M. Paulides, A. Christ, N. Kuster, and G. C. Van Rhoon,
“Assessment of induced SAR in children exposed to electromagnetic plane
waves between 10 MHz and 5.6 GHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, no. 11,
pp. 3115–3130, May 2010.
[42] T. Samaras, A. Christ, and N. Kuster, “Effects of geometry discretization
aspects on the numerical solution of the bioheat transfer equation with the
FDTD technique,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 51, pp. N221–N229, May 2006.
[43] G. Lazzi, O. Gandhi, and D. Sullivan, “Use of PML absorbing layers for
the truncation of the head model in cellular telephone simulations,” IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2033–2039, 2000.
[44] R.P. Findlay and P.J. Dimbylow, “Variations in calculated SAR with distance to the perfectly matched layer boundary for a human voxel model,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 51, no. 23, pp. N411–N415, Dec. 2006.
[45] I. Laakso, S. Ilvonen, and T. Uusitupa, “Performance of convolutional
PML absorbing boundary conditions in finite-difference time domain SAR
calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 7183–7192, 2007.
[46] I. Laakso, T. Uusitupa, and S. Ilvonen, “Comparison of SAR calculation
algorithms for the finite difference time-domain method,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 55, no. 15, pp. N421–N431, Aug. 2010.
[47] B. B. Beard, W. Kainz, T. Onishi, T. Iyama, S. Watanabe, O. Fujiwara,
J. Wang, G. Bit-Babik, A. Faraone, J. Wiart, A. Christ, N. Kuster,
A.-K. Lee, H. Kroeze, M. Siegbahn, J. Keshvari, H. Abrishamkar,
W. Simon, D. Manteuffel, and N. Nikoloski, “Comparisons of computed
mobile phone induced SAR in the SAM phantom to that in anatomically
correct models of the human head,” IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat.,
vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 397–407, May 2006.
[48] J. Wiart, A. Hadjem, M.F. Wong, and I. Bloch, “Analysis of RF exposure
in the head tissues of children and adults,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53,
no. 13, pp. 3681–3695, 2008.
[49] C. Gabriel and A. Peyman, “Dielectric measurement error analysis and
assessment of uncertainty,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 51, no. 23, pp. 6033–
6046, Dec. 2006.
[50] J. Keshvari, R. Keshvari, and S. Lang, “The effect of increase in dielectric
values on specific absorption rate (SAR) in eye and head tissues following
900, 1800 and 2450 MHz radio frequency (RF) exposure,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1463–1467, 2006.
[51] J. Wang, O. Fujiwara, and S. Watanabe, “Approximation of aging effect
on dielectric tissue properties for SAR assessment of mobile telephones,”
IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 408–413, May
2006.
[52] A. Peyman, C. Gabriel, E. H. Grant, G. Vermeeren, and L. Martens, “Variation of the dielectric properties of tissues with age: the effect on the values
of SAR in children when exposed to walkie-talkie devices,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 227–241, 2009.
[53] A. Christ, M. C. Gosselin, M. Christopoulou, S. Kühn, and N. Kuster,
“Age-dependent tissue specific exposure of cell phone users,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1767–1783, 2010.
[54] S. Fiocchi, M. Parazzini, and P. Ravazzani, “RFID system for newborn
identity reconfirmation in hospital: exposure assessment of a realistic
newborn model and effects of the change of the dielectric properties with
age,” Progr. Biophys. Mol. Biol, vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 443–448, Dec. 2011.
[55] S. Fiocchi, M. Parazzini, A. Paglialonga, and P. Ravazzani, “Computational exposure assessment of electromagnetic fields generated by an RFID
system for mother-newborn identity reconfirmation,” Biolectromagnetics,
vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 408–416, Jul. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

