2020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

The Forward Problem of Electroarthrography:
Modeling Load-Induced Electrical Potentials
at the Surface of the Knee
Qingyi Han, Michael D. Buschmann, and Pierre Savard∗

Abstract—Electroarthrography (EAG) is a novel technology recently proposed to detect cartilage degradation. EAG consists of
recording electrical potentials on the knee surface while the joint is
undergoing compressive loading. Previous results show that these
signals originating from streaming potentials in the cartilage reflect joint cartilage health. The aim of this study is to contribute
to the understanding of the generation of the EAG signals and to
the development of interpretation criteria using computer models
of the human knee. The knee is modeled as a volume conductor
composed of different regions characterized by specific electrical
conductivities. The source of the EAG signal is the load-induced
interstitial fluid flow that transports ions within the compressed
cartilage. It is modeled as an impressed current density in different sections of the articular cartilage. The finite-element method is
used to compute the potential distribution in two knee models with
a realistic geometry. The simulated potential distributions correlate very well with previously measured potential values, which
further supports the hypothesis that the EAG signals originate
from compressed cartilage. Also, different localized cartilage defects simulated as a reduced impressed current density produce
specific potential distributions that may be used to detect and localize cartilage degradation. In conclusion, given the structural
and electrophysiological complexity of the knee, computer modeling constitutes an important tool to improve our understanding
of the generation of EAG signals and of the various factors that
affect the EAG signals so as to help develop the EAG technology as
a useful clinical tool.
Index Terms—Arthritis, bioelectric phenomena, finite-element
analysis, medical simulation.

I. INTRODUCTION
RTICULAR cartilage is a conjunctive tissue which protects the subchondral bones from direct contact. This allows diarthrodial joints to absorb shock and reduce friction during movement. Osteoarthritis (OA), which is characterized by a
degeneration of the articular cartilage, is the most prevalent form
of joint disorders. It affects up to 10% of adults worldwide and
is a leading cause of disability, which leads to an important economic burden that accentuates with an aging population [1]–[4].

A

Manuscript received August 12, 2013; revised February 13, 2014; accepted
February 28, 2014. Date of publication March 14, 2014; date of current version
June 14, 2014. This work was supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Q. Han and M. D. Buschmann are with the Institut de génie biomédical,
École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, QC H3C 3A7, Canada (e-mail:
qingyi.han@polymtl.ca; michael.buschmann@polymtl.ca).
∗ P. Savard is with the Institut de génie biomédical, École Polytechnique de
Montréal, Montréal, QC H3C 3A7, Canada (e-mail: pierre.savard@polymtl.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2312104

This multifactorial joint disorder involves complex biochemical,
enzymatic, and metabolic alterations associated with structural,
morphological, and biomechanical changes. Appearing initially
as superficial fibrillations on cartilage, OA can later spread into
deeper zones until the denudation of subchondral bones [5], [6].
Treatments at this stage often require some form of partial or
total prosthetic joint replacement [7], [8].
Current techniques that are employed by clinicians to assess
joint function mainly include physical examination, imaging
technologies, and marker-based evaluations. Medical imaging
aims to visualize the morphologic changes of the cartilage using technologies such as radiography and magnetic resonance
imaging [9], [10]. To date, none of these techniques provide
specific diagnostic information early enough to prevent progression of the disease. By detecting biochemical and metabolic
changes through blood, synovial fluid, or urine sample analyses, biomarkers may succeed to provide information on cartilage
breakdown at a very early stage [11]–[13], however, without localizing the damaged area.
Experiments on bovine and on human cadavers showed that
the breakdown of cartilage is correlated with its electromechanical characteristics [14], [15]. Articular cartilage comprises a
solid phase consisting mainly of an extracellular matrix hydrate
in a fluid phase containing electrolytes [16]. The matrix architecture is defined by a cross-linked network of collagen fibers
(mainly type II with several minor collagen types) that immobilizes a high content of proteoglycans, primarily aggrecan, consisting of numerous glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains branching off a core protein. Negatively charged sulfated and carboxyl
groups in GAG attract cations in the electrolyte to maintain
electrical neutrality. When a compressive force is exerted on articular cartilage, the cations and the synovial fluid are displaced
away from fixed negatively charged GAGs by hydrodynamic
drag and a mechanically derived electrical field arises along the
flow direction. The electric potential associated with this field
is known as streaming potentials [17]–[19]. Studies with animal
models revealed that streaming potentials are highly sensitive
to cartilage degradation, even at an early stage [15], [20]. This
has led to the development of a novel technique called electroarthrography (EAG) where electrical potentials are recorded
on the knee surface during mechanical loading of the joint (see
Fig. 1).
A recent EAG study has shown that electrical potentials
recorded on the knee surface were significantly higher in normal
subjects than in patients with OA, whereas potentials recorded
in patients with a total knee prosthesis were effectively null,

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HAN et al.: FORWARD PROBLEM OF ELECTROARTHROGRAPHY

Fig. 1. EAG measurements for a normal subject [21]. Joint loading and cartilage compression is achieved by having the subject slowly shift his weight from
one leg to the other approximately every ten seconds. The EAG signals represent the low-pass filtered (5 Hz) potential at four electrode sites over the medial
side of the knee (a) with respect to a reference electrode placed over the tibia.
Cartilage compression produces rectangular EAG pulses at all electrode sites
(b), with the highest signals at site 6 (0.3 to 0.4 mV). The vertical calibration
bar corresponds to 0.75 mV.

thus supporting the hypothesis that the EAG signals originate
from compressed cartilage and that EAG could be used to detect articular cartilage degradation [15]. To further develop EAG
as a noninvasive diagnostic tool for OA, some basic questions
remain to be answered.
1) Can the spatial distribution of the potentials recorded on
the knee surface be used to confirm that bioelectrical EAG
sources are located within the region of compressed cartilage?
2) Even though in vitro experiments have shown that streaming potential amplitude is sensitive to cartilage deterioration, can EAG be used to detect and pinpoint lesions?
3) The knee being a highly heterogeneous structure, what
are the factors that can affect the propagation of the EAG
signals between the cartilage and the knee surface?
The aim of this study is to answer these questions by developing computer models that reproduce the geometrical and electrical properties of the human knee and by simulating the EAG
potentials. By solving the forward problem of EAG using techniques commonly used in biophysical electrocardiography [22],
we wish to improve the understanding of EAG signals and to
contribute to the development of EAG interpretation criteria.
II. METHODS
A. Knee Geometry
To simulate accurate potential distributions on its surface,
a realistic 3-D knee structure accounting for electrical properties but not mechanical properties was constructed. Rather than
dealing with electromechanical events explicitly we will impose
current sources consistent with their electromechanical generation. The knee model, which is delimited by a closed outer
surface, consists of multiple internal regions with specific electrical conductivities. Four types of tissues are distinguished:
muscle, bone, cartilage, and fat. For simplification, muscle is
deemed as one bloc grouping all the muscular tissues around
the articulation; also, the cartilage covering the femoral and the
tibial condyles, as well as the menisci is treated as a single
conducting region. Thereupon, the model geometry comprises
seven regions: one muscular region; three bone regions (femur,

2021

Fig. 2. Geometrical model of knee and EAG sources. (a) and (b) Front views
of the 3-D meshes for the simplified GG model (GG in A) and the specific SG
model (SG in B). The highlighted blue regions are the electrode sites on the
knee surface used in the experimental protocol. The red point is the position
of the reference electrode near the tibia. (c) and (d) Enlarged views of the 3-D
meshes for the load bearing regions in which impressed current sources are used
to generate the EAG.

tibia and patella); two cartilage regions with one covering the
femorotibial joint and the other covering the interior facet of
the patella; and finally one region of fat defined as the space
between all the other regions and the outer knee surface.
In this study, two types of knee geometries are used: a simplified general geometry (GG) and a specific subject geometry (SG) (see Fig. 2). Both represent a healthy male subject’s
right knee at full extension (zero degree of flexion). The GG
model was created manually with a CAD toolkit using basic
geometrical shapes and complying with averaged Caucasian
male knee dimensions [23]–[28]. The SG model was based on
data from the Visible Human Project (U.S. National library of
Medicine). High-resolution photographs of cadaveric slices at
1-mm intervals in the transaxial plane were segmented individually and semimanually with respect to the tissue frontiers using
a segmentation software (sliceOmatic v 4.3, Tomovision). The
segmented images were then transformed into point clouds, assembled, and rendered into 3-D solid objects with the help of a
3-D CAD software (Catia V5, Dassault Systèmes).
The electrical sources are imposed in the load bearing areas
where the streaming potentials occur in articular cartilage and
menisci. Physiologically, two separate articular contact regions
can be distinguished at the medial and lateral sides of the knee.
Here, the cartilage contact regions are modeled as two cylindrical shapes joining the femoral condyles (medial and lateral) and
the tibial plateau. These cylinders also include meniscal tissue
since its conductivity is similar to cartilage. For the GG model,
each contact region has a radius of 1.4 cm and a thickness of
4 mm which corresponds to the sum of femoral and tibial cartilage thicknesses, including the menisci. The dimensions of
the GG model’s contact regions are based on measurements of
the tibiofemoral weight-bearing areas [29]. The SG model has a
variable thickness (3 to 7 mm) and a smaller area (1.2 cm radius)
due to the single subject’s anatomy (Visible Human project).

2022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

B. Electrical Modeling
Streaming potentials are mechanically induced electrophysiological signals originating from compressed articular cartilage.
Inside compressed cartilage, the flow of interstitial fluid created
by a pressure gradient carries positively charged ions. This phenomenon constitutes the electrical source of streaming potentials for the intact knee and it can be represented as an impressed
→
−
(or external) current density J s within the compressed cartilage. For our study, the mechanical loading of the cartilage is
achieved by the subject slowly shifting his weight from one leg
to the other while standing. For such low frequency bioelectrical
signals (< 5 Hz), the capacitive and inductive effects are negligible and the quasi-static hypothesis is applicable. Thus, the
electrical potential is governed by the following equation [22]:
→
−
∇ · (σ∇φ − J s ) = 0

Fig. 3. (a) Numbering of the eight electrodes and their relative positions on
the knee surface. (b) Potential values at the eight electrode sites: the red bars
represent the mean potential values measured in 20 normal subjects [21]; the
green bars represent the computed potential values using a uniform impressed
current density (single-sub-source configuration) in the GG model; the blue bars
represent the computed values using two different, uniform current densities in
the medial and lateral regions (two-sub-source configuration) in the same model.

To evaluate the effect of the geometry of the sources, three
electrical source configurations were developed: a single-subsource configuration with a uniform impressed current density;
a two-sub-source configuration with two different uniform current densities in the medial and lateral contacts regions; an eightsub-source configuration, for which each of the two cylinders
is divided into four identical sections with eight specific current densities in total. For the last configuration, the subsources
are located in the following regions: medial anterior internal
(MAI), medial anterior external (MAE), medial posterior internal (MPI), and medial posterior external (MPE). The same
nomenclature applies for the lateral contact region (LAI, LAE,
LPI, and LPE).
For both GG and SG models, eight electrodes corresponding to measurement sites are also included on the outer knee
surface in accordance with the experimental protocol [21]: four
electrodes are placed on the medial side and four on the lateral
side [see Fig. 3(a)]. They are modeled as circular zones on the
knee surface, whose size corresponds to the electrode diameter
used during the experiments (0.85 cm). The medial and lateral
sides each have two electrodes at the joint level distanced 5
cm, along with one electrode above and one electrode below
these two electrodes. The reference electrode is placed at the
mid-femur level which corresponds to the lowest point of the
model. Finally, to investigate the effects of the outer fat layer
thickness, the distance between the knee surface and the medial
epicondyle of the femur was modified in the GG model. The
knee contour was enlarged eight times and the surface potentials were repeatedly calculated.

(1)

where σ is the local conductivity (S/m), φ is the electrical poten→
−
tial (V), and J s is the impressed current density (A/m2 ). This
impressed current density is zero in all regions except within the
two load bearing regions described in the preceding section. At
the interface between two homogeneous regions with different
electrical conductivities or at the interface between compressed
and uncompressed cartilage, the potential and the normal component of the current density are continuous. At the interface
with air, on the outer surface of the model, the normal component of the current density is zero. The potential at the site of
the reference electrode used in the experimental measurements
and which is located over the tibia (see Fig. 2) is set to zero.
Inside compressed cartilage, the flow of interstitial fluid created by a pressure gradient carries positively charged ions. This
→
−
convection current can be represented by the vector field J s in
a Cartesian coordinate system:
−
→
J s = (Jsx , Jsy , Jsz ).

(2)

The magnitude of each component depends on the fluid velocity along the same direction and on the concentration of
charge carriers in the fluid phase. In this study, the following
assumptions are applied.
1) Since the permeability of the bones (femoral condyles
and tibial plateau) that compress the cartilage is negligible, there is no fluid flow and no impressed current density
in the Z-direction within the two cylindrical shapes representing compressed cartilage.
2) The regions of compressed cartilage have isotropic hydraulic permeability.
3) The pressure gradient is oriented along the radius of a
cylindrical shape representing compressed cartilage.
According to these assumptions, a simplified current source
configuration is obtained:
⎧
x − x0
⎪
Jsx = Js 
⎪
⎪
(x − x0 )2 + (y − y0 )2
⎪
⎨
y − y0
Jsy = Js 
⎪
⎪
⎪
(x − x0 )2 + (y − y0 )2
⎪
⎩ z
Js = 0

(3)

HAN et al.: FORWARD PROBLEM OF ELECTROARTHROGRAPHY

2023

where Js is the scalar current magnitude of the subsource (either a quadrant or a cylinder), x and y are the coordinates of the
impressed current source, and x0 and y0 are the coordinates of
the center of the selected cylindrical shape representing com→
−
pressed cartilage. The uniform impressed current density J s
is thus oriented radially within each cylindrical shape, from the
→
−
center to the periphery. The values of J s used in the simulations
are obtained using the approach described in the D. Regression
Method subsection.
C. Finite Element Method
The finite element method (FEM) was used for computing the
potential distribution using the COMSOL Multiphysics simulation environment (version 3.5a, COMSOL, Inc., Burlington,
MA, USA). The two knee models (GG and SG) were meshed
with first-order tetrahedral elements with more than 200 000
elements for each geometry. The meshing technique was optimized as the cylindrical sources and the electrodes had higher
mesh densities. The computations were carried out via iterated
conjugated gradient for faster calculation speed and reduced
memory requirements.
The two knee models were fashioned as multicomponent volume conductors with sectionally homogeneous, constant conductivity distributions. The four types of tissue were attributed
the following conductivities: σmuscle = 0.4 S/m, σb one =
0.035 S/m, σcartilage = 0.18 S/m, σfat = 0.04 S/m, [30]–[34].
The electrode potentials were computed as the average of the
node potentials inside the electrode zone.
D. Regression Method
The simulated potential distributions were fitted to the mean
potential values measured at the eight electrode sites on 20
normal subjects [21] using the following procedure. The matrix
representation of the simulated electrode potentials is
Vm = AJs

(4)

where Vm is an 8 × 1 vector of electrode potentials, A is an
8 × N transfer matrix which depends on both the geometry and
conductivities of all the components of the knee structure, Js
is an N × 1 vector of impressed current density, and N can be
1 or 2 depending on the subsource configuration. The transfer
matrix A was obtained by assigning unity to one subsource and
zero to the others. The current density for the subsources Js
was estimated from the measured potentials Vm by using the
least squares quadratic method with nonnegativity constraint
(MATLAB).
III. RESULTS
Our initial hypothesis was that the EAG signals are generated
by an impressed current density with a uniform value Js that
is radially oriented within the two load bearing areas on the
medial and lateral sides of the knee. By using the constrained
regression method described in the preceding section, we found
that the value Js = 0.173 A/m2 generated on the surface of
the GG model a potential distribution that best reproduced in

a least-squares sense, the mean potential values measured at
eight electrode sites in 20 normal subjects [21]. These simulated potential values [see Fig. 3(b)] have higher amplitudes on
the femorotibial joint level similar to the measured potentials.
However, the simulated potentials are higher than the measured
potentials on the lateral side and lower on the medial side. To
compensate for this effect, we allowed the current density to differ in the lateral and medial regions (two-sub-source configuration). Permitting two separate subsources, the impressed current
densities were estimated at Js = 0.062 A/m2 on the lateral side
and Js = 0.180 A/m2 on the medial side. The simulated potentials, which are reduced on the lateral side and increased on the
medial side, then accurately reproduce the measured potentials,
with differences between the simulated and measured potentials
smaller than 10 μV for the electrodes at the femorotibial joint
level. However, the simulated potentials for both the single and
double source configurations are much lower than the measured
potential at the site of electrode 8.
The effect of the knee geometry of a specific subject was
investigated with the SG model. The potential distribution on
the entire knee surface is illustrated in Fig. 4 for both GG and
SG models using the two previously determined impressed current densities (two-sub-source configuration). For both models,
two local maximum potentials can be seen on both sides of the
knee, with higher potentials on the medial side. The GG model
has broader, more blurred, maximum, and minimum patterns
than the SG model on both lateral and medial sides. The maximal potential values are higher for the GG model than for the
SG model, with the medial maxima of 270 μV versus 234 μV,
and the lateral maxima of 130 μV versus 90 μV. The minimal
potential values are also more positive for the GG model than
for the SG model, with the medial minima of −20 μV versus
−90 μV, and the lateral minima of −6 μV versus −25 μV.
The current distribution inside the knee is illustrated in Fig. 5
for both GG and SG models. The current lines start from the
side surfaces of the two cylindrical sources representing the load
bearing regions, then spread sideways, either up or down, and
finally rejoin the top or the bottom surfaces of the two cylinders.
The current lines are concentrated around the articular joint,
where the femoral condyles tend to be surrounded by a higher
current density than the tibial plateau. There is little exchange of
current between the medial and lateral sides. The current density
drops greatly on the upper and lower parts of the knee.
To understand the relationship between the potential distribution on the knee surface and a localized defect in the articular
cartilage, it is important to first characterize how the surface
potential distribution reflects the activity of small, specific cartilage regions. Thus, Fig. 6(a) shows eight subsources that divide
the lateral and medial cylinders into quadrants. The effect of an
individual subsource on the surface potential distribution is obtained by assigning a radial impressed current density of 1 A/m2
to a selected quadrant (this value is non-physiological and is simply used to visualize the transfer matrix), whilst by assigning
a null impressed current density to the seven other quadrants
and then computing the potential distribution. Fig. 6(b) shows
that for the four external subsources (LPE, LAE, MPE, and
MAE), a strong, well-localized maximum potential pattern is

2024

Fig. 4. Knee surface potential distributions computed with (a) the GG model
and (b) the SG model. The upper row corresponds to the medial side of the knee
and the lower row to the lateral side.

Fig. 5. Current streamlines inside (a) the general GG model and (b) the subjectspecific SG model. The current streamlines are generated at ten starting points
randomly selected in the model. The color bar indicates the potential value
inside the knee. This potential value varies from −6.675 to 1.372 mV for the
GG model and from −7.142 to 0.916 mV for the SG model.

recognizable when one of them is activated. Similarly, a strong
but broader minimum potential pattern can be observed when
any of the internal subsources are activated (LPI, LAI, MPI,
and MAI). These observations clearly reflect the direction of
the impressed current. When flowing toward the knee surface,
it produces positive potentials on the nearest surface whereas it
produces negative potentials when flowing toward the center of
the knee. The distance between the sources and the knee surface
is discernible in the equipotential maps: the maxima patterns are
sharper and cover a smaller region for the external sources that
are closer to the surface, whereas the minima patterns cover a
broader region for the internal sources that are farther from the
surface. Finally, the position of the sources is also discernible:
the anterior subsources produce extrema that are more anterior
on the maps than their posterior counterparts, whereas lateral
subsources produce lateral extrema on the maps and medial
subsources produce medial extrema.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 6. (a) Unfolding of the knee surface used for the formatting of the 2-D
equipotential maps (left) and nomenclature of the eight subsources inside the
lateral (L) and medial (M) contact regions (right). These subsources are denoted:
MAI, MAE, MPI, and MPE. The same nomenclature applies for the lateral
contact region (LAI, LAE, LPI, and LPE). (b) Each of the eight equipotential
maps computed with the GG model corresponds to a single activated subsource
in green (impressed current density is 1) while the seven others subsources
in white are nul. The activated subsource’s position is indicated by the green
quadrant symbol beside each map.

Fig. 7. Equipotential maps computed with the GG model and depicting the
effects of a localized defect. (a) Reference equipotential maps obtained with
eight active subsections. (b) Each equipotential map corresponds to a 50%
decrease of the current density of a specific sub-section indicated by a red
shaded quadrant, the green quadrants represent the sub-sections with 100% of
the estimated current density.

To further contribute to the understanding of the relationship between the knee surface potentials and a localized defect in articular cartilage, Fig. 7(b) shows equipotential maps
computed with the GG model after decreasing by 50% the impressed current density in one quadrant while maintaining the
impressed current density in the seven other quadrants. For reference, Fig. 7(a) shows the map obtained with all eight quadrants
active (their impressed current density corresponds to the medial
and lateral densities estimated with the two-sub-source configuration). Overall, each subsource has a different effect on the
potential distribution in the knee and the potential distributions
on the knee surface. The most noticeable changes occur for
the medial quadrants. The decrease of the current density in the
external quadrants (MAE, MPE) produces a significant decrease

HAN et al.: FORWARD PROBLEM OF ELECTROARTHROGRAPHY

2025

IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 8. Effect of the thickness of the outer fat layer on the potentials computed
at the eight electrode sites of the GG model. For the initial model, the medial
and lateral sides have the same outer fat layer thickness. By increasing the
circumference of the skin representing a thicker fat layer without changing the
other structures in the knee, the potential at the electrode sites along the joint line
(2, 3, 6, and 7) decreased, whereas the potential slightly increased or remained
constant at the sites above and below the joint line (1, 4, 5, and 8). The X-axis
corresponds to the thickness of the fat layer (mm) and the Y-axis indicates the
electrode potential (μV).

in the amplitude of the potential maximum, especially for the
anterior one (MAE). Paradoxically, the decrease of the current
density in the internal quadrants (MAI, MPI) produces an increase in the amplitude of the potential maximum. This increase
can be attributed to an imbalance of the effects of impressed
current flow between the external and internal quadrants. Impressed current from the internal quadrants produces negative
extrema on the neighboring knee surface whereas impressed
current from the external quadrants produces positive extrema
(see Fig. 6). These potentials from the external quadrants are
normally dominant when all the quadrants are active because
the external sources are closer to the knee surface than the internal sources. A reduction of impressed current in the internal
quadrants further contributes to the dominance of the positive
potentials from the external quadrants. Similar changes can be
observed for the lateral quadrants, but they are less discernible.
The fat layer under the skin of the knee constitutes an electrical barrier between the electrical sources and the knee surface
that may have an effect on the knee surface potentials. To investigate this effect, the GG model was modified by increasing
the thickness of the fat layer from 4 to 29 mm (to cover a large
range), without changing the other structures in the knee. Fig. 8
shows the potential simulated at the eight electrode sites used
in the experiments [21] as a function of the fat layer thickness.
The potential at the electrode sites along the joint line (2, 3,
6, and 7) decreases significantly as a function of the fat layer
thickness, whereas it is slightly increased or remains the same
at sites above and below the joint line (1, 4, 5, and 8). The electrodes on the medial side show the same tendency as those on
the lateral side with regard to the fat layer thickness.

Different approaches have been previously used to model articular cartilage. To understand its mechanical behavior under
loading, the cartilage has been modeled as a biphasic linear
medium [16], a poroviscoelastic medium [35], or a medium reinforced with collagen fibrils [36]. Given the complexity of
realistic geometry and the governing differential equations,
FEMs have often been used to investigate cartilage inhomogeneity [37], the presence of chondrocytes [38], or the effects
of meniscectomy [39]. The electromechanical behavior of cartilage and the generation of streaming potentials have also been
investigated with an electrokinetic model relating fluid flow and
electrical current density to the pressure and electrical potential
gradients [40], [41]. This study did not address the relationship
between cartilage loading and streaming potentials, and focused
instead on the propagation of the electrical signals between the
cartilage sources and the knee surface.
Bioelectrical sources generate potential distributions on the
body surface with spatial patterns that are specific to the location
and orientation of the sources. Thus, these potential distributions
can be used to localize the sources. The close fit between the
measured and simulated potentials presented in Fig. 3 and in
particular, the match between the site of maximum measured
potential over the joint line and the site of maximum potential
on the simulated potential distributions supports the hypothesis
that the EAG electrical sources are located in the load bearing
cartilage. For the rest of the knee surface shown in Figs. 4, 6, and
7 and which is not covered by the eight electrodes, the amplitude
of the simulated potential is negligible, which corresponds to
our preliminary measurements which were performed with 30
electrodes covering the entire knee surface [42].
Moreover, the higher potentials measured over the medial side
versus the lateral side can be explained by the higher impressed
current density in the medial compartment that was computed
with our model. This higher impressed current density on the
medial side is consistent with higher hydrostatic pressures in the
medial compartment compared to the lateral compartment of the
joint [39], [43], and by the relationship between the magnitude
of the streaming potentials and the pressure gradient [40].
The potential distributions computed with the general knee
geometry (GG model) and the specific SG (SG model) were
consistent, and both conformed with the experimental data. The
simulated potential distributions indicate that the positions of
the electrodes applied on the knee surface are crucial and should
concentrate on the medial and lateral joint lines.
A possible clinical application of EAG is the detection and
localization of an underlying site of cartilage degradation. To
investigate the relationship between the knee surface potentials
and small, specific cartilage regions, the two cylindrical source
regions were divided into eight quadrants, each having a specific
radial impressed current density [see Fig. 6(a)]. Each quadrant
represents a different functional area to which can be associated a specific abnormality [31], this division can discriminate
between anterior and mid-anterior lesions as well as interior
and exterior lesions of the tibiofemoral weight-bearing areas as
in [44]. We found that the EAG signals reflect the direction of
the impressed current, which generates positive potentials on

2026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

the nearest surface when the current flows toward the surface,
whereas it produces negative potentials when flowing toward
the center of the knee [see Fig. 6(b)]. Localized defects were
simulated by decreasing by 50% the impressed current density
in one quadrant while maintaining the impressed current elsewhere. This reduction can be interpreted as a reduction in either
the thickness or the GAG concentration of the cartilage in that
quadrant. As expected, a decrease of the current density in the
external quadrants produced a decrease in the amplitude of the
nearby potential maximum, but a decrease in the internal quadrants produced a paradoxical increase in the amplitude of the
potential maximum (see Fig. 7). This last effect, which can be
attributed to an imbalance of the impressed current flow, shows
that the interpretation of the EAG signals may not be straightforward and that clinical studies are essential to determine rules for
the EAG interpretation. At this point, it is difficult to determine
the clinical importance of this effect since the more prevalent lesions tend to cover a large part of the condyles and are expected
to result in an overall decrease in EAG signals. Similarly, even
if the EAG changes were less discernible for reductions in the
lateral quadrants with respect to the medial quadrants, the importance of this effect is unclear since medial lesions are more
prevalent than lateral lesions [45].
Previous experimental results also showed variation in the
amplitude of the EAG signals among different subjects. A range
of factors can contribute to this variation such as age, sex,
weight, Body Mass Index, alignment of the lower extremities
(valgus, varus, hyperextension). We investigated specifically the
effect of the fat layer thickness around the knee. As fat tissue has
a low electrical conductivity, it can impede the electrical current
flow. We found that the simulated potentials at the electrode sites
along the joint line decreased significantly as a function of the
fat layer thickness, whereas it is slightly increased or remains
the same at sites above and below the joint line (see Fig. 8). On
the corresponding knee surface equipotential maps (not shown),
this effect corresponds to a smearing of the potential maximum
pattern. A future clinical decision-making process could thus
consider this factor for the interpretation of the EAG signals.
Since previous work has demonstrated that streaming potentials are sensitive to changes in the molecular structure of articular cartilage [14], [15], the noninvasive detection of streaming
potentials with the EAG technique could provide critical information at early stages of disease that is currently not possible
with imaging techniques that primarily detect changes in the geometry and thickness of the cartilage. The EAG technology thus
appears to be a promising new technology that can complement
the existing tools for the diagnosis of joint disease.
V. CONCLUSION
Computer modeling constitutes an important tool to improve,
both qualitatively and quantitatively, our understanding of the
generation of EAG signal. By using this approach, we were
thus able to demonstrate that 1) the spatial distribution of the
simulated potentials confirm that bioelectrical EAG sources are
located within the region of compressed cartilage; 2) EAG has
the potential to detect and localize articular cartilage lesions;

and 3) the structure of the knee, such as the thickness of the
subcutaneous fat layer can affect the propagation of the EAG
signals between the cartilage and the knee surface.
REFERENCES
[1] A. D. Lopez, C. D. Mathers, M. Ezzati, D. T. Jamison, and C. J. Murray,
Global Burden of Disease and Risk Factors. Washington, DC, USA: The
World Bank, 2006.
[2] L. M. March and C. J. Bachmeier, “Economics of osteoarthritis: A global
perspective,” Baillière’s Clin. Rheumatol., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 817–834,
1997.
[3] F. Massicotte, Understanding Osteoarthritis from Bench to Bedside.
Trivandrum, India: Research Signpost, 2011, ch. 1, pp. 1–26.
[4] D. D. Dunlop, L. M. Manheim, E. H. Yelin, J. Song, and R. W. Chang,
“The costs of arthritis,” Arthrit. Care Res., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 101–113,
2003.
[5] R. Kijowski, D. G. Blankenbaker, P. T. Stanton, J. P. Fine, and A. A. De
Smet, “Radiographic findings of osteoarthritis versus arthroscopic findings
of articular cartilage degeneration in the tibiofemoral joint,” Radiology,
vol. 239, no. 3, pp. 818–824, 2006.
[6] R. Iorio and W. L. Healy, “Unicompartmental arthritis of the knee,” J.
Bone Joint Surg., vol. 85, no. 7, pp. 1351–1364, 2003.
[7] T. G. Koch, L. Moroni, Y. Leysi-Derilou, and L. C. Berg, “Joint cartilage
tissue engineering and pre-clinical safety and efficacy testing,” InTech,
vol. 10, pp. 181–216, 2011.
[8] S.-P. Piercarlo, A. C. Marco, R. Scarpa, R. Caporali, F. Parazzini,
A. Zaninelli, F. Atzeni, and C. Bianca, “Osteoarthritis: An overview of
the disease and its treatment strategies,” Semin. Arthrit. Rheumat., vol. 35,
no. 1, Suppl. 1, pp. 1–10, 2005.
[9] G. Krishanu B, D. Jeffrey, and W. Barbara N, “Radiographic evaluation
of osteoarthritis,” Radiol. Clin. North Am., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 11–41, 2004.
[10] F. Eckstein, F. Cicuttini, J. P. Raynauld, J. C. Waterton, and C. Peterfy,
“Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of articular cartilage in knee osteoarthritis (OA): Morphological assessment,” Osteoarthrit. Cartilage,
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 46–75, 2006.
[11] D. Bauer, D. Hunter, S. Abramson, M. Attur, M. Corr, D. Felson,
D. Heinegård, J. Jordan, T. Kepler, N. Lane, T. Saxne, B. Tyree, and
V. Kraus, “Classification of osteoarthritis biomarkers: A proposed approach,” Osteoarthrit. Cartilage, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 723–727, 2006.
[12] D. Patra and L. Sandell, “Recent advances in biomarkers in osteoarthritis,”
Curr. Opin. Rheumatol., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 465–470, 2011.
[13] M. Y. Wang, “Serum biomarkers for osteoarthritis,” Neurosurgery, vol. 66,
no. 6, pp. N21–N22, Jun. 2010.
[14] A. Garon, M. Légaré, R. Guardo, P. Savard, A. R. Poole, and
M. D. Buschmann, “Detection and analysis of cartilage degeneration by
spatially resolved streaming potentials,” J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 819–826, 2002.
[15] E. H. Frank, A. J. Grodzinsky, T. J. Koob, and D. R. Eyre, “Streaming potentials: A sensitive index of enzymatic degradation in articular cartilage,”
J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 5, pp. 497–508, 1987.
[16] V. C. Mow, S. C. Kuei, W. M. Lai, and C. G. Armstrong, “Biphasic creep
and stress relaxation of articular cartilage in compression? theory and
experiments,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 73–84, Feb. 1980.
[17] A. Grodzinsky, H. Lipshitz, and M. Glimcher, “Electromechanical properties of articular cartilage during compression and stress relaxation,”
Nature, vol. 275, no. 5679, pp. 448–450, 1978.
[18] A. C. Chen, T. T. Nguyen, and R. L. Sah, “Streaming potentials during
the confined compression creep test of normal and proteoglycan-depleted
cartilage,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 269–277, 1997.
[19] B. Schmidt-Rohlfing, U. Schneider, H. Goost, and J. Silny, “Mechanically
induced electrical potentials of articular cartilage,” J. Biomech., vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 475–482, 2002.
[20] L. J. Bonassar, K. A. Jeffries, C. G. Paguio, and A. J. Grodzinsky, “Cartilage degradation and associated changes in biomechanical and electromechanical properties,” Acta Orthopaedica, vol. 66, no. s266, pp. 38–44,
1995.
[21] A. Préville, P. Lavigne, M. Buschmann, J. Hardin, Q. Han, L. Djerroud,
and P. Savard, “Electroarthrography: A novel method to assess articular
cartilage and diagnose osteoarthritis by non-invasive measurement of loadinduced electrical potentials at the surface of the knee,” Osteoarthrit.
Cartilage, vol. 21, no. 11, 2013.
[22] R. M. Gulrajani, Bioelectricity and Biomagnetism. New York, NY,
USA: Wiley, 1998, ch. 5.

HAN et al.: FORWARD PROBLEM OF ELECTROARTHROGRAPHY

[23] K. Hitt, J. R. ShurmanII, K. Greene, J. McCarthy, J. Moskal, T. Hoeman,
and M. A. Mont, “Anthropometric measurements of the human knee:
Correlation to the sizing of current knee arthroplasty systems,” J. Bone
Joint Surg., vol. 85, no. suppl. 4, pp. 115–122, 2003.
[24] D. S. Y Yoshioka and T. Cooke, “The anatomy and functional axes of the
femur,” J. Bone Joint Surg., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 873–880, 1987.
[25] Y. Yoshioka, D. W. Siu, R. A. Scudamore, and T. D. V. Cooke, “Tibial
anatomy and functional axes,” J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 132–
137, 1989.
[26] M. A. Rauh, M. Bayers-Thering, C. M. Buyea, M. Phillips, and
K. A. Krackow, “Reliability and validity of a new caliper for measuring patellar thickness,” J. Arthroplasty, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 105–107, 2002.
[27] B. B. Seedhom, E. B. Longton, V. Wright, and D. Dowson, “Dimensions
of the knee. radiographic and autopsy study of sizes required by a knee
prosthesis,” Ann. Rheumat. Dis., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 54–58, 1972.
[28] Z. A. Cohen, D. M. McCarthy, S. Kwak, P. Legrand, F. Fogarasi,
E. J. Ciaccio, and G. A. Ateshian, “Knee cartilage topography, thickness,
and contact areas from MRI: In-vitro calibration and in-vivo measurements,” Osteoarthr. Cartilage, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 95–109, 1999.
[29] P. Maquet, A. V. de Berg, and J. Simonet, “Femorotibial weight bearing
areas. experimental determination,” J. Bone Joint Surg., vol. 57, no. 6,
pp. 766–771, 1975.
[30] D. Miklavčič, N. Pavšelj, and F. X. Hart, Electric Properties of Tissues.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2006.
[31] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, “The dielectric properties of
biological tissues: I. Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11,
pp. 2231–2249, 1996.
[32] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.
[33] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, 1996.
[34] C. Gabriel, A. Peyman, and E. H. Grant, “Electrical conductivity of tissue
at frequencies below 1 MHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, no. 16, pp. 4863–
4873, 2009.
[35] A. Mak, “Unconfined compression of hydrated viscoelastic tissues: A
biphasic poroviscoelastic analysis,” Biorheology, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 371–
383, 1986.
[36] L. Li, M. Buschmann, and A. Shirazi Adl, “The asymmetry of transient
response in compression versus release for cartilage in unconfined compression,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 123, no. 5, pp. 519–522, 2001.
[37] L. Li, A. Shirazi-Adl, and M. Buschmann, “Alterations in mechanical
behaviour of articular cartilage due to changes in depth varying material properties–A nonhomogeneous poroelastic model study,” Comput.
Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 45–52, 2002.
[38] S. Federico, A. Grillo, G. L. Rosa, G. Giaquinta, and W. Herzog, “A transversely isotropic, transversely homogeneous microstructural-statistical
model of articular cartilage,” J. Biomech., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 2008–2018,
2005.
[39] M. Kazemi, L. Li, P. Savard, and M. Buschmann, “Creep behavior of the
intact and meniscectomy knee joints,” J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater.,
vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 1351–1358, 2011.
[40] E. H. Frank and A. J. Grodzinsky, “Cartilage electromechanics–I: Electrokinetic transduction and the effects of electrolyte pH and ionic
strength,” J. Biomech., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 615–627, 1987.
[41] E. H. Frank and A. J. Grodzinsky, “Cartilage electromechanics–II. A continuum model of cartilage electrokinetics and correlation with experiments,” J. Biomech., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 629–639, 1987.
[42] A. Préville, “Électroarthrographie: Mesure et analyse des potentiels
électriques à la surface du genou pour l’évaluation de l’arthrose” M.Sc.A.
thesis, École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2012.

2027

[43] D. Périé, M. Hobatho, “In vivo determination of contact areas and pressure
of the femorotibial joint using non-linear finite element analysis,” Clin.
Biomech., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 394–402, 1998.
[44] N. Hunt, J. Sanchez-Ballester, R. Pandit, R. Thomas, and R. Strachan,
“Chondral lesions of the knee: A new localization method and correlation
with associated pathology,” Arthrosc.: J. Arthrosc. Relat. Surg., vol. 17,
no. 5, pp. 481–490, 2001.
[45] W. C. Bae, M. M. Payanal, A. C. Chen, N. D. Hsieh-Bonassera,
B. L. Ballard, M. K. Lotz, R. D. Coutts, W. D. Bugbee, and R. L. Sah,
“Topographic patterns of cartilage lesions in knee osteoarthritis,” Cartilage, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 10–19, 2010.

Qingyi Han was born in Beijing, China. She received the M.Sc.Eng. degree in electrical engineering from école Supérieure d’électricité (Supélec),
Gif-sur-Yvette, France. After receiving the M.Sc degree in biomedical engineering from the École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, she
worked toward the Ph.D degree in the same field.
Her current research interests include the forward and inverse problems of electroarthrography
and electric field modeling in human knee using
finite-element analysis.

Michael D. Buschmann received the B.Eng. degree in physics from the University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada, in 1984, and the Ph.D. degree
in medical engineering and medical physics from the
Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, in 1992.
His postdoctoral training in cartilage microscopy
and histology was then completed at the University
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, in 1994. Since 1994, he
has established a multidisciplinary research program
as a Professor of biomedical engineering and chemical engineering at the Ecole
Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada. His current research interests include use of biomaterials to repair joint tissues, polymer-based gene and
drug delivery systems, and electromechanical diagnostic technologies.

Pierre Savard received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, in
1974 and 1978, respectively. He received the postdoctoral training in magnetocardiography at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA, from 1979 to 1980.
He is currently the Director of the Biomedical Engineering Institute, École Polytechnique de Montréal
and the University de Montréal, Montréal. His research interests include bioelectrical modeling and
instrumentation.

