2092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

A Closed-Loop Brain–Computer Interface Triggering
an Active Ankle–Foot Orthosis for Inducing Cortical
Neural Plasticity
Ren Xu, Student Member, IEEE, Ning Jiang, Member, IEEE, Natalie Mrachacz-Kersting, Chuang Lin,
Guillermo Ası́n Prieto, Juan C. Moreno, Member, IEEE, Jose L. Pons, Senior Member, IEEE,
Kim Dremstrup, Member, IEEE, and Dario Farina∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we present a brain–computer interface (BCI) driven motorized ankle–foot orthosis (BCI-MAFO), intended for stroke rehabilitation, and we demonstrate its efficacy in
inducing cortical neuroplasticity in healthy subjects with a short
intervention procedure (∼15 min). This system detects imaginary
dorsiflexion movements within a short latency from scalp EEG
through the analysis of movement-related cortical potentials (MRCPs). A manifold-based method, called locality preserving projection, detected the motor imagery online with a true positive rate
of 73.0 ± 10.3%. Each detection triggered the MAFO to elicit a
passive dorsiflexion. In nine healthy subjects, the size of the motorevoked potential (MEP) elicited by transcranial magnetic stimulation increased significantly immediately following and 30 min
after the cessation of this BCI-MAFO intervention for ∼15 min
(p = 0.009 and p < 0.001, respectively), indicating neural plasticity. In four subjects, the size of the short latency stretch reflex
component did not change following the intervention, suggesting
that the site of the induced plasticity was cortical. All but one
subject also performed two control conditions where they either
imagined only or where the MAFO was randomly triggered. Both
of these control conditions resulted in no significant changes in
MEP size (p = 0.38 and p = 0.15). The proposed system provides a fast and effective approach for inducing cortical plasticity
through BCI and has potential in motor function rehabilitation
following stroke.

Manuscript received December 13, 2013; revised March 5, 2014; accepted
March 21, 2014. Date of publication March 26, 2014; date of current version
June 14, 2014. This work was supported by the EU project BETTER (Contract
247935) and by China Scholarship Council (Contract 201204910155). Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
R. Xu and N. Jiang are with the Department of Neurorehabilitation Engineering, Bernstein Focus Neurotechnology Göttingen, Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University Medical Center Göttingen, Georg-August
University, 37075 Göttingen, Germany (e-mail: ren.xu@bccn.uni-goettingen.
de; ning.jiang@bccn.uni-goettingen.de).
N. Mrachacz-Kersting and K. Dremstrup are with the Department of Health
Science and Technology, Center for Sensory-Motor Interaction, Aalborg University, DK-9220 Aalborg, Denmark (e-mail: nm@hst.aau.dk; kdn@hst.aau.dk).
C. Lin is with the Department of Neurorehabilitation Engineering, Bernstein Focus Neurotechnology Göttingen, Bernstein Center for Computational
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Göttingen, Georg-August University,
37075 Göttingen, Germany, and is also with the School of Software, Dalian
University of Technology, 116024 Dalian, China (e-mail: lin.chuang@bccn.
uni-goettingen.de).
G. Ası́n Prieto, J. C. Moreno, and J. L. Pons are with the Bioengineering
Group, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas, Madrid, Spain (e-mail:
guillermo.asin.prieto@csic.es; jc.moreno@csic.es; jose.pons@csic.es).
∗ D. Farina is with the Department of Neurorehabilitation Engineering, Bernstein Focus Neurotechnology Göttingen, Bernstein Center for Computational
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Göttingen, Georg-August University,
37075 Göttingen, Germany (e-mail: dario.farina@bccn.uni-goettingen.de).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2313867

Index Terms—Brain–computer interface (BCI), motorized
ankle–foot orthosis (MAFO), movement-related cortical potential
(MRCP), plasticity, stroke rehabilitation.

I. INTRODUCTION
RAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE (BCI) has been successfully developed as a communication tool for locked-in
patients since the 1970s [1]. More recently, BCI systems have
been applied as potential rehabilitation tools for neurological
disorders, such as stroke [2]. In this application, BCI is used
to detect motor intentions of the user during motor imagination
and this triggers electrical stimulation (ES) [3]–[6], or visual
feedback [7], [8], in order to reestablish a closed-loop control.
In order to detect the motor intention, several BCI systems
choose sensory motor rhythms (SMRs). This strategy usually requires a number of training sessions before the users can produce
the desired signals [9]. Even after the user being able to produce
the required rhythms, the efficacy of the system in inducing
observable neurophysiological changes remains low (weeks of
intervention are necessary) [10], [11]. One of the possible reasons for this low efficiency lies in the lack of control in the
timing of the motor intention detection. Consequently, the feedback triggered by such detection, e.g., ES or visual feedback,
reaches the motor cortex too late, relative to the timing of the
motor intention. According to the Hebbian facilitation principle
that cells that fire together wire together [12], such intervention
can hardly induce plasticity. Indeed, none of the SMR-based
neuromodulation studies reported the timing of motor intention detection. Nonetheless, numerous studies have verified in
animal preparations that timing is essential to long-term potentiation (LTP), i.e., the long lasting increase in synaptic efficacy
that is one of the mechanisms underlying memory formation
and learning [13]. For a BCI-based neuromodulation system, it
is thus imperative that the afferent feedback is timed to arrive in
synchrony with the movement intention [14].
Recently, in a series of studies, we proposed an alternative
approach for BCI-based neuromodulation. We chose a type of
slow cortical potential, called movement-related cortical potential (MRCP), as the EEG signal modality for movement intention detection. We demonstrated the possibility of detecting
movement intentions, real or imaginary, from healthy subjects
and stroke patients using these potentials with 60–70% accuracy [15]. Especially, we closely investigated the detection delay
with respect to the corresponding onset of the movement inten-

B

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

XU et al.: CLOSED-LOOP BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE TRIGGERING AN ACTIVE ANKLE–FOOT ORTHOSIS

tion, and found that MRCP-based detection timing is in the order
of hundreds of ms from the onset of movement intention [15].
This timing is sufficient for establishing Hebbian association and
thus inducing plasticity, as demonstrated by Mrachacz-Kersting
et al. [14]. We further proved that when such detection triggers a
sub-motor-threshold ES, significant enhancement of the output
of the cortical motor projection can be observed following a relatively short intervention (about half an hour) [16]. Comparing
with the results from SMR-based methods, it is likely that this
relatively high efficiency in plasticity induction using MRCP
triggers can be attributed to the more accurate detection timing
of the motor intentions, and thus synchronous activation of motor cortex and afferent neurons projecting indirectly to primary
motor cortex (M1).
In the current study, we present a new online BCI-based neuromodulation system, still based on MRCPs but with a different way of eliciting afferent feedback with respect to previous
studies. For MRCP detection, we used a manifold-based dimensional reduction algorithm [17] for improved online detection
with respect to the matched filter approach that we applied in
previous studies [15], [16]. For feedback, we propose the application of a motorized ankle–foot orthosis (MAFO), instead of
the sub-motor-threshold ES, for more natural afferent feedback.
In this study, we focus on the efficacy of the proposed system
in inducing cortical plasticity with healthy subjects.
The MAFO is a wearable ankle foot exoskeleton, designed
specifically for ambulatory rehabilitation of drop-foot [18].
Compared with ES, it provides a more natural approach for
inducing sensory feedback since it mimics the real movement
and is coherent with the conventional physical rehabilitation
treatment of ankle muscles in stroke patients. Prior research has
demonstrated that the recovery of the control of ankle dorsiflexion is particularly dependent on the input from the motor
cortex [19]. Moreover, in poststroke rehabilitation, the recovery
of the control of ankle dorsiflexion is a key goal to promote
a direct control of ankle stiffness required to improve ambulation [20]. In addition, MAFO is a more feasible device for home
settings than ES, as it requires less involvement of healthcare
professionals (i.e., no need to set stimulation parameters).
In this study, we present the complete setup for a BCI-MAFO
system that is designed as a closed-loop rehabilitation tool for
drop-foot. It detects motor intention (MRCP) from scalp EEG in
real time, and triggers the MAFO to elicit instantaneous passive
dorsiflexion. The online system is applied to healthy subjects
as a first step to demonstrate its efficacy. Transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) is used to assess the excitability of the motor
cortex before and after the intervention and thus to objectively
quantify the degree of neuroplastic changes.
II. METHODS

2093

did not complete the latter two conditions). In addition, four
of the subjects took part in the stretch-reflex and active motorevoked potential (MEP) experiments (see below). This study
protocol was approved by the local ethical committee of the
Region North Jutland in Denmark (N-2100067).
B. Apparatus and Instrumentation
1) EMG: Surface EMG signals were collected from the tibialis anterior (TA) muscle with disposable electrodes (Neuroline 720, Ambu). EMG was collected at the same location with
different amplifiers during different stages of the experiment.
During the pre- and postmeasures, EMG was acquired with a
custom-made EMG Amplifier (University of Aalborg, Aalborg,
Denmark). Bipolar electrodes were placed on the mid-belly
of the right TA muscle according to the recommendations of
Cram et al. [21]. During the intervention, EMG was acquired
by the last channel of a 16-channel amplifier (g.USBamp, gTec
GmbH). A monopolar electrode was placed next to the electrodes used for the pre- and post measures, while the reference
and ground electrodes were placed on the bony surface of the
right knee and right ankle, respectively.
2) EEG: An active EEG electrode system (ActiveCap,
Brainproducts GmbH) was used to acquire EEG. Nine electrodes were placed on Cz, Fz, FC1, FC2, C3, C4, CP1, CP2, and
Pz according to the standard international 10-20 system, and
connected to the first nine channels of the dc-coupled biosignal
amplifier (g.USBamp gTec, GmbH). The ground electrode was
placed on AFz, and the reference on the left earlobe. Through
software configuration, the EEG channels were set to have a
common ground and reference, while the EMG channel was set
to have a separate ground and reference. The sampling rate was
set to 1200 Hz, and during acquisition the impedance was maintained below the requirement by the manufacture of ActiveCap.
3) MAFO: The MAFO used here is a single degree-offreedom (ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion) mechatronic
device, which integrates state-of-the-art planar dc motors and
planar harmonic transmissions for a compact and light system
design [18]. A MATLAB Real-Time Workshop system (Mathworks Co.) was used as the real-time control interface of the
MAFO. This allows easy interfacing with other equipment for
biosignal acquisition and processing. MAFO has been subject
to extensive electromechanical testing which renders it suitable
for clinical research. Various control modes can be implemented
in the control architecture of MAFO; in particular, it can block
the joint for isometric states and impose isokinetic conditions
or arbitrary joint movements.
4) TMS: TMS was implemented using a double-coned
figure-of-eight coil and a Magstim 200 (Magstim Company,
Dyfed, U.K.) to assess the changes in the excitability of the
cortical projections to the TA.

A. Subjects
Ten healthy subjects (nine male and one female, age: 28.1
± 4.2 years) participated in this study. All but one subject
were naı̈ve to MRCP-based BCI systems. Nine of them participated in experiments consisting of three intervention conditions:
BCI-MAFO, BCI-alone, and MAFO-alone (one male subject

C. Experimental Procedures
Subjects were seated in a custom-made chair, and placed their
right foot in an instrumented pedal, from which the torque at the
ankle was measured by a torque transducer (Aalborg University,
Aalborg, Denmark). Initially the optimal spot for TMS was

2094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 1. Experiment flow. After ∼20 min preparation, the experiment starts
with three stages: premeasures, intervention, and postmeasures.

identified using 50% of the stimulator output. This site was
defined as that spot on the motor cortex where the MEP remained
consistent in amplitude within three consecutive stimuli and
where the largest MEPs were attained within the TA. This spot
was marked with a felt pen to ensure that pre-, post-, and 30 min
poststimuli were applied to the same area. Next, the resting
threshold (RTh) was measured, as the intensity where 5 out of 10
consecutive stimuli provided MEPs above 50 μV. Subsequently,
stimuli were delivered at 90%, 100%, 110%, 120%, and 130%
of RTh, in random order. Ten stimuli were delivered at each
level of intensity, with an interval between stimuli of 5 and
7 s. These were repeated immediately and 30 min following the
intervention outlined below, with the identical RTh to that of
pre-TMS (see Fig. 1).
During the premeasures, active MEPs and stretch reflexes
and pre-TMS were induced as outlined earlier and in Fig. 1. The
postmeasures stage would be performed after the intervention
stage (in all three conditions). In addition to active MEPs and
stretch reflexes, two TMS-measurements were performed: one
immediately after the intervention stage (post-TMS) and another
one 30 min after the intervention stage (post30-TMS), which
was used to determine the duration of the induced effects.
We compared the peak-to-peak value of MEPs from pre-,
post-, and post30-TMS, while for active MEPs, the root-meansquare (rms) value was used for comparison. This is a typical
way to avoid contamination of any aberrant EMG spikes within
the active MEP that would preclude the correct peak recognition
of the MEP [14]. The MEP increase was defined as the percentage increase of post or post30 over pre, e.g., for post-TMS, MEP
increase = (post – pre)/pre × 100% (see Figs. 2 and 3).
1) Experiment 1: BCI-MAFO Intervention (see Fig. 2): The
intervention consisted of two parts (a continuous recording): a
training run and a testing run. In the training run, subjects were
asked to perform 30 self-paced ballistic dorsiflexion movements
(real movements) of their right foot. In order to control the force
output of the movement, the subjects received visual feedback
of the force produced. First the subjects were asked to perform
maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) for 10 s, and then they
were instructed to control their force between 40%-60% of the
MVC with a subject-view graphic user interface (GUI). The
EEG and EMG of the training run were recorded simultaneously, and processed immediately after the training run. A manifold based non-linear dimensionality reduction method, called
locality preserving projection (LPP) [22], was used, along with
linear discriminant analysis (LDA), to detect MRCPs. The LPPLDA classifier was trained on the EEG data from the training
run (see Section II-D) and used online in the testing run of the
intervention stage, as described later.

Fig. 2. BCI-MAFO intervention. The subject sat in a comfortable chair and
was asked to do self-paced dorsiflexion imagery. The motor intention was detected from scalp EEG through modality of MRCP. Each detection would immediately trigger the MAFO to elicit a passive dorsiflexion.

Fig. 3. EMG during training and testing runs. The gray and black line stands
for EMG signal from training and testing session, respectively.

During the BCI-MAFO testing run, the subjects were instructed to perform imaginary dorsiflexion movements of the
right foot. As shown in Fig. 3, there was no visible EMG activity during motor imagery. The acquired EEG was processed in
real time using the trained LPP-LDA classifier (see Section IID). Each positive detection immediately triggered the MAFO
to induce a passive dorsiflexion. The angle was 15◦ , and the
velocity was 40 ◦ s−1 , which is in accordance with those of normal walking [23]. At the same time, a red bar appeared on the
subject GUI as the visual feedback of the detection. The subjects was asked to say “false” when the MAFO moved without
a motor imagery or “miss” when the imagery was performed
but MAFO did not move. It was determined that speech of these
words does not influence the proper working of the detector [17].
The testing run of the intervention concluded when 50 MAFO
movements had been triggered. This included true and false
detections. Therefore, the number of paired events (i.e.,

XU et al.: CLOSED-LOOP BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE TRIGGERING AN ACTIVE ANKLE–FOOT ORTHOSIS

imagery and MAFO being triggered correctly) was always less
than 50.
The counting of true and false detections during the experiment was recorded and used to calculate the true positive (TPR)
and false positive (FP) as BCI performance.
2) Experiment 2: Control Interventions: Two control interventions were also performed, in which the BCI-MAFO intervention was replaced by either BCI-alone or MAFO-alone. This
was to ensure that any changes in the excitability of the cortical
projections to the TA were indeed due to the main intervention. During the BCI-alone condition, the subjects performed
the same tasks as those in the BCI-MAFO condition. The only
difference was that no passive movements were induced. During the MAFO-alone condition, the subject did not perform the
motor imagery task, and the MAFO moved randomly, with similar random intervals as the other two experimental conditions.
For both control interventions, TMS measures at rest were performed prior to, immediately following and 30 min after the
cessation of the intervention.
The interval between test days and thus the BCI-MAFO interventions and the two control conditions was at least 24 h.
Previous studies on similar plasticity inducing protocols have
shown that the effect of enhanced MEPs ceases 24 h after cessation of the intervention [14], [16], thus we believe that this
interval was sufficient to eliminate the influence of the TMS on
subsequent conditions.
3) Experiment 3: The Effect of the BCI-MAFO Intervention on Spinal Excitability: To investigate if any plasticity occurred at the spinal level following the intervention, stretch
reflex and active MEP measurements were included as part of
the pre- and postmeasures for four subjects. For the stretch reflex measurements, the right leg of the subjects was affixed to
a servo-controlled hydraulic actuator (MTS-Systems Corporation, 215.35 [24]), such that the anatomical ankle axis of rotation was closely aligned with the fulcrum of the actuator. The
foot segment of the right leg of the subject was firmly strapped
to a custom made plate that extended from the actuator, thus
producing a tight interface between the arm of the motor and
the foot of the subject, ensuring that the movement of the actuator was transmitted solely to the ankle joint. The angular
position of the actuator was monitored by an angular displacement transducer (Transtek, DC ADT series 600). The subjects
were asked to maintain a 5% MVC in their right TA while the
perturbations were applied. The EMG level was displayed on
a computer screen placed in front of the subject. The instructions to the subjects at all times were to maintain the 5% MVC
EMG level without interfering with the imposed plantar–flexion
perturbation.
Thirty stretches were randomly applied at intervals ranging
from 5 to 7 s (velocity of 200◦ s−1 to 250◦ s−1 ; amplitude:
6◦ ; hold time: 460 ms). The angular velocity and the amplitude
of the imposed perturbations were adjusted for each subject so
that the amplitude of the response peaks observed in the TA
EMG trace were approximately the same and also similar to the
amplitude of the active TA MEP prior to the intervention.
The latencies of the first response peak, termed short latency
response (SLR) in the literature, were extracted from the data

2095

both prior to and immediately following the intervention. The
rms value of a window extending 10 ms on either side of SLR
(thus 20 ms for each window in total) was calculated and used
as an indication of the size of each of this purely spinal component of the TA stretch reflex. Postmeasures were expressed as a
percentage of the prevalues.
Active MEPs were recorded prior to and immediately following the intervention while the subjects maintained a TA contraction of 5% MVC. For the premeasures, care was taken to
ensure that the amplitude of the rectified MEP was approximately matched to the amplitude of the SLR component of the
stretch reflex. This was to ensure that the motor units targeted by
an imposed stimulus (mechanical or electrical) were from a similar pool. The magnitude of the MEPs measured was determined
from the averaged rms value of the rectified MEP.
D. EEG Processing Algorithm
1) LPP: LPP has been very successful used in applications
such as image processing [25]. LPP projects the data along
the directions that preserve the neighborhood structure, thus it
can perceive the local manifold structure in high-dimensional
space [22]. In [17], we first applied it to MRCP detection for
BCI applications and demonstrated its desirable performance
with higher accuracy and shorter latency than the previously
used matched filter [15], [16]. The same algorithm described
in [17] was used in the present online study.
2) LPP-LDA Classifier: LDA is widely used for EEG classification [26], [27], so its working principle is not repeated
here for the sake of conciseness. The combination of LPP and
LDA was frequently used in pattern recognition [28]–[30], and
the LPP-LDA classifier for MRCP detection was first proposed
in [17].
In this study, the LPP-LDA classifier was trained from the
data collected in the training run. First, the Teager-Kaiser (TK)
energy operator was used to detect the onset of each dorsiflexion
execution from the EMG signals in the training run (note that
in the training run, the task was actually executed, contrary
to the testing run). The TK operator was shown to be more
accurate than using the amplitude of the surface EMG for onset
detection [31]. To increase the signal-to-noise ratio of Cz, a
bandpass filter from 0.05 to 3 Hz was applied, followed by
a large Laplacian spatial filter centered at Cz. The EEG data
between 1.5 s before and 0.5 s after the movement onset were
extracted as the “signal intervals,” while others were extracted
as the “noise intervals.” For the LPP-LDA classifier, the MRCP
detection is a two-class classification problem, where the “signal
intervals” belong to one class and the “noise intervals” belong to
the other class. Both the “signal intervals” and “noise intervals”
from the training run were used as the training data for the
LPP-LDA classifier.
In the testing run, the classifier would work on the incoming
data stream (2 s long with 1.9 s overlapping), classifying each
interval of data into one of the two classes. An MRCP detection would be generated when two consecutive decisions were
classified as “signal,” triggering an MAFO-elicited dorsiflexion.
The afferent volley generated by the passive movement by
the MAFO was elicited at the instant of MRCP detection. In a

2096

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE I
BCI PERFORMANCE

previous study, focused on the detection algorithm used in the
current study [17], the latency of detection was quantified to be
∼300 ms, following the peak negativity of the MRCP. Therefore, the afferent elicitation was triggered within few hundreds
milliseconds from the peak negativity that corresponds to the
motor command for movement initiation. The interval between
motor execution and trigger was crucial, as plasticity cannot be
induced if the afferent feedback is generated too early or too
late with respect to the motor imagery [14].
E. Statistical Analysis
Three-way repeated measure analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was used for statistical analysis. The three main factors were
intervention condition (BCI-MAFO, BCI-alone, and MAFOalone), TMS intensity (five TMS stimulation levels), and
TMS measurement timing (pre, post, and post30). Full-model
ANOVA with all interaction terms was performed first, and
when significant interactions were detected, focused ANOVA
tests were performed.

Fig. 4. Pre-, post-, and post30-MEPs in a representative subject (n = 1). For
the five TMS intensity levels, the BCI-MAFO intervention induced substantial
changes in the MEP just following and 30 min after the intervention.

III. RESULTS
A. BCI Performance
The BCI performance measures of the BCI-MAFO intervention, i.e., TPR and FP, are presented in Table I. The duration of
the testing run was 13.9 ± 3.8 min. TPR and FP were 73.0 ±
10.3% and 1.3 ± 0.5 min−1 , respectively, which are consistent
with the results in [17].
B. Changes in the Excitability of the Cortical Projections
to the TA
The average MEP at each simulation intensity of a typical
subject before, immediately after, and 30 min after the BCIMAFO intervention is illustrated in Fig. 4. Each point represents the median value of the MEP size (peak-to-peak value) of
the ten stimuli at each of the five stimulation intensities. The
symbols indicate the timing of TMS measurement, i.e., pre,
post, or post30. Following the BCI-MAFO intervention, there
were increases in the MEP amplitude at all stimuli intensities
above RTh from premeasure to the two postmeasures. This indicates that this short-time intervention induced evident plasticity,
which outlasted the intervention.

The full-model ANOVA revealed a significant interaction
between intervention condition and TMS measurement timing
(p = 0.026), while no other interaction was detected (p = 0.51
and p = 0.56 for the other two-factor interactions, and p = 0.87
for the three-factor interaction). Subsequently, focused ANOVA
tests were performed on each of the three intervention conditions. Whenever significance of a main factor was detected,
post hoc multiple comparison (Tukey simultaneous test) was
performed. In all three focused ANOVA, no interaction between TMS intensity and TMS measurement timing was found
(p = 0.40, p = 0.99, and p = 0.59, respectively), so reduced
ANOVA only considering the main effects were performed.
For BCI-MAFO, TMS measurement timing was found to be
a significant factor (p < 0.001). As shown in Fig. 5, post hoc
comparison found that MEPs in the post- and post30-TMS were
significantly greater (p = 0.009 and p < 0.001, respectively)
than in pre-TMS, with increase of 87.2 ± 57.0% and 123.2
± 81.2%, respectively, and there was no statistical difference
between post and post30 (p = 0.38). Conversely, for both BCIalone and MAFO-alone, TMS measurement timing was not a
significant factor (p = 0.38 and p = 0.15).

XU et al.: CLOSED-LOOP BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE TRIGGERING AN ACTIVE ANKLE–FOOT ORTHOSIS

2097

Fig. 5. Statistical results. MEP increased significantly in both post- and
post30-TMS (p = 0.009, and p < 0.001, respectively) for BCI-MAFO condition, while there is no statistical significance for the other two control conditions,
i.e., BCI-alone and MAFO-alone. Pre-MEP is taken as 100%, as indicated by
the dashed line.

Fig. 7. Change in TA stretch reflex after the BCI-MAFO intervention. (a)
Right ankle angle change (in degrees). (b) TA-rectified EMG trace prior to (thin
line) and following (thick line) the intervention. (c) Active TA-rectified MEP
prior to (thin line) and following (thick line) the intervention. Data are for one
representative subject. (a) and (b) show the average for 30 traces and (c) shows
the average of 10 traces. SLR, MLR, and LLR stand for short, median, and long
latency response, respectively.

IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 6. EMG baseline during active TMS. The amplitudes were calculated
from rms value.

C. Changes in Spinal Excitability Compared to Changes in
Active MEP
In four subjects, the EMG baseline during active MEP in preand postmeasure (as shown in Fig. 6) was compared by t-test.
No statistically significant difference was found for all subjects
(p = 0.06, 0.19, 0.83, and 0.64, respectively).
Also, the changes in the TA stretch reflex parameters were
compared to the changes of the TA MEP elicited during a similar
level of TA contraction (i.e., 5% MVC) (see also Fig. 7). The rms
value for the background level of activation was 36.0 ± 11.0 μV
for the MEP trials and 36.3 ± 9.8 μV for the stretch reflex trials
prior to the intervention. Post intervention, these values were
38.2 ± 9.0 μV and 35.0 ± 9.0 μV. The TA active MEP increased
across all subjects by 64 ± 32%, although as only four subjects
were examined this did not reach statistical significance (p =
0.22). The SLR component did not change, being on average 100
± 15% of the pre-intervention value following the intervention.

In this study, we proposed the BCI-MAFO system and
demonstrated that it induced plasticity following a very short intervention (∼15 min), during which self-paced motor imagery
was detected online using an LPP-LDA algorithm, and used
to trigger the MAFO to elicit passive dorsiflexion movements.
The MEPs increased significantly following and 30 min after
the BCI-MAFO intervention, while there was no change in the
M1 components of the TA stretch reflex. This indicates that the
site of the plastic change was likely supra-spinal.
A. BCI for Rehabilitation
In the past decades, the BCI studies for motor function rehabilitation have focused on SMR, since its desynchronization
and synchronization (ERD/ERS) were found to be modulated by
motor imagery [32], [33]. In these studies, SMR-based BCI was
used to provide visual feedback or to trigger external devices,
such as ES [3]–[6] or orthoses [7], [8], aiming at the rehabilitation of motor functions [9], [11], [34], [35]. Cortical plasticity
did occur either in healthy subjects or stroke patients through a
period of intensive interventions that usually lasted for a number of weeks [10], [11]. In Ramos-Murguialday et al. [11],
the intervention was conducted on patients over a four-week
period with daily training. In [10], with healthy subjects, the

2098

intervention consisted of six to eight 40-min-long training sessions over a four-week period. Significant plasticity was not
observed in all subjects [10].
In the current study, we showed that only one ∼15 min intervention was sufficient for the proposed BCI-MAFO system
to induce significant cortical plasticity, quantified by increases
in the TMS-induced MEP. Although a direct comparison between the efficacy of these SMR-based studies and the current
approach is difficult, we believe the fast-involving plasticity observed in the current study is primarily due to the high temporal
precision using the proposed method. As such, the artificial
sensory feedback reaches the cortex at almost the same time
when the subject imagines the movement. This timing had been
demonstrated to be crucial in inducing plasticity [14]. If the
afferent volley arrives 400–500 ms too late or too early with
respect to motor intention, the Hebbian association would not
be satisfied [14]. Consequently, the LTP-like effect, which is the
primary mechanism in plasticity induction, memory formation,
and learning [13], would not be induced. Therefore, the latency
between motor imagery and associated feedback is an essential
factor of an effective BCI system in rehabilitation.
In addition, all but one subject of the current study were BCI
or EEG-naı̈ve subjects in the sense that they never participated in
any experiments involving BCI and EEG measurements. They
were able to produce an MRCP in the first session naturally.
MRCP is indeed generated in a variety of movements [36], and
thus, it is applicable to naı̈ve subjects even without training [17].
This property is especially desirable for ambulatory applications
in the household environment. This naı̈ve-user-friendly nature
of MRCP is another appealing factor of the proposed approach.

B. Previous Studies on MRCP-Based Systems
MRCP can be observed either in cue-based (synchronized)
[14], [37], [38] or self-paced (asynchronized) paradigms [16],
[39]. The MRCP is referred to as contingent negative variation (CNV) in the cue-based paradigm, and Bereitschafts potential (BP) in the self-paced paradigm [40]. Recent evidence
showed that MRCPs originate from premotor cortex within a
cue-based paradigm and from supplementary motor area within
a self-paced paradigm [41], indicating different neurological
process under these two conditions. The state of the brain under
a self-paced paradigm should be more similar to that when the
subject is performing voluntary movements. More importantly,
compared with cue-based paradigms, self-paced BCI is more
natural because the user, rather than the machine, controls the
timing of operation. This fully patient-driven system with voluntary involvement is more engaging for patients so as to result
in more significant outcomes in rehabilitation [42] and, thus,
is more suitable for ambulatory neuromodulation applications,
and for other fully interactive BCI-based systems. This is the
reason why this modality was chosen also in the current study.
In this study, we proposed a self-paced BCI-MAFO system,
and demonstrate for the first time the high efficiency in inducing
plasticity when an active orthosis is triggered by brain waves
within a precise temporal accuracy. The MEPs increased on

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

average by 87.2% after the intervention with less than 50 imagery attempts in ∼15 min.
The improved performance of LPP-LDA algorithm was one
key component for this high efficiency system. As shown by
Xu et al. [17], the LPP-LDA had higher accuracy and lower
latency than the previous used matched filter. This insured that
the triggered afferent reached the cortex precisely and timely,
likely resulting in effective neuroplasticity induction according
to the Hebbian rule.
The natural sensory feedback provided by MAFO was another
key component of the current system. The single ES applied in
our previous studies was set to motor threshold which means that
mainly low-threshold afferents were recruited, as the threshold
for the other afferents, such as cutaneous afferents, is higher [43].
In addition, we applied it to one nerve that innervates the target
muscle TA. By using MAFO, we stretched the target muscle and
unloaded the antagonists. Another important advantage in using
joint movements to provide the afferent feedback lies in the fact
that cutaneous and other high-threshold afferents have been implicated to play a large role in contributing to muscle activation
during human walking [43], [44]. Further, non-muscle afferents
(mainly cutaneous afferents) are also activated by MAFO, which
in turn activate the TA through a transcortical loop, and these
may also play a role in the larger effects induced [44]. All these
factors resulted in afferents that are very close to those activated
during voluntary dorsiflexion, compared with those produced
by simple sub-motor-threshold ES.
Consistent with the findings presented in [16], there was no
significant change in MEP size in the BCI-alone condition. The
absence of MEP change was mainly due to the small number of
trials during the testing session, which has been shown to be an
influencing factor for changes in MEP size [16], [45].
C. Limitations
The plastic changes induced were likely at the cortical level
since the MEPs increased following our intervention while the
M1 component of the TA stretch reflex remained unchanged.
However, the stretch reflex does not represent all the potential
changes in the spinal circuitries. Therefore, one needs to interpret this conclusion with caution. Also the active MEP did not
change significantly across subjects. This may be due to the fact
that only four subjects participated in this part of the experiment,
and there were increases in three.
V. CONCLUSION
An online BCI-MAFO system aimed at stroke rehabilitation
was presented in this study, and its ability in inducing cortical
plasticity with a very short intervention time was shown in ten
healthy subjects.
The results mentioned earlier demonstrate that healthy subjects can learn to use the self-paced BCI to achieve binary control of the robotic orthosis that provides a physical mobilization
with a therapeutic goal. And this control can be achieved using
nine scalp EEG signals to detect motor intention within a few
hundreds ms. After a ∼15 min intervention, the MEP increased
87.2%, clearly indicating voluntary control of robot-assisted

XU et al.: CLOSED-LOOP BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE TRIGGERING AN ACTIVE ANKLE–FOOT ORTHOSIS

therapy can be used to induce cortical plasticity for poststroke
rehabilitation.
In the future, studies on a greater subject sample and longer
duration should be conducted to assess for retention of the plastic
changes over time. Once the basic neurophysiological mechanisms of this intervention are fully identified, it will be possible
to extend the investigation to stroke patients with diverse etiologies and lesion locations.
In conclusion, an effective BCI-MAFO system with minimal
intervention was proposed, by the combination of a high performance BCI algorithm (i.e., LPP-LDA) and natural sensory
feedback produced by MAFO, which could potentially be an
ambulatory rehabilitation tool for stroke patients.

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]

REFERENCES
[1] J. J. Shih, D. J. Krusienski, and J. R. Wolpaw, “Brain–computer interfaces
in medicine,” Mayo Clin. Proc. Mayo Clin., vol. 87, pp. 268–279, 2012.
[2] J. J. Daly and J. R. Wolpaw, “Brain–computer interfaces in neurological
rehabilitation,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 7, pp. 1032–1043, 2008.
[3] A. H. Do, P. T. Wang, C. E. King, A. Abiri, and Z. Nenadic, “Brain–
computer interface controlled functional electrical stimulation system for
ankle movement,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 49, 2011.
[4] A. H. Do, P. T. Wang, C. E. King, A. Schombs, S. C. Cramer, and
Z. Nenadic, “Brain–computer interface controlled functional electrical
stimulation device for foot drop due to stroke,” in Proc. 2012 Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., pp. 6414–6417.
[5] M. Takahashi, K. Takeda, Y. Otaka, R. Osu, T. Hanakawa, M. Gouko,
and K. Ito, “Event related desynchronization-modulated functional electrical stimulation system for stroke rehabilitation: A feasibility study,” J.
Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 9, no. 1, p. 56, 2012.
[6] A. Biasiucci, R. Leeb, A. Al-Khodairy, V. Buhlmann, and J. Millan, “Motor recovery after stroke by means of BCI-guided functional electrical
stimulation,” in Proc. 5th Int. Brain Comput. Interface Meeting, 2013.
[7] G. Prasad, P. Herman, D. Coyle, S. McDonough, and J. Crosbie, “Applying
a brain–computer interface to support motor imagery practice in people
with stroke for upper limb recovery: A feasibility study,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 60, 2010.
[8] T. Ono, A. Kimura, and J. Ushiba, “Daily training with realistic visual feedback improves reproducibility of event-related desynchronisation following hand motor imagery,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 124, no. 9, pp. 1779–
1786, 2013.
[9] E. Buch, C. Weber, L. G. Cohen, C. Braun, M. A. Dimyan, T. Ard,
J. Mellinger, A. Caria, S. R. Soekadar, A. Fourkas, and N. Birbaumer,
“Think to move: A neuromagnetic brain–computer interface (BCI) system for chronic stroke,” Stroke, vol. 39, pp. 910–917, 2008.
[10] F. Pichiorri, F. De Vico Fallani, F. Cincotti, F. Babiloni, M. Molinari,
S. C. Kleih, C. Neuper, A. Kübler, and D. Mattia, “Sensorimotor rhythmbased brain–computer interface training: The impact on motor cortical
responsiveness,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, p. 025020, 2011.
[11] A. Ramos-Murguialday, D. Broetz, M. Rea, L. Läer, O. Yilmaz,
F. L. Brasil, G. Liberati, M. R. Curado, E. Garcia-Cossio, A. Vyziotis,
W. Cho, M. Agostini, E. Soares, S. Soekadar, A. Caria, L. G. Cohen, and
N. Birbaumer, “Brain-machine-interface in chronic stroke rehabilitation:
A controlled study,” Ann. Neurol., vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 100–108, 2013.
[12] D. O. Hebb, The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological theory.
Psychology Press, 2005.
[13] G. Hagemann, C. Redecker, T. Neumann-Haefelin, H. Freund, and
O. Witte, “Increased long-term potentiation in the surround of experimentally induced focal cortical infarction,” Ann. Neurol., vol. 44, no. 2,
pp. 255–258, 1998.
[14] N. Mrachacz-Kersting, S. R. Kristensen, I. K. Niazi, and D. Farina, “Precise temporal association between cortical potentials evoked by motor
imagination and afference induces cortical plasticity,” J. Physiol., vol. 590,
pp. 1669–1682, 2012.
[15] I. K. Niazi, N. Jiang, O. Tiberghien, J. F. Nielsen, K. Dremstrup, and
D. Farina, “Detection of movement intention from single-trial movementrelated cortical potentials,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, p. 066009, 2011.
[16] I. K. Niazi, N. Mrachacz-Kersting, N. Jiang, K. Dremstrup, and D. Farina,
“Peripheral electrical stimulation triggered by self-pace detection of motor

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]

[35]

[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]

2099

intention enhances motor evoked potentials,” IEEE Trans. Neural Rehabil.
Syst. Eng., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 595–604, Jul. 2012.
R. Xu, N. Jiang, C. Lin, N. Mrachacz-Kersting, K. Dremstrup, and
D. Farina, “Enhanced low-latency detection of motor intentions from
EEG for closed-loop brain–computer interface applications,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 288–296, Feb. 2014.
J. L. Pons, “Rehabilitation exoskeletal robotics,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Mag., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 187–201, May–Jun. 2010.
C. Capaday, B. A. Lavoie, H. Barbeau, C. Schneider, and M. Bonnard,
“Studies on the corticospinal control of human walking. I. Responses to
focal transcranial magnetic stimulation of the motor cortex,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 129–139, 1999.
M. Zhang, T. C. Davies, and S. Xie, “Effectiveness of robot-assisted therapy on ankle rehabilitation—A systematic review,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil.,
vol. 10, no. 1, p. 30, 2013.
J. Cram, G. Kasman, and J. Holtz, Introduction to Surface Electromyography. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen, 1998.
X. He and P. Niyogi, “Locality preserving projections,” NIPS, vol. 16,
pp. 153–160, 2003.
D. C. Boone and S. P. Azen, “Normal range of motion of joints in male
subjects,” J. Bone Joint Surg., vol. 61, pp. 756–759, 1979.
M. Voigt, M. De Zee, and T. Sinkjær, “A fast servo-controlled hydraulic
device for the study of muscle mechanical and reflex properties in humans,” in Proc. 17th Congr. Int. Soc. Biomech., 1999.
X. He, S. Yan, Y. Hu, P. Niyogi, and H.-J. Zhang, “Face recognition using
Laplacian faces,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 27, no. 3,
pp. 328–340, Mar. 2005.
D. J. McFarland, C. W. Anderson, K.-R. Müller, A. Schlögl, and
D. J. Krusienski, “BCI meeting 2005—Workshop on BCI signal processing: Feature extraction and translation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 135–138, Jun. 2006.
N. Ince, F. Goksu, A. Tewfik, and S. Arica, “Adapting subject specific motor imagery EEG patterns in space–time–frequency for a brain computer
interface,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 236–246,
Jul. 2009.
J. Zhang, H. Shen, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Unified locally linear embedding and
linear discriminant analysis algorithm (ULLELDA) for face recognition,”
Adv. Biometric Pers. Authentication, pp. 296–304, 2005.
S. Yan, D. Xu, B. Zhang, H.-J. Zhang, Q. Yang, and S. Lin, “Graph embedding and extensions: A general framework for dimensionality reduction,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 40–51, Jan.
2007.
H. Wang, S. Chen, Z. Hu, and W. Zheng, “Locality-preserved maximum
information projection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 571–585, Apr. 2008.
X. Li, P. Zhou, and A. S. Aruin, “Teager-Kaiser energy operation of surface EMG improves muscle activity onset detection,” Ann. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 35, pp. 1584–1593, 2007.
M. B. Sterman, “EEG biofeedback: Physiological behavior modification,”
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 5, pp. 405–412, 1981.
G. Pfurtscheller and F. H. Lopes Da Silva, “Event-related EEG/MEG
synchronization and desynchronization: Basic principles,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 110, pp. 1842–1857, 1999.
K. K. Ang, C. Guan, K. S. G. Chua, B. T. Ang, C. W. K. Kuah, C. Wang,
K. S. Phua, Z. Y. Chin, and H. Zhang, “A large clinical study on the ability
of stroke patients to use an EEG-based motor imagery brain–computer
interface,” Clin. EEG Neurosci., vol. 42, pp. 253–258, 2011.
S. R. Soekadar, M. Witkowski, J. X. F. R. Mellinger, A. Ramos,
N. Birbaumer, and L. G. Cohen, “ERD-based online brain-machine interfaces (BMI) in the context of neurorehabilitation: Optimizing BMI learning and performance,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19,
no. 5, pp. 542–549, Oct. 2011.
O. F. Do Nascimento, K. Dremstrup, and M. Voigt, “Relationship between
plantar-flexor torque generation and the magnitude of the movementrelated potentials,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 160, pp. 154–165, 2005.
G. Gangadhar, R. Chavarriaga, and J. Millan, “Fast recognition of
anticipation-related potentials,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 4,
pp. 1257–1260, Apr. 2009.
G. Garipelli, R. Chavarriaga, and J. Millan, “Single trial analysis of slow
cortical potentials: A study on anticipation related potentials,” J. Neural
Eng., no. 10, p. 036014, 2013.
E. Lew, R. Chavarriaga, S. Silvoni, and J. Millan, “Detection of self-paced
reaching movement intention from EEG signals,” Front. Neuroeng., vol. 5,
pp. 1–17, 2012.
M. Johanshahi and M. Hallettm, The Bereitschaftspotential: MovementRelated Cortical Potentials. New York: Springer, 2003.

2100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

[41] M. Lu, N. Arai, C. Tsai, and U. Ziemann, “Movement related cortical
potentials of cued versus self-initiated movements: Double dissociated
modulation by dorsal premotor cortex versus supplementary motor area
rTMS,” Hum. Brain Mapping, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 824–839, 2012.
[42] N. Maclean, P. Pound, C. Wolfe, and A. Rudd, “Qualitative analysis of
stroke patients’ motivation for rehabilitation,” BMJ, vol. 321, no. 7268,
pp. 1051–1054, Oct. 2000.
[43] T. Sinkjaer, J. B. Andersen, M. Ladouceur, L. O. Christensen, and
J. B. Nielsen, “Major role for sensory feedback in soleus EMG activity in
the stance phase of walking in man,” J. Physiol., vol. 523, pp. 817–827,
2000.
[44] J. B. Nielsen and T. Sinkjaer, “Afferent feedback in the control of human
gait,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 12, pp. 213–217, 2002.
[45] J. Liepert, C. Terborg, and C. Weiller, “Motor plasticity induced by synchronized thumb and foot movements,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 125, pp. 435–
439, 1999.

Ren Xu (S’12) received the B.Sc. degree in electronic
information science and technology from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China, in 2009, and the M.Sc. degree in signal and
information processing from the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2012. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in applied computer
science from the University Medical Center, GeorgAugust University, Göttingen, Germany.
His current research interests include biomedical
signal processing and brain–computer interface for
rehabilitation.

Ning Jiang (S’02–M’09) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1998, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in engineering from the University of New
Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada, in 2004 and
2009, respectively.
He was a Marie Curie Fellow at the Strategic Technology Management, Otto Bock Healthcare GmbH,
Germany, from 2010 to 2012. He is currently a Research Scientist with the Department of Neurorehabilitation Engineering, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Georg-August University, Göttingen, Germany. His current research
interests include signal processing of electromyography, advanced prosthetic
control, neuromuscular modeling, and BCI for neurorehabilitation.

Natalie Mrachacz-Kersting received the M.Ed. degree in human movement science from the University
of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, in 1997, and
the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark, in 2005.
In 2005–2007, she was a Lecturer in the Department of Sport and Exercise Science, The University
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, and in 2007–
2009, she was an Assistant Professor in Motor Control at Aalborg University, where since 2009, she has
been an Associate Professor in the Department of
Health Science and Technology. There she is the head of two laboratories,
the Motor Control Laboratory and the Neuroplasticity Laboratory. She acts as
referee for numerous journals. Her current research interests include studying
the role of feedback from muscle afferents in both motor control and neural
plasticity.

Chuang Lin received the M.Sc. and the Ph.D. degrees in signal processing from Harbin Institute
of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2004 and 2008,
respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian, China. He is
also a Research Scientist of the European Research
Council Project DEMOVE in the Department of
Neurorehabilitation Engineering, University Medical Center Göttingen, Georg-August University, Germany, within the Bernstein Center for Computational
Neuroscience (BCCN) and the Bernstein Focus Neurotechnology (BFNT)
Göttingen. His current research interests include biomedical signal processing, stochastic signal processing, pattern recognition, and machine learning.

Guillermo Ası́n Prieto received his M.S. degree in
biomedical engineering from Politechnic University
of Madrid in 2013, and is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in lower limb rehabilitation and assistance with motorized orthoses.
He is currently a Research Fellow with the Bioengineering Group, Automatics and Robotics Center
of the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC),
Madrid, Spain.

Juan C. Moreno (M’12) was born in Bogotá, Colombia, in 1978. He received the Ph.D. degree in industrial engineering from the School of Industrial Engineering (ETSII), Technical University of Madrid
(UPM), Madrid, Spain, in 2006.
In 2001, he joined the Spanish National Research
Council (CSIC) as a Technical Assistant and Junior
Researcher in the Industrial Automation Institute. He
cofounded CSIC’s start-up company Technaid, where
he was a Postdoctoral Researcher, continuing his research line activities in the framework of European
projects. In 2008, he assumed the current position at the Bioengineering Group
(GBIO) of CSIC, as the Leader of projects in Gait Neurorehabilitation. His
current research interests include signal processing, pattern recognition, electromechanical design problems in biomedical engineering, system modeling
and identification, functional electrical stimulation (neuroprosthetics), rehabilitation robotics and specially its optimization for the neurological rehabilitation
after stroke and spinal cord injury, unobtrusive motion capture, and analysis and
synthesis of neural control of human walking and biomechanical simulations.
Dr. Moreno was the recipient of TR35 Spain 2012 Award by Massachusetts
Institute of Technology’s journal, Technology Review for his work on technology for a more efficient rehabilitation of people with limited mobility. In 2011,
he received the Princess Infanta Cristina Award by the Spanish Institute for
Older People and Social Services in the research, development, and innovation
category for his work on intelligent gait orthoses.

Jose L. Pons (M’02–SM’13) received the B.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering from U. Navarr, in
1992, M.Sc. degree in advanced control from U.
Politécnica de Madrid, in 1994, and Ph.D. in physics
from U. Complutense, in 1997. He has been with
the Center of the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Madrid, Spain, since 1993, where he is
currently a Professor. He has actively participated in
a number of National, European, and International
RTD projects in the area of rehabilitation robotics,
new actuators and control technologies. In particular,
he was the Scientific Coordinator of EU GAIT, EU MANUS, EU ESBiRRo
projects, EU TREMOR, EU BETTER ,and HYPER, all of them focusing on
unveiling neuromotors mechanisms in healthy and pathological conditions. He
is the editor of Wearable Robotics (John Wiley & Sons, 2008) a seminal publication in the field on robotics exoskeleton in rehabilitation and assistance. His
current research interests include in the field of rehabilitation robotics, neuroprosthetics, and assistive technologies.

XU et al.: CLOSED-LOOP BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE TRIGGERING AN ACTIVE ANKLE–FOOT ORTHOSIS

Kim Dremstrup (M’12) received the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees from Aalborg University, Aalborg,
Denmark, in 1984 and 1992, respectively.
He is currently the Head of the Department
of Health Science and Technology and a Professor
within the Faculty of Medicine at Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. He is affiliated to the Center
for Sensory Motor Interaction where he is heading
the BCI Laboratory. His current research interests
include methods for retrieval and analysis of information from the brain. Especially, methods for EEG
analysis, sleep research, rehabilitation technology, and brain–computer interfaces are points of foci. He was the inventor of the commercialized Nightingale
Automatic Sleep Analyzer System and the coinventor of the widely used EDF
biodata format. He is the author or coauthor of more than 150 research publications, including more than 50 peer-reviewed journal papers.
Dr. Kim Dremstrup is the President for the Danish Society for Biomedical
Engineering.

2101

Dario Farina (M’01–SM’09) received the M.Sc. degree in electronics engineering from Politecnico di
Torino, Torino, Italy, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degrees
in automatic control and computer science and in
electronics and communications engineering from
the Ecole Centrale de Nantes, Nantes, France, and
Politecnico di Torino, respectively, in 2002.
During 2002–2004, he was a Research Assistant
Professor at Politecnico di Torino, and in 2004–2008,
an Associate Professor in Biomedical Engineering at
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. From 2008
to 2010, he was Full Professor in Motor Control and Biomedical Signal Processing and Head of the Research Group on Neural Engineering and Neurophysiology of Movement at Aalborg University. In 2010, he was appointed as
a Full Professor and Founding Chair in the Department of Neurorehabilitation
Engineering, University Medical Center Göttingen, Georg-August University,
Göttingen, Germany, within the Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience. He is also the Chair for Neuroinformatics of the Bernstein Focus
Neurotechnology Göttingen. His current research interests include biomedical
signal processing, specifically time–frequency analysis, pattern recognition, and
blind source separation, modeling, neurorehabilitation technology, and neural
control of movement. Within these areas, he has authored or coauthored approximately 300 papers in peer-reviewed journals and more than 300 conference
papers/abstracts, book chapters, and encyclopedia contributions. He is an Associate Editor of the Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing and
the Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology and member of the Editorial
Board of the Journal of Neuroscience Methods.
Dr. Farina has been the Vice-President of the International Society of Electrophysiology and Kinesiology (ISEK) from 2010 to 2012 and is currently the
President of ISEK. He is the recipient of the 2010 IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society Early Career Achievement Award for his contributions to
biomedical signal processing and to electrophysiology. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING.

