IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

601

Automatic Classification of Intracardiac Tumor and
Thrombi in Echocardiography Based on Sparse
Representation
Yi Guo, Yuanyuan Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Dehong Kong, and Xianhong Shu

Abstract—Identification of intracardiac masses in echocardiograms is one important task in cardiac disease diagnosis. To improve diagnosis accuracy, a novel fully automatic classification
method based on the sparse representation is proposed to distinguish intracardiac tumor and thrombi in echocardiography.
First, a region of interest is cropped to define the mass area. Then,
a unique globally denoising method is employed to remove the
speckle and preserve the anatomical structure. Subsequently, the
contour of the mass and its connected atrial wall are described by
the K-singular value decomposition and a modified active contour
model. Finally, the motion, the boundary as well as the texture features are processed by a sparse representation classifier to distinguish two masses. Ninety-seven clinical echocardiogram sequences
are collected to assess the effectiveness. Compared with other stateof-the-art classifiers, our proposed method demonstrates the best
performance by achieving an accuracy of 96.91%, a sensitivity of
100%, and a specificity of 93.02%. It explicates that our method is
capable of classifying intracardiac tumors and thrombi in echocardiography, potentially to assist the cardiologists in the clinical
practice.
Index Terms—Automatic classification, echocardiography,
intracardiac tumor and thrombi, sparse representation.

I. INTRODUCTION
NTRACARDIAC masses are hazardous in cardiovascular
disease. Generally, they are abnormal structures within or
immediately adjacent to the heart, which must be distinguished
for diagnosis [1]. Two main types of intracardiac masses are
tumor and thrombus.
Primary cardiac tumors are rare entities. Approximately 75%
of them in adults are benign, with the majority composed of
myxomas [2]. Cardiac tumors may cause obstruction to the left
ventricular filling [3]. Patients are present with the embolization,

I

Manuscript received October 15, 2013; revised January 6, 2014, February 13,
2014 and March 14, 2014; accepted March 17, 2014. Date of publication March
21, 2014; date of current version March 2, 2015. This work was supported
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 61271071 and
Grant 11228411), the National Key Technology R&D Program of China (Grant
2012BAI13B02), and Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of
Higher Education of China (Grant 20110071110017).
Y. Guo and Y. Wang are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200433, China (e-mail: guoyi@fudan.edu.cn; yywang@
fudan.edu.cn).
D. Kong and X. Shu are with the Department of Echocardiography, Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai 200032, China (e-mail: kongdh99@hotmail.com;
shu.xianhong@zs.hospital.sh.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2313132

Fig. 1. Examples of echocardiograms, in which the intracardiac mass is outlined in red and corresponds to (a) an intracardiac tumor and (b) an intracardiac
thrombus.

intracardiac obstruction and constitutional sighs. Because of the
high risk of embolization and sudden death, the tumors need
prompt resection.
Intracardiac thrombi are common findings in patients with
ischemic stroke. They may lead to atrial fibrillation, enlarged
atrial chamber and low cardiac outputs [4]. Most patients with
thrombi are treated with heparin and thrombolysis [5].
For the noninvasive and low cost nature, echocardiography is
widely used in diagnosis of intracardiac masses. The echocardiographic identifications of intracardiac masses have great impacts on the medical doctors’ decision, since different diseases
are related with diverse therapy options. In general, the echocardiogram sequence shows that most intracardiac tumors have a
narrow stalk and a broad base. The surface may be friable or villous. The internal echoes are heterogeneous. The tumors show
continuity with the atrial wall, with a high degree of mobility, as
shown in Fig. 1(a) [6]. The echocardiographic appearances of
the thrombi are motionless, dense, ovoid, and echo reflecting

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

602

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

mass with a broad base of attachment to the endocardium.
The contour is well defined, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Here, we
also include a supplementary video file which contains four
videos of different intracardiac tumors and thrombi to illustrate the mobility differences of two masses. It is available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Although intracardiac tumors and thrombi are different in
pathology, they behave similarly in echocardiography. Often,
they are misinterpreted. In most hospitals, echocardiographic
identifications are carried out by cardiologists manually. The
diagnosis is time-consuming. Recognition depends on the image quality and techniques, as well as the cardiologist’s experience. Hence, the demand for an automatic classification is
increasing, which is potential to improve the diagnostic accuracy and to guide which case should be recommended for a
surgery. The ultrasound image analysis has been successfully
employed in the computer-aided diagnosis for cardiovascular
disease, such as revealing valuable ultrasound features in early
stroke prediction [7], designing fuzzy rule-based decision support system in the diagnosis of coronary artery [8], and applying
adaptive block matching methodologies in carotid artery wall
and plaque dynamics [9]. Nevertheless, it is still challenging in
intracardiac masses identification due to the similar echocardiographic appearances of two masses and the suboptimal image
quality including large amount of speckle noise, signal drop-out,
artifacts, and missing contours. Strzelecki et al. used a neural
network to classify and segment different intracardiac masses in
tumor echocardiograms in a semiautomatic manner [10]. However, to the best of our knowledge, a fully automatic classification method has not been previously reported in the area of
distinguishing intracardiac masses in echocardiograms.
Typically, this kind of classification methods is composed of
four parts including despeckling, segmentation, feature extraction, and classification. Unlike the additive, white and Gaussian
(AWG) noise, the speckle in the ultrasound image is a multiplicative noise, whose texture often carries useful anatomical
information. To achieve the best diagnosis, it is essential to despeckle the images without affecting important image features
and destroying anatomical details. Various methods have been
used in the ultrasound image despeckling, such as the local
statistics [11]–[13], the median filter [14], the speckle reducing
anisotropic diffusion (SRAD) [15], [16], and the wavelet-based
methods [17]. As locally based methods, they compromise between the averaging (in homogeneous regions) and preserving
(at edges and features). These filters are capable of suppressing
the speckle, but they remove fine details as well. As for the
segmentation, the active contour model (ACM) [18], the level
set [19], the active appearance model (AAM) [20], the fuzzybased methods [21], and the graph cut [22] have been evaluated. While these methods may be effective for specific types
of images, they are unsatisfactory in the intracardiac mass segmentation owing to the movement of cardiac chamber during the
cardiac cycle. In the systolic stage, the chamber shrinks so small
that it is filled with an intracardiac mass, with the atrial wall and
the mass boundary overlapped. Considerable efforts have been
made on the application of the computer aided classification, like
the multilayer feedforward artificial neural network (ANN) [10],

the back propagation neural network (BPNN) [23], the support
vector machine (SVM) [24], and the ensemble learning [25].
Most of these classifiers require training stages and supervision
from experienced cardiologists. Therefore, it is meaningful to
find a stable classifier with a great capacity of generalization
without any training process.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in sparse representation. The sparse concept originated from the transformdomain methods, which assumed that true signals could be
sparsely represented by a linear combination of few basis elements in the transform domain. Instead of using fixed and
orthogonal transforms, images can be described by sparse linear combinations of an overcomplete dictionary. Applications
of the sparse representation include denoising [26], [27], compression [28], regularization in inverse problems [29], [30], and
classification [31]. The K-singular value decomposition (KSVD) is one of the typical methods in the sparse representation,
which utilizes overcomplete dictionaries obtained from a preliminary training procedure [26].
In this paper, a novel method is proposed to classify the
intracardiac tumor and thrombi in echocardiograms. Different
from other approaches, the contribution of this method is incorporating the sparse representation methodology into the whole
algorithm. The proposed method may offer several useful innovations. In the despeckling module, a novel globally denoising
approach combining the K-SVD and the nonlocal-means algorithm (NLM) is employed to remove the speckle. Such a denoising method is quite general and able to cope with large amount
of speckle noise and artifacts in echocardiograms. In the mass
segmentation, the K-SVD is described to seek the initial contour
of the mass and its connected atrial wall, and a modified ACM
with a new external force is applied to refine the contour. Then,
for each segmented mass, nine features are extracted, involving
the motion, the boundary and the texture features. Besides the
regular features in a single frame, the spatial-temporal information and new texture characters are also considered. Finally, a
sparse representation classifier (SRC) is applied to assess the
overall classification performance.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the basic K-SVD algorithm is briefly introduced. In
Section III, a detailed description of our proposed classification
method is present. In Section IV, the experiments and results
are elaborated. The discussions are presented in Section V. Our
contributions and conclusions are summarized in Section VI.
II. BASIC K-SVD SPARSE REPRESENTATION
The K-SVD aims at formulating the image by using a few
linear combinations drawn from a large and redundant dictionary [26]. Through an overcomplete dictionary, the original image is decomposed into a sparse coefficients matrix populated
primarily with zeros. Only a few nonzero coefficients reveal
the nature of the image, greatly reducing the complexity of the
original image.
Assuming an image Y with the size of M ×N, Y ∈RM ×N , Y
is divided into L overlapping image patches of size b × b, L =
(M − b + 1) × (N − b + 1). The patches are ordered as

GUO et al.: AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION OF INTRACARDIAC TUMOR AND THROMBI

603

2

column vectors lexicographically yi ∈ Rb . The overcomplete
2
dictionary matrix D ∈ Rb ×K contains K prototype atoms for
K
columns {dj }j =1 . A sparse approximation of the image Y can
be realized by the linear combination of atoms in D
min ||yi − Dxi ||22

s.t.

xi

||xi ||0 ≤ T0 , i ∈ 1, . . . , L

(1)

where xi is the ith vector in the sparse coefficient matrix X
corresponding to yi , ·0 is the l0 norm, counting nonzero coefficients, T0 is a sparsity threshold, and ·2 is the l2 norm. The
number of prototype atoms K is usually taken as 4 × b2 [26].
Since exact determination of sparse representation proves to
be a nondeterministic polynomial (NP) hard problem, approximate solutions are considered instead. A recent study reveals
that if X is sparse enough, the solution of l0 minimization problem is equivalent to the pursuit problem.
The K-SVD optimizes D and X through a number of iterations. Each iteration consists of two steps.
In the sparse coding stage, D is fixed to find the best coefficient X. The mean square error (MSE) is defined as shown
MSE =

L

i=1

e2i =

L


||yi − Dxi ||22 .

(2)

i=1

The sparsity is measured by the smallest MSE. An orthogonal
matching pursuit (OMP) method is used to find the approximation one [25].
In the dictionary updating step, X is fixed, while the SVD
method is applied to search for a better dictionary D. Fixing all
other columns in D, it updates one column dk at a time whose
coefficient corresponds to the kth row in X in the tth iteration,
called Xtk . Then, (1) can be rewritten as
2



2

K






j
j
k

Y −

dj Xt  = (Y −
dj Xt ) − dk Xt 



2
j =1
j = k
2

= ||Ek − dk Xtk ||22

(3)

where Ek stands for the error for all column when the kth atom
is removed, and ωk is the group of indices to {yi }, which uses
the atom dj
ωk = {i|1 ≤ i ≤ K, Xtk (i) = 0}.

(4)

The Ωk is a matrix of L × |ωk |, with ones on the (ωk (i),
i)th entries and zeros elsewhere. We define YkR = Y Ωk , EkR =
EΩk . Then, (3) is rewritten as
||Ek Ωk − dk Xtk Ωk ||22 = ||EkR − dk XRk ||22 .
b 2 ×n

T

(5)

The SVD decomposes R
into UΔV , where U is leftsingular vectors, V is right-singular vectors, and V T is the
transpose of V . dk is replaced by the first output basis vector of
U.
After several iterations, the algorithm stops when there is no
change in the MSE. All atoms are updated and a better dictionary
is found.
The K-SVD is originally designed for Gaussian noise removal. It cannot be directly applied to ultrasound images with
the Rayleigh distribution noises. Here, the K-SVD is modified in

Fig. 2.

Workflow diagram for the proposed classification method.

our processing steps. In the following sections, we will explain
it in detail.
III. METHODS
The workflow diagram of our method are illustrated in Fig. 2.
It involves the frame decomposition, automatic region of interests (ROIs) selection, globally despeckling, intracardiac mass
segmentation, feature extraction, and classification.
A. Frame Decomposition
The cardiologists acquire echocardiogram sequences when
diagnosing the disease. To segment the intracardiac mass and
evaluate its movement, the echocardiographic sequences are divided into consecutive frames beforehand. The typical duration
of an echocardiogram sequence is about 3–4 s. The frame rate
is 39 frames per second. Each decomposed frame is 480 × 640
pixels.
Besides the scanned region, an echocardiogram depicts texts
and labels, containing information about the patient and scanning transducer, as shown in Fig. 1. Compared with moving
heart in two successive frames, these texts and labels are static.
After subtraction of two successive frames, the static information are all removed, while the sector scanned region containing
moving heart is remained. Then, the profile of the sector scanned
region is detected and a rectangle covering the sector is identified. Finally, the original image is cropped to keep the scanned
region for further analysis.
B. Automatic ROI Selection
In order to focus on the mass area, a ROI containing the mass
and its surrounding tissues are defined. A coarse-to-fine iteration
strategy for subwindows clustering is applied to automatically
select the ROI.
Fig. 1 depicts that compared with the mass and the myocardium, the cardiac chamber owns unique texture features,
with lower intensities and uniformed distributions. Such intensity differences help to assort the images into two classes: the
uniform areas (chamber) and the texture areas (the mass or the
myocardium).

604

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

The classification is implemented with a coarse-to-fine strategy [32]. The size of the initial subwindows is 40 × 40. Each
time, several texture features of subwindows, including the
mean, the variance, and the gray level co-occurrence matrix
(GLCM) [33] are calculated and input into a fuzzy K-means
algorithm to cluster the similar subwindows. The uniform subwindows in a coarse position, which, in turn, are searched to
get a fine position with half size of subwindows. The iteration
ends when all remaining subwindows share the same intensity
distribution. In a short axis view echocardiogram, the chamber
usually lies near the cardiac center. So in the fine position, the
Euclidian distance between each subwindow and the cardiac
center is computed to trim off far-away windows and obtain
final chamber location. The distance threshold is specified as 80
pixels by experienced cardiologists.

set. If λ1 ≤ Y meank /Y meani ≤ λ2 , the patch yk is considered, where λ1 <1 and λ2 >1 are two constants close to one.
Otherwise, the patch yk will be eliminated. Then, the n (n < t)
2
most similar patches are saved, as Y_similar ∈ Rb ×n . The same
weights are set to each candidate.
Different from the pixel filtering, all pixels in a small patch
are denoised together at one time as ỹi

C. Globally Despeckling by the K-SVD Decomposition and
the NLM

As the basis for the further features extraction, extracting
the boundary of the mass is of great importance. Since the
intracardiac mass has a base connected with the atrial wall, the
mass and the atrial wall should be segmented together.
1) Initial Contour: As described in Section III-B, the cardiac
chamber and the mass or atrial wall share different intensities.
The overcomplete dictionary D in the K-SVD can discriminate
these two areas by two types of atoms, corresponding to the
texture area (intracardiac mass and the atrial wall) and the homogeneous area (cardiac chamber). Here, X_sum is also used
to distinguish two areas and convert the original image into a
binary one in which the intensities of the homogeneous areas are
1. Because of the intensity inhomogeneity in echocardiogram,
some regions may be misclassified. The binary image is dilated
and eroded with a square structuring element of the size 3 × 3
to choose eight-connectedness subregions and calculate the Euclidean distance between each subregion and the center of the
ROI to trim off those faraway ones. The Canny edge operator is
utilized to get a rough initial contour. In the Canny operator, the
sigma of a Gaussian filter and the gradient threshold are both
set as 1 [37].
2) Refine the Boundary With a Modified ACM: The ACM
is well-known for image segmentation. It is based on curve
evolution and energy function minimization, moving in reaction to two components: the internal forces and the external
forces [38]. The internal forces impose constraints on the contour itself, while the external forces push the contour toward
image features. The ACM is defined as

 1
1
[α|X  (s)|2 + β|X  (s)|2 + Eext [X(s)] ds (9)
E=
2
0

For ultrasound images, the speckle is a Rayleigh-distributed
multiplicative noise. It degrades the contrast resolution, limiting
the detectability of small, low-contrast lesions [34].
Different from locally based denoising methods, the NLM
extends the “neighborhood” to the “whole image,” taking advantage of the high degree of redundancy in an image. Usually
for a fixed configuration, many similar samples can be found
in the whole image. With the help of these related patches in
far-away areas, rather than the irrelevant ones in local neighborhood, the denoising performance will be greatly improved,
especially in the edge preservation.
However, for the computation aspects, it is impossible to find
all similar patches in the whole image. An alternative way is to
restrict the search windows in a larger size, achieving the local
optimization [27], [35], [36]. In order to truly realize the globally
despeckling in the whole image and decrease the computational
complexity, a small number of nonzero sparse coefficients helps
to compress the original image and estimate patches’ similarities
much faster.
The K-SVD makes the overcomplete dictionary D containing two kinds of atoms with different sparse coefficients. For the
texture area, their coefficients have a small number of nonzeros, while the coefficients of the homogeneous areas are all
zeros. Thus, the sum of each sparse coefficients vector in X, as
X_sum∈R1 × L , is a good descriptor to assess the similarity
b

2

X sumi =

Xj i i = 1, . . . , L

(6)

j =1

diff(i) = |X sumi − X sumj |, j = 1, . . . , L(j = i). (7)
For the patch yi to be filtered, its differential vector diff(i)
is sorted in an ascending order. The smaller diff(i) is, the more
similar two patches are. The first t columns are chosen and
their corresponding image patches in the original image are
considered to be the candidates.
To avoid two patches with opposite characteristics having
the same X_sum, the intensity average vector Y_mean ∈R1×L
is employed to remove the irrelevant patches in the candidates

ỹi =

n


Ysim ilar i

(8)

i=1

ỹi is reshaped from column vector of the size b2 × 1 to matrix
of the size b×b. For the overlapping pixels, their outcomes are
averaged.
D. Intracardiac Mass Segmentation

where X  (s) and X  (s) constitute the internal energy. They are
the first and the second derivative of the boundary curve, α and
β are weighting constants, a measure of elasticity and stiffness,
respectively. Eext [X(s)] is the external energy, attracting to
image features, usually taken as the high gradient edges.
The ACM suffers from two key weaknesses: 1) it is sensitive
to the initial contour; 2) an inappropriate external force may
lead to boundary concavities.
As to the first problem, if the initial contour lies far away
from the object, it will be difficult for the ACM to converge

GUO et al.: AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION OF INTRACARDIAC TUMOR AND THROMBI

Fig. 3. Four consecutive frames in a tumor echocardiogram: (a) the 52th
frame, (b) the 53th frame, (c) the 54th frame, and (d) the 55th frame.

to the desired segmentation. Here, with the help of the sparse
coefficients, the closest initial contour is easily searched.
For the second difficulty, usually, the gradient [38] and the
gradient vector flow (GVF) [39] are utilized as the external
forces. They are vulnerable to the image noises, especially challenging in echocardiograms with poor image contrast and inhomogeneous intensities. A new external force, X_sum in the
K-SVD, is a better choice. It contains the information of local
characteristics of each image patch, including intensities, variances, neighborhood distributions and texture features, more
robust than the traditional gradient. Therefore, the ACM is modified by presenting X_sum as a new external force.

605

Fig. 4. Four consecutive frames in a thrombus echocardiogram: (a) the 5th
frame, (b) the 6th frame, (c) the 7th frame, and (d) the 8th frame.

Fig. 5. Illustration of intracardiac mass segmentation. The yellow line is the
border of the atrial wall and the red line is the border of a mass. The white
circles represent the “mass–atrial separation points.”

E. Feature Extraction
When identifying intracardiac mass in an echocardiogram
sequence, usually the cardiologists make the judgment based
on two rules: the motion feature (the mass movement) and the
boundary feature (the base length) [2]–[6]. Although two masses
show differences in echo reflections, texture characteristics are
visually indistinguishable due to the poor image quality. They
are always omitted clinically. However, texture features, especially the mass internal echo is quite important in the classification [10].
Here, for each segmented mass, three types of features are
computed: the motion feature, the boundary feature, and the
proposed texture features.
The motion feature is a primary factor in mass recognition.
During a cardiac cycle, intracardiac tumors show high degree
of mobility, while the thrombi stay motionless, illustrated in
Figs. 3 and 4. It can be also seen from the supplementary video
file at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

To quantitatively assess the mass movement, the displacements of every corresponding boundary points in two consecutive frames are calculated. In the earlier segmentation, the
extracted contour contains both the mass and the atrial wall,
among which only the mass contour is needed. In Fig. 5, the
extracted contour is concave, with two inflexions as the division of the mass and the atrial, called “mass–atrial separation
points.” By computing the coordinates’ differences of two consecutive boundary points in the x- and y-axis, respectively, the
mass border can be separated. Then, for each point in the mass
border, the block matching algorithm [40] is applied to search
their corresponding points in the following frame. The motion
feature is defined as the mean displacement of a mass during
whole echocardiogram sequence


n
m
1 1 
2
|Pt (i) − Pt+1 (i)|
(10)
Motion =
n t=1 m i=1

606

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

where P (·) is the mass border, m is the length of P , and n is the
frame number of the whole sequence.
Another essential boundary feature is the base length. An
intracardiac tumor has a narrow stalk connected to the atrial
wall, whereas a thrombus lies entirely on the wall. The overlap
length of these two masses with the atrial wall is different.
Here, the base length is the Euclidian distance between two
mass–atrial separation points. The base length of a thrombus is
much longer than that of a tumor.
In addition, texture characteristics derived within the mass are
also considered. Three kinds of texture features are extracted.
The GLCM is a common method for the texture feature analysis. Five features derived from the GLCM (contrast, entropy,
autocorrelation, energy and homogeneity) are computed at θ =
0◦ , 45◦ , 90◦ , and 135◦ and d = 1. The mean intensity inside
the mass could also potentially classify the homogenous and
inhomogeneous areas. The GLCM features and the mean intensity are the traditional texture descriptors. Furthermore, the
mean sparse coefficient is introduced as a new texture feature
for a better classification. The sparse coefficients represent the
integrative information of the local statistics in a mass.
A total of nine features: the mass movement, the base length,
five GLCM features, the mean intensity and the mean sparse
coefficient are calculated for the further classification.
F. Sparse Representation-Based Classifier
A sparse representation-based classifier (SRC) is used to identify an intracardiac mass. It relies on the idea that the test sample
can be represented as a linear combination of the training sample [31]. Different from other classifiers, the SRC is a nonparametric learning method which does not need a training process
but only need the training data [41].
Suppose A is a training matrix for the entire training set with
l training samples of p classes
A = [A1 , A2 , . . . , Ap ] = [v11 , v12 , . . . , vp1 , . . . , vpl p ]

(11)

where Ai is the ith training sample and viq is its qth feature.
A new test sample y is the linear representation of the training
matrix A
(12)
y = Ax0
where x0 = [0, . . . , 0, αi,1 , αi,2 , . . . , αi,l , 0, . . . 0]T is a coefficient vector, whose coefficients are remarkable for the class the
test sample belongs to, while for the other class, the coefficients
are all zeros. x0 is obtained by solving the linear equation (12),
which is underdetermined. This motivates us to seek its sparse
solution
x̂0 = arg min ||x||0

subject to Ax = y.

(13)

Unlike the K-SVD, the SRC approximates the l0 norm coefficients by l1 minimization problem [42].
Ideally, if the test sample y belongs to a certain class, the
coefficients in the estimated x̂0 not within this class should all
be zeros. But given the noise and the modeling error, there are
small nonzero entries associated with multiple object classes.
The noisy model is modified as
y = Ax0 + ε

(14)

where ε is the noise level. Then, (13) is converted into
x̂1 = arg min ||x||1

subject to ||Ax − y||2 ≤ ε.

(15)

We consider using the residual error to classify y. After estimating x̂1 , the given test sample ŷ is approximated as
ŷi = Aδi (x̂i )

(16)

where δi (x̂i ) is a new vector whose only nonzero entries in x̂1
are associated with the class i. The residual error ri (ŷ) is
ri (ŷ) = yi − Aδi (x̂i ).

(17)

The test sample y is classified with the class having the minimal residual error. The SRC algorithm can generalize well in
the face recognition with insufficient training samples [31], [41].
It is also quite suited for our application because it is not only
computationally simple, but also has good generalization ability.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Data Description
A total of 97 clinical echocardiogram sequences were collected at Department of Echocardiography, Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai, China. They were recorded using the Philips iE33
ultrasound imaging system equipped with a S5-1 transducer
(imaging bandwidth from 1 to 5 MHz). The sequences were
saved in AVI format. The whole classification method was applied on the sequences after they were recorded and stored by
the cardiologists.
All patients were submitted to surgery. The histopathology of
the masses proved that 43 sequences were intracardiac thrombi
and 54 were intracardiac tumors. The histological results served
as the gold-standard in our classification.
B. Whole Method Implementation
Our proposed classification method was implemented on 97
echocardiogram sequences. All sequences were processed from
frame decomposition, automatic ROI selection, globally despeckling, intracardiac mass segmentation, and nine feature extraction. The SRC was applied to the whole dataset to identify
the masses.
As an example, Fig. 6 depicts the output for an intracardiac
tumor. The coarse-to-fine strategy helped to automatically select the ROI in an echocardiogram [32]. The globally despeckling approach eliminated the noise while preserving important
anatomical details. By means of the sparse representation, the
initial mass contour was easily searched at a proper location.
The modified ACM guided the deformable contour in a desired
manner, finally eliminating the ambiguity and converging to the
true boundary.
C. SRC Sparsity Evaluation
The goal of this experiment was to evaluate the sparsity and
residual of the SRC. The sparsity was defined as the average
ratio of zero coefficients number to the training sample at each
test sample. The residual was the mean of all residual errors.
Sparsity was related not only with the training or testing data

GUO et al.: AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION OF INTRACARDIAC TUMOR AND THROMBI

607

Fig. 7.

Sparsity and the residual at different ε.

TABLE I
RUNTIME OF THE PROPOSED CLASSIFICATION METHOD AT DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF NOISE INTERFERENCE

Fig. 8. Two coefficient vectors of one test sample at different ε: (a) at small ε
and (b) at large ε.

Fig. 6. Example of the output for an intracardiac tumor. (a) The original
echocardiogram image, (b) a rectangle covering the cardiac, (c) the cropped
image, (d) 40 × 40 subwindows, (e) 20 × 20 subwindows, (f) the remained subwindows after calculation of Euclidian distance, (g) the ROI, (h) the despeckled
result, (i) the binary image after the classification, (j) the cardiac chamber after
the mathematical morphology, (k) the initial boundary, and (l) the final contours.

set, but also with the noise level ε in (14). The noise ε was varied
in the set {10−4 , 2 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 2 × 10−3 , 10−2 , 2 × 10−2 ,
10−1 }.
A leave-one-out trial was employed in the SRC to distinguish
these two masses [24]. It trained the classifier with a training
set formed from all but one case of the total data set. The single
remaining case was tested and compared with its labeled class.
This process has been repeated 97 times until all samples were
tested.
Fig. 7 depicts the sparsity and the residual at different ε.
Table I shows the runtime at different ε.
Generally, the larger ε was, the lower the sparsity was, the
higher the residual was. At ε = 10−4 , over 90% coefficients
were zeros. At ε = 0.1, the sparsity and the residual was almost

0.5, which meant the coefficients were not concentrated on any
one subject and instead spread widely across the entire training
set.
For more instruction, Fig. 8 shows two coefficient vectors of
one test sample at different ε. Without the loss of the generality,
one test sample was taken randomly as an illustration. For the
other samples in the test set, we had the similar results.
At a small ε, the coefficient vector was very sparse, only a
few values were nonzero, but it needed longer operation time.
While at a large ε, the sparse coefficients were spread evenly
over all classes, leading to high misclassification rate. Here, we
set ε = 0.001 for a balance value between the sparsity and the
runtime.
D. Comparison of Features Subsets
A total of nine features were calculated for the further classification. To evaluate the performances of different features, four
subsets were selected from nine features. They were the cardiologist’s feature descriptors, the traditional texture features, our
new texture feature sets and all nine features. The features in the
subsets were selected from all nine features. The cardiologist’s
feature descriptors included the mass movement and the base
length. The traditional texture features were five GLCM features
and the mean intensity. Our new feature sets consisted of the
traditional texture features and a new mean sparse coefficient.

608

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED CLASSIFICATION METHOD
ON DIFFERENT FEATURE SUBSETS

TABLE III
COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF FIVE DIFFERENT CLASSIFIERS

The effectiveness of each feature subsets in the classification
were evaluated using five performance indices based on the true
positive (TP), the true negative (TN), the false positive (FP)
and the false negative (FN): the overall accuracy (ACC), the
sensitivity (SEN), the specificity (SPE), the positive predicative
value (PPV), and the negative predictive value (NPV) [8]
ACC =
SEN =
SPE =
PPV =
NPV =

TP + TN
TP + FN + FP + TN
TP
TP + FN
TN
FP + TN
TP
TP + FP
TN
.
TN + FN

TABLE IV
RUNTIME FOR DIFFERENT STEPS OF THE PROPOSED CLASSIFICATION METHOD

(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)

Table II shows the performance of our method with different
feature sets. The overall classification accuracy ranged from
74.23% to 96.91%. The highest classification rate was achieved
when all nine features were employed as expected.
E. Comparison of Different Classifiers
In this section, the performances of our proposed methods
were compared with some state-of-the-art classifiers, including the SVM, the BPNN, the ANN, and the Adaboost. All the
classifiers used the same nine features and a leave-one-out trial.
The LIBSVM [43] were used to implement the SVM classifier. The SVM used Gaussian kernel. The value of the cost
parameter and the kernel parameter to train the SVM were determined by applying the grid search with cross-validation. Both
the ANN classifier and the BPNN classifier had three layers with
9 input nodes, 10 hidden nodes, and 1 output node. A sigmoid
activation function and a purelin activation function were applied between input layer and hidden layer and between the
hidden layer and the output layer, respectively. The training
state was conducted for 100 times with a goal error as 0.01.
The difference between the ANN and the BPNN was the way
of the propagation. In the ANN, the neurons moved in forward
direction, with no connections back. In the BPNN, by means of
the anticipated and the actual outputs, it adjusted the weights
of the various layers backwards from the output layer to the
input layer. In Adaboost, 20 two-class Gaussian models were
generated as weak classifiers. The Adaboost were trained for

100 times. The parameters of 4 classifiers were all optimized
before the classification.
Table III shows the performances of different classifiers. All
classifiers obtained high accuracy from 90.72% to 96.91%. The
SEN, SPE, PPV, and NPV all reached clinically acceptance
range. The runtime meant the classification for 97 sequences
with leave-one-out trial. Obviously, without training process,
our SRC was much faster than other four classifiers.
Table IV shows the operation time of each processing steps in
our classification method. It took about 386.1 s to analyze and
identify the mass, in which the globally despeckling part and
the mass segmentation part were time-consuming.
V. DISCUSSION
The whole classification method is based on the sparse representation, including four novel elements. First, a coarse-to-fine
strategy is defined to automatically select the ROI. Second, a
globally denoising approach combing the K-SVD and the NLM
is employed to eliminate the speckle. Thirdly, a modified ACM
with a new external force is applied to extract the intracardiac
mass boundary. Finally nine features are implemented to a new
sparse classifier to distinguish two masses.
A. Influence of Despeckling and Segmentation
Fig. 6 illustrates that our globally despeckling approach
achieved the balance between the noise suppression and the
structure reservation. Important imaging details were better preserved in the denoised image. The main advantage of our approach over the majority of existing denoising methods was that
it made full use of the information in the whole image, reducing
the noise and retaining the object boundaries.
The segmentation of the mass was of great importance in
our proposed method. As the basis of further feature extraction,
false segmentation would lead to incorrect base length calculation and mass movement estimation. Our segmentation method

GUO et al.: AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION OF INTRACARDIAC TUMOR AND THROMBI

based on the sparse representation and the modified ACM were
capable of extracting the boundary of the mass and the atrial
wall, especially at the systole stage.
The evaluations of the globally despeckling and mass segmentation were in our previous published paper [37].
B. Features Comparisons
In this study, nine features were extracted according to the
mass segmentation. Besides the cardiologist’s original selected
features, new texture characteristics were proposed as supplementary.
Among all feature subsets, the cardiologist’s feature subset obtained good results. Although a little higher in the SPE
(94.44%), on the whole, the traditional texture features produced
suboptimal effects. It corroborated the clinical observation. But
when adding a new feature: the mean sparse coefficient, the performances were improved significantly, especially in SPE from
48.84% to 93.02% and PPV from 69.86% to 94%. The integration of the new texture features and the clinical selected features
had the ability to provide more accurate classification results.
The results of our experiments revealed that there was no single feature which could accurately determine whether a mass
was a tumor or a thrombus. The combination achieved the best
accuracy. Two indices selected by the cardiologists were dominant in all features. Besides, with the new mean sparse coefficient, the texture characteristics could also benefit the overall
performance.
Moreover, other anatomical context features may also help to
improve the overall performance. Our future work will focus on
the feature selection techniques to select more optimal feature
subsets to distinguish two masses better.
C. Classification Comparisons
In the previous studies, Strzelecki et al. segmented and classified intracardiac masses in tumor echocardiograms in a semiautomatic manner [10]. The mass were initially marked by a
cardiologist and segmented using a network of synchronized
oscillators. A total of 266 texture parameters were calculated
to the ANN to identify various types of masses. The research
showed that 91% masses were classified properly.
In our experiments, by using only nine features, all five classifiers achieved satisfactory results with the overall accuracy
over 90%. Due to the one-way propagation, the ANN was less
robust than other classifiers. Seven thrombi were misclassified.
Our SRC was able to identify 96.91% masses with the highest
sensitivity. The SEN was 100%. It illustrated that all tumors
were correctly detected, which was crucial in clinical. Moreover, in the aspect of running time, the SRC had no parameters
and training process, it outperformed other classifiers in an extremely low computation.
D. Limitation
Our proposed method had a few limitations. In clinical practice, the efficiency and minimum user interaction were very important. Although our method was fully automatic without any

609

clinical intervention, the total operation time was long, difficult
for clinical real-time processing. The main problems were the
sparse representation in the globally despeckling and the initial
contour localization. It was time-consuming to decompose each
image block into the sparest coefficients. Improvements may be
possible by further optimizing and accelerating the algorithm.
Besides, the sample size was small to make a solid conclusion.
More intracardiac masses with a variety size should be added to
verify the effectiveness of our classification method.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new method is proposed for the classification
of intracardiac tumor and thrombi in the echocardiograms. The
whole method is based on the sparse representation. The mass
area in ROI is automatic defined by a coarse-to-fine strategy.
A novel globally denoising approach combing the K-SVD and
the NLM is employed to eliminate the speckle. The globally
despeckling algorithm yields better noise attenuation and edge
enhancement, without destroying the important cardiac structures. The K-SVD and a modified ACM with a new external
force are applied to segment the mass. Our detected contours
closely approximate the manually traced ones. Nine features,
including the cardiologist’s original selected features and new
texture characteristics are then extracted. They are capable of
distinguishing two masses, whose values are identical with the
clinical observations. Finally, all features are implemented to
the SRC. The simple classifier is able to identify the intracardiac mass with an overall accuracy of 96.91% and a sensitivity
of 100%. It can detect all intracardiac tumors. The better accuracy and simple implementation make the proposed method
beneficial to help the cardiologists make a diagnosis before the
surgery, providing a realistic performance benchmark for further
research efforts.
REFERENCES
[1] C. M. Otto, Textbook of Clinical Echocardiography. Philadelphia, PA:
Saunders, 2009, pp. 378–398.
[2] S. Maraj, G. S. Pressman, and V. M. Figueredo, “Primary cardiac tumors,”
Int. J. Cardiol., vol. 133, no. 2, pp. 152–156, Apr. 2009.
[3] L. M. Shapiro, “Cardiac tumors: Diagnosis and management,” Heart,
vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 218–222, Feb. 2001.
[4] M. M. Ragland and Y. Tak, “The role of echocardiography in diagnosing
space-occupying lesions of the heart,” J. Clin. Med. Res., vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 22–32, Mar. 2006.
[5] F. Boulay, N. Danchin, J. L. Neimann, J. P. Godenir, and J. P. Houppe,
“Echocardiographic features of right atrial thrombi,” J. Clin. Ultrasound,
vol. 14, pp. 601–606, Oct. 1986.
[6] J. M. Sarjeant, J. Butany, and R. J. Cusimano, “Cancer of the heart: Epidemiology and management of primary tumors and metastases,” Amer. J.
Cardiovasc. Drugs, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 407–421, 2003.
[7] S. Golemati, A. Gastounioti, and K. S. Nikita, “Toward novel noninvasive and low-cost markers for predicting strokes in asymptomatic carotid
atherosclerosis: The role of ultrasound image analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 652–658, Mar. 2013.
[8] M. G. Tsipouras, T. P. Exarchos, D. I. Fotiadis, A. P. Kotsia, K. V. Vakalis,
K. K. Naka, and L. K. Michalis, “Automated diagnosis of coronary artery
disease based on data mining and fuzzy modeling,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 447–458, Jul. 2008.
[9] A. Gastounioti, S. Golemati, J. S. Stoitsis, and K. S. Nikita, “Carotid
artery wall motion analysis from B-mode ultrasound using adaptive block
matching: In silico evaluation and in vivo application,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 58, no. 24, pp. 8647–8661, Nov. 2013.

610

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

[10] M. Strzelecki, A. Materka, J. Drozdz, M. Krzeminska-Pakula, and
J. D. Kasprzak, “Classification and segmentation of intracardiac masses in
cardiac tumor echocardiograms,” Comput. Med. Imaging Graph, vol. 30,
no. 2, pp. 95–107, Mar. 2006.
[11] J. S. Lee, “Speckle analysis and smoothing of synthetic aperture radar
images,” Comput. Graph Image Process., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 24–32, Sep.
1981.
[12] V. S. Frost, J. A. Stiles, K. S. Shanmuggam, and J. C. Holtzman, “A model
for radar images and its application for adaptive digital filtering of multiplicative noise,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 157–165, Feb. 1982.
[13] D. T. Kuan, A. A. Sawchuk, T. C. Strand, and P. Chavel, “Adaptive restoration of images with speckle,” IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Process.,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 373–383, Mar. 1987.
[14] T. Huang, G. Yang, and G. Tang, “A fast two-dimensional median filtering
algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 13–18, Feb. 1979.
[15] Y. Deng, Y. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Speckle reduction of ultrasound images
based on Rayleigh trimmed anisotropic diffusion filter,” Pat. Recognit.
Lett., vol. 32, no. 13, pp. 1516–1525, Oct. 2011.
[16] Y. Yu and S. T. Acton, “Speckle reducing anisotropic diffusion,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 1260–1270, Nov. 2002.
[17] S. Gupta, R. C. Chauhan, and S. C. Sexana, “Wavelet-based statistical
approach for speckle reduction in medical ultrasound images,” Med. Biol.
Eng. Comput., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 189–192, Mar. 2004.
[18] R. Bellotti, F. Carlo, G. Gargano, S. Tangaro, D. Cascio, E. Catanzariti,
P. Cerello, S. C. Cheran, P. Delogu, I. Mitri, C. Fulcheri, D. Grosso,
A. Retico, S. Squarcia, E. Tommasi, and B. Golosio, “A CAD system for
nodule detection in low-dose lung CTs based on region growing and a
new active contour model,” Med. Phys., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 4901–4910,
Dec. 2007.
[19] K. Suzuki, R. Kohlbrenner, M. L. Epstein, A. M. Obajuluwa, J. W. Xu,
and M. Hori, “Computer-aided measurement of liver volumes in CT by
means of geodesic active contour segmentation coupled with level-set
algorithms,” Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 2159–2166, May 2010.
[20] X. Chen, J. K. Udupa, U. Bagci, Z. Ying, and J. Yao, “Medical image
segmentation by combining graph cuts and oriented active appearance
models,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2035–2046, Apr.
2012.
[21] D. Smeets, D. Loeckx, B. Stijnen, B. Dobbelaer, D. Vandermeulen, and
P. Suetens, “Semi-automatic level set segmentation of liver tumors combining a spiral-scanning technique with supervised fuzzy pixel classification,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 13–20, Feb. 2010.
[22] R. J. Schneider, D. P. Perrin, N. V. Vasilyev, G. R. Marx, P. J. Nido, and
R. D. Howe, “Mitral annulus segmentation from 3D ultrasound using
graph cuts,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1676–1687,
Sep. 2010.
[23] S. Walczak, “Artificial neural network medical decision support tool:
Predicting transfusion requirements of ER patients,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Tech. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 468–474, Sep. 2005.
[24] J. Levman, T. Leung, P. Causer, D. Plewes, and A. L. Martel, “Classification of dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance breast lesions
by support vector machines,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 27, no. 5,
pp. 688–696, May 2008.
[25] S. Oh, M. S. Lee, and B. Zhang, “Ensemble learning with active example selection for imbalanced biomedical data classification,” IEEE Trans.
Comput. Biol. Bioinform., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 316–325, Mar. 2011.
[26] M. Aharon, M. Elad, and A. Bruckstein, “K-SVD: An algorithm for designing overcomplete dictionaries for sparse representation,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4311–4322, Nov. 2006.
[27] K. Dabov, A. Foi, V. Katkovnik, and K. Egiazarian, “Image denoising by
sparse 3D transform-domain collaborative filtering,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1–16, Aug. 2007.
[28] J. Zepeda, C. Guillemot, and E. Kijak, “Image compression using sparse
representations and the iteration-tuned and aligned dictionary,” IEEE J.
Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1061–1073, Sep. 2011.
[29] J. Yang, J. Wright, T. Huang, and Y. Ma, “Image super-resolution via sparse
representation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 2861–
2873, Nov. 2010.
[30] S. Malla and G. Yu, “Super-resolution with sparse mixing estimators,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 2889–2900, Nov. 2010.
[31] J. Wright, A. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, “Robust face
recognition via sparse representation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 210–227, Feb. 2009.

[32] Y. Guo, Y. Wang, D. Kong, and X. Shu, “Automatic endocardium extraction for echocardiogram,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng. Inform., 2011,
pp. 157–161.
[33] R. Parekh, “Using texture analysis for medical diagnosis,” IEEE MultiMedia, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 28–37, Feb. 2012.
[34] T. C. Aysal and K. E. Barner, “Rayleigh-maximum-likelihood filtering
for speckle reduction in ultrasound images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging.,
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 712–727, May 2007.
[35] A. Buades, B. Coll, and A. Morel, “A review of image denoising algorithms with a new one,” Multiscale Model. Simul., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 490–
530, 2005.
[36] Y. Guo, Y. Wang, and T. Hou, “Speckle filtering of ultrasonic images
using a modified non local-based algorithm,” Biomed. Signal Proces.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 129–138, Apr. 2011.
[37] Y. Guo, Y. Wang, D. Kong, and X. Shu, “Automatic segmentation of cardiac tumor in echocardiogram based on sparse representation and modified
ACM,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Eng. App. Sci., 2012, pp. 22–30.
[38] M. Kass, A. Within, and D. Terzopoulos, “Snakes: Active contour models,”
Int. J. Comput. Vision, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 321–331, Jan. 1988.
[39] C. Xu and J. Prince, “Snake, shapes, and gradient vector flow,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 359–369, Mar. 1998.
[40] L. M. Po and W. C. Ma, “A novel four-step search algorithm for fast block
motion estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Techno., vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 313–317, Jun. 1996.
[41] L. Zhang, W. Zhou, P. Chang, J. Liu, Z. Yan, T. Wang, and F. Li, “Kernel sparse represenatation-based classifier,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1684–1695, Apr. 2012.
[42] C. B. Burkhardt, “Speckling in ultrasound B-mode scans,” IEEE Trans.
Sonics Ultrason., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Jan. 1978.
[43] C. C. Chang and C. J. Lin, “LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–27, Apr.
2011.

Yi Guo received the B.Sc. degree in electronic engineering and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Fudan University, Shanghai,
China, in 2013.
She is currently a Lecturer in the Department of
Electronic Engineering, Fudan University. Her current research interests include medical signal and image processing.

Yuanyuan Wang (SM’03) received the B.Sc., M.Sc.,
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 1990, 1992, and
1994, respectively.
During 1994 to 1996, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, University of Wales,
Bangor, U.K. In May 1996, he went back to Department of Electronic Engineering, Fudan University as
an Associate Professor, where he was then promoted
to a Full Professor in May 1998, and is currently the
Director of Biomedical Engineering Center and the Vice Dean of Information
Science and Engineering School. He is also the author or coauthor of 6 books
and 430 research papers. His current research interests include medical ultrasound techniques and medical signal processing.

GUO et al.: AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION OF INTRACARDIAC TUMOR AND THROMBI

Dehong Kong received the Graduate degree from
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 2006, and got the Ph.D. degree from
Fudan University in 2012.
She is currently with the Physicians of Cardiology, Department of Echocardiography, Zhongshan
Hospital affiliated to Fudan University, Shanghai. Her
current research interests include the diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases using echocardiography.

611

Xianhong Shu received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees.
She is currently the Professor of Cardiology in
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China, where she is the Chief of Echocardiology
Department, the Vice Director of Shanghai Institute
of Cardiovascular Diseases. Her current research interest includes echocardiographic diagnosis of heart
diseases.

