2396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Murine Heart Volume: Numerical Comparison and
Calibration of Conductance Catheter Models
Sorin Popa, Student Member, IEEE, Kyle Fricke∗ , Student Member, IEEE, John Dubois,
Anil T. G. Kottam, and Robert Sobot, Member, IEEE

Abstract—A full set of finite-element method (FEM) studies of
the catheter within a cylindrical cuvette and within an elliptical
cuvette are presented along with novel insight on the fundamental
electromagnetic properties of the catheter. An in vitro experiment
with modified small mouse pressure–volume catheters was conducted and the results are presented as a validation of the FEM
models. In addition, sensitivity analysis on the electrode size and
position is conducted and the results allow for a novel calibration
factor based on catheter geometry to be presented. This calibration factor is used in conjunction with Wei’s conductance volume
equations to reduce the average measured error in cuvette volume
measurements from 26.5% to 5%.
Index Terms—Conductance-based catheter, electromagnetic
simulation, finite-element method (FEM), murine heart, pressure–
volume, sensitivity analysis, sensor calibration.

I. INTRODUCTION
EDICAL research in the fields of cardiovascular genetics, cardiovascular diseases, and cardiovascular drug
trials for humans relies on the use of small animal subjects in laboratory experiments. In the preparatory phase, the subjects, most
commonly mice, undergo various gene alterations to affect, for
example, their cardiovascular system in order to emulate some
of the typical human cardiovascular diseases. Undoubtedly, the
most comprehensive way to assess the contractile function of
the heart relies on pressure–volume (PV) relationships, often
called pressure–volume loops (see Fig. 1). The analysis of in
vivo measured left ventricular (LV) PV loops as an indicator of
the cardiac functionality is remarkably useful, as it allows researchers to determine load-independent indexes of contractility
and chamber stiffness [1], [2].
However, the instantaneous measurements that are needed to
generate PV loops are still difficult to obtain using noninvasive
imaging techniques due to the small size (≈1 mL) and rapid

M

Manuscript received October 15, 2013; revised February 5, 2014 and March
13, 2014; accepted March 14, 2014. Date of publication March 25, 2014; date
of current version August 18, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. Popa was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Western University, London, ON N6A 3K7, Canada. He is now with Imperial
College, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: popa.c.sorin@gmail.com).
∗ K. Fricke is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Western University, London, ON N6A 3K7, Canada (e-mail: kfricke@uwo.ca).
J. Dubois and A. T. G. Kottam are with Transonic Scisense Inc., London, ON
N6E 3A1, Canada (e-mail: jdubois@scisense.com; akottam@scisense.com).
R. Sobot is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Western University, London, ON N6A 3K7, Canada (e-mail: rsobot@uwo.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2313621

Fig. 1. LV PV loops in a healthy person (grey PV area) and for persons with
acute (blue PV area) or chronic, congestive (red PV area) cardiac failure.

heart rate (up to 700 beats/min) of the murine heart [3]. Instead,
accurate blood pressure measurements are obtained by using
a piezoresistive MEMS sensor inserted in the LV of the subject’s heart. In addition, since the introduction of conductancebased volumetric measurement and more accurate postprocessing techniques, significant progress has been made in regards
to miniaturization of integrated dual-sensor PV catheters that
enabled simultaneous real-time measurement of both the blood
pressure and the heart volume [4]. In the conductance-based
techniques, heart volume calculations are derived from the measured blood conductance due to flow of an ac current between
two of the catheter’s electrodes.
The known excitation current iAC , whose frequency is set to
20 kHz, flows mostly through the blood and partially through
the myocardium volume. At that frequency, the blood exhibits
purely resistive behavior, while myocardium shows both resistive and capacitive properties [5]. Thus, the equivalent electrical
diagram of the measurement technique includes the blood conductance (Gb ) in parallel with myocardium conductance (Gm )
and capacitance (Cm ) (see Fig. 2). For this reason, in order to derive accurate blood volumetric results the measured conductance
must be corrected for the parasitic effects of the myocardium.
So far, several catheter-based volumetric models have been
published in the literature, three of which are referenced in this
paper. The original Baan’s linear model [6] measured only the
blood conductance and ignored the capacitive component of the
parallel myocardium contribution. Additionally, the model assumed that conductance Gm remains constant throughout the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

POPA et al.: MURINE HEART VOLUME: NUMERICAL COMPARISON AND CALIBRATION OF CONDUCTANCE CATHETER MODELS

2397

Fig. 2. Equivalent electrical diagram of conductances involved in the PV
catheter-based measurements.

cardiac cycle, this has since been addressed in [7]. Based on
these assumptions, Baan suggested the use of a hypertonic saline
bolus to be injected into the bloodstream in order to help estimate
Gm [1]. Although this method is still used, it has several significant drawbacks: it only provides one constant value for Gm over
the cardiac cycle; the saline bolus may temporarily change value
of Gm , and the increased volume can cause harmful effects to
the murine cardiovascular system [8], [9]. An alternative method
to estimate the parallel conductance based on the use of dualfrequency stimulation was suggested in [10], which also does
not account for the variation in Gm during the cardiac cycle.
Wei et al. [3] introduced a nonlinear model that corrects for the
nonuniform electric field generated within the LV. Furthermore,
Wei [11] developed a measurement technique that allows for
the instantaneous measurement of Gm throughout the cardiac
cycle by measuring admittance. So far, this method is accepted
as the most accurate at removing the parallel effects of the myocardium, which allows for the extraction of the conductance
term Gb that is related solely to the blood volume [12]. In recent
work [13], Dubois et al. have developed a nonlinear admittanceto-volume equation that is computationally simpler than Wei’s
equation, while it is based on raw measured admittance Y and it
eliminates the inherent parallel contribution of the myocardium
(σb + iωεb ), where σb is the blood conductivity, εb is the blood
permittivity, and ω is frequency of the excitation current.
Baan’s, Wei’s, and Dubois’ conductance-to-volume equations
are currently being used in the industry yet there are no published works on their comparative analysis. In this paper, we
present a comparison study of all three conductance-to-volume
equations along with the accuracy of the analytical model of the
conductance catheter. In addition, we study the overall accuracy
of the admittance catheter volume measurements and present an
empirical calibration factor to improve the volume measurement
accuracy with the existing conductance-to-volume equations. In
this paper, we developed a new accurate model of a small animal
catheter manufactured by Scisense Inc., which is then used in
our analytical, numerical, and experimental analysis.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce the basic principle behind conductance-based PV
measurements; numerical verification of the models is presented
in Section III, which is followed by in vitro experimental data in
Section IV. Sensitivity due to physical variations of the catheters
and correction factor is presented in Section V. Concluding
remarks are in Section VI.

Fig. 3. Geometry of a general conductance-based measurement environment,
where specific material properties can be modeled by σ m , σ b , r , m and
overall shape by R. Summary for eight catheter sizes used along with nominal
1.2 F is in Table I.
TABLE I
PHYSICAL DIMENSIONS OF USED CATHETERS

II. CONDUCTANCE-BASED PV MEASUREMENTS
In this section, we briefly review cardiovascular physiology and the basic principle of conductance-based PV catheter
measurements.
A. Conductance Volume Measurement Technique
The principle of idealized volumetric measurements of a
cylindrical cavity made of perfectly conductive material (σm →
∞) and filled in with nonperfect conductive fluid (σb , εr ) is illustrated in Fig. 3 and Table I. The volume is calculated from measured conductance values of a tetra polar catheter centered inside
the cylinder, where the four ring electrodes (in, V+ , V− , gnd)
serve as the input and output terminals. Thus, the conductance of the blood and the myocardium volume is calculated
from the known excitation current iA M [which is injected between (in, gnd) terminals], and the measured potential difference (which is measured between (V+ , V− ) terminals) by using
Ohm’s law. In the idealized case of the cylindrical volume and
 θ), it is
perfectly symmetrical homogeneous electric field E(r,
trivial to calculate that real cylindrical volume as Vreal = πR2 H
and measured reference volume as exactly Vref = πR2 L, where
R is the cavity radius, H is the cavity height, and L is the known
distance between the two output electrodes. Therefore, the real
volume Vreal is effectively measured between the centers of V+

2398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

and V− electrodes, which actually defines the smaller reference
volume Vref . Obviously, the reference volume measurement is
the function of the catheter geometry, and the measured voltage
between the two inner electrodes (V+ , V− ) is due to not only the
conductance of the blood (Gb ) but also the parallel admittance
of the myocardium (Gm , Cm ) (see Fig. 2).
B. Conductance to Volume Equations
Baan’s linear model [6] that connects the measured conductance and volume VolB is derived as follows:
1
ρ L2 (Gm eas − Gm )
α
1
= ρ L2 gb
α
gb−E D − gb−E S
α = ρL2
SV

VolB =

(1)
(2)
(3)

where ρ is the blood resistivity, Gm eas is the measured conductance, Gm is the parallel conductance, and gb−E D and gb−E S
are the calculated blood conductance at diastole and systole, respectively. This technique assumes a uniform electric field and a
linear conductance-to-volume relationship, which results in the
overestimated LV volume in mice. This overestimation is even
greater in the relative magnitude in larger animals due to the
increased non-linearity of the conductance volume relationship
for larger volumes [3].
In order to improve accuracy of (1), starting from Maxwell’s
equations in [3] Wei derived (4) from a cylinder model
⎤
⎡
4a20
+
1
2
2
πg L d ⎢ d2
1 ⎥
VolW = inf
(4)
⎣
2 − g2 ⎦
4
(ginf − gb )
inf
where ginf is the conductance of infinitely large volume of blood,
assuming cylindrical blood volume, spherical electrodes, nonconducting inner electrodes (V+ ,V− ), and uniform electric field
 θ). However, the shape of the ventricular is not cylindrical
E(r,
and (4) does not include an empirical factor to force volume
differences created from gb ES and gb ED . Wei introduced an
empirical correction factor β to include the experimentally measured SV in the analytic equation (6) [3]. The improved analytic
approximation becomes
β
β
− 2
(ginf − gb ED )2
ginf

1
1
β = SV
−
2
(ginf − gb ED )
(ginf − gb

VolW =
where

2
ED )

. (5)

From the analytic approximation equation (5), Wei’s nonlinear conductance-to-volume equation (6) is empirically developed for noncylindrical volumes which includes an empirical
correction factor γ to force the measured SV to the known SV,

VolD = πa20 L −

measured from an independent SV probe
γ
ρL2 (Gm eas − Gm )
γ − Gm eas − Gm
γ
=
ρL2 (Gb )
γ − Gb

VolW =

(6)

where ρ is the blood resistivity (Ωm), L is the length between
the voltage sensing electrodes (m), γ is the field form factor,
Gm eas is the instantaneous measured conductance (S), Gm is
the surrounding myocardial conductance (S), and Gb is the blood
conductance (S) [3]. The field form factor γ is calculated as
√
−b ± b2 − 4ac
γ=
2a
where

a = SV − ρL2 (Gb−E D − Gb−E S )
b = −SV (Gb−E D + Gb−E S )
c = SV × Gb−E D × Gb−E S .

(7)

In [3], it is indicated that (6) reduces the volume calculation
error by an order of magnitude relative to the error of Baan’s
equation (1).
As a further extension to (4), Dubois et al. recently developed
a nonlinear admittance-to-volume (7) that is computationally
simpler than Wei’s equation [13]. The equation is derived for
the case of finite cylindrical volume and takes into account the
small complex component of blood’s admittance by including
both the blood conductivity (σb ) and the blood permittivity
(εb ). The equation uses the raw measured admittance Y and
eliminates the parallel contribution of the inherent myocardium
(σm + iωεm ). The asymptotic admittance, Yinf , is calculated
purely analytically based on the catheter geometry L, d and the
catheter radius a0 (see Fig. 3). Admittances YED and YES are
measured at diastole and systole respectively, while admittance
Ya0 is calculated at the boundary condition where the radius of
the cylinder is equal to the radius of the catheter. The equation
is derived from the analytical derivation (4), while the authors
imply it is self-calibrating for any effects of either the electrodes
or catheter system overall. The mean error of VolD compared to
ultrasound measurements was reported to be within the industry
acceptable range of 15% [13].
C. Calibration Techniques
All three equations (1), (6), and (8) require some form of
the empirical correction factor to compensate for the irregularity of the nonuniform myocardium, which must be determined
in vivo by using an independent stroke volume measurement,
for instance a flow meter. The main purpose of in vivo calibration is to estimate the parallel contribution of the myocardium,
Gm [12], while in vitro calibration is required to correct the
magnitude and the phase angle of the measured admittance [11].
Magnitude calibration focuses the electrical instrumentation that

SV (Y − Ya0 )(YE D − Yinf )2 (YE S − Yinf )2 (Y + Ya0 − 2Yinf )
(Y − Yinf )2 (Ya0 − Yinf )2 (YE D − YE S )(2Yinf − YE D − YE S )

(8)

POPA et al.: MURINE HEART VOLUME: NUMERICAL COMPARISON AND CALIBRATION OF CONDUCTANCE CATHETER MODELS

2399

the catheter is connected to, for example, known resistor and
capacitor (RC) loads are used to calibrate the conversion from
voltage to conductance. Phase calibration is performed by obtaining admittance measurements in Plexiglas cuvettes filled
with saline of known conductivities that span the range of typical conductivity values for murine blood and myocardium [11].
The purpose of this calibration is to determine the phase shift
attributed to the catheter itself (since saline has a negligible
complex component in its admittance) so that the parasitic error
is subtracted from the measured results.
III. NUMERICAL COMPARISON OF EQUATIONS
Using the COMSOL finite-element method (FEM) simulation
setup [14] as the reference, we evaluated the accuracy of the
three conductance-to-volume conversion equations.
A. FEM Numerical Conductance Model Setup
To numerically evaluate the analytical conductance-tovolume model equation (4), the geometry of the catheter in
the FEM simulation is modified to match that of the one used
in the derivations in [3]. The catheter used in the derivation of
(4) neglects the effects of the catheter body and assumes that
the input electrodes are perfect spheres of radius a0 , while the
voltage electrodes are assumed point size in order to eliminate
the averaging of voltage values of the entire electrode. This is
the ideal case, in a realistic catheter, the electrodes are platinum
cylindrical rings rather than spheres and the measurement electrodes measure the average voltage induced from the electric
field produced via an instrumentation amplifier circuit.
The geometry of the catheter model created follows that of
Fig. 3 and the nominal 1.2 F catheter dimensions outlined in
Table I. The catheter is centered in a cylindrical cuvette and
modeled as a cylinder of radius a0 and total length 8 mm.
The top of the source electrode (top) is located 2 mm below
the surface of the cuvette with the remaining dimensions of the
1.2 F (see Table I) measured center to center. Distortions of
the electric field due to proximity effects from the surface of
the cuvette should not be present since the catheter is inserted
deeper than 0.5 mm into the cuvette [14]. The cuvette radius is
parameterized along with its 20-mm length to vary the volume
of the cuvette cylinder between 8 and 60 μL which corresponds
to the typical range of murine LV volumes. For example, the
shape and distribution of the resulting electric field for a single
volume is shown in Fig. 4. This simulated geometry is referred
to as the standard geometry.
The cuvette material is set to have a conductivity of 1.26 S/m
and a relative permittivity of 86 to replicate the electric properties of 0.1 MOL potassium chloride (KCL) solution in 1 L of
water [3]. The KCL solution is used as a nonperfect conductive
solution to measure conductances corresponding to known volumes. The material of all four electrodes is set to a conductivity
of 9 661 000 S/m (platinum). The boundary ac current source at
the cylindrical surface of the source electrode is set to a current
density of 9.5 A/m2 , equivalent to a peak current of 30 μA at
10 k/Hz (the equivalent electrical diagram is in Fig. 2). It should
be noted that in a realistic catheter electrode edge effects result
in higher current densities at the top and bottom of the electrode

Fig. 4. COMSOL FEM simulation of a standard geometry catheter in the
standard environment.

edges. In order to represent the realistic case of current flow
between the sensor itself and the instrumentation amplifier, the
sensing electrodes are modeled as high impedance. In the ideal
derivation of (4), no current flows into the sensing electrodes.
B. Analytical Conductance-to-Volume Model Accuracy
Four additional simulations are preformed to investigate the
effects of the physical simplification of the analytical model (4)
specifically with the sensing electrodes [3]: 1) the cylindrical
cuvette is changed to an elliptical shape to investigate the shape
of the electric field on a nonconfined boundary (see Fig. 5);
2) cylindrical sensing electrodes are changed to spherical electrodes to match the physical model used in the derivation of (4);
3) spherical sensing electrodes are set to 10 μS/m to approximate a nonconductive material, and 4) spherical electrodes are
replaced by point probes to determine the effect of the shape
and size of the electrode itself.
For each simulation, the measured voltage sensed from the
inner electrodes is used to calculate the conductance values and
the corresponding volume is calculated by (4). It can be shown
that intermediate result for (4) includes an analytical expression
for the blood conductance gb , which is found to be
gb =

π d (d2 − L2 )
× (σ + j ωε)
4L
⎡
⎢
⎢
×⎢
⎢	
⎣

⎥
⎥
1
⎥
	
−

 2

 2 ⎥ .
⎦
d
d
+
R2 +
2
2
1

a0 2

⎤
(9)

2400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. COMSOL FEM simulation of a standard geometry catheter in an
elliptical cuvette.

electrodes are used [i.e., model used in (4)]. Furthermore, the
analytically derived conductance values from (9) are not linearly correlated with either the cylindrical electrode simulated
data or any set of the spherical electrode simulated data. It is
shown (see Fig. 6) that when using the standard geometry (i.e.,
cylindrical electrodes that are a better representation of a realistic catheter), the average error is 177% (see Fig. 6). The
measured conductance values from the spherical data are offset
from the analytically calculated data by a significant amount
over the original cylinder electrode model, however, this offset
is more prominent for larger volumes. The offset decreases in
the magnitude when the inner sensing electrodes are simulated
as nonconductive spheres and decreases further when the inner
voltage probes are set to points inside the COMSOL environment. The simulation with spherical low conductance electrodes
and point voltage probes produces the closest conductance values compared to the analytical data, which is expected because
the analytical model assumed infinite volume, i.e., nondistorted
field lines.
Overall, this result indicates that the simplifying assumptions
(e.g., spherical versus cylindrical electrodes) made in the analytical derivation have significant effects on (4) and (9) accuracy.
There are several theoretical reasons to possibly explain this
behavior: the electric potential is unevenly distributed on the
surface of the electrodes; there is an interaction within the top
pair of electrodes and within the bottom pair of electrodes, and
finally the constraining volume of the cuvette has an effect on
the generated electric field. These effects are unaccounted for
in the analytical derivation. Therefore, the analytical solution
is too simplistic to accurately model a conductance-to-volume
catheter.
C. Comparison of Conductance-to-Volume Equations

Fig. 6. Conductance–volume datasets. (a) Analytically calculated data (9).
(b) Simulated cylindrical electrodes. (c) Spherical low conductance electrodes.
(d) Simulated spherical electrodes. (e) Spherical low conductance point probes
are compared to analytical data for (9).

This value of gb is used to calculate an ideal conductance value
from the known cuvette geometry denoted as analytically calculated reference data. Five simulations are preformed along with
the analytically calculated reference conductances: 1) analytically calculated reference data, 2) original simulation cylinder
environment described in Section III-A, 3) spherical electrodes
low conductance, 4) spherical electrodes modeled as in derivation of (4), and 5) point probes (see Fig. 6) that are based on
known cuvette volumes yielding five conductance-to-volume
relationships.
It becomes clear that the analytical equation greatly underestimates conductance values by an average of 135% when spherical

In the standard simulated geometry and simulation environment, each of the three equations is used to calculate volumes
based on the measured conductance values. To simulate the
asymptotic conductance, Ginf , the cuvette volume is set to
30 mL, which resulted in the conductance value within 6% of
the Ginf in [3]. Since there is no muscle component in the simulation, the Ya0 in Dubois’ equation is set to zero and it uses
conductance values since the complex component is negligible.
The resulting simulated conductance versus calculated volume
for each equation is plotted in Fig. 7 along with the reference
dataset (simulated data).
The volume range extends beyond the typical murine LV
volume range to test the accuracy of the equations in the nonlinear section of the conductance–volume relationship. Although
these data are obtained from a simulated mouse catheter that
would not measure this volume range in practice, it is reasonable to use these data in comparing the conductance–volume
equations since measurements from larger catheters exhibit the
same nonlinear relationship [3]. In this way, each respective
equation is tested more rigorously and the conclusions can be
extended to the use of larger animal catheters as well. Baan’s
linear equation (1) consistently overestimates volumes over the
entire conductance range on average 287% (see Table II). This

POPA et al.: MURINE HEART VOLUME: NUMERICAL COMPARISON AND CALIBRATION OF CONDUCTANCE CATHETER MODELS

Fig. 8.

Fig. 7.

2401

Experimental and comparison methodology flow.

Comparison of calculated volumes from simulated data.

TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN KNOWN CUVETTE VOLUMES (SIMULATED) AND
VOLUMES CALCULATED USING (1), (4), AND (7)

Fig. 9. Radially organized cuvette tray with an integrated guide for various
cylindrical volume etalons.

is in accordance with Wei’s results [3] and is explained by the
fact that Baan’s linear equation (1) cannot model the nonlinear
relationship at higher volumes.
Dubois’ equation (7) consistently underestimates volumes,
on average 80%, throughout the conductance range. When (7)
is used to calculate volumes with conductance values generated
from (9), Fig. 6 dataset (a), the calculated volumes match the
reference volumes well, average error of 1.87%. This suggests
that Dubois’ equation (7) is a rearranged version of the analytical equation (4) derived from Maxwell’s equations [3], which by
itself we showed to be oversimplified and inaccurate to model
the conductance-to-volume relationship for realistic catheters.
Consequently, Dubois’ equation is also determined to be inaccurate in modeling the conductance-to-volume relationship for
cylindrical cuvette volumes. Volumes calculated using Wei’s
equation (6) are overestimated and have an average error of 21%
relative to the reference volumes yet they are the most accurate
compared to those obtained using the other equations. The error
is greatest for mid-range conductance values since Wei’s equation also uses SV to force the calculated volumes to match the
end-systolic volume (ESV) and end-diastolic volume (EDV).
Plotting volumes calculated using Wei’s equation versus the
reference volumes displays a strong linear correlation with an
R2 value of 0.98 and a slope of 1.06. This correlation is the most

linear and has a slope with a value closest to unity when compared to similar plots of volumes calculated using either Dubois’
or Baan’s equation versus reference volume. This suggests that
Wei’s equation (6) is the most accurate conductance–volume
equation and should be preferred over Baan’s or Dubois’. Furthermore, the linear correlation suggests that the error in Wei’s
equation can be calibrated for by subtracting a calibration constant fromall the calculated volumes.
IV. IN VITRO CATHETER EXPERIMENTS
We conducted in vitro catheter measurement experiments to
further analyze the accuracy of Wei’s conductance-to-volume
equation (6). In addition, we investigated the sensitivity of
the electrode geometry to determine its impact on volume
measurements.
A. In Vitro Conductance Catheter Experimental Setup
For our in vitro measurement setup, we designed a radially
organized cuvette tray with an integrated guide (see Fig. 9)
which enabled us to eliminate variations in the catheter’s position within the cuvette, and therefore, reduce the effect on the
measured conductance [14]. The set of cuvettes span a volume
range of approximately 15 to 600 μL and can be used with either
mouse or rat catheters. The entire apparatus is constructed out
of Plexiglas and the cuvette dimensions are measured to within
less than 12.7 μm and the volume is calculated to within 0.21 μL

2402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 11.
Fig. 10.

Measured data with the curve fitted conductance versus volume.

Catheter 190 under microscope measuring source electrode rings.

within the murine LV volume range and to within 0.6 μL within
the rat LV volume range.
Eight custom Scisense 1.2 F catheters are used in this experiment, five catheters are manufactured without a pressure sensor
(volume only), serial numbers: 190, 315, 507, 587, 590 and
three with a pressure sensor, serial numbers 12-870, 12-1146,
12-1147. A microscope with digital image capture capabilities is
used to measure the complete catheter geometry (a, b, d, L, a0 )
(see Fig. 10) full dimensions are summarized in Table I, while
the peak output current of the catheters is measured as 24.04 μA
at a frequency of 20 kHz. The conductivity of the KCL solution is 0.77 S/m. All catheters are limited to the same depth of
approximately 4 mm when inserted into the guide to ensure
minimal field distortion.
The conductance measurements are recorded using an oscilloscope that interfaces with a Scisense advantage system. The
advantage system interfaces with the catheter and outputs the
raw admittance signal encoded as two output channels; one for
magnitude and one for phase. The phase is negligible as is expected due to the fact that Plexiglas has a very low permittivity
and the KCL solution should produce no phaseshift. The measurement methodology outlined in Fig. 8 is followed for each
catheter, where conductance values are measured from each cuvette shown in Fig. 9. Each cuvette volume is measured four
times with the average conductance value used in (6). In addition to the in vitro measured data, COMSOL simulations are
also completed with the respective electrode dimensions, KCL
solution conductivity, peak output, and frequency current of the
source electrode. Together, these are referred to as the measured
geometry and measured environment.
B. In Vitro Conductance Catheter Experimental Results
In vitro conductance measurements from each catheter are
compared to the known volumes and summarized in Fig. 11. In
addition, the simulated conductance for each catheter model is
plotted against the measured conductance for the corresponding
catheter (see Fig. 12). All five catheters (volume only) display
a strong linear correlation with an R2 = 0.999, slope of 0.8,

Fig. 12. Measured versus simulated conductance for the five catheters used in
the experiment.

Fig. 13. Root-mean square error versus catheter dimension a versus catheter
dimension b versus catheter dimension L.

and y intercept of approximately 40 μS. The comparisonof the
conductance values directly removes possible sources of error
such as those in Wei’s conversion equation. The data correlation strongly suggests that the error between the simulated
conductance and measured conductance is linear and constant
between catheters. This means that it can be corrected for with
a constant scale and shift factor applied to the simulated data. A
possible source of error between the measured conductance and

POPA et al.: MURINE HEART VOLUME: NUMERICAL COMPARISON AND CALIBRATION OF CONDUCTANCE CATHETER MODELS

2403

TABLE III
AVERAGE ERROR FOR EACH CATHETER WHEN USING (6)

simulated conductance that cannot be accounted for is variance
in the conductivity of the saline solution due to evaporation or
residue. To evaluate the possible influence of conductivity on
the measurements, a simulation is performed with one of the
catheter geometries with a sweep of plausible solution conductivity values. The simulations show an average spread of 13%
in conductance values that are linearly correlated. The actual
effect of varying conductivity on in vitro measurements is likely
greater in the magnitude however it can easily be corrected for
once the conductivity of the solution is known. This source of
error exists between measured data and simulated data. It does
not affect the catheter measurement results because utmost care
is taken to ensure that the KCL solution does not change conductivity between catheter measurements.
There is however a variation between in vitro and simulated
conductance measurements from each catheter. The magnitude
of the variation is much smaller in the simulated results due to
there being fewer variables and sources of error. The only difference between the simulations is the measured geometry that
suggests that the difference is related to the catheter geometry.
The average error in the volume calculated from the measured
conductance using Wei’s equation for each catheter when compared to the known volume is summarized in Table III.
Overall, we show that there is on average 26.25% error in
volume measurements using eight commercial catheters. The
most accurate conductance-to-volume equation (6) is used to
calculate volumes; the catheters have all undergone the current
state-of-the-art in vitro calibration. The magnitude of this error
is much larger than the currently accepted industry standard of
15%.
V. CATHETER GEOMETRIC SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
We found that the average standard deviations (σ) in dimensions (a, b) is 22 μm and in dimension L is 38 μm, as measured on the sample of eight catheters (five volume only, three
pressure–volume) provided by Scisense. The largest difference
between different catheters in the same dimension is 98 μm in
L, 53 μm in a, and 63 μm in b. Thus, the effects of variation in
the catheter geometry (a, b, L) on measured conductance must
also be evaluated.
A. Catheter Sensitivity Geometric Setup
In order to simulate the sensitivity in conductance measurements, the standard geometry model and both standard and the

Fig. 14.

Root-mean square error versus catheter dimension a.

elliptical environments are used, while the catheter geometry is
parameterized with dimensions that range ±2σ from the volume only catheter dimensions (190, 315, 507, 587, 590). Each
dimension, (a, b, L) is parameterized individually and the simulation is run for each configuration. All three parameters are then
parameterized in the model and each is swept between three values: the ideal dimension value, the ideal dimension value plus
2σ, and the ideal dimension value minus 2σ to create the additional 27 datasets for various volumes. The effective volume of
the cuvette is calculated based on the distance L between the
inner electrodes, the radius of the cuvette R, and the volume
occupied by the catheter body itself.
B. Sensitivity Simulation Results
The simulated conductance values vary for each change in the
catheter geometry, for both the simulations using cylindrical cuvettes and the simulations using elliptical cuvettes. The variation
in the calculated volume error using Wei’s equation is investigated to determine the possible correlation between the catheter
geometry and the simulated conductance. The simulated conductance measurements from each geometric catheter configuration are converted to volume measurements using Wei’s equation (6) with ideal geometric parameters. The setup accurately
represents the actual application of PV catheters in combination with (6) when using the ideal manufacturer dimensions.
By studying the nature of the variation in the volume error produced by Wei’s equation (6) between datasets, it is possible to
determine: 1) the degree to which unaccounted variations in the
catheter geometry effect volume measurements and 2) whether
there is a correlation between specific catheter geometry and the
resulting volume error.
The plot of the root mean square volume error generated
by sweeping individual catheter dimensions a and L (see
Figs. 14 and 15). The error resulting from sweeping dimension
a alone and dimension b alone are identical due to symmetry
and as such only one graph is shown. Both plots show strong
linear relationships suggesting that the resulting volume error
is significant and correlated with catheter dimensions instead of
being random.

2404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 17. Calibration factor versus catheter dimensions d and L, five volume
catheters only.
TABLE IV
FITTING CURVE COEFFICIENTS
Fig. 15.

Root-mean square error versus catheter dimension L.

Fig. 16. Simulated calibration factor versus catheter dimension d and L for 27
simulated catheter geometries.

The 3-D plot of the root mean square volume error in Fig. 13
is generated by extrapolating the 27 data points generated from
the variation of the electrode geometry. The plot shows a predictable and relatively linear relationship between the catheter
geometry and the resulting volume error. The maximum variance in the volume error is 43%. Although the magnitude of
the error is relatively small (average of 7%) for these simulated
datasets, based on the results in Section IV-B, it is likely that the
magnitude of this error would be larger in an in vivo experiment.
The volumes from the same set of data used to generate Fig. 13
are also plotted against the correct volumes of the cuvettes. The
resulting plots display a very strong linear correlation with an
R2 value greater than 0.99 and a slope of 1. The only distinction between datasets is the y intercept value that changes in the
magnitude for each geometric catheter configuration. This value
is always negative, so the absolute magnitude is plotted for of
the 27 catheter configurations in Fig. 16. A linear fit is generated that has an R2 value greater than 0.9. This result suggests
that there is a linear correlation between the catheter geometry
and the resulting volume error in volumes calculated by Wei’s
equation (6). Furthermore, such a relationship suggests that a
constant calibration factor can be calculated for each catheter
based solely on the dimensions between the inner electrodes and
the dimension between its outer electrodes. Since the COMSOL
simulations have been proven to correspond in a linear fashion

with data measured in vitro this result suggests that such an
equation can be developed for actual catheters.
The analysis described previously is applied to the volumes
calculated from the conductance measured in vitro. The resulting
plot is shown in Fig. 17, although it does not display the same
linear fit as in Fig. 16, this is likely due to the fact that five
sample catheters (volume only) are used. The equation of the
plane in Fig. 17 is then used as a calibration factor for Wei’s
equation (6)
Vol(d, L) = VolW − (101 L − 56.3 d − 138.5).

(10)

This equation is then used to calibrate the volume measurements
described in Section IV-B. With the added correction terms, the
volume error after calibration is reduced to 5% on average. This
is 1/3 of the industry accepted level of error and much lower
than the original volume error of 26.25% (see Table III).
Alternatively, the calibrated curves in (10) may be approximated by fitting curve and the measured data (see Fig. 11) in
the form
√
(11)
Vol(gm eas ) = gm eas z x + y gm eas
where the three coefficients are found to be as in Table IV.
VI. CONCLUSION
We presented comparison of currently used conductance-tovolume equations, which reveals that Baan’s linear equation (1)
is too simplistic and significantly overestimates volume, and as
such its use is not recommended. Dubois’ equation (7) is based
on the analytical equation (4) and is therefore very inaccurate.
It consistently underestimates volumes and its use is also not
recommended. Wei’s equation (6) is the most accurate out of
the three and is therefore the only currently viable equation for
conductance-to-volume calculations. However, both simulated

POPA et al.: MURINE HEART VOLUME: NUMERICAL COMPARISON AND CALIBRATION OF CONDUCTANCE CATHETER MODELS

data and in vitro measurements suggest that the error in Wei’s
can be eliminated using a calibration constant.
Overall, we experimentally showed that there is an average
of 26.25% error in volume measurements when using Wei’s
equation (6), which is much greater than the industry accepted
value of 15%. Measured data are used to develop a calibration
equation (10) that can be used to decrease the measurement
error to 5% when using Wei’s equation (6).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Transonic Scisense Inc.,
NSERC, OCE, CFI, and CMC Microsystems for supporting
this study and for providing the design technology.

2405

Sorin Popa (S’13) received the B.E.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of
Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, in 2013. He
is currently working toward the M.Res. degree in bioengineering science from Imperial College, London,
U.K.

Kyle Fricke (S’09–M’10–S’12) received the B.E.Sc.
degree in computer engineering and M.E.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, in 2010 and 2012,
respectively, where he is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Baan, E. T. van der Velde, H. G. de Bruin, G. J. Smeenk, J. Koops,
A. D. van Dijk, D. Temmerman, J. Senden, and B. Buis, “Continuous
measurement of left ventricular volume in animals and humans by conductance catheter,” Circulation, vol. 70, pp. 812–823, 1984.
[2] M. Krenz, “Conductance, admittance, and hypertonic saline: Should we
take ventricular volume measurements with a grain of salt?,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 107, no. 6, pp. 1683–1684, 2009.
[3] C. L. Wei, J. W. Valvano, M. D. Feldman, and J. A. Pearce, “Nonlinear
conductance-volume relationship for murine conductance catheter measurement system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 1654–
1661, Oct. 2005.
[4] R. Sobot, “Implantable RF telemetry for cardiac monitoring in the murine
heart: A tutorial review,” EURASIP J. Embedded Syst., vol. 2013, pp.
1–15, 2013.
[5] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and E. Corthout, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41,
pp. 2231–2269, 1996.
[6] G. Mur and J. Baan, “Computation of the input impedances of a catheter
for cardiac volumetry,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME–31, no. 6,
pp. 448–453, Jun. 1984.
[7] C. C. Wu, T. C. Skalak, T. R. Schwenk, C. M. Mahler, A. Anne,
P. W. Finnerty, H. L. Haber, R. M. I. Weikle, and M. D. Feldman, “Accuracy of the conductance catheter for measurement of ventricular volumes
seen clinically: Effects of electric field homogeneity and parallel conductance,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 266–277, Apr.
1997.
[8] D. Georgakopoulos, W. A. Mitzner, C.-H. Chen, B. J. Byrne, H. D. Millar,
J. M. Hare, D. A. Kass. (1998). In vivo murine left ventricular pressure–
volume relations by miniaturized conductance micromanometry. Amer. J.
Physiol.—Heart Circulat. Physiol. 274(4), pp. H1416–H1422. Available:
http://ajpheart.physiology.org/content/274/4/H1416
[9] J. M. Nielsen, S. B. Kristiansen, S. Ringgaard, T. T. Nielsen, A. Flyvbjerg,
A. N. Redington, and H. E. Bøtker. (2007). Left ventricular volume measurement in mice by conductance catheter: Evaluation and optimization of
calibration. Amer. J. Physiol.—Heart Circulat. Physiol. 293(1), pp. H534H540. Available: http://ajpheart.physiology.org/content/293/1/H534
[10] T. J. Gawne, K. S. Gray, and G. R. E, “Estimating left ventricular offset
volume using dual–frequency conductance catheters,” J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 63, pp. 872–876, 1987.
[11] C. L. Wei, J. W. Valvano, M. D. Feldman, M. Nahrendorf, R. Peshock,
and J. A. Pearce, “Volume catheter parallel conductance varies between
end–Systole and end-diastole,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 8,
pp. 1480–1489, Aug. 2007.
[12] J. Porterfield and J. Pearce, “Comparison of conductance to volume equations: The gain coefficient α,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2009, pp. 3043–3046.
[13] A. Kottam, J. Dubois, A. McElligott, and K. K. Henderson, “Novel approach to admittance to volume conversion for ventricular volume measurement,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 2514–2517.
[14] C. L. Wei and M. H. Shih, “Calibration capacity of the conductance-tovolume conversion equations for the mouse conductance catheter measurement system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1627–1634,
Jun. 2009.

John Dubois received the B.Sc. degree in physics
from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada, in 1981, and the M.Sc. degree in physics
from the University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada. He is currently working with Transonic
Scisense, London, ON, Canada, as a Senior Systems
Developer.

Anil T. G. Kottam received the B.Tech. degree in
biomedical engineering from the Cochin University
of Science and Technology, Kochi, India, in 2001, and
the M.S.E. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX, USA, in 2003 and 2007, respectively.
He is currently a Senior Scientist at Admittance
Technologies, Austin, TX, USA.

Robert Sobot (M’96) received the B.Sc. degree in
engineering physics (a five years program) from the
University of Belgrade, Siberia, in 1989, and the
M.A.Sc. and the Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC,
Canada, in 1996 and 2005, respectively.
He joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Western University, London, ON,
Canada, as an Assistant Professor in 2006, and in
2012 was promoted to Associate Professor. From
1996 to 2001, he was with PMC-Sierra Inc., Canada,
first as an Analog Circuit Designer, then as a Team Leader. Prior to 1994, he
worked for number of companies in Europe and North America on various
projects including MEMS pressure sensors, silicon IR detectors, and radiocontrolled systems. During 2012–2013, he was a Visiting Researcher at Université Pierre et Marie Curie at Sorbonne (LiP6). He has authored two textbooks
on the topic of “Wireless Communication Electronics,” and he established the
Implantable System Laboratory at Western University. His current research interests include implantable telemetry systems, biomedical IC applications, RF
ICs for wireless communications, brain to machine interface, Sigma-Delta modulation, and analog adaptive equalization.
Dr. Sobot is a Member of IEEE Circuits and Systems Society and Solid-State
Circuits Society.

