1506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Toward Integrated Molecular Diagnostic System
(iMDx): Principles and Applications
Seung-min Park, Andrew F. Sabour, Jun Ho Son, Sang Hun Lee, and Luke P. Lee*

Abstract—Integrated molecular diagnostic systems (iMDx),
which are automated, sensitive, specific, user-friendly, robust,
rapid, easy-to-use, and portable, can revolutionize future medicine.
This review will first focus on the components of sample extraction,
preservation, and filtration necessary for all point-of-care devices
to include for practical use. Subsequently, we will look for lowpowered and precise methods for both sample amplification and
signal transduction, going in-depth to the details behind their principles. The final field of total device integration and its application
to the clinical field will also be addressed to discuss the practicality
for future patient care. We envision that microfluidic systems hold
the potential to breakthrough the number of problems brought
into the field of medical diagnosis today.
Index Terms—Diagnostics, integration, microfluidics, point-ofcare (POC).

I. INTRODUCTION
N comparison to the commonly equipped hospital laboratory, a majority of on-site medical field ranging from international military zones to areas of rural and impoverished
isolations have lagged behind the rest of the world in terms of
health care. While many technological advances in the developed world have allowed the average hospital to successfully
treat its patients, several key challenges oppose similar gains to
the rest of the world. In an effort to alleviate the equipment burden, significant growth in the field of microfluidics as depicted
by reviews such as Fiorini and Chiu has propelled the concept of
“lab on a chip” as a viable alternative [1]. When in a developing
area, the need for careful sample preparation and device design
is critical to long lasting medical diagnostics. Crude samples,
whether it be blood, urine, or saliva, must first be treated be-

I

Manuscript received January 9, 2014; accepted February 12, 2014. Date
of publication March 19, 2014; date of current version April 17, 2014. This
work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health under Award
U54CA151459 (Center for Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence and Translation). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S.-m. Park is with the Department of Bioengineering, and the Berkeley Sensor and Actuator Center, UC Berkeley, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA, and also with the Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
(e-mail: sp293@berkeley.edu).
A. F. Sabour is with the Department of Bioengineering, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: afsabour@
berkeley.edu).
J. H. Son and S. H. Lee are with the Department of Bioengineering,
and the Berkeley Sensor and Actuator Center, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: jhson78@berkeley.edu; sanghun.
lee@berkeley.edu).
∗ L. P. Lee is with the Department of Bioengineering, and the Berkeley
Sensor and Actuator Center, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720 USA (e-mail: lplee@berkeley.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2309119

fore the proper biomolecules can be detected. Such prerequisites
call for buffer dilutions in addition to several other prediagnostic
preparation steps for sample retrieval and conditioning. Methods of on-chip sample preparation, sample mixing, and cellular
lysis have to preserve the biomolecules necessary, while at the
same time create a simple, durable, and energy-efficient device design for any resource applications. Once preserved and
filtered, sensitive, low-powered sample amplification and detection of desired components becomes another obstacle to a
POC platform. Biomolecules of interest such as DNA, RNA,
and proteins become primary methods of disease detection and
individually dictate separate collection of treatment protocols.
Although each biomolecule demands its own set of amplification steps, a device which collectively tests for all three allows
for a series of confirmatory steps necessary for both a precise
and accurate diagnosis. Integrating the entire diagnostic process
on a single, easy-to-use device to effectively apply in a clinical setting plays the final lock in bridging the gap between the
developed and developing world. A fully functional and efficient integrated molecular diagnostic system (iMDx) platform
must be able to accurately detect the desired biomarkers while
independently handling a biospecimen from retrieval to signal
transduction. Creating an elegant but durable design incorporating all components of sample treatment and detection will
offer the next step to solving clinical issues with a greater level
of simplification for both a developed and developing setting.
As of now, elegant reviews written by Vo-Dinh and Cullum,
and Bashir et al. have already noted the timed development of
biosensors and separate on-chip components aiding in medical
diagnostics [2], [3]. This review paper focuses on the field of microfluidics to comfortably fulfill the necessary medical niche in
low-resource settings, and will discuss critical criteria to achieve
reliable and affordable diagnostic systems. Each section of the
review will be equipped with a timeline portraying the series of
developments leading up to possible integrations into an iMDx
platform.
II. SAMPLE PRESERVATION AND PREPARATION
A. Sample Preservation
Sample/reagent preservation is a critical component for POC
platforms in limited resource settings. In order to ensure a
proper diagnostic performance, any necessary POC reagents
or collected sample biospecimens need to be preserved during
storage or transport for downstream assays. Integration of sample/reagent storage and downstream assays on a microfluidic
system would significantly relieve demands from end-users,
thereby offering a very viable solution in enabling an entire

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

1507

Fig. 1. Chronicle development of on-chip sample preparation system: microfabricated nanobarb for mechanical cell lysis (2003) [37], sample preservation utilizing
a naturally reoccurring organic compound (2004) [8], on-chip electrochemical integration for membrane disruption (2005) [31], innovative method for soft sample
mixing through a SlipChip system (2009) [48], and gravity-driven fluid dynamic blood–plasma separation (2011) [19]. Reproduced from [8], [19], [31], [37],
and [48] with permission.

sample-to-answer platform in limited resource settings. Within
the past decade, numerous strides have been made in developing and advancing on-chip sample preparation techniques for
potential use in an iMDX platform (Fig. 1).
A bioinspired material for sample preservation has recently
received much attention, using a trehalose sugar-based glassification found in nature. The material has been modeled by tardigrades, known as water bears, and brine shrimp going through a
phenomenon known as anhydrobiosis [4] as an active response
to adverse environments to survive in extreme dehydration and
elevated temperatures for over 120 years. This survival mechanism arrests their metabolic activity and turns each organism
into a “tun” state after complete dehydration [5]. The trehalose
within these anhydrobiotic organisms protects important biological elements (e.g., DNA, RNA, proteins, membranes, and
cellular systems) from harsh environments by the formation of
a glass-like shell, securely “shrink-wrapping” DNA and protecting it against degradation. It has a higher glass transition
temperature than that of other general sugars, enabling glassification at an elevated temperature to ensure the use of trehalose
only in extreme cases [6]. Protective effects of trehalose can be
accounted for by two stabilizing mechanisms; the stabilization
of membranes and lipid assemblies at very low levels of hydration, and the stabilization of biological macromolecules in
the folded state under conditions that would normally promote
their denaturation [7]–[10]. The unique properties of trehalose
make it a sufficient candidate for long-term on-chip dehydration
preservation at ambient temperatures. Other components such
as sucrose and dextran have also been shown to complement the
trehalose preservation of biomolecules. The Yager laboratory at
the University of Washington showed a good example utilizing
trehalose in a microfluidic system by performing a controlled
release of dry reagents with temporal and spatial distribution
upon rehydration [6], [8]. The lab developed a final formulation
which consisted of 5% sucrose, 5% trehalose, and 1% BSA.
Their experimentation showed the utility of storing reagents
separately and then combining them immediately prior to use in
a simple POC platform.
In an effort to advance the trehalose, Biomatrica, the Biostabiliity Company, has developed multiple commercial products

based on the trehalose technique to stabilize and preserve
DNA/RNA/enzymes/proteins either in purified form, whole
blood, saliva, or tissues at room temperatures for up to 12 years.
The use of these products are reflected in a series of publications
including forensic applications [11], [12], sample preservation
after collection [13], and storage of oligonucleotides [14].
An alternative material for sample/reagent preservation is
sol–gel. Park et al. have developed a novel formulation of
nanoporous sol–gel microarrays with physical properties applicable for protein immobilization and RNA–protein interaction
in a microfluidic format [15]. The sol–gel system is capable of
holding an extreme level of sensitivity (femtogram scale), due
to the large amounts of active proteins that can be preserved
in a 3-D dual-nanoporous sol–gel matrix. Sol–gel technology
functions perfectly without the need for affinity capture tags or
recombinant proteins, enabling the entrapment of proteins in
their native state.
A method of freeze-drying, also known as lyophilization, has
also been used as a method for sample and reagent storage in
a wide variety of settings. Although lyophilizaiton does provide long-term stability to reagents, both freezing and drying
steps have been known to add an additional stress to designated reagents. Research in lyophilization protocols have led to
numerous lyoprotective effects through the addition of certain
protective compounds beforehand, and continue to show great
promise in the future [16], [17].
B. Sample Preparation
Sample preparations are typically performed in laboratory
settings with time consuming, multistep, and labor-intensive
processes. In order to fulfill the requisites for a fully functional
POC platform, the capability of an autonomous, efficient, and
multiplexed sample preparation method is vital for any selected
downstream assays. Unfortunately, due to the diverse source
of biospecimens, each with their respective source of detectable
biomolecules, the development of both a wholesome and simple
sample preparation technique becomes a challenge to implement
in device designs.
The presence of bacteria cells in crude blood samples offers
direct confirmation toward the presence of pathogenic material.

1508

Fig. 2. (a) Schematic diagram for SIMBAS. Cross-sectional views describing
the principle of microfluidic trench-based filtration. The presence of degasdriven flow removes the need for an external pumping system. Reprinted from
[19] permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC). (b) Restriction
effect of blood separation. (a) Schematic view of the blood flow in microfluidic
channel. (b) A 1:20 diluted sample injected at 100 μL/min with an 18-μm
difference after restriction enables the device to separate. Reprinted from [28]
with permission from Springer. (c) Standing SAWs enable effective separation
of bacteria from blood. Reprinted from [18] with permission from ACS.

Recently, a microfluidic device developed by Ai et al. utilized
surface acoustic waves (SAWs) to separate particles and cells
of varying properties [18]. Acoustic radiation force, highly dependent on a component’s mechanical characteristics, would
thereby separate unidentical cells toward different nodes and
ultimately different outlets as seen in Fig. 2. Using this microfluidic device allows the separation of bacteria and normal
blood cells, providing specific organisms for efficient downstream analyses.
In certain cases, the preservation of whole blood enables
diagnosis of unique diseases. Specific pathogens, such as plasmodium, parasites (malaria), and HIV virus, replicate in blood
cells and have higher counts than in plasma. For serum analysis,
once blood cells are filtrated, pathogens in the serum will be
lysed and the DNA/RNA/proteins will be stored.
To endeavor autonomous sample preparation, our laboratory
have developed SIMBAS (Self-powered Integrated Microfluidic
Blood Analysis Systems) as shown in Fig. 2 [19]. To effectively
harvest the pathogenic information, we successfully separated a
large portion of blood cells and plasma through a sedimentationbased sample fractionation system. Well-optimized trenches
separate blood cells (red blood cells and white blood cells)
effectively allowing for the extraction of human genes and proteins (i.e., hemoglobin). The downstream plasma after an array
of trenches contains smaller and lighter cells such as bacterial,
plasmodium, and viral cells, which can be delivered to a lysis
module for further pathogenic module separation. An advantage
of SIMBAS is that it is self-powered by a prevacuumed polymer,
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). This becomes a simple solution

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

for powerless microfluidic operations that can be optimized for
various field applications like a POC device.
The need for continuous flow separation methods has also led
to the emergence of several innovative methods of mechanical
separation, most notably in the field of microfiltration. Selective segregation based upon particle size differences between
red blood cells (2 μm) and white blood cells (5 μm) allows
for varying degrees of extraction before complications in critical pore size, blood passing capability, and trapping or filtering
efficiency. Recently however, research by Ji et al. has led to filtrate designs appropriately named U-Filter and Snake, demonstrating an efficient cross-flow design while allowing for high
blood passing capability [20]. Microfilter devices, operating entirely on capillary action and transverse-flow, also play a role
in a passive on-chip method for blood plasma separation [21].
Transverse or cross-flow filtration produces high separation efficiencies by reducing the accumulation of clogging elements
on the filter face. Filtration is thus a highly efficient, but shortlived preparation method. Problems with clogging, preferential
low flow rate, and typical blood dilution requirements require
the development of innovative designs to properly fulfill POC
practicality.
As opposed to mechanical separation, Haeberle et al. implemented a decanting chamber on a rotating lab-disk to extract
plasma by means of centrifugation [22]. While such a device
requires a rotating motor, further research has led to designs
inducing the centrifugal force by flow through curved channels. Sollier et al. developed a spiral design allowing for injection in the center, where the centrifugal force induces flow
in the curved channels to obtain continuous fragmentation and
flow particulates and plasma into an end outer and inner channel, respectively [23]. Unfortunately, while the centrifugal force
makes particles with a higher density than plasma travel toward
the outer channel wall, the presence of a Dean drag force from
high flow rates causes particles to circulate and mix. Recent
development of a 180◦ bend device is suggested to allow opposing Dean forces to contribute in separation, prevailing over the
centrifugal effect [24], [25]. Sample preparation through use of
centrifugation supports a high flow rate, simple fabrication, no
clogging design that through further development in coupling
with hydrodynamic principles shows great promise.
Hydrodynamic effects, rather than particle retention or the
use of external centrifugal forces, exploit a natural phenomenon
in blood flow found in networks of branched blood capillaries through the use of channel bifurcations. Blood flows in
microcirculation are characterized by a narrow cell-free layer
located nearby channel walls. Several devices have been noted
to use wide and shallow channels in a rectangular cross section to create an inverted T-bifurcation with one inlet, the feed
channel, and two outlets, a large drain channel with a smaller
perpendicular plasma collection duct [26], [27]. A similar device proposed by Faivre et al. utilizes the cross section of a
microfluidic channel to modify the spatial distribution of cells
downstream of a narrowed channel and increase the cell-free
layer adjacent to the boundary [28] as shown in Fig. 2. According to the hydrodynamic effect, cells are drawn into the higher
flow rate drainage vessel from the asymmetric distribution of

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

shear forces on the surface of cell, allowing plasma to then enter
the two outer outlets. Yang et al. experimented in increasing the
total plasma volume by placing five parallel plasma channels
within the device instead of a single bifurcating region [29].
Higher volumes of plasma were thereby extracted allowing for
greater concentration of desired biomolecules for downstream
analysis. The hydrodynamic effect ultimately implements a
robust and efficient blood plasma separation method utilizing
a high flow rate. Unfortunately, a low extraction yield due to a
limited number of bifurcating channels gives room for further
design improvement.
Cell lysis is another desired but an optional component of the
sample preparation in fulfilling iMDx. Any pathogenic cells,
bacteria or viruses in plasma can undergo lysis—breaking down
biological containment and enabling downstream moleculebased detection. Lysis modules can also be tuned for the selective disruption of mammalian cells when whole blood is
contaminated with bacteria or other pathogen. Selective lysis
allows for the widest flexibility of the sample output for downstream assay (lysate of select pathogens).
1) Electrochemical Lysis: Electrochemical lysis allows one
to selectively lyse the cells in the blood sample. Since there
are no chemical reagents involved, electrochemical lysis would
not interfere with downstream assay. Low power will also be
possible since electrical fields can be highly concentrated in
microscale geometries [30]. Research with alkali solutions has
also allowed researchers to create an on-chip cell lysis based on
local hydroxide electro-generation [31], [32]. Hydroxide ions,
generated electrochemically within the device by a palladium
electrode, irreversibly porate the membrane of a cell and lead to
cellular lysis.
2) Chemical Lysis: Chemical disruption is a common and
theoretically simple method of cellular lysis used in a wide
range of experiments. At its core, the lysis revolves around
the use of detergents or alkali materials to chemically deteriorate/solubilize the proteins and lipids present within the
membrane of targeted cells. Recent discoveries have led to the
integration of chemical lysis in bioanalytical assays on a microfluidic chip. Schilling et al. developed a relatively simple
diffusion-based microfluidic system that allows the continuous
lysis of bacterial cells in addition to the fractionation and detection of a large intracellular enzyme [33]. A cell suspension
and a chemical lytic agent enter through separate inlets into
the lysis channel, where the two liquids mix only through lateral diffusion. In a very similar integration, Irimia et al. use a
microfabricated device for the controlled mixing of a picoliter
cell suspension and lysis solution [34]. Virtual walls formed by
pockets of air within the fluids were allowed to expand and detract through electrically-driven heaters, pressurizing the liquids
and forcing them to move from channel to channel in intended
directions. Drawing the air out of the capillary allowed a mechanically gentle nature of lysis, mixing the cell solution and
chemical lysate together. Another device developed by Sethu
et al. notably achieves complete lysis of erythrocytes and approximately total recovery of leukocytes by exposing cells to
an isotonic buffer for 40 s [35]. Methods using the device for
purposes of a massively parallel lytic experiment can reportedly

1509

process several milliliters of whole blood in less than 15 min.
While the device has focused specifically on erythrocytes,
adaption of the platform mechanism may allow it to become
incorporated on a fully integrated device for future sample
preparation. Chemical methods are particularly attractive because extensive experience and well-established protocols for
large samples are available. Unlike other lysis methods though,
a separate fluid or lysate is typically needed to treat the experimental cell suspension.
3) Acoustic Lysis: A relatively uncommon, acoustic lysis involves the use of ultrasonic waves to generate localized areas
of high pressure and create cavitation. Cavitation, referring to
the formation and instant collapse of cavities (bubbles or nuclei)
within a liquid, in turn destroys nearby cells and performs lysis.
To do this, an equipment such as a horn, bell, or other specialized
tool is necessary to create the proper acoustic waves. Taylor et al.
discovered a microfluidic model that rapidly captures bacterial
spores on a filter, washes the spores with water, and then disrupts
the spores in the presence of glass beads by applying ultrasonic
energy through a thin-film flexible interface [36]. By placing the
ultrasound horn tip in contact with a flexible interface, pulses
of positive pressure, temperature increase, and streaming flow
acted together to get the beads moving in violent motion and produce a sufficient force to achieve cell disruptions. With relatively
high lysing speeds, ultrasound lysing destroys the integrity of
the cell wall and provides an extract of intracellular components
(typically DNA) in an efficient and uninhibited manner. This
method however has the disadvantages of a nonuniform energy
distribution, large volume from the ultrasonic transducer, and
high-power consumption from the general ultrasonic operation.
Costly and difficult to reproduce, acoustic lysis would have to
undergo several price and equipment changes before becoming
practical for iMDx.
4) Mechanical Lysis: Biological cells are not rigid particles. This philosophy is the key to mechanical lysis. Mechanical lysis occurs when the cell membrane (and/or cell wall)
is sheared, punctured, pressured, or mechanically disrupted in
some way to release the contents of its cytoplasm. Di Carlo
et al. discovered a micromechanical filter where cells, forced
through at a certain flow rate, would come into contact with
a series of nanoscaled barbs (nanoknives) [37]. Cells passing
through the filter would first be punctured by the nanoknives,
and then proceed by forming and disassociating multiple protrusions of the cell body into the gaps between the knives. Improvements to this design were developed by Yun et al. by
fabricating handheld ultrasharp nanoblade arrays which would
lyse cells both at a faster speed and minimization of the lysate
dead volume [38]. An alternative design was discovered by Kim
et al. that uses pure mechanical stress with a deflected PDMS
membrane between two microchannels [39]. As the pressure
from the controlled channel begins, compressive stress is directly applied to the cell through the PDMS. Increasing the
pressure slowly brings all cells into direct contact with the
deflected membrane, forcing cells to begin to burst and release their intracellular content. Unfortunately, construction of
a microfluidic device incorporating the aspects needed for mechanical lysis (nanoknives, PDMS, and beads) may become

1510

complex and costly. To improve, research must be made in finding simpler and more effective methods for not only lysing,
but also obtaining the biomolecules necessary for downstream
analysis.
5) Thermal Lysis: One of the more firmly established techniques for DNA analysis, thermal lysis has made a strong
presence in numerous research groups. Heat produced from an
external generator is applied to targeted cells, and as a result,
poration occurs within the cellular membrane. Given enough
energy, the formation of pores becomes severe and irreversible,
thereby leading to lysis and a release of intracellular components. Waters et al. created a microfluidic device incorporating thermal cell lysis, multiplex PCR amplification, and electrophoresis of the amplified products [40]. In order to perform
the lysis, however, the entire microchip was thermally cycled
in a commercial thermal cycler. More recently, Privorotskaya
et al. reported a rapid thermal lysis of cells through the use of
silicon–diamond microcantilever heaters [41]. These microcantilever heaters, fabricated from selectively doped single crystal
silicon, provide a uniform distribution of local resistive heating
and cell immobilization on the cantilever surface. After electrically heating the cantilevers, all the cells compromised, with no
clear intact membrane observed. DNA molecules were seen to
still reside on the cantilever surface during the lysis process, allowing for potential downstream analysis. Thermal lysis offers
a reliable and straightforward method to the extraction of both
bulk and single-cell DNA. Unlike other lysis methods, the clean
application of heat requires only a simple device and avoids all
the complications of lysate purification, high-voltage safety, or
complex device manipulation. However, despite the numerous
advantages, necessity for an external power source adds both
to the cost and storage of thermal experimentation. High temperatures also denature a majority of non-DNA biomolecules
within the cell, and the violent bursting of the cell membrane
can potentially create a lysate in need of purification.
6) Electrical Lysis: Due to its speed and reagentless feature,
electrical lysis has become a growing field in bioanalytical research. The science behind electrical disruption revolves around
the fact that the bilayer structure of a cell membrane is dielectric. When a cell becomes exposed to an external field, a transmembrane potential is produced and the attraction of opposite
charges between the inner and outer membrane generates the
compression pressure. The resulting cell membrane becomes
thinner and increasingly permeable, and if the electrical field
strength surpasses a critical value, an irreversible breakdown of
the cell membrane will cause the cell to spill its intracellular
content. Integrating several steps required for bioanalytical experimentation, McClain et al. created a device that incorporated
cell handling, rapid cell lysis, electrophoretic separation, and
detection of fluorescent cytosolic dyes [42]. Loaded cells were
then hydrodynamically transported to a region on a microfluidic device where they were focused and rapidly lysed using an
electric field. The voltage applied to lyse the cells was supplied
by a function generator coupled with an ac amplifier (with dc
offsets) in a desire to avoid electrolysis. Although the device offers a relatively fast and efficient method for full biomolecular
analysis, after 45 min of continuous use, the separation perfor-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 3. (A) Integrated microfluidic cell culture and lysis on a chip. Electrodes
are on either side of the trapping region, which is preceded by a high resistance, or pinched, section. Scale bars are 1.3 mm. Reprinted from [32] with
permission of RSC. (B) The schematic view of the electrical lysis device including the orifice. The electric field was highly focused through geometrical
constriction of the fluidic channel. The concentrated electric field effectively
lysed cells in a brief period of time. Reprinted from [40] with permission of
Elsevier. (C) On-chip development of ultrasharp nanoblade arrays improving
previous nanoknives mechanical lysis experimentation. Reprinted from [38]
with permission of RSC. (D) On-chip chemical lysis using continuous flow for
rapid erythrocyte lysis. Lysis efficiency correlated with the distance traveled in
the microfluidic system. Reprinted from [35] with permission of ACS.

mance on the microfluidic device began to degrade. Contrary
to the use of an ac current, Wang et al. developed a microfluidic flow-through device with a specialized geometric modification for high-throughput electrical lysis based completely on
the continuous dc voltage [43]. Although a dc field simplifies
the need of using electrical pulses, it generates bubbles due to
the electrolysis of water and Joule heating associated with the
high field strength needed. By geometrically modifying the size
of a microchannel, the overall voltage needed to lyse the cells
dramatically decreases. In a very similar discovery, Lee and
Cho added on to the idea of a geometric modification by creating a continuous and low-voltage cell lysis device in which the
width and length of a channel constrict to generate focused high
electric field strength for cell lysis as shown in Fig. 3 [44].
More recently, Bao et al. created a simple microfluidic device that physically traps and then performs electrical lysis on
E. coli cells [45]. The device integrates the capture of cells using
a microscale bead array that acts as a microscale matrix filter.
The microfluidic bead array then provides an ideal, reusable platform for the incorporation of applied periodic electrical pulses in
the channel. Electrical lysis stands as an advantageous method
due to both its rapid lysis and selectivity toward the cell membrane, leaving organelle membranes and a majority of other
intracellular biomolecules undamaged [46]. Many biochemical
reactions occur on time scales of seconds or less, and as a result,
the microsecond speed of electrical disruption becomes vital in
the analysis of cellular properties such as enzymatic activity.

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

1511

Fig. 4. Historical advancement of on-chip amplification for signal transduction: spatiotemporal variation in temperature allows for quick DNA amplification
(1998) [55], on-chip integration of ELISA for protein detection (2001) [81], photonic crystal structures enabling label-free and ultrasensitive protein detection,
(2006) [87], CD platform for on-chip PCR to detect Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (2010) [61] integrated microfluidic array for simultaneous gene
and protein expression monitoring from a few cells (2011) [97], and digital improvement of bench top LAMP into on-chip integration (2012) [68]. Reproduced
from [55], [61], [68], [81], [87], and [97] with permission.

However, due to the need for an external electrical voltage, cost
and complexity of the procedure may substantially increase.
Device fabrication and control may also be relatively difficult,
and electrodes may have a very limited lifespan and restrict further experimentation. While electrical lysis is more complicated
and costly than methods such as thermal, its speed and efficiency
may be a beneficial tradeoff for certain experiments.
Another critical part to sample preparation is the mixing of
reagents with collected samples as a precursor for satisfying requirements of any downstream assay. So far, many microfluidic
systems have utilized valve-based systems to route the sample to many reaction chambers [47]. The Ismagilov laboratory
at Caltech has introduced an innovative technique, so-called,
“SlipChip” to perform multiplex microfluidic reaction by mixing without any pumps or valves [48]. No bonding during fabrication of devices and no active/passive valves for operation are
very attractive features as a POC diagnostic platform. Similar
techniques were introduced based on the preloaded plate-based
method [49], [50]. Many other sample preparation methods exist
such as a preconcentration module for concentrating extremely
low analytes [51] and embedded actuation system (e.g. electrochemical pump [52].
III. SIGNAL AMPLIFICATION AND TRANSDUCTION
In order to perform reliable signal transduction, biospecimens and their related signals must be amplified immediately after sample preparation. Signal enhancement of desired biomolecules ranging from oligonucleotides to proteins
will greatly enhance laboratory or physician disease detection
through the observation of key biomarkers. In the case of infectious diseases, one can aim at amplifying strain specific DNAs
or mRNAs for verifying the existence of foreign entities such as
virus (HIV) and bacteria [Malaria, Tuberculosis (TB)]. In addition to infectious diseases, diseases caused by genetic anomalies
such as cancer can be diagnosed by detecting certain abnormalities in specific gene expressions. A common example arises in
lung cancer, where patients are known to express three times
the amount of the hTERT gene as fragments found as circulating DNA in blood [53]. Similarly, lung cancer patients on

average are found to express 2.3 times more exosomal miRNA
than a typical control group [54]. As depicted in Fig. 4, the
timely progression of several key experiments are coming up as
stepping-stones for future avenues of integrating signal amplification and transductions on a self-reliable iMDX device.
All genetic material, including DNA, RNA, and miRNA, can
be specifically sequence-based amplified through a common
laboratory practice known as polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Initial attempts for on-chip integration of the PCR were made
in 1998. A report published in Science demonstrated the use
of a micromachined chemical amplifier to perform the PCR
in a continuous flow at a high speed [55]. The research group
converted standard thermocycling into a spatiotemporal flow
pattern, having liquid flow through two defined heat blocks for
annealing and denaturation of nucleic acids, with an entire amplification achieved in approximately 10 min. In the same year,
Burns et al. demonstrated the use of an integrated nanoliter DNA
analysis device with microheaters, thermistors, and detectors in
a microfluidic platform [56]. Many small but noticeable variations have additionally tried to accomplish the PCR on a small
scale as shown in Fig. 5 [57]. Kim et al. show the successful
PCR on chip in nanodroplets dispersed in an oil phase based
on the application of low-power (∼30 mW) laser radiation as
an optical heating source [58]. For RNA species, the reverse
transcription step was additionally incorporated into a single
chip for POC clinical diagnostics [59]. An additional DNA extraction step was added to a microchip along with the real-time
PCR for rapid pathogen detection [60]. Various other integrated
PCRs on-chip have been reported over the two last decades [61]
and their review can be found in Lab Chip Focus [62]. Although the design and applications of many on-chip PCRs vary
widely, utilizing microfabricated devices holds a clear advantage in demonstrating enhanced analytical performance, superior component miniaturization, enabling high-throughput, and
improved automation.
Unfortunately, the nature of the PCR thermocycling makes
it a challenge to integrate onto an existing microfluidic system.
Advancements by groups such as Shah et al. have worked on
noncontact heating through microwave energy to simplify and
improve amplification setups [63]. Still, the PCR unavoidably

1512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 5. (A) Drawing of the on-chip PCR system with the optical configuration underneath. The integrated heater enables the light to interact with the sample
placed above the heater. (Top right) A figure of four reactions at the glass on the top of the heaters. (Bottom) Photograph of the total system for PCR amplification.
Reprinted from [57] with permission of RSC. (B) On-chip integration of reverse-transcription PCR for detection of pathogenic RNA species. Reprinted from [59]
with permission of RSC. (C) Digitalized quantification of lambda DNA concentration by LAMP. An array of 535 wells is shown before (left) and after (right)
incubation at 65 ◦ C for 70 min. By counting the number of chambers with florescence, one can conjecture Reprinted from [68] with permission from RSC. (D)
Microfluidic electrochemical detection via LAMP to detect pathogenic DNA for POC purposes. Reprinted from [69] with permission of Wiley.

necessitates a cycling of temperatures, adding significant power
consumption, complexity, and cost to the whole process. In order
to compensate the thermocycling steps of the PCR, isothermal
amplification methods have recently received much attention
due to its simplicity in maintaining the same temperature during
the entire amplification. One isothermal amplification method
known as LAMP (loop mediated isothermal amplification) incorporates a versatility that allows it to function on many different microfluidic POC systems. LAMP is a single-tube amplification process in which the DNA of interest is amplified using a set
of primers at a constant temperature of 65–70 ◦ C [64]. LAMP
also has the ability to amplify miRNA species, which are 25
bases long on average. This amplification scheme is especially
amenable to adaptation onto a portable iMDx setup. Li et al.
demonstrated ultrasensitive amplification of Let-7a with selectivity by amplifying similar miRNAs to Let-7a [65], [66]. Since
Let-7a is closely related to human cancer and plays a key role
in suppressing tumors, isothermal amplification methods widen
the horizon for possible cancer diagnostics. Our lab has begun to
optimize the integration of LAMP-based assays on-chip using a
self-powered degassing method for automated molecular detection. Current assays allow for visualization with the naked eye
through proper illumination facilitated by fluorescent excitation
for quantitative analysis [67]. For further quantitative analysis of
existing pathogenic DNA in a sample, Gansen et al. developed a
self-digitized LAMP using a microfluidic chamber array. Fig. 5
demonstrated an accurate quantification of relative and absolute
DNA concentrations with sample volumes of less than 2 μl [68].
Increasing motivation toward on-chip integration of LAMP has

led Hsieh et al. to develop a microfluidic electrochemical quantitative LAMP (MEQ-LAMP) allowing for the rapid, sensitive,
and quantitative detection of designated DNA [69]. As shown
in Fig. 5, MEQ-LAMP reaction achieves real-time quantitative
detection at a high specificity through the employment of six
different primers. Overall platform effectiveness has led to the
detection of at least 16 copies of genomic DNA of food-borne
illnesses in less than an hour, establishing a powerful position
in utilizing LAMP for potential iMDx.
Other isothermal amplification techniques have also been
developed more recently, and researchers are now trying to
incorporate these techniques into a given POC platform. Transcription mediated amplification [70], nucleic acid sequencebased amplification (NASBA) [71], single primer isothermal
amplification [72], rolling circle amplification [73], helicasedependent amplification [74], strand displacement amplification [75], recombinase polymerase amplification [76], and smart
amplification process version 2 [77] are the best-known isothermal amplification methods for readily integrated devices using
a microfluidic system. The detailed description of these amplification method’s descriptions can be found in [78]–[80].
While oligonucleotides play a key role in disease detection,
biomarkers, indicators of biological states or conditions, are
majorly protein-based. Unfortunately, unlike their nucleotidebased counterparts, proteins cannot be amplified directly by
well-known polymerases. Conventional methods for signal
amplification have therefore utilized indirect signal transduction such as ELISA (Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay).
These immunoassays use an enzymatic substrate to transduce a

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

1513

Fig. 6. (A) A schematic of plasmonic ELISA. Color change by nanoparticle formation enables naked eye detection of pathogenic biomarkers such as p24.
Reprinted from [83] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group (NPG). (B) Aptamer-based protein detection scheme aided by micromagnetic beads and
microfluidics. Reprinted from [90] with permission from Wiley. (C) A diagram of an integrated microfluidic chip using a Raman imaging system for label-free
bimolecular detection. Reprinted from [85] with permission from AIP. (D) Capillary-driven microfluidics for one-step POC immunodiagnostics using antibodies
(dAbs) and capture antibodies (cAbs). Reprinted from [82] with permission from RSC.

Fig. 7. Timeline progression of on-chip system integration: initial attempt in microfabricating on-chip PCR along with several sample detection methods on a
single device (1998) [56], fully integrated system brought to developing countries for the detection of infectious disease by incorporating a sample preparation and
POC ELISA like assay for amplification (2011) [110], highly-integrated LOC system for multiparameter analysis in a cartridge microfluidic platform (2012) [128],
and MicroBAR system to reliably confirm the existence of pathogenic DNA via LAMP (2013) [67]. Parallel development of integrated paper microfluidic including
various aspects needed from a fully functional iMDx platforms. Reproduced from [56], [67], [110], and [128] with permission.

signal that is proportional to the original quantity of the antigen
in the sample. Quantification of these assays then measures the
absorbance for the intensity of a given solution color through
a plate reader. The ease-of-concept and efficiency of ELISA
has made it a gold standard for protein-based amplification;
however, complexity in terms of protocol makes it hard to implement in resource limited settings. To solve this problem,
many variations on signal transduction have been discovered
for POC applications. Lateral flow immunoassay is a variation
from ELISA that allows users to visibly distinguish end results with their naked eye. A classic example of a lateral flow
immunoassay is thepregnancy kit. The pregnancy kit demonstrates a compact, cost-efficient naked eye detection method for
a specific hormone found in the urine of pregnant women (see

Fig. 6). Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is targeted for
determining pregnancy because of a doubling rate of 72 h after
conception, allowing for simple detection through a clean lateral
flow immunoassay.
Unfortunately, most biomarkers targeting infectious and/or
genetic diseases are low in abundance, poor in stability,
and sometimes go through significant interference incomplex
biosamples such as blood. In order to efficiently generalize
the use of point-of-care diagnostics, it is necessary to demonstrate ultrasensitive detection schemes through a reliable method
of amplification. Initial efforts toward on-chip integration of
ELISA was initially developed and characterized by Eteshola
et al. The group demonstrated the first preliminary evaluation of a heterogeneous sandwich enzyme-linked immunoassay

1514

through an innovative method design in a PDMS microfluidic device [81]. In another effort to integrate reliable protein
detection, Gervais et al. incorporated microfluidic functional
elements, reagents, and analyte molecules collectively into a
one-step immunoassay using a capillary-driven microfluidic
platform [82]. Addition of only a small sample volume is
noted to trigger a large cascade of events leading from sample preparation to signal transduction through a fluorescence
microscope. Amplification and the ability to transduce signals
from biomolecules of low quantity are critical to the generalized
function of a disease diagnostic device. For signal amplification applications in biospecimens, the Stevens laboratory used
nanoparticle growth to obtain significant color change from a
blue to red solution in the presence or absence of target molecule
p24 for naked-eye detection of HIV (see Fig. 6) [83]. Their data
revealed extreme sensitivity in a range as low as 1 × 10−18 g/ml,
using clinical trials to confirm the validity against HIV patients.
The sera of 30 donors was assayed with plasmonic ELISA with
their assay determining HIV infection even with less than 50
copies of viral load from ten patients. In a similar design, our
laboratory has developed a plasmonic method to distinguish the
presence and absence of amyloid beta through nanoparticle aggregation, enabling the naked eye to detect Alzheimer’s disease
diagnostic [84]. However, due to many of these techniques being based on a 96-well plate technology, they are not readily
available for sample-to-answer iMDx.
A promising extension of plasmonic application on signal
transduction is Raman Scattering or SERS (Surface Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy). As shown in Fig. 6, Liu and Lee utilized
a nanowell array fabricated by soft-lithography achieving labelfree detection of biomolecules with gigantic signal enhancement of 107 [85]. Park et al. demonstrated a microfluidic and
nanofluidic interface to enhance the signal from dengue virus
by using SERS [51]. Many SERS-based detection schemes are
attractive because of their extreme signal amplification capability; however, this methodology is not readily available for
standalone diagnostics since it requires a complicated external
signal reader. In addition to SERS, another variation of plasmonic detection includes photonic crystals designed to reflect
selected bands of wavelengths when illuminated. The field of
biophotonbic crystals offers an alternate label-free and ultrasensitive biochemical or cell-based assay that has been researched
extensively by Cunningham et al. [86], [87].
Research in the field of micro- and nanocantilevers has allowed label-free detection of a variety of different biomolecules,
on chip. The Craighead laboratory established the world record
of measuring the weight of a single virus particle by using a
laser actuated cantilever device [88], later on incorporating this
ultrasensitive cantilever in a microfluidic platform [89]. Arntz
et al. developed a functional label-free protein detection device using an array of microfabricated cantilevers functionalized with covalently anchored antibodies [90]. Biomarker proteins were detected via sensitive measurements of surface stress
placed by antigen–antibody molecular recognitions. Sensitivity for myoglobin detection, the biomolecule of choice in the
experiment, was found to be as low as 20 μg/ml. Use of microcantilevers has been repeated and slightly varied by labs such

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

as Wee et al. [91] and branched into areas of DNA detection as
well [92]. Label-free detection also includes fabrications of silicon nanowire devices. Found to be effectively used for a wide
variety of biomolecular applications, the general idea revolves
around coating the wires with desired receptors and then measuring the conductance through the wires. Several groups have
done extensive research into both the fabrication and biomolecular detection capabilities of silicon nanowires, showing promising results for the application to be incorporated for on-chip
diagnostic purposes [93]–[95].
Currently, antibodies serve as standard reagents that can bind
various disease targets with high affinity and specificity. Antibodies have been extensively utilized for many applications
in medical and life sciences research, but have shortcomings in
their general use as disease capture reagents for high-throughput
capture and detection. For the long-term storage, antibodies also
show vulnerability against heat and are susceptible to degradation over time. In contrast to antibodies, target-specific aptamers can easily be generated regardless of immunogenicity or
target toxicity. Once a specific aptamer has been selected and
sequenced, unlimited amounts of the exact same aptamer can
be synthesized with little effort and investment [96]. Avoiding
the cost of reagent maintenance, storage, and transportation,
aptamers are the perfect candidate as an essential recognition
component of diagnostic devices [97]. In an attempt to utilize its growing capabilities, Csordas et al. demonstrated indirect amplification of proteins in serum through micromagnetic
aptamers PCR technology [98]. After tagging aptamers with
micromagnetic beads, the group selected target-aptamer complexes and selectively amplified them with the real-time PCR.
Protein signal transduction was ultimately made possible by aptamer amplification. Collectively, aptamers characteristics and
current research looking into further applications put them as a
strong candidate for integration into an iMDx platform.
Ever since a family of aptamers has been approved by U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a therapeutic reagent
(Macugen) for macular degeneration by targeting Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor [99], clinical use of aptamers has now
become a hot topic [100]. However, one major hurdle to overcome is its low-throughput and labor-intensive selection process, so-called Systematic Evolution of Ligands by Exponential
Enrichment). Many microfluidic platforms [15], [101]–[104]
have been introduced in order to reduce this burdensome workflow, but still more efficient and automated platforms are required for clinical use of the aptamers.
Finally, the combination of gene expression and protein immunoassay was developed by Dimov et al. from a few mammalian cells enabling sample prepartion of the input cells with
effective perturbation of the cell and simultaneous real-time optical analysis for gene and protein assay [105].
IV. INTEGRATED SYSTEM
The last part of this review is the integration of modules introduced previously and their possible clinical use in proposed
devices with patient samples. Starting with the development of
the first pregnancy kit [106], integration has grown as a field

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

1515

Fig. 8. (a) Schematic of an early-integrated PCR on chip integrating microfluidic channels, microheaters, temperature sensors, and detectors. Reprinted from [56]
with permission from AAAS. (b) An integrated device for POC assays. The red O-rings were used to interface with external pumping systems. Reprinted from [107]
with permission from NPG. (c) An example of system integration and pictures of integrated microfluidic device. The data represent fluid handling of a POC
ELISA-like assay. This device is tested in the developing countries targeting Syphilis and HIV. Reprinted from [110] NPG with permission. (d) The design of the
MicroBAR system and operation. (a) A disposable microfluidic cartridge is loaded with sample fluid (e.g., blood) via SIMBAS degas-driven flow. (b)–(c) The
instrument features blue excitation LEDs on the side of the chip. An ITO substrate provides uniform heating across the reaction chambers of the chip. Below
this substrate is a green plastic emission filter followed by a neoprene foam barrier with holes. The microfluidic chip sticks to the surface of the ITO. Reprinted
from [67] with permission from PLOS.

of functionality and innovation where numerous modules and
inputs/outputs are elegantly arranged for complete optimization [107]. Several attempts for a fully functional integrated
platform have already been made (Fig. 7), and reviews such as
Soper et al., have already gone over different methods of biosensor integration in field such as cancer diagnostics and general
POC devices [108]. General consensus remains that in order to
implement highly multiplexed but low-complexity iMDx, the
final product should be capable to integrate the technologies
required for portable analysis of clinical samples. To add to this
discussion, we will also include a review of paper microfluidic
systems, a relatively new field that incorporates all necessary
modules in one paper platform.
Fabrication of a complete sample-in answer-out diagnostic
platform slowly came to fruition when Easley et al. connected
injected whole blood with endpoint genetic analysis on a single
device [109]. The device claims to perform DNA purification
and PCR-based amplification all on-chip, connecting modules
of sample preparation and amplification together. Injections of
nanoliter aliquots of amplicon enabled the device to also perform

electrophoretic separation, complementing the first two modules
with a form of signal transduction. While the device does contain
certain practical drawbacks, it helped pave the way as a sample
for a fully integrated POC system.
A model example for a fully integrated diagnostic microfluidic platform nicknamed the mChip (mobile microfluidic chip
for immunoassay on protein markers) was developed by the
Sia laboratory to be applied for medical testing in areas of
Rwanda, India, and Tanzania [110]. The mChip contains the
complete integration of multiple microfluidic technologies for
manufacturing, fluid handling, and signal transduction based
with a miniaturized ELISA protocol. Sample preparation starts
by retrieving only several microliters of blood, which can be obtained on site from a needle prick. Reagents are then delivered
to the sample through a bubble-based method, where metered
plugs of reagents are introduced sequentially into a tubing separated by air spaces, to deliver antibodies, washing solutions, and
signal development solutions. Fig. 8 shows signal amplification
by on-chip ELISA, followed shortly after by transduction both
performed using minimal instrumentation. A device as simple

1516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 9. Past progression of paper microfluidic into integrated diagnostic platform: Primary take-home biomolecular testing kit used to detect hCG in a single
comprehensive platform (1968) [106], Whiteside lab popularized the concept of using paper as a comprehensive microfluidic device (2006) A figure from [113].
(2010). Low-cost, pumpless T-sensor and H-filter in paper networks (2010) [128]. The first in-home test kit for HIV by swapping gums [135]. Reproduced
from [98], [113], [128], and [125] with permission.

as a cellular phone is then used to detect any signals and create a
following prognosis on the presence of HIV or syphilis. Everything in the chip is self-driven with no moving parts, electricity,
or external instrumentation needed. Using a reproducible and
low-cost fabrication method, the mChip shows promise in clinical settings and is one of the few fully integrated autonomous
diagnostic platforms to treat samples from retrieval to transduction. Fluctuations in temperature are recorded to likely affect
the performance of the mChip, and while such obstacles are important to overcome to create a fully applicable iMDx device,
the mChip is a first step to future diagnostic research.
Greatly inspired by the simplicity behind pregnancy diagnostics, developments in paper-based iMDx have flourished in
recent times by showing the ability to integrate several functional modules into a basic, low-cost paper device (Fig. 9). In
an effort to create an innovative, pump-free, and extremely lowcost integrated microfluidic platform, the Whitesides Group at
Harvard University helped establish what is now known as the
rapidly emerging field of paper microfluidics [111]. Working
on the principle of passive capillary-driven flow through patterned paper channels, paper microfluidics has been considered
as an easy-to-prototype, inexpensive, lightweight, and biocompatible design offering a useful new method for the fabrication of microfluidic devices. Due to the rapid popularization
of the field, many research groups have designed a variety of
new fabrication methods starting from baseline photolithography methods [112]–[114] to inkjet etching [115], [116], inkjet
printing [117], [118], wax printing [119]–[121], and laser treatment [122]. Methods of simply cutting designs have also led
Fenton et al. to a cutting technique where paper patterns are first
cut precisely by a computer-controlled plotter and then sandwiched between vinyl or polyester plastic sheets to protect assay
surfaces [123]. With fabrication methods moving toward simple
and low-cost processes, even the type of paper and the following
preparation steps were brought into account. Entire fabrications
taking less than 10 min have been recorded, using materials
such as an omniphobic RF paper prepared from the reaction of
hydrophilic cellulose paper with fluoroalkyl trichlorosilanes in
the gas phase [124].
In addition to fabrication processes, structure developments
have widened the areas of applications for paper platforms.
Martinez et al. started off by fabricating 3-D fluidic networks
in paper simply by patterning and stacking multiple layers of

network designed papers [113] as shown in Fig. 9. The push
of paper microfluidics into 3-D expanded the capabilities of the
field to incorporate multiplexing tests and multiple functional
zones. Key diagnostic amplification methods such as ELISA
have also been adapted to fit paper-based platforms, as described
by Cheng et al. [125]. Paper-based ELISA, also known as
P-ELISA, shows promise in terms of convenience, low cost,
and ease-of-use due to its compatibility with paper platforms.
Unfortunately, P-ELISA is also less sensitive than conventional
ELISA on the order of a magnitude, while also suffering from
concerns over contamination and exposed environment conditions when working in tests zones open to the atmosphere.
Research from Martinez et al. utilizes the development of
3-D microfluidic paper-based platforms that can be programmed, after fabrication, by the user to generate multiple
patterns of flow [126]. These devices are controlled by pressing one-time “on” buttons that closes a small space between
two vertically aligned channels and allow fluid to transfer from
one channel to the other. The basis of these devices give the
end-user freedom in controlling time-sensitive fluid movements
between a wide variety of samples, opening up the possibility
to choose which biomarkers to test for at which times. Finally,
incorporation of electrodes and circuits onto paper platforms
is a budding field that has garnered some recent research but
has yet to be fully established [127]. In addtion to the Whiteside lab, the Yager group complimented the advancement of
paper microfluidics through the implementation of their own
devices [128].
Along with the integration of the functional modules introduced previously, a portable detection system plays as a final
component for full iMDx performance in resource-limited settings. Because a variety of signal transduction methods currently exist, corresponding detection modules should accompany methods used to provide direct interpretation of results. In
light of this, Schumacher et al. fabricated a device incorporating several diagnostic steps typically seen in laboratories. After
necessary sample preparation and amplification, the device performs a diagnostic assay through a self-performing assay protocol, data acquisition, and data analysis in just 15 min [129]. Our
laboratory has developed a portable detection system, microfluidic bioamplification reader (MicroBAR) in order to interpret
the final stages of iMDx performance throughout a variety of
resource-limited areas. This portable instrument, as shown in

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

Fig. 8, uses microfluidic cartridges to perform a rapid genotyping assay on bacterial or viral pathogens in blood, saliva, or
other bodily fluids. Powered by a rechargeable lithium polymer
battery, it features a touchscreen interface, cell phone and GPS
modules, USB interface, and SD card reader for storing assay
results for direct interpretation from the genotyping assay.
LAMP technology introduced previously was used to detect
SNPs of pathogenic DNA for TB [67].
The field of paper microfluidics has garnered much applause
recently due to its innovative approach in solving complex fabrication processes and restrictive costs. Valuable advantages of
paper microfluidics include: 1) utilization of a common, flexible,
and extremely cheap cellulosic material, 2) capillary wicking of
solutions that provides a means of transporting fluids without
the assistance of an external source, 3) biocompatibility allowing the storage and immobilization of a variety of reagents, and
4) fabrication processes that range between a large variety of
equipment, speed, precision, and costs. These components, in
addition to new discoveries into structure and fluid flow designs
have put paper microfluidics on the forefront of potential integrated medical diagnostic devices in limited-resource settings.
Several drawbacks however have been labeled in a detailed review by Li et al. in the use of paper-based platforms [130]. Solutions reaching the detection zone at the end of the device typically retain only 50% of the total initial volume, creating significant concerns with sample retention when the sample quantity is
small or retrieval of a large sample is either costly or impractical.
Inefficient sample retention presents a problem in low-resource
settings where the abundance is a luxury. Certain hydrophobic agents, such as wax, used by previously discussed paper
fabrication methods may not be strong enough to withstand
samples of low surface tension. This is because hydrophobic
materials such as wax that are used to detail patterns on paper
do not specifically block the paper’s pores, allowing for low surface tension samples to bypass the barriers and render the device
useless. A low limit of detection of paper-based microfluidic
platforms for samples of very low concentration presents a third
critical drawback. Especially in areas where even slight water
contamination or presence of toxin in blood may be critical to
health diagnostics, paper microfluidics may be too ill-equipped
to sufficiently detect and offer sound diagnosis to the medical
staff.
V. PROSPECTIVES
Although tremendous advancements have been made in microfluidic diagnostic platforms, the majority of microfluidic
works introduced previously is a “proof of principle” or “
validation of single functionality.” To calibrate the readiness
of a device for clinical use, the Technology Readiness Level
(TRL) matrices can be used as an effective protocol [131]. TRL
is a measure to assess the readiness of evolving technologies
including materials, components, and devices proposed by the
United States Department of Defense. According to its criteria, the reviewed works above are in the range of TRL3 or
TRL4, categorized as “Analytic Proof of Concept” or “Standalone component validated,” respectively. In order to integrate

1517

Fig. 10. An example of a schematic drawing of iMDx. A fully functional
POC device should include: 1) methods of biospecimen preparation, 2) signal
amplification and transduction, and 3) a cost-efficient and easy to fabricate
method of integration and application to clinical settings.

each functional module into a unit, the demonstration of a complete iMDx prototype at the Alpha level (TRL5, Integrated Component Validated) is required according to recent DARPA’s RFA
(Request for Application, DARPA-11-38 and DARPA-11-39).
The demonstrated prototype should be consistent with the requirements for FDA clearance and Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment. An Alpha level (TRL 5) iMDx is expected to
be self-calibrating, carrying all necessary reagents to test samples along with negative controls. Other requirements to achieve
a TRL5 iMDx include an ability to dispose and fabricate at low
costs (e.g., injection molding).
As an additional guideline to formulate a sturdy iMDx, we
would like to suggest a 3S criteria—speed, sensitivity and selectivity. Successful integration in compliance with the 3S criteria will help commercialize the given product. As an example, the first in-home FDA-approved HIV test, OraQuick,
was released in 2012. According to our 3S criteria, the device
complies with 1) speed—the result can be obtained in 20 min,
2) sensitivity—antibodies generated by the human immune system three months after suspected incident can even be obtained by gum swab, 3) selectivity—diagnosing HIV infection with more than 99% accuracy. Furthermore, clinical validation regarding the performance of the device can be found
in [132]–[135].
A successful iMDx will comply with the 3S criteria suggested above for POC diagnostics in resource-limited settings, showing the necessary level of independence to be fully
functional as a standalone platform as shown in Fig. 10. By
incorporating the methods of sample preparation, amplification,
and signal transduction indicated in this review, future research
into the development of an innovative microfluidic platform will
undoubtedly offer a simple and efficient alternative to current
medical equipment. Furthermore, development of a low-cost,
portable, sensitive, and fully integrated iMDx will revolutionize

1518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

medical diagnostics in numerous settings across the world and
the field of diagnostic devices.

REFERENCES
[1] G. S. Fiorini and D. T. Chiu, “Disposable microfluidic devices: Fabrication, function, and application,” Biotechniques, vol. 38, pp. 429–446,
Mar. 2005.
[2] T. Vo-Dinh and B. Cullum, “Biosensors and biochips: Advances in biological and medical diagnostics,” Fresenius J. Anal. Chem., vol. 366,
pp. 540–551, Mar./Apr. 2000.
[3] R. Bashir, “BioMEMS: State-of-the-art in detection, opportunities and
prospects,” Adv. Drug Del. Rev., vol. 56, pp. 1565–1586, Sep. 22, 2004.
[4] P. Westh and H. Ramlov, “Trehalose accumulation in the tardigrade
Adorybiotus coronifer during anhydrobiosis,” J. Exp. Zoology, vol. 258,
pp. 303–311, Jun. 1991.
[5] W. Welnicz, M. A. Grohme, L. Kaczmarek, R. O. Schill, and M. Frohme,
“Anhydrobiosis in tardigrades—The last decade,” J. Insect Physiol.,
vol. 57, pp. 577–583, May 2011.
[6] G. E. Fridley, H. Q. Le, E. Fu, and P. Yager, “Controlled release of dry
reagents in porous media for tunable temporal and spatial distribution
upon rehydration,” Lab Chip, vol. 12, pp. 4321–4327, Nov. 7, 2012.
[7] D. Y. Stevens, C. R. Petri, J. L. Osborn, P. Spicar-Mihalic,
K. G. McKenzie, and P. Yager, “Enabling a microfluidic immunoassay
for the developing world by integration of on-card dry reagent storage,”
Lab Chip, vol. 8, pp. 2038–2045, 2008.
[8] E. Garcia, J. R. Kirkham, A. V. Hatch, K. R. Hawkins, and P. Yager,
“Controlled microfluidic reconstitution of functional protein from an
anhydrous storage depot,” Lab Chip, vol. 4, pp. 78–82, 2004.
[9] R. D. Lins, C. S. Pereira, and P. H. Hunenberger, “Trehalose-protein interaction in aqueous solution,” Proteins-Structure Function Bioinformatics, vol. 55, pp. 177–186, Apr. 1, 2004.
[10] J. F. Carpenter and J. H. Crowe, “Modes of stabilization of a protein by
organic solutes during desiccation,” Cryobiology, vol. 25, pp. 459–470,
Oct. 1988.
[11] S. B. Lee, K. C. Clabaugh, B. Silva, K. O. Odigie, M. D. Coble, O.
Loreille, M. Scheible, R. M. Fourney, J. Stevens, G. R. Carmody, T. J.
Parsons, A. Pozder, A. J. Eisenberg, B. Budowle, T. Ahmad, R. W. Miller,
and C. A. Crouse, “Assessing a novel room temperature DNA storage
medium for forensic biological samples,” Forensic Sci. Int. Genet., vol. 6,
pp. 31–40, Jan. 2012.
[12] A. Allen-Hall and D. McNevin, “Human tissue preservation for disaster
victim identification (DVI) in tropical climates,” Forensic Sci. Int. Genet.,
vol. 6, pp. 653–657, Sep. 2012.
[13] D. S. Stevens, C. H. Crudder, and G. J. Domingo, “Post-extraction stabilization of HIV viral RNA for quantitative molecular tests,” J. Virol.
Methods, vol. 182, pp. 104–110, Jun. 2012.
[14] G. E. Hernandez, T. S. Mondala, and S. R. Head, “Assessing a novel
room-temperature RNA storage medium for compatibility in microarray
gene expression analysis,” Biotechniques, vol. 47, pp. 667–670, Aug.
2009.
[15] S. M. Park, J. Y. Ahn, M. Jo, D. K. Lee, J. T. Lis, H. G. Craighead, and
S. Kim, “Selection and elution of aptamers using nanoporous sol-gel
arrays with integrated microheaters,” Lab Chip, vol. 9, pp. 1206–1212,
May 7, 2009.
[16] W. Wang, “Lyophilization and development of solid protein pharmaceuticals,” Int. J. Pharmaceutics, vol. 203, pp. 1–60, Aug. 10, 2000.
[17] C. J. Chen, D. D. Han, C. F. Cai, and X. Tang, “An overview of liposome
lyophilization and its future potential,” J. Controlled Release, vol. 142,
pp. 299–311, Mar. 19, 2010.
[18] Y. Ai, C. K. Sanders, and B. L. Marrone, “Separation of Escherichia coli
bacteria from peripheral blood mononuclear cells using standing surface
acoustic waves,” Anal. Chem., vol. 85, pp. 9126–9134, Oct. 1, 2013.
[19] I. K. Dimov, L. Basabe-Desmonts, J. L. Garcia-Cordero, B. M. Ross,
Y. Park, A. J. Ricco, and L. P. Lee, “Stand-alone self-powered integrated microfluidic blood analysis system (SIMBAS),” Lab Chip, vol. 11,
pp. 845–850, Mar. 7, 2011.
[20] H. M. Ji, V. Samper, Y. Chen, C. K. Heng, T. M. Lim, and L. Yobas,
“Silicon-based microfilters for whole blood cell separation,” Biomed.
Microdevices, vol. 10, pp. 251–257, Apr. 2008.
[21] T. A. Crowley and V. Pizziconi, “Isolation of plasma from whole blood
using planar microfilters for lab-on-a-chip applications,” Lab Chip,
vol. 5, pp. 922–929, 2005.

[22] S. Haeberle, T. Brenner, R. Zengerle, and J. Ducree, “Centrifugal extraction of plasma from whole blood on a rotating disk,” Lab Chip, vol. 6,
pp. 776–781, Jun. 2006.
[23] E. Sollier, H. Rostaing, P. Pouteau, Y. Fouillet, and J. L. Achard,
“Passive microfluidic devices for plasma extraction from whole human blood,” Sens. Actuators B-Chem., vol. 141, pp. 617–624, Sep. 7,
2009.
[24] D. Di Carlo, D. Irimia, R. G. Tompkins, and M. Toner, “Continuous
inertial focusing, ordering, and separation of particles in microchannels,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 104, pp. 18892–18897, Nov. 27,
2007.
[25] D. Di Carlo, J. F. Edd, D. Irimia, R. G. Tompkins, and M. Toner, “Equilibrium separation and filtration of particles using differential inertial
focusing,” Anal. Chem., vol. 80, pp. 2204–2211, Mar. 15, 2008.
[26] R. D. Jaggi, R. Sandoz, and C. S. Effenhauser, “Microfluidic depletion
of red blood cells from whole blood in high-aspect-ratio microchannels,”
Microfluidics Nanofluidics, vol. 3, pp. 47–53, Feb. 2007.
[27] E. Sollier, M. Cubizolles, Y. Fouillet, and J. L. Achard, “Fast and continuous plasma extraction from whole human blood based on expanding
cell-free layer devices,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 12, pp. 485–497,
Jun. 2010.
[28] M. Faivre, M. Abkarian, K. Bickraj, and H. A. Stone, “Geometrical
focusing of cells in a microfluidic device: An approach to separate blood
plasma,” Biorheology, vol. 43, pp. 147–159, 2006.
[29] S. Yang, A. Undar, and J. D. Zahn, “A microfluidic device for continuous, real time blood plasma separation,” Lab Chip, vol. 6, pp. 871–880,
2006.
[30] H. J. Lee, J. H. Kim, H. K. Lim, E. C. Cho, N. Huh, C. Ko, J. C. Park,
J. W. Choi, and S. S. Lee, “Electrochemical cell lysis device for DNA
extraction,” Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 626–633, Mar. 7, 2010.
[31] D. Di Carlo, C. Ionescu-Zanetti, Y. Zhang, P. Hung, and L. P. Lee, “Onchip cell lysis by local hydroxide generation,” Lab Chip, vol. 5, pp. 171–
178, Feb. 2005.
[32] J. T. Nevill, R. Cooper, M. Dueck, D. N. Breslauer, and L. P. Lee, “Integrated microfluidic cell culture and lysis on a chip,” Lab Chip, vol. 7,
pp. 1689–1695, Dec. 2007.
[33] E. A. Schilling, A. E. Kamholz, and P. Yager, “Cell lysis and protein extraction in a microfluidic device with detection by a fluorogenic enzyme
assay,” Anal. Chem., vol. 74, pp. 1798–1804, Apr. 15, 2002.
[34] D. Irimia, R. G. Tompkins, and M. Toner, “Single-cell chemical lysis
in picoliter-scale closed volumes using a microfabricated device,” Anal.
Chem., vol. 76, pp. 6137–6143, Oct. 15, 2004.
[35] P. Sethu, M. Anahtar, L. L. Moldawer, R. G. Tompkins, and M. Toner,
“Continuous flow microfluidic device for rapid erythrocyte lysis,” Anal.
Chem., vol. 76, pp. 6247–6253, Nov. 1, 2004.
[36] M. T. Taylor, P. Belgrader, B. J. Furman, F. Pourahmadi, G. T. A. Kovacs,
and M. A. Northrup, “Lysing bacterial spores by sonication through
a flexible interface in a microfluidic system,” Anal. Chem., vol. 73,
pp. 492–496, Feb. 1, 2001.
[37] D. Di Carlo, K. H. Jeong, and L. P. Lee, “Reagentless mechanical cell
lysis by nanoscale barbs in microchannels for sample preparation,” Lab
Chip, vol. 3, pp. 287–291, 2003.
[38] S. S. Yun, S. Y. Yoon, M. K. Song, S. H. Im, S. Kim, J. H. Lee, and
S. Yang, “Handheld mechanical cell lysis chip with ultra-sharp silicon
nano-blade arrays for rapid intracellular protein extraction,” Lab Chip,
vol. 10, pp. 1442–1446, Jun. 7, 2010.
[39] Y. C. Kim, J. H. Kang, S. J. Park, E. S. Yoon, and J. K. Park, “Microfluidic biomechanical device for compressive cell stimulation and lysis,”
Sens. Actuators B-Chem., vol. 128, pp. 108–116, Dec. 12, 2007.
[40] L. C. Waters, S. C. Jacobson, N. Kroutchinina, J. Khandurina,
R. S. Foote, and J. M. Ramsey, “Microchip device for cell lysis, multiplex
PCR amplification, and electrophoretic sizing,” Anal. Chem., vol. 70,
pp. 158–162, Jan. 1, 1998.
[41] N. Privorotskaya, Y. S. Liu, J. C. Lee, H. J. Zeng, J. A. Carlisle,
A. Radadia, L. Millet, R. Bashir, and W. P. King, “Rapid thermal lysis of cells using silicon-diamond microcantilever heaters,” Lab Chip,
vol. 10, pp. 1135–1141, 2010.
[42] M. A. McClain, C. T. Culbertson, S. C. Jacobson, N. L. Allbritton,
C. E. Sims, and J. M. Ramsey, “Microfluidic devices for the highthroughput chemical analysis of cells,” Anal. Chem., vol. 75, pp. 5646–
5655, Nov. 1, 2003.
[43] H. Y. Wang, A. K. Bhunia, and C. Lu, “A microfluidic flow-through device for high throughput electrical lysis of bacterial cells based on continuous dc voltage,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 22, pp. 582–588, Dec. 15,
2006.

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

[44] D. W. Lee and Y. H. Cho, “A continuous electrical cell lysis device
using a low dc voltage for a cell transport and rupture,” Sens. Actuators
B-Chem., vol. 124, pp. 84–89, Jun. 10, 2007.
[45] N. Bao and C. Lu, “A microfluidic device for physical trapping and
electrical lysis of bacterial cells,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 92, p. 214103,
May 26, 2008.
[46] H. Lu, M. A. Schmidt, and K. F. Jensen, “A microfluidic electroporation
device for cell lysis,” Lab Chip, vol. 5, pp. 23–29, 2005.
[47] T. Thorsen, S. J. Maerkl, and S. R. Quake, “Microfluidic large-scale
integration,” Science, vol. 298, pp. 580–584, Oct. 18, 2002.
[48] W. Du, L. Li, K. P. Nichols, and R. F. Ismagilov, “SlipChip,” Lab Chip,
vol. 9, pp. 2286–2292, Aug. 21, 2009.
[49] R. Moerman, J. Knoll, C. Apetrei, L. R. van den Doel, and G. W. van
Dedem, “Quantitative analysis in nanoliter wells by prefilling of wells
using electrospray deposition followed by sample introduction with a
coverslip method,” Anal. Chem., vol. 77, pp. 225–231, Jan. 1, 2005.
[50] X. Zhou, L. Lau, W. W. Lam, S. W. Au, and B. Zheng, “Nanoliter dispensing method by degassed poly(dimethylsiloxane) microchannels and
its application in protein crystallization,” Anal. Chem., vol. 79, pp. 4924–
4930, Jul. 1, 2007.
[51] S. M. Park, Y. S. Huh, H. G. Craighead, and D. Erickson, “A method for
nanofluidic device prototyping using elastomeric collapse,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 106, pp. 15549–15554, Sep. 15, 2009.
[52] S. M. Park, K. H. Lee, and H. G. Craighead, “On-chip coupling of electrochemical pumps and an SU-8 tip for electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 10, pp. 891–897, Dec. 2008.
[53] G. Sozzi, D. Conte, M. Leon, R.Ciricione, L. Roz, C. Ratcliffe, E. Roz,
N. Cirenei, M. Bellomi, G. Pelosi, M. A. Pierotti, and U. Pastorino,
“Quantification of free circulating DNA as a diagnostic marker in lung
cancer,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 21, pp. 3902–3908, Nov. 1, 2003.
[54] G. Rabinowits, C. Gercel-Taylor, J. M. Day, D. D. Taylor, and
G. H. Kloecker, “Exosomal microRNA: A diagnostic marker for lung
cancer,” Clin. Lung Cancer, vol. 10, pp. 42–46, Jan. 2009.
[55] M. U. Kopp, A. J. de Mello, and A. Manz, “Chemical amplification:
Continuous-flow PCR on a chip,” Science, vol. 280, pp. 1046–1048,
May 15, 1998.
[56] M. A. Burns, B. N. Johnson, S. N. Brahmasandra, K. Handique,
J. R. Webster, M. Krishnan et al., “An integrated nanoliter DNA analysis
device,” Science, vol. 282, pp. 484–487, Oct. 16, 1998.
[57] P. Neuzil, L. Novak, J. Pipper, S. Lee, L. F. P. Ng, and C. Y. Zhang,
“Rapid detection of viral RNA by a pocket-size real-time PCR system,”
Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 2632–2634, 2010.
[58] H. Kim, S. Dixit, C. J. Green, and G. W. Faris, “Nanodroplet real-time
PCR system with laser assisted heating,” Opt. Exp., vol. 17, pp. 218–227,
Jan. 5, 2009.
[59] S. H. Lee, S. W. Kim, J. Y. Kang, and C. H. Ahn, “A polymer lab-ona-chip for reverse transcription (RT)-PCR based point-of-care clinical
diagnostics,” Lab Chip, vol. 8, pp. 2121–2127, 2008.
[60] J. G. Lee, K. H. Cheong, N. Huh, S. Kim, J. W. Choi, and C. Ko,
“Microchip-based one step DNA extraction and real-time PCR in one
chamber for rapid pathogen identification,” Lab Chip, vol. 6, pp. 886–
895, 2006.
[61] M. Focke, F. Stumpf, B. Faltin, P. Reith, D. Bamarni, S. Wadle, C. Muller,
H. Reinecke, J. Schrenzel, P. Francois, D. Mark, G. Roth, R. Zengerle,
amd F. von Stetten, “Microstructuring of polymer films for sensitive
genotyping by real-time PCR on a centrifugal microfluidic platform,”
Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 2519–2526, Oct. 7, 2010.
[62] A. J. de Mello, “DNA amplification: Does ‘small’ really mean ‘
efficient’?,” Lab Chip, vol. 1, pp. 24N–29N, 2001.
[63] J. J. Shah, G. Jon, and G. Michael, “Microwave-induced adjustable nonlinear temperature gradients in microfluidic devices,” J. Micromech.
Microeng., vol. 20, p. 105025, 2010.
[64] T. Notomi, H. Okayama, H. Masubuchi, T. Yonekawa, K. Watanabe,
N. Amino, and T. Hase, “Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of
DNA,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 28, p. E63, Jun. 15, 2000.
[65] C. P. Li, Z. P. Li, H. X. Jia, and J. L. Yan, “One-step ultrasensitive
detection of microRNAs with loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(LAMP),” Chem. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 2595–2597, 2011.
[66] H. X. Jia, Z. P. Li, C. H. Liu, and Y. Q. Cheng, “Ultrasensitive detection
of microRNAs by exponential isothermal amplification,” Angewandte
Chemie-Int. Ed., vol. 49, pp. 5498–5501, 2010.
[67] F. B. Myers, R. H. Henrikson, J. Bone, and L. P. Lee, “A handheld
point-of-care genomic diagnostic system,” PLoS One, vol. 8, p. e70266,
2013.

1519

[68] A. Gansen, A. M. Herrick, I. K. Dimov, L. P. Lee, and D. T. Chiu, “Digital LAMP in a sample self-digitization (SD) chip,” Lab Chip, vol. 12,
pp. 2247–2254, 2012.
[69] K. Hsieh, A. S. Patterson, B. S. Ferguson, K. W. Plaxco, and H. T. Soh,
“Rapid, sensitive, and quantitative detection of pathogenic DNA at the
point of care through microfluidic electrochemical quantitative loopmediated isothermal amplification,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., vol. 51,
pp. 4896–4900, May 14, 2012.
[70] N. Ramalingam, T. C. San, T. J. Kai, M. Y. M. Mak, and H. Q. Gong,
“Microfluidic devices harboring unsealed reactors for real-time isothermal helicase-dependent amplification,” Microfluidics Nanofluidics,
vol. 7, pp. 325–336, Nov. 2009.
[71] I. K. Dimov, J. L. Garcia-Cordero, J. O’Grady, C. R. Poulsen, C. Viguier,
L. Kent, P. Daly, B. Lincoln, M. Maher, R. O’Kennedy, T. J. Smith, A. J.
Ricco, and L. P. Lee, “Integrated microfluidic tmRNA purification and
real-time NASBA device for molecular diagnostics,” Lab Chip, vol. 8,
pp. 2071–2078, Dec. 2008.
[72] N. Kurn, P. C. Chen, J. D. Heath, A. Kopf-Sill, K. M. Stephens, and
S. L. Wang, “Novel isothermal, linear nucleic acid amplification systems
for highly multiplexed applications,” Clinical Chem., vol. 51, pp. 1973–
1981, Oct. 2005.
[73] T. Konry, I. Smolina, J. M. Yarmush, D. Irimia, and M. L. Yarmush,
“Ultrasensitive detection of low-abundance surface-marker protein using isothermal rolling circle amplification in a microfluidic nanoliter
platform,” Small, vol. 7, pp. 395–400, Feb. 7, 2011.
[74] M. Mahalanabis, J. Do, H. ALMuayad, J. Y. Zhang, and
C. M. Klapperich, “An integrated disposable device for DNA extraction
and helicase dependent amplification,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 12,
pp. 353–359, Apr. 2010.
[75] J. L. He, Z. S. Wu, H. Zhou, H. Q. Wang, J. H. Jiang, G. L. Shen, and
R. Q. Yu, “Fluorescence aptameric sensor for strand displacement amplification detection of cocaine,” Anal. Chem., vol. 82, pp. 1358–1364,
Feb. 15, 2010.
[76] S. Lutz, P. Weber, M. Focke, B. Faltin, J. Hoffmann, C. Muller, D. Mark,
G. Roth, P. Munday, N. Armes, O. Piepenburg, R. Zengerle, and F. von
Stetten, “Microfluidic lab-on-a-foil for nucleic acid analysis based on
isothermal recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA),” Lab Chip,
vol. 10, pp. 887–893, Apr. 7, 2010.
[77] Y. Mitani, A. Lezhava, Y. Kawai, T. Kikuchi, A. Oguchi-Katayama, Y.
Kogo, M. Itoh, T. Miyagi, H. Takakura, K. Hoshi, C. Kato, T. Arakawa,
K. Shibata, K. Fukui, R. Masui, S. Kuramitsu, K. Kiyotani, A. Chalk,
K. Tsunekawa, M. Murakami, T. Kamataki, T. Oka, H. Shimada, P. E.
Cizdziel, and Y. Hayashizaki, “Rapid SNP diagnostics using asymmetric
isothermal amplification and a new mismatch-suppression technology,”
Nature Methods, vol. 4, pp. 257–262, Mar. 2007.
[78] P. Gill and A. Ghaemi, “Nucleic acid isothermal amplification technologies: A review,” Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids, vol. 27,
pp. 224–243, Mar. 2008.
[79] P. J. Asiello and A. J. Baeumner, “Miniaturized isothermal nucleic acid
amplification, a review,” Lab Chip, vol. 11, pp. 1420–1430, Apr. 21,
2011.
[80] P. Craw and W. Balachandran, “Isothermal nucleic acid amplification
technologies for point-of-care diagnostics: A critical review,” Lab Chip,
vol. 12, pp. 2469–2486, 2012.
[81] E. Eteshola and D. Leckband, “Development and characterization of
an ELISA assay in PDMS microfluidic channels,” Sens. Actuators B:
Chem., vol. 72, pp. 129–133, Jan. 25, 2001.
[82] L. Gervais and E. Delamarche, “Toward one-step point-of-care immunodiagnostics using capillary-driven microfluidics and PDMS substrates,”
Lab Chip, vol. 9, pp. 3330–3337, Dec. 7, 2009.
[83] R. de la Rica and M. M. Stevens, “Plasmonic ELISA for the ultrasensitive
detection of disease biomarkers with the naked eye,” Nat. Nanotechnol.,
vol. 7, pp. 821–824, Dec. 2012.
[84] I. Choi and L. P. Lee, “Rapid detection of abeta aggregation and inhibition by dual functions of gold nanoplasmic particles: Catalytic activator and optical reporter,” ACS Nano, vol. 7, pp. 6268–6277, Jul. 23,
2013.
[85] G. L. Liu and L. P. Lee, “Nanowell surface enhanced Raman scattering
arrays fabricated by soft-lithography for label-free biomolecular detections in integrated microfluidics,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 87, p. 074101,
2005.
[86] I. D. Block, L. L. Chan, and B. T. Cunningham, “Photonic crystal optical
biosensor incorporating structured low-index porous dielectric,” in Proc.
IEEE Sens., 2005, pp. 742–745.

1520

[87] I. D. Block, L. L. Chan, and B. T. Cunningham, “Photonic crystal optical
biosensor incorporating structured low-index porous dielectric,” Sens.
Actuators B: Chem., vol. 120, pp. 187–193, Dec. 14, 2006.
[88] B. Ilic, Y. Yang, and H. G. Craighead, “Virus detection using nanoelectromechanical devices,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 85, pp. 2604–2606,
Sep. 27, 2004.
[89] K. L. Aubin, J. Huang, S. M. Park, Y. Yang, M. Kondratovich,
H. G. Craighead, and B. R. Ilic, “Microfluidic encapsulated nanoelectromechanical resonators,” J. Vacuum Sci. Technol. B, vol. 25, pp. 1171–
1174, Jul.-Aug. 2007.
[90] Y. Arntz, J. D. Seelig, H. P. Lang, J. Zhang, P. Hunziker, J. P. Ramseyer,
E. Meyer, M. Hegner, and C. Gerber, “Label-free protein assay based on
a nanomechanical cantilever array,” Nanotechnology, vol. 14, pp. 86–90,
Jan. 2003.
[91] K. W. Wee, G. Y. Kang, J. Park, J. Y. Kang, D. S. Yoon, J. H. Park,
and T. S. Kim, “Novel electrical detection of label-free disease marker
proteins using piezoresistive self-sensing micro-cantilevers,” Biosens.
Bioelectron., vol. 20, pp. 1932–1938, Apr. 15, 2005.
[92] R. McKendry, J. Y. Zhang, Y. Arntz, T. Strunz, M. Hegner, H. P. Lang,
M. K. Baller, U. Certa, E. Meyer, H. J. Guntherodt, and C. Gerber,
"Multiple label-free biodetection and quantitative DNA-binding assays
on a nanomechanical cantilever array," in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,
vol. 99, pp. 9783-9788, Jul. 23, 2002.
[93] W. U. Wang, C. Chen, K. H. Lin, Y. Fang, and C. M. Lieber, “Labelfree detection of small-molecule-protein interactions by using nanowire
nanosensors,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 102, pp. 3208–3212,
Mar. 1, 2005.
[94] J.-I. Hahm and C. M. Lieber, “Direct ultrasensitive electrical detection of
DNA and DNA sequence variations using nanowire nanosensors,” Nano
Lett., vol. 4, pp. 51–54, 2004.
[95] F. Patolsky, G. Zheng, and C. M. Lieber, “Fabrication of silicon nanowire
devices for ultrasensitive, label-free, real-time detection of biological and
chemical species,” Nat. Protoc., vol. 1, pp. 1711–1724, 2006.
[96] A. D. Ellington and J. W. Szostak, “In vitro selection of RNA molecules
that bind specific ligands,” Nature, vol. 346, pp. 818–822, Aug. 30, 1990.
[97] A. E. G. Cass and Y. Y. Zhang, “Nucleic acid aptamers: Ideal reagents for
point-of-care diagnostics?,” Faraday Discussions, vol. 149, pp. 49–61,
2011.
[98] A. Csordas, A. E. Gerdon, J. D. Adams, J. Qian, S. S. Oh, Y. Xiao, and
H. T. Soh, “Detection of proteins in serum by micromagnetic aptamer
PCR (MAP) technology,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., vol. 49, pp. 355–
358, 2010.
[99] J. H. Lee, M. D. Canny, A. De Erkenez, D. Krilleke, Y. S. Ng,
D. T. Shima, A Pardi, and F. Jucker, “A therapeutic aptamer inhibits
angiogenesis by specifically targeting the heparin binding domain of
VEGF(165),” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 102, pp. 18902–18907,
Dec. 27, 2005.
[100] X. Ni, M. Castanares, A. Mukherjee, and S. E. Lupold, “Nucleic acid
aptamers: Clinical applications and promising new horizons,” Current
Medicinal Chem., vol. 18, pp. 4206–4214, Sep. 2011.
[101] S. Meyer, J. P. Maufort, J. Nie, R. Stewart, B. E. McIntosh, L. R. Conti, K.
M. Ahmad, H. T. Soh, and J. A. Thomson, “Development of an efficient
targeted cell-SELEX procedure for DNA aptamer reagents,” PLoS One,
vol. 8, p. e71798, 2013.
[102] K. M. Ahmad, S. S. Oh, S. Kim, F. M. McClellen, Y. Xiao, and H. T. Soh,
“Probing the limits of aptamer affinity with a microfluidic SELEX platform,” PloS One, vol. 6, p. e27051, Nov. 14, 2011.
[103] M. Cho, Y. Xiao, J. Nie, R. Stewart, A. T. Csordas, S. S. Oh,
J. A. Thomson, and H. T. Soh, “Quantitative selection of DNA aptamers
through microfluidic selection and high-throughput sequencing,” Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 107, pp. 15373–15378, Aug. 31, 2010.
[104] D. R. Latulippe, K. Szeto, A. Ozer, F. M. Duarte, C. V. Kelly, J. M.
Pagano, B. S. White, D. Shalloway, J. T. Lis, and H. G. Craighead,
“Multiplexed microcolumn-based process for efficient selection of RNA
aptamers,” Anal. Chem., vol. 85, pp. 3417–3424, Mar. 19, 2013.
[105] I. K. Dimov, G. Kijanka, Y. Park, J. Ducree, T. Kang, and L. P. Lee,
“Integrated microfluidic array plate (iMAP) for cellular and molecular
analysis,” Lab Chip, vol. 11, pp. 2701–2710, Aug. 21, 2011.
[106] M. Crane, “Diagnostic test device,” U.S. Patent 3 579 306, 1969.
[107] P. Yager, T. Edwards, E. Fu, K. Helton, K. Nelson, M. R. Tam, and
B. H. Weigl, “Microfluidic diagnostic technologies for global public
health,” Nature, vol. 442, pp. 412–418, Jul. 27, 2006.
[108] S. A. Soper, K. Brown, A. Ellington, B. Frazier, G. Garcia-Manero, V.
Gau, S. I. Gutman, D. F. Hayes, B. Korte, J. L. Landers, D. Larson, F.
Ligler, A. Majumdar, M. Mascini, D. Nolte, Z. Rosenzweig, J. Wang,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

[109]

[110]

[111]
[112]
[113]
[114]

[115]
[116]
[117]
[118]
[119]
[120]
[121]

[122]
[123]
[124]

[125]
[126]
[127]
[128]
[129]

and D. Wilson, “Point-of-care biosensor systems for cancer diagnostics/prognostics,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 21, pp. 1932–1942, Apr.
15, 2006.
C. J. Easley, J. M. Karlinsey, J. M. Bienvenue, L. A. Legendre, M. G.
Roper, S. H. Feldman, M. A. Hughes, E. L. Hewlett, T. J. Merkel, J.
P. Ferrance, and J. P. Landers, “A fully integrated microfluidic genetic
analysis system with sample-in-answer-out capability,” Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, vol. 103, pp. 19272–19277, Dec. 19, 2006.
C. D. Chin, T. Laksanasopin, Y. K. Cheung, D. Steinmiller, V. Linder,
H. Parsa, J. Wang, H. Moore, R. Rouse, G. Umviligihozo, E. Karita,
L. Mwambarangwe, S. L. Braunstein, J. van de Wijgert, R. Sahabo, J.
Justman, E. W. El-Sadr, and S. K. Sia, “Microfluidics-based diagnostics
of infectious diseases in the developing world,” Nat. Med., vol. 17,
p. 1015-1019, Aug. 2011.
X. L. Mao and T. J. Huang, “Microfluidic diagnostics for the developing
world,” Lab Chip, vol. 12, pp. 1412–1416, 2012.
A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, M. J. Butte, and G. M. Whitesides, “Patterned paper as a platform for inexpensive, low-volume, portable bioassays,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., vol. 46, pp. 1318–1320, 2007.
A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, and G. M. Whitesides, “Threedimensional microfluidic devices fabricated in layered paper and tape,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 105, pp. 19606–19611, Dec. 16, 2008.
S. A. Klasner, A. K. Price, K. W. Hoeman, R. S. Wilson, K. J. Bell,
and C. T. Culbertson, “Paper-based microfluidic devices for analysis of
clinically relevant analytes present in urine and saliva,” Anal. Bioanal.
Chem., vol. 397, pp. 1821–1829, Jul. 2010.
K. Abe, K. Suzuki, and D. Citterio, “Inkjet-printed microfluidic multianalyte chemical sensing paper,” Anal. Chem., vol. 80, pp. 6928–6934,
Sep. 15, 2008.
K. Abe, K. Kotera, K. Suzuki, and D. Citterio, “Inkjet-printed paperfluidic immuno-chemical sensing device,” Anal. Bioanal. Chem., vol. 398,
pp. 885–893, Sep. 2010.
J. L. Delaney, C. F. Hogan, J. F. Tian, and W. Shen, “Electrogenerated
chemiluminescence detection in paper-based microfluidic sensors,” Anal.
Chem., vol. 83, pp. 1300–1306, Feb. 15, 2011.
X. Li, J. F. Tian, G. Garnier, and W. Shen, “Fabrication of paper-based
microfluidic sensors by printing,” Colloids Surfaces B-Biointerfaces,
vol. 76, pp. 564–570, Apr. 1, 2010.
Y. Lu, W. W. Shi, L. Jiang, J. H. Qin, and B. C. Lin, “Rapid prototyping
of paper-based microfluidics with wax for low-cost, portable bioassay,”
Electrophoresis, vol. 30, pp. 1497–1500, May 2009.
E. Carrilho, A. W. Martinez, and G. M. Whitesides, “Understanding wax
printing: A simple micropatterning process for paper-based microfluidics,” Anal. Chem., vol. 81, pp. 7091–7095, Aug. 15, 2009.
V. Leung, A. A. M. Shehata, C. D. M. Filipe, and R. Pelton, “Streaming potential sensing in paper-based microfluidic channels,” Colloids
Surfaces a-Physicochemical Eng. Aspects, vol. 364, pp. 16–18, Jul. 20,
2010.
G. Chitnis, Z. Ding, C. L. Chang, C. A. Savran, and B. Ziaie, “Lasertreated hydrophobic paper: An inexpensive microfluidic platform,” Lab
Chip, vol. 11, pp. 1161–1165, Mar. 21, 2011.
E. M. Fenton, M. R. Mascarenas, G. P. Lopez, and S. S. Sibbett, “Multiplex lateral-flow test strips fabricated by two-dimensional shaping,” ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, vol. 1, pp. 124–129, Jan. 2009.
A. C. Glavan, R. V. Martinez, E. J. Maxwell, A. B. Subramaniam,
R. M. D. Nunes, S. Soh, and G. M. Whitesides, “Rapid fabrication of
pressure-driven open-channel microfluidic devices in omniphobic R-F
paper,” Lab Chip, vol. 13, pp. 2922–2930, 2013.
C. M. Cheng, A. W. Martinez, J. L. Gong, C. R. Mace, S. T. Phillips,
E. Carrilho, K. A. Mirica, and G. M. Whitesides, “Paper-based ELISA,”
Angewandte Chemie-Int. Ed., vol. 49, pp. 4771–4774, 2010.
A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, Z. H. Nie, C. M. Cheng, E. Carrilho,
B. J. Wiley, and G. M. Whitesides, “Programmable diagnostic devices
made from paper and tape,” Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 2499–2504, 2010.
E. J. Maxwell, A. D. Mazzeo, and G. M. Whitesides, “Paper-based electroanalytical devices for accessible diagnostic testing,” Mater. Res. Soc.
Bulletin, vol. 38, pp. 309–314, Apr. 2013.
J. L. Osborn, B. Lutz, E. Fu, P. Kauffman, D. Y. Stevens, and P. Yager,
“Microfluidics without pumps: Reinventing the T-sensor and H-filter in
paper networks,” Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 2659–2665, Oct. 21, 2010.
S. Schumacher, J. Nestler, T. Otto, M. Wegener, E. Ehrentreich-Forster,
D. Michel, K. Wunderlich, S. Palzer, K. Sohn, A. Weber, M. Burgard, A.
Grzesiak, A. Teichert, A. Brandenburg, B. Koger, J. Albers, E. Nebling,
and F. F. Bier, “Highly-integrated lab-on-chip system for point-of-care
multiparameter analysis,” Lab Chip, vol. 12, pp. 464–473, Feb. 7, 2012.

PARK et al.: TOWARD INTEGRATED MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM (iMDX): PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

[130] X. Li, D. R. Ballerini, and W. Shen, “A perspective on paper-based
microfluidics: Current status and future trends,” Biomicrofluidics, vol. 6,
pp. 011301-1–011301-13, Mar. 2012.
[131] “Technology readiness assessment (TRA) guidance,” U.S. Dept. Defense, Washington, DC, USA, 2011.
[132] R. J. O’Connell, T. M. Merritt, J. A. Malia, T. C. VanCott, M. J. Dolan, H.
Zahwa, W. P. Bradley, B. M. Branson, N. L. Michael, and C. C. De Witt,
“Performance of the OraQuick rapid antibody test for diagnosis of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in patients with various levels
of exposure to highly active antiretroviral therapy,” J. Clin. Microbiol.,
vol. 41, pp. 2153–2155, May 2003.
[133] Y. J. Cha, Q. Park, E. S. Kang, B. C. Yoo, K. U. Park, J. W. Kim, Y.
S. Hwang, and M. H. Kim, “Performance evaluation of the OraQuick
hepatitis C virus rapid antibody test,” Ann. Lab. Med., vol. 33, pp. 184–
189, May 2013.

1521

[134] T. C. Granade, B. S. Parekh, S. K. Phillips, and J. S. McDougal, “Performance of the OraQuick and Hema-Strip rapid HIV antibody detection
assays by non-laboratorians,” J. Clin. Virol., vol. 30, pp. 229–232, Jul.
2004.
[135] A. Holguin, M. Gutierrez, N. Portocarrero, P. Rivas, and M. Baquero,
“Performance of OraQuick advance rapid HIV-1/2 antibody test for detection of antibodies in oral fluid and serum/plasma in HIV-1+ subjects
carrying different HIV-1 subtypes and recombinant variants,” J. Clin.
Virol., vol. 45, pp. 150–152, Jun. 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

