IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2049

Chemotherapy Drug Scheduling for the Induction
Treatment of Patients With Acute Myeloid Leukemia
E. Pefani, N. Panoskaltsis, A. Mantalaris, M. C. Georgiadis, and E. N. Pistikopoulos*

Abstract—Leukemia is an immediately life-threatening cancer
wherein immature blood cells are overproduced, accumulate in
the bone marrow (BM) and blood and causes immune and blood
system failure. Treatment with chemotherapy can be intensive or
nonintensive and can also be life-threatening since only relatively
few patient-specific and leukemia-specific factors are considered
in current protocols. We have already presented a mathematical
model for one intensive chemotherapy cycle with intravenous (IV)
daunorubicin (DNR), and cytarabine (Ara-C) [1]. This model is
now extended to nonintensive subcutaneous (SC) Ara-C and for a
standard intensive chemotherapy course (four cycles), consistent
with clinical practice. Model parameters mainly consist of physiological patient data, indicators of tumor burden and characteristics
of cell cycle kinetics. A sensitivity analysis problem is solved and
cell cycle parameters are identified to control treatment outcome.
Simulation results using published cell cycle data from two acute
myeloid leukemia patients [2] are presented for a course of standard treatment using intensive and nonintensive protocols. The
aim of remission–induction therapy is to debulk the tumor and
achieve normal BM function; by treatment completion, the total
leukemic population should be reduced to at most 109 cells, at
which point BM hypoplasia is achieved. The normal cell number
should be higher than that of the leukemic, and a 3-log reduction
is the maximum permissible level of population reduction. This
optimization problem is formulated and solved for the two patient
case studies. The results clearly present the benefits from the use
of optimization as an advisory tool for treatment design.
Index Terms—Cell cycle models, chemotherapy optimization,
mathematical modelling, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

CUTE myeloid leukemia (AML) is a cancer of the bone
marrow (BM) and blood wherein blood cells are unable to

Manuscript received October 4, 2013; revised January 24, 2014; accepted
March 16, 2014. Date of publication March 24, 2014; date of current version
June 14, 2014. This work was supported in part by European Research Council
(MOBILE, ERC Advanced Grant 226462), the Richard Thomas Leukaemia
Fund and CPSE Industrial Consortium. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
E. Pefani and A. Mantalaris are with the Centre of Process Systems Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: eleni.pefani08@imperial.ac.uk;
a.mantalaris@imperial.ac.uk).
N. Panoskaltsis is with the Department of Haematology, Imperial College
London, London HA1 3UJ, U.K. (e-mail: n.panoskaltsis@imperial.ac.uk).
M. C. Georgiadis is with the Department of Chemical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece (e-mail: mgeorg@
otenet.gr).
∗ E. N. Pistikopoulos is with the Centre of Process Systems Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, London SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail:
e.pistikopoulos@imperial.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2313226

develop or function normally, are overproduced at an immature
stage of development and overtake any normal elements remaining in the BM and blood. This uncontrolled growth compounds
the morbidity and mortality due to the disease by inhibiting development of healthy blood and immune cells through multiple
mechanisms [3], [4].
The main aim of treatment for AML is to reduce the leukemia
burden in the BM to the point of being undetectable which, if
maintained, is defined as cure. Treatment for AML in a fit patient is usually intensive chemotherapy. The first stage of treatment is induction chemotherapy which aims to achieve the rapid
restoration of normal BM function by reducing the total body
leukemic cell burden by 3-logs, during therapy at which point
BM hypoplasia will be achieved (total 109 leukemic cells). The
desired hypoplastic marrow will be characterized by a smaller
and weaker leukemic population and a higher proportion of normal BM cells normally functioning to support blood production
and the immune system. It is generally assumed, however, that
after completion of induction treatment, a substantial burden of
leukemia cells will remain undetected (minimal residual disease). In order to consolidate the remission and instigate cure,
postremission therapy is directed toward further reduction of
residual leukemia, which may be as high as 108 to 109 cells
when the disease is considered to be in complete morphologic
remission [5]. The elimination of these residual leukemic cells
may be accomplished by either cytotoxic chemotherapy, causing
significant myelosuppression or by replacement of a patient’s
stem cells through allogeneic transplantation, a procedure combining myeloablation and immunotherapy [5].
Chemotherapy treatment itself can be life-threatening since
only relatively few patient-specific and leukemia-specific factors
are considered in current protocols; choice of chemotherapy, intensity and duration often depends on either the availability of a
clinical trial, the treating physician’s experience or the collective
experience of the treating center, with significant international
protocol variability. There is, therefore, a need to optimize current treatment schedules for cancers such as AML in order to
limit toxicities, improve clinical trial pathways for new drugs,
and to enable personalized healthcare. Toward this end various
system engineering approaches have been developed for the automation of chemotherapy as treatment [6]–[10]. Various mathematical models have been developed for different cancer types
in an attempt to describe disease dynamics during chemotherapy and thereafter to propose the optimal treatment design in a
hypothetical average patient case study. Due to the hypothetical
design, these models do not include patient- and disease-specific
characteristics as parameters in the model, but rather use mean
values derived from a number of patient/volunteers studied. To

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE I
BRIEF GUIDE TO MODEL EQUATIONS

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the closed-loop system for the design of
optimal personalized chemotherapy protocols.

our knowledge, there is a lack of models that include personalized patient and disease information and which use optimization
methods in order to design optimal personalized chemotherapy
protocols.
In this paper, a closed-loop system is proposed and presented
for the design of optimal personalized chemotherapy protocols
(see Fig. 1). A mathematical model is presented that captures
AML disease dynamics under the treatment effect of two antileukemic agents: cytarabine (Ara-C) and daunorubicin (DNR).
The chemotherapy protocols followed are consistent with standard clinical practice [11] and consist of 1) DNR and Ara-C used
via the intravenous (IV) route (DA protocol) and 2) low dose
Ara-C administered via the subcutaneous (SC) route (LD Ara-C
protocol). Both DNR and Ara-C are considered cell-cycle specific agents. Specifically, Ara-C acts on the proliferation phase
of the cell cycle (S-phase) [12] and DNR acts on the S-phase
and the growth phase of the cell cycle (G1-phase) [13]. The
action of these drugs defines cell cycle as a critical factor within
the proposed mathematical model together with the pharmacology aspects of pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics
(PD) that provide the complete description of drug diffusion and
action after administration.
Sensitivity analysis method is applied on the developed model
that uses the model parameters and their assigned interpatient
variability ranges to identify the most crucial parameters that
control the treatment outcome. Published cell cycle data for two
patient case studies [2] are used for the simulation of AML
behavior and treatment outcomes for the patients under the
two studied treatment protocols. Moreover, the optimization
scheduling problem of chemotherapy treatment as an application is presented. The developed and presented optimization
algorithm is afterward applied to the studied patients and the results demonstrate the potential benefit of treatment design from
the use of mathematical modeling and optimization methods
(see Fig. 1).
II. DESCRIPTION OF THE MATHEMATICAL MODEL
The need for more personalized treatment design has been
previously discussed [14]–[16]; the main sources of inter- and
intra-patient variability are in the cellular kinetics of the tumor
and normal cell populations and in the kinetics of the anticancer agents when administered to patients. Thus, the desired

mathematical model for the simulation of patient behavior and
tumor response during chemotherapy should consist of three
parts: 1) the cell cycle model, which is the target of drug action,
2) PK, and 3) PD aspects that provide the complete description
of drug diffusion and action after administration.
A mathematical model for the treatment of AML using IV
DA protocol has already been developed and presented for the
first chemotherapy cycle of induction treatment [1]. This model
is extended in this paper to cover both IV and SC doses for the
full-length course of chemotherapy treatment (four successive
chemotherapy cycles) under DA and LD Ara-C protocols.
A brief guide of the proposed model is available in Table I.
Initially, drug dose (u,j ) of antileukemic agent j is injected into
the patient IV over duration,j [see (1)]. The inflow rate of drug j
is then transmitted by direct injection into the blood [see (2)] and
is circulated to the whole body. This inflow is the main input for
the calculation of drug concentration in the blood (CB,j ) taking
into account patient-specific parameters such as the total patient
blood volume (VB ), the blood flow in organs [Qi i: heart (H),
liver (Li), BM (M), Le (lean muscle), K (kidneys)] and Ci,j is
the concentration of drug j in organs i. The drug is transmitted
via the blood to the organs and the general mass balance in the
organs is represented in (3), that includes the elimination rate of
the drug in the liver (k,L ,j ). After drug elimination and action,
the drug is excreted through the urine with clearance rate (kk ,j )
from the kidneys.
The PD model is used for the calculation of drug effect, which
is the percentage of dead cells due to drug action. The main input for PD is the drug concentration in the location of the tumor
which, for AML is the concentration of drug in the BM (CM ,j )
as is calculated by the PK model. Em ax,j , E50,j and slope are
the PD parameters that depend on the drug, j. Slope parameter
has physical meaning only for DNR and thus for this drug the
PD model will be used in its current formulation as a sigmoid
Emax model [see (4)]. For Ara-C, slope equals unity and if it
is replaced in the PD formulation in (4) it will convert the expression to an E-max PD model. The effect, j, calculated by
the PD model is the percentage of cells which react with the
drug j and are killed. This effect is multiplied by the number

PEFANI et al.: CHEMOTHERAPY DRUG SCHEDULING FOR THE INDUCTION TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA

TABLE II
CHEMOTHERAPY OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM

of cells reacting with drug in order to calculate the number of
cells dead due to treatment and the cells which remain after
drug action. The mass balance is in (5), where, y is the cell
cycle phase (y: G1, S, G2M), Py is the cell population in phase
y and k is the transition rate of cells from one phase to its proceeding phase, i.e., ky −1 is the transition rate from phase y–1 to
phase y.
The SC route is an alternative route of drug delivery wherein
the chemotherapy is injected directly into the patient’s subcutaneous tissue (S). In this type of drug administration, the
drug inflow reaches the systemic circulation with a certain time
delay (absorption rate) and in a decreased amount (bioavailability) as some of the initial drug given is bound during absorption
through to the blood compartment. For the model of the SC
route, (2) will be replaced by (2a) and (2b) which account for
drug bioavailability (kb ) and absorption delay (ka ).
III. OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM FOR CHEMOTHERAPY
SCHEDULING
The aim of remission-induction therapy is to debulk the tumor and restore normal BM function. By the end of treatment,
the leukemic population should be reduced to a level of at
most approximately 109 cells, at which point BM hypoplasia
is achieved. Moreover, the normal cell population should be
higher than that of the leukemic and a 3-log reduction is set as
the maximum permissible level of population reduction. Treatment design will be mainly based on the control of four schedule
parameters, i.e., the drug used, the dose load, the dose duration,
and the number of dose applications. The optimization algorithm is presented in Table II.
The objective function is the minimization of the leukemic
cells (Cellsleuk ) subjected to the treatment schedule that is defined by the drug used (j), the dose load (un ,j ), the dose duration
(tn ,j ) the number of applications (NA) and the interval period
between two succeeding dose applications (τn ). The four first
parameters are the optimization schedule variables, whereas, the
interval period between two doses is a design variable defined
by preclinical drug testing and/or by treating clinicians.

2051

TABLE III
PK, PD, AND CELL CYCLE PARAMETERS AND INTERINDIVIDUAL RANGES
USED FOR MODEL SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS AND SI RESULTS

The feasible optimization solutions are defined by the set of
the equality and inequality constraints. Equality constraints consist of the expressions used to calculate the number of leukemic
and normal (Cellsnor ) cells throughout the treatment. Both cell
populations are functions of the drug PD effect (effectn ) that is
defined by the drug concentration profile at the tumor site, i.e.,
the BM (CM ,n ,j ). The drug concentration profile is determined
by the treatment inflow, a variable calculated by the schedule and design parameters. Moreover, the inequality constraints
consist of constraints on the number of normal cells with a maximum population reduction set to 3-log throughout the treatment
(path-constraint) and by treatment completion they will have to
be higher than that of the number of leukemic cells (end-point
constraint).
IV. RESULTS
A. Sensitivity Analysis
To gain a further understanding of the model and the crucial parameters affecting treatment outcome, i.e., the level
of leukemic cells, a global sensitivity analysis and quasiMonte Carlo-based high-dimensional model representation using Sobol’s indices was performed using the GUI-HDMR software [17]. The output of interest is the number of leukemic cells
and the parameters checked are for the cell cycle times, PK and
PD (see Table III).
Specifically, drug elimination rates in the liver were included
for the studied drugs as interpatient variability has been previously reported [18], [19]. Patient variability for DNR renal
clearance is well-documented; however, there is no measured

2052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE IV
HYPOTHESIZED PATIENT CASE STUDY BASED ON PUBLISHED DATA [2]

variability for renal excretion of Ara-C at the proposed doses
and this parameter is not included in the sensitivity analysis.
For analysis of interpatient PD variability, previously reported
parameters [20] have been used which include analysis of PD
action of DNR and Ara-C on BM samples of 179 patients with
AML.
For the calculation of parameters sensitivity index (SI), 40 000
simulations were run of all the possible combinations of the
tested parameters within their assigned ranges. The SI results
are presented in Table III.
The SA results clearly indicate that the duration of the cell
cycle phases is the most crucial parameter where the whole
cell cycle duration (Tc ) has an effect of 60.4% and the DNA
replication, S-phase (Ts ), has 27.05% effect on the treatment
outcome. Of note, the limit for a parameter to be considered
crucial for the measured variable is at least 10%.
B. Simulation Results
The presented model is used for the simulation analysis of
two different chemotherapy protocols, the LD Ara-C and DA
protocols, consistent with current standard clinical practice [11].
LD Ara-C consists of (SC) Ara-C doses of 20 mg administered
every 12 h for 10 days, whereas, DA consists of DNR 60 mg/m2
infused for 1 h IV on days 1, 3, and 5 with Ara-C 100 mg/m2
injected IV every 12 h for 10 days, also starting on day 1 of
the protocol. The two protocols (LD Ara-C and DA) are simulated for two patient case studies using previously published
AML- and patient-specific data [2]. Table IV lists the cell population and physiological characteristics of the two patient case
studies. For the normal cell population, published data from the
work of [21] are used and for the PK and PD information of
the two drugs, parameters in Table III are set to their nominal
values.
In clinical practice, AML treatment usually consists of four
chemotherapy cycles of either the nonintensive LD Ara-C or
the intensive DA protocol with interval recovery periods between chemotherapy cycles of approximately 25 days when no
drug is supplied. During this period, frequent blood tests take
place to monitor patient blood and immune system recovery, i.e.,

Fig. 2. Simulation results for the full treatment course using LD Ara-C and
DA protocols for patients 1 and 2.

the recovery of the level of leukocytes, platelets, and erythrocytes. Practical limitations restrict the acquisition of recurrent
data-points for the number of leukemic/blast cells throughout
treatment; the number of BM aspirations is limited for patient
safety and ethical reasons. This “black box” period increases
the uncertainty for the analysis of clinical data as the behavior
of leukemic cells is unknown.
Based on clinical experience over this period, recovery of
normal populations will be achieved with a risk of disease relapse. A 1-log leukemic cell increase is assumed in our model
that is expressed by cell cycle times Ts and Tc equal to 40 and
211 h, respectively [22] assuming a slower attrition rate. We
have assumed slower cell expansion as chemotherapy administration causing BM hypoplasia will also alter the BM microenvironment and initially limit the previously permissive effects
enabling rapid leukemic cell growth.
The disease behavior of the two patients presented in Table IV is simulated for the full course of treatment using DA
and LD Ara-C. The calculated normal and leukemic populations for each chemotherapy cycle of the two patients are shown
in Fig. 2.
Patient 1 shows resistance to LD Ara-C from the first cycle of
treatment as tumor debulking is suboptimal, to a level of less than

PEFANI et al.: CHEMOTHERAPY DRUG SCHEDULING FOR THE INDUCTION TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA

1-log reduction. At the start of the second cycle, the AML cell
number is 2.44·1011 (see Fig. 2), higher than the initial tumor
load of 1.82·1011 cells (see Fig. 2). This pattern is kept throughout treatment and, at completion of the four cycle course, AML
disease burden is maintained at 5.89·1011 cells, indicating that
this protocol may not by adequate to induce a remission for this
case study as indicated by model simulation; the leukemic population is consistently higher than that of the normal for the entire
course of nonintensive treatment. In contrast, the DA protocol
simulation clearly demonstrates effectiveness for Patient 1. The
leukemic burden decreases to <109 cells and BM hypoplasia
is achieved from the first chemotherapy cycle. Moreover, even
with the first cycle of DA, the leukemic population is debulked
to a level enabling a relative excess of normal cells (see Fig. 2),
achieving one of the major objectives of remission-induction for
AML.
For Patient 2, both protocols are effective at reducing the
leukemic burden to less than that required to achieve hypoplasia, i.e., 109 cells. However, with DA, the leukemic population
is undetectable from completion of the third cycle, whereas
residual disease (1.9·106 cells) remains after completion of LD
Ara-C, although still at a level compatible with the standard
definitions of complete morphologic remission, i.e., total AML
burden of <109 cells.
This difference in the level of leukemic burden throughout
the treatment course of Patient 2 is due to the increased toxicity
of DA that results in a decreased number of normal cells as well.
The calculated normal population reduction is 1-log after LD
Ara-C and 2-log after DA. Moreover, for both chemotherapy
protocols, the leukemic population of Patient 2 is decreased
from the very first chemotherapy cycle to a level at which the
normal population is higher. That is an important objective for
treatment with chemotherapy as it will allow for normal cells to
reconstitute the BM resulting in improved recovery.
Based on the current model, the treatment outcome of AML
depends on the initial tumor burden and on leukemia population
kinetics. As illustrated by simulation results, Patient 1 is a more
difficult clinical challenge compared with Patient 2. Patient 1
is resistant to LD Ara-C, whereas, DA affords better results—
regardless, leukemic disease burden is worse compared with that
of Patient 2. Patient 2 responds to both protocols (by definition
achieving morphologic complete remission), although DA is
superior since AML cells are undetectable after the third cycle
of simulated intensive treatment.
The difference in treatment outcomes is possibly due to the
difference in cell population kinetics between the two patients
(see Table IV). The initial leukemic burden of Patient 1 is slightly
higher compared with that of Patient 2. Moreover, Patient 1 has
higher duration of the G1 -phase, that is the cell cycle phase
unaffected by the actions of Ara-C and on which DNR is active.
This population is the nonproliferating leukemic population that
causes a time delay from the formation of a newly formed cell
until its duplication through S-phase. The longer the G1 -phase,
the more resistant the cell population to standard chemotherapy
since the cells untouched by DNR will continue into S-phase
and proliferate once treatment ceases. Moreover, Patient 1 also
has a lower duration of S-phase, indicating a high proliferation

2053

rate and faster disease expansion. These three characteristics,
long G1 -phase, short S-phase, and high proliferation rate are
indicative features of more resistant disease.
According to the current presented results, one would suggest
DA for the treatment of both patients. However, consideration of
AML population kinetics only is not sufficient for the selection
of treatment type or schedule for treatment of individual patients.
In clinical practice, choice of chemotherapy type and regimen
is determined by the treating clinician by combining personal
experience in treating the condition with patient-specific parameters such as age, physiologic state as determined by liver, heart,
pulmonary and kidney function, past medical history and potential tolerance (performance status) to the expected toxicities
of chemotherapy. For this reason, the purpose of this paper is
not to compare the two studied protocols but to optimize and
analyze them separately for each patient.

C. Optimization Results
The optimization algorithm presented in Section III is solved
for the two patients undergoing simulated treatment with the
two studied protocols [11], [19]. For Ara-C in the DA protocol,
the bounds of the total drug administration (sum of all applied
doses) are set between 50 and 4000 mg/m2 with dose duration between 1 min (rapid bolus dosing) to 24 h administration
(continuous infusion). In contrast, because DNR has a lower
threshold for potential toxic effects, the window for dose optimization is stricter with administration within 60 min on days
1, 3, and 5. The only independent variable for optimization of
DNR is the dose load that can be within 30–90 mg/m2 per dose.
Moreover, for LD Ara-C, the maximum dose load per day is
40 mg and doses are permitted up to four daily rapid bolus
doses or daily continuous doses applications for a maximum
period of 20 days.
This optimization problem was formed and solved using
gOPT [23] and the optimized treatment protocols for the two
patient case studies are presented below.
1) Optimization of the DA Protocol: The purpose of induction chemotherapy is to reduce the leukemic population to a
level below that represented in a hypoplasic BM (i.e., 109 cells)
and below the level of normal cells remaining while permitting a maximum 3-log reduction in the number of normal cells.
With these constraints, at the end of chemotherapy, a BM with a
recovering normal population and a weakened or ideally undetectable leukemic cell population will be achieved. Simulation
results reach the desired BM state for both patients analyzed
with DA (see Fig. 2). For this reason, the aim of DA optimization in these patients would not be to increase dose load, i.e.,
treatment toxicity, but to use the same total dose and optimize
for schedule. This optimization problem is solved for the two
patients using DA. Standard DA uses DNR 60 mg/m2 on days
1, 3, and 5 and Ara-C 100 mg/m2 every 12 h for days 1–10.
The optimized protocol suggests daily continuous doses of AraC at 200 mg/m2 /day whereas, the same schedule for DNR is
maintained as the toxicity window of this drug does not allow
for the flexibility of alternative optimization solutions. Fig. 3

2054

Fig. 3. Optimization results for the full treatment course using LD Ara-C
and DA protocols for patients 1 and 2 bolus doses or daily continuous doses
applications for a maximum period of 20 days.

summarizes the results using the optimized DA treatment protocol for both patients.
After completion of the first chemotherapy cycle with optimal
DA for Patient 1, the leukemic burden is further reduced with
a variance of 7.3·106 cells compared with that of unoptimized
DA at the same time point. This reduction will successively
affect the initial conditions of the following chemotherapy cycles resulting in further reduction of leukemic cell numbers and
which eventually become undetectable at completion of optimal
treatment.
Rapid tumor debulking with optimized DA occurs in Patient 2
where, after the first chemotherapy cycle, leukemic cells are further reduced by 1.2·105 cells compared with the same point after
an optimized DA. This difference leads to a decreased number
of the initial leukemic population for the second chemotherapy
cycle, by the end of which AML cells are undetectable and there
is no need for a third cycle. Moreover, the normal population
is kept to the same order of magnitude for both the simulation
and optimization DA protocols. This might be expected considering that normal BM compartments consist of proliferating
cells susceptible to chemotherapy as well as a relatively stable
supply (dependent on age) of quiescent stem and progenitor
cells which are in reserve for the purposes of BM reconstitution

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

when needed, e.g., after hypoplastic crisis [23]. Since the transition rate of quiescent cells depends on population depletion,
the population will be adjusted to the loss and the transition
rate will be adapted to keep the population constant [1]. In the
optimal protocol, since there is a constant infusion and fewer
dosing intervals, it may enable a constant transition of quiescent
cells to the proliferating state and result in more robust recovery
of normal BM.
2) Optimization of the LD Ara-C Protocol: Standard LD
Ara-C consists of 20 mg given SC every 12 h for 10 days on
each cycle of treatment. Patient 1 showed resistance to standard
LD Ara-C simulated treatment; leukemic burden decreased over
each chemotherapy cycle, but over the entire course of treatment,
the final leukemic population was higher than that at diagnosis.
For this reason, the optimization protocol suggests that for the
two first chemotherapy cycles, extended treatment duration to
20 days may be of benefit. For the first two cycles, a total dose
increase of 400 mg is suggested (i.e., 800 mg total dose over
the first two cycles), administered as continuous SC infusions.
Debulking is more effective and, after the end of the second cycle, leukemic cell burden is below the desired hypoplasia level
(see Fig. 3). For cycles 3 and 4, the total dose is kept to the
same levels as for that of the simulation protocol, i.e., 400 mg
but given as continuous daily SC infusions, as in cycles 1 and
2. At the end of optimal LD Ara-C treatment, there is a total
3-log reduction of leukemic cell burden (6.4·108 cells; Fig. 3).
This population is below the level defined by complete morphologic remission and below the level of remaining normal cells,
meeting the treatment objective. The reduction of normal cells
is higher over the first two chemotherapy cycles compared with
that during the last two cycles (see Fig. 3) as is expected since the
first cycles are of increased toxicity. Moreover, normal cell numbers are greater than that of leukemic onwards from the second
chemotherapy cycle (see Fig. 3). The optimization objective is to
achieve a higher normal population from the first chemotherapy
cycle, but given the aggressiveness of the leukemic population
of Patient 1, this constraint had to be relaxed for an optimal
solution to be found. Therefore, for Patient 1, the required difference between the normal and leukemic population is relaxed
over the first cycle to the maximum possible level and then over
the second cycle, the normal population is higher indicating a
healthier BM.
Patient 2 had a successful outcome with standard LD Ara-C
simulated treatment—leukemic cells were lower than the defined level of complete remission and normal cells were in excess. For this patient, the optimization problem will be to keep
the total dose constant, i.e., 400 mg total and determine if there is
an ameliorated treatment schedule. This optimization problem
is solved and the optimized protocol suggests daily continuous
SC infusion of 40 mg/day for 10 days per cycle of treatment.
During the optimized protocol, a reduction of the leukemic
burden is achieved, although the total dose is kept constant.
This difference increases as chemotherapy continues, due to the
lower initial tumor burden of each successive cycle, between
cycles 2 to 4. By treatment completion, the leukemic population
is further reduced with a variance of 1.86·106 cells compared
with that of the simulated standard LD Ara-C protocol.

PEFANI et al.: CHEMOTHERAPY DRUG SCHEDULING FOR THE INDUCTION TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA

V. DISCUSSION
This paper focuses on the design and optimization of
chemotherapy protocols for the treatment of AML. A mathematical model is developed and presented for the full course
of treatment using two standard chemotherapy protocols, one
intensive (DA) and the other nonintensive (LD Ara-C). The
developed model has been created in the gPROMS environment [24] and consists of a model simulator and an optimizer.
The required information input for both the simulator and the
optimizer consist of patient, disease, and drug information. Sensitivity analysis takes place in this paper using collectible data
from the open literature in order to define the parameter ranges
for PK, PD, and cell cycle. The results show that cell cycle
time is the crucial model parameter that highly affects disease
treatment outcome. However, it should be noted that the current
model described leukemic and normal population dynamics under the influence of two different chemotherapy protocols using
two antileukemic agents. If this model were expanded to cover
the comparison of different chemotherapy protocols with a variety of drugs, then the PK information would be equally important for the accurate estimation of treatment behavior. In this
case, detailed patient-specific information affecting PK properties such as metabolism, excretion, and clearance rate would be
required for the automation of treatment design.
Simulation results are presented over the two chemotherapy
protocols for two patient cases [2]. Patient 1 is a more difficult case study in terms of establishing a successful treatment
outcome, due to more aggressive leukemic cell population kinetics. Specifically, this patient shows a higher initial tumor burden
together with a lower proliferation S-phase and a prolonged
nonproliferation state of cells, with limited effect of chemotherapy. Simulation results of this patient show successful treatment
outcome only for DA, not for LD Ara-C during which leukemic
cells continue to increase. In contrast, Patient 2 displays a better simulated treatment outcome for both protocols. Of note,
leukemic cells become undetectable for this patient under the
simulated DA protocol.
The treatment objective is to reduce the leukemic population to a level of approximately 109 cells at which point BM
hypoplasia is achieved and, in terms of leukemia burden, is defined as complete morphologic remission. Moreover, the normal
cell population should be higher than that of the leukemic and
a 3-log reduction is the maximum level of population reduction permitted per chemotherapy cycle. In this way normal BM
reconstitution and function will be achieved and is one of the
main aims of remission induction therapy in AML. This optimization problem is solved using gOPT [24] for the two patient
case studies.
Overall, the optimization protocols are more efficient and
effective in disease management than the simulated protocols
applied in standard clinical practice. The common feature for
both patients and for both protocols is that continuous infusions
of Ara-C are preferred. Using these optimized protocols, BM
hypoplasia within each cycle and complete morphologic remission is achieved for all patients with an excess of normal cells
onward from the end of cycle 2. Continuous dosing is already

2055

performed in clinical practice in the U.S. for AML. Specifically,
the DA 7+3 protocol includes Ara-C 100–200 mg/m2 continuous IV infusion for seven days with standard infusion DNR 60–
90 mg/m2 /day for three days. However, the constraints in dosing
and duration in the optimization model are control variables that
would be modified based on the physician’s flexibility on treatment design and will be defined on a patient-by-patient basis,
i.e., a stricter window for dose ranges would be preferred for
patients with poorer performance status.
AML is a biologically and clinically heterogeneous disease
with diverse morphologic, immunophenotypic, and cytogenetic
characteristics. Numerous genetic and epigenetic abnormalities
as well as changes in the microenvironment in the BM have been
detected that lead to AML and, in current clinical practice, an attempt is being made to use some of these changes in the classification of disease, prognosis and treatment modifications toward
the design of more specialized clinical protocols. However, in
most patients, these factors are currently not useful in treatment
design as there is no robust methodology which can apply the
data to design of protocols in relation to outcome, nor which can
model treatment toxicities in a disease-specific, patient-specific
fashion. As most of these changes in AML relate to growth of the
leukemic clone(s), we have therefore taken the first step in this
work to use growth as related to cell cycle in addition to the PK
and PD to model optimized treatment schedules and outcomes.
This platform can now be verified in real time with datasets
from actual patients who have undergone treatment. Moreover,
further elaboration of the PK models of DNR and Ara-C used
herein with inclusion of more compartments such as the central
nervous system would be of interest in order to quantify other
organ-specific drug toxicities. Inclusion of these toxic effects
would pose a challenging optimization problem that would account for the patient-specific control of treatment toxicity in
other organs at risk and not only that of the normal BM considered in this paper. However, with currently available datasets, it
is unrealistic to derive a mathematical model which could accurately describe such an inclusive disease and treatment-response
system. In this case, a great pool of parameters would have to
be considered with no measured experimental values leading
to increased uncertainty in the simulation results. The leading
principle behind the current presented model is to include phenomena governed by parameters measured in clinical practice
(patient physiological characteristics, treatment schedule, blast
percentage in BM aspirate, BM cellularity) and parameters provided by pharmaceutical companies on drug properties (drug
half-life, clearance rate) and the only parameters not measured
routinely are the cell cycle duration times (a test which could
be easily added into routine clinical practice at patient diagnosis using current technology). The ultimate purpose of this
paper is to demonstrate the usefulness of mathematical modeling and optimization as advisory tools for treatment design.
Further work is required before the findings of this tool are
made useful and fit-for-purpose for use in treatment algorithms
in clinical practice. The patient case studies and simulated treatment outcomes demonstrate that chemotherapy regimens can
be improved by using the same total dose under an optimal

2056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

dosing treatment schedule. The derivation of such a system is
fundamental for automation and systematic design of optimal
personalized chemotherapy treatment protocols with improved
effectiveness and outcomes yet limited toxicity.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Pefani, N. Panoskaltsis, A. Mantalaris, M. C. Georgiadis, and
E. N. Pistikopoulos, “Design of optimal patient-specific chemotherapy
protocols for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia,” Comput. Chemical Eng. J., vol. 57, pp. 187–195, Oct. 2013.
[2] B. Clarkson, T. Ohkita, K. Ota, and J. Fried, “Studies of cellular proliferation in human leukemia. I. estimation of growth rates of leukemic and
normal hematopoietic cells in two adults with acute leukemia given single
injections of triatiated thymidine,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 46, pp. 506–529,
Dec. 1967.
[3] N. Panoskaltsis, C. D. L. Reid, and S. C. Knight, “Quantification and cytokine production of circulating lymphoid and myeloid cells in acute
myelogenous leukemia,” Leukemia, vol. 17, pp. 716–730, 2003.
[4] N. Panoskaltsis, “Dendritic cells in MDS and AML—Cause, effect or
solution to the immune pathogenesis of disease?” Leukemia, vol. 19,
pp. 354–357, 2005.
[5] W. J. Williams, E. Beutler, A. J. Erslev, and M. A. Lichtman, Hematology,
3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1983.
[6] P. Dua, V. Dua, and E. N. Pistikopoulos, “Optimal delivery of chemotherapeutic agents in cancer,” Comput. Chemical Eng., vol. 32, no. 1/2, pp. 99–
107, Jan. 2008.
[7] M. M. Hadjiandreou and G. D. Mitsis, “Mathematical modeling of tumor growth, drug-resistance, toxicity, and optimal therapy design,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 415–425, Sep. 6, 2013.
[8] M. R. Somayaji, M. Xenos, L. Zhang, M. Mekarski, and A. A. Linninger,
“Systematic design of drug delivery therapies,” Comput. Chemical Eng.,
vol. 32, pp. 89–98, Jan. 2008.
[9] C. Hall, E. Lueshen, A. Mosat, and A. A. Linninger, “Interspecies scaling
in pharmacokinetics: A novel whole-body physiologically based modeling framework to discover drug biodistribution mechanisms in vivo,” J.
Pharm. Sci., vol. 101, pp. 1221–1241, Mar. 2012.
[10] Y. Hsu and A. A. Linninger, “Quantitative integration of biological, pharmacokinetic, and medical imaging data for organ-wide dose-response predictions,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 625–632, Mar.
2013.
[11] D. W. Milligan, D. Grimwade, J. O. Cullis, L. Bond, D. Swirsky,
C. Craddock, J. Kell, J. Homewood, K. Campbell, S. McGinley,
K. Wheatley, and G. Jackson, “Guidelines on the management of acute
myeloid leukemia in adults,” Brit. J. Haematol., vol. 135, pp. 470–474,
2006.

[12] D. Kufe, D. Spriggs, E. M. Egan, and D. Munroe, “Relationships among
ara-CTP pools, formation of (Ara-C)DNA, and cytotoxicity of human
leukemic cells,” Blood, vol. 64, pp. 54–58, Jul. 1984.
[13] D. H. Huffman and N. R. Bachur, “Daunorubicin metabolism in acute
myelocytic leukemia,” Blood, vol. 39, pp. 637–643, May 1972.
[14] S. D. Undevia, C. G. Gomez-Abuin, and M. J. Ratain, “Pharmacokinetic
variability of anticancer agents,” Nature Rev., vol. 5, pp. 447–458, Jun.
2005.
[15] S. Garattini, “Pharmacokinetics in cancer chemotherapy,” Eur. J. Cancer,
vol. 43, pp. 271–282, Jan. 2007.
[16] M. A. G. Essers and A. Trumpp, “Targeting leukemic stem cells by breaking their dormancy,” Mol. Oncol., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 443–450, Oct. 2010.
[17] T. Zhien and A. S. Tomlin, “GUI–HDMR—A software tool for global
sensitivity analysis of complex models,” Environ. Modelling Software,
vol. 24, pp. 775–785, Jul. 2009.
[18] UCLH - Dosage Adjustment for Cytotoxics in Renal Impairment (Version 3) (Jan. 2009). [Online]. Available: http://www.
eastmidlandscancernetwork.nhs.uk/Library/RenalDosageAdjustments.pdf
[19] BC Cancer Agency. (2006). Cancer drug manual: Daunorubicin. [Online].
Available: http://www.bccancer.bc.ca/NR/rdonlyres/74387BC6-E514-4B
BC-9D0F-7AD044B0D287/28818/Daunorubi-cinmonograph_14Apr08_
RW.pdf
[20] A. Quartino, M. Karlsson, A. Freijs, N. Jonsson, P. Nygren, J. Kristensen,
E. Lindhagen, and R. Larsson, “Modeling of in vitro drug activity and
prediction of clinical outcome in acute myeloid leukemia,” J. Clin. Pharmacol., vol. 47, pp. 1014–1021, Aug. 2007.
[21] L. K. Andersen and M. C. Mackey, “Resonance in periodic chemotherapy:
A case study of acute myelogenous leukemia,” J. Theor. Biol., vol. 209,
pp. 113–130, Mar. 2001.
[22] A. Raza, H. D. Preisler, R. Day, Z. Yasin, M. White, J. Lykins, C. Kukla,
M. Barcos, J. Bennett, and G. Browman, “Direct relationship between
remission duration in acute myeloid leukemia and cell cycle kinetics: A
leukemia intergroup study,” Blood, vol. 76, pp. 2191–2197, Sep. 1990.
[23] B. Lewin, L. Cassimeris, V. R. Lingappa, and G. Plopper, Cells, 2nd ed.
Boston, MA, USA: Jones & Bartlett Publishers, 2007.
[24] gPROMS, Introductory user’s guide, release 2.2, Process Systems Enterprise Limited, London, U.K., 2003.

Authors’photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

