IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

2235

Position-Dependent Characterization of Passive
Wrist Stiffness
Autumn L. Pando, Hyunglae Lee, Will B. Drake, Neville Hogan, and Steven K. Charles∗

Abstract—Because the dynamics of wrist rotations are dominated by stiffness, understanding wrist rotations requires a
thorough characterization of wrist stiffness in multiple degrees of
freedom. The only prior measurement of multivariable wrist stiffness was confined to approximately one-seventh of the wrist range
of motion (ROM). Here, we present a precise nonlinear characterization of passive wrist joint stiffness over a range three times
greater, which covers approximately 70% of the functional ROM
of the wrist. We measured the torque–displacement vector field
in 24 directions and fit the data using thin-plate spline smoothing
optimized with generalized cross validation. To assess anisotropy
and nonlinearity, we subsequently derived several different approximations of the stiffness due to this multivariable vector field.
The directional variation of stiffness was more pronounced than
reported previously. A linear approximation (obtained by multiple linear regression over the entire field) was significantly more
anisotropic (eigenvalue ratio of 2.69 ± 0.52 versus 1.58 ± 0.39;
p < 0.001) though less misaligned with the anatomical wrist axes
(12.1 ± 4.6◦ versus 21.2 ± 9.2◦ ; p < 0.001). We also found that
stiffness over this range exhibited considerable nonlinearity—the
error associated with a linear approximation was 20–30%. The
nonlinear characterization over this greater range confirmed significantly greater stiffness in radial deviation compared to ulnar
deviation. This study provides a characterization of passive wrist
stiffness better suited to investigations of natural wrist rotations,
which cover much of the wrist’s ROM. It also provides a baseline for the study of neurological and/or orthopedic disorders that
result in abnormal wrist stiffness.
Index Terms—Impedance, nonlinear, passive, resistance, stiffness, wrist.

Manuscript received November 21, 2013; revised January 22, 2014 and March
18, 2014; accepted March 20, 2014. Date of publication March 25, 2014; date
of current version July 15, 2014. The work of H. Lee was supported in part by a
Samsung Fellowship. The work of N. Hogan was supported in part by the Eric
P. and Evelyn E. Newman Fund. A. L. Pando and H. Lee contributed equally to
this work. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. L. Pando was with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Brigham
Young University, Provo, UT 84602 USA. She is now with Quicken Loans Inc.
Scottsdale, AZ 85260 USA (e-mail: ladypando@gmail.com).
H. Lee was with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. He is now with the Sensory Motor Performance Program, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago,
IL 60611 USA (e-mail: hyunglae@alum.mit.edu).
W. B. Drake was with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Brigham
Young University, Provo, UT 84602 USA. He is now with B-K Manufacturing
Arab, AL 35016 USA (e-mail: will.b.drake@gmail.com).
N. Hogan is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: neville@mit.edu).
∗ S. K. Charles is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and
the Neuroscience Center, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602 USA
(e-mail: skcharles@byu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2313532

I. INTRODUCTION
ECADES of upper limb motor control studies have investigated how the neuromuscular system controls the inertial dynamics of shoulder and elbow movements (reaching),
recent studies have shown that the dynamics of wrist movements
are dominated by stiffness, not inertia [1]. Passive wrist stiffness is greater in radial–ulnar deviation (RUD) than in flexion–
extension (FE) and does not align with the anatomical axes [2],
creating nontrivial dynamics for which the neuromuscular system must compensate in order to make coordinated wrist movements. The effects of stiffness are observable in wrist movement
behavior: incomplete compensation for the passive stiffness of
the wrist creates the pattern of path curvature observed in wrist
movements [3], [4].
Despite its dominant role in wrist movements, the passive
stiffness of the wrist has only been measured in a small portion
of the range of motion (ROM) of the wrist joint. Although the
ROM of the wrist joint ranges from approximately 77◦ of flexion
(FLX) to 67◦ of extension (EXT) and from 21◦ of radial deviation (RD) to 36◦ of ulnar deviation (UD) [5], the only previous
in vivo measurement of passive wrist stiffness in both degrees
of freedom [2] was limited to 17◦ movements in FE and RUD,
which is approximately one-seventh of the wrist ROM and does
not permit reliable assessment of nonlinearity [see Fig. 1(a)]. In
contrast, natural wrist movements generally involve large portions of the wrist ROM [6], [7]. The purpose of this study was to
characterize the passive stiffness of the wrist joint over a much
greater range than previously measured to facilitate investigations of natural wrist behavior.
We measured and analyzed passive wrist stiffness1 in 15 subjects from 37◦ FLX to 36◦ EXT and from 16◦ RD to 28◦ UD
[see Fig. 1(a)], which covers approximately 42% of the ROM
of the wrist and 70% of wrist motion during activities of daily
living [6]. We found the stiffness over this range to exhibit considerable nonlinearity, with significantly greater stiffness in RD
than UD. The directional variation of stiffness differed significantly from that measured over the smaller range [2], being
both more anisotropic and less misaligned with respect to the
anatomical axes (p < 0.001 in both cases). These data—the
nonlinear vector field and its linear approximations—provide
a more accurate and detailed characterization of the wrist to

D

1 Because stiffness is a locally linear approximation of the torquedisplacement relationship, a nonlinear torque-displacement relationship is more
correctly termed “nonlinear static mechanical impedance” than “nonlinear stiffness” (static mechanical impedance refers to the static component of the relationship between displacement and the torque it evokes). However, because
“stiffness” is a simpler and more familiar term, we use it throughout this paper
to describe both linear and nonlinear torque–displacement relationships.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

USA). This robot is capable of moving the wrist independently
in FE, RUD, and forearm pronation–supination (PS) [8]. The
robot sensed displacement in each degree of freedom (DOF)
at 200 Hz with a resolution of 0.0006◦ and was able to apply
1.95 Nm of torque in FE and RUD. Each subject was seated with
their right arm attached to the robot in a parasagittal plane. The
shoulder was in approximately 0◦ of abduction, 25◦ of FLX,
and 0◦ of internal rotation, with the elbow flexed at approximately 65◦ to place the forearm in the horizontal plane. The
subject’s distal forearm was fastened with a strap to a custommade attachment plate [indicated by “1” in Fig. 1(b)] fixed to
the PS stage of the robot (which remained stationary during
the experiment). The strap was attached to the PS stage [at “4”
in Fig. 1(c)] and this plate [“1” in Fig. 1(b)] and pressed the
dorsal aspect of the distal forearm (more specifically the dorsal
tubercle of the radius and the dorsal-most protuberance of the
ulnar head) against this plate. We found previously [3] that this
arrangement places the forearm in a neutral position compatible
with the ISB standard [9] and minimizes movement in PS. The
hand was attached at the metacarpals to the robot end-effector
via a custom-made interface [see “2” in Fig. 1(b)]. This interface
attached to the linear bearing of the robot [see “3” in Fig. 1(b)]
and was machined to be concave on the side on which it interfaced with the hand to wrap around the back of the hand.
Importantly, this interface allowed the fingers to be free and the
wrist and finger muscles to relax as much as possible. To record
the amount of muscle activity during the stiffness measurement,
surface EMG sensors (Trigno by Delsys, Boston, MA, USA)
were placed over the flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris,
extensor carpi radialis, and extensor carpi ulnaris muscles and
set to sample 200 times per second.
Fig. 1. (a) Range of motion over which stiffness was measured in this study
(“Current range,” filled black circles), compared to the only previous 2-DOF
measurement of wrist stiffness [2] (“Prior range,” dashed circle). Also shown
are the approximate full range of motion of the wrist (“Wrist ROM,” solid black
line, adapted from [5]) and the robot (“Robot ROM,” dashed rectangle). The
actual displacement (filled black circles) differed from the programmed targets
(“Target,” open circles) because of the control system and torque limit of the
robot motors (see Methods). Negative extension and radial deviation represent
flexion and ulnar deviation, respectively. (b–c) Photo of setup. Each subject’s
distal forearm was strapped to the pronation-supination (PS) stage of the robot
(which remained stationary during the experiment) via a strap attached to the PS
stage (4) and a custom-made plate (1). The hand was attached at the metacarpals
(2) to the end-effector of the wrist robot (3).

support studies of wrist motor control, and also a baseline for
evaluating wrist pathologies.
II. METHODS
A. Subjects
Fifteen right-handed individuals (seven male, eight female;
age range 20–27 years; BMI range 16.8–24.7) with no selfreported neuromuscular or biomechanical disorders participated
in this study. Following procedures approved by Brigham Young
University’s Institutional Review Board, informed consent was
obtained from all subjects.
B. Experimental Setup
Stiffness was measured using an InMotion Wrist Rehabilitation Robot (Interactive Motion Technologies, Watertown, MA,

C. Protocol
The robot rotated each subject’s wrist between a center target at neutral wrist position (defined below) and 24 peripheral
targets requiring FE, RUD, or combinations [see Fig. 1(a)].
The movement cycle began in pure EXT and proceeded counterclockwise, with five repetitions per target before moving
counterclockwise to the next target. Targets were placed on
the periphery of a rectangle close to the ROM limits of the
wrist robot. The robot was commanded to reach each target via
proportional-derivative control (with proportional and derivative gains of 10 Nm/rad and 0.1 Nms/rad, respectively). The
robot proceeded toward each target until it either reached the
target (within the error allowed by the controller gains) or the
torque limit of the robot motors (1.95 Nm in FE and RUD)
[see Fig. 1(a)]. The torques applied by the robot motors were
estimated from the voltages sent to the servo-amplifiers (essentially voltage-controlled current sources for the motors). From
the estimated motor torques, we calculated the torques at the
robot end-effector. The relationships between the voltage sent
to the servo-amplifiers, the current sent to the motors, and the
resulting torques were previously characterized in detail for the
similar prototype robot [10].
FE and RUD were defined to be in neutral position when the
long axis of the third metacarpal aligned with the long axis of the

PANDO et al.: POSITION-DEPENDENT CHARACTERIZATION OF PASSIVE WRIST STIFFNESS

forearm [9]. More specifically, the wrist was in neutral FE and
RUD when the elbow joint center (EJC), the wrist joint center
(WJC), and the center of the head of the third metacarpal were
aligned. The EJC was defined midway between the medial and
lateral epicondyles. The WJC was defined proximodistally midway between the distal end of the radius and the proximal end
of the third metacarpal, and mediolaterally and ventrodorsally
midway between the medial and lateral aspects and midway
between the ventral and dorsal aspects of the distal forearm,
respectively.
When moving a joint from rest, the initial stiffness is often
significantly larger than the stiffness of the remaining portion
of the movement [11], [12]. To enable the later removal of
this short-range stiffness effect, we commanded the robot to
start each outbound movement 2◦ “behind” the center target (in
the direction opposite of the peripheral target) and make one
continuous movement from there through the center target to
the peripheral target. Inbound movements were commanded to
start from the peripheral target and travel through the center
target to 2◦ on the other side of the center target, from where the
next repetition immediately followed.
Subjects were asked to relax their arm throughout the experiment. To avoid evoking reflex action, the robot was programmed
to rotate the wrist smoothly (following a minimum jerk profile)
and at a low average velocity of 5.2◦ /s. The actual average velocity of the robot (different from the programmed velocity because
of the controller dynamics) was 4.3◦ /s. The activity of the four
prime wrist muscles was monitored to ensure that the measured
stiffness was indeed passive. The entire stiffness measurement
lasted 35 min. After the robot measured stiffness, we measured
subjects’ maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) three times
in each of the four instrumented wrist muscles by asking subjects to flex or extend their wrist as hard as they could (close to
neutral FE) while we resisted by pressing against their hand and
supporting their distal forearm.
D. Data Processing
To remove the effects of short-range stiffness from the data
(see above), the displacement and torque data of the first 2◦
were removed from each movement. The recorded torque included not only the torque required to overcome the stiffness of
the wrist joint, but also the torque necessary to overcome the dynamics of the robot and the gravitational effects of the hand. Because these nonstiffness-related torques are position dependent,
they would affect the estimated stiffness unless removed. These
torques are subject specific, so we measured them separately
for each subject by rerunning the entire protocol with a weight
(in the place of the subject’s hand) under similar conditions: the
weight was matched to the subject’s hand mass and placed at
the center of mass of the subject’s hand (estimated using regression equations from [13]) relative to the robot, and the robot
FE and RUD offsets were the same as in the subject’s original
measurement. The nonstiffness-related torques were then subtracted from the total recorded torque data. We also observed
effects due to hysteresis, which required greater torques for
outbound movements (loading responses) than inbound move-

2237

ments (unloading responses). For inbound movements, hysteresis created a discontinuity around the neutral position, which we
removed by shifting the inbound torque by the mean distance
between outbound and inbound torque (this was done separately
for each movement direction).
E. Analysis
1) EMG: After subtracting the mean EMG from the raw
EMG (separately for each movement), we rectified and low-pass
filtered the remaining EMG signal using a second-order Butterworth filter with cut-off frequency at 3 Hz. We then averaged
the EMG over the duration of each movement and normalized
by the MVC for each muscle. We then compared this average
to the baseline level, estimated as the average EMG over the 1-s
period at the beginning of each movement before the wrist had
displaced more than 0.5% of its total displacement (we excluded
movements whose displacement after 1 s exceeded 0.5% of the
total displacement).
2) Stiffness Estimation: The multivariable torque–angle relation of the passive wrist was represented as a vector field V :
(τFE , τRUD ) = V (θFE , θRUD )

(1)

where θFE and θRUD are angular displacements in the FE and
RUD directions, respectively, and τFE and τRUD are the corresponding applied torques. The components of the vector field
were estimated as scalar functions φ1 and φ2 based on thin-plate
spline (TPS) smoothing [14] with generalized cross validation
(GCV) [15]:
τFE = φ1 (θFE , θRUD )

(2)

τRUD = φ2 (θFE , θRUD ) .

(3)

This method provides an optimal compromise between fidelity to the data and roughness of the solution, and the method
is sufficiently robust to eliminate the effect of measurement
noise, even when the amount of noise is unknown [15]. A more
detailed explanation of the vector field decomposition is provided in Appendix A of [16].
Each of the five measurement repetitions was approximated
separately by TPS smoothing with GCV (described above) and
averaged into a single vector field to estimate a continuous field
(separately for outbound and inbound data). This continuous
vector field approximation (CVFA) is a complete characterization of wrist stiffness. To simplify further analysis, we used it to
evaluate local stiffness at any point of interest as a linear approximation to the torque–displacement vector field. In particular,
we computed a “directional stiffness,” Knon−linear for each of
the 24 directions, calculated as the slope of the least squares
linear fit between displacement in that direction and the component of the restoring torque in that direction.2 Included in the fit
were all points (from the CVFA) in a given direction between
neutral position and the edge of the CVFA, which was bounded
by a box with sides at 14◦ in RD, 29◦ in UD, and 37◦ in FLX
and EXT (the values for the bounding box were chosen based
2 Note that this directional stiffness ignores torque components orthogonal to
the displacement and hence cannot be used to assess nonconservative behavior.

2238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

on actual displacements). To quantify how well the linearized
fit approximated the nonlinear torque data in that direction, we
calculated the square of the Pearson correlation coefficient R2
for each movement direction.
Although this directional stiffness was estimated as a linear fit
in each direction, over the entire range it is a nonlinear estimate
because stiffness is not the same in opposite directions. Finally,
we also computed a linear estimate of stiffness about the origin
by applying multiple linear regression to the entire range (as
opposed to each direction), producing a single 2 × 2 stiffness
matrix [2].
We performed Jarque–Bera tests (MATLAB’s jbtest function)
of normality of the data and a one-way ANOVA to examine differences in stiffness between FLX, EXT, RD, and UD. Furthermore, we used Tukey’s honestly significant difference (HSD)
test to find pairs that differed significantly from each other.
3) Nonlinearity of Wrist Stiffness: To evaluate the degree
to which passive wrist stiffness is nonlinear, we compared our
nonlinear estimate to our linear estimate by calculating for each
direction the difference in stiffness, normalized by the directional stiffness in that direction
Kerror = |Klinear − Knon -linear | /Knon -linear

(4)

where Knon -linear is the directional stiffness (defined above)
and Klinear is the linear stiffness in each direction. To provide
a fair comparison with Knon -linear (which only includes stiffness along the displacement, as described above), we derived
Klinear separately for each direction from the conservative portion of the stiffness matrix as the ratio between the component
of the restoring torque in the direction of displacement and the
corresponding displacement.
4) Spring-Like Property of the Wrist: In general, a vector
field can be decomposed according to Helmholtz’s theorem into
two components: conservative and nonconservative. The conservative component is the gradient of a scalar function, and there is
no work associated with a closed-loop integral within a conservative vector field. In contrast, the nonconservative component
exhibits a rotational field (aka curl field), and closed-loop displacements add or remove energy from the system. Energetically
passive systems, such as purely elastic springs, are perfectly
conservative. However, due to the possible presence of reflex
feedback coupling motions of one DOF to muscles acting on
another, the passive wrist may be nonconservative, in particular
if the gains of coupling feedback are unequal [17]. To quantify
the extent to which our measurements of passive wrist stiffness
were nonconservative, we decomposed the stiffness matrix K
into its conservative component (Ks , the symmetric part of K)
and nonconservative component (Ka , the antisymmetric part
of K) and compared their relative magnitudes. Specifically, we
calculated the ratio of the square roots of the determinants of
each component


ρ = det (Ka )/ det (Ks ).
(5)
For a system to be fundamentally spring-like requires that
the nonconservative component of the stiffness be zero, i.e.,
det (Ka ) = 0 and ρ = 0. A more detailed discussion of springlike behavior is provided in Appendixes B and C of [16].

To determine whether any nonconservative components were
significant, we compared them to any nonconservative components in the data taken during the measurement with the mass in
place of the human subject’s hand (described above). Because
the mass was completely passive, any nonconservative components identified were clearly artifacts, possibly due to noise
from sensors and actuators. Nonconservative stiffness components measured with a human subject that were greater than
these artifactual components were regarded as noteworthy. One
subject’s value of ρ was more than three standard deviations
from the mean of all subjects. This subject’s data were excluded
from further analysis.
5) Representations of Wrist Stiffness: The nonlinear and linear stiffness estimates were represented as follows. Nonlinear
stiffness was graphed as a polar plot representing stiffness in
each movement direction, the angle corresponding to the direction of displacement, and the radius corresponding to stiffness
in that direction. To allow graphical comparison of our linear
stiffness estimate to both our nonlinear estimate and to previous measurements of linear stiffness, we represented our linear
stiffness estimate as a polar plot and as a stiffness ellipse.3 The
stiffness ellipse marks the locus of the restoring torque due to
a unit displacement in each direction and is characterized by
its shape, orientation, and area [18]. The lengths and directions of the semimajor axes of the stiffness ellipse are given by
the eigenvalues (λ1 and λ2 , with λ1 ≥ λ2 ) and eigenvectors of
the associated stiffness matrix, respectively. We represented the
shape of the ellipse by the ratio of the semimajor axis lengths
(computed as λ1 /λ2 ), the orientation by the angle between the
major axis (given by the eigenvector associated with λ1 ), and
the RUD axis, and we computed the area of the ellipse as πλ1 λ2 .
III. RESULTS
Raw displacement, torque, and EMG data for a representative
movement involving FE and RUD are shown in Fig. 2. Movement in PS was minimal, with a total range of less than 2◦ for
all subjects (not shown).
A. EMG Analysis
In general, subjects were able to maintain their wrist muscles
in a relaxed condition during the experiment: when averaged
over all subjects, the activation levels of flexors (FCR and FCU)
and extensors (ECR and ECU) were less than 1.4 and 3.2%
of MVC, respectively (see Table I). There was no significant
difference between this muscle activity and the estimated noise
levels (p > 0.05 for all muscles; Table I).
B. Stiffness Estimation
A representative vector field approximation for a single repetition of a subject’s outbound data is shown in Fig. 3. This is an
3 It is common to only plot the conservative portion of the stiffness matrix
because only that portion is guaranteed to have real eigenvalues, from which the
shape, orientation, and area of the ellipse are calculated. Because the nonconservative portion of passive systems is small in general (it would be zero in the
absence of experimental error) and in our experiment (see Results), the ellipses
of the total and the conservative portion of the stiffness matrix are similar.

PANDO et al.: POSITION-DEPENDENT CHARACTERIZATION OF PASSIVE WRIST STIFFNESS

2239

Fig. 2. Raw displacement, torque, and EMG data, all from the same representative movement involving both FE and RUD. (a) Displacements that occurred
during the measurement with the subject are shown in black, whereas the displacements without the subject (with a mass in place of the subject’s hand) are in
gray. The data preceding the circles were considered to be in the range of short-range stiffness and were excluded from further analysis. (b) The torques that
produced the displacements shown in A. Negative torque in extension and radial deviation represent torque in flexion and ulnar deviation, respectively. Black and
gray colors indicate measurements with and without the subject, as in A. (c) Raw EMG data in each of the four measured wrist muscles (distributed vertically
for visualization). The bar on the bottom right shows 10% MVC. (d) Detrended, rectified, and low-pass filtered EMG signals, as well as their averages over the
duration of a single movement. The order of muscles (top to bottom) is the same as in c.

TABLE I
MUSCLE ACTIVITY AND ESTIMATED NOISE LEVEL, EXPRESSED AS A
PERCENTAGE OF MVC

extremely precise characterization: the mean deviation between
the “raw” torque measurements and the scalar function estimates
was less than 0.0005 Nm for both τFE and τRUD in all subjects,
which is about 200 times smaller than the measurement error
of the apparatus (about ±0.1 Nm). This precision emerges from
the averaging provided by the thin-plate spline smoothing we
employed. The five repetitions were approximated separately
for both outbound and inbound data. No statistically significant
difference was found between them. Averaged over all subjects,
p = 0.70 ± 0.07, 0.67 ± 0.08, 0.65 ± 0.09, and 0.60 ± 0.09
(mean ± SE) for φ1 outbound, φ1 inbound, φ2 outbound, and
φ2 inbound, respectively (with all subjects satisfying p > 0.05
in all cases and power ≈ 1.0), confirming the repeatability of
our measurements.

We averaged the repetitions into a single vector field which
provides the most complete representation of passive wrist
stiffness, and we identified linear and nonlinear (directional)
stiffness estimates from this single vector field. Clear directional variation of wrist stiffness was observed in FE–RUD
space (F3 , 52 = 27.29, p ≈ 0.0 when KRD , KUD , KFLX , and
KFLX were compared): stiffness in the FE direction was consistently lower than in the RUD direction for both nonlinear
and linear stiffness estimates, resulting in an anisotropic shape
[see Fig. 4(a)]. In addition, the nonlinear stiffness estimate
showed differences in FLX versus EXT and RD versus UD
which were qualitatively similar across subjects: 11 out of 14
subjects showed a general trend of KRD > KUD > KEXT >
KFLX , while two subjects showed a pattern of KRD > KUD >
KFLX > KEXT and 1 subject the pattern of KUD > KRD >
KEXT > KFLX . Considering all subjects together, KRD was
significantly higher than KUD (F1,26 = 6.26, p = 0.019), while
KFLX and KEXT were not significantly different (F1,26 =
2.36, p = 0.137), that is KRD > KUD > KEXT ≈ KFLX . Directional stiffness values, estimated as separate linear fits in
each movement direction, with their corresponding R2 values,
are given in Table II. High R2 values in all movement directions
demonstrated that estimating stiffness for each movement direction as a linear fit was a good approximation of the nonlinear
field.
The linear approximation of the entire CVFA is presented
as the conservative portion of the stiffness matrix and as the

2240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

IV. DISCUSSION
Because stiffness effects dominate the dynamics of wrist rotations, understanding how the neuromuscular system controls
wrist rotations requires a knowledge of wrist stiffness throughout the ROM of the wrist. Here, we provide an extremely precise
characterization of relaxed wrist stiffness over the central 42% of
the ROM of the wrist, which covers approximately 70% of wrist
activity during activities of daily living [6]. While our findings
agree qualitatively with a previous study, which covered 14% of
wrist ROM [2], we found stiffness over this three-times greater
range to be significantly more anisotropic but less misaligned
with the anatomical axes, and we provide both linear and nonlinear estimates of passive wrist stiffness over this greater range.
A. Comparison to Previous Studies

Fig. 3: Representative continuous vector field approximation for a single subject, shown as (a) the torque in extension versus extension and radial deviation
and (b) the torque in radial deviation versus extension and radial deviation
(negative extension and radial deviation represent flexion and ulnar deviation,
respectively). The red data points are the torque compensated measurements,
which were approximated by the surfaces representing scalar functions (φ 1 ,φ 2 )
obtained by thin-plate spline smoothing with generalized cross validation. EXT
and RD represent extension and radial deviation, respectively.

anisotropy, angle, and area of the corresponding stiffness ellipse (see Table III), and displayed as a polar plot [see Fig. 4(b)]
and as a stiffness ellipse [see Fig. 4(c)]. We compared the linear stiffness estimate to the nonlinear stiffness estimate using
Kerror , which represents the normalized difference between the
polar plots of the nonlinear stiffness [see Fig. 4(a)] and linear
stiffness [see Fig. 4(b)] in each direction. Averaged over all directions, Kerror was 0.33 ± 0.04 (mean ± SE of all subjects),
0.20 ± 0.03, and 0.25 ± 0.03 for outbound, inbound, and combined data, respectively. Errors substantially increased when
only the half of the data points nearest to the limit of the ROM
were used: Kerror was 0.57 ± 0.11, 0.27 ± 0.04, and 0.34 ±
0.05 for outbound, inbound, and combined data, respectively.
C. Spring-Like Property of the Passive Wrist
A representative decomposition of one subject’s outbound
torque–displacement vector field into conservative and nonconservative components is shown in Fig. 5(a). As with this
subject, in general, the nonconservative component was substantially smaller than the conservative components: averaged
over all subjects, ρ (4) was 0.131, 0.071, 0.102 for outbound, inbound, and combined data, respectively. Three subjects showed
nonconservative components which were modest compared to
conservative components but statistically significantly different
from zero. An example subject’s data exhibiting nonconservative components is shown in Fig. 5(b).

In addition to providing stiffness over a range three times
greater than previous studies, the current study involved several
innovations designed to provide a more accurate measurement
of wrist stiffness. These included 1) a custom-built attachment
device that encouraged relaxation of finger and wrist muscles,
2) placement of the wrist in standard neutral position to be
consistent between subjects and allow comparison with future
studies, 3) removal of short-range stiffness effects, 4) compensation for gravity and robot dynamics on a subject-by-subject
basis, and 5) a nonlinear multi-DOF data fit using thin-plate
spline smoothing optimized with generalized cross validation.
To relate our 2-DOF stiffness measurement to prior studies,
which are almost all limited to a single DOF, we compared the
diagonal elements of our stiffness matrix (which represent stiffness in pure FE and RUD) to the prior measurements. Note that
our matrix elements were obtained through regression over the
entire vector field (in both DOF) and therefore represent stiffness
over a much larger range than 1-DOF measurements. Previous
1-DOF measurements ranged from less than 0.15 Nm/rad [19]
and 0.32–0.7 Nm/rad [20] to 0.88 Nm/rad [2], 1 Nm/rad [11],
2.2 Nm/rad [21], and 3 Nm/rad [22]. The 20-fold range of
these previous measurements likely reflects different experimental procedures; nevertheless our average stiffness in FE
(0.84 Nm/rad) falls in the middle of it. Our measurement of
stiffness in RUD (see K22 = 2.02 Nm/rad in Table III) is higher
than the two previous single-DOF measurements of 1.45 [23]
and 1.63 Nm/rad [2]. Since stiffness increases toward the limits
of the wrist’s ROM, the increased RUD stiffness seen in our
study is likely due to the larger range over which we measured
stiffness (the range over which we measured FE stiffness was
also larger than in prior studies but did not approach the limit of
the wrist’s ROM in FE).
To relate the conservative portion of the stiffness matrix (including off-diagonal elements) to prior work, we compared our
measurement of stiffness to the only previously published measurement of coupled wrist stiffness [2] and found similarities and
differences. We compared the linear stiffness estimates from the
two studies by comparing the shape, orientation, and size of the
stiffness ellipses (see Table III). While our findings are qualitatively similar (the shape is anisotropic, with greater stiffness
in RUD than in FE; the orientation of the ellipse is slightly

PANDO et al.: POSITION-DEPENDENT CHARACTERIZATION OF PASSIVE WRIST STIFFNESS

2241

Fig. 4. Stiffness measurements averaged over all subjects (left column) and for individual subjects (right column). (a) Polar plots of directional stiffness. The
angle corresponds to the direction of displacement, and the radius corresponds to stiffness in that direction (see Methods for details). (b) Polar plots of the (linear)
stiffness matrix. (c) Stiffness ellipses of the conservative portion of the linear stiffness, which mark the locus of restoring torque due to unit displacements in
all directions. Negative torque in extension (EXT) and radial deviation (RD) represent torque in flexion and ulnar deviation, respectively. In all plots in the left
column, the thick solid line represents the mean stiffness, and the gray bands represent the mean ± 1 standard error. The solid thin line and the dotted thin line in
a represent the mean stiffness for outbound and inbound movements, respectively. The outbound and inbound means are also included in b and c but are barely
distinguishable from the overall mean. All plots in the right column depict the average of outbound and inbound stiffness for each subject.

tilted counterclockwise relative to the anatomical axes; and the
size of ellipse is highly variable among subjects), we found that
our stiffness measurements were significantly more anisotropic
(p < 0.001; eigenvalue ratio of 2.69 ± 0.52 versus 1.58 ± 0.39)
and less tilted (p < 0.001; 12.1 ± 4.6◦ versus 21.2 ± 9.2◦ ), with
a marginally significant difference in the area of the stiffness
ellipse (p = 0.054; 5.61 ± 3.42 versus 7.19 ± 3.41).

We believe that these differences may be due to the following (deliberate) methodological differences. First, the current
measurement covers a range that is three times greater. Second,
in the previous study, the origin of the stiffness measurement
was chosen as the position for grasping a handle, while we
placed the origin in standard neutral wrist position [9] to allow
for widespread comparison with future studies. Compared to

2242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

TABLE II
DIRECTIONAL STIFFNESS AND CORRESPONDING R2 VALUES

As in the previous 2-DOF study [2], intersubject differences
in the shape and orientation of wrist stiffness were small (for all
subjects, stiffness is greater in RUD than FE, with the direction
of greatest stiffness slightly pronated from pure RUD), while
differences in the magnitude of wrist stiffness were relatively
large (see Fig. 4 and Table III). This is to be expected: the
shape and orientation reflect the anatomical geometry of the
wrist bones and tendon routing, which is relatively stereotyped
between subjects, whereas stiffness magnitude increases with
the size of muscles and ligaments (as do springs arranged in
parallel), which varies greatly between subjects.
B. Comparison Between Nonlinear and Linear Estimates

TABLE III
LINEAR STIFFNESS

The simplified linear and nonlinear estimates of stiffness in
this study were compared to evaluate the degree to which passive
wrist stiffness is nonlinear over this range. While both methods
revealed that wrist stiffness is anisotropic and pronated relative
to the anatomical axes, the estimation error (measured as Kerror )
was substantial for both outbound, inbound, and combined data
(higher than 30%, 20%, and 25%, respectively). Furthermore,
the finding that this error increased substantially toward the
limit of the ROM of the wrist implies that the accuracy of a
linear representation of stiffness (from multiple linear regression) is best for smaller ranges and decreases as the size of
the movement range increases. Furthermore, a linear analysis is
unable to discern differences in stiffness in opposite directions,
whereas the nonlinear estimate revealed substantial differences
KRD > KUD > KEXT > KFLX ).
C. Spring-Like Behavior

our study, subjects in the previous study were in approximately
20◦ of EXT and 2◦ of UD, with the anatomical axes pronated
approximately 11◦ relative to the robot. Third, in the previous
study, the fingers were flexed around a handle. In our study,
we deliberately chose to leave the fingers unconstrained to allow the wrist to be in standard neutral position and to encourage
finger and wrist muscles to relax fully. Fourth, the previous study
accounted for gravity and robot dynamics through an average
measurement of these effects, while we measured and removed
these effects separately for each subject.

An ideal mechanical spring is energetically passive. Comparison of the conservative and nonconservative components of the
torque field provided a quantification of the energetic passivity
of the passive wrist joint. Most subjects’ nonconservative component was statistically indistinguishable from zero, indicating
that the wrist of young, healthy subjects is predominantly springlike in a relaxed condition. Identification of energetic passivity
is important, since it ensures stable interaction with a dynamically passive environment [24]. Although the nonconservative
component was small in all subjects, it was statistically nonzero
in three subjects. Unlike the linear approximation, the CVFA allows one to determine the location (in the FE-RUD space) where
the nonconservative component is nonzero [see Fig. 5(b)]. As
observed previously in the human ankle, this information has
clinical relevance because significant nonconservative stiffness
in a specific region implies that intermuscular feedback between muscles acting on different DOFs is unbalanced in that
region [25].
D. Limitations of This Study
The stiffness reported here is only valid for the range over
which it was measured [see black circles in Fig. 1(a)]. The robot
targets (open circles) were chosen to maximize the measurement range within the constraints of the ROM of the wrist and
robot (solid line and dashed rectangle, respectively; the slight

PANDO et al.: POSITION-DEPENDENT CHARACTERIZATION OF PASSIVE WRIST STIFFNESS

2243

Fig. 5. Comparison of conservative (left column) and non-conservative components (right column) of the restoring torque. Torque is represented by an arrow
(units shown in the center of the figure) with its tail at the tip of the displacement vector. The axes in all subplots are the same as in the bottom left subplot.
(a) Representative subject. (b) Subject showing non-conservative components (non-zero curl). Statistically significant non-zero curl is highlighted with a box.

disagreement between the targets and the overlap of the wrist
and robot ROM was caused by differences in neutral position
between subjects). However, in practice, the robot did not reach
the targets (compare black and open circles) because of the
steady-state error of the proportional-derivative controller and
the torque limit of the robot motors (see Methods). This resulted
in an anisotropic measurement range and, by EXT, measurements closer to the limit of the wrist ROM in some directions
than in others. Because stiffness generally increases as one approaches the limit of the ROM, stiffness measurements can be
expected to be higher in the directions in which the measurement
range approached more closely the limit of the ROM. Indeed, our
finding that KRD > KUD > KEXT ≈ KFLX matches the percentage of the ROM measured [see Fig. 1(a)]. However, this simply reflects the fact that stiffness and ROM are two sides of the
same phenomenon: stiffness is greater in RD than in UD, FLX,
and EXT—even when the nominal measurement range was
isotropic [2]—at least in part because its ROM is smaller than in
UD, FLX, and EXT. In other words, given that the ROM is the
locus at which the stiffness torque reaches the same, high value
in each direction (an “isotorque curve”), the order of stiffness
(KRD > KUD > KEXT ≈ KFLX ) is the opposite of the order
of ROM (ROMRD < ROMUD < ROMEXT ≈ ROMFLX [5]).
This is true for the small, isotropic measurement range covering
14% of the wrist ROM in [2],4 the larger, anisotropic measurement range covering 42% of the wrist ROM in the current study,
and would likely be true for the entire wrist ROM as well.
4 Formica et al. found K
R D > K U D > K E X T > K F L X (i.e., a difference
between K E X T and K F L X ), but the origin was placed in 20◦ of extension
relative to neutral position, so the order of ROM was ROMR D < ROMU D <
ROME X T < ROMF L X (i.e., there was a difference between ROME X T and
ROMF L X ), validating the statement that the orders of stiffness and ROM are
inversely related.

Likewise, the reported stiffness is, strictly speaking, only valid
for the conditions under which it was measured. These conditions include a relaxed-muscle state, pseudostatic conditions
(average speed was 4.3◦ /s), unconstrained fingers, and straight
movements to and from a neutral posture. That said, to the extent
that we measured static behavior (which was the reason for the
procedures used), the stiffness depends only on the current location and not on the starting location or direction of the movement
(ignoring short-range stiffness and hysteresis). Also, studies of
shoulder–elbow movements suggest that while muscle activity
clearly increases stiffness magnitude, the change in the shape
and orientation of the stiffness ellipse is quite limited [26], [27].
Accordingly, relaxed wrist stiffness measured under conditions
similar to those in this study [2] has successfully been used to
explain wrist behavior under different conditions, including fast
movements [4].
Finally, the displacement and torque applied to the wrist joint
were not measured directly at the wrist joint but estimated from
other measured variables. Care was taken to align the axes of
the wrist and robot as closely as possible, but the alignment
was not perfect. In particular, the location of the robot’s differential gear mechanism [8] forces the FE axis of the robot
to be approximately 2 cm proximal to the FE axis of the wrist
[see Fig. 1(b)–(c)]. Also, while the robot is designed to have
an offset between the RUD axes of the robot and the wrist, this
offset causes a slightly nonlinear relationship between the RUD
angles of the wrist and the robot [10]. Further, the torque applied
to the wrist was assumed to be equal to the torque at the robot
end-effector, which was estimated from the voltages sent to the
servo-amplifiers [10]. The combined effect of these limitations
(which have been present in all prior 2-DOF measurements of
wrist stiffness) on the estimate of wrist stiffness is believed to

2244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

be relatively small, but further experimentation and analysis are
required to quantify it.
E. Relevance to Motor Control and Stiffness Pathologies
The anisotropic nature of wrist stiffness causes path curvature [3] unless the neuromuscular system specifically compensates for the anisotropy [4]. Our stiffness estimates are more
anisotropic than previous measurements, suggesting that stiffness anisotropy may be an even greater control challenge than
previously recognized. Another consequence of this anisotropy
is that rotating the wrist in some directions requires less torque
than in others, providing the opportunity for the neuromuscular system to choose “paths of least resistance” when it has
the choice. It was previously observed [2] that the direction of
least stiffness (from EXT and slight RD to FLX and slight UD)
corresponds to the direction of the “dart thrower’s motion,” a
commonly used wrist movement direction [7], [28]. The nonlinear estimate shows a dramatic decrease in stiffness in this
direction, even compared to directions that are close-by [seen
as a “pinching” of the stiffness trace in Fig. 4(a)], indicating an
even greater anisotropy than indicated by the stiffness ellipse
[Fig. 4(c)]. Therefore, following this “path of least resistance”
would be more advantageous than previously believed.
Abnormal joint viscoelasticity is one of the most common
symptoms of neuromuscular and biomechanical disorders and
demands more consistent and quantitative analysis. Here we
provide a quantitative characterization of relaxed healthy wrist
stiffness over the central 42% of the wrist ROM and about
70% of wrist activity during activities of daily living. Following
recent investigations of ankle stiffness [29]–[31], the wrist stiffness measurements presented here can serve as a baseline for
evaluating stiffness pathologies, tracking changes with injury
and rehabilitation, and assessing the effectiveness of orthotic,
implant, and arthroplasty designs.
REFERENCES
[1] S. K. Charles and N. Hogan, “Dynamics of wrist rotations,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 44, pp. 614–621, 2011.
[2] D. Formica, S. K. Charles, L. Zollo, E. Guglielmelli, N. Hogan, and
H. I. Krebs, “The Passive stiffness of the wrist and forearm,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 108, pp. 1158–1166, 2012.
[3] S. K. Charles and N. Hogan, “The curvature and variability of wrist and
arm movements,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 203, pp. 63–73, May 2010.
[4] S. K. Charles and N. Hogan, “Stiffness, not inertial coupling, determines
path curvature of wrist motions,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 107, pp. 1230–
1240, 2012.
[5] K. N. An, R. A. Berger, and W. P. I. Cooney, Biomechanics of the Wrist
Joint. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[6] J. Ryu, W. P. Cooney, L. J. Askew, K. N. An, and E. Y. S. Chao, “Functional ranges of motion of the wrist joint,” J. Hand Surgery-Amer. Vol.,
vol. 16A, pp. 409–419, May 1991.
[7] A. K. Palmer, F. W. Werner, D. Murphy, and R. Glisson, “Functional
wrist motion—A biomechanical study,” J. Hand Surgery-Amer. Volume,
vol. 10 A, pp. 39–46, 1985.
[8] H. Krebs, B. T. Volpe, D. Williams, J. Celestino, S. Charles, D. Lynch,
and N. Hogan, “Robot-aided neurorehabilitation: A robot for the wrist
rehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 327–335, Sep. 2007.

[9] G. Wu, F. C. T. Van Der Helm, H. E. J. Veeger, M. Makhsous, P. Van Roy,
C. Anglin, J. Nagels, A. R Karduna, K. McQuade, X. Wang, F. W. Werner,
and B. Buchholz, “ISB recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate
systems of various joints for the reporting of human joint motion—Part II:
Shoulder, elbow, wrist and hand,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 38, pp. 981–992,
May 2005.
[10] J. R. Celestino, “Characterization and control of a robot for wrist rehabilitation,” M.S. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2003.
[11] H. W. Axelson and K. E. Hagbarth, “Human motor control consequences
of thixotropic changes in muscular short-range stiffness,” J. Physiol.London, vol. 535, pp. 279–288, Aug. 2001.
[12] K. S. Campbell, “Short-range mechanical properties of skeletal and cardiac muscles,” in Muscle Biophysics: From Molecules to Cells (Advance
in Experimental Medicine and Biology Series), D. E. Rassier, Ed., New
York: Springer 2010, vol. 682, pp. 223–246.
[13] P. De Leva, “Adjustments to Zatsiorsky-Seluyanov’s segment inertia parameters,” J. Biomech., vol. 29, pp. 1223–1230, Sep. 1996.
[14] F. L. Bookstein, “Principal warps - thin-plate splines and the decomposition of deformations,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 11,
no. 6, pp. 567–585, Jun. 1989.
[15] G. Wahba, Spline Models for Observational Data. Philadelphia, PA,
USA: SIAM, 1990.
[16] H. Lee, P. Ho, M. A. Rastgaar, H. I. Krebs, and N. Hogan, “Multivariable
static ankle mechanical impedance with relaxed muscles,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 44, pp. 1901–1908, Jul. 2011.
[17] N. Hogan, “The mechanics of multi-joint posture and movement control,”
Biological Cybern., vol. 52, pp. 315–331, 1985.
[18] J. M. Dolan, M. B. Friedman, and M. L. Nagurka, “Dynamic and loaded
impedance components in the maintenance of human arm posture,” IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 698–709, May./Jun. 1993.
[19] S. L. Lehman and B. M. Calhoun, “An identified model for human wrist
movements,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 81, pp. 199–208, 1990.
[20] C. Gielen and J. C. Houk, “Nonlinear viscosity of human wrist,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 52, pp. 553–569, 1984.
[21] A. B. Leger and T. E. Milner, “Passive and active wrist joint stiffness
following eccentric exercise,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 82, pp. 472–479,
Aug. 2000.
[22] S. J. De Serres and T. E. Milner, “Wrist muscle activation patterns and
stiffness associated with stable and unstable mechanical loads,” Exp. Brain
Res., vol. 86, pp. 451–458, 1991.
[23] N. Rijnveld and H. I. Krebs, “Passive wrist joint impedance in flexionextension and abduction-adduction,” presented at the Int. Conf. Rehabil.
Robot., Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 2007.
[24] N. Hogan, “On the stability of manipulators performing contact tasks,”
IEEE J. Robot. Autom., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 677–686, Dec. 1988.
[25] H. Lee, T. Patterson, J. Ahn, D. Klenk, A. Lo, H. I. Krebs, and N. Hogan,
“Static ankle impedance in stroke and multiple sclerosis: A feasibility study,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 8523–8526.
[26] F. A. Mussa-Ivaldi, N. Hogan, and E. Bizzi, “Neural, mechanical, and
geometric factors subserving arm posture in humans,” J. Neuroscience,
vol. 5, pp. 2732–2743, 1985.
[27] E. J. Perreault, R. F. Kirsch, and P. E. Crago, “Voluntary control of static
endpoint stiffness during force regulation tasks,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 87,
pp. 2808–2816, Jun. 2002.
[28] Z. M. Li, L. Kuxhaus, J. A. Fisk, and T. H. Christophel, “Coupling
between wrist flexion-extension and radial-ulnar deviation,” Clinical
Biomech., vol. 20, pp. 177–183, Feb. 2005.
[29] A. Roy, L. W. Forrester, R. F. Macko, and H. I. Krebs, “Changes in passive
ankle stiffness and its effects on gait function in people with chronic
stroke,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop., vol. 50, pp. 555–571, 2013.
[30] L. W. Forrester, A. Roy, H. I. Krebs, and R. F. Macko, “Ankle training with
a robotic device improves hemiparetic gait after a stroke,” Neurorehabil.
Neural Repair, vol. 25, pp. 369–377, 2011.
[31] A. Roy, H. I. Krebs, C. T. Bever, L. W. Forrester, R. F. Macko, and
N. Hogan, “Measurement of passive ankle stiffness in subjects with
chronic hemiparesis using a novel ankle robot,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 105,
pp. 2132–2149, 2011.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

