IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

219

Estimating Energy Expenditure Using Body-Worn
Accelerometers: A Comparison of Methods,
Sensors Number and Positioning
Marco Altini, Julien Penders, Ruud Vullers, and Oliver Amft

Abstract—Several methods to estimate energy expenditure (EE)
using body-worn sensors exist; however, quantifications of the differences in estimation error are missing. In this paper, we compare
three prevalent EE estimation methods and five body locations to
provide a basis for selecting among methods, sensors number, and
positioning. We considered 1) counts-based estimation methods,
2) activity-specific estimation methods using METs lookup, and
3) activity-specific estimation methods using accelerometer features. The latter two estimation methods utilize subsequent activity
classification and EE estimation steps. Furthermore, we analyzed
accelerometer sensors number and on-body positioning to derive
optimal EE estimation results during various daily activities. To
evaluate our approach, we implemented a study with 15 participants that wore five accelerometer sensors while performing a
wide range of sedentary, household, lifestyle, and gym activities
at different intensities. Indirect calorimetry was used in parallel
to obtain EE reference data. Results show that activity-specific
estimation methods using accelerometer features can outperform
counts-based methods by 88% and activity-specific methods using
METs lookup for active clusters by 23%. No differences were found
between activity-specific methods using METs lookup and using
accelerometer features for sedentary clusters. For activity-specific
estimation methods using accelerometer features, differences in EE
estimation error between the best combinations of each number of
sensors (1 to 5), analyzed with repeated measures ANOVA, were not
significant. Thus, we conclude that choosing the best performing
single sensor does not reduce EE estimation accuracy compared
to a five sensors system and can reliably be used. However, EE
estimation errors can increase up to 80% if a nonoptimal sensor
location is chosen.
Index Terms—Accelerometers, energy expenditure (EE), physical activity (PA), wearable sensors.

I. INTRODUCTION
HYSICAL activity (PA) and exercise capacity are among
the most important determinants of health and wellbeing.
Ubiquitous sensing technologies, able to monitor objectively

P

Manuscript received July 26, 2013; revised January 30, 2014; accepted March
17, 2014. Date of publication March 20, 2014; date of current version December
30, 2014.
M. Altini is with the Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 Eindhoven,
The Netherlands (e-mail: marco.altini@imec-nl.nl).
J. Penders and R. Vullers are with Holst Centre/IMEC, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: julien.penders@imec-nl.nl; Ruud.Vullers@
imec-nl.nl).
O. Amft is with the University of Passau, 94032 Passau, Germany, and
also with the Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 Eindhoven, The
Netherlands (e-mail: amft@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2313039

and noninvasively human behavior, started providing unprecedented insights into the relation between PA and health
[1].
Energy expenditure (EE) is the most commonly used single metric to quantify PA. Different methods to estimate EE
have been developed in the past, from counts-based estimation
methods to activity-specific EE equations, developed using one
or more accelerometers. Counts-based estimation methods are
developed by fitting a single regression line to all the data, independently of the activity performed. On the other hand, in
activity-specific estimation methods, the estimation process is
split into two steps. First, activities are classified into clusters
that group them according to a certain criteria (e.g., EE level [2],
motion patterns [3], etc.). Second, an activity-specific model is
applied to estimate EE. Activity-specific EE models [3]–[5]
showed higher performance compared to single models [6], [7].
However, little agreement is found in the literature regarding
number of accelerometers, location on the body, and the role
of accelerometer features [e.g., used for activity recognition
only (activity-specific models using METs lookup), or for both
activity recognition and activity-specific EE models (activityspecific using accelerometer features)] [5], [8]. Even though the
use of a single sensor is more practical, recent advances in sensor technology and the ease of integrating small accelerometers
into shoes [9], watches or mobile phones, reduced obtrusiveness
of wearable sensors, allowing researchers to deploy multisensor
systems.
Determining the optimal number and on-body positioning of
accelerometers to accurately estimate EE requires addressing
the following issues, that have not been studied: 1) On activity
recognition: what is the influence of activity type misclassification on the EE estimation error when using activity-specific
approaches? 2) On differences in EE within an activity cluster:
which activity-specific approach performs best during different
activities? and 3) On EE estimation: how do activity recognition accuracy and EE estimation error change based on sensors
number and positioning?
In this paper, we analyze three prevalent EE estimation methods as well as on-body sensors number and positioning to
estimate EE. In particular, this paper provides the following
contributions:
1) We analyze EE estimation error for three common EE
estimation approaches (counts-based, activity-specific using METs lookup and activity-specific using accelerometer features). We show that activity-specific using accelerometer features approaches outperform counts-based

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

220

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

approaches and activity-specific using METs lookup approaches for active clusters.
2) We analyze all combinations of five accelerometers onbody positions and evaluate their impact on activity recognition and EE estimation error. We show that a single
accelerometer is sufficient to maintain the lowest EE estimation error when suitably placed.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Counts-Based Estimation Methods
Counts-based methods were the first EE estimation algorithms developed, given the relation between motion intensity
close to the body’s center of mass and EE [6]. However, single
regression models are unable to fit all the activities, since the
slope and intercept of the regression model change based on
the activity performed while data are collected [10]. As a result,
even when motion intensity (activity counts) is representative
of EE, the output can be inaccurate. Additionally, the inability
of these systems to recognize high or low body movement (e.g.,
biking or arm exercises) caused high estimation error for activities not involving whole body motion. In [11], the authors
had to remove biking activities from their evaluation, due to the
inability of their system to capture EE changes when there is
limited motion close to the body’s center of mass.
B. Activity-Specific Estimation Methods
The latest algorithms extended estimation methods based on
single models by performing activity recognition over a predefined set of activities—or clusters of activities, and then applying different methods to predict EE [3]–[5], [8], [10], based
on the activity detected (activity-specific EE approaches). Other
machine-learning-based methods were developed [7], trying to
directly estimate EE from accelerometer features, using for example neural networks [7], [12]. However, these approaches
suffer from the same limitations of the counts-based estimation
methods, being unable to capture the peculiarities of the relation
between accelerometer features and EE during different activities [13]. The most common activity-specific approaches are the
following:
1) Activity-Specific Using METs Lookup: One approach is
to assign static MET values from the compendium on physical
activities [14] to each one of the clusters of activities [3], [8],
and use anthropometric features or other static features (e.g.,
heart rate at rest) to personalize the activity-specific models for
different individuals.
2) Activity-Specific Using Accelerometer Features: Another
approach is to apply a regression equation for each activity classified [5], [10], extending counts-based approaches to multiple
clusters of activities. The regression models typically use accelerometer features and anthropometric characteristics as independent variables.
C. Comparisons
1) Comparisons of Estimation Methods: Altini et al. [3]
showed that activity-specific estimation methods using METs
lookup outperform counts-based approaches when a single sen-

Fig. 1. Block diagram of counts-based estimation methods. Accelerometer
and anthropometric features are used independently of the activity type.

sor is used. In [8], the authors extended the static approach
of [3], developing a custom MET table, which takes into account the heart rate at rest, to predict EE, showing 15% improvement in performance compared to the best counts-based
estimation methods. In both our previous work [4] and in [8],
activity-specific estimation methods using METs lookup and
accelerometer features were implemented and compared. However, while we proposed a combined approach using METs
lookup for sedentary clusters of activities and using accelerometer features for active clusters, the authors of [8] opted for
using METs lookup only. The two systems used a different sensor setup. One single sensor on the chest was used in [4], while
three sensors placed on the upper arm, thigh, and waist were
used in [8]. The different activity types, sensors number and
positioning might have motivated the different choices made by
the authors. Thus, it is unclear which estimation method works
best as well as if different estimation methods require different
sensors number.
2) Comparisons of Sensors Number and Positioning: When
it comes to sensors number and positioning, comparisons are
lacking. Some works investigated the accuracy of sensors placed
on different parts of the body to detect a specific set of activities [2], [5], [15]–[17]. However, none of these works considered how sensors number and positioning affects EE. Some
researchers showed high accuracy in EE estimates adopting one
sensor placed on the lower back [3] or chest [4]. Others used
two or three accelerometers [5], [8]. Small differences between
protocols used to collect data, algorithms evaluation metrics,
as well as the inclusion of extra sensors in only some of the
systems (e.g., heart rate), limit our understanding of what is the
best solution in terms of sensors number and positioning.
III. ANALYSIS APPROACH
This section covers the approach we used to analyze the role
of different estimation methods, sensors number and positioning
for EE estimation.
1) Estimation Methods: We compared three common methods to estimate EE: 1) counts-based, activity-specific using
2) METs lookup and using 3) accelerometer features (see
Figs. 1 and 2).
a) Counts-based estimation methods: These methods consist in a linear regression model. The model can be formalized in vector form as follows: y = Xβ + . In the
context of EE estimation, y is the vector of target EE
values, β is the vector of regression coefficients, and X
is the vector of input features. The vector X contains p
features, features that can be grouped into two categories:
accelerometer features (Xacc ) and anthropometric characteristics (Xant ).

ALTINI et al.: ESTIMATING ENERGY EXPENDITURE USING BODY-WORN ACCELEROMETERS

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the activity-specific estimation methods considered
for comparison in this work. a) shows approaches using METs lookup while b)
shows approaches using accelerometer features as predictors.

b) Activity-specific estimation methods using METs
lookup: They are composed of two parts: activity recognition and activity-specific models. Assuming n clusters
of activities C = {c1 , . . . , cn }, ∀ci ∈ C, ∃ yact i =
Xact i βact i + . Each yact i maps an activity cluster to EE.
yact i is the vector of target EE values for a specific cluster
of activities, β is the vector of regression coefficients, and
Xact i is the vector of input features. The vector Xact i contains r features, a MET value depending on the activity
type, taken from the compendium of physical activities
(Xm et i ), and anthropometric characteristics (Xant ), used
to personalize models between individuals.
c) Activity-specific estimation methods using accelerometer features: Similarly to b), we assume n clusters
of activities C = {c1 , . . . , cn }, ∀ci ∈ C, ∃ yact i =
Xact i βact i + . Where each yact i maps an activity cluster
to EE. As in b), yact i is the vector of target EE values
for a specific cluster of activities, β is the vector of regression coefficients, and Xact i is the vector of m input
features. Features can be grouped into accelerometer features (Xacc i ) and anthropometric characteristics (Xant ).
Xacc i differ from Xm et i introduced in b), since they are
not constant and change within a cluster.
2) Sensors Number and Positioning: We evaluated all
possible combinations of five sensors (see Section V-B
for details). Our analysis is structured as follows:
a) Activity recognition: ∀ sensors number j ∈ {1, . . . , 5},
and ∀ combinations k of j sensors, k = 5j , we implemented an activity recognition model to classify clusters
of activities ci ∈ C = {c1 , . . . , cn }. Additionally, activity
recognition accuracy was evaluated in the ability to discriminate between sedentary and active clusters of activities. This analysis was performed to understand to which
extent misclassification of the activity class can affect EE
estimation accuracy for activity-specific EE models.

221

b) Differences in EE within an activity cluster: We
assumed perfect activity recognition (i.e., ∀ instance d,
we assume cd p = cd a where cd p is the predicted cluster,
while cd a is the actual cluster). Assuming n clusters of
activities C = {c1 , . . . , cn }, ∀ci ∈ C, ∀ sensors number
j ∈ {1,
 . . . , 5}, and ∀ combination k of j sensors,
k = 5j , we implemented an activity-specific model
using accelerometer features; yi,j,k = Xi,j,k βi,j,k + ,
where Xi,j,k is the vector of the input features (as in
Section III-1c, features include Xacc i , j , k and Xant ).
Xacc i , j , k includes features from one of the k combinations of j sensors for the activity i. On the other
hand, as shown in Section III-1b, activity-specific
estimation methods using METs lookup do not include
accelerometer features in the activity-specific models.
Thus, once perfect activity recognition is assumed,
there is no difference in EE estimation due to sensor
number and positioning. Assuming n clusters of activities C = {c1 , . . . , cn }, ∀ci ∈ C, we implemented one
activity-specific regression model using METs lookup
per activity, as in Section III-1.b; yact i = Xact i βact i + .
This analysis was performed to understand in which activities accelerometer features can improve EE estimation
accuracy, compared to activity-specific estimation methods using METs lookup, and if higher sensors number can
reduce EE estimation error.
c) EE estimation: Combining activity-recognition and
activity-specific EE models, we analyzed the impact
of multiple accelerometers in EE estimation. Misclassification rates were taken into account by applying
the wrong activity-specific EE model in the estimation
process. As in all activity-specific models, ∀ci ∈ C =
{c1 , . . . , cn }, ∃ yact i = Xact i βact i + . Given an instance d, we can apply n EE models, one ∀ci , if cd p = cd a ,
the wrong activity-specific EE model will be applied (e.g.,
yact p = Xact p βact p +  instead of yact a = Xact a βact a +
). This analysis was performed to understand if more
sensors improve not only activity recognition, as known
from the literature, but also EE estimation accuracy, due
to reduced misclassification rates.

A. Statistics and Performance Measure
Models were derived using data from all but one participants,
and validated on the remaining one (leave-one-participant-out
cross validation). Performance of the activity recognition models was evaluated using the average of the percentage of correctly
classified instances (i.e., accuracy). Results for EE estimates
were reported using root-mean-square error (RMSE), where the
outcome variable was gross EE expressed in kilocalorie per
minute. A one-way repeated-measures within-subjects ANOVA
with six levels was used to compare EE models. The Tukey test
was used to perform pairwise comparisons. Paired t-tests were
used to compare RMSE between the best and worst sensor for
each number of sensors (1 to 5). Significance was assessed at
α < 0.05.

222

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

IV. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Activity-Type Clusters
We grouped all recorded activities into two categories to separate sedentary and active behavior. We included lying (lying
down resting), sitting (sitting resting, desk work, reading, writing, working on a PC, watching TV), and standing (standing
resting, standing cooking) postures in our sedentary clusters.
Active clusters were four, one representative of household activities, namely the high whole body motion (HWBM) cluster
(stacking groceries, washing dishes, folding clothes, cleaning
and scrubbing, washing windows, sweeping, vacuuming) and
three representatives of locomotion and active transportation,
such as walking, (self-paced, self-paced carrying books, treadmill flat: 3, 4, 5, 6 km/h, incline: 3, 5km/h, 5, 10%), biking (cycle ergometer, low, medium, and high resistance level at 60 and
80 r/min), and running (7, 8, 9, 10 km/h on a treadmill).

axis) as the only accelerometer feature, together with anthropometric characteristics (body weight and RMR), as typically done
in epidemiological studies (see Fig. 1).
2) Activity-Specific Estimation Methods Using METs
Lookup: Activity-specific estimation methods using METs
lookup relied on the activity recognition system of Section IV-C.
METs values were used together with anthropometric features
(body weight and RMR), for the activity-specific linear regression models [see Fig. 2(a)]. METs values were chosen based
on compendium values for the activities included in each cluster, resulting in 1 for lying, 1.3 for sitting and standing, 3.5 for
HWBM, 3 for walking, 6.7 for biking, and 11 for running.
3) Activity-Specific Estimation Methods Using Accelerometer Features: Within one activity cluster, EE can be estimated
using other features, representative of EE changes within the
activity cluster [4], [5], [10]. Depending on sensors selected, we
created different EE activity-specific linear models, using the
selected set of features for those sensors [see Fig. 2(b)].

B. Features Extraction and Selection
Features extracted from the sensors’ raw data were used to
derive activity recognition and EE models. Accelerometer data
from the three axes of all five sensors were segmented in 4 s
windows, bandpass (BP) filtered between 0.1 and 10 Hz, to
isolate the dynamic component caused by body motion, and
low-pass filtered at 1 Hz, to isolate the static component, due to
gravity. Feature selection for activity recognition was based on
correlation, due to the hypothesis that a good feature set includes
features correlated with the class, but uncorrelated to each other.
The final feature set included: mean of the absolute BP signal,
interquartile range, mean distance between axes, median, variance, standard deviation, zero crossing rate, main frequency
peak, low and high-frequency band signal power. Feature selection for EE was based on how much variation in EE each
feature could explain within one cluster. The process was automated using linear forward selection. Features to be selected
depended on the combination of sensors considered for a model.
Additionally, anthropometrics features (body weight and resting
metabolic rate (RMR), estimated with the Harris–Benedict formula [18]) were added depending on the cluster, following the
methodology for activity-specific EE models presented in [4].
C. Activity Recognition
We adopted a constant set of parameters for sliding window
and classifier type of the activity recognition. We selected a
time window of 4 s, which is short enough to detect short breaks
in sedentary time, and long enough to capture the repetitive
patterns of some activities (e.g., walking). Given the positive
results in past research on activity recognition, we selected support vector machines (SVMs) as classifiers. For the SVMs, we
used a polynomial kernel with degree 5 (λ = 10, C = 1), fixing
these parameters for all models.
D. Energy Expenditure
1) Counts-Based Methods: We implemented single regression models using data from all activities and motion intensity
(i.e., mean of the absolute BP signal summed over the three

V. EVALUATION STUDY
A. Participants
Participants were 15 (11 male, 4 female), mean age 29.8 ±
5.2 years, mean weight 71.8 ± 15.9 kg, mean height 1.75 ±
0.10 cm, mean BMI 23.2 ± 3.0 kg/m2 . Imecs IRB approved
the study. Each participant signed an informed consent form.
B. Instruments
1) Body Area Network: The sensor platform used was the
ECG Necklace. Five ECG Necklaces were synchronized in a
wireless network [19]. One ECG Necklace was placed on the
chest (C) and configured to acquire one lead ECG data at 256 Hz,
and accelerometer data at 64 Hz (ADXL330). Sampling frequency was chosen as 64 Hz since it is considered to be much
higher than typical human motion. The other four ECG Necklaces were configured to acquire only accelerometer data at
64 Hz and placed on the dominant ankle (An), dominant thigh
(T), dominant wrist (W), and waist (Wa)—at the right hip. All
sensors were attached to the body using elastic bands. ECG
data were not used for this study. Activity type was annotated
manually by experimenter.
2) Indirect Calorimeter: Breath-by-breath data were collected using the Cosmed K4b2 indirect calorimeter. The Cosmed
K4b2 weights 1.5 kg and showed to be a reliable measure of
EE [20]. The system was manually calibrated before each experiment according to the manufacturer instructions.
C. Experiment Design
Participants were invited for recordings on two separate days.
They reported to the lab at 8:00 A.M., after refraining from
drinking (except for water), eating and smoking in the 2 h before
the experiment. The protocol included a wide range of sedentary,
lifestyle, and sport activities. Each activity was carried out for a
period from 4 to 12 min, except for running (1 to 4 min). The first
minute of each recording was removed to discard nonsteadystate data.

ALTINI et al.: ESTIMATING ENERGY EXPENDITURE USING BODY-WORN ACCELEROMETERS

VI. RESULTS
Given the high number of models implemented, we report
only results for the best combinations of 1 to 5 sensors [see
Figs. 3(a), (b), 4(a), (b), and 5(a)], as well as information on exactly which sensors provide these optimal performance, together
with the worst performance obtained with the same number of
sensors, for comparison.
A. Estimation Methods
Fig. 3 shows the effect of different feature sets on EE estimation performance for activity-specific EE models, assuming
perfect activity recognition. Only one activity-specific model
using METs lookup is needed for comparison, since these approaches do not use accelerometer features. The RMSE obtained
for activity-specific estimation methods using METs lookup
was 1 kcal/min, while for activity-specific estimation methods
using accelerometer features it ranged between 0.84 and 0.86
kcal/min ([18% error reduction, p < 0.05, Fig. 3(a)]. 23% error
reduction was shown for active clusters using accelerometer features. Fig. 4 shows performance of the EE estimation models in
combination with activity recognition, as well as counts-based
estimation methods. For clarity, results for the activity-specific
estimation methods using METs lookup were omitted in Fig. 4.
Activity-specific estimation methods using METs lookup rely
on the same activity recognition algorithms used by the activityspecific method using accelerometer features, thus the METsbased method would still perform suboptimally. The RMSE for
activity-specific estimation methods using accelerometer features ranged from 0.85 to 0.89 kcal/min. RMSE for countsbased estimation methods was between 1.6 and 2.6 kcal/min
depending on sensor position (88% error increase for the bestperforming sensor, C, p < 0.05). The error obtained using the
counts-based estimation was significantly higher compared to
activity-specific models even when counts were considered separately for sedentary and active clusters [see Fig. 5(b)].
B. Sensors Number and Positioning
Sensors number and positioning is evaluated according to the
three criteria of Section III: 1) activity recognition, 2) differences
in EE within an activity cluster, and 3) EE estimation).
1) Activity Recognition: Fig. 5(a) shows the performance
of the activity recognition models. Additionally, the impact of
sensor location (best versus worst for each number of sensors)
is shown [see Figs. 5(b)–(e)]. Accuracy varied between 85 for 1
sensor, and 98% for 3 or more sensors [see Fig. 5(a)]. Accuracy
for active clusters was always above 98%, with differences of
only 1% between the best single sensor system and a five sensors
body area network [see Fig. 5(a)]. Sedentary clusters accuracy
ranged between 69.9 and 97%. Sensor location affected the
accuracy by 12% for a single sensor, while the decrease in
performance was reduced to 7%, 5%, and 4% for two, three,
and four sensors, respectively [see Figs. 5(b)–(e)].
2) Differences in EE Within an Activity Cluster: Fig. 3 shows
the effect of different feature sets on EE estimation performance
for activity-specific estimation methods using accelerometer
features, assuming perfect activity recognition. No significant

223

differences were found when different locations on the body
were considered to extract activity-specific features. However,
differences are found when analyzing separately sedentary and
active clusters, showing higher errors in sedentary clusters using
accelerometer features from four or five sensors [see Fig. 3(b)].
3) EE Estimation: Fig. 4 shows performance of the EE estimation models in combination with the activity recognition.
In this analysis, differences in performance are due to 1) higher
misclassification rates of models based on a smaller number of
sensors and 2) different feature sets used for activity-specific
estimation methods using accelerometer features, depending on
the sensors that are part of the system. Sensor location analysis
shows the Chest sensor as the best single sensor for EE estimation, while the Wrist sensor seems to perform worse than any
other combination [see Figs. 5(c)–(f)].
VII. DISCUSSION
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that state
of the art activity-specific EE estimation methods are evaluated
to determine benefits of using multiple accelerometers for EE
estimation. For activity-specific estimation methods, evaluating
the benefit of multiple sensors is important, since additional
accelerometers can contribute differently. First, additional sensors can improve the accuracy of the activity recognition model,
thus, reducing EE estimation error due to the selection of the
wrong activity-specific EE model. Second, features from more
than one sensor could better explain the EE variance within one
cluster of activities.
A. Estimation Methods
Our estimation results show that activity-specific estimation
methods using accelerometer features outperform counts-based
estimation methods by 88% and activity-specific estimation
methods using METs lookup by 18%. Counts-based estimation
methods were outperformed by the activity-specific estimation,
regardless of sensor location, with RMSE between 1.6 kcal/min
at the chest to 2.6 kcal/min at the wrist. The results reflect
a similar behavior to what was observed for activity-specific
models, where wrist-based models were poorly performing due
to weak relation between movement and EE. The inability of
counts-based estimation methods to fit all activities is further reflected by the estimation error when considering sedentary and
active clusters separately. Activity-specific estimation methods
using accelerometer features provide no advantage compared
to activity-specific estimation methods using METs lookup for
sedentary clusters, but only for active clusters (23% error reduction). This is due to the fact that active clusters can be performed
at varying intensities (e.g., walking at different speeds), and assigning static METs values prevents the model from capturing
these differences in intensity within one cluster of activities.
However, sedentary clusters of activities cannot be performed
at varying intensities (e.g., sitting or lying down), making it possible to estimate EE accurately using METs lookup approaches.
We assume model development did not lead to overfitting given
the similar level of error variability between simple and complex methods. We expect that overfitting was avoided as the data
from one participant were eight used for training or evaluation.

224

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3. EE estimation RMSE for sedentary and active clusters when perfect activity recognition is assumed in activity-specific estimation methods. Boxplots 1 to
5 in plot a as well as 1S − 1A to 5S − 5A on plot b concern activity-specific estimation methods using accelerometer features, while an activity-specific model
using METs lookup is shown as METs on plot a and M S − M A on plot b. ∗ indicates significant differences between the annotated model (activity-specific
model using METs lookup) and all of the other models, i.e., the ones using accelerometer features (p < 0.05). Λ indicates significant differences between models
the annotated models, i.e., 4S (four sensors, sedentary clusters) and 5S (five sensors, sedentary clusters) and model sedentary model when only one sensor is used,
i.e., 1S (p < 0.05). RMSE for the best and worst activity-specific model using accelerometer features for each number of sensors is shown on the bottom row.
C is Chest, T is Thigh, An is Ankle, W is Wrist, and Wa is Waist. (a) All clusters-best. (b) Sedentary and Active clusters-best. (c) 1 sensor-best VS worst. (d) 2
sensors-best VS worst. (e) 3 sensors-best VS worst. (f) 4 sensors-best VS worst.

Fig. 4. EE estimation RMSE for sedentary and active clusters in activity-specific estimation methods using accelerometer features, after activity classification.
Activity-specific estimation methods using METs lookup are not shown due to subperforming results. Comparison with a counts-based model is shown in a) as
counts-based and b) as CS and CA. ∗ indicates significant differences between the annotated counts-based model and all of the other models, i.e., activity specific
models using accelerometer features (p < 0.05). RMSE for the best and worst activity-specific models using accelerometer features for each number of sensors
is shown on the bottom row. C is Chest, T is Thigh, An is Ankle, W is Wrist, and Wa is Waist. (a) All clusters-best. (b) Sedentary and Active clusters-best. (c) 1
sensor-best VS worst. (d) 2 sensors-best VS worst. (e) 3 sensors-best VS worst. (f) 4 sensors-best VS worst.

ALTINI et al.: ESTIMATING ENERGY EXPENDITURE USING BODY-WORN ACCELEROMETERS

225

Fig. 5. Activity recognition accuracy for sedentary (average accuracy of lying, sitting, and standing) and active (average accuracy of HWBM, walking, biking,
and running) clusters, and their average. Classification accuracy for different sensors number and positioning are shown on the right. C is Chest, T is Thigh, An is
Ankle, W is Wrist, and Wa is Waist. (a) Sedentary and Active clusters-best. (b) 1 sensor-best VS worst. (c) 2 sensors-best VS worst. (d) 3 sensors-best VS worst.
(e) 4 sensors-best VS worst.

B. Sensors Number and Positioning
Our results on the sensors number and positioning point
out three main findings: 1) On activity recognition: if properly
chosen, two sensors are sufficient to provide accurate PA type
assessment (see Fig. 5). 2) On differences in EE within an activity cluster: Adding features from more than one sensor in the
activity-specific models using accelerometer features does not
improve the accuracy of the EE estimate (see Fig. 4). 3) On EE
estimation: Applying a wrong EE model due to misclassification of the activity type has a small (nonstatistically significant)
impact on the EE estimate accuracy provided that an optimal
sensor positioning is chosen (e.g., the Chest sensor, see Fig. 4).
Thus, choosing the best performing single sensor does not reduce performance for EE estimation compared to a five sensors
system.
1) Activity Recognition: Our results on the sensor number
for activity recognition confirm previous works that considered
multiple accelerometers [5], [15]–[17]. Adding more sensors
improves accuracy, until a plateau is reached, when two or more
sensors are used, in our case, 97/98% accuracy using Chest
and Wrist or Chest and Thigh sensors. It is of interest for our
analysis, how activity recognition influences EE estimates as
discussed next.
2) Differences in EE Within an Activity Cluster: Our second
finding concerns the accelerometer features needed to explain
differences in EE within one cluster. To determine such features,
we developed EE models assuming perfect activity recognition
(see Fig. 3). We showed that accelerometer features from one
sensor are sufficient to explain differences in EE within one
cluster of activities. This finding can be explained by the fact
that within one cluster of activities (for example walking) the
variation in EE is explained mainly by the level of motion intensity of the whole body. Other features, such as motion intensity
of the wrist sensor, can lead to errors, since high level of motion
(e.g., while writing), do not correspond to high EE. This reasoning might explain why in Fig. 3 the error is shown to increase
when features from 4 or 5 sensors are used for sedentary clusters
[see Fig. 4(b)].
Even though adding features from more sensors does not reduce EE estimate error, accelerometer features from at least one
sensor should be used for active clusters (23% error reduction
compared approaches using METs lookup). In a recent review
on activity-specific EE estimation [21], the controversy between
applying static values (i.e., MET values) and the need of includ-

ing accelerometer features in linear models had been raised.
Past research showed inconsistency in the approach used for
activity-specific models even after implementing and comparing estimation methods using METs lookup or accelerometer
features [4], [8]. With this analysis, we show that accelerometer features are relevant only for active clusters, and most importantly this is true regardless of the number of sensors used
[see Fig. 3(b)]. Our findings are consistent with our previous
work using one sensor [4], indicating that the best approach
to obtain high accuracy and limit model complexity, is to use
a combined approach. Activity-specific models using METs
lookup can be used for sedentary activities, where static METs
values and anthropometric features are sufficient to accurately
estimate EE.
3) EE Estimation: Provided that the best performing sensor
is chosen, no significant error reduction was found when more
than one sensor was used for EE estimation. This is due to the
fact that errors are mainly due to misclassification of posture
(one single sensor is unable to recognize all of the three postures in the sedentary cluster), resulting in applying a very similar activity-specific EE model. Thus, the EE estimation RMSE
for a single sensor placed on the Chest is similar when compared
to a five sensors system (no statistically significant difference),
even if activity classification accuracy is decreased by up to 13%
on average, and 28% for sedentary clusters. This is an important finding since past work showed good accuracy using one
single accelerometer and activity-specific approaches [3], [4],
but no previous work could compare performance of EE estimation methods when different sensors number and positioning
were used, preventing us from understanding if systems relying
on multiple sensors for activity recognition [5], [8] could still
provide better results.
C. Limitations
Performance for activities that were not part of the dataset
should be assessed outside of the lab. However, there is
currently no reference system able to measure breath-by-breath
EE in unconstrained settings. Only by using indirect calorimetry
and supervised settings, we can record data which allow us to
analyze how multiple sensors affect the EE estimate process in
both activity recognition and intraindividual differences within
one activity. Another limitation was to limit the number of MET
values used for our analysis to the ones associated to the activity clusters, while more fine grained values could be used for

226

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

certain activities (e.g., walking at different speeds). However,
we believe that using individual MET values for activities may
not generalize, since some activities (e.g., related to household)
show different EE but cannot be accurately subdivided when using a limited number of sensors. Hence, some activity clusters
would still require a single MET value to be used, while actual
EE varies widely.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We suggest using one single sensor close to the body’s center
of mass (chest or waist), together with a combined activityspecific estimation method, for accurate and unobtrusive EE
estimation. The combined estimation method should be composed of activity-specific models using METs lookup for the
sedentary activity clusters, and activity-specific models using
accelerometer features for the physically active clusters. This
approach showed to be both practically feasible, since it limits the number of sensors to one, and accurate in terms of EE
estimation accuracy.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Butte, U. Ekelund, and W. KR, “Assessing physical activity using wearable monitors: Measures of physical activity,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise,
vol. 44, no. 1, Suppl. 1, pp. S5–S12, Jan. 2012.
[2] L. Atallah, B. Lo, R. King, and G.-Z. Yang, “Sensor positioning for
activity recognition using wearable accelerometers,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 320–329, Aug. 2011.
[3] A. G. Bonomi, “Improving assessment of daily energy expenditure by
identifying types of physical activity with a single accelerometer,” J.
Appl. Physiol., vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 655–661, 2009.
[4] M. Altini, J. Penders, and O. Amft, “Energy expenditure estimation using
wearable sensors: A new methodology for activity-specific models,” in
Proc. Wireless Health Conf., 2012.
[5] E. Tapia, “Using machine learning for real-time activity recognition and
estimation of energy expenditure” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst.
Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2008.
[6] S. E. Crouter and D. R. Bassett, “A refined 2-regression model for the actigraph accelerometer,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1029–
1037, 2010.
[7] P. Freedson, “Evaluation of artificial neural network algorithms for predicting METs and activity type from accelerometer data: Validation on an
independent sample,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 111, pp. 1804–1812, 2011.
[8] F. Albinali, S. S. Intille, W. Haskell, and M. Rosenberger, “Using wearable
activity type detection to improve physical activity energy expenditure
estimation,” in Proc. 12th ACM Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Comput., 2010,
pp. 311–320.
[9] S. J. Morris and J. A. Paradiso, “Shoe-integrated sensor system for wireless gait analysis and real-time feedback,” in Proc. 2nd Joint EMBS/BMES
Conf., 2002, vol. 3, pp. 2468–2469.
[10] V. T. van Hees, R. C. van Lummel, and K. R. Westerterp, “Estimating
activity-related energy expenditure under sedentary conditions using a
tri-axial seismic accelerometer,” Obesity, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1287–1292,
2009.
[11] S. Crouter, J. Churilla, and D. Bassett, “Estimating energy expenditure
using accelerometers,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 98, no. 6, pp. 601–612,
Dec. 2006.
[12] M. P. Rothney, M. Neumann, A. Beziat, and K. Y. Chen, “An artificial
neural network model of energy expenditure using nonintegrated acceleration signals,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 103, no. 4, pp. 1419–1427,
Oct. 2007.
[13] A. G. Bonomi and G. Plasqui, ““Divide and conquer”: Assessing energy
expenditure following physical activity type classification,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 112, no. 5, p. 932, Mar. 2012.
[14] B. E. E. A. Ainsworth, “Compendium of physical activities: An update
of activity codes and met intensities,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 32,
no. 9, pp. S498–504, 2000.
[15] L. Bao and S. Intille, “Activity recognition from user-annotated acceleration data,” in Pervasive Computing. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2004,
vol. 3001, pp. 1–17.

[16] I. Cleland, B. Kikhia, C. Nugent, A. Boytsov, J. Hallberg, K. Synnes,
S. McClean, and D. Finlay, “Optimal placement of accelerometers for the
detection of everyday activities,” Sensors, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 9183–9200,
2013.
[17] D. O. Olguın and A. S. Pentland, “Human activity recognition: Accuracy
across common locations for wearable sensors,” 2006.
[18] D. Frankenfield, L. Roth-Yousey, and C. Compher, “Comparison of predictive equations for resting metabolic rate in healthy nonobese and obese
adults: A systematic review, vol. 105, pp. 775–789, May 2005.
[19] M. Altini, S. Del Din, S. Patel, S. Schachter, J. Penders, and P. Bonato, “A
low-power multi-modal body sensor network with application to epileptic
seizure monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 1806–
1809.
[20] J. E. McLaughlin, “Validation of the COSMED K4 b2 portable metabolic
system,” Int. J. Sports Med., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 280–284, 2001.
[21] V. T. van Hees and U. Ekelund, “Novel daily energy expenditure estimation by using objective activity type classification: Where do we go from
here?,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 107, pp. 639–640, 2009.
Marco Altini received the M.Sc. degree in engineering and computer science from the University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, in 2010. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
Technical University of Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands.
His current research interests include machinelearning techniques for the development and
implementation of activity recognition, energy expenditure, and cardiorespiratory fitness estimation
algorithms based on acceleration and physiological
signals acquired using wearable sensors.

Julien Penders received the M.Sc. degree in systems
engineering from the University of Liege, Liege, Belgium, and the M.Sc. degree in biomedical engineering from Boston University, Boston, MA, USA, in
2004 and 2006, respectively.
He is currently the Program Manager with the
Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. He
has authored or coauthored more than 30 papers in
journals and conference proceedings on body area
networks and autonomous wireless sensor networks,
and is the author of two book chapters.

Ruud Vullers received the M.Sc. degree in physics
at the Radboud University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands, and the Ph.D. degree at the
K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in 1994 and 2000,
respectively.
He then started as a Researcher for Philips Research Laboratories in the area of Optical Storage.
In 2006, he joined IMEC/Holst Centre, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands, where he is Principal Researcher
and Activity Leader in the micropower program. This
program focuses on the development of energy harvesters, design of power management, and evaluation of energy storage systems
for use in autonomous wireless sensor nodes.
Oliver Amft received the M.Sc. degree from the
Chemnitz University of Technology, Chemnitz, Germany, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree from ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, in 2008, both in electrical engineering and information technology.
He is a Full Professor (W3) and Chair of Sensor Technology at University of Passau, Passau,
Germany. He is also with the Wearable Computing
Lab, ETH Zurich and the Signal Processing Systems
section at TU Eindhoven, Eindhoven, Netherlands.
His research interests include multimodal activity
recognition and human behavior inference algorithms and has coauthored more
than 90 publications in this field.

