2070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Lasting Modulation Effects of rTMS on Neural
Activity and Connectivity as Revealed by
Resting-State EEG
Lei Ding∗ , Member, IEEE, Guofa Shou, Member, IEEE, Han Yuan, Member, IEEE, Diamond Urbano,
and Yoon-Hee Cha

Abstract—The long-lasting neuromodulatory effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) are of great interest
for therapeutic applications in various neurological and psychiatric disorders, due to which functional connectivity among brain
regions is profoundly disturbed. Classic TMS studies selectively
alter neural activity in specific brain regions and observe neural
activity changes on nonperturbed areas to infer underlying connectivity and its changes. Less has been indicated in direct measures
of functional connectivity and/or neural network and on how connectivity/network alterations occur. Here, we developed a novel
analysis framework to directly investigate both neural activity and
connectivity changes induced by rTMS from resting-state EEG
(rsEEG) acquired in a group of subjects with a chronic disorder of
imbalance, known as the mal de debarquement syndrome (MdDS).
Resting-state activity in multiple functional brain areas was identified through a data-driven blind source separation analysis on
rsEEG data, and the connectivity among them was characterized
using a phase synchronization measure. Our study revealed that
there were significant long-lasting changes in resting-state neural
activity, in theta, low alpha, and high alpha bands and neural networks in theta, low alpha, high alpha and beta bands, over broad
cortical areas 4 to 5 h after the last application of rTMS in a consecutive five-day protocol. Our results of rsEEG connectivity further
indicated that the changes, mainly in the alpha band, over the
parietal and occipital cortices from pre- to post-TMS sessions were
significantly correlated, in both magnitude and direction, to symptom changes in this group of subjects with MdDS. This connectivity
measure not only suggested that rTMS can generate positive treatment effects in MdDS patients, but also revealed new potential
targets for future therapeutic trials to improve treatment effects. It
is promising that the new connectivity measure from rsEEG can be
used to understand the variability in treatment response to rTMS
in brain disorders with impaired functional connectivity and, eventually, to determine individually tailored stimulation parameters
and treatment procedures in rTMS.

Manuscript received January 4, 2014; revised February 13, 2014; accepted
February 27, 2014. Date of publication; date of current version. This work
was supported in part by NSF CAREER ECCS-0955260, DOT-FAA 10-G-008,
NIH/NIDCD R03 DC010451, and an equipment grant from the MdDS Balance
Disorders Foundation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ L. Ding is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Center
of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA
and also with the Laureate Institute of Brain Research, Tulsa, OK 74136 USA
(e-mail: leiding@ou.edu).
G. Shou is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73072 USA (e-mail: guofashou@gmail.com).
H. Yuan, D. Urbano, and Y.-H. Cha are with the Laureate Institute of
Brain Research, Tulsa, OK 74136 USA (e-mail: hanyuan83@gmail.com;
durbano@laureateinstitute.org; ycha@laureateinstitute.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2313575

Index Terms—Connectivity, dysconnectivity disease, independent component analysis (ICA), mal de debarquement syndrome
(MdDS), neuromodulation, phase, repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS).

I. INTRODUCTION
RANSCRANIAL magnetic stimulation (TMS) has proven
to be an important neural stimulation tool in investigating
the pathophysiological bases of neurological and psychiatric
conditions [1]. It can be used to modulate cortical excitability using either inhibitory low-frequency (≤1 Hz) or facilitatory
high-frequency stimulation (≥5 Hz) [1]–[3]. The effects of TMS
can be observed not only in local areas at the stimulation site,
but also in remote, anatomically and/or functionally connected
sites [1], [2], [4]. The effects of TMS in remote cortical structures are of therapeutic interest, since deep brain and certain
neocortical structures that exhibit more individual variations are
difficult to accurately and efficiently target with surface stimulation. Moreover, repetitive TMS (rTMS) can induce robust
and long-lasting effects (outlasting the stimulation period) [4],
especially at low-frequency stimulation. Thus, there is great interest in the therapeutic applications of rTMS in neurological
and psychiatric disorders [5]–[7].
A variety of methods have been introduced to measure the
neuromodulatory effects of TMS. Electromyography (EMG)
has been mainly used with single- and paired-pulse TMS to
investigate normal and/or impaired motor cortical excitability [8] and various EMG measures [8] have been developed
in single-pulse TMS paradigms (motor evoked potential, MEP;
resting/active motor threshold, MT and cortical silent period,
CSP) and in paired-pulse TMS paradigms (short-interval intracortical inhibition/facilitation, SICI/ICF; short-latency/longlatency afferent inhibition; and transcallosal inhibition). Altered
values of these measures have been reported in neurological and
psychiatric disorders [8]. The major drawback of the TMS-EMG
protocol is that the intervention and read-out is largely limited
to the motor cortex (M1) and only in a few brain disorders there
have been clear neuropathological evidence of a direct link to
motor dysfunction [9]–[11]. Studies of M1 cannot be simply
translated to other cortical structures due to differences in cortical architecture, neuron density, and receptor distribution, which
might cause different neuromodulation responses [8].
Recent developments that combine TMS and functional neuroimaging techniques, including electroencephalography (EEG)

T

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DING et al.: LASTING MODULATION EFFECTS OF rTMS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY AND CONNECTIVITY

[12]–[16], functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
[17]–[21], and positron emission tomography (PET) [22], have
extended the investigation of modulation of cortical excitability
to regions other than M1. In particular, the TMS-EEG protocol
has been extensively used to assess neuromodulation effects in
occipital [23], parietal [24], premotor [25], and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (DLPFC) [12], [26], in addition to M1 [13], [14].
Accordingly, many TMS-EEG measures have been proposed to
elucidate cortical excitatory and inhibitory changes. As an example, the long-interval cortical inhibition (LICI) measure has
been used to assess TMS stimulation responses in DLPFC [27]
and other cortical regions [28]. It revealed deficits of cortical inhibition in the gamma frequency band at DLPFC in schizophrenia patients [29]. TMS-EEG measures have been derived from
evoked potentials (EPs), such as fronto-central gamma-band
EP in schizophrenia patients [15] and P30 in Alzheimer patients [30]. EEG spectral power difference before and after TMS
is the most widely used measure, especially when resting-state
EEGs (rsEEGs) are being investigated [12], [13], [15]. Some
of these studies indicate that long-lasting effects of rTMS can
be induced in areas outside the motor cortex, adding evidence
beyond from behavioral [31], [32] and clinical effects [5], [33].
Recently, accumulating evidence suggest that functional
connectivity, especially resting-state functional connectivity,
is profoundly altered in many neurological and psychiatric
disorders [8], [34]–[36], i.e., a category of diseases involving
dysconnectivity [6], [37]. A technique that is sensitive enough
to detect early and subtle functional connectivity changes in
these disorders would thus be important in the diagnosis and
eventual treatment of these disorders. While the TMS measures discussed earlier imply certain functional connectivity
and network changes, most of them do not directly measure
changes or alterations in networks. The tools to directly map
functional connectivity and to develop network measures in
studying their changes under various conditions (healthy, diseased and/or TMS stimulated) would be of both theoretical and
eventual practical utility. It has been suggested that network
measures are more sensitive clinical biomarkers for dysconnectivity diseases [34], that they can better predict stimulation
outcomes [38], [39], and that network-guided stimulation treatments lead to better outcomes [40]. Recent studies using restingstate fMRI (rsfMRI) [17]–[19], [21] have shown different excitatory/inhibitory effects of rTMS between the stimulated and
functionally connected regions. Early EEG studies have used
coherence as a connectivity measure with increased coherence
indicating inhibitory rTMS effects in resting state [14], [41] and
under tasks [25]. These network measures highlight the possibility of extending TMS measures to investigate functional
connectivity and network changes.
In this study, we developed a novel rsEEG analysis framework to study neural activity changes (using spectral power)
and connectivity changes (using phase coherence) after the application of rTMS. We evaluated these two measures at the
component level of rsEEG signals, as decomposed from grouplevel independent component analysis (ICA) [42], [43]. Our
method addressed the volume conduction effect [44] in EEG
channel signals, and thus avoided false positives in identifying

2071

significant rsEEG connectivity (e.g., coherence) due to volume
conduction. Since these EEG network measures were computed
from rsEEG data, we expected that our capability of detecting
significant network structural and connectivity changes would
be similar to those measured from rsfMRI [17]–[20].
We applied this new TMS-EEG protocol to a chronic neurological disorder of imbalance, called mal de debarquement
syndrome (MdDS) [45]. MdDS is a disorder caused by entrainment to background oscillating environments in which individuals experience a persistent sensation of low frequency rocking
dizziness after disembarking from a moving vessel such as a
boat or a plane. In some rare individuals, as those investigated
in this study, this rocking dizziness lasts for months or years. Inner ear function testing and structural brain imaging are normal
in MdDS [45]. However, fluorodeoxyglucose PET and rsfMRI
data have revealed resting-state metabolic and functional connectivity differences in MdDS individuals compared to healthy
controls [35], which can be used to study the proposed connectivity measure in this new TMS-EEG protocol. We chose MdDS
patients also because the disorder appears to be one of abnormal neuroplasticity that is not related to organ damage, which is
optimal in studying functional connectivity changes rather than
those due to structural alterations. Furthermore, the perception
in MdDS can be modulated by moving subjects passively, such
as driving [45], which suggests that a similar effect might potentially be achieved by external brain modulation. Our pilot
study [33] showed that the rocking perception of MdDS can be
acutely modified by rTMS over DLPFC.
Many studies have investigated short-term EEG changes induced by single session rTMS with effects lasting up to 90 min
[46]. Since acute changes can be affected by nonspecific rTMS
related factors like pain, fatigue, and anxiety, in this study, we
were particularly interested in measuring more remote effects of
rTMS that would be indicative of actual neuromodulation [1].
The rsEEG data in this study were thus recorded 4 to 5 h after
the last rTMS session at the end of a consecutive five-day protocol [33]. We hypothesized that rTMS targeted at DLPFC might
generate long-lasting effects on networks broader than those
regions specifically related to the treatment of MdDS since
the same stimulation protocol has been used for other disorders [12], [26], [27]. Therefore, we not only correlated rsEEG
changes to the direction and magnitude of symptom changes that
subjects reported during the course of their treatment, but also
compared rsEEG measures before and after five rTMS sessions
using the group of subjects as a whole without distinguishing
symptom improvement and/or worsening.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Subjects
Patients with a history of persistent MdDS meeting the following criteria were recruited through a university neurology clinic
as well as an advertisement on the MdDS Balance Foundation
website (www.mddsfoundation.org): 1) a chronic perception of
rocking dizziness that started after disembarking from sea, air,
or land based travel; 2) symptoms lasting at least six months
to avoid any possibility of a spontaneous remission during the

2072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

trial [45]; 3) no other cause for symptoms after evaluation by
an experienced neurotologist (Y.H.C); 4) no contraindications
to receiving rTMS including pregnancy, medications that lower
seizure threshold, or a personal or family history of seizures;
5) at least 18 years old.
Ten right-handed women (age: 47.6 ± 10.7 yrs) with persistent MdDS lasting from 8 to 91 (40.5 ± 24.2) months participated in the study. Though there was no gender exclusion in recruitment, MdDS is significantly more prevalent in women [45]
and so this composition was not unexpected. Symptoms were
triggered by sea travel in four subjects, air travel in three subjects, land travel in two subjects, and an amusement park ride
in one subject. Written informed consent was obtained from
participants before the start of all procedures, and the study was
approved by Western IRB. Subjects completed the Edinburgh
Handedness Inventory [47].
B. rTMS Sessions
Prior to the rTMS treatment, subjects underwent a
magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition with gradient echo
(MPRAGE) scan on a General Electric (GE) Discovery MR750
3 T MRI whole-body scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee WI,
USA). The MPRAGE images were used for neuronavigation
during the treatment sessions.
Each subject underwent five sessions of rTMS on five consecutive days. The Localite TMS Navigator (Localite GmBH,
Germany) frameless stereotaxy system was used for neuronavigation to identify the middle of the middle frontal gyrus, which
is the center of the DLPFC. Navigation was used throughout
the procedure to ensure consistent targeting. rTMS was performed with the Magventure MagPro X100 stimulator with a
cooled figure-of-eight coil. Motor thresholding was performed
each day with independent measurements made for both the
right and left M1 hand areas. MTs were defined as the percent
intensity of the stimulator output that generated a 50 μV MEP
in the contralateral abductor pollicis brevis muscle in five out of
ten trials.
Each rTMS session consisted of a standard protocol of 1 Hz
right DLPFC stimulation at 110% of MT for 1200 pulses
(20 min) followed by 10 Hz left DLPFC stimulation at 110%
MT for 2000 pulses (25 min). The 10 Hz protocol was administered as trains of 40 pulses over 4-s followed by 26 s of rest,
i.e., each train was 30 s. Fifty 10 Hz trains were administered at
each session. Subjects were seated in a recliner in a quiet room
with their eyes open. Subjects rated the degree of their MdDS
symptoms on a visual analogue scale (VAS) of 0–100 each day,
where 0 was complete suppression of symptoms. The change in
the VAS from Day 1 to 5 was used as the measure of symptom
change.
C. EEG Recording and Preprocessing
rsEEG was recorded in two 5-min sessions: one before the
subjects received their first TMS treatment on Day 1 (the preTMS rsEEG session) and another 4 to 5 h after the last TMS
session on Day 5 (the post-TMS rsEEG session). 126-channel
EEG signals were recorded using a BrainAmp amplifier (Brain

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the analysis process: (a) preprocessing steps from
raw rsEEG to artifacts-rejected rsEEG epochs for individual subjects, (b) steps
to calculate spatial patterns and spectral dynamics of ICs of interest using a
group-level ICA, and (c) group-level analyses examining the effects of rTMS
treatment on neural activity and connectivity.

Products GmbH, Munich, Germany). The online reference channel was located at the FCz position, while the ground electrode
was located at the AFz position. The impedance of all electrodes
was maintained below 10 kΩ during recordings. EEG signals
were recorded at a sampling frequency of 1000 Hz with an analog filter (from 0.016 to 250 Hz) and a resolution of 0.1 μV.
Subjects were siting in a recliner quietly with eyes closed in a
quiet darkened room when rsEEG data were recorded.
The preprocessing steps for each individual subject are depicted in Fig. 1(a). First, a bandpass filter of 0.5–30 Hz was
performed on pre- and post-TMS rsEEG data separately from
each subject. Second, bad channels were detected using an automatic method from the FASTER toolbox [48] integrated in
EEGLAB [49], as well as by visual inspection. rsEEG data on
bad channels and at the channel FCz were then interpolated
from neighboring channels using the EEGLAB toolbox [49].
Third, rsEEG data were segmented into 1-s epochs with bad
epochs identified and removed using the FASTER toolbox. In
these FASTER processes, the statistical threshold was selected
at Z-score >3 for each metric used [48]. Finally, rsEEG data
were rereferenced to an arithmetically derived common average
and downsampled to 250 Hz. After these steps, the resulting
rsEEG epochs from pre- and post-TMS rsEEG sessions of each
individual subject were concatenated for an Infomax ICA [49]
to reject additional artifacts [see Fig. 1(a)]. rsEEG data from
each subject were decomposed into 64 independent components
(ICs); those ICs linked to ocular, cardiac, and muscular activity
were rejected. The purpose of combining pre- and post-TMS
rsEEG data before ICA-based artifact rejection was to avoid
possible spectral power differences between them due to different numbers of artifact-related ICs being rejected if processed

DING et al.: LASTING MODULATION EFFECTS OF rTMS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY AND CONNECTIVITY

separately. After all processes were performed on all subjects,
an average of 291 (SD: 15) epochs for each rsEEG session was
obtained for each subject.

Phase coherence. ICPC was employed to detect the connectivity between two functional brain regions (i.e., two ICs) [49],
which is calculated as follows:

D. Group-Level ICA Analysis
To obtain dissociable rsEEG patterns linked to distinct neural substrates over all subjects, a group-level ICA scheme
was employed [see Fig. 1(b)]. Preprocessed rsEEG epochs
from individual subjects were separately normalized using a
z-transform to reduce intersubject variations, and then temporally concatenated. These concatenated time-domain 1-s epoch
data were converted into a 3-D time–frequency representation
(TFR) (X̂ ∈ C N c ×N f ×N T ) using a short-time Fourier transform
(STFT), where Nc , Nf , and NT denote the number of channels
(i.e., 126 plus the interpolated FCz), the number of frequency
bins (i.e., 27 bins from 4 to 30 Hz with a resolution of 1 Hz),
and the number of epochs (i.e., 5827 epochs from ten subjects
each with two rsEEG sessions), respectively. Thereafter, the 3D complex-valued TFR data were rearranged into a 2-D matrix
X̃ ∈ C N c ×(N f N T ) by mixing samples in temporal and spectral domains, and fed into a complex ICA model [42], [43] as
follows:
S̃ = A−1 X̃

(1)

where A ∈ RN c ×N s is the real-valued mixing matrix, S̃ ∈
C N s ×(N f N T ) is the IC source activation matrix, and Ns denotes the number of ICs (i.e., 25). After the group-level ICA
decomposition, the spatial patterns (columns of A) of the
group-level ICs were obtained. Their spectral dynamics were
calculated from STFT-transformed temporally concatenated
rsEEG epochs (without z-transform) using the unmixing matrix
(A−1 ), and reorganized into pre-and post-TMS sessions for each
individual.
From the resulted 25 group-level ICs, 13 ICs were identified based on their spatial-spectral patterns, i.e., spatial patterns
approximately explained by dipolar sources [50] and/or spectral powers with evident peak(s) in theta, alpha, and/or beta
bands, after excluding those ICs related to nuisance processes
(e.g., eye movement and residue muscle activity). Epoch-wise
spectral dynamics of 13 ICs were then used to compute rsEEG
measures as discussed next [see Fig. 1(c)].
E. Spectral Domain rsEEG Measures
Two rsEEG measures, i.e., spectral powers of individual ICs
and inter-IC phase-based coherences (ICPCs) [49] of any pair
of two different ICs (i.e., 78 pairs from 13 ICs), were computed
and statistically compared in the contrast of pre- and post-TMS
rsEEGs [see Fig. 1(c)].
Spectral power. For both pre- and post-TMS sessions, spectral
powers at four frequency bands, i.e., theta (4–7 Hz), low alpha
(8–10 Hz), high alpha (11–13 Hz), and beta (14–30 Hz) band,
were obtained by averaging spectral powers over the frequency
bins in each band. The statistical difference between pre- and
post-TMS rsEEGs at each frequency band was examined [see
Fig. 1(c)] by a paired t test (two-tailed) for each IC, with the
significant level set at p < 0.05.

2073

ICPCj,k (f )



n

1 


= ×
ei[ϕ j ( f , e ) −ϕ k ( f , e ) ] 

n
e=1

(2)

where n is the number of epochs, and ϕj (f ,e) and ϕk (f ,e) are the
phases from the eth epoch of jth and kth ICs at the frequency
f . If the phases of two ICs fluctuate in synchrony over time
courses (i.e., epochs), the difference between them would be a
constant and the ICPC value is close to 1. Otherwise, it would
be close to 0. As in the analysis of spectral power, ICPC differences between pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs were also examined
at the same four frequency bands [see Fig. 1(c)]. We first tested
whether ICPCs obtained in each rsEEG session (separately for
pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs) were significantly different from
zero (null hypothesis for no significant connections) using onesample t-tests (two-tailed), and those significant connections
obtained were used to form neural networks in each condition.
The significant level was set to p < 0.01 with Bonferroni correction (divided by the number of IC pairs, 78). Thereafter, the
ICPC differences between pre- and post-TMS sessions at four
frequency bands were examined by a paired t test (two-tailed)
only in cases with at least one significant ICPC (p < 0.01, corrected) in either pre- or post-TMS rsEEG. The significant level
was set to p < 0.05.
F. Relationship Between rsEEG Measures and VAS Scores
To investigate the relationship between rsEEG measures and
changes in symptoms [see Fig. 1(c)], the differences in spectral
power and ICPC between pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs at the
four frequency bands of individual ICs were correlated to VAS
score changes from pre- to post-TMS tests using a cross-subject
Pearson correlation analysis. The correlation coefficients (CCs)
with p < 0.05 were considered to be significant. Similarly, the
correlation analyses involving ICPC were only conducted in
cases with at least one significant ICPC in either pre- or postTMS rsEEG. The directions of changes in both rsEEG measures
and VAS scores were investigated to further verify the correspondence between electrophysiological and symptom changes.
Since the number of ICPC changes was relatively large, the directions of ICPC changes of individuals were investigated using
metrics concerning total ICPC changes. First, subjects were categorized, based on VAS score changes, into positive (reduced
at least 10 points), neutral (less than 10 points), and negative
groups (increased at least 10 points). Second, the connections
that indicated significant CCs from the correlation analysis earlier were tested in individual subjects to identify a subset of
connections that show significant ICPC changes (p < 0.01, corrected) from pre- to post-TMS rsEEG for each subject. The
direction of ICPC changes of each subject in three groups was
then evaluated using two metrics computed from the subset of
connections: 1) fraction of connections of reduced ICPCs; and
2) sum of ICPC changes.

2074

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Summary of VAS score changes over ten subjects.

Fig. 4. Grand averaged spectral powers of 13 ICs over ten subjects for preand post-TMS sessions. Red lines denote the frequency bands of significant
power differences (p < 0.05). Solid lines: mean powers; shaded areas: SEM.

Fig. 3.

Scalp maps of 13 ICs of interest.

III. RESULTS
Edinburgh handedness scores ranged from 40 to 100 (mean:
86; median: 95), indicating overall strong right-hand dominance
in patients. A range of symptom changes was reported in this
cohort of ten subjects (see Fig. 2). A minimum of a 10-point
change in the VAS was required to be considered either a positive
or negative response. According to this categorization criterion,
three subjects (S1, S2, and S3) were in the positive responder
group, three subjects (S8, S9, and S10) were in the negative
responder group, and the remaining subjects (S4, S5, S6, and
S7) were in the neutral group.
A. ICs of Interest
Thirteen ICs (see Fig. 3) were identified with typical spatialspectral patterns (labeled as ICk, k = 1. . .13), which were consistent with previously reported IC patterns from rsEEG [43],
[51]–[53]. IC1 indicates an occipital topography over the primary visual cortex. IC2 and IC3 show the left and right occipital topographies, respectively, over the lateral primary visual
cortex. IC4 and IC5 indicate the left and right occipital topographies, respectively, which are toward the temporal cortex and
cover the secondary visual cortex. These five ICs to a large
extent correspond to the visual resting-state networks (RSNs)
identified in fMRI [51]. IC6 and IC7 indicate the left and right
temporal topographies, respectively, covering the left and right
secondary somatosensory cortex [43]. IC8 indicates the most
complex pattern among all ICs and resembles the IC that has
been identified in a recent study [51], showing the significant
correlation to the default mode network (DMN) from fMRI [51].

IC9 indicates a typical parietal topography over the parietal cortex. IC10 shows the patterns over both left and right central
sulcus (CS) in the primary motor cortex. IC11 indicates a dipolar pattern over the central medial region, which corresponds
to the supplementary motor area. Both IC12 and IC13 indicate prefrontal topographies, while IC12 shows a symmetrical
distribution over the left and right DLPFC and IC13 shows a
distribution over the medial prefrontal cortex. Note that the left
and right symmetric patterns are sometimes detected in combination [51] or separately [52], [53].
It is noted that IC1 to IC7 are all related to sensory functions
involved in processing motion information, which is of particular interest since many symptoms in MdDS appear to involve
abnormal motion information processing [35]. Moreover, the
posterior parietal cortex (IC9) has also been reported to involve
motion processing [35]. IC12 is of interest since it overlaps the
rTMS stimulation sites over DLPFC.

B. Spectral Power Differences Between Pre- and Post-TMS
rsEEG
All 13 ICs had alpha peaks in both pre- and post-TMS rsEEG
data, while IC13 exhibited the most diminished peak (see Fig. 4).
The two prefrontal ICs (IC12 and IC13) and one motor component (IC11) indicated another peak in the beta band. While no
spectral peaks in the theta band were evident, the two prefrontal
ICs had more elevated theta power in the entire spectral power
distributions as compared with other ICs.
Only four out of 13 ICs indicated spectral power differences
in at least one of the four frequency bands examined. In IC2,
IC8, and IC12, a significant theta power difference between
pre- and post-TMS rsEEG (p < 0.05; Fig. 4) was revealed, with
enhanced theta powers in post-TMS rsEEG in all three ICs. IC8
further revealed significantly higher spectral power in the low
alpha band (p < 0.05) in post-TMS rsEEG than pre-TMS rsEEG
(see Fig. 4), which might be extended from the theta band power
difference. IC11 indicates significantly higher spectral power in
the high alpha band (p < 0.05) in post-TMS rsEEG than preTMS rsEEG (see Fig. 4).

DING et al.: LASTING MODULATION EFFECTS OF rTMS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY AND CONNECTIVITY

Fig. 5. Scatter plots of significant cross-subject correlations between spectral power changes and VAS score changes from pre- to post-TMS sessions:
(a) significant correlations in high alpha and beta bands from IC2, and
(b) significant correlations in beta band from IC9. Red crosses denote coordinate origins; black lines are regressed lines; and blue, black, and red dots
indicate subjects from positive, neutral, and negative groups, respectively.

Fig. 6. Significant ICPCs (p < 0.01, corrected) in the four frequency bands
from both pre-TMS (a) and post-TMS (b) sessions.

C. Relationship Between Spectral Power Changes and VAS
Score Changes
The significant correlations between spectral power changes
and VAS score changes were only revealed in two ICs (IC2
and IC9) (see Fig. 5). IC2 showed the significant negative correlations in the high alpha (CC = −0.64; p < 0.05) and beta
bands (CC = −0.73; p < 0.02) [see Fig. 5(a)]. IC9 indicated
a significant positive correlation in the beta band (CC = 0.67;
p < 0.05) [see Fig. 5(b)]. Most subjects from the positive group
and negative group indicate opposite directions of changes in
both spectral power and VAS score, and all subjects from the
neutral group show small changes.
Comparing the ICs showing significant rTMS effects (see
Fig. 4) and the ICs showing significant correlations to VAS
scores (see Fig. 5), only one IC overlapped (IC2). However, if
specific frequency band changes are also taken into consideration, no IC overlapped in these two investigations.

2075

Fig. 7. Significant ICPC differences (p < 0.05) between pre- and post-TMS
sessions identified in (a) theta band, (b) low alpha band, (c) high alpha band, and
(d) beta band. Circles mark sensory function related ICs. Dashed lines: reduced
connections; solid lines: enhanced connections.

all frequency bands, as well as the numbers of the most significant connections (p < 0.001, corrected). The low alpha band
had the least number of significant connections and the smallest
number of the most significant connections. Based on visualization, long connections over different lobes (e.g., among the
prefrontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes) and connections between homologous structures in both hemispheres were
present (e.g., in the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes) in all
frequency bands and in both pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs. The
only obvious missing significant connections were between the
frontal lobe and the temporal lobe in the high alpha band in
both pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs. The most significant connections within the frontal lobe seemed to be only in the beta band.
Importantly, the numbers of significant connections in all frequency bands were less in post-TMS rsEEGs than in pre-TMS
rsEEGs.
Fig. 7 shows the quantitative results of connectivity differences between pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs. The most significant
ICPC decrease (p < 0.005) appeared in the beta band between
the prefrontal and parietal lobes (between IC12 and IC8). There
were more modestly significant ICPC decreases (p < 0.01) between IC8 and IC5 in the high alpha band. Other significant
ICPC decreases (p < 0.05) were between IC3 and IC12 in both
the theta and high alpha bands and between IC7 and IC13 in
the beta band. Two significant ICPC increases (p < 0.05) were
between IC8 and IC10 in both theta and high alpha bands. Other
significant ICPC increases were all between a sensory related
area [circled in Fig. 7(a)] and a nonsensory related area (not
circled). In sum, there were total 12 significant connectivity
changes, four of them involving DLPFC with decreased connectivity and five involving the parietal lobe.

D. ICPC Differences Between Pre- and Post-TMS rsEEG

E. Relationship Between ICPC Changes and VAS Score
Changes

Both pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs indicate a network of significant connections (as measured by ICPC) among 13 ICs in
multiple frequency bands (see Fig. 6). Note that those ICs with
symmetric left and right distributions (IC8, IC10, and IC12)
are represented by two dots (with each on one hemisphere) and
thus the total number of nodes in Fig. 6 is 16. The numbers of
significant connections (p < 0.01, corrected) in the beta band in
both pre- and post-TMS rsEEGs were the highest ones among

Eight significant correlations (p < 0.05) between the ICPC
changes and the VAS score changes from pre- to post-TMS
session were revealed in the theta [see Fig. 8(a)], low alpha [see Fig. 8(b)], and high alpha [see Fig. 8(c)] bands, but
none in the beta band. Most of the significant correlations
(p < 0.05) involved ICs from the parietal lobe (five involving
either IC8 or IC9) and sensory-related areas (seven involving either IC1, IC2, IC3, IC5, or IC7). The only significant correlation

2076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 8. Significant cross-subject correlations (p < 0.05) between ICPC
changes and VAS score changes from pre- to post-TMS sessions in (a) theta,
(b) low alpha, and (c) high alpha bands.

Fig. 9. Directions of ICPC changes in subjects from positive (blue dots),
neutral (black dots), and negative groups (red dots) using two metrics: 1) x-axis:
number of negative significant ICPC changes over total number of significant
ICPC changes; 2) y-axis: sum of all significant ICPC changes.

involving the prefrontal lobe was linked to the parietal lobe (between IC9 and IC12). It is important to note that all significant
correlations were positive, meaning that the coherences among
these areas decreased as the VAS score decreased, i.e., symptoms improved. Fig. 9 exhibited that all subjects from the positive group and negative group exhibited opposite direction of
changes, and all subjects from the neutral group showed smaller
changes than subjects from other two groups.
While ICs showing many significant connectivity changes
from pre- to post-TMS sessions (see Fig. 7) were from the
prefrontal lobe in the theta, high alpha, and beta bands, ICs
showing significant correlations with VAS scores (see Fig. 8)
were mainly from the parietal lobe and sensory-related areas in
the theta and low and high alpha bands. No IC pair overlapped
in both investigations.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, we developed novel rsEEG measures of neural
activity and connectivity in evaluating lasting modulation effects
induced by rTMS in a group of MdDS patients. First, we characterized the resting-state activity of multiple functional brain
areas identified in a data-driven blind source separation analysis
(i.e., ICA) from rsEEG data. We then characterized the RSNs
defined by the connectivity among these brain areas. We studied the resting-state activity and connectivity changes in these
brain areas before and after consecutive days of rTMS in an attempt to capture neuromodulation effects. We further correlated

these changes to clinical symptom changes. We demonstrated
that there are significant changes in resting-state neural activity
(see Fig. 4) and neural networks (see Fig. 7) over broad cortical areas before and after rTMS. We further showed that the
changes in the parietal and occipital lobes (see Figs. 5 and 8)
were significantly correlated to the clinical effects between preand post-TMS sessions.
While TMS effects from classical measures have successfully elucidated the pathophysiology of various neurological
and psychiatric disorders [54], [55], they also appear to be nonspecific [4]. For example, many different disorders can exhibit
the same kind of abnormalities [55] and disorders without clear
motor cortex pathology have been found to exhibit abnormal
motor cortical excitability [56]. This can be due to the nonspecific nature of TMS stimulation itself, the particular stimulation paradigm utilized, or because only indirect TMS effects
are being measured. Specifically, some classical TMS measures
(e.g., MEP and CSP) only investigate peripheral output system
changes (e.g., muscles) to study corresponding brain areas (e.g.,
the motor cortex) [8]; some investigate hypothetical connectivity
changes between the stimulation site and remote areas by comparing only neural activity changes at these areas using different
conditions as contrasts (e.g., pre- and poststimulation, real and
sham stimulations, and with and without stimulation) [12], [13];
and some from paired-pulse stimulation paradigms (e.g., SICI
and LICI) depend on transiently altered interactions in pretargeted brain areas [8]. All these investigational means are limited
in their capabilities of evaluating complex network/connectivity
changes. On the other hand, while it is still uncertain, dysconnectivity diseases are likely driven by alterations in normal neurophysiological connectivity [57], e.g., synaptic plasticity or developmental wiring [58]. While the mechanisms of the lasting
modulation effects of rTMS are also unclear, long-term potentiation [59] and depression [60] of cortical synapses have been
suggested, which is also related to connectivity changes. These
findings suggest that understanding the lasting neuromodulation
effect of rTMS and its potential to affect dysconnectivity diseases requires directly mapping neural connectivity structures.
Novel network measurements that can detect dynamic connectivity changes among various brain regions are needed in order
to understand the neuromodulatory effect of rTMS.
The rsEEG connectivity analysis we developed in this study
involved constructing neural connectivity maps (see Fig. 6) and
detecting dynamic connectivity changes before and after rTMS
(see Figs. 7 and 8). Results from the connectivity measure indicate that the human brain is highly functionally connected across
hemispheres and various cortical lobes over multiple frequency
bands in the resting state, regardless of the pre- or post-TMS condition (see Fig. 6). This finding was consistent with other rsEEG
studies in healthy subjects [52], [53] and rsfMRI studies in both
healthy subjects [61] and patients [34]. More importantly, it also
revealed significant connectivity changes specific to the clinical effect of rTMS in our patients (see Fig. 8). Finally, it is
worth noting that the advantage of measuring network changes
from rsEEG over those from rsfMRI are twofold: 1) EEG has
much higher temporal resolution than fMRI (milliseconds versus seconds), which provides significantly better capability of

DING et al.: LASTING MODULATION EFFECTS OF rTMS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY AND CONNECTIVITY

detecting dynamic connectivity changes; and 2) BOLD fMRI
is an indirect measure of neural activity, which is complicated
by other system variations (e.g., respiration) [62], as compared
with a primary neural response measured in EEG.
Another EEG measure (i.e., IC spectral power) was also used
in this study to evaluate neural activity changes after rTMS sessions. While both EEG measures indicated consistent patterns
in general, the ICPC measure seemed to be more sensitive. For
example, in Figs. 4 and 7, both measures revealed significant
changes over broad cortical areas after rTMS sessions (including
the frontal, central, parietal, and occipital areas) but the ICPC
measure also indicated the involvement of the temporal area. In
Figs. 5 and 8, both measures revealed that major significant correlations against VAS scores were from the parietal (particularly
IC9) and occipital areas. The ICPC measure further indicated
involvement of more areas within the occipital area, and some
significant connectivity changes involving DLPFC (IC12) and
DMN (IC8) (see Fig. 8).
It is hypothesized that the imbalance sensation in MdDS patients is caused by a poorly regulated network that involves reduced prefrontal connectivity and increased connectivity in parietal, temporal, and occipital areas for motion processing [35].
The EEG changes specific to symptom changes suggest a beta
power decrease in the parietal area (IC9) and an alpha power
increase in the left lateral primary visual area (IC2) (see Fig. 5).
The symptom-specific network changes indicate all positive (no
negative) correlations to VAS score changes mainly over the
occipital, temporal, and parietal areas (see Fig. 8). In summary,
when the symptom improves, in above areas, cortical inhibition increases (alpha power) whereas cortical activations (beta
power) and functional connectivity decreases, which can be interpreted as suppressed motion processing in these areas. However, the beta band EEG power increases in IC2 along with VAS
score decreases [see Fig. 5(a)] was an exception to this pattern.
One of the limitations in this study is the lack of Sham stimulation as a control due the rareness of the disease [45]. Therefore,
we further investigated the direction of changes in two rsEEG
measures (see Figs. 5 and 9). It is suggested that the direction of
changes (i.e., decreased, almost none, and increased changes)
in both spectral power and ICPC correspond to the direction
of changes in VAS scores (i.e., positive, neutral, and negative,
respectively). While the number of subjects in each group is limited, it provides evidence that these EEG changes are induced
by rTMS, which can be further verified in future studies with
more subjects.
It is interesting that the patterns related to general changes
and those related to symptom-specific changes in rsEEG measures do not overlap. This is because subjects with different
symptom changes were grouped together in the investigation of
rsEEG changes before and after rTMS. The different treatment
responses might be caused by the symptom severity and duration of MdDS subjects [33]. As indicated in Fig. 2, the numbers
of subjects in positive, negative, and neutral groups are almost
equal, and the symptom-specific rsEEG changes (see Fig. 9) at
the group level can be largely canceled out due to the opposite directions of changes in the positive and negative groups
and almost zero changes in the neutral group. The detection of

2077

these nonspecific rsEEG changes suggests that more general and
broader neural modulation effects might result from rTMS over
DLPFC, which is why DLPFC has been targeted by rTMS in various psychiatric disorders [12], [26], [27]. More importantly, the
detection of symptom-specific changes not only suggests that
rTMS can generate positive treatment effects in MdDS patients,
but can also reveal potentially new targets in future therapeutic
trials to improve treatment effects. DLPFC was selected as the
target area for rTMS in this study because rTMS over this area
was shown to acutely decrease the sensation of low frequency
oscillation in MdDS [33], [63]. An important finding in our
study is that while many connectivity changes were observed
in the prefrontal area after rTMS, they were not significantly
correlated to symptom changes. Interestingly, those connectivity changes within motion processing areas were significantly
correlated to symptom changes (see Fig. 8). These facts suggest that the parietal and occipital areas may be additional or
even better targets for rTMS in treating MdDS patients. Also
interestingly, while more significant connections in the resting
brain were in the theta and beta bands (see Fig. 6), the most
significant connectivity changes related to symptom changes
were in the alpha band (see Fig. 8). It is consistent with the
fact that many TMS-EEG studies have yielded results in alpha
oscillation changes [23].
In contrast to previous TMS-EEG studies [12], [13], [15], we
examined oscillatory neural activity and connectivity changes
from rTMS in multiple resting-state neural substrates at the IC
level. Compared to the channel-level analysis, applying ICA to
rsEEG data has the following advantages. First, ICA addresses
the volume conduction issue [44] that reduces crosstalk in EEG
data from different neural sources and avoids false detection of
coherence. Second, locations of neural sources underlying individual ICs can be inferred from their spatial patterns and have
been well reported in the literature. However, it should be noted
that the source localization capability of ICA, as compared with
fMRI, is still limited since it does not directly reconstruct sources
inside the human brain, which might produce ambiguities in the
interpretation of IC sources. As an example, while differences
can be observed, IC8 and IC10 show similar spatial patterns in
many aspects. This problem can be further addressed by EEG
source imaging technologies [64], [65] and one of our works
has demonstrated the capability of reconstructing RSNs from
EEG alone [66]. Third, ICA can resolve oscillatory activity and
obtain their patterns with high sensitivity that is otherwise difficult to measure directly at the channel level, particularly from
rsEEG [53]. Finally, we adopted a newly developed complex
ICA strategy built from our previous study [43]. Complex ICA
methods have demonstrated better capability in detecting neural components over artifactual components than time-domain
ICAs [42]. While the phase coherence was first used to measure interchannel synchrony caused by external [49] and internal
events [67], [68], as well as in resting-state data [69], its use on
ICs from event-related potentials has also been suggested [49].
In this study, we extended its use on ICs obtained from rsEEG
data. While most previous studies use magnitude correlation
to investigate connectivity among ICs [70], phase synchrony
represents another important mechanism of communication in

2078

the human brain [71]. Due to the enforced constraint on detecting ICs, i.e., maximal statistical independence, synchronized
sources might be detected in one IC (such as IC10 and IC12, in
which left and right components from symmetric structures in
both hemispheres are indicated) or in different ICs but showing
significant coherences (see Fig. 6). Therefore, rsEEG changes
in both activity and connectivity have been investigated in this
study considering that the activity of individual ICs might suggest network changes too.
The use of the combination stimulation protocol in this study
was based on a pilot study in investigating the role of rTMS
in the treatment of MdDS [33]. This pilot study determined
that high-frequency left DLPFC stimulation was overall the
most effective one in acutely reducing the rocking perception
in MdDS and low-frequency right DLPFC stimulation was the
second most effective one. A similar pattern has been reported
in the treatment of depression using rTMS. While both protocols have been noted to be more effective than sham stimulation in inducing response and remission in depression, recent studies have shown that combining two protocols can be
more efficient than unilateral stimulations in terms of number of pulses required and duration of sessions [72]. Theoretically, because of strong interhemispheric inhibition between
the cerebral hemispheres [73], the net effect of low-frequency
stimulation over the right DLPFC and high-frequency stimulation over the left DLPFC would synergistically act to reduce
right DLPFC tone while increasing left DLPFC tone. Furthermore, since some patients may be left-sided responders while
others are right-sided responders [33], this combined protocol
would give all subjects the best chance at obtaining a clinical
response.
Due to the rareness of MdDS [45], we only investigated ten
subjects in this study. Thus, resting-state connectivity changes
were not directly compared between responders and nonresponders. Instead, we used a correlation analysis and a direction analysis as surrogates which used the change in symptom
score as a continuous or categorical variable. Sham group and
more subjects are needed in future studies to further verify that
rsEEG changes after rTMS are all induced by rTMS. With more
subjects, issues, such as the relationship between treatment responses and symptom severity/duration, can be investigated.
Furthermore, since there was only one EEG recording session
after rTMS, time-varying features of positive neuromodulatory
effects across hours and days cannot be studied. Multiple recording sessions after rTMS may provide more data in understanding long-lasting characteristics of rTMS effects.These should
be addressed in a future study. Nevertheless, the technology
presented here is to advance the capability of the TMS-EEG
protocol in evaluating neuromodulatory effects of rTMS. It has
the potential to contribute to the establishment of a closed-loop
system that can deliver electrical and/or magnetic stimulation
to dysconnectivity disorders, in which the measured neural activity and connectivity changes from rsEEG can be used to determine patient-tailored stimulation parameters and treatment
procedures. This kind of feedback system may enhance understanding of the variability in treatment response to rTMS
while providing individualized treatment targets. This study on

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

MdDS disease demonstrates the merits for further investigation
into developing novel TMS-EEG technologies.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Hallett, “Transcranial magnetic stimulation: A primer,” Neuron,
vol. 55, pp. 187–199, 2007.
[2] V. Di Lazzaro, M. Dileone, F. Pilato, F. Capone, G. Musumeci, F. Ranieri,
V. Ricci, P. Bria, R. Di Iorio, C. de Waure, P. Pasqualetti, and P. Profice,
“Modulation of motor cortex neuronal networks by rTMS: Comparison
of local and remote effects of six different protocols of stimulation,” J.
Neurophysiol., vol. 105, pp. 2150–2156, 2011.
[3] N. A. Noh, G. Fuggetta, P. Manganotti, and A. Fiaschi, “Long lasting
modulation of cortical oscillations after continuous theta burst transcranial
magnetic stimulation, PLoS ONE,” vol. 7, no. 4, e35080, 2012.
[4] M. Kobayashi and A. Pascual-Leone, “Transcranial magnetic stimulation
in neurology,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 2, pp. 145–156, 2003.
[5] B. Dell’Osso, E. Mundo, N. D’Urso, S. Pozzoli, M. Buoli, M. Ciabatti,
M. Rosanova, M. Massimini, V. Bellina, M. Mariotti, and C. Altamura,
“Augmentative repetitive navigated transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) in drug-resistant bipolar depression,” Bipolar Disorders, vol. 11,
pp. 76–81, 2009.
[6] A. Hasan, P. Falkai, and T. Wobrock, “Transcranial brain stimulation in
schizophrenia: Targeting cortical excitability, connectivity and plasticity,”
Curr. Med. Chem., vol. 20, pp. 405–413, 2013.
[7] S. Jung, Y. Kim, S. Kim, and N. Paik, “Prediction of motor function
recovery after sub-cortical stroke: Case series of activation PET and TMS
studies,” Ann. Rehabil. Med, vol. 36, pp. 501–511, 2012.
[8] T. Bunse, T. Wobrock, W. Strube, F. Padberg, U. Palm, P. Falkai, and
A. Hasan, “Motor cortical excitability assessed by transcranial magnetic
stimulation in psychiatric disorders: A systematic review,” Brain Stimulation, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 158–169, 2014.
[9] A. Hasan, T. Wobrock, C. Grefkes, M. Labusga, K. Levold, T. SchneiderAxmann, P. Falkai, H. Müller, J. Klosterkötter, and A. Bechdolf, “Deficient
inhibitory cortical networks in antipsychotic-naive subjects at risk of developing first-episode psychosis and first-episode schizophrenia patients:
A cross-sectional study,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 72, pp. 744–751, 2012.
[10] R. Nardone, J. Bergmann, M. Christova, F. Caleri, F. Tezzon, G. Ladurner,
E. Trinka, and S. Golaszewski, “Short latency afferent inhibition differs
among the subtypes of mild cognitive impairment,” J. Neural Transm,
vol. 119, pp. 463–471, 2012.
[11] A. J. Levinson, P. B. Fitzgerald, G. Favalli, D. M. Blumberger, M. Daigle,
and Z. J. Daskalakis, “Evidence of cortical inhibitory deficits in major
depressive disorder,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 67, pp. 458–464, 2010.
[12] I. Griskova, O. Ruksenas, K. Dapsys, S. Herpertz, and J. Höppner, “The effects of 10 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on resting EEG
power spectrum in healthy subjects,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 419, pp. 162–
167, 2007.
[13] G. Fuggetta, E. F. Pavone, A. Fiaschi, and P. Manganotti, “Acute modulation of cortical oscillatory activities during short trains of high-frequency
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human motor cortex: A
combined EEG and TMS study,” Hum. Brain Mapping, vol. 29, pp. 1–13,
2008.
[14] A. Oliviero, L. H. A. Strens, V. Lazzaro, P. A. Tonali, and P. Brown, “Persistent effects of high frequency repetitive TMS on the coupling between
motor areas in the human,” Exp. Brain Res, vol. 149, pp. 107–113, 2003.
[15] F. Ferrarelli, M. Massimini, M. J. Peterson, B. A. Riedner, M. Lazar,
M. J. Murphy, R. Huber, M. Rosanova, A. L. Alexander, N. Kalin, and
G. Tononi, “Reduced evoked gamma oscillations in the frontal cortex in
schizophrenia patients: A TMS/EEG study,” Am. J. Psychiatry, vol. 165,
pp. 996–1005, 2008.
[16] M. Massimini, F. Ferrarelli, R. Huber, S. K. Esser, H. Singh, and
G. Tononi, “Breakdown of cortical effective connectivity during sleep,”
Science, vol. 309, pp. 2228–2232, 2005.
[17] A. Vercammen, H. Knegtering, E. J. Liemburg, J. A. Boer den, and
A. Aleman, “Functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal region in
schizophrenia: Effects of rTMS treatment of auditory hallucinations,” J.
Psychiatr. Res., vol. 44, pp. 725–731, 2010.
[18] C. Grefkes, D. A. Nowak, L. E. Wang, M. Dafotakis, S. B. Eickhoff, and
G. R. Fink, “Modulating cortical connectivity in stroke patients by rTMS
assessed with fMRI and dynamic causal modeling,” NeuroImage, vol. 50,
pp. 233–242, 2010.
[19] M. C. Eldaief, M. A. Halko, R. L. Buckner, and A. Pascual-Leone, “Transcranial magnetic stimulation modulates the brain’s intrinsic activity in

DING et al.: LASTING MODULATION EFFECTS OF rTMS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY AND CONNECTIVITY

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

[39]

a frequency-dependent manner,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 108,
pp. 21229–21234, 2011.
L. Martin, J. J. Borckardt, S. T. Reeves, H. Frohman, W. Beam, Z. Nahas,
K. Johnson, J. Younger, A. Madan, D. Patterson, and M. George, “A
pilot functional MRI study of the effects of prefrontal rTMS on pain
perception,” Pain Med., vol. 14, pp. 999–1009, 2013.
T. Watanabe, R. Hanajima, Y. Shirota, S. Ohminami, R. Tsutsumi,
Y. Terao, Y. Ugawa, S. Hirose, Y. Miyashita, S. Konishi, A. Kunimatsu,
and K. Ohtomo, “Bidirectional effects on interhemispheric resting-state
functional connectivity induced by excitatory and inhibitory repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation,” Hum. Brain Mapping, published online 29 Jul. 2013.
A. P. Strafella, T. Paus, M. Fraraccio, and A. Dagher, “Striatal dopamine
release induced by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human motor cortex,” Brain, vol. 126, pp. 2609–2615, 2003.
G. Thut, H. Théoret, A. Pfennig, J. Ives, F. Kampmann, G. Northoff,
and A. Pascual-Leone, “Differential effects of low-frequency rTMS at
the occipital pole on visual-induced alpha desynchronization and visual
evoked potentials,” NeuroImage, vol. 18, pp. 334–347, 2003.
W. Klimesch, P. Sauseng, and C. Gerloff, “Enhancing cognitive performance with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation at human individual alpha frequency,” Eur. J. Neurosci., vol. 17, pp. 1129–1133, 2003.
W. H. Chen, T. Mima, H. R. Siebner, T. Oga, H. Hara, T. Satow, T. Begum, T. Nagamine, and H. Shibasaki, “Low-frequency rTMS over lateral
premotor cortex induces lasting changes in regional activation and functional coupling of cortical motor areas,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 114,
pp. 1628–1637, 2003.
D. J. Schutter, J. van Honk, A. A. d’Alfonso, A. Postma, and E. H. de
Haan, “Effects of slow rTMS at the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex on
EEG asymmetry and mood,” Neuroreport, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 445–447,
2001.
F. Farzan, M. S. Barr, A. J. Levinson, R. Chen, W. Wong, P. B. Fitzgerald,
and Z. J. Daskalakis, “Reliability of long-interval cortical inhibition in
healthy human subjects: A TMS-EEG study,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 104,
pp. 1339–1346, 2010.
M. Rosanova, A. Casali, V. Bellina, F. Resta, M. Mariotti, and
M. Massimini, “Natural frequencies of human corticothalamic circuits,”
J. Neurosci, vol. 29, pp. 7679–7685, 2009.
F. Farzan, M. S. Barr, A. J. Levinson, R. Chen, W. Wong, P. B. Fitzgerald,
and Z. J. Daskalakis, “Evidence for gamma inhibition deficits in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia,” Brain, vol. 133,
pp. 1505–1514, 2010.
P. Julkunen, A. M. Jauhiainen, M. Kononen, A. Paakkonen, J. Karhu,
and H. Soininen, “Combining transcranial magnetic stimulation and electroencephalography may contribute to assess the severity of Alzheimer’s
disease,” Int. J. Alzheimer’s Dis., vol. 2011, Article ID 654794, 2011.
S. M. Kosslyn, A. Pascual-Leone, O. Felician, S. Camposano,
J. P. Keenan, W. L. Thompson, G. Ganis, K. E. Sukel, and N. M. Alpert,
“The role of area 17 in visual imagery: Convergent evidence from PET
and rTMS,” Science, vol. 284, pp. 167–170, 1999.
C. Hilgetag, C. H. Theoret, and A. Pascual-Leone, “Enhanced visual spatial attention ipsilateral to rTMS-induced ‘virtual lesions’ of human parietal cortex,” Nat. Neurosci, vol. 4, pp. 953–957, 2001.
Y. H. Cha, Y. Cui, and R. W. Baloh, “Repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation for mal de debarquement syndrome,” Otol. Neurotol, vol. 34,
pp. 175–179, 2013.
D. S. Bassett, B. G. Nelson, B. A. Mueller, J. Camchong, and K. O. Lim,
“Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia,” NeuroImage, vol. 59,
pp. 2196–2207, 2012.
Y.-H. Cha, S. Chakrapani, A. Craig, and R. W. Baloh, “Metabolic and
functional connectivity changes in mal de debarquement syndrome,” PLoS
ONE, vol. 7, p. e49560, 2012.
C. Hanson, S. J. Hanson, J. Ramsey, and C. Glymour, “Atypical effective
connectivity of social brain networks in individuals with autism,” Brain
Stimulation, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 578–589, 2013.
K. J. Friston, “The disconnection hypothesis,” Schizophrenia Res., vol. 30,
pp. 115–125, 1998.
S. Vanneste, F. Focquaert, P. Heyning, and D. Ridder, “Different resting
state brain activity and functional connectivity in patients who respond
and not respond to bifrontal tDCS for tinnitus suppression,” Exp. Brain
Res, vol. 210, pp. 217–227, 2011.
M. Arns, A. Cerquera, R. M. Gutiérrez, F. Hasselman, and J. A. Freund,
“Non-linear EEG analyses predict non-response to rTMS treatment in
major depressive disorder,” Clin. Neurophysiol, to be published, 2013.

2079

[40] T. Kleinjung, P. Eichhammer, M. Landgrebe, P. Sand, G. Hajak, Steffens,
J. Strutz, and B. Langguth, “Combined temporal and prefrontal transcranial magnetic stimulation for tinnitus treatment: A pilot study,” Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg., vol. 138, pp. 497–501, 2008.
[41] L. H. A. Strens, A. Oliviero, B. R. Bloem, W. Gerschlager, J. C. Rothwell,
and P. Brown, “The effects of subthreshold 1 Hz repetitive TMS on corticocortical and interhemispheric coherence,” Clin. Neurophysiol, vol. 113,
pp. 1279–1285, 2002.
[42] E. Bingham and A. Hyvarinen, “A fast fixed-point algorithm for independent component analysis of complex valued signals,” Int. J. Neural Syst.,
vol. 10, pp. 1–8, 2000.
[43] G. Shou, L. Ding, and D. Dasari, “Probing neural activations from continuous EEG in a real-world task: Time-frequency independent component
analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 209, pp. 22–34, 2012.
[44] S. P. van den Broek, R. F. , M. Donderwinkel, and M. J. Peters, “Volume
conduction effects in EEG and MEG,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol, vol. 106, pp. 522–534, 1998.
[45] Y. H. Cha, “Mal de debarquement,” Semin. Neurol, vol. 29, pp. 520–527,
2009.
[46] G. Thut and A. Pascual-Leone, “A review of combined TMS-EEG studies
to characterize lasting effects of repetitive TMS and assess their usefulness in cognitive and clinical neuroscience,” Brain Topography, vol. 22,
pp. 219–232, 2010.
[47] R. C. Oldfield, “The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh inventory,” Neuropsychologia, vol. 9, pp. 97–113, 1971.
[48] H. Nolan, R. Whelan, and R. B. Reilly, “FASTER: Fully automated statistical thresholding for EEG artifact rejection,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 192, pp. 152–162, 2010.
[49] A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 134, pp. 9–21, 2004.
[50] A. Delorme, J. Palmer, J. Onton, R. Oostenveld, and S. Makeig, “Independent EEG sources are dipolar,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7, p. e30135, 2012.
[51] H. Yuan, V. Zotev, R. Phillips, W. C. Drevets, and J. Bodurka, “Spatiotemporal dynamics of the brain at rest—Exploring EEG microstates
as electrophysiological signatures of BOLD resting state networks,” NeuroImage, vol. 60, pp. 2062–2072, 2012.
[52] J.-L. Chen, T. Ros, and J. H. Gruzelier, “Dynamic changes of ICA-derived
EEG functional connectivity in the resting state,” Hum. Brain Mapping,
vol. 34, pp. 852–868, 2013.
[53] V. A. Ponomarev, A. Mueller, G. Candrian, V. A. Grin-Yatsenko, and
J. D. Kropotov, “Group independent component analysis (gICA) and current source density (CSD) in the study of EEG in ADHD adults,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 125, pp. 83–97, 2014.
[54] M. C. Ridding, R. Inzelberg, and J. C. Rothwell, “Changes in excitability
of motor cortical circuitry in patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Ann.
Neurol., vol. 37, pp. 181–188, 1995.
[55] S. Rona, A. Berardelli, L. Vacca, M. Inghilleri, and M. Manfredi, “Alterations of motor cortical inhibition in patients with dystonia,” Movement
Disorders, vol. 13, pp. 118–124, 1998.
[56] F. Maeda, J. P. Keenan, and A. Pascual-Leone, “Interhemispheric asymmetry of motor cortical excitability in major depression as measured by
transcranial magnetic stimulation,” Brit. J. Psychiatry, vol. 177, pp. 169–
173, 2000.
[57] I. J. S. Valli, A. Mechelli, S. Bhattacharyya, M. Raffin, P. Allen, P. FusarPoli, D. Lythgoe, R. O’Gorman, M. Seal, and P. McGuire, “Altered medial
temporal activation related to local glutamate levels in subjects with prodromal signs of psychosis,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 69, pp. 97–99, 2011.
[58] K. E. Stephan, T. Baldeweg, and K. J. Friston, “Synaptic plasticity and
dysconnection in schizophrenia,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 59, pp. 929–939,
2006.
[59] B. Gustafsson and H. Wigstrom, “Physiological mechanisms underlying
long-term potentiation,” Trends Neurosci, vol. 11, pp. 156–162, 1998.
[60] B. R. Christie, D. S. Kerr, and W. C. Abraham, “Flip side of synaptic
plasticity: Long-term depression mechanisms in the hippocampus,” Hippocampus, vol. 4, pp. 127–135, 1994.
[61] M. D. Fox and M. E. Raichle, “Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity
observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 8, pp. 700–711, 2007.
[62] H. Yuan, V. Zotev, R. Phillips, and J. Bodurka, “Correlated slow fluctuations in respiration, EEG, and BOLD fMRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 79,
pp. 81–93, 2013.
[63] L. D. Selemon and P. S. Goldman-Rakic, “Common cortical and subcortical targets of the dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices

2080

[64]
[65]
[66]

[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

in the rhesus monkey: Evidence for a distributed neural network subserving spatially guided behavior,” J. Neurosci, vol. 8, pp. 4049–4068,
1998.
L. Ding, “Reconstructing cortical current density by exploring sparseness
in the transform domain,” Phys. Med. Biol, vol. 54, pp. 2683–2697, 2009.
L. Ding and H. Yuan, “Simultaneous EEG and MEG source reconstruction
in sparse electromagnetic source imaging,” Hum. Brain Mapping, vol. 34,
pp. 775–795, 2013.
H. Yuan, L. Ding, M. Zhu, and J. Bodurka, “Spatial and temporal similarity
of EEG microstates and BOLD resting state networks,” presented at 19th
Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping, Seattle,
WA, USA, 2013.
J. F. Cavanagh, M. X. Cohen, and J. B. Allen, “Prelude to and resolution of
an error: EEG phase synchrony reveals cognitive control dynamics during
action monitoring,” J. Neurosci., vol. 29, pp. 98–105, 2009.
J. van Driel, K. R. Ridderinkhof, and M. X. Cohen, “Not all errors are
alike: Theta and alpha EEG dynamics relate to differences in errorprocessing dynamics,” J. Neurosci., vol. 32, pp. 16795–16806, 2012.
A. S. Ghuman, J. R. McDaniel, and A. Martin, “A wavelet-based method
for measuring the oscillatory dynamics of resting-state functional connectivity in MEG,” NeuroImage, vol. 56, pp. 69–77, 2011.
J. L. Chen, T. Ros, and J. H. Gruzelier, “Dynamic changes of ICA-derived
EEG functional connectivity in the resting state,” Hum. Brain Mapping,
vol. 34, pp. 852–868, 2013.
J. P. Lachaux, E. Rodriguez, J. Martinerie, and F. J. Varela, “Measuring
phase synchrony in brain signals,” Hum. Brain Mapping, vol. 8, pp. 194–
208, 1999.
M. S. George, J. J. Taylor, and E. B. Short, “The expanding evidence
base for rTMS treatment of depression,” Curr. Opin. Psychiatry, vol. 26,
pp. 13–18, 2013.
A. Ferbert, A. Priori, J. C. Rothwell, B. L. Day, J. G. Colebatch, and
C. D. Marsden, “Interhemispheric inhibition of the human motor cortex,”
J. Physiol., vol. 453, pp. 525–546, 1992.

Lei Ding (S’02–M’07) received the B.E. degree (honors) from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in
2000, and the Ph.D. degree (Dissertation Fellow)
from the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 2007, both in biomedical
engineering.
He has been with the Faculty of the University of
Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA, as an Assistant Professor (since 2007) and Associate Professor (since
2013) at the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Center for Biomedical Engineering.
He is also an Adjunct Associate Professor at the Laureate Institute for Brain
Research, Tulsa, OK, USA. He has published more than 50 peer review papers
in areas of neuroimaging and neural engineering. His current research interests include functional neuroimaging, neuromodulation, epilepsy, psychiatric
disorders, cognitive engineering, neuroadaptive interface, and brain computer
interface.
Dr. Ding is serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE Access and IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING. He received the National Science Foundation CAREER Award and is the only recipient of the New Scientist
Award from Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science and Technology
at 2009. He is also listed in Who’s Who in America.

Guofa Shou (M’07) received the B.S. degree
from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
China, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2009, both in
biomedical engineering.
From 2007 to 2008, he was a Visiting Scholar with
the School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland, Australia.
From 2008 to 2009, he was an Intern Researcher with
Philips Research Asia-Shanghai. From 2009 to 2010,
he was a Postdoctoral Fellow with Zhejiang University. Since 2010, he has been a Research Associate with the School of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA. His
research interest includes neuroimaging, neural signal processing, cardiac imaging, and bioelectromagnetism.

Han Yuan (S’05–M’11) received the B.S. degree
from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2005,
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 2010, both in
biomedical engineering.
She was a Postdoctoral Associate and currently
a Staff Scientist at the Laureate Institute for Brain
Research, Tulsa, OK, USA. Her research interests
include multimodal functional neuroimaging, neural
interfacing, and neuromodulation.

Diamond Urbano was born in San Diego, CA, USA,
in 1989. She received the B.A. degree in psychology
from Northeastern State University in Broken Arrow,
Tahlequah, OK, USA, in 2013, where she assisted in
research projects in relation to social psychology.
She is currently with the Transcranial Magnetic
Stimulation Laboratory, Laureate Institute for Brain
Research, Tulsa, OK, and plans to pursue graduate
training in clinical psychology.
Ms. Urbano has been nominated for the Jack L.
Haney Service Award and the Northeastern State University Hall of Fame. She has received the DELTA Discipline Award, DELTA
Shining Star Award, as well as the Northeastern State University Outstanding
Senior Award.

Yoon-Hee Cha received the B.S. degree in biology from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA,
in 1995, and the M.D. degree from Mayo Medical
School, Rochester, MN, USA, in 2001.
She is a Neurologist using functional imaging and
neuromodulation to treat disorders of balance and
motion perception. She completed her medical internship at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital in
Boston, MA, in 2002 and completed her residency
training in neurology at the University of California
San Francisco from 2002 to 2005 during which time
she was a Chief Resident from 2004 to 2005. She completed fellowship training
in neurotology at the University of California Los Angeles from 2005 to 2007
after which time she joined the faculty and began work on functional imaging
and neuromodulation methods. She is currently an Assistant Professor and Principal Investigator at the Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa, OK, USA,
where she runs the Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Laboratory.
Dr. Cha received the Howard Hughes-NIH Research Scholars Program Fellowship, the Harry Hoffman Humanitarian Award, the Philanthropic Educational Organization Award for Research, the American Academy of Neurology
Clinical Research Training Award, the MdDS Balance Foundation Early Career
Distinguished Investigator Award, and has been inducted into the National Organization of Rare Disorders Hall of Fame.

