660

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Robust Automatic Measurement of 3D Scanned
Models for Human Body Fat Estimation
Andrea Giachetti, Christian Lovato, Francesco Piscitelli, Chiara Milanese, and Carlo Zancanaro

Abstract—In this paper, we present an automatic tool for estimating geometrical parameters from 3-D human scans independent on pose and robustly against the topological noise. It is based
on an automatic segmentation of body parts exploiting curve skeleton processing and ad hoc heuristics able to remove problems due to
different acquisition poses and body types. The software is able to
locate body trunk and limbs, detect their directions, and compute
parameters like volumes, areas, girths, and lengths. Experimental
results demonstrate that measurements provided by our system
on 3-D body scans of normal and overweight subjects acquired in
different poses are highly correlated with the body fat estimates obtained on the same subjects with dual-energy X-rays absorptiometry (DXA) scanning. In particular, maximal lengths and girths, not
requiring precise localization of anatomical landmarks, demonstrate a good correlation (up to 96%) with the body fat and trunk
fat. Regression models based on our automatic measurements can
be used to predict body fat values reasonably well.
Index Terms—Body fat, dual-energy X-rays absorptiometry
(DXA), geometry processing, three-dimensional (3-D) anthropometry, whole-body scanner.

I. INTRODUCTION
HREE-dimensional whole-body scanners can provide a lot
of information about the human body shape that is not only
useful for applications like the clothing design or ergonomic
studies, but also for healthcare. Anthropometric measurements
are, in fact, widely used both for computing simple parameters
related to the body fitness, e.g., the waist-to-hip (W/H) ratio,
and for indirect estimation of body composition (e.g. body fat)
using regression models [1]. Specific measurements as the waist
circumference and the abdominal sagittal diameter correlates
well with the body fat and can be used as predictors for metabolic
disorders and cardiovascular risk [2]–[5].
The availability of an automatic processing system able to
derive robust measurements from 3-D scans, possibly not depending too much on the pose and mesh quality could therefore

T

Manuscript received October 4, 2013; revised January 31, 2014; accepted
March 25, 2014. Date of publication March 28, 2014; date of current version
March 2, 2015. The work of C. Lovato and F. Piscitelli was supported by the
Doctoral Programme in Multimodal Imaging in Biomedicine of the University
of Verona.
A. Giachetti and C. Lovato are with the Department of Computer Science,
University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy (e-mail: andrea.giachetti@univr.it;
chrlovato@yahoo.it).
F. Piscitelli, C. Milanese, and C. Zancanaro are with the Department of Neurologic and Movement Sciences, University of Verona, 37134
Verona, Italy (e-mail: francesco.piscitelli@univr.it; chiara.milanese@univr.it;
carlo.zancanaro@univr.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2314360

be extremely useful to develop easy and reliable healthcare applications.
Three-dimensional scanners are able to provide complete digital models of the subjects’ bodies, encoding a huge amount of
information that can be processed automatically making it easier for physicians to evaluate compact descriptors that can be
correlated with the body composition or diagnostic variables.
From the digital models, in fact, it is possible to extract not only
a wide set of measurements usually picked up from manual anthropometry, but also, using geometry processing techniques, to
derive other parameters (e.g., curvatures, statistical variations
of local and global properties, salient points location) encoding
relevant shape variability in the analyzed population.
There are, however, several issues with an health-related analysis of scanned digital bodies. The quality of the scans is not
uniform, and measurement systems often depend heavily on the
subject pose. Furthermore, it is difficult to compare manual and
digital anthropometric measurements, because the former are
based on the identification of anatomical landmarks, obtained
through observation and palpation by expert anthropometrists
which are difficult to locate only through marker-less digital
acquisitions.
In this paper, we present a pipeline for the automatic extraction of health-related geometrical parameters from heterogeneous body scans. Special aspects of this study are the use a
geometry processing pipeline capable of dealing with models
acquired by different scanners in different poses and the computation of parameters independent of the precise location of
poorly characterized landmarks (e.g., maximal girths).
With our system, we were also able to estimate relevant parameters robustly with challenging body types (e.g., obese subjects). These parameters have been correlated with the body fat
values estimated on the same subjects with a dual- energy X-rays
absorptiometry (DXA) scanner. Experimental results demonstrate that several computed values are highly correlated with
total body less head (TBLH) fat and trunk fat.
II. RELATED WORK
Digital anthropometry is widely used to collect sets of measurements for different applications. Especially in fields like the
clothing design and ergonomy, the use of automatic measurements on 3-D digital models is going to replace the traditional
and time-consuming tape-based measurements. Several papers
describe methods to process 3-D scans to recognize and measure body parts, even if with different approaches, constraints,
practical purposes, and accuracy. Industrial solutions are often
closed and strictly related to specific acquisition devices, providing different sets of body parameters and measurements.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GIACHETTI et al.: ROBUST AUTOMATIC MEASUREMENT OF 3D SCANNED MODELS FOR HUMAN BODY FAT ESTIMATION

661

Fig. 1. Basic idea of our system: 3-D scan is automatically processed extracting simple measurements based on skeletonization and body partitioning.
These measurements can be used to derive health indicators and composition
parameters.

An overview of several methods to analyze and model the human body is presented in [6]. Recent works on automatic landmarking try to make the automatic analysis more robust, for example against pose variation [7] and different body types [8]. Accuracy in automatic landmarking with methods non-optimized
for scanner and poses seems, however, still an open problem.
An approach to derive geometric descriptors of a body consists of creating a statistical model of shape and pose from
annotated examples. This method has been proposed, for example in [9] and [10]. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is
applied and PCA space directions correlated with features like
the body fat or muscledness have been recovered with regression
techniques. However, it is quite hard to create an accurate statistical model decoupling shape and pose due to the necessity of
annotating a large set of models with corresponding landmarks.
The use of 3-D body scanners for studying obesity is not
new; several scanner manufacturers provide software tools to
collect sets of measurements that can be used to analyze the
body shape, and these anthropometric data have been recently
correlated with metabolic parameters in validation studies [11],
[12], [13], [14]. Methods used to extract measurements in these
studies are, however, not standardized, usually require standard
posture and compute girths at landmarks derived by markers or
manually corrected in case of failure of automatic detection. A
dedicated index, designed to be a potential replacement to the
body mass index (BMI), and called body volume index [15] has
been proposed to evaluate obesity. It is computed, however, with
a closed software solution and is currently being validated.
The novelty of our approach is that we propose a system generating fully automatic measurement of parameters independent
of precise landmarking that can be obtained even with limitedquality models and few pose-related constraints. The software
tool and the experimental study described here are designed as
first steps in the development of an open system for the analysis
of body shape features related to obesity and other diseases.
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM
We designed a processing pipeline (roughly described by
Fig. 1) able to estimate selected shape parameters on models
acquired by different devices and in different poses. The pipeline
is based on a robust body partitioning relying on curve skeleton

Fig. 2. First identification of limbs is made analyzing curve skeleton paths and
scalar values of the radius and eccentricity across them. These features allow the
identification of wrists and ankles and a first rough location of limb attachments
to the trunk.

extraction and evaluation of volumetric features to refine the
placement of body parts boundaries.
Given the model and knowledge of the acquisition reference
system, we first remove outliers and floor points from the acquired point cloud and then remesh models to ensure a uniform
quality using the Poisson method [16]. The resulting watertight
models are then simplified with quadric edge collapse algorithm in order to obtain meshes with a controlled number of
faces (20 K). These first steps are implemented using Meshlab
scripting [17]. Together with the triangulated mesh, we also create a voxelized version of the geometry, discretized with cubes
with side of 4 mm. In this voxelized volume, we compute some
parameters like the distance from the border and the multiscale
area projection transform (MAPT) [18] that are used in the further processing.
The following step is the estimation of the curve skeleton of
the model, e.g., a connected set of lines that are well centered
in the tubular part of the model [19]. We apply the method
described in [20] providing a smooth and centered connected
tree, and also the estimated values computed at the skeletal
points. If the legs are not in contact under the knee and arms are
not adherent to the trunk under the elbow, this curve skeleton
allows the recognition of limbs and of the head without further
constraints on subject’s pose.
The recognition of these body parts is performed as follows.
The curve skeleton is a tree structure where line junctions are
the nodes and lines with single connections are the leaves (see
Fig. 2). We remove iteratively from it the shortest leaf with
related connections, until only five leaves still remain: these lines
should represent, at least partially, the skeleton of the limbs and
the head. A simple decision tree based on the length and distance
functions of the leaves is able to label them according to the
structure included (arm, leg, and head). Leaves, i.e., candidate
skeleton branches that should include limbs and head/neck are
then processed in order to find a possibly accurate position of

662

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Fig. 3. (a) and (b) Skeletal lines segmented at radius discontinuities correspond
to limbs sufficiently well only if arms and legs are not adherent to each other or
to the body. (c) This happens also in routine health-related scanning, especially
for overweight people.
Fig. 4.

the features that approximately define the segmentation of the
main body parts, e.g., limbs and neck attachments to the trunk,
knee, and elbow joints, wrist and ankle joints. In order to locate
these points on the curve skeleton, we considered the behavior of
three selected scalar values along the leaf points: local average
diameter, eccentricity (computed throwing radii perpendicular
to the local line direction and finding intersections with the
border), and local curvature.
Salient points roughly corresponding to ankles and wrists are
placed where, going from the center to the extremity of the limb,
the derivative of the average radius has a sign change. Attachments of legs and arms to the trunk are roughly placed where,
going from the center of the leaf towards the trunk, there is a
sudden change of the average radius or of the local eccentricity.
Fig. 2 shows example plots of scalar values along the centerlines
and the related feature positions detected. The heuristic on curve
skeleton branches and the subsequent segmentation provides a
reasonable partitioning of the human body, even in nonstandard
poses [see Figs. 3 (a) and (b)], but only if the topology of the
mesh is good. This is not the case for many routine acquisitions, especially if performed in healthcare practice. Especially
studying overweight subjects, we have models where arms are
partially attached to the trunk and legs that are in contact above
the knees [see Fig. 3(c)]. We developed specific methods to
overcome this problem.
In order to adjust the body segmentation, we first obtain a
rough estimate of the trunk axial direction, taken as the direction
of the line joining the midpoints of legs and arms attachment. We
similarly obtain a rough estimation of the transversal direction
(joining the leg attachments) and of the coronal direction as
the vector product of the first two. We then move iteratively
upward the leg attachments along the axial direction and check
the local section of the body locally perpendicular to it. We stop
the procedure when the front-to-back distance computed in the
points moved from the original attachments is higher than the
maximal front-to-back distance computed near the center of the
segment joining the two landmarks (see Fig. 4).
Leg attachments are then refined centering them in the leg
section. Starting from the leg attachment and going upward,
along the trunk axis, we detect attachments of the arms to the
trunk (not necessarily corresponding to armholes, if arms are
close to it), located where distances of the points from left and

Heuristic applied to find the corrected leg attachments.

Fig. 5. Heuristic used to locate shoulders. (a) Initial landmarks location
based on arm attachments and axis estimation. (b) Landmarks moved upward.
(c) Landmarks moved in the MAPT. MAPT is shown using volume rendering
inside the body shapes.

right borders along the transversal direction present a sudden
discontinuity. We use then the sections of the trunk under these
point to refine the estimated trunk axis direction, as the direction optimally fitting the sections centroids. The trunk width
measured at the detected attachments is also used to define lateral boundaries of the trunk in the upper region, avoiding the
inclusion of the arm size in the trunk segmentation.
To estimate approximate landmarks corresponding to the
shoulders, we proceed as follows: first, we initialize two points
near the position of the upper arms joints, with the distance
from the axis equal to the distance of leg attachments from the
trunk axis [see Fig. 5(a)]. We move the points upward along the
trunk axis direction until they are close to the geometry border
[see Fig. 5(b)]. Finally, we refine the landmarks’ positions by
searching in a neighborhood of the reached positions the maximum of the MAPT [18], a volumetric function measuring the
amount of spherical symmetry in a defined radius range (here,
approximately corresponding to that of human shoulders’one).
The function is computed by estimating the amount of the surface area projected at the selected distance around the centers
of the voxels of a discretized grid. The final shoulder landmarks
[see Fig. 5(c)] are finally connected to the previously extracted
internal endpoints of the arms skeletons following paths maximizing the border distance. A further segmentation of knees and

GIACHETTI et al.: ROBUST AUTOMATIC MEASUREMENT OF 3D SCANNED MODELS FOR HUMAN BODY FAT ESTIMATION

663

TABLE I
LIST OF AUTOMATICALLY ESTIMATED MEASUREMENTS

Fig. 6. Examples of centerline extraction and partitioning with stick figure extraction and corresponding approximate body partitioning derived. The method
is robust to relevant body type variations and nonnegligible pose variations.

elbows is performed searching near the expected position the
maxima of smoothed curvature, if sufficiently large, otherwise
(limbs not flexed), using the local values of the derivative of the
radius.
This procedure is able to segment the body parts even for
nonstandard poses and different body types. Fig. 6 shows the
example of skeletons and segmented bodies derived by our procedure. Stick figures are obtained by joining the salient points
extracted, labeled surfaces shown here are obtained by first segmenting the voxelized volume with a region growing approach
starting from the labeling of the segmented skeleton, then propagating labels to the mesh nodes.
The whole segmentation and measurement pipeline is implemented as a C++ code, loading the preprocessed mesh,
and computing and saving rough and segmented curve skeletons with associated parameters, stick figure, labeled mesh, and
measurements without human feedback.
IV. MEASUREMENT OF SHAPE FEATURES
The accuracy of the placement of body sections boundaries is,
however, clearly limited. Furthermore, we do not have specific
anatomical markers identified on the mesh. It is very difficult
to locate automatically anatomical landmarks with high precision, and it is indeed rather difficult to recognize corresponding body points in different subjects with different body types.
Location of landmarks used in tape-based anthropometry is then
done by palpation, so that it is often not possible to identify
these points using pure geometrical information. Actually, even
manually placed landmarks present relevant problems related
to interoperators variability in location and measurements as
shown, for example, in [21]. For these reasons, we decided to
follow a novel approach, not trying to reproduce classical anthropometric measurements on digital models but attempting
to find a body characterization not depending on precise landmarks placement. The idea is to compute simple parameters that
can be estimated well with the available information, validating
the results without a comparison with manual measurements,
but directly correlating the values with body fat estimates. For
example, from the model partitioning, trunk and limbs axes,
transversal and coronal direction in the trunk, we can easily
compute geometrical values that according to the tape-based

anthropometry literature are probably correlated with the body
fat. Maximal lengths and girths in selected slices/directions are
particularly interesting not depending on the precise localization
of anatomical landmarks. We believe that their measurement can
be much more stable and relevant for the health-based analysis
than classical point-based measurements.
Table I shows the set of measurements that we computed on
the 3-D models acquired. On the same subjects we acquired
as well body composition parameters using a DXA scanner so
that we could realize the study presented in the following sections demonstrating the value of the automatic shape analysis
performed with our software. Note that breasts region is segmented with a simple gender-independent heuristic based on
the location of the minimal girth under the arm attachments.
V. AUTOMATIC MEASUREMENTS AND BODY FAT
To understand if these measurements can be really useful
for the indirect estimation of body composition parameters,
we computed them on 3-D scans of subjects also undergoing different acquisition procedures. We analyzed a group of
25 obese otherwise healthy female subjects, aged 20–60 years
(BMI 30–40 kg/m2 ). The subjects underwent DXA scanning,
optical 3-D scanning, and standard anthropometric procedures.
During scanning and anthropometry, subjects wore close-fitting
underwear. During DXA examination, subjects wore light garment, transparent to X-rays. For every subject, 3-D scanning,
DXA, and manual anthropometry were performed sequentially
in one session. Another group of subjects was comprised of 25
nonobese females, undergoing 3-D scanning in multiple poses
(see Fig. 7) and DXA scanning. Data come from a previous

664

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE II
PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS OF THE ESTIMATED VALUES WITH
DXA-BASED MEASUREMENTS FOR THE COMPLETE SET OF SUBJECTS
(OBESE/NONOBESE SUBJECTS)

Fig. 7.

Three different poses used for the nonobese subject acquisition.

study which received approval from the proper local ethical
body.

TABLE III
PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS OF THE ESTIMATED VALUES WITH
DXA-BASED ESTIMATES FOR THE SET OF OBESE SUBJECTS

A. DXA Scanning
DXA represents the de facto standard measuring tool for body
composition analysis. It allows to assess the body composition
in terms of fat, lean, and mineral mass at the total body as well
as regional level [23]. The device used in this experiment is a
DXA QDR Explorer W (Hologic, MA, USA) available at the
Department of Neurologic and Movement Sciences, University
of Verona, Verona, Italy. The body composition assessment consists of an acquisition step and a subsequent definition of body
regions on the 2-D acquisition performed by the same operator
(CM) to ensure consistency. Main results of this analysis consist
of whole-body composition parameters and regional composition data.
In our experiments, we evaluated correlation of body measurements with three parameters evaluated by the DXA scanner:
trunk fat, TBLH fat and trunk fat percentage. Trunk fat is the
total fat measured in the trunk region (as defined by the operator
according to manually placed standard anatomical landmarks
on the 2-D acquisition); TBLH fat refers to the fat of the whole
body without the head; the reason for that is the large amount of
the mineralized tissue in the skull, preventing reliable evaluation
of the head fat component. These parameters are well-known
risk factors for metabolic alterations and disease.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Measure Repeatability on Same or Variated Poses
We first exploited multiple acquisitions to evaluate the repeatability of geometric measurements described in Table I. For
most of the values, the standard deviation of the differences
between the corresponding measurements in the paired acquisitions is indeed negligible and not significantly changed by
pose variations. Only for a few measurement types, this value is
higher and worse in case of different pose, e.g., minimum trunk
width, that is difficult to evaluate when arms are attached to
the body, or values computed in limbs. In any case, performing
paired T-tests comparing all the sets of measurements of the

same 25 subjects in same or in different poses (see Fig. 7), we
always found that the differences are not statistically significant.
B. Correlation of Measurements With DXA Parameters
The correlation between the estimated values and the three
fat indexes estimated with the DXA scanner is shown in Table II. Here, the Pearson coefficients for the correlation between
measurements are shown for the three fat-related values.
Because the correlation coefficients depend on the range of
the body fat within the group, we also analyzed the coefficients
for the two groups (obese/nonobese) separately. Results are reported in Tables III and IV. The correlations for the subgroups
are lower, but still highly significant for selected measurements.
For the obese subjects, we can also compare the correlation of the automatically extracted measurements with available
data from manual anthropometry. It is particularly interesting
fact that the correlation of automatic measurements with trunk
and TBLH fat (see Table III) is higher than that with manual
anthropometric measurements. If the manually estimated hip

GIACHETTI et al.: ROBUST AUTOMATIC MEASUREMENT OF 3D SCANNED MODELS FOR HUMAN BODY FAT ESTIMATION

665

TABLE IV
PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS OF THE ESTIMATED VALUES WITH
DXA-BASED ESTIMATES FOR THE SET OF NONOBESE SUBJECTS

circumference presents a Pearson coefficient similar to the one
obtained with the maximal average radius of the trunk section,
the correlation of all the manual measurements with TBLH fat
or trunk fat percentage is relevantly lower than those obtained
with many automatic measurements. We explain this fact with
the difficulty in precisely localizing the landmarks used in manual procedures. The search for the maximal size with automatic
procedures on the 3-D mesh partially overcomes this problem.
Automatic measurements also seem much more informative on
the body composition than the BMI.
C. Indirect Fat Estimation
We finally tried to evaluate the indirect body fat estimates that
can be obtained from the automatic measurements on the full
set of models. The idea is simply to compute the coefficients of
a regression formula and use the regression model obtained to
estimate the body fat.
We tested different regression functions using MATLAB implementations provided in PRTools (http://www.37steps.com),
e.g., ridge regression, LASSO, support vector regression, Gaussian process regression. The best results were obtained with the
usual linear regression. On the set of 50 subjects, the regression error (absolute residual error divided by the target value) is
0.052 for TBLH fat, 0.060 for trunk fat, and 0.064 for trunk fat
percentage.
To evaluate the real error of an automatic measure-based fat
estimation, we should, however, separate training and test sets.
Due to the limited number of subjects available, we validated
the estimator using a leave-one-out cross-validation procedure,
computing the regression parameters on all but one subject and
estimating with the obtained coefficients the fat parameters of
the remaining one.
Fig. 8 shows Bland–Altman plots representing differences
between DXA-estimated fat parameters (trunk fat, trunk fat percentage, and TBLH fat) and corresponding values computed by
linear regression with the leave-on-out procedure. Plots show a
reasonable agreement of the two measurements, and the accuracy of the estimate does not seem to change with the amount
of the fat. The differences of the means divided by the average

Fig. 8. Bland–Altman plots representing the difference between the DXAestimated fat values and the predictions obtained with the regression coefficients
(in the leave-one-out cross-validation) as a function of the average of the two
estimates. Almost, all the values are within the lines representing the conventional two standard deviations distance from the average, and the behavior does
not seem to depend on the individual fat mass.

values are 1.0%, 1.1%, and 0.9%, respectively, and performing
a paired T-test, by conventional criteria, they are not statistically
significant.
D. Feature Selection
The different measurements tested are not independent and
may not be all useful to improve the fat predictability. Different
approaches can be used to try to figure out an optimal subset
of measurements. We applied for the task a backward feature
selection procedure, removing iteratively the features leaving
the lowest regression error for the remaining ones. Fig. 9 shows
plots of the changes in the regression residual error when less
relevant features are iteratively removed. It is possible to see
that dropping some measurements from the original list with
14 elements, the quality of the fit remains almost unchanged.
It seems that good predictability for each parameter can be
obtained with a subset of eight to nine measurements, and further
addition of features does not change relevantly the result. The

666

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

for epidemiological studies due to its easiness and low cost, it
does not convey information about the body composition and
has limitations in assessing the risk of obesity-related health
problems [26], [27]. Since 3-D scanning has already been used
with success in epidemiological surveys [28], the development
of reliable 3-D measurements correlating with, and/or predicting
health-related body fat parameters would represent a significant
improvement over BMI.
If we consider that our measurement pipeline actually works
on a simplified model at a modest resolution (voxelized on a grid
with 4-mm spacing) and acquisitions with this accuracy can be
performed also with cheap devices like Microsoft Kinect; the
proposed body evaluation could be practical in the near future,
with cheap and portable setups at home or in a medical doctor’s
office.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Fig. 9. Changes in regression errors obtained in a backward feature selection,
e.g., removing iteratively less relevant features from the model.

last feature left in the backward selection is always the body
volume. The addition of trunk section maximal measurements
is always effective in relevantly improving the accuracy, and
also measurements in the limbs are able to improve the fat
predictability, even if with a smaller effect.
VII. DISCUSSION
We have presented an automatic system able to extract simple measurements from 3-D human body scans. Special aspects
of our systems are the ability to work with models of different
quality, resolution, and pose. The set of measurements extracted,
including maximal lengths and diameters in trunk sections, is
not critically depending on specific landmarks that are difficult
to be located and makes usual digital and even manual anthropometry subject to nonnegligible interoperator errors. These
measurements do not correspond to classical anthropometric
measurements, but encode even more reliable information on
body composition than classical values.
Our tests, in fact, showed that these automatically extracted
body measurements strongly correlate with the DXA-measured
total body and trunk fat, which are recognized health risk factors
[24], and reasonably predict body fat parameters in regression
equations thereby providing indirect evidence that 3-D scanning
may have medical value.
These findings are supported by previous results showing that
3-D body scanning measurement of conventional anthropometric parameters (e.g., W/H ratio) is of use in forecasting metabolic
disorders [25], [2]. Furthermore, research directly correlating
automatic measurements presented herein and clinically relevant parameters is needed to fully validate our approach.
We also showed that automatically extracted body measurements from 3-D scans might perform equally or better than BMI
in correlating with body fat parameters. While BMI is practical

The authors would like to thank Prof. P. Moghetti and Dr.
M.G. Zenti, Department of Medicine, University of Verona,
Verona, Italy, for recruiting obese subject. Prof. E. Trucco
checked the English.
REFERENCES
[1] J. A. Hodgdon, “Body composition in the military services: Standards and
methods,” in Body Composition and Physical Performance: Applications
for the Military Services. Washington, DC, USA: National Academies
Press, 1992, pp. 57–70.
[2] J. D. Lin, W. K. Chiou, H. F. Weng, J. T. Fang, and T. H. Liu, “Application of three-dimensional body scanner: Observation of prevalence of
metabolic syndrome,” Clin. Nutrition, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1313–1323, 2004.
[3] M. K. Tulloch-Reid, D. E. Williams, H. C. Looker et al., “Do measures of
body fat distribution provide information on the risk of type 2 diabetes in
addition to measures of general obesity?” Diabetes Care, vol. 26, no. 9,
pp. 2556–2561, 2003.
[4] E. Turcato, O. Bosello, V. Di Francesco et al., “Waist circumference and
abdominal sagittal diameter as surrogates of body fat distribution in the elderly: Their relation with cardiovascular risk factors,” Int. J. Obes. Related
Metabolic Disorders, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1005–1010, 2000.
[5] M. Zamboni, E. Turcato, F. Armellini et al., “Sagittal abdominal diameter
as a practical predictor of visceral fat,” Int. J. Obesity Related Metabolic
Disorders: J. Int. Assoc. Study Obesity, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 655–660, 1998.
[6] N. Werghi, “Segmentation and modeling of full human body shape from
3-D scan data: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev.,
vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1122–1136, Nov. 2007.
[7] S. Wuhrer, Z. B. Azouz, and C. Shu, “Posture invariant surface description and feature extraction,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern
Recog., 2010, pp. 374–381.
[8] H. Han and Y. Nam, “Automatic body landmark identification for various
body figures,” Int. J. Ind. Ergonomics, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 592–606, 2011.
[9] D. Anguelov, P. Srinivasan, D. Koller, S. Thrun, J. Rodgers, and J. Davis,
“SCAPE: shape completion and animation of people,” ACM Trans.
Graph., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 408–416, Jul. 2005.
[10] N. Hasler, C. Stoll, M. Sunkel, B. Rosenhahn, and H. P. Seidel, “A statistical model of human pose and body shape,” Comput. Graphics Forum,
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 337–346, 2009.
[11] T. N. Garlie, J. P. Obusek, B. D. Corner, and E. J. Zambraski, “Comparison of body fat estimates using 3-D digital laser scans, direct manual
anthropometry, and DXA in men,” Amer. J. Human Biol., vol. 22, no. 5,
pp. 695–701, 2010.
[12] R. Heuberger, T. Domina, and M. MacGillivray, “Body scanning as a
new anthropometric measurement tool for health-risk assessment,” Int. J.
Consumer Studies, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 34–40, 2008.
[13] J. Wang, D. Gallagher, J. C. Thornton, W. Yu, M. Horlick, and F. X.
Pi-Sunyer, “Validation of a 3-D photonic scanner for the measurement
of body volumes, dimensions, and percentage body fat,” Amer. J. Clin.
Nutrition, vol. 83, no. 4, pp. 809–816, 2006.

GIACHETTI et al.: ROBUST AUTOMATIC MEASUREMENT OF 3D SCANNED MODELS FOR HUMAN BODY FAT ESTIMATION

667

[14] J. C. K. Wells, T. J. Cole, D. Bruner, and P. Treleaven, “Body shape in
American and British adults: Between-country and inter-ethnic comparisons,” Int. J. Obesity, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 152–159, 2007.
[15] A. Tahrani, K. Boelaert, R. Barnes et al., “Body volume index: time to
replace body mass index?” Endocrine Abstracts, vol. 15, p. 104, 2008.
[16] M. Kazhdan, M. Bolitho, and H. Hoppe, “Poisson surface reconstruction,”
in Proc. 4th Eurographics Symp. Geometry Process., 2006, pp. 61–70.
[17] P. Cignoni, M. Callieri, M. Corsini et al., “MeshLab: An open-source
mesh processing tool,” in Proc. Eurographics Italian Chapter Conf., 2008,
pp. 129–136.
[18] A Giachetti and C Lovato, “Radial symmetry detection and shape characterization with the multiscale area projection transform,” Comput. Graphics Forum, vol. 31, pp. 1669–1678, 2012.
[19] N. D. Cornea and P. Min, “Curve-skeleton properties, applications, and
algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Visualization Comput. Graphics, vol. 13, no. 3,
pp. 530–548, May/Jun. 2007.
[20] C. Lovato, U. Castellani, and A. Giachetti, “Automatic segmentation
of scanned human body using curve skeleton analysis,” in Computer
Vision/Computer Graphics Collaboration Techniques, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2009,
vol. 5496, pp. 34–45.
[21] M. Kouchi and M. Mochimaru, “Errors in landmarking and the evaluation
of the accuracy of traditional and 3-D anthropometry,” Appl. Ergonomics,
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 518–527, 2011.
[22] D. M. Thomas, C. Bredlau, A. Bosy Westphal et al., “Relationships between body roundness with body fat and visceral adipose tissue emerging
from a new geometrical model,” Obesity, 2013.
[23] C. V. Albanese, E. Diessel, and H. K. Genant, “Clinical applications of
body composition measurements using DXA,” J. Clin. Densitometry,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 75–85, 2003.
[24] W. V. Brown, K. Fujioka, P. W. F. Wilson, and K. A. Woodworth, “Obesity: Why be concerned?” Amer. J. Med., vol. 122, no. 4, p. I–CO4, 2009.
[25] W.-K. Chiou, J.-D. Lin, H.-F. Weng et al., “Correlation of the dysmetabolic
risk factors with different anthropometric measurements,” Endocrine J.,
vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 139–148, 2005.
[26] F. B. Madeira, A. A. Silva, H. F. Veloso et al., “Normal weight obesity is
associated with metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance in young adults
from a middle-income country,” PloS One, vol. 8, no. 3, p. e60673, 2013.
[27] R. Thibault and C. Pichard, “The evaluation of body composition: A useful
tool for clinical practice,” Ann. Nutrition Metabolism, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 6–
16, 2011.
[28] J. C. K. Wells, P. Treleaven, and S. Charoensiriwath, “Body shape by 3-d
photonic scanning in Thai and UK adults: Comparison of national sizing
surveys,” Int. J. Obesity, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 148–154, 2011.

Christian Lovato, Ph.D., is postdoctoral fellow at
the Department of Computer Science of the University of Verona, Verona, Italy. He worked in several
projects related to Digital Anthropometry and 3D
modelling.

Andrea Giachetti, Ph.D., is Associate Professor at
the Department of Computer Science of the University of Verona, Verona, Italy. He received Master’s degree in Physics, in 1993 and Ph.D. degree in
Physics in 1997, from the University of Genova, Genova, Italy. His research activity is mainly focused on
Computer Vision, Computer Graphics, Medical image processing and Shape Analysis.

Carlo Zancanaro, M.D., is Full professor of Human
Anatomy at the University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
His research interests are mainly focused on Anthropometry and Body Composition.

Francesco Piscitelli, Ph.D. works at the Department
of Neurological and Movement Sciences, University
of Verona, Verona, Italy. His main research area is
Body Composition and Body Dimensions in correlation with team sport activity.

Chiara Milanese is Research Assistant at the Department of Neurological and Movement Sciences,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy. Her current research is focused on kinanthropometry and body
composition correlated to physical activity, sport as
well as healthy and disease conditions, and in kinematics and dynamics analysis of sport activities.

