1482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Strategies for Whole Lung Tissue Engineering
Elizabeth A. Calle, Mahboobe Ghaedi, Sumati Sundaram, Amogh Sivarapatna, Michelle K. Tseng,
and Laura E. Niklason*

Abstract—Recent work has demonstrated the feasibility of using decellularized lung extracellular matrix scaffolds to support the
engineering of functional lung tissue in vitro. Rendered acellular
through the use of detergents and other reagents, the scaffolds are
mounted in organ-specific bioreactors where cells in the scaffold
are provided with nutrients and appropriate mechanical stimuli
such as ventilation and perfusion. Though initial studies are encouraging, a great deal remains to be done to advance the field and
transition from rodent lungs to whole human tissue engineered
lungs. To do so, a variety of hurdles must be overcome. In particular, a reliable source of human-sized scaffolds, as well as a method
of terminal sterilization of scaffolds, must be identified. Continued
research in lung cell and developmental biology will hopefully help
identify the number and types of cells that will be required to regenerate functional lung tissue. Finally, bioreactor designs must be
improved in order to provide more precise ventilation stimuli and
vascular perfusion in order to avoid injury to or death of the cells
cultivated within the scaffold. Ultimately, the success of efforts to
engineer a functional lung in vitro will critically depend on the ability to create a fully endothelialized vascular network that provides
sufficient barrier function and alveolar-capillary surface area to
exchange gas at rates compatible with healthy lung function.
Index Terms—Decellularization, decellularized lung, lung
engineering, organ engineering, tissue engineering.

Fig. 1. Lung engineering includes three main components, including (A) an
organ-specific scaffold, (B) appropriate numbers and types of cells, possibly
obtained from the patient that requires the organ, and (C) a bioreactor in which
to cultivate the tissue or organ (C). The leading source of scaffolds is currently
a decellularized extracellular matrix scaffold, while the optimal cell source has
yet to be determined. iPS cells and fetal-associated cells may be more tractable
for the clinic due to fewer ethical hurdles that has led to greater access to these
cell types. iPS cells have the additional benefit of fewer potential immunological
complications. An effective bioreactor must provide physiological stimuli and
support active cell growth.

I. INTRODUCTION
UNG disease is currently the third most common cause
of death in the United States and is the only one of the
top three causes of death that is increasing in prevalence [1].
Lung transplantation is the primary intervention for end stage
lung disease, but this option is limited by a paucity of donor
organs and the poor longevity of transplanted lungs. Of those
that are implanted, over 75% of grafts fail in the first ten years,
resulting in a patient survival rate of only 30% at the ten year time
point [2]. Tissue engineering may offer an alternative solution
to this unmet clinical need for functional, replacement lungs.

L

Manuscript received January 2, 2014; revised March 3, 2014; accepted March
19, 2014. Date of publication March 28, 2014; date of current version April 17,
2014. The work of Laura E. Niklason was supported by the National Institutes of
Health under Grants U01 HL111016 and R01 HL098220. The work of Sumati
Sundaram was supported by Connecticut Innovations # 13SC36. Asterisk indicates the corresponding author.
E. A. Calle, A. Sivarapatna, and M. K. Tseng are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06519 USA (e-mail: elizabeth.calle@yale.edu; amogh.sivarapatna@yale.edu;
michelle.tseng@yale.edu).
M. Ghaedi and S. Sundaram are with the Department of Anesthesia, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06519 USA (e-mail: mahboobe.ghaedi@yale.edu;
sumati.sundaram@yale.edu).
∗ L. E. Niklason is with the Department of Anesthesia and Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519 USA (e-mail:
laura.niklason@yale.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2314261

First and foremost, the engineered lung tissue must be able
to exchange gas. The tissue, then, must possess a network of
vascular conduits, with an adequate surface area and membranes
thin enough to allow rapid diffusion of gases into and out of the
blood. The vascular network must resist thrombosis and possess
sufficient barrier function to prevent flooding of the alveoli with
blood or blood components. By these criteria, two groups have
met with modest success in regenerating functional lung tissues.
Petersen et al., as well as Ott et al., have successfully implanted
engineered lungs that exchanged gas for several hours [3], [4].
While these examples provide an encouraging foundation
for the field of whole organ lung engineering, significant work
remains to be done in three key areas: the scaffold used to
construct the organ, the cells used to populate the organ, and the
bioreactor in which to cultivate the organ (see Fig. 1).
The scaffold provides the architecture of the organ and supports the function of the organ by maintaining multiple, independent compartments and by providing a hierarchical, branching
structure. The cells impart additional biological function, and
the bioreactor facilitates growth and development via nutrient
and waste transfer as well as oxygen transport. These three main
components are undoubtedly intertwined. Seeding of endothelial and epithelial cells, which enhance the barrier function, also
provides a renewable population that confers long-term stability of the engineered tissue and allows the transplanted organ to
function for more than a few hours.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CALLE et al.: STRATEGIES FOR WHOLE LUNG TISSUE ENGINEERING

With this complex union of constituents in mind, we review
the successes and challenges encountered thus far in the areas
of scaffold generation, strategic recellularization, and bioreactor
design. We aim to provide insight into a rapidly evolving field
that ultimately aims to reconstitute functional lungs in vitro.
II. LUNG SCAFFOLDS
A. Design Criteria and Scaffold Properties
The ability to exchange gas falls primarily on three physical
properties of the lung: 1) extensive surface area, 2) very thin
alveolar capillary membranes, and 3) viscoelastic behavior.
For gas exchange to occur, the air and blood must be closely
apposed (the walls of the alveoli are only 20–60 nm in thickness
[5], [6]). Indeed, a set of adult human lungs has a surface area of
70–100 m2 , approximately the surface area of a tennis court. An
increase of the barrier thickness by twofold or loss of half of the
surface area for gas exchange due to ruptured or absent alveolar
walls would halve the diffusion capacity of oxygen. Although
human lungs do possess some “reserve capacity,” a reduction
of more than one-third of the diffusion capacity is incompatible
with healthy lung function [7]. To date, gently decellularized
whole organ scaffolds achieve this requirement more effectively
than any other scaffold alternative. Other methods, such as the
use of hydrogels, electrospun scaffolds, or other “bulk” synthetic
methods fail to recapitulate the structural hierarchy of a lung due
to insufficient control over form [8]. Techniques such as 3-D
printing, while attractive due to reproducibility and impressive
structural control, are so far unable to achieve adequate spatial
resolution to recapitulate the gas-exchanging alveolar-capillary
network.
The necessity for the lung to be both compliant and elastic
also favors the use of decellularized tissue as a scaffold. Compliance or distensibility allows the lungs to inflate as a direct
result of small pressure differences between the alveoli and the
surrounding environment. Elastic recoil allows for passive exhalation, which helps to minimize the work of ventilation [7]. Various groups have decellularized rodent lungs using CHAPS [3]
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and TritonX-100 [4], or TritonX100 and sodium deoxycholate (SDC) [9]. All of these methods
produce acellular scaffolds that exhibit hysteresis, but decreased
compliance, compared to the native lung [3], [4], [9]. In addition
to the absence of surfactant in decellularized lungs, this is likely
due to lack of elastin, compared to native lungs [3], [9]. Additional work by Petersen et al. demonstrated that the ultimate
tensile stress value of decellularized lung is similar to that of
native lung [10].
In addition to mechanical considerations, a decellularized
scaffold for lung regeneration must be hospitable to cell adhesion, survival, and proliferation. Decellularized scaffolds from
the variety of methods in the literature retain many of the major
basement membrane and extracellular matrix proteins present in
the native organ, [3], [4], [9], [11]–[14], [15]–[19]. Among these
are fibrillar collagens I and III, which provide structural integrity,
and collagen IV, which forms the basement membrane. Other
basement membrane proteins such as laminins and fibronectin
are present in varying amounts. Compared to nonspecific, com-

1483

mercial substrates such as Matrigel or collagen I, organ specific
extracellular matrices promote cellular phenotypes that are more
appropriate to the organ [20]–[23].
In addition to the objectives of removing the cellular material and retaining ECM components, the scaffolds must be
devoid of residual detergents, which are cytotoxic [19], [24].
Studies with pulmonary valves suggest that concentrations of
< 50 mg/L in the final wash, as detected by high-performance
liquid chromatography, indicate a fully rinsed, nontoxic scaffold [24]. Lungs decellularized with SDS that support epithelial
cell growth contain undetectable levels of SDS per mg tissue
after sufficient rinsing [16].
In addition to the residual quantity, the type of detergent(s)
used impacts the results of cellular repopulation, though there
are conflicting reports of the “best” substrate by this measure.
Repopulation of mouse lung scaffolds decellularized with each
of the aforementioned detergents with either mesenchymal stem
cells or the C10 epithelial cell line demonstrated little difference
between scaffolds [25]. Human microvascular endothelial cells
seeded onto urinary bladder basement membrane decellularized
with 3% TritonX-100, 4% SDC, 8 mM CHAPS, or 1% SDS have
a more normal phenotype and form a more confluent monolayer
when cultured on TritonX-treated matrix, compared to the other
detergents [26]. Finally, human alveolar epithelial cells seeded
onto human lung matrix decellularized with regimens similar to
those above, showed fewer apoptotic cells, less T-cell activation,
and induction of fewer cytokines on lungs decellularized with
1% SDS, compared to cells cultured on matrix treated with other
detergents [17]. Although these data may reflect differences
in the tissue response to the detergents applied or cell typespecific interactions with acellular matrix, there is clearly more
work to be done. As efforts proceed, optimized decellularization
regimens should be evaluated by 1) the effect that they have on
whole lung mechanics, 2) the degree to which ECM components
are retained, the extent to which 3) cellular components are
removed, and 4) the viability, phenotype, and function of cells
seeded onto the acellular matrix.
In sum, work on rodents [3], [4], [9], [12], [13], [15],
macaques [11], and more recently with the human and pig tissue [14], [16]–[18], has established the feasibility of the decellularization approach. Acellular matrices are useful platforms to
study cell behavior [3], [4], [11]–[15], [22], [27]–[29]. One major hurdle in transitioning from rodent to large animal lungs is
establishing consistent and reliable scaffold production across
species and across laboratories. The long-term structural integrity and the ability of the scaffold to support long-term cell
survival will also need to be evaluated.
B. Use of Decellularized Pulmonary Scaffolds in the Clinic
In 2008, the first example of using a decellularized cadaveric trachea that was seeded with bone marrow cells and nasal
epithelium to replace an airway segment in a patient was reported [30]. In 2008, nearly 11,000 lungs were deemed unsuitable for transplant due to the poor organ function and were
therefore never procured, despite prior consent for lung procurement [31]. Whether these donated, but unused organs could

1484

be salvaged for scaffold generation in the future is unclear. If the
extracellular matrix is significantly compromised, cadaveric human lungs may not be an option. Therefore, alternative sources
such as nonhuman primate or porcine lungs may be critical to
the advancement of the field.
Porcine organs in particular are an attractive option in the
near-term. Much of the infrastructure for pig cultivation for other
tissue-based products, such as heart valves, pericardium, and
intestinal submucosa, already exists [32], [33]. Recent success
in establishing a pig model of cystic fibrosis suggests that pigs
may be good models for human lung disease as well [34], [35].
Additionally, fully cellular, porcine lungs that were transplanted
into immune-depleted baboons were able to provide adequate
gas exchange (“full respiratory support”) for up to 11 h, with
little histological evidence of microvascular or alveolar damage
upon explant [36]. At a minimum, this demonstrates sufficient
surface area to support human gas exchange requirements if
decellularized porcine lungs were to serve as a scaffold for
generation of lung tissue that could be implanted in a human. The
ability of a human immune system to accommodate a porcine
extracellular matrix requires additional evaluation.
One additional consideration is the sterilization of scaffolds.
Unfortunately, no single method of sterilizing matrix-based allografts or xenografts has been established [37]. Chemical and
high-dose antibiotic treatments present the risk of toxicity or
adverse reaction to residual compounds, while extreme conditions such as high heat (autoclaving) will denature collagens.
Sterilization of the bone and anterior cruciate ligament allografts with gamma irradiation or electron beams, respectively,
can have adverse effects on the mechanical properties of these
grafts [38], [39]. Low doses of gamma irradiation (2M Rad)
can be used to terminally sterilize decellularized tracheas, [40],
but whether the more delicate structure of the lung can withstand similar treatment remains to be seen. Ethylene oxide
would require extensive out-gassing, and toxic ethylene glycol byproducts are formed when gas comes into contact with
water [37]. Ultimately, supercritical carbon dioxide may be
the most promising option for terminal sterilization of complex
3-D biological products such as a decellularized lung scaffolds,
though this technology is still in its infancy. First described as
an efficient method of destroying microorganisms in 1995 [41],
supercritical CO2 does not require temperatures above 37 ◦ C,
can penetrate tissues, and is nontoxic [42]. Terminal sterilization
of acellular dermal matrix with supercritical CO2 has proven effective at reducing bioburden to levels below FDA guidelines,
with minimal disruption of mechanical properties [43], [44].
For all of these reasons, supercritical CO2 is an attractive option
for acellular scaffold sterilization, provided it does not negatively impact the structure, composition, or mechanics of the
lung extracellular matrix.
In summary, a scaffold suitable for use in whole lung tissue engineering must first and foremost be devoid of cells and
cell components prior to reseeding. Recommendations by the
Badylak group, for example, stipulate a lack of visible nuclear
material by DAPI or H&E staining, DNA fragment length of
less than 200 bp, and less than 50 ng dsDNA/mg ECM by dry
weight [45]. The scaffold must also provide a hospitable envi-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 2. The lung includes (A) 23 generations of airways, terminating in the (B)
alveolar compartment, which is the site of gas exchange. Two key challenges to
successful lung engineering are 1) determining the source and type of epithelial
cells with which to populate the airways with a sufficient number of cells and 2)
engineering an effective alveolar-capillary barrier, to enable gas exchange. Key
cell types are indicated along the airway branches of the lung (A). Components
of the alveolar-capillary barrier are indicated in (B). This barrier includes type I
(T1) and type II (T2) epithelial cells and microvascular endothelial cells (EC).
Tight junctions between T1 cells (∗) provide a barrier to components > 1 nm
in diameter. Endothelial cell junctions (∗∗) provide a barrier to material >
5 nm in diameter. The basement membrane separating the air and blood is <
100 μm thick and provides approximately half of the barrier function of an
intact alveolar-capillary barrier.

ronment for cell adhesion and survival, which largely relies on
retention of constituent basement membrane proteins. The scaffold must also meet structural criteria specific for lung function,
such as sufficient surface area for gas exchange and an intact
basement membrane between air and blood. At a minimum, this
membrane should provide a barrier to cell-sized particles. At
least two-thirds of the vascular compartment must be comprised
of patent, perfusable conduits so that blood can be oxygenated.
The overall mechanics of the scaffold must be compatible with
continuous ventilation long term; that is, possessing of both a
viscous and elastic region when examined on a stress–strain
curve. Finally, though the scaffold must be sterile, there can be
no toxic elements retained within the scaffold.
III. STRATEGIES FOR CELLULAR REPOPULATION: CELL TYPES
AND USE WITH A DECELLULARIZED WHOLE
ORGAN SCAFFOLD
A. Essential Cellular Constituents of the Lung
The lung is largely comprised of three categories of cell type:
epithelial, endothelial, and interstitial, or mesenchymal. The
epithelia line the airways from trachea to alveoli; they provide
the barrier function between air and blood and perform regionally specific functions such as mucociliary clearance and gas
exchange (see Fig. 2). Unlike the gut epithelium, which is completely renewed in less than a week, the epithelial layer of the
lung is renewed only once every four months during normal
homeostasis [46], [47].
Endothelial cells, which account for approximately 50% of
the cells in the lung, also provide barrier function and accomplish the critical task of preventing thrombosis, both physically
and by production of hemoactive substances. They additionally
provide biochemical and molecular support for the epithelium.
Finally, interstitial cells, which are comprised of fibroblasts and other mesenchymal cells (MSCs), provide structural

CALLE et al.: STRATEGIES FOR WHOLE LUNG TISSUE ENGINEERING

stability through extracellular matrix production and turnover.
They are also critical for the survival and physiologically appropriate organization of the epithelium.
Taken together, there are nearly 250 billion cells in the human
lung, of which 26% are found in the nonalveolar regions (i.e.,
trachea and upper airways) and 74% are found in the alveolar regions [48]. The nonalveolar regions of the lung total 65
billion cells, including 30–40% interstitial cells, approximately
40–50% endothelial cells, and a smaller fraction of epithelium—
approximately 10 billion total [49]. The 184 billion cells found
in the alveoli are approximately 50% endothelial, followed by
25% interstitial, and 25% epithelial, with the remaining small
fraction accounted for by alveolar macrophages [50]. This translates to 80 billion endothelial cells (largely microvascular), 60
billion interstitial cells, and 35 billion epithelial cells in the alveolar region alone. For successful lung tissue engineering, each
category of cells will have to be provided for.
B. Epithelial Cells
The two central questions in epithelial cell repopulation of the
scaffold are 1) which cell types are both necessary and sufficient
to generate functional lung tissue and 2) how can these cells be
obtained?
1) Primary Lung Cell Types: In the trachea and upper airways, the primary function of the epithelium is to humidify the
air taken in by the lungs and to provide immunological protection via mucociliary clearance. The production of secretoglobins
and immunoglobulins confer additional immunity. In the adult
trachea and primary bronchi (cartilaginous airways), the luminal
epithelium performs these roles; this population includes ciliated columnar epithelial cells, mucus-producing goblet cells,
neuroendocrine cells, basal cells, and both Clara (club) and
club-like cells.
Neuroendocrine cells are located within the monolayer of
epithelium and serve as a “specialized” epithelial phenotype.
They are able to sense oxygen, produce bioactive compounds,
and promote the secretory functions of other epithelial cell types
[51]–[54]. Though they make up less than 10% of the airway
epithelial cell population [51], these are likely an important
component of the airway epithelium for lung engineering efforts.
Basal cells account for approximately 30% of the pseudostratified mucociliary population in the human lung (though only
2% of the rat airway population). They are located beneath the
columnar epithelial cells in the proximal airways and constitute
90% of the cell surfaces in constant contact with the basement
membrane [49]. More heavily represented in the trachea and
proximal airways, the frequency of basal cells diminishes toward the distal lung. In the upper airways, they assist in resolving club cell injury in the mouse and give rise to ciliated cells,
which otherwise do not replicate [55], [56]. Basal cells that are
isolated from the human trachea are classified as stem cells for
the region [57].
Club cells are also multifunctional. Characterized by the production of the secretoglobin club cell secretory protein (CCSP,
also known as CC10), they are distributed asymmetrically along
the airway tree. Although largely absent from the proximal air-

1485

ways of the human lung, club cells represent up to 22% of the
total population in the respiratory bronchioles and account for
44% of the replicating cells at this level [58]. Indeed, they are
the principle cells required for maintaining homeostasis of the
bronchial airway epithelium and the bronchioles of normal adult
mice after injury [59], [60].
The function of the distal lung is primarily gas exchange and
the production of systemic exocrine and hemoactive factors.
This region of the lung is organized into a complex system of
alveoli that is comprised of two primary epithelial cells types:
squamous type I epithelial cells and cuboidal type II cells. Type
I cells line the majority of the alveoli (covering up to 95%
of the alveolar surface area) and are the primary site of gasexchange, while type II cells secrete alveolar surfactants and
give rise to type I cells. Recent evidence suggests that type
II cells are actually a heterogeneous population made up of
subpopulations with differing regenerative capacities [61]. In
addition, though type II epithelial cells have historically been
considered the primary progenitor cell of the alveolus, careful
lineage-tracing experiments by the Hogan group have recently
shown that murine type II cells are capable of clonal expansion
as well. This capacity for self-renewal promotes the status of
murine type II cells to that of an alveolar stem cell [62].
2) Lung-Resident Stem and Progenitor Cells: The ability of
certain epithelial cell populations to recapitulate healthy lung
tissue in the context of various insults and injuries is an area of
intense research interest and is extremely relevant to lung regeneration. Populations that have been identified in rodents and also
have candidate analogs in human lung include a subpopulation
of bronchial epithelium that is integrin α6 β4 positive [63] and
a p-63 expressing “basal-like” cell that proliferates in response
to influenza infection [64]. Putative OCT4+ progenitor cells,
isolated from pig lungs [65], and cells from human lungs that
express the stem cell marker c-kit, may have the capacity to
regenerate damaged lung tissue [66].
The population of bronchial epithelial cells that are characterized by the α6 β4 integrin and a lack of surfactant protein
C (SP-C) proliferate after severe injury—they are otherwise
“dormant” after more mild insults [63]. When supplied with
the appropriate mixed cell population from embryonic mouse
lungs (including both epithelial and MSCs) in a kidney capsule
“organoid” assay, these β4+ cells are able to recapitulate entire
lung structures in a clonal manner. β4+ progenitor cells generate both CCSP+ airway structures and SP-C+ alveolar-like
structures, but require both MSCs and a mixed population of
embryonic epithelial cells in order to give rise to lung-specific
progeny. Contributions of other elements of the kidney capsule
environment are likely important as well, though these are as
yet undefined.
Studies by Kumar et al. have used array-based techniques to
distinguish regional epithelial progenitors [64]. Despite shared
expression of 99% of the hybridized genes, epithelial progenitors from different regions of the airway tree can be separated
by whole genome expression profiles. These cells give rise to
different progeny in air–liquid interface experiments. Although
the nasal and tracheal epithelium yield robust populations of
mucus-producing and ciliated epithelial cells, the distal airway

1486

stem cells form hollow, alveoli-like spheres, and show expression of type I and type II cell markers.
One potentially important marker of lung progenitors may be
OCT4. In the pig lung, there appears to be an OCT4+ epithelial
progenitor that is also characterized by an ability to self-renew,
form colonies, and give rise to type I and II alveolar epithelial
cells [65]. Another study of type I epithelial cells which express OCT4 showed they had phenotypic plasticity in vitro [67].
These data indicate that OCT4 may characterize the capacity for
phenotypic plasticity and self-renewal in the lung epithelium.
Finally, a somewhat controversial study published in 2011
asserts the existence of rare c-kit-expressing cells within the
human lung that can be isolated and expanded in culture. These
proposed “c-kit+ lung stem cells” are reported to form bronchioles, alveoli, and pulmonary vessels [66]. The ability of these
cells to generate cell types of all three germ layers—a feat typically achieved by only embryonic or induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells—would indicate a cell of great potential value. However, no reports replicating these data have been published to
date.
3) Exogenous Stem Cells: Embryonic, Induced Pluripotent,
and Fetal-Associated Cells:
a) Human embryonic stem cells: Several groups have utilized murine, and then human, embryonic stem cells to derive
distal epithelium in vitro [68]–[72]. These protocols produce
cells that phenotypically appear to be “type II-like;” they possess lamellar bodies and show expression of surfactant proteins,
including surfactant protein C [28], [70]–[73]. Derivation of airway epithelial cells from ESCs has also been demonstrated following culture of ESCs under an air–liquid interface [72]–[74].
Although these studies are important feasibility studies and can
be used to inform strategies for directing the differentiation of
other stem and progenitor cells, their clinical utility may ultimately be limited by the significant ethical hurdles associated
with human embryonic stem cells. Therefore, other sources of
stem and progenitor cells from which to generate lung cells are
indispensable.
b) iPS cells: iPS cells are the product of adult somatic
cell reprogramming to an embryonic-like state by inducing a
“forced” expression of specific pluripotent genes [75], [76].
Several research groups have reported the successful differentiation of iPS cells toward a range of pulmonary epithelial types,
including both type II-like cells and airway epithelium, using
a variety of protocols [73], [77], [78]. For the purposes of cell
transplantation and tissue engineering, many ways to generate
integration-free iPS cells have been reported. Several techniques
rely on nonintegrating DNA such as plasmids [75], [79], adenoviruses [80], [81], or episomes [82]. RNA-based methods such
as Sendai virus [83] or messenger RNA (mRNA, [84], [85])
have also emerged. Additional trials have been done with proteins [86] or chemically defined reagents [87]. Though rapid
progress has been made, it is still premature to predict which
method of stem or iPS cell generation will be most germane for
lung regeneration.
c) Fetal-associated stem cells: Recent literature has also
described the use of “fetal associated” stem cells as a multior pluripotent cell source. These cells are derived from tissues

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

and substances associated with a fetus such as the placenta,
amnion and amniotic fluid, umbilical cord blood, Wharton’s
jelly, and other components and may be used to generate lung
cells [88]–[90]. Though less is known about these cells types,
this population possesses growth kinetics and plasticity intermediate between adult and embryonic stem cells. In addition,
these cells can be obtained with little difficulty; human amniotic fluid stem cells, for example, can be derived from discarded
amniocentesis specimens [88], [89]. Similarly, placental- and
umbilical cord-derived stem cells can be collected at birth and
stored for potential future use, without the ethical hurdles that
are associated with embryonic stem cells. Both placental- and
umbilical cord-derived stem cells can be differentiated to cells
similar to alveolar epithelium in vitro and express lung epithelial
markers in vivo in a mouse model [88], [90].
4) Strategy for Lung Epithelial Regeneration In Vitro: To
recapitulate the composition of the lung, initial functions include the ability of the cells to adhere to the decellularized
scaffold when delivered to the appropriate compartment, to survive, proliferate, and differentiate. The repopulated lung must
also contain diverse groups of cell types. Each type must exist in
an anatomically appropriate region of the lung. Several groups
have used a variety of cell types to repopulate acellular lung
scaffolds. Despite differences in the decellularization method,
cell type, culture medium, and bioreactor conditions, these studies highlight several key strategies for successful repopulation.
These include 1) the use of a mature cell phenotype or support
to become such during culture, 2) the application of appropriate
physiological stimuli such as ventilation and perfusion during
culture, and 3) exposure of the airway compartment to air when
possible. The culture time required to achieve mature phenotypes distributed throughout the lung will depend in part on the
maturity of the cells used, and may range from 7–10 days to
several weeks or months [3], [13], [28], [91].
When supplied with a minimal medium and cultured on the
acellular lung in vitro, mature cell types outperform less differentiated populations. Mixed, fully differentiated lung cells
from neonatal rats expressed a greater variety and abundance
of mature lung cell types under these conditions, compared
to a mixed population of fetal rat lung cells [3], [4]. Neonatal rat lung cells also exhibit regional specificity of epithelial
marker expression when seeded into the airway compartment
of decellularized lungs. In addition to the alveolar epithelial
cell markers AQP-5 and pro-SPC, markers of types I and II
cells, respectively, CCSP was also abundant in cells lining
proximal airways. In some cases, cytokeratin-14 positive cells
were located beneath the club cell populations, suggestive of
a basal cell-like phenotype [3]. Though fetal lung cell cultures
showed evidence of distal lung markers SP-A, SP-C, TTF-1
and T1α, the variety of cell types and regional localization of
neonatal cultures was largely not observed in fetal lung cell
populations [4], [92].
Immature, progenitor populations can be used to produce
differentiated epithelium within an acellular matrix when additional support is provided, however. Subcutaneous implantation
of a decellularized mouse lung repopulated with “predifferentiated” murine embryonic stem cells (mESC) is one way to

CALLE et al.: STRATEGIES FOR WHOLE LUNG TISSUE ENGINEERING

provide this support. Much like the kidney capsule assay, subcutaneous implantation provides a physiological microenvironment that favors cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation.
After two weeks of cultivation, the repopulated, implanted lung
contained cells positive for the distal lung epithelial markers
TTF-1 and pro-SPC. There were also scattered FOXJ1+ cells
indicating the presence of proximal airway cells [13]. Additional studies with lung progenitors derived from mESC or
human iPS cells resulted in mature lung cell markers after
treatment with differentiation and maturation medium during
culture [13], [28], [91]. After ten days of culture, the mESCderived progenitors showed both regionally appropriate and robust expression of alveolar epithelial markers associated with
maturation [28]. In contrast, the undifferentiated mESC cultured in a minimal medium were relatively unorganized and
somewhat lacking in definitive lung epithelial markers both at
14 and 21 days [15]. Most impressively, the iPS-derived human lung progenitor cultures (cultured on human lung ECM
for up to 55 days) contained both the messenger RNA and the
protein for a diverse array of proximal and distal lung epithelial markers. These included the basal cell marker p63 and the
club cell marker CCSP. In addition, these cells expressed TTF-1
(NKX2.1). These markers are associated with distal lung progenitors, club cells, and type II epithelial cells, respectively.
Multiple surfactant proteins characteristic of type II cells were
detected. The type I epithelial marker T1α (podoplanin, PDN)
was also present. Additionally, the SP-B+ cells demonstrated
the ability to take up labeled surfactant protein B, indicating the
functional capacity to recycle surfactant [91]. Clearly, biochemical signals are an important part of encouraging regionally and
functionally specific lung epithelial cell types and are a fruitful
avenue for additional pursuit.
In addition to biochemical signals, mechanical signals such as
ventilation are also important stimuli for maturation of lung cells
during development [93]. Ventilation of lung constructs has been
used to promote lung phenotypes in repopulated decellularized
constructs [3], [4], [9], [92]. Indeed, lack of ventilation leads
to decreased cell coverage of the extracellular matrix scaffold
and accumulation of the protein in the airways of lungs cultured
for eight days [3]. When whole, native rat lungs are cultured in
vitro, ventilation leads to maintenance of CCSP expression in
the airways and robust expression of pro-SPC in punctate, cytoplasmic locations, similar to the native lung. Lungs that were
perfused only displayed more diffuse and somewhat less abundant pro-SPC staining. A count of apoptotic cells in lungs that
were simultaneously ventilated and perfused showed cell viability equal to that of freshly explanted rat lungs; either ventilation
or perfusion alone were vastly better than static lung culture [94].
Finally, the creation of an air–liquid interface by ventilation with air during culture has a positive effect on the lung
cell phenotype. When exposed to the air rather than submerged
in the liquid, type II cells produce more surfactant [95], and
proximal cells maintain a ciliated phenotype [96]. Cilia were
also observed in neonatal-seeded scaffolds when ventilated with
air [3]. The appearance of T1-α, a type I marker, and cilia in the
experiments by Longmire et al. [28] is also likely derived from
the tendency of unanchored lung slices to float in the liquid

1487

media (unpublished observations), thereby creating an air–
liquid interface.
Ultimately, for effective epithelial repopulation, the key stem
and progenitor cells that must be recapitulated are basal cells,
club cells, and alveolar type II cells. In fact, these cells are
likely indispensable to any serious lung tissue engineering effort, as they provide antecedents for the epithelium of each of
the three major regions of the lung, including the trachea, airways (bronchi, bronchioles, etc.), and alveoli. Administration
of basal cells, club cells, or other lung-resident progenitors to a
decellularized scaffold has not been evaluated. The appearance
of some of the markers of each of these cells in the Huang studies is encouraging. However, the degree of organization is not
clear. Studies designed to explore the regional specificity of a
progenitor cell population’s survival in the whole lung and the
ability of the cells to constitute an organized epithelium in an
acellular extracellular matrix scaffold long term would provide
additional necessary information for lung engineering efforts.
If these cells can be induced to differentiate in a regionally
specific way within a whole acellular lung scaffold, perhaps
based on microenvironmental cues, such a “one cell type” approach would be appealing. This approach may also have the
potential to capitulate the heterogeneity that exists within the
cell type. Basal cells, club cells, and alveolar type II cells are
all heterogeneous populations [59], [61], [97], [98]. However,
if this type of organization cannot be achieved, more mature
phenotypes, such as bona fide basal, club, or type II cells may
be required. In that case, site-specific cell delivery will become
an important element of repopulation efforts.
In the case of any repopulation efforts, time points at which
repopulated cells are evaluated are critical. A phenomenon of
“dedifferentiation,” followed by “redifferentiation,” has been described under a variety of conditions. Early experiments using
basal cells and secretory cells to repopulate denuded trachea,
for example, followed this sequence of events [98], as did repair following basal cell ablation [97]. In the case of human
iPS cell-derived lung field progenitor cells, the appearance of
mRNA for distal lung markers was apparent at d15 in the absence of protein. This was followed by disappearance of the
RNA signal, then recurrence, accompanied by the robust protein expression of distal markers [91]. Though the time required
to reach this “maturation” stage was sometime between 15 and
48 days, regeneration of an epithelial layer may be possible in
7–14 days [97], [98]. This will require both a sufficient density of cells seeded into the scaffold, and culture conditions that
will foster the proliferation and differentiation of regional epithelial populations. Because an acellular substrate may mimic
an “injured” substrate in some respects, cells cultured in this
environment may activate “repair” programs, compared to cells
in a confluent monolayer. This state, described for basal cells in
both mice [99] and humans [100], is characterized by a high proliferative index and extensive expansion of the basal cell pool.
The use of cells in this state would facilitate rapid repopulation
of the scaffold and provide a pool of cells to recapitulate multiple differentiated phenotypes, as basal cell hyperplasia gives
way to differentiated phenotypes of the tracheal and bronchial
epithelium [99], [100].

1488

More primitive stem and progenitor cells also possess a
greater capacity for proliferation than differentiated cell types.
The 10 billion proximal airway cells and 35 billion alveolar epithelial cells required to recellularize a set of human lungs will
demand extensive expansion. Whether this should occur prior
to seeding on the lung or during culture on the lung matrix must
be further evaluated.
C. Endothelial Cells
1) Endothelial Cell Functions: Like the epithelium, the endothelium exhibits significant heterogeneity that needs to be
understood in order to modulate the contribution of each type to
the engineered lung tissue. An intact endothelial monolayer prevents the formation of fibrin clots largely by preventing contact
of blood with the underlying collagen of the basement membrane and interstitial extracellular matrix [101]. Heparan sulfate
also binds antithrombin III and chondroitin sulfate, and dermatan sulfate facilitates binding of the thrombomodulin in the
EC membrane with the circulating thrombin [102]. Additionally, the endothelium produces hemo-active compounds such
as nitric oxide and prostacylins, which actively inhibit platelet
aggregation.
In response to mechanical stimuli, pulmonary endothelial
cells of arterial origin produce more prostacyclin than venous
endothelium [103]. Pulmonary artery endothelial cells also express more tissue plasminogen activator than microvascular endothelial cells or HUVECs, though microvascular endothelial
cells express more urokinase-type plasminogen activator [102],
[104]. Both of these enzymes convert plasminogen to plasmin,
which lyses fibrin clots. Therefore, repopulation of an otherwise
thrombogenic substrate, such as decellularized lung with cells
that produce fibrinolytic substances would be advantageous. By
actively mitigating the formation or stability of fibrin clots, the
presence of plasminogen activators could potentially prolong
the life of an implanted graft.
An effective endothelial layer, particularly in the lung, also
depends critically on successful barrier function. Compared to
the endothelium of the large vessels, microvascular endothelial cells express more cell–cell junction molecules such as Ncadherin, VE-cadherin, and activated leukocyte cell adhesion
molecule, a component of adherins junctions [105]. Consequently, microvascular endothelial cells form tighter cell–cell
junctions [105], [106]. Human lung microvascular endothelial cells may also enhance the barrier function of epithelial
cells [107], which actually provide a barrier with a smaller
transport threshold than that of the endothelium. Compared to
the 5-nm cutoff for endothelial cell–cell barriers, the epithelium
provides a barrier to molecules greater than 1 nm.
Finally, the endothelium, especially the microvascular endothelium, plays a critical role in the support of regional epithelial stem and progenitor cell proliferation [108]. VEGF receptor inhibitor [109] or knockout of endothelial nitric oxide
synthase [110] leads to fewer airspaces and a disrupted alveolar
structure. These results highlight the importance of the endothelium, not only for its role in blood interactions and trans epiand endothelial transport, but also for supporting normal ep-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

ithelial behavior and lung structure. A repopulated scaffold that
lacks the endothelium may not, in fact, be able to recapitulate
appropriate function without the paracrine factors endowed by
the endothelium.
2) Endothelial Cell Sources: Several groups have reported
the differentiation of endothelium from human iPSs and human
embryonic stem cells [71], [111]–[118]. Human iPS cell-derived
ECs differentiated in the static culture express general endothelial markers CD31 and VE-Cadherin, but are functionally and
phenotypically heterogeneous, with arterial, venous, or lymphatic subtypes present [115]. Whereas some groups report that
ECs derived from human ES or iPS cells resemble a primarily
arterial phenotype [117], others report that a larger percentage
of cells are of a venous phenotype [119]. This is likely accounted for by the use of different protocols and the variety
of soluble factors used to drive differentiation. Nevertheless,
these cells appear to be efficacious in vivo—transplantation of
iPS-ECs improved neovascularization and blood flow recovery
in a hind limb ischemic model [120]. Furthermore, iPS-ECs
displayed good attachment, stabilization, patency, and characteristic vascular structure when seeded on decellularized vessel
scaffolds [121], [122]. Therefore, in vitro differentiation of the
pluripotent cells could indicate a viable population to scale up
for the vascularization of the engineered lung [121], [122]
3) Strategy for Lung Endothelial Regeneration In Vitro: For
successful vascular engineering of the lung, derivation of the
endothelium from iPS cells for this purpose will likely include
a combination of arterial and microvascular endothelial cells.
Approximately half of the cells used to reseed a lung must
be vascular endothelium. For a human lung, this tallies over
100 billion cells. Few definitive data have been reported thus far
regarding comprehensive endothelialization of acellular organ
scaffolds. The only reports of endothelial cell seeding of decellularized lung extracellular matrix scaffold are those of implanted
engineered rat lungs. Each of these constructs included a population of endothelial cells within the vascular compartment of
the engineered tissue. In addition to an uneven distribution of
endothelial cells within the compartment, the constructs lacked
complete coverage of the basement membrane by a continuous
endothelial monolayer. This led to thrombosis and failure of
the organ within hours [3], [4], to days [124]. The only other
report of endothelial cells invested in a decellularized matrix
was the ingrowth of vessels in a subcutaneously implanted construct. Whether these vessels essentially “tunneled” through the
matrix or faithfully traversed the existing vascular conduits is
unclear [13].
For advances to be made in this area, considerations for repopulating an acellular scaffold include the cell size in comparison
to the capillary diameter, cell density, and cell type. Ott et al.
used human umbilical vein endothelial cells and Petersen et al.
used rat lung microvascular endothelial cells. While the venous
endothelium is widely available, arterial and microvascular endothelium possess more appropriate characteristics for the lung
endothelium. They possess greater capacity for anticoagulation
and proliferate more quickly. Rapid proliferation will facilitate
coverage of the extensive vascular surface area of a lung scaffold
on a short time scale.

CALLE et al.: STRATEGIES FOR WHOLE LUNG TISSUE ENGINEERING

Regardless of the type of the endothelium used, the single
most important task is to create a monolayer of cells within
as many capillaries as possible. The capillary beds possess the
highest portion of the vascular surface area and are also at greatest risk for thrombosis, due to the low flow in these regions.
Capillaries are also the sites of gas exchange. For all of these
reasons, successful endothelialization is the single most important (and most challenging) component of the lung or any organ
tissue-engineering endeavor.
D. Interstitial and MSCs
Interstitial cells comprise approximately 30% of the cells in
the lung—approximately 75 billion cells in a full set of human
lungs. They primarily serve to provide structural stability, as
well as biochemical and physical support for the surrounding
endothelial and epithelial cell populations. There are many different types of interstitial cells, each with distinct functions.
Fibroblasts are differentiated cells that produce and degrade the
extracellular matrix. Though the extracellular matrix turnover
declines with age, approximately 2–10% of the collagen in an
adult lung may be renewed every day [125].
Additional in vitro experiments have demonstrated the ability
of various stromal cells to accelerate epithelial wound repair
via migration and proliferation [126]. The lung mesenchyme
promotes branching and distal lung morphogenesis, and specifies regional epithelial patterning during development [127]. Interstitial cells promote polarization of the bronchial epithelium
and ciliogenesis via direct contact with the epithelium [128]. Finally, PDGFRα+ MSCs foster the survival of alveolar epithelial
cells and the formation of “alveolospheres” in vitro [62]. Other
specialized interstitial cells of the lung include lipofibroblasts,
telocytes, and pericytes. These interact with epithelial and endothelial cells, respectively, to process surfactant and promote
vascular formation and stabilization [129]–[131].
Overall, the objective of using interstitial cells in lung tissue
engineering is to confer the physical and biochemical support
enjoyed by the normal lung on the engineered tissue. The central
question is which interstitial cells to use for lung tissue engineering. The prolific production of ECM by fibroblasts, while
important and useful when well controlled, may induce fibrosis in an engineered lung context. Lung MSCs are located in
the perivascular area in the bronchioalveolar region of the lung.
While MSCs are generally mesodermal in origin, studies have
also found human lung-specific MSCs to express nestin (a neural stem cell marker) [132]. In vitro differentiation of the MSC
into lung phenotypes has received great attention, but after almost a decade of research in this area, incontrovertible evidence
of such differentiation remains limited and controversial.
1) Role of MSCs During Injury In Vivo: Bone marrowderived MSCs have been shown to play a role in mitigating
lung injury in animal models of disease. For example, Tropea et al. demonstrated that systemic delivery of MSCs in a
mouse model of bronchopulmonary dysplasia led to significant increase of bronchioalveolar stem cells as compared with
controls [133]. Studies have highlighted the importance of the
soluble factors secreted by MSCs that seem to play a role in the

1489

therapeutic efficacy of MSCs [134]. Some of the critical factors may include keratinocyte growth factor (fibroblast growth
factor 7), interleukin-10, angiopoietin-1, interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist, and prostaglandin E2.
2) In Vivo and Clinical Uses of MSCs: Both systemic as well
as intratracheal administration of MSCs in a spectrum of animal
models demonstrate the efficacy of MSCs for resolving lung disease and injury. For a more detailed review, please refer [135].
MSCs from the bone marrow, placenta, and amniotic fluid have
been utilized in human models of lung injury [136], [137]. A
more recent milestone involves a Phase II clinical trial involving
administration of bone marrow MSCs in patients with COPD.
Although not efficacious in mitigating the disease, no adverse
effects were reported over the two-year follow-up period [138].
MSCs have also been used in ex vivo tissue regeneration models. Macchiarini et al. recently achieved clinical success using
autologous bone marrow MSCs and the nasal epithelium for
chondrocytes and luminal epithelium regeneration, respectively,
to create bioartificial airways from decellularized cadaveric tracheas [30], [139], [140].
3) Strategies for the Use of MSCs in Lung Tissue Engineering: To date, several kinds of stromal cells, such as bone marrow
and adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells, have been introduced to decellularized lung scaffolds. Decellularized lungs that
are inoculated with MSCs result in cellular deposition mainly
in the parenchyma, and to a lesser extent in the small and larger
airways. Where the MSCs attach and bind is largely determined by the ECM components of the decellularized scaffold,
which in turn is highly defined by the method utilized to decellularize the scaffold. Bonvillain et al. found that the murine
MSC initially adhere to areas rich in collagen I and laminin
as well as fibronectin-rich areas, while in a macaque model
they showed substantial preference for laminin above all other
matrix molecules [11]. Studies by Daly et al. revealed substantial “homing” of inoculated MSCs to collagen I, collagen
IV, and laminin-rich areas, but very little binding of MSCs to
fibronectin [12]. There is mounting evidence that the ECM contributes to the functional behavior of MSCs [141], [142]. Cells
with different known integrin expression have different binding characteristics on the decellularized matrix [12]. Overall,
determination of cell-matrix interactions will be key in understanding the regional specification of MSCs on a decellularized
lung scaffold.
Although MSCs bind to and proliferate on decellularized
scaffolds, it is unclear what phenotypes they assume under different culture conditions. Over a 28-day culture of MSCs on
decellularized mouse lungs in small airway growth medium and
basal medium, only transient expression of TTF1 was detected,
and no other epithelial markers [12]. Other groups reported that
rhesus marrow-derived MSCs as well as adipose MSCs in the
decellularized matrix did not have epithelial marker expression
after seven days of culture [11].
Overall, successful employment of interstitial cells for lung
tissue engineering may require a combination of fibroblasts and
MSCs. Based on the ratio of cell types in an intact lung, a 1:1 or
2:1 ratio of interstitial cells to epithelium would be most appropriate. A combination of MSCs with epithelium, followed by

1490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

supplementation with differentiated fibroblasts, would provide
epithelial support while minimizing the likelihood of the epithelium being overrun by MSCs. MSCs are less proliferative, less
migratory, and produce less ECM than fibroblasts. As a source
of MSCs, bone marrow and adipose-derived MSCs are most
accessible. Each of these cell types has been used clinically for
other applications; these populations are generally regarded as
safe. Bone marrow MSCs have even demonstrated the ability
to support the lung epithelium during acute injury by mitochondrial transfer [143]. However, the ability of these cells to
perform appropriately in the context of lung tissue engineering
has not been clearly established. Efforts in the near term will
center on exploring bone marrow and adipose-derived MSCs
for tissue engineering.
Long-term, lung-resident MSCs will be the most appropriate MSC source. Human lung-MSCs instilled into mouse lungs
localize to the alveolar compartment, where they secrete keratinocyte growth factor, a key growth factor for lung epithelium.
They also show higher initial retention and greater longevity in
the lung, as compared to fibroblasts [144]. One caveat is that
there may be a variety of lung-MSC subpopulations. One recent
report of MSCs derived from the mature lung, for example, indicates that CD166- lung-MSCs support the formation of lung
epithelium stem cell colonies in vitro, while CD166+ lungMSCs do not [145]. Like epithelial cells used for lung tissue
engineering, the MSC population that is used may ultimately
have to be a heterogeneous one. Regardless, interstitial cells,
including both MSCs and fibroblasts, will be an indispensable
component of a successfully engineered lung.

whole organ engineering and culture. In addition to assays for
soluble factors, noninvasive evaluation of engineered lungs may
be possible through imaging techniques such as multiphoton
microscopy [149], [150] or magnetoacoustic-tomography with
magnetic induction (MAT-MI) [151]. Multiphoton microscopy
allows imaging of multiple tissue components based on inherent
differences in nonlinear excitation and with minimal photo damage to living cells, while MAT-MI can be used to construct image
of a composite “tissue” (i.e., a phantom with regions of different
salinity) by exploiting differences in electrical impedance.
Additional design considerations particularly important to
human lung-sized bioreactors include cost, overall “handleability,” and the availability of pumps and ventilators or other
mechanisms to drive physiological stimuli. The organ size may
also make orientation of the organ within the bioreactor important to successful culture, as gravitational influences on cell
seeding and matrix distension may be important for organs larger
than rodent-sized. Culture medium requirements will also pose a
unique challenge to whole lung engineering, as the volume of the
medium required to support a set of adult human lungs, extrapolating from the medium requirements of a confluent T75 flask
of microvascular endothelial cells, could translate to >300 L
of medium per week. If growth factors or small molecules are
added to this volume for the purpose of stem cell differentiation
or the support of highly specialized epithelial phenotypes, the
cost could become unsustainable very quickly. Though the use
of multiple cell types simultaneously may provide some “endogenous” growth factor and paracrine factor support, advances
in the recombinant protein production hold greater potential for
reducing the cost of medium additives.

IV. BIOREACTORS
A. Bioreactor Design Criteria

B. Challenges for the Bioreactor Use

To facilitate seeding of multiple cell types, the bioreactormounted decellularized scaffold should provide independent
access to the vascular and airway compartments. Additionally,
the bioreactor must maintain sterility, adequate nutrient transfer and waste removal, and sufficient oxygen transport to prevent the growing cells from becoming hypoxic. For a lung, the
bioreactor should be capable of providing tissue-specific environmental or mechanical stimuli such as an air–liquid interface
and cyclic stretch (i.e., ventilation), generated by negative pressure [94], [146]. Like any 3-D tissue, perfusion should also be
provided and it should be pulsatile to mimic the blood supplied
to the body by the heart [147]. Bioreactors such as those used
by Price et al. [9] and Petersen et al. [94] are relatively easy
to modify to accommodate different connections or additional
ports or probes. Specifically, the ability to monitor biologically
relevant parameters such as pH, lactate, glucose, and CO2 and
O2 levels in real time could provide information about the state
of the cells populating the matrix and, ultimately, the function of
the organ. Lactate concentration, for example, directly reflects
cellular hypoxia and metabolic state [148].
Obtaining information about cell growth, proliferation, and
differentiation over the course of culture without terminating
the experiment, as typical analytical techniques such as RNA or
protein analysis require, would be a significant advancement in

With the advent of large-scale cell culture for bioprocess
applications (e.g., antibody production in the pharmaceutical
industry), steady advances have increased the bioprocess protein
yield 100-fold since the mid-1980s [152], [153]. Hence, it is
not unreasonable to think that, while current projected costs
for whole lung culture are very high, these costs may come
down with increased efficiency of culture medium utilization
and bioreactor improvements.
Finally, biologically relevant mechanical stimuli, while provided by the first generation of bioreactors reported [9], [94],
may not be finely tuned enough to impart the greatest advantage
possible for the developing organ. Ventilation in particular may
be the most important mechanical cue to “get right.” Plentiful evidence exists that the frequency and the volume of breaths
administered to both patients, and to tissues in vitro, have significant impacts on the health of both the endothelial and epithelial
layers [154]–[157]. While mechanical distension is important
for the differentiation of type I and II cells and the balance between the number of each population in utero [93], [158] and
in vitro [159], overdistension can disrupt barrier integrity [155]
and even induce apoptosis of type II cells [160], [161]. In addition to the tidal volume, ventilation frequency is important—a
program of variable stretch has been shown to impart less injury to and greater surfactant production by type II epithelium

CALLE et al.: STRATEGIES FOR WHOLE LUNG TISSUE ENGINEERING

than regular stretch cycles [162]. Ventilation strategy can also
significantly influence pulmonary vascular resistance, thereby
affecting perfusion and vascular integrity [163].
Therefore, defining an “appropriate ventilation protocol” will
likely be critical to cultivating successful lung tissue. When ex
vivo lung perfusion (EVLP) is applied to whole human or pig
lungs, a tidal volume of 6–8 mL/kg, at 7 breaths/min provides
adequate ventilation without adversely affecting cell viability or
vascular resistance [163] In addition, Cypel et al. perform “lung
recruitment maneuvers” every hour during the course of EVLP
to recruit regions of collapsed alveoli. A similar strategy may
be useful for long-term lung culture.
An appropriate ventilation program for the engineered lung
tissue may also necessitate reconciling the scaffold with the repopulating cell type, as a full-sized adult human lung containing
differentiated cells would typically require 500 ml of air, at a
ventilation rate of 12 breaths/min [7]. In contrast, liquid ventilation at approximately 40 breaths/min for several minutes per
hour would be a more logical choice for fetal or primitive cell
types, as this more closely mimics fetal ventilation movements
in the human [93]. Ultimately, exposure to air is beneficial for
maintaining and promoting epithelial differentiation [95], [96],
so a transition may have to be made from liquid to air ventilation
in vitro. Because of the “leaky” nature of acellular and newly
seeded extracellular matrix scaffolds, quantitative models or visual information about the “actual stretch” experienced by the
cells within the scaffold will be of use as well.
V. CONCLUSION
Overall, significant progress has been made in recent years
toward engineering functional lung tissue in vitro. Although the
first report of whole heart engineering [123] preceded that of
whole lung by two years [3], [4], work in lung tissue engineering has outpaced that of the heart, liver (also 2010, [164]), and
kidney (2012, [92], [165], [166]), as judged by the abundance,
frequency, and scope of manuscripts produced on this topic.
In addition to more than one group implanting the recellularized tissue and a large number of groups seeding various cells
onto the decellularized tissue, at least three independent groups
have decellularized human and pig lungs [16], [17], [19], scaled
up from rodent lungs. Collectively, groups working on whole
lung engineering have been early adopters of new technology
(six papers using proteomics to query the composition of lung
scaffolds [11], [12], [14], [19], [22], [167] exist, for example,
compared to only one paper each that uses this technique to
analyze kidney [167] or liver [22] matrix). Though the use of
such techniques will require refinement and greater depth of
understanding in order to truly inform and direct future efforts;
the dissemination and use of such tools is a positive sign of
the interest and commitment of multiple groups to advancing
lung engineering efforts. There is also active comparison of
decellularization regimens, which will hopefully accelerate the
specification of an “optimized” protocol.
Despite these auspicious first few years, much work remains.
Each of the three central elements of tissue engineering—the
scaffold, the cells, and recellularization strategies designed to

1491

deliver the cells to the scaffold, and the bioreactor in which the
tissue is cultivated—require more detailed study and additional
improvements.
While decellularized extracellular matrix scaffolds remain the
state of the art in whole organ engineering presently, identifying
a reliable scaffold source that will provide consistent quality
and minimal variability between scaffolds will be critical. In
addition, a defined method of terminal sterilization for a biologically active scaffold of the size and structure required for
whole organ engineering is a tractable but challenging element
of moving this technology to the clinic.
One additional consideration, which perhaps should be examined in tandem with select cell populations, is the composition of the extracellular matrix after decellularization. Although
many different detergents and other reagents are available to effect cell removal, an optimal decellularization method for lung
tissue engineering has yet to be identified. Clearly, defining
appropriate evaluation criteria for decellularized matrices will
be a critical first step. The ability to articulate specific standards may hinge on the use of tools such as extracellular matrix
proteomics, only recently applied to decellularized lung tissue [11], [12], [14], [16], [22], [168], that may provide insight
heretofore unavailable in the field.
For the purpose of repopulation of the scaffold and generation of the lung tissue, cell selection will require careful consideration of regionally specific lung stem and progenitor cells
identified to date, as well as continued investigation of lung
cell and developmental biology. In addition, the field will certainly benefit as stem cell biology advances. Unlike the ability
of investigators to generate differentiated cardiomyocytes and
hepatocytes from iPS cells, no one has yet produced a method
for directed differentiation of definitive lung cells. The principle
objective of continued work with primary cells is to determine
the numbers and types of cells required to generate an adequate
amount of the functional lung tissue to support an organism.
Advancements in the areas of the bioreactor design will center on improved monitoring of the developing tissue, as well
as more precise control of physical stimuli such as ventilation
and perfusion. In particular, tuning the volume and frequency of
ventilation will be important to both epithelial and endothelial
survival [157], [161], and proliferation. Refining ventilation and
perfusion will require bringing the considerable molecular and
cellular tools available for 2-D stretch experiments into three
dimensions. Drawing comparisons between models of compromised alveolar barrier integrity and a partially repopulated acellular scaffold may also be productive, since the engineered lung
tissue may initially resemble an injured lung more closely than
it approximates an intact whole lung.
Ultimately, many if not all of the challenges posed by tissue sterility, scaffold procurement, bioreactor improvement, and
even epithelial cell differentiation and scale up are surmountable, given sufficient resources, time, and effort. In our opinion,
the ultimate success of lung regeneration in vitro will depend
most heavily on the ability of researchers to produce a sufficiently endothelialized organ. The provision of a nonthrombogenic surface for blood flow, the creation of tight cell–cell
junctions [103], [105], and the production of various dilatory

1492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

vasoactive substances [103] are needed to ensure patency of the
most extensive vascular bed in the body [169]. Without a profusion of perfused conduits in close proximity to air, the lung will
not function for gas exchange.
The principle consideration to note is that the challenges are
many and varied but are not insurmountable. The combination of
talented physicians, scientists, engineers, biologists, and others
will continue to move the field forward. Importantly, there are
many opportunities for technological innovation and for bridges
to be built across disciplines. Therefore, concerted, collaborative efforts among biologists, engineers, clinicians, chemists,
and emerging areas must be leveraged to overcome the physical and biological challenges of repopulating a whole organ
scaffold with the aim of developing a transplantable organ in
vitro.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Disclosures: L.E.N. has a financial interest in Humacyte, Inc.,
a regenerative medicine company. Humacyte did not fund these
studies, and Humacyte did not affect the design, interpretation,
or reporting of any of the experiments herein.

REFERENCES
[1] D. L. Hoyert and J. Xu, “LDD_2008.pdf.” [Online]. Available: http://sacredvancouver.com/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr61/nvsr61_06.pdf.
[accessed: Dec. 28, 2012].
[2] H. R. A. S. A. U S Department of Health and Human Services. (2011).
United states organ transplant OPTN and SRTR annual data report 2011.
[Online]. Available: srtr.transplant.hrsa.gov
[3] T. H. Petersen, E. A. Calle, L. Zhao, E. J. Lee, L. Gui, M. B. Raredon, K.
Gavrilov, T. Yi, Z. W. Zhuang, C. Breuer, E. Herzog, and L. E. Niklason,
“Tissue-engineered lungs for in vivo implantation,” Science, vol. 329,
pp. 538–541, 2010.
[4] H. C. Ott, B. Clippinger, C. Conrad, C. Schuetz, I. Pomerantseva,
L. Ikonomou, D. Kotton, and J. P. Vacanti, “Regeneration and orthotopic
transplantation of a bioartificial lung,” Nat. Med., vol. 16, pp. 927–933,
2010.
[5] T. Hachenberg and R. Rettig, “Stress failure of the blood-gas barrier,”
Curr. Opin. Anaesthesiol, vol. 11, pp. 37–44, 1998.
[6] E. R. Weibel, Morphometry of the Human Lung. New York, NY, USA:
Academic, 1963.
[7] W. F. Boron and E. L. Boulpaep, Medical Physiology. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier, 2008.
[8] M. Li, M. J. Mondrinos, X. Chen, M. R. Gandhi, F. K. Ko, and
P. I. Lelkes, “Co-electrospun poly(lactide-co-glycolide), gelatin, and
elastin blends for tissue engineering scaffolds,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
A, vol. 79, pp. 963–973, 2006.
[9] A. P. Price, K. A. England, A. M. Matson, B. R. Blazar, and
A. Panoskaltsis-Mortari, “Development of a decellularized lung bioreactor system for bioengineering the lung: The matrix reloaded,” Tissue
Eng. A, vol. 16, pp. 2581–2591, 2010.
[10] T. H. Petersen, E. A. Calle, M. B. Colehour, and L. E. Niklason, “Matrix composition and mechanics of decellularized lung scaffolds,” Cells
Tissues Org., vol. 195, pp. 222–231, 2012.
[11] R. W. Bonvillain, S. Danchuk, D. E. Sullivan, A. M. Betancourt, J. A.
Semon, M. E. Eagle, J. P. Mayeux, A. N. Gregory, G. Wang, I. K. Townley,
Z. D. Borg, D. J. Weiss, and B. A. Bunnell, “A nonhuman primate model
of lung regeneration: Detergent-mediated decellularization and initial
in vitro recellularization with mesenchymal stem cells,” Tissue Eng.,
vol. 18, pp. 2437–2452, Dec. 2012.
[12] A. B. Daly, J. M. Wallis, Z. D. Borg, R. W. Bonvillain, B. Deng, B. A.
Ballif, D. M. Jaworski, G. B. Allen, and D. J. Weiss, “Initial binding
and recellularization of decellularized mouse lung scaffolds with bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells,” Tissue Eng., vol. 18, pp. 1–
16, Jan. 2012.

[13] T. Jensen, B. Roszell, F. Zang, E. Girard, A. Matson, R. Thrall, D.
M. Jaworski, C. Hatton, D. J. Weiss, and C. Finck, “A rapid lung
de-cellularization protocol supports embryonic stem cell differentiation
in vitro and following implantation,” Tissue Eng. C Methods, vol. 18,
pp. 632–646, 2012.
[14] A. J. Booth, R. Hadley, A. M. Cornett, A. A. Dreffs, S. A. Matthes, J. L.
Tsui, K. Weiss, J. C. Horowitz, V. F. Fiore, T. H. Barker, B. B. Moore, F. J.
Martinez, L. E. Niklason, and E. S. White, “Acellular normal and fibrotic
human lung matrices as a culture system for in vitro investigation,” Amer.
J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., vol. 186, pp. 866–876, 2012.
[15] J. Cortiella, J. Niles, A. Cantu, A. Brettler, A. Pham, G. Vargas, S.
Winston, J. Wang, S. Walls, and J. E. Nichols, “Influence of acellular
natural lung matrix on murine embryonic stem cell differentiation and
tissue formation,” Tissue Eng., vol. 16, pp. 2565–2580, 2010.
[16] S. E. Gilpin, J. P. Guyette, G. Gonzalez, X. Ren, J. M. Asara, D. J.
Mathisen, J. P. Vacanti, and H. C. Ott, “Perfusion decellularization of
human and porcine lungs: Bringing the matrix to clinical scale,” J. Heart
Lung Transplantation, vol. 32, pp. S69–S70, 2013.
[17] J. E. E. Nichols, J. Niles, M. Riddle, G. Vargas, T. Schilagard, L. Ma, K.
Edward, S. Lafrancesca, J. Sakamoto, S. Vega, M. Ogedegbe, R. Mlcak,
D. Deyo, L. Woodson, C. McQuitty, S. Lick, D. Beckles, E. Melo, and J.
Cortiella, “Production and assessment of decellularized pig and human
lung scaffolds,” Tissue Eng. A, vol. 19, pp. 2045–2062, 2013.
[18] J. D. O’Neill, R. Anfang, A. Anandappa, J. Costa, J. Javidfar, H. M.
Wobma, G. Singh, D. O. Freytes, M. D. Bacchetta, J. R. Sonett, and
G. Vunjak-Novakovic, “Decellularization of human and porcine lung
tissues for pulmonary tissue engineering,” Ann. Thorac. Surg., vol. 96,
pp. 1046–1055, 2013.
[19] D. E. Wagner, N. R. Bonenfant, D. Sokocevic, M. J. Desarno, Z. D. Borg,
C. S. Parsons, E. M. Brooks, J. J. Platz, Z. I. Khalpey, D. M. Hoganson,
B. Deng, Y. W. Lam, R. A. Oldinski, T. Ashikaga, and D. J. Weiss,
“Three-dimensional scaffolds of acellular human and porcine lungs for
high throughput studies of lung disease and regeneration,” Biomaterials,
vol. 35, pp. 2664–2679, Jan. 2014.
[20] K. M. French, A. V. Boopathy, J. A. Dequach, L. Chingozha, H. Lu, K.
L. Christman, and M. E. Davis, “A naturally derived cardiac extracellular matrix enhances cardiac progenitor cell behavior in vitro,” Acta
Biomater., vol. 8, pp. 4357–4364, Dec. 2012.
[21] J. D. O’Neill, D. O. Freytes, A. J. Anandappa, J. A. Oliver, and
G. V. Vunjak-Novakovic, “The regulation of growth and metabolism
of kidney stem cells with regional specificity using extracellular matrix
derived from kidney,” Biomaterials, vol. 34, pp. 9830–9841, 2013.
[22] Y. Shamis, E. Hasson, A. Soroker, E. Bassat, Y. Shimoni, T. Ziv et al.,
“Organ-specific scaffolds for in vitro expansion, differentiation, and organization of primary lung cells,” Tissue Eng. C Methods, vol. 17, pp. 861–
870, 2011.
[23] J. A. DeQuach, S. H. Yuan, L. S. Goldstein, and K. L. Christman, “Decellularized porcine brain matrix for cell culture and tissue engineering
scaffolds,” Tissue Eng. A, vol. 17, pp. 2583–2592, Nov. 2011.
[24] S. Cebotari, I. Tudorache, T. Jaekel, A. Hilfiker, S. Dorfman, W. Ternes,
A. Haverich, and A. Lichtenberg, “Detergent decellularization of heart
valves for tissue engineering: Toxicological effects of residual detergents
on human endothelial cells,” Artif. Organs, vol. 34, pp. 206–210, 2010.
[25] J. M. Wallis, Z. D. Borg, A. B. Daly, B. Deng, B. A. Ballif, G. B. Allen,
D. M. Jaworski, and D. J. Weiss, “Comparative assessment of detergentbased protocols for mouse lung de-cellularization and re-cellularization,”
Tissue Eng. C Methods, vol. 18, pp. 420–432, 2012.
[26] D. M. Faulk, C. A. Carruthers, H. J. Warner, C. R. Kramer, J. E. Reing,
L. Zhang, A. D’Amore, and S. F. Badylak, “The effect of detergents on
the basement membrane complex of a biologic scaffold material,” Acta
Biomater., vol. 10, pp. 183–193, 2013.
[27] J. S. Lwebuga-Mukasa, D. H. Ingbar, J. A. Madri et al., “Repopulation
of a human alveolar matrix by adult rat type II pneumocytes in vitro. A
novel system for type II pneumocyte culture,” Exp. Cell Res., vol. 162,
pp. 423–435, 1986.
[28] T. A. Longmire, L. Ikonomou, F. Hawkins, C. Christodoulou, Y. Cao, J.
C. Jean, L. W. Kwok, H. Mou, J. Rajagopal, S. S. Shen, A. A. Dowton,
M. Serra, D. J. Weiss, M. D. Green, H.-W. Snoeck, M. I. Ramirez, and D.
N. Kotton, “Efficient derivation of purified lung and thyroid progenitors
from embryonic stem cells,” Stem Cell, vol. 10, pp. 398–411, 2012.
[29] D. K. Mishra, M. J. Thrall, B. N. Baird, H. C. Ott, S. H. Blackmon, J.
M. Kurie, and M. P. Kim, “Human lung cancer cells grown on acellular
rat lung matrix create perfusable tumor nodules,” Ann. Thorac. Surg.,
vol. 93, pp. 1075–1081, 2012.
[30] P. Macchiarini, P. Jungebluth, T. Go, M. Asnaghi, L. Rees, T. Cogan, A.
Dodson, J. Martorell, S. Bellini, P. Parnigotto, S. Dickinson, A. Hollan-

CALLE et al.: STRATEGIES FOR WHOLE LUNG TISSUE ENGINEERING

[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]
[43]

[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]

der, S. Mantero, M. Conconi, and M. Birchall, “Clinical transplantation
of a tissue-engineered airway,” Lancet, vol. 372, pp. 2023–2030, 2008.
A. S. Klein, E. E. Messersmith, L. E. Ratner, R. Kochik, P. K. Baliga,
and A. O. Ojo, “Organ donation and utilization in the united states,
1999–2008,” Amer. J. Transplantation, vol. 10, pp. 973–986, 2010.
F. J. Schoen, “Cardiac valves and valvular pathology: Update on function,
disease, repair, and replacement,” Cardiovasc. Pathol., vol. 14, pp. 189–
194, 2005.
T. J. Keane, R. Londono, N. J. Turner, and S. F. Badylak, “Consequences
of ineffective decellularization of biologic scaffolds on the host response,” Biomaterials, vol. 36, pp. 1771–1781, 2011.
D. A. Stoltz, D. K. Meyerholz, A. A. Pezzulo, S. Ramachandran, M. P.
Rogan, G. J. Davis, R. A. Hanfland, C. Wohlford-Lenane, C. L. Dohrn, J.
A. Bartlett, G. A. Nelson, E. H. Chang, P. J. Taft, P. S. Ludwig, M. Estin,
E. E. Hornick, J. L. Launspach, M. Samuel, T. Rokhlina, P. H. Karp, L.
S. Ostedgaard, A. Uc, T. D. Starner, A. R. Horswill, K. A. Brogden, R.
S. Prather, S. S. Richter, J. Shilyansky, P. B. Mccray, J. Zabner, and M.
J. Welsh, “Cystic fibrosis pigs develop lung disease and exhibit defective bacterial eradication at birth,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 2, pp. 29–31,
2010.
C. S. Rogers, D. A. Stoltz, D. K. Meyerholz, L. S. Ostedgaard, T.
Rokhlina, P. J. Taft, M. P. Rogan, A. A. Pezzulo, P. H. Karp, O. A.
Itani, A. C. Kabel, C. L. Wohlford-Lenane, G. J. Davis, R. A. Hanfland,
T. L. Smith, M. Samuel, D. Wax, C. N. Murphy, A. Rieke, K. Whitworth,
A. Uc, T. D. Starner, K. A. Brogden, J. Shilyansky, P. B. McCray, J.
Zabner, R. S. Prather, and M. J. Welsh, “Disruption of the CFTR gene
produces a model of cystic fibrosis in newborn pigs,” Science, vol. 321,
pp. 1837–1841, 2008.
C. W. Daggett, M. Yeatman, A. J. Lodge, E. P. Chen, S. S. Linn, C.
Gullotto, M. M. Frank, J. L. Platt, and R. D. Davis, “Total respiratory
support from swine lungs in primate recipients,” J. Thorac. Cardiovasc.
Surg., vol. 115, pp. 19–27, 1998.
C. T. Vangsness, P. P. Wagner, T. M. Moore, and M. R. Roberts,
“Overview of safety issues concerning the preparation and processing
of soft-tissue allografts,” Arthroscopy, vol. 22, pp. 1351–1358, 2006.
T. Schmidt, A. Hoburg, C. Broziat, M. D. Smith, U. Gohs, A. Pruss, and
S. Scheffler, “Sterilization with electron beam irradiation influences the
biomechanical properties and the early remodeling of tendon allografts
for reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL),” Cell Tissue
Bank, vol. 13, pp. 387–400, 2012.
A. Kaminski, A. Jastrzebska, E. Grazka, J. Marowska, G. Gut, A. Wojciechowski, and I. Uhrynowska-Tyszkiewicz, “Effect of gamma irradiation on mechanical properties of human cortical bone: Influence of
different processing methods,” Cell Tissue Bank, vol. 13, pp. 363–374,
2012.
N. T. Remlinger, C. A. Czajka, D. A. Vorp, D. B. Stolz, S. F. Badylak, S.
Gilbert, and T. W. Gilbert, “Hydrated xenogeneic decellularized tracheal
matrix as a scaffold for tracheal reconstruction,” Biomaterials, vol. 31,
pp. 3520–3526, May 2010.
H. Ishikawa, M. Shimoda, H. Shiratsuchi, and Y. Osajima, “Sterilization of microorganisms by the supercritical carbon dioxide microbubble method,” Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., vol. 59, pp. 1949–1950,
1995.
A. K. Dillow, F. Dehghani, J. S. Hrkach, N. R. Foster, and R. Langer,
“Bacterial inactivation by using near- and supercritical carbon dioxide,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 96, pp. 10344–10348, 1999.
Q.-Q. Qiu, P. Leamy, J. Brittingham, J. Pomerleau, N. Kabaria, and
J. Connor, “Inactivation of bacterial spores and viruses in biological
material using supercritical carbon dioxide with sterilant,” J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomater., vol. 91, pp. 572–578, 2009.
S. Webb, “‘Supercritical’ CO2 emerging as transplant tissue sterilization
option,” Sci. Amer., 2009.
P. M. Crapo, T. W. Gilbert, and S. F. Badylak, “An overview of tissue and whole organ decellularization processes,” Biomaterials, vol. 32,
pp. 3233–3243, 2011.
L. M. Crosby and C. M. Waters, “Epithelial repair mechanisms in the
lung,” Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol., vol. 298, pp. L715–
L731, 2010.
E. L. Rawlins and B. L. M. Hogan, “Epithelial stem cells of the lung:
Privileged few or opportunities for many?,” Development, vol. 133,
pp. 2455–2465, 2006.
K. C. Stone, R. R. Mercer, B. A. Freeman, L. Y. Chang, and J. D. Crapo,
“Distribution of lung cell numbers and volumes between alveolar and
nonalveolar tissue,” Amer. Rev. Respir. Dis., vol. 146, pp. 454–456,
1992.

1493

[49] R. R. Mercer, M. L. Russell, V. L. Roggli, and J. D. Crapo, “Cell number
and distribution in human and rat airways,” Amer. J. Respir. Cell Mol.
Biol., vol. 10, pp. 613–624, 1994.
[50] K. C. Stone, R. R. Mercer, P. Gehr, B. Stockstill, and J. D. Crapo, “Allometric relationships of cell numbers and size in the mammalian lung,”
Amer. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol., vol. 6, pp. 235–243, Feb. 1992.
[51] L. R. Young, A. S. Brody, T. H. Inge, J. D. Acton, R. E. Bokulic, C.
Langston, and G. H. Deutsch, “Neuroendocrine cell distribution and
frequency distinguish neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy from
other pulmonary disorders,” Chest, vol. 139, pp. 1060–1071, 2011.
[52] J. L. Peake, S. D. Reynolds, B. R. Stripp, K. E. Stephens, and
K. E. Pinkerton, “Alteration of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells during
epithelial repair of naphthalene-induced airway injury,” Amer. J. Pathol.,
vol. 156, pp. 279–286, 2000.
[53] S. D. Reynolds, A. Giangreco, J. H. Power, and B. R. Stripp, “Neuroepithelial bodies of pulmonary airways serve as a reservoir of progenitor
cells capable of epithelial regeneration,” Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cell.
Mol. Physiol., vol. 278, pp. L1256–L1263, Jun. 2000.
[54] S. D. Reynolds, A. Giangreco, J. H. Power, and B. R. Stripp, “Neuroepithelial bodies of pulmonary airways serve as a reservoir of progenitor cells capable of epithelial regeneration,” Amer. J. Pathol., vol. 156,
pp. 269–278, Jan. 2000.
[55] E. L. Rawlins, L. E. Ostrowski, S. H. Randell, and B. L. M. Hogan,
“Lung development and repair: Contribution of the ciliated lineage,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 104, pp. 410–417, 2007.
[56] K. U. Hong, S. D. Reynolds, S. Watkins, E. Fuchs, and B. R. Stripp,
“Basal cells are a multipotent progenitor capable of renewing the
bronchial epithelium,” Amer. J. Pathol., vol. 164, pp. 577–588, 2004.
[57] J. R. Rock, M. W. Onaitis, E. L. Rawlins, Y. Lu, C. P. Clark, Y. Xue,
S. H. Randell, and B. L. M. Hogan, “Basal cells as stem cells of the
mouse trachea and human airway epithelium,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA, vol. 106, pp. 12771–12775, 2009.
[58] J. E. Boers, A. W. Ambergen, and F. B. Thunnissen, “Number and proliferation of Clara cells in normal human airway epithelium,” Amer. J.
Respir. Crit. Care Med., vol. 159, pp. 1585–1591, 1999.
[59] E. L. Rawlins, T. Okubo, Y. Xue, D. M. Brass, R. L. Auten, H. Hasegawa,
F. Wang, and B. L. M. Hogan, “The role of scgb1a1+ Clara cells in
the long-term maintenance and repair of lung airway, but not alveolar,
epithelium,” Stem Cell, vol. 4, pp. 525–534, 2009.
[60] M. J. Evans, S. G. Shami, L. J. Cabral-Anderson, and N. P. Dekker, “Role
of nonciliated cells in renewal of the bronchial epithelium of rats exposed
to NO2,” Amer. J. Pathol., vol. 123, pp. 126–133, 1986.
[61] J.-H. Lee, J. Kim, D. Gludish, R. R. Roach, A. H. Saunders, J. Barrios,
A. J. Woo, H. Chen, D. A. Conner, Y. Fujiwara, B. R. Stripp, and C. F.
Kim, “Surfactant protein-C chromatin-bound green fluorescence protein
reporter mice reveal heterogeneity of surfactant protein C-expressing
lung cells,” Amer. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol., vol. 48, pp. 288–298, 2013.
[62] C. E. Barkauskas, M. J. Cronce, C. R. Rackley, E. J. Bowie, D. R. Keene,
B. R. Stripp, S. H. Randell, P. W. Noble, and B. L. M. Hogan, “Type
2 alveolar cells are stem cells in adult lung,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 123,
pp. 3025–3036, 2013.
[63] H. A. Chapman, X. Li, J. P. Alexander, A. Brumwell, W. Lorizio, K. Tan,
A. Sonnenberg, Y. Wei, and T. H. Vu, “Integrin α6β4 identifies an adult
distal lung epithelial population with regenerative potential in mice,” J.
Clin. Invest., vol. 121, pp. 2855–2862, 2011.
[64] P. A. Kumar, Y. Hu, Y. Yamamoto, N. B. Hoe, T. S. Wei, D. Mu, Y. Sun,
L. S. Joo, R. Dagher, E. M. Zielonka, D. Y. Wang, B. Lim, V. T. Chow,
C. P. Crum, W. Xian, and F. Mckeon, “Distal airway stem cells yield
alveoli in vitro and during lung regeneration following H1N1 influenza
infection,” Cell, vol. 147, pp. 525–538, 2011.
[65] M. Khatri, S. M. Goyal, and Y. M. Saif, “Oct4+ stem/progenitor swine
lung epithelial cells are targets for influenza virus replication,” J. Virol.,
vol. 86, pp. 6427–6433, 2012.
[66] J. Kajstura, M. Rota, S. R. Hall, T. Hosoda, D. D’Amario, F. Sanada,
H. Zheng, B. Ogrek, C. Rondon-Clavo, J. Ferreira-Martins, A. Matsuda,
C. Arranto, P. Goichberg, G. Giordano, K. J. Haley, S. Bardelli, H. Rayatzadeh, X. Liu, F. Quaini, R. Liao, A. Leri, M. A. Perrella, J. Loscalzo,
and P. Anversa, “Evidence for human lung stem cells,” N. Engl. J. Med.,
vol. 364, pp. 1795–1806, 2011.
[67] R. F. Gonzalez, L. Allen, and L. G. Dobbs, “Rat alveolar type I cells
proliferate, express OCT-4, and exhibit phenotypic plasticity in vitro,”
Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol., vol. 297, pp. L1045–L1055,
2009.
[68] N. N. Ali, A. J. Edgar, A. Samadikuchaksaraei, C. M. Timson, H. M.
Romanska, J. M. Polak, and A. E. Bishop, “Derivation of type II alveolar

1494

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]
[74]

[75]
[76]
[77]

[78]

[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]
[83]

[84]
[85]
[86]

[87]

[88]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

epithelial cells from murine embryonic stem cells,” Tissue Eng., vol. 8,
pp. 541–550, 2002.
M. E. Winkler, C. Mauritz, S. Groos, A. Kispert, S. Menke, A. Hoffmann,
I. Gruh, K. Schwanke, A. Haverich, and U. Martin, “Serum-free differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells into alveolar type II epithelial
cells,” Cloning Stem Cells, vol. 10, pp. 49–64, 2008.
B. Roszell, M. J. Mondrinos, A. Seaton, D. M. Simons, S. H. Koutzaki,
G.-H. Fong, P. I. Lelkes, and C. M. Finck, “Efficient derivation of alveolar
type II cells from embryonic stem cells for in vivo application,” Tissue
Eng. A, vol. 15, pp. 3351–3365, 2009.
D. Wang, D. L. Haviland, A. R. Burns, E. Zsigmond, and R. A. Wetsel,
“A pure population of lung alveolar epithelial type II cells derived from
human embryonic stem cells,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 104,
pp. 4449–4454, 2007.
E. R. Banerjee, M. A. Laflamme, T. Papayannopoulou, M. Kahn,
C. E. Murry, and W. R. Henderson, “Human embryonic stem cells differentiated to lung lineage-specific cells ameliorate pulmonary fibrosis in a
xenograft transplant mouse model,” PLoS One, vol. 7, e33165, pp. 1–15,
2012.
L. Van Haute, G. De Block, I. Liebaers, K. Sermon, and M. De Rycke,
“Generation of lung epithelial-like tissue from human embryonic stem
cells,” Respir. Res., vol. 10, p. 105, 2009.
H. Mou, R. Zhao, R. Sherwood, T. Ahfeldt, A. Lapey, J. Wain et al.,
“Generation of multipotent lung and airway progenitors from mouse
ESCs and patient-specific cystic fibrosis iPSCs,” Cell Stem Cell, vol. 10,
pp. 385–397, 2012.
K. Okita, M. Nakagawa, H. Hyenjong, T. Ichisaka, and S. Yamanaka,
“Generation of mouse induced pluripotent stem cells without viral vectors,” Science, vol. 322, pp. 949–953, 2008.
K. Okita, T. Ichisaka, and S. Yamanaka, “Generation of germlinecompetent induced pluripotent stem cells,” Nature, vol. 448, pp. 313–
317, Jul. 19, 2007.
M. D. Green, A. Chen, M.-C. Nostro, S. L. d’Souza, C. Schaniel, I. R.
Lemischka, V. Gouon-Evans, G. Keller, and H.-W. Snoeck, “Generation of anterior foregut endoderm from human embryonic and induced
pluripotent stem cells,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 29, pp. 267–272, 2011.
A. P. Wong, C. E. Bear, S. Chin, P. Pasceri, T. O. Thompson, L.-J. Huan,
F. Ratjen, J. Ellis, and J. Rossant, “Directed differentiation of human
pluripotent stem cells into mature airway epithelia expressing functional
CFTR protein,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 30, pp. 876–882, 2012.
K. Okita, H. Hong, K. Takahashi, and S. Yamanaka, “Generation of
mouse-induced pluripotent stem cells with plasmid vectors,” Nat. Protoc., vol. 5, pp. 418–428, 2010.
M. Stadtfeld, M. Nagaya, J. Utikal, G. Weir, and K. Hochedlinger, “Induced pluripotent stem cells generated without viral integration,” Science, vol. 322, pp. 945–949, 2008.
W. Zhou and C. R. Freed, “Adenoviral gene delivery can reprogram
human fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells,” Stem Cells, vol. 27,
pp. 2667–2674, 2009.
J. Yu, K. Hu, K. Smuga-Otto, S. Tian, R. Stewart, I. I. Slukvin, and J.
A. Thomson, “Human induced pluripotent stem cells free of vector and
transgene sequences,” Science, vol. 324, pp. 797–801, 2009.
N. Fusaki, H. Ban, A. Nishiyama, K. Saeki, and M. Hasegawa, “Efficient
induction of transgene-free human pluripotent stem cells using a vector
based on Sendai virus, an RNA virus that does not integrate into the
host genome,” Proc. Jpn. Acad. Phys. Biol. Sci., vol. 85, pp. 348–362,
2009.
L. Warren, Y. Ni, J. Wang, and X. Guo, “Feeder-free derivation of human
induced pluripotent stem cells with messenger RNA,” Sci. Rep., vol. 2,
pp. 1–7, 2012.
L. Warren, Y. Ni, J. Wang, and X. Guo, “Feeder-free derivation of human
induced pluripotent stem cells with messenger RNA,” Cell Stem Cell,
vol. 7, pp. 618–630, 2010.
D. Kim, C.-H. Kim, J.-I. Moon, Y.-G. Chung, M.-Y. Chang, B.-S. Han,
S. Ko, E. Yang, K. Y. Cha, R. Lanza, and K.-S. Kim, “Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells by direct delivery of reprogramming
proteins,” Cell Stem. Cell, vol. 4, pp. 472–476, Jun. 5, 2009.
G. Chen, D. R. Gulbranson, Z. Hou, J. M. Bolin, V. Ruotti, M. D.
Probasco, K. Smuga-Otto, S. E. Howden, N. R. Diol, N. E. Propson, R.
Wagner, G. O. Lee, J. Antosiewicz-Bourget, J. M. C. Teng, and J. A.
Thomson, “Chemically defined conditions for human iPSC derivation
and culture,” Nat. Methods, vol. 8, pp. 424–429, May 2011.
G. Carraro, L. Perin, S. Sedrakyan, S. Giuliani, C. Tiozzo, J. Lee, G.
Turcatel, S. P. De Langhe, B. Driscoll, S. Bellusci, P. Minoo, A. Atala,
R. E. De Filippo, and D. Warburton, “Human amniotic fluid stem cells

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]
[93]
[94]
[95]
[96]
[97]

[98]
[99]
[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]
[104]

[105]

[106]
[107]

[108]

can integrate and differentiate into epithelial lung lineages,” Stem Cells,
vol. 26, pp. 2902–2911, 2008.
P. De Coppi, G. Bartsch, M. M. Siddiqui, T. Xu, C. C. Santos, L. Perin,
G. Mostoslavsky, A. C. Serre, E. Y. Snyder, J. J. Yoo, M. E. Furth, S.
Soker, and A. Atala, “Isolation of amniotic stem cell lines with potential
for therapy,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 25, pp. 100–106, 2007.
M. E. De Paepe, Q. Mao, S. Ghanta, V. Hovanesian, and J. F. Padbury,
“Alveolar epithelial cell therapy with human cord blood-derived
hematopoietic progenitor cells,” Amer. J. Pathol., vol. 178, pp. 1329–
1339, 2011.
S. X. L. Huang, M. N. Islam, J. O’Neill, Z. Hu, Y.-G. Yang, Y.-W. Chen,
M. Mumau, M. D. Green, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, J. Bhattacharya, and
H.-W. Snoeck, “Efficient generation of lung and airway epithelial cells
from human pluripotent stem cells,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 32, pp. 84–91,
2014.
J. J. Song, J. P. Guyette, S. E. Gilpin, G. Gonzalez, J. P. Vacanti, and
H. C. Ott, “Regeneration and experimental orthotopic transplantation of
a bioengineered kidney,” Nat. Med., vol. 19, pp. 646–651, 2013.
M. R. Inanlou, M. Baguma-Nibasheka, and B. Kablar, “The role of fetal
breathing-like movements in lung organogenesis,” Histol. Histopathol.,
vol. 20, pp. 1261–1266, 2005.
T. H. Petersen, E. A. Calle, M. B. Colehour, and L. E. Niklason, “Bioreactor for the long-term culture of lung tissue,” Cell Transplant, vol. 20,
pp. 1117–1126, 2011.
C. Coraux, B. Nawrocki-Raby, J. Hinnrasky, C. Kileztky, D. Gaillard, C.
Dani, and E. Puchelle, “Embryonic stem cells generate airway epithelial
tissue,” Amer. J. Resp. Crit. Care Med., vol. 32, pp. 87–92, 2005.
L. E. Ostrowski and P. Nettesheim, “Inhibition of ciliated cell differentiation by fluid submersion,” Expt. Lung Res., vol. 21, pp. 957–970,
1995.
P. R. Tata, H. Mou, A. Pardo-Saganta, R. Zhao, M. Prabhu, B. M. Law, V.
Vinarsky, J. L. Cho, S. Breton, A. Sahay, B. D. Medoff, and J. Rajagopal,
“Dedifferentiation of committed epithelial cells into stem cells in vivo,”
Nature, vol. 503, pp. 218–223, 2013.
J. Y. Liu, P. Nettesheim, and S. H. Randell, “Growth and differentiation of
tracheal epithelial progenitor cells,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 266, pp. L296–
L307, 1994.
S. Musah, J. Chen, and G. W. Hoyle, “Repair of tracheal epithelium by
basal cells after chlorine-induced injury,” Respir. Res., vol. 13, pp. 107–
119, 2012.
M. Ghosh, S. Ahmad, A. Jian, B. Li, R. W. Smith, K. M. Helm, M. A.
Seibold, S. D. Groshong, C. W. White, and S. D. Reynolds, “Human
tracheobronchial basal cells. Normal versus remodeling/repairing phenotypes in vivo and in vitro,” Amer. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol., vol. 49,
pp. 1127–1134, Dec. 2013.
I. Vlodavsky, A. Eldor, E. HyAm, R. Atzom, and Z. Fuks, “Platelet
interaction with the extracellular matrix produced by cultured endothelial
cells: A model to study the thrombogenicity of isolated subendothelial
basal lamina,” Thrombosis Res., vol. 28, pp. 179–191, 1982.
T. Arisaka, M. Mitsumata, M. Kawasumi, T. Tohjima, S. Hirose, and
Y. Yoshida, “Effects of shear stress on glycosaminoglycan synthesis in
vascular endothelial cells,” Ann. N Y Acad. Sci., vol. 748, pp. 543–554,
1995.
A. R. Johnson, “Human pulmonary endothelial cells in culture: Activities
of cells from arteries and cells from veins,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 65,
pp. 841–850, 1980.
H. Muth, U. Maus, M. Wygrecka, J. Lohmeyer, F. Grimminger, W.
Seeger, and A. Günther, “Pro- and antifibrinolytic properties of human pulmonary microvascular versus artery endothelial cells: Impact
of endotoxin and tumor necrosis factor-alpha,” Crit. Care Med., vol. 32,
pp. 217–226, 2004.
S. F. Ofori-Acquah, J. King, N. Voelkel, K. L. Schaphorst, and T. Stevens,
“Heterogeneity of barrier function in the lung reflects diversity in
endothelial cell junctions,” Microvasc. Res., vol. 75, pp. 391–402,
2008.
T. Stevens, “Functional and molecular heterogeneity of pulmonary
endothelial cells,” Proc. Amer. Thorac. Soc., vol. 8, pp. 453–457,
2011.
W. Neuhaus, F. Samwer, S. Kunzmann, R. M. Muellenbach, M. Wirth, C.
P. Speer, N. Roewer, and C. Y. Förster, “Lung endothelial cells strengthen,
but brain endothelial cells weaken barrier properties of a human alveolar
epithelium cell culture model,” Differentiation, vol. 84, pp. 294–304,
2012.
B.-S. Ding, D. J. Nolan, P. Guo, A. O. Babazadeh, Z. Cao, Z. Rosenwaks,
R. G. Crystal, M. Simons, T. N. Sato, S. Worgall, K. Shido, S. Y. Rabbany,

CALLE et al.: STRATEGIES FOR WHOLE LUNG TISSUE ENGINEERING

[109]

[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]
[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]
[125]
[126]

and S. Rafii, “Endothelial-derived angiocrine signals induce and sustain
regenerative lung alveolarization,” Cell, vol. 147, pp. 539–553, 2011.
T. D. Le Cras, N. E. Markham, R. M. Tuder, N. F. Voelkel, and
S. H. Abman, “Treatment of newborn rats with a VEGF receptor inhibitor causes pulmonary hypertension and abnormal lung structure,”
Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol., vol. 283, pp. L555–L562,
2002.
R. N. N. Han, S. Babaei, M. Robb, T. Lee, R. Ridsdale, C. Ackerley, M.
Post, and D. J. Stewart, “Defective lung vascular development and fatal
respiratory distress in endothelial NO synthase-deficient mice: A model
of alveolar capillary dysplasia?” Circulation Res.
D. James, H.-S. Nam, M. Seandel, D. Nolan, T. Janovitz, M. Tomishima,
L. Studer, G. Lee, D. Lyden, R. Benezra, N. Zaninovic, Z. Rosenwaks,
S. Y. Rabbany, and S. Rafii, “Expansion and maintenance of human
embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells by TGFbeta inhibition is
Id1 dependent,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 28, pp. 161–166, 2010.
S. Levenberg, L. S. Ferreira, L. Chen-Konak, T. P. Kraehenbuehl, and
R. Langer, “Isolation, differentiation and characterization of vascular
cells derived from human embryonic stem cells,” Nat. Prot., vol. 5,
pp. 1115–1126, 2010.
S. Levenberg, J. S. Golub, M. Amit, J. Itskovitz-Eldor, and R. Langer,
“Endothelial cells derived from human embryonic stem cells,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 99, pp. 4391–4396, 2002.
Z. Li, S. Hu, Z. Ghosh, Z. Han, and J. C. Wu, “Functional characterization
and expression profiling of human induced pluripotent stem cell- and
embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells,” Stem Cells Development,
vol. 20, pp. 1701–1710, 2011.
A. J. Rufaihah, N. F. Huang, J. Kim, J. Herold, K. S. Volz, T. S.
Park, J. C. Lee, E. T. Zambidis, R. Reijo-Pera, and J. P. Cooke, “Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived endothelial cells exhibit
functional heterogeneity,” Amer. J. Transl. Res., vol. 5, pp. 21–35,
2013.
R. Tatsumi, Y. Suzuki, T. Sumi, M. Sone, H. Suemori, and N. Nakatsuji,
“Simple and highly efficient method for production of endothelial cells
from human embryonic stem cells,” Cell Transplant, vol. 20, pp. 1423–
1430, 2011.
M. P. White, A. J. Rufaihah, L. Liu, Y. T. Ghebremariam, K. N. Ivey, J. P.
Cooke, and D. Srivastava, “Limited gene expression variation in human
embryonic stem cell and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived endothelial cells,” Stem Cells, vol. 31, pp. 92–103, 2012.
D. Wang, D. L. Haviland, A. R. Burns, E. Zsigmond, and R. A. Wetsel,
“A pure population of lung alveolar epithelial type II cells derived from
human embryonic stem cells,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 25, pp. 317–318,
Mar. 2007.
D. E. Glaser, R. M. Gower, N. E. Lauer, K. Tam, A. A. Blancas, A. J.
Shih, S. I. Simon, and K. E. McCloskey, “Functional characterization
of embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells,” J. Vasc. Res., vol. 48,
pp. 415–428, 2011.
W.-H. Lai, J. C. Y. Ho, Y.-C. Chan, J. H. L. Ng, K.-W. Au, L.-Y. Wong,
C.-W. Siu, and H.-F. Tse, “Attenuation of hind-limb ischemia in mice
with endothelial-like cells derived from different sources of human stem
cells,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, e57876, pp. 1–10, 2013.
A. Margariti, B. Winkler, E. Karamariti, A. Zampetaki, T.-N. Tsai, D.
Baban, J. Ragoussis, Y. Huang, J.-D. J. Han, L. Zeng, Y. Hu, and Q.
Xu, “Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into endothelial cells capable
of angiogenesis and reendothelialization in tissue-engineered vessels,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 109, pp. 13793–13798, 2012.
K.-D. Choi, J. Yu, K. Smuga-Otto, G. Salvagiotto, W. Rehrauer, M.
Vodyanik, J. Thomson, and I. Slukvin, “Hematopoietic and endothelial
differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells,” Stem Cells,
vol. 27, pp. 559–567, 2009.
H. C. Ott, T. S. Matthiesen, S.-K. Goh, L. D. Black, S. M. Kren, T.
I. Netoff, and D. A. Taylor, “Perfusion-decellularized matrix: Using
nature’s platform to engineer a bioartificial heart,” Nat. Med., vol. 14,
pp. 213–221, 2008.
J. J. Song, S. S. Kim, Z. Liu, J. C. Madsen, D. J. Mathisen, J. P. Vacanti,
and H. C. Ott, “Enhanced in vivo function of bioartificial lungs in rats,”
Ann. Thorac. Surg., vol. 92, pp. 998–1006, 2011.
M. I. Townsley, “Structure and composition of pulmonary arteries,
capillaries, and veins,” Compr. Physiol., vol. 2, pp. 675–709, Jan.
2012.
K. M. Akram, S. Samad, M. A. Spiteri, and N. R. Forsyth, “Mesenchymal stem cells promote alveolar epithelial cell wound repair in vitro
through distinct migratory and paracrine mechanisms,” Respir. Res.,
vol. 14, pp. 1–16, 2013.

1495

[127] J. M. Shannon, L. D. Nielsen, S. A. Gebb, and S. H. Randell, “Mesenchyme specifies epithelial differentiation in reciprocal recombinants
of embryonic lung and trachea,” Dev. Dyn., vol. 212, pp. 482–494,
1998.
[128] M. M. Myerburg, J. D. Latoche, E. E. McKenna, L. P. Stabile, J. S.
Siegfried, C. A. Feghali-Bostwick, and J. M. Pilewski, “Hepatocyte
growth factor and other fibroblast secretions modulate the phenotype
of human bronchial epithelial cells,” Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol.
Physiol., vol. 292, pp. L1352–L1360, 2007.
[129] V. K. Rehan, S. Sugano, Y. Wang, J. Santos, S. Romero, C. Dasgupta, M.
P. Keane, M. T. Stahlman, and J. S. Torday, “Evidence for the presence
of lipofibroblasts in human lung,” Expt. Lung. Res., vol. 32, pp. 379–393,
2006.
[130] Y. Zheng, M. Zhang, M. Qian, L. Wang, V. B. Cismasiu, C. Bai, L.
M. Popescu, and X. Wang, “Genetic comparison of mouse lung telocytes
with mesenchymal stem cells and fibroblasts,” J. Cell Mol. Med., vol. 17,
pp. 567–577, Apr. 2013.
[131] K. Chow, J. P. Fessel, Kaoriihida-Stansbury, E. P. Schmidt, C. Gaskill, D.
Alvarez, B. Graham, D. G. Harrison, D. H. Wagner Jr, E. Nozik-Grayck,
J. D. West, D. J. Klemm, and S. M. Majka, “Dysfunctional resident
lung mesenchymal stem cells contribute to pulmonary microvascular
remodeling,” in Pulmonary Circulation. vol. 3, 2013, pp. 31–49.
[132] M. Ricciardi, G. Malpeli, F. Bifari, G. Bassi, L. Pacelli, A. H. N. Kamdje,
M. Chilosi, and M. Krampera, “Comparison of epithelial differentiation
and immune regulatory properties of mesenchymal stromal cells derived
from human lung and bone marrow,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7, e35639, pp. 1–
10, 2012.
[133] K. A. Tropea, E. Leder, M. Aslam, A. N. Lau, D. M. Raiser, J.-H. Lee,
V. Balasubramaniam, L. E. Fredenburgh, S. Alex Mitsialis, S. Kourembanas, and C. F. Kim, “Bronchioalveolar stem cells increase after mesenchymal stromal cell treatment in a mouse model of bronchopulmonary
dysplasia,” Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol., vol. 302, pp. L829–
L837, 2012.
[134] J. W. Lee, X. Fang, A. Krasnodembskaya, J. P. Howard, and
M. A. Matthay, “Concise review: Mesenchymal stem cells for acute lung
injury: Role of paracrine soluble factors,” Stem Cells, vol. 29, pp. 913–
919, 2011.
[135] M. A. Matthay, B. T. Thompson, E. J. Read, D. H. McKenna, K. D. Liu,
C. S. Calfee, and J. W. Lee, “Therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem
cells for severe acute lung injury,” Chest, vol. 138, pp. 965–972, 2010.
[136] R. J. Hodges, R. Lim, G. Jenkin, and E. M. Wallace, “Amnion epithelial
cells as a candidate therapy for acute and chronic lung injury,” Stem Cells
Int., vol. 2012, 709763, pp. 1–7, 2012.
[137] J. W. Lee, N. Gupta, V. Serikov, and M. A. Matthay, “Potential application of mesenchymal stem cells in acute lung injury,” Expert Opin. Biol.
Ther., vol. 9, pp. 1259–1270, Oct. 2009.
[138] D. J. Weiss, R. Casaburi, R. Flannery, M. LeRoux-Williams, and
D. P. Tashkin, “A placebo-controlled, randomized trial of mesenchymal
stem cells in COPD,” Chest, vol. 143, pp. 1590–1598, Jun. 2013.
[139] S. Baiguera, P. Jungebluth, A. Burns, C. Mavilia, J. Haag, P. De Coppi,
and P. Macchiarini, “Tissue engineered human tracheas for in vivo implantation,” Biomaterials, vol. 31, pp. 8931–8938, 2010.
[140] T. Go, P. Jungebluth, S. Baiguero, A. Asnaghi, J. Martorell, H. Ostertag,
S. Mantero, M. Birchall, A. Bader, and P. Macchiarini, “Both epithelial cells and mesenchymal stem cell-derived chondrocytes contribute to
the survival of tissue-engineered airway transplants in pigs,” J. Thorac.
Cardiovasc. Surg., vol. 139, pp. 437–443, 2010.
[141] U. Lindner, J. Kramer, J. Behrends, and B. Driller, “Improved proliferation and differentiation capacity of human mesenchymal stromal cells
cultured with basement-membrane extracellular matrix proteins,” Cytotherapy, vol. 12, pp. 992–1005, 2010.
[142] A. Ode, G. N. Duda, and J. D. Glaeser, “Toward biomimetic materials in
bone regeneration: Functional behavior of mesenchymal stem cells on a
broad spectrum of extracellular matrix components,” J. Biomed. Mater.
Res. A., 2010.
[143] M. N. Islam, S. R. Das, M. T. Emin, M. Wei, L. Sun, K. Westphalen,
D. J. Rowlands, S. K. Quadri, S. Bhattacharya, and J. Bhattacharya,
“Mitochondrial transfer from bone-marrow-derived stromal cells to pulmonary alveoli protects against acute lung injury,” Nat. Med., vol. 18,
pp. 759–765, 2012.
[144] L. Badri, N. M. Walker, T. Ohtsuka, Z. Wang, M. Delmar, A. Flint, M.
Peters-Golden, G. B. Toews, D. J. Pinsky, P. H. Krebsbach, and V. N.
Lama, “Epithelial interactions and local engraftment of lung-resident
mesenchymal stem cells,” Amer. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol., vol. 45,
pp. 809–816, 2011.

1496

[145] J. L. McQualter, R. C. McCarty, J. Van der Velden, R. J. J. O’Donoghue,
M.-L. Asselin-Labat, S. Bozinovski, and I. Bertoncello, “TGF-β signaling in stromal cells acts upstream of FGF-10 to regulate epithelial stem
cell growth in the adult lung,” Stem Cell Res., vol. 11, pp. 1222–1233,
2013.
[146] N. Soni and P. Williams, “Positive pressure ventilation: What is the real
cost?,” Br. J. Anaes., vol. 101, pp. 446–457, 2008.
[147] A. Solan, S. Dahl, and L. E. Niklason, “Effects of mechanical stretch on
collagen and cross-linking in engineered blood vessels,” Cell Transplant,
2009.
[148] B. Phypers, “Lactate physiology in health and disease,” Continuing Edu.
Anaesthesia, Critical Care Amp. Pain, vol. 6, pp. 128–132, 2006.
[149] N. Merna, C. Robertson, A. La, and S. C. George, “Optical imaging predicts mechanical properties during decellularization of cardiac tissue,”
Tissue Eng. Part C Methods, vol. 19, pp. 802–809, 2013.
[150] L. E. Niklason, A. T. Yeh, E. A. Calle, Y. Bai, A. Valentı́n, and
J. D. Humphrey, “Enabling tools for engineering collagenous tissues integrating bioreactors, intravital imaging, and biomechanical modeling,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 107, pp. 3335–3339, 2010.
[151] X. Li, Y. Xu, and B. He, “Imaging electrical impedance from acoustic
measurements by means of magnetoacoustic tomography with magnetic
induction (MAT-MI),” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 323–
330, Feb. 2007.
[152] P. Wang, S. Dong, J. A. Brailsford, K. Iyer, S. D. Townsend, Q. Zhang,
R. C. Hendrickson, J. Shieh, M. A. S. Moore, and S. J. Danishefsky, “At
last: Erythropoietin as a single glycoform,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.,
vol. 51, pp. 11576–11584, 2012.
[153] F. M. Wurm, “Production of recombinant protein therapeutics in cultivated mammalian cells,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 22, pp. 1393–1398,
2004.
[154] A. A. Birukova, A. Rios, and K. G. Birukov, “Long-term cyclic
stretch controls pulmonary endothelial permeability at translational and
post-translational levels,” Exp. Cell Res., vol. 314, pp. 3466–3477,
2008.
[155] R. A. Oeckler and R. D. Hubmayr, “Cell wounding and repair in ventilator injured lungs,” Respir. Physiol. Amp. Neurobiol., vol. 163, pp. 44–53,
2008.
[156] H. R. Wirtz and L. G. Dobbs, “The effects of mechanical forces on lung
functions,” Respir. Physiol., vol. 119, pp. 1–17, 2000.
[157] U. Raaz, H. Kuhn, H. Wirtz, and S. Hammerschmidt, “Rapamycin
reduces high-amplitude, mechanical stretch-induced apoptosis in pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells,” Microvascular Res., vol. 77,
pp. 297–303, 2009.
[158] J. L. Alcorn, M. E. Smith, J. F. Smith, L. R. Margraf, and
C. R. Mendelson, “Primary cell culture of human type II pneumonocytes: Maintenance of a differentiated phenotype and transfection with
recombinant adenoviruses,” Amer. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol., vol. 17,
pp. 672–682, 1997.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

[159] J. A. Gutierrez, R. F. Gonzalez, and L. G. Dobbs, “Mechanical distension
modulates pulmonary alveolar epithelial phenotypic expression in vitro,”
Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 274, pp. L196–L202, 1998.
[160] Y. S. Edwards, L. M. Sutherland, J. H. Power, T. E. Nicholas, and
A. W. Murray, “Cyclic stretch induces both apoptosis and secretion in
rat alveolar type II cells,” FEBS Lett., vol. 448, pp. 127–130, 1999.
[161] S. Hammerschmidt, H. Kuhn, T. Grasenack, C. Gessner, and H. Wirtz,
“Apoptosis and necrosis induced by cyclic mechanical stretching in alveolar type II cells,” Amer. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol., vol. 30, pp. 396–402,
2004.
[162] S. P. Arold, E. Bartolák-Suki, and B. Suki, “Variable stretch pattern
enhances surfactant secretion in alveolar type II cells in culture,” Amer.
J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol., vol. 296, pp. L574–L581, 2009.
[163] M. Cypel, J. C. Yeung, S. Hirayama, M. Rubacha, S. Fischer, M. Anraku,
M. Sato, S. Harwood, A. Pierre, T. K. Waddell, M. de Perrot, M. Liu,
and S. Keshavjee, “Technique for prolonged normothermic ex vivo lung
perfusion,” J. Heart Lung Transplant, vol. 27, pp. 1319–1325, 2008.
[164] B. E. Uygun, A. Soto-Gutierrez, H. Yagi, M.-L. Izamis, M. A. Guzzardi,
C. Shulman, J. Milwid, N. Kobayashi, A. Tilles, F. Berthiaume, M.
Hertl, Y. Nahmias, M. L. Yarmush, and K. Uygun, “Organ reengineering
through development of a transplantable recellularized liver graft using
decellularized liver matrix,” Nat. Med., vol. 16, pp. 814–820, Jul. 2010.
[165] C. Sullivan, J. B. Leon, S. S. Sayre, M. Marbury, M. Ivers, J. A. Pencak, K.
A. Bodziak, D. E. Hricik, E. J. Morrison, J. M. Albert, S. D. Navaneethan,
C. M. D. Reyes, and A. R. Sehgal, “Impact of navigators on completion
of steps in the kidney transplant process: A randomized, controlled trial,”
Clin. J. Amer. Soc. Nephrol., vol. 7, pp. 1639–1645, Oct. 2012.
[166] G. Orlando, A. C. Farney, S. S. Iskandar, S.-H. Mirmalek-Sani, D. C.
Sullivan, E. Moran, T. Aboushwareb, P. De Coppi, K. J. Wood, R. J.
Stratta, A. Atala, J. J. Yoo, and S. Soker, “Production and implantation
of renal extracellular matrix scaffolds from porcine kidneys as a platform
for renal bioengineering investigations,” Ann. Surg., vol. 256, pp. 363–
370, Aug. 2012.
[167] K. H. Nakayama, C. C. Lee, C. A. Batchelder, and A. F. Tarantal, “Tissue
specificity of decellularized rhesus monkey kidney and lung scaffolds,”
PLoS One, vol. 8, e64134, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[168] D. E. Wagner, R. W. Bonvillain, T. Jensen, E. D. Girard, B. A. Bunnell,
C. M. Finck, A. M. Hoffman, and D. J. Weiss, “Can stem cells be used
to generate new lungs? Ex vivo lung bioengineering with decellularized
whole lung scaffolds,” Respirology, vol. 18, pp. 895–911, 2013.
[169] C. D. Ochoa, S. Wu, and T. Stevens, “New developments in lung endothelial heterogeneity: Von willebrand factor, P-selectin, and the Weibelpalade body,” Semin. Thromb. Hemost., vol. 36, pp. 301–308, 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

