2106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Variable Ventilation as a Diagnostic Tool
for the Injured Lung
Bradford J. Smith and Jason H. T. Bates∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Mechanical ventilation of patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a necessary life support measure
which may lead to ventilator-induced lung injury, a complication
that can be reduced or ameliorated by using appropriate tidal volumes and positive end-expiratory pressures. However, the optimal
mechanical ventilation parameters are almost certainly different
for each patient, and will vary with time as the injury status of
the lung changes. In order to optimize mechanical ventilation in an
individual ARDS patient, therefore, it is necessary to track the manner in which injury status is reflected in the mechanical properties
of the lungs. Accordingly, we developed an algorithm for assessing
the time-dependent manner in which different lung regions open
(recruit) and close (derecruit) as a function of the pressure waveform that is applied to the airways during mechanical ventilation.
We used this algorithm to test the notion that variable ventilation
provides the dynamic perturbations in lung volume necessary to
accurately identify recruitment/derecruitment dynamics in the injured lung. We performed this test on synthetic pressure and flow
data generated with established numerical models of lung function
corresponding to both healthy mice and mice with lung injury. The
data were generated by subjecting the models to a variety of mechanical ventilation regimens including variable ventilation. Our
results support the hypothesis that variable ventilation can be used
as a diagnostic tool to identify the injury status of the lung in ARDS.
Index Terms—Computational model, derecruitment, diagnostic
tool, optimal mechanical ventilation, recruitment.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE current standard of care for acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) dictates use of the low tidal volume
(Vt ) of 6 mL/kg ideal body weight to reduce ventilator-induced
lung injury (VILI) caused by overdistention (volutrauma) [1]
together with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) to maintain airway patency [2], [3]. These guidelines are based on the
aggregate characteristics of ARDS patients in general, which
constitute a rather heterogeneous patient population [1] in which
the best average strategy is very unlikely to be best in any particular case. It seems reasonable to suppose, therefore, that optimizing mechanical ventilation for individual patients should
improve outcomes beyond the current universally applied low-

T

Manuscript received December 10, 2013; revised February 24, 2014; accepted March 27, 2014. Date of publication April 7, 2014; date of current
version August 18, 2015. This work was supported by National Institutes of
Health under Grant P30 GM103532 and Grant T32 HL076122. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
B. J. Smith is with the Vermont Lung Center, University of Vermont College of
Medicine, Burlington, VT 05405 USA (email: bradford.smith@med.uvm.edu).
∗ J. H. T. Bates is with the Vermont Lung Center, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, VT 05405 USA (e-mail: jason.h.bates@uvm.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2315964

Vt approach. However, personalized management of mechanical
ventilation must conceptually involve the minimization of a cost
function describing the injury that different ventilatory settings
would cause. Any such injury prediction will inevitably depend
on the current injury status of the lung [4], and thus must be
based on diagnostic parameters that can be tracked continuously
in time.
It is reasonable to believe that such diagnostic parameters
must relate to lung mechanical function, since we have shown
that acute lung injury is typically accompanied by substantial
changes in lung derecruitability, reflected in the propensity of
a recruited lung to derecruit over time [4]–[10]. Assessing the
derecruitability of the lungs thus requires that lung volume be periodically perturbed in a manner sufficient to cause a significant
degree of recruitment, so that the dynamics of subsequent derecruitment can be observed. We have previously achieved this in
mouse models of lung injury by recruiting the lungs with a large
inspiration and then tracking lung elastance while low-Vt ventilation is applied at various levels of PEEP [6], [7], [11], [12].
This provides a set of elastance time profiles to which we
can fit a computational model that recapitulates the regionally
distributed time-dependent nature of derecruitment [10]. Previous in vitro [13] and computational [14]–[16] studies suggest that our model fits can be used to infer the extent to
which lung injury affects surface tension at the air–liquid interface. However, the ventilatory maneuvers we have employed
in mice to determine derecruitability do not resemble any of
the conventional regimens of mechanical ventilation employed
for managing ARDS patients, and thus are very unlikely to be
considered clinically acceptable methodologies by the medical
community.
We therefore seek a means of perturbing lung volume in a
manner that will be safe for ARDS patients while at the same
time allowing the dynamics of recruitment and derecruitment
(R/D) to be observed. These requirements are potentially met
by variable ventilation (VV) [17], which attempts to recapitulate the breath-to-breath changes in Vt and breathing frequency
seen during spontaneous breathing. VV has been shown to be
protective in animal models of lung injury [18]–[20], and we
have previously shown that this therapeutic efficacy may be
related to the dynamics of R/D [21]. Here, we investigate the
use of VV in a different role, namely as a diagnostic modality that provides the volume perturbations necessary to identify
lung derecruitability. In order to perform this investigation in a
precisely controlled environment, we estimated derecruitability
from synthetic airway pressure and flow data generated by subjecting our previously developed computational model of R/D
dynamics [4], [8], [10], [22] to regimens of VV.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SMITH AND BATES: VARIABLE VENTILATION AS A DIAGNOSTIC TOOL FOR THE INJURED LUNG

2107

TABLE I
NOMENCLATURE

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Generation of Synthetic Data
We simulated pressure and flow at the airway opening during
mechanical ventilation using a simulation model consisting of
NUnits = 48000 parallel elastic lung units. Each lung unit had
an elastance EUnit that was constant at low volumes but which
increased quadratically with volume above a critical volume
VCrit thus:
EUnit (VUnit )
⎧
⎪
⎨ EBase , if VUnit ≤ VCrit /NUnits
= NUnits EBase + EFac ((VCrit /NUnits ) /NUnits )2 ,
⎪
⎩
if VUnit > VCrit /NUnits

(1)

where EBase , EFac (=13EBase ), and VUnit are constants. The
elastance Em o d of the entire model was a function of the number
of open units Nop en according to
N
−1
U n its 

0	
closedunit


Em o d (t) =
. (2)
i
i
VUnit
openunit
1/EUnit
i=1

The airflow resistance of each unit was Runit = NUnits Raw ,
with Raw = 0.47 cm · H2 O · s · mL−1 to match experimental
observations [22]. The total resistance Rm o d of the model was
therefore
Rm o d (t) = RUnit [Nop en (t)]−1 .

(3)

Flow into the model for each breath was driven by a volume
waveform buffered by a gas elastance Egas = 130 cm · H2 O ·
mL−1 [22], representing the ventilation delivered by the small
animal ventilator we used in our previous studies [10]. Inspiration was sinusoidal, while expiration from the model was driven
by the difference between the elastic recoil pressure within each
open lung unit and the prescribed level of PEEP. The rate of
expiration from each unit was governed by the ratio of this pressure difference to the sum of RUnit and the resistance of the
ventilator tubing Req = 0.4 cm · H2 O · s · mL−1 .
The dynamics of R/D of each lung unit was simulated using
virtual trajectories as we have described previously [4], [8]–[10],
[22] which provide an empirical approximation to the pressure
dependence and latency of these phenomena. Each lung unit
was associated with a trajectory represented by a variable 0 ≤ y
≤ 1 that decreased in value at a rate given by dy/dt = SC (P −
PC ) if the airway pressure P was less than the critical closing
pressure PC ; SC is the closing velocity constant. Conversely,
if P was greater than the critical opening pressure PO , then
dy/dt = SO (P − PO ). The opening velocity constant SO =
10SC , causing reopening to occur an order of magnitude more
quickly than closure, as we have previously determined to be the
case in injured mice [10]. The model equations were integrated
using the forward Euler method at a simulation frequency of
150 Hz.
The dynamics of the model were thus governed by statistical
distributions used to assign values of PO , SO , PC , and SC to
each lung unit. Closing and opening pressures have previously
been reported to follow Gaussian distributions [23], [24], and

we have used these distributions in previous model fitting studies [8], [10]. Accordingly, PC in this study was drawn from
a Gaussian distribution having a mean μ specified to correspond to a particular clinical situation. The standard deviation
of the Gaussian was 3 cm·H2 O in all cases. PO was also drawn
from a Gaussian distribution such that PO = PC + ΔP with
ΔP = 4 cmH2 O in all cases. We have also found in previous
model fitting studies [5], [10] that monotonically decreasing
probability density functions (PDFs) are appropriate for SO and

2108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE II
PARAMETER VALUES FOR HEALTHY AND INJURED MICE

SC , so in this study we selected these parameters from exponential PDFs.
We initialized the simulation model by ventilating it for 1 min
with Vt = 0.25 mL at 200 breaths/min followed by two deep inspirations (DI, Vt = 1.0 mL, 0.8 Hz). This ventilation sequence
was applied to provide a standardized volume history for the
virtual trajectories for each iteration of the model, and the two
large DIs were included to fully recruit the simulation model.
80 s sequences of mechanical ventilation were then applied
at a respiratory rate of 240 breaths/min (appropriate for a 20 g
mouse) in the four patterns listed below. The first 40 s were used
to establish a standardized volume history, while the pressures
and flows in the later 40 s (the fitting period) were used to
estimate derecruitability as described in Section II-B.
VVH : VV for healthy mice. The tidal volume of each breath
was chosen using the PDF defined by Thammanomai et al. [25]
and [26]

g0
for V tM in ≤ Vt ≤ VP
(4)
p (Vt ) =
−δ
g0 (Vt /VP )
for VP ≤ Vt ≤ VM ax
where V tM ean is mean tidal volume (8.0 mL/kg), V tM in is the
minimum tidal volume (0.7V tM ean ), VM ax is maximum tidal
volume (3.5V tM ean ), VP = 0.9V tM ean , the decay constant δ =
5.1, and PEEP = 3cm · H2 O. The normalization constant g0 =
3.35 was chosen so that ∫VV Mt Ma xi n p (Vt ) dVt = 1.
VVI : VV for mice with HCl-induced lung injury. This was
identical to VVH except with VM ax = 2.25V tM ean [25] and
g0 = 3.31.
CV: Constant volume ventilation with Vt = 8.0 mL/kg and
PEEP = 3 cm · H2 O.
CV-RM: Constant volume ventilation with Vt = 8.0 mL/kg
and PEEP = 3 cmH2 O with two successive 50 mL/kg inspirations at 0.8 Hz applied at the onset of the fitting period.
We simulated pressure and flow at the airway opening during
VVH , VVI , CV, and CV-RM in a healthy BALB/c mouse and a
mouse with VILI [22] to enable calibration of the model to previously collected experimental data. The model parameters for
these two conditions are listed in Table II. We have found previously that the progression of VILI is accompanied by changes
in lung derecruitability that can be characterized in terms of
two injury-dependent populations of lung units with markedly
different R/D characteristics [22]. Accordingly, in this study, we
separated the lung units in the VILI simulations into two groups:
one containing 30% of the units that opened and closed relatively

TABLE III
INITIAL CONDITIONS

slowly with low critical opening and closing pressures, and the
remaining 70% that opened and closed more rapidly at higher
pressures (see Table II). This gave bimodal PDFs for PO and PC
for the injured mice as shown in Fig. 3(black line). These PC
PDFs are similar to the distributions of regional compliance at
low inflation pressures in dogs with oleic acid injury reported by
Kaczka et al. [27], suggesting that acid injury increased PC in
a subset of lung units resulting in derecruitment and decreased
compliance. Furthermore, at higher inflation pressures, the compliance distributions were similar to those of healthy dogs. This
indicates that recruitment in the injured lung occurred between
15 and 20 cm·H2 O which is in agreement with the 18 cm·H2 O
upper peak of our bimodal PC distribution.
B. Estimation of Lung Derecruitability
We estimated lung derecruitability and elastance from the
simulated airway pressure and flow data generated by the simulation model using an estimation model that was similar in
many ways to the simulation model but significantly simpler
in structure so that its parameters could be determined uniquely
by model fitting. The estimation model contained NUnits = 512
lung units. The PDF for PC in the estimation model consisted of
the superposition of four Gaussian distributions having means
at 0, 6, 12, and 18 cm·H2 O each with a standard deviation
of 3 cm·H2 O. The amplitudes of these four Gaussians were
specified by a weighting vector α = [α1 , α2 , α3 , α4 ]. Similarly,
PDFs for SC for each of these four Gaussian PC distributions
were chosen from exponential distributions of the form λc e−λc z ,
where the value of λc for each distribution was specified in the
four element vector λ.
To fit the estimation model to data generated by the simulation model, we had to determine nparam = 10 parameters that
together minimized the objective function f = RMS(Psim −
Pest ) when the estimation model was driven by the corresponding ventilation waveform. Here, Psim and Pest are the
airway pressures predicted by the simulation and estimation
models, respectively, and RMS indicates the root mean square.
The parameters are the four components of α, the four components of λ, EBase , and VCrit (see Table III). Model fitting
was achieved iteratively using a constrained parallel pattern
search algorithm [28]–[32] that functions by repeatedly simulating pressure and flow data with the estimation model using sets
of parameter values selected from within a specified bounded
domain. The lower (l) and upper (u) bounds on this domain,
listed in Table III, were selected to include parameters values
that we have observed in our previous experimental studies in
mice [4], [10], [22], [33]. To standardize the volume history of

SMITH AND BATES: VARIABLE VENTILATION AS A DIAGNOSTIC TOOL FOR THE INJURED LUNG

the estimation model prior to each run through the iterative fitting algorithm, we first ventilated it for 40 s using the prescribed
ventilation pattern. A second 40 s period of ventilation was then
applied and these data were used to compute the value of the
objective function.
ean
+
The initial guess for the parameter values was x0 = xm
0
m ean
is the average parameter starting value (see
Δ0 B where x0
Table III), B is a random number from a uniform distribution
−1 ≤ B ≤ 1, and Δ0 is the initial step size vector. This random
variation was included to avoid bias in the solution due to the
prescribed initial conditions which would be unknown in clinical
or laboratory scenarios.


We defined a set of search directions D = d(1) , . . . , d(p m a x )
where each d(i) is a vector of length nparam and superscripts
indicate the direction index. The maximum number of search
n
directions pm ax = ng p a r a m = 59 049, and ng = 3 is the number
of possible values for each variable in x. The search directions
were defined as
i
i
d(i) (j) = j − ng j /ng − 1
ng
ng
0 ≤ i < pm ax

and

0 ≤ j < nparam .

(5)

Each iteration of the pattern search algorithm 0 ≤ k ≤ 30
consisted of three steps.
1) Generate a set of trial points which correspond to the
search directions
(i)

Xk = {xk + Δk d(i) : 0 ≤ i < pm ax }

Fig. 1. Lung unit elastance prescribed in the simulation model (black circles)
and determined with the estimation model using (a) VV H and (b) VV I for
healthy and injured mice. Gray area shows mean ± standard deviation over 16
runs.

trial point into 512 additional threads (1 per RU) which were
then used to evaluate the dynamics of R/D. This novel approach
provided a substantial performance improvement, particularly
when polling smaller parameter spaces near the bounds of the
search domain.
III. RESULTS

(6)

where Δk is the step size vector and xk is the solution vector from the previous step. The four (out of nparam ) ele(i)
ments for each Xk corresponding to the weighting vector
α are scaled to a magnitude of 1 and duplicate trial points
resulting from this transformation are removed. Likewise,
any direction index which contains points outside the con(i)
strained domain l ≤ {X}k ≤u is also eliminated. Finally,
only a single value of λC is included for any entry of α = 0,
where the remainder of the trial parameter values are identical. The remaining trial points in Xk are evaluated in a
queue.
2) If a trial point zk ∈ Xk exists so that f (zk ) < f (xk ), then
the iteration is deemed successful, and we set xk +1 =
zk , δk +1 = δk , and return to step 1 if k ≤ 30. Otherwise,
the algorithm is terminated.
3) If a trial point zk ∈ Xk does not exist so that f (zk ) <
f (xk ), then the iteration is deemed unsuccessful and we
set xk +1 = xk and δk +1 = 0.5δk . If k ≤ 30 and δk +1 >
0.025δ0 , the algorithm returns to step 1. Otherwise, the
algorithm is terminated.
The pattern search algorithm is readily parallelized [28]–[31]
because once Xk is calculated the objective function evaluation
for each trial point is independent of the others. Accordingly, we
implemented the previous algorithm using the compute unified
device architecture on a graphics processing unit (GPU) (Tesla
K20, NVIDIA, Santa Clara CA) as suggested by Zhu [34] and
[35]. Each trial point was assigned to an independent thread
on the GPU and dynamic parallelism was used to branch each

2109

Fig. 1 shows EUnit as a function of total lung volume in
the fully recruited lung for the healthy and injured simulation
models (circles), as well as the corresponding EUnit curves for
selected cases provided by the estimation model (the latter are
the averages of 16 estimations obtained using different random
initial guesses for the parameter values of the estimation model).
The gray areas in Fig. 1 show the mean ± standard deviation,
demonstrating the repeatability of these estimates. These results
show that we are able to accurately estimate the volume dependence of EUnit from the airway pressure and flow data recorded
during various modes of mechanical ventilation in mice, including two different types of VV.
The PDF for PC used for simulating data from a healthy
mouse is shown in Fig. 2 (gray circles), together with the PDF
produced by the estimation model, again showing good agreement. The area of the black lines in Fig. 2 represents the mean ±
standard deviation. Corresponding plots for the injured mouse
are shown in Fig. 3, and demonstrate that the estimation model
is able to recover the bimodal distribution we used in the simulation model to generate the airway pressure and flow data.
Note that the position of the lower peak in the PDF for PC
(at 3 cm·H2 O) does not align with positions of any of the four
Gaussians comprising the composite PC distribution used in the
estimation model, demonstrating the capacity of the composite
distribution to estimate the PDF for PC .
We quantified the accuracy of the elastance fit as
εE =

Est
Sim
Est
Sim
− EBase
− VCrit
EBase
VCrit
+
Sim
Sim
EBase
VCrit

(7)

2110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 2. Probability density of P C for healthy mice prescribed in the simulation
model (gray circles) and the mean ± standard deviation of 16 iterations of the
estimation model.

Fig. 3. Probability density of the closing pressure for injured mice prescribed
in the simulation model (black line) and computed using the estimation model.
Gray area shows the mean ± standard deviation of 16 iterations of the estimation
model.

where superscript Sim and Est indicate the simulation and estimation models, respectively. Likewise, the accuracy of the PC
fit was described by

 50 
4



εP =
αi κi (PC ) − K (PC ) dPC
(8)



−50
i=1

where K is the PC PDF in the simulation model and κi is the
PDF for PC for the ith Gaussian distribution in the estimation
model. Statistically significant differences in εE and εP , determined using a one-way analysis of variance (p = 0.05) and
Tukey’s honestly significant difference criterion, are indicated
with symbols in Fig. 4.
The performance of the estimation algorithm was proportional to the degree to which the applied ventilation waveform
perturbed the model system. Fig. 5 shows that CV-RM spanned
the widest range of open fractions and, as shown in Fig. 4, provided the best parameter estimate. The dashed line in this figure
shows the minimum possible value for εP due to the composite
PDF used in the estimation model.
To evaluate the efficacy of the fitting method in recovering
data which could be used to evaluate injury or optimize mechanical ventilation, we determined the open fraction ϕ during
“derecruitability tests” which we have previously demonstrated
are a sensitive measure of lung injury [6]–[8], [10], [12], [22].
We utilized ϕ to test the performance of the estimation model
because changes in the open fraction of the lung that occur
as a result of R/D play a pivotal role in the genesis of VILI.
The derecruitability tests consisted of a 1 min stabilization period (Vt = 0.25 mL, 200 breaths/min) followed by a recruitment maneuver (2 breaths of Vt = 0.25 mL, 50 breaths/min)

Fig. 4. Mean error between the simulation and estimation models for 16
estimation model runs, light gray bars show error in P C and dark gray bars
show errors in elastance. Lines shows the standard error. ∗ indicates a significant
difference from CV-RM and ‡ indicates a significant difference from CV (p =
0.05). Dashed line shows the lowest possible value of εP for the injured mouse
due to the composite P C PDF.

Fig. 5. Open fraction predicted by the simulation model for an injured mouse.
The first 40 s of the simulation is used to initialize the model and the second
40 s is used to fit the estimation model.

SMITH AND BATES: VARIABLE VENTILATION AS A DIAGNOSTIC TOOL FOR THE INJURED LUNG

Fig. 6. Average error in the open fraction during derecruitability tests at different PEEPs using parameters determined via the estimation algorithm and
compared to the simulation model for injured mice.

as described earlier for the simulation model. The predicted
open fraction was then monitored during 3 min of ventilation
at 8 mL/kg and 240 breaths/min. This procedure was repeated
for a range of PEEPs. The RMS difference in ϕ predicted using
the average parameters determined with the estimation model
(ΦE ) and prescribed in the simulation model (φS ) was used to
quantify the model accuracy during the derecruitability tests.
Fig. 6 shows the average RMS(ΦS –φE ) for ten simulations of
the VILI mice at 0.5 cm·H2 O PEEP increments. Here, we note
that at low PEEPS all modes of ventilation resulted in excellent
approximations to the parameters used in the simulation model.
However, as PEEP increased, the accuracy of the ϕ predictions
decreased.
IV. DISCUSSION
The pulmonary edema that characterizes ARDS impairs surfactant function and causes increased derecruitment of small
airways and alveoli. This, in turn, increases the susceptibility of
the lung to VILI as a result of the excessive fluid-mechanical
and tissue stresses that invariably accompany mechanical ventilation. The current standard of care in ARDS is a one-sizefits-all approach employing low Vt to reduce volutrauma, and
is based on the reduction in mortality reported with 6 mL/kg
compared to the nominal prior standard of 12 mL/kg [1]. However, the seminal clinical trial on which the low-Vt approach
is based employed a large number of patients at multiple sites
and at huge expense. Gaining new evidence to further refine the
6 mL/kg target is probably beyond the practical limits of randomized clinical trials because of the large number of patients
that would be required to obtain statistical significance.
Currently, PEEP and the fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2 )
are both frequently prescribed based on blood oxygenation, and
thus provide some degree of personalized management aimed at
optimizing the efficacy of gas exchange. However, while decrements in oxygenation are readily measured in the clinic, they
lag behind the lung derecruitment that is responsible for them,
suggesting that better personalized control of VILI would be
achieved by monitoring lung function. In addition, lung function
measurements potentially reflect the repetitive R/D events and
the tissue overdistension that constitutes the fundamental injurious processes behind VILI. Accordingly, we hypothesize that
further improvements in the ventilatory management of ARDS

2111

patients will demand a personalized approach that adapts to the
changing lung mechanics of individual patients. This approach
would use continuous monitoring of lung function to adjust the
parameters of a predictive computational model which is then
used to determine the least injurious mode of ventilation.
In a series of previous studies in mice, we have demonstrated
that the dynamics of R/D are sensitive and specific indicators of
lung injury, and that they can be used to follow the progression of
VILI [6]–[8], [10], [12], [22]. Accordingly, we believe that the
dynamic derecruitability of the lung constitutes the appropriate
readout on which to base an adaptive and personalized strategy
for mechanical ventilation of the ARDS lung. The question we
address in this study is how to determine derecruitability in
a manner that could potentially be applied safely to a human
patient with ARDS. In our prior mouse studies, we estimated
derecruitability from the transient responses in lung elastance
observed during episodes of mechanical ventilation at different
levels of PEEP, each episode being preceded by a large inflation
to recruit closed lung units [6], [7], [10]–[12]. These maneuvers
provided the volume perturbations necessary for identifying the
lung’s propensity to derecruit, but they would almost certainly
be unacceptable in the clinical arena; very large inflations may
themselves cause VILI, and ventilation for even a few minutes
at a low level of PEEP may be highly inadvisable for severely
injured lungs because it would promote atelectrauma.
Our goal in this study was therefore to determine if VV imposes a set of volume perturbations that is rich enough to allow accurate identification of the dynamic R/D characteristics
of the lung. Actually, the extent to which this can be done is
a matter of degree; even conventional mechanical ventilation
perturbs lung volume, and so should itself be able to reveal
R/D dynamics to some extent. The problem with conventional
ventilation, however, is that its perturbations are completely
regular and rather modest, and thus can only reveal the derecruitability characteristics of the lung over a limited range of
operating conditions. By contrast, the explicit goal of VV is to
impose a varied volume perturbation to the lung [17], so we
reasoned that it would be much better suited to the identification of lung derecruitability. Also, VV has shown potential as a
therapy for ARDS [36] in both animals [20], [37], [38] and humans [36], [39] due to increased surfactant secretion [19], [26]
and recruitment [21], [26], [40], [41].
In this study, we used simulated airway pressure and flow data
to test the use of various ventilation patterns in the assessment
of lung derecruitability. The data were generated by an established computational model of R/D dynamics [4], [8], [10], [22],
which allowed us to make objective comparisons of the performances of the various ventilation patterns since the true R/D
characteristics represented by the data were known precisely.
Our results show that the ability to determine derecruitability
accurately is closely linked to the range over which volume is
perturbed. Thus, for example, CV-RM gave the best estimates
of the true parameter values (see Figs. 2, 3, and 4), no doubt because of the very large degree of derecruitment that was induced
by the initial deep inspirations in this scenario (see Fig. 5). By
contrast, the very limited amount of recruitment produced by
CV resulted in the least accurate parameter estimates. These

2112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

differences occurred because the peak pressures did not exceed
approximately 10 cm·H2 O with CV, so the open fraction varied,
on average, by less than 1% as shown in Fig. 5. Consequently,
changes in α and λ? did not substantially impact the objective
function. On the other hand, with CV-RM the airway pressures
reached almost 30 cm·H2 O causing ϕ to span from an average
of 0.22–0.96. Therefore, even minor changes in R/D properties
are reflected in the objective function obtained with CV-RM.
The two VV ventilation patterns were intermediate in performance between these two extremes, as shown in Fig. 4. The
predicted open fraction for VVH in the injured mouse is shown
in Fig. 5, demonstrating that a sufficient period of low-Vt ventilation must follow a deep breath for derecruitment to occur
and provide information for the parameter fitting. The timing
between these recruitment events is implicit in the definition
of the VV tidal volume PDF [see (4)]. Interestingly, all four
ventilation patterns provided good estimates of the nonlinear
elastance for the injured mouse simulations. This was likely due
to the fact that all the ventilation patterns perturbed lung volume
enough to cause VUnit to exceed VCrit in those lung units that
remained open. In contrast, VUnit did not exceed VCrit during
CV and VVI in the healthy mouse simulations due to the greater
degree of recruitment.
The accuracy of the estimation model was further assessed
by simulating derecruitability tests in injured mice over a range
of PEEP using the best fit parameters. At low PEEP, there were
only minor differences in ϕ between the estimation and simulation models (see Fig. 6), as expected due to the good agreement
in the PC distributions (see Fig. 3). However, with increasing PEEP, the estimated ϕ diverged progressively from that of
the simulation model for all ventilation modes except CV-RM
(see Fig. 6). This deviation at high PEEP is proportional to the
peak pressures during the fitting period and is also reflected in
the pressure and elastance errors (see Fig. 4). These findings
demonstrate the tradeoff between the ability of a ventilation
mode to avoid damaging the lung (i.e., not causing large volume excursions) versus providing the information necessary to
assess derecruitability. On balance, we believe that VV achieves
a useful compromise between these competing factors.
The real-world efficacy of our parameter estimation algorithm
could be impaired by noise in the measured pressure response
to a prescribed flow. A full analysis of the effects of noise on the
fitting performance is beyond the scope of the current investigation. We have, however, compared the results of the estimation
model in the absence and presence of random noise in the pressure signal using VVI in an injured mouse. The noise in Psim
was drawn from a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of 0.22 cm·H2 O, equal to 1% of the peak-to-peak pressure
amplitude. We evaluated eight iterations of the estimation algorithm; for each iteration, the initial conditions were identical in
the noisy and noise-free cases. The addition of noise did not significantly change the mean of the fitted values for α, λ, EBase ,
or VCrit (paired t-test, p = 0.01). However, the mean of the standard deviation of the ten predicted parameter values did increase
by 53%. These findings suggest that the estimation algorithm
is robust enough to provide accurate parameter estimates in the
presence of noise.

In summary, we have developed a numerical optimization algorithm that uses pressures and flows evaluated at the trachea
to identify a distributed model of the lung that encapsulates
its intrinsic stiffness as well as the dynamics of R/D. The performance of this algorithm was evaluated using simulated data
representing healthy and injured mice subjected to four types of
mechanical ventilation. Our results indicate that the spectrum
of lung volume perturbations provided by VV is rich enough
for the ongoing assessment of lung derecruitability. This potentially gives VV a useful diagnostic capability to complement its
emerging role as a therapeutic modality.

REFERENCES
[1] Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network, “Ventilation with lower
tidal volumes compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung
injury, and the acute respiratory distress syndrome,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol.
342, pp. 1301–1308, 2000.
[2] M. A. Matthay, L. B. Ware, and G. A. Zimmerman, “The acute respiratory
distress syndrome,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 122, pp. 2731–2740, Aug. 2012.
[3] M. A. Matthay, S. Bhattacharya, D. Gaver, L. B. Ware, L. H. Lim,
O. Syrkina, F. Eyal, and R. Hubmayr, “Ventilator-induced lung injury:
in vivo and in vitro mechanisms,” Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol.,
vol. 283, pp. L678–L682, Oct. 2002.
[4] A. S. Seah, K. A. Grant, M. Aliyeva, G. B. Allen, and J. H. T. Bates,
“Quantifying the roles of tidal volume and PEEP in the pathogenesis of
ventilator-induced lung injury,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, pp. 1505–
1516, 2011.
[5] S. P. Albert, J. DiRocco, G. B. Allen, J. H. T. Bates, R. Lafollette,
B. D. Kubiak, J. Fischer, S. Maroney, and G. F. Nieman, “The role of
time and pressure on alveolar recruitment,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 106,
pp. 757–765, 2009.
[6] G. Allen and J. H. Bates, “Dynamic mechanical consequences of deep
inflation in mice depend on type and degree of lung injury,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 96, pp. 293–300, Jan. 2004.
[7] G. Allen, L. K. Lundblad, P. Parsons, and J. H. Bates, “Transient mechanical benefits of a deep inflation in the injured mouse lung,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 93, pp. 1709–1715, Nov. 2002.
[8] J. H. T. Bates and C. G. Irvin, “Time dependence of recruitment and derecruitment in the lung: A theoretical model,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 93,
pp. 705–713, 2002.
[9] B. Ma and J. H. T. Bates, “Modeling the complex dynamics of derecruitment in the lung,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, pp. 3466–3477, 2010.
[10] C. B. Massa, G. B. Allen, and J. H. T. Bates, “Modeling the dynamics of
recruitment and derecruitment in mice with acute lung injury,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 105, pp. 1813–1821, 2008.
[11] G. B. Allen, M. E. Cloutier, Y. C. Larrabee, K. Tetenev, S. T. Smiley,
and J. H. Bates, “Neither fibrin nor plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 deficiency protects lung function in a mouse model of acute lung injury,”
Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cellular Mol. Physiol., vol. 296, pp. L277–L285,
Mar. 2009.
[12] G. B. Allen, T. Leclair, M. Cloutier, J. Thompson-Figueroa, and
J. H. Bates, “The response to recruitment worsens with progression of
lung injury and fibrin accumulation in a mouse model of acid aspiration,”
Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cellular Mol. Physiol., vol. 292, pp. L1580–L1589,
Jun. 2007.
[13] D. P. Gaver III, R. W. Samsel, and J. Solway, “Effects of surface tension
and viscosity on airway reopening,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 69, pp. 74–85,
1990.
[14] D. Halpern and D. P. Gaver III, “Boundary element analysis of the timedependent motion of a semi-infinite bubble in a channel,” J. Comput. Phys,
vol. 115, pp. 366–375, 1994.
[15] D. Halpern and D. P. Gaver, “The influence of surfactant on the propagation of a semi-infinite bubble through a liquid-filled compliant channel,”
J. Fluid Mech., vol. 698, pp. 125–159, May 2012.
[16] D. P. Gaver III, D. Halpern, O. E. Jensen, and J. B. Grotberg, “The steady
motion of a semi-infinite bubble through a flexible-walled channel,” J.
Fluid Mech., vol. 319, pp. 25–65, 1996.
[17] G. R. Lefevre, S. E. Kowalski, L. G. Girling, D. B. Thiessen, and
W. A. C. Mutch, “Improved arterial oxygenation after oleic acid lung in-

SMITH AND BATES: VARIABLE VENTILATION AS A DIAGNOSTIC TOOL FOR THE INJURED LUNG

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]

jury in the pig using a computer-controlled mechanical ventilator,” Amer.
J. Respiratory Critical Care Med., vol. 154, pp. 1567–1572, Nov. 1996.
S. P. Arold, R. Mora, K. R. Lutchen, E. P. Ingenito, and B. Suki, “Variable
tidal volume ventilation improves lung mechanics and gas exchange in
a rodent model of acute lung injury,” Amer. J. Respiratory Critical Care
Med., vol. 165, pp. 366–371, Feb. 2002.
S. P. Arold, B. Suki, A. M. Alencar, K. R. Lutchen, and E. P. Ingenito,
“Variable ventilation induces endogenous surfactant release in normal
guinea pigs,” Amer. J. Physiol. Lung Cellular Mol. Physiol., vol. 285,
pp. L370–L375, Aug. 2003.
C. L. Bellardine, A. M. Hoffman, L. Tsai, E. P. Ingenito, S. P. Arold,
K. R. Lutchen, and B. Suki, “Comparison of variable and conventional
ventilation in a sheep saline lavage lung injury model,” Critical Care
Med., vol. 34, pp. 439–445, Feb. 2006.
B. Ma, B. Suki, and J. H. T. Bates, “Effects of recruitment/derecruitment
dynamics on the efficacy of variable ventilation,” J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 110, pp. 1319–1326, 2011.
B. J. Smith, K. A. Grant, and J. H. Bates, “Linking the development of
ventilator-induced lung injury to mechanical function in the lung,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 41, pp. 527–536, 2013.
S. Crotti, D. Mascheroni, P. Caironi, P. Pelosi, G. Ronzoni, M. Mondino,
J. J. Marini, and L. Gattinoni, “Recruitment and derecruitment during
acute respiratory failure: A clinical study,” Amer. J. Respiratory Critical
Care Med., vol. 164, pp. 131–140, Jul. 2001.
P. Pelosi, M. Goldner, A. McKibben, A. Adams, G. Eccher, P. Caironi,
S. Losappio, L. Gattinoni, and J. J. Marini, “Recruitment and derecruitment during acute respiratory failure: An experimental study,” Amer. J.
Respiratory Critical Care Med., vol. 164, pp. 122–130, Jul. 2001.
A. Thammanomai, L. E. Hueser, A. Majumdar, E. Bartolak-Suki, and
B. Suki, “Design of a new variable-ventilation method optimized for lung
recruitment in mice,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 104, pp. 1329–1340, May
2008.
A. Thammanomai, H. Hamakawa, E. Bartolak-Suki, and B. Suki, “Combined effects of ventilation mode and positive end-expiratory pressure
on mechanics, gas exchange and the epithelium in mice with acute lung
injury,” Plos One, vol. 8, Jan. 2013.
D. W. Kaczka, K. L. Cao, G. E. Christensen, J. H. T. Bates, and
B. A. Simon, “Analysis of regional mechanics in canine lung injury using
forced oscillations and 3D image registration,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39,
pp. 1112–1124, Mar. 2011.
P. D. Hough, T. G. Kolda, and V. J. Torczon, “Asynchronous parallel pattern search for nonlinear optimization,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 23,
pp. 134–156, Jun. 2001.
T. G. Kolda, “Revisiting asynchronous parallel pattern search for nonlinear
optimization,” SIAM J. Optimization, vol. 16, pp. 563–586, 2005.
T. G. Kolda and V. J. Torczon, “On the convergence of asynchronous
parallel pattern search,” SIAM J. Optimization, vol. 14, pp. 939–964,
2004.

2113

[31] D. N. J. White, “Parallel pattern search energy minimization,” J. Mol.
Graph. Modelling, vol. 15, pp. 154–157, Jun. 1997.
[32] R. M. Lewis and V. Torczon, “Pattern search algorithms for bound constrained minimization,” SIAM J. Optimization, vol. 9, pp. 1082–1099,
1999.
[33] B. J. Smith and J. H. T. Bates, “Assessing the progression of ventilatorinduced lung injury in mice,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 12,
pp. 3449–3457, Dec. 2013.
[34] W. H. Zhu, “Massively parallel differential evolution-pattern search optimization with graphics hardware acceleration: An investigation on bound
constrained optimization problems,” J. Global Optimization, vol. 50,
pp. 417–437, Jul. 2011.
[35] W. H. Zhu, “Nonlinear optimization with a massively parallel evolution
strategy-pattern search algorithm on graphics hardware,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 11, pp. 1770–1781, Mar. 2011.
[36] S. Kowalski, M. C. McMullen, L. G. Girling, and B. G. McCarthy, “Biologically variable ventilation in patients with acute lung injury: A pilot
study,” Can. J. Anesthesia, vol. 60, pp. 502–503, May 2013.
[37] A. Boker, M. R. Graham, K. R. Walley, B. M. McManus, L. G. Girling,
E. Walker, G. R. Lefevre, and W. A. C. Mutch, “Improved arterial oxygenation with biologically variable or fractal ventilation using low tidal
volumes in a porcine model of acute respiratory distress syndrome,” Amer.
J. Respiratory Critical Care Med., vol. 165, pp. 456–462, Feb. 2002.
[38] W. A. C. Mutch, G. M. Eschun, S. E. Kowalski, M. R. Graham,
L. G. Girling, and G. R. Lefevre, “Biologically variable ventilation prevents deterioration of gas exchange during prolonged anaesthesia,” Brit.
J. Anaesthesia, vol. 84, pp. 197–203, Feb. 2000.
[39] A. Boker, C. J. Haberman, L. Girling, R. P. Guzman, G. Louridas,
J. R. Tanner, M. Cheang, B. W. Maycher, D. D. Bell, and G. J. Doak,
“Variable ventilation improves perioperative lung function in patients undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysmectomy,” Anesthesiology, vol. 100,
pp. 608–616, Mar. 2004.
[40] W. A. Mutch, S. Harms, M. Ruth Graham, S. E. Kowalski, L. G. Girling,
and G. R. Lefevre, “Biologically variable or naturally noisy mechanical
ventilation recruits atelectatic lung,” Amer. J. Respiratory Critical Care
Med., vol. 162, pp. 319–323, Jul. 2000.
[41] M. C. McMullen, L. G. Girling, M. R. Graham, and W. A. C. Mutch, “Biologically variable ventilation improves oxygenation and respiratory mechanics during one-lung ventilation,” Anesthesiology, vol. 105, pp. 91–97,
Jul. 2006.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

