1412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Retinal Prosthesis
James D. Weiland∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, and Mark S. Humayun, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Retinal prosthesis has been translated from the laboratory to the clinic over the past two decades. Currently, two devices
have regulatory approval for the treatment of retinitis pigmentosa.
These devices provide partial sight restoration and patients use this
improved vision in their everyday lives. Improved mobility and object detection are some of the more notable findings from the clinical trials. However, significant vision restoration will require both
better technology and improved understanding of the interaction
between electrical stimulation and the retina. This paper reviews
the recent clinical trials and highlights technology breakthroughs
that will contribute to next generation of retinal prostheses.
Index Terms—Blindness, medical device, neural prosthesis, retinal prosthesis.

I. INTRODUCTION
N a healthy retina, light is detected by photoreceptors (rods
and cones) via photosensitive molecules in the outer segments of the photoreceptors [1]. These molecules, once transformed by light, trigger a cascade of neurochemical events that
leads to other neural cells in the retina (ganglion cells) sending
signals to the downstream visual centers of the brain. Retinal degenerative diseases, like retinitis pigmentosa [2] and age-related
macular degeneration [3] affect primarily photoreceptors, leaving the retina unable to sense light, but remaining neurons in
the retina (bipolar cells and ganglion cells) can be electrically
activated, based on established techniques for nerve stimulation.
Several studies from early scientists demonstrated that electric and magnetic fields could excite neurons in the visual system
and create the sensation of light. However, the work of Brindley
and Lewin [4] is often cited as the seminal study that spawned
the current efforts in visual prostheses. In this study, a blind patient was implanted with a device that allowed 80 independent
stimulus channels interfaced with the visual cortex (occipital
pole in the back of the brain). An external system was used
to wirelessly drive the internal system. Using this device, the

I

Manuscript received December 27, 2013; revised March 10, 2014; accepted
March 25, 2014. Date of publication April 2, 2014; date of current version April
17, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under Grant EEC-0310723 and Office of Science (BER) U.S. Department of
Energy under Grant DE-FC02-04ER63735, in part by the National Eye Institute
under Grant 5R01EY022931, in part by The W.M. Keck Foundation, and in part
by the Research to Prevent Blindness. M. Humayun has a financial interest in
Second Sight Medical Products, Inc. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. D. Weiland is with the Departments of Ophthalmology and Biomedical
Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033 USA
(e-mail: jweiland@usc.edu).
M. S. Humayun is with the Departments of Ophthalmology and Biomedical
Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033 USA
(e-mail: humayun@usc.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2314733

patient could see spots of light when the individual channels
were activated. Around the same time Potts and Inoue were using a corneal electrode to stimulate the eye [5]. Although their
primarily goal was to characterize the cortical evoked potential resulting from ocular/retinal stimulation, they did include
individuals with retinitis pigmentosa in their study. The RP patients showed similar evoked potential patterns as the normally
sighted volunteers. Together, this early work demonstrated that
the visual system could be electrically stimulated in a potentially useful way and that RP did not eliminate the eye’s ability
to respond to electrical stimulation.
The field of retinal prosthesis took a large step forward in the
1990s, with experiments involving temporary (acute) implantation of a stimulating array in the eye of blind test subjects [6], [7].
In an operating room setting, but under only local anesthesia,
a hand-held probe was inserted in the eye. At the end of these
probes, were electrodes that could be used to stimulate the retina.
The electrodes were placed at different retinal locations and the
subjects described what they saw when the current pulses were
applied to the electrode. Given the spatial mapping (retinotopic
organization), when the electrode was on the right side of the
eye, the subject would see something on the left, and vice-versa.
These studies demonstrated that potentially useful spots of light
could be created, even in a retina that had degenerated due to
decades of disease. When multielectrode arrays were used, simple forms (lines) could be created. It was important to conduct
acute studies to demonstrate basic feasibility before undertaking the expensive and challenging effort of making a device for
long-term (chronic) implantation.
II. TYPES OF SYSTEMS
A typical retinal prosthesis has multiple components each
with a specific function (see Fig. 1). These include an imager
to convert light to electrical signal, electronics to process and
condition the image and generate electrical stimulus pulses,
and an array of microelectrodes to stimulate the retina. Other
important components found in one form or another on most
implants include hermetic packaging and wireless data/power
transmission. However, retinal prostheses are often categorized
based on the location of the electrode array, which forms the
functional interface with the retina. The locations where an
electrode array can be implanted to stimulate the retina include
epiretinal (on the top surface of the retina), subretinal (under the
retina), and suprachoroidal (between the sclera and choroid).
Fig. 1(a) conceptual diagram of a retinal prosthesis.
Several prototype systems of chronic implantable devices
have been tested in clinical trials. These fall into two types
of implants. The first type of device was designed to show feasibility in humans, but not intended to be a commercially viable
medical device. Thus, the main concern for these devices was

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WEILAND AND HUMAYUN: RETINAL PROSTHESIS

Fig. 1. Retinal prosthesis concept. An image is converted to an electrical
signal by an imaging device. The electrical signal is processed by external
and/or implanted circuitry. The circuit produces a pattern of electrical stimulus
which is applied to the retina via a microelectrode array positioned near the
retina. Image courtesy of annual review of biomedical engineering.

patient safety and they generally were not refined to the same
degree as a commercial product. For example, a number of these
early chronic implants could only be activated when the patient
visited the clinic. The second type of devices are intended as
commercial devices, so they are engineered not only for robustness and safety, but also to have expected longevity of over
a decade and with human factors considerations. The Argus
II retinal prosthesis (Second Sight Medical Products, Inc.) has
received approval in both Europe and the United States to be
sold as a treatment for retinitis pigmentosa. The Alpha IMS
system by Retina Implant has received regulatory approval in
Europe. A summary of current and past clinical trials of retinal
implants can be found at www.clinicaltrials.gov, search “retinal
prosthesis.”
A. Epiretinal
Epiretinal implants involved in feasibility studies include the
Argus I from Second Sight and devices from Intelligent Medical
Implants, GmbH (IMI) and the Epi-Ret Consortium (Epi-Ret).
All three of these systems used wireless power and data delivery
(to avoid transcutaneous wires).
The Argus I device was implanted in six subjects between
2002 and 2004 [8]. Argus I was a modified cochlear implant.
As such, the electronics were implanted behind the ear and a
cable run along the temple, into the orbit, and, finally, into the
eye, terminating in a 4 × 4 grid of platinum electrodes, either
520 or 260 μm diameter. With training, subjects were able to
distinguish objects from a small set [9] and detect motion of
a moving bar. Subjects have been implanted for as long as
10 years with the device still functional (Arup Roy, personal
communication).
The IMI device was implanted in a total of seven subjects
[10]. This device utilized a microfabricated array with a total
of 49 electrodes. The implant was entirely in the orbit, with the
electronics module on the outside of the eye and the electrode

1413

array in the eye (via a cable across the eye wall). This system
could only be activated in the clinic as no camera system was
available. Using this device, subjects could see spots of light and
some simple patterns. The implants were removed after several
months, or in one case, 1.5 years, possibly due to the fact that
the electronics were encapsulated with a polymer (see Section
III-A for discussion of packaging).
The Epi-Ret device was implanted in six patients [11]. The
stimulating array had 25 electrodes and also was miniaturized
to the point where the entire device could be implanted in the
eye. A unique feature of the stimulating array was protruding
electrodes, which improved contact with the retina and resulted
in low perceptual thresholds. Like the IMI device, the Epi-Ret
system was designed only for semichronic implantation (four
weeks) and did not have a camera system so the implant could
only be activated in the clinic.
The Argus II is similar to the IMI device, in that the electronics
are on the outside of the eye and the electrode array is on the
retina, connected by a cable across the eyewall to the electronics
[12]. The Argus II however, has a camera system that provides
input to the implant, allowing patients to leave the clinic with
the system operational. The electronics are protected with a
hermetic enclosure and implant longevity is estimated to be
greater than ten years, based on accelerated lifetime testing [13].
Sixty electrodes are arranged in a 6 × 10 format. Fig. 2 shows
the components of the Argus II system.
Thirty subjects were enrolled between 2007 and 2009 in the
Argus II clinical trial [12]. All subjects were able to perceive
light during electrical stimulation. Other tasks on which subjects
performed well include object localization (27/28 subjects better
with system on versus system off) and motion detection (16/28
subjects better with system on versus system off). Letter reading
was tested in 22/30 subjects [14]. Six of these subjects were
able to identify any letter of the alphabet at a 63.5% success rate
(versus 9.5% with the system off). In all 22 subjects tested, a
small set of eight letters was identified 72.5% correctly, versus
16.8% with the system off. Subjects were free to take as much
time as needed to make a judgment. Adverse events that occurred
during the trial include low eye pressure and infection, but such
events decreased in later implants.
B. Subretinal
The second type of experimental implants tested in humans
were subretinal implants, which were implanted in the location
vacated by degenerated photoreceptors. Optobionics tested passive subretinal implants in 30 subjects [15]. A passive implant
relies on incident light to activate photodiodes arrayed on a silicon disk, with the resulting electrical current stimulating the
retina via electrodes also patterned on the disk. These devices
did not account for the low level of light that reaches the back of
the eye [16]. Ultimately, passive subretinal implants proved to
produce inadequate stimulating current, though some patients
reported improved vision. Animal studies show a “neurotrophic
effect,” [17] which results in improved retinal health due to the
presence of the subretinal implant, suggesting a possible mechanism behind improved vision reported by patients.

1414

Fig. 2. Argus II retina prosthesis. (a) External system has a camera mounted
in a pair of glasses. The video processing unit (VPU) processes the camera data,
then transmits wireless power and data via the coil. (b) Implant coil receives
power and data for processing by the electronics (within the silver case). The
coil and case are secured with a scleral band that encircles the eye. The electrode
cable traverses the eye wall and the electrode array is attached to the array with
a retinal tack. Images from [12].

A more sophisticated device was tested in human by Retina
Implant, GmbH (RI) [18]. The RI device had a subretinal array
of microphotodiodes like the optobionics device, but in addition
included circuitry to amplify the photocurrent to an adequate
level, as shown in Fig. 3. This additional circuitry required
an external power source. In the experimental device, implant
power was provided via a percutaneous cable, which crossed the
skin behind the ear. The commercial system described below
(Alpha IMS) includes a wireless power module in the place
of the percutaneous cable. In addition to the microphotodiode
array, the experimental system included 16 “direct stimulation
(DS)” electrodes, each of which were connected to the percutaneous connector via a separate path, thus allowing access
to these electrodes by external test equipment [19]. The DS
electrodes were either 50 × 50 μm or 100 × 100 μm (larger
electrodes in later implants).
Twelve patients were implanted with the experimental RI system [18]. One implant failed shortly after surgery and was not
tested, so only 11 subjects are considered. Using the DS electrodes, 6 of 11 subjects could perceive light from single electrode
stimulation. Two additional subjects could detect light when DS
electrodes were used in combination while three subjects could
not detect light from DS stimulation. Of the eight subjects who

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 3. Alpha IMS system (retina implant, GmbH). (1) Subretinal photodiode
array (MPDA). The MPDA has 1500 elements, each of which has a photodiode
to sense light, circuitry to amplify the signal, and electrode to deliver the stimulus
pulse. (2) Microflex cable holds the MPDA while larger wire connect to (3) the
subdermal receiver. (4) Return electrode is outside the eye, under the skin. (5) and
(6) External system provides power to the implant as well as some configuration
data. (7) Implant position on the head. Images courtesy Dr. Eberhart Zrenner.

could detect light, six could detect patterns consisting of simple
lines or letters formed from the 4 × 4 array of DS electrodes.
The authors note that more success was possible in pattern
detection when electrodes were activated sequentially versus
simultaneously.
Detailed test results for MPDA mediated vision are available
on the last 3 of the 12 subjects implanted with the experimental
system [18]. These subjects received implants with an improved
seal and redesigned cable, which allowed for longer implant
lifetimes. The average implant length for these three subjects
was 126 days. All three subjects could detect light mediated by
the MPDA. Two subjects had measurable visual acuity (0.34
and 0.22 cycles per degree). One subject could successfully
complete a number of visually guided tasks, including letter
recognition. This subject could recognize letters and correctly
report light in a quadrant.
The Alpha IMS Wireless implant has been tested in nine subjects to date [20]. It is identical to the RI implant described
above, except the wireless version has a power module under
the skin behind the ear (see Fig. 3). The power module receives
power and configuration data from an external system via inductive coupling. Eight of nine subjects could perceive light using
the system. The subjects could also detect and identify objects
used in a table setting. Four subjects could read letters from a
reduced set. Three of the implants showed visible chip degradation eventually leading to chip failure after approximately
250 days. The authors attribute this failure to the quality of the

WEILAND AND HUMAYUN: RETINAL PROSTHESIS

chip’s hermetic seal [21]. Recently, the Alpha IMS Wireless
implant received CE Marking for commercial sale in Europe.
C. Suprachoroidal
Recently, a suprachoroid transcleral (STS) retinal prosthesis
has been tested in humans [22]. The surgical approach for this
implant involves cutting a flap in the sclera (the outer layer of
the eye) and placing an electrode in the flap, such that the exposed electrode contacts are directed toward the choroid (vascular layer) and retina, which lies on the other side of the choroid.
A single return electrode is placed in the vitreous cavity. Thus,
stimulus current passes through the choroid to the retina. An
STS device with nine electrodes was implanted in a limited
study in two patients. The electronics case was positioned under
the skin behind the ear. It was shown that stimulation resulted
in light perception and the subjects could reach out and grab an
object, using a camera to guide them. This study was limited to
four weeks implantation.
D. Limitations of Current Systems
All the systems described earlier face limitations. The
Argus II and the STS systems are relatively low-resolution devices. Both of these devices are designed as permanent implants,
thus the hermetic packaging (see Section III-A) is large. The Alpha IMS has the highest density of electrodes, but this density
is only possible because the system has less robust packaging
scheme. As such, the longest Alpha IMS lifetime reported is less
than 1 year. With current packaging technology, there appears
to be a tradeoff between system lifetime and visual acuity. In
Section III, we review engineering research in packaging and
other areas that will expand the system design space for retinal
implants and may obviate some of these tradeoffs.
Even if a high density, long-lasting implant can be made,
questions remain about how to deploy such a system to achieve
high-resolution vision on a consistent basis. The biological challenges facing retinal implants may be even greater than the engineering challenges. None of the implants tested in patients
have produced perceptions of “pixelized vision,” as depicted in
numerous studies of simulated prosthetic vision [23]–[25]. For
example, vision produced by the Argus II does not result in
a 6 × 10 array of identical phosphenes that can be precisely
controlled by the external camera system. Visual acuity testing demonstrates the challenges remaining for prosthetic vision
system. In the Argus II trial, best measured visual acuity was
(20/1260) [12]. Measurable visual acuity was obtained in 7 of
30 test subjects. The Alpha IMS study reports visual acuity in 2
of 9 subjects, with a best measurement of 20/546 [20]. Thus, in
both clinical trials, fewer than 25% of patients had measurable
visual acuity. A magnifying feature under user control on the
Argus II may enable 20/200 vision [26]. However, this approach
would be akin to looking through binoculars where even slight
movements of the head results in exaggerated shifts in visual
field. In both the Argus II and Alpha IMS, the typical patients do
not perceive even simple forms in an immediate way, rather they
scan their head and/or eyes over objects in order to make a judgment as to what they are viewing. With natural vision one can

1415

perceive the letter “T,” for example. One does not consciously
think about a horizontal line on top of a vertical line, but simply
knows that it is a “T” without conscious thought. Retinal prosthesis subjects have not yet achieved this type of vision. Yet,
there exist “high achieving” patients with both systems, where
visual acuity can be measured. In those patients with measureable visual acuity, strong evidence exists that the system does
provide spatial information that can be used in visual tasks [27].
Thus, it is critical to understand why these subjects perform well
while others do not.
III. ENGINEERING RESEARCH
Technical challenges exist that must be overcome before a
high-resolution, long-lasting retinal prosthesis can be achieved.
To protect electronics long-term, new materials and processes
are needed to create a robust, yet thin, barrier to water and ions.
Efficient circuit architectures must be utilized that allow 100 s of
channels of stimulation while maintaining power consumption
below a safe level. Electrode arrays have a number of areas for
improvement. Electrode substrates need to adapt to the curvature
of the retina without crushing the soft retinal tissue. Electrode
materials must support higher charge density since small electrodes are needed for high-resolution retinal stimulation. Video
processing is one area that can contribute to improving the visual
performance in patients with limited resolution devices.
A. Packaging
Implantable electronic devices require a protective barrier to
ensure that neither moisture nor ions reach incorporated electronic circuits. Donaldson has described two methods to achieve
this barrier: encapsulation and hermetic enclosure [28]. Encapsulation refers to the use of a conformal coating to form a protective layer around the electronics. When polymers are used
to form this layer, water will penetrate through the polymer,
but the conformality of the coating prevents the condensation
of water on the surface of the electronics. This method relies
heavily on “cleanliness and absence of voids” [28], meaning the
chip surface must be free particulates and the conformal coating cannot have voids where water can condense. This is very
difficult to achieve reliably in practice, as evidenced by the fact
that Donaldson could identify only a single electronically active
medical device that uses the encapsulation approach. The 1–2
year lifetimes of the retinal prosthetic devices encapsulated with
polymers suggest that more process development is needed to
make this a viable approach for long-term encapsulation.
The vast majority of current neurostimulation implants use
the hermetic enclosure approach. Traditional methods for forming the hermetic enclosure involve the use of titanium or ceramic cases joined to a feedthrough (a substrate with multiple
isolated conductors) that together form a hermetic package for
the electronics [29] (see Fig. 4). Both the thickness of the case
and the conductor pitch (spacing) lead to implant sizes that are
much larger than those of the enclosed electronics. The Argus
II uses this style of packaging and due to limitations in conductor spacing, is limited to 60 independent stimulus channels.
This is not to diminish the engineering accomplishment of a 60

1416

Fig. 4. Hermetic packaging schemes. Top: an electronics module is placed
inside an enclosure, which includes a feedthrough platform with conductors and
a case or lid. The feedthrough and case are sealed together. Bottom: coating an
electronic chip is an ideal protection scheme, but to date no coating technology
has proven adequate for long-term implantation.

conductor feedthrough. In fact, the Argus II packaging represents a 3× increase in number channel number and a 10× decrease in size, when compared to cochlear implants. Rather, this
example demonstrates how much more remains to be accomplished in bioelectronics packaging before a high-resolution device with a hermetic enclosure is possible. Typical feedthrough
conductor spacing in present day bioelectronic implants is on
the order of 1 mm. Contrast that dimension with integrated circuit (IC) pad spacing of 150 μm, electrode dimensions of less
than 25 μm, and transistor sizes of less than 1 μm, and it is
becomes clear that packaging is a major driver of implant size,
particularly with implants that are inductively powered and do
not have batteries (another major size factor).
Increased feedthrough density is being realized with advanced processing techniques. Suaning et al. have achieved
high feedthrough density by laminating a laser-cut platinum
foil between two sheets of alumina (a ceramic used commonly
in medical implants) [30]. The platinum foil is patterned to form
long lines. The gap between the lines is filled with alumina suspended in a viscous liquid. Subsequent baking of the laminated
structures promotes crystal regrowth in the alumina suspension,
leading to a dense alumina surrounding the platinum lines. Interior package bond pads are created by drilling through one
of the alumina sheets to the Pt foil followed by an electrodeposition process to fill the drilled hole. Electronics are placed
on the same side of the laminate and connected to the bond
pads, to allow signal communication across the package. An
alumina cap is then bonded to the laminate structure to seal the
electronics. Schuettler et al. describe a screen printing approach
to achieving 360 channels in a feedthrough whose overall size
is less than 25 mm × 25 mm [31]. Gill et al. stack green alumina sheets and Pt wires in an alternating pattern, and then heat
and compress the structure to densify the alumina around the
wires. [32]. Cutting sections normal to the wires results in a patterned grid of platinum conductors embedded in alumina (see
Fig. 5). Testing of this substrate showed helium leak rate of less
than 8 × 10−11 mbar·l/s.
To replace the large metal enclosure, several groups have investigated deposition of thin films to serve as barriers to water

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 5. High-density feedthrough technology. Front view shows platinum conductors embedded in alumina substrate. Image from [32].

and ions. Such an approach can reduce the volume of the implant by 50% or more. However, making pinhole free films is
challenging, particularly around 3-D structures. As discussed
earlier, polymers do not provide adequate, long-term protection
against water vapor penetration. The IMI device used parylene coating and did not function longer than 2 years. Current research is directed at using diamond like films, nanocrystalline diamond, or other silicon-based films (silicon-carbide).
Weiland et al. have investigated multilayer, multimaterial films,
using both diamond like coatings and metal films, that show
good conformality around corners and edges and improved ion
barrier properties, though long-term testing has not been completed [33]. Ultrananocrystalline diamond films have been deposited in very dense and inert films [34]. Recently, amorphous
silicon carbide (a-SiCx :H or a-SiC) has been proposed as an
encapsulation material for electrodes and electronics by several
groups [35], [36]. This material has perhaps the most promise
of all materials tested so far, but still has key shortcomings. SiC
has excellent dielectric properties and can be deposited, with
careful instrumentation, at temperatures below 400 ◦ C. It is also
highly resistant to degradation. Limitations of SiC include slow
deposition rates (0.2 to 0.5 μm/h) when using low temperature
deposition. The a-SiC intrinsic compressive stress is moderate
(0.2 to 0.3 GPa), but this level of stress may still limit the maximum film thickness (e.g., <5 μm) to maintain good adhesion
and avoid device distortion.
B. Electronics
There are several electronics components involved in retina
prostheses. For those using external cameras, both the camera
and supporting hardware are custom electronic systems, but
typically use off-the-shelf parts. As such, these require careful
engineering, but do not present significant technical challenges.
Some of the more innovative approaches to camera/video processing are reviewed in Section III-D below.
In contrast, active research is taking place to improve electronics for inductive power and data telemetry as well as

WEILAND AND HUMAYUN: RETINAL PROSTHESIS

implanted stimulator electronics. Recent advances in these areas
are reviewed below.
1) Telemetry: All retinal prosthetic systems use some form
of wireless technology for data and/or power. In contrast to
deep brain stimulators which run on batteries with fixed settings, retinal implants have a requirement for small size which
preclude batteries and must be constantly updated with new data
based on the input to the camera. Conceivably, a retinal prosthesis could be configured with a battery module in the chest
with a cable running up to the orbit and a camera in the eye.
Such a system would only require occasional wireless access
for battery recharging and system diagnostic and configuration.
However, this architecture would complicate the surgical approach by requiring placement of a battery module in the chest
and connection of this module to the eye, via a subcutaneous
lead. Presently, no retinal prosthesis system uses a battery.
The Alpha IMS has an implanted imager chip thus no realtime data link is needed for this system. An earlier prototype
has a percutaneous connector behind the ear, but the most recent version has a wireless module behind the ear, with a cable
running to the eye. The position of the wireless module has the
advantage of ensuring a strong, stable inductive link, since the
wireless module can be just under the skin. In contrast, inductive
coils on the eye, as is done in the Argus II and IMI implants,
mandate additional design considerations for relative movement
between the primary and secondary coils, since the eye remains
mobile within the orbit. The behind the ear position is very
similar to the cochlear implant, so many of the wireless design
details have been optimized already. The tradeoff for a behind
the ear wireless module is the increased surgical complexity
needed for running a cable from behind the ear into the eye.
Cochlear implants use a single wireless link to carry both
power and data. The signal is modulated to carry data information and the induced current from the ac signal is rectified
and regulated to provide dc power. However, a fundamental
conflict exists when choosing a wireless frequency. To achieve
an adequate data rate, the carrier frequency is typically an order of magnitude higher than the required data rate, which for
advanced retinal prosthesis may be megabits/sec. Thus, a carrier frequency of greater than 10 MHz may be needed [37].
However, to maintain efficiency of the power link, in terms of
signal penetration into tissue and ac–dc conversion, frequency
less than 10 MHz is desired [38].
Multiband approaches have been proposed to allow efficiency
in both the power and data links. This approach separates the
frequencies used for power and data [39]. The power signal
will be stronger, use a lower frequency and use larger coils,
to accommodate the need for transmission of significant power
(implants require 10’s of mW). The data signal is higher frequency, can use much smaller coils since the data signal can be
much lower power. However, such systems require careful design since some interference between the links will exist. A 256
channel retinal prosthesis system with dual band telemetry has
been demonstrated on the bench top, supporting the technical
feasibility of this approach [39].
Optical data and power links have also been investigated for
retinal implants. The Optobionics subretinal microphotodiode

1417

Fig. 6. Two hundred fifty six channel stimulator by Liu et al. The chip has
integrated power conditioning and data decode, and 256 independent output
channels. Image courtesy of Dr. Wentai Liu.

array was powered by incident light, but this was inadequate to
stimulate the retina. Gross et al. have designed a retinal prosthesis with an optical data link combined with an inductive
power link [40]. The authors were able to achieve a data rate
of 200 kB/s. This prototype evolved eventually into the IMI
implant.
2) Integrated Circuit: The implanted IC must perform a
number of functions. These include ac–dc conversion (if inductive power telemetry is use), data demodulation (if wireless
data link), digital control, analog drivers, and reverse telemetry
for diagnostics. One of the major design challenges are related
to the multiple voltages and negative voltages. Negative voltages
are needed since the stimulus driver must supply both anodic
and cathodic current.
Liu et al. have designed, fabricated, and tested multiple generations of IC for retinal stimulation. They designed the initial
version of the IC that is now in the Argus II. Their most recent
contribution is a complete system with data demodulation, timing controlled rectification, digital control, and 256 independent
stimulus drivers [41] (see Fig. 6). The timing controlled rectifier
does not use diodes and thus eliminates a significant source of
power loss. This IC was demonstrated as part of an end-to-end
functional system, [39] with the actual analog output displayed
on an LED board and wireless power and data. An innovative
aspect of this design is the used of circuit under pad layout,
which takes advantage of the multiple metal layers in the process to place bond pads over the circuitry, thereby reducing the
IC area.
Ortmanns et al. have designed a 232 channel retinal stimulator
chip [42]. The chip is fabricated in 0.35 μ CMOS and includes
high voltage (+/− 15 V) compatible with high stimulus currents through small electrodes. The overall chip size is less than
5 × 5 mm. An innovative charge balancing scheme is used to
reduce accumulated, residual charge on the electrodes due to
imbalance in the current source. Electrode voltage is sensed in
between pulses and voltages greater than +/− 50 mV trigger
balance pulses that reduce the voltage. This active scheme reduces chip size versus standard schemes, which involve blocking

1418

capacitors or high-voltage transistors to connect the electrodes
to a common point.
A chip for subretinal stimulation has been fabricated and
tested [43]. It has 256 channel and was fabricated in 0.18 μ
CMOS. High-voltage components were included to allow a wide
range of stimulus currents. The chip includes power and data
telemetry blocks as well as diagnostics for sampling the electrode voltage on any output and transmission of this data via a
low-rate, reverse telemetry link. Output drivers can be configured as sources or sinks to allow current steering.
A 96 channel retinal stimulator has been designed to allow
current steering between local sources and sinks [44]. The chip
included high-voltage drivers (up to 20 V) which require special,
high-voltage transistors, since the design was done in 0.35 μm
process (Austria Microsystems). However, many of the other
chip features could be handled by low-voltage transistors, resulting in significant space saving. The chip includes switches
that allow each electrode to be configured as either a current
source or a group of six electrodes forming a hexagonal sink
surrounding the source. The purpose of having a local sink is to
focus current in a narrow area of the retina. It was implemented
as a test chip, with two current drivers and switching to accommodate 14 electrodes. The chip also includes a feature to short
all electrodes together to dissipate accumulated charge on any
single electrode.
A 512 channel retinal chip has been implemented in 65 nm
CMOS [45]. This chip features novel autocalibration circuitry
on the output, which is used to tune the circuit to improve
precision and eliminate charge balance. The data channel can
support data rates of 20 MB/s. The small transistor size allows
the chip to be 4.5 × 3.1 mm2 , so the chip can possibly fit entirely
inside the eye, depending on the size added by the packaging
scheme. Voltage is +/− 2.5 V. While this design choice will
allow low power operation, the output current may be limited
depending on the impedance of the electrodes.

C. Electrodes
Electrode technology used by the Argus II and Alpha IMS represents an important step for implantable bioelectronics. Older
implants such as cochlear implants and deep brain stimulators
used hand-made electrode assemblies. These feature large platinum contacts supported by a silicone substrate. In contrast,
retinal implants use photolithography and micromachining to
fabricate arrays. This is needed because of the high number and
the density of contacts required for vision. Fig. 7 shows an example of 1000 electrode epiretinal array, implanted in the eye
of large animal model. Along with the cortical array used in the
Braingate study [46], stimulating arrays now implanted in humans build on decades of research and development [47], [48].
Also, both the Argus II and Alpha IMS use advanced electrode
materials, platinum gray and titanium nitride, respectively. Both
are superior to bulk platinum, which is typically used for neurostimulation, in terms of charge injection capacity. Platinum
gray [13] can inject 1 mC/cm2 and titanium nitride [49] can
inject 0.9 mC/cm2 , versus 0.1–0.35 mC/cm2 for platinum [50].

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Fig. 7. Parylene substrate electrode array with 1000 individual electrode contacts, implanted in the eye of a canine. The image is acquired via a fundus
camera, through the dilated pupil. Fluorscein injected into the circulatory systemically shows integrity of the retinal blood vessels under the array.

Mechanical damage to the retina is possible if the electrode
substrate materials are too rigid. Polyimide and parylene are traditional substrates for photolithographically patterned electrode
arrays, but are rigid relative to silicone. However, patterning
metal onto silicone is difficult. Schuettler et al. have invented
a novel process for fabrication of silicone/platinum arrays [51].
Medical grade silicone is spun on a glass carrier. A platinum
foil is placed on top of the layer of silicone. An Nd:YAG laser is
used to cut a pattern in the platinum, to form conducting lines,
bond pads, and electrodes. Another layer of silicone is deposited
on the top to form the final insulation layer. Prototype devices
demonstrated a minimal feature size of 30 μm, which is greater
than photolithography (typically 2–5 μm), but may be adequate
depending on the number of pixels in the array.
A fundamental problem facing retinal prostheses is the visual field that can be addressed. The eye is a 2.5 cm diameter
sphere (roughly) and the retina lines the back half of the eye.
To completely address the entire retina, the dimension of the
array must be π∗d/2 or almost 4 cm. Subretinal implants are
limited by the fact that the retina must be detached to insert
these arrays. Current implants cover less than 15 degrees of
visual angle. Increasing the subretinal array size risks detaching the entire retina, which has disastrous consequences for the
long-term health of the retina. The surgery for the Alpha IMS
includes a silicone oil injection in the eye, which reduces the
likelihood of retinal detachment [20]. Epiretinal implant size is
limited because of the small incisions that can be safely made
in the eyewall (less than 5 mm). Ameri et al. describe a foldable
array that can be inserted through a small sclerotomy (eye wall
incision), then expanded once in the eye [52]. This approach
allows 1 cm wide array, thus 45◦ –50◦ of visual angle. Subsequent development of this idea has demonstrated long-term
implantation of these arrays into animal eyes [53].

WEILAND AND HUMAYUN: RETINAL PROSTHESIS

1419

D. Cameras and Video Processing
The Argus II current uses an off-the-shelf video camera while
the Alpha IMS has imaging capability in the eye. Video processing algorithms can potentially improve the performance of
retinal prostheses by highlighting important areas and deemphasizing scene elements that are not relevant to the current
task. For example, something far in the distance may not be as
important as a nearby object. Another aspect of the system design is the position of the camera. The Alpha IMS has a distinct
advantage in that the imaging component is inside the eye thus
moves with the eye. It is well known that perception requires
not just vision but eye movement and feedback of eye position
to integrate visual information and enable understanding of a
scene. Argus II requires head scanning to integrate visual information. Such motions are not impossible, but less natural. As
discussed below, miniaturized implantable cameras are under
development that will impart to epiretinal implants the ability
to control camera direction with eye position.
1) Machine Vision: The first sophisticated algorithm directed to retinal prosthesis was proposed and developed by
Eckmiller et al. [54]. The retinal encoder predicts the ganglion
cell output in response to a given input and can be used to drive
the stimulus of an epiretinal device. The encoder approximates
the typical primate ganglion cell receptive field (RF) properties of primate retinal ganglion cells by means of individually
tunable spatiotemporal RF filters. The encoder maps visual patterns onto spike trains for a number of contacted ganglion cells.
An implementation of this scheme simulated part of the central
retina with a hexagonal array of 64 × 64 photosensors/pattern
pixels that formed the input to an evenly interlaced distribution of partly superimposed 34 × 34 RF filters of P-On, P-Off,
and M ganglion cells. Each ganglion cell filter included one
RF-center pixel and six RF-periphery pixels. To the authors’
knowledge, this algorithm has not been tested in humans with
retinal implants.
Others have looked to use software algorithms that process the
video to enhance certain relevant parts of the scene. Parikh et al.
used saliency algorithm biased by user input to demonstrate
improved object localization with simulated prosthetic vision
[55]. The algorithm was trained to selectively highlight a soda
can in the user’s peripheral vision (outside the range of simulated
prosthetic vision). When simulated phosphenes on the edge of
the array where used to guide the user where to look, the user
easily located the object of interest. Without these guiding cues,
the user struggled to find the soda can.
Enhancement of important areas may be useful for mobility as well. McCarthy et al. used an RGB-D sensor (color
and depth) to obtain information regarding distance to objects [56]. This information was then processed to extract local
surface variation. From this, important objects and nearby objects were highlighted using intensity and presented in a simulated prosthetic vision paradigm. Their results clearly show
that this computer vision approach can accentuate nearby, potentially important obstacles such as a low wall next to a
sidewalk. Thus, rather than code the brightest objects with
the highest intensity, instead determine the importance of
objects.

Fig. 8. Intraocular camera positioned in place of the crystalline lens, similar
to what is done in cataract surgery when an intraocular lens is implanted. Such a
device will allow eye gaze to be in accord with perception, a key to improving the
visual capability of implant patients. Image courtesy Dr. Armand R. Tanguay,
Jr.

2) Novel Camera: As mentioned in the previous section,
depth cameras may become important for retinal prostheses if
depth perception is not possible due to low resolution or monocular implantation. Depth cameras like those used in commercial
products such as the Microsoft Kinnect, project a speckle pattern
of infrared dots onto a scene, then detect the relative position
of those dots, compared to a calibrated surface. The distortion
in the pattern allows depth of the reflecting surfaces to be measured. Depth cameras can be used as input for computer vision
algorithms like those described earlier, but also are used as input
to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithms.
SLAM can be used to build up a map of the local environment
and a person’s position and pose within this environment [57].
Such information can be useful when determining how to use
prosthetic vision to guide someone through a complex environment [58].
A microcamera implanted in the place of the crystalline lens
can couple gaze with the stimulus pattern (see Fig. 8). To fit in
this space, a camera has been designed that is a cylinder about
3 mm in diameter and 4 mm long [59]. The design features a
hermetic packaged capsule, a custom aspheric lens to focus the
image on the wide-dynamic range CMOS sensor. Power and
control circuits are placed behind the sensor. The optical system was designed to have an unusually wide depth of field, to
obviate the need for accommodation (i.e., refocusing on close
objects). The benefits of an intraocular camera architecture have
been explored using simulation, since direct comparison would
require a similar system with both external and implanted cameras. Simulation experiments suggest that users can perform
tasks in a more natural manner when the images they see are
controlled by the direction of eye gaze.
E. Summary
Results from the engineering efforts have made significant
advances, but in some areas, much work remains. ICs have
achieved sophistication that meets the requirements of current

1420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

systems, though more efficient designs are possible. Hermetic
packaging has also made significant advances, but hermetic
coatings remain a challenge. Electrode arrays can achieve the
requisite electrode site density, but must become more adaptable
in terms of their shape, such that each site of a multielectrode
array is in close proximity to the retina.
IV. BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Critical questions remain about the retinal response to electrical stimulation and how the brain interprets this response.
The clinical trials of both subretinal and epiretinal implants
demonstrate that patients do not experience idealized pixelated
vision as depicted in many publications. Each electrode does
not produce an identical phosphene that is equidistant from its
neighbor. In fact, in the Argus II clinical trial, only 55% of single electrodes could produce a perception within the stimulation
safety limits. In the Alpha IMS device, it is not clear if a single
electrode can produce a perception, given its small size (50 μm).
In both devices, electrodes grouped together in parallel are used
to elicit a response if a single electrode cannot.
In spite of these difficulties in consistently achieving pixelized vision, it is clear that patients do have some spatial information. Patients can detect the direction of movement, which
requires multiple pixels that are perceived at different locations.
The highest performing test subjects who read letters clearly
obtain information from multiple pixels to complete this task
and subjects have reported form vision in some cases. But the
typical patient experience is not that of an array of independent phosphenes under precise control of the implant. The reasons for this relate to both spatial and temporal irregularity of
the phosphenes. The clinical trial results were discussed earlier in Section II. Below, we described more detailed human
psychophysics studies that tried to understand which stimulus parameters affect perception. In addition, we discuss recent
studies in animal models of retinal disease that are beginning to
reveal the basic mechanism of retinal stimulation.
A. Human Studies
While all implants have reported basic characteristics of light
perception and some have measured visual acuity and object
detection, most of the visual psychophysics studies have been
published by groups involved with the Argus I and Argus II
implants. These implants are long-term, versus, for example,
four week implants in the Epi-Ret trial. The long-term nature
of the implant allows in-depth studies with repeated measures
in the same subjects, which are needed to build a significantly
robust set of data.
1) Psychophysics: Horsager et al. examined channel interaction using several measures in Argus I implant patients [60].
A “same-different” task asked subjects to judge whether two
stimuli appeared to be the same or different. If different stimuli generate a “same” response, then the visual system cannot
resolve the differences between the two stimuli. A brightness
task asked subjects to judge whether or not two stimuli were the
same brightness or if the second stimulus was brighter or dimmer than the first. Brightness was used as an indirect measure

of strength of activation. Using these measures, subjects were
able to detect differences in simultaneous versus interleaved
multichannel stimulation. Simultaneous stimulation means all
electrodes are active at the same time while interleaved stimulation means the pulse are temporally separated so that only one
electrode is active. Subjects were able to detect difference when
pulses spacing was as low as 3 ms. Thus, the timing of pulses
will affect the perception.
Nanduri et al. examined the relationship between perception
size and stimulus magnitude and frequency [61]. This is important since increasing the amplitude of the stimulus was found
to make perceptions both brighter and larger. However, objects
may be brighter, but not bigger. So finding a way to increase
the brightness of a perception without increasing its size can
potentially improve the quality of the visual experience. It was
found the increasing the frequency of stimulation increased perceived brightness without increasing the size. Thus, pulse rate
modulation should be considered as a means of intensity coding
for future retinal prosthesis.
Neural stimulation can lead to desensitization of nerves, requiring an increasing stimulus to create perception. In retinal
prosthesis patients, phosphenes become less bright with continuous stimulation. Nine Argus II implant patients were tested to
measure the rapidity of phosphene fading [62]. Pulses were applied continuously on a group of four electrodes (simultaneous
stimulation). The phosphene was initially bright and distinct
in all subjects, but faded in all but one of these subjects. In
four subjects, the phosphene faded slowly over several seconds,
while in the others it faded more rapidly, in less than 1 s. The
residual perception was less distinct and dim. While this is a
concern for retinal implants, the natural motion of the head and
eye while viewing a scene may act to refresh an electrode. Video
processing may be needed to regulate the amount of stimulus
applied to single electrode over a given time window.
2) Imaging: Brain imaging studies will be an important
part of future retinal prosthesis research, complementing psychophysics. Very little work has been done in this area since
implants have only been put in humans in the last decade. One
study not involving implants used positron emission tomography (PET) to examine active brain areas when the eye was
stimulated with an external electrode [63]. Similar patterns of
brain activity were elicited by electrical stimulation in blind
subjects when compared to light stimulation in sighted subjects
(see Fig. 9). It is worth noting that the Argus II is labeled as
MRI conditional, which means that patients with implants can
undergo MRI procedures within certain limits [64]. Indeed, Argus II implantees have been scanned as part of routine medical
care [65]. Functional MRI would require activation of the device
in the scanner. Alternatively, PET or EEG can be used, but both
are considered less accurate than MRI.
B. Animal Studies
There are a multitude of reports describing electrical stimulation of the retina in animal models. This work was reviewed
by Freeman and the reader is encouraged to use that review
to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the prior art [66].

WEILAND AND HUMAYUN: RETINAL PROSTHESIS

Fig. 9. PET imaging of (left) light stimulation in subjects with normal vision
and (right) corneal electrical stimulation in blind subjects (with RP). Posterior
view shown, arrows indicate posterior pole. Courtesy Dr. John Xie.

Here, we focus on key results that are of direct consequence
to challenges noted in the clinical trials. A distinction made
in many of these studies should be defined for clarity. All the
studies mentioned below use retinal ganglion cell responses as
a measure. This is appropriate, since this represents the output
of the retina. Direct stimulation refers to electrical stimulation
that depolarizes the retinal ganglion cell until an action potential
is initiated. Indirect stimulation refers to electrical stimulation
that acts on another cell type in the retina, but through synaptic transmission, causes a retinal ganglion cell to fire an action
potential.
1) Increased Degeneration Leads to Higher Thresholds:
Using animal models of degeneration, multiple studies have
demonstrated that degenerated retina has a higher stimulus
threshold than normal retina. Jensen and Rizzo showed a consistent elevation in threshold for rd1 mouse retina (versus normal)
up to postnatal day 200 [67]. These experiments used subretinal
stimulation. Chan et al. examined threshold for epiretinal stimulation in s334ter rat (a common retinal degeneration model) and
found threshold elevated, but only in older rats with a greater
extent of degeneration [68]. A number of other studies support
this finding. However, Sekirnjak et al. found no difference in
threshold in old, blind rat retina compared to normal [69]. Experimental differences in this last study include use of a small
stimulating electrode (10–20 μm diameter versus >75 μm diameter in other studies) and explicit direct stimulation. The Chan
study of epiretinal stimulation likely included both direct and
indirect stimulation. This is a better model of the current clinical
situation in patients, but the Sekirnjak study suggests that if individual ganglion cells can be targeted, then threshold differences
may not exist. The implications of these findings are that near
term retinal implants must be able to supply higher currents, but
future implants, with advanced electrode array technology, may
be able to use lower stimulus and still elicit perception. More
detailed studies of retinal ganglion cell properties during retinal
degeneration are needed to confirm these results.
2) Axonal Stimulation Can be Avoided With Longer Pulses:
A key challenge facing epiretinal prostheses relates to stimulation of axons. Ideally, each electrode site would stimulate only
nearby cell bodies. This will ensure that the perception generated
by stimulation will be small (on the order of the electrode) and

1421

correlated in visual space with the position of the electrode site
on the retina. Images are inverted horizontally and vertically
on the retina by the optics of the cornea and lens. Therefore,
stimulation in the left half of the retina should generate perceptions in the right visual field. If axons originating from cells in
the periphery and passing underneath the electrode site are also
stimulated, then the perception will also reflect activation of
those peripheral cells and appear as an ellipse or streak. Thus,
stimulation of these “axons of passage” should be avoided if
possible. This is a challenge, since retinal ganglion cell axons
form the top layer of the retina and are closest to epiretinal
electrodes.
Axonal stimulation can be avoided by increasing the length
of the stimulus pulses. This approach was first explored by
Greenberg et al. [70] then later by Jensen et al. [71], and Freeman et al. [72]. Weitz et al. recently demonstrated a calcium
imaging technique that allows direct visualization of the intracellular calcium of retinal ganglion cells, which is a reliable
and accepted reporter of ganglion cell activity [73]. In all of
these studies, it was found that long pulses result in no activation of retinal ganglion cells except by synaptic transmission
from bipolar cells. Bipolar cells do respond to long pulses. The
mechanism behind this is not clear, but it is thought to be related to the biophysics of the bipolar cell membrane that allows
it to integrate stimulus over longer time scales. Freeman et al.
proposed that the L-type calcium channel in bipolar cells plays
a key role in this behavior [74].
3) Continuous Stimulation: The study of phosphene fading
described earlier can be replicated in animal models. Jensen
and Rizzo showed that repetitive stimulation using subretinal
stimulation has a desensitizing effect when pulses are spaced
up to 400 ms apart [75]. Epiretinal stimulation studies show a
similar phenomenon for indirect stimulation. Pulse rates greater
than 10 pulses/s result in decreased responses from the retina
[76]. In contrast, direct stimulation does not diminish spike
responses and each pulse elicits a single action potential at rates
up to 500 pulses/s [77]. Desensitization may be related to the
adaptive mechanisms that exist in the retina (and in most neural
systems).
V. CONCLUSION
Retinal prostheses represent a real, near term hope for blind
individuals. The clinical trials demonstrate that tangible benefits
can be obtained, specifically improved mobility and object localization. Patients with implants are generally pleased and use the
devices in their everyday lives. However, room for improvement
exists. When using the prosthesis in the real-world, patients do
not report “pixelized vision,” where each electrode creates a
spot of light. Creating form vision is a major challenge. Image
fading also must be addressed, since patients need to rely on the
quality of images throughout the day. Implant patients cannot
yet recognize the details of faces or objects. To achieve this
important goal, the resolution of implants must be increased, by
increasing both the number of electrodes and the density of electrodes. Hermetic packaging is the main engineering challenge
limiting the number of independent stimulation channels, which

1422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

in turn will limit resolution. Significant advances in electrode
array and electronic circuits should enable high-resolution implants. These challenges must be addressed by interdisciplinary
teams of engineers, clinicians, and scientists, working in consultation with industry and patients, to build on the early success
of retinal prostheses.

[18]

[19]

REFERENCES
[1] J. E. Dowling, The Retina: An Approachable Part of the Brain. Cambridge, MA, USA: Bellknap Press, 1987.
[2] D. T. Hartong, E. L. Berson, and T. P. Dryja, “Retinitis pigmentosa,”
Lancet, vol. 368, pp. 1795–1809, Nov. 2006.
[3] L. M. Gehrs, J. R. Jackson, E. N. Brown, R. Allikmets, and
G. S. Hageman, “Complement, age-related macular degeneration and a
vision of the future,” Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 128, no. 3, pp. 349–358,
Mar. 2010.
[4] G. S. Brindley and W. S. Lewin, “The sensations produced by electrical
stimulation of the visual cortex,” J. Physiol., vol. 196, pp. 479–493, May
1968.
[5] A. M. Potts and J. Inoue, “The electrically evoked response (EER) of the
visual system. II. Effect of adaptation and retinitis pigmentosa,” Invest.
Ophthalmol., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 605–612, Jun. 1969.
[6] M. S. Humayun, E. De JuanJr., J. D. Weiland, G. Dagnelie, S. Katona,
R. J. Greenberg, and S. Suzuki, “Pattern electrical stimulation of the human retina,” Vision Res., vol. 39, no. 15, pp. 2569–2576, Jul. 1999.
[7] J. F. Rizzo III, J. Wyatt, J. Loewenstein, S. Kelly, and D. Shire, “Perceptual
efficacy of electrical stimulation of human retina with a microelectrode array during short-term surgical trials,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis Sci., vol. 44,
no. 12, pp. 5362–5369, Dec. 2003.
[8] M. S. Humayun, J. D. Weiland, G. Y. Fujii, R. J. Greenberg,
R. Williamson, J. Little, B. V. Mech, V. Cimmarusti, G. Van Boemel,
G. Dagnelie, and E. De Juan Jr., “Visual perception in a blind subject with
a chronic microelectronic retinal prosthesis,” Vision Res., vol. 43, no. 24,
pp. 2573–2581, Nov. 2003.
[9] D. Y. Yanai, J. D. Weiland, M. Mahadevappa, R. J. Greenberg, I. Fine,
G. Y. Fujii, and M. S. Humayun, “Visual performance using a retinal
prosthesis in three subjects with retinitis pigmentosa,” Am. J. Ophthalmol.,
vol. 143, no. 5, pp. 820–827, May 2007.
[10] R. Hornig, T. Zehnder, M. Velikay-Parel, T. Laube, M. Feucht,
and G. Richard, “The IMI Retinal Implant System,” in Artificial
Sight: Basic Research, Biomedical Engineering, and Clinical Advances,
M. S. Humayun, J. D. Weiland, G. Chader, and E. X. Greenbaum, Eds.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2007.
[11] G. Roessler, T. Laube, C. Brockmann, T. Kirschkamp, B. Mazinani,
M. Goertz, C. Koch, I. Krisch, B. Sellhaus, H. K. Trieu, J. Weis,
N. Bornfeld, H. Röthgen, A. Messner, W. Mokwa, and P. Walter, “Implantation and explantation of a wireless epiretinal retina implant device:
Observations during the EPIRET3 prospective clinical trial,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis Sci., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 3003–3008, Jun. 2009.
[12] M. S. Humayun, J. D. Dorn, L. Da Cruz, G Dagnelie, J. A. Sahel,
P. E. Stanga, A. V. Cideciyan, J. L. Duncan, D. Eliott, E. Filley, A. C. Ho,
A. Santos, A. B. Safran, A. Arditi, L. V. Del Priore, and R. J. Greenberg,
“Interim results from the international trial of second sight’s visual prosthesis,” Ophthalmology, vol. 119, no. 4, pp. 779–788, Apr. 2012.
R
[13] D. D. Zhou, J. D. Dorn, and R. J. Greenberg, “The Argus
II retinal
prosthesis system: An overview,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Multimedia Expo
Workshops (ICMEW), Conf., San Jose, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[14] L. Da Cruz, B. F. Coley, J. D. Dorn, F. Merlini, E. Filley, P. Christopher,
F. K. Chen, F. Wuyyuru, J. A. Sahel, P. E. Stanga, M. S. Humayun,
R. J. Greenberg, and G. Dagnelie, “The Argus II epiretinal prosthesis
system allows letter and word reading and long-term function in patients
with profound vision loss,” Brit. J. Ophthalmol., vol. 97, no. 5, pp. 632–
636, May 2013.
[15] A. Y. Chow, V. Y. Chow, K. H. Packo, J. S. Pollack, G. A. Peyman, and
R. Schuchard, “The artificial silicon retina microchip for the treatment of
vision loss from retinitis pigmentosa,” Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 122, no. 4,
pp. 460–469, Apr. 2004.
[16] D. Palanker, A. Vankov, P. Huie, and S. Baccus, “Design of a highresolution optoelectronic retinal prosthesis,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2,
pp. 105–120, 2005.
[17] M. T. Pardue, M. J. Phillips, H. Yin, A. Fernandes, Y. Cheng, A. Y. Chow,
and S. L. Ball, “Possible sources of neuroprotection following subretinal

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

silicon chip implantation in RCS rats,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. S39–S47, Jan. 2005.
E. Zrenner, K. U. Bartz-Schmidt, H. Benav, D. Besch, A. Bruckmann,
V. P. Gabel, F. Gekeler, U. Greppmaier, A. Harscher, S. Kibbel, J. Koch,
A. Kusnyerik, T. Peters, K. Stingl, H. Sachs, A. Stett, P. Szurman,
B. Wilhelm, and R. Wilke, “Subretinal electronic chips allow blind patients to read letters and combine them to words,” Proc. Biol. Sci., vol. 278,
no. 1711, pp. 1489–1497, May 2011.
R. Wilke, V. P. Gabel, H. Sachs, K. U. Bartz Schmidt, F. Gekeler, D. Besch,
P. Szurman, A. Stett, B. Wilhelm, T. Peters, A. Harscher, U. Greppmaier,
S. Kibbel, H. Benav, A. Bruckmann, K. Stingl, A. Kusnyerik, and
E. Zrenner, “Spatial resolution and perception of patterns mediated by
a subretinal 16-electrode array in patients blinded by hereditary retinal
dystrophies,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 5995–6003,
Aug. 2011.
K. Stingl, K. U. Bartz Schmidt, D. Besch, A. Braun, A. Bruckmann,
F. Gekeler, U. Greppmaier, S. Hipp, G. Hörtdörfer, C. Kernstock,
A. Kusnyerik, A. Schatz, K. T. Stingl, T. Peters, B. Wilhelm, and
E. Zrenner, “Artificial vision with wirelessly powered subretinal electronic
implant alpha-IMS,” Proc. Royal Soc. B: Biol. Sci., vol. 280, no. 1757,
pp. 1–8, Apr. 2013.
K. Stingl, K. U. Bartz Schmidt, D. Besch, A. Braun, A. Bruckmann,
F. Gekeler, U. Greppmaier, S. Hipp, G. Hörtdörfer, C. Kernstock,
A. Kusnyerik, A. Schatz, K. T. Stingl, T. Peters, B. Wilhelm, and
E. Zrenner, “Details on the patient cohort and the subretinal implant alpha
IMS (retina implant AG, Reutlingen) in the first module of a multicentre
clinical trial and video material of patient reports,” Proc. Royal Soc. B,
vol. 280, no. 1757, pp. 1–8, Apr. 2013.
T. Fujikado, T. Morimoto, H. Kanda, S. Kusaka, K. Nakauchi, M. Ozawa,
K. Matsushita, H. Sakaguchi, Y. Ikuno, M. Kamei, and Y. Tano, “Clinical
trial of chronic implantation of suprachoroidal-transretinal stimulation
system for retinal prosthesis,” Sensors Mater., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 181–187,
Apr. 2012.
K. Cha, K. Horch, and R. A. Normann, “Simulation of a phosphene-based
visual field: Visual acuity in a pixelized vision system,” Annals Biomed.
Eng., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 439–449, Apr. 1992.
J. S. Hayes, J. D. Weiland, M. S. Humayun, and G. Dagnelie, “Visually
guided performance of simple tasks using simulated prosthetic vision,”
Artif. Organs, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1016–1026, Nov. 2003.
R. W. Thompson, M. S. Humayun, and G. Dagnelie, “Facial recognition
using simulated prosthetic pixelized vision,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.,
vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 5035–5042, Nov. 2003.
J. A. Sahel, S. Mohand-Said, P. E. Stanga, A. Caspi, and R. J. Greenberg,
“Acuboost: Enhancing the maximum acuity of the Argus II retinal prosthesis system,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci, vol. 54, 2013.
A. Caspi, J. D. Dorn, K. H. McClure, M. S. Humayun, R. J. Greenberg,
and M. J. McMahon, “Feasibility study of a retinal prosthesis: Spatial
vision with a 16-electrode implant,” Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 127, no. 4,
pp. 398–401, Apr. 2009.
A. Vanhoestenberghe and N. Donaldson, “Corrosion of silicon integrated
circuits and lifetime predictions in implantable electronic devices,” J.
Neural Eng., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2013.
G. Jiang and D. D. Zhou, “Technology advances and challenges in hermetic packaging for implantable medical devices,” in Implantable Neural
Prostheses 2. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2010, pp. 27–61.
G. J. Suaning, P. Lavoie, J. Forrester, T. Armitage, and N. H. Lovell,
“Microelectronic retinal prosthesis: III. A new method for fabrication of
high-density hermetic feedthroughs,” in Proc. 28th Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
Conf., 2006, pp. 1638–1641.
M. Schuettler, J. S. Ordonez, T. S. Santisteban, A. Schatz, J. Wilde, and
T. Stieglitz, “Fabrication and test of a hermetic miniature implant package
with 360 electrical feedthroughs,” in Proc. 32nd Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
Conf., 2010, pp. 1585–1588.
E. C. Gill, J. Antalek, F. M. Kimock, P. J. Nasiatka, B. P. McIntosh,
A. R. Tanguay Jr., and J. D. Weiland, “High-density feedthrough technology for hermetic biomedical micropackaging,” in MRS Proceedings.
vol. 1572, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2013.
J. D. Weiland, F. M. Kimock, J. E. Yehoda, E. C. Gill, B. P. McIntosh,
P. J. Nasiatka, and A. R. Tanguay Jr., “Chip-scale packaging for bioelectronic implants,” in Proc. IEEE Neural Eng. Conf., San Diego, CA, USA,
Nov. 2013, pp. 931–936.
X. Xiao, J. Wang, C. Liu, J. A. Carlisle, B. V. Mech, R. J. Greenberg,
D. Guven, R. Freda, M. S. Humayun, J. D. Weiland, and O. Auciello,
“In vitro and in vivo evaluation of ultrananocrystalline diamond for coating
of implantable retinal microchips,” J. Biomed. Mat. Res. Part B., vol. 77,
no. 2, pp. 273–281, Feb. 2006.

WEILAND AND HUMAYUN: RETINAL PROSTHESIS

[35] S. F. Cogan, D. J. Edell, A. A. Guzelian, Y. Ping Liu, and R. Edell,
“Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposited silicon carbide as an implantable dielectric coating,” J. Biomed. Mat. Res. Part A, vol. 67, no. 3,
pp. 856–867, Mar. 2003.
[36] A. Sharma, L. Rieth, P. Tathireddy, R. Harrison, H. Oppermann, M. Klein,
M. Töpper, E. Jung, R. Normann, G. Clark, and F. Solzbacher, “Evaluation
of the packaging and encapsulation reliability in fully integrated, fully
wireless 100 channel utah slant electrode array (USEA): Implications for
long term functionality,” Sens. Acts. A: Phys., vol. 188, pp. 167–172,
2012.
[37] M. Zhou, M. R. Yuce, and W. Liu, “A non-coherent DPSK data receiver with interference cancellation for dual-band transcutaneous telemetries,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 2003–2012, Sep.
2008.
[38] G. Wang, W. Liu, M. Sivaprakasam, M. Zhou, J. D. Weiland, and
M. S. Humayun, “A dual band power and data telemetry for retinal prosthesis,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., 2006, pp. 4392–4395.
[39] K. Chen, Y. Lo, Z. Yang, J. Weiland, M. S. Humayun, and W. Liu, “A
system verification platform for high-density epiretinal prostheses,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 326–337, Jun. 2013.
[40] M. Gross, R. Buss, K. Kohler, J. Schaub, and D. Jager, “Optical signal and
energy transmission for a retina implant,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Eng. Med.
Biol. Conf., 1999.
[41] K. Chen, Z. Yang, L. Hoang, J. Weiland, M. Humayun, and W. Liu, “An
integrated 256-channel epiretinal prosthesis,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,
vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 1946–1956, Sep. 2010.
[42] M. Ortmanns, N. Unger, A. Rocke, M. Gehrke, and H. J. Tietdke, “A
0.1 mm2 , digitally programmable nerve stimulation pad cell with highvoltage capability for a retinal implant,” in Proc. Dig. Techn. Papers
Solid-State Circuits Conf., 2006, pp. 89–98.
[43] D. B. Shire, W. Ellersick, S. K. Kelly, P. Doyle, A. Priplata, W. Drohan,
O. Mendoza, M. Gingerich, B. McKee, J. L. Wyatt, and J. F. Rizzo III,
“ASIC design and data communications for the Boston retinal prosthesis,”
in Proc. IEEE 34th Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., 2012, pp. 292–295.
[44] N. B. Dommel, Y. T. Wong, T. Lehmann, C. W. Dodds, N. H. Lovell, and
G. J. Suaning, “A CMOS retinal neurostimulator capable of focussed,
simultaneous stimulation,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 245–252,
Mar. 2009.
[45] M. Monge, M. Raj, M. H. Nazari, H. C. Chang, Y. Zhao, J. Weiland,
M. Humayun, Y. C. Tai, and A. Emami-Neyestanak, “A fully intraocular
0.0169 mm2 /pixel 512-channel self-calibrating epiretinal prosthesis in
65nm CMOS,” Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Digest Tech.,
Papers (ISSCC), 2013, pp. 296–297.
[46] L. R. Hochberg, M. D. Serruya, G. M. Friehs, J. A. Mukand, M. Saleh,
A. H. Caplan, A. Branner, D. Chen, R. D. Penn, and J. P. Donoghue, “Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia,”
Nature, vol. 442, pp. 164–171, 2006.
[47] J. Csicsvari, D. A. Henze, B. Jamieson, K. D. Harris, A. Sirota, P. Barthó,
K. D. Wise, and G. Buzsáki, “Massively parallel recording of unit and
local field potentials with silicon-based electrodes,” J. Neurophys., vol. 90,
no. 2, pp. 1314–1323, Feb. 2003.
[48] T. Stieglitz, M. Schuettler, and J. U. Meyer, “Micromachined, polyimidebased devices for flexible neural interfaces,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 2,
no. 4, pp. 283–294, Apr. 2000.
[49] J. D. Weiland, D. J. Anderson, and M. S. Humayun, “In vitro electrical properties for iridium oxide versus titanium nitride stimulating electrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 1574–1579, Dec.
1999.
[50] T. L. Rose and L. S. Robblee, “Electrical stimulation with Pt electrodes.
VIII. Electrochemically safe charge injection limits with 0.2 ms pulses,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 1118–1120, Nov. 1990.
[51] M. Schuettler, S. Stiess, B. V. King, and G. J. Suaning, “Fabrication of
implantable microelectrode arrays by laser cutting of silicone rubber and
platinum foil,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. S121–S128, Jan. 2005.
[52] H. Ameri, T. Ratanapakorn, S. Ufer, H. Eckhardt, M. S. Humayun, and
J. D. Weiland, “Toward a wide-field retinal prosthesis,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 122–128, Mar. 2009.
[53] Y. Zhang, S. L. Rauen, M. Koss, A. Calle, B. Diniz, S. Swenson,
F. S. Markland, S. Ufer, H. Eckhardt, M. S. Humayun, and J. D. Weiland,
“Wide-field retinal prosthesis with three dimensional, contoured, silicone/polyimide substrates,” in Proc. IEEE Neural Eng. Conf., San Diego,
CA, USA, Nov. 2013.
[54] R. Eckmiller, D. Neumann, and O. Baruth, “Tunable retina encoders for
retina implants: Why and how,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 45–52,
Jan. 2005.

1423

[55] N. Parikh, L. Itti, M. Humayun, and J. Weiland, “Performance of visually
guided tasks using simulated prosthetic vision and saliency-based cues,”
J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 113–121, Feb. 2013.
[56] C. McCarthy, D. Feng, and N. Barnes, “Augmenting intensity to enhance
scene structure in prosthetic vision,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia
Expo Workshop, San Jose, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[57] V. Pradeep, G. Medioni, and J. D. Weiland, “Visual loop closing using
multi-resolution SIFT grids in metric topological SLAM,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comp. Vision Pattern Recog., Miami, FL, USA, Jun. 2009, pp. 1438–
1445.
[58] V. Pradeep, G. Medioni, and J. D. Weiland, “A wearable system for the
visually impaired,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., 2010,
pp. 6233–6236.
[59] P. J. Nasiatka, N. R. B. Stiles, B. P. McIntosh, M. C. Hauer, J. D. Weiland,
M. S. Humayun, and A. R. TanguayJr., “An intraocular camera for retinal prostheses: Restoring sight to the blind,” in Optical Processes in
Microparticles and Nanostuctures, Advanced Series in Applied Physics,
A. Serpenguzel and A. Poon, Eds.. Singapore: World Scientific, vol. 6,
2011, ch. 20, pp. 385–429.
[60] A. Horsager, R. J. Greenberg, and I. Fine, “Spatiotemporal interactions in
retinal prosthesis subjects,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 51, no. 2,
pp. 1223–1233, Feb. 2010.
[61] D. Nanduri, I. Fine, A. Horsager, G. M. Boynton, M. S. Humayun,
R. J. Greenberg, and J. D. Weiland, “Frequency and amplitude modulation have different effects on the percepts elicited by retinal stimulation,”
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 205–214, Jan. 2012.
[62] A. P. Fornos, J. Sommerhalder, L. Da Cruz, J. A. Sahel, S. Mohand-Said,
F. Hafezi, and M. Pelizzone, “Temporal properties of visual perception on
electrical stimulation of the retina,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 53,
no. 6, pp. 2720–2731, Jun. 2012.
[63] J. Xie, G. J. Wang, L. Yow, M. S. Humayun, J. D. Weiland, C. J. Cela,
H. Jadvar, G. Lazzi, E. Dhrami-Gavazi, and S. H. Tsang, “Preservation of
retinotopic map in retinal degeneration,” Exp. Eye Res., vol. 98, pp. 88–96,
Mar. 2012.
[64] J. D. Weiland, B. Faraji, R. J. Greenberg, M. S. Humayun, and F. Shellock,
“Assessment of MRI issues for the Argus II retinal prosthesis,” Magn.
Reson. Imaging, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 382–389, Apr. 2012.
[65] Y. H. Luo, I. Davagnanam, and L. Dacruz, “MRI brain scans in two patients
with the Argus II retinal prosthesis,” Ophthalmology, vol. 120, no. 8,
p. 1711, Aug. 2013.
[66] D. K. Freeman, J. F. Rizzo III, and S. I. Fried, “Encoding visual information in retinal ganglion cells with prosthetic stimulation,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 56–68, Mar. 2011.
[67] R. J. Jensen and J. F. RizzoIII, “Activation of retinal ganglion cells in
wild-type and rd1 mice through electrical stimulation of the retinal neural
network,” Vis. Res, vol. 48, no. 14, pp. 1562–1568, Jun. 2008.
[68] L. L. Chan, E. J. Lee, M. S. Humayun, and J. D. Weiland, “Both electrical
stimulation thresholds and SMI-32 immunoreactive retinal ganglion cell
density correlate with age in s334ter line 3 rat retina,” J. Neurophys.,
vol. 105, no. 6, pp. 2687–2697, Jun. 2011.
[69] C. Sekirnjak, C. Hulse, L. H. Jepson, P. Hottowy, A. Sher, W. Dabrowski,
A. M. Litke, and E. J. Chichilnisky, “Loss of responses to visual but not
electrical stimulation in ganglion cells of rats with severe photoreceptor
degeneration,” J. Neurophys., vol. 102, no. 6, pp. 3260–3269, Jun. 2009.
[70] R. J. Greenberg, T. J. Velte, M. S. Humayun, G. N. Scarlatis, and E. De
Juan Jr., “A computational model of electrical stimulation of the retinal
ganglion cell,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 505–514,
May 1999.
[71] R. J. Jensen, O. R. Ziv, and J. F Rizzo III, “Thresholds for activation of
rabbit retinal ganglion cells with relatively large, extracellular microelectrodes,” Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1486–1496, Apr.
2005.
[72] D. K. Freeman, D. K. Eddington, J. F. Rizzo III, and S. I. Fried, “Selective activation of neuronal targets with sinusoidal electric stimulation,” J.
Neurophys, vol. 104, no. 5, pp. 2778–2791, May 2010.
[73] A. C. Weitz, M. R. Behrend, N. S. Lee, R. L. Klein, V. A. Chiodo,
W. W. Hauswirth, M. S. Humayun, J. D. Weiland, and R. H. Chow, “Imaging the response of the retina to electrical stimulation with genetically encoded calcium indicators,” J. Neurophys, vol. 109, no. 7, pp. 1979–1988,
Jul. 2013.
[74] D. K. Freeman, J. S. Jeng, S. K. Kelly, E. Hartveit, and S. I. Fried, “Calcium channel dynamics limit synaptic release in response to prosthetic
stimulation with sinusoidal waveforms,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 322–334, Apr. 2011.

1424

[75] R. J. Jensen and J. F. Rizzo III, “Responses of ganglion cells to repetitive
electrical stimulation of the retina,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 78–88,
Jan. 2007.
[76] C. Sekirnjak, P. Hottowy, A. Sher, W. Dabrowski, A. M. Litke, and
E. J. Chichilnisky, “Electrical stimulation of mammalian retinal ganglion
cells with multielectrode arrays,” J. Neurophys., vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 3311–
3327, Jun. 2010.
[77] A. K. Ahuja, M. R. Behrend, M. Kuroda, M. S. Humayun, and
J. D. Weiland, “An in vitro model of a retinal prosthesis,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1744–1753, Jun. 2008.

James D. Weiland (S’92–M’97–SM’08) received
the B.S. degree in 1988, the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering in 1993, the M.S. degree in electrical
engineering in 1995, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering in 1997, all from the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
After receiving the B.S. degree, he worked on
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Engines for four years. He
joined the Wilmer Ophthalmological Institute, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, as a Postdoctoral Fellow in 1997 and was appointed as an
Assistant Professor of ophthalmology in 1999. He was also appointed as an Assistant Professor at the Doheny Eye Institute, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2001. He is currently a Professor of ophthalmology
and biomedical engineering at the University of Southern California. He is also
the Deputy Director of the Biomimetic Microelectronic Systems Engineering
Research Center. His research interests include retinal prostheses, neural prostheses, electrode technology, visual evoked responses, implantable electrical
systems, and wearable visual aids for the blind.
Dr. Weiland is a Senior Member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, the Biomedical Engineering Society, the Sigma Xi, and the
Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014

Mark S. Humayun (M’97–SM’10–F’12) received
the Medical degree from Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
He completed Advanced Fellowship Training in
vitreoretinal surgery from Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore, MD, USA, and also served as a Faculty
Member at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore. He is currently
the Cornelius J. Pings Chair in Biomedical Sciences
and a Professor of ophthalmology and biomedical engineering at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. He
has 148 peer-reviewed publications. He has authored 21 book chapters and has
92 patents listed on the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
Dr. Humayun is a member of the National Academies Institute of Medicine
and the National Academy of Engineering. He is included on many lists of the
Best Doctors in the country. He also received top engineering awards including
being named the R&D Magazine Innovator of the Year in 2005.

