IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2135

Development and Evaluation of a Prior-to-Impact
Fall Event Detection Algorithm
Jian Liu∗ and Thurmon E. Lockhart

Abstract—Automatic fall event detection has attracted research
attention recently for its potential application in fall alarming system and wearable fall injury prevention system. Nevertheless, existing fall detection research is facing various limitations. The current study aimed to develop and validate a new fall detection algorithm using 2-D information (i.e., trunk angular velocity and
trunk angle). Ten healthy elderly were involved in a laboratory
study. Sagittal trunk angular kinematics was measured using inertial measurement unit during slip-induced backward falls and
a variety of daily activities. The new algorithm was, on average,
able to detect backward falls prior to impact, with 100% sensitivity, 95.65% specificity, and 255 ms response time. Therefore, it
was concluded that the new fall detection algorithm was able to
effectively detect falls during motion for the elderly population.
Index Terms—Fall detection, fall intervention, slips and falls.

I. INTRODUCTION
ALLS are the leading cause of injury deaths among people
65 years and older. The National Safety Council reported
that in 2007, 21 600 Americans met their death by falling, and of
these deaths, the majority (over 80%) were people over 65 years
of age [1]. Among all the causes leading to falls, slipping was
considered as the most frequent unforeseen triggering event.
Foot slippage was found to contribute between 40% and 50% of
fall-related injuries [2], and 55% of the falls on the same level
[3].
Among all the fall intervention approaches, automatic fall
event detection has attracted research attention recently [4], for
its potential application in fall alarming system and fall impact
prevention system (e.g., wearable airbag [5], [6]). Nevertheless, the existing approaches have not satisfied the accuracy and
robustness requirements of a satisfactory fall detection system
[7].
Nevertheless, existing fall detection research is facing three
major problems. The first problem is concerned with detection
performance, more specifically the balance between misdetection and false alarms. Due to the heterogeneity of betweensubject motion features and ambiguity of within-subject activity
characteristics, higher fall detection sensitivity is always found

F

Manuscript received December 27, 2013; revised March 10, 2014; accepted
February 2, 2014. Date of publication April 4, 2014 Date of current version June
14, 2014. This work was supported by the National Institute of Health under
Grant L30AG022963-02A1. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. Liu is with the Division of Applied Science and Technology, Marshall
University, Huntington, WV 25755 USA (e-mail: liuji@marshall.edu).
T. E. Lockhart is with the Grado Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060 USA (e-mail: lockhart@vt.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2315784

to be associated with higher false alarm rates [8]. Almost all of
the current fall detection techniques are facing this issue to a
varying degree. The second problem is that the target of detection is unclear. Different devices may actually detect the impact
of a fall, the incapacity to rise/recover after a fall (postfall impact), or the fall itself (the postural disturbance prior to the fall
impact). From the perspective of preventing fall injuries directly
using a wearable protection system, timely and accurate detection of a fall event prior to an impact is of utmost importance.
Unfortunately, very few studies have been conducted in this area
[8], [9]. Last but not least, most fall detection methods were
developed using simulated falls. Recent research has clearly indicated the performance decrement when testing the existing
detection algorithm with real-world falls [10]. Fall detection research with naturalistic falls due to balance perturbations is very
limited [11], [12].
The rationale behind fall detection is that people often execute voluntary activities [e.g., activities of daily living (ADLs)]
in a controlled manner, as suggested by Wu [5]. This is reflected
mainly in terms of motion intensity [5], [9], [13]. In other words,
abrupt motion (with high speed or acceleration) may very likely
be an involuntary activity such as falling. This idea is, explicitly
or implicitly, the basis for various detection algorithms and sensors used by different investigators [7], [14], [15]. However, as
evident in these studies, motion intensity alone is not a sufficient
criterion to differentiate between falling and ADLs. For example, Nyan et al. [14] utilized trunk backward angular velocity
to detect fall events. Though a perfect sensitivity (100%) was
demonstrated, frequent false alarms (5 out of 20 trials) were
observed during bending down and standing up.
Therefore, the objective of the current study was to develop
and validate a fall detection algorithm using 2-D information
(i.e., trunk angular velocity ω and trunk angle α). Unexpected
slip-induced falls were used for algorithm development and validation. It was hypothesized that the new algorithm would have
significantly lower response time than the baseline algorithm
[14]. Lower response time would indicate less time delay between the detected event and the actual fall.

II. METHODS
A. Subjects
Ten elderly participants (age = 75 ± 6 years, weight = 74.1 ±
9.1 kg, height = 174 ± 7.5 cm) were recruited for this study.
They were required to be in good physical health and free
from any major musculoskeletal disorders (e.g., knee or hip
replacement, osteoporosis, etc.) as screened by the study physician. Informed consent was approved by the local Institutional

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2136

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Illustration of fall experiment setup (IMU: inertial measurement unit).

Review Board and obtained from the participants prior to the
experiment.
B. Apparatus
One Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU, Inertia-Link, MicroStrain, Inc., USA) was placed close to the sternum (see Fig. 1).
The inertia link is a miniature orientation sensor, which is capable of measuring 3-D orientation, 3-D acceleration, and 3-D
angular velocity. The sampling rate was set to be 100 Hz.
An adapted biomechanical model [16] with one additional
marker on the sternum was used in this study. A six-camera
infrared motion capture system (ProReflex MCU 240, Qualisys,
Gothenburg, Sweden) was used to measure the 3-D position of
the reflective markers. The sampling frequency was 100 Hz.
The vertical position of the marker on the sternum was used to
identify the motion phases of falling.
A linear walking track with movable floor surfaces was used
to create slip-induced falls. An overhead harness system was
used to prevent the participants’ other body parts except feet
from hitting the ground. Typical household furniture (i.e., bed,
desk, chair, etc.) was used to allow the participant to perform
daily activities in a seminaturalistic living environment.
C. Procedure
Participants were required to change into experimental attire
(e.g., short, sleeveless shirt, and athletic shoes) to facilitate the
attachment of IMUs and reflective markers. An ADL protocol
composing of five activities (i.e., bending over, lying down,
sitting down on a normal chair, sitting into a rocking chair,
sitting into a bucket seat) was performed by all the participants.
Each ADL activity was performed three times. The order of
all the ADLs activities was randomized using a balanced Latinsquare design. The participants were instructed to perform these
ADLs “as naturally as possible” at their own pace.
After the ADL session, a separate walking and fall session
was conducted. Details on the walking and slip-induced fallprotocol can be found in our previous publications [17]. Briefly,

Fig. 2.

Illustration of fall detection algorithm.

unexpected slips were induced by having the participants walk
over a slippery surface (covered with 3:1 personal lubricant and
water mixture) without their awareness. The overhead harness
was adjusted to allow the participants to fall up to 20 cm vertically in case they lost balance.
D. Data Reduction
All of the participants were randomly assigned into two
groups. The data from the first group (four participants) were
used as the training dataset to construct the new detection algorithm. The data from the second group (six participants)
were used as the validation dataset to validate the detection
performance.
The logic flow of the new detection algorithm is illustrated
in Fig. 2. The quadratic form of predictive discriminant analysis [18] was performed on the training dataset in order to
derive the discriminant function, F(α, ω), for the new algorithm
(Algorithm I). The discriminant function provides a numerical
way to differentiate fall trials from ADL trials. As a composite
score integrating both α and ω, the detection threshold is not
associated with any physical meaning. The optimal detection
threshold for Algorithm I was determined based on the relationship between threshold and sensitivity/specificity [12], and the
following rules.
If a specific threshold (or a range of thresholds) could achieve
the highest sensitivity and the highest specificity simultaneously,
this threshold (or the midpoint of that range of thresholds)

LIU AND LOCKHART: DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION OF A PRIOR-TO-IMPACT FALL EVENT DETECTION ALGORITHM

Fig. 3.

2137

Illustration of slip-induced backward fall.

was selected as the optimal detection threshold for the new
algorithm.
If no threshold could achieve the highest sensitivity and the
highest specificity simultaneously, the optimal threshold for that
algorithm had to satisfy: 1) specificity over 95% and 2) the highest sensitivity. In case that no threshold could achieve specificity
over 95%, the optimal threshold for the algorithm was set to be
a threshold associated with the highest specificity with nonzero
sensitivity.
The baseline algorithm (Algorithm II) was formulated from
the literature [14]. The associated discriminant function, F(ω),
is in the form of
F(ω) = −ω

Fig. 4. Composite illustration of trunk angular phase plots from all the ADL
trials (indicated by dots) and all the backward fall trials (indicated by lines).

All of the data processing was performed in a local computer using a custom-designed MATLAB program (R2012 a,
MathWorks, USA).

(1)

where ω is the trunk sagittal angular velocity.
The optimal threshold for the baseline algorithm is set to be
–130°/s [14].
To facilitate the description of the fall dynamics, the following events (i.e., fall initiation, fall detection, fall completion)
were defined and are illustrated in Fig. 2. Fall initiation was
defined similar to slip start [16], which is the instant when the
forward heel velocity occurred after heel contact. Fall detection
was defined as the instant when the fall detection algorithm first
recognized a fall trial. Fall completion was defined as the instant when the trunk center-of-mass reached its lowest vertical
position.
The response time (a detection performance measure) was
defined as the duration between fall initiation and fall detection
(see Fig. 3). This variable was used to quantify how much time
would be required for a fall to be detected after it was initiated.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed at the activity level to quantify the overall performance
of the new algorithm and the baseline algorithm. Briefly, one
data trial (i.e., a group of data points) was associated with one
group attribute (i.e., fall or ADL). During detection, if a fall
was detected at any instant within one trial, then the detection
outcome for this data trial was assigned as fall. Otherwise, the
detection outcome for that data trial was assigned as ADL. Sensitivity and specificity were calculated to quantify the rate of
correctly detected falls relative to the total amount of actual
falls, and the rate of correctly detected ADLs relative to the
total amount of ADLs, respectively. Both sensitivity and specificity were computed at the trial level. Subsequently, area under
curve (AUC) was calculated to quantify the overall detection
performance of both the baseline and the new algorithms.

E. Statistical Analysis
A one-way within-subject ANOVA was conducted with the
algorithm (Algorithms I and II) as the within-subject independent variable and the response time (from all ten subjects) as the
dependent variable. A significant level of p ࣘ 0.05 was used for
hypothesis testing. All the statistical analyses were performed
in JMP 10.0 (SAS Institute, USA).
III. RESULTS
Totally, 179 ADL trials and 13 backward falls were collected
and analyzed in the current study. The trunk sagittal angular
kinematics from all the ADL trials and backward falls are illustrated in Fig. 4. The data points in this phase plot were the basis
for the discriminant analysis. As shown, backward falls were
characterized by a simultaneous occurrence of an extremely
high trunk extension angular velocity and a slight trunk extension angle, which were clearly distinguishable from ADLs.
For the purpose of algorithm generation, four participants’
data (69 ADL trials and 6 slip-induced backward falls) were
used as the training dataset and analyzed for deriving the fall
discriminant function. The discriminant function for the new
algorithm was found to be:
  
  
α
−0.0586
α
·
+
FAlgorithm I = −0.5251 +
ω
−0.0070
ω

  −1
0.0246 −0.0010
α
·
·
(2)
−0.0010 −0.0004
ω
where a specific data trial was detected as a fall if any joint
instantaneous values (α and ω) of this trial was less than a

2138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 5. Activity ROC curves of Algorithms I (new algorithm) and II (baseline
algorithm) using training dataset.

Fig. 6. Activity ROC curves of Algorithms I (new algorithm) and II (baseline
algorithm) using validation dataset.

predetermined detection threshold. Otherwise, this data trial was
detected as nonfall. The optimal detection threshold was determined to be −4.994, as this threshold satisfied the requirements
of achieving the highest sensitivity while maintaining specificity over 95%. The effect of detection threshold on sensitivity
and specificity can be found in our previous publication [12].
In particular, the sensitivity and specificity associated with this
algorithm configuration were 100% and 95.65%, respectively.
The overall discrimination performance of the new algorithm
and the baseline algorithm is illustrated in Fig. 5. As shown, the
new algorithm achieved a very high discrimination performance,
with an AUC of 0.9952, approaching an ideal performance level
(AUC = 1.0). Though being slightly lower than that of new
algorithm, the performance of baseline algorithm was also very
high, with an AUC of 0.9855.
For the purpose of validation, the remaining six participants’
data (105 ADL trials and 7 slip-induced backward fall trials)
were used as the validation dataset and processed by the new
algorithm and the baseline algorithm.
The overall discrimination performances of the Algorithms
I and II for the validation dataset are illustrated in Fig. 6. The
performance of the Algorithm I using the validation dataset
(AUC = 1.0) was slightly higher than that using the training
dataset (AUC = 0.9952). For Algorithm II, the performance
with the validation dataset (0.9743) was slightly lower than that
with the training dataset (0.9855).
The new algorithm achieved a slightly lower specificity with
the validation dataset (95%) than with the training dataset
(95.65%). In addition, the new algorithm achieved the same
level of high sensitivity (100%) with both datasets. Similarly,
the baseline algorithm resulted in a lower specificity with the validation dataset (90%) than with the training dataset (92.75%).
However, the baseline algorithm achieved a higher sensitivity with the validation dataset (85.71%) than with the training
dataset (83.33%).

Comparing the performance of different algorithms, Algorithm I was found to outperform Algorithm II by 14.29% in
sensitivity, and 5% in specificity. In other words, the new algorithm using 2-D information (α and ω) resulted in better
detection performance over the baseline algorithm using just
one-dimension information (ω) in terms of higher sensitivity
and specificity.
Response time was calculated by processing all the fall trials
with both the new algorithm and the baseline algorithm. The
ANOVA test indicated that the new algorithm was able to detect
backward falls significantly faster than the baseline algorithm
(p = 0.0002). On average, the response time from the new
algorithm (Mean = 255 ms, SD = 22 ms) was 29 ms faster than
that from the baseline algorithm (Mean = 284 ms, SD = 34 ms).
V. DISCUSSIONS
Fall event detection is an important fall intervention solution
as it helps reducing the fall-related injuries in an indirect manner and possibly in a direct manner (e.g., wearable protection
system). Therefore, a prior-to-impact type of fall detection algorithm was developed and evaluated in the current study and
was hypothesized to provide detection performance superior to
those existing in research.
The findings from the current study indicated that the new
algorithm achieved a high detection performance in terms of
sensitivity and specificity. The performance was also validated
by the validation dataset. Both sensitivity and specificity are
important quantitative performance measures to evaluate the
effectiveness of a fall detection algorithm [7]. Hence, these two
measures were reported in most of the previous studies [4]. The
performance of the new algorithm in the current study compared
favorably to those in the literature [4]. The current study also
evaluated the performance of the new detection algorithm sideby-side with a baseline algorithm from the literature [14], and

LIU AND LOCKHART: DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION OF A PRIOR-TO-IMPACT FALL EVENT DETECTION ALGORITHM

found that the new algorithm performed better than the baseline
algorithm.
The performance gain of the new algorithm can be attributed
to its unique design that utilizes 2-D information. Previous studies [15], [19], [20] have also employed a multicriteria algorithm
to detect a fall. Nevertheless, such multicriteria algorithms process the multidimensional measurements discretely, in a way
that multiple 1-D measurements were processed either in a sequential manner, or in a parallel manner. In contrast, the 2-D
measurements in the current study were utilized in an integrative
manner. All of the information was analyzed in one discriminant function to generate one processed signal to be compared
against one detection threshold.
Beside the detection performance improvements, the current
study also has several methodological advantages over the previous studies. First, the elderly participants, instead of the young
adults, were involved in the fall testing protocol in the current
study. As reported in the literature [21], [22], the motion characteristics between young and elderly populations are expected to
be different. Therefore, generalization of the testing results obtained from young participants to the elderly population should
be made with caution. Second, the current study induced slipinduced backward falls during walking. For most of the previous
studies [13], [15], [23], various types of falls were performed by
the participants voluntarily falling from standing posture. More
recently, more naturalistic falls due to balance perturbation have
been incorporated in a few fall detection studies [11], [12]. The
current study represents another effort to evaluate an algorithm
in falls initiated during dynamic activity.
The new algorithm was also found to be able to successfully
detect the fall event prior to the impact, with an average response
time to be 255 ms. Response time has great implications in
designing a wearable injury protection system. Being able to
detect falls faster (i.e., shorter response time) or in other words,
being able to provide more time (i.e., more lead-time) for a
wearable protection system to function before the fall impact
occurs is very critical to prevent/reduce impact-related injuries.
Due to the safety concerns, no actual fall impact was allowed in
the current study. Thus, the actual lead-time was not available
from the current study.
The trunk segment was selected as the focus of the current
study based on the practical consideration that trunk segment
was an ideal site of ambulatory sensor attachment. It is agreed by
many researchers that the trunk segment is the optimal location
for a fall detector due to its proximity to the body’s center of
mass and acceptable user compliance [13], [24]. Nevertheless,
the upper arms, shanks, and head could also be desirable body
sites for fall detectors attachment [25].
The new algorithm, in essence, is a threshold technique. It
may be argued that other classification techniques should be
adopted in developing a fall detection algorithm. These techniques may include neural networks [26], wavelet technique
[27], [28], and so on. However, as explained in details by Karantonis et al. [29], the real-time and prior-to-impact nature of fall
detection task imposed several constraints on choosing a classification technique and dictates the choice of threshold technique
in the algorithm design.

2139

As a proof of the concept, the current study was associated
with various limitations and simplifications. First, the detection algorithm was developed specifically for backward falls.
The backward falls were chosen in the current study mainly
due to the fact that slipping was considered the most frequent
unforeseen triggering event leading to majority of the falls on
the same level [3]. In the future, it is certainly desirable to further enhance the detection algorithm for as many different types
of falls as possible. Second, the fall dynamics in the current
study was not complete due to the adoption of safety harness.
In addition, the current study is also limited by small sample
size and healthy elderly participants only. Future studies with
a larger sample size and diverse participant populations would
certainly enhance the external validity of the new fall detection
algorithm. In addition, a fall detection with generic detection
threshold may not be able to achieve the optimal performance
at individual user level, which could be addressed by adopting an individual-specific detection model [11] or an automatic
individual calibration concept [12].
In conclusion, the current study developed and validated a
new fall detection algorithm, which is able to detect slip-induced
backward falls prior to impact with high sensitivity and specificity. Such algorithm would be extremely useful toward developing a wearable fall injury protection system.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The paper’s contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institute of Health.

REFERENCES
[1] National Safety Council, Injury Facts, Itasca, IL, USA, 2009.
[2] T. K. Courtney, G. S. Sorock, D. P. Manning, J. W. Collins, and M. A.
Holbein-Jenny, “Occupational slip, trip, and fall-related injuries—Can the
contribution of slipperiness be isolated?” Ergonomics, vol. 44, pp. 1118–
1137, Oct. 20, 2001.
[3] SWEA, “Occupational disease and occupational accidents 1998,” Swedish
Work Environment Authority and Statistics, Stockholm, Sweden, 2000.
[4] N. Noury, P. Rumeau, A. K. Bourke, G. Olaighin, and J. E. Lundy, “A
proposal for the classification and evaluation of fall detectors,” Irbm, vol.
29, pp. 340–349, Dec. 2008.
[5] G. Wu, “Distinguishing fall activities from normal activities by velocity
characteristics,” J. Biomech., vol. 33, pp. 1497–1500, Nov. 2000.
[6] T. Tamura, T. Yoshimura, M. Sekine, M. Uchida, and O. Tanaka, “A wearable airbag to prevent fall injuries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 910–914, Nov. 2009.
[7] M. Mubashir, L. Shao, and L. Seed, “A survey on fall detection: Principles
and approaches,” Neurocomputing, vol. 100, pp. 144–152, 2013.
[8] M. N. Nyan, F. E. H. Tay, and E. Murugasu, “A wearable system for
pre-impact fall detection,” J. Biomech., vol. 41, pp. 3475–3481, 2008.
[9] G. Wu and S. W. Xue, “Portable preimpact fall detector with inertial
sensors,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 178–
183, Apr. 2008.
[10] F. Bagala, C. Becker, A. Cappello, L. Chiari, K. Aminian, J. M. Hausdorff,
W. Zijlstra, and J. Klenk, “Evaluation of accelerometer-based fall detection algorithms on real-world falls,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 5, p. e37062,
Doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0037062.
[11] X. Hu and X. Qu, “An individual-specific fall detection model based on
the statistical process control chart,” Safety Sci., vol. 64, pp. 13–21, 2014.
[12] J. Liu and T. E. Lockhart, “Automatic individual calibration in fall
detection—An integrative ambulatory measurement framework,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 16, pp. 504–510, 2013.

2140

[13] A. K. Bourke, J. V. O’Brien, and G. M. Lyons, “Evaluation of a thresholdbased tri-axial accelerometer fall detection algorithm,” Gait Posture,
vol. 26, pp. 194–199, 2007.
[14] M. N. Nyan, F. E. H. Tay, A. W. Y. Tan, and K. H. W. Seah, “Distinguishing
fall activities from normal activities by angular rate characteristics and
high-speed camera characterization,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 28, pp. 842–
849, Oct. 2006.
[15] U. Lindemann, A. Hock, M. Stuber, W. Keck, and C. Becker, “Evaluation
of a fall detector based on accelerometers: A pilot study,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 43, pp. 548–551, Sep. 2005.
[16] T. E. Lockhart, J. C. Woldstad, and J. L. Smith, “Effects of age-related
gait changes on the biomechanics of slips and falls,” Ergonomics, vol. 46,
pp. 1136–1160, Oct. 10, 2003.
[17] J. Liu and T. E. Lockhart, “Age-related joint moment characteristics during normal gait and successful reactive-recovery from unexpected slip
perturbations,” Gait Posture, vol. 30, pp. 276–281, 2009.
[18] C. J. Huberty, Applied Discriminant Analysis. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, 1994.
[19] M. Kangas, A. Konttila, P. Lindgren, I. Winblad, and T. Jamsa, “Comparison of low-complexity fall detection algorithms for body attached
accelerometers,” Gait Posture, vol. 28, pp. 285–291, 2008.
[20] M. Kangas, I. Vikman, J. Wiklander, P. Lindgren, L. Nyberg, and T. Jamsa,
“Sensitivity and specificity of fall detection in people aged 40 years and
over,” Gait Posture, vol. 29, pp. 571–574, Jun. 2009.
[21] Y. Lajoie, N. Teasdale, C. Bard, and M. Fleury, “Upright standing and gait:
Are there changes in attentional requirements related to normal aging?”
Exp. Aging Res., vol. 22, pp. 185–198, Apr.–Jun. 1996.
[22] E. T. Hsiao and S. N. Robinovitch, “Common protective movements govern unexpected falls from standing height,” J. Biomech., vol. 31, pp. 1–9,
Jan. 1998.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

[23] K. Karamanidis, A. Arampatzis, and L. Mademli, “Age-related deficit in
dynamic stability control after forward falls is affected by muscle strength
and tendon stiffness,” J. Electromyogr Kinesiol, vol. 18, pp. 980–989, Dec.
2008.
[24] K. Doughty, R. Lewis, and A. McIntosh, “The design of a practical and
reliable fall detector for community and institutional telecare,” J. Telemed.
Telecare, vol. 6, pp. 150–154, 2000.
[25] X. Hu and X. Qu, “Differentiating slip-induced falls from normal walking and successful recovery after slips using kinematic measures,” Ergonomics, vol. 56, pp. 856–867, 2013.
[26] K. Kiani, C. J. Snijders, and E. S. Gelsema, “Recognition of daily life
motor activity classes using an artificial neural network,” Archives Phys.
Med. Rehabil., vol. 79, pp. 147–154, Feb. 1998.
[27] M. N. Nyan, F. E. H. Tay, K. H. W. Seah, and Y. Y. Sitoh, “Classification of
gait patterns in the time-frequency domain,” J. Biomech., vol. 39, pp. 2647–
2656, 2006.
[28] B. Najafi, K. Aminian, A. Paraschiv-Ionescu, F. Loew, C. Bula, and P.
Robert, “Ambulatory system for human motion analysis using a kinematic
sensor: Monitoring of daily physical activity in the elderly,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 711–723, Jun. 2003.
[29] D. M. Karantonis, M. R. Narayanan, M. Mathie, N. H. Lovell, and B. G.
Celler, “Implementation of a real-time human movement classifier using
a triaxial accelerometer for ambulatory monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 156–167, Jan. 2006.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

