IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2125

Unconstrained Sleep Apnea Monitoring Using
Polyvinylidene Fluoride Film-Based Sensor
Su Hwan Hwang, Hong Ji Lee, Hee Nam Yoon, Da Woon Jung, Yu-Jin G. Lee, Yu Jin Lee, Do-Un Jeong,
and Kwang Suk Park∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We established and tested an unconstrained sleep
apnea monitoring method using a polyvinylidene (PVDF) filmbased sensor for continuous and accurate monitoring of apneic
events occurred during sleep. Twenty-six sleep apnea patients and
six normal subjects participated in this study. Subjects’ respiratory signals were measured using the PVDF-based sensor during
polysomnography. The PVDF sensor comprised a 4 × 1 array, and
a thin silicon pad was placed over the sensor to prevent damage.
Total thickness of the merged system was approximately 1.1 mm
which was thin enough to prevent the subject from being consciously aware of its presence. It was designed to be placed under
subjects’ backs and installed between a bed cover and mattress.
The proposed method was based on the standard deviation of the
PVDF signals, and it was applied to a test set for detecting apneic
events. The method’s performance was assessed by comparing the
results with a sleep physician’s manual scoring. The correlation
coefficient for the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) values between the
methods was 0.94 (p < 0.001). The areas under the receiver operating curves at three AHI threshold levels (>5, >15, and >20)
for sleep apnea diagnosis were 0.98, 0.99, and 0.98, respectively.
For min-by-min apnea detection, the method classified sleep apnea
with an average sensitivity of 72.9%, specificity of 90.6%, accuracy of 85.5%, and kappa statistic of 0.60. The developed system
and method can be applied to sleep apnea detection in home or
ambulatory monitoring.
Index Terms—Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI), PVDF-sensor, unconstrained sleep apnea monitoring.

I. INTRODUCTION
LEEP APNEA is a typical sleep-related breathing disorder
(SRBD) characterized by frequent, abnormal cessation of
respiration during sleep [1]. During the apneic period, there is an
increased effort in breathing, leading to arousal and sleep fragmentation [2]. Thus, severe and frequent sleep apnea disrupts

S

Manuscript received July 9, 2013; revised November 4, 2013; accepted March
25, 2014. Date of publication April 4, 2014; date of current version June 14,
2014. This work was supported by Samsung Electronics, Inc. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
S. H. Hwang, H. J. Lee, H. N. Yoon, and D. W. Jung are with the Interdisciplinary Program in Bioengineering, Seoul National University, Seoul
110-799, Korea (e-mail: lostzoo@bmsil.snu.ac.kr; hongjidan@bmsil.snu.ac.kr;
hnyoon@bmsil.snu.ac.kr; dwjung@bmsil.snu.ac.kr).
Y.-J. G. Lee is with the Seoul Metropolitan Eunpyeong Hospital, Seoul
122-913, Korea (e-mail: eugenie8199@hotmail.com).
Y. J. Lee and D.-U. Jeong are with the Department of Neuropsychiatry and
the Center for Sleep and Chronobiology, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul 110-744, Korea (e-mail: ewpsych@hanmail.net; jeongdu@snu.ac.kr).
∗ K. S. Park is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799, Korea (e-mail:
pks@bmsil.snu.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2314452

the sleep architecture of subjects and can lead to sleep disorders such as severe snoring [3], fatigue, daytime sleepiness [4],
and systemic hypertension [5]. In addition, apnea-induced hypoxia during sleep can cause stroke [6], arrhythmias [7], diabetes [8], and cardiovascular diseases [9]. In previous study,
Young et al. reported that approximately 2% of adult women
and 4% of adult men in the middle-age range are affected by
sleep apnea [10]. Kim et al. analyzed data to determine the
prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) in 457 Korean
adults aged 40–69 years and 27% of men and 16% of women,
respectively, had SDB [11]. Furthermore, a recent study of SDB
in adults discovered the actual prevalence rates of SDB representing substantial increase over the last two decades (10%
among 30–49-year-old men; 17% among 50–70-year-old men;
3% among 30–49-year-old women; and 9% among 50–70-yearold women) [12].
In a general sleep and sleep-related disorder monitoring system, polysomnography (PSG) has been regarded as the goldstandard method. According to the PSG recording and diagnosis
rules, apneic events are detected based on the nasal-oral airflow
amplitude and blood oxygen saturation (SaO2 ) level [13]. Even
though PSG has been used for the assessment of sleep apnea,
the detection of apneic events using PSG has some problems.
First, PSG recording during sleep is an inconvenient experience
for subjects because numerous sensors are attached to the patient’s body (SpO2 ) and face (nasal-oral airflow). Second, the
manual scoring of nocturnal apneic events from PSG data is
a very time-consuming and laborious process, and it demands
specially trained sleep experts.
For overcoming some of these drawbacks, in recent years,
many alternative methods without using PSG to detect apneic
or hypopneic events have been proposed. These studies have involved sleep apnea detection based on several biosignals. For example, electrocardiogram (ECG)-based studies have shown that
RR-interval- or R-peak amplitude-based methods [14]–[17] are
useful for apnea detection. A ballistocardiogram (BCG)-based
system measured the respiration rate with high correlation using
an air mattress with a balancing tube [18]. Pulse oximetry- and
respiratory-based studies [19], [20] revealed a relatively high
correlation coefficient (r > 0.9) between the apnea-hypopnea
index (AHI) from PSG and the suggested one. Despite these
efforts, a clearly superior method or system for unconstrained
sleep apnea monitoring still does not exist.
Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) film is a very thin and flexible film that is widely used for film transducer or speaker elements [21]. This piezoelectric polymer is good for applications
where mechanical loads are applied [22]. In particular, it can be

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

applied where signal-to-noise requirements influence very low
mass loading by the sensors. In previous studies, a PVDF film
was used as a sensor for recoding several biosignals such as respiration [23]–[25], heart rate [26], and BCG [27], [28]. Specifically, in 2007, the reliability and validity of many alternative
sensors (including a PVDF sensor) for measuring apnea and hypopnea were reported, along with their scoring approaches, in
an American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) paper [29].
Berry et al. compared the capability of a PVDF thermal sensor
attached to the upper lip with a pneumotachograph to detect respiratory events in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) patients [30]. In
addition, Koo et al. used PVDF-incorporated belts surrounding
the chest and abdomen to validate respiratory event classification during PSG [31]. Although these studies constrainedly
measured a subject’s physiological signals to detect sleep apnea, to the best of our knowledge, fully unconstrained systems or
methods for monitoring apneic events during sleep using signals
measured by PVDF-based sensors have rarely been studied.
This study was conducted to establish an unconstrained sleep
apnea monitoring method using a PVDF film-based sensor for
the continuous and accurate monitoring of apneic events occurring during sleep.

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF SUBJECT- AND PSG-RELATED PARAMETERS
(MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION)

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Participants and PSG Data
Thirty-two subjects participated in this study. Twenty-eight
nocturnal PSG datasets were collected at the Seoul National
University Hospital (SNUH) from July 2012 to February 2013.
Four diurnal PSG datasets were additionally recorded for the relatively young (<30 years) participants. All of the PSG datasets
were collected based on the standard PSG routine and scored by
registered polysomnographic technologist who has more than
ten year experience in scoring human sleep records according to the criteria of Rechtschaffen and Kales [32]. Additionally, scoring result were reviewed and confirmed once again by
sleep physician who is a member of AASM and professor of
neuropsychiatry, a member of AASM & American Board of
Sleep Medicine. Using the international 10–20 system, electroencephalogram (EEG) electrodes were placed at the O2-A1
and C3-A2 positions. In addition to the EEG data, bilateral
electrooculogram, electromyogram from the chin and bilateral
tibialis anterior muscles, lead II ECG, nasal-oral airflow, abdominal and thoracic movement, snoring, and pulse oximetry
(SpO2 ) signals were also collected. During sleep, the subjects
respiratory signals from the PVDF film-based sensor were simultaneously recorded with the PSG data. All of the signals
were measured using an NI-DAQ 6221 (National Instruments,
Austin, TX, USA) data acquisition unit with a 250-Hz sampling
rate.
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) of SNUH approved all
of these procedures. All of the participants were provided with
information about the methods and purpose of the study and
informed consent approved by the IRB was obtained. A summary of the subject- and PSG-related parameters is presented
in Table I. Based on the AHI (events per hour) data, the apnea

severity of each subject was graded as normal (<5), mild (5–15),
moderate (15–30), or severe (>30).
B. Respiratory Signal Acquisition System
The respiratory signals of the subjects were measured using
the PVDF film-based sensor. During the inhalation and exhalation respiratory phases, different levels of pressure caused by
the volume change in the body were applied to the PVDF sensor.
As a result, the output signals of the sensor reflect the normal
or apneic breathing of the subjects. The PVDF sensor was a
122-μm-thick silver ink metalized piezofilm sensor (part number: 3-1004-346-0, Measurement Specialties, Inc., Hampton,
VA, USA) and its typical specifications as follows:
Electro-M echanical Conversion

(1 direction)23 × 10 −1 2 m /V
700 × 10 −6 N/V

M echano-Electrical Conversion

(1 direction)12 × 10 −3 V
p er m icrostrain
400 × 10 −3 V /μm , 14.4 V /N

Capacitance

1.36 × 10 −9 F, Dissipation Factor of
0.018@10K Hz
Im p edance of 12 KΩ@10 KHz

M aximum Op erating Voltage

DC : 280 V (yields 7 μm displacem ent
in 1 direction)
AC : 840 V (yields 21 μm displacem ent
in 1 direction)

M aximum Applied Force

6 −9kgF (yields voltage output of
830 to 1275 V )

HWANG et al.: UNCONSTRAINED SLEEP APNEA MONITORING USING POLYVINYLIDENE FLUORIDE FILM-BASED SENSOR

Fig. 1. (a) Size of PVDF sensors and combined system. (b) Actual system
installation.

Fig. 2. Signal output from PVDF sensor (ch. 3) is shown in top figure. It includes many types of physiological signals such as respiration, BCG, and body
movement. The middle panel shows the nasal airflow measured by a thermocouple sensor from the PSG data. The bottom figure indicates a physician-diagnosed
apneic event. When an apneic event occurred, the variation in the PVDF signal
was relatively small compared with the other cases.

It was installed between a bed cover and a bed mattress to
avoid direct contact with the subjects body. A thin silicon pad
was placed over the sensor to prevent damage. The total thickness of the merged system (PVDF + pad) was approximately
1.1 mm, which was thin enough to prevent the subject from
being consciously aware of its presence. Actually, none of the
participants had an uncomfortable feeling or felt that the sensor
interfered with their sleep from PSG report after PSG. Thus,
we can conclude that the proposed method is an unconstrained
sleep apnea monitoring method because subjects are not experiencing psychological and physical stress. As shown in Fig. 1,
the sensor was composed of a 4 × 1 array and was designed to
be placed under the subject’s back [22].
C. Apneic Events Decision Method
In this study, apneic events included apnea and hypopnea
events. As shown in Fig. 2, the signal outputs from the PVDF
sensor included many types of physiological signals, including those for respiration, BCG, and body movement. When an
apneic event occurred, the change in the PVDF signal was relatively small compared with the other cases. Thus, to distinguish

2127

apneic events from normal breathing or body movement, the
standard deviation of PVDF signals was used in this study. To
determine a method for apnea monitoring, PSG and PVDF data
from six subjects (about 20%) with normal-to-severe apnea were
randomly selected as a training set.
All of the detection procedures for apneic events are concisely
described in Fig. 3. From the analysis of the training set, the data
from PVDF channels #3 and #4, which reflected changes in the
abdomen volume induced by breathing, were selected for the
final analysis. At 60-s intervals, the raw signal (R_PVDF) data
from each PVDF channel were low-pass-filtered at 0.5 Hz (fifth
order, IIR Butterworth) and both channel respiration signals
(RESP) were obtained. After that, principal component analysis
(PCA) was applied to R_PVDF and RESP, respectively. PCA
is a well-known method for feature extraction and is defined as
an orthogonal linear transformation. PCA reduces the dimensionality of a data matrix to find new variables using the eigenvectors with the largest eigenvalues. These are sorted according
to decreasing eigenvalue, and the eigenvalues with lower significance are discarded. In this way, the data dimensionality is
decreased without a loss of information [33]. Thus, to obtain a
common feature between the two channels data and to reduce
the noise contamination, PCA factor 1 (PC1) was extracted from
the R_PVDF (PC1R PVDF ) and RESP (PC1RESP ).
After applying PCA, 60-s datasets from PC1R PVDF and
PC1RESP were divided into six periods of 10 s each. Before
the threshold determination, the standard deviation of each 10-s
data set from PC1RESP was calculated. In (1), xm and xk denote
a 10-s PC1RESP dataset and 10-s PC1R PVDF dataset, and σm
and σk represent the standard deviations of xm and xk , where
m and k are segment numbers (1 ≤ m, k ≤ 6)


σm = E(x2m ) − (E(xm ))2 , σk = E(x2k ) − (E(xk ))2 .
(1)
To minimize the underestimation of apnea because of an increased threshold caused by body movement, the threshold was
selected using the average of the remaining values, with the exception of the largest value, among σm . In this way, we were
able to obtain an adaptive threshold for PC1RESP for every 60-s
period
Adaptive Threshold =

1
5

6


σm

m =1, m = j

where σj = max{σm }, 1 ≤ m ≤ 6.

(2)

Using σk and σm , each body movement, normal breathing,
apneic event, or out-of-bed period was determined based on the
following conditions, which are listed according to their priority.
In this study, the maximum output voltage of the PVDF signals
was 5 V.
Condition 1: σk > 0.4 × maximum output voltage (for movement).
Condition 2: σm > 0.7 × adaptive threshold (for normal
breathing).
Condition 3: 0.1 × adaptive threshold < σm < 0.7 × adaptive
threshold (for apneic event).

2128

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 3. Apneic event decision procedure for every 60-s period. The procedure was based on the following four steps: 1) extraction of the respiratory signal from
PVDF data; 2) principal component extraction and data segmentation; 3) threshold determination; and 4) apneic event decision. All values used in the conditions
were determined based on the training set data. For example, the subfigure at the lower left corner shows value determination for the upper threshold of the apneic
event decision.

Condition 4: σm < 0.1 × adaptive threshold (for out-of-bed
event).
All of the values used for the conditions were based on the
training set data. For instance, the upper threshold was determined by the mean performance evaluation of the training set
for an apneic event decision. As shown in the lower left corner
of Fig. 3, when the value for the upper threshold of an apneic
event decision was 0.7, the mean performance was the highest.
Interestingly, this 70% threshold level for an apneic event decision corresponded to standard hypopnea scoring rules [34].
In this analysis, Cohen’s kappa (k) coefficient was marked as
the “mean performance.” All of the analyses were performed
using MATLAB software (MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA,
R2012b version).

D. Statistical Analysis and Evaluation
To evaluate the AHI estimation performance, a linear regression analysis was used for the correlation coefficient, and the
Bland–Altman method was used to assess the agreement [35].
In this analysis, statistical significance at the 5% level was used.
In addition, the sleep apnea diagnosis was conducted based on
three levels of AHI cutoff values because there was no threshold value for AHI that clearly discriminated patients with and
without sleep apnea [19].
According to the min-by-min analysis, if apneic events occurred more than once (up to six), the current minute was considered to be an “estimated apnea minute (ApneaEST ).” The same
rule was applied to the apneic events from PSG (ApneaPSG ),
and min-by-min statistical analyses between ApneaEST and
ApenaPSG were performed. The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy were used for these statistical analyses.

In this study, the sensitivity denoted the proportion of correctly identified apnea minutes, while the specificity denoted
the proportion of other correctly identified states. In addition,
the performance of the proposed method was quantified using
Cohen’s kappa, which is very commonly used for studies that
measure the agreement between two separate evaluators [36].
III. RESULTS
A. Results of AHI Estimation
To evaluate the performance of our system, the algorithm
determined by the training set data was applied to the test set
data, and the apneic event estimation results were compared
with the ones from PSG. The AHI from the proposed method
(AHIEST ) was compared with the one from PSG (AHIPSG ). As
shown in Fig. 4(a), a significant correlation (Pearson’s correlation coefficient = 0.94, p < 0.001) was found between AHIEST
and AHIPSG . Fig. 4(b) shows the agreement between AHIEST
and AHIPSG , which was evaluated by using the Bland–Altman
method. In this figure, the mean difference between the AHI values was −2.3 events/h (no significant difference) and approximately 96% (25 of 26) of the cases were within the dashed lines
(95% confidential interval, –15.0–10.2). Table II shows a comparison between the AHI estimation results from the proposed
method and those from previous methods. The results from the
nasal-oral airflow-based [20] and PVDF thermal sensor-based
methods [37] had similar performances compared with ours. In
other studies, a nasal airflow-based method [38] showed a higher
correlation coefficient than our method, while a peripheral arterial tonometry-based method [19] showed a lower correlation
coefficient than the one from ours. In Table II, concordance
means the ratio of cases that were within two standard deviations in the Bland–Altman plot.

HWANG et al.: UNCONSTRAINED SLEEP APNEA MONITORING USING POLYVINYLIDENE FLUORIDE FILM-BASED SENSOR

2129

TABLE III
DIAGNOSTIC RESULTS AT THREE AHI THRESHOLD LEVELS

operating characteristics curve (ROC) was greater than 0.98. At
AHI thresholds of 5 and 15, there was one false positive in each
case. However, the estimated AHIs slightly exceeded each AHI
cutoff level (5.1 and 15.3).
C. Results of Min-By-Min Sleep Apnea Detection

Fig. 4. (a) Relationship between AHIs from PSG and our method. A significant
(p < 0.001) correlation was found between these AHIs. (b) Bland–Altman
plots between AHIs from PSG and our method. All but one of the cases were
distributed within two standard deviations.
TABLE II
RELATIONSHIP AMONG AHIS ESTIMATED BY EACH METHOD AND PSG

The min-by-min apnea detection results are shown in Table IV. From the test set data, each statistical result was calculated depending on the severity of AHI. From the normal
(AHI < 5) to severe level (AHI > 30), the specificity and accuracy were gradually decreased. A kappa statistical analysis
revealed a borderline case between substantial (0.6 < k < 0.8)
and moderate agreement (0.4 < k < 0.6), whereby the overall
k = 0.6. Fig. 5 shows apnea minute estimation results for the
best case (see Fig. 5(a), subject #5) and worst case (see Fig. 5(b),
subject #21) from the nocturnal data. In the best case, the
AHI, sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and kappa statistic were
46.2 events/h, 91.9%, 88.7%, 90.8%, and 0.79, respectively.
In the worst case, the corresponding values were 5.1 events/h,
82.9%, 87.7%, 87.3%, and 0.45, respectively.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Agreement Between the Proposed Method and PSG

B. Results of Diagnosing Sleep Apnea
With dichotomous AHI thresholds of 5, 15, and 20 events per
hour, the sleep apnea diagnosis results for the test set data were
assessed using various statistical values. As shown in Table III,
for all of the AHI thresholds, the kappa statistic revealed almost
perfect agreement (k > 0.8), and the area under the receiver

In this study, we established a fully unconstrained sleep apnea monitoring method using a PVDF film-based sensor. Respiratory signals were obtained from the subjects without their
even being aware of the recording process, and apneic events
during sleep were automatically detected using the suggested
algorithm. The apnea detection process was based on the following steps: 1) the extraction of the respiratory signal from
the PVDF data; 2) principal component extraction and data
segmentation; 3) threshold determination; and 4) apneic event
decisions. When the proposed method was applied to the test
set data, it was shown that the estimated AHI from the present
study was significantly correlated with the one from PSG [see
Fig. 4(a)]. In the min-by-min analysis (see Table IV), for all of
the subjects, the kappa statistics revealed greater than moderate
agreement (k > 0.4). Furthermore, about half (12 of 26) of the
subjects showed substantial agreement (k > 0.6) in the test set.
Other results (see Table III) showed that the suggested algorithm

2130

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE IV
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF MIN-BY-MIN SLEEP APNEA DETECTION

B. Comparison With Previous Studies

Fig. 5. (a) Min-by-min apnea detection results for best case (subject #5).
The AHI, sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and kappa statistic values were
46.2 events/h, 91.9%, 88.7%, 90.8%, and 0.79, respectively. (b) Results for
worst case (subject #21). The corresponding values were 5.1 events/h, 82.9%,
87.7%, 87.3%, and 0.45, respectively.

could accurately diagnose the sleep apnea patients based on the
high accuracy and agreement of the results. Consequently, we
can conclude that the results of our method were comparable to
those of PSG. Because the PVDF film-based method is simple
and does not require trained experts, if combined with signal
processing unit, it can be used for ambulatory sleep apnea monitoring. Moreover, it can support apnea event detection during
PSG recording.

The proposed unconstrained PVDF-based method had an accuracy similar to that for the ambulatory device that is currently
used in clinical practice or constrained PVDF-based methods
(see Table II). For instance, Ayas et al. used a wrist-worn device that combines a peripheral arterial tonometer (PAT), actigraph, and arterial oxygen saturation to diagnose OSA [19].
Even though the device used the attenuation of the PAT signal
amplitude, which is strongly correlated with apnea [39], along
with the SaO2 signal, which directly reflects the absence of
breathing, the correlation coefficient between PSG AHI and the
wrist-worn device was lower than that for ours. Another example is the NightWatch (NW) system, which records the SaO2 ,
nasal-oral airflow, and chest and abdominal wall motion using
sensors attached to the patient’s face and body [20]. White et al.
assessed the accuracy of the NW system used at home and in
the lab to monitor sleep apnea. Although NW collected many
physiological signals for apnea detection, its AHI estimation
performance was similar to our results. However, in the present
study, the method and system were not applied at home, and the
apnea detection accuracy might be reduced under this condition. Han et al. also detected apneic events using a single nasal
airflow channel from PSG data [38]. The performance of their
method was found to be better than ours in a linear regression
analysis of AHI, while the concordance on the Bland–Altman
plot calculated in this study was slightly higher than that found
in their study.
Koo et al. detected respiratory events using PVDF impedance
belts surrounding the patient’s chest and abdomen [31], and
their method was comparable to standard respiratory inductance
plethysmography in determining respiratory events during PSG.
Nakano et al. monitored oronasal airflow using a PVDF thermal
sensor, and found that an airflow monitor could be used to detect SDB [37]. Berry et al. compared the readings from a PVDF
thermal sensor attached to the upper lip with a mask pneumotachograph and accurately detected respiratory events compared
with the detection accuracy of pneumotachography in patients
with OSA [30]. Even though they used belts or a thermal sensor that could directly measure the respiratory-induced signals,
there were no significant differences in the AHI estimation results between the constrained methods and our unconstrained
method. In particular, the apnea diagnostic ability at a fixed
AHI threshold of the proposed method performed better in relation to the sensitivity, specificity, kappa statistics, and area

HWANG et al.: UNCONSTRAINED SLEEP APNEA MONITORING USING POLYVINYLIDENE FLUORIDE FILM-BASED SENSOR

under the ROC than the other methods with a PVDF-based
sensor [31], [37]. Moreover, the greatest disadvantage of these
systems was the necessity for the subject to wear or attach the
PVDF-based sensor to their body or face during sleep, which
could interrupt their normal sleep architecture. However, the
number of analyzed apnea datasets in this study was less than
those of the previous PVDF-based studies [31], [37], and our
apnea detection performance could be different with larger data
sets.
C. Validation of PVDF Film-Based Sensors
In this study, the PVDF sensors were uniformly oriented under
the subject’s back position in a particular direction. To ensure
the validity and reliability of the respiratory signal measurements, the PVDF sensors were aligned horizontally, as shown
in Fig. 1, because subjects tend to move more often from side
to side than in the transverse planar direction (up and down)
during sleep. Sensors that are similar in shape and size to ours
can easily be found in several commercialized sleep monitoring devices. For example, SleepScan SL-501 (TANITA, Tokyo,
Japan) is a device that collects numerous kinds of physiological signals during sleep, including the pulse rate, respiration
rate, and body motion data, and it is designed to be long in the
horizontal direction. Other analogous examples are the EarlySense System (EarlySense, Waltham, MA, USA) and Nemuri
(which means “Sleep”) SCAN NN-1300 (PARAMOUNT BED,
Tokyo, Japan). Using PVDF sensors, we could obtain not only
respiration signals, but also BCG signals. Moreover, when the
PVDF sensor was aligned horizontally, the best signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) for the BCG signal was revealed in the preliminary
test. It is speculated that blood ejection-induced vibration was
transferred more strongly along a particular axis to the sensor
through the bed mattress during the recording. However, the
results of the SNR test that depended on the PVDF direction
were not included in this paper.
As mentioned in Section II, the data from PVDF channels
#1 and #2 that reflected changes in the chest volume induced
by breathing were not selected for the final analysis. From the
training set data, the apnea detection performances using all
of the channels were lower than those from channels #3 and
#4. Because the subjects slept most of the time with pillows
during PSG, there was a small gap between the bed mattress
and a subject’s upper body. One could speculate that the volume
change in the chest during respiration did not effectively transfer
to the PVDF because the upper body was not fully in contact
with the sensor. Furthermore, a PVDF impedance belt-based
study showed that the respiratory signal measured by a chest belt
was less correlated with the airflow than that from an abdomen
belt [31]. As a result, channels #1 and #2 showed relatively high
error components in the PVDF signals, which could degrade the
apnea detection performance. This is why the data from these
channels were finally excluded in the analysis.
D. Validation of Apnea Detection Algorithm
During PSG recording, the respiration patterns were different
for the various subjects and varied depending on the position

2131

in bed and the sleep posture. To consider these things, adaptive
thresholds were set based on the standard deviation of the PVDF
signals for every minute for each subject in the apnea detection
algorithm. As a result, we could obtain accurate AHI estimation
results compared with PSG AHI. However, our method tended
to underestimate apneic events at a higher AHI level, as shown in
Fig. 4(a) and (b). At this level, apneic events occurred frequently
in a short period, and the apneic event detection was ineffective under these conditions. In this study, the apnea detection
algorithm was developed based on a “fixed time window” in
consideration of real-time processing for ambulatory or home
monitoring purposes. Apnea can persist for more than 30 s (1
epoch) in patients with severe apnea, and these durations can be
diagnosed as normal breathing in our algorithm because the apnea threshold was set based on a change in the standard deviation
of the PVDF data in the fixed time window. This is why we used
a 60-s analysis window instead of 1 epoch, which is the most
widely used time scale in sleep studies. Despite these efforts,
the increased baseline of the threshold due to the restricted time
window made it difficult to detect consecutive multiple apneic
events.
In contrast, our method tended to overestimate apneic events
at the lower AHI level. One could speculate that our method
may misestimate a respiratory signal drop as an apneic event
that does not meet the standard scoring criteria. Moreover, other
SRBD such as snoring, respiratory event-related arousals, upper
airway obstruction, and Cheyne–Stokes breathing could occur
in patients with sleep apnea [2]. These can also influence the
amplitude decrease in the respiratory signals and might be estimated to be sleep apnea or hypopnea in our system. Moreover,
PVDF signals may be distorted by motion artifacts that cannot
be removed completely from the analysis process, which is one
of the reasons that our method overestimates apneic events at a
lower AHI. Despite these shortcomings, the overall apnea detection performance showed a high relationship between AHIs
(R = 0.94).
In addition, as shown in Table IV, the sensitivity was significantly lower than the specificity in the normal and mild severity
groups. In these groups, the apnea detection sensitivity could be
reduced considerably by only a few wrong estimates because the
percentage of sleep apnea occurrences was markedly less than
that of normal breathing. Thus, the kappa statistic was also used
to evaluate the apnea detection performance. In particular, the
difference between the sensitivity and specificity of the normal
group was approximately 10% less than that of the moderate
severity group, but there was no difference between the overall
kappa statistics. Therefore, we could conclude that the proposed method showed similar apnea detection performances in
all of the groups. In this study, the algorithm performed poorly
when subjects slept in a lateral posture. During the respiratory
cycle, respiratory-induced vertical (frontal axis) pressure was
effectively transferred from the body to the PVDF sensors in
a supine or prone posture. However, respiratory-related vertical pressure was transferred horizontally to the PVDF sensor
in the lateral posture, and the respiratory signal measured by
the sensor was significantly attenuated or distorted. As a result, the apnea detection performance in the lateral posture was

2132

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

not validated for subjects who shared the bed with the partner.
Additional PVDF sensor or increased size of sensor will probably be needed to detect sleep apnea for two people. Lastly, the
practicability of the proposed method was not assessed in the
home and ambulatory environments. In these environments, the
apnea detection performance could be different, and problems
that were not considered in the sleep laboratory might occur.
To verify this issue, a validation of the proposed algorithm will
be performed using PVDF signals measured in the home and
ambulatory environments in a future study.
V. CONCLUSION
Fig. 6. PC1R P V D F , PC1R E S P , respiration from thoracic movement, respiration from nasal-oral airflow and apnea events, respectively. Amplitude of
PC1R E S P is decreased with oscillation during OSA. On the other hand, amplitude of PC1R E S P is also decreased but without oscillation during CSA. In this
figure, data from subject #29 were used.

relatively low and reflected a tradeoff between detection accuracy and unconstrained monitoring.
In this study, very minute levels of oscillations such as “respiratory efforts” that can separate the OSA and central sleep
apnea (CSA) could be measured using PVDF sensor, as shown
in Fig. 6. In the figure, amplitude of respiration signal from nasal
airflow sensor is decreased and that from chest belt sensor is decreased with oscillation during OSA. On the other hand, the amplitude from nasal airflow sensor has similar trend to OSA, but
the amplitude of signal from chest belt sensor is decreased without oscillation during CSA. Those differences between OSA
and CSA are also shown through our PVDF film-based system.
So, we may think that OSA and CSA can be distinguished in
our system using this amplitude decimation attenuation of the
signal amplitude and oscillation occurrence. Although types of
sleep apnea were not separated in this study, we plan to focus
on OSA/CSA classification using PVDF film-based system to
improve the impact of our work.
E. Limitations
Our proposed method also had some limitations. First, we
did not separate sleep apnea into obstructive, central, and mixed
types as mentioned in “Validation of apnea detection algorithm”
session. With an improved algorithm and PVDF sensor, OSA
and CSA can be divided into different types of apnea. Second,
hypopnea events were not differentiated in the apneic events
decision. However, this seems to have little clinical significance
because both types of events have similar consequences and
pathophysiologies [13]. In addition, AHI, which is an index of
sleep apnea severity, is defined as the “sum” of apnea and hypopnea events instead of the frequency of each type of event [19].
Third, no analysis of the event-by-event apnea detection compared with PSG was conducted in this study because the coupled
systems had different time scales for diagnosing sleep apnea.
Fourth, test of the size and shape optimization of PVDF-based
sensor was not performed because we were focusing on the
possibility and potential of sleep apnea monitoring using PVDF
film-based sensor in this study. Fifth, the proposed method was

In this study, a new sleep apnea monitoring method using a PVDF film-based sensor was developed that can unconstrainedly measure respiratory signals from subjects. Using the
proposed system and method, we were able to obtain apnea
detection performances similar to those of ambulatory devices
and constrained PVDF-based studies. The developed system
and method can be applied to sleep apnea detection for home or
ambulatory monitoring purposes.
REFERENCES
[1] C. A. Kushida, M. R. Littner, T. Morgenthaler, C. A. Alessi, D. Bailey,
J. Coleman, L. Friedman, M. Hirshkowitz, S. Kapen, M. Kramer, T. L.
Chiong, D. L. Loube, J. Owens, J. P. Pancer, and M. Wise, “Practice parameters for the indications for polysomnography and related procedures:
An update for 2005,” Sleep, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 499–521, 2005.
[2] M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, and W. C. Dement, “Normal human sleep:
An overview,” in Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine, 5th ed.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: Saunders, 2011, pp. 16–26.
[3] R. L. Wilkin, Clinical Assessment in Respiratory Care. St. Louis, MO,
USA: Mosby, 1985, pp. 268–272.
[4] B. El-Ad and P. Lavie, “Effect of sleep apnea on cognition and mood,”
Int. Rev. Psychiatry, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 277–282, 2005.
[5] M. Hirshkowitz, I. Karacan, A. Gurakar, and R. L. Williams, “Hypertension, erectile dysfunction, and occult sleep apnea,” Sleep, vol. 12, no. 3,
pp. 223–232, 1989.
[6] S. Yan-fang and W. Yu-ping, “Sleep-disordered breathing: Impact on functional outcome of ischemic stroke patients,” Sleep Med., vol. 10, no. 7,
pp. 717–719, 2009.
[7] R. S. Leung, “Sleep-disordered breathing: Autonomic mechanisms and
arrhythmias,” Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 324–338, 2009.
[8] H. E. Resnick, S. Redline, E. Shahar, A. Gilpin, A. Newman, R. Walter,
G. A. Ewy, B. V. Howard, and N. M. Punjabi, “Diabetes and sleep disturbances: Findings from the sleep heart health study,” Diabetes Care,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 702–709, 2003.
[9] Y. Peker, J. Hedner, A. Johansson, and M. Bende, “Reduced hospitalization with cardiovascular and pulmonary disease in obstructive sleep apnea
patients on nasal CPAP treatment,” Sleep, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 645–653,
1997.
[10] T. Young, M. Palta, J. Dempsey, J. Skatrud, S. Weber, and S. Badr, “The occurrence of sleep-disordered breathing among middle-aged adults,” New
Engl. J. Med., vol. 328, no. 17, pp. 1230–1235, 1993.
[11] J. K. Kim, K. H. In, J. H. Kim, S. H. You, K. H. Kang, J. J. Shim, S. Y. Lee,
J. B. Lee, S. G. Lee, C. Park, and C. Shin, “Prevalence of sleep-disordered
breathing in middle-aged korean men and women,” Amer. J. Respir. Crit.
Care. Med., vol. 170, no. 10, pp. 1108–1113, 2004.
[12] P. E. Peppard, T. Young, J. H. Barnet, M. Palta, E. W. Hagen, and K. M.
Hla, “Increased prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in adults,” Amer.
J. Epidemiol., vol. 177, no. 9, pp. 1006–1014, 2013.
[13] “Sleep-related breathing disorders in adults: Recommendations for syndrome definition and measurement techniques in clinical research. The
report of an American academy of sleep medicine task force,” Sleep,
vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 667–689, 1999.
[14] J. Boyle, N. Bidargaddi, A. Sarela, and M. Karunanithi, “Automatic detection of respiration rate from ambulatory single-lead ECG,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 890–896, Nov. 2009.

HWANG et al.: UNCONSTRAINED SLEEP APNEA MONITORING USING POLYVINYLIDENE FLUORIDE FILM-BASED SENSOR

[15] M. O. Mendez, A. M. Bianchi, M. Matteucci, S. Cerutti, and T. Penzel,
“Sleep apnea screening by autoregressive models from a single ECG lead,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 2838–2850, Dec. 2009.
[16] P. de Chazal, C. Heneghan, E. Sheridan, R. Reilly, P. Nolan, and M.
O’Malley, “Automated processing of the single-lead electrocardiogram
for the detection of obstructive sleep apnoea,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 686–696, Jun. 2003.
[17] F. Roche, J. M. Gaspoz, I. C. Fortune, P. Minini, V. Pichot, D. Duverney, F.
Costes, J. R. Lacour, and J. C. Barthélémy, “Screening of obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome by heart rate variability analysis,” Circulation, vol. 100,
no. 13, pp. 1411–1415, 1999.
[18] Y. G. Lim, K. H. Hong, K. K. Kim, J. H. Shin, S. M. Lee, G. S. Chung, H.
J. Baek, D. U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Monitoring physiological signals
using nonintrusive sensors installed in daily life equipment,” Biomed. Eng.
Lett., vol. 1, pp. 11–20, 2011.
[19] N. T. Ayas, S. Pittman, M. MacDonald, and D. P. White, “Assessment of
a wrist-worn device in the detection of obstructive sleep apnea,” Sleep
Med., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 435–442, 2003.
[20] D. P. White, T. J. Gibb, J. M. Wall, and P. R. Westbrook, “Assessment
of accuracy and analysis time of a novel device to monitor sleep and
breathing in the home,” Sleep, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 115–126, 1995.
[21] M. A. O’Reilly and K. Hynynen, “A PVDF receiver for ultrasound monitoring of transcranial focused ultrasound therapy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2286–2294, Sep. 2010.
[22] S. H. Hwang, H. N. Yoon, D. W. Jung, Y. J. Lee, D. U. Jeong, and K. S.
Park, “Apnea event estimation during sleep using polyvinylidene fluoride
film,” in Proc. eTELEMED, 2013, pp. 280–283.
[23] J. Siivola, “New noninvasive piezoelectric transducer for recording of
respiration, heart rate and body movements,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 423–425, 1989.
[24] G. R. Manjunatha, K. Rajanna, D. R. Mahapatra, M. M. Nayak, U. M.
Krishnaswamy, and R. Srinivasa, “Polyvinylidene fluoride film based nasal
sensor to monitor human respiration pattern: An initial clinical study,” J.
Clin. Monit. Comput., vol. 27, pp. 647–657, Jun. 2013.
[25] S. J. Choi and Z. W. Jiang, “A novel wearable sensor device with conductive fabric and PVDF film for monitoring cardiorespiratory signals,” Sens.
Actuators, A, vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 317–326, 2006.
[26] F. Wang, M. Tanaka, and S. Chonan, “Development of a PVDF piezopolymer sensor for unconstrained in-sleep cardiorespiratory monitoring,” J.
Intel. Mater. Syst. Struct., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 185–190, 2003.
[27] H. J. Baek, G. S. Chung, K. K. Kim, and K. S. Park, “A smart health
monitoring chair for nonintrusive measurement of biological signals,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 150–158, Jan. 2012.
[28] Y. Y. Chiu, W. Y. Lin, H. Y. Wang, S. B. Huang, and M. H. Wu, “Development of a piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) polymer-based
sensor patch for simultaneous heartbeat and respiration monitoring,” Sens.
Actuators A, vol. 189, pp. 328–334, 2013.
[29] S. Redline, R. Budhiraja, V. Kapur, C. L. Marcus, J. H. Mateika, R.
Mehra, S. Parthasarthy, V. K. Somers, K. P. Strohl, L. G. Sulit, D. Gozal,
M. S. Wise, and S. F. Quan, “The scoring of respiratory events in sleep:
Reliability and validity,” J. Clin. Sleep. Med., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 169–200,
2007.
[30] R. B. Berry, G. L. Koch, S. Trautz, and M. H. Wagner, “Comparison of
respiratory event detection by a polyvinylidene fluoride film airflow sensor
and a pneumotachograph in sleep apnea patients,” Chest, vol. 128, no. 3,
pp. 1331–1338, 2005.
[31] B. B. Koo, C. Drummond, S. Surovec, N. Johnson, S. A. Marvin, and S.
Redline, “Validation of a polyvinylidene fluoride impedance sensor for
respiratory event classification during polysomnography,” J. Clin. Sleep.
Med., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 479–485, 2011.
[32] A. Rechtschaffen and A. Kales, A Manual of Standardized Terminology, Techniques and Scoring System for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects.
Washington, DC, USA: NIH Publication, 1968.
[33] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern Classification, 2nd ed.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2001.
[34] C. Iber, The AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and Associated Events:
Rules, Terminology and Technical Specifications. Westchester, IL, USA:
Amer. Acad. Sleep Med., 2007, pp. 45–47.
[35] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 1,
no. 8476, pp. 307–310, 1986.
[36] A. J. Viera and J. M. Garrett, “Understanding interobserver agreement:
The kappa statistic,” Family Med., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 360–363, 2005.
[37] H. Nakano, T. Tanigawa, T. Furukawa, and S. Nishima, “Automatic detection of sleep-disordered breathing from a single-channel airflow record,”
Eur. Respir. J., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 728–736, 2007.

2133

[38] J. H. Han, H. B. Shin, D. U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Detection of apneic
events from single channel nasal airflow using 2nd derivative method,”
Comput. Meth. Programs Biomed., vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 199–207, 2008.
[39] R. P. Schnall, A. Shlitner, J. Sheffy, R. Kedar, and P. Lavie, “Periodic,
profound peripheral vasoconstriction—A new marker of obstructive sleep
apnea,” Sleep, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 939–946, 1999.

Su Hwan Hwang received the B.S. degree in
biomechatronics and electronic electrical engineering from Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea,
in 2009. He is currently working toward the combined M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in interdisciplinary
program in bioengineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
His current research interests include biomedical
signal measurement and processing in sleep medicine
with the goal of translating the engineering works into
practical medical research and clinical applications.

Hong Ji Lee received the B.S. degree in information communication engineering from Ewha Womans
University, Seoul, Korea, in 2010. She is currently
working toward the combined M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in interdisciplinary program in bioengineering
from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
Her main research interests include the study of
biomedical instrumentations and signal processing
for ubiquitous healthcare. Her current research interests include tremor monitoring systems for diagnosis
of Parkinson disease.

Hee Nam Yoon received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Korea, in 2011. He is currently working toward
the combined M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in interdisciplinary program in bioengineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
His current research interests include biomedical
signals and systems for sleep medicine and synchronization dynamics of human biological signals.

Da Woon Jung received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Korea, in 2011. She is currently working toward
the combined M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in interdisciplinary program in bioengineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
Her current research interests include biomedical
signals analysis for sleep medicine and synchronization dynamics of human biological signals.

2134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Yu-Jin G. Lee received the M.D. degree from
Soonchunhyang University Hospital, Cheonan, Korea, in 2005.
She is a Psychiatrist and a Specialist in sleep
medicine. She was a Clinical Fellow at the Center for
Sleep and Chronobiology, Seoul National University
Hospital. She is currently with the Seoul Metropolitan Eunpyeong Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
Dr. Lee is a Member of the Board of Directors of
the Korean Academy of Sleep Medicine.

Yu Jin Lee received the M.D. degree from Ewha
Womans University, Seoul, Korea and the Ph.D.
degree from the Chungbuk National University,
Cheongju, Korea.
She is currently an Associate Professor in the Division of Sleep and Chronobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, College of Medicine and Hospital, Seoul
National University Seoul, Korea.

Do-Un Jeong received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees
from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in
1976 and 1988, respectively.
He is currently a Professor of psychiatry at the
Seoul National University College of Medicine and
Director of the Center for Sleep and Chronobiology,
Seoul National University Hospital. His research interests include signal processing in sleep and clinical
sleep disorders.
Dr. Jeong is the former President of the Korean
Society of Medical and Biological Engineering and
the Korean Academy of Sleep Medicine as well as a Fellow of the American
Academy of Sleep Medicine.

Kwang Suk Park (M’78–SM’09) received the B.S.,
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electronics engineering
from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in
1980, 1982, and 1985, respectively.
In 1985, he joined the Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, as a Founding Staff Member,
where he is currently a Professor. He is also the Director of Advanced Biometric Research Center, Seoul
National University. His main research interests include biological signal measurement and processing
for the diagnosis. His current research interests include nonintrusive measurements of biological signals for ubiquitous healthcare.
Dr. Park is a member of the Korean Society of Medical and Biological Engineering and has served as the Secretary General of the World Congress on
Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering held in Seoul in 2006. He is also
a Senior Member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
Since 2005, has been serving as an Associated Editor for the IEEE JOURNAL OF
BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS. He has also chaired or co-chaired the
Annual International Conference on u-Healthcare during past ten years.

