1780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

Feature Selection and Activity Recognition
System Using a Single Triaxial Accelerometer
Piyush Gupta∗ and Tim Dallas

Abstract—Activity recognition is required in various applications such as medical monitoring and rehabilitation. Previously
developed activity recognition systems utilizing triaxial accelerometers have provided mixed results, with subject-to-subject variability. This paper presents an accurate activity recognition system
utilizing a body worn wireless accelerometer, to be used in the reallife application of patient monitoring. The algorithm utilizes data
from a single, waist-mounted triaxial accelerometer to classify gait
events into six daily living activities and transitional events. The
accelerometer can be worn at any location around the circumference of the waist, thereby reducing user training. Feature selection
is performed using Relief-F and sequential forward floating search
(SFFS) from a range of previously published features, as well as
new features introduced in this paper. Relevant and robust features
that are insensitive to the positioning of accelerometer around the
waist are selected. SFFS selected almost half the number of features in comparison to Relief-F and provided higher accuracy than
Relief-F. Activity classification is performed using Naı̈ve Bayes and
k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) and the results are compared. Activity
recognition results on seven subjects with leave-one-person-out error estimates show an overall accuracy of about 98% for both the
classifiers. Accuracy for each of the individual activity is also more
than 95%.
Index Terms—Accelerometer, activity recognition, detrended
fluctuation analysis (DFA), error estimates, feature selection, knearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier, leave-one-person-out (LOO) error, Naı̈ve Bayes classifier, Relief-F algorithm, sequential forward
floating search (SFFS) wrapper algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION
ALLS are a major problem associated with old age. Falls
can force elderly people to depend on others, severely affecting their quality of life. Therefore, it is important to develop
a technology that can monitor gait of elderly people that looks
for precursors to falls. Lack of physical activity and loss of
muscle strength is often associated with falls [1]. Therefore, a
cost-effective system is needed that can investigate the relationship between probability of fall with the fitness and total count of

F

Manuscript received May 9, 2013; revised September 18, 2013 and December
14, 2013; accepted February 7, 2014. Date of publication March 28, 2014; date
of current version May 15, 2014. This work was supported in part by AT&T
Labs-Research. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ P. Gupta is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409-3102 USA (e-mail:
piyushgupta.2@gmail.com).
T. Dallas is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409-3102 USA (e-mail:
tim.dallas@ttu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2307069

daily living activities of the elderly person. The first step in this
direction is to develop an autonomous system that can classify
a gait data-set into different daily living activities. Moreover,
with such a system, elderly people (and caregivers/medical personnel) can keep track of the level of activities being performed
by them on a regular basis.
Some of the gerontology literature investigates the association of level of daily living activities with the occurrences of falls
in elderly population. Graafmans et al. [2] and Smee et al. [3]
related levels of daily physical activities performed by elderly
population to the falls. Graafmans et al. [2] utilized validated
questionnaires to collect falls and daily activity level data on
694 elderly subjects. The study concluded that the elderly people with the highest activity level had significantly lower risk of
falls. Moreover, Smee et al. [3] concluded in a study on 32 independent living elderly people that lower physical functionality
was strongly (independent of age) related to greater risk of falls.
Therefore, a lot of time and money has been invested world-wide
by different organizations, both public and private, to classify
activities of daily living (ADL) and fall detection. A number of
systems have been proposed and sometimes tested [4]–[27]. A
few of these systems are discussed in this section to allow our
proposed system to be put in context.
Bao and Intille [4] utilized 5 biaxial accelerometers, worn on
different parts of the body, to classify 20 different ADL. Four
features were calculated specifically for each axis (mean, energy,
frequency-domain entropy, and correlation of acceleration data)
and different classifiers were tested. Data from 20 subjects was
used for the experiments and the best performance of 84% was
obtained using decision tree classifiers. The system provided a
strong case for detection of ADL. However, the limitations are
the number of accelerometers that can be used on one’s body and
the need of accelerometers to be put in a prescribed orientation.
Khan et al. [5], [6] utilized a single triaxial accelerometer
to distinguish between the different ADL. In [5], a triaxial accelerometer was attached to the chest of the user in a particular
orientation and was able to classify fifteen activities with an average accuracy of 97.9%. However, when the system was tested
with the sensor at five different positions, the accuracy of the
system was reduced to 47%. In [6], a new system is proposed
which can detect activities irrespective of the position of the
sensor with an accuracy of 94.4%. However, all of the transitional activities (sit-to-stand, etc.) were excluded from these
newer experiments.
He et al. [7], [8] utilized a single, triaxial accelerometer in
various body locations in an orientation independent setting.
The paper identifies four different activities as walking, running, jumping and being still (stationary). The system reports

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GUPTA AND DALLAS: FEATURE SELECTION AND ACTIVITY RECOGNITION SYSTEM USING A SINGLE TRIAXIAL ACCELEROMETER

97.51% of overall accuracy in identifying the four activities.
However, the system did not include any transition states in the
experiments.
Atallah et al. [9] utilized six wearable accelerometers, in addition to the ear-worn activity recognition sensor (e-AR), at
different body positions to evaluate the best sensor position and
relevant features. Filter-based feature selection approaches: Relief [28], Simba [29], and minimum redundancy maximum relevance (mRMR) [30], were evaluated for selecting the features
for each sensor. k-Nearest neighbor (k-NN) (with k = 1, 5, and
7) and Bayesian classifier were tested for activity classification.
The activities were classified into five broad groups as: very
low level, low level, medium level, high level, and transitional
activities. Outcomes of the three feature selection algorithms
were relatively similar, as were the classification performance
of k-NN (k = 5 and 7) and Bayesian classifier. However, results
showed that none of the sensor positions, in isolation, could
provide high precision and recall for all the groups.
More systems have been proposed for monitoring the gait of
an individual to determine falls and the daily living activities,
some of which are listed in [10]–[27]. However, most of these
systems require accelerometers to be in a particular orientation
and position on the human body or else exclude transitional
events such as sit-to-stand, stand-to-kneel-to-stand, etc.
This study is focused on utilizing minimum number of sensors and analyzing data from young, age-matched subjects to
determine if data corresponding to different physical activities
tends to form different clusters. This study uses feature selection algorithms to carefully select the best features, from a range
of newly developed features and previously published features,
such that the new system is independent of the accelerometer position around the waist. The paper proposes an activity
recognition system that requires less training of the user and,
therefore, is a step towards utilizing it in a more realistic environment. Moreover, our study aims to classify the transitional
events in ADLs.

II. SYSTEM COMPONENTS AND OVERVIEW
A. Belt-Clip Accelerometer
A MEMS triaxial accelerometer is used to measure acceleration in three orthogonal directions at all times. This research
utilizes a custom made belt-clip device that can be easily worn
at waist level on a belt. A Freescale MMA7260 accelerometer
is used in the belt-clip device to report acceleration in the range
of ±4.0 g. The belt-clip is 15 cm × 11 cm × 4.5 cm in size and
weighs about 100 g. The belt-clip accelerometer sampled data
at a sampling rate of 126 Hz during this experiment. The beltclip accelerometer transmits nine ZigBee packets in one second
(each containing 14 time-stamped samples). These packets are
de-packaged at the server into individual samples as they are received. Consistent sampling allows time and frequency domain
analysis. Previous research studies have demonstrated that human movements can be modeled by signals at and below 18 Hz.
Therefore, a sampling rate of 126 Hz was considered to be more
than sufficient.

Fig. 1.

Belt-clip triaxial accelerometer.

Fig. 2.

Gateway provided by AT&T Labs.

Fig. 3.

Graphical depiction of experimental setup.

1781

The belt-clip accelerometer, as shown in Fig. 1, utilizes
ZigBee protocol for wireless communication to the gateway.
The belt clip is supported by a rechargeable battery which lasts
a couple of days before requiring recharge. The belt-clip has a
battery indicator and is a preproduction prototype model to be
used for geriatric gait study in this research project.
B. AT&T Gateway
An AT&T supplied Actuarius gateway converts a message
received in ZigBee protocol to User Datagram Protocol (UDP).
ZigBee protocol is used by the accelerometers for sending the
data to the gateway. Once received by the gateway, the data
packets are sent to the server side processing unit utilizing UDP
protocol. The gateway is shown in Fig. 2. The complete system
implementation is shown in Fig. 3.
C. MATLAB
MATLAB was used to record and analyze the data on the
server. Each activity of each individual was recorded in a separate spreadsheet file and labeled so as to be used to calculate
training or test vectors later.

1782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE I
INITIAL SET OF FEATURES FOR ACTIVITY RECOGNITION

Fig. 4.

Positions of three belt-clip accelerometers for feature selection.

Algorithm development for the activity recognition system
was done in two steps. The first step identifies and selects features that can reliably classify activities irrespective of where
the belt-clip is worn on the waist. The second step was to train
and test those features using two separate classifiers (k-NN and
Naı̈ve Bayes) and evaluate the error estimates from data on more
diverse subjects. The following sections explain the feature selection process followed by the activity recognition experiment
and its results.
III. FEATURE SELECTION
A. Experimental Setup for Feature Selection
Data were collected in an area that consisted of a room and a
small corridor closely resembling an apartment/home or office
setting. Data were collected on two young healthy subjects, one
male and one female, aged 28 years with no walking impairment. Subjects were asked to wear three triaxial accelerometers at their waist at three different positions. All the belt-clip
accelerometers were tested before the experiments (on turntable/pendulum) for noise, repeatability and reproducibility to
ensure the data from the three independent belt-clips are consistent. Positions of the triaxial accelerometers on the waist are
shown in Fig. 4. This was done to ensure that the data for the
same activity is simultaneously collected by three accelerometers having different orientation for their X and Z axes with
respect to the human body. Therefore, if the set of final selected
features are able to correctly identify activities from all three
accelerometers independently, the accuracy of the features can
be said to not depend on the location of the belt-clip around
the waist. The design of the belt-clip accelerometer, when worn
on belt at the waist, allows the Y -axis of the accelerometers
to mostly align with the vertical direction (longitudinal axis)
of human motion. Though there might be some minor tilt with
respect to the Y -axis when a user wears it on his/her belt, the
features selected are expected to be robust enough to accurately
recognize the gait event.
B. Data Setup and Feature Computation
Two subjects were asked to perform six activities (including transitional events) namely walking, jumping, running, sitto-stand/stand-to-sit, stand-to-kneel-to-stand, and being stationary (sitting or standing at one place). Standing-to-kneeling-tostanding is to simulate the instances when a user is putting
down or picking up an object from the ground. The two sub-

jects performed all the daily living activities at comfortable, yet
varied speeds and manners such that a more diverse data can
be collected to select the best features possible. The acceleration data signals are segmented into windows of 6 s each with
a 50% overlap between two consecutive windows. Therefore,
every decision made about the activity is for the duration of
the six seconds window. Previous literatures have utilized window sizes ranging from 2 s to 6.7 s for the purposes of activity
detection [4]–[27]. Since the transitional events have variable
completion/execution time, a longer window size (6 s) was chosen such that even the slowest of the stand-to-kneel-to-stand
or stand-to-sit events performed in the experiments are completely contained in a window. Moreover, prior work published
in [4] has demonstrated success with 50% overlap in windows. It
should be noted that the stand-to-sit/sit-to-stand transitions and
standing-to-kneeling-to-standing events were not performed in
isolation. The user was also walking before or after performing
these tasks to simulate a more realistic scenario. Even though
the 6 s window that entirely contained the transitional event was
kept and labeled appropriately into sit-to-stand or standing-tokneeling-to-standing, there were instances when the window of
transitional event data contained some part due to walking, too.
A large set of features were calculated using the raw accelerations recorded during the activity. Some of these features
are previously shown to be effective for activity recognition in
the published literature. However, according to our best knowledge, some of the unique features presented in this paper have
not been used previously for activity recognition using a triaxial
accelerometer. These features will be explained in more detail
in this paper, whereas references are provided for the more commonly used/cited features. A list of all the features is provided
in Table I. All the features were evaluated for the longitudinal
axis (Y –vertical), resultant acceleration (X−Y −Z), and for the
acceleration in horizontal (X−Z) plane.
The details of mean trend, windowed mean difference, variance trend, detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) coefficient,
and uncorrelated energy are given below. These newly evaluated features were intuitively discovered and included since we
need a high accuracy for transitional events from activities like
walking and being stationary (sitting or standing). As mentioned
before, the 6 s sample of transitional event might contain some

GUPTA AND DALLAS: FEATURE SELECTION AND ACTIVITY RECOGNITION SYSTEM USING A SINGLE TRIAXIAL ACCELEROMETER

data corresponding to walking or being stationary that followed
or preceded the transitional event. In such cases, energy, entropy, mean and variance of these samples were expected and
observed to be closer to those of walking or being stationary.
Therefore, following new features were developed which will
break this 6-s data into smaller windows and analyze it to capture
the transitions.
1) Mean Trend and Windowed Mean Difference: The 6 s
long acceleration series is further divided into 12 windows (0.5 s
each) with no overlap. The mean of each of these 0.5 s windows
is calculated and subtracted from the mean of the succeeding
window. Therefore, a trend of mean (slope) for every half second
is found for the entire 6 s window. The sum of absolute values
of these slopes is calculated to be a feature called mean trend.
μT =

12


(|μi − μi−1 |).

i=2

Also, the mean of each of these 0.5 s windows is subtracted
from the overall mean of the 6 s data. The sum of absolute
values of these distances is called the windowed mean difference
feature
μD =

12


(|μ − μi |).

i=1

2) Variance Trend and Windowed Variance Difference:
Variance trend and windowed variance difference is computed
similarly to the mean trend and windowed mean difference,
except variance is calculated instead of mean for each of the
windows
σT 2 =

12


 2
2 
σi − σi−1
i=2

12


 2
σ − σi2  .
σD =
2

i=1

3) DFA Coefficient: DFAs [31] provide us with a methodology to examine long-range correlation of a time series data.
While DFA does not account for spurious correlations introduced by external nonstationary trends, it investigates fluctuations from the linear local trends. DFA leads to the value of
alpha (α) that can be used to examine the relationship between
the amount of fluctuations in a subset of a time series to the
length of the subset [26]. An uncorrelated time series such as
white noise will have a value of 0.5 for the alpha. An alpha
value of less than 0.5 indicates that the fluctuations in one direction are likely to be followed by the fluctuations in the opposite
direction. An alpha value more than 0.5 reflects self-similarity
such that the fluctuations at one time scale are similar to the
fluctuations at the other time scale.
To perform DFA and compute the scaling exponent α of
a time series given by x(i) (where i = 1, 2, . . . , N ), the time
series should first be integrated [32]
y (k) =

k

i=1

x (i) − x̄,

k = 1, 2, . . . , N.

1783

Once the integrated time series y(k) is evaluated, it is divided
it into N /n boxes of equal length (n) with no overlap. Then, a
best-fit local trend yn is fitted onto the each box. Calculate the
average fluctuations F (n) by the following equation:


N
1 
F (n) = 
[y (i) − yn (i)]2 .
N i=1
The same procedure is repeated for different box sizes and
the average fluctuations F (nm ) as per different scales is evaluated. As deviations becomes larger with the time scale, F (n)
is expected to increase with the increase of box sizes n. After
plotting log F (ni ) with respect to log ni , the value of α can be
estimated by the slope of the least squares fitted line [32].
4) X−Z Energy Uncorrelated: Energy of X- and Z-axis
accelerations (Ex and Ez ) are calculated and added together.
Cross-correlation factor (rxz ) is calculated between the X- and
Z-axis acceleration series. Then, X–Z energy uncorrelated is
found, shown as follows:
EUxz = 2 ∗ (Ex + Ez ) − rxz ∗ (Ex + Ez ).
5) Maximum Difference Acceleration: Difference between
maximum and minimum acceleration experienced on each axis
(dx, dy, and dz) during the 6 s window is calculated [10]. Difference acceleration for the Y –axis (dAy = dy) is considered
as one feature. The other features are simply calculated for the
X–Z plane and the X−Y −Z space as [10]
	
dAx,z = 	
(dx2 + dz 2 ) and
dAx,y ,z = (dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 ).
C. Feature Selection
A total of 31 features were computed for the 6 s window of data from each triaxial accelerometer. Two people
performed all six activities of walking, running, jumping,
standing-to-kneeling-to-standing, sitting-to-standing/standingto-sitting, and being stationary (sitting/standing). Since transitional activities, standing-to-kneeling-to-standing and sittingto-standing/standing-to-sitting, are single events rather than
continuously performed activities, the number of samples for
these two gait events is lower than the other four activities.
Feature selection was performed in filter-based approach using
Relief-F [28], [33], and Wrapper-based approach using a variant of sequential forward floating search (SFFS) [34]. k-NN
(10 neighbors) and Naı̈ve Bayes classifiers were utilized for
error estimation. Moreover, since different features are on different scales, all the features were normalized to obtain best
results for k-NN. This ensures equal weight to all the potential
features, while using k-NN classifier.
1) Filter-Based Feature Selection Using Relief-F: Kira and
Rendell [28] came up with a Relief algorithm in 1992 for a general problem with a high number of features. Kononenko [33]
improved the basic Relief algorithm, into Relief-F, by improving noise immunity and introducing support for multi-class
problems. The Relief and Relief-F algorithms use a statistical
approach rather than heuristic search for finding the feature
subset. Relief-F provides a relevance weight to each of the

1784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

TABLE II
RESULTS FROM FEATURE SELECTION USING RELIEF-F

TABLE III
RESULTS FROM FEATURE SELECTION USING SFFS

TABLE IV
FINAL FEATURES SELECTED FOR ACTIVITY RECOGNITION USING SFFS

potential feature and the ones above a set relevance threshold
are selected.
In our approach, we determined the threshold as the number of features that provide best resubstitution accuracy with
the classifiers. For evaluating resubstitution accuracy, the same
dataset is used for training and testing purposes. The features
were sorted according to their relevance in decreasing order.
The most relevant feature was first added and resubstitution error on the given data-set was found using k-NN and Naı̈ve Bayes
classifiers. Then, the next relevant features were added one by
one and resubstitution error was calculated each time until all
the 31 features were added. Now, the least number of features
that provided minimum resubstitution errors were selected. The
minimum resubstitution error and number of features selected
for each of k-NN and Naı̈ve Bayes classifier using Relief-F is
shown in Table II. The errors are out of 1740 samples calculated
for the two subjects.
2) Wrapper-Based Feature Selection Using SFFS: The
Wrapper-based approach for feature selection has certain advantages and disadvantages over the filter-based approach. The
filtering methodology is based on data processing and data filtering and does not use a particular classification approach as
a standard. Therefore, they are more generalized features and
can be implemented using any of the classification systems.
However, the Wrapper approach uses a classification scheme as
a wrapper around which the whole feature selection is carried
out. The features that provide high accuracy when included in
the learning scheme of the wrapper are picked in the subset.
Though they have poor generalization across different learning methods and are computationally expensive, they tend to
provide higher accuracy than the filter-based approaches.
Our implementation of SFFS approach starts with an empty
set for the desired selected features “X.” The features are to be
selected from a larger set of features “S.” Let’s say the most
significant feature in S, with respect to X, is the one which
provides the least resubstitution error when included in the X.
At each iteration, the most significant feature in S is included
into X if its inclusion does not increase the resubstitution error.
Similarly, the least significant feature in X is found and removed
if its exclusion helps improve the accuracy. Moreover, if there
is a tie between two or more features to be the most significant
feature in S, the one having higher weight from Relief-F is selected. Also, since special conditions are required to prevent the
SFFS algorithm from getting into an infinite loop, resubstitution error and the new set of X after each iteration was verified.
If the error became zero, the desired X has been selected and,
therefore, the program can safely be terminated. However, if
the error is not zero, but the set X before and after iteration is
equal, the program has reached its limit for the dataset and the
resulted X can be assumed to be the most optimum set for the

given implementation. Therefore, this is the final selected set of
features and the program should be safely terminated.
Our SFFS implementation was carried out twice using Naı̈ve
Bayes and k-NN, respectively. The minimum resubstitution error and number of features selected for each of k-NN and Naı̈ve
Bayes classifier using SFFS is shown in Table III.
Clearly, SFFS provided much better estimates for resubstitution error at less than half the number of features as compared to Relief-F-based filtering. Even though k-NN performed
marginally better than the Naı̈ve Bayes classifier, the performance of the two classifiers is considered to be equal and, therefore, both the classifiers are evaluated for activity recognition in
multiple subjects using their correspondingly selected features.
The features selected by SFFS for NB and k-NN are given in
Table IV.
It is interesting to note that the mean trend, windowed mean
difference, and DFA coefficients for one or more axis were
included as relevant features by both the classifiers. The preference in inclusion of these features over overall mean and energy
proved that our hypothesis for further breaking the windows is
justified.
IV. ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
Once the feature set and classifier is known for a classification
problem, the system requires training and a testing dataset for
evaluating the efficacy of features in a more practical scenario.
The feature validation and, therefore, activity recognition was
performed on data from seven subjects.
A. Experimental Setup for Activity Recognition
Data were collected in the same area where data were collected on the two subjects for the feature selection process. Data
were collected on seven young healthy subjects, including the
two previously recruited subjects, between 22 and 28 years of
age with no walking impairment. Subjects were asked to wear
the triaxial accelerometer at their waist. No specific instructions
were given about how to wear the accelerometer and where exactly around the waist it should be worn. Each subject was asked
to perform the six previously mentioned activities. All individuals conducted these activities in their own preferred speed for
about 2–3 min each.
Different individuals wore the accelerometer on different positions around the waist. It was also interesting to note during

GUPTA AND DALLAS: FEATURE SELECTION AND ACTIVITY RECOGNITION SYSTEM USING A SINGLE TRIAXIAL ACCELEROMETER

TABLE V
ACCURACY IN CLASSIFICATION FOR INDIVIDUAL ACTIVITIES

TABLE VI
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR ACTIVITY RECOGNITION USING NB

the experiment that the left handed individuals (2 out of 7) wore
the sensor on the left side of the waist whereas right handed individuals wore it on the right side. Though this behavior might
not be true for the entire left-handed and right-handed population, we expect our algorithm to eliminate any errors due to
difference in positions of accelerometer around the waist and,
therefore, reduce the training and efforts of the real subjects.
B. Feature Computation and Activity Classification
Hereby, all the feature vectors are calculated separately for
NB classifier and k-NN classifier. Since data were collected on
seven individuals, the leave-one-person-out (LOO) strategy was
used to train and classify the daily living activities. Therefore,
data collected on six individuals was used to train the system
and then the system was tested by classifying the data of the
seventh individual accordingly. This was repeated seven times
until data from all the individuals was classified.
V. RESULTS
The results from the activity recognition on seven subjects
showed high accuracy for all the activities. Samples or feature
vectors computed on seven subjects totaled to be 2026. The
overall accuracy of the system was about 98% from both the
classifiers. The result for each individual activity using the LOO
error estimation is provided in Table V for both the classifiers.
Classification results showed accuracy of more than 95% for all
the activities.
Tables VI and VII show the confusion matrix of activity classification using k-NN and Naı̈ve Bayes classifiers, respectively.
The system showed excellent classification results for all of the
activities considered in this experiment. As per the confusion
matrix, there were misclassifications of jumping into running,
and vice versa, for both the classifiers. The system misclassified

1785

TABLE VII
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR ACTIVITY RECOGNITION USING k-NN
(10 NEIGHBORS)

four samples each from transitional events, and stand-to-kneelto-stand into walking for the k-NN classifier. The reason for this
is due to the fact that these events were not performed in isolation but added with walking as explained in Section III. Since
the window size is fixed at 6 s, the windows of the transitional
gait event also contained the walking movement of the subject
prior to or after the transition is over. Therefore, at times when
the transition is completed very quickly, there is a good portion
of the windowed data that includes data from walking. Even
though the new features performed well in classifying them
correctly, 3%–4% samples were still misclassified.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Even though the activities were performed by different individuals at different speed and style, it was observed that the
system can classify different activities with high accuracy. The
system, thus, provides a foundation towards a more robust system that will require minimum training of the users and provide
least errors due to orientation and positioning offsets. The overall accuracy of the system is 98%; however, the future work
requires testing on more subjects.
Moreover, both the classifiers, k-NN classifier (10 neighbors)
and Naı̈ve Bayes classifier, provided high accuracy and comparable results for their respective feature sets. It was shown
that different classifiers work better with different features for
activity recognition and, therefore, wrapper-based feature selection might provide better results than the filter-based approach.
Though there are some commonly used features for activity
classification using accelerometers in previously published literature, this paper introduces more features that are shown to
be relevant for the activity recognition. Mean trend, windowed
mean difference, energy uncorrelated, and DFA are introduced
as features showing good results for activity classification. These
features were chosen ahead of other popular features, energy and
mean, by feature selection algorithms.
The system showed excellent results in LOO test scenario
for seven different young healthy subjects performing activities
in their own preferred manner. However, it will be interesting
to analyze results on more diverse population. Furthermore,
the system can be utilized to perform further investigations in
the differences in ADL between elderly and young subjects or
people with different weights. It is likely that different training
sets are required for people in different age groups or weight
groups. Moreover, since the feature vectors and classifiers are

1786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

known, it will be an interesting exercise to evaluate if 6 s (and
50% overlap) is an optimum window length or if the results
for transitional events can be improved, without compromising
accuracy of other activities, by reducing the size of the window.
The system can also be used in monitoring elderly people.
This may help to better understand the events prior to the falling
cases when the elderly fell while unattended. It may also help
relate the falls in the elderly people to the amount of activities performed by them on a daily basis. Furthermore, it might
help quantify the amount of activities that are required by an
individual to reduce the chances of falling.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank AT&T Labs-Research
(R. Miller and Dr. L. Ji) and ACM, Inc. (A. Kalpaxis and
A. Kalpaxis) for providing sensors and devices utilized in this
study. The authors would also like to thank G. Ramirez (Texas
Tech) for the testing of these devices and Dr. R. Banister for his
assistance with this work.
REFERENCES
[1] C. N. Scanaill, S. Carew, P. Barralon, N. Noury, D. Lyons, and
G. M. Lyons, “A review of approaches to mobility telemonitoring of the
elderly in their living environment,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 34, pp. 547–
563.
[2] W. C. Graafmans, P. Lips, G. J. Wijlhuizen, S. M. Pluijm, and L. M.
Bouter, “Daily physical activity and the use of a walking aid in relation
to falls in elderly people in residential care setting,” Gerontol. Geriatrics,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 23–28, Feb. 2003.
[3] D. J. Smee, J. M. Anson, G. S. Waddington, and H. L. Berry, “Association
between physical functionality and falls risk in community-living older
adults,” Current Gerontol. Geriatrics Res., vol. 2012, p. 6, 2012.
[4] L. Bao and S. S. Intille, “Activity recognition from user-annotated acceleration data,” in Proc. PERVASIVE (LNCS 3001), A. Ferscha and
F. Mattern, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2004, pp. 1–17.
[5] A. M. Khan, Y.-K. Lee, S. Lee, and T.-S. Kim, “A triaxial accelerometerbased physical activity recognition via augmented signal features and a
hierarchical recognizer,” IEEE Trans. Info. Tech. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 5,
pp. 1166–1172, Sep. 2010.
[6] A. M. Khan, Y.-K. Lee, S. Lee, and T.-S. Kim, “Accelerometer’s position
independent physical activity recognition system for long-term activity
monitoring in the elderly,” IEEE Trans. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 48,
no. 12, pp. 1271–1279, Nov. 2010.
[7] Z. He, Z. Liu, L. Jin, L.-X. Zhen, and J.-C. Huang, “Weightlessness
feature—A novel feature for single tri-axial accelerometer based activity
recognition,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Pattern Recog., Dec. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[8] Z. He and L. Jin, “Activity recognition from acceleration data based on
discrete consine transform and SVM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man,
Cybern., Oct. 2009, pp. 5186–5189.
[9] L. Atallah, B. Lo, R. King, and G.-Z. Yang, “Sensor positioning for activity
recognition using wearable accelerometers,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circt.
Syst., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 320–329, Aug. 2011.
[10] P. Gupta, G. Ramirez, D. Lie, T. Dallas, R. Banister, and A. Dentino,
“MEMS based sensing and algorithm development for fall detection and
gait analysis,” in Proc. Soc. Photographic Instrum. Eng. 15th Annu. Symp.,
Jan. 2010, vol. 7593–7629.
[11] M. Zhang and A. A. Sawchuk, “Human daily activity recognition with
sparse representation using wearable sensors,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 553–560, May 2013.
[12] A. Mannini and A. M. Sabatini, “On-line classification of human activity
and estimation of walk-run speed from acceleration data using support
vector machines,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 3302–3305.
[13] M. Sekine, T. Tamura, T. Togawa, and Y. Fukui, “Classification of waistacceleration signals in a continuous walking record,” Med. Eng. Phys.,
vol. 22, pp. 285–291, Jun. 2000.

[14] D. Gafurov, E. Snekkenes, and P. Bours, “Gait authentication and identification using wearable accelerometer sensor,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop
Autom. Identification Adv. Tech., Jun. 2007, pp. 220–225.
[15] J. Mantyjarvi, J. Himberg, and T. Seppanen, “Recognizing human motion
with multiple acceleration sensors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man,
Cybern., 2001, vol. 2, pp. 747–752.
[16] J. R. Kwapisz, G. M. Weiss, and S. A. Moore, “Activity recognition using
cell phone accelerometers,” in Proc. 4th Int. Workshop Knowl. Discovery
From Sens. Data Human Factors, 2010, pp. 10–18.
[17] M. Sekine, T. Tamura, M. Akay, T. Togawa, and Y. Fukui, “Analysis of
acceleration signals using wavelet transform,” Methods Info. Med., vol. 39,
no. 2, pp. 183–185, 2000.
[18] M. Stikic, K. V. Laerhoven, and B. Schiele, “Exploring semi-supervised
and active learning for activity recognition,” in Proc. 12th Int. Symp.
Wearable Comput., Sep. 2008, pp. 81–90.
[19] X. Long, B. Yin, and R. M. Aarts, “Single-accelerometer-based daily
physical activity classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2009, pp. 6107–6110.
[20] M. Mathie, A. Coster, N. Lovell, and B. Celler, “Accelerometry: Providing
an integrated, practical method for long-term, ambulatory monitoring of
human movement,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. R1–R20, 2004.
[21] N. Ravi, N. Dandekar, P. Mysore, and M. Littman, “Activity recognition
from accelerometer data,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2005, pp. 1541–
1546.
[22] D. W. Kang, J. S. Choi, G. R. Tack, B. S. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. C. Chung,
and S. J. Park, “Real-time elderly activity monitoring system based on a
tri-axial accelerometer,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conv. Rehabil. Eng. Assistive
Technol., 2008, Singapore, pp. 262–265.
[23] J.-K. Wu, L. Dong, and W. Xiao, “Real-time physical activity classification
and tracking using wearable sensors,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Inform.,
Commun. Signal Process., Dec. 10–13, 2007, pp. 1–6.
[24] E. M. Tapia, “Using machine learning for real-time activity recognition
and estimation of energy expenditure,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2008.
[25] C. W. Han, S. J. Kang, and N. S. Kim, “Implementation of HMM-based
human activity recognition using single triaxial accelerometer,” IEICE
Trans. Fundam. Electron., Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. E93-A, no. 7,
pp. 1379–1383, Nov. 2010.
[26] M. Khan, S. I. Ahamed, M. Rahman, and R. O. Smith, “A feature extraction method for real time human activity recognition on cell phones,”
presented at isQoLT, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2011.
[27] U. Maurer, A. Smailagic, D. P. Siewiorek, and M. Deisher, “Activity recognition and monitoring using multiple sensors on different body positions,”
in Proc. Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sens. Netw., Apr. 3–5,
2006, pp. 4–116.
[28] K. Kira and L. A. Rendell, “A practical approach to feature selection,” in
Proc. 9th Int. Workshop Mach. Learning, Jul. 1–3, 1992, pp. 249–256.
[29] A. Navot and N. Tishby, “Margin based feature selection—Theory and
algorithms,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learning, 2004, pp. 43–50.
[30] H. Peng, F. Long, and C. Ding, “Feature selection based on mutual information criteria of max-dependency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1226–1238,
Aug. 2005.
[31] J. J. Sosnoff, M. D. Goldman, and R. W. Motl, “Real-life walking impairment in multiple sclerosis: Preliminary comparison of four methods
for processing accelerometry data,” Multiple Sclerosis, vol. 16, no. 7,
pp. 868–877, Jul. 2010.
[32] C.-K. Peng, S. Havlin, H. E. Stanley, and A. L. Goldberger, “Quantification of scaling exponents and crossover phenomena in nonstationary
heartbeat time series,” Chaos, vol. 5, pp. 82–87, 1995.
[33] I. Kononenko, “Estimating attributes: Analysis and extensions of
RELIEF,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learning, Catania, Italy, May 1994,
pp. 171–182.
[34] A. Jain and Z. Douglas, “Feature selection: Evaluation, application, and
small sample performance,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 153–158, Feb. 1997.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

