2406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Human Brain Distinctiveness Based on EEG Spectral
Coherence Connectivity
D. La Rocca, Student Member, IEEE, P. Campisi, Senior Member, IEEE, B. Vegso, P. Cserti, G. Kozmann,
F. Babiloni, and F. De Vico Fallani∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The use of EEG biometrics, for the purpose of automatic people recognition, has received increasing attention in
the recent years. Most of the current analyses rely on the extraction of features characterizing the activity of single brain regions,
like power spectrum estimation, thus neglecting possible temporal
dependencies between the generated EEG signals. However, important physiological information can be extracted from the way
different brain regions are functionally coupled. In this study, we
propose a novel approach that fuses spectral coherence-based connectivity between different brain regions as a possibly viable biometric feature. The proposed approach is tested on a large dataset
of subjects (N = 108) during eyes-closed (EC) and eyes-open (EO)
resting state conditions. The obtained recognition performance
shows that using brain connectivity leads to higher distinctiveness with respect to power-spectrum measurements, in both the
experimental conditions. Notably, a 100% recognition accuracy is
obtained in EC and EO when integrating functional connectivity between regions in the frontal lobe, while a lower 97.5% is
obtained in EC (96.26% in EO) when fusing power spectrum information from parieto-occipital (centro-parietal in EO) regions.
Taken together, these results suggest that the functional connectivity patterns represent effective features for improving EEG-based
biometric systems.
Index Terms—Biometrics, electroencephalography (EEG),
match score fusion, resting state, spectral coherence.

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) signals provide
relevant information about individual differences related
to brain anatomical and functional traits as already pointed out
in early neurophysiologic studies [1] and [2]. Although some
isolated attempts to discriminate people from their electrical
brain activity have been performed in the past [3], only recently,
the scientific community has started a more systematic investigation on the use of EEG signals as human distinctive traits
which can be potentially used in a biometric system [4]. A variety of EEG elicitation protocols for the purpose of automatic
user recognition has been implemented, ranging from resting
state with eyes open (EO) and eyes closed (EC) to self-paced
mental imagery [5].
In particular, resting state is an advantageous condition for
biometric applications since it does not require active involvement of the subject during the EEG recording, thus reducing
inconvenience, fatigue, and artifact occurrences. From a neurophysiological perspective, ongoing EEG activity during resting
state elicits patterns of synchronous oscillations in specific frequency ranges (from 1 to 40 Hz) that share and support basic
cognitive functions [6]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that
EEG activity during resting wakefulness carries genetic information [7] and personality correlates [8]. The number of studies
investigating EEG activity during resting states as a potential
biometric marker has increased, though the obtained results suggest that more efforts should be done to improve its efficacy in
terms of correct recognition performance (CRR) and/or sample
size, i.e., the number of subjects to recognize. A comprehensive
survey of the different methods, protocols, and achieved results
can be found in [9].
As evidenced by this survey, the large part of the studies exploring EEG for biometric purposes has focused on the extraction of features from the activity of single sensors (or channels)
corresponding to different brain regions. However, complementary information can be obtained from the temporal dependence
between activities of different brain areas [10]. From a neuroscience perspective, two brain regions that exhibit coherent
or correlated activities are supposed to exchange information
[11], [12] and this kind of communication represents, nowadays, a key element to understand the brain organization [13].
Many analytical tools are available to measure statistical interdependence between brain signals that are based on different
mathematical principles (e.g., correlation, information theory,
phase coherence, and Granger causality), implemented in timeor frequency domain, capturing linear or nonlinear changes [14],
[15]. These tools allow the estimation of the so-called functional
brain connectivity [16].

E

Manuscript received November 27, 2013; revised March 31, 2014; accepted
April 6, 2014. Date of publication April 16, 2014; date of current version August
18, 2014. This work was in part supported by a grant from the Italian Minister
of Foreign Affairs “Direzione Generale per la Promozione del sistema Paese”
between Italy and Hungary. The work of F. De Vico Fallani was supported in
part by the program “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IAIHU-06. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
D. La Rocca is with Section of Applied Electronics, Department of Engineering, Università degli Studi “Roma Tre,” 00146, Roma, Italy; currently she is also
with TAO, CNRS-INRIA-LRI, University of Paris Sud, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette,
France (e-mail: daria.larocca@uniroma3.it).
P. Campisi is with Section of Applied Electronics, Department of Engineering, Università degli Studi “Roma Tre,” 00146, Roma, Italy (e-mail:
patrizio.campisi@uniroma3.it).
B. Vegso, P. Cserti and G. Kozmann are with Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Faculty of Information Technology, University of Pannonia, 8201, Veszprem, Hungary (e-mail: bvegso@gmail.com;
exhodus87@gmail.com; kozmann.gyorgy@virt.uni-pannon.hu).
F. Babiloni is with IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00179, Rome,
Italy; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Rome
“Sapienza”, 00185, Rome, Italy; BrainSigns srl, 00152, Rome, Italy (e-mail:
fabio.babiloni@uniroma1.it).
∗ F. De Vico Fallani is with UPMC Université Paris 06, UM75, F-75013,
Paris, France; Inserm, U1127, F-75013, Paris, France; CNRS, UMR7225, F75013, Paris, France; ICM, Paris, France; Inria, Aramis project-team, Centre
Paris-Rocquencourt, France (e-mail: fabrizio.devicofallani@gmail.com).
This paper contains supplemental material available online at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org (file size: 23 KB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2317881
0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ROCCA et al.: HUMAN BRAIN DISTINCTIVENESS BASED ON EEG SPECTRAL COHERENCE CONNECTIVITY

Interestingly enough, we know that the way different brain
regions are functionally connected is not homogeneous, and
that specific connectivity patterns emerge during wakeful resting state conditions [17]. Our hypothesis is that the functional
connectivity between EEG sensors could be a more robust feature for biometric recognition purpose, compared to EEG activity of channels considered separately. A previous study has
tested, among others, time-domain connectivity measures between two frontal sensors (Fp1 and Fp2) for the identification of
51 subjects [18]. The recognition accuracy, obtained separately
with different classifiers, reached a maximum of CRR = 31%
for cross-correlation and CRR = 24% for mutual information.
In this regard, the large part of the studies using EEG for biometric purposes showed that the extraction of features describing
the spectral content of the signals could give better recognition
performance [9]. Hence, frequency-domain connectivity measures could be more appropriate for detecting those putative
distinctive features.
Changes of EEG amplitudes in the same subject and during
the same condition can occur due to the physiologic circadian
rhythms [19], substance assumption [20], or different recording technical solutions [21]. In contrast to univariate measures,
such as power spectrum estimation, spectral coherence is a simple bivariate connectivity method that is not sensitive to the
amplitude changes of the EEG oscillations. In fact, two signals
may have different amplitudes and/or phases, but high coherence occurs when this phase difference tends to remain constant
[22]. Therefore, this property could play a critical role in increasing the overall classification performance in presence of
large intrasubject EEG variability due to scale factors.
Another common issue in EEG-based biometric systems
is the general tendency to perform classification from single
elements, e.g., power spectrum of one EEG signal or functional
connectivity between two EEG signals [18], [23]–[25]. Less
often the feature space has been enriched by including information from a limited number of a priori selected elements [26],
[27]. These parsimonious procedures appear certainly justified
by possible implications on industrial research for smart EEG
systems with few sensors. However, such technical solution
restricts the feature space and consequently can affect the
overall classification performance. Alternative methodological
solutions integrating information from multiple elements can be
beneficial with the aim of catching more robust and distinctive
brain patterns, thus maximizing the recognition rates.
In this study, we propose a fusion approach [28] to integrate at the match-score level, the information obtained from
the estimation of spectral coherence. The combined use of EEG
spectral coherence and classification algorithms has been previously exploited in neuroscience to distinguish between healthy
and diseased populations [29] or to determine the changes between baseline and motor/cognitive tasks [30]. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first time that such a combined approach
is also used for biometric purposes.
II. METHODS
A. Dataset and Preprocessing
Scalp EEG signals were gathered from the freely online
database PhysioNet BCI [31]. The database consists of N = 108

2407

healthy subjects recorded in two different baseline conditions,
i.e., 1-min EO resting state and 1-min EC resting state. In each
condition, subjects were comfortably seated on a reclining chair
in a dimly lit room. During EO, they were asked to avoid ocular
blinks in order to reduce signal contamination. The EEG data
were recorded with a 64-channel system (BCI2000 system [32])
with an original sampling rate of 160 Hz. All the EEG signals
are here referenced to the mean signal gathered from electrodes
on the ear lobes. Data are subsequently downsampled to 100 Hz
after applying a proper antialiasing low-pass filter to restrict the
available frequency range up to 50 Hz. The electrode positions
on the scalp follow the standard 10–10 montage. Five electrodes are excluded and only Nch = 56 electrodes (see Fig. 3)
are retained for the subsequent analysis. These electrodes were
selected because they constitute a montage common to different
available datasets that we can use in future analysis.
For each subject and condition (EO, EC) the obtained EEG
signals are segmented into NT = 6 consecutive nonoverlapping
epochs of 10 s. These epochs are considered as different observations of the same mental state and they are used to extract
specific spectral features for the assessment of person recognition. In particular, we consider the two following methods,
power spectral density (PSD) and spectral coherence (COH)
connectivity detailed in Sections II-B and II-C, respectively.

B. Power Spectral Density
Although parametric linear or nonlinear EEG signal processing has been recently investigated for biometric purposes [33],
[34], a nonparametric Fourier Transform-based spectral analysis
is chosen in this study due to its obvious physical interpretation
in terms of EEG rhythms. Specifically, the PSD of the EEG signals was extracted from each segmented epoch (10 s) by computing the Welch’s averaged modified periodogram. A sliding
Hanning window of 1 s, with an overlap of 0.5 s, is applied to
improve the estimation quality. The number of FFT points is set
to 100 in order to have a PSD estimate with a frequency resolution of 1 Hz (the frequency sampling is 100 Hz). The resulting
PSD for the electrode i, with i = 1, . . . , Nch , is a feature vector
of NFT = 41 elements characterizing the power of the EEG oscillations from 0 up to 40 Hz. In the present study, we consider
a restricted range of frequency, namely 1–40 Hz. This choice
covers the standard spectrum of physiologic EEG oscillations
from low (Delta 13 Hz, Theta 4–7 Hz) to intermediate (Alpha
8 − 14Hz) and high frequency bands (Beta 15–29 Hz, Gamma
30–40 Hz). Each segmented epoch is finally characterized by
(PSD)
= Nch feature vectors ζ̂ (PSD) of NF = 40 elements,
NE
where Nch = 56 is the total number of electrodes.

C. Spectral Coherence Connectivity
In this study, functional connectivity is estimated by calculating COH [35]. This method is frequently used due to its
practical and intuitive interpretation. COH quantifies the level
of synchrony between two stationary signals at a specific frequency f . Given two EEG signals recorded from channels i and
j, the spectral coherence COHi,j (f ) for a particular frequency

2408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

f is computed as follows:
COHi,j (f ) =

|Si,j (f )|2
Si,i (f ) · Sj,j (f )

(1)

where Si,j (f ) is the cross spectrum of the signals acquired
from channels i and j, while Si,i (f ) and Sj,j (f ) are the
respective autospectra. By definition COHi,j (f ) ranges between 0, which corresponds to no synchrony at the frequency
f, and 1, which corresponds to maximum synchrony at the
frequency f . Here, Si,j (f ), Si,i (f ), and Sj,j (f ) are computed
by means of the Welch’s averaged modified periodogram, with
same parameters used for the computation of the PSD (see
Section II-B.). In particular, the use of 1-s Hanning windows
is aimed to improve the stationarity of the segmented EEG
signals [36]. For each electrode pair, we consider a feature vector ζ̂ (COH) consisting of NF = 40 COH values ranging from
f = 1 to f = 40 Hz. The total number of electrodes Nch being equal to 56, we have that i = 1, . . . , Nch − 1 and j = i +
1, . . . , Nch and each segmented epoch (10 s) is finally character(COH)
= N c h ·(N2 c h −1) = 1540 features vectors of NF
ized by NE
elements.
D. Classifier
We use a classification approach to predict the class, namely
the subject identity, to which the observed feature vector ζ̂ belongs. The model we use for the discriminant analysis assumes
that the feature vectors ζ̂ form a Gaussian mixture distribution.
For this reason, before the classification, we apply a Fisher’s Z
transformation to the COH values in order to normalize their distributions [37]. A logarithmic transformation is instead applied
to the PSD values [38].
A Mahalanobis distance-based classifier is then used to perform identification. This method requires the computation of
the covariance matrix of the feature vectors of each class. Given
the few observations for each subject (six epochs) the covariance matrices cannot be robustly computed. Therefore, we use a
common procedure consisting in the approximation to equal covariance matrices [39]. Specifically, a pooled covariance matrix
is obtained by merging the class-specific distributions of the feature vectors after removing their mean value. Notably, the normalizing transformations, previously introduced, support such
approximation. A partition of the NT × N normalized feature
vectors extracted from the dataset is used to enroll the subjects
and generate templates representing the class distributions.
A cross-validation framework is here considered to assess the
recognition performance. In each cross-validation run, for each
subject m, five epochs are used to generate the class distributions
(i.e., enrollment phase), while the remaining epoch is employed
to perform the identification (i.e., test phase). A number Nr = 6
of runs are provided, considering all possible partitions (leaveone-out framework). The Mahalanobis distances are computed
between each observation m in the test dataset, and the class
distributions n obtained in the enrolling, according to the
formula:
dm ,n = (ζ̂m − μn )Σ−1 (ζ̂m − μn )T

(2)

with m, n = 1, . . . , N , N being the number of classes (subjects), ζ̂m the observed feature vector from subject m, μn the
mean vector for the class distribution n, and Σ the pooled covariance matrix.
We use the misclassification (or confusion) matrix M to evaluate the recognition performance. Each column of this matrix
N × N represents the instances in a predicted subject identity
(i.e., class), while each row represents the instances in an actual
class. For a given subject m, the predicted subject identity n̂ is
obtained according to
n̂ = arg minn dm ,n .

(3)

Eventually, for each run the correct recognition rate (CRR)
is defined as the average over the diagonal of the resulting
misclassification matrix M


N
1 
CRR =
M [n, n] × 100.
(4)
N n =1
E. Match Score Fusion
Performance in terms of correct recognition percentage is
computed as described in the previous section for both the PSD
and COH feature vectors estimated from each channel and channel pair, respectively. Furthermore we hypothesize that different spectral features could be distinctive for different subjects.
Therefore, we try to obtain complementary information considering multiple spectral features from different EEG channels or
channel pairs, in order to improve overall performance. Through
the fusion of single-element information we obtain patterns of
brain activity, supposed to be a more robust characterization
representative of brain organization of specific subjects. In this
regard, we perform a fusion at the match score level, considering
the sum of scores related to different elements
 1
(5)
Sm ,n =
dem ,n
e∈E

where E is a selection of elements from the set of 56 channels for
ζ̂ (PSD) , or from 1540 channel pairs when considering ζ̂ (COH) .
We then compute the misclassification matrix M to evaluate
recognition accuracy as described in Section II-D by maximizing Sm ,n with respect to n. We select the elements to consider
in the match score fusion according to a forward–backward approach. Specifically, only elements which improve accuracy are
retained in the fusion. First, all the elements are sorted in a
descending order of accuracy according to the single-element
classification results. Starting from the first one, each single element is then added stepwise in the subset E to compute (5). If
the inclusion of the i-th element improves the resulting accuracy
then it is retained for the final fusion, otherwise it is removed
(see Fig. 3). More details about the pseudocode implementation
of the match score fusion can be found in the Supplementary
File 1.
Each step of the fusion algorithm is computed within
a leave-one-out cross-validation framework, as discussed in
Section II-D. Specifically, for each tested subset of elememts
E, related to a specific step of the fusion algorithm, Sm ,n is
computed for each of the six partitions of the dataset. Then, the

ROCCA et al.: HUMAN BRAIN DISTINCTIVENESS BASED ON EEG SPECTRAL COHERENCE CONNECTIVITY

2409

CRRs related to the different partitions are averaged together to
obtain the performance related to the particular step. If that performance represents an improvement compared to the previous
step, the related element is retained in E for the final fusion. This
analysis is carried out separately for three brain macro-areas (or
zones), namely frontal (F), central (C), and parieto-occipital (P),
in order to compare performance and distinctive activity patterns
among them.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, the results of the analysis performed for subject
recognition based on EEG signals are reported and discussed.
Resting-state conditions EO and EC are investigated separately
and the related outcome is here compared for all the performed
tests. Two different characterizations of the brain activity are
considered as distinctive features to test within the provided
biometric framework. In particular, after the preprocessing described in Section II-A, PSD and COH estimates are obtained as
reported in Sections II-B and C. As previously pointed out, PSD
measures the activity of single brain regions while COH rather
measures their functional connectivity. Then, two different sets
of feature vectors, ζ̂ (PSD) and ζ̂ (COH) , are extracted according
to the previously described methods. A classification based on
Mahalanobis distance, detailed in Section II-D, is then carried
out to evaluate the distinctiveness of the two considered feature
vectors in all tested conditions, in terms of CRR.

Fig. 1. Spatial distribution of CRR values obtained considering (a) PSD features from single EEG channel and (b) COH features from single channel pairs.
In (b), the elements of the adjacency matrices code all the possible EEG channel pairs. They are organized in order to highlight the connectivity within and
between three zones: frontal (F), central (C), and parieto-occipital (P). The two
analyzed conditions EO (on the left) and EC (on the right) are reported for each
of the two investigated spectral features.

A. Single-Element Classification
A preliminary test on distinctiveness related to each feature
is reported in Fig. 1. The CRR values obtained within a crossvalidation framework, as described in Section II-D, are shown
in false colors. In particular, the scalp maps shown in Fig. 1(a)
represent the spatial distribution of the CRR values obtained
through single channel PSD features, in the EO and EC conditions. The adjacency matrices shown in Fig. 1(b) report the
CRR values of the COH features for each channel pair. Given the
Nch × Nch adjacency matrix Adj, each element Adji,j represents the CRR obtained considering the COH between channels
i, j as feature vector. According to this representation, the position of the EEG channels over the head is coded by the x and y
axes of the adjacency matrix.
The CRR scalp maps for the PSD features show that the most
distinctive regions appear in the central part of the brain (C)
during EO (max CRR = 86.91%), while the P zone is more distinctive in the EC condition (max CRR = 90.49%). The better
distinctiveness of the posterior areas during EC condition was
already reported in previous EEG studies [25], [26], [33] and it
is probably related to well-known physiological increase of the
parieto-occipital Alpha power in such condition [40]. A possible
explication for this evidence is that EC resting states interrupt
the visual processing while enhancing endogenous and autonomic related brain activity [41], which reflects the influence of
genetic factors [42]. For the CRR adjacency matrices in the EC
condition the best discriminant channel pairs are mainly located
in the parieto-occipital zone P (max CRR = 78.5%). In the EO
condition, the CRR values are generally lower compared to EC
(max CRR = 75.86%). In both conditions, short-range func-

tional connectivity carries more distinctive information as can
be observed by the tendency of the highest CRR values to stand
close to the main diagonal of the Adj matrices.
Taken together, these findings show that COH features are less
distinctive than PSD features in a single-element approach. This
outcome is in line with our hypothesis that a functional brain
network consisting of more elements “linked” together could
better characterize different people, describing some aspects of
brain organization assumed to be specific of each subject.
B. Match-Score Fusion
To improve performance, a fusion of the elements at the match
score level is obtained for each brain zone (F, C, and P), within
the same cross-validation framework described in Section II-E.
The related CRR improvements with respect to the single element approach are shown in Fig. 2. Here, the two conditions EO
and EC, and the two considered features PSD and COH, are
compared. In general, the match-score fusion approach improves the performance with respect to the single element approach for each zone, condition, and feature. Notably, a perfect
recognition rate (CRR = 100%) is obtained when fusing the
scores of the COH features, for the EC condition (in all the
zones) and for the EO condition (in the frontal zone). The different behavior in performance improvement between PSD and
COH features can be in part explained by the lower variability
of the PSD features vector across different brain regions (Supplementary File 4). In this case, most of distinctive information
is supposed to be contained in the single elements. Instead,

2410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Performances in terms of CRR (y-axis) obtained considering singleelement classification versus match-score fusion in each brain zone (x-axis).
The color of the bars codes the spectral feature and the condition according to
the legend.

Fig. 3. Distinctive functional connectivity patterns in each brain zone (on the
top) and related steps for the match score fusion selection (on the bottom).
Results for the EO and EC to conditions are reported in (a) and (b), respectively.
The color of each line in the bottom panels codes the CRR values obtained for
different brain zones, according to the top panels. Symbol markers highlight
the fusion steps that increased the overall CRR accuracy. Different symbols are
used for different cerebral zones (F-triangles, C-circles, P-squares). X-axes are
put into logarithmic scales for the sake of representation.

COH features vector tends to be more variable across brain
regions and the inclusion of more COH elements can eventually
improve the CRR, while single elements represent very partial
information.
Fig. 3 shows the optimal combination of channel pairs in
every zone for COH features (see Section II-E). Results are
shown for the two conditions EO (a) and EC (b). The plots
shown on the bottom part of the figure represent the steps of the
match score fusion. Here, each highlighted symbol represents a
subsequent improvement of the overall CRR, which leads to include the related channel pair in the final distinctive connectivity

pattern represented in the upper part of the figure. It can be noticed that the maximum value of CRR is achieved more rapidly
for the EC condition, as shown by the vertical lines in the plots
on the bottom part of the figure. The resulting distinctive connectivity patterns consist mainly of short-range COH elements,
a result which is in line with the previous outcome reported in
the single-element classification analysis. The topology of the
more discriminant COH elements reveals a hemispheric symmetry with respect to the longitudinal line. In particular, the
predominance of the frontal EEG sensors (line F7-F8) can be
observed in both the EO and EC conditions. Neurophysiological evidence shows that specific genetic factors can influence
EEG frontal activity [43]. Thus the highly discriminant spectral
COH observed in this zone could in part reflect a subjective
distinctiveness of brain functioning. We also report the involvement of temporo-parietal and dorsal centro-parietal sensors of
the brain zone C. Brain regions near the temporo-parietal junction play a specific role in self-other distinction processes and
in representing thoughts, beliefs, desires, and emotions [44],
influenced by a combination of biological and environmental
factors. A comprehensive analysis reporting the fusion steps for
the COH features in all the conditions and zones is detailed in
Table I, along with a description of the obtained identification
accuracy and topology. A predominance of short-range connectivity characterizes the distinctive patterns for all the considered
brain zones.
Notably, the inclusion of the long-range (i.e., interzone) connectivity in the fusion algorithm does not improve the recognition performance (Supplementary File 2). The superiority of
short-range over long-range connectivity could be partially imputed to volume condition effects, which are known to affect
COH measurements [45]. Although removing those effects is
important, in general, to estimate true interactions between the
cortical generators, this would not represent an issue in our study.
In fact, volume conduction effects depend on the morphology
and electrical conductibility of the subject’s head structures. In
this regard, any possible volume conduction contributions on
the EEG signals could instead represent a relevant personal trait
to be exploited for the biometric recognition. As a partial confirmation of our claim, we report that the recognition performance
of the imaginary coherence (robust to volume conduction effects
[45]) is significantly lower than standard COH (Supplementary
File 3).
To sum up, the results of the herein proposed analysis show
that a perfect identification of 108 subjects (CRR = 100%) can
be obtained considering spectral COH features within specific
regions of the head, and fusing the respective information at
the match score level. This result outperforms the state-of-theart recognition performance obtained with EEG during resting
states, notably a CRR = 98.73% for a dataset of 45 subjects
[33] and a CRR = 97.5% for a dataset of 40 subjects [24].
C. Limitations and Possible Solution
The proposed approach presents methodological and technical limitations that should be taken into account in scenarios
different from the presented experimental protocol. First, the

ROCCA et al.: HUMAN BRAIN DISTINCTIVENESS BASED ON EEG SPECTRAL COHERENCE CONNECTIVITY

2411

TABLE I
CRRS FOR COH FEATURES, OBTAINED THROUGH THE FUSION OF THE CHANNEL PAIRS REPORTED IN EACH ROW
Eyes-Open
F
C
P

72,74
F2-F4
74.14
TP7-T7
75.86
P7-P5

91,43
F1-F3
91.28
CP5-TP7
91.59
PO4-PO8

94,55
F4-F6
92.99
C5-T7
93.92
O1-PO3

97,2
F3-F5
95.33
T8-C6
94.08
O1-PO7

97,82
F6-F8
96.26
FC2-FCz
94.39
P2-P4

99,06
F1-Fz
97.04
C2-Cz
95.79
PO7-P5

99,84
F5-F7
97.82
CP2-CPz
96.26
O1-O2

100
F2-Fz
98.29
CP5-T7
97.51
P2-Pz

77.26
F2-F4
72.43
TP7-T7
78.5
PO3-O1

97.04
F3-F5
90.65
FC2-FCz
92.21
PO4-PO8

97.82
F1-F3
96.73
FC2-FC4
95.01
PO7-O1

98.6
F5-F7
99.22
C6-T8
98.13
PO3-PO7

98.75
F6-F8
100
FC1-FC3
98.29
P2-P4

99.06
F4-F6

99.69
Fp2-Fpz

100
F2-F6

98.44
PO7-P7

98.6
PO7-P5

99.06
P1-P3

98.44
TP8-CP6
98.29
P3-P5

98.6
CP6-T8
98.75
P4-P6

98.91
POz-PO3

99.69
O2-PO4

99.84
O2-POz

100
P4-Pz

99.07
PO7-P1

Eyes-Closed
F
C
P

Each column represents a step of the fusion, and the related accuracy achieved is reported together with the channel pair considered in that step (see Section E.). Results for
EO, EC, and the three investigated brain zones are shown.

COH requires EEG signals to be (quasi)stationary. Appropriate
short time windows should be selected by testing the stationarity of the signals [46]. Alternatively, different connectivity
methods that do not require stationarity (e.g., wavelet-based)
can be used [47]. Second, the Mahalanobis distance-based
classifier assumes that features are Gaussian distributed. Possible deviation from Gaussianity should be then compensated
by applying appropriate data transformations [37] or using reduced polynomial regression-based classifiers [48]. Third, the
fusion approach implies many EEG sensors to be placed on the
scalp. This affects the design of the biometric system and the
time needed to establish a good skin-sensor electrical contact.
Possible solutions can come from the technology development
related to dry and miniaturized sensors, or contactless biosensors [49]. Finally, most of the computational time is spent during
the offline enrollment and definition of the fusion steps (around
20 min on a current standard personal computer). Though it is
not the aim of this study, we envisage that possible optimizations
can be obtained by parallelizing the single-element ranking and
the cross-validation runs described in Section II.

IV. CONCLUSION
In the past few years, there has been a growing interest in
EEG-based biometric systems. Compared to other traits that are
usually considered in biometrics (e.g., fingerprint, iris, voice,
signature), EEG activity presents two main advantages, among
others: i) it is harder to steal and ii) it is a dynamic measure, thus
allowing for constant recognition and mental state monitoring
[4].
Despite such interest, classification performance decreases
from maximum accuracy when the number of people to recognize becomes high, i.e., N > 100 [50], [51]. Possible causes
rely on the methods that are commonly used to extract characteristic features from the EEG signals. Indeed, the majority of
these methods only consider the activity of a single brain region without taking into account its dynamic relationship with
other regions. However, the human brain works as an interconnected system where different specialized areas continuously

exchange information through stable synchronous connectivity
patterns [10].
In the present study, we propose to exploit such synchronous
“communication” between different EEG sensors, under the
hypothesis that this information could exhibit stronger intraclass
invariant properties. Specifically, spectral coherence estimates
within specific zones (i.e., frontal, central, parieto-occipital) are
integrated according to a fusion at match score level [28] based
on the sum rule. We test the proposed approach on a large
number of subjects (N=108) having been recorded with a highdensity EEG system with 56 sensors.
Taken together, the obtained results indicate that:
1) the combined use of spectral coherence and fusion algorithms significantly improves the overall recognition performance compared to existing techniques based on single
element approaches and/or power spectrum estimates; and
2) a perfect recognition can be achieved in both eyes-closed
and eyes-open resting states by considering eleven EEG
sensors in the frontal region of the brain. This represents
a technical advantage for future implementation of smart
EEG-based biometric helmets.
Although connectivity-based approaches have not received
much attention in this field, we suggest that they will probably
turn out to be effective invariant features to further develop
robust EEG-based user-recognition systems.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Berkhout and D. O. Walter, “Temporal stability and individual differences in the human EEG: An analysis of variance of spectral values,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-15, no. 3, pp. 165–168, Jul. 1968.
[2] H. Van Dis, M. Corner, R. Dapper, G. Hanewald, and H. Kok, “Individual
differences in the human electroencephalogram during quiet wakefulness,”
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 47, pp. 87–94, 1979.
[3] H. H. Stassen, “Computerized recognition of persons by EEG spectral patterns,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 49, nos. 1/2,
pp. 190–194, 1980.
[4] P. Campisi, D. La Rocca, and G. Scarano, “EEG for automatic person
recognition,” IEEE Comput., vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 87–89, Jul. 2012.
[5] S. Marcel, and J. D. R. Millan, “Person authentication using brainwaves
(EEG) and maximum a posteriori model adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 743–752, Apr. 2007.

2412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

[6] D. Mantini, M. G. Perrucci, C. D. Gratta, G. L. Romani, and M. Corbetta,
“Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human
brain,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 104, no. 32, pp. 13170–13175,
Aug. 2007.
[7] F. Vogel and E. Schalt, “The electroencephalogram (EEG) as a research
tool in human behavior genetics: Psychological examinations in healthy
males with various inherited EEG variants,” Human Genetics, vol. 47,
pp. 81–111, 1979.
[8] A. J. Tomarken, R. J. Davidson, R. E. Wheeler and L. Kinney,
“Psychometric properties of resting anterior EEG asymmetry: Temporal stability and internal consistency,” Psychophysiol., vol. 29, no. 5,
pp. 576–592, 1992.
[9] P. Campisi, and D. La Rocca, “Brain waves for automatic biometric based
user recognition,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 9, no. 5, pp.
782–800, May. 2014.
[10] F. Varela, J.-P. Lachaux, E. Rodriguez, and J. Martinerie, “The brainweb:
Phase synchronization and large-scale integration,” Nature Rev. Neurosci.,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 229–239, Apr. 2001.
[11] T. Akam and D. M. Kullmann, “Oscillations and filtering networks support
flexible routing of information,” Neuron, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 308–320, 2010.
[12] L. Astolfi, F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, S. Salinari, C. Babiloni, A. Basilisco,
P. M. Rossini, L. Ding, Y. Ni, B. He, M. G. Marciani, and F. Babliloni,
“Estimation of the effective and functional human cortical connectivity
with structural equation modeling and directed transfer function applied
to high-resolution EEG,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 22, no. 10, pp.
1457–1470, 2004.
[13] H. Bin, Y. Lin, C. Wilke, and H. Yuan, “Electrophysiological imaging
of brain activity and connectivity—Challenges and opportunities,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1918–1931, Jul. 2011.
[14] O. David, D. Cosmelli, and K. J. Friston, “Evaluation of different measures of functional connectivity using a neural mass model,” Neuroimage,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 659–673, 2004.
[15] M. Billinger, C. Brunner, and G. R. Müller-Putz, “Single-trial connectivity estimation for classification of motor imagery data,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 10, no. 4, p. 046006, Aug. 2013.
[16] K. J. Friston, “Functional and effective connectivity: A review,” Brain
Connect., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13–36, 2011.
[17] H. Laufs, K. Krakow, P. Sterzer, E. Eger, A. Beyerle, A. Salek-Haddadi,
and A. Kleinschmidt, “Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional
and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at
rest,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 100, no. 19, pp. 11053–11058,
2003.
[18] A. Riera, A. Soria-Frisch, M. Caparrini, C. Grau, and G. Ruffini, “Unobtrusive biometric system based on electroencephalogram analysis,” EURASIP
J. Adv. Signal Process, vol. 2008, 143728, 2008.
[19] D. Aeschbach, J. R. Matthews, T. T. Postolache, M. A. Jackson, H. A.
Giesen, and T. A. Wehr, “Two circadian rhythms in the human electroencephalogram during wakefulness,” Amer. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp.
Physiol., vol. 277, no. 6, pp. R1771–R1779, 1999.
[20] T. M. Sokhadze, R. L. Cannon, and D. L. Trudeau, “Eeg biofeedback
as a treatment for substance use disorders: review, rating of efficacy
and recommendations for further research,” J. Neurother., vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 5–43, 2008.
[21] T. C. Ferree, P. Luu, G. S. Russell, and D. M. Tucker, “Scalp electrode
impedance, infection risk, and EEG data quality,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 112, no. 3, pp. 536–544, 2001.
[22] P. L. Nunez, Electric Fields of the Brain: The Neurophysics of EEG.
Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2006.
[23] M. Poulos, M. Rangoussi, and N. Alexandris, “Neural network based
person identification using EEG features,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.
Speech Signal Process., 1999, vol. 2, pp. 1117–1120.
[24] F. Su, H. Zhou, Z. Feng, and J. Ma, “A biometric-based covert warning system using EEG,” in Proc. 5th IAPR Int. Conf. Biometrics, 2012,
pp. 342–347.
[25] F. De Vico Fallani, G. Vecchiato, J. Toppi, L. Astolfi, and F. Babiloni, “Subject identification through standard EEG signals during resting states,” in
Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 2331–2333.
[26] P. Campisi, G. Scarano, F. Babiloni, F. De Vico Fallani, S. Colonnese, E.
Maiorana, and L. Forastiere, “Brain waves based user recognition using
the ‘eyes closed resting conditions’ protocol,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop
Inf. Forensics Security, Nov./Dec 2011, pp. 1–6.
[27] D. La Rocca, P. Campisi, and J. Sole-Casals, “EEG based user recognition
using bump modelling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. BIOSIG, 2013, pp. 1–12.
[28] A. A. Ross, K. Nandakumar, and A. K. Jain, Handbook of Multibiometrics.
New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2006.

[29] F. H. Duffy and H. Als, “A stable pattern of EEG spectral coherence
distinguishes children with autism from neuro-typical controls—A large
case control study,” BMC Med., vol. 10, no. 1, p. 64, 2012.
[30] D. J. Krusienski, D. J. McFarland, and J. R. Wolpaw, “Value of amplitude,
phase, and coherence features for a sensorimotor rhythm-based braincomputer interface,” Brain Res. Bull., vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 130–134, Jan.
2012.
[31] Database physionet bci. [Online]. Available:http://www.physionet.org/
pn4/eegmmidb/
[32] Bci2000 system. [Online]. Available: http://www.bci2000.org
[33] D. La Rocca, P. Campisi, and G. Scarano, “EEG biometrics for individual
recognition in resting state with closed eyes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. BIOSIG,
2012, pp. 1–12.
[34] M. Poulos, M. Rangoussi, N. Alexandris, and A. Evangelou, “Person
identification from the eeg using nonlinear signal classification,” Methods
Inf. Med., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 64–75, 2002.
[35] F. G. Andres and C. Gerloff, “Coherence of sequential movements and
motor learning,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 520–527, 1999.
[36] A. A. Fingelkurts and A. A. Fingelkurts, “Making complexity simpler:
multivariability and metastability in the brain,” Int. J. Neurosci., vol. 114,
no. 7, pp. 843–862, 2004.
[37] A. Amjad, D. Halliday, J. Rosenberg, and B. Conway, “An extended difference of coherence test for comparing and combining several independent
coherence estimates: Theory and application to the study of motor units
and physiological tremor,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 69–79,
1997.
[38] T. Gasser, P. Bächer, and J. Möcks, “Transformations towards the normal
distribution of broad band spectral parameters of the EEG,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 119–124, 1982.
[39] J. Schürmann, Pattern Classification: A Unified View of Statistical and
Neural Approaches (A Wiley-Interscience Publication Series). New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 1996.
[40] E. Niedermeyer, “The normal EEG of the waking adult,” in Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related
Fields. Baltimore, MD, USA: Williams & Wilkins, 2005, p. 167.
[41] R. Barry, A. Clarke, S. Johnstone, C. Magee, and J. Rushby, “EEG differences between eyes-closed and eyes-open resting conditions,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 118, no. 12, pp. 2765–2773, 2007.
[42] S. Bodenmann, T. Rusterholz, R. Dürr, C. Stoll, V. Bachmann, E. Geissler,
K. Jaggi-Schwarz, and H.-P. Landolt, “The functional val158Met polymorphism of COMT predicts interindividual differences in brain α oscillations
in young men,” J. Neurosci., vol. 29, no. 35, pp. 10855–10862, 2009.
[43] B. P. Zietsch, J. L. Hansen, N. K. Hansell, G. M. Geffen, N. G. Martin, and M. J. Wright. (2007). Common and specific genetic influences on EEG power bands delta, theta, alpha, and beta. Biol. Psychol.
[Online]. 75(2), pp. 154–164. Available:http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0301051107000099
[44] R. Saxe and N. Kanwisher, “People thinking about thinking people: The
role of the temporo-parietal junction in ‘theory of mind’,” Neuroimage,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1835–1842, 2003.
[45] G. Nolte, O. Bai, L. Wheaton, Z. Mari, S. Vorbach, and M. Hallett, “Identifying true brain interaction from EEG data using the imaginary part of
coherency,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 115, no. 10, pp. 2292–2307, 2004.
[46] D. Kwiatkowski, P. C. B. Phillips, P. Schmidt, and Y. Shin, “Testing the
null hypothesis of stationarity against the alternative of a unit root,” J.
Econometrics, vol. 54, no. 1/3, pp. 159–178, 1992.
[47] M. Le Van Quyen, J. Foucher, J.-P. Lachaux, E. Rodriguez, A. Lutz, J.
Martinerie, and F. J. Varela, “Comparison of Hilbert transform and wavelet
methods for the analysis of neuronal synchrony,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 83–98, 2001.
[48] G. Scarano, L. Forastiere, S. Colonnese, and S. Rinauro, “Reduced polynomial classifier using within-class standardizing transform,” in Proc. IEEE
5th Int. Symp. Commun. Control Signal Process. 2012, pp. 1–4.
[49] Y. M. Chi, T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and noncontact
biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 3, pp. 106–119, Jan. 1, 2010.
[50] K. Brigham and B. V. Kumar, “Subject identification from electroencephalogram (EEG) signals during imagined speech,” in Proc. IEEE 4th
Int. Conf. Biometrics, Theory, Appl. Syst., 2010, pp. 1–8.
[51] R. Palaniappan, and D. Mandic, “Biometrics from brain electrical activity:
A machine learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 738–742, Apr. 2007.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

