IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2161

Liquid Metal Angiography for Mega Contrast
X-Ray Visualization of Vascular Network in
Reconstructing In-Vitro Organ Anatomy
Qian Wang† , Yang Yu† , Keqin Pan, and Jing Liu∗

Abstract—Visualization on the anatomical vessel networks plays
a vital role in the physiological or pathological investigations. However, so far it still remains a big challenge to identify the fine structures of the smallest capillary vessel networks via conventional
imaging ways. Here, the room temperature liquid metal angiography was proposed for the first time to generate mega contrast X-ray
images for multiscale vasculature mapping. Particularly, gallium
was adopted as the room temperature liquid metal contrast agent
and infused into the vessels of in vitro pig hearts and kidneys. We
scanned the samples under X-ray and compared the angiograms
with those obtained via conventional contrast agent—the iohexol.
As quantitatively demonstrated by the grayscale histograms and
numerical indexes, the contrast of the vessels to the surrounding
tissues in the liquid metal angiograms is orders higher than that
of the iohexol enhanced images. And the angiogram has reached
detailed enough width of 0.1 mm for the tiny vessels, which indicated that the capillaries can be clearly distinguished under the
liquid metal enhanced images. Further, with tomography from
the micro-CT, we also managed to reconstruct the 3-D structures
of the kidney vessels. Tremendous clarity and efficiency of the
method over existing approaches have been experimentally clarified. It was disclosed that the usually invisible capillary networks
now become distinctively clear in the gallium angiograms. This basic mechanism has generalized purpose and can be extended to a
wide spectrum of 3-D computational tomographic areas. It opens
a new soft tool for quickly reconstructing high-resolution spatial
channel networks for scientific researches as well as engineering
practices where complicated and time-consuming resections are no
longer a necessity.
Index Terms—Gallium, mega contrast, room temperature liquid
metal, X-ray angiography.

Manuscript received October 8, 2013; revised March 17, 2014; accepted April
9, 2014. Date of publication April 15, 2014; date of current version June 14,
2014. This work was supported in part by the NSFC under Grant 51376102 and
in part by the Tsinghua University Grant 20121088098. † Q. Wang and Y. Yu
contributed equally. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Q. Wang and Y. Yu are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail:
wqianrzhwd@163.com; sd1974362@163.com).
K. Pan is with the Hospital of Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
(e-mail: pkq12@126.com).
∗ J. Liu is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of
Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China and also with the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100190, China (e-mail: jliubme@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2317554

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE William Harvey revealed the secret of blood circulation in the 17th century for the first time, physicians
and scientists have discovered numerous facts and effects inside
this cyclic system. Tremendous surgical efforts were ever made
either in vivo or in vitro biological body, just wishing to see
more about the distributions, functions, and behaviors of various vascular networks. Generally, the circulation involves heart,
lung, arteries, veins, and capillaries, from which the blood can
bring oxygen, nutrients to every organs and tissues and take
away carbon-dioxide and all metabolic wastes. Meanwhile, for
many clinical scenarios such as tumors and phlebeurysma, the
abnormal growth of blood vessels may indicate progress of the
disease [1], [2]. Further, tracing drugs and special molecules is
also heavily dependent on understanding the vessels’ anatomical structure. Many clinical treatments, pathological evaluation
as well as organ physiological interpretations are mostly carried
out through the blood vessels into the road. Even for a typical
biological or medical training, observing vasculature networks
through surgical resections and microscope on selected animals
is often a basic route for interpreting the life sciences and technology. In fact, the visualization of vasculature has become an
essential foundation for evaluating the lesions in the vascular
medical image analysis [3], [4]. Overall, it is extremely critical
to clarify the fine distribution and variation of the blood vessels
in the physiological and pathological researches.
Angiography is a vascular reconstruction way that helps
physicians diagnose and evaluate the physiological conditions
related to blood vessels. It can be performed with many medical imaging methods, such as ultrasound (US), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and
X-rays [5]–[7]. US and MRI are mainly used for mapping large
vessels. To improve the vascular image, many contrast agents
endowed with different physical properties to the surrounding
tissues were often adopted. For CT and X-ray angiography,
the efficacy of the contrast agent relies heavily on its density.
Though both X-ray and CT can obtain rather high-resolution
2-D and 3-D images, it remains a big challenge to clearly display the vessels, especially for those complex networks made
up of tiny capillaries. So far, most of the existing contrast agents
are made of solutions whose density is close to that of water. For
such situations, the resembling property between the agent and
the capillaries in tiny scale significantly reduces the possibility
to distinguish them in the medical images.
Recently, tremendous efforts have been made to find new
contrast agents which could significantly improve the vascular

S

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2162

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

imaging quality. Among all the imaging methods ever tried, it
is X-ray that was applied to angiography for the first time in
1896, just in the following year of Röntgen’s discovery of the
beam, in the study of a corpse’s hand [8]. As an inexpensive
and widely available imaging way, the basic idea for X-ray
angiography is to modify the density in the vessels to distinguish
them from the surrounding tissues. The most typical contrast
media as tremendously investigated generally include iodine and
iodinated agents [9], nanoparticles [10]–[13] and so on. Such
vascular-enhanced radiological angiography in fact becomes the
foundation for advanced CT and 3-D vasculature reconstruction
[14]–[16]. It is also a standard reference for evaluating other
contrast-enhanced imaging methods [17]–[19]. Generally, high
energy X-ray is a necessity for obtaining good contrast image.
However, when raising the energy of the X-ray, the contrast
efficacy of iodine would decrease. As an alternative, the newly
emerging nanoparticles were intensively investigated aiming to
further improve the quality of the existing contrast agents, yet
the improvement is still rather limited.
Here, instead of seeking and trying more complex chemicals,
we proposed for the first time the liquid metal angiography to realize ever powerful vascular radiological imaging which offers
mega contrast X-ray images as compared with the existing conventional ways. Through infusing the room temperature liquid
metal such as gallium into the arteries of the pig heart and kidney
in vitro, we managed to significantly lighten the target vessels in
several orders larger than before under an ordinary radiological
imaging instrument. In this way, the capillaries used to be hardly
detectable now become easily detectable on the image with outstanding clarity. This method opens the mega contrast nonsurgical approach for characterizing the fine distribution and variation
of the biological vasculature system. It also suggests possibility
for a localized in vivo vascular-enhanced radiological imaging
in the near future. The principle has generalized purpose and
can be extended to a variety of 3-D computational tomographic
areas including many engineering applications other than the
biomedical category alone. This work sets up a highly efficient
soft tool for quickly reconstructing high-resolution spatial channel network for scientific researches or engineering applications
where complicated and time-consuming resections are no longer
needed.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The present study has been approved by the Ethics Committee
of Tsinghua University, Beijing, China under contract [SYXK
(Jing) 2009-0022].
As the first trial in this area, the gallium metal with a purity
of 99.999% was adopted as the contrast agent. There are several
reasons for such choice. First, the melting point of gallium is
29.78 ◦ C, which is close to the room temperature. And the
metal is endowed with a significant property of overcooling,
indicating that the phase change does not happen immediately
when the temperature drops below the melting point. Second, the
gallium is chemically very stable and does not react with water
at around room temperature, and a series of former researches
have proven that gallium is safe for human in many normal

occasions [20], [21], especially compared to another famous
liquid metal—the mercury. It is, thus, rather convenient and safe
for manipulating the material. Most importantly, the density
of gallium is much higher than that of the tissue and blood.
Therefore, it has superior visibility under X-ray irradiation and
will make a fluent and conformal fill-in throughout the target
vessels.
Physiologically, heart is the engine of the circulatory system.
Oxygen and nutrients to the heart is conveyed by the coronary
artery, which runs throughout the myocardium with its complex
capillary network supporting behind. Many diseases happen
with the pathological changes in the heart vessels, and it is vital
to sketch out the vessels’ fine distribution. The kidney is another
important organ with large amount of vessels, which plays the
role of blood filter. Therefore, the in vitro heart and kidney
can serve as the typical and suitable experimental objects. For
such consideration, we chose the commercially available pig
hearts and kidneys which were all within two days’ fresh state
after sacrifice. And another contrast agent, the iohexol, was
selected as a comparison to evaluate the performance and to
investigate the basic imaging principle of the liquid metal-based
radiological angiography.
For sample preparation, either agent was infused into the main
branches of the vessels within 15 min. There are three branches
for heart and two branches for kidney. The volume of the agents
into each coronary branch was about 1 ml, while the infusion
amount into either renal arterial branch is about 0.8 ml. Then
the filled organ was taken to the imaging instrument. Repetitive imaging experiments were performed on each group of
the above different organs using X-ray (GE XR/A, Hospital of
Tsinghua University), clinical CT scanner (Phillips Brilliance
6, Hospital of Tsinghua University) and micro-CT scanner
(XM-Tracer-130, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences). It took very short time for each X-ray
photograph, and the time consumption for the clinical CT scan
was about 3 min each case. While for the micro-CT, the scan
took about 1 h. Yet it should be noticed that the in vitro organs
were without circulation, so there was no need to worry about
the agents flowing away from the region of interest. In this paper, the angiograms of the sample hearts (see Figs. 1 and 2)
were produced by the clinical X-ray and CT instrument, while
the images of the kidney (see Fig. 3) were from the micro-CT
scanner. All the results disclosed the distinctively high contrast
quality of the presented imaging method.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
As is anticipated, the angiograms depicted in Fig. 1(a) and
(b) display tremendous differences for the hearts infused with
liquid metal gallium and iohexol (35 g(I)/100 ml), respectively.
Interestingly enough, the gallium produces superior contrast
effect intuitively and enables one to see through a highly clear
coronary network, while only several relatively large vessels
could be observed in the heart infused with iohexol as commonly
tried so far. For further comparison, we calculated the grayscale
curves at five different heights in both angiograms and compared
them with each other. The curves of a1–a5 representing the

WANG et al.: LIQUID METAL ANGIOGRAPHY FOR MEGA CONTRAST X-RAY VISUALIZATION OF VASCULAR NETWORK

Fig. 1. Comparison of contrast effects between angiograms with liquid metal
and conventional agent under X-ray irradiation. (a) X-ray angiogram of heart
filled with liquid metal gallium. (b) X-ray angiogram of heart filled with iohexol.
Histogram of either image is placed at the bottom of the image A and B. (c)
Plots of the grayscale along the horizontal lines at five different heights labeled
in A and B (For aesthetic, we did not draw the whole lines on images of A
and B). The working parameters for the X-ray in both A and B are 55 kV and
25 mAs. The resolution is 0.1 mm/pixel.

gallium angiography case all show significantly steep peeks
than those in b1–b5 of the iohexol enhanced image cases [see
Fig. 1(c)].
Fig. 2 reveals the effects of X-ray irradiation intensity on the
image quality. With the same exposure parameter (10 mAs),
the contrast between the vessels (gallium) and the other soft
tissues increases along with the addition of the X-ray intensity
(see Fig. 2(a), 80 kV; Fig. 2(b), 100 kV; and Fig. 2(c), 120 kV).
However, the increasing penetrability also makes some capillaries invisible, which can be seen in the subimages in a1–a3
and b1–b3. The plots of the subimages’ grayscale histograms
in Fig. 2(d) and (e) have given proofs in quantity. In both plots,
there exist two peaks for the subimages, which can be generally
seen as one representing the enhanced vessels and the other representing the background tissues. The distance between the two
peaks becomes longer when the X-ray gets stronger, indicating a
higher contrast; while the height of the vessel peak decreases at
the same time, which means the vessels become darker. Fig. 2(f)
is the 3-D reconstruction of the coronary arteries from the CT
scan, whose parameters are set as 120 kV and 100 mAs.

2163

Fig. 2. Effect of X-ray irradiation intensity on image contrast of heart filled
with liquid metal gallium. (a) Image of the heart at 80 kV. (b) Image of the
heart at 100 kV. (c) Image of the heart at 120 kV. The exposure parameter in all
three images is set as 10 mAs identically. The square labeled with a1, a2, b1,
b2, c1, c2 is zoomed in and presented below the image A, B, C, respectively.
(d) Comparison of the histogram for three subimages labeled with a1, b1, c1 in
A, B, and C. (e) Comparison of the histogram for three subimages labeled with
a2, b2, c2 in A, B, and C. (f) Gallium enhanced coronary 3-D vasculature of
the heart, with the right coronary artery in blue, the left anterior descending in
magenta and the circumflex (CX) in yellow. The parameters of the CT scan are
120 kV and 55 mAs. The resolution is 0.1 mm/pixel.

Fig. 3. Mega contrast vasculature of a pig kidney infused with liquid metal
gallium under X-ray irradiation. (a) Angiogram of a whole pig kidney with one
branch of its arterial network filled with gallium. The network of arterial vessels
shows high contrast to the ambient tissues at a resolution of 0.078 mm/pixel.
(b) Image with a higher resolution of 0.013 mm/pixel on a localized area from the
image A. (c) Zoom-in of a local area from the image B, where the diameter of the
thinnest vessels is down to 0.1 mm. (d) Gallium enhanced kidney 3-D vasculature
viewed in various directions. The X-ray parameters for this angiogram are 70 kV
and 3.2 mAs.

For more precise evaluation, numerical index is adopted
to further describe the contrast discrepancy between the angiograms of liquid metal and iohexol. The evaluation method
considers the dynamic range of the graylevels and the ratio of
black and white areas as the factor for contrast [22], and the

2164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE I
NUMERICAL INDEXES CALCULATED FOR FIG. 1

TABLE II
NUMERICAL INDEXES CALCULATED FOR FIG. 2

equation can be expressed as
Fcontrast =

σ
(α4 )0.25

(1)

where σ denotes standard deviation of the grayscale probabilistic distribution and σ4 denotes the Kurtosis. The Kurtosis is
based on the mean μ4 and the variance σ 2 and expressed as
μ4
α4 =
.
(2)
(σ 2 )2
For both Figs. 1 and 2, the numerical indexes of different
regions of interest (ROI)—the whole heart and local areas, such
as lines and squares, have been calculated and listed in Tables I
and II. In Table I, the numbers clearly shows that the liquid
metal has much higher contrast than the iohexol under the same
radiological conditions. Situation revealed in Table II is a little
bit different—the whole heart contrast value of Fig. 2(a) is higher
than those of the others, while the results for the localized areas
are quite the opposite. The reason lies in that the major area
for the whole image is soft tissues with different thickness. Xrays with higher energy tends to penetrate them more easily and
diminish the grayscale variance because they are similarly dark.
Yet for the localized areas where the liquid metal has higher
ratios, X-ray with higher energy raised the grayscale interval
between the vessels and tissues, thus leading to much better
contrast.
In order to offer more evidences on various organ vasculatures, we also managed to infuse the gallium into the renal artery
of the pig kidney. The X-ray images are shown in Fig. 3(a)–(c).
A whole branch of the renal artery network is intact and the
texture of the small vessels is rather clear. One can even see

the thinnest tube in the images that has reached 0.1 mm [see
Fig. 3(c)]. In the previous works, it was claimed that the liposomes help visualized details to a width of 100–200 μm,
and the nanoemulsions enable the detection of tumors smaller
than 300 μm with a targeting ability [9]. The images presented
in [11] are reconstructed based on voxels of 45 μm each cubic side, yet the dendrimer-stabilized silver nanoparticles were
injected into the back of a mouse instead of vessels. Hence,
the present visualizing ability in the obtained images is a rather
good performance compared with the reported works like the
iodinated contrast agents and nanoparticles.
Given the imaging apparatus with high enough resolution,
we further scanned this kidney with micro-CT, and Fig 3(d)
has displayed the 3-D views for tiny vessel with the liquid
metal angiography. Therefore, segmentation of the renal artery
becomes rather easy now by the new method.
Clearly, the introduction of the liquid metal angiography
opened a brand new way for revolutionizing the current radiological imaging. The liquid phase of the metal warrants its
easy flow into the capillaries, while the extremely high density of such special agent offers a mega contrast which is hard to
achieve otherwise via the existing approaches. Thus, it is entirely
feasible to map further smaller vessels using the present method
on condition that the resolution of the imaging device allows for
more precise scanning like the X-ray micro-CT [14], [23]. With
such a mega contrast, it is rather easy and convenient to rebuild
the fine vascular structure. The capacity of this imaging strategy is huge which can in fact find strong evidence from former
nanofluidic researches. For example, a nanothermometer was
once demonstrated with gallium filled in the carbon nanotube
with a diameter of 75 nm, yet the way to “read the scale” was
recommended as the scanning electron microscope (SEM) [24].
Clearly, with the liquid metal angiogram for targeted nanosize
vessel network, reading with a high-resolution X-ray will be
feasible, too.
The extremely large X-ray attenuation coefficient of gallium
is owing to its high density which is much higher than that of
conventional water like image enhancer agents. Let μ2 and μ1
denote the X-ray attenuation coefficient of the contrast agent
filled in the vessels and that of the surrounding tissues respectively, and l denotes the diameter of a vessel. The contrast of
this vessel in the whole image C can then be expressed as
C = 1 − exp [− (μ2 − μ1 ) I] .

(3)

It tells that, under the same contrast condition, the larger the
difference between μ2 and μ1 , the clearer the vessel can be seen.
Therefore, the high X-ray attenuation coefficient of the gallium
makes it a mega contrast X-ray agent, which indicates that vessels can be more distinctively detected in the image. However,
the high attenuation property means that stronger X-ray irradiation intensity is needed. Otherwise, the X-ray cannot penetrate
the whole objective. Generally, the attenuation is mainly caused
by Compton scattering when the X-ray energy is high, then the
attenuation factors of the contrast agent and the surrounding tissues will have small differences. Naturally, the corresponding
image will produce poor contrast. However, for gallium angiography, this problem does not exist as reflected in Fig. 2.

WANG et al.: LIQUID METAL ANGIOGRAPHY FOR MEGA CONTRAST X-RAY VISUALIZATION OF VASCULAR NETWORK

Compared to all the other existing agents, the gallium is just a
simple substance with no need of further processing or reaction.
Thanks to its unique feature as liquid phase around room temperature, the gallium is easy to flow into the capillaries, and its
high density significantly raises the contrast of the vessels under
the X-ray, which is obvious in the grayscale histograms. On condition that the imaging apparatus allows, the tiniest channel that
can be distinguished using gallium could even reach nanometer
scale. With all the above merits, the metal flow performs far
much better than those conventional contrast agents for visualizing the vessel networks, which suggests that the gallium could
serve as an ideal contrast agent for in vitro vascular-enhanced
radiological imaging.
The liquid metal has been provided as a highly convenient
and useful tool for reconstructing the distribution of the fine
vessel networks in tissues and organs, especially in computational tomography and 3-D modeling, which is quite important
for studying visual animal vasculature including human subjects in the near future. Previously, to reconstruct such anatomical vascular networks, tremendous efforts, times and costs are
requested, as indicated by the well-known virtual human program performed before throughout the world. Besides, since
the liquid metal will overflow through the orifices, the infusion
may help find out some unnoticeable wounds on or beneath the
surface, which can be applied in the forensic detection. What’s
more, there remains the potential of in vivo localized vascularenhanced imaging with the material. A small amount of the
liquid metal can be infused to the target vessels which has a low
velocity of blood flow in the living tissues and sucked out with
little residual. Though microscale amount of the gallium may
react with certain constituents in the blood, it may be possible to
neutralize the gallium ions with common chelating agents like
citrate to keep safe [25], [26]. As is known, the citrate of the
gallium radionuclide (Ga-67) is chemically harmless and even
used as tracer for the clinical tumor scan [27]–[31]. However, its
possibility still stays theoretical and needs further study for living organisms, and the early trials must be restricted in specific
and localized cases.
Overall, the liquid metal angiography has demonstrated significant values in the field of vascular network visualization. The
filling and freezing of the liquid metal would keep the shapes
of the targets. Clearly, the basic idea of the present method is
pretty generalized. For example, the objects to be characterized
can be extended to more other cavities spanning from animals’
digestive tracts to plants’ tube structures, even including insects’
holes. Verification of such liquid metal-based channel mapping
may indicate more unexpected discoveries. Further, the unique
properties of the liquid metal, such as a high conductivity of
heat and electricity, also suggest that physical principles in these
aspects can be considered following the infusion to achieve different biomedical performances.
IV. CONCLUSION
In summary, the liquid metal angiography as established
in this paper offers mega contrast quality for reconstructing
the significantly enhanced radiological vascular imaging. With
melting point around room temperature and extremely higher

2165

density over conventional image contrast agent, the liquid metal
can be easily injected into the vascular network system which
would finally fill the finest capillaries and lighten them with
superior clarity under the X-ray scan. This method is highly
applicable for computational tomography and 3-D vasculature
reconstruction, which will no longer need complex, expensive
and time-consuming surgical resections. It provides a powerful
angiographic tool for physiological and pathological researches,
which also has the potential to be used for certain localized in
vivo situations in the near future. In addition, owing to its generalized applicability, the present image reconstruction principle
can even be extended to more other scientific or engineering areas where quickly reconstructing high-resolution spatial channel
networks is requested. As a fundamental discovery as well as an
important step as made in the material enhanced angiography
area, this study may also help refresh people’s basic understandings on visualizing biological anatomy either in an organ
or whole body and is expected to generate impact for future
researches. Firstly, from the device aspect, the present unconventional image enhancing method paved the way to exploit full
potentials of X-ray that would significantly enhance its maximum performance for many scientific studies related to channel
network reconstruction in the near future.

REFERENCES
[1] M. A. Konerding, E. Fait, and A. Gaumann, “3D microvascular architecture of pre-cancerous lesions and invasive carcinomas of the colon,” Brit.
J. Cancer, vol. 84, no. 10, pp. 1354–1362, Oct. 2001.
[2] P. Carmeliet and R. K. Jain, “Principles and mechanisms of vessel normalization for cancer and other angiogenic diseases,” Nature Rev. Drug
Discovery, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 417–427, Jun. 2011.
[3] K. S. Nikita, “Atherosclerosis: The evolving role of vascular image analysis,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 1–3, Jan. 2013.
[4] S. Golemati, A. Gastounioti, and K. Nikita, “Towards novel noninvasive and low-cost markers for predicting strokes in asymptomatic carotid
atherosclerosis: The role of ultrasound image analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 652–658, Mar. 2013.
[5] Z. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Computed tomographic
angiography of anterior spinal artery in acute cervical spinal cord injury,”
Spinal Cord, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 442–447, Jun. 2013.
[6] C. M. Anderson, D. Saloner, R. E. Lee, V. J. Griswold, L. G. Shapeero,
J. H. Rapp, S. Nagarkar, X. Pan, and G. A. Gooding, “Assessment of
carotid-artery stenosis by MR angiography-comparison with X-ray angiography and color-coded Doppler ultrasound,” Am. J. Neuroradiol.,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 989–1003, Mar. 1992.
[7] J. Knowles, “Seeing is believing,” Science, vol. 299, no. 5615, pp. 2002–
2003, Mar. 2003.
[8] J. Darius, “Radiography of the living brain,” Nature, vol. 308, no. 5956,
pp. 225–225, Mar. 1984.
[9] F. Hallouarda, N. Antona, P. Choquetb, A. Constantinescob, and
T. Vandammea, “Iodinated blood pool contrast media for preclinical X-ray
imaging applications—A review,” Biomaterials, vol. 31, no. 24, pp. 6249–
6268, Aug. 2010.
[10] O. Rabin, J. M. Perez, J. Grimm, G. Wojtkiewicz, and R. Weissleder, “An
X-ray computed tomography imaging agent based on long-circulating
bismuth sulphide nanoparticles,” Nature Mater., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 118–
122, Jan. 2006.
[11] H. Liu, H. Wang, R. Guo, X. Y. Cao, J. L. Zhao, Y. Luo, M. W. Shen,
G. X. Zhang, and X. Y. Shi, “Size-controlled synthesis of dendrimerstabilized silver nanoparticles for X-ray computed tomography imaging
applications,” Polymer Chemistry-Uk, vol. 1, no. 10, pp. 1677–1683, Sep.
2010.
[12] Y. Liu, K. Ai, J. Liu, Q. Yuan, Y. He, and L. Lu, “A high-performance
ytterbium-based nanoparticulate contrast agent for in vivo X-ray computed
tomography imaging,” Angewandte Chemie Int. Edition, vol. 51, no. 6,
pp. 1437–1442, Feb. 2012.

2166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

[13] J. F. Hainfeld, M. D. Slatkin, T. M. Focella, and H. M. Smilowitz, “Gold
nanoparticles: A new X-ray contrast agent,” Brit. J. Radiol., vol. 79,
no. 939, pp. 248–253, Mar. 2006.
[14] S. Ananda, V. Marsden, K. Vekemans, E. Korkmaz, N. Tsafnat, L. Soon,
A. Jones, and F. Braet, “The visualization of hepatic vasculature by
X-ray micro-computed tomography,” J. Electron Microsc., vol. 55, no. 3,
pp. 151–155, Jun. 2006.
[15] J. P. Van Den Wijngaard, J. C. Schwarz, P. Van Horssen, M. G. Van Lier,
J. G. Dobbe, J. A. Spaan, and M. Siebes, “3D imaging of vascular networks
for biophysical modeling of perfusion distribution within the heart,” J.
Biomech., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 229–239, Jan. 2013.
[16] S. M. Jorgensen, O. Demirkaya, and E. L. Ritman, “Three-dimensional
imaging of vasculature and parenchyma in intact rodent organs with
X-ray micro-CT,” Am. J. Physiol.-Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 275,
pp. H1103–H1114, 1998.
[17] Q. Yang, K. Li, and X. Liu, “Contrast-enhanced whole-heart coronary
magnetic resonance angiography at 3.0-T: A comparative study with
X-ray angiography in a single center,” J. Am. College Cardiol., vol. 54,
no. 1, pp. 69–76, Jun. 2009.
[18] V. Froeling, F. Diekmann, D. M. Renz, E. M. Fallenberg, I. G. Steffen,
S. Diekmann, R. Lawaczeck, and F. F. Schmitzberger, “Correlation of
contrast agent kinetics between iodinated contrast-enhanced spectral tomosynthesis and gadolinium-enhanced MRI of breast lesions,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1528–1536, Jun. 2013.
[19] N. M. Khilnani, P. A. Winchester, M. R. Prince, E. Vidan, D. W. Trost,
H. L. Bush, R. Watts, and Y. Wang, “Peripheral vascular disease: Combined 3D bolus chase and dynamic 2D MR angiography compared with
X-ray angiography for treatment planning,” Radiology, vol. 224, no. 1,
pp. 63–74, Jul. 2002.
[20] L. C. Cadwallader, “Gallium safety in the laboratory,” in Proc. Idaho Nat.
Laboratory, 2003.
[21] S. M. Dunne and R. Abraham, “Dental post-operative sensitivity associated with a gallium-based restorative material,” Brit. Dental J., vol. 189,
no. 6, pp. 310–313, Sep. 2000.
[22] H. Tamura, S. Mori, and T. Yamawaki, “Textural features corresponding
to visual perception,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. SMC-8, no. 6,
pp. 460–473, Jun. 1978.
[23] F. Plouraboue, P. Cloetens, and C. Fonta, “X-ray high-resolution vascular
network imaging,” J. Microsc. Oxford, vol. 215, no. 2, pp. 139–148, Aug.
2004.
[24] Y. H. Gao and Y. Bando, “Carbon nanothermometer containing gallium,”
Nature, vol. 415, no. 6872, pp. 599–600, Feb. 2002.
[25] B. J. Foster, K. Clagett-Carr, D. Hoth, and B. Leyland-Jones, “Gallium nitrate: The second metal with clinical activity,” Cancer Treatment Reports,
vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 1311–1319, Nov. 1986.
[26] C. S. Ivanoff, A. E. Ivanoff, and T. L. Hottel, “Gallium poisoning: A rare
case report,” Food Chem. Toxicology, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 212–215, Feb.
2012.
[27] W. C. Chen, K. D. Tsai, C. H. Chen, M. S. Lin, and C. M. Chen, “Role of
Gallium-67 scintigraphy in the evaluation of occult sepsis in the medical
ICU,” Intern. Emerg. Med., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 53–58, Feb. 2012.
[28] F. B. Hagemeister, S. M. Fesus, L. M. Lamki, and T. P. Haynie, “Role of
the gallium scan in Hodgkin’s disease,” Cancer, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 1090–
1096, Mar. 1990.
[29] R. Kagan, T. Witt, S. Bines, S. Economou, and G. Mesleh, “Gallium-67
scanning for malignant melanoma,” Cancer, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 272–274,
Jan. 1988.
[30] R. L. Hayes, “The tissue distribution of gallium radionuclides,” J. Nuclear
Med., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 740–742, Jul. 1977.
[31] G. A. Andrews and C. L. Edwards, “Tumor scanning with gallium 67,” J.
Am. Med. Assoc., vol. 233, no. 10, pp. 1100–1103, Sep. 1975.

Qian Wang was born in 1986, in Shandong Province,
China. She received the B.E. degree from the Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of
Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2009, where she is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree regarding the image guided minimally
invasive physical therapy of tumor.
Her current research interests include bioheat
transfer, medical instrumentation, and image guided
tumor treatment.

Yang Yu was born in 1988, in Liaoning Province,
China. He received the B.E. degree from the Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of
Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2010, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree regarding mobile healthcare technology and
physiological signal processing.
His research interests include mobile health monitoring system, medical image and image guided minimally invasive physical therapy of tumor.

Keqin Pan was born in 1969, in Jiangxi Province,
China. He received the B.M. degree from the Department of Clinical Medicine, Jiangxi Medical College,
China, in 1993.
He is currently the Director of the Department of
Radiology and the Associate Chief Physician with
the Hospital of Tsinghua University. His research
interests include radiological medical image and
angiography.

Jing Liu received the B.E. degree in power engineering and control and the B.S. degree in physics in 1992,
and the Ph.D. degree in thermal science with specialty
in bioengineering in 1996, all from Tsinghua University (THU), Beijing, China.
He then served as Assistant Professor there, a Postdoctoral Research Associate at Purdue University,
and a Senior Visiting Scholar at MIT. He has been a
Professor with the Technical Institute of Physics and
Chemistry, the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
since 1999 and became Professor of THU since 2006.
He has authored nine popular books on cutting edge frontiers in bioengineering
and energy areas with one reprinted five times, 15 invited book chapters, and
more than 300 peer reviewed journal papers. Quite a few of them were frequently
featured by worldwide science media. His research interests include biomedical
instrumentation, bioheat and mass transfer, micro/nano fluidics, mobile health
technology and chip cooling. He contributed significantly to the bioheat transfer area through numerous conceptual innovation, methodology development
and technical inventions. Focusing on the technological challenges raised by
the global health care issues, he has published two books entitled “Advanced
Technologies for Low-cost Medicine” and “Biomedical Engineering on a Mobile Phone: Principle and Application,” aiming to better serve for the society.
His work was also fully reflected in emerging areas where he pioneered a series
of nonconventional innovations especially the liquid metal-based biomedical
technology, printed electronics, and thermal management, etc.
Dr. Liu is a recipient of the Best Paper of the Year Award from ASME Journal
of Electronic Packaging, the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young
Scholars of China, the National Science and Technology Award for Chinese
Young Scientist, and five times highest teaching award from CAS, etc.

