2154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Design and Optimization of an Ultra Wideband and
Compact Microwave Antenna for Radiometric
Monitoring of Brain Temperature
Dario B. Rodrigues∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Paolo F. Maccarini, Member, IEEE, Sara Salahi, Tiago R. Oliveira,
Pedro J. S. Pereira, Paulo Limão-Vieira, Brent W. Snow, Doug Reudink, Life Fellow, IEEE,
and Paul R. Stauffer, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present the modeling efforts on antenna design
and frequency selection to monitor brain temperature during prolonged surgery using noninvasive microwave radiometry. A tapered log-spiral antenna design is chosen for its wideband characteristics that allow higher power collection from deep brain.
Parametric analysis with the software HFSS is used to optimize
antenna performance for deep brain temperature sensing. Radiometric antenna efficiency (η) is evaluated in terms of the ratio of
power collected from brain to total power received by the antenna.
Anatomical information extracted from several adult computed
tomography scans is used to establish design parameters for constructing an accurate layered 3-D tissue phantom. This head phantom includes separate brain and scalp regions, with tissue equivalent liquids circulating at independent temperatures on either side
of an intact skull. The optimized frequency band is 1.1–1.6 GHz
producing an average antenna efficiency of 50.3% from a two turn
log-spiral antenna. The entire sensor package is contained in a
lightweight and low-profile 2.8 cm diameter by 1.5 cm high assembly that can be held in place over the skin with an electromagnetic
interference shielding adhesive patch. The calculated radiometric
equivalent brain temperature tracks within 0.4 ◦ C of the measured
brain phantom temperature when the brain phantom is lowered
10 ◦ C and then returned to the original temperature (37 ◦ C) over a

Manuscript received November 28, 2013; revised March 9, 2014; accepted
April 9, 2014. Date of publication April 15, 2014; date of current version
June 14, 2014. This work was supported by NIH R21-DK092912 and Thermimage Corp. The work of D. B. Rodrigues was supported by the Portuguese
Foundation for Science and Technology through the Postgraduate Scholarship
SFRH/BD/73215/2010. The work of D. B. Rodrigues, P. J. S. Pereira, and P.
Limão-Vieira was supported by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and
Technology under Grant PEstOE/FIS/UI0068/2011. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. B. Rodrigues is with the Centre of Physics and Technological Research, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal (e-mail:
db.rodrigues@campus.fct.unl.pt).
P. F. Maccarini, S. Salahi, and P. R. Stauffer are with the Department
of Radiation Oncology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710 USA (e-mail:
paolo.maccarini@duke.edu; sara.louie@ansys.com; paul.stauffer@duke.edu).
T. R. Oliveira is with the Physics Institute, University of São Paulo,
05508-090 São Paulo, Brazil (e-mail: tiagor@if.usp.br).
P. J. S. Pereira is with the Department of Mathematics, Instituto
Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa, 1959-007 Lisboa, Portugal (e-mail:
ppereira@deq.isel.ipl.pt).
P. Limão-Vieira is with the Centre of Physics and Technological Research, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal (e-mail:
plimaovieira@fct.unl.pt).
B. W. Snow is with the Department of Surgery and Urology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84113 USA (e-mail: brent.snow@hsc.utah.edu).
D. Reudink is with ThermImage, Salt Lake City, UT 84127 USA (e-mail:
dougr@thermimage.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2317484

4.6-h experiment. The numerical and experimental results demonstrate that the optimized 2.5-cm log-spiral antenna is well suited
for the noninvasive radiometric sensing of deep brain temperature.
Index Terms—Antenna design, brain temperature, log-spiral antenna, microwave radiometry, noninvasive monitoring.

I. INTRODUCTION
ROLONGED surgeries use general anesthesia that impairs
thermoregulation processes in the human body and is associated with hypothermia, i.e., when core temperature is below
36 ◦ C [1]. In some surgeries, hypothermia is actually forced;
patients are cooled 5–18 ◦ C below normal body temperature
in order to reduce the sensitivity of critical brain tissues to
ischemia [2]. In either case, it is critical to safely and rapidly
rewarm the patient to normal body core temperature (37 ◦ C) before the end of surgery to avoid complications such as a higher
risk of morbid myocardial outcomes or prolonged surgical recovery [1]–[4]. Current thermometry devices typically measure
surface temperatures or intracavitary surrogates of body temperature that do not accurately reflect true core temperature of deep
organs. Each of these core temperature surrogates have inherent
problems with probe placement, time delay in readings, and/or
are objectionably invasive [5], [6]. In this paper, we present a
novel monitoring approach based on noninvasive and entirely
passive microwave (MW) radiometry. We choose to monitor
core temperature inside the brain rather than in alternative sites
due to the critical nature of this organ and its central role in
thermoregulation [2], [7], [8].
MW radiometry is a noninvasive technique that collects thermal radiation (electromagnetic noise) emitted in the MW frequency spectrum by any material above absolute zero temperature. The thermal radiation is received by an antenna and
converted, with proper calibration, into a measure of absolute
temperature taken from a weighted average of its radiation pattern [9]–[11]. This technique contrasts with infrared thermometry that collects thermal radiation at higher frequencies (0.3–
430 THz), where photons travel only a few millimeters through
skin.
There have been many reports of medical applications of MW
radiometry, including the detection of breast cancer [12], monitoring and control of superficial and deep hyperthermia applicators [13]–[15], measurement of brain temperature in infants [9]

P

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

RODRIGUES et al.: DESIGN AND OPTIMIZATION OF AN ULTRA WIDEBAND AND COMPACT MICROWAVE ANTENNA

or adults [16], vesicoureteral reflux detection in young children
[17], [18] and more recently monitoring of brown fat metabolism
[19]. In the particular case of monitoring adult brain temperature, there are no reports to our knowledge of an antenna that is
small enough to conform to the human head during prolonged
surgery, present a stable reading over several hours, and offer an
accuracy below 0.5 ◦ C, which is the smallest difference that has
been associated with hypothermia-induced complications [7].
The major challenge in MW radiometry lies in the nature
of thermal noise itself which is characterized by extremely
low-power levels (∼10−14 W/MHz at 37 ◦ C). To maximize
power collection, wideband antennas are generally used to collect thermal noise over a wide frequency range. We previously
demonstrated that due to its circular polarization and wideband
matching, a 7-cm-diameter log-spiral antenna is sensitive to
small temperature variations in deep-seated targets [17]. Thus,
we choose the same log-spiral design for our new compact radiometric sensor, but in order to be conformal with the human
head, we use a diameter of 2.5 cm.
In this paper, we focus on the theoretical modeling of the
design of a miniature 2.5-cm-diameter receive antenna and optimization of the frequency band for radiometric temperature
monitoring of brain. A realistic head phantom model is built to
validate the theory and demonstrate performance of this sensor.
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. Log-Spiral Antenna Design
Log-spiral antennas exhibit frequency-independent properties over a wideband limited by the finite physical dimensions
of the antenna [20], [21]. The microstrip log-spiral design explored in this study consists of a single arm with variable width
metal trace formed by ρe0 (inner) and ρe1 (outer), defined by


ρe0 : ρ = ρ0 eaθ
ρe1 : ρ = ρ1 eaθ

(1)

where (ρ, θ) are polar coordinates; ρ0 = 0.25 mm and ρ1 =
0.75 mm are the initial (θ = 0) inner and outer radius of the
metal trace, respectively, located at the center of a coaxial feed
port with diameter ρ1 – ρ0 ; and a is the spiral growth rate
coefficient given by a = ln(ρext /ρ0 )/(2πN ), which is defined
by the number of log-spiral turns (N ) possible within an outer
radius (ρext ). The antenna diameter is fixed at 2.5 cm to allow
the sensor to be conformal with the human head. The end of
the spiral arm is tapered (see Fig. 1) to minimize reflections at
lower frequencies and improve impedance matching [21].
Since the function of the antenna is to collect thermal radiation, which is randomly polarized, it is desirable for the antenna
to have circular or elliptical rather than linear polarization. When
the antenna arm length is shorter than one wavelength, polarization is linear. As the arm length is increased (or frequency
increased), the polarization becomes nonlinear [20]. To be an
efficient radiator, the spiral length must be at least similar to
the wavelength. Thus, the number of turns is a parameter to be
optimized. The arm length L(N ) is determined over the line

2155

Fig. 1. Radiometric receive antenna: microstrip log-spiral patch design with
tapered ends.
TABLE I
CERAMIC SUBSTRATES USED IN THE ANTENNA DESIGN

defined by ρe0 and is given by
L(N ) = (ρext − ρ0 )



1 + a(N )2 /a(N ).

(2)

The microstrip is mounted on a 4.45-mm-thick hydrocarbon
ceramic substrate that is backed by a ground plane (Fig. 1).
Three different substrates are chosen from the RO3000 series
(Rogers Corp., Rogers, CT, USA) due to availability, ease of
construction, high dielectric permittivity, and ultralow loss properties (see Table I), all of which are desirable for radiometric
applications.
The presence of a very thick and high dielectric substrate behind the antenna will affect the antenna’s operating bandwidth.
According to the ring theory [22], the lower cutoff frequency fL
is a function of the circumference length with radius ρext and
the higher cutoff frequency fH is dependent on the diameter of
the coaxial feed port (ρ1 –ρ0 ):



√
fH =c/(2π(ρ1 −ρ0 ) εr, e ﬀ )
√
fL =c/(2πρe x t εr, e ﬀ )

(3)

where c is the speed of light and εr,eﬀ is the effective permittivity,
which affects the wavelengths detected by the antenna.
The final element of the antenna is a thin coverlay disk (radius ρext ) placed between the spiral metal trace and scalp (see
Fig. 1), which is used to improve antenna match impedance to
tissue and provide electrical insulation of the metal from the
conductive skin. The coverlay is chosen from the ultralow loss
(σcoverlay = 4.50 × 10−3 S/m) Eccostock HiK series (Emmerson & Cumming, Randolph, MA, USA) with thickness (δ) and
dielectric permittivity to be optimized (see Table II).
B. Experimental Human Head Phantom Model
A physical head phantom was developed to validate the optimized antenna design. From computed tomography (CT) scans
of an unidentified patient head, we determined appropriate

2156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE II
LOG-SPIRAL ANTENNA PARAMETERS FOR PARAMETRIC ANALYSIS

Fig. 3. Computational model of the multilayer human head phantom used for
antenna optimization.

Fig. 2. Human head model with variable temperature liquid brain phantom.
This liquid circulates through a balloon that fills the inside of the skull. The liquid
scalp phantom is also temperature controlled and circulates in an adjustable
thickness region under the skull. The black coaxial cable connects the radiometer
electronics to the antenna sensor coupled to scalp surface.

Fig. 4. Frequency-dependent electrical properties (relative permittivity εr and
electrical conductivity σ) of both phantom models (measured here) and human
tissues [23].

C. Virtual Human Head Computational Model
values for the thickness of scalp, bone, and brain tissues to
generate a realistic physical model. Measurements showed that
scalp thickness varies from 4.2 (forehead) to 8 mm (temporal
lobe), and the average thickness of skull bone is 6.7 mm in both
regions. Based on these dimensions, an experimental model of
the human head was constructed (see Fig. 2) around an artificial
human skull (Life Size Skull, www.anatomywarehouse.com).
To model the thermodynamics of scalp, an adjustable
thickness (6–16 mm) compartment filled with circulating
temperature-controlled distilled water was sealed against the
outer surface of the skull. A mixture of propylene glycol (46%)
and deionized water (54%) was used to approximate the electrical properties of mixed grey and white matter. The brain
liquid phantom was circulated vigorously (1.7 L/min) with a
high flow peristaltic pump (Masterflex 7592-40, Cole Parmer,
Vernon Hills, IL, USA) through a water bath heater (Neslab
RTE740, Cole Parmer) and into a latex balloon (see Fig. 2, top
left) that filled the interior of the skull. Scalp temperature was
circulated similarly, but controlled in a different water bath to
allow independent scalp and brain temperatures and thus obtain
realistic differential temperature of surface and deep tissues.
Electrical properties for the liquid tissue phantoms were characterized at normothermic temperatures for scalp (32 ◦ C) and
brain (37 ◦ C) using a coaxial dielectric probe (E85070C, Agilent
Technologies, Santa Rosa, CA, USA) connected to a network
analyzer (E5071C, Agilent Technologies).

The physical head phantom was translated into an anatomically accurate computer-aid design model (see Fig. 3). CT
images of the artificial skull were acquired and segmented
using Avizo (Visualization Sciences Group, Burlington, MA,
USA). The resulting 3-D surfaces of the surrogate skull were
assumed to be the outer boundary of a uniform volume of tissue.
The remaining objects were created in DesignModeler (Ansys
Inc., Canonsburg, PA, USA) with accurate geometry and dimensions. The final virtual phantom model was then imported
into HFSS (Ansys Inc., Canonsburg, PA, USA) and coupled
with the antenna design to perform a finite element method
simulation-based optimization. This computational approach
has been validated experimentally for similar antenna design
projects [18], [19]. Note that the phantom frequency-dependent
properties were integrated in this dispersive numerical model
(see Fig. 4).
D. Optimization Goals
The reciprocity theorem states that the radiation and receiving
patterns of an antenna are identical [10]. Thus, one can estimate
the radiation receiving pattern from the power loss density profile Pd (W/m3 ) that is given by
Pd (r) =

1
σ |E(r)|2
2

(4)

RODRIGUES et al.: DESIGN AND OPTIMIZATION OF AN ULTRA WIDEBAND AND COMPACT MICROWAVE ANTENNA

2157

TABLE III
LOG-SPIRAL ANTENNA GOAL FUNCTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS

where E (V/m) is the electric field at the position r in the
computational domain V . The antenna efficiency η is evaluated
in terms of Pd and is defined by the ratio of power received from
brain to total power received by the antenna:

Pd,brain (r)dVbrain
, Vbrain ⊂ V.
(5)
η = Vb ra in 
V Pd (r)dV
The design optimization is based on a parametric analysis
(see Table II) that aims to maximize efficiency as well as bandwidth (Δf) of the receive antenna (see Table III). The band is
chosen based on the constraint S11 ≤ −10 dB, in order to minimize the mismatch (S11 ) between antenna and tissue load. For
convenience, we define ηΔ f as the average efficiency over Δf
where S11 ≤ −10 dB. This function (ηΔ f ) is used to quantitatively compare simulation results of the different parametric
analyses. Furthermore, due to the frequency allocation for wireless local area networks, mobile phones, and pagers, by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), some frequency
bands must be avoided due to excessive environmental background interference (see Table III).
E. Radiometric Temperature Measurements
Following the design optimization, the antenna was fabricated, connected to the radiometer electronics described elsewhere [11], [24], [25] and tested on the physical phantom. The
radiometer used is an analog Dicke radiometer that uses a dualmatched ultralow noise and high-gain (G) amplifier design to
provide a time-sequenced comparison to an internal 50-Ω reference for long-term stable calibration. Radiometric power (Pant )
was measured continuously and converted into an equivalent
temperature (TB ) using
Pant = GkB TB Δf

(6)

where kB is the Boltzmann constant. Volume averaged brain
temperature (Tbrain ) was extracted from TB using an algorithm
similar to those described previously [9]–[11], [14] and modified
for this application by Maccarini et al. [25]:
TB = α1 Tbrain + α2 Tref ,

α2 = 1 − α1

(7)

where αi (i = 1, 2) are calibration coefficients determined from
a calibration measurement and (6); Tref is the temperature of
the 50-Ω calibration reference that is being monitored with
a thermistor located in the printed circuit board. This reference temperature allows to derive the gain in (6) since the
amplifiers of the reference and antenna are matched, yielding
Pref = GkB Tref Δf .
An initial steady-state condition was established in the head
physical model by circulating the scalp phantom at 32 ◦ C and

Fig. 5. Determination of operating frequency bandwidth Δf where
S 1 1 ≤ −10 dB for substrates RO3010 (εr, su b stra te = 10.2), RO3006
(εr, su b stra te = 6.15) and RO3003 (εr, su b stra te = 3): (a) Δf versus logspiral turns N and (b) average antenna efficiency η Δ f versus N . Nominal
values: δ = 1 mm and εr, c ove rlay = 30.

brain phantom at 37 ◦ C. Temperature in the brain phantom was
cycled between the values 37–27–37 ◦ C to simulate the induction of hypothermia during surgery. The heating water bath
for the scalp phantom was held constant to provide constant
scalp temperature and thus ensuring radiometric reading variations independent from scalp. All phantom temperatures were
monitored continuously using fiber-optic probes (Luxtron 3100,
LumaSense Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) for comparison with the radiometric readings.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Antenna Bandwidth Simulations
Simulations of S11 and efficiency (η) showed no significant
dependence on coverlay permittivity over the range 5–40; thus,
simulations were performed using εr,coverlay = 30 due to availability. For the initial optimization of εr,substrate , simulations
used δ = 1 mm since that parameter as found to be less critical
than εr,substrate and number of turns N [18]. After determining optimal εr,substrate and N , a parametric analysis for δ was
implemented in order to refine the results.
Fig. 5(a) presents operating bandwidth Δf for which S11 ≤
−10 dB and compares simulation results for three substrates
(see Table I). Best results are achieved for substrate RO3010
with N = 2, which provides an ultrawideband of approximately

2158

Fig. 6. Coverlay thickness (δ) parametric analysis to improve impedance
matching at the interface between antenna and human head. (a) S 1 1 versus frequency and (b) antenna efficiency versus frequency. Nominal values:
N = 2, εr, c ove rlay = 30 and εr, su b stra te = 10.2.

500 MHz. Fig. 5(b) presents average antenna efficiency across
the band (ηΔ f ), showing similar efficiencies for RO3010 and
RO3006 substrates for most values of N and generally higher
efficiency with increasing substrate permittivity. Due to the combination of high efficiency and large bandwidth, εr,substrate =
10.2 (RO3010) and N =2 are chosen as nominal values for the
remaining simulations.
The use of a coverlay improves both the matching impedance
and antenna efficiency (see Fig. 6). Best results for S11 and
efficiency are achieved for δ = 1 mm [see Fig. 6(a)] yielding
an average efficiency ηΔ f of 50.3% in the 1.1–1.6 GHz band
[see Fig. 6(b)]. Note that the difference between the higher and
lower frequencies of this band corresponds to the Δf highlighted
with a circle in Fig. 5(a). Antenna efficiency results are only
presented for the coverlay thickness parametric analysis since it
does not vary significantly in the remaining variables’ sweeps.
In fact, the efficiency is higher than 40% across the band where
S11 ≤ −10 dB for all simulations, with the exception of the
zero thickness coverlay [see Fig. 6(b)].
B. Simulated Radiation Patterns
Fig. 7 shows the power loss density Pd (W/m3 ) of the optimized tapered log-spiral antenna for five representative frequencies. Within the range 1.1–1.6 GHz, simulations demonstrate that a significant portion of the MW energy is received
from deep brain. As expected, there is little power deposited

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 7. HFSS-simulated receive pattern for the 2.5-cm log-spiral antenna when
placed on the heterogeneous multilayer human head model. The receive pattern
is shown for five specific radiometric sensing frequencies, i.e., 1.0, 1.1, 1.35,
1.6, and 2.0 GHz. Radiometric antenna efficiency η (%) is evaluated in terms
of the ratio of the power collected from brain to the total power received by the
antenna and thus intrinsically normalized.

in (or received from) the phantom bone due to its very low
electrical conductivity (Fig. 4). Below 1.0 GHz, the antenna
exhibits lower efficiency due to its small size compared to the
wavelength, though this improves immunity from EMI at the
particularly noisy 810–960 MHz band. At higher frequencies
approaching 2.0 GHz, energy received by the antenna is collected mainly from the scalp.
The lower cutoff frequency fL can be extrapolated from
Fig. 6(a) and corresponds to the frequency where S11 starts
decreasing abruptly: fL = 0.98 GHz. From (3), we can deduce
εr,eﬀ = 15.2, which is slightly higher than εr,substrate = 10.2.
The higher effective permittivity occurs since it also accounts for
higher scalp and brain phantom permittivities (see Fig. 4), e.g.,
εr,scalp = 67.0 and εr,brain = 59.0 at 1.35 GHz. These results
indicate that the substrate dictates the wavelength attenuation
of the electromagnetic waves that are detected by the spiral
antenna. Using εr,,eﬀ = 15.2, one can estimate the detectable
wavelengths by the spiral antenna to be in the interval 48.1–
70.0 mm along the bandwidth 1.1–1.6 GHz. These values are
higher, but of the same order, than the spiral length 41.2 mm
(N = 2). The radiation patterns on Fig. 7 (xz and yz planes)
for the lower (1.1 GHz) and upper (1.6 GHz) frequencies of the
operating band show a slightly more focused radiation pattern
in the yz plane which indicates an elliptical polarization.
Fig. 8 presents HFSS simulations of absolute power collected from different regions of the head model as a function of

RODRIGUES et al.: DESIGN AND OPTIMIZATION OF AN ULTRA WIDEBAND AND COMPACT MICROWAVE ANTENNA

Fig. 8. Normalized received power versus frequency. From brain (Pbrain),
scalp (Pscalp), sum of power received from scalp and brain (Pscalp+Pbrain),
and from the entire computational volume composed of air, scalp, skull, brain,
and head model plexiglass support structure (Pall).

Fig. 9. Effective brain temperature derived from total power measurements
of the noninvasive radiometric sensor (black curve) closely mirrors the actual
temperature of the circulating brain phantom (red curve). Green curve (dash
dot line) shows reference temperature and blue curve (dash line) shows the
measured scalp temperature, with no significant drift during the 4.5-h period
of monitoring. Bottom right: photo of a 2.5-cm-diameter log-spiral antenna
encapsulated together with radiometer printed circuit inside a cylindrical copper
tube with 1-mm wall thickness and 1.5-cm height.

frequency. One can observe that the antenna receives energy
mainly from scalp and brain in the 1.1–1.6 GHz band and
mainly from scalp at higher frequencies. The remaining energy
is collected from skull (< 0.3%), mylar, and plexiglass used to
support the head phantom (< 1.5%), and the antenna materials
including substrate and coverlay (< 2.3%).
C. Antenna Implementation and Phantom Results
A radiometer sensor was built according to the optimized
parameters (bottom right in Fig. 9). The sensor package is
lightweight and has a low profile of 2.8 cm diameter by 1.5 cm
height. This sensor can be held in place on the scalp with an
EMI shielding adhesive patch and/or elastic strap. The sensor
was tested in a realistic head phantom experiment that simulates
brain temperature variations over a 4.6-h surgery. Radiometric
brain temperature (Tbrain ) was determined using (6) and (7)
with α1 = 0.32, which was determined from an initial calibration measurement (Tbrain = 37 ◦ C at t = 0 s). The α coefficients are, in theory, closely related to the average thermal radi-

2159

ation contribution from each region over the band 1.1–1.6 GHz.
For instance, one could expect α1 ≈ 0.5 since in brain ηΔ f ≈
50%, but in practice the radiometer system components also
contribute with thermal radiation, which reduces the overall
contribution from phantom materials. From simulations, the energy collection is mostly from scalp and brain. Equation (7)
accounts for brain temperature explicitly, whereas scalp temperature is embodied in Tref since the high thermal conductivity
(> 1W/m/K) of both coverlay and substrate materials allow
high heat transfer between scalp substrate, where the thermistor is located. This is clearly illustrated in Fig. 9, since Tref is
dictated by Tscalp plus 2.4 ◦ C due to electronic heating.
The scalp phantom was maintained constant at 32 ◦ C to
demonstrate clearly that the radiometric power changes were
due entirely to intracranial temperature variation. However, during surgery, all tissues reduce their temperature due to anesthesia. The next step will be to vary scalp phantom temperature
as well, to account for all possible temperature distribution scenarios during surgery. This will imply to refine the calibration
algorithm by including explicitly scalp temperature in (7) as
α3 Tscalp , which will be measured with a thermistor at the skin
surface. This setup will allow us to correlate α parameters [see
(7)] with simulated average efficiencies (ηΔ f ) and thus isolating
the thermal noise contribution of the radiometric system.
The maximum difference between the temperature measured
directly with fiber-optic sensors and the calculated equivalent
radiometric brain temperature was 0.38 ◦ C during the rapid temperature changes when cooling (−0.35 ◦ C/min) and rewarming
(0.32 ◦ C/min) the brain phantom (see Fig. 9). This occurs due
to the 74 s delay in measurements caused by a moving median
calculation to reduce EMI. However, the temperature rates of
patients undergoing surgery are at least ten times slower than the
cooling/rewarming rates implemented in our study [7]. Thus, the
transient temperature errors during rapid cooling and rewarming periods appear to overestimate the errors of slowly changing temperatures. Moreover, these temperature errors should
be lower than the errors from reading core temperature from
slowly changing sites like esophagus and rectum. The 0.4 ◦ C
experimental error fits the current clinical need of ≤ 0.5 ◦ C resolution, corresponding to the smallest temperature difference
that has been associated with hypothermia-induced complications [7]. The data also demonstrate our ability to track temperature changes of brain (core temperature) during long time
periods typical of open heart bypass surgery, enabling the physician to carefully monitor and return the patient’s temperature to
normothermic range quickly at the end of a long procedure.
The presented experimental model of the human head accounts for the major physiological and anatomical parameters
but has some limitations. Phantoms never reproduce the actual
clinical situation precisely. Brain, in particular, is a complex organ with spatial and temporal temperature variations that cannot
be predicted and may degrade the accuracy of volume averaged
clinical measurements. Despite some limitations, the head phantom described in this study serves a dual purpose. 1) to validate
the computational method used to design the MW antenna and
2) to test accuracy and long-term stability of the radiometric system linked to the antenna. Furthermore, a new computational

2160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

model is currently under implementation in order to refine the
design of the antenna for clinic use. This virtual model incorporates human electrical properties and accounts for more detailed
anatomy that includes skin, scalp, meninges, cerebrospinal fluid,
and brain parenchyma.
IV. CONCLUSION
An MW radiometric sensor was developed for rapid noninvasive measurement of brain temperature. The key element
of the sensor is a tapered 2.5-cm-diameter microstrip logspiral antenna, embedded in a 2.8-cm-diameter low-cost radiometric sensor. The antenna design was optimized for deep
brain sensing yielding a log-spiral antenna with N = 2, δ =
1 mm, εr,coverlay = 30 and εr,substrate = 10.2 (RO3010) over
the 1.1–1.6 GHz band. This particular arrangement allows a
theoretical bandwidth Δf = 500 MHz and an average antenna
efficiency of 50.3% over the optimized band. These simulations
allow estimation of the different received energy contributions
from scalp, skull, and brain tissues, which pave the way for
temperature profiling across the human head. The sensor was
tested on a full-scale multilayer tissue phantom of the human
head. During a 4.5-h experiment, the maximum error associated
with the calculated radiometric brain temperature was 0.4 ◦ C.
We anticipate that this newly developed sensor will help reduce
complications from extended surgeries, thereby reducing overall
costs and improving clinical outcomes for patients recovering
from post-surgical hypothermia.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank ANSYS and Agilent for the
continuous software support.
REFERENCES
[1] K. H. Polderman, “Mechanisms of action, physiological effects, and complications of hypothermia,” Crit. Care Med., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. S186–S202,
Jul. 2009.
[2] T. D. Yan, P. G. Bannon, J. Bavaria, J. S. Coselli, J. A. Elefteriades,
R. B. Griepp, G. C. Hughes, S. A. Lemaire, T. Kazui, N. T. Kouchoukos,
M. Misfeld, F. W. Mohr, A. Oo, L. G. Svensson, and D. H. Tian, “Consensus on hypothermia in aortic arch surgery,” Ann. Cardiothoracic Surg.,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 163–168, Mar. 2013.
[3] S. Rajagopalan, E. Mascha, J. Na, and D. I. Sessler, “The effects of mild
perioperative hypothermia on blood loss and transfusion requirement,”
Anesthesiology, vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 71–77, Jan. 2008.
[4] M. Schwarz, M. W. Krueger, H. J. Busch, C. Benk, and C. Heilmann,
“Model-based assessment of tissue perfusion and temperature in deep
hypothermic patients,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1577–
1586, Jul. 2010.
[5] J. L. Moran, J. V. Peter, P. J. Solomon, B. Grealy, T. Smith, W. Ashforth,
M. Wake, S. L. Peake, and A. R. Peisach, “Tympanic temperature measurements: Are they reliable in the critically ill? A clinical study of measures of agreement,” Crit. Care Med., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 155–164, Jan.
2007.
[6] L. Lawson, E. J. Bridges, I. Ballou, R. Eraker, S. Greco, J. Shively, and
V. Sochulak, “Accuracy and precision of noninvasive temperature measurement in adult intensive care patients,” Amer. J. Crit. Care, vol. 16,
no. 5, pp. 485–496, Sep. 2007.

[7] D. I. Sessler, “Temperature monitoring and perioperative thermoregulation,” Anesthesiology, vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 318–338, Aug. 2008.
[8] L. McIlvoy, “Comparison of brain temperature to core temperature: A
review of the literature,” J. Neurosci. Nurs., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 23–31, Feb.
2004.
[9] K. Maruyma, S. Mizushina, T. Sugiura, G. M. J. Van Leeuwen, J. W. Hand,
G. Marrocco, F. Bardati, A. D. Edwards, D. Azzopardi, and D. Land,
“Feasibility of noninvasive measurement of deep brain temperature in
newborn infants by multifrequency microwave radiometry,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2141–2147, Nov. 2000.
[10] S. Jacobsen and P. R. Stauffer, “Non-parametric 1-D temperature restoration in lossy media using Tikhonov regularization on sparse radiometry
data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 178–188, Feb. 2003.
[11] K. Arunachalam, P. R. Stauffer, P. F. Maccarini, S. Jacobsen, and
F. Sterzer, “Characterization of a digital microwave radiometry system for
noninvasive thermometry using a temperature-controlled homogeneous
test load,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53, no. 14, pp. 3883–3901, Jul. 2008.
[12] F. Bardati and S. Iudicello, “Modeling the visibility of breast malignancy
by a microwave radiometer,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 1,
pp. 214–221, Jan. 2008.
[13] L. Dubois, J. P. Sozanski, V. Tessier, J. C. Camart, J. J. Fabre, J. Pribetich,
and M. Chive, “Temperature control and thermal dosimetry by microwave
radiometry in hyperthermia,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 44,
no. 10, pp. 1755–1761, Oct. 1996.
[14] S. Jacobsen and P. R. Stauffer, “Can we settle with single-band radiometric temperature monitoring during hyperthermia treatment of chestwall
recurrence of breast cancer using a dual-mode transceiving applicator?”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 911–928, Feb. 2007.
[15] S. Jacobsen, P. R. Stauffer, and D. G. Neuman, “Dual-mode antenna design for microwave heating and noninvasive thermometry of superficial
tissue disease,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 1500–1509,
Nov. 2000.
[16] A. Oikonomou, I. S. Karanasiou, and N. K. Uzunoglu, “Phased-array near
field radiometry for brain intracranial applications,” Prog. Electromagn.
Res., vol. 109, pp. 345–360, Oct. 2010.
[17] K. Arunachalam, P. F. Maccarini, V. De Luca, F. Bardati, B. W. Snow, and
P. R. Stauffer, “Modeling the detectability of vesicoureteral reflux using
microwave radiometry,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, no. 18, pp. 5417–5435,
Sep. 2010.
[18] Y. Birkelund, O. Klemetsen, S. K. Jacobsen, K. Arunachalam,
P. Maccarini, and P. R. Stauffer, “Vesicoureteral reflux in children: A phantom study of microwave heating and radiometric thermometry of pediatric
bladder,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3269–3278, Nov.
2011.
[19] D. B. Rodrigues, P. F. Maccarini, S. Salahi, E. Colebeck, E. Topsakal,
P. J. S. Pereira, P. Limao-Vieira, and P. R. Stauffer, “Numerical 3D modeling of heat transfer in human tissues for microwave radiometry monitoring
of brown fat metabolism,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 8584, pp. 0S1–12, Feb. 2013.
[20] J. D. Dyson, “The equiangular spiral antenna,” IRE Trans. Ant. Prop.,
vol. AP-7, no. 2, pp. 181–187, Apr. 1959.
[21] R. H. Duhamel and D. E. Isbell, “Broadband logarithmically periodic antenna structures,” Proc. Int. Conv. Rec. Inst. Rad. Eng., vol. 45, no. 3,
pp. 119–128, 1957.
[22] J. A. Kaiser, “The Archimedean two-wire spiral antenna,” IRE Trans. Ant.
Prop., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 312–323, May 1960.
[23] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2271–2293, Nov. 1996.
[24] O. Klemetsen, Y. Birkelund, S. K. Jacobsen, P. F. Maccarini, and
P. R. Stauffer, “Design of medical radiometer front-end for improved performance,” Prog. Electromagn. Res. B, vol. 27, pp. 289–306, Jan. 2011.
[25] P. F. Maccarini, D. B. Rodrigues, T. R. Oliveira, and P. R. Stauffer, “Radiometric profiling for brain temperature monitoring,” IEEE Sens. J., to
be published.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

