IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2187

An EEMD-IVA Framework for Concurrent
Multidimensional EEG and Unidimensional
Kinematic Data Analysis
Xun Chen∗ , Aiping Liu, Martin J. McKeown, Howard Poizner, and Z. Jane Wang, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Joint blind source separation (JBSS) is a means to
extract common sources simultaneously found across multiple
datasets, e.g., electroencephalogram (EEG) and kinematic data
jointly recorded during reaching movements. Existing JBSS approaches are designed to handle multidimensional datasets, yet to
our knowledge, there is no existing means to examine common
components that may be found across a unidimensional dataset
and a multidimensional one. In this paper, we propose a simple,
yet effective method to achieve the goal of JBSS when concurrent
multidimensional EEG and unidimensional kinematic datasets are
available, by combining ensemble empirical mode decomposition
(EEMD) with independent vector analysis (IVA). We demonstrate
the performance of the proposed method through numerical simulations and application to data collected from reaching movements
in Parkinson’s disease. The proposed method is a promising JBSS
tool for real-world biomedical signal processing applications.
Index Terms—Data fusion, EEG, EEMD, IVA, JBSS,
unidimensional.

I. INTRODUCTION
N biomedical signal processing applications, it is often the
case that measured signals are the mixtures of underlying
sources. From the recovered sources, the ones of interest can
be further identified and interpreted for their biomedical significance under the application at hand. Currently, this issue
can be efficiently addressed through blind source separation

I

Manuscript received January 1, 2014; revised March 28, 2014; accepted
April 9, 2014. Date of publication April 22, 2014; date of current version June
14, 2014. This work was supported by PPRI/UBC Chair in Parkinsons Research
(MJM), ONR MURI Award N00014-10-1-0072 and NSF Grant SMA-1041755.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ X. Chen is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of
Medical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230009,
China and also with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4 Canada (e-mail:
xunchen@ece.ubc.ca).
A. Liu and Z. J. Wang are with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
(e-mail: aipingl@ece.ubc.ca; zjanew@ece.ubc.ca).
M. J. McKeown is with the Pacific Parkinsons Research Centre, Department
of Medicine (Neurology),University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T
2B5, Canada (e-mail: martin.mckeown@ubc.ca).
H. Poizner is with the Institute for Neural Computation, Graduate Program in
Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
(e-mail: hpoizner@ucsd.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2319294

(BSS) techniques such as independent component analysis
(ICA) [1], [3].
BSS was originally designed for the decomposition of a single dataset into constituent components. However, in many
biomedical applications, it is natural to assume that multiple
datasets share some common underlying sources. Yet traditional
BSS techniques face the challenge that even if common sources
are isolated when multiple datasets are individually analyzed,
the source order may be permutated across datasets. To address
this concern, joint blind source separation (JBSS) methods have
recently been proposed for different biomedical applications,
where the aim is to separate the underlying sources from each
dataset while keeping a consistent ordering of the extracted
sources. Examples include group-level inference for multisubject functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data [4] and
the joint analysis of multimodal datasets from a corticomuscular
coupling experiment [5].
Several methods have been developed for achieving JBSS
under different situations. The multiset canonical correlation
analysis (M-CCA) extends the theory of canonical correlation
analysis (CCA) to more than two datasets to identify canonical
variates that maximize the correlation structure among multiple datasets [4]. The multiblock partial least squares (mbPLS)
method is a two-level, multiple-block extension of the regular partial least squares (PLS) approach. It extracts components
exhibiting high covariance between the predictors and the response, and summarizes both the sublevel and superlevel information [6]. While both M-CCA and mbPLS have been shown to
be promising for multisubject and multimodal data fusion, they
suffer from several limitations. First, they are both based on a deflationary procedure for cost optimization, which may result in
error accumulation. Second, the orthogonality constraint on the
demixing matrix limits the solution space examined. Moreover,
they consider only up to second-order statistics and thus could
be insufficient to obtain a unique latent variable model if the data
are not strictly multivariate Gaussian [7]. The interpretation of
the extracted sources may be difficult in real applications [8].
To explore higher order statistics, JBSS approaches inspired
by ICA have been investigated. In statistics, independence is a
much stronger condition than uncorrelatedness. Among these
approaches, the group ICA and the joint ICA are probably
the most popular ones. Group ICA maintains the correspondence
of the extracted sources across different datasets by assuming a
common signal subspace shared by all datasets and maximizes
the statistical independence of the sources within the common
signal subspace [2]. It is particularly suitable for multisubject

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2188

data analysis. Joint ICA was developed to maximize the independence of joint sources of multiple datasets by assuming that
all modalities share the same mixing matrix [2]. The decomposed independent sources from different datasets can be more
relevant. However, these two approaches rely on stringent assumptions, which may not be easily satisfied in practice. The
parallel ICA and the IC-PLS method were then proposed to
keep the extracted sources maximally independent within each
dataset and uniquely sorted in order of relevance across different
datasets [9], [10]. However, a compromise between statistical
independence and the interrelevance was made in the two methods by solving a multiobjective optimization function.
Very recently, independent vector analysis (IVA), as an
extension of ICA from one to multiple datasets, has attracted
increasing attention. IVA was originally designed to address the
permutation problem in the frequency domain for the separation of acoustic sources [11]. In [12], IVA was formulated as a
general JBSS framework to ensure that the extracted sources are
independent within each dataset and correlated well across multiple datasets. IVA has been shown to achieve superior performance than previous techniques in two simulation studies [12].
In this paper, we explore kinematic and electroencephalogram (EEG) data signals during reaching movements in
humans. While these types of data are normally analyzed separately (e.g., [13], [14]) joint EEG and kinematic data analysis
could provide a promising way to assess functional interactions
in the motor control system akin to corticomuscular coupling
analysis. For example, Hammon et al. tried to extract reach
information from brain signals, which was the first demonstration of decoding reach targets from EEG [15]. More recently,
Sanders et al. exploited CCA to jointly model modulation index
features derived from local field potential and EEG recordings
with both the overall motor impairment and motor subscores
in a monkey model of parkinsonism [16]. They found that the
modulation index features correlate significantly with scores for
Parkinsonian disability. When employing IVA to joint analyze
EEG recordings with other signals, the direct assumption is still
that there exist some potential dependence between these two
types of datasets. Nevertheless, the advantage of IVA is that it
exploits higher order statistics (HOS) to separate statistically
independent sources from each dataset. More specifically, using
HOS is based on the notion that it is insufficient to consider
only up to the second-order statistics (SOS) (e.g., correlation
and covariance) for obtaining a unique LV model [7]. This indicates that the extracted sources by SOS may be a linear combination of real underlying sources so that the interpretation
becomes more complicated. HOS overcomes the defect and has
found many successful biomedical applications, especially for
brain signals [2], [17], [18]. For example, HOS can be used to
reliably separate EEG/fMRI data into meaningful constituent
components, including consistently and transiently task-related
physiological changes, nontask-related physiological phenomena and machine or movement artifacts [17], [18]. These meaningful components then can be utilized for artifact removal or
other purposes. These previous findings adequately support the
usage of IVA for joint EEG and kinematic data analysis in this
paper.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

However, all current JBSS methods proposed so far have
been designed to handle multidimensional datasets, and might
fail to extract meaningful sources in the current situation
where we jointly analyze the concurrent multichannel EEG and
single-channel kinematic (behavior) data. A similar situation
may arise during the exploration of the relationship between
two single-channel biosensors by examining their underlying
sources.
In this study, we therefore propose a simple, yet effective
method to achieve the goal of JBSS when unidimensional
datasets are included among the multiple datasets to be assessed.
To take advantage of existing JBSS approaches, a reasonable
choice is to decompose unidimensional datasets into multidimensional ones. Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) is a
suitable option for this purpose. EMD is a single-channel technique that decomposes nonstationary and nonlinear time series
into a finite number of intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) [19].
Compared with other decomposition methods (e.g., wavelet
transform), EMD is completely data driven, meaning that it
decomposes a signal in a natural way without requiring prior
knowledge [3]. It has been shown to be efficient in many biomedical applications, e.g., denoising electrohysterogram (EHG) signals [20] and EEG signals [21]. However, the original EMD
algorithm is highly sensitive to noise and may cause mode mixing. Recently, a noise-assisted version of EMD, called ensemble
EMD (EEMD), was proposed and has been demonstrated to be
more robust in real-life applications [22]. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on JBSS for the joint multidimensional EEG and
unidimensional kinematic data case and propose the EEMDIVA algorithm by exploring the combination of EEMD and IVA.
The main contributions of the proposed method are 1) It is the
first time that EEMD is applied for solving the unidimensional
problem in JBSS; 2) We propose applying IVA for multimodal
data fusion (e.g., EEG and kinematic data), and before applying
IVA we propose using a multidirectional latent variable extraction (Multi-LV) method to joint preprocess multiple datasets
instead of employing principal component analysis (PCA) to
each individual dataset separately.
We will examine the performance of the proposed EEMDIVA method on both synthetic data and real data. We first validate it on simulated data. We then apply it to the concurrent
kinematic and EEG data collected from patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) when performing a haptic reaching task. We
note that while EEMD-IVA is proposed for solving unidimensional cases in JBSS, it is generally applicable when one dataset
contains relatively fewer channels (e.g., two or three) by applying the method to each channel and integrating the decomposed
signals.
II. METHODS
A. Problem Formulation and Notation
We first describe the joint multidimensional and unidimensional problem in the JBSS framework. Let M be the number of
datasets. The mth dataset X[m ] is with the size pm × N , where
pm is the number of variables, and N is the number of samples.
X[m ] can also be expressed by its corresponding column vectors

CHEN et al.: EEMD-IVA FRAMEWORK FOR CONCURRENT MULTIDIMENSIONAL EEG

as

can have
X

where

2189

[m ]

[m ]
x(n )

=

[m ]
[m ]
[m ]
[x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(N ) ],

1mM

(1)

(1  n  N ) with size pm × 1 is a realization of

the random column vector x[m ] . Each dataset is assumed to be
a linear mixture of L underlying independent sources
x[m ] = A[m ] s[m ] ,

1mM

(2)

where A[m ] s are mixing matrices and s[m ] s are random source
[m ] [m ]
[m ]
vectors with size L × 1, i.e., s[m ] = [s1 , s2 , . . . , sL ]T ,
where the superscript T denotes the transpose operation.
In the JBSS framework, the concept of source component vector (SCV) has been defined across multiple datasets [11]. The lth
[1] [2]
[M ]
SCV, sl = [sl , sl , . . . , sl ]T (1  l  L), is a random vector independent of all other SCVs and the components within
each SCV are dependent. The general JBSS goal is to identify the aforementioned SCVs by finding the mixing matrices
A[m ] s or their inverse matrices W[m ] ’s and the corresponding
source vector estimates y[m ] = W[m ] x[m ] . The estimate of the
[1]
[2]
[M ]
[m ]
lth SCV is given as yl = [yl , yl , . . . , yl ]T . Here, yl is
the estimate of the lth component in the mth dataset, given by
[m ]
[m ]
[m ]
yl = (wl )T x[m ] , where (wl )T is the lth row vector of
W[m ] .
In the joint multidimensional and unidimensional case, the
number of variables pm may be equal to one, indicating that
only one variable is available in the mth dataset, while there may
exist several underlying sources to be estimated in association
with other multidimensional datasets. The conventional JBSS
techniques will fail to handle this situation. Faced with this
challenge, we propose the EEMD-IVA method by combining
the advantages of EEMD and IVA.
B. Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition
EMD is a single-channel decomposition method for nonstationary and nonlinear signals [19]. EMD decomposes a signal
into a finite number of IMFs, which represent fast to slow oscillations. An IMF is a function that satisfies two following
conditions [19]: 1) The number of extrema and the number of
zero crossings must either be equal or differ at most by one; and
2) at any point, the mean value of the envelope defined by the
local maxima and the envelope defined by the local minima is
zero. To obtain an IMF from the original signal x, a sifting process is performed [19]. First, all extrema of the original signal x
need to be identified. All local maximum points are connected
by a cubic spline line as the upper envelope eu . Repeat the procedure for local minimum points to form the lower envelope el .
Their mean a1 is calculated as
eu + el
.
(3)
a1 =
2
The difference between the signal and the mean is defined as
the first component h1 as
h1 = x − a1 .

(4)

In the second sifting process, h1 is treated as the signal, and we

h11 = h1 − a11 .

(5)

Subsequently, we can repeat this sifting procedure k times until
h1k is an IMF, with
h1k = h1(k −1) − a1k .

(6)

Therefore, the first IMF component derived from the original
signal is designated as
c1 = h1k .

(7)

A criterion for stopping the sifting process to have an IMF has
been established by limiting the size of the standard deviation
(SD), calculated from the two consecutive sifting sequences as
below


N

[h1(k −1) (n) − h1k (n)]2
.
(8)
SD =
h21(k −1) (n)
n =1
A typical value for SD can be set between 0.2 and 0.3 [19].
To extract the second IMF component, we remove c1 from
the original signal x to have
r1 = x − c1 .

(9)

The residual r1 is treated as a new signal and the same sifting
process is applied to obtain the second IMF component c2 and
the residual
r2 = r1 − c2 .

(10)

This procedure can be repeated on the subsequent residuals rj s
until the final residual rJ no longer contains any oscillation
information
rj = rj −1 − cj .

(11)

By summing up (9)–(11), we can obtain
x=

J


cj + rJ .

(12)

j =1

Thus, we decompose the original signal x into J empirical
modes cj ’s and a residue rJ .
However, the original EMD algorithm is highly sensitive to
noise. Recently, Huang et al. introduced a new noise-assisted
data analysis method, called EEMD [22]. The method defines
the true IMF components as the mean of an ensemble of trials.
Each trial consists of the signal plus an additive i.i.d. white
noise of the same standard deviation. In this case, although each
individual trial may produce noisy results, it is canceled out in
the ensemble mean of sufficient trials since the noise in each
trial is assumed independent. Regarding the number of trials, a
few hundred is generally enough to lead to a reasonable result.
A standard deviation of 20% of the original signal has been
suggested for the noise term [22].

2190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

C. Independent Vector Analysis
The goal of IVA is to identify independent SCVs from multiple multidimensional datasets. This can be achieved by minimizing the mutual information among the estimated SCVs [12]:
II V A  I[y1 ; y2 ; . . . ; yL ]
=

L


H[yl ] − H[y1 , y2 , . . . , yL ]

l=1

=

L

l=1

=

L

l=1

−

M




H[yl ] − H W[1] x[1] , . . . , W[M ] x[M ]


M



[m ]
H[yl ]

− I[yl ]

m =1

log|det(W[m ] )| − C1

(13)

m =1

where
	 H denotes
 the entropy and C1 is the constant term
H x[1] , . . . , x[M ] . The final representation indicates that minimizing the IVA cost function is equivalent to simultaneously
[m ]
minimizing the entropy of all components yl ’s and maximizing the mutual information within each estimated SCV yl .
Therefore, each estimated SCV is independent of all other estimated SCVs and meanwhile the components within each SCV
are dependent with each other. IVA can ultimately solve the
problem of permutation ambiguity when applying BSS techniques to multiple datasets.
The implementation algorithms involve the selection of specific distributions. The most popular ones include IVA-L [11]
and IVA-G [12]. IVA-L assumes that each SCV follows a multivariate Laplace distribution that is isotropic and possesses no
second-order correlation, while IVA-G exploits second-order
statistical information across datasets by assuming that each
SCV is multivariate Gaussian distributed. In some applications,
the second-order information across datasets may be minimal,
such as in the frequency domain BSS for speech recognition [23]. However, in some other applications, it is expected to
have much larger correlation, for instance in group fMRI studies [4]. In this paper, we will utilize IVA-G by taking into account
the importance of the second-order information in the concurrent multidimensional EEG and unidimensional kinematic data
analysis application.
D. Proposed EEMD-IVA
To deal with the case of joint multidimensional EEG and unidimensional kinematic data analysis in the JBSS framework, we
propose taking advantage of both EEMD and IVA by exploring
their combination and denote the proposed method as EEMDIVA. We note that IVA requires all datasets have the same number of observation variables and assumes that the number of
sources L within each dataset is equal to the number of observation variables (i.e., pm = L, for 1  m  M ). However, this
condition that pm = L may not be satisfied in practice, especially in multimodal data fusion. Also, in the group analysis,

pm ’s could be quite large so that much redundant information
exists, indicating that L should be much smaller than pm .
PCA is a typical preprocessing step in multivariate data
analysis to decompose the data into a set of uncorrelated
principal components (PCs) ordered by the variance of each
component. Particularly, PCA is often used for dimension
reduction by removing insignificant PCs and noise components.
Nevertheless, PCA may become less effective in the JBSS than
in the traditional BSS. For dimension reduction, PCA is performed independently to each dataset and retains as much of the
variance within individual datasets as possible, while a different
objective in JBSS is to keep as much of the relevant variance
across multiple datasets as possible. Therefore, we suggest to
employ here the multi-LV extraction method proposed in [5] as
the preprocessing step for dimension reduction.
In the multi-LV method, suppose we have M multidimensional datasets Z[m ] (1  m  M ) and define the sublatent
variables (subLVs) in each dataset to be linear combinations
of the original variables, i.e., Z[m ] v[m ] . One super latent variable (supLV) tg is designed to relate the subLVs by solving the
following optimization problem:
max

t g ,v [ m ]

s.t.

M


(tTg Z[m ] v[m ] )2 ,

m =1

tTg tg = 1,

(v[m ] )T v[m ] = 1 ∀m = 1, 2, . . . , M.
(14)

Note that in the above formulation, all data are assumed to
be zero-mean and normalized to unit variance in advance. The
subLV Z[m ] v[m ] in each data space carries its associated variation information and (tTg Z[m ] v[m ] )2 models the covariance information between the subLV Z[m ] v[m ] and the supLV tg . The
supLV tg relates all subLVs simultaneously and actually plays a
role as the linkage. By solving the above optimization problem,
the extracted subLVs will carry as much variation as possible
within each dataset and meanwhile be correlated as closely as
possible across datasets. One can refer to our previous work [5]
for details.
The major steps of the proposed EEMD-IVA algorithm is
summarized in Algorithm 1. More specifically, if pm = 1, we
employ EEMD to decompose the corresponding dataset X[m ]
and derive a set of averaged IMFs as the new substitute for X[m ] .
Then, the multi-LV method is employed for dimension reduction. Finally, IVA is applied to the subLVs prepared from each
dataset. After these steps, it is expected that underlying sources
can be extracted within each dataset and are well correlated
across multiple datasets.
E. Joint EEG and Kinematic Data Analysis Using EEMD-IVA
In this section, we first present synthetic data, which will be
used to demonstrate the specific procedure and the performance
of the proposed EEMD-IVA. Then, we describe the collection
and processing for real data, as well as the specific procedure
for joint multidimensional EEG and unidimensional kinematic
data analysis.

CHEN et al.: EEMD-IVA FRAMEWORK FOR CONCURRENT MULTIDIMENSIONAL EEG

Fig. 1.

2191

Six simulated source signals.

[3]
where S[1] = [s1 ; s2 ; s3 ; s4 ], S[2] = [s1 ; s2 ; s5−
=
3 ; s5 ], and S
5+
[s1 ; s2 ; s3 ; s6 ] with
⎤
⎡
0.76 −0.55 0.17 0.34
⎢ 0.79 0.65
0.32 0.23 ⎥
⎥
⎢
(17)
A[1] = ⎢
⎥
⎣ 0.87 0.46 −0.58 0.67 ⎦

0.23

−0.33

0.73
⎢ 0.82
⎢
=⎢
⎣ 0.78
0.13

−0.52
−0.67

0.21
0.6

−0.1
−0.64

0.71
0.35

⎡

A[2]

In this specific real data study, we have two hypotheses: temporally, the EEG coherence connectivity features are modulated
by the kinematic data; spatially, the brain patterns between normal and PD subjects are significantly different. As in many
medical applications, extrapolating one subject’s data to a wide
population range is clearly problematic because of substantial
intersubject variability. Therefore, to meaningfully achieve a
group level consensus, we will compute spatial patterns for each
subject individually and apply a posthoc method to combine the
results at the group level.
1) Synthetic Data: As an illustrative example, without loss
of generality, six sources and three mixed datasets were generated and analyzed. One of the three datasets was unidimensional.
The following six source signals were considered:

s2 = 1.5 sin(0.025t)
s3 = 2 cos(0.08t)sin(0.006t)

s5 = 1.5 sin(0.025(t + 63))sin(0.2t)
(15)

where t denotes the time index vector, valued from 1 to T
(T = 1000), and si ’s (i = 1, 2, . . . , 6) represent six simulated
sources, as shown in Fig. 1. Note that here si ’s are row vectors.
Three mixed datasets X[1] , X[2] , and X[3] were generated
as follows, with each column denoting one observation in their
respective data space
m = 1, 2, 3

0.7

(18)

0.42
0.56 ] .

(19)

The sources s1 , s2 , and s3 existed in all datasets, representing
5+
common information. s5−
3 and s3 represent time-shift versions
of s3 , shifting right and left with five time points, respectively.
The source s4 only contributed to X[1] , s5 only to X[2] , and s6
only to X[3] , representing unique information within individual
datasets.
To examine the reliability of the proposed method, we employed two types of random noise, which were Gaussian noise
and Uniform noise. The noise was added to S[m ] ’s before generating the mixed datasets as below
sn = s + ε · n

SNR =

s4 = triangular waveform

X[m ] = A[m ] · S[m ] ,

−0.55

0.11
⎤
0.29
0.18 ⎥
⎥
⎥
0.45 ⎦

(20)

where s was a source and n was random noise following Gaussian distribution (N (0, 1)) or Uniform distribution (U (−1, 1)).
Then, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) could then be adjusted by
changing the parameter ε

s1 = 1.5 cos(0.01t)sin(0.5t)

s6 = 1.5 sin(0.2t)

A[3] = [ 0.69

0.45

(16)

RMS(s)
RMS(ε · n)

(21)

where the root mean squared (RMS) value was defined as

1 T
ss .
RMS(s) =
(22)
T
The correlation coefficient (CC) between the original source
and the recovered source was utilized as an evaluation measure
to the effect of source separation. It should be noted that since
there were 12 sources in the simulated datasets we actually used
the average SNR value and also the average CC value in the
subsequent analysis.

2192

2) Real Data:
a) Participants: Nine PD patients (mean ± SD age: 62.8
± 8.4 years) participated in this study. Twelve age-matched
healthy subjects were recruited as controls. For these PD subjects, testing was conducted as off-medication, since the measurement was taken after a minimum of 12-h withdrawal of
L-dopa medication [24]. No subject in the control group had
any neurological or psychiatric disease. All participants were
right-hand dominant with normal or corrected to normal vision. All participants signed the informed consent document
approved by the human subjects Institutional Review Board of
the University of California, San Diego, CA, USA. For more
experimental information, one may refer to [13].
b) Hardware: EEG data were collected using an active
electrode EEG system (Biosemi, Inc., ActiveTwo, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands) consisting of a cap plus four EOG electrodes,
temporal to both eyes and above and below the right eye, two
EMG electrodes on the trapezius and right and left sternocleidomastoids, and two reference electrodes on the left and right
mastoids. Data were recorded with a 512-Hz sampling rate, and
referenced to the averaged mastoid electrodes. Head position relative to the EEG sensors was determined with a electromagnetic
motion tracking system (Polhemus, FASTRAK, Colchester, VT,
USA) [14]. Kinematic data were recorded by two three-degree
of freedom haptic robotic devices (Phantom Premium 1.0, Geomagic, Wilmington, MA, USA). The two haptic robots sat facing
each other such that subjects could insert the tips of their thumb
and index finger into thimble gimbals affixed to the left and right
robots, respectively. The robots passively tracked subjects digits
during the reach. When the digits made contact with the virtual
object as seen on the monitor, the robots motors activated and
applied an opposing force as if a real object was being touched.
The haptic robots allowed precise manipulation of the timing
and magnitude of object rotation and were extremely accurate
spatially and temporally. The Euclidean position information
(x, y, z) was recorded with a 1000-Hz sampling rate [13].
c) Protocol: Participants sat at a table with two phantom
haptic robots affixed to their thumb and index finger of the right
hand. Participants reached to and grasped a virtual rectangular object (3.5 × 8.5 × 6 cm). Participants placed the digits
of their right hand on a virtual starting dock, with the object
located 13–18 cm away in the virtual environment. The object
was located 13–18 cm away in a virtual environment designed
using custom scripts (Vizard, WorldViz LLC, Santa Barbara,
CA, USA, [25]) as shown in Fig. 2. Participants had haptic as
well as visual feedback of the dock so that they felt their hands
resting on a solid surface. At the sound of a tone, participants
reached toward the object at a comfortable speed and grasped
the left and right sides of the object with their thumb and index
finger, respectively. When the object was touched, participants
had haptic feedback, feeling as if a real object was present. Object was rotated on 33% of trials during the reach by rotating
it 90◦ in the frontal plane (see Fig. 2). The perturbation occurred at a randomly jittered distance of 20–40% between the
starting dock and the front of the object. Participants had ample
time to familiarize themselves with the environment and task
requirements prior to the experiment. The reason of choosing

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 2. Haptic reaching task: the subject was instructed to reach to and grasp
a virtual rectangular object. Left Panel in the bottom is a diagram illustrating
the object shape during unperturbed (upper) and perturbed (lower) trials, which
consisted of a 90 ◦ rotation of the object in the frontal plane. Right Panel shows
the temporal representation of a trial. An audio-visual cue was used to indicate
the start of the movement. Object rotation occurred at 20–40% of the reaching
movement. During grasp, force feedback was provided by the haptic robots
as well as a visual cue indicating that the object was touched, at which point
participants were free to return to the starting position and await the next trial.

Fig. 3. Ten brain regions: Front-L - F1, F3, F5; Front-R - F2, F4, F6; Front-M
- FCz, Cz; MOT-L - C1, C3, C5, FC1, FC3, and FC5; MOT-R - C2, C4, C6, FC2,
FC4, and FC6; PAR-L - P3, P5, P7, CP3, CP5, and TP7; PAR-R - P4, P6, P8,
CP4, CP6, and TP8; PAR-M - Pz, CPz; OCC-L - O1, PO3, PO7; OCC-R - O2,
PO4, PO8.

virtual objects is that virtual world allows us to precisely manipulate the timing and degree of object rotation while accurately
measuring digit trajectories and forces. Furthermore, this setup
allows us to introduce sensory feedback such as adding perturbations at various epochs during the reach. By including perturbation, participants had to adapt their grip size online in order to
appropriately grasp the object due to rotation. This necessitated
dynamic error detection and elicitation of a corrective response.
d) Preprocessing: Raw EEG data were processed by a
band-pass filter (1 to 55 Hz) offline to remove drift and line
noise. Artifacts associated with eye blinks and muscular activities were removed using the Automated Artifact Removal in

CHEN et al.: EEMD-IVA FRAMEWORK FOR CONCURRENT MULTIDIMENSIONAL EEG

the EEGLAB MATLAB Toolbox [18]. To simplify analysis, the
EEG signals were divided into ten regions as shown in Fig. 3.
The ten regions were Front-L - F1, F3, F5; Front-R - F2, F4,
F6; Front-M - FCz, Cz; MOT-L - C1, C3, C5, FC1, FC3, and
FC5; MOT-R - C2, C4, C6, FC2, FC4, and FC6; PAR-L - P3,
P5, P7, CP3, CP5 and TP7; PAR-R - P4, P6, P8, CP4, CP6 and
TP8; PAR-M - Pz, CPz; OCC-L - O1, PO3, PO7; OCC-R - O2,
PO4, PO8. The raw time courses of the electrodes within each
region were averaged as the overall activity of the region, and
the averaged time course were then zero-meaned and normalized to unit variance. While the proposed framework is capable
of handling data at an individual electrode level, we found in
our previous work [26] that averaging recordings within a region has several potential benefits: 1) It reduces the effects of
possible spurious activity measured at individual electrodes,
2) it reduces intersubject variability due to slight variations in
the placement of the electrode cap, and 3) regions can be chosen
as they are biologically related to the motor task we are studying
based on prior medical knowledge, making neuroscience interpretations easier. For subsequent analysis, data collected during
the reaching and grasping periods were concatenated in time
into a single matrix for each individual subject. Data from the
rest periods were excluded from the analysis.
3) Feature Extraction: In most existing EEG studies, the
analysis is performed directly on raw EEG data. However, recent studies suggest that time-varying EEG features can be
used instead of raw signals (e.g., corticomuscular coupling
analysis [5], [10], [27]). In this paper, we examine the coupling
relationship between time-varying EEG features and kinematic
[1]
[2]
signals, constituting Xb and Xb , respectively, for each subject
b (for b = 1, 2, . . . , B), where B is the total number of subjects
(B = 21 in this study).
Band-limited, pairwise EEG coherences [28] are considered
as EEG features in this paper, since this type of time-varying
features represent temporal, spatial, and spectrum information
simultaneously. EEG coherence examines the dependency relationship in the frequency domain between two EEG signals:
Coh(f ) = |Se ∗ e ◦ (f )|2 /(Se ∗ e ∗ (f )Se ◦ e ◦ (f ))

(23)

where |Se ∗ e ◦ | is the cross-spectrum between the signals e∗ and
e◦ ; Se ∗ e ∗ is the autospectrum of the signal e∗ , and Se ◦ e ◦ is
the autospectrum of the signal e◦ . In this paper, we calculate the
time-varying pairwise coherences between EEG channels, using
a Hamming window with length 500 and with a 95% overlap. To
be consistent with common EEG practice, we further divide the
coherence into four frequency bands, i.e., theta band (4–8 Hz),
alpha band (8–13 Hz), beta band (13–30 Hz), and gamma band
(30–55 Hz). The time-varying summed coherence values within
each band are then used as the EEG features.
For kinematic data, the aperture between thumb and index
fingers is a particularly interesting feature, which can be calculated by Euclidean distance. This feature can directly reflect
the ability of dynamic error detection. For the subsequent joint
analysis with EEG features, we resampled the unidimensional
aperture measurement to ensure the same temporal length as
that of the EEG features.

2193

4) Source Extraction: We applied EEMD-IVA to the timevarying EEG and kinematic features and then obtained several
SCVs for each subject. We were particularly interested in the
first SCV since its components from each dataset are the most
dependent on each other [for a clearer illustration one may refer
to Fig. 4(d)]. Considering the multivariate Gaussian assumption
for each SCV in IVA-G, this indicates that the components
within the first SCV are the most correlated sources from the
time-varying EEG and kinematic data. Therefore, the first SCV
for each subject was kept for further analysis.
5) Spatial Pattern Extraction: To assist the biological interpretation of the results, we also extracted connectivity patterns
between EEG channels representing functional connections between brain regions. After the identification of the first SCV
[1]
for each subject, we regressed the EEG-related components y1b
[1]
back onto the EEG features Xb (for b = 1, 2, . . . , B) for all
subjects as follows:

1
[1] [1]
Xb y1b
(24)
rb =
[1] T
[1] T
[1] [1]
(y1b ) (Xb ) Xb y1b
[1]

where y1b is the first component (EEG-related) of the first SCV
for the bth subject and rb is the connectivity pattern (weights)
of the component for the same subject.
In addition, we also wanted to determine which EEG features
in the connectivity patterns had significant contributions to the
corresponding temporal patterns. We tackled this problem by
identifying EEG features whose corresponding weights were
significantly different from zero. To determine the group-level
connectivity pattern, we horizontally put the column vector rb ’s
of normal subjects into a matrix RN and rb ’s of PD subjects
into a matrix RPD . Then, we applied a two-tailed t-test to each
connectivity feature of the two matrices RN and RPD across
all subjects within each group. This allowed for identification
of specific connections that are differentially recruited by PD
subjects during the task.
To better describe the EEMD-IVA-based procedure for concurrent EEG and kinematic data analysis procedure, we summarized the entire procedure in Algorithm 2.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Simulation Study
In this section, we applied the proposed EEMD-IVA method
to synthetic data described in Section II-E1. We used this simulation to demonstrate the specific procedure and the source
separation effect of the proposed EEMD-IVA. In Fig. 4(a), we
present the mixed datasets generated according to (16). Please
note that X3 is unidimensional. We aimed to recover the four
underlying independent sources in each dataset and meanwhile
relate the correspondent sources across the three datasets.
First, since X3 was unidimensional, we needed to apply
EEMD to X3 for decomposition and obtain a set of averaged
IMFs, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Then each dataset was multivariate, and we needed to remove irrelevant redundant information
across datasets.

2194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 4. Results demonstrated by applying the EEMD-IVA to the simulated datasets (Gaussian noise with ε = 0.1). (a) Mixed datasets; (b) the IMFs produced by
applying EEMD to X 3 ; (c) the subLVs extracted from each dataset; (d) the final recovered underlying sources. Estimated S i means recovered sources from the
mixed dataset X i . SC V i , defined in Section II-A, indicates the corresponding three sources across the three datasets in the ith row here.

Fig. 5. Performance comparisons between EEMD-IVA and WT-IVA in terms
of correlation coefficient (CC) at various SNR values under two noise types. (a)
Gaussian distributed noise. (b) Uniform distributed noise.

Hence, subsequently we employed the multi-LV method to
extract subLVs from each dataset. As mentioned earlier, these
subLVs could carry as much variation information as possible within each dataset and meanwhile be correlated as highly
as possible across datasets. Another important property of these
subLVs is that the subLVs within each dataset were uncorrelated
with each other, as observed in Fig. 4(c). However, multi-LV
may not be able to completely recover the underlying sources,
due to following reasons: 1) the highest priority of multi-LV is
to find the subLVs explaining significant variance within each
dataset, while the second priority is to find subLVs highly correlated across multiple datasets; 2) Uncorrelatedness is insufficient
to accurately recover the underlying sources if the datasets are
not strictly multivariate Gaussian.
Therefore, finally, IVA was performed to these extracted subLVs and helped to achieve the goal in the JBSS framework.

The recovered sources are present in Fig. 4(d), from which we
can see that the sources of each dataset have been accurately
recovered and the corresponding sources are highly correlated
across datasets. We note that the proposed method recovered all
underlying sources of the unidimensional dataset X3 .
In addition, we also implemented Wavelet transform (WT)IVA for a performance comparison study in terms of CC in
various SNR values and noise types. The mother wavelet used
in the WT-IVA method was Daubechies 6, and the level of the
wavelet transform was set to 8. The results are shown in Fig. 5,
from which we can see that EEMD-IVA has consistently better
performance for source separation than WT-IVA. The possible
reason is due to the fact that wavelet decomposition splits up
a signal at each step in a predetermined manner by means of
predefined linear time invariant filters, thereby precluding the
possibility of adapting the decomposition to local variations of
the oscillation [3]. With no a priori knowledge of the signal
of interest, it is very hard to make any decision for selecting
mother wavelets and decomposition levels. In contrast, EEMD
is a data-driven algorithm, meaning that it decomposes a signal in a natural way without prior knowledge about the signal of interest embedded in the data series. Therefore, in our
method, EEMD is a superior choice. From Fig. 5, we can also
observe that, even if the SNR value is very low around 1.5,
the CC value can still be kept above 0.8 by using the proposed
EEMD-IVA.
This simulation example demonstrates that the proposed
EEMD-IVA is an effective tool to deal with the joint

CHEN et al.: EEMD-IVA FRAMEWORK FOR CONCURRENT MULTIDIMENSIONAL EEG

2195

Fig. 6. Average temporal patterns and spatial patterns jointly derived from the EEG coherence and kinematic datasets. Top panel: Temporal patterns of the EEG
(red) and kinematic signals (blue) of normal subjects (left) and PD subjects (right). Bottom panel: EEG connectivity patterns of normal subjects (left) and PD
subjects (right). The connections reflect the respective connectivity patterns in the normal and PD groups.

multidimensional and unidimensional case in JBSS. Besides,
we have also tested the proposed EEMD-IVA for different
synthetic datasets and could obtain similar results as shown
above.
B. Real Data Study
In this section, we applied the EEMD-IVA-based group analysis method to concurrent multidimensional EEG data and unidimensional kinematic data collected from normal subjects and
patients with PD during a haptic reaching task. In this real
biomedical application, we were particularly interested in identifying the relationships between a specific kinematic feature
and EEG-based brain patterns.
Overall, a maximum of 180 trials (five blocks of 36 trials)
were performed by each participant, with rest provided between
blocks to limit fatigue. Each trial lasted for about 3.7 s and
with the 512-Hz sampling rate the length of a trial was 1894.
Participants had to adapt their grip size online in order to appropriately grasp the object due to rotation. This necessitated
dynamic error detection and elicitation of a corrective response.
In this study, we considered kinematic and EEG data from trials
with object rotation. We were particularly interested in a specific
kinematic feature, i.e., aperture, which is the distance between
thumb and index fingers. This feature can directly reflect the
ability of dynamic error detection.

As described in Section II-E3, the EEG features of each
subject can be represented by a 2-D matrix with size p1 × N ,
where the columns correspond to the samples at different time
points and the rows correspond to the features, i.e., pairwise
band-limited coherences between EEG channels. Considering
ten brain regions and four frequency bands, p1 is equal to
C210 × 4 = 180 in this study. Also, considering the number of
trials, the Hamming window length and overlap, N is equal to
2481. For kinematic data, since it is unidimensional, the feature
dimension p2 is equal to 1 and N is the same as EEG features
due to the alignment.
After applying the proposed method, the temporal and spatial
patterns for the two groups are shown in Fig. 6. Note that the
temporal patterns are the average across all subjects within each
group and that, for spatial patterns, only connections whose
weights are statistically significantly different from zero are
shown. In addition, the results for individual subjects were also
present in Fig. 7. For each subject’s result, we plotted temporal
patterns extracted from EEG and kinematic data as well as the
ensemble average, and the corresponding band-limited weight
values by back regression as described in Section II-E5.
In most previous coupling studies, EEG activity at a
specific locus (e.g., sensorimotor cortex contralateral to the
hand performing the task) is directly compared to other signals
(e.g., EMG or kinematic data) by coherence methods. It is well
known that coherence is a normalized measure of correlation

2196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 7. Results for individual subjects. The temporal patterns, including the ensemble average, derived from the EEG (red) and kinematic signals (blue) and the
corresponding band-limited weight values are shown. (a) For 12 normal subjects. (b) For 9 PD subjects. (c) The indexes for the connections between the ten brain
regions. The box plots in (a) and (b) summarize the correlation coefficients between temporal patterns in each group. The black lines in the weight plots represent
the average values across subjects. The red asterisks indicate significant connections.

between two waveforms or signals in the frequency domain and
has been successfully used to assess the interactions between
motor-related brain areas and the muscles. It can also be used
to analyze other types of data.
Despite coherence’s popularity in coupling analysis, there are
several implicit assumptions of coherence that potentially limit
its usefulness in practical scenarios. Coherence emphasizes the
role of individual locus in the brain in driving the motor system
while motor activity is known to be more distributed [29]. In
fact, recent work has suggested that interactions between brain
regions correspond more closely to ongoing motor activity than
brain activity at discrete sites [6]. Besides, the original coherence is pairwise, i.e., dealing with only two types of datasets or
signals, while in practice we may need to simultaneously analyze more than two types of signals, for example, brain, muscle,

and kinematic data. In this study, we find that the connectivities
between certain brain regions are closely associated with the
ongoing kinematic feature during a dynamic motor task. This
may be related to the fact that during a dynamic motor task,
subjects may need to recruit additional regions such as frontal
regions for motor selection [30], contralateral (i.e., ipsilateral to
hand movement) sensorimotor cortex for fine modulatory control [31] and occipital regions for posterror adaptations [32].
Also, our proposed method can be easily applied to multimodal
datasets.
Both PD and normal subjects demonstrated prominent alpha
activity related to aperture size, consistent with the visual aspects of the task. It may seem paradoxical that PD subjects had
rare beta-band connectivity in the sensorimotor cortex compared with controls, especially since PD subjects may have

CHEN et al.: EEMD-IVA FRAMEWORK FOR CONCURRENT MULTIDIMENSIONAL EEG

2197

vidual weighting of EEG features varied across subjects (bottom
panel). When rigorous statistical testing was applied, we found
significant differences for brain regions recruited by PD and
controls as shown in Fig. 6, which was consistent with previous
research findings.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an EEMD-IVA method to deal
with the unidimensional case in JBSS by combining the advantages of EEMD and IVA, and have presented an EEMD-IVAbased group analysis method for concurrent multidimensional
EEG and unidimensional kinematic data analysis. The simulation results support the usefulness of the proposed method.
Furthermore, when applied to a real EEG/kinematic data, it
reveals promising results on identifying significant differences
between PD subjects and age-matched control subjects. We note
that while EEMD-IVA is proposed for handling unidimensional
cases in JBSS, it can be generally applicable when one dataset
contains relatively fewer channels (e.g., two or three) by integrating the decomposed signals. The proposed method represents a promising tool for multisubject and multimodal data
analysis.
REFERENCES

enhanced beta-band EEG activity associated with the clinical
signs of bradykinesia and rigidity [33], [34]. We believe that
this is because the current method specifically looks at the common sources among the EEG and kinematic signals. Since a key
aspect in PD is the inability to modulate the beta-band oscillations [35], it is very likely that the relevant beta-band activity,
co-varying with phasic kinematic activity, is reduced in PD.
The most striking difference was the missing theta-band connectivity in PD that was present in normal subjects. Frontal EEG
theta activity is closely related to default mode network (DMN)
activity [36] that is normally active during rest and becomes
“deactivated” during task performance. The lack of theta activity we observed is consistent with impaired deactivation of the
DMN, we [37] and others have previously described in PD [38].
Another striking finding was the absence of frontal occipital
connectivity in PD subjects compared to normal controls within
the alpha band. We interpret our findings in the context of a
recent study investigating frontal-occipital connectivity during
visual search [39]. Specifically, ventral medial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) was found to be strongly connected to the lateral
occipital cortex during a visual search paradigm. The dopaminedeficiency in PD likely explains the inability of the impaired
connectivity in the vmPFC [40].
The results in Fig. 7 demonstrate the variability across subjects. As expected from the formulation of the problem, the
temporal EEG and kinematic features were highly correlated
and consistent across subjects (top panel). However, the indi-

[1] B. He, L. Yang, C. Wilke, and H. Yuan, “Electrophysiological imaging of
brain activity and connectivity challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1918–1931, Jul. 2011.
[2] V. D. Calhoun, J. Liu, and T. Adali, “A review of group ICA for fMRI
data and ICA for joint inference of imaging, genetic, and ERP data,”
NeuroImage, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. S163–S172, 2009.
[3] B. Mijovic, M. D. Vos, I. Gligorijevic, J. Taelman, and S. V. Huffel,
“Source separation from single-channel recordings by combining
empirical-mode decomposition and independent component analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2188–2196, Sep. 2010.
[4] Y. Li, T. Adali, W. Wang, and V. Calhoun, “Joint blind source separation
by multiset canonical correlation analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 3918–3929, Oct. 2009.
[5] X. Chen, X. Chen, R. K. Ward, and Z. J. Wang, “A joint multimodal group
analysis framework for modeling corticomuscular activity,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1049–1059, Aug. 2013.
[6] J. Chiang, Z. J. Wang, and M. J. McKeown, “A multiblock PLS model of
cortico-cortical interactions in Parkinson’s disease during corticomuscular
activity,” NeuroImage, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 1498–1509, 2012.
[7] A. Hyvarinen and E. Oja, “Fast fixed-point algorithm for independent
component analysis,” Neural Comput., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1483–1492,
1997.
[8] M. G. Gustafsson, “Independent component analysis yields chemically
interpretable latent variables in multivariate regression,” J. Chem. Inf.
Model., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1244–1255, 2005.
[9] J. Liu, G. Pearlson, A. Windemuth, G. Ruano, N. I. Perrone-Bizzozero, and
V. Calhoun, “Combining fMRI and SNP data to investigate connections
between brain function and genetics using parallel ICA,” Human Brain
Mapping, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 241–255, 2009.
[10] X. Chen, C. He, Z. J. Wang, and M. J. McKeown, “An IC-PLS framework
for group corticomuscular coupling analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 2022–2033, Jul. 2013.
[11] T. Kim, T. Eltoft, and T. W. Lee, “Independent vector analysis: An extension of ICA to multivariate components,” in Proc. Independent Component
Analysis Blind Signal Separation, 2006, pp. 165–172.
[12] M. Anderson, T. Adali, and X. L. Li, “Joint blind source separation
with multivariate Gaussian model: Algorithms and performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1672–1683, Apr.
2012.
[13] J. R. Lukos, J. Snider, M. E. Hernandez, E. Tunik, S. Hillyard, and
H. Poizner, “Parkinson’s disease patients show impaired corrective grasp

2198

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

control and eye-hand coupling when reaching to grasp virtual objects,”
Neuroscience, vol. 254, pp. 205–221, 2013.
C. Lainscsek, M. E. Hernandez, H. Poizner, and T. J. Sejnowski, “Multivariate spectral analysis of electroencephalography data,” in Proc.
IEEE/EMBS 6th Int. Conf. Neural Eng., Nov. 2013, pp. 1151–1154.
P. S. Hammon, S. Makeig, H. Poizner, E. Todorov, and V. R. de Sa, “Predicting reaching targets from human EEG,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 69–77, Jan. 2008.
T. H. Sanders, A. Devergnas, T. Wichmann, and M. A. Clements, “Canonical correlation to estimate the degree of parkinsonism from local field
potential and electroencephalographic signals,” in Proc. IEEE/EMBS 6th
Annu. Int. Conf. Neural Eng., Nov. 2013, pp. 158–161.
M. J. McKeown, S. Makeig, G. G. Brown, T. P. Jung, S. S. Kindermann,
A. J. Bell, and T. J. Sejnowski, “Analysis of fMRI by decomposition into
independent spatial components,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 160–188, 1998.
A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 9–21, 2004.
N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shin, Q. Zheng,
N. C. Yen, C. C. Tung, and H. H. Liu, “The empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and nonstationary time series
analysis,” Proc. Roy. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 454, no. 1971,
pp. 903–995, 1998.
M. Hassan, S. Boudaoud, J. Terrien, B. Karlsson, and C. Marque, “Combination of canonical correlation analysis and empirical mode decomposition applied to denoising the labor electrohysterogram,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 2441–2447, Sep. 2011.
K. T. Sweeney, S. F. McLoone, and T. E. Ward, “The use of ensemble
empirical mode decomposition with canonical correlation analysis as a
novel artifact removal technique,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60,
no. 1, pp. 97–105, Jan. 2013.
Z. Wu and N. E. Huang, “Ensemble empirical mode decomposition: A
noise-assisted data analysis method,” Adv. Adapt. Data Anal., vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 1–41, 2009.
T. Kim, H. T. Attias, S. Y. Lee, and T. W. Lee, “Blind source separation exploiting higher-order frequency dependencies,” IEEE Trans. Audio
Speech Lang. Process., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 70–79, Jan. 2007.
J. G. Nutt, W. R. Woodward, J. P. Hammerstad, J. H. Carter, and
J. L. Anderson, “The on-off phenomenon in Parkinson’s disease: Relation
to levodopa absorption and transport,” New England J. Med., vol. 310,
no. 8, pp. 483–488, 1984.
J. Snider, M. Plank, D. Lee, and H. Poizner, “Simultaneous neural and
movement recordings in large-scale immersive virtual environments,” in
Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf., 2011, pp. 98–101.
G. Tropini, J. Chiang, Z. J. Wang, E. Ty, and M. J. McKeown, “Altered
directional connectivity in Parkinson’s disease during performance of a
visually guided task,” Neuroimage, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2144–2156, 2011.
X. Chen, Z. J. Wang, and M. J. McKeown, “A three-step multimodal
analysis framework for modeling corticomuscular activity with application
to Parkinson’s disease,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., 2013, DOI:
10.1109/JBHI.2013.2284480.

[28] M. A. Guevara and M. Corsi-Cabrera, “EEG coherence or EEG correlation?,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 145–153, 1996.
[29] V. Murthy and E. Fetz, “Coherent 25-to 35-Hz oscillations in the sensorimotor cortex of awake behaving monkeys,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,
vol. 89, no. 12, pp. 5670–5674, 1992.
[30] P. Praamstra, L. Boutsen, and G. W. Humphreys, “Frontoparietal control
of spatial attention and motor intention in human EEG,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 764–774, 2005.
[31] J. Liepert, C. Dettmers, C. Terborg, and C. Weiller, “Inhibition of ipsilateral motor cortex during phasic generation of low force,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 114–121, 2001.
[32] C. Danielmeier, T. Eichele, B. U. Forstmann, M. Tittgemeyer, and
M. Ullsperger, “Posterior medial frontal cortex activity predicts post-error
adaptations in task-related visual and motor areas,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31,
no. 5, pp. 1780–1789, 2011.
[33] P. Brown, “Abnormal oscillatory synchronisation in the motor system
leads to impaired movement,” Current Opinion Neurobiol., vol. 17, no. 6,
pp. 656–664, 2007.
[34] E. Florin, R. Erasmi, C. Reck, M. Maarouf, A. Schnitzler, G. R. Fink,
and L. Timmermann, “Does increased gamma activity in patients suffering from Parkinson’s disease counteract the movement inhibiting beta
activity?,” Neurosci., vol. 237, pp. 42–50, 2013.
[35] N. Jenkinson and P. Brown, “New insights into the relationship between
dopamine, beta oscillations and motor function,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 34,
no. 12, pp. 611–618, 2011.
[36] R. Scheeringa, M. Bastiaansen, K. Petersson, R. Oostenveld, D. G. Norris,
and P. Hagoort, “Frontal theta EEG activity correlates negatively with the
default mode network in resting state,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 67,
no. 3, pp. 242–251, 2008.
[37] S. J. Palmer, J. Li, Z. J. Wang, and M. J. McKeown, “Joint amplitude and
connectivity compensatory mechanisms in Parkinson’s disease,” Neuroscience, vol. 166, no. 4, pp. 1110–1118, 2010.
[38] T. van Eimeren, O. Monchi, B. Ballanger, and A. P. Strafella, “Dysfunction
of the default mode network in Parkinson disease: a functional magnetic
resonance imaging study,” Arch. Neurol., vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 877–883,
2009.
[39] S. P. Pantazatos, T. K. Yanagihara, X. Zhang, T. Meitzler, and J. Hirsch,
“Frontal occipital connectivity during visual search,” Brain Connectivity,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 164–175, 2012.
[40] G. Jocham, T. A. Klein, and M. Ullsperger, “Dopamine-mediated reinforcement learning signals in the striatum and ventromedial prefrontal
cortex underlie value-based choices,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1606–
1613, 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

