IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

2659

A Head Impact Detection System Using SVM
Classification and Proximity Sensing
in an Instrumented Mouthguard
Lyndia C. Wu, Livia Zarnescu, Vaibhav Nangia, Bruce Cam, and David B. Camarillo∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Injury from blunt head impacts causes acute neurological deficits and may lead to chronic neurodegeneration. A
head impact detection device can serve both as a research tool
for studying head injury mechanisms and a clinical tool for realtime trauma screening. The simplest approach is an acceleration
thresholding algorithm, which may falsely detect high-acceleration
spurious events such as manual manipulation of the device. We
designed a head impact detection system that distinguishes head
impacts from nonimpacts through two subsystems. First, we use
infrared proximity sensing to determine if the mouthguard is worn
on the teeth to filter out all off-teeth events. Second, on-teeth, nonimpact events are rejected using a support vector machine classifier trained on frequency domain features of linear acceleration
and rotational velocity. The remaining events are classified as head
impacts. In a controlled laboratory evaluation, the present system
performed substantially better than a 10-g acceleration threshold
in head impact detection (98% sensitivity, 99.99% specificity, 99%
accuracy, and 99.98% precision, compared to 92% sensitivity, 58%
specificity, 65% accuracy, and 37% precision). Once adapted for
field deployment by training and validation with field data, this system has the potential to effectively detect head trauma in sports,
military service, and other high-risk activities.
Index Terms—Impact detection, infrared proximity sensing,
support vector machines (SVMs), traumatic brain injury.

I. INTRODUCTION
LUNT head impacts in sports, military service, and other
activities can cause traumatic brain injury [1]–[4]. Repeated trauma is shown to increase the likelihood of subsequent
injury [5] and lead to chronic neurodegeneration [6]–[8]. To
prevent repeat injury, legislative efforts such as the Lystedt Law
require youth athletes be removed from play if suspected of
sustaining head trauma [9]. However, such legislations cannot
be fully enforced due to injury underreporting in sports [10].
A more objective method of injury screening may be head im-

B

Manuscript received December 19, 2013; revised April 15, 2014; accepted
April 16, 2014. Date of publication April 25, 2014; date of current version
October 16, 2014. Date of publication; date of current version. This work
was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Institute
of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) 3R21EB01761101S1 and
David and Lucile Packard Foundation 38454. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
L. C. Wu and L. Zarnescu are with the Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail: lyndiacw@stanford.edu;
liviaz@stanford.edu).
V. Nangia and B. Cam are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail: vnangia@stanford.edu;
bcam@stanford.edu).
∗ D. B. Camarillo is with the Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail: dcamarillo@stanford.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2320153

pact monitoring. Previous research found statistically significant
correlation between the number of head impacts and the resulting neurophysiological deficit [11]. In football players, a greater
number of head impacts with high impact kinematics were more
likely to lead to concussions [12]. Furthermore, repeated subconcussive impacts have also been associated with blood-brain
barrier disruption and diffusion tensor imaging changes, indicating elevated risks for cognitive deficits [13]. Thus, technologies
for detecting and recording head impacts may not only serve as
research tools to help investigate head injury mechanisms, but
also as clinical tools for on-field injury screening.
The head impact telemetry (HIT) system [14]–[16], which
achieves inertial sensing through helmet-embedded accelerometers, has been used to record and characterize head impact
kinematics in youth and collegiate populations across multiple
sports [17]–[20]. Injury tolerance findings based on HIT system
data [21], [22] confirm the potential of such head impact measurement technology to be used for injury prediction. However,
helmet-mounted sensing systems such as the HIT system may
dislocate from the head in some impact conditions, causing measurement error [23]. In addition, impact detection performance
of these systems has not been reported. As a low-cost alternative,
instrumented mouthguards [24] are well suited for head impact
detection since they can be custom-fit to tightly couple to the
upper jaw and directly measure skull kinematics. In this paper,
we present the design and evaluate the performance of a head
impact detection system that uses an instrumented mouthguard.
A first-order simple impact detection algorithm is to record all
events above a predefined linear acceleration threshold. However, this approach may falsely detect many spurious highacceleration nonimpact events (see Fig. 1). For example, some
nonimpacts could be generated by manual manipulation of the
device, and some could come from device placement or removal. These misclassified events will skew conclusions when
studying head injury mechanisms and raise false positives when
screening for head trauma. In a head impact detection system,
we want most head impacts detected (high sensitivity) with few
nonimpact false positive events (high precision). Due to frequent incidence of nonimpact events from normal motions on
the field, using a linear acceleration threshold will likely detect a
large number of false positives and have poor precision in head
impact detection. Increasing the acceleration threshold could
help improve precision but will sacrifice sensitivity.
We need to better distinguish between nonimpact events
and head impacts for improved sensitivity and precision in head
impact detection. Since the mouthguard only measures head

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. Head impacts and nonimpact events registered by the instrumented
mouthguard. On the field, both head impacts (left column) and nonimpact events
involving spurious mouthguard activities (center and right columns) may trigger
event registration on an instrumented mouthguard. Some nonimpact events are
generated when the mouthguard is not worn on the teeth (center column) and
some when it is worn (right column).

motion when coupled to the teeth, events where the mouthguard
is not worn should be rejected. When the mouthguard is worn,
differences in dynamic signature may be used to distinguish
between head impacts and nonimpact events. With these design considerations, we hypothesize that a classification system
combining mouthguard proximity detection and signal classification will have better sensitivity and precision in head impact
detection compared to simple acceleration thresholding.
II. METHODS
Our head impact detection system distinguishes head impacts from nonimpacts through two classification subsystems
[see Fig. 2(a)]. First, we use infrared (IR) proximity sensing to
determine if the mouthguard is worn on the teeth. All off-teeth
events are filtered out at this step. Second, on-teeth, nonimpact
events are rejected using a support vector machine (SVM) classifier trained on frequency-domain features of linear acceleration
and rotational velocity. The remaining events are classified as
head impacts.
A. Instrument Design
Signals used in the classification system are collected using
an instrumented mouthguard [see Fig. 2(b), left]. A tight fit
is achieved by forming ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) material
around a dental mold with a mouthguard pressure former (Great
Lakes Orthodontics, Tonawanda, NY, USA). Each mouthguard
contains a sensor board and a battery sealed between two layers
of EVA material. For kinematic and proximity sensing, the sensor board [see Fig. 2(b), right] is equipped with a three-axis high
range accelerometer (ST H3LIS331), a three-axis high range gyroscope (Invensense ITG-3500A), and a digital proximity sensing module packaged with an infrared emitter–receiver pair for
near-field proximity sensing (AMS TMD2771). In addition, a
microprocessor (ST STM32L151) and a flash memory chip (ST
M25P16) allow wireless processing and recording. Kinematic
accuracy of this instrumented mouthguard has been validated in
lab using an anthropomorphic test device [24].

Fig. 2. Impact detection system illustration and instrumented mouthguard
design. The head impact detection system contains two subsystems (A). First
the proximity signal is used to filter out events where the mouthguard is not
worn on the teeth. The remaining events are passed through the support vector
machine (SVM) classifier trained to distinguish between head impacts and nonimpacts. Proximity and kinematic signals are measured using an instrumented
mouthguard (B).

To screen for potential head impacts, the mouthguard records
all events with linear acceleration exceeding 7 g. This triggering acceleration threshold is tuned to be lower than published
systems with 10–15 g thresholds [25], [26] to decrease the likelihood of missing events of interest. Linear acceleration and rotational velocity samples are obtained for 10 ms pretrigger and
90 ms posttrigger, with accelerometer sampling rate of 900–
1000 Hz and gyroscope sampling rate of 800–900 Hz. A 10-bit
resolution IR reading is obtained at the end of the 100-ms kinematic recording for each registered event.
B. IR Proximity Sensing and SVM Classifier Design
Signals collected by the proximity and kinematic sensors are
used as inputs to the two classification subsystems. To optimize
the system for head impact detection, we designed and trained
each subsystem in a controlled laboratory setting.
1) Proximity Sensing Optimized to Detect Mouthguard
Dislocation: Optical and capacitive proximity sensors have
been widely employed to sense relative positioning of objects
such as mobile phones and the user’s hand [27] or robots and

WU et al.: HEAD IMPACT DETECTION SYSTEM USING SVM CLASSIFICATION AND PROXIMITY SENSING

2661

TABLE I
TYPES AND NUMBERS OF LAB-RECONSTRUCTED EVENTS

Fig. 3. In vitro proximity characterization. The proximity output versus distance relationship was characterized in two dimensions: movement of the sensor
in (A) the buccal direction and that in (B) the occlusal direction.

obstacles [28]. For our impact detection system, we tuned an IR
proximity sensor to help reject off-teeth nonimpact events.
With the IR proximity module configured for near-field detection, we characterized in vitro sensing behavior by unittesting a sensor component. We used a synthetic-resin composite tooth model that has matching optical properties as human
teeth (Puche Dental Lab, Torrance, CA, USA). Since a mouthguard can move perpendicular or parallel to the tooth surface,
we measured sensor output in one perpendicular direction and
one parallel direction: away from the tooth surface (buccal) and
toward the bite plane (occlusal). To simulate 1-D motion of the
sensor in each direction, we attached the sensor to a linear actuator (Firgelli Technologies L12-50-100-12-P) to move away from
a stationary tooth in steps of 0.5 mm (see Fig. 3). Movement
in the buccal direction was measured from the surface of the
tooth to the surface of the sensor, and movement in the occlusal
direction was from the bottom of the tooth to the bottom of the
sensor package. To investigate effects of EVA material, we varied material thickness between the sensor and the mouthguard
from 0 to 3 mm. Based on sensor response characteristics, we
chose the sensor position and material thickness that allowed the
embedded proximity sensor to detect mouthguard dislocation.
After unit-testing the sensor component, we built a full mouthguard to characterize in vivo sensing behavior and determine an
on-teeth/off-teeth threshold. A human subject performed a range
of on-teeth and off-teeth events with a mouthguard. On-teeth
events included talking, shouting, biting, and chewing; off-teeth
events included mouthguard manual manipulation, dropping,
and helmet insertion. The proximity readings from on-teeth and
off-teeth events were each fit to a normal distribution. From these
distributions, a proximity threshold was chosen to maximize the
likelihood of detecting all on-teeth events while rejecting all offteeth events.
The chosen on-teeth/off-teeth proximity threshold was verified by measuring the corresponding amount of in vivo mouthguard dislocation. In this experiment, the subject was asked to
put on and take off the mouthguard while mouthguard movement
was tracked using the Ascension 3-D guidance trakSTAR system (Ascension Technology Corporation, Shelburne, VT, USA).
We used two small six degree-of-freedom electromagnetic sensors with one sensor fixed on the mouthguard and the other on
the subject’s head. The change in distance between these two
markers was tracked and recorded as the mouthguard dislocation
distance. Proximity readings were obtained continuously during
mouthguard movement and time-synchronized with the tracked

Event Class

Description

Number Simulated

Event Number

Head Impact

Front
Front Boss
Rear Boss
Rear
Front Face Guard

16
32
32
32
16
128
84

—
—
—
—
—

169

85–253

136

254–389

136

390–525

84

526–609

89

610–698

72
770

699–770

Total
Spurious
Nonimpact
Event

Total

Manual manipulation
(out-of-mouth) or
striking mouthguard
against object
Off-teeth biting or
chewing
Dropping mouthguard on
the ground
Inserting mouthguard
into helmet
Putting on/taking off
mouthguard
On-teeth biting or
chewing
Shouting, talking, suction

1–84

distances. To control for error, we conducted the experiment in a
metal-free environment and characterized the Ascension system
to have approximately 1-mm offset error in our measurement
range (less than previously reported [29]), which we accounted
for in all distance measurements.
2) SVM Classifier Trained to Reject Nonimpacts: The SVM
method is a well-established statistical pattern recognition
method [30]. SVM classifiers have been shown to be effective at
recognizing human motion [31]–[34]. We trained an SVM classifier with frequency-domain features of linear and rotational
motion to help distinguish between head impacts and nonimpact events.
For training the SVM classifier and evaluating overall system
performance, a labeled dataset containing both head impacts
and nonimpact events simulating field conditions was obtained.
Head impacts were reconstructed using a spring-driven impactor
and a dummy headform mounted on a flexible Hybrid III neck
(Humanetics Innovative Solutions, Plymouth, MI, USA), which
was anchored at the base of the neck [see Fig. 4(a)]. The impactor
piston head was made of ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene, with a diameter of 127 mm and a radius-of-curvature of
72 mm. Impacts at five different orientations and eight velocities
ranging from 2.1–8.5 m/s were reconstructed [24] (see Table I).
An instrumented mouthguard firmly clamped onto the upper jaw
of the headform recorded the reconstructed head impacts. For
nonimpact reconstruction [see Fig. 4(b)], we observed videos of
multiple football practices and a game to identify a comprehensive set of nonimpact sources (see Table I). Two subjects wore
instrumented mouthguards and simulated all types of nonimpacts.
The lab-reconstructed events were partitioned into a training
portion for training the SVM classifier, and a testing portion to
evaluate overall system performance. Raw data included x, y, z
linear acceleration and rotational velocity. From these data, we
extracted frequency-domain features rather than time domain
features, since impact and nonimpact events were expected to

2662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

x, y, and z were interpolated to a common frequency vector due
to different sampling rates in different chips. The common frequency vector contained 100 frequencies evenly spaced between
15 and 400 Hz for linear acceleration and 50 frequencies evenly
spaced between 15 and 180 Hz for rotational velocity. PSD
magnitudes were concatenated into a 150-element preliminary
feature vector containing both linear acceleration and rotational
velocity PSD magnitude vectors for each event [see Fig. 4(c),
bottom].
From the preliminary feature vector, a subset of features
that optimized classifier performance was chosen. First, features were selected to minimize misclassification of events in
the training data. Feature selection was performed using information from training data only to avoid bias. The Pearson
correlation coefficients between all 150 features in the preliminary feature vector and the class labels (impact or nonimpact)
were calculated for events in training data [35]. Features were
selected in a sequential process, starting with those that have
high correlation to the class labels but low correlation to other
already selected features. This selected subset of features was
used to train an SVM classifier with a radial basis function
kernel. In order to find the best SVM decision boundary, the
“patternsearch” function in the MATLAB optimization toolbox
was used to minimize the misclassification rate within the training data. A decision boundary was chosen to have sensitivity
>95% and also to maximize the F-measure (harmonic mean of
sensitivity and precision) [36].
C. System Evaluation

Fig. 4. Impact and nonimpact data acquisition and processing. Impacts were
simulated with a spring-driven impactor (A) and nonimpact events were simulated with human subjects (B). In (C), we illustrate the kinematic data processing
method. From the raw data, the power spectral density (PSD) magnitude was
used to construct a 150-element-long preliminary feature vector for each event.
The sample traces shown are from an impact event.

involve orders-of-magnitude differences in colliding masses and
therefore different dynamics. Thus, we computed power spectral density (PSD) features from the raw kinematic data [see
Fig. 4(c)]. PSD magnitudes of the signals were calculated between 15 and 400 Hz. A total of 15 Hz was the minimum
frequency chosen due to the limited time window for data sampling, and 400 Hz was the maximum since it was below the
Nyquist frequency for all raw data vectors. The accelerometer
chip has a bandwidth of 500 Hz, which encompasses the full
PSD range. For the gyroscope chip, the bandwidth is 184 Hz for
the chosen sampling rate, and PSD above this frequency was
discarded.
All of the PSD information was combined into a single preliminary feature vector for SVM training. The PSD vectors in

We evaluated the performance of the combined classification
system on a testing partition of lab-reconstructed data. In order to
measure system performance, we used our classification system
to classify events in the testing data as either impacts or nonimpacts, and compared our predictions to a priori labeled ground
truth information. First, events in the testing data with proximity readings below the on-teeth/off-teeth proximity threshold
were rejected as off-teeth nonimpact events, while events with
proximity readings above the threshold remained unclassified
as potential impacts. The same features used for SVM training
were then extracted from the unclassified events, and classified
using the SVM decision boundary determined during training.
After classification, the numbers of true positives (TP), false
positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and false negatives (FN)
were calculated. We computed sensitivity, precision, specificity,
and accuracy as the classification performance measures, which
are defined below:
TP
TP + FN
TP
precision =
TP + FP
TN
specificity =
TN + FP
TP + TN
accuracy =
.
TP + FP + TN + FN
sensitivity =

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

WU et al.: HEAD IMPACT DETECTION SYSTEM USING SVM CLASSIFICATION AND PROXIMITY SENSING

The main measures used to evaluate system performance were
sensitivity and precision. Sensitivity is important since the impact detection system should not reject head impact events. Precision is also an important factor since we do not want to classify
nonimpact events as head impacts and detect a large number of
false positives. In fact, precision is preferred over specificity as
a performance measure, since we expect a large number of true
negatives on the field, which can give high specificity even with
a substantial amount of false positives. Furthermore, since sensitivity and precision vary based on decision threshold, the area
under the ROC curve was also used as a measure of classifier
performance [37], [38].
Because there is variability in data partitioning, we conducted
100 Monte Carlo simulations [39] of 5-fold cross validation [40]
to obtain an unbiased estimate of our classification system’s
average performance. At the beginning of each cross-validation
cycle, the set of all impact and nonimpact events was randomly
partitioned into five approximately equal portions. For each
pass of the cross validation, four portions were used to perform
feature selection and SVM classifier training, and the remaining
portion was used to evaluate classification performance. The
sensitivity, precision, specificity, accuracy, and area under the
ROC curve were recorded for each pass of the cross validation
and averaged at the end of all simulations to estimate the true
performance of the classification system.
To compare our system with simple acceleration thresholding and verify how each classification subsystem helped, we
evaluated the performance of four classification methods.
1) Peak linear acceleration thresholding. In this classification
method, all events with peak linear acceleration magnitude
greater than a predetermined threshold (10 g) are classified
as impacts.
2) Peak linear acceleration thresholding (10 g) with the proximity classification subsystem, to show value of proximity
sensing.
3) Classification using an SVM classifier only, to demonstrate its standalone performance.
4) Combined SVM and proximity classification to show
overall performance.
All human subject experiments have been approved by the
Stanford Institutional Review Board (IRB 21304), and informed
consent was obtained from the subjects.
III. RESULTS
A. IR Proximity Sensing and SVM Classifier Design
1) Sensor Positioning in Mouthguard and On-Teeth
Threshold Choice: In vitro IR proximity sensor output monotonically decreases with increasing buccal or occlusal movement
from a tooth (see Fig. 5). Thus, by embedding a sensor in the
mouthguard to face the teeth, we can use the IR signal drop
to detect mouthguard dislocation. The transparent mouthguard
material thickness between sensor and teeth was chosen to be 2
mm, since thicker material led to increased signal backscattering and much higher output at large displacements (see Fig. 5,
yellow). Also, for teeth protection, we did not choose material
thinner than 2 mm to maintain sufficient overall mouthguard
thickness with two layers of material [41].

2663

Fig. 5. In vitro proximity sensor characterization. Proximity output with respect to (A) buccal movement of the sensor and (B) occlusal movement of the
sensor are shown with different thicknesses of EVA medium material. Three
trials were performed for each material thickness and error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Pressure-forming led to thinning of EVA material and post-form
thicknesses are displayed in brackets. We chose 2 mm as the optimal material
thickness to maximize output range and provide sufficient thickness for teeth
protection. Sensor position inside the mouthguard was optimized to account for
the saturation bands.

Even when configured with the lowest available emitter signal
strength for near-field sensing, the sensor saturated at close proximity to a tooth in both the occlusal and buccal directions (see
Fig. 5, saturation bands). In these saturation regions, changes
in displacement are not detected by the sensor. With the chosen
2-mm material thickness, we cannot fully avoid the 6-mm saturation band in the buccal direction [see Fig. 5(a)]. However,
we can avoid the 1-mm occlusal saturation band [see Fig. 5(b)]
by offsetting the edge of the sensor package 1 mm below the
edge of the tooth, so any movement in the occlusal direction
should cause a drop in proximity output. All mouthguards used
in subsequent in vivo experiments were constructed with the
2-mm material thickness and 1-mm offset in sensor position.
Fig. 6 shows in vivo experimental results to determine and
verify an on-teeth/off-teeth threshold. On-teeth and off-teeth
IR proximity output distributions are shown in Fig. 6(a). We
chose a threshold at five standard deviations below the on-teeth
mean (normalized proximity value = 0.81), which corresponds
to a probability of misclassifying 1 in 3 million on-teeth events.
This threshold is also 29 standard deviations above the off-teeth
mean, which maximizes the rejection of off-teeth events. At the
same time, we can reject the majority of events that may have IR
output between the on-teeth and off-teeth distributions, such as

2664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. In vivo proximity sensor characterization. On-teeth and off-teeth proximity output values are fit to normal distributions (A). We chose a threshold of
0.81 to maximize rejection of off-teeth and transition events while minimizing
the misclassification of on-teeth events. Proximity output with respect to mouthguard distance off-teeth (B) was used to verify the threshold. The plot displays
average output from 5 take-off and 5 put-on trials, with error bars showing
standard deviation in distances corresponding to each proximity value.

transition events during which the mouthguard is put on or taken
off the teeth. The average in vivo mouthguard off-teeth distance
corresponding to the chosen threshold is 3.7 mm ± 2.2 mm
standard deviation [see Fig. 6(b)]. The standard deviation may
have resulted from slightly different 3-D mouthguard trajectories in each trial. Considering that maxillary (upper) teeth are
5–10 mm tall [42], this off-teeth distance is less than a tooth
length.
1) SVM Feature Selection: Features were ranked using our
sequential feature selection process, with the top features having
high correlations to the class labels and low correlations to one
another. The optimal number of features was chosen by monitoring classification performance while varying the number of
features used [see Fig. 7(a)]. We chose an optimal set of eight
features (see Table II) to minimize false positive rate, although
anywhere from 6–11 features produced nearly the same result.
Feature values had log-normal distributions, with median and
interquartile range (IQR) shown in Table II. The highest ranked
features had very different values between impacts and nonimpacts, while lower rank features had more overlap [see Fig. 7(b)].
On average, impacts had much higher linear acceleration PSD
magnitudes at low frequencies (features 1 and 2) than nonimpacts, with very little overlap between the interquartile ranges.

Fig. 7. Feature selection for optimal classification performance. (A) Optimal
number of features was chosen to minimize the number of false positives.
The exact features chosen are listed in Table II. (B) Shows feature values of
the optimal set of eight features ordered by feature rank. The lines display the
median value for each feature, and the error bars represent the upper and lower
quartiles. The y-axis is shown in log scale because values have approximately
log-normal distributions.

TABLE II
OPTIMAL FEATURE SET FOR CLASSIFICATION
Data Type

Frequency
(Hz)

Feature
Rank

Median Value,
Impacts (IQR)

Median Value,
Nonimpacts (IQR)

Linear
Acceleration

15
50
132
190
302
345
15
58

1
2
7
8
6
5
3
4

4.75 (3.15)
2.33 (2.00)
0.79 (0.69)
0.61 (0.83)
0.57 (0.67)
0.58 (0.61)
3.95 (2.90)
0.58 (0.34)

0.67 (0.91)
0.78 (1.10)
0.58 (0.90)
0.50 (0.76)
0.40 (0.69)
0.37 (0.65)
2.11 (2.76)
0.85 (1.19)

Rotational
Velocity

Similar trends were observed in rotational velocity features at
low frequencies (features 3 and 4). Although there is very little
difference between the linear acceleration PSD magnitudes of
impacts and nonimpacts at high frequencies (features 5–8), the
slight differences in feature values further helped to distinguish
between the two types of events. Over the 100 Monte Carlo

WU et al.: HEAD IMPACT DETECTION SYSTEM USING SVM CLASSIFICATION AND PROXIMITY SENSING

2665

these on-teeth nonimpact and transition events. In fact, SVM
had good standalone performance that was much improved over
thresholding (see Table III). However, SVM alone misclassified
off-teeth events such as inserting the mouthguard into a helmet
or dropping the mouthguard. Therefore, combining the two
classification subsystems maximized the rejection of nonimpact
events by allowing the strength of each subsystem to overcome
the weakness of the other. The combined system misclassified
only a few high-acceleration on-teeth biting and chewing events.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 8. Misclassified events. The distribution of misclassified events is displayed by category to illustrate the effectiveness of each type of classifier. Simple
acceleration thresholding misclassified many more events in all categories than
other classifiers. The IR proximity subsystem rejected all off-teeth events, and
the SVM classifier rejected the majority of on-teeth events and transition events.
The combined classifier occasionally misclassified on-teeth biting events.

Although some design details of impact detection algorithms
have been presented in patents [43], performance of these algorithms has not been reported. Our paper is the first to present
a complete head impact detection system design and its evaluation. In a controlled laboratory setting, the present system
demonstrated substantially improved performance over acceleration thresholding. The greatest amount of improvement was
in classification precision, which increased from 37% to near
100% (see Table III), due to a much lower number of false positive events. The proximity subsystem helped eliminate off-teeth
false positives, while the SVM subsystem rejected the majority
of on-teeth false positives.
A. IR Proximity Sensing

simulations with 5-fold cross validation, we found feature selection to be fairly consistent. The features presented in Table II
were chosen 90% of the time, and any feature variations stayed
within a few hertz of these values.
B. System Performance
In our laboratory evaluation of classifiers, 10 g linear acceleration thresholding had 92% sensitivity, with poor precision
(37%), specificity (58%), and accuracy (65%) (see Table III),
since a large number of nonimpacts were misclassified as impacts. Adding IR proximity to linear acceleration thresholding
resulted in substantially improved performance. Sensitivity remained the same (92%), but precision was much higher (92%),
because this classifier could reject off-teeth nonimpacts. SVM
classification alone also performed much better than the 10-g
linear acceleration threshold, at 98% sensitivity and 97% precision. Combining SVM with proximity improved the classification performance to 98% sensitivity and 99.98% precision. If
the sensitivity was lowered to 96%, no nonimpact events were
misclassified.
The distribution of misclassified events pooled over 100
Monte Carlo simulations is shown in Fig. 8. Simple acceleration thresholding had more misclassifications than others, with
false positives relatively evenly distributed across all types of
nonimpact events. The IR proximity subsystem successfully
rejected all off-teeth nonimpacts. But this subsystem was not
designed to recognize on-teeth nonimpacts. It also had trouble
with some transition events, since IR was only sampled once
per event, which did not capture the full duration of the event.
Adding the SVM subsystem helped to reject the majority of

The unique IR scattering and reflective properties of human
teeth allow the use of IR proximity sensing to detect mouthguard
dislocation. IR sensing of a regular opaque surface does not have
monotonically decreasing signal with increasing distance. There
is low IR output at close proximity, due to insufficient distance
between the sensor and the surface to allow the emitted IR light
to be reflected/scattered to the detector. On the other hand, human teeth have unique optical properties [44], [45]. Even at
close proximity, IR signal can penetrate through the tissue and
backscatter to the detector. Thus, IR proximity sensing worked
well for detecting the presence of teeth next to the sensor in
the mouthguard tray. We also characterized the effects of EVA,
a biocompatible material safe for oral applications [46], as a
medium material between the sensor and the teeth. We found
that if the material is thin enough, it does not significantly interfere with the IR signal. To extend this technology to other
applications, wearable devices may use IR proximity sensing to
detect device fixation onto tissue, and EVA is a good biocompatible medium material if the sensor cannot sit directly next to
tissue.
B. SVM Signal Classification
SVM training revealed that low frequency components (15–
60 Hz) were the most helpful in classification (see Table II).
Most of the impacts had significantly higher PSD magnitudes
than nonimpacts at these low frequencies [see Fig. 7(b)]. During
impacts, the mouthguard was tightly coupled to a helmeted head
mounted on a flexible neck [24]. During nonimpacts, however,
the mouthguard was mainly moving on its own and interacting with stiffer objects (e.g., helmet/ground). If we approximate

2666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE III
EVALUATION OF HEAD IMPACT CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

Sensitivity
Precision
Specificity
Accuracy
Area Under ROC

10 g Threshold Only

10 g Threshold + Proximity

SVM Alone

SVM + Proximity

0.92
0.37
0.58
0.65
0.780 (0.031)

0.92
0.93
0.96
0.94
0.979 (0.005)

0.98
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.998 (0.001)

0.98
0.9998
0.9999
0.99
1 (0.000)

the events using a simple spring-mass system,
 the natural frequency of the system is proportional to k/m, where k is
stiffness and m is mass. With much higher masses of colliding
objects and lower stiffness of a flexible neck, the head impacts
are expected to have lower natural frequency than nonimpacts,
which may explain the PSD magnitude differences at low frequencies. In fact, we were limited by our data sampling time
window (100 ms) to obtain even lower frequency information,
which may help further improve classifier performance. One
other difference between the two classes of events is that nonimpacts generally had lower PSD magnitudes than impacts at
all frequencies, since a mouthguard moving on its own resulted
in lower signal power than a spring-driven piston impacting a
dummy headform. These differences in PSD shapes may have
allowed the SVM classifier to distinguish between most impacts
and nonimpacts.
Some of the nonimpacts misclassified by SVM alone, such as
dropping the mouthguard, had large linear acceleration and rotational velocity, with high PSD magnitudes at both low and high
frequencies. In contrast to these false positives, we did not see
high PSD at low frequencies for most dropping events that were
correctly classified. This difference in dynamics may arise from
different orientations of the device as it hit the ground, if mouthguard stiffness is directionally dependent. Furthermore, the
dynamics may depend on the sensor location relative to the contact location. In addition to the off-teeth false positives, on-teeth
biting and chewing events misclassified by the combined system
also had high PSD magnitudes across the entire frequency spectrum. The low-frequency components in these events may have
come from chewing or grinding of the mouthguard away from
the sensor location. In summary, the misclassified nonimpacts
may have PSD features more similar to head impacts than nonimpacts with low signal power. Fortunately, with the combined
system, off-teeth nonimpacts are reliably rejected by proximity
sensing, and on-teeth nonimpacts with high signal power are
rare due to the limited range of on-teeth motion.

C. Limitations and Future Work
Since we reconstructed impacts and nonimpacts in a controlled laboratory setting, this dataset does not contain a comprehensive set of field conditions. Impact and nonimpact features
may have greater variability on the field, and the laboratoryoptimized classifier will likely have decreased performance in
classifying field data. Thus, it may be necessary to train and
optimize the system using field data prior to field deployment.

On the field, we may expect more varied impact dynamics
than our lab reconstruction. Due to limitations of the springloaded impactor, we could not reconstruct noncentroidal impacts, whiplash of the head and neck, or initial rotation prior
to impact. Also, the lowest impact velocity in our reconstruction was 2.1 m/s, while a substantial portion of field impacts
could have lower velocity [47]. Another variable is that the
mouthguards may not be rigidly attached on the teeth during
head impacts on the field, while our lab reconstruction had the
mouthguard firmly clamped. This could be investigated by using IR proximity sensing to confirm mouthguard fixation on
the field. These limitations in impact reconstruction could lead
to simplified dynamics in our laboratory dataset, and result in
changes in selected features if the system was trained on field
data. In the reconstructed head impacts, we saw dominant lowfrequency modes. Although similar low-frequency components
were observed in preliminary field data, additional field data are
required to isolate dominant human head impact modes from
any noise in the laboratory impactor-headform system (e.g., due
to the dynamics of the Hybrid III neck or the shape and material
of the impactor piston head.)
In addition to variations in impact dynamics, there may be
more nonimpacts on the field depending on the specific subject
or field conditions, in which case classification precision may
decrease with the current decision boundary. To optimize for
precision, we can adjust the decision boundary according to the
relative weighting of events when training with field data. Also,
it is likely that certain players may generate a much greater
number of off-teeth nonimpact events on the field. So even
though the IR proximity subsystem did not significantly improve
precision from SVM alone in our lab evaluation (from 0.97 to
1, Table III), it will be essential on the field to ensure high
precision.
For field deployment, we may optimize for either sensitivity
or precision by adjusting the decision boundary of our classification subsystems. A system with perfect sensitivity does
not miss any head impacts, which is ideal for clinical use as a
trauma screening device. For head injury mechanism research,
classification precision may be more important, since we need
to correlate head kinematics with cognitive function changes,
and false positive events could lead to erroneous conclusions.
Considering that the present system already demonstrates high
sensitivity and precision, we can aim to optimize for sensitivity, sacrifice some precision, and reject the remaining false
positives by verifying events through video. In practice, poor
precision of the acceleration thresholding algorithm leads to a
large number of false positives. In order to extract head impacts,

WU et al.: HEAD IMPACT DETECTION SYSTEM USING SVM CLASSIFICATION AND PROXIMITY SENSING

recorded events need to be manually verified by reviewing game
or practice videos, such as what was done in a study by Daniel
et al. [17]. Although video verification ensures fidelity of data
by substantially enhancing accuracy, it is a lengthy and tedious
task given a large number of subjects and data collection events.
Our system has the potential to eliminate the need for video
verification once adapted for the field.
Future field adaptation and deployment of the head impact
detection system is aided by the simplicity of the design. Implementing the IR proximity subsystem only required the addition of a small low-power IR proximity sensing module to
existing hardware, and reliable rejection of off-teeth events was
achieved by applying a predefined threshold on one IR sample
per recorded event. The SVM classifier, once trained on field
data to obtain a suitable decision boundary, will be computationally inexpensive to apply since it only involves dot-product
operations [30] on the PSD features, which can also be efficiently computed [48]. Therefore, both classification subsystems are readily built into data postprocessing algorithms or
incorporated into the current embedded system for real-time
classification.
V. CONCLUSION
In a controlled laboratory setting, a novel head impact detection system had substantially improved performance over
acceleration thresholding. IR proximity sensing helped to reliably reject events where the device was not fixated to the teeth,
and SVM classification helped reject most of the remaining
nonimpact events. Since more complex impact and nonimpact
conditions are expected on the field, we anticipate the necessity to train and validate the system using field data to optimize
field performance. Once adapted for field deployment, this system has the potential to more sensitively and precisely capture
head impacts for blunt head injury research. It also has clinical
potential to be incorporated into on-field screening devices for
real-time identification of head trauma.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Stanford Department of
Athletics for their support in this research. A patent application
has been filed for the technology described in this paper and will
be assigned to Stanford University [49]. Royalties gained from
any intellectual property granted for this work will be shared
among the inventors, the department, and the school, according
to Stanford’s technology licensing policies.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ommaya, L. Thibault, and F. A. Bandak, “Mechanisms of impact head
injury,” Int. J. Impact Eng., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 535–560, 1994.
[2] J. P. Kelly, “Concussion in sports: Guidelines for the prevention of catastrophic outcome,” J. Amer. Med. Assoc., vol. 266, no. 20, p. 2867,
Nov. 1991.
[3] B. D. Jordan, “Acute and chronic brain injury in United States national
team soccer players,” Amer. J. Sport Med., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 704–705,
1996.
[4] C. W. Hoge, D. McGurk, J. L. Thomas, A. L. Cox, C. C. Engel, and C. A.
Castro, “Mild traumatic brain injury in U.S. soldiers returning from Iraq,”
New Engl. J. Med., vol. 358, no. 5, pp. 453–463, 2008.

2667

[5] S. Abrahams, S. Mc Fie, J. Patricios, M. Posthumus, and A. V. September, “Risk factors for sports concussion: An evidence-based systematic
review,” Brit. J. Sport Med., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 91–97, 2014.
[6] S. T. DeKosky, K. Blennow, M. D. Ikonomovic, and S. Gandy, “Acute
and chronic traumatic encephalopathies: Pathogenesis and biomarkers,”
Nat. Rev. Neurol., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 192–200, Apr. 2013.
[7] C. M. Baugh, J. M. Stamm, D. O. Riley, B. E. Gavett, M. E. Shenton,
A. Lin, C. J. Nowinski, R. C. Cantu, A. C. McKee, and R. A. Stern,
“Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: Neurodegeneration following repetitive concussive and subconcussive brain trauma,” Brain Imag. Behav.,
vol. 6, pp. 244–254, May. 2012.
[8] K. M. Guskiewicz, M. McCrea, S. W. Marshall, R. C. Cantu, C. Randolph,
W. Barr, J. A. Onate, and J. P. Kelly, “Cumulative effects associated with
recurrent concussion in collegiate football players: The NCAA Concussion Study.” J. Amer. Med. Assoc., vol. 290, no. 19, pp. 2549–2555,
Nov. 2003.
[9] Revised Code of Washington 28A.600.190, “Youth sports, concussion and
head injury guidelines, injured athlete restrictions (Zackery Lystedt law),”
2009.
[10] I. J. S. Williamson and D. Goodman, “Converging evidence for the underreporting of concussions in youth ice hockey,” Brit. J. Sport Med., vol. 40,
no. 2, pp. 128–132, Feb. 2006.
[11] E. L. Breedlove, M. Robinson, T. M. Talavage, K. E. Morigaki, U. Yoruk,
K. O’Keefe, J. King, L. J. Leverenz, J. W. Gilger, and E. A. Nauman,
“Biomechanical correlates of symptomatic and asymptomatic neurophysiological impairment in high school football,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, pp.
1–8, Feb. 2012.
[12] J. G. Beckwith, R. M. Greenwald, J. J. Chu, J. J. Crisco,
S. Rowson, S. M. Duma, S. P. Broglio, T. W. McAllister, K. M. Guskiewicz,
J. P. Mihalik, S. Anderson, B. Schnebel, P. G. Brolinson, and M. W. Collins,
“Head impact exposure sustained by football players on days of diagnosed
concussion,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 737–746, Apr.
2013.
[13] N. Marchi, J. J. Bazarian, V. Puvenna, M. Janigro, C. Ghosh, J. Zhong,
T. Zhu, E. Blackman, D. Stewart, J. Ellis, R. Butler, and D. Janigro, “Consequences of repeated blood-brain barrier disruption in football players,”
PLOS ONE, vol. 8, no. 3, p. e56805, Mar. 2013.
[14] S. M. Duma, S. J. Manoogian, W. R. Bussone, P. G. Brolinson, M. W.
Goforth, J. J. Donnenwerth, R. M. Greenwald, J. J. Chu, and J. J. Crisco,
“Analysis of real-time head accelerations in collegiate football players,”
Clin. J. Sport Med., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3–8, Jan. 2005.
[15] S. Rowson, J. G. Beckwith, J. J. Chu, D. S. Leonard, R. M. Greenwald, and
S. M. Duma, “A six degree of freedom head acceleration measurement
device for use in football,” J. Appl. Biomech., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 8–14,
Feb. 2011.
[16] M. A. Allison, Y. U. N. S. Kang, J. H. B. Iv, M. R. Maltese, and K. B.
Arbogast, “Validation of a helmet-based system to measure head impact
biomechanics in ice hockey,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., vol. 46, no. 1, pp.
115–123, 2014.
[17] R. W. Daniel, S. Rowson, and S. M. Duma, “Head impact exposure in
youth football,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 976–981, Apr.
2012.
[18] J. J. Crisco, B. J. Wilcox, J. G. Beckwith, J. J. Chu, A.-C. Duhaime,
S. Rowson, S. M. Duma, A. C. Maerlender, T. W. McAllister, and
R. M. Greenwald, “Head impact exposure in collegiate football players.”
J. Biomech., vol. 44, no. 15, pp. 2673–2678, Oct. 2011.
[19] N. Reed, T. Taha, M. Keightley, C. Duggan, J. Cubos, J. Baker, B. Faught,
M. Mcpherson, and W. Montelpare, “Measurement of head impacts in
youth ice hockey players,” Int. J. Sports Med., vol. 31, pp. 826–833, 2010.
[20] J. T. Gwin, J. J. Chu, T. A. McAllister, R. M. Greenwald, R. Greenwald,
A. Ashare, and S. W. Dean, “In situ measures of head impact acceleration
in NCAA Division I Mens Ice Hockey: Implications for ASTM F1045
and other ice hockey helmet standards,” J. ASTM Int., vol. 6, no. 6, pp.
1–10, 2009.
[21] S. Rowson and S. M. Duma, “Brain injury prediction: Assessing the
combined probability of concussion using linear and rotational head acceleration,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 41, pp. 873–882, Jan. 2013.
[22] J. R. Funk, S. Rowson, R. W. Daniel, and S. M. Duma, “Validation of
concussion risk curves for collegiate football players derived from HITS
data,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 79–89, 2012.
[23] R. Jadischke, D. C. Viano, N. Dau, A. I. King, and J. McCarthy, “On
the accuracy of the head impact telemetry (HIT) system used in football
helmets,” J. Biomech., vol. 46, no. 13, pp. 2310–5, Sep. 2013.
[24] D. B. Camarillo, P. B. Shull, J. Mattson, R. Shultz, and D. Garza, “An
instrumented mouthguard for measuring linear and angular head impact

2668

[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

kinematics in American football,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 41, pp. 1939–
1949, Apr. 2013.
S. Rowson, G. Brolinson, M. Goforth, D. Dietter, and S. M. Duma, “Linear and angular head acceleration measurements in collegiate football.”
J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 131, no. 6, pp. 061016-1061016-7, Jun. 2009.
S. Rowson, S. M. Duma, J. G. Beckwith, J. J. Chu, R. M. Greenwald,
J. J. Crisco, P. G. Brolinson, A.-C. Duhaime, T. W. McAllister, and A. C.
Maerlender, “Rotational head kinematics in football impacts: An injury
risk function for concussion,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–13,
Jan. 2012.
K. Hinckley, J. Pierce, M. Sinclair, and E. Horvitz, “Sensing techniques
for mobile interaction,” in Proc. 13th Annu. ACM Symp. User Interface
Softw. Technol., 2000, pp. 91–100.
G. Benet, F. Blanes, J. E. Simó, and P. Pérez, “Using infrared sensors for
distance measurement in mobile robots,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 40, no.
4, pp. 255–266, 2002.
J. B. Hummel, M. R. Bax, M. L. Figl, Y. Kang, C. Maurer, Jr, W. W.
Birkfellner, H. Bergmann, and R. Shahidi, “Design and application of an
assessment protocol for electromagnetic tracking systems,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 32, pp. 2371–2379, 2005.
C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Mach. Learn., vol.
20, no. 3, pp. 273–297, Sep. 1995.
C. Schuldt, I. Laptev, and B. Caputo, “Recognizing human actions: A local
SVM approach,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Pattern Recog., vol. 3, 2004, pp.
32–36.
N. Ravi, N. Dandekar, P. Mysore, and M. L. Littman, “Activity recognition
from accelerometer data,” in Proc. 17th Conf. Innovative Appl. Artif.
Intell., 2005, pp. 1541–1546.
Shuangquan Wang, Jie Yang, Ningjiang Chen, Xin Chen, and Qinfeng
Zhang, “Human activity recognition with user-free accelerometers in the
sensor networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Netw. Brain, vol. 2, 2005, pp.
1212–1217.
Youngwook Kim and Hao Ling, “Human activity classification based on
micro-Doppler signatures using a support vector machine,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 1328–1337, May 2009.
I. Guyon and A. Elisseeff, “An introduction to variable and feature selection,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, pp. 1157–1182, 2003.
T. Fawcett, “ROC graphs: Notes and practical considerations for researchers,” Mach. Learn., vol. 31, pp. 1–38, 2004.
C. E. Metz, “Basic principles of ROC analysis,” vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 283–298,
1978.
T. Fawcett, “An introduction to ROC analysis,” Pattern Recogn. Lett., vol.
27, no. 8, pp. 861–874, Jun. 2006.
Q.-S. Xu and Y.-Z. Liang, “Monte Carlo cross validation,” Chemometr.
Intell. Lab., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2001.
S. Geisser, “The predictive sample reuse method with applications,”
J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., vol. 70, no. 350, pp. 320–328, 1975.
B. Westerman, P. M. Stringfellow, and J. A. Eccleston, “EVA mouthguards: How thick should they be?,” Dental Traumatol., vol. 18, no. 1, pp.
24–27, 2002.
P. Magne, G. O. Gallucci, and U. C. Belser, “Anatomic crown width/length
ratios of unworn and worn maxillary teeth in white subjects,” J. Prosthet.
Dent., vol. 89, no. 5, pp. 453–461, May 2003.
R. M. Greenwald and J. J. Chu, “Power management of a system for
measuring the acceleration of a body part,” U.S. Patent 11/031 970, Aug.
2005.
D. Fried, R. E. Glena, J. D. Featherstone, and W. Seka, “Nature of light
scattering in dental enamel and dentin at visible and near-infrared wavelengths,” Appl. Opt., vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 1278–1285, Mar. 1995.
A. Joiner, “Tooth colour: A review of the literature,” J. Dent., vol. 32, pp.
3–12, 2004.
R. Langer, H. Brem, and D. Tapper, “Biocompatibility of polymeric delivery systems for macromolecules,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res., vol. 15, no.
2, pp. 267–277, 1981.
S. Rowson and S. M. Duma, “Development of the star evaluation system
for football helmets: integrating player head impact exposure and risk of
concussion,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2130–2140, 2011.
G. Asada, M. Dong, T. Lin, F. Newberg, G. Pottie, W. Kaiser, and
H. Marcy, “Wireless integrated network sensors: Low power systems on
a chip,” in Proc. 24th Eur. Solid-State Circuits Conf., 1998, pp. 9–16.
B. Cam, D. B. Camarillo, and L. C. Wu, “Device for detecting on-body
impacts,” U.S. Patent 14/199 716, 2014.

Lyndia C. Wu received the B.A.Sc. degree in engineering science with a biomedical engineering major
from the University of Toronto, ON, Canada, in 2012.
She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
bioengineering at Stanford University, CA, USA.
Her research interests include medical devices,
with past projects ranging from MEMS design,
MRI imaging coil development, and radiotherapy ergonomics. Her Ph.D. research focuses on investigating mild traumatic brain injury mechanisms, and developing translational tools to aid in accurate and
objective diagnosis.

Livia Zarnescu received the B.Sc. degree in optical
engineering and mathematics from the University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, in 2010, and the M.S.
degree in bioengineering from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, in 2012. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of
Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA.
Her research interests include cell mechanics, microscopy, machine learning, and bioinformatics with
applications to developmental biology.

Vaibhav Nangia received the B.E. degree in mechanical engineering from PEC University of Technology, Chandigarh, India, in 2011, and the M.S. degree
in mechanical engineering from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, in 2013 with a focus in mechatronics.
His previous work includes surgical robotics as
well as noninvasive medical device development for
patients with gait disorders. As a part of his Ph.D.
research at Stanford, he is interested in using his electromechanical design skills to continue to help build
smart medical devices that make people’s lives better.

Bruce Cam received the B.Sc. degree in mechanical
engineering with a biomechanics minor from the University of Florida, FL, USA, in 2012. He is currently
working toward the M.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering at Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
He has previously performed research on the neural control of hemiparetic gait, and his interests include dynamics, biomechanics, and medical devices.

David B. Camarillo (M’08) received the undergraduate degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA,
and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
He is currently an Assistant Professor of bioengineering at Stanford University. Both his graduate
work and industry experience with Intuitive Surgical and Hansen Medical were in the area of surgical robotics. He performed his postdoctoral research
in biophysics at the University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA, in 2011. He is an expert in instrumentation and biomechanics whose research interests include medical technology design as it applies
to mild traumatic brain injury, in vivo microscopy for infertility, and flexible
robotics for cardiovascular therapy. He directs a National Institute of Health
(NIH) funded laboratory working to solve these problems.

