IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2179

An Armband Wearable Device for Overnight
and Cuff-Less Blood Pressure Measurement
Ya-Li Zheng, Student Member, IEEE, Bryan P. Yan, Yuan-Ting Zhang, Fellow, IEEE,
and Carmen C. Y. Poon∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—24-h blood pressure (BP) has significant prognostic
value for cardiovascular risk screening, but the present BP devices are mainly cuff-based, which are unsuitable for long-term BP
measurement, especially during nighttime. In this paper, we developed an armband wearable pulse transit time (PTT) system for
24-h cuff-less BP measurement and evaluated it in an unattended
out-of-laboratory setting. Ten healthy young subjects participated
in this ambulatory study, where PTT was measured at 30-min
interval by this wearable system and the reference BP was measured by a standard oscillometric ambulatory BP monitor. Due to
the misalignment of BP and PTT on their recording time caused
by the different measurement principles of the two BP devices, a
new estimation method has been proposed: transients in PTT were
removed from the raw data by defined criteria, and then evenly interpolated, low-pass filtered, and resampled to synchronize at the
time when BP was recorded. The results show that with the proposed method, the correlation between PTT and systolic BP (SBP)
during nighttime with dynamic range of 21.8 ± 14.2 mmHg has
improved from −0.50 ± 0.24 to −0.62 ± 0.20 (p < 0.1), and the
difference between the estimated and reference SBP has improved
from 0.7 ± 10.7 to 2.8 ± 8.2 mmHg with root mean square error
reduced from 10.7 to 8.7 mmHg. In addition, the correlation between a very low frequency component of SBP and PTT obtained
from the proposed method during nighttime is −0.80 ± 0.10 and
the difference is 2.4 ± 5.7 mmHg for a dynamic BP range of 13.5 ±
8.0 mmHg. It is therefore concluded from this study that the proposed wearable system has great potential to be used for overnight
SBP monitoring, especially to measure the averaged SBP over a
long period.
Index Terms—Cuff-less, mobile health, pulse transit time (PTT),
24-h ambulatory blood pressure (BP), wearable devices.

Manuscript received October 28, 2013; revised February 12, 2014 and April
2, 2014; accepted April 9, 2014. Date of publication April 18, 2014; date of
current version June 14, 2014. This work was supported by the Hong Kong
Innovation and Technology Commission (ITS/159/11) and in part by the 973
Project Fund (2010CB732606) and the Guangdong LCHT Innovation Research
Team Fund in China. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Y. Zheng is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: ylzheng@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
B. P. Yan is with the Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital,
Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: bryan.yan@cuhk.edu.hk).
Y.-T. Zhang is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong and also with the Key Lab for
Health Informatics, Chinese Academy of Science, Shenzhen, China (e-mail:
ytzhang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
∗ C. C. Y. Poon is with the Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: cpoon@surgery.cuhk.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2318779

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIOVASCULAR disease (CVD) remains the number
one cause of death worldwide [1]. In 2008, CVD caused
17 million deaths globally, accounting for nearly one-third of
all deaths [2], and the number is estimated to reach up to 23.3
million by 2030 [1]. Blood pressure (BP) is one of the most
important risk factors for predicting CVD events. Nevertheless,
clinic BP has been questioned as it may not reflect the normal
BP level due to the white-coat effect [3]. 24-h ambulatory BP
monitoring is being increasingly adopted in clinical diagnosis
and treatment of hypertension [4]. Other related parameters,
such as nighttime BP and BP variability, have been proved
to be capable of providing independent clinical values in the
prediction of CVD events [5], [6].
Though the significance of ambulatory BP monitoring in the
clinical practice has been recognized, the present BP measurement devices are mainly cuff-based, which may cause discomfort due to the inflation of cuff during measurement, and are
thus unsuitable for long-term BP monitoring, especially during
nighttime. Pulse transit time (PTT), defined as the time for the
pulse to travel from the heart to a peripheral site, has been proposed to be a potential surrogate of BP [7]–[10]. Since PTT
can be readily derived from electrocardiogram (ECG) and photoplethysmogram (PPG) by wearable devices [11]–[13], it provides a very practical solution for ambulatory BP monitoring.
Most of the present studies, however, focused on the short-term
correlation between BP and PTT, aiming to validate the potential
of PTT for beat-to-beat BP estimation. For example, two recent
studies reported continuous BP and PTT overnight in a laboratory setting, but only the correlation between beat-to-beat BP
and PTT within a few minutes rather than overnight correlation
was investigated [14], [15]. To the best knowledge of the authors, no study has investigated the correlations between BP and
PTT within 24 h or overnight in an out-of-laboratory daily life
setting. Therefore, this study aims to investigate whether PTT
can be a surrogate of 24-h BP in an unattended environment.

C

II. SYSTEM AND METHOD
A. System Design
An armband-based wearable monitoring device shown in
Fig. 1 was developed for ambulatory ECG and PPG measurement. ECG was measured by three electrodes. This wearable
device is an improved version of the system we reported in [16].
In this system, to avoid long wires across the body, two e-textile
electrodes were sewed in the armband wrapped around the left
arm, and the other one adopted the adhesive Ag–Ag/Cl electrode

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 1. Armband wearable device for 24 h ECG and PPG measurement.
(a) Block diagram of the system. (b) Circuitry of the system. (c) Final package
in a stretchable armband.
Fig. 2.

which was placed on the right side of the subject’s thorax. One
electrode on the armband works as a common electrode with the
right leg driven circuit to actively cancel common-mode interference. PPG was measured by near-infrared LED emitter and a
phototransistor in reflective mode. The acquired ECG and PPG
were amplified and filtered by band-pass filters with frequency
band of 0.5–17 and 0.5–10 Hz, respectively. The filtered analog signals were digitalized by a microcontroller unit (MCU,
ATmega 8) at the sample rate of 500 Hz and resolution of 8-bit,
and then stored in a flash memory module mounted on the armband. To save power, the MCU was programmed to switch on
the powering circuit every 30 min and then switch off after 1min data recording. A buzzer was used for reminding the subject
to keep still during signal recording to avoid motion artifacts.
B. Protocol
Ten healthy young subjects (27 ± 3 years old) were recruited
in this study. No severe physical activities were involved during
the monitoring. Oscar 2 oscillometric ambulatory BP monitor
(SunTech Medical) which is the standard device for 24 h ambulatory BP measurement was used in this study to measure
reference BP. The device was set to automatically take measurements of systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP) every
30 min during the whole day according to the clinical guidelines [3]. 1 min of ECG and PPG was recorded every 30 min by
the wearable device. After 24-h monitoring, the subjects came
back to the laboratory and removed all the sensors. The starting, ending, sleeping, and waking time were self-reported by
each subject. All subjects signed informed consent form and the
study was approved by the University Ethics Committee.
C. Measurement of the Reference BP
Finapres and Portapres were often used as the reference BP
measurement devices in previous in-laboratory studies [14],
[15]. Since these devices are bulky, a standard 24-h ambulatory
BP meter was chosen to be the reference in the current study.

Principle of BP measurement by the automated oscillometric method.

The reference device measures intermittent BP at intervals of
around 30 min to evaluate the performance of the PTT-based
method over a 24-h period.
The measurement principle of this 24-h ambulatory BP monitor, however, makes it difficult to obtain synchronized BP and
PTT measurements during a 24-h period. First, although the two
devices were set to have the same sampling rate (one sample
per 30 min), they tend to be out-of-sync a few hours after the
start of the study due to the built-in sampling pattern of the 24-h
ambulatory BP monitor. Second, using a cuff inflation to trigger
the recording of PTT can better synchronize the two devices
but such a design was not adopted due to other practical issues:
1) if a physical cable was used to connect the two devices that
were placed on the two arms of a subject, it would cause great
inconvenience to the subject and therefore the design is not recommended by the doctor; 2) if wireless communication such as
Bluetooth was used, the heavy power consumption of the wireless module is found to be impractical for the 24-h study. Third,
it is essentially difficult to synchronize PTT with BP at exactly
the same beat due to the intermittent nature of the oscillometric
measuring principle of this ambulatory BP monitor. Specifically,
the oscillometric BP device, which measures BP by detecting
the maximal oscillation in a sphygmomanometer cuff caused by
blood flow, assumes that BP do not vary a lot during the measurement period [17]. This may be reasonable for a well-control
protocol in laboratory settings which requires the subject to keep
still during the whole procedure. However, for the ambulatory
24-h study, BP may change transiently within a few seconds
during daily activities such as walking, eating or drinking, deep
breathing, and posture change [18]–[20], as shown in Fig. 2.
Since it is difficult to know when the BP readings displayed on
the device actually occur within the cuff inflation period, it is
impossible to synchronize BP and PTT with precision in second.
Therefore, resampling is needed to synchronize BP and PTT.
In this study, a novel processing algorithm is proposed to
overcome the synchronizing issue aforementioned. Based on

ZHENG et al.: AN ARMBAND WEARABLE DEVICE FOR OVERNIGHT AND CUFF-LESS BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT

2181

Fig. 3. Illustration of the proposed method for the analysis of SBP and PTT.
Symbols and lines are denoted as follows: open circle—raw SBP and PTT;
cross symbol—removed transients; dotted line—smoothed data by Method 1;
solid line—smoothed data by Method 2; open triangle—SBP smoothed and
resampled to the time of BP measurements; solid triangle—PTT smoothed by
Method 2 to the time of BP measurements.

this method, the correlation between BP and PTT within 24 h and
the estimation accuracy of this wearable device is investigated.

Fig. 4. Experimental data from [22] and the fitted exponential relationship of
elastic modulus and transmural pressure.

D. Data Analysis

vious study showed that postural change would induce changes
of around 5% on PTT [12], so the threshold to exclude the transients in PTT is determined to 9 ms for all subjects. 2) Repeat the
steps (low-pass filtering and resampling) in Method 1 on PTT obtained from step 1 of Method 2 to get a new smoothed PTT (solid
triangles in Fig. 3). 3) Remove the interpolated points in SBP
and PTT which were located in the transitional period between
daytime and nighttime. Interpolations between two neighboring raw data points whose intervals were longer than 3 h were
discarded.
The correlation between SBP and PTT obtained by Methods
1 and 2 was computed for each subject, respectively.
3) Nonlinear Model for BP Estimation: To assess whether
PTT has potential to be a surrogate of BP, a nonlinear BP-PTT
model, which was first proposed in our previous work [10], is
adopted in this study and elaborated as follows: The fundamental
concept of relating BP with PTT is based on Moens–Korteweg
equation which expressed PWV in terms of the elastic modulus
of the artery wall for lateral expansion (Ein ), the thickness of
the arterial wall (h), the radius of the artery at the end of diastole
(r), and the density of blood (ρ), i.e.,

Ein h
.
(1)
PWV =
2ρr

1) PTT: The acquired ECG and PPG were low-pass filtered
with cutoff frequency of 30 and 16 Hz, respectively. For each
1-min episode of ECG and PPG, PTT was derived as the time
interval between the R-peak of ECG and the point with maximum slope on the rising edge of PPG. Data segments with poor
signal quality due to motion artifacts were manually discarded
before further analysis.
2) Proposed Method for PTT Analysis: To investigate the
relationship between BP and PTT during daytime and nighttime separately, the 24-h data of each subject were divided into
two segments, daytime and nighttime, according to the subject’s
sleeping and waking time. Since BP and PTT were measured intermittently by two individual devices as well as the limitation
of oscillometric BP measurements mentioned earlier, resampling should be performed to align PTT recordings at the time
when BP was measured. Due to the low sampling rate in data
acquisition, high frequency (HF) components of PTT variability would not be able to be captured. Therefore, a low-pass
antialiasing filter was applied before resampling. In addition,
PTT may change transiently due to daily activities; some interpolations may be misleading. In consideration of these issues,
two analysis methods are proposed for comparison as shown in
Fig. 3 and illustrated next:
In Method 1, the raw SBP and PTT were evenly resampled with sample rate 0.00056 Hz (i.e., 1/30/60 Hz) and then
smoothed by a low-pass filter with cutoff frequency lower
than Nyquist frequency (i.e., 0.00028 Hz). A low-pass Butterworth digital filter with cutoff frequency of 0.00019 Hz (i.e.,
1/30/60/3 Hz) was used in the analysis. The smoothed SBP (the
open triangles in Fig. 3) and PTT were then resampled at the time
when raw SBP data were measured. All data were resampled by
linear interpolation.
Method 2 includes the following processing steps. 1) Remove
the transients from the raw PTT by a defined criterion: when the
deviation between raw data point and smoothed data (DPTT )
is beyond a defined threshold, this raw data point is treated as
a transient and would be removed from raw dataset. One pre-

In addition, the mathematical representations of the elasticity
or compliance of arterial wall as a function of BP are needed to
arrive at an equation that allows the estimation of BP from PWV.
A very commonly used experimental finding is based on the
in vivo and in vitro studies on 12 anaesthetized dogs by Hughes
et al. [21]. This study concluded that the elastic modulus (Ein )
increased exponentially with the mean BP (MBP) of the dogs’
descending thoracic aorta in vivo, i.e.,
Ein = E0 eγ P t

(2)

where Pt is MBP. The exponential dependence of elasticity
modulus on BP was also reported on human arteries [22] and is
reproduced in Fig. 4. Based on (2) and the in vivo experimental

2182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

data from Fig. 4, the coefficients in (2) can be fitted as follows:
E0 = 1429 mmHg and γ = 0.031 mmHg−1 .
Substituting (2) into (1), MBP is derived to be logarithmically
related to PTT, i.e.


PTT0
2
MBP = MBP0 + ln
.
(3)
γ
PTT

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS BETWEEN THE SMOOTHED SBP
AND PTT BY TWO ANALYSIS METHODS AT DIFFERENT PERIODS
FOR EACH SUBJECT

On the other hand, according to Bramwell–Hill equation,

V ΔP
(4)
PWV =
ρ ΔV
for a given pulse, if ΔP is the pulse pressure (PP), i.e., the
difference between SBP and DBP, and it is assumed that the
changes of the arterial diameter are negligible, PP is found to
be proportional to 1/PTT2 , i.e.,

2
PTT0
(5)
PP = PP0 ·
PTT
where PP0 , MBP0 , and PTT0 can be obtained from calibration.
Since MBP is often estimated as 1/3 · SBP + 2/3 · DBP,
SBP and DBP can be estimated from (3) and (5), respectively


PTT0
1
2
2
DBP = SBP0 + DBP0 + ln
3
3
γ
PTT

2
(SBP0 − DBP0 ) PTT0
−
3
PTT

2
PTT0
SBP = DBP + (SBP0 − DBP0 )
.
(6)
PTT
The advantage of this model is that only one calibration point
is needed to determine the individual parameter, which is important for the practical use of this method. In this study, the first
measurements of BP and PTT were adopted for calibration, and
the rest of the data were used for validating the accuracy of this
model. The difference between the PTT-based estimation and
the reference device was compared between the two methods
(Methods 1 and 2) as well as between different references (raw
and smoothed SBP).
III. RESULTS
A. Correlation During 24 h, Daytime, and Nighttime
Very weak correlation was found between 24-h SBP/DBP
and PTT in most subjects. When 24-h data were segmented into
daytime and nighttime, all subjects showed median negative
correlation between smoothed SBP and PTT during nighttime
as shown in Table I.
On the other hand, no consistent correlations were found between SBP and PTT during daytime, i.e., some subjects showed
positive correlation, some showed negative correlation or no
correlation. The correlation of SBP and PTT during daytime
did not show significant improvement by Method 2 for most
subjects. Very few subjects showed significant correlation between DBP and PTT, which is not shown in this paper. One
typical example of the 24-h SBP and PTT data processed by

two methods and the correlations between smoothed SBP and
PTT during daytime, nighttime, and 24 h are given in Fig. 5.
The ranges of BP change, the correlation coefficients between
PTT and SBP as well as the differences between the reference
BP and PTT-based estimation by Methods 1 and 2 are summarized in Table II. The correlation between raw SBP and PTT
was significantly improved by Method 2 from −0.50 ± 0.24 to
−0.62 ± 0.21 (p < 0.1). In addition, the correlations between
the smoothed SBP and PTT were significantly stronger that of
raw SBP and PTT for both methods (−0.61 ± 0.24 versus −0.50
± 0.24 for Method 1, and −0.80 ± 0.10 versus −0.62 ± 0.21
for Method 2, p < 0.05).
B. PTT-Based BP Estimation
After excluding the first point, which was used for individual
calibration, 90 and 70 pairs of SBP and PTT during nighttime
were included in the estimation for Methods 1 and 2, respectively. The estimation performance was evaluated by mean and
SD of the difference as well as the root mean square error
(RMSE) between the estimation and reference SBP. Table II
shows that using Method 2, the RMSEs between the estimated
and reference SBP were reduced from 10.7 to 8.7 mmHg for raw
SBP and from 8.9 to 6.2 mmHg for smoothed SBP, respectively.
The differences between the PTT-based estimated and raw SBP
were 0.7 ± 10.7 and 2.8 ± 8.2 mmHg for Methods 1 and 2,
respectively. For the smoothed reference SBP, the differences
were 0.5 ± 8.9 and 2.4 ± 5.7 mmHg for Methods 1 and 2,
respectively. The dynamic ranges of overnight SBP for all subjects are from 80 to 145 mmHg and from 91 to 141 mmHg for
raw and smoothed SBP, respectively. The Bland–Altman plots
of the differences between the PTT-based estimations and the
different references are shown in Fig. 6.
IV. DISCUSSION
The correlation between BP and PTT has been studied extensively in the past to explore the potential of PTT as a surrogate
of BP. According to Moens–Korteweg equation, it is known that
when BP changes, the pressure-dependent vascular elasticity
will change, thus inducing a change on pulse wave velocity and
a reverse change on PTT. This pulse wave propagation-based

ZHENG et al.: AN ARMBAND WEARABLE DEVICE FOR OVERNIGHT AND CUFF-LESS BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT

2183

Fig. 6. Bland–Altman plot of the difference between PTT estimated and reference SBP during nighttime for all subjects. (a) Raw SBP as the reference. (b)
Smoothed SBP as the reference.

Fig. 5. (a) Typical example of the reference SBP and PTT in 24 h. (b) Correlation between smoothed SBP and PTT during three periods by Methods
1 and 2.

model described the physiological basis of the negative correlation between beat-to-beat BP and PTT. It is however unknown
whether this relationship still holds for BP and PTT over a much
longer period. In this paper, the 24-h ambulatory study was conducted to explore the relationship between intermittent BP and
PTT within 24 h in an unattended out-of-laboratory setting. Due
to the differences in measuring principles of the cuff-based and
PTT-based cuff-less BP measurement methods, it is impossible
to measure the two BP exactly at the same time point. Therefore, resampling is needed to calculate the correlation between
PTT and BP. Limited by the very low sampling rate, i.e., sampling at 30-min interval, it would be unable to capture the HF
fluctuations in both BP and PTT, as known to the sampling the-

orem. Therefore, BP and PTT should be first low-pass filtered
before interpolating. It is found that the correlation between the
smoothed SBP and PTT was larger than that between the raw
SBP and PTT, which suggests that the relationship between SBP
and PTT is frequency dependent. This result is consistent with
the conclusion of Liu’s study [23], which found that the ratio of
low frequency (LF) and HF, i.e., LF/HF ratio, of SBP was about
four times higher than that of PTT.
Two previous studies investigated the nighttime BP-PTT relationship in laboratory settings [14], [15]. In Chua’s study,
the overnight data were segmented into 5-min nonoverlapping
epochs and the correlation between SBP and PTT within these
epochs was reported to be around −0.2 [14]. This result is very
different from our study, which may be caused by two factors:
1) the frequency band of interest in Chua’s study is 0–0.15 Hz,
while this study focuses on 0–0.00019 Hz; 2) the reference BP
was measured by Portapres in Chua’s study, which is known to
provide relative changes of continuous BP instead of absolute
BP levels, while this study used standard ambulatory BP device
which is based on automated oscillometric measuring principle [24]. In Vlahandonis’ study, Finapres was adopted as the
reference, and good negative correlation (r = −0.57∼−0.65)
was found between SBP and PTT. However, this study also only

2184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE TWO ANALYSIS METHODS AND BETWEEN DIFFERENT REFERENCES

investigated the short-term correlation, i.e., 500 s of each sleep
stage, rather than overnight correlation [15]. In addition, neither
of the two studies evaluated the performance of BP estimation
according to standards. In this respect, this study is the first
one to investigate overnight BP–PTT relationship and shows
the potential of PTT for cuff-less and overnight BP estimation
in unattended settings.
A. Rationale for Removing PTT Outliers
It is worth noting that the transients in PTT were removed
from the raw data in Method 2 is not because they are incorrect, but rather to propose a more reasonable metric to compare
the measurements from the two different devices. Specifically,
the different measurement principles and other practical issues
result in misalignment in the measurement time of the two BP
devices. Therefore, resampling is necessary to synchronize BP
and PTT before calculating the measurement differences. However, due to the very low sampling rate (1/30/60 Hz), only very
LF components (within 1/30/60/2 Hz) of PTT can be reserved
according to Nyquist sampling theorem. The linear interpolations near the transients are therefore unreliable. In this way, it
is considered that the smoothed line obtained by excluding the
transients might be more representative of the real PTT trend
than the smoothed line when including the transients. For example, the solid line in Fig. 5(a) was shifted downward to the
blue dash line due to the existence of the second PTT outlier
(open circle). It is thus suggested to remove the transients before
resampling.
1) Rationale for Disregarding Interpolations During Transitional Periods: The rationale to disregarding interpolations
during day–night transitional periods is that the interpolations
around those transiently changing PTT samples are not as reliable as those around slowly changing PTT samples due to the
very low sampling rate. Since a steep change of around 20%
during day–night transitional periods occurred on the 24-h PTT
in healthy subjects [25], the linear interpolations during these
periods are therefore inauthentic. To evaluate the correlation
between PTT and BP, it is reasonable to remove this nonsystematic error source. After removing these points, it was found
that the correlation between SBP and PTT was significantly improved. Some subjects did not shown significant improvement
on the correlation by Method 2 since no transients were removed
from the raw data during nighttime according to the defined
criterion.
2) Correlation Between BP and PTT: Nighttime Versus Daytime, SBP Versus DBP: We found that SBP and PTT showed

much better negative correlation during nighttime than daytime.
It can be explained by two factors which may have larger effects on PTT–BP relationship during daytime than nighttime:
1) vascular tone. Some in vivo experimental studies have investigated the effects of smooth muscle relaxation and contraction on PWV–BP relationship, and showed that the relationship
can be significantly altered by the administration of vasoactive drugs [22], [26]. Daytime activities such as posture change,
walking, and working may regulate vascular tone and change the
relationship of BP and PTT. 2) The time delay between from Rpeak of ECG and characteristic point of PPG contains two parts:
pre-ejection period (PEP) and the transit time of the pulse wave
from heart to periphery, i.e., vascular transit time. PEP is the time
delay between the ventricular depolarization and opening of the
aortic valve. It may change with venous return, cardiac contractility, and arterial BP [27] under different physiological status
like stress, emotion, and physical effort [28]. Some studies have
shown that PEP has great contribution in the change of PTT during posture change and dynamic exercise [29], [30]. Under some
situations, PEP and vascular transit time even changed in opposite direction [31], [32]. The previous reasons can explain why
SBP and PTT showed no significant correlation during daytime.
On the other hand, unlike SBP which is determined by both the
vasostate and left ventricular contraction, DBP is irrelevant of
left ventricular contraction, which makes it uncorrelated with
PEP. This is why weak correlation was found between DBP and
PTT. Other studies have reported similar results, and suggested
that vascular transit time instead of PTT is more correlated with
DBP [32], [33].
3) Estimation Error for Raw and Smoothed SBP: The differences between PTT-based estimation and the reference raw SBP
were within 2.8 ± 8.2 mmHg, which is slightly beyond the difference recommended by Association for the Advancement of
Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) standard, i.e., 5 ± 8 mmHg.
The result is consistent with that as reported in Poon’s study
(0.6 ± 9.8 mmHg) [10] and another recent comparative study
(1.2 ± 9.7 mmHg) using the same model [34]. There are several
sources of systematic errors of this model: 1) the elasticityrelated parameter γ was set as a constant for all subjects. Since
the elastic property of artery wall varies with age and gender, a
feasible solution to reduce this error is to adopt different γ according to the gender and age of the subject [9]. 2) The changes
of PTT are not only related to BP changes, but also PEP and vascular tone. This error can be reduced by taken into account these
confounding factors in the BP–PTT model. Moreover, approximating MBP from fractions of SBP and DBP is another source
of error. In addition, using smoothed PTT to estimate raw BP in

ZHENG et al.: AN ARMBAND WEARABLE DEVICE FOR OVERNIGHT AND CUFF-LESS BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT

this study may also cause errors. Since the relationship of BP and
PTT was shown to be frequency dependent [23], the smoothed
PTT may be unable to accurately estimate HF components of BP.
This explains the better results for smoothed BP estimation than
raw BP. Nevertheless, the result is very close to the requirements
of AAMI standard on evaluating BP measurement devices.
Therefore, the wearable device and the proposed estimation
method provide an effective and practical solution for overnight
cuff-less BP estimation which is known with more clinical
value in the prediction of CVD events compared to daytime BP
[5].
The difference between PTT-based estimation and the
smoothed reference SBP, i.e., 2.4 ± 5.7 mmHg, is much smaller
than that for raw reference SBP. Though no current studies
have evaluated the clinical value of the smoothed BP, it actually
contains different physiological meaning and important clinical
significance. It is known that HF fluctuation (>0.15 Hz) in BP
is associated with mechanical influences from respiration, while
LF fluctuation (0.05–0.15 Hz) is related to sympathetic nerve
regulation on vasomotor tone [35]. Though the mechanism underlying very LF (VLF) fluctuation (<0.05 Hz) is still unclear,
it is suggested that VLF may depend on myogenic regulations
or thermoregulation, which provides different information compared to HF and LF components [36]. In addition, the average
value of two or three BP readings measured at intervals of 1 min
is commonly used in clinical diagnosis of hypertension [37].
Moreover, the mean value of 24-h ambulatory BP measurements
has been validated as independent risk factors to predict CVD
death in many clinical studies [3], [38]. These facts implicate
the clinical significance of smoothed BP.
This study has a few limitations: 1) BP and PTT were not
aligned. Nevertheless, it must be noted that technically, it is
difficult to perfectly align the measurements obtained from the
two noninvasive BP devices with different measurement principles. 2) Low number of data samples. The number of data
points is mainly limited by the sampling frequency of the reference BP device which was set to operate at every 30 min as
outlined in most clinical guidelines of 24-h ambulatory BP measurement worldwide [4], [39], [40]. Although after resampling,
the number of sampling points has been reduced, it presents a
fairer judgment to the measurement differences between the two
methods. 3) The proposed method has limitation in estimating
BP accurately with transient changes during daytime. The much
better correlation during nighttime is likely due to the fact that
there are fewer transient events during this period. Therefore,
lack of synchronization has no big influence on BP–PTT correlation. But it is not the case for daytime when transient PTT
and BP changes exist, and an exact synchronization is therefore
necessary. In this respect, continuous BP and PTT should be
measured simultaneously. However, two main practical issues
make it difficult to evaluate the PTT-based method for continuous and long-term BP estimation in ambulatory settings: 1) the
high power consumption of wearable device for continuous and
long-term PPG measurement; 2) the availability of continuous
BP reference device for ambulatory use. As far as we know,
the current continuous BP devices are either invasive or nonportable. Based on these considerations, this study, even though

2185

has the aforementioned limitations, is already the best one can
achieve with the state-of-the-art technologies whilst complying
with the clinical guidelines. In spite of its limitation in daytime
BP estimation, this study is still of important clinical significance. The results of this study indicate that once calibrated
at the beginning of nighttime, PTT can provide accurate estimation of overnight SBP without a cuff. As validated in many
clinical studies, nighttime SBP is a better predictor of clinical outcome in the prediction of CVDs or events compared to
daytime BP [5], [38].
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, an armband-based wearable device was developed for long-term BP measurement based on PTT method. 24-h
take-home study was conducted to evaluate the accuracy of this
device. To overcome the difficulties of misalignment in time between the recordings from the PTT-based wearable device and
the oscillometric-based reference device, a new analysis method
was proposed to preprocess PTT. The results showed that the
correlation between SBP and PTT during nighttime was significantly improved by the proposed method to −0.62 ± 0.21
with the difference between the PTT-based estimation and the
reference SBP in 2.8 ± 8.2 mmHg. The results were further improved to −0.80 ± 0.10 and 2.4 ± 5.7 mmHg after smoothing
SBP. Therefore, this study provides a complete and effective
solution for nighttime SBP measurement, which is known with
significant clinical value for cardiovascular risk screening.
In future, a larger cohort study including more healthy subjects and patients with CVDs will be conducted to further validate this wearable device for overnight BP monitoring.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to editor and reviewers for their
valuablhe and critical comments, Mr. Billy Leung, Dept. of
Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK), for
his developments of the wearable system in this study and Mr.
Stanley Sy, Department of Surgery, CUHK, for his contribution
on developing the software for signal storage in flash memory.
REFERENCES
[1] Cardiovascular Diseases (CVDs), WHO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2013,
[Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs317
/en/index.html
[2] D. E. Bloom, E. T. Cafiero, E. Jané-Llopis, S. Abrahams-Gessel, L. R.
Bloom, S. Fathima, A. B. Feigl, T. Gaziano, M. Mowafi, A. Pandya, K.
Prettner, L. Rosenberg, B. Seligman, A. Z. Stein, and C. Weinstein, “The
global economic burden of non-communicable diseases,” World Economic
Forum, Geneva, Switzerland, Sep. 2011.
[3] E. O’Brien, R. Asmar, L. Beilin, Y. Imai, J. M. Mallion, G. Mancia,
T. Mengden, M. Myers, P. Padfield, and P. Palatini, “European society of
hypertension recommendations for conventional, ambulatory and home
blood pressure measurement,” J. Hypertension, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 821–
848, May 2003.
[4] K. Shimada, Y. Imai, K. Kario, Y. Kawano, G. Kimura, I. Kuwajima,
Y. Yamamoto, Y. Doi, K. Kikuchi, K. Otsuka, T. Ozawa, and I. Saito,
“Guidelines for the clinical use of 24 hour ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring (ABPM) (JCS 2010)—Digest version,” Circ. J., vol. 76, no. 2,
pp. 508–519, Feb. 2012.
[5] E. Dolan, A. Stanton, L. Thijs, K. Hinedi, N. Atkins, S. McClory,
E. D. Hond, P. McCormack, J. A. Staessen, and E. O’Brien, “Superiority

2186

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

of ambulatory over clinic blood pressure measurement in predicting mortality,” Hypertension, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 156–161, Jun. 2005.
M. Kikuya, A. Hozawa, T. Ohokubo, I. Tsuji, M. Michimata,
M. Matsubara, M. Ota, K. Nagai, T. Araki, H. Satoh, S. Ito, S. Hisamichi,
and Y. Imai, “Prognostic significance of blood pressure and heart rate
variabilities—The ohasama study,” Hypertension, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 901–
906, Nov. 2000.
W. Chen, T. Kobayashi, S. Ichikawa, Y. Takeuchi, and T. Togawa, “Continuous estimation of systolic blood pressure using the pulse arrival time
and intermittent calibration,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 569–574, Sep. 2000.
Y. Chen, C. Wen, G. Tao, M. Bi, and G. Li, “Continuous and noninvasive
blood pressure measurement: A novel modeling methodology of the relationship between blood pressure and pulse wave velocity,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 2222–2233, Nov. 2009.
Y. Chen, C. Wen, G. Tao, and M. Bi, “Continuous and noninvasive measurement of systolic and diastolic blood pressure by one mathematical
model with the same model parameters and two separate pulse wave velocities,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 871–882, Apr. 2012.
C. C. Y. Poon and Y. T. Zhang, “Cuff-less and noninvasive measurements
of arterial blood pressure by pulse transit time,” in Proc. 27th IEEE Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Shanghai, 2005, pp. 5877–5880.
V. Chandrasekaran, R. Dantu, S. Jonnada, S. Thiyagaraja, and K. P. Subbu,
“Cuffless differential blood pressure estimation using smart phones,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1080–1089, Apr. 2013.
Y. L. Zheng, B. Leung, S. Sy, Y. T. Zhang, and C. C. Y. Poon, “A clip-free
eyeglasses-based wearable monitoring device for measuring photoplethysmograhic signals,” in Proc. 34th IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., San Diego, 2012, pp. 5022–5025.
M. Z. Poh, N. C. Swenson, and R. W. Picard, “Motion-tolerant magnetic
earring sensor and wireless earpiece for wearable photoplethysmography,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 786–794,
May 2010.
E. Chua, S. Redmond, G. McDarby, and C. Heneghan, “Towards using
photo-plethysmogram amplitude to measure blood pressure during sleep,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 945–954, Mar. 2010.
A. Vlahandonis, S. N. Biggs, G. M. Nixon, M. J. Davey, L.
M. Walter, and R. S. C. Horne, (2014, Mar.). “Pulse transit time
as a surrogate measure of changes in systolic arterial pressure in
children during sleep,” J. Sleep Res. [Online]. pp. 1–8. Available:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jsr.12140/abstract
Y. L. Zheng, B. P. Yan, Y. Zhang, C. M. Yu, and C. C. Y. Poon, “Wearable
cuff-less PTT-based system for overnight blood pressure monitoring,” in
Proc. 35th IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka, Japan,
2013, pp. 6103–6106.
T. G. Pickering, J. E. Hall, L. J. Appel, B. E. Falkner, J. Graves, M. N. Hill,
D. W. Jones, T. Kurtz, S. G. Sheps, and E. J. Roccella, “Recommendations
for blood pressure measurement in humans and experimental animals: Part
1: Blood pressure measurement in humans: A statement for professionals from the subcommittee of professional and public education of the
American heart association council on high blood pressure research,”
Hypertension, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 142–161, Feb. 2005.
J. C. Philips, M. Marchand, and A. J. Scheen, “Squatting, a posture test
for studying cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in diabetes,” Diabetes
Metabolism, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 489–496, Nov. 2011.
K. Jagomägi, R. Raamat, J. Talts, E. Länsimies, and J. Jurvelin, “Portapres
and differential oscillometric finger blood pressure changes during deep
breathing test in the assessment of BRS index,” Clin. Physiol. Funct.
Imag., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 9–13, Jan. 2003.
Y. L. Zheng, C. C. Y. Poon, and Y. T. Zhang, “Investigation of temporal
relationship between cardiovascular variables for cuffless blood pressure
estimation,” in Proc. 1st IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Biomed. Health Inf., Shen
Zhen, 2012, pp. 644–646.
D. J. Hughes, C. F. Babbs, L. A. Geddes, and J. D. Bourland, “Measurements of Young’s modulus of elasticity of the canine aorta with ultrasound,” Ultrason. Imag., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 356–367, Oct. 1979.
A. J. Bank, R. F. Wilson, S. H. Kubo, J. E. Holte, T. J. Dresing, and
H. Wang, “Direct effects of smooth muscle relaxation and contraction
on in vivo human brachial artery elastic properties,” Circ. Res., vol. 77,
no. 5, pp. 1008–1016, Nov. 1995.
Q. Liu, C. C. Y. Poon, and Y. T. Zhang, “Time-frequency analysis of variabilities of heart rate, systolic blood pressure and pulse transit time before
and after exercise using the recursive autoregressive model,” Biomed.
Signal Process. Control, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 364–369, Oct. 2011.

[24] S. C. Jones, M. Bilous, S. Winship, P. Finn, and J. Goodwin, “Validation
of the oscar 2 oscillometric 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitor
according to the international protocol for the validation of blood pressure
measuring devices,” Blood Pressure Monit., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 219–223,
Aug. 2004.
[25] D. Bia, R. Armentano, F. Pessana, Y. Zocalo, S. Lluberas, and A. P. Avolio,
“Non-symmetrical double-logistic analysis of 24 hour arterial stiffness
profile in normotensive and hypertensive subjects,” in Proc. 30th IEEE
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vancouver, BC, 2008, pp. 809–812.
[26] S. Kinlay, M. A. Creager, M. Fukumoto, H. Hikita, J. C. Fang,
A. P. Selwyn, and P. Ganz, “Endothelium-derived nitric oxide regulates
arterial elasticity in human arteries in vivo,” Hypertension, vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 1049–1053, Nov. 2001.
[27] D. B. Newlin and R. W. Levenson, “Pre-ejection period: Measuring betaadrenergic influences upon the heart,” Psychophysiology, vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 546–552, Nov. 1979.
[28] G. Sharwood-Smith, J. Bruce, and G. Drummond, “Assessment of pulse
transit time to indicate cardiovascular changes during obstetric spinal
anaesthesia,” Br. J. Anaesthesia, vol. 96, no. 1, pp. 100–105, Oct. 2006.
[29] J. Muehlsteff, X. Aubert, and G. Morren, “Continuous cuff-less blood
pressure monitoring based on the pulse arrival time approach: The impact
of posture,” in Proc. 30th IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
Vancouver, BC, 2008, pp. 1691–1694.
[30] J. Muehlsteff, X. L. Aubert, and M. Schuett, “Cuffless estimation of systolic blood pressure for short effort bicycle tests: The prominent role of
the pre-ejection period,” in Proc. 28th IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2006, New York, pp. 3460–3464.
[31] E. S. Winokur, D. D. He, and C. G. Sodini, “A wearable vital signs monitor
at the ear for continuous heart rate and pulse transit time measurements,”
in Proc. 34th IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., San Diego, CA,
2012, pp. 2724–2727.
[32] R. Payne, C. Symeonides, D. Webb, and S. Maxwell, “Pulse transit time
measured from the ECG: An unreliable marker of beat-to-beat blood
pressure,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 136–141, Sep. 2006.
[33] M. Y. M. Wong, E. Pickwell-MacPherson, and Y. T. Zhang, “The acute
effects of running on blood pressure estimation using pulse transit time in
normotensive subjects,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 169–
175, Sep. 2009.
[34] B. McCarthy, C. Vaughan, B. O’Flynn, A. Mathewson, and C. Ó. Mathúna,
“An examination of calibration intervals required for accurately tracking
blood pressure using pulse transit time algorithms,” J. Human Hypertension, vol. 27, pp. 744–750, May 2013.
[35] G. Parati, J. P. Saul, M. Di Rienzo, and G. Mancia, “Spectral analysis
of blood pressure and heart rate variability in evaluating cardiovascular
regulation: A critical appraisal,” Hypertension, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1276–
1286, Jun. 1995.
[36] C. Julien, J. P. Saul, and G. Parati, “Very low frequency blood pressure
fluctuations: Not only myogenic responsiveness,” J. Hypertension, vol. 26,
no. 6, pp. 1065–1068, Jun. 2008.
[37] D. A. Calhoun, D. Jones, S. Textor, D. C. Goff, T. P. Murphy, R. D. Toto,
A. White, W. C. Cushman, W. White, and D. Sica, “Resistant hypertension: Diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment a scientific statement from
the American heart association professional education committee of the
council for high blood pressure research,” Hypertension, vol. 51, no. 6,
pp. 1403–1419, Apr. 2008.
[38] R. H. Fagard, H. Celis, L. Thijs, J. A. Staessen, D. L. Clement, M. L. De
Buyzere, and D. A. De Bacquer, “Daytime and nighttime blood pressure
as predictors of death and cause-specific cardiovascular events in hypertension,” Hypertension, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 55–61, Jan. 2008.
[39] G. A. Head, B. P. McGrath, A. S. Mihailidou, M. R. Nelson,
M. P. Schlaich, M. Stowasser, A. A. Mangoni, D. Cowley, M. A. Brown,
L. A. Ruta, and A. Wilson, “Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in
Australia: 2011 consensus position statement,” J. Hypertension, vol. 30,
no. 2, pp. 253–266, Feb. 2012.
[40] R. C. Hermida, M. H. Smolensky, D. E. Ayala, F. Portaluppi, J. J. Crespo,
F. Fabbian, E. Haus, R. Manfredini, A. Mojón, A. Moyá, L. Piñeiro,
M. T. Rı́os, A. Otero, H. Balan, and J. R. Fernández, “2013 ambulatory blood pressure monitoring recommendations for the diagnosis of
adult hypertension, assessment of cardiovascular and other hypertensionassociated risk, and attainment of therapeutic goals,” Chronobiol. Int.,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 355–410, Apr. 2013.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

