IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

2413

A Novel Use of Transfer Function Estimation
for Early Assessment of Brain Injury Outcome
Daniel Svenkeson∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Bobby Sena, Meeko Oishi, Member, IEEE,
Suguna Pappu, and Howard Yonas

Abstract—Normal blood flow in the brain as a response to pressure fluctuations is commonly referred to as cerebral autoregulation. Linear, nonparametric models of cerebral autoregulation
were estimated for 77 human subjects afflicted with brain injury,
with mean arterial pressure used as input, and invasively measured
regional cerebral blood flow used as output. The data were continuously monitored from the beginning of subject hospital stay. Mean
transfer function gain as a function of frequency was calculated
for each subject over a limited time window spanning 48 h, starting postsurgery. The mean transfer function gain of the cerebral
autoregulation model provided a highly accurate, statistically significant, assessment of patient outcome. Subjects were accurately
grouped by outcome, with a high significance (p < 0.013) across
the entire measurement spectrum (0.005–0.25 Hz). In addition,
the frequency band from 0.1 to 0.25 Hz contains particularly low
variance in transfer function gain. This spectral region provides
a highly statistically significant (p < 1.7e-3) assessment of brain
injury patient health that is useful for outcome prediction.
Index Terms—Cerebral autoregulation (CA), control system,
frequency response, outcome prediction, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), system identification, transfer function (TF), traumatic brain injury (TBI).

I. INTRODUCTION
ARLY assessment of brain injury patient health is important for monitoring recovery progress and preventing
secondary injury to the brain. These indicators can lead to better
treatment and improved recovery rates by serving as feedback
for medical care staff on the usefulness or effectiveness of treat-

E

Manuscript received December 31, 2013; revised March 10, 2014; and
March 28, 2014; accepted April 6, 2014. date of publication April 17, 2014;
date of current version August 18, 2014. The work of D. Svenkeson and M.
Oishi was supported in part by the National Science Foundation Career Award
CMMI-1254990 and by the University of New Mexico, School of Engineering
start-up funding. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. Svenkeson is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131 USA
(e-mail: svenkesd@unm.edu).
B. Sena is with the Medical School, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
NM 87131 USA (e-mail: BobbySena@salud.unm.edu).
M. Oishi is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and
Center for Biomedical Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
NM 87131 USA (e-mail: oishi@unm.edu).
S. Pappu is with the Department of Neurosurgery, and Center for
Biomedical Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131
USA (e-mail: SPappu@salud.unm.edu).
H. Yonas is with the Department of Neurosurgery, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131 USA (e-mail: hyonas@salud.unm.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2317942

ments. In particular, medical care during the first two to three
days after injury occurrence is critical to the outcome of a patient. One indicator of healthy brain function is the status of
cerebral autoregulation (CA), commonly defined as the ability
of cerebral hemodynamics to maintain constant perfusion (blood
flow) to the brain despite changes in blood pressure [1]. CA is
important for healthy brain function, and the loss of autoregulation can result in an inadequate perfusion into brain tissue,
leading to secondary injuries after the initial brain trauma [2].
One empirical method of analyzing CA is through a transfer function (TF), an input–output representation of a system
amenable to frequency domain analysis. A single input, single
output (SISO) dynamical system is modeled with mean arterial
pressure (MAP) as the input and cerebral blood flow (CBF) as
the output. Researchers have previously used nonparametric TF
representations of the MAP to the CBF system to characterize
CA [3]–[9]. For example, in [5], [7], and [10], CA is described
in the frequency domain as a high-pass filter for healthy individuals. The simple input–output relationship between MAP
and CBF is likely an oversimplification of the full CA mechanism [11]–[15], but it is nonetheless useful (see coherence
discussion in Appendix). The gain and phase of the TF has been
used to distinguish between healthy and impaired autoregulation in [3]–[7], [16], [17]. More general spectral analysis, such
as coherence, has been used to assess linearity [7] and stationarity [14] for the various spectral components in the frequency
response curve.
In this paper, we construct a robust early assessment of patient
outcome, based on a TF representation of CA, from continuously
monitored data. Our method makes use of an invasive regional
measurement of CBF (rCBF), captured by a thermal dilution
probe, to monitor subjects continuously (similar to [18], [19])
for up to five days at a time. This contrasts with a more common method for measurement of CBF, transcranial doppler [3],
which is not amenable to long periods of monitoring due to
the bulky nature of the recording device and nonautonomous
nature of implementation. Long-term monitoring does present
challenges, such as medical intervention effects, disconnected
or poorly calibrated sensors, uncontrolled patient movement,
and other potentially data-corrupting events. Therefore, careful
preprocessing is necessary to be robust to data heterogeneity.
We hypothesize that TF gain is an accurate early assessor
of patient well being, and can be useful as a predictor of ultimate patient outcome. We believe that the increased gain in
patients with good outcome after a multiday monitored hospital
stay is indicative of the improved cerebral pressure-flow system that more closely resembles CA. Section I describes the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE I
PATIENT OUTCOME AND TYPE OF INJURY SUMMARY

TABLE II
AMOUNT OF SYNCHRONIZED, CONTINUOUS DATA AVAILABLE FOR EACH
OUTCOME GROUP AFTER DISCARDING CORRUPTED AND MISSING DATA
SECTIONS, THEN DIVIDING AVAILABLE DATA IN EACH MONITORING WINDOW
INTO 10-MIN BLOCKS

experimental setup, including difficulties of data collection in
a clinical setting. Section II describes the offline analysis of
the data, including preprocessing, identification of the TF, and
model validation. Section III describes the results of the TF
analysis across outcome groups. In Section IV, we discuss the
accuracy of the proposed assessment and its implications for
the critical care of brain injury patients. We conclude by summarizing our contribution and suggesting directions for future
work.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND DATA ANALYSIS
A. Patients and Measurements
The clinical portion of this study that includes patient monitoring took place at the University of New Mexico Hospital,
from march 2010 to june 2012, under patient consent and approval from the University of New Mexico institutional review
board under IRB number 11-260. A total of 77 subjects were
involved in this study.
Two different types of brain injuries are included: traumatic
brain injury (TBI) and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). TBI is
the result of blunt force trauma to the head that leads to changes
in blood flow and pressure in the brain. SAH is defined by bleeding into spaces around the brain, usually caused by a ruptured
aneurysm or physical trauma to the brain. Subject outcome was
determined upon release from intensive care as Good, Rehab,
Skilled Care, or Poor. Subjects categorized as Good went home
following their hospital stay without need for further rehabilitation or skilled care, and with minimal side effects. Subjects
categorized as Rehab were doing well enough to begin relevant
physical therapy to relearn life skills. They did not necessarily
require 24-h observation or complete assistance from a healthcare professional. The Skilled Care category encompassed subjects who were not well enough to begin rehabilitation therapy.
In this case, they likely need complete (or nearly complete)
assistance and observation. The Poor category was applied to
subjects where the outcome was death. A summary of the patients and their respective injury types and recovery groups is
shown in Table I.
In all of the subjects, monitoring began within 12 h of admission to the hospital (although exact times between injury
and the start of monitoring are unknown). The subjects were
continually monitored with a thermal dilution probe (Bowman
Hemedex) to gather rCBF data. The thermal dilution probe was
inserted invasively into white matter of the brain, typically on
the side opposite to the injury, in a standard location 1 cm in
front of the coronal suture and 3 cm lateral to the midline. The

probe was purposefully placed away from the location of the
injury so that the measured blood flow data were not corrupted
by local effects of the injury. MAP was monitored at the radial
artery. Data were concurrently captured by the component neuromonitoring system (CNS from Moberg Research, Inc.). MAP
was gathered at 0.5 Hz and rCBF at 1 Hz. In the following, we
consider data gathered within a monitoring window of length
12, 24, or 48 h starting from the first instance of data collection
for a given subject.
B. Methods
1) Preprocessing: Data were continuously recorded for the
duration of the hospital stay. Spurious data resulted when
patient movement affected the sensor readings, medical treatment caused extraneous effects, or sensors periodically ran selfcalibration routines that precluded data recording. Initial processing of the data created additional gaps when erroneous data
(e.g., physiologically impossible values) were removed.
Since gaps in the data occurred at different times for each
subject, we divided the data into smaller blocks in which both
MAP and rCBF were simultaneously and continuously collected. Block size was constrained below by a minimum length
necessary to contain all spectral information of interest, and
constrained above by interruptions due to data gaps. A balance between these two requirements led to division of the data
into blocks 10 min in length. Each data block is absent gaps or
anomalous data points and, hence, is amenable to consistent preprocessing techniques. The data in each block were resampled
to obtain simultaneous measurements at a sampling frequency
of 0.5 Hz. The blocks were individually high-pass filtered at
0.005 Hz, using a sixth-order Butterworth IIR filter, to detrend
the data and remove any sensor drift (e.g., from the thermal
dilution probe [20]). A summary of the volume of data available
after division into blocks is shown in Table II. For some subjects, the 12- and 24-h monitoring windows contained too many
erroneous sections to form a single complete 10-min block;

SVENKESON et al.: A NOVEL USE OF TRANSFER FUNCTION ESTIMATION FOR EARLY ASSESSMENT OF BRAIN INJURY OUTCOME

2415

Fig. 1. Dynamical system representation of the cerebral pressure-flow system
showing rCBF related to MAP through a TF H (ω).

therefore, the data did not constitute a single usable block. The
number of subjects shown in Table I is sometimes smaller than
Table II, as subjects without usable blocks were not included in
any further analysis.
2) TF Frequency Response Estimation: A nonparametric TF
frequency response can be estimated using Welch’s method of
averaging modified periodograms [21]. This method for spectral estimation has been shown to produce robust results with
average blood pressure and CBF velocity measured by transcranial Doppler [22]. Welch’s method produces an asymptotically
unbiased spectral estimate with reduced variance as compared
to a modified periodogram (assuming overlapping windows are
true independent random variables), without sacrificing spectral
resolution [23].
We presume (as in Fig. 1) that the signal x(t) represents
the input signal, MAP, and that the signal y(t) represents the
output signal, rCBF. Welch’s method was used to compute the
MAP (input) power spectral estimate S xx (ω), the rCBF (output)
power spectral estimate S y y (ω), and the input–output crossspectral estimate S xy (ω), for a single data block. For a data
block of length 300 points (600 s), the windowing for Welch’s
method was accomplished using a Hamming window with a
length of 100 points (200 s) and 50% overlap, which resulted in
five segments for averaging per data block. All spectral estimates
are evaluated at 128 frequencies between 0 Hz and the Nyquist
frequency, 0.25 Hz.
The TF frequency response estimate for a single data block i
for subject j is
Hji (ω) =

Sjxy ,i (ω)
Sjxx,i (ω)

.

(1)

The corresponding TF gain and phase for a single data block i
for subject j is
Gij (ω) = ((Hji (ω))2 + (Hji (ω))2 )1/2


i
(ω))
(H
j
φij (ω) = tan−1
.
(Hji (ω))
The mean TF gain and phase response for subject j
M j
Gj (ω) = M1 j
Gi (ω)
i=1 j
M j
φj (ω) = M1 j
φi (ω)
i=1 j

Fig. 2.

Process of calculating group mean TF from individual subject data.

where NO , O ∈ {Good, Rehab, Skilled Care, Poor} (see
Table II) is the number of patients in each outcome group.
3) Input/Output Signal Power: The average power spectral
estimate for all data blocks Mj in the monitoring window for
subject j was calculated for MAP and rCBF, respectively:
M j
xx
S j (ω) = M1 j
S xx,i (ω)
j=1 j
(5)
M
yy
y y ,i
S j (ω) = M1 j
j = 1 Sj (ω).
The group mean power spectrum for each outcome was calculated by averaging the power spectral estimate for the subjects
in a single group, for MAP and rCBF, respectively,
N O
xx
xx
S O (ω) = N1O
S (ω)
jO = 1 j
(6)
N O
yy
yy
S O (ω) = N1O
S (ω).
jO = 1 j
C. Handling of Outliers

(2)

(3)

is the mean of all single block estimates over a monitoring
window that contains Mj blocks for subject j. Finally, the group
mean TF gain and phase response for each outcome is given by
N O
GO (ω) = N1O
G (ω)
j = 1 jO
(4)
NOO
1
φO (ω) = N O
φ (ω)
jO = 1 j O

The mean values used to calculate group estimates (i.e., group
mean TF gain) can be sensitive to extreme outliers in both
the single patient calculations and the group calculations. In
order to study the effects of the outliers, we repeat the analysis
in Section II-B2 with median values, as well. The effect of
median statistical methods on significance of group separation
is compared to the effect of mean statistical methods, to examine
the potential negative impact of outliers.
III. RESULTS
In order to produce an early assessor, that is, predictive of patient outcome, we restrict our analysis to monitoring windows
of 12, 24, and 48 h. We focus primarily on the 48-h monitoring window in particular because it has highly significant results, while still representing an early stage of subject recovery.

2416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 3. Group mean TF gain comparison for all outcome groups. Standard
error lines (dashed) shown only for Rehab and Skilled Care outcomes. See
Fig. 4 for the standard error for Good and Poor groups (omitted here for clarity).

Unless otherwise specified, the results shown are using a 48-h
monitoring window. The delineation between outcome groups
Rehab and Skilled Care is inherently subjective and includes
highly heterogeneous symptoms in the subjects. A more accurate representation of outcome is likely a spectrum, with Good
and Poor at the extremes. Hence, to avoid classifications based
on subjective criteria, we focus primarily on the Good and Poor
groups, where lasting symptoms are fairly homogeneous. The
analysis, however, extends to all outcome groups and maintains
statistical significance.

Fig. 4. Group mean TF gain for outcome groups Good and Poor using data
over a 48-h monitoring window. Dashed lines indicate standard error of the
mean.

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE (p-VALUE) OF OUTCOME
GROUP SEPARATION

A. TF Gain
The group mean TF gain responses GO (ω) are shown in Fig. 3
for all outcome groups. To determine the statistical significance
of the outcome groups, we performed an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) test on the TF gain curves for all four outcome groups
at all frequency points. The average over the entire spectrum is
p = 0.0478 with a maximum of pm ax = 0.3528. The spectrum
from 0.1 to 0.25 Hz has particularly low variability, and evaluating the ANOVA test over this subset of frequencies results
in pavg = 4.3e-3 with a maximum of pm ax = 0.0396. The improved significance of this subset of the spectrum (compared to
the entire spectrum) is due to the largely overlapping curves of
the Good and Rehab outcome groups in low frequencies (see
Fig. 3).
Fig. 4 shows the group mean TF gain GO (ω) for Good and
Poor. Significant differences exist in the population means for
the entire spectrum. Statistical analysis of the group mean separation of GGood (ω) and GPo or (ω) was performed at each frequency point using Welch’s t-test, chosen under the assumption
that the outcome groups may have unequal variances. The results of the t-test are given as a p value at each frequency point,
indicating the probability of the null hypothesis that the groups
have equal mean values. While threshold for significance is

p = 0.05, we also consider p values as an indicator of relative
robustness of the result.
For the group mean TF gain responses, p values reach a maximum over all frequencies of pm ax = 0.013 near 0.05 Hz and
have an average value, over all frequencies, of pavg = 1.8e-3.
Hence mean TF gain, calculated from a monitoring window of
48 h, is a statistically significant early assessor of the ultimate
outcome of a subject and, therefore, may be useful as an outcome predictor across the entire spectrum (0.005–0.25 Hz). A
summary of the p values is shown in Table III.
We again consider the subset of the spectrum higher than
0.1 Hz (0.1–0.25 Hz), which demonstrates a highly statistically
significant region of GO (ω) between groups and, therefore, low
p values. This spectral region of interest features a maximum
value of pm ax = 1.7e-3, and an average value of pavg = 2.9e-4.
In contrast, the spectral region between approximately 0.05 and
0.1 Hz shows the highest amount of GO (ω) variability, also
shown by the increased width in the standard error lines in Fig. 4
throughout this region. Therefore, assessment, or prediction, of
subject outcome is best accomplished when this high-variability
region is ignored, and the spectral region of interest from 0.1 to
0.25 Hz is used.

SVENKESON et al.: A NOVEL USE OF TRANSFER FUNCTION ESTIMATION FOR EARLY ASSESSMENT OF BRAIN INJURY OUTCOME

2417

Fig. 5. Group mean MAP spectral power for Good and Poor outcome groups
over a 48-h monitoring window. Dashed lines indicate standard error of the
mean.
Fig. 7. Group mean TF gain for 12- (x’s), 24- (dashed), and 48-h (solid)
monitoring windows.

0.1 Hz, with pm ax = 1.5e-3 for TF gain, and pm ax = 0.078 for
rCBF.
C. Effect of Time Span

Fig. 6. Group mean rCBF signal power for Good and Poor outcome groups
over a 48-h monitoring window. Dashed lines indicate standard error of the
mean.

The analysis described in Section II-B2 and II-B3 was performed on three different monitoring windows: 12, 24, and 48 h.
The corresponding group mean TF estimates GO (ω) are shown
in Fig. 7. The t-tests have maximum values of pm ax = 0.143 for
the 12-h time monitoring window, pm ax = 0.072 for the 24-h
time monitoring window, and pm ax = 0.013 for the 48-h time
monitoring window. Fig. 7 shows the effect of the length of the
monitoring window on the computed group mean TF gain. As
shown in Table III, all three windows produce statistically significant results on average, although the longer windows produce
more significant results (lower p-values). The only monitoring
window to maintain significance across all frequencies is the
48-h window.

B. Input and Output Signal Power

D. Median Statistics

We also analyzed power spectral estimates of MAP and rCBF
individually to evaluate their potential relevance in grouping the
patients for outcomes Good and Poor. The magnitude of the
xx
group mean spectral power estimate for the input (MAP) S O (ω)
yy
is shown in Fig. 5 and the output (rCBF) S O (ω) in Fig. 6.
Welch’s t-test was used to determine the statistical significance
of the difference in the populations at each frequency point (in
the same manner as in Section III-A). The results shown in
Table III compare the p-values for the individual signals as well
as for the TF gain response.
Although rCBF is a better predictor than MAP, TF gain outperforms both rCBF and MAP alone. TF gain is an order of
magnitude better in most spectral areas considered, with overall
pm ax = 0.013 for TF gain, and pm ax = 0.078 for rCBF. This
trend is particularly evident in the frequency spectrum above

In order to examine the effects of extreme outliers, we repeated the analysis of Section II-B2, but median calculations
were done in place of mean calculations in (3) and (4) when
calculating the subject and group TF gain response. We compared the two extreme groups Good and Poor for statistical
significance using the Wilcoxon rank sum test, which is a test
on the null hypothesis that two populations have equal medians.
When considering the entire spectrum, the maximum p-value
is pm ax = 1.5e-3, compared to pm ax = 0.013 when using mean
statistics (all using a 48 h monitoring window). When examining the spectral region of interest (0.1–0.25 Hz) the maximum
improves to pm ax = 8.3e-5, compared to pm ax = 1.7e-3 when
using mean statistics (all using a 48 h monitoring window). The
improvement in the statistical significance when using median
statistics indicates that outliers do have a negative impact on

2418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 8. Group mean TF gain for outcome groups Good and Poor using data
over a 48-h monitoring window, separated by injury: SAH (top) and TBI
(bottom). Relative scarcity of TBI subjects with a Good outcome (three out
of 77 total subjects) warrants caution in direct comparison to the other injuryoutcome scenarios.

excluded subject according to the result
⎫
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎨ 1
	
|GX (ω) − GO (ω)|
P = arg min
O ⎪
⎪
⎭
⎩ Nω
0.1 ≤ ω ≤ 0.25
(7)
where GX (ω) is the excluded subject, Nω is the number of
frequency points evaluated between 0.1 and 0.25 Hz, and O ∈
{Good, Poor} or O ∈ {Not Poor, Poor}. The Not Poor outcome
group is a combination of Skilled Care, Rehab, and Good. This
process was repeated for each individual subject. The prediction
was deemed accurate if the LOOA classification P matched the
actual subject outcome. For example, if the excluded subject was
closer to the Poor outcome group mean than the Good outcome
group mean according to (7), it was classified as Poor. If the
actual subject outcome was Poor, then the prediction is deemed
accurate. We performed the LOOA on two different scenarios,
one which considered the Poor versus Good outcomes only,
and one which considered the Poor outcome versus all other
outcomes (we labelled this group Not Poor for simplicity). For
the first scenario, the Poor outcome prediction accuracy was
89%, and the Good outcome prediction accuracy was 66%. For
the second scenario, the Poor outcome prediction accuracy was
89%, and the Not Poor prediction accuracy was 59%.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 9. Group mean magnitude squared coherence for all outcome groups
using data over a 48-h monitoring window.

the group mean TF gain estimates. The impact is not enough to
discount the group mean TF gain as an accurate assessment and
useful for a predictor, but it is possible that performance can be
improved through elimination of the outliers either in the data
collection environment, preprocessing, or group calculations.
E. Prediction
We implemented leave-one-out analysis (LOOA) by repeating the group mean TF gain curves while excluding a single
subject, and using the excluded subject to validate the results.
Validation was done by determining the minimum average distance P from the excluded subject to the group mean gain
curves for the spectrum from 0.1 to 0.25 Hz, and classifying the

One of the most important reasons for early assessment
of CA is the potential for improved outcome through modified treatment strategies for individuals that have experienced
brain injury. We claim that calculation of the mean TF gain
curve G(ω) of input MAP to output rCBF, for a patient with
a severe brain injury, can be used as an early assessor of patient outcome with high statistical significance. Specifically, the
subset of the spectrum from 0.1 to 0.25 Hz is particularly useful as an early assessor and potentially as an early predictor of
outcome.
By developing a technique that seeks to enable early prediction of outcome, we aim to prevent secondary injury that may
develop. Previous work correlates patient outcome with monitored parameters [3], [24]–[27], but does not limit the data to
the beginning stages of the injury. The results may be heavily
skewed by the physiology of a patient long after brain injury,
and therefore after permanent damage from secondary injury.
Our method has been shown to produce a statistically significant assessment within a critical time period, early enough in
the critical care phase to be useful in clinical practice.
Our findings of the gain and phase response of our CA model
differ in some ways from previous studies where frequency response similar to a high-pass filter was found [5], [7], [10].
Previous attempts have examined CA health using TF analysis,
and found significance in TF phase [4]–[6], [15], [28], [29].
However, we did not find significant trends in TF phase in our
dataset (max p = 0.99, average p = 0.68 between Good and
Poor groups, results shown in Appendix Fig. 10). Furthermore,
we note that, the group mean TF gain curves do not display the
characteristics of a high-pass filter [6]–[8], [10], [30]. However,

SVENKESON et al.: A NOVEL USE OF TRANSFER FUNCTION ESTIMATION FOR EARLY ASSESSMENT OF BRAIN INJURY OUTCOME

Fig. 10. Group mean TF phase comparison for all outcome groups using data
over a 48-h monitoring window. Dashed lines show standard error.

higher gains, particularly at high frequencies, are correlated
with improved outcomes. In existing high-pass filter models, a
healthy CA response is equated with low gain in low frequencies and higher gain in the high frequency range. Our study
shows that the better outcomes show a higher gain in the highfrequency region and, therefore, more closely exhibit high-pass
filter characteristics than worse outcomes. We suggest that highfrequency TF gain in this context may be considered a measure
of CA health, and overall patient health with regard to the final
outcome.
We hypothesize that there may be methodological reasons
why our findings do not show the common high-pass filter characteristic, and why the phase measurement is not significant
between groups. First, all the subjects being monitored have
suffered a severe injury and surgery prior to data collection. It
should not be expected that any of the subjects exhibit a normal CA response because of the recency and severity of injury.
Second, the thermal dilution probe may have measurement TF
characteristics that are not accounted for in the dynamical systems model that serves as the basis for our calculations. Finally,
the CBF measurement used in our study is by definition a very
localized measurement. A direct comparison with a more global
measurement of CBF taken with transcranial Doppler (commonly used in previous studies) may not be valid, as localized
flow in small vessels may have different characteristics. Further
work is needed to compare classical measurement techniques
with the invasive rCBF measure, and also to compare CA in
normal subjects with injured subjects, in order to determine the
causes for these unexpected results. Comparison with classical
measurement techniques would also give insight as to whether
our methods are translatable to other measurement techniques.
Our speculation on the physiological causes that lead to different gain responses, according to injury severity, is based on
cerebrovascular resistance. Normally, increased gain in highfrequency regions of CA may be related to normal action of
compensatory myogenic and metabolic mechanisms in cerebral

2419

blood vessels. In a healthy individual, relatively constant CBF is
achieved through mediation of cerebrovascular resistance [31]
by these mechanisms [1]. Under normal conditions with intact
CA, slow changes in MAP do not cause major changes in CBF.
Fast MAP changes, however, are expected to cause a short-lived
change in CBF. Intuitively speaking, loss of CA is evident when
changes in MAP are transferred to CBF regardless of the frequency. Our results shown in Figs. 3 and 4 do not follow this
intuition, and in fact the entire gain curve is shifted downward
according to severity of injury. This is counter intuitive to what
one expects with a loss of CA and leads us to believe that a
low TF gain in high-frequency regions may indicate a specific
mode of CA failure. In general, low gain is analogous to a muted
system response, i.e., large changes in the input only result in
small changes at the output. Therefore, low gain in cerebral
blood pressure-flow response is abnormal in higher frequencies
and may indicate elevated cerebrovascular resistance. If cerebrovascular resistance is at a relatively high steady-state level,
compensatory mechanisms are unable to affect flow in the same
manner as a healthy system. This results in low gain transference
of changes in pressure to CBF, no matter the frequency, and may
indicate a physiologically damaging state of the pressure-flow
system. We cannot draw any conclusions as to exactly how this
high resistance state of the cerebral blood pressure-flow system
is related to healthy CA; however, the TF gain estimate is useful
as an early assessment in an unhealthy brain. Further work is
needed to determine the implications of our work in defining
CA in an injured brain.
In our analysis, we do not distinguish between the two major
types of brain injury, TBI and SAH. However, since the two
types of injuries may have different mechanisms for secondary
injury, we repeated our analysis for the Good and Poor outcome groups separately for TBI subjects and for SAH subjects.
The group mean TF gain curves separated by type of injury are
shown in Fig. 8. The results for SAH subjects closely resemble
that of the combined injury gain curves shown in Fig. 4. For TBI
subjects, the gain at frequencies above 0.1 Hz resemble those in
Fig. 4, in that the two outcomes have distinctly different gain,
but at lower frequencies, the gain curves have similar values.
This could be due to the relative scarcity of TBI subjects with
a Good outcome (three out of 77 total subjects) in our study.
Hence our methods may be robust to the type of brain injury,
although further study with more TBI subjects with a Good
outcome are needed.
The LOOA performed in this study is a simple method of
predicting the subject outcomes. We chose to limit our outcome
prediction to well defined, dichotomous, groups such as Poor
and Good outcomes, as well as Poor and Not Poor. A more
accurate classification of outcomes may allow a more accurate
and useful prediction. Beyond more accurate classification, a
more rigorous detection or estimation method and algorithm
may drastically improve the prediction accuracy. As a preliminary step, the early assessor in this paper demonstrates the
potential utility of creating an outcome predictor specific to the
needs of a researcher or clinician.
Beyond showing that TF gain may be useful as a predictor, we have also tailored our methods to a data collection

2420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

scenario that needs almost no supervision, special case treatment, or specialized personnel to implement. Other than initial
setup procedures, no further intervention is needed by humans
to perform the analysis. Data collection and TF gain analysis
can be done automatically over various time monitoring window
sizes, and this study has shown it to be a predictor with as little as
48 h of data. Further analysis is needed to determine a minimum
monitoring window size needed for an accurate prediction. The
dataset available in our study makes this difficult because of the
scarcity of good data within the shorter windows, summarized
in Table II. It is possible that further refinement to preprocessing techniques could salvage more usable data from regions of
poor data quality. A new experiment with a focus on collecting
quality data streams for all patients specifically from the start of
treatment would enable us to pinpoint the minimum necessary
monitoring window length needed for statistical significance.
V. CONCLUSION
Our study has shown that an invasive, regional measurement
of CBF, used in concert with MAP measurements in a TF model,
is a statistically significant predictor of brain injury patient outcome. While the entire spectrum is a predictor, we have found
that significance improves dramatically when the subset of the
spectrum from 0.1 to 0.25 Hz are considered. Prediction or early
indication of patient outcome could lead to improved treatments
and valuable feedback for health care professionals.
APPENDIX
SUPPLEMENTAL TF MEASURES
Group mean coherence for MAP and rCBF is shown in Fig. 9.
The coherence was calculated for an individual 10 min block of
data and then averaged over all blocks to form a single subject
mean coherence, then the single subject mean coherence values
were averaged over each outcome group to form a group mean
coherence. This process is the same used for all group mean
results shown in this paper, see Section II-B2 for details.
Our assumption that MAP and rCBF form a dynamical system
from which we can estimate a TF relies on massive averaging
on the individual level (all 10-min blocks form an individual TF,
and the gains for each block are all averaged) and when forming
group mean gain curves. If our assumption is correct, then the
resulting averaged gain should converge to a value that is representative of the true nature of the dynamical system. The convergence of similar outcome groups to similar gain curves with
statistical significance shows that this is successfully happening.
Low coherence may indicate the limitations of using a linear,
SISO model for CA. Further work is needed to determine if inclusion of coherence for validation of data will improve results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. Olin and M. Krasberg
for their assistance with data collection and data management,
respectively. The author would also like to thank Dr. Pattichis
for feedback on LOOA and other aspects of this work.

REFERENCES
[1] O. Paulson, S. Strandgaard, and L. Edvinsson, “Cerebral autoregulation,”
Cerebrovasc. Brain Metab. Rev., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 161–192, 1989.
[2] J. Miller and D. Becker, “Secondary insults to the injured brain,” J. Roy.
College Surg. Edinburgh, vol. 27, no. 5, p. 292, 1982.
[3] C. A. Giller, “The frequency-dependent behavior of cerebral autoregulation,” Neurosurgery, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 362–368, 1990.
[4] R. B. Panerai, A. W. R. Kelsall, J. M. Rennie, and D. Evans, “Analysis
of cerebral blood flow autoregulation in neonates,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 779–788, Aug. 1996.
[5] R. Panerai, J. Rennie, A. Kelsall, and D. Evans, “Frequency-domain analysis of cerebral autoregulation from spontaneous fluctuations in arterial
blood pressure,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 315–322,
1998.
[6] R. R. Diehl, D. Linden, D. Lücke, and P. Berlit, “Phase relationship between cerebral blood flow velocity and blood pressure a clinical test of
autoregulation,” Stroke, vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1801–1804, 1995.
[7] R. Zhang, J. H. Zuckerman, C. A. Giller, and B. D. Levine, “Transfer
function analysis of dynamic cerebral autoregulation in humans,” Amer.
J. Physiol., vol. 274, no. 1, pp. H233–H241, 1998.
[8] A. P. Blaber, R. L. Bondar, F. Stein, P. T. Dunphy, P. Moradshahi,
M. S. Kassam, and R. Freeman, “Transfer function analysis of cerebral
autoregulation dynamics in autonomic failure patients,” Stroke, vol. 28,
no. 9, pp. 1686–1692, 1997.
[9] H.-H. Hu, T. B.-J. Kuo, W.-J. Wong, Y.-O. Luk, C.-M. Chern, L.-C. Hsu,
and W.-Y. Sheng, “Transfer function analysis of cerebral hemodynamics
in patients with carotid stenosis,” J. Cerebral Blood Flow Metab., vol. 19,
no. 4, pp. 460–465, 1999.
[10] T. Peng, A. B. Rowley, P. N. Ainslie, M. J. Poulin, and S. J. Payne, “Multivariate system identification for cerebral autoregulation,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 308–320, 2008.
[11] R. Panerai, S. Deverson, P. Mahony, P. Hayes, and D. Evans, “Effect of
CO2 on dynamic cerebral autoregulation measurement,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 265–275, 1999.
[12] T. Peng, A. B. Rowley, P. N. Ainslie, M. J. Poulin, and S. J. Payne,
“Wavelet phase synchronization analysis of cerebral blood flow autoregulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 960–968, Apr.
2010.
[13] R. B. Panerai, S. L. Dawson, and J. F. Potter, “Linear and nonlinear analysis of human dynamic cerebral autoregulation,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 277,
no. 3, pp. H1089–H1099, 1999.
[14] C. A. Giller and M. Mueller, “Linearity and non-linearity in cerebral
hemodynamics,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 633–646, 2003.
[15] M. Latka, M. Turalska, M. Glaubic-Latka, W. Kolodziej, D. Latka, and
B. J. West, “Phase dynamics in cerebral autoregulation,” Amer. J. Physiol.
Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 289, no. 5, pp. H2272–H2279, 2005.
[16] F. P. Tiecks, A. M. Lam, R. Aaslid, and D. W. Newell, “Comparison of
static and dynamic cerebral autoregulation measurements,” Stroke, vol. 26,
no. 6, pp. 1014–1019, 1995.
[17] R. B. Panerai, R. P. White, H. S. Markus, and D. H. Evans, “Grading of
cerebral dynamic autoregulation from spontaneous fluctuations in arterial
blood pressure,” Stroke, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 2341–2346, 1998.
[18] P. J. Sioutos, J. A. Orozco, L. P. Carter, M. E. Weinand, A. J. Hamilton,
and F. C. Williams, “Continuous regional cerebral cortical blood flow
monitoring in head-injured patients,” Neurosurgery, vol. 36, no. 5,
pp. 943–950, 1995.
[19] S.-C. Lee, J.-F. Chen, and S.-T. Lee, “Continuous regional cerebral blood
flow monitoring in the neurosurgical intensive care unit,” J. Clin. Neurosci., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 520–523, 2005.
[20] S. Wolf, P. Vajkoczy, J. Dengler, L. Schürer, and P. Horn, “Drift of
R
the bowman hemedex
cerebral blood flow monitor between calibration
cycles,” in Intracranial Pressure and Brain Monitoring XIV. New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2012, pp. 187–190.
[21] P. Welch, “The use of fast Fourier transform for the estimation of power
spectra: A method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms,” IEEE Trans. Audio Electroacoust., vol. AC-15, no. 2, pp. 70–
73, Jun. 1967.
[22] E. D. Gommer, E. Shijaku, W. H. Mess, and J. P. Reulen, “Dynamic cerebral autoregulation: Different signal processing methods without influence
on results and reproducibility,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 48, no. 12,
pp. 1243–1250, 2010.
[23] A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing,
3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs. NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, Aug. 2009.

SVENKESON et al.: A NOVEL USE OF TRANSFER FUNCTION ESTIMATION FOR EARLY ASSESSMENT OF BRAIN INJURY OUTCOME

[24] M. Czosnyka, P. Smielewski, P. Kirkpatrick, D. K. Menon, and
J. D. Pickard, “Monitoring of cerebral autoregulation in head-injured patients,” Stroke, vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 1829–1834, 1996.
[25] S. K. Piechnik, X. Yang, M. Czosnyka, P. Smielewski, S. H. Fletcher,
A. L. Jones, and J. D. Pickard, “The continuous assessment of cerebrovascular reactivity: A validation of the method in healthy volunteers,” Anesthesia Analgesia, vol. 89, no. 4, pp. 944–944, 1999.
[26] M. Czosnyka, P. Smielewski, S. Piechnik, L. A. Steiner, and J. D. Pickard,
“Cerebral autoregulation following head injury,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 95,
no. 5, pp. 756–763, 2001.
[27] C.-W. Lu, M. Czosnyka, J.-S. Shieh, A. Smielewska, J. D. Pickard, and
P. Smielewski, “Complexity of intracranial pressure correlates with outcome after traumatic brain injury,” Brain, vol. 135, no. 8, pp. 2399–2408,
2012.
[28] Y. Liu, A. Birch, and R. Allen, “Dynamic cerebral autoregulation assessment using an ARX model: Comparative study using step response and
phase shift analysis,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 647–653, 2003.

2421

[29] E. W. Lang, R. R. Diehl, and H. M. Mehdorn, “Cerebral autoregulation
testing after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: The phase relationship
between arterial blood pressure and cerebral blood flow velocity,” Crit.
Care Med., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 158–163, 2001.
[30] R. R. Diehl, D. Linden, D. Lücke, and P. Berlit, “Spontaneous blood
pressure oscillations and cerebral autoregulation,” Clin. Auton. Res., vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 7–12, 1998.
[31] R. Aaslid, K.-F. Lindegaard, W. Sorteberg, and H. Nornes, “Cerebral
autoregulation dynamics in humans.,” Stroke, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 45–52,
1989.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

