IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

2507

Coherent Photoacoustic-Ultrasound Correlation
and Imaging
Fei Gao, Student Member, IEEE, Xiaohua Feng, and Yuanjin Zheng∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Both photoacoustics and ultrasound have been researched extensively but separately. In this letter, we report an
initial study on the coherent correlation between pulsed photoacoustic wave and pulse-echo ultrasound wave. By illuminating an
object with a pulsed laser and external ultrasound sequentially,
both the endogenous photoacoustic wave and pulse-echo ultrasound wave are received and coherently correlated, demonstrating
enhanced signal-to-noise ratio. Image contrast of the proposed coherent photoacoustic-ultrasound imaging is also demonstrated to
be improved significantly on vessel-mimicking phantom, due to fusion of the optical absorption and ultrasound reflection contrasts
by coherent correlation of either conventional laser-induced photoacoustic imaging or pulse-echo ultrasound imaging separately.
Index Terms—Coherent correlation, image contrast, photoacoustic imaging, signal-to-noise ratio, ultrasound.

Fig. 1. (a) Diagrams of the coherent PAUS correlation, where the object is
excited by both a pulsed laser and external ultrasound. (b) Schematic of the
incoherent detection (top), and coherent PAUS correlation including time-shift,
multiplication, and integration (bottom), where ∗ represents the convolution.

I. INTRODUCTION
HOTOACOUSTIC and thermoacoustic effects refer to the
acoustic generation thermoelastically induced by pulsed
electromagnetic wave, e.g., laser, microwave, or very recently proposed magnetic mediation [1]–[4]. In the recent
decade, the photoacoustic technique shows significant potentials for biomedical sensing and imaging, ranging from contrastenhanced molecular imaging to whole-body tomography of
small animals [5]–[12]. Although photoacoustic imaging could
break through the optical diffusion limit by converting photons
to ultrasound and sustaining high spatial resolution in deep tissue, the sensitive detection of the weak photoacoustic signal
is a long-standing challenge especially for deep tissue imaging [13], due to strong optical scattering/absorption, very low
energy conversion efficiency from optical to acoustic energy,
and strict ANSI safety standard limit (<20 mJ/cm2 ) [14]. In
a typical photoacoustic imaging system, a pulsed laser will
illuminate the sample to induce the transient acoustic emission, which will be detected by ultrasound transducers for

P

Manuscript received November 18, 2013; revised January 30, 2014 and
April 2, 2014; accepted April 26, 2014. Date of publication April 29, 2014;
date of current version August 18, 2014. This work was supported by the
Singapore National Research Foundation under its Exploratory/Developmental
Grant (NMRC/EDG/1062/2012) and administered by the Singapore Ministry of
Health’s National Medical Research Council. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
F. Gao and X. Feng are with the School of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail:
fgao1@e.ntu.edu.sg; xfeng1@e.ntu.edu.sg).
∗ Y. Zheng is with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail:
yjzheng@ntu.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2321007

image reconstruction. Due to sharing of the same ultrasound
components with conventional pulse-echo ultrasound imaging, recent studies have demonstrated the feasibility of
photoacoustic-ultrasound dual-modality imaging approaches
[15]–[20]. However, these dual-modality approaches all separately explore the pulsed photoacoustic wave and pulse-echo
ultrasound wave for complementary imaging reconstructions.
Up to now, the coherent correlation between endogenous photoacoustic wave and exogenous ultrasound wave has been an
untapped area to be explored.
In this letter, we report the initial research on the study of intrinsic physical correlation between endogenous photoacoustic
wave and exogenous ultrasound wave coming from the same
object by fusing the optical absorption and ultrasound reflection
contrasts based on the coherent detection approach (see Fig. 1).
The proposed coherent photoacoustic-ultrasound (PAUS) correlation is implemented by cross-correlating (multiplication and
integration) the two signals to enhance the weak PA signal and
suppress the uncorrelated strong noise significantly, leading to
significantly enhanced signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The proposed coherent PAUS imaging is also demonstrated through
a vessel-mimicking phantom experiment with improved contrast significantly than either conventional pulsed photoacoustic
imaging or pulse-echo ultrasound imaging separately.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Theory of the Coherent PAUS Correlation
In communication, radar, and sonar systems, coherent detection (also called matched filtering) is usually applied to recover
the weak received signal r (t) immersed in the white Gaussian
noise introduced by the communication channel [21]. Specifically, a template signal s (t) that is a replica of the transmitted

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

signal highly correlated with the received signal is used to crosscorrelate with the received signal r (t) to achieve the maximum
SNR:
 +∞
s∗ (t) × r (t + τ ) dτ
(1)
s, r (t) =
−∞

where s∗ (t) is the complex conjugate of s (t). In a photoacoustic procedure, the laser-induced photoacoustic wave p (r, t)
could be treated as the weak received signal suffering the strong
noise induced in the acoustic channel. To optimally detect the
weakp (r, t), a replica of the true photoacoustic signal is required, which is however physically not available. Here, we
propose a method to obtain a highly correlated template signal
by transmitting and receiving the pulse-echo ultrasound signal
u (r, t) with a controlled similar pattern to the photoacoustic
signal coming from the same object and experiencing the same
acoustic channel response.
First, the pattern (time-domain waveform and frequencydomain spectrum) of the photoacoustic signal should be estimated. As shown in Fig. 1(a), using ultrashort laser illumination,
the induced photoacoustic wave p (r, t) in a nonviscous medium
could be described as [22]
∇2 p (r, t) −

1 ∂2
β ∂
H (r, t)
p (r, t) = −
vs2 ∂t2
Cp ∂t

(2)

where H (r, t) = μa (r) Φ (r, t) is the heating function, defining
the thermal energy deposited at position r and time t by the laser
illumination related with the optical absorption coefficient μa
and optical radiation fluence rate Φ, Cp is the specific heat,
β is the volume expansion coefficient, and vs is the acoustic
velocity. The solution of the wave equation using Green function
approach is




1
| r − r |
1 ∂


H
r
,
t
−
p (r, t) =
.
dr
4πvs2 ∂t | r − r |
vs
(3)
According to (3), the detected pressure at location r and time
t comes from sources over a spherical shell centered at r with
a radius of |r − r|. For a spherical absorber with radius a, the
photoacoustic wave could have an analytical solution [17]
p (r, t) = H (r) U (a − | R − vs t |) (R − vs t)/2R

1, x ≥ 0
where
U (x) =
0, x < 0.

(4)

Here, R is the distance between the absorber and the detector.
It is predicted that the pulsewidth of the “N-shape” photoacoustic signal is proportional to the size of the absorber, i.e., the
laser spot size when the object is much larger. In fact, the photoacoustic signal in real situation pr (r, t) also depends on the
unknown object’s properties, and suffering unknown acoustic
channel impulse response I (r, t), which could be expressed as
pr (r, t) = I (r, t) ∗ p (r, t) + N1 (r, t)

(5)

where I (r, t) is related to the unknown object’s properties,
acoustic channel’s attenuation, distortion, and ultrasound transducer’s frequency response. N1 (r, t) is related to the additive white Gaussian noise of the acoustic transmission channel.

The one-way propagation delay of a photoacoustic signal from
the object to the detector is τp = d/vs with the distance d and the
acoustic speed vs of 1.5 mm/μs, as shown in Fig. 1(b). A template signal that is highly correlated with the real photoacoustic
signal is to be generated. It should come from the same object
and experience the same acoustic channel impulse response and
transducer’s frequency response. Therefore, here, we employ an
external ultrasound signal u (r, t), which is designed to highly
resemble the photoacoustic signal: u (r, t) ≈ p (r, t). Practically, we can transmit a controlled ultrasound signal, which
has similar waveform and spectrum as the photoacoustic signal
as much as possible. Then, the received pulse-echo ultrasound
signal ur (r, t) is expressed as
ur (r, t) = Γ × I (r, t) ∗ u (r, t) + N2 (r, t)

(6)

where Γ is the reflection coefficient due to the acoustic
impedance mismatch and the round-trip propagation delay of
the pulse-echo ultrasound signal is τu = 2d/vs ; then, we have
τu = 2τp . According to (5) and (6), the photoacoustic signal and
ultrasound signal are highly correlated because they are from
the same object, experiencing the same acoustic channel and
ultrasound transducer’s same frequency response, i.e., sharing
the same unknown I (r, t).
In conventional photoacoustic imaging and ultrasound imaging, as well as the recently proposed dual-modality PAUS imaging [15]–[20], the laser-induced photoacoustic signal and pulseecho ultrasound signal are processed separately to acquire two
independent images. In this letter, we propose to coherently correlate these two signals that are highly correlated based on the
above analysis as shown at the bottom of Fig. 1(b), to achieve
significantly enhanced SNR and image contrast through cross
correlation:
PAUS (r, t) = ur (r) , pr (r) (t)
 +∞
=
u∗r (r, t) × pr (r, t + τ ) dτ .

(7)

−∞

Similar to coherent detection in communication, radar, and
sonar systems, the coherent PAUS correlation is able to significantly improve the detection of SNR of the received signals
by integrating the weak but correlated the signal pattern, and
suppressing the strong but uncorrelated noise and interference.
Moreover, the coherent correlation between photoacoustic and
pulse-echo ultrasound signals fuses optical absorption and ultrasound reflection from the same object, which is expected to significantly improve the image contrast. In addition, considering
the propagation delay relationship d = vs Δτ = vs (τu − τp ),
the depth information could be extracted accurately by performing both the forward and backward cross correlations as
shown in Fig. 1(b), where the distance between two peaks indicates the accurate depth information. Next, we will demonstrate
the experiments of coherent PAUS correlation and preliminary
imaging results.
B. Experimental Setup
The diagram of the experimental setup for the coherent PAUS
correlation and imaging is shown in Fig. 2. A Q-switched pulsed

GAO et al.: COHERENT PHOTOACOUSTIC-ULTRASOUND CORRELATION AND IMAGING

2509

Fig. 3. (a) Measured time-domain photoacoustic and ultrasound signals in
high SNR situation for system evaluation. (b) Spectrums of them with similar
central frequency and bandwidth.

Fig. 2. Experimental setup of the coherent PAUS correlation and imaging.
ConL, condenser lens; FC, fiber collimator; MMF, multimode fiber; ND, neutral
density; BS, beam splitter; PD, photodiode; US, ultrasound transducer.

laser (FDSS 532-1000, CryLaS, GmbH) with 532-nm wavelength and 1.8-ns pulsewidth is used to provide the light source.
The output laser beam is attenuated by a neutral density filter
(NDC-50C-2M, Thorlabs) and then focused into the fiber collimator by a condenser lens (LB1471, Thorlabs). To handle the
high-peak power laser, multimode fiber is adopted. The output of the multimode fiber (MHP550L02, Thorlabs) is focused
by another pair of condenser lens to a spot with 3-mm diameter, generating the “N-shape” photoacoustic signal of 0.5-MHz
central frequency based on an analytic solution. Then, a beam
splitter and a photodiode (DET10A, Thorlabs) are used to
monitor the laser intensity fluctuation. The vessel-mimicking
phantom is a silicone tube (outer diameter: 3 mm, inner diameter: 2.2 mm) filled with the porcine blood pumped by a
syringe, which is designed to model the brain superior sagittal sinus (SSS), human’s carotid, jugular with similar vessel
diameter (1 ∼ 5 mm) and measured the photoacoustic signal waveform [23], [24]. The phantom is immersed in water
for optimum light transparency and acoustic coupling. A focused ultrasound transducer (V303-SU, Olympus, central frequency: 0.9 MHz, –6 dB bandwidth: 59.74%, normalized sensitivity at 0.5 MHz: 20%) driven by an ultrasound pulser-receiver
(5077PR, Olympus) working in its transmission mode is used to
excite the exogenous ultrasound signal, which is matched to the
predicted photoacoustic signal’s central frequency, and receives
both the laser-induced photoacoustic wave and pulse-echo ultrasound wave with pulser-receiver working in its receiving mode
sequentially and separately. (In some cases, both signals can be
recorded at the same time but resolved in time because they
appear at different time locations.) Both the pulsed laser and
pulser-receiver in its transmission mode are sequentially triggered by a function generator (33250A, Agilent) with two TTL
trigger signals. Then, the acoustic signals received by the transducer and pulser-receiver in its receiving mode are recorded by
an oscilloscope (WaveRunner 640Zi, LeCroy) and sent to PC
for post data processing. The water tank could be moved by the
XY translation stage (XYR1, Thorlabs) for raster scanning to

acquire imaging data. Before the measurement, laser focusing
and ultrasound transducer are well aligned by manually tuning
the position of the ultrasound transducer until the maximum
photoacoustic signal is achieved and observed from an oscilloscope. To identify the photoacoustic and pulse-echo ultrasound
signals from laser burst induced jitter noise, proper time-gating
is applied to remove the unwanted interference before the coherent PAUS correlation and image reconstruction. Moreover,
the laser-induced jitter noise is uncorrelated with the photoacoustic and pulse-echo ultrasound signals and could be easily
suppressed by the proposed correlated PAUS approach.
III. RESULTS
A. System Evaluation
Before performing the coherent PAUS correlation and imaging experiments, the validity evaluation of the proposed system
is conducted by detecting both the photoacoustic wave and ultrasound wave in high-SNR situation shown in Fig. 3(a), where
the signals are aligned for intuitive comparison. The signal patterns of both photoacoustic and ultrasound waves achieve good
agreement in both time domain [see Fig. 3(a)] and frequency
domain [see Fig. 3(b)], showing the strong coherent correlation
between them.
B. Signal SNR Improvement
First, to prove the feasibility of detecting the weak photoacoustic signal by cross-correlating it with a strong and correlated
ultrasound signal, the separate laser-induced pulsed photoacoustic signal and pulse-echo ultrasound signal are recorded sequentially with separately triggered laser and ultrasound excitations
as shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), where the photoacoustic signal
is suffering low SNR (4.4 dB) due to the weak signal strength
and inevitable instrumental noise. The ultrasound signal can be
made relatively strong (9.6 dB) by increasing transmit power
and treated as the template signal. Then, based on the proposed coherent PAUS correlation approach, the photoacoustic
signal and ultrasound signal are cross-correlated within 6 μs
time window as shown in Fig. 4(c). The SNR of the coherent
PAUS correlation signal is significantly increased to 22.5 dB
due to the correlated PAUS signal integration and uncorrelated

2510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 4. Separately detected (a) pulsed photoacoustic wave, (b) pulse-echo ultrasound wave, and (c) the coherent PAUS correlation wave using backward cross
correlation. (d) and (e) Low-pass filtered signals of (c) and (a), respectively. In some extreme, the low signal SNR scenario, (f) pulsed photoacoustic wave, (g)
pulse-echo ultrasound wave, and (h) the coherent PAUS correlation using both forward cross correlation and backward cross correlation. (i) and (j) Low-pass
filtered signals of (h) and (f), respectively.

noise suppression. In the next step, to prove the feasibility of
the coherent PAUS correlation at a worse case, the SNR of the
photoacoustic signal and the pulse-echo ultrasound signal are
set to be below –10 dB by reducing the power of laser and ultrasound sources as shown in Fig. 4(f) and (g). It shows that due to
the strong noise background, both the photoacoustic and ultrasound signals are hardly identified. After performing both the
backward and forward cross correlations within a longer window (10 μs), two peaks could be clearly identified in Fig. 4(h)
to give the depth information (d = vs Δτ = 37.5 mm) of the
object. Finally, the coherent PAUS signals in Fig. 4(c) and (h)
are further low-pass filtered to improve the SNR and peak detection in Fig. 4(d) and (i). Although proper low-pass filtering
(four-order Butterworth filter with cutoff frequency at 1 MHz)
of the origin photoacoustic signals in Fig. 4(a) and (f) could
improve the signal SNR to a certain extent, which are shown in
Fig. 4(e) and (j), it is impossible to suppress the noise components with similar spectrum as the photoacoustic signal. On the
other hand, the coherent correlation behaves as a matched filter
to exactly extract the highly correlated photoacoustic signal and
suppresses the uncorrelated white noise, which the traditional
filtering process can never achieve. It is shown that the low-pass
filtered PAUS signals in Fig. 4(d) and (i) perform much higher
SNR than the low-pass filtered original photoacoustic signals in
Fig. 4(e) and (j), especially when suffering strong background
noise and interference.
To fully explore the capability of the coherent PAUS correlation on SNR improvement, the input laser pulse energy is
swept from 10 to 200 μJ to induce the photoacoustic signals
with different SNR (from –20 to –5 dB) as shown in Fig 5,
where the SNR of pulse-echo ultrasound from the blood of the
vessel-mimicking phantom remains 9.6 dB. It is clearly shown
that over 20 dB SNR, an improvement is achieved by the coherent PAUS correlation across a wide range of input laser energy.
More interestingly, the SNR improvement is becoming more

Fig. 5. SNR of the photoacoustic signal, the coherent PAUS correlation signal
and the SNR improvement when the input laser pulse energy is swept from 10
to 200 μJ.

significant when the laser energy is decreasing, validating its
potential to achieve a superior sensitivity when the photoacoustic signal suffers severe noisy background.
It is worth noting that only one wide ultrasound pulse is
received by overlapping the four echoes from the four interfaces
of the vessel-mimicking phantom due to the small diameter
(outer: 3 mm, inner: 2.2 mm) of the tube, and the low 0.5-MHz
central frequency (>3 mm resolution) used in the experiment.
Then, the four ultrasound echoes at 0.5 MHz are overlapped
significantly and cannot be differentiated.
C. Image of the Vessel-Mimicking Phantom
The images of the blood in the vessel-mimicking phantom [see Fig. 6(a)] are created by laterally moving the object in the Y -axis by the XY translation stage (see Fig. 2).

GAO et al.: COHERENT PHOTOACOUSTIC-ULTRASOUND CORRELATION AND IMAGING

2511

Fig. 7. (a) and (b) Photograph of the experimental setup and phantom.
(c) Pulse-laser induced photoacoustic imaging, (d) pulse-echo ultrasound imaging, and (e) the proposed coherent PAUS imaging. PR: pulser-receiver; FG:
function generator; UT: ultrasound transducer.

Fig. 6. Reconstructed images of the (a) vessel-mimicking phantom by
(b) pulsed laser-induced photoacoustic imaging, (c) pulse-echo ultrasound imaging, and (d) the proposed coherent PAUS imaging.

The received acoustic signals are subjected to the low-pass filtering and Hilbert transformation to extract the envelope. Three
comparable B-scan images of the pulsed photoacoustic imaging
[see Fig. 6(b)], pulse-echo ultrasound imaging [see Fig. 6(c)],
and the proposed coherent PAUS imaging [see Fig. 6(d)] are
reconstructed, respectively. The slight location difference of
photoacoustic image and ultrasound image is due to the wider
ultrasound pulse and slight time delay difference caused by
the different signal generation mechanism. As expected, the
proposed coherent PAUS imaging performs much better image
contrast (the different between image pixel intensity of object
and background pixel intensity) than the separate photoacoustic or ultrasound imaging that may suffer strong noisy and/or
low contrast background, due to coherently correlating the photoacoustic and ultrasound signals to improve the SNR, fusing
both optical absorption and acoustic reflection properties of the
same target. It is also observed that the axial resolution of the
coherent PAUS imaging is slightly degraded. The reason is that
the cross correlation will induce more cycles than the original signals due to its time-shifted multiplication and integration
processing, which leads to a bit larger pulse envelope width.
D. Image of the Vessel-Mimicking Phantom With Chicken
Breast Tissue as Random Scatterer
To validate the proposed PAUS correlation approach in a more
realistic scenario, e.g., human brain SSS, carotid and jugular

vessels in deep tissue, a piece of ex vivo chicken breast tissue
with a 5-mm thickness is placed on top of the vessel-mimicking
phantom. Fig. 7(a) and (b) shows the photograph of the experimental and phantom setup. The reconstructed images of photoacoustic, pulse-echo ultrasound, and the proposed correlated
PAUS approach are shown in Fig. 7(c)–(e), respectively. It is observed that due to the existence of the chicken breast scatterer,
more distortion is induced in both photoacoustic and ultrasound
images. However, the SNR improvement is still significant by
applying the coherent PAUS correlation in Fig. 7(e).
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The primary application of the proposed coherent PAUS approach is related to photoacoustic tomography for deep tissue
imaging. For this first application, such as brain imaging with
intact scalp [8], [23], due to the deep imaging depth and much
stronger attenuation [∼6.9 dB/(MHz·cm)] of high-frequency
components of photoacoustic signals caused by the scalp, only
low-frequency signals could be survived and detected by the
transducer with low frequency. High-sensitivity detection and
low-signal SNR are the bottleneck of deep tissue imaging. Other
similar applications also include carotid/jugular imaging with
> 2-cm penetration depth [24]. In these applications, the imaged
vessels (e.g., sheep SSS, human’s carotid, jugular, radial artery,
etc.) have a diameter range between 1 and 5 mm, where the
detected photoacoustic signals have frequency spectrum that is
typically from hundreds of kHz to 1 MHz, which are the specifications we have followed for the vessel-mimicking phantom
in this study. Therefore, the proposed PAUS coherent imaging
approach is primarily targeting such kind of applications, where

2512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

low sensitivity and signal SNR are the critical challenges, and
low-frequency photoacoustic signals are usually detected. To
coherently correlate with the weak photoacoustic signals, lowfrequency ultrasound signals are chosen to match the spectrum
of the photoacoustic signals to maximize the signal SNR for
detection of the proposed PAUS coherent imaging.
For the second application, it is related to high-resolution (but
low imaging depth) photoacoustic microscopic imaging. Typical applications include subcutaneous vascular imaging [9],
endoscopic, intravascular imaging [19], [20], and retinal imaging [25]. Due to the low imaging depth and better optical focusing, high-frequency photoacoustic signals can be induced to
render high-resolution images, where the requirements of sensitivity and signal SNR are not critically challenging compared
to the above deep tissue imaging. Theoretically, the proposed
PAUS coherent imaging is also applicable to achieve enhanced
sensitivity and signal SNR for such high-resolution applications,
which may be fully explored in the future work. In summary,
this letter is to introduce a novel PAUS method, and address
its performance for the applications in the first case, and leave
the detailed study for its use in the second case to the future
work.
In conclusion, we have conducted the initial study on the
coherent correlation of endogenous photoacoustic wave and exogenous pulse-echo ultrasound wave. Due to the coherent correlation of the optical absorption and acoustic reflection properties
from the same object, the experimentally detected PAUS correlation signal achieved significantly enhanced SNR than conventional pulsed photoacoustic or pulse-echo ultrasound signals.
Preliminary imaging results demonstrated much improved image contrast by the proposed coherent PAUS correlation imaging
approach. The proposed PAUS correlation could be treated as
a new imaging modality fusing mechanical impedance, optical absorption, and thermoelastic properties of the same object,
delivering higher sensitivity and image contrast than existing ultrasound or photoacoustic imaging only. Except the anatomical
image acquired in this study, functional information (e.g., blood
oxygen saturation) could also be extracted by applying multiwavelength laser illumination to excite distinct photoacoustic
signals. Functional coherent PAUS imaging with dedicated calibration will be explored further. Future work will also focus on
the 3-D PAUS imaging implementation for in vivo small animal
studies.
REFERENCES
[1] M. H. Xu, Y. Xu, and L. H. V. Wang, “Time-domain reconstructionalgorithms and numerical simulations for thermoacoustic tomography in
various geometries,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 1086–
1099, Sep. 2003.
[2] A. C. Tam, “Applications of photoacoustic sensing techniques,” Rev. Modern Phys., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 381–431, Apr. 1986.
[3] F. Gao, Y. J. Zheng, X. H. Feng, and C.-D. Ohl, “Thermoacoustic resonance effect and circuit modelling of biological tissue,” Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 102, no. 6, pp. 063702-1–063702-4, Feb. 11, 2013.
[4] X. H. Feng, F. Gao, and Y. J. Zheng, “Magnetically mediated thermoacoustic imaging toward deeper penetration,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 103,
no. 8, pp. 083704-1–083704-4, Aug. 19, 2013.

[5] M. H. Xu and L. H. V. Wang, “Photoacoustic imaging in biomedicine,”
Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 041101-1–041101-22, Apr. 2006.
[6] L. H. V. Wang and S. Hu, “Photoacoustic tomography: In vivo imaging
from organelles to organs,” Science, vol. 335, no. 6075, pp. 1458–1462,
Mar. 23, 2012.
[7] L. V. Wang, “Multiscale photoacoustic microscopy and computed tomography,” Nature Photon., vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 503–509, Sep. 2009.
[8] X. D. Wang, Y. J. Pang, G. Ku, X. Xue, G. Stoica, and L. V. Wang, “
Noninvasive laser-induced photoacoustic tomography for structural and
functional in vivo imaging of the brain,” Nature Biotechnol., vol. 21,
no. 7, pp. 803–806, Jul. 2003.
[9] H. F. Zhang, K. Maslov, G. Stoica, and L. V. Wang, “Functional photoacoustic microscopy for high-resolution and noninvasive in vivo imaging,”
Nature Biotechnol., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 848–851, Jul. 2006.
[10] F. Gao, Y. J. Zheng, and D. F. Wang, “Microwave-acoustic phasoscopy
for tissue characterization,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 101, no. 4, pp. 0437021–043702-5, Jul. 23, 2012.
[11] V. Ntziachristos and D. Razansky, “Molecular imaging by means of multispectral optoacoustic tomography (MSOT),” Chem. Rev., vol. 110, no. 5,
pp. 2783–2394, May 12, 2010.
[12] J. Xia and L. Wang, “Small-animal whole-body photoacoustic tomography: A review,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1380–1389,
May 2014.
[13] S. R. Kothapalli, T. J. Ma, S. Vaithilingam, O. Oralkan, B. T. KhuriYakub, and S. S. Gambhir, “Deep tissue photoacoustic imaging using a
miniaturized 2-d capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducer array,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1199–1204, May 2012.
[14] American National Standard for Safe Use of Lasers, ANSI Z136 1-2000,
Laser Inst. Amer., Orlando, FL, USA, 2000.
[15] J. J. Niederhauser, M. Jaeger, R. Lemor, P. Weber, and M. Frenz, “Combined ultrasound and optoacoustic system for real-time high-contrast vascular imaging in vivo,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 436–
440, Apr. 2005.
[16] J. Jose, R. G. H. Willemink, S. Resink, D. Piras, J. C. G. van Hespen, C.
H. Slump, W. Steenbergen, T. G. van Leeuwen, and S. Manohar, “Passive element enriched photoacoustic computed tomography (PER PACT)
for simultaneous imaging of acoustic propagation properties and light
absorption,” Opt. Exp., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2093–2104, Jan. 31, 2011.
[17] P. Subochev, A. Katichev, A. Morozov, A. Orlova, V. Kamensky, and I.
Turchin, “Simultaneous photoacoustic and optically mediated ultrasound
microscopy: Phantom study,” Opt. Lett., vol. 37, no. 22, pp. 4606–4608,
Nov. 15, 2012.
[18] Y. Jiang, A. Forbrich, T. Harrison, and R. J. Zemp, “Blood oxygen flux
estimation with a combined photoacoustic and high-frequency ultrasound
microscopy system: A phantom study,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 036012-1–036012-8, Mar. 2012.
[19] J. M. Yang, C. Favazza, R. M. Chen, J. J. Yao, X. Cai, K. Maslov, Q.
F. Zhou, K. K. Shung, and L. H. V. Wang, “Simultaneous functional
photoacoustic and ultrasonic endoscopy of internal organs in vivo,” Nature
Med., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1297–1302, Aug. 2012.
[20] W. Wei, X. Li, Q. F. Zhou, K. K. Shung, and Z. P. Chen, “Integrated ultrasound and photoacoustic probe for co-registered intravascular imaging,”
J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 106001-1–106001-6, Oct. 2011.
[21] G. L. Turin, “An introduction to matched-filters,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 311–329, Jun. 1960.
[22] C. H. Li and L. H. V. Wang, “Photoacoustic tomography and sensing in
biomedicine,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, no. 19, pp. R59–R97, Oct. 2009.
[23] I. Y. Petrov, Y. Petrov, D. S. Prough, I. Cicenaite, D. J. Deyo, and R.
O. Esenaliev, “Optoacoustic monitoring of cerebral venous blood oxygenation though intact scalp in large animals,” Opt. Exp., vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 4159–4167, Feb. 13, 2012.
[24] A. Dima and V. Ntziachristos, “Non-invasive carotid imaging using optoacoustic tomography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 20, no. 22, pp. 25044–25057,
Oct. 22, 2012.
[25] S. L. Jiao, M. S. Jiang, J. M. Hu, A. Fawzi, Q. F. Zhou, K. K. Shung,
C. A. Puliafito, and H. F. Zhang, “Photoacoustic ophthalmoscopy for
in vivo retinal imaging,” Opt. Exp., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 3967–3972,
Feb. 15, 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

