2434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Quantitative Gait Measurement With Pulse-Doppler
Radar for Passive In-Home Gait Assessment
Fang Wang∗ , Member, IEEE, Marjorie Skubic, Senior Member, IEEE,
Marilyn Rantz, Member, IEEE, and Paul E. Cuddihy

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a pulse-Doppler radar system for in-home gait assessment of older adults. A methodology has
been developed to extract gait parameters including walking speed
and step time using Doppler radar. The gait parameters have been
validated with a Vicon motion capture system in the lab with 13
participants and 158 test runs. The study revealed that for an optimal step recognition and walking speed estimation, a dual radar
set up with one radar placed at foot level and the other at torso
level is necessary. An excellent absolute agreement with intraclass
correlation coefficients of 0.97 was found for step time estimation
with the foot level radar. For walking speed, although both radars
show excellent consistency they all have a system offset compared
to the ground truth due to walking direction with respect to the
radar beam. The torso level radar has a better performance (9%
offset on average) in the speed estimation compared to the foot
level radar (13%–18% offset). Quantitative analysis has been performed to compute the angles causing the systematic error. These
lab results demonstrate the capability of the system to be used as
a daily gait assessment tool in home environments, useful for fall
risk assessment and other health care applications. The system is
currently being tested in an unstructured home environment.
Index Terms—Eldercare technology, gait analysis, passive monitoring, radar, step time, walking speed.

I. INTRODUCTION
ESEARCHERS have revealed great advantages of aging
in place where seniors would be able to remain in the home
environment of their choice with supportive health care services
provided as needed [1]. However, there are huge challenges in
keeping older adults healthy and functionally able so that they
can age in place. One of the challenges of keeping seniors living
independently is falls. Falls are a major cause of morbidity
in elders; one out of three adults age 65 and older falls each

R

Manuscript received January 30, 2014; revised April 3, 2014; accepted
April 11, 2014. Date of publication April 23, 2014; date of current version
August 18, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality under Grant R01HS018477 and in part by the U.S.
National Science Foundation under Grant CNS-0931607. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ F. Wang is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA (e-mail: fwnf5@mail.missouri.edu).
M. Skubic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA (e-mail: skubicm
@missouri.edu).
M. Rantz is with the Sinclair School of Nursing, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65211 USA (e-mail: rantzm@missouri.edu).
P. E. Cuddihy is with the General Electric Global Research, Niskayuna, NY
12309 USA (e-mail: cuddihy@ge.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2319333

year [2]; falls are the leading cause of injury death among older
adults 65 or older [3]; the direct medical costs of falls, adjusted
for inflation, was $30.0 billion in 2010 [4].
Increased fall risk in the elderly has been associated with
changes in gait characteristics including gait speed decline,
stride frequency increase, and stride length decrease at a given
walking speed [5]. We are developing an in-home fall risk assessment system that incorporates different low-cost passive
sensors for early detection of gait changes in order to screen
which elderly people are more at risk of falling. We aim to detect gait changes over time early enough so that effective strategies can be implemented to prevent or reduce severe negative
health outcomes, and evaluate healing/deterioration following
an intervention. The goal is to enable elderly people to maintain
quality of life in their own home with adequate health care while
preventing or reducing institutional care. We believe the key to
both better health and lower healthcare cost is prevention, which
hinges on early detection and early intervention addressing risk
of falls.
Unobtrusive continuous quantitative activity and gait assessment and monitoring offer great advantages for the early detection of health changes including real-time detection of changes
in fall risk, as well as monitoring elderly activity and gait
analysis in a home environment remotely while preserving privacy [6], [7]. The major advantages of the pulse-Doppler radar
with respect to other technologies are that it makes unobtrusive
characterization of human gait possible by using the Doppler
effect of electromagnetic waves and is much less affected by
environmental conditions such as lighting and furniture clutter.
In the next section, we discuss related work in this field.
Section III gives a detailed description of the gait analysis
methodology. Section IV presents validation experiments and
results. We offer discussion in Section V, and conclude in
Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In health care, detailed gait analysis necessary for fall risk
assessment is commonly done by health care providers directly
assessing gait or by trained personnel using a gait lab. Typically,
assessment of walking ability may or may not be a part of a
routine primary care office visit for an older person and it is
difficult for the health care provider to compare accurately from
one visit to another. Assessments performed in a gait lab are
accurate but costly, and typically performed too infrequently
to detect changes in time for interventions to be successful. In
addition, our research has revealed that people display different
gait patterns when they are tested in a lab setting as compared to

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE GAIT MEASUREMENT WITH PULSE-DOPPLER RADAR FOR PASSIVE IN-HOME GAIT ASSESSMENT

in a home environment [6], [8]. There is a clear need for a low
cost, continuous gait assessment tool for older adults that can be
deployed in a home environment to capture the whole picture
of an elderly person’s gait and detect changes so that treatment
to improve walking ability can be initiated in time to reduce the
risk of debilitating, costly falls.
With advancements in technology, researchers have attempted to deploy different techniques for continuous gait assessment with varying degrees of obtrusiveness. Among the
most studied techniques are those using wearable accelerometers and gyroscopes. Many wearable systems have demonstrated
accuracy and precision, but suffer from limitations such as short
battery life, the need to download the data or introduce additional
hardware for wireless data collection, and the inconvenience of
both having to wear the device and having to remember to consistently wear it. Research shows compliance with consistently
wearing the device declines over time [9]. For these reasons,
wearable devices are currently inadequate for a long-term, inhome, unobtrusive monitoring.
Low-cost passive sensor systems for gait assessment, such
as inexpensive passive infrared motion sensors, are used for
continuous and unobtrusive assessment of mobility and walking
speed in the home [10]. However, such systems can provide only
walking speed as the single gait parameter. While walking speed
is a good and important gait parameter, additional parameters
are needed for a more complete fall risk assessment [11].
Vision sensors are a rich source of information that can be
used for gait analysis; vision-based gait analysis has been an
active research topic in the computer vision community. Our
low-cost multiwebcam system [6] has been shown to provide
accurate unobtrusive gait assessment in a noncontrolled multiperson home environment. Despite the advantages, it also faces
challenges of lighting condition, occlusion, and computation
complexity.
There are a number of existing studies using radars, including
Doppler radar, and ultrawideband pulse radars, in medical monitoring applications, such as respiration and heartbeat vital sign
monitoring [12], [13]. Recent research also explored the concept of using these radars for gait analysis. Geisheimer et al. [14]
demonstrate that different human body parts generate different
radar signatures. Tahmoush and Silvious [15] use Ku-band and
Ka-band radar in an outdoor environment to estimate the gait
velocity from the frequencies with the highest reflection levels,
and then extract stride rate from the velocity. Otero [16] uses a
continuous wave radar to detect and classify people based on the
Doppler signatures (velocity and stride rate) they produce when
walking. The stride rate is estimated by taking the Fourier transform at each Doppler frequency bin after computing the radar
spectrogram. Tivive et al. [17] proposed a method of characterizing the human motion based on the nature of arm swings using
Doppler radar. Orović et al. [18] introduced a human gait classification method based on the time–frequency analysis of the
radar data, and the motion signature obtained from the arm and
leg movements. Kim and Ling [19] investigated the feasibility
of classifying different human activities using micro-Doppler
signature.
With the advance of digital techniques, pulse-Doppler radars
have become light and inexpensive, and Doppler processors

2435

Fig. 1. (a) Human walk illustration and (b) associated Doppler radar spectrogram (blue line: torso motion, black circle: leg swing).

for coherent pulse radars are more common. The advantage of
combining Doppler processing with pulse radars is to provide
accurate velocity information. This velocity is called range-rate.
It describes the rate that a target moves toward or away from
the radar. Pulse Doppler radar has the advantage of low power
consumption, simple radar architecture, and accurate velocity
estimation. These features are important for long term, passive,
remote in-door gait monitoring. We have developed our sensor
system based on the Doppler radar from GE security design [20]
and implemented several modifications for increased sensitivity
for the medical application. Advanced signal processing techniques are developed and utilized to reliably extract the gait
parameters.
There are a number of existing studies that employ a radar
system and investigated walking velocity and stride rate estimation using radar qualitatively [21]–[24]. However, none have
developed an automated approach and system for on-going gait
analysis for assessment of fall risk, and no large dataset was studied statistically and validated quantitatively. Therefore, in contrast to the existing published research, we employed a different
radar system (pulse-Doppler radar), developed algorithms for
gait analysis and conducted large-scale experiments with highly
accurate ground truth to evaluate the accuracy and reliability of
the radar system.
III. GAIT ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
A. Radar and Human Motion
A human body is an articulated object, comprising a number
of rigid parts connected by joints. The walking gait is a complex motion of swinging arms and legs. Obtained from webcam
images, Fig. 1(a) illustrates this through various poses of a
human walking.

2436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

The radar transmits an electromagnetic wave at a specific
frequency and measures the shifts in the reflected waves. These
frequency shifts can then be used to obtain the velocities of the
person’s body parts in the radar’s direction. Different body parts
create distinct Doppler signatures when a person moves, which
can be easily viewed through a spectrogram. The spectrogram
is the short-time Fourier transform of the radar signal, defined
as:

STFT (t, f ) =

r (t + τ ) w (τ ) exp (−j2πf τ ) dτ

(1)
Fig. 2. Extracted frequency shift from torso motion (black line) shown in a
spectrogram.

where t is time, f is frequency, r is the radar signal, and w is a
sliding window function.
A spectrogram showing a typical Doppler signature of a person walking is shown in Fig. 1(b), where the horizontal axis
represents time t, the vertical axis represents frequency f and
the color at any point represents the energy of the signal at a
certain time and frequency P (f, t). The energy is color coded
with red being the highest intensity and white the lowest. These
plots are obtained by taking a succession of FFTs, each over
a short-time window. The integration time used in our study is
0.4 s and consecutive FFT windows have 50% overlap. Fig. 1(b),
thus, shows how the spectra of the reflected signals change as
a function of time during a human walk in the direction of the
radar beam.
The frequency shift with the highest reflected energy yields
the torso motion speed as the torso has the largest surface area
in a human body, thus the gait velocity. Leg swings generate a
much higher frequency shift due to the motion being faster than
that of the torso. However, the reflected energy from the legs
is lower due to their smaller radar cross-section area. Nevertheless, the reflections from the legs are still visible in the radar
spectrogram and this information can be used to extract stride
duration information. Signal processing algorithms are designed
and implemented to extract human movement parameters that
are employed by these strategies. During the act of walking the
human body structure moves cyclically from the swing phase
where there is forward motion of the legs [‘‘o” in Fig. 1(b)], to
the double support phase when both feet are on the ground and
the most body parts are moving at the overall velocity of the
walker, which corresponds to a peak torso velocity. This cyclic
pattern is clearly visible in the spectrogram shown in Fig. 1(b).

speed is first estimated based on Section III-C, and then the
walking segments are selected with Algorithm I. The step time
estimation described in Section III-D can be done in the selected
walk segment. The speed threshold in Algorithm I is set to be
40 cm/s in the study, and can be varied based on the subject’s
normal walking speed. The walking sequence length threshold
is set to Tt = 3 s.
Algorithm I walking sequences selection
For each input data point
If (speed > threshold)
If (continuous)
Add to the current existing walk sequence
Else
Start a new sequence
Keep the previous sequence if the length is
greater than Tt second
C. Walking Speed
Doppler radars use the principle of the Doppler effects to
measure the velocity of a target. Doppler theory states that an
electromagnetic wave reflected from a moving target undergoes
a frequency shift proportional to the velocity of the target. This
enables the estimation of different movement parameters such
as torso velocity and step time [22], [24].
The equation for computing the nonrelativistic Doppler frequency shift, Fd , of a simple point scatter moving with speed v
with respect to a stationary transmitter is:
F d = Ft

B. Walk Segmentation for Gait Analysis
When presented with a large amount of radar data of a person’s daily activities, it is necessary to locate the walk segment
suitable for gait analysis. Unlike critical monitoring such as fall
detection and vital sign monitoring, the problem of locating suitable walking segments can be overcome in our application, as
long as some good walking sequences can be identified. When
this technology is deployed in a home, identifying a few good
gait sequences each day is sufficient to serve the gait monitoring
purpose. When presented with the input radar data, the walking

2v
cos θ cos ϕ
c

(2)

where Ft is the frequency of the transmitted signal, θ is the
angle between the subject motion and the beam of the radar in
the ground plane, ϕ is the elevation angle between the subject
and the radar beam, and c is the speed of light. For complex
objects, such as walking humans, the velocity of each body
part varies over time. Additionally, the radar cross-section of
various body parts is a function of aspect angles. Walking speed
is estimated by the torso velocity, vtorso , which corresponds
to the frequency shift with the highest reflected energy, and is
extracted using Algorithm II.

WANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE GAIT MEASUREMENT WITH PULSE-DOPPLER RADAR FOR PASSIVE IN-HOME GAIT ASSESSMENT

Algorithm II walking speed estimation:
1. Band pass filter (freq_low, freq_high) to limit the frequency
range reasonable based on human gait speed
2. Compute spectrogram
3. Reduce spectral noise with average filter
4. Select frequency with peak energy at time t as the torso
frequency shift F (t)f → max[P (t, f )]
5. Refine outlier torso frequency beyond (mean + 3∗std dev)
6. Update freq_low, freq_high based on obtained torso frequency, and repeat step 1–5 three times with updated freq_low,
freq_high
7. Suppress no-motion (sum energy at time t < threshold)
torso frequency to zero
8. Compute the walking speed v = F2Fd ct

2437

Fig. 3. Spectrogram after background noise subtraction with time-domain
signal F(t) in blue line and extracted steps (o).

D. Step Recognition
As mentioned earlier, a leg swing generates a much higher
frequency shift than the torso motion, but the reflected energy
is lower due to their smaller radar cross-section area. Therefore,
in order to extract the leg swing instance, background noise
subtraction is necessary.
The noisy spectrogram pixel estimate, P (t, f ), at frequency
index f and time t, consists of background noise Pback (t, f )
and the actual signal due to motion Pm (t, f ) as P (t, f ) = Pm
(t, f ) + Pback (t, f ). Thus, the estimated value of the background noise can be subtracted from each computed pixel P
(t, f ) in order to obtain Pm (t, f ). The value of the background
signal at each frequency Pback (f ) can be used instead of Pback
(t, f ) and can be estimated by averaging Pback (t, f ) over the
time t. Thus, the power of the Doppler signal due to motion
only, Pm (t, f ), can be estimated as:

P (t, f ) − Pback (f ) if P (t, f ) > Pback (f )
Pm (t, f ) =
Otherwise.
Pback (f )
(3)
Algorithm III step recognition:
1. Apply average filter on radar data
2. Compute spectrogram
3. Obtain Pm (t, f ) through background noise subtraction
4. Apply median filter on spectral data
5. At each time t, select highest frequency F (t) satisfying
[Pm (t, f ) > Pth ]
6. Refine outlier leg frequency beyond (mean + 3∗ std dev)
7. Smooth F (t) with an average filter
8. Obtain step instances through time domain peak selection for F (t), where peak is F (t) ≥ F (t − 1) and F(t) ≥
F(t + 1) + c
9. Eliminate step instances with time intervals to their neighboring steps ≤ 0.35 s
The step recognition is performed as Algorithm III. A preselected energy threshold Pth is set to be −70 dB, and the constant
c in the peak selection step is chosen as 0.01 in the study. The
last step in Algorithm III is used to eliminate the step instances
that may come from the signal fluctuation and are picked up by
the peak detection. The value 0.35 s was selected in determining the step instances that are too close, which is based on the
findings of this study as well as our previous work [6] that the

Fig. 4. Walking speed comparison: Vicon versus radar. Dashed line: velocity
threshold selected.

step time is normally greater than 0.4 s including healthy young
adults. An example spectrogram with extracted step instances
is shown in Fig. 3. The step time T is then computed from the
time intervals between step instances.
E. Vicon as Ground Truth
The commercial 3-D motion analysis system, Vicon MX,
allows for very accurate measurement of movement, using reflective markers and seven simultaneous cameras. The cameras
emit infrared light signals and detect the reflection from the
markers attached to the participant’s head and the toe of both
shoes. Based on the angle and time delay between the original
and reflected signals, it tracks the movement trajectories of the
reflective markers in 3-D space. The Vicon cameras were sampled at 100 Hz and were properly calibrated according to the
manufacturer’s instructions prior to data collections.
Walking speed can be easily computed using the torso marker
3-D location information. A comparison of walking speed obtained from Vicon versus radar is illustrated in Fig. 4. The radar
and Vicon were synchronized using time stamp, and the velocity
was used as a feature for visual inspection of the alignment.
A footfall is a momentarily stationary location of the foot.
The accurate detection of the footfall is achieved by monitoring
the foot markers’ velocity M(t) at time t. As shown in Fig. 5,
the footfalls are identified as the markers’ cross zero velocity

2438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. Foot velocity obtained from Vicon markers attached to the shoes (black
lines), and steps recognized (blue dash line).

from stationary to motion. Once the footfalls are identified,
the step time is extracted from the time information associated
with each footfall. As mentioned earlier, radar system relies
on the detection of leg swing motion for step recognition, then
computes the associated gait parameters. In the time domain,
each step time segment based on the initial foot motion used by
the Vicon is likely not to align exactly with the one based on the
peak motion estimated by the radar. These two motions happen
at two different times. However, this exact alignment of the two
in step recognition is not critical as we are interested only in
the time intervals between step instances as the step time. The
low-cost radar system is able to accurately estimate these gait
parameters compared to the ground truth.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Study Overview
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the pulse-Doppler
radar’s accuracy and reliability in assessing human gait in an
indoor environment, and to investigate the feasibility of developing and eventually deploying such technology for continuous
eldercare gait assessment in the home.
Thirteen volunteers (seven females, six males, age 23–67)
were recruited to participate in the study, with Doppler radar,
Vicon and other sensors including web cameras, Microsoft
Kinect depth camera recording. All participants provided informed consent. The participants with Vicon reflective markers
attached to the toe of both shoes and their back were asked to
walk in their normal speed, slow speed, and faster speed for
a 17 ft distance, straightly toward the radar, turn around, and
return to the starting point. The walking segment can be clearly
observed on the spectrogram in Fig. 2 where the person starts to
accelerate from a fixed stance toward the radar, reaches an approximately constant velocity, then begins to slow down, turns
around, and begins to walk in the opposite direction.
The experiments were conducted in two sessions with different radar arrangements: 1)single radar setting: one radar was
placed on the ground, 2) dual radar setting: one radar was on
the ground, and the second radar was 1.25 m directly above
the ground. They are referred as foot radar and torso radar respectively in this paper. The foot radar on the ground level is

expected to produce a more accurate foot step estimation; and
the torso radar is at the same height of a person’s torso for a
more accurate estimation of the torso’s velocity. All radars were
placed directly at the end of the walkway. Vicon markers were
attached on both radars in the dual radar setting (not the single
radar setting) to obtain the radars’ 3-D locations for further
analysis.
Each continuous straight walk period is considered as a walking segment. In total, there are 168 walk segments collected,
with 112 walk segments collected from eight participants with
the single radar setting, and 56 walk segments collected from
five participants with the dual radar setting. Half of the walk
segments are in the “toward” radar direction, and the other half
are in the ‘‘away” from radar direction. The numbers of “slow,”
“normal,” and “fast” speed walks are the same in either direction
for each participant.
The radar used in the experiments is an off the shelf pulseDoppler range control radar, RCR-50 from GE Security [20],
which has a carrier frequency of 5.8 GHz, a pulse repetition
frequency of 10 MHz, a duty cycle of 40%, and a variable range
setting of 20 to 50 ft. The radar was designed as a security device
to detect any motion in a room. To fit the gait assessment application, the range was set to 20 ft, and the integrated infrared sensor
is disabled. The radar’s back was covered by a 2 ft × 2 ft metal
shield to reduce interference. The RCR mixes the transmitted
and reflected signals and passes the resulting waveform through
a low-pass filter to capture the frequency shift. The collection
of the radar signal is done using a data acquisition (DATAQ)
unit [25]. The radar outputs this low-pass filtered signal, which
is then digitalized and sampled at 960 Hz and stored.
Prior to the data collection, the radar system was calibrated
with the following two steps: 1) online calibration: the real-time
signal waveform is observed through DATAQ software directly.
The radar position, direction and shield are adjusted until the
waveform is accurate and clear enough to reflect the testing
motion in the radar range. 2) offline calibration: some sample
data of sequences are collected of a person walking toward or
away from radar. The radar position, direction, and shield are
again adjusted until the spectrogram of the walk pattern is clear
enough to differentiate the step instances.

B. Results
The gait parameters obtained from the tests cover a large
variation: velocity ranges from around 50 to 150 cm/s, step time
from around 0.5 to 1.1 s. The set of experiments was designed
to test the radar system with some extreme walking patterns as
demonstrated by the large variation in the gait parameters. For
the application of elderly in-home gait assessment and monitoring, the variations of the walking speed and step times are
expected to be much less.
1) Velocity Estimation: As illustrated in Fig. 4, velocity obtained from the Vicon was used as ground truth for comparison. Walk sequences were obtained using Algorithm I, and
the threshold value of 50% of the peak speed was used. Only
speed results above the threshold were used for comparison.

WANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE GAIT MEASUREMENT WITH PULSE-DOPPLER RADAR FOR PASSIVE IN-HOME GAIT ASSESSMENT

2439

Fig. 6. Walking speed comparison for the single radar setting: Vicon versus
Foot radar. Blue dashed line: v ra d a r = 0.87∗ v v ic o n .

This method has been tested before in a realistic living environment to segment the continuous walk [6].
The velocity comparison results for the single radar setting
are shown in Fig. 6. Clearly, the walking speed obtained from
the radar system is consistently lower than the ground truth
values. The relation between the radar estimated speed and the
Vicon ground truth is approximated as: vradar = 0.87∗ vvicon .
This observation is mainly due to the fact that the radar can only
detect the effective velocity directly toward or away from the
radar as veﬀ = (vreal cos θ cos ϕ), and it also matched results in
Fig. 4, where radar speed results above the threshold used for
comparison are consistently lower than the Vicon ones. Furthermore, it is also interesting to observe that, for many areas below
the threshold velocity, which are not used for comparison, the
radar instead overestimates the velocity. Using the Fig. 4 data
segment from 10 to 30 s as an example, at around 10 and 30 s,
the subject is at the farthest place from the radar, near the edge
of the Vicon viewing area. It is believed that the discrepancy of
the two systems here is mainly from the subject entering/exiting
the Vicon viewing area, which caused the abrupt Vicon marker
location change and consequential inaccurate Vicon velocity results. At around 20 s, near the middle of this data segment, the
subject is at the closest distance to the radar with highest energy
reflected as seen in the spectrogram, makes the turn around motion, and walks in the opposite direction. We believe the radar
results may be affected by the turn around motion, and therefore
are higher than the Vicon’s velocity.
To further analyze the effects of angles θ and ϕ on the accuracy of the walking speed estimation, Vicon markers were
attached to the radars in the dual radar setting to obtain the
radars’ accurate 3-D positions. θ, the angle between the subject’s walking trajectory and the beam of the radar in the ground
plane, was computed from the walking path fitting line and the
radar’s pointing direction as a time invariant parameter for a
particular walk segment, as shown in Fig. 7(a). Elevation angle
ϕ is a time variant parameter [see Fig. 7(c)] that was estimated
using the subject’s torso height and the distance to the radar in
the ground plan as illustrated in Fig. 7(b).
The velocity estimated from the floor radar and the torso
radar is compared with the Vicon ground truth in Figs. 8 and 9,

Fig. 7. Angle θ and ϕ affect the walking speed estimated by the radar: (a) θ
estimation: walk paths (dash line: fitting line) and radar beam projected on the
ground plane (red), (b) ϕ estimation and experiment setup, and (c) cosϕ as a
time variant parameter.

respectively, and are approximated as:
vfo ot
vtorso

radar
radar

= 0.82∗ vvicon
∗

= 0.91 vvicon

(4a)
(4b)

It has been observed that the foot radar has a larger error than
the torso radar in the velocity estimation when compared to the
ground truth. This is because both θ and ϕ are nonnegligible for
the foot radar, especially for ϕ when the participants are close
to the radar. For the torso radar, on the other hand, ϕ is greatly
reduced to a negligible level as the radar beam is at the similar
height as the torso. In Figs. 8 (a), (b), and (c), the foot radar
estimated walking speed is corrected with computed angle ϕ
first, and then angle θ. As expected, after angle ϕ correction,
the foot radar results [see Fig. 8(b)] appear to be very similar
the torso radar results [see Fig. 9(a)]. Since cosθ is, on average,
0.91 based on (4b), cosϕ for the foot radar can be approximated
as, on average, 0.82/0.91 = 0.90. Therefore, for the foot radar,
the velocity errors caused by angle θ and ϕ are about the same

2440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 9. Torso radar walking speed comparison in the dual radar setting: (a)
Vicon versus Torso radar. Dashed line: vtorso radar = 0.91∗ v v ic o n . (b) Vicon
versus Torso radar with angle θ corrected.
TABLE I
RADAR AND VICON IN-LAB COMPARISON

Fig. 8. Foot radar walking speed comparison in the dual radar setting: (a)
Vicon versus Floor radar. Dashed line: v fo o t ra d a r = 0.82∗ v v ic o n . (b) Vicon
versus Foot radar with angle ϕ corrected. (c) Vicon versus Foot radar with both
angles ϕ and θ corrected.

level. It is worth mentioning due to the different radar placement
and different participants in the two sessions, it is not surprising
to see the foot radar in the dual radar setting produced a slightly
different error on average than the foot radar in the single radar
setting with respect to the ground truth.
Similarly, the torso radar walking speed was corrected with
computed angle θ in Fig. 9. Compared to the foot radar, the torso
radar data points are of a much tighter distribution, demonstrating a more accurate velocity estimation.
Table I lists the comparison between the Doppler radar and
Vicon. Intraclass coefficients (ICCs) of the type (2,1) were used
to evaluate the level of agreement between the radar and Vicon. The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) is a measure
of the reliability of measurements which includes consistency
and absolute agreement measures. Paired t-tests were used to
determine the systematic difference between the two systems.
Table I results revealed that both foot and torso radar have a

good consistency (ICC consistency of 0.97 and 0.99, respectively) in measuring the subjects’ walking speed, but in terms of
the absolute agreement, the torso radar has a much better performance of 0.96 than the foot radar of 0.87. This matched with
the observance in Figs. 8 and 9. The paired T -test (p < 0.05)
confirmed that the difference is statistically significant for both
foot and torso radar. Thus, even though the radar measurement
is consistent when compared to the Vicon ground truth, there
is a systematic difference between the two measurements. The
instructions to the participants were to walk straight toward the
radar, but there were no constraints on the participant’s walking
path, similar to an elderly person walking in a natural home environment. This is a major challenge in walking speed estimation
using the radar in a home environment.
2) Step Recognition: An excellent agreement in step time
between the foot radar system and Vicon is achieved as shown

WANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE GAIT MEASUREMENT WITH PULSE-DOPPLER RADAR FOR PASSIVE IN-HOME GAIT ASSESSMENT

Fig. 10. Step time comparison: Vicon versus Foot radar including both single
radar and dual radar setting.

in Fig. 10, where both the single radar and dual radar setting results are combined. A paired T -test showed that the
differences between the two measurement systems under comparison are not statistically significant (p > 0.05). ICC of 0.97
demonstrates an excellent level of consistency and absolute
agreement between the two systems under comparison. On the
contrary, due to the height of the torso radar to the feet/legs,
data analysis showed that the leg swing signals are too weak to
produce decent step recognition.
It is clear that the foot radar system has a strong advantage
in the step time estimation considering its accuracy and that it
is unaffected by the environment, such as lighting variations,
clothing, and occlusion due to clutter. It has great potential
to be a complementary system to the vision sensors we have
developed [6]. The vision sensors have the advantage of good
performance in estimating unconstrained walking speed, but the
step recognition is at times compromised by occlusion in a real
living environment.
V. DISCUSSION
The proposed Doppler radar in-home gait assessment system
has been validated with Vicon ground truth. Results show that
a dual radar setting is needed for an optimal walking speed and
step time measurement and provides a clear advantage over the
single radar system. The foot radar accurately estimates the step
time compared with the ground truth with intraclass correlation coefficients of 0.97 in terms of consistency and absolute
agreement. The walking speed estimation with both torso and
foot radars is systematically lower than the ground truth due to
the angles between the walking person and radar beam. Torso
radar has clearly a higher accurate walking speed (on average
9% lower) than the foot radar (on average 13%–18% lower)
because of the minimized elevation angle. We are in the process of testing the radar system in ten senior apartments with
13 resident participants for two years. The initial walking speed
results collected with the single foot radar setting [24] are on
average 14.5% lower before angle calibration and 10.5% lower
after angle correction compared to the ones recorded by clinicians, in agreement with the lab results reported here. We will

2441

report further results as the study proceeds. We have found that
in order to accurately estimate the walking speed, it is necessary
to minimize the angle to the radar beam. This can be achieved
through radar placement at the torso level, a constrained walking path in line with the radar beam, using only the walking
segment in a certain distance, and using other sensors, such as
vision sensors, for angle correction.
Through the study we have learned the radar system’s capability, strength, and drawbacks. Radar has clear advantages in
the following aspects.
1 Operating conditions. The Doppler radar can operate in
low or no light conditions, and is much less affected by
clutter in the daily living environment.
2 Doppler-based devices are relatively insensitive to constant background effects, as these can usually be eliminated through background subtraction.
3 Computation cost and associated hardware cost. One advantage of the radar system lies in its cost, and its minimal
energy consumption. Consequently they can be deployed
in a long-term in-home monitoring or a remote diagnostic application. The entire Doppler radar system used for
this study includes a $50 RCR-50 radar and a $500 wireless DATAQ unit. In addition, the radar signal processing
is much less computationally intensive compared to, for
example, color vision sensors.
4 Privacy. The radar system does not raise privacy concerns
for in-home use.
Inevitably, the radar system also has some drawbacks. The
approach of using Doppler radar to measure walking speed can
be effective and accurate in the front direction, but its accuracy
decreases with the increase of the angles between the radar
beam and the walking direction, and eventually loses accuracy
completely with the sagittal direction movement. In addition,
Doppler-based mechanisms are affected by secondary moving
objects in the range of the sensor, such as another moving person
in the field of view of the radar, which cannot be easily identified
and isolated.
To address these drawbacks, strategic placement of the radar
system, such as at the end of a hall way, can help to optimize
the system’s performance by constraining the walking direction
to align with the radar beam. It may also prove useful to add
a calibration step during which data from a specific home are
used to generate a linear or low-order regression curve which
minimizes the error between speeds measured by the radar and
ground truth.
For our application, we are most interested in the changes in
gait patterns as a means of detecting early health problems or
functional decline. So a systematic offset in the walking speed
as seen in this study is not necessarily a problem for detecting a
pattern change. In addition, the incorporation of radar and other
sensing techniques, such as vision sensors, would provide an improved overall system with proper sensor fusion. For example,
the multiple vision sensor-based 3-D gait assessment system [8]
developed has advantages in accurately capturing walking speed
without walking direction constraints, but in many cases has difficulties in step recognition due to occlusion of the foot area by

2442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

furniture and other objects in the home. The camera system
faces challenges of variable lighting conditions, which is the
strength of radar system. With the help of vision sensors, it is
possible to remove secondary moving objects by tracking and
segmenting out the target walker with the use of a suitable algorithm [26], and estimate the angles between the walker and the
radar beam. Additionally, the low-power consumption and low
computational complex radar could be used to provide triggering information for the vision sensors. This type of fusion holds
great promise of being able to perform 3-D gait assessment in
various environments at home.
Long-term in-home monitoring is expected to be more challenging than the lab setting monitoring demonstrated in this
study, due to the complexity of the real-world environment. The
work reported here is a first step toward investigating the feasibility of using such a system in an unstructured home setting.
Although the positive results demonstrated the feasibility of deploying such systems in an elderly resident’s home, there are
issues to be addressed in our future research.
We believe that the Doppler radar-based gait assessment is
a promising avenue for future exploration. In particular, we
hypothesize that Doppler-based gait recognition might be used
synergistically with vision-based gait assessment systems since
the two are complimentary in their capabilities and drawbacks.
There is still much potential to improve the performance of
the Doppler radar system beyond that demonstrated in this paper.
We will report the longitudinal study results of deploying the
system in ten senior apartments currently as the study proceeds.
All of these are our future research topics.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, we have proposed and validated a low-cost
Doppler radar system for passive and continuous in-home gait
assessment. Using signal processing techniques we explicitly
estimated human torso velocity and leg swing for step recognition. We found the radar system has achieved a high accuracy
on the step time estimation, while the walking speed estimation
is systematically affected by the walking path direction.
The system is robust to environmental conditions, computationally efficient, and with no privacy concerns. Thus, this
technology is especially suitable for passive, long-term use in
an unstructured daily living environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the contribution and support of the
University of Missouri Eldertech research team.
REFERENCES
[1] K. D. Marek, L. Popejoy, G. Petroski, D. Mehr, M. Rantz, and W. W. Lin,
“Clinical outcomes of aging in place,” Nursing Res., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 202–
211, 2005.
[2] J. M. Hausdorff, D. A. Rios, and H. K. Edelber, “Gait variability and
fall risk in community–living older adults: A 1–year prospective study,”
Archives Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 82, no. 8, pp. 1050–1056, 2001.

[3] M. C. Hornbrook, V. J. Stevens, D. J. Wingfield, J. F. Hollis,
M. R. Greenlick, and M. G. Ory, “Preventing falls among community–
dwelling older persons: Results from a randomized trial,” Gerontologist,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 16–23, 1994.
[4] J. A. Stevens, “Fatalities and injuries from falls among older adults—
United States, 1993–2003 and 2001–2005,” Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep.,
vol. 55, no. 45, pp. 1221–1224, 2006.
[5] Y. Barak, R. C. Wagenaar, and K. G. Holt, “Gait characteristics of elderly
people with a history of falls: A dynamic approach,” Phys. Therapy,
vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 1501–1510, 2006.
[6] F. Wang, E. Stone, M. Skubic, J. Keller, C. Abbott, and M. Rantz, “Towards a passive low-cost in-home gait assessment system for older adults,”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 346–355, Mar.
2013.
[7] S. Wang, M. Skubic, and Y. Zhu, “Activity density map visualization
and dissimilarity comparison for eldercare monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 607–614, Jul. 2012.
[8] F. Wang, E. Stone, W. Dai, T. Banerjee, J. Giger, R. Krampe, M. Rantz,
and M. Skubic, “Testing an in-home gait assessment tool for older adults,”
in Proc IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2009, pp. 6147–6150.
[9] G. Demiris, M. J. Rantz, M. A. Aud, K. D. Martek, H. W. Tyrer,
M. Skubic, and A. A. Hussam, “Older adults attitudes towards and perceptions of ‘smart home’ technologies: A pilot study,” Med. Informat.,
vol. 29, pp. 87–84, 2004.
[10] S. Hagler, D. Austin, T. L. Hayes, J. Kaye, and M. Pavel, “Unobtrusive
and ubiquitous in-home monitoring: A methodology for continuous assessment of gait velocity in elders,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57,
no. 4, pp. 813–820, Apr. 2010.
[11] L. Z. Rubenstein, Falls in older people: Epidemiology, risk factors and
strategies for prevention,” Age Aging, 35–S2, pp. ii37–ii47, 2006.
[12] C. Li, J. Cummings, J. Lam, E. Graves, and W. Wu, “Radar remote monitoring of vital signs,” IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 47–56, Feb.
2009.
[13] A. Lazaro, D. Girbau, and R. Villarino, “Analysis of vital signs monitoring
using an IR-UWB radar,” Progress Electromagn. Res., vol. 100, pp. 265–
284, 2010.
[14] J. L. Geisheimer, W. S. Marshall, and E. Greneker, “A continuous-wave
(CW) radar for gait analysis,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 35th Asilomar Conf.
Signals, Syst. Comput., 2001, pp. 834–838.
[15] D. Tahmoush and J. Silvious, “Stride rate in radar micro-doppler images,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man Cybern., 2009, pp. 4323–4328.
[16] M. Otero, “Application of a continuous wave radar for human gait recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man Cybern., 2009, pp. 4323–4328.
[17] F. Tivive, A. Bouzerdoum, and M. G. Amin, “A human gait classification
method based on radar doppler spectrograms,” EURASIP J. Advances
Signal Process., vol. 2010, Article ID 389716, 2010.
[18] I. Orović, S. Stankovic, and M. Amin, “A new approach for classification
of human gait based on time-frequency feature representations,” J. Signal
Process., vol. 91, no. 6, pp. 1448–1456, 2011.
[19] Y. Kim and H. Ling, “Human activity classification based on microdoppler signatures using a support vector machine,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 1328–1337, May 2009.
[20] [Online]. Available: www.interlogix.com/_/assets/library/1036806B_
RCR50_inin.pdf
[21] A. Mehmood, J. M. Sabatier, M. Bradley, and A. Ekimov, “Extraction of
the velocity of walking human’s body segments using ultrasonic doppler,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 128, no. 5, 2010.
[22] T. Yardibi, P. Cuddihy, S. Genc, C. Bufi, M. Skubic, M. Rantz, L. Liu,
and C. Phillips, “Gait characterization via pulse-doppler radar,” in Proc.
IEEE Intl. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Communic.: Workshop Smart Environ.
Enhance Health, 2011, pp. 662–667.
[23] C. E. Phillips III, J. Keller, M. Popescu, M. Skubic, M. J. Rantz,
P. E. Cuddihy, and T. Yardibi, “Radar walk detection in the apartments of
elderly to assist with assessing fall risk,” in Proc IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc. Conf., 2012, pp. 5863–5866.
[24] P. E. Cuddihy, T. Yardibi, Z. J. Legenzoff, L. Liu, E. Philips, C. Abott,
C. Galambos, J. Keller, M. Popescu, and J. Back, “Radar walking speed
measurements of seniors in their apartments: Technology for fall prevention,” in Proc IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2012, pp. 260–263.
[25] [Online]. Available: www.dataq.com
[26] E. E. Stone and M. Skubic, “Silhouette classification using pixel and voxel
features for improved elder monitoring in dynamic environments,” in Proc.
IEEE Pervasive Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2011, pp. 655–661.

WANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE GAIT MEASUREMENT WITH PULSE-DOPPLER RADAR FOR PASSIVE IN-HOME GAIT ASSESSMENT

Fang Wang (M’01) received the B.S. degree from
Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 1997, the M.S.
degree from Southern Methodist University, Dallas,
TX, USA, in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA, in 2011.
From 2001 to 2006, she was with Motorola,
Inc./Freescale Semiconductor, Tempe, AZ, USA,
where she was engaged in the characterization and
modeling for CMOS and BiCMOS technology development for RF/IF applications. From 2012 to 2013,
she was a Senior R&D Engineer at Ansys Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA, working on
EDA software development. She is currently an Assistant Teaching Professor in
the Computer Science Department at the University of Missouri. Her research
interests include computational intelligence, pattern recognition, computer vision, eldercare technology, and EDA software development with emphasis on
the semiconductor modeling.

Marjorie Skubic (S’90–M’91–SM’13) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA, in 1997, where
she specialized in distributed telerobotics and robot
programming by demonstration.
She is currently a Professor in the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department at the University
of Missouri, Columbia, with a joint appointment in
computer science. In addition to her academic experience, she has spent 14 years working in industry
on real-time applications such as data acquisition and
automation. Her current research interests include sensory perception, computational intelligence, human–robot interaction, and sensor networks for eldercare.
In 2006, she established the Center for Eldercare and Rehabilitation Technology
at the University of Missouri and serves as the Center Director for this interdisciplinary team. The focus of the center’s work includes monitoring systems for
tracking the physical and cognitive health of elderly residents in their homes,
logging sensor data, developing visualizations and clinical decision support
systems, extracting activity and gait patterns, identifying changes in patterns,
correlating sensor data patterns to health changes, and generating alerts for
health changes.

2443

Marilyn Rantz (M’12) received the Ph.D. degree in
nursing from the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, USA, in 1992, where she specialized in longterm care health policy and public program evaluation and gerontological nursing.
She is currently a Curators Professor at the Sinclair
School of Nursing, University of Missouri, Columbia,
where additionally she holds the named position of
University Hospital Professor of Nursing, has an appointment as Professor in the Department of Family and Community Medicine in the MU School of
Medicine.
Dr. Rantz developed and sustained a research program to improve quality of
care of elderly. Her innovative work in nursing home quality spans nearly 30
years, in practice and as a leading researcher, and establishes her as a premier
international expert in quality measurement in nursing homes. In late 2012, election to the Institute and Medicine and also secured a $14.8 million grant from
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for their Initiative to Reduce
Avoidable Hospitalizations among Nursing Facility Residents; the largest ever
received across the entire University of Missouri, Columbia campus. In total,
she and her multidisciplinary research teams have garnered nearly $60 million
in funds to support their work measuring effectiveness of nurse care coordination, conduct cutting edge research in long-term care, new delivery models of
care, and for technology development to enhance aging in place of communitydwelling elders. She is a fellow of the American Academy of Nursing.

Paul E. Cuddihy, photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.

