IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

2209

An Implantable Pressure Sensing System With
Electromechanical Interrogation Scheme
Albert Kim∗ , C. R. Powell, and Babak Ziaie, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we report on the development of an implantable pressure sensing system that is powered by mechanical
vibrations in the audible acoustic frequency range. This technique
significantly enhances interrogation range, alleviates the misalignment issues commonly encountered with inductive powering, and
simplifies the external receiver circuitry. The interrogation scheme
consists of two phases: a mechanical vibration phase and an electrical radiation phase. During the first phase, a piezoelectric cantilever acts as an acoustic receiver and charges a capacitor by
converting sound vibration harmonics occurring at its resonant
frequency into electrical power. In the subsequent electrical phase,
when the cantilever is not vibrating, the stored electric charge is
discharged across an LC tank whose inductor is pressure sensitive;
hence, when the LC tank oscillates at its natural resonant frequency, it radiates a high-frequency signal that is detectable using
an external receiver and its frequency corresponds to the measured
pressure. The pressure sensitive inductor consists of a planar coil
(single loop of wire) with a ferrite core whose distance to the coil
varies with applied pressure. A prototype of the implantable pressure sensor is fabricated and tested, both in vitro and in vivo (swine
bladder). A pressure sensitivity of 1 kHz/cm H2 O is achieved with
minimal misalignment sensitivity (26% drop at 90◦ misalignment
between the implanted device and acoustic source; 60% drop at
90◦ misalignment between the implanted device and RF receiver
coil).
Index Terms—Acoustic powering, bladder pressure, implantable pressure sensor, mechanical vibration.

I. INTRODUCTION
MPLANTABLE wireless devices for monitoring physiological parameters have been the focus of considerable investigations since the 1950s, following the pioneering works of
MacKay using passive (LC) and single transistor relaxation
oscillators [1]. Subsequent decades have witnessed a plethora
of devices and systems leveraging integrated circuit miniaturization and microelectromechanical system (MEMS) technology [2]–[8]. Batteries [9] and inductive powering [10]–[12] have
been the two mainstay energy sources for most implantable
wireless systems with the former being more suitable for

I

Manuscript received June 15, 2013; revised January 10, 2014 and March 21,
2014; accepted April 7, 2014. Date of publication April 29, 2014; date of current
version June 14, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ A. Kim is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47906 USA (e-mail: kim126@purdue.edu).
C. R. Powell is with the Department of Urology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202 USA (e-mail: Pocrpowell@iupui.edu).
B. Ziaie is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47906 USA (e-mail: bziaie@purdue.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2318023

Fig. 1. Schematic of a common interrogation scheme (phase-dip method) for
passive transponders.

low-power or short lifetime applications and the latter targeting implants with higher energy budget and longer implantation times. A recent example of battery operated systems is the
PillCam [13], the latest generation of earlier radio-pills, which
features an imaging system (miniature video camera and light
source) interfaced with low-power electronics and an RF radio
transmitter. In contrast, cochlear implants are an archetype of
inductively powered systems that provide auditory sensation for
many profoundly deaf patients [14]. Aside from the two aforementioned methods, a few efforts have harnessed ultrasound for
powering implantable devices; a recent example is the work by
Shih and Shih [15] wherein a 35–45 kHz transmitter powers a
subcutaneous system.
Another group of implantable wireless sensors is based on
passive transponders, in which the resonant frequency of a simple LC circuit is indicative of the measured parameter (e.g.,
a pressure signal coupled to a variable capacitor or inductor
through a movable membrane) and is remotely monitored with
an external coil [16]–[18]. The standard interrogation scheme
for implantable passive LC transponders is the “phase-dip”
method (see Fig. 1). This technique requires an external coil to
be in close proximity and parallel to that of the passive transponder in order to maximize the coupling between the two coils.
The impedance of the external coil in the vicinity of the resonant frequency of the transponder is monitored by an impedance
analyzer. The phase of the impedance drops at the resonant frequency of the implanted sensor, offering a remote measurement
technique to interrogate the transponder. Although conceptually simple and easy to fabricate, such passive systems have a
limited interrogation range (1–2 cm, depending on the diameter
of the coils), are alignment sensitive, and require sophisticated
receiver circuitry.
Despite numerous efforts in the passive transponder area,
these limitations have prevented all but a select few devices from
successful commercialization (an example being CardioMEMS

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 3. Acoustic wave intensity at resonant frequency of the cantilever versus
time showing operating phases (charging and RF radiation) of the device. The
threshold is the intensity above which the cantilever vibrates vigorously enough
to charge the capacitor.

A. Device Operation

Fig. 2. Schematic of an acoustically powered LC transponder implanted in
the bladder.

cardiovascular transponders [19], [20]). In this paper, we present
the design, implementation, and characterization of a novel electromechanical interrogation scheme for implantable transponders to address most of the aforementioned shortcomings.
II. DESIGN AND MODELING OF INTERROGATING SYSTEM
Fig. 2 shows a schematic of an acoustically powered LC
transponder for remote measurement of bladder pressure. The
pressure sensor can be implemented using either a capacitive
or an inductive scheme (in the present paper, we used an inductive pressure sensor). The transponder is excited by audible
acoustic waves from a speaker. The use of acoustic vibrations
to power the device allows for deep penetration into the tissue
since at such low frequencies the tissue loss is minimal [15].
In addition, mechanical vibrations allow for an omnidirectional
operation (due to the point source nature of the speaker and
near field operation). The received mechanical power is rectified and used to drive the LC tank at its resonant frequency, thus
emitting a series of RF pulses whose frequency is indicative of
bladder pressure. A simple receiver (oscilloscope in our case)
can be used to detect the radiated signal. The bottom portion of
Fig. 2 depicts a magnified three-dimensional (3-D) illustration
of the implanted unit in more detail. The device consists of a
piezoelectric cantilever beam, which receives and converts the
acoustic vibrations into electrical power; a rectifying circuit; a
power storage capacitor; a single-turn loop inductor that acts as
a part of both the LC sensor and the transmitter antenna; and
an inductive pressure sensor made of a flexible polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membrane and a ferrite core. The membrane
containing the ferrite core in the center is separated from the
inductor by a PDMS ring. Appling pressure to the membrane
changes the distance between the ferrite core and the inductor,
thus modulating the resonant frequency of the LC tank.

Fig. 3 illustrates an acoustic waveform at the piezoelectric
cantilever beam resonant frequency as a function of time. Device
operation occurs in two phases, a mechanical charging phase and
an electrical radiating phase. When the acoustic power is above
the threshold that is required to induce deflection in the cantilever beam, the cantilever resonates at its natural mechanical
frequency and begins charging the capacitor (charging phase).
When the acoustic power is below the threshold at cantilever
resonant frequency or incoming signal frequency is at nonresonant values, the cantilever motion is significantly dampened.
This ends the charging phase and initiates the radiating phase, in
which the LC tank begins radiating an RF signal based on its natural electrical resonant frequency using the stored energy from
the charging phase. Fig. 4 shows a block diagram illustrating
various components of the transponder. The blue dashed boxes
indicate external components and the red solid box indicates the
implanted system. Music from a loudspeaker penetrates dermal
and muscle tissue to reach the implanted transponder. Whenever the music exhibits a frequency harmonic that matches the
mechanical resonant frequency of the acoustic receiver (piezoelectric cantilever beam), the cantilever generates an electrical
voltage. The voltage is then rectified and stored in the capacitor.
As mentioned above, at nonresonant frequencies, the generation
of electric power is interrupted, causing the stored energy to be
dumped into the LC sensor thus radiating an RF pulse that can
be detected externally with an interrogation coil.
B. Acoustic Vibration Conversion
The most important factor for efficient conversion of the
acoustic to electrical power is matching the natural mechanical resonance of the cantilever beam to the acoustic frequency
of the most energetic harmonics in the driving sound wave [21].
The resonant frequency of a cantilever beam with a point
proof mass located at the free end is given by [22]

E (wt3 )
αn2
(1)
fr =
2π 12 (m + mp ) L4
where fr is the mechanical resonant frequency; αn is a constant (α1 = 1.875 for the fundamental mode); E in the Young

KIM et al.: IMPLANTABLE PRESSURE SENSING SYSTEM WITH ELECTROMECHANICAL INTERROGATION SCHEME

Fig. 4.

2211

Schematic block diagram of the pressure sensing system with electromechanical interrogation scheme.

modulus of the beam material; w, t, and L are, respectively, the
width, thickness, and length of the cantilever; m is the mass of
the cantilever; and mp is the mass of the point proof mass attached at the free end tip (the proof mass allows for adjustment
of resonant frequency independent of cantilever dimensions).
In this paper, we used music as the source of acoustic power.
Based on the frequency distribution of various types of music, we chose our cantilever dimensions and proof mass weight
(20 mm × 2 mm × 0.38 mm PZT series bimorph beam with
35 mg of solder as the proof mass) such that its resonant frequency (350 Hz) falls within the strong bass harmonics in rap
music (100–400 Hz).
The maximum mechanical output power generated by the
cantilever vibrating at its resonant frequency and modeled as a
discrete mass/spring/damper system can be given by
Pm ax =

mωr3 Y 2
4ζ

(2)

where m is the mass, ζ is the damping factor, ωr is the natural
resonant frequency, and Y is the oscillation amplitude. Equation
(2) indicates that for optimum operation the system should be
designed to resonate at its natural frequency with a minimum
damping. Evaluation of electromechanical conversion efficiency
using piezoelectric properties of the cantilever beam is rather
complicated and has been worked out by Roundy et al [21]. For
the purpose of this paper, it is sufficient to emphasize important
parameters that can increase the electrical output power for a
given input mechanical energy. In addition to mass, damping
factor, and vibration amplitude indicated by (2), the piezoelectric coupling coefficient (k) as defined by (3) plays an important
role in increasing the output power

stored electrical energy
.
(3)
k=
applied mechanical energy
For the configuration in which the cantilever is subjected to
transverse vibration, the relevant coupling coefficient is k31 ,
which relates the output electrical power to the shear stress in
the beam. For power conversion, PZT is the material of choice
since it has the largest coupling coefficient among commercial
piezoelectric materials (k31 = 0.35–0.45).
Finally, it should be noted that one can use either a unimorph
or bimorph configuration for the PZT beam. Bimorph beams are
advantageous since they can be connected in series or in parallel,

Fig. 5. Inductive pressure sensor incorporating a single-loop coil, a PDMS
ring, and a PDMS membrane with a ferrite core at its center.

increasing the available voltage or current. In our system, we
used a series connected bimorph PZT beam from Piezo Systems
Inc. (T215-A4CL).
C. Pressure Sensor Design
A simple inductive pressure sensor was incorporated into the
transponder (see Fig. 5). Variations in bladder pressure deflect
an elastic membrane that contains an embedded ferrite core,
which also acts as a boss. As the ferrite core moves toward or
away from the sensor coil, the circuit inductance changes due to
the higher magnetic permeability of the ferrite, thus providing
a means for modulating the resonant frequency of the LC tank.
The sensitivity of sensor depends on the membrane dimensions
and material properties, as well as the relative permeability of
the ferrite core and its dimensions.
According to the International Continence Society (ICS) minimal standards [23], the typical bladder pressure range is 0–
50 cmH2 O; however, the maximum abnormal pressure can reach
up to 200 cmH2 O. We designed our membrane to respond to
the above pressure range based on the following equation [24]
for a bossed-membrane pressure sensor:


t2
E
d2m
tdm
(4)
ΔP = 2
ap 2
2 + bp R 2 E
RM
R M 1 − vM
M
where t is the thickness of membrane, dm is the maximum
deflection, RM is the radius of membrane,ap (≈3.51) and bp
(≈7.13) are the constants that are a function of the boss-tomembrane radii ratio (RV /RM , RV is the radius of the boss,
which is the ferrite core in our case and RM is radius of the

2212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

membrane as stated above), E is the modulus of elasticity, and
vM is the Poisson’s ratio. In our design, we used a 50-μm-thick
PDMS membrane with an outer radius of 2.75 mm and a ferrite
core with a radius of 1 mm. Using tabulated material constants
for PDMS (E = 360 kPa, vM = 0.5) and a residual stress of zero
(i.e., membrane is cut out of a cast PDMS sheet), the maximum
deflection for an applied pressure of 50 cmH2 O is 1.63 mm,
whereas an extreme pressure of 200 cmH2 O results in 2.06 mm
deflection. We should mention that although our membrane is
not homogeneous (i.e., the boss is of a different material that
the rest of the membrane), (4) provides a good approximation
for the aforementioned urinary bladder pressure range.
The inductance change can be expressed theoretically as


(5)
ΔL ∼ μ0 κ d20 + μr d2r
where ΔL is the change in inductance, κ is a geometrical factor,
μ0 is the magnetic permeability of air, μr is the relative magnetic permeability of the ferrite core at the distance of d0 (≈32),
d0 is the initial separation between the bottom of the ferrite core
and the plane of the inductor (d0 = 2 mm in our design), and
dr is the distance between the inductor and the bottom of the
ferrite core after deflection (in this case dr = dm ) [25]. The
fabricated loop of wire (22 AWG, 8 mm in diameter) used in
our prototype had an initial inductance (L0 ) of 408 nH (when
membrane is flat). Note that ferrite plays two important roles in
our device, first, it is an integral part of the pressure sensor (the
separation of ferrite from the coil and hence the coil inductance
is a function of pressure), second, due to its high permeability,
it increases the Q of in the transmitting RF phase, thus allowing for a more accurate frequency determination. Using (5), the
theoretical inductance for an applied pressure of 50 cmH2 O is
approximately 499 nH (ΔL = 81 nH). The increase in inductance as the pressure increases results in a decrease in resonant
frequency of the LC tank (assuming parasitic capacitances are
constant), as expressed by (6). This yields a base resonant frequency of 788 kHz and a change to 713 kHz for 50 cmH2 O
(sensitivity of 1.5 kHz/cmH2 O for a fixed parallel charging capacitance of 0.1 μF). The measured base resonant frequency
in air was 431 kHz, with parasitic capacitances being the main
reason for further decrease above the calculated initial/base frequency
feﬀ =

1
√
,
2π Leﬀ C

where Leﬀ = L0 + ΔL.

(6)

An important feature of the loop inductor and its orthogonal
lead connection shown in Fig. 5 is that it imparts a superior
omnidirectionality to the radiated RF pulse. Both the loop inductor and the parallel interconnect create a near-field magnetic
configuration that allows the outside receiver to pick up the RF
pulse over a wide range of angular positions (see Section IV).
III. FABRICATION PROCESS
Fig. 6 shows the fabrication process of a prototype transponder. The circuit was assembled on a glass substrate (2 mm ×
3 mm × 300 μm). The discrete components, including the PZT5H cantilever (20 × 2 × 0.38 mm3 ), four Schottky diodes

Fig. 6. Fabrication procedure: (a) acoustic receiver (PZT cantilever) and rectifier circuitry are assembled on a glass substrate; (b) acrylic holder, proof of
mass, and antenna/sensor coil are added; (c) assembled parts are inserted into a
glass tube and an acrylic lid is attached; and (d) inductive sensor with PDMS
membrane and ferrite core are added.

Fig. 7.

Optical photograph of a prototype transponder.

(rectifier circuitry), and a 0.1 μF multilayer ceramic surface
mount filter capacitor were attached to the glass substrate using
silver epoxy [see Fig. 6(a)]. Next, a laser-micromachined acrylic
mounting ring was added to clamp the cantilever base.
A single-loop transmitter/sensor coil (22 AWG) was wrapped
around the acrylic mounting ring and a connection was made
to a capacitor. A proof mass of 0.035 g was then attached to
the free end tip of the PZT cantilever. The discrete components
were coated with a droplet of PDMS to mechanically secure and
encapsulate them [see Fig. 6(b)]. The assembled device was enclosed in a glass tube (40 mm long, 8 mm diameter) with one end
capped with acrylic and the other featuring the acrylic mounting ring that holds the transmitter/sensor coil [see Fig. 6(c)].
Finally, the pressure sensor was assembled by attaching a ferrite
core on a thin PDMS membrane and bonding it on top of the
transmitter/sensing coil through a PDMS ring [see Fig. 6(d)].
A 10 μm thick layer of Parylene-C was deposited by CVD on
the entire device for biocompatibility assurance. Fig. 7 shows
a photograph of the prototype transponder. We should mention
that although the biocompatibility of PZT is not fully evaluated and is still under investigation, the hard shell package with
glass tube protects the body from direct contact with PZT and

KIM et al.: IMPLANTABLE PRESSURE SENSING SYSTEM WITH ELECTROMECHANICAL INTERROGATION SCHEME

2213

Fig. 8. (a) Acoustic powering characterization setup. Output open-circuit voltage as a function of (b) axial distance (along the x-axis) from the speaker and
(c) and (d) transverse separation (along the y- and z-axes).

is suitable for short-term applications such as bladder pressure
monitoring.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. In Vitro Characterizations
To characterize the acoustic powering as a function of distance
and angular position, the transponder was submerged in a water
tank (50 × 40 × 20 cm3 ) to mimic soft tissue (acoustic wave
velocity and density in soft tissue and water are similar, 1496
versus 1540 m/s and 1.07 versus 1 g/cm3 ) and air–skin interface.
To transfer the acoustic wave into the water tank, a metal plate
was attached to the speaker and submerged in one end. Figs. 8
and 9 illustrate experimental setups showing only the speaker
and the transponder (not represented to the scale) while omitting
the water tank, metal plate, and other auxiliary instruments to
give a more clear view.
The transponder’s output open circuit voltage (rectified) as a
function of distance along the axial (x) and transverse (y and
z) directions are depicted in Fig. 8(b)–(d). The speaker was excited using a single tone frequency matched to the resonant frequency of the cantilever (350 Hz) with an input sound pressure
level (SPL) of 60 dB (equivalent to normal speaking); precise
transponder positioning was achieved using a micromanipulator. Fig. 8 (b) shows transponder’s output as a function of axial
distance from center of the speaker; clearly illustrating deep
penetration depths of up to 15 cm (small fluctuations follows
the near field pattern of acoustic wave, which is a well-known effect in ultrasonic and EM radiation theory). Fig. 8(c)–(d) shows
the output as a function of transverse displacement in the yand z-directions with a fixed axial position (x = 10 cm); the

Fig. 9. Acoustic power transfer characterizations under angular misalignments. (a)–(c) Different modes of angular displacement and output open-circuit
voltage as a function of the angle.

y-direction shows a similar trend as the axial one. Increase in
first few centimeter of the output for z-direction is due to our
experimental setup in which a higher power was transferred to
the device as the transponder was submerged deeper in the water
(near the water surface part of the speaker power was escaped
into air).
Fig. 9 depicts the transponder output characteristic as a function of angular displacement. Under the same experimental
setup as Fig. 8, the transponder was fixed at an axial distance of
10 cm. SPL was set to 60 dB with single-tone frequency fixed
at the resonant frequency of the cantilever. As the transponder
rotates about two angular directions θ and φ [see Figs. 9(a) and
(b)], the surface area that is exposed to acoustic wave is reduced,
and thus a lower output voltage is expected. However, the PZT
cantilever is small enough to be completely contained within
the large radiation pattern of the acoustic wave field from the
speaker and the reflected acoustic waves from the boundaries;
thus, it still absorbs a significant fraction of the wave. The variations in θ and φ do not cause a complete drop-out even at a

2214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 10. Acoustic intensity versus open-circuit output voltage (after the rectifier) of the transponder.

90◦ position (output attenuated by 26% at 90◦ in θ-direction and
18% in φ-direction).
In the case of ω angular rotations [see Fig. 9(c)], the exposed
surface with respect to the acoustic wave beam width remains
relatively constant, thus affecting the output voltage only minimally. The features shown in Figs. 8 and 9 are unique to acoustic powering and are not achievable through magnetic/inductive
methods, which show a strong sensitivity to separation and misalignment.
Fig. 10 shows the open-circuit voltage measured by the receiver as a function of SPL under a fixed axial distance of 15 cm
and single-tone excitation at the cantilever resonant frequency
(350 Hz). As expected, an increase in the SPL (vibrational amplitude) leads to an increase in the rectified output power. Based
on these results, one can calculate the overall energy efficiency.
To generate 60 dB SPL at 10 cm away (equivalent to 1 μW/mm2
sound intensity) the speaker consumes an input electrical power
of 11.7 W. The PZT cantilever converts acoustic power into
electrical power with an electromechanical coupling coefficient
of 0.4 resulting in an electrical output power of 16 μW from
the PZT assuming an impinging area of 40 mm2 . This yields
a maximum conversion efficiency of 1.4 × 10−6 . However,
when calculated using the actual measurement across a load of
1 kΩ the overall electrical efficiency drops to 10−7 (the system
impedance seen by the load was measured to be 0.05 Ω). Although this value is extremely low, it is important to note the
difference between our system, which uses the received power
to transmit a short RF pulse, and other systems in which power
is used to operate an internal circuitry including amplifiers, AD
converters, oscillators, etc. For the latter systems, the efficiencies achieved using acoustic powering might not be adequate
unless the system is designed for low-power operation, whereas
for the former ones the received power is enough to radiate the
RF pulse signal that indicated the measured physiological parameter (bladder pressure in our case). Using PZT with a power
amplifier belongs to the ultrasonic powering, which others have
pursued in recent years [26] and is fundamentally different than
the electromechanical powering and interrogation scheme presented here.
The RF part of the interrogating system performance was
evaluated using the experimental setup shown in Fig. 11. The
transponder was submerged inside a water-filled balloon of

Fig. 11. (a) Experiment setup; (b) output RF pulse signal captured from an
oscilloscope.

15 cm diameter mimicking the bladder. Acoustic vibrations were
generated by a 12-in speaker connected via a power amplifier to
an mp3 player [see Fig. 11(a)]. For stable and uniform vibration
transfer to the water balloon, a thin metal plate was attached
to the speaker and the water balloon was placed in intimate
contact with the metal sheet. For RF signal readout, a commercial (TDK’s TSL-0709) coil was placed near the water balloon
surface and was connected to an oscilloscope. The upper part
of Fig. 11(b) shows the RF signal picked up by the receiver
coil, and the bottom inset is the magnified portion along the
x-axis depicted by the green dashed line. As expected, an underdamped oscillating behavior with high quality factor (Q ≈
15) was observed.
Fig. 12(a) shows the measured maximum RF pulse peak-topeak voltage as a function of the distance between the transponder and the readout receiver coil with the measurement done at
10 cm separation between the transponder and the speaker (SPL
of 60 dB). Note that the y-axis of Fig. 12(a) is in logarithmic
scale to show small changes in the output at larger distances.
As expected, the output peak voltage of the RF pulse drops exponentially with distance with the lowest RF signal that could
be detected with an oscilloscope being 0.1 mV at 7 cm away.
The output peak voltage of the RF pulse was sufficiently high to
allow a detectable change in the electrical resonant frequency of
the LC tank. Angular sensitivity measurements were also carried out [see Fig. 12(b)]. As depicted, the transponder showed
low misalignment sensitivity due to the coil geometric design
discussed in Section III. Although an interrogation range of up
to 7 cm is sufficient for many applications including bladder

KIM et al.: IMPLANTABLE PRESSURE SENSING SYSTEM WITH ELECTROMECHANICAL INTERROGATION SCHEME

2215

Fig. 13.

Photograph of in vivo experiment setup.

Fig. 14.

In vivo implant results for resonant frequency versus pressure change.

Fig. 12. Output RF pulse strength versus (a) distance and (b) angle. Both
results are from a transmitted SPL of 60 dB.

pressure measurement; one can increase the range by using a
more sensitive receiver instead of the oscilloscope reported here.
Additionally, we investigated the acoustic force exerted to
the inductive sensor’s PDMS membrane, since that can also
cause a change in the inductance separate from the physiological pressure of interest. The inductance was measured using an
LCR meter while the pressure sensor was attached to the same
speaker used in the experiments. We noticed a significant inductance modulation (84.28%) by the vibration force at 50 Hz
driving frequency (which is the resonant frequency of the membrane). However, from 50 to 200 Hz, we only observed 1.42%
inductance change; furthermore, we did not see any inductance
change beyond 200 Hz. The device sends out pressure data in
terms of resonant frequency of LC tank only when it receives
acoustic vibrations above 200 Hz (or more precisely at 350 Hz,
i.e., the resonant frequency of the PZT cantilever), thus the inductance variations caused by lower mechanical harmonics at
50 Hz does not affect the pressure measurements since at these
frequencies the transponder is silent and is not broadcasting any
signal.
Finally, we should mention that the timing of the RF pulses
emitted by the transponder is stochastic in nature and depends on
the presence of the harmonics occurring at the cantilever beam
natural frequency and their strength. Such RF bursts are easily
captured by an oscilloscope as demonstrated here. Alternatively,
embedded wireless RF receiver modules such as the one reported
by Dutta et al. [27] can be used to automatically capture and
detect such stochastic RF pulses.

B. In Vivo Characterizations
The pressure transponder was also evaluated in vivo by implanting it inside a pig’s bladder. Fig. 13 shows a photograph of
the in vivo experimental setup. The implantation was done under
general anesthesia. The transponder was deployed into the bladder via the urethra using a flexible catheter. Once the transponder
was successfully implanted, music acoustic vibrations were provided using the same 12-in speaker, power amplifier, and MP3
player that were used for the in vitro experiments. A thin metal
plate was attached to the speaker to make immediate physical
contact with the hip of the pig. The receiver antenna was placed
over the abdomen and was connected to an oscilloscope. To
change and monitor pressure inside of the bladder, a clinical
ambulatory urodynamic system was also placed in the bladder
with its catheter used to pump saline into the bladder to change
the intravesical pressure. Fig. 14 shows the resonant frequency
of the LC tank versus bladder pressure. When pressure was
changed from 0 cmH2 O to 20 cmH2 O, the corresponding resonant frequency change was from 250 to 232 kHz, resulting in a
sensitivity of 1 kHz/cmH2 O (20 cmH2 O is maximum one can
increase the pressure in an anesthetized pig with the injection
of saline). Comparing to theoretical values, the initial resonant
frequency dropped from 431 kHz (in vitro, air) to 250–268 kHz
(in vitro water and in vivo). The drop in resonant frequency in
the water tank and in vivo setting is attributed to parasitic capacitances; the coil/antenna are surrounded by aqueous biological

2216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

media (i.e., water and muscle/soft-tissue) which have a significantly higher permittivity than air (water permittivity being 80.1
while muscle is 59–67 [28]). This leads to a resonant frequency
drop due to the increase in capacitances.
V. CONCLUSION
We presented a novel electromechanical interrogation scheme
for implantable passive transponders. The described method
uses musical acoustic vibrations to excite the transponder. This
approach has major advantages as compared to inductive techniques including reduced directionality sensitivity and increased
interrogation range. A midbass range of musical sound was used
to excite an acoustically tuned piezoelectric receiver. The generated charge was then used to excite a parallel LC resonator in
which the inductive element was a pressure sensor. The transmitted RF pulses were picked up by an oscilloscope. A prototype
sensor (40 mm long and 8 mm in diameter) for measuring bladder pressure was fabricated and fully characterized. The tests
verified deep penetration depth of acoustic vibrations, low misalignment sensitivity (both for powering and readout links), and
adequate pressure sensitivity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. T. Maleki for valuable
discussions and help with reviewing the paper.

REFERENCES
[1] R. S. MacKay, “Radio telemetering from within the human body,” IRE
Trans. Med. Electron., vol. 6, pp. 100–105, 1959.
[2] R. B. Robrock and W. H. Ko, “A six channel physiological telemetry
system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 14, pp. 40–46, 1967.
[3] W. H. Ko, J. Hynecek, and J. Homa, “Single frequency RF powered ECG
telemetry system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 105–109,
Feb. 1979.
[4] J. W. Knutti, H. V. Allen, and J. D. Meindl, “Integrated circuit implantable
telemetry systems,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 47–50,
Apr. 1983.
[5] E. Fromm, “A thick-film hybrid implantable telemeter,” IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Mag., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 38–41, Mar. 1983.
[6] A. M. Leung, W. H. Ko, T. M. Spear, and J. A. Bettice, “Intracranial pressure telemetry system using semicustom integrated circuits,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 386–395, Apr. 1986.
[7] K. Stangel, S. Kolnsberg, D. Hammerschmidt, B. J. Hosticka, H. K. Trieu,
and W. Mokwa, “A programmable intraocular CMOS pressure sensor
system implant,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1094–
1100, Jul. 2001.
[8] A. M. Sodagaer, G. E. Perlin, Y. Yao, K. Najafi, and K. D. Wise, “An implantable 64-channel wireless microsystem for single-unit neural recording,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 2591–2604, Sep.
2009.
[9] J. G. Webster, "Batteries," In Design of Cardiac Pacemakers, J. G. Webster,
Ed. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 1995.
[10] W. J. Heetderks, “RF powering of millimeter- and submillimeter-sized
neural prosthetic implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 323–327, May 1988.
[11] Z. Hamici, R. Itti, and J. Champier, “A high-efficiency power and data
transmission system for biomedical implanted electronic devices,” Meas.
Sci. Technol., vol. 7, pp. 192–201, 1996.
[12] W. H. Ko, S. P. Liang, and C. D. F. Fung, “Design of radio-frequency
powered coils for implant instruments,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 15,
pp. 634–640, 1977.

[13] G. Iddan, G. Meron, A. Glukhovsky, and P. Swain, “Wireless capsule
endoscopy,” Nature, vol. 405, p. 417, 2000.
[14] C. M. Zierhofer, I. J. Hochmair-Desoyer, and E. S. Hochmair, “Electronic
design of a cochlear implant for multichannel high-rate pulsatile stimulation strategies,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 112–116,
Mar. 1995.
[15] P. J. Shih and W. P. Shih, “Design, fabrication, and application of bioimplantable acoustic power transmission,” J. Microelectromech. Syst.,
vol. 19, pp. 494–502, 2010.
[16] O. Akar, K. Najafi, and T. Akin, “A wireless batch-sealed absolute capacitive pressure sensor,” Sens. Actuators A: Phys., vol. 98, pp. 29–38,
2001.
[17] R. M. Haque and K. D. Wise, “An intraocular pressure sensor based on
a glass reflow process,” presented at the Solid-State Sens., Actuator Microsyst. Workshop, Hilton Head, SC, USA, Jun. 2010.
[18] G. Chitnis, T. Maleki, B. S. Samuels, L. B. Cantor, and B. Ziaie, “A
minimally invasive implantable wireless pressure sensor for continuous
ion monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 250–256,
Jan. 2013.
[19] M. G. Allen, “Micromachined endovascularly implanted wireless
aneurysm pressure sensors: From concept to clinic,” in Proc. 13th Int.
Conf. Solid-State Sens. Actuators Microsyst., Seoul, Korea, 2005, pp. 275–
278.
[20] W. T. Abraham, P. B. Adamson, R. C. Bourge, M. F. Aaron, M. R.
Costanzo, L. W. Stevenson, W. Strickland, S. Neelagaru, N. Raval, S.
Krueger, S. Weiner, D. Shavelle, B. Jeffries, and J. S. Yadav, “Wireless
pulmonary artery haemodynamic monitoring in chronic heart failure: A
randomised controlled trial,” The Lancet, vol. 377, pp. 658–666, 2011.
[21] S. Roundy, E. S. Leland, J. Baker, E. Carlenton, E. Reilly, E. Lai, B. Otis,
J. M. Rabaey, P. K. Wright, and V. Sundararajan, “Improving power output
for vibration-based energy scavengers,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 28–36, Jan.-Mar. 2005.
[22] J. W. Yi, W. Y. Shih, and W.-H. Shih, “Effect of length, width, and mode
on the mass detection sensitivity of piezoelectric unimorph cantilevers,”
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 91, p. 1680, 2002.
[23] P. Abrams, L. Cardozo, M. Fall, D. Griffiths, P. Rosier, and U. Ulmsten,
“The standardization of terminology of lower urinary tract function. Report from the standardization subcommittee of the international continence
society,” J. Neurol. Urodyn., vol. 21, pp. 167–178, 2002.
[24] W. K. Schomburg, Introduction to Microsystem Design. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2011.
[25] G. Chitnis and B. Ziaie, “A ferrofluid-based pressure sensor for biomedical
applications,” in Proc. Tech. Dig. Solid-State Sens. Actuator Workshop,
Hilton Head, SC, USA, Jun. 2012, pp. 408–411.
[26] T. Maleki, N. Cao, S. H. Song, C. Kao, S.-C. Ko, and B. Ziaie, “An
ultrasonically powered implantable micro-oxygen generator (IMOG),”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3104–3111, Nov. 2011.
[27] P. Dutta, M. Grimmer, A. Arora, S. Bibyk, and D. Culler, “Design of a wireless sensor network platform for detecting rare, random, and ephemeral
events,” presented at the 4th Int. Symp. Inf. Process. Sens. Netw., Los
Angeles, CA, 2005.
[28] M. Schroeder, A. Sadasiva, and R. M. Nelson, “An analysis on the role of
water content and state on effective permittivity using mixing formulas,”
J. Biomechanics, Biomed., Biophysical Eng., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2008.

Albert Kim was born in Newark, DE, USA, in 1983.
He received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering in 2008 and 2011, respectively, from
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, where
he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering.
His current research interests include the development of implantable microdevices system and wearable devices for healthcare.

KIM et al.: IMPLANTABLE PRESSURE SENSING SYSTEM WITH ELECTROMECHANICAL INTERROGATION SCHEME

C. R. Powell received the B.S. degree in electrical
engineering from Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN, USA, in 1997, and the M.D. degree from the
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
USA, in 2002.
In 2004, he completed his internship in general
surgery, and in 2008, he completed residency training
in urologic surgery from the University of Illinois
in Chicago. After finishing a fellowship in Female
Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery in 2009
at the University of Iowa, he joined the faculty as an
Assistant Professor of Urology at the Indiana University School of Medicine.
His current research interests include the management of voiding dysfunction,
bio-MEMS, reconstructive surgery, including the use of bowel segments to
reconstruct the lower urinary tract, and robotic surgery.

2217

Babak Ziaie ( SM’07) received the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1994.
From 1995 to 1999, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow and an Assistant Research Scientist at the Center for Integrated Microsystems (CIMS), University
of Michigan. He subsequently joined the Electrical
and Computer Engineering Department, University
of Minnesota as an Assistant Professor (1999–2004).
Since January 2005, he has been with the School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, where he is currently a Professor. His current
research interests include biomedical applications of MEMS and microsystems
(bio-MEMS).

