IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

493

An Interoperable System for Automated Diagnosis
of Cardiac Abnormalities from
Electrocardiogram Data
Thidarat Tinnakornsrisuphap and Richard E. Billo

Abstract—Electrocardiogram (ECG) data are stored and analyzed in different formats, devices, and computer platforms. As
a result, ECG data from different monitoring devices cannot be
displayed unless the user has access to the proprietary software of
each particular device. This research describes an ontology and encoding for representation of ECG data that allows open exchange
and display of ECG data in a web browser. The ontology is based on
the Health Level Seven (HL7) medical device communication standard. It integrates ECG waveform data, HL7 standard ECG data
descriptions, and cardiac diagnosis rules, providing a capability
to both represent ECG waveforms as well as perform automated
diagnosis of 37 different cardiac abnormalities. The ECG ontology is encoded in XML, thus allowing ECG data from any digital
ECG device that maps to it to be displayed in a general-purpose
Internet browser. An experiment was conducted to test the interoperability of the system (ability to openly share ECG data without
error in a web browser) and also to assess the accuracy of the
diagnosis model. Results showed 100% interoperability using 276
ECG data files and 93% accuracy in diagnosis of abnormal cardiac
conditions.
Index Terms—Automated electrocardiogram (ECG) diagnosis,
Health Level 7 (HL7), interoperability, medical device communication, ontology.

characteristic ECG waveform that, in turn, can lead to a deduction of a specific cardiac condition. Much of this reported
research has been limited to development of heuristic models to
detect a single specific cardiac disease.
For example, hidden Markov models have been used to examine ECG waveforms to detect abnormal heart rhythm [1]; point
scoring has been used for detection of right ventricular hypertrophy [2]; and artificial neural nets and computer interactive
redefinition of criteria for myocardial infarction [3], [4]. However, no system has been reported for automated detection of a
robust suite of cardiac abnormalities that are recorded through
ECG waveforms.
There is a need to share and integrate ECG data among different devices and systems [5], [6], as well as provide a greater
level of automated support to physicians that use data from
these systems to detect cardiac disease. Such technologies are
necessary to advance arising new models of healthcare such
as telemedicine and assistive technologies. The availability of
such technology provides an overall better quality of healthcare
to patients.

I. INTRODUCTION
URRENTLY, 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring systems have proprietary formats for operation and
data storage and are manufactured by a multitude of different
vendors. The ECG data are recorded, read, and analyzed by
different methods depending on computing platforms and software implementation intricacies. ECG output data are not shared
among different products, or able to be presented in a ubiquitous
manner across heterogeneous computing platforms that do not
contain the vendor’s ECG software display product.
On a related issue, with respect to disease diagnosis from the
output of these ECG systems, automated systems have been developed that can serve as supportive decision aids to physicians
diagnosing cardiac conditions. By examining the ECG signal, a
number of informative measurements can be derived from the

C

Manuscript received July 16, 2013; revised October 28, 2013, February 3,
2014 and March 6, 2014; accepted April 26, 2014. Date of publication May 2,
2014; date of current version March 2, 2015.
T. Tinnakornsrisuphap was with the School of Mechanical, Industrial and
Manufacturing Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331 USA
(e-mail: thidarat_t@lifetime.oregonstate.edu).
R. E. Billo is with the Office of the Vice President for Research, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: rbillo@nd.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2321515

II. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this research were to: 1) develop an ontological model and subsequent software system to promote open
exchange and presentation of ECG data; and 2) use this ontology
as an aid for the automatic diagnosis of a number of common
cardiac abnormalities that may be present in ECG output. The
general approach was to make use of an emerging standard for
electronic exchange of medical data; to develop an ontology for
the explicit specification of such a standard; to implement this
ontology in a widely accepted machine readable format so that
ECG data exchange can be done efficiently without the need of
proprietary algorithms or software; and finally, to use the ontology as the basis for automated ECG diagnosis of 37 specific
cardiac abnormalities. This research included data from 12-lead
ECGs operating both in at-rest situations and in continuous
monitoring situations such as ambulatory recordings.
Health Level 7 (HL7) [6] was selected as the medical data
exchange standard. The ontology that was developed served to
integrate ECG waveform data, HL7 ECG data descriptions, and
cardiac diagnosis rules. The ontology was then implemented
in the Extensible Markup Language (XML) because of its
widespread acceptance for exchanging data on the Internet.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

494

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
IRREGULAR RHYTHM DIAGNOSIS DESCRIPTION

Fig. 1.

Standard ECG wave structure (adapted from [8]).

III. ONTOLOGICAL MODEL FOR REPRESENTATION
AND DIAGNOSIS
An ontological model was developed to represent ECG waveform data, explicit measurements of the ECG waveforms, and
the diagnostic rules that allow detection of specific cardiac abnormalities. The HL7 point-of-care medical device communication standard [7] was used as the exchange standard. The
ontological model served two purposes, allowing both interoperability and diagnosis.
A. ECG Wave Structure
To model ECG output data and then to make inferences as to
any cardiac abnormalities that it may represent, one must first
understand the structure of the ECG waveform. Fig. 1 illustrates
the structure of ECG waves, along with intervals, standard time,
and voltage measures [8].
The P wave represents atrial activation. The PR interval is
the time from onset of atrial activation to onset of ventricular
activation. The QRS complex represents ventricular activation
while the QRS duration is the duration of ventricular activation.
The ST-T -wave represents ventricular repolarization. The QT
interval is the duration of ventricular activation and recovery.
The U -wave represents the time interval after depolarization in
the ventricles.
B. HL7 Medical Device Communication
HL7 provides standards for the exchange and sharing of electronic health information [6]. HL7 was designed to address
the interface requirements of an entire health care organization including clinical, financial, and administrative information
among heterogeneous computer systems. The standards enable
healthcare information interoperability and sharing of electronic
clinical and relevant data.
The Lab Automation Special Interest Group (SIG) of HL7
defined a draft set of standards for point-of-care medical device communication, which has concurrently been adopted as
a draft IEEE standard [7]. It was intended to provide for open
systems communications between medical devices and patient

care information systems. The scope of the standard includes
nomenclature architecture and a data dictionary for ECG and
other clinical areas such as Vital Signs, Respiratory Measurements, and Common Blood Gas Measurements. This research
made use of the ECG section of the HL7 point-of-care medical device communication standard that includes both the data
dictionary for ECG measurements, as well as enumerations for
ECG diagnostics (i.e., abnormal conditions) derived from ECG
signals by an ECG monitoring system.
C. Diagnostic Rules
It is important to note that the ECG section of the HL7
point-of-care medical device communication standard makes
no causal connection between the ECG measurements and the
ECG diagnostics. The research team was required to develop
these diagnostic criteria as part of the project. The diagnosis
knowledge was collected from available rules obtained from a
variety of sources, including cardiology textbooks, interviews
with experienced cardiac surgeons, and peer-reviewed papers
in the published literature [7]–[14]. An example diagnosis of
Irregular Rhythm is described in Table I. Diagnostic rules were
developed for a total of 37 cardiac abnormalities.
D. Ontology Schema
An ontology-based system representing structure for the presentation, measurement of ECG data, and criteria for diagnosis
was developed. The structure of the ontology was synthesized
from existing data descriptions as listed in the HL7 medical device communication standard, the technical and clinical literature and recommendations from cardiac surgeons. Fig. 2 depicts
the schema for the developed ontology representing the relationships among ECG data and the HL7 standard. The ontology
integrates the ECG waveform data with HL7 textual measurement and diagnosis descriptions. In addition, through the type
entitled Criteria, the developed ontology improves the use of the
HL7 medical device communication standard by adding causal
linkages between ECG measurements and abnormal conditions
that represent a comprehensive set of diagnosis rules that draw
upon HL7 measurements.
In the ontology, no preliminary morphological classification of a beat was done. All beats were considered. Waveform

TINNAKORNSRISUPHAP AND BILLO: INTEROPERABLE SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATED DIAGNOSIS OF CARDIAC ABNORMALITIES

Fig. 3.

495

Software development framework.
TABLE II
ECG DIGITAL DATA

Fig. 2.

Schema for ontology.

Structure consists of necessary components for ECG plots and
associated waves. The structure format was adapted from recommendations in [10]. Lead refers to a vector along which the
heart’s electrical activity is recorded as a waveform [11], which
can be No. 1–No. 12 for each electrode lead. In the type Wave,
“Start” indicates the sample number that starts the wave; “Peak”
indicates the sample number of the peak point of the wave; and
“End” indicates the sample number that ends the wave.
The type Diagnosis serves to connect HL7 measurements and
abnormal conditions through diagnosis criteria. As stated previously, the diagnosis knowledge was collected from available
rules obtained from a variety of sources including cardiology
textbooks, interviews with experienced cardiac surgeons, and
papers in the published literature.

A. Phase 1: Generation of XML Documents (ECG-XML)
from ECG Data
XML documents were automatically created from ECG x-, ycoordinate data. XML Schema [10], [15] was used to restrict and
validate ECG data instantiated into XML documents. Waveform
data and structure were also encoded in XML Schema. This task
made use of the ecgpuwave software available from PhysioNet
[16] to detect the boundary of each wave (start, peak, and end).
The XML Schema consists of structures for the components
of the waveform drawn from the x and y coordinates of the
graphical waveform. The x-axis represents the time interval
in seconds while the y-axis represents amplitude in millivolts.
Table II shows an example of ECG digital data.
Fig. 4 continues the example by presenting the ECG-XML
document showing the instantiation of ECG data above (x, y)
and ECG wave data (P -wave, QRS complexes, T -wave).
B. Phase 2: Inclusion of Diagnosis in the XML Documents
(ECG-XML-DIAG)

IV. SOFTWARE FRAMEWORK
The software operating process for converting ECG waveform data to a common data file, implementing the ontology,
and diagnosing abnormal conditions is illustrated in Fig. 3. Tasks
were divided into three phases and are described in the following
sections.

In this step, all beats of ECG data in XML format (ECGXML) were diagnosed by using the diagnosis rules for each
abnormal condition listed in the HL7 medical device communication standard. Table III shows examples of ECG measurement
properties including duration, amplitude, and appropriate wave
intervals. To properly identify abnormal conditions, rate and

496

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE IV
RATE AND RHYTHM PROPERTIES

C. Phase 3: Representation of ECG-XML-DIAG With
Graphical and Text Information
ECG-XML-DIAG documents were converted to output in an
Internet browser for presentation purposes. Users are able to
see output consisting of an ECG image and appropriate diagnosis without the need of proprietary software. The presentation process was implemented in an Internet browser by using
JavaScript, a Java Applet, and PHP Version 4.3.11-1 as programming language tools.
For user’s output, both graphical and textual information
are presented via a browser. Graphical information consists
of an image of the ECG plot along with boundary and status
of each wave. Textual information lists heart rates (both atrial
and ventricular rates), rhythm status (both atrial and ventricular
rhythms), abnormal ECG measurements, and possible findings
(normal ECG or abnormal conditions found).
Fig. 6 illustrates graphical output of the process for a single
beat of Premature Ventricular Contraction and output of textual
information for this ECG data.
Fig. 4.

ECG-XML document instantiated with ECG coordinate and wave data.

TABLE III
ECG MEASUREMENT PROPERTIES

V. VALIDATION
The system was validated for interoperability, as well as its
ability to correctly diagnose abnormal conditions.
A. Interoperability

rhythm were calculated and included as properties in the type
Diagnosis as shown in Table IV.
Rules for diagnosis were then added to the system. An example of ECG-XML-DIAG is listed in Fig. 5. This example file
includes an encoding of the Irregular Rhythm description (from
Table I) and Premature Ventricular Contraction (description not
shown).

Interoperability was defined as the ability to openly share
ECG data in a web browser without the need for proprietary
software. With such a definition, users of heterogeneous platforms would be able to use the system via web access without
the need for proprietary ECG device software. The researchers’
ultimate intention was that, in practice, ECG device manufacturers would provide software drivers for their products that
map their ECG device data from their proprietary formats to
the standard ontology realized as XML code as described in
this research. In this way, the data could be readily exchanged
and displayed in any Internet browser. This is common practice
in other industries. For example, CAD vendors routinely allow
for a user to store or translate design data from their product’s
proprietary format to an open standard for exchange purposes.
In the present research, ECG waveform data uniquely structured in device files was converted to a common file consistent
with the ontology developed from the HL7 device communication standard. The criterion for interoperability was that all
ECG data from numerous files went through the system and
displayed without error in Internet Explorer.

TINNAKORNSRISUPHAP AND BILLO: INTEROPERABLE SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATED DIAGNOSIS OF CARDIAC ABNORMALITIES

Fig. 6

Fig. 5.

ECG-XML-DIAG document.

Interoperability was tested with ECG data from eight
databases representing eight different vendor devices that were
available in PhysioBank [17]. The system converts data from
PhysioBank because such data was stored in the PhysioBank
format and did not conform to any open standard. In turn, PhysioBank databases themselves represent an archival copy of ECG
data contributed by authors of numerous published articles. Each
database remains unchanged from the original archived copies
provided to PhysioBank. PhysioNet software provides access to
the unique structures of the various databases so as to make the
data available to users of PhysioBank; however, the data is not
interchangeable, thus cannot be viewed without PhysioNet software or functions from PhysioNet to allow access. So, although

497

(a) Graphical and (b) textual output.

our system literally only performs a single conversion of heterogeneous data from the PhysioBank system to an open standard
(thus demonstrating the feasibility for device manufacturers to
develop such drivers for their unique products), if successful,
the interoperability test would indicate that it could provide
transparent viewing in web browsers, without the need for ECG
device vendors’ software.
We used PhysioBank data of ECG’s because they were well
characterized, meaning the data themselves were carefully reviewed by physicians to correct any errors so they could be
used for assessment purposes. In total, these eight databases
provided 276 ECG data files that served as input to the system.
The databases were:
1) MIT-BIH Arrhythmia;
2) European ST-T;
3) Long-Term ST;
4) MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test;
5) Creighton University Ventricular Tachyarrhythmia;
6) MIT-BIH Atrial Fibrillation;
7) MIT-BIH Supra-ventricular Arrhythmia; and
8) Normal Sinus Rhythm.

498

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

∧

ECG data were a combination of data from patients at-rest
and ambulatory with length varying from 10 s to 24 h. Further
details on conditions under which ECG data were collected for
each of the databases can be found in [17].

p was used to calculate the confidence interval of p, shown as
follows:



(0.05)(1 − 0.05)
p ∈ 0, 0.05 + 1.645
(1)
132

B. Diagnosis

where 1 – α is a one-sided level of confidence interval for p and
zα is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal
distribution. Therefore, sensitivity can be calculated through the
following:

This task involved validating accuracy of the system in correctly detecting abnormal cardiac conditions as well as normal
ECGs. Discrete data analysis [18] was used to determine the
accuracy of the model in diagnosing normal and abnormal conditions. For accuracy, the list of abnormal conditions found
by the software for each ECG was compared with their actual known diagnoses that were provided with the ECG data
from PhysioBank. (The databases contained information about
normal ECG or abnormal conditions accurately diagnosed by
physicians.)
Accuracy of the model was validated in terms of its sensitivity, specificity, and overall accuracy. Sensitivity is the ability
to predict positive results correctly when abnormal conditions
exist. Specificity is the ability to predict negative results when
the data are actually normal. Overall accuracy is the calculation resulting from combining results from both sensitivity and
specificity tests. It represents the percentage of total correct
results predicted by the model.
This research used an acceptable error rate of 10% determined from information about ECG decision support systems
and algorithms for classifying cardiac diseases in the literature [19], [20] and from recommendations from three experienced cardiac physicians.
Assuming a normal distribution, a sample size that guaranteed the following two probability requirements was determined
from the acceptable error rate [21]:
1) P [accept the model when error rate ≥ p2 ] ≤ β(accept bad
lot);
2) P [reject the model when error rate ≤ p1 ] ≤ α (reject good
lot).
The first inequality states that the sample size should be large
enough so that if the error rate is greater than p2 , there is a
very small chance (less than β) of not detecting it. The second
inequality states that if the error rate is satisfactory (e.g., less
than p1 ), there is a low probability (less than α) of rejecting the
model. Normally, p1 ranges between 1% and 5% while α and β
range between 5% and 10%. A sampling plan with a minimum
sample size of 117 was selected to assure the two probability
requirements with 95% confidence intervals were met.
Inferences on population probabilities of discrete random
variables were considered. The cell probability or success prob∧
ability p was calculated by the sample proportion p =x/n, where
n is the number of samples that is obtained from the population.
The variable x is the number of observations that possess the
particular characteristics of interest that is the number of ECGs
in which the model cannot accurately detect the abnormal conditions. With an appropriate n, the sample proportion is assumed
to have a normal distribution.

Minimum sensitivity rate = (1 − upper bound of p) × 100%.
(2)
VI. RESULTS
Results were determined for both Interoperability and Accuracy (sensitivity, specificity, and overall accuracy). Of the 276
12-lead ECGs used to validate interoperability, the system was
able to diagnose each and every ECG with heart rates, heart
rhythm, abnormal ECG measurements, and possible diagnostic findings. Therefore, it was concluded that the system amply
demonstrated interoperable capability because it was able to
present all diagnosis results in a browser from the encoded representation of the open standard HL7 Ontology.
For sensitivity, from 132 ECGs with a variety of abnormal
conditions, 125 ECGs were diagnosed correctly according to the
physician’s diagnosis. The model misdiagnosed 7 ECGs. From
(1) and using the critical point zα = z0.05 = 1.645, a one-sided
95% confidence interval for the probability p of sensitivity error
was as follows:



(0.05)(1 − 0.05)
p ∈ 0, 0.05 + 1.645
132
p = (0, 0.09) .
This result shows that the upper bound on the probability
p is 0.09, which can be used to obtain a lower bound on the
complementary 1 – p [18] that being 0.91; thus, the model has
a sensitivity rate of at least 91%. The proportion of ECGs with
abnormal conditions that the model can detect correctly will be
at least 91%.
For specificity, from 144 normal ECGs, 138 ECGs were correctly diagnosed by the model as normal without finding any
abnormal conditions. The model misdiagnosed 6 ECGs. The
upper bound on the probability p is 0.07 providing a lower
bound of 0.93; thus, the model has a specificity rate at least
93%. Consequently, the proportion of normal ECGs that the
model can interpret correctly will be at least 93%.
The overall accuracy of the model was calculated by considering the total number of samples and the total number of
errors from sensitivity and specificity tests. From 276 ECGs,
the acceptable error rate (p2 ) = 0.10 does not fall in (0, 0.07).
Consequently, the proportion of normal and abnormal ECGs
that the model diagnoses correctly will be at least 93%.

TINNAKORNSRISUPHAP AND BILLO: INTEROPERABLE SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATED DIAGNOSIS OF CARDIAC ABNORMALITIES

VII. DISCUSSION
The accuracy of the model is acceptable because the results
yielded less than the designated 10% error rate. However, it
was seen that the error rate of sensitivity is higher than that of
the specificity. The explanation for this result is that it is more
difficult to automatically diagnose an ECG that indicates abnormal conditions. If an obvious abnormal condition occurs, the
model will diagnose it correctly. However, in some challenging
records, when an abnormal condition is embedded within another abnormal condition in the same ECG strip, a misdiagnosis
is likely to occur. For example, when an ECG strip has multiple
beats of Left Bundle Branch Block, and there is a single beat of
Premature Ventricular Contraction occurring between those Left
Bundle Branch Block beats, the model will detect Left Bundle
Branch Block but may or may not detect Premature Ventricular
Contraction.
In some records, physicians’ diagnoses were different than
the abnormal conditions diagnosed by the model. For example,
one ECG record was diagnosed as a normal ECG by a physician.
However, the model found “Irregular Rhythm” in this ECG strip.
The atrial rate that was measured by P –P duration has slightly
varied rates. The model incorrectly diagnosed Irregular Rhythm
because it detected a wide range of atrial rates from 54 to 66
beats per minute.
After being tested on the data sets, an exploratory analysis
was done by systematically modifying sensitivity and specificity
parameters to determine why the model only had 93% total
accuracy. This analysis showed a tradeoff. When the model got
better at correctly interpreting normal ECGs as normal (higher
specificity), it tended to be less sensitive to correctly detecting
an abnormal condition when diagnosing abnormal ECGs (lower
sensitivity).

VIII. CONCLUSION
The developed ontology provides a structure for the representation and open exchange of ECG data so that it can be
made readily available for viewing on a multitude of computing
platforms. In addition, by using ECG digital data as inputs, abnormal cardiac conditions can be automatically diagnosed and
presented. Both of these capabilities are based on the HL7 standard for point-of-care medical device communication [7]. The
ontology was encoded in XML vocabularies providing human
and machine readable formats, allowing it to be displayed in an
Internet browser.
This research shows that an open platform and software independent system can be developed to represent, openly exchange, and accurately diagnose cardiac data. ECG data can
be shared and diagnosed across systems without the need for
proprietary ECG software. It also promotes the use of the HL7
standard for data exchange and provides an automated ECG diagnosis system with acceptable accuracy rates that can be used
as a decision aid for ECG diagnosis. The researchers encourage ECG device vendors to provide capability to map output
data from their products to an open standard for data exchange.
Such technology serves to advance emerging telemedicine and

499

assistive medicine technologies for providing better healthcare
to patients.
Future research can improve understanding of ECG diagnosis
and develop a more accurate ECG diagnosis model. An example of methods to improve the accuracy rate of the model is
to include ECG images as pattern recognition of knowledge
for diagnosis. More detailed measurement of the ECG waveform can also be implemented for a wider range of diagnosis.
Demographic information such as age and gender can also be
included for a more accurate ECG prediction algorithm. Moreover, an inclusion of a preliminary morphological classification
with information of beat number and beat type in the current
ontology may add benefit.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Hughes, L. Tarassenko, and S. Roberts, “Markov models for automated
ECG interval analysis,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 16 (NIPS 2003), S. Thrun, L. Saul, and B. Schoelkopf, Eds.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
[2] H. Hiroki, K. Arakawa, J. Muramatsu, J. T. Sugimoto, T. Sawayama,
K. Inoue, N. Kawai, and T. Mizutani, “New electrocardiographic criteria
for diagnosing right ventricular hypertrophy in mitral stenosis-comparison
with the Bonner’s and Mortara’s criteria,” J. Japanese Circulation, vol. 52,
no. 10, pp. 1114–1120, 1988.
[3] B. Heden, O. Hans, R. Rittner, and L. Edenbrandt, “Acute myocardial
infarction detected in the 12-lead ECG by artificial neural networks,”
Circulation, vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 1798–1802, 1997.
[4] P. Porela, K. Hanninen, T. Vuorenmaa, M. Arstila, K. Pulkki,
A. Bredbacka, K. J. Antila, J. Jalonen, H. Helenius, and L.-M. VoipioPulkki, “Computer-assisted electrocardiograhy in structured diagnosis of
acute myocardial infarction,” J. Scand. Cardiovasc., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 89–
96, 1999.
[5] Health Informatics. Standard Communication Protocol. ComputerAssisted Electrocardiography, IST/35 Standard BS EN 1064, 2005.
[6] Health Level Seven (HL7). (2014). [Online]. Available: http://www.hl7.org
[7] Draft Standard for Health informatics—Point-of-care medical device
communication—Nomenclature, IEEE P1073-1.1.1/d08, pp. 62–81, 2003.
[8] D. Jenkins and S. Gerred (1996). ECG library. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ecglibrary.com/ecghome.html
[9] F. G. Yanowitz. (2005). ECG learning center. [Online]. Available:
http://ecg.utah.edu
[10] H. Wang, F. Azuaje, G. Clifford, B. Jung, and N. Black, “Methods and tools
for generating and managing ecgML-based information,” in Computers
in Cardiology, Chicago, IL, USA: IEEE, vol. 31, 2004.
[11] Regulated Clinical Research Information Management Technical
Committee. HL7 aECG implementation guide [Online]. Available:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HL7_aECG
[12] ECG Interpretation Made Incredibly Easy, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
[13] D. Dubin, Rapid Interpretation of EKG’s, 6th ed. Tampa, FL, USA:
Cover Publishing Company, 2000.
[14] H. J. L. Marriott, Practical Electrocardiography. Philadelphia, PA,
USA: Williams & Wilkins, 1988.
[15] P. Walmsley, Definitive XML Schema, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
USA: Prentice-Hall, 2013.
[16] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. N. Amaral, L. Glass, J. M. Hausdorff,
P. C. Ivanov, R. G. Mark, J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C. K.
Peng, and H. E. Stanley. Physiobank, Physiotoolkit, and Physionet: Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals. Circulation [Online]. 101(23), e215–e220. Available:
http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/101/23/e215
[17] ECG Databases. (2014). [Online]. Available: http://physionet.org/
physiobank/database/#ecg
[18] A. J. Hayter, Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists.
Boston, MA: PWS-Kent, 1996.
[19] S. Kaufman, I. Poupyrev, E. Miller, M. Billinghurst, P. Oppenheimer, and
S. Weghorst, “New interface metaphors for complex information space
visualization: An ECG monitor object prototype,” in Medicine Meets Virtual Reality: Global Healthcare Grid. San Diego, CA: IOS Press, 1997,
pp. 131–140.

500

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

[20] U. Ayesta, L. Serrano, and I. Romero, “Complexity measure revisited: A
new algorithm for classifying cardiac arrhythmias,” in Proc. 23rd Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1589–1591.
[21] H. Burstein, Attribute Sampling: Tables and Explanations; Tables for
Determining Confidence Limits and Sample Size Based on Close Approximations of the Binomial Distribution. Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill,
1971.

Thidarat Tinnakornsrisuphap received the B.S.
degree in 1998, industrial engineering from
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 2002 and 2006, industrial engineering from Oregon State University,
Corvallis, USA.
She graduated from the School of Mechanical,
Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, Oregon
State University. Now she resides in San Diego, CA,
USA. Her current research interests include information systems engineering, human factors engineering, database management, data modeling, web applications, statistics, and
ergonomics.

Richard Billo received the B.A. degree from West
Virginia University, in 1978, the M.A. degree from
the University of the Pacific, in 1981, both in psychology, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in industrial
engineering from Arizona State University, AZ, USA,
in 1987 and 1989, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Vice President for Research at the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
IN, USA. He is currently a Member of the Editorial
Board for the International Journal of Radio Frequency Identification Technology and Applications.
He was involved in research for the National Science Foundation, the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, the U. S. Postal Service, and
numerous corporations. His current research interests include wireless networks,
bioinformatics, and automatic data capture.

