2422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Quantifying Spatiotemporal Properties of Vocal Fold
Dynamics Based on a Multiscale Analysis
of Phonovibrograms
Jakob Unger∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Dietmar J. Hecker, Melda Kunduk, Maria Schuster, Bernhard Schick,
and Joerg Lohscheller

Abstract—In order to objectively assess the laryngeal vibratory
behavior, endoscopic high-speed cameras capture several thousand
frames per second of the vocal folds during phonation. However,
judging all inherent clinically relevant features is a challenging
task and requires well-founded expert knowledge. In this study, an
automated wavelet-based analysis of laryngeal high-speed videos
based on phonovibrograms is presented. The phonovibrogram is
an image representation of the spatiotemporal pattern of vocal fold
vibration and constitutes the basis for a computer-based analysis of
laryngeal dynamics. The features extracted from the wavelet transform are shown to be closely related to a basic set of video-based
measurements categorized by the European Laryngological Society for a subjective assessment of pathologic voices. The waveletbased analysis further offers information about irregularity and
lateral asymmetry and asynchrony. It is demonstrated in healthy
and pathologic subjects as well as for a surgical group that was
examined before and after the removal of a vocal fold polyp. The
features were found to not only classify glottal closure characteristics but also quantify the impact of pathologies on the vibratory
behavior. The interpretability and the discriminative power of the
proposed feature set show promising relevance for a computerassisted diagnosis and classification of voice disorders.
Index Terms—Computer-aided analysis, high speed videoendoscopy (HSV), multiscale product (MSP), vocal fold dynamics,
wavelet analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE mechanism of voice production is a highly complex
process that is fundamentally initiated by the oscillating
vocal folds (VF) modulating the air from the lungs. Irregular
or asymmetric VF vibration leads to impairments of the voice

T

Manuscript received October 18, 2013; revised April 8, 2014; accepted April
11, 2014. Date of publication April 23, 2014; date of current version August 18,
2014. This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG),
LO-1413/2-2. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. Unger is with the Department of Computer Science, Trier University of
Applied Sciences, 54293 Trier, Germany (e-mail: unger@hochschule-trier.de).
D. J. Hecker and B. Schick are with the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Saarland University Hospital, 66424 Homburg/Saar, Germany (e-mail: Dietmar.Hecker@uniklinikum-saarland.de; Bernhard.Schick@
uniklinikum-saarland.de).
M. Kunduk is with the Department of Communication Disorders, Louisiana
State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803 USA (e-mail: mkunduk@lsu.edu).
M. Schuster is with the Department of Audiology and Phoniatrics, University of Munich 80539, Munich Germany (e-mail: maria_elke.schuster@med.
uni-muenchen.de).
J. Lohscheller is with the Department of Computer Science,
Trier University of Applied Sciences, 54293 Trier, Germany (e-mail:
J.Lohscheller@hochschule-trier.de).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2318774

quality [1]. In this regard, the visual endoscopic inspection of
VF dynamics is a crucial issue for clinical examination.
The most common examination technique in clinical practice
is videostroboscopy capturing full laryngeal images of different oscillation cycles at slightly shifted phases. For irregular
vibrations, however, the phase cannot be predicted robustly [2]
that makes a correct interpretation of stroboscopic videos difficult. Videokymography [3], [4] as a further technique captures
the lateral VF movements at a single position along the glottal axis. The restriction to a single line allows high sampling
rates but inhibits a full documentation of VF dynamics along
the entire anterior–posterior dimension. Among modern imaging techniques, high-speed videoendoscopy (HSV) constitutes
the only technique that captures the true intracycle vibratory
behavior through a full image of the VFs [2]. This is facilitated
by sampling rates of several thousand frames per second.
Assessment and clinical interpretation of high-speed video
recordings are conventionally made by perceptual evaluations.
For this purpose, the European Laryngological Society (ELS)
composed a basic protocol for a functional assessment of pathological voices originally developed using stroboscopic imaging
[5] that can also be applied to high-speed recordings and is
widely used for the description of VF vibrations. The set of basic subjective measurements covers the type of glottal closure,
regularity, mucosal wave, and symmetry. Several studies have
been carried out to find correlations between perceptual ELS
parameters and voice quality [6]–[8]. However, the categorical
ELS description strongly depends on expert’s perceptual judging. It therefore just allows a rough categorical description and
further may not provide reproducible results.
To overcome low inter- and intrarater reliability, several
approaches aim for an objective computerized analysis of highspeed video data. Yan et al. [9] proposed a Hilbert transformbased methodology to analyze amplitude and frequency
variations of the time-varying glottal area enclosed by the two
VFs. The 1-D glottal area waveform (GAW), however, does
not differentiate between vibration characteristics of the VFs
alongside the anterior–posterior dimension and therefore, provides only a rough characterization of laryngeal function. Based
on the work of Zhang et al. [10], [11], Krausert et al. [12]
evaluate parameters quantifying the spatiotemporal correlation
along the anterior–posterior dimension of the varying number of pixels between left and right VF contours. Since no
distinction is made between left and right VF vibrations, no
conclusions can be deduced about the lateral symmetry and

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

UNGER et al.: QUANTIFYING SPATIOTEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF VOCAL FOLD DYNAMICS BASED ON A MULTISCALE ANALYSIS

synchronicity. Further studies in the current literature focus
on symmetry and perturbation measures. Among them, time
periodicity [13], [14], amplitude periodicity [13], [14], phase
symmetry [13], [15], [16], and amplitude symmetry [13], [16],
[17] (or slight variations thereof) found wide ranging acceptance. These measures capture the degree of vibration anomaly
but do not describe characteristics of the vibration pattern as a
whole.
An alternative approach to characterize VF vibrations is to
adapt the observed VF movements to previously defined biomechanical models. The spectrum ranges from lumped element
models with one [18], two [19], [20], or more [21] mass elements to finite-element models [22]. Lumped mass models have
found wide-ranging acceptance but as VF vibration is an extremely complex process, the physiologically correct interpretation of the identified parameters is still a challenging task. Finiteelement approaches enable an accurate modeling of geometry
and physiology without assuming lumped elements. However,
detailed finite-element models with a high spatial resolution
that are combined with parameter optimization approaches are
computationally highly expensive. In consequence, they are currently not applicable for an interpretation of VF vibrations.
Besides the model-based approach, eigenmode analysis has
proven to be an appropriate tool to describe spatiotemporal properties of VF vibration [23], [24]. Here, a principal component
analysis (PCA) is performed providing a set of orthogonal spatial eigenfunctions “principal modes” where each mode is associated with a corresponding temporal eigenfunction. Neubauer
et al. [24] deduced four different parameters from the spatiotemporal eigenmode decomposition. The method was exemplarily demonstrated for distinguishing two types of biphonation
caused by left–right and anterior–posterior asymmetries. Deducing the VF vibration pattern itself from the principal modes
is, however, quite challenging since besides the spatial eigenfunctions also the corresponding temporal eigenfunctions have
to be taken into account. A low-dimensional representation of
the VF vibration patterns based on the spatial and temporal
eigenfunctions has not been proposed yet.
A recently introduced approach allows a documentation of
the whole spatiotemporal pattern by analyzing the time-varying
deflections for each VF separately along the anterior–posterior
dimension. The entire vibration information of VF dynamics
is extracted from high-speed recordings and transformed in a
2-D matrix called phonovibrogram (PVG). A PVG provides
a compact description and visualization of the entire vibration pattern of both VFs. It can be assessed subjectively and,
furthermore, provides a basis for an objective analysis of the
underlying vibration modes [25]. A first step toward a computerized analysis of PVGs was made by Lohscheller et al. [25] and
Voigt et al. [26], [27]. Voigt et al. extracts PVG iso-lines from
individual oscillation cycles composing a feature vector for classification tasks. However, the feature vector described in Voigt
et al. [26] comprises over 300 highly correlated features that are
difficult to interpret in a clinical context. Up to the present, there
has not been a novel concept to concentrate the high amount of
information captured within a PVG within a compact and meaningful set of parameters.

2423

The work presented here describes a novel approach for a
computerized analysis of PVGs. It will be shown that the vibration pattern can be quantified by merely three coefficients
for each VF independently. The parameter set can be clinically regarded as an objective pendant to a generalized form of
the ELS classification that is revealed by correlating subjective
expert ratings with the novel parameter set. Further, parameters obtained from the wavelet analysis are shown to provide
additional information about the vibration characteristics such
as asymmetry, irregularity, and asynchrony. The clinical interpretability and discriminative power of the parameter set are
demonstrated through a collective of healthy and pathological
subjects and is compared to a set of benchmark measures.
II. MATERIAL AND METHOD
A. Subjects and Equipment
In order to evaluate the applicability of the later described
approach under clinical aspects, the performance of the waveletbased methodology is investigated related to different clinical
scenarios. Altogether, 194 high-speed recordings of 162 subjects
(96 females, 67 males) were analyzed involving the following
categories:
P1) Correlation between wavelet-eigenvalues and vibration
types in healthy subjects: One of the key points of the computerbased analysis is to obtain a clinical interpretable set of parameters that describes the nature of the VF dynamics. To investigate
the interrelationship between the numerically derived measures
and a visual assessment of the VF opening and closing process, a correlation analysis is performed between the introduced
parameters and the subjectively determined vibration characteristic. For this purpose, 110 videos of 100 healthy subjects (63
females, age 41.27 ± 15.84 years, 37 males, age 49.05 ± 15.33
years) were presented to six expert raters in random order and
ten of these videos were shown twice in order to estimate intrarater reliability.
P2) Reproducibility and comparability: Under clinical aspects, the reproducibility of analysis results in repetitive measuring is highly relevant to guarantee reliable findings. To demonstrate this demand, the procedure was repeatedly applied to several high-speed videos recorded from a healthy female subject
(40 years) and a healthy male subject (31 years) each examined
seven times under identical phonation conditions.
P3) Discriminating pathologies: The differentiation of
healthy from pathologic voices is a fundamental integral part
within the clinical diagnostic process. The discriminative power
of the wavelet-based PVG analysis was investigated by classifying data from 50 subjects (28 females, mean age 48.80 ± 18.43
years, 22 males, mean age 56.40 ± 12.81 years) with the diagnosis of unilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve paresis (32 left-sided
and 18 right-sided) versus the data obtained from the healthy
subjects (see P1).
P4) Quantification of therapeutic success: Besides a categorical description of pathologies, it is desirable to quantify the
improvement or deterioration of voice characteristics over the
course of surgery and/or therapy. A collective of ten patients
(four females, age 37.00 ± 14.26, six males, age 47.83 ± 9.83)

2424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. PVG construction process. (a) From each video frame, left and right
VF contour are identified and the glottal axis is estimated. (b) The left contour
is rotated by 180 ◦ around the posterior ending of the glottis (P). Along the
glottal axis, from most anterior (A) to most posterior (P) ending, the distances
to the left and right VF contour are coded in a monochromatic scale. (c) PVGrepresentation is obtained by concatenating single monochromatic stripes along
the time axis.

who underwent a surgical treatment due to VF polyps (seven
left-sided and three right-sided) was examined before, one week
after and three month after the surgical intervention. It was investigated if the proposed wavelet parameters are capable to
capture the change of VF dynamics during the healing process.
Healthy and paretic subjects were examined with the aid
of the HS Endocam 5562 high-speed camera system (Richard
Wolf GmbH, Knittlingen, Germany). The camera captures 4000
frames per second with a spatial resolution of 256 × 256 pixels.
The KayPENTAX HSV system (Model 9700, Lincoln Park,
NJ) was employed for the surgical group. Recordings with
120 × 256 pixels were captured at 2000 frames per second. All
subjects were requested to phonate the vowel /ae/ at habitual
pitch and loudness for at least 1 s during rigid endoscopy.
B. Method
1) PVG: The PVG is a visualization technique that comprehensively describes the vibration pattern of each VF independently. The data matrix behind the PVG image further provides
a basis for pattern recognition algorithms classifying pathologic
VF vibration. To build the PVG from a high-speed video, the
glottal area is segmented within each video frame [see Fig. 1(a)].
In order to ensure accurate segmentation results, a supervised
modified region growing algorithm was used that had been extensively evaluated under clinical aspects before [28]. Along the
entire length of the VFs, the most anterior (A) and posterior (P)
points are identified spanning the glottal axis that separates left
and right VF from each other. The spatial and temporal properties of VF vibrations are derived by color- or gray-scale-coding
the distances from the glottal axis to the segmented VF contours
for each frame separately alongside the entire anterior–posterior
dimension [see Fig. 1(b)]. The entire process of PVG computation and visualization is described in detail by Lohscheller
et al. [25]. In this study, from all high-speed recordings, PVGs
were extracted comprising 1000 frames.
2) Characterization of PVG Structures: For regular VF vibrations, the PVG consists of periodically recurring geometric structures representing individual VF oscillation cycles. To
further analyze these structures, a set of descriptive features is
extracted from the PVG image. The cycles are essentially characterized by the opening and closing instants forming an indi-

vidual contour. In Fig. 1(c), the shown triangular shape of these
instants (white dashed line) represents a “zipper-like” opening
and closing of the VFs. Describing the vibration characteristics
of VFs demand the identification of these opening and closing
instants along the anterior–posterior dimension. However, due
to the high sampling rate, high-speed cameras have a comparatively low spatial resolution. Furthermore, owing to the very
short exposure time of the camera, the time-varying VF deflections tend to be quite noisy. Since conventional finite difference
approximation schemes amplify the present noise level, they are
not appropriate to detect the opening and closing instances in a
stable manner. Here, a robust multiscale approach is employed
for localization of opening and closing instants. These instants
are subsequently utilized to quantitatively describe the recurring
geometric PVG-structures as well as the VF dynamics.
3) Wavelet Multiscale Product (MSP): The continuous
wavelet transform (CWT) is given by the inner L2 product
Wψ {g}(a, b) = g, ψa,b L 2

(1)

and can be considered as convolution with a set of functions


t−b
1
ψa,b (t) = ψ
(2)
a
a
generated by a mother wavelet ψ(t). The mother wavelet has to
satisfy the admissibility criterion
 ∞
|Ψ(ω)|2 |ω|−1 dω < ∞
(3)
0<
∞

−∞

where Ψ(ω) = −∞ ψ(t)e−itω dt denotes the Fourier transform
of ψ(t). Commonly, wavelets are characterized by the number
of vanishing moments. A wavelet ψ is said to have n vanishing
moments if and only if
 ∞
tl ψ(t)dt = 0
∀l < n ∈ N, l ∈ N0 .
(4)
−∞

If we further assume that ψ has a fast decay, i.e., for any m ∈ N,
there exists a constant cm ∈ R such that
cm
∀t ∈ R
(5)
|ψ(t)| ≤
1 + |t|m
it is well known [29] that for arbitrary wavelets with n vanishing
moments there exists a function Θ(t) such that
dn Θ(t)
.
(6)
dtn
As differentiation and integration may commute under the given
assumptions [29], the wavelet transform
ψ(t) = (−1)n

Wψ {g}(a, b) = an g ∗
with


dn 
dn Θ̄a
(b) = an n g ∗ Θ̄a (b) (7)
n
dt
dt



t
1
Θ̄a (t) = √ Θ −
a
a

(8)

can be considered as differential operator of the smoothed source
signal [29].
The local differentiability can be characterized by the mathematical concept of Lipschitz regularity. Mallat and Hwang [30]

UNGER et al.: QUANTIFYING SPATIOTEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF VOCAL FOLD DYNAMICS BASED ON A MULTISCALE ANALYSIS

developed a methodology to localize singular structures (points
or areas where the signal is not continuous at a particular derivative) by following modulus maxima in the time-scale plane. As
has been noted, the wavelet transform can be interpreted as differential operator where the order is determined by the number
of vanishing moments. The singularity type is therefore given by
the vanishing moments of the corresponding wavelet. The MSP
denotes the pointwise product of wavelet coefficients of successive scales. Noise components are characterized by a weak
correlation of different scale levels and are thereby suppressed
whereas singularities appear across several scales and are consequently enhanced. Based on this concept, several authors proposed a MSP approach, i.e., for edge detection [31] and lung
sound filtering [32]. In the given context of glottal closure detection, the MSP has been also employed in acoustic waveforms
[33], [34] and electroglottograph signals [35], [36]. Here, the
MSP has proven to be a more reliable indicator than estimating
the signals’ derivative using finite difference schemes.
4) Wavelet-based PVG Analysis: In order to localize points
of maximum acceleration within the PVG image, a real-valued
Mexican hat wavelet

 2 	
t 2
t
(9)
ψ1 (t) = C1 e−( σ ) 1 −
σ
is employed. The constant C1 is chosen to normalize the wavelet
such that |ψ1 | = 1. The Mexican hat wavelet has two vanishing moments according to (4) and also fulfills the fast-decay
criterion [37]. Consequently, the wavelet acts as a second-order
differential operator.
To quantify the periodically occurring geometric structure
that is formed between opening and closing instants, the wavelet
phase is estimated by employing the analytic Morlet wavelet
t2

ψ2 (t) = C2 e2π it e− 2

(10)

where C2 is the normalization factor. The Morlet Wavelet
is composed of an exponential function multiplied with a
Gaussian window and provides a harmonic structure that best
represents the periodic movement of the VFs. It is composed by
approximately five consecutive oscillation cycles and provides
a good compromise between spatial and spectral resolution. It
is commonly used to estimate the instantaneous frequency
and
√
2
phase from quasi-periodic signals [38]. For σ = 2π in (9), the
spectral peaks of ψ1 and ψ2 match each other
















argω max 
Ψ̂1 (ω)
 = argω max 
Ψ̂2 (ω)
 , ω > 0 (11)
such that the scales of Wψ 1 and Wψ 2 correspond to equivalent
peak frequencies. For left (l) and right (r) VF and each position
k along the glottal axis from P to A (0% ≤ k ≤ 100%), the
wavelet phase reads as
 
 l,r  l,r  	
T
a0 , b

W
ψ
2
Φl,r
(12)
 kl,r  l,r 

k (b) = arctan
a0 , b
 Wψ 2 Tk
l,r
dewhere al,r
0 denotes the scale of maximum energy. Let g
note area enclosed by the left or right VF and the glottal axis.
Presuming sustained phonation, the constant scale of maximum

2425

energy (for left and right VF) is given by
al,r
0 = arga max






Wψ {g l,r (t)}(a, b)
2 .
2

(13)

b

The process can be interpreted as a correlation process where
large similarity between signal and wavelet involves high CWT
modulus values. The wavelet phase has a clear physical meaning: the phase of the dominant frequency contribution that is
equivalent to the fundamental frequency for regular VF vibration. Assigning CWT coefficients of Wψ 1 to their phase values
Φk (b) yields characteristic scale-dependent patterns (see Fig. 2)


Cal,r (k, ϕ) =
M

={b|Φ lk, r

(b)=ϕ}



1
Wψ 1 Tkl,r (a, b)
|M |

(14)

providing minima at the opening and closing instants. The
choice of the wavelet-scale parameter a thereby represents the
necessity of accurate localization precision and noise suppression: While the noise mainly contributes to higher scales, the
opening and closing instants are blurred for lower scales. However, the instants can be seen across a larger range of scales.
Hence, opening and closing instants come out at different frequency levels that are taken into consideration by the MSP.
In the current study, the MSP involves three scales, a = a40 ,
a0
a0
8 , and 16 (see Fig. 3). These scales were chosen with regard
to the current dataset. The vibration pattern Ca with the most
abrupt opening and closing has its maximum at scale a = a160
whereas the smoothest vibration peaks at scale a = a40 . The odd
number of scales preserves the sign. From the resulting phasemultiscale graph, the dominating pattern is obtained by taking
the minimum values for each position k during the opening
phase (0 ≤ ϕ ≤ π) and closing phase (π < ϕ ≤ 2π).
5) PCA: To enable a compact representation of the extracted
opening and closing contour, the distances Δϕk (defined in
Fig. 2, right) from opening to closing instants are calculated
for each position k from the most anterior to posterior point of
the glottal axis and for the left and right VF, respectively. From
the distance vector Δϕk , a PCA of 100 healthy subjects, the
reference group, each divided in left and right VF, is performed.
By taking the distance vector, no distinction is made between
opening and closing phases. Hence, the contours in Figs. 4–8
are presented symmetrically.
The corresponding eigenvalues of the covariance-matrix are
proportional to the variance along the dimension of the eigenvector. The variances along the first three components (62.7%,
24.2%, and 5.9%) make up more than 90% of the overall variance, thus efficiently encoding the underlying PVG structure.
Vibration characteristics given by the first eigenvalues are obtained for each VF separately. This separate consideration allows
the derivation of symmetry and irregularity measures.
6) Symmetry and Irregularity Features: Several features can
be derived from the distribution of the projected eigenvalues.
The lateral vibration asymmetry Fasym is quantified by evaluating the L2 distance between left (l) and right (r) projection

2426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Vibration pattern C a is obtained by assigning the wavelet coefficients of scale a =
terms of local minima.

a0
8

to their phase values and reveals opening and closing instants in

Fig. 4. PCA-subspace of left and right VF vibrations of 100 healthy subjects
spanned by the first two dominant eigenvectors.

expected. For completely aperiodic VF vibration, the eigenvectors will be distributed more or less randomly. Having this in
mind, a measure of irregularity Firr can be derived from the
contribution of higher eigenvalues. Here, we evaluate the contribution of the components of order 4 and higher
Fig. 3. MSP provides a robust and precise localization of opening and closing
instants.

l,r
Firr

N 





 l,r 

=

λi 


(16)

i=4

within the PCA space spanned by the first three components

 3
 
2
λli − λri .
(15)
Fasym = 
i=1

A measure of regularity can be obtained from the distribution of
the eigenvalues. The PCA space was calculated from exclusively
healthy subjects. In consequence, regular vibration patterns are
strongly concentrated on the first eigenvalues. If, on the other
hand, the vibration pattern considerably differs from regular and
periodic vibrations, a higher trend toward higher eigenvalues is

where N denotes the total number of eigenvectors. Quantitative
assessment of synchrony can be performed by the comparing
the left and right vibration phase signals. The wavelet phases of
left and right side




φl,r (b) = arg Wψ 1 g l,r (t) al,r
(17)
0 ,b
are finally used to derive an averaged phase delay Fasync of K
video frames
K 





1  


i (φ l (b)−φ r (b) ) 

(18)
Fasync =



 arg e
K
b=1

UNGER et al.: QUANTIFYING SPATIOTEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF VOCAL FOLD DYNAMICS BASED ON A MULTISCALE ANALYSIS

2427

Fig. 5. (a) and (b) 50%, 70%, and 90% contours of the estimated probability distribution for healthy and paretic male and female subjects. (c) Partition of the
PCA space induced by expert ratings. The areas are given where longitudinal, ventral, or dorsal probability densities are dominant.

Fig. 6. Effect of the eigenvalue components: The first encodes the open-closed ratio, the second distinguishes between dorsal, longitudinal, and ventral types
(the longitudinal can be seen as superposition of dorsal and ventral patterns), and the third eigenvalue reveals oval and hour-glass vibration types.

providing a measure of asynchrony. Note that Fasym and Fasync
concern a relationship between measures of left and right VF
whereas Firr quantifies absolute irregularity values for each
individually.
7) Benchmark Parameters: In order to facilitate a comparison to conventional approaches, a set of perturbation and symmetry parameters serves as benchmark for the wavelet features :
amplitude periodicity index (API), time periodicity index (TPI),
amplitude symmetry index (ASI), and phase symmetry index
(PSI) as defined by Qiu et al. [13]. These features capture comparable quantities and were already evaluated in a variety of
studies [14]–[17]. Thus, they have proven their value to assess
individual characteristics of VF dynamics. The parameter range
of PSI and ASI covers the interval from −1 to 1 where zero repre-

sents perfect symmetry. For discriminating pathologic vibration
patterns, the absolute values P SI and ASI are computed. All
of these parameters refer to a single kymogram at a specific
position along the anterior–posterior axis. Since the wavelet
measures incorporate vibration characteristics along the entire
glottal axis, mean values for all kymogram lines were taken as
benchmark parameters.
8) Statistical Analysis: Shapiro–Wilk tests were used to test
for normal distribution of all parameters. T-tests or Mann–
Whitney U tests are performed for finding significant differences of the parameter distributions calculated for healthy and
paretic subjects, depending on whether data are normally distributed or not. The p-values are then Bonferroni corrected due
to multiple testing. The significance level is taken as p < 0.05.

2428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 7. (a) Wavelet-based features: For the irregularity measure, a distinction
is made between the paralyzed VF and the contralateral side. For all parameters, a significant difference for the paretic group was found whereas for the
(b) benchmark parameters only the P SI parameter exhibited significant
alterations.

ANOVA or Kruskal–Wallis tests are performed for pre- and
postsurgical conditions and the control group. Paired t-tests or
Mann–Whitney U tests posthoc tests are taken for the pre- and
postconditions whereas nonpaired posthoc tests are employed
for tests against the control group.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The proposed wavelet features evaluated for different subjects
and examination setups are presented within the Figs. 4–8. The
anterior–posterior dimension and the phase axis were divided
into 256 and 30 uniform intervals.
P1) Correlation between wavelet-eigenvalues and vibration
types in healthy subjects: Fig. 4 shows the PCA space of the reference group projected on the plane and spanned by the first two
eigenvectors. All projections of the reference group are located
within a diamond-shaped region given by the dashed lines. Appropriate PVG-contours that are described by the value of the
first and second eigenvalues are depicted above and beside the
PCA space. The eigenvalue representation was found to be even
highly sensitive toward gender-specific differences. Healthy female subjects are predominantly characterized by high λ1 values
[see Fig. 5(b)] indicating a longer duration of the opened phase
and low wide-spreaded λ2 values according to Fig. 5(c). For
healthy male subjects, longer closed phases were observed indicated by a low λ1 measure [see Fig. 5(a)].
The contours, concerning the underlying VF vibration patterns, are illustrated in Fig. 6. For each of the three dominant
eigenvalues, the results of two representative subjects are shown.

For each subject, a high-speed image, the GAW for one cycle,
as well as the PVG-shape is given. The first component exhibits
a rectangular PVG shape: a narrow one for a low λ1 and a
broad one for high λ1 values. Consequently, the first eigenvalue
represents the open-closed ratio of the vibration pattern and is
not influenced by anterior–posterior vibration modes. A complete and long closed phase is represented by negative values
of the first component [as seen for the healthy male subjects in
Fig. 5(a)] whereas an absence of VF contact can be identified by
high and positive values. The second parameter λ2 distinguishes
between triangular forms: The contour describes the spatiotemporal process of VF opening and closing. When the apex of the
contour shows from anterior to posterior, a zipper-like opening
and closing is given (ventral). The VFs open at anterior parts and
gradually continue opening alongside the glottal axis to the most
posterior ending. An opposite movement from posterior to anterior corresponds to low λ2 quantities [dorsal, mostly seen for the
healthy female subjects in Fig. 5(b)]. A simultaneous opening
and closing (longitudinal) can be seen as linear superposition
of both zipper movements and is consequently characterized by
values of λ2 around zero. Finally, λ3 indicates movements from
medial to terminal positions and vice versa.
Evidently, there is a close relationship between the eigenvectors’ geometries and the ELS scheme for glottal closure characteristics: longitudinal (λ2 ≈ 0), ventral (high λ2 ), dorsal (low
λ2 ), convex (high λ3 ), and hour-glass (low λ3 ). But rather than
assessing the glottal gap that remains when the VF are closed,
the eigenvalues quantify the entire process of opening along the
glottal axis.
The eigenvalues comprehensively describe the geometric
structure that appears within the PVG representation. To that
end, it would be desirable to compare the eigenvalue decomposition to subjective expert ratings of what is seen subjectively.
For this purpose, six expert raters were instructed to assess
the VF opening process—where the opening process starts and
ends—and assigned each video to one of the following categories: longitudinal: VFs open simultaneously along the glottal
axis, dorsal, and ventral: given by a zipper-like opening process, oval and hour-glass: the VFs open from medial to terminal
and from terminal to medial, respectively. Intra- and interrater
reliability were evaluated according to Cohen [39] (Cohen’s
kappa) and Fleiss [40] (generalized Cohen’s kappa). Both reliability measures (intrarater reliability: 0.64 ± 0.20, interrater
reliability: 0.23) were found to be rather low. It is remarkable
that nevertheless clearly delineated areas emerge in the PCA
space when computing mean probability distributions [41] for
longitudinal, ventral, and dorsal ratings and taking the maximum probability for each position [see Fig. 5(c)]. The oval
and hour-glass ratings could be distinguished according to the
third eigenvalue (p = 2.24 · 10−11 ). Oval closure was located at
λ3 = 4.63 ± 15.29 and hour-glass at λ3 = −23.67 ± 24.92.
P2) Reproducibility and Comparability: The full potential of
the methodology strongly depends on reproducible and comparable results necessary for a reliable clinical interpretation.
To demonstrate this demand, seven consecutive examinations
under comparable conditions of 1) a single female subject (40
years) and 2) a single male subject (31 years) were analyzed. For

UNGER et al.: QUANTIFYING SPATIOTEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF VOCAL FOLD DYNAMICS BASED ON A MULTISCALE ANALYSIS

2429

Fig. 8. (a) Wavelet-based measures and (b) benchmark parameters evaluated from ten subjects before (Presurg), one week after (one week post) and three months
after (three months post) the removal of a VF polyp. The control group is given by 100 healthy subjects. Only for Firr and Fa sy m significant discrepancies were
found.

both subjects, reasonable small standard deviations (percentage
of the entire parameter range) of the first three eigenvalue for the
female 4.3%, 5.3%, and 2.2% and the male subject 4.1%, 3.6%,
and 2.2% were found confirming the desired reproducibility of
the approach.
P3) Differentiation of Healthy From Pathologic Voices: In
order to investigate the potential of the approach to discriminate between healthy and pathological vibrations, all wavelet
measures were derived from 100 healthy subjects and 50 paretic
subjects. The derived eigenvalues obtained from all 150 subjects
were projected within the PCA space. For the healthy group,
a leave-one-out strategy was pursued excluding the analyzed
subject from the PCA reference group. According to Fig. 5(a)
and (b), paretic subjects exhibit completely different genderspecific vibration patterns compared to the healthy group. Predominantly dorsal vibratory characteristics for healthy female
subjects moved toward longitudinal movement. The concentration of the male’s eigenvalue distribution of the first eigenvalue
axis is shifted to the opposing side corroborating the fact that
paresis is often accompanied by a complete absence of VF contact indicated by high λ1 values. The paretic subjects are partially beyond the delimited area of healthy vibration meaning
that there are differences to the reference group. Conversely, it
does not mean that projections located within this area indicate
an absence of pathology.
Besides the eigenvalues that describe the vibration pattern
itself, Fig. 7 presents in the upper row the results of the wavelet
perturbation measures Firr , Fasym , and Fasync for the 100
healthy and 50 paretic subjects. To compare the performance of
the wavelet measures for all subjects, likewise the benchmark
parameters AP I, T P I, ASI, and P SI were computed. Mann–
Whitney U tests were performed since the parameters were not
normally distributed (the significance level was Bonferroni cor-

rected, p < 0.0063). All of the proposed wavelet-based parameters were significantly altered in case of VF paresis. However,
no significant differences of Firr were seen for comparing the
paretic and contralateral healthy side (p = 0.6817). In contrast
to the significantly different wavelet-irregularity measures, the
benchmark parameters only showed a statistical significant difference for the PSI parameter.
The features’ discriminative power was further assessed by
training a support vector machine (SVM) with the different feature sets. In the case of supervised learning, a predictive model is
built in order to assign unknown vibration patterns to the healthy
or paresis class. The SVM was configured with a linear kernel
function. A leave-one-out strategy was pursued to evaluate classification accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. A classification
accuracy of 68%, sensitivity of 56%, and specificity of 74% was
achieved for the set of benchmark parameters. The classification
accuracy could be considerably increased by using the wavelet
measures λ1 -λ3 , Firr , Fasym , and Fasync . Here, an accuracy of
85% could be achieved (sensitivity: 80%, specificity: 88%).
P4) Quantification of therapeutic success: The fundamental
suitability of the wavelet-based analysis to evaluate even slight
changes of the vibration patterns due to surgical intervention
was verified by applying the proposed wavelet analysis to ten
subjects that underwent surgical removal of a VF polyp. All
subjects were examined before (Presurg), one week after (one
week post) and three months after (three months post) the surgical procedure. The distributions of irregularity, asymmetry,
and asynchrony measures as well as the benchmark set AP I,
T P I, ASI, and P SI are depicted in Fig. 8. The Kruskal–Wallis
test exhibited a significant change (the significance levels were
Bonferroni corrected, p < 0.0063) for the wavelet measures
Firr and asymmetry Fasym . Posthoc tests (Bonferroni corrected,
p < 0.0083) corroborated significant alterations between preop

2430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

and 3 m postconditions but none appeared significant for comparing one week post and three month postconditions. Tests
also revealed significant differences for the control group except for comparing the Fasym parameter of the control group
with the three month post condition. In contrast to the wavelet
measures, no significant differences could be determined for the
benchmark parameters.
IV. DISCUSSION
In recent years, HSV has been available for scientific and
clinical use and constitutes a state-of-the-art technique to examine VF dynamics. The visual assessment is time consuming and
costly; one second of phonation corresponds to thousands of
video frames, and it is a challenging task to judge all clinically
relevant features. Recent studies showed further fairly low intraand interrater reliability of subjective HSV ratings of healthy and
pathologic vibration patterns even for experts [42]–[44].
The aim of the here presented approach is to provide a new
set of quantitative measures to describe the vibration characteristics of VFs with a very high accuracy. In order to investigate
profoundly the performance of the approach it is validated in
different setups.
P1) Correlation between wavelet-eigenvalues and vibration
types in healthy subjects: The variation of healthy VF vibration
patterns is predominantly represented by the first eigenvectors.
It was shown that the eigenvalues have a descriptive meaning
facilitating a subjective interpretation of the PCA projection.
A group of six expert raters confirmed the subjective meaning of the PCA space. Even though there was a substantial
amount of disagreement between and within judges (emphasizing the general problem of low inter- and intrarate variability in
connection with subjective categorization), clearly delineated
areas emerged from estimated probability distributions. Consequently, the eigenvalues provide a quantitative and objective
representation of vibration characteristics and facilitate a fine
graduation of the vibration types instead of categorical and
subjective judgments. Therefore, the PCA space can be seen
as norm-map quantitatively describing vibration patterns for
examining different groups (e.g., gender-specific patterns) or
pathologies [as given in Fig. 5(a) and (b)].
A related procedure involving a PCA was presented by
Neubauer et al. [24]. The vibration patterns are decomposed
into spatial (vibration modes) and temporal eigenfunctions. The
vibration modes reflect the characteristics of laryngeal dynamics along the glottal axis. However, in contrast to the wavelet
approach, the PCA space is spanned by a single subject. This
efficiently encodes the underlying VF dynamics in only a few
spatial modes but complicates an adequate interpretation since
the temporal eigenfunctions vary among different subjects and
each individual temporal eigenfunction defines a different impact of the spatial modes on the vibration pattern.
P2) Reproducibility and comparability: The stable eigenvalues of the male and female subject examined several times under
comparable phonatory conditions substantiate the reproducibility of the proposed VF vibration assessment. The standard deviations were found to be reasonable small. This basic quality

allows to compare different measurements, monitor vibration
patterns over a longer period of time and determine normal parameter ranges and is therefore indispensable in clinical daily
routine.
P3) Differentiation of healthy from pathologic voices: In order
to evaluate the features’ discriminative power, 50 subjects with
a diagnosis of unilateral paresis were examined. Both genders
come along with high λ1 values indicating a long or permanent
glottal opening for the paretic group. In particular, there are considerable disparities for the male subjects where predominantly
long closed phases can be observed for the healthy group. All
wavelet perturbation measures were significantly higher for the
paretic group. The increased Fasym parameter indicates higher
lateral asymmetry between both VFs meaning that the vibration
patterns of left and right VF differ clearly from each other. From
the Firr parameter, it can be deduced that paretic VF vibration
involves significantly altered vibration patterns. No differences
were observed between irregularity measures of the paretic VF
and the contralateral side. This might be due to disturbances of
the airstream arising from a reduced coupling of the VFs. Consequently, not only the paralyzed VF fold vibrates irregularly,
but also the contralateral side is impaired. Finally, the Fasync
measure offers a loss of synchronicity for paretic VF vibration.
A set of benchmark parameters originally defined for kymograms was compared to the proposed parameters. Here, only
a single parameter P SI (phase symmetry index) proved to be
significantly altered for the paretic group.
The wavelet feature set quantifying the entire spatiotemporal
pattern turned out to be more sensitive to pathologic vibration
patterns than the benchmark parameters.
A linear kernel SVM was trained in order to assess the parameters’ discriminative power. The small number of the here
presented features helps to avoid the “curse of dimensionality,”
meaning that high-dimensional data structures may reduce the
predictive power [45]. The SVM classification results showed
substantial improvements for the wavelet parameters compared
with the benchmark set. The parameter space constitutes a
low-dimensional descriptive feature set that correlated with subjective ratings of the vibration characteristics of VFs. As genderspecific distributions were observed for the eigenvalues, separate
models for males and females could further enhance the classifier performance but could also prevent the correlation to the
ELS scheme.
P4 Quantification of therapeutic success: In order to further
investigate the method’s ability to quantitatively assess the intraindividual changes of laryngeal dynamics, ten subjects were
examined endoscopically before, shortly after and three month
after the removal of a VF polyp. The results clearly emphasize the meaningfulness of the eigenvalue distribution. For all
ten subjects, a successive decrease of the contribution of higher
eigenvectors (Firr ) can be seen (see Fig. 8)—implying a converge toward “normal vibratory behavior.” The same result was
demonstrated for the symmetry parameter Fasym meaning that
the vibration patterns of left and right VF assimilate after surgical intervention. To this extent, the objective quantification
and definition of healthy parameter ranges allow us to quantify
the impact of a pathology on the vibratory behavior and has to

UNGER et al.: QUANTIFYING SPATIOTEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF VOCAL FOLD DYNAMICS BASED ON A MULTISCALE ANALYSIS

be extended to further pathologic findings. Although mass augmentation resulting from a VF polyp principally causes asynchronous vibration, no significant alteration was found for the
Fasync parameter which is also confirmed by the P SI parameter that quantifies similar quantities. A reason may be seen
in a localized phase displacement for polyps. The asynchrony
measure takes the entire length from anterior to posterior into account and localized phase properties do not make up significant
differences to the control group.
A. Effects of Spatial and Temporal Resolution
Generally, the accuracy of all kind of approaches dealing with
a quantitative analysis of VF vibrations directly depends on the
temporal and spatial resolution of the image sensor. Consequently, the degree of accuracy is influenced by a superposition
of a spatial quantization and a temporal resolution component.
The spatial signal to noise ratio of the quantization error (maximal number of pixels that encode the vibration amplitude) is
proportional to 6 dB per bit.
As lateral deflection amplitudes are mostly given by a limited number of pixels, the spatial camera resolution plays here
an important role for analyzing methodologies. This is particularly true for amplitude measures. The wavelet-based approach
estimates, however, the cycle progress continuously by incorporating the local signal environment and estimating the dominant
structure given over several oscillation cycles. As no explicit
amplitude detection is involved, this approach results in reliable
parameters even for low sampling rates. However, more experiments have to be carried out to estimate the robustness of the
proposed method toward temporal and spatial camera resolution
settings.
First investigations were carried out to examine the methods’
robustness to different sampling rates. Therefore, an error was
estimated by dividing the deviation arising from down sampling
(4000 to 2000 fps) by the parameters’ range at 2000 fps for all
healthy subjects. Here, an overall error of 5.23% ± 4.33 points
was found for the wavelet measures. This error is about the same
order of magnitude as the multiple recordings investigated in P2.
Nevertheless, the standard deviation of the measure appears to be
on the order of the average values meaning that a certain decrease
of accuracy has to be expected. For the benchmark parameters,
an error of 6.15% ± 3.72 points was found demonstrating that
the effect of the sampling rate on the accuracy of the wavelet
parameters are in the same range as comparable approaches.
B. Further Applications
The approach further permits the generalization to assess nonstationary phonation such as phonation onset or pitch-raise that
showed promising results for diagnosis of functional dysphonia
[46], [47]. Extension to nonstationary analysis is quite straight
forward by employing wavelet ridges [38], [48] for phase estimation and windowed PVG segments. While stationary phonation sequences are represented through coordinates in the PCA
space, nonstationary laryngeal mechanisms will form an individual trajectory through the space and could give a more
detailed insight into VF vibratory characteristics.

2431

V. CONCLUSION
Direct observation of the VFs during phonation is an essential
part of clinical examination. However, perceptual assessment of
laryngeal function even for an expert is time consuming and
exhibits rather low interrater reliability. Results of a mathematically abstract computer-based analysis are often difficult to
interpret in a clinical context. In this study, a novel approach for
a quantitative analysis of PVGs is presented. Using a wavelet
multiscale product and PCA, a norm-map for the assessment of
VF dynamics is built. The feature set was found to be more sensitive to pathologic vibratory characteristics than in comparison
to benchmark perturbation measures and hence, more suitable
for an automatic classification of voice disorders. Through its
sensitivity and interpretability, the wavelet measures can not
only classify but even quantify the impact of pathologies on
the vibratory behavior that was demonstrated with pre- and
postsurgical examinations. The wavelet-based analysis shows
substantial potential for supporting visual assessment and an
automated computer-assisted diagnosis of voice disorders from
endoscopic high-speed videos.

REFERENCES
[1] U. Eyshold, F. Rosanowski, and U. Hoppe, “Irregular vocal fold vibrations
caused by different types of laryngeal symmetry,” Eur. Arch. Otorhinolaryngol., vol. 260, no. 8, pp. 412–417, 2003.
[2] D. D. Deliyski, P. P. Petrushev, H. S. Bonilha, T. T. Gerlach, B. MartinHarris, and R. E. Hillman, “Clinical Implementation of Laryngeal HighSpeed Videoendoscopy: Challenges and Evolution,” Folia. Phoniatr.
Logop., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 33–44, 2008.
[3] H. K. Schutte, J. G. Švec, and F. Šram, “First results of clinical application
of videokymography,” Laryngoscope, vol. 108, no. 8, pp. 1206–1210,
1998.
[4] J. Lohscheller, J. G. Švec, and M. Doellinger, “Vocal fold vibration amplitude, open quotient, speed quotient and their variability along glottal
length: Kymographic data from normal subjects,” Logoped. Phoniatr. Vocol., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 182–192, 2013.
[5] P. H. Dejonckere, P. Bradley, P. Clemente, G. Cornut, L. Crevier-Buchman,
G. Friedrich, P. Van De Heyning, M. Remacle, and V. Woisard, “A basic protocol for functional assessment of voice pathology, especially for
investigating the efficacy of (phonosurgical) treatments and evaluating
new assessment techniques guideline elaborated by the committee on
phoniatrics of the European Laryngological Society (ELS),” Eur. Arch.
Otorhinolaryngol., vol. 258, no. 2, pp. 77–82, 2001.
[6] E. C. Inwald, M. Doellinger, M. Schuster, U. Eysholdt, and C. Bohr,
“Multiparametric analysis of vocal fold vibrations in healthy and disordered voices in high-speed imaging,” J. Voice, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 576–590,
2011.
[7] P. H. DeJonckere, L. Crevier-Buchman, J. P. Marie, M. Moerman,
M. Remacle, and V. Woisard, “Implementation of the European Laryngological Society (ELS) basic protocol for assessing voice treatment effect,”
Rev. Laryngol. Otol. Rhinol., vol. 124, no. 5, pp. 279–283, 2003.
[8] G. Friedrich and P. H. DeJonckere, “The voice evaluation protocol of the
European Laryngological Society (ELS)—First results of a multicenter
study,” Laryngo-Rhino.-Otol., vol. 84, no. 10, pp. 744–752, 2005.
[9] Y. Yan, K. Ahmad, M. Kunduk, and D. Bless, “Analysis of vocal-fold
vibrations from high-speed laryngeal images using a hilbert transform
based methodology,” J. Voice, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 161–175, 2005.
[10] Y. Zhang and J. J. Jiang, “Asymmetric spatiotemporal chaos induced by a
polypoid mass in the excised larynx,” Chaos, vol. 4, no. 4, 043102, 2008.
[11] Y. Zhang, J. J. Jiang, C. Tao, E. Bieging, and J. K. MacCallum, “Quantifying the complexity of excised larynx vibrations from high-speed imaging
using spatiotemporal and nonlinear dynamic analyses,” Chaos, vol. 17,
no. 4, 043114, 2007.
[12] C. R. Krausert, Y. Liang, Y. Zhang, A. L. Rieves, K. R. Geurink, and J. J.
Jiang, “Spatiotemporal analysis of normal and pathological human vocal
fold vibrations,” Amer. J. Otol., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 641–649, 2012.

2432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

[13] Q. Qiu, H. K. Schutte, L. Gu, and Q. Yu, “An automatic method to quantify
the vibration properties of human vocal folds via videokymography,”
Folia. Phoniatr. Logop., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 128–136, 2003.
[14] R. A. Dedivitis, C. B. Sertorio, and E. G. Pfuetzenreiter, “Videokymographic analysis of patients after frontolateral laryngectomy with sternohyoid muscle flap reconstruction,” Acta. Otorhinolaryngol. Ital., vol.
29, no. 3, pp. 144–150, 2009.
[15] H. S. Bonilha, D. D. Deliyski, and T. T. Gerlach, “Phase asymmetries in
normophonic speakers,” Amer. J. Speech Lang. Pathol., vol. 17, no. 4, pp.
367–376, 2008.
[16] D. D. Mehta, D. D. Deliyski, S. M. Zeitels, T. F. Quatieri, and R. E.
Hillman, “Voice production mechanisms following phonosurgical treatment of early glottic cancer,” Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryngol., vol. 199, no.
1, pp. 1–9, 2010.
[17] C. Manfredi, L. Bochi, S. Bianchi, N. Migali, and G. Cantarella, “Objective
vocal fold vibration assessment from videokymographic images,” Biomed.
Signal Process., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 129–136, 2006.
[18] J. Flanagan and L. Landgraf, “Self-oscillating source for vocal-tract
synthesizers,” IEEE Trans. Audio Electroacoust., vol. AU-16, no. 1, pp.
57–64, Mar. 1968.
[19] R. Schwarz, U. Hoppe, M. Schuster, T. Wurzbacher, U. Eysholdt,
and J. Lohscheller, “Classification of unilateral vocal fold paralysis by
endoscopic digital high-speed recordings and inversion of a biomechanical
model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1099–1108, Jun.
2006.
[20] M. Doellinger, U. Hoppe, F. Hettlich, J. Lohscheller, S. Schuberth,
and U. Eysholdt, “Vibration parameter extraction from endoscopic image
series of the vocal folds,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 8, pp.
773–781, Aug. 2002.
[21] R. Schwarz, M. Doellinger, T. Wurzbacher, U. Eysholdt, and
J. Lohscheller, “Spatio-temporal quantification of vocal fold vibrations
using high-speed videoendoscopy and a biomechanical model,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Amer., vol. 123, no. 5, pp. 2717–2732, 2008.
[22] F. Alipour, D. A. Berry, and I. R. Titze, “A finite-element model of vocalfold vibration,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 108, no. 6, pp. 3003–3012,
2000.
[23] D. A. Berry, H. P. Herzel, I. R. Titze, and K. Krischer, “Interpretation of
biomechanical simulations of normal and chaotic vocal fold oscillations
with empirical eigenfunctions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 95, no. 6, pp.
3595–3604, 1994.
[24] J. Neubauer, P. Mergell, U. Eysholdt, and H. Herzel, “Spatio-temporal
analysis of irregular vocal fold oscillations: Biphonation due to desynchronization of spatial modes,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 110, no. 6, pp.
3179–3192, 2001.
[25] J. Lohscheller, U. Eysholdt, H. Toy, and M. Doellinger, “Phonovibrography: Mapping high-speed movies of vocal fold vibrations into 2-D
diagrams for visualizing and analyzing the underlying Laryngeal dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 300–309, Mar. 2008.
[26] D. Voigt, M. Doellinger, A. Yang, U. Eysholdt, and J. Lohscheller, “Automatic diagnosis of vocal fold paresis by employing phonovibrogram
features and machine learning methods,” Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed., vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 275–288, 2010.
[27] D. Voigt, M. Doellinger, T. Braunschweig, A. Yang, U. Eysholdt, and
J. Lohscheller, “Classification of functional voice disorders based on
phonovibrograms,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 51–59, 2010.
[28] J. Lohscheller, H. Toy, F. Rosanowski, U. Eysholdt, and M. Doellinger,
“Clinically evaluated procedure for the reconstruction of vocal fold vibrations from endoscopic digital high-speed videos.,” Med. Image Anal., vol.
11, no. 4, pp. 400–413, 2007.
[29] S. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, 3rd ed. San Diego, CA,
USA: Academic, 2009, ch. 6.
[30] S. Mallat and W. L. Hwang, “Singularity detection and processing with
wavelets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 617–643, Mar. 1992.
[31] L. Zhang and P. Bao, “Edge detection by scale multiplication in wavelet
domain,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 23, no. 14, pp. 1771–1784, 2002.
[32] D. Flores-Tapia, Z. M. K. Moussavi, and G. Thomas, “Heart sound
cancellation based on multiscale products and linear prediction,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 234–243, Feb. 2007.
[33] A. Bouzid and N. Ellouze, “Open quotient measurements based on multiscale product of speech signal wavelet transform,” Speech Commun., vol.
51, no. 9, pp. 782–792, 2009.
[34] M. R. P. Thomas, J. Gudnason, and P. A. Naylor, “Estimation of glottal
closing and opening instants in voiced speech using the YAGA algorithm,”
IEEE Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 82–91, Jan. 2012.

[35] A. Bouzid and N. Ellouze, “Voice source parameter measurement based
on multi-scale analysis of electroglottographic signal,” Speech Commun.,
vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 782–792, 2009.
[36] M. R. P. Thomas and P. A. Naylor, “The SIGMA algorithm: A glottal
activity detector for electroglottographic signals,” IEEE Audio, Speech,
Lang. Process., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1557–1566, Nov. 2009.
[37] S. Didas and J. Weickert, “Integrodifferential equations for continuous
multiscale wavelet shrinkage,” Inverse Probl. Imag., vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
47–62, 2007.
[38] S. G. Roux, T. Cenier, S. Garcia, P. Litaudon, and N. Buonviso, “A waveletbased method for local phase extraction from a multi-frequency oscillatory
signal,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 135–143, 2007.
[39] J. Cohen, “A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales,” Educ. Psychol.
Meas., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 37–46, 1960.
[40] J. L. Fleiss, “Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters,”
Psychol. Bull., vol. 76, no. 5, pp. 378–382, 1971.
[41] Z. I. Botev, J. F. Grotowski, and D. P. Kroese, “Kernel density estimation
via diffusion,” Ann. Statist., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2916–2957, 2010.
[42] B. J. Poburka and D. M. Bless, “A multi-media, computer-based method
for stroboscopy rating training,” J. Voice, vol. 12, no. 4, 513–526, 1998.
[43] I. M. Verdonck-de Leeuw, J. M. Festen, and H. F. Mahieu, “Deviant vocal
fold vibration as observed during videokymography: The effect on voice
quality,” J. Voice, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 313–322, 2001.
[44] K. A. Kendall and R. J. Leonard, Laryngeal Evaluation: Indirect Laryngoscopy to High-Speed Digital Imaging. New York, NY, USA: Thieme
Medical Publishers, 2010, ch. 29.
[45] G. F. Hughes, “On the mean accuracy of statistical pattern recognizers,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-14, no. 1, pp. 55–63, Jan. 1968.
[46] T. Braunschweig, J. Flaschka, P. Schelhorn-Neise, and M. Doellinger,
“High-speed video analysis of the phonation onset, with an application to
the diagnosis of functional dysphonias,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 30, no. 1,
pp. 59–66, 2008.
[47] T. Wurzbacher, R. Schwarz, M. Hoppe, U. Eyshold, and J. Lohscheller,
“Model-based classification of nonstationary vocal fold vibrations,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 210, no. 2, pp. 1012–1027, 2006.
[48] N. Delprat, B. Escudie, P. Guillemain, R. Kronland-Martinet, P.
Tchamitchian, and B. Torresani, “Asymptotic wavelet and Gabor analysis: extraction of instantaneous frequencies,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
38, no. 2, pp. 644–664, Mar. 1992.

Jakob Unger (S’13) was born in Goettingen,
Germany, in 1983. He received the Diploma degree in computer science from the Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany, in 2010. He is
working toward the Ph.D. degree at Saarland University, Homburg, Germany, with special respect to
computational analysis of vocal fold vibration.
He is currently working in the field of biomedical engineering at the Department of Computer Science, Trier University of Applied Sciences, Trier,
Germany. His research interests include signal processing, time–frequency analysis, and partial differential equations.

Dietmar J. Hecker was born in Saarbruecken,
Germany, in 1967. Before receiving the diploma degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Applied Sciences in Saarbruecken, Saarbruecken,
Germany, in 1993, he worked as an Electrician. In
2006, he received the M.Sc. degree with distinction in
medical engineering from the University of Applied
Sciences in Saarbruecken. He is working toward the
Ph.D. degree at Saarland University, Homburg, Germany, with special respect to otoacoustic emissions.
He is currently working as a Medical Engineer in
the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Saarland University Hospital (head:
Prof. Dr. B. Schick), Homburg, Germany. His research interests include statistical learning theory and signal processing in the auditory and vestibular system.

UNGER et al.: QUANTIFYING SPATIOTEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF VOCAL FOLD DYNAMICS BASED ON A MULTISCALE ANALYSIS

Melda Kunduk received the Ph.D. degree in speech
pathology from the Department of Communication
Sciences and Disorders, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, WI, USA.
She is currently an Associate Professor at the
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Louisiana State University (LSU-COMD)
Baton Rouge, LA, USA. She is an Adjunct Faculty at
the LSU Health Sciences Center/Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery and provides
clinical services at The Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center—Voice Center. She is the Director of the Laryngeal
Imaging Research Laboratory, which is located within the LSU-COMD Department. Her research interests include the assessment and treatment techniques
of voice and swallowing disorders. In the area of voice, she investigates the vocal fold vibratory function using high-speed digital videoendoscopy in normal
and disordered voices. In the area of dysphagia, she investigates the effects of
behavioral treatment on swallowing function following head and neck cancer
treatment modalities.

Maria Schuster received the M.D. degree from
the University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany,
in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, in
2005, and is specialized in phoniatrics and pediatric
audiology.
She is the Head of the Section of Audiology
and Phoniatrics in the Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Munich, Campus Grosshadern, Munich, Germany.
Her main research interests include disordered language, speech, and voice, and the various methods of diagnostics and treatment.

2433

Bernhard Schick was born in Marburg/Lahn,
Germany, in 1967. Following Medical School at the
Philipps-University, Marburg, he completed his ENT
residency in the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Fulda Hospital (head: Dr. W. Draf), Hessen,
Germany.
He worked as a Consultant in Otorhinolaryngology at Saarland University Medical Center (head: Dr.
P. Plinkert) and Erlangen University Hospital (head:
Dr. H. Iro). In 2003, he became an Associate Professor in Otorhinolaryngology. In 2009, he became a
Full Professor and the Head of the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Saarland
University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. His research interests include
auditory processing, development of new endoscopic approaches in otorhinolaryngology, and design of novel transplants for ENT surgery.

Joerg Lohscheller studied electrical engineering at
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. He received the Ph.D. degree in engineering (with highest distinction) from the University of ErlangenNuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, in 2003.
From 2009 to 2013, he was a Full Professor of
Medical Informatics and since 2013, he has been a
Full Professor of Computer-aided Clinical Diagnostics at Trier University of Applied Sciences, Trier,
Germany. In addition, he has been an Adjunct Professor at the Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
LA, USA, since 2008. He has also been a Member of the medical faculty of
Saarland University since 2011.

