464

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Automatic Identification and Classification of Muscle
Spasms in Long-Term EMG Recordings
Jeffrey Winslow, Member, IEEE, Adriana Martinez, and Christine K. Thomas

Abstract—Spinal cord injured (SCI) individuals may be afflicted
by spasticity, a condition in which involuntary muscle spasms are
common. EMG recordings can be analyzed to quantify this symptom of spasticity but manual identification and classification of
spasms are time consuming. Here, an algorithm was created to find
and classify spasm events automatically within 24-h recordings of
EMG. The algorithm used expert rules and time-frequency techniques to classify spasm events as tonic, unit, or clonus spasms.
A companion graphical user interface (GUI) program was also
built to verify and correct the results of the automatic algorithm
or manually defined events. Eight channel EMG recordings were
made from seven different SCI subjects. The algorithm was able to
correctly identify an average (±SD) of 94.5 ± 3.6% spasm events
and correctly classify 91.6 ± 1.9% of spasm events, with an accuracy of 61.7 ± 16.2%. The accuracy improved to 85.5 ± 5.9% and
the false positive rate decreased to 7.1 ± 7.3%, respectively, if noise
events between spasms were removed. On average, the algorithm
was more than 11 times faster than manual analysis. Use of both
the algorithm and the GUI program provide a powerful tool for
characterizing muscle spasms in 24-h EMG recordings, information which is important for clinical management of spasticity.
Index Terms—Automatic classification, clonus, motor units,
spasticity, spinal cord injury (SCI).

I. INTRODUCTION
PINAL CORD injured (SCI) individuals are commonly
afflicted by spasticity, a complex phenomenon that may involve hyperreflexia, increased muscle tone resulting in higher
resistance to muscle stretch at rest, and muscle spasms (involuntary muscle contractions), including the repeated contractions of
clonus [1]. Studies on chronic SCI (≥1 year post injury) subjects
show that 65–75% of the sampled population have symptoms of
spasticity. Spasticity can degrade the quality of life of individuals with SCI by restricting activities of daily living and rehabilitation, causing pain and fatigue, and by disturbing sleep [2].
Others use spasms to their advantage. For example, a SCI
individual may know how to trigger a spasm and that contrac-

S

Manuscript received November 19, 2013; revised March 13, 2014; accepted
April 19, 2014. Date of publication April 29, 2014; date of current version March
2, 2015. This work was funded by the Craig Nielsen Foundation (#83848); the
National Institutes of Health (NS-30226; R24 A#1F51C43 under contract to the
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago) and The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis.
J. Winslow and A. Martinez are with The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136 USA (e-mail:
jwinslow@cableone.net; AMartinez9@med.miami.edu).
C. K. Thomas is with the The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Department
of Neurological Surgery, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136 USA (e-mail:
cthomas3@med.miami.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2320633

tion can shift his or her position in bed without any additional
help.
Muscle spasms are common. They can occur throughout the
day and night, and take various forms. The repetitive contractions of clonus can interfere with locomotion [3]. Sustained
contractions can result in limb extension or flexion so make it
hard to dress. Periodic limb movements (myoclonus) can disrupt sleep [4]. Additionally, trains of motor unit potentials can
continue for minutes but may go unnoticed [5], [6].
Analysis of biological signals across time is one approach
to understand complex phenomena. For example, long-term
(24-h) electromyographic (EMG) recordings are useful to determine the characteristics of muscle spasms, particularly how
common they are, and the prevalence of different types of contractions. In this way, EMG recordings can best provide a quantifiable measure to assess both some of the symptoms of spasticity and their severity. These long-term recordings generate
large datasets, and multiple channels of EMG only compound
the amount of data that must be processed. Presently, EMG experts can manually classify the different types of muscle spasms
found in long-term recordings reliably [7], but the process is
tedious and time consuming. These issues are not unique to
EMG. Long-term ECG (electrocardiograms) and EEG (electroencephalograms) recordings also produce large quantities of
data that are not feasible to analyze manually. Systems have
been created to classify long-term ECG [8] and EEG [9], [10]
automatically to look for biological anomalies in cardiac muscle
and brain, respectively.
The aim of this paper was to produce an algorithm to automatically identify and classify muscle spasms in EMG records
from different subjects and muscles by applying rules defined
by experts in EMG recognition. The algorithm was designed
to recognize spasm events, mark their start and end times, and
appropriately label different contraction types. In addition, a
graphical user interface (GUI) was created to verify spasms that
were identified and classified manually by an expert with 5 years
of experience in EMG recognition. The results of this manual
(expert) spasm analysis were used to evaluate the performance
of the automatic algorithm.

II. METHODS
The subject pool consisted of seven SCI individuals (two
women, five men; 27–52 years) who had a SCI at C4 (n = 1),
C6 (n = 5) or C7 (n = 1) due to a diving (n = 4), motor vehicle
(n = 2) or sports (n = 1) accident that occurred from 4 to
33 years ago. The American Spinal Injury Association Impairment scale was A (n = 6) or B (n = 1). All subjects signed a

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WINSLOW et al.: AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF MUSCLE SPASMS IN LONG-TERM EMG RECORDINGS

465

Fig. 2. Automatic algorithm flowchart. Spasm events were identified and
classified based on integrated EMG above an integral threshold. The algorithm
also identified clonus by investigating the frequency spectrum of the EMG
envelope.

Fig. 1. EMG processing. EMG from Subject 1, Right medial gastrocnemius,
5 PM-6 PM (a) was rectified (b) and integrated (c) by calculating the area under
the EMG every 10 ms. (d) Integrals greater than the threshold (dashed line) were
considered EMG.

consent form approved by the University of Miami Investigational Review Board. One 24-h recording was made per subject.
A battery-powered data logging device with custom software [5] recorded EMG data from eight different leg muscles
(right and left medial gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, biceps
femoris, vastus lateralis) for 24 h. All EMG signals were amplified on site (x400; Motion Lab Systems, Baton Rouge, LA,
USA) and hardware filtered (30 Hz–1 kHz) before sampling at
1000 Hz. Each experiment consisted of 192 h of data per subject (8 channels × 24 h). EMG recording sites were as described
by Mummidisetty et al. [16]. Briefly, self-adhering electrodes
(Superior Silver, no. 626SS, Uni-Patch, Wabasha, MN, USA)
were trimmed (1 cm × 3 cm) and positioned over the distal third
of each muscle in a bipolar configuration (4-cm interelectrode
distance). A ground electrode (1 cm × 3 cm) was positioned
on each muscle, 4-cm proximal to the other two electrodes. The
electrodes were held in place with Hypafix tape.
A. EMG Processing
The automatic algorithm used integrated EMG extensively to
indicate muscle activity. The integral signal was constructed by
rectifying the EMG and computing the area under the curve every 10 ms (see Fig. 1). The average duration of surface recorded
motor unit potentials was 10 ms, and potentials from motor units
were the minimum signal that was expected to be recorded [11].
To separate the EMG from the baseline, a threshold integral
(mean of highest 10% of integrals + 3SD) was calculated for
each channel of each recording from five 30-s regions of quiet
baseline (no EMG activity; see [12]).
B. Rule-Based Identification and Classification
The automatic algorithm found all spasm events and then
automatically classified them as tonic, unit, or clonus spasms.

Fig. 3. Spasm classification rules flowchart. (a) Spasm events were classified
according to how many consecutive above-threshold integrals they contained
within a fixed time, and how many bursts of EMG were above threshold. Spasm
events were classified as (b) unit, (c) tonic, or (d) clonus using rules described by
Thomas et al. [7]. Unit spasms included distinct motor unit potentials, whereas
motor unit potentials formed an interference pattern in tonic spasms. Clonus
consisted of EMG bursts that occurred at frequencies between 4 and 12 Hz.

Fig. 2 details these steps of the algorithm. All processing was
done one channel at a time.
Spasm events were identified using the same rules as experts
[7]. Regions of EMG were grouped into segments such that
spasm events were at least 1 s apart and had at least five integrals
above threshold that spanned at least 100 ms.
Fig. 3(a) shows the rules used to classify spasm events [7]. An
EMG region that had only two to four integrals above threshold

466

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Fig. 4. Wavelet filtered EMG envelope and spectrogram (Subject 1, Right medial gastrocnemius, 8 AM–9 AM). EMG was wavelet filtered using a nonlinearly
scaled Morlet wavelet (passband 74.8–193.9 Hz) to obtain an EMG envelope. The EMG envelope was subjected to a short-time Fourier transform (inset, left).
A hamming window was applied to each EMG envelope window before taking the transform to minimize leakage of the spectral peaks. Two second windows
ensured that at least four bursts of EMG (if they occurred at 4 Hz) were contained on either side of the window midpoint, which would meet the minimum number
of EMG bursts necessary for clonus. Overlapping windows were used to enhance the time resolution of the frequency content. The primary clonus rhythm was at
6 Hz and this peak was greater than twice the next largest peak, so clonus was indicated.

in 100 ms was classified as an EMG potential. An event with 5
or more nonconsecutive above-threshold integrals was labeled
a unit spasm as these data were potentials from one or more
motor units [see Fig. 3(b)]. An event consisting of five or more
consecutive integrals was labeled a tonic spasm because the
EMG from various potentials formed an interference pattern
[see Fig. 3(c)]. A tonic spasm was labeled clonus depending on
the spectral analysis of the event EMG envelope (see Fig. 3(d);
see clonus classification).
C. Clonus Classification
Clonus involves periodic bursts of EMG between 4 and 12 Hz,
the frequency of which largely depend on the length of the reflex
arc [13], [14]. Clonus is documented clinically when there are
four bursts of EMG [15]. These two criteria were used here
to indicate clonus (at least four EMG bursts, with periodicity
between 4 and 12 Hz).
To identify clonus, wavelet, and short-time Fourier transforms were applied to all spasm events. First, an envelope of
the EMG was created using a wavelet filtering technique based
on nonlinearly scaling a mother Morlet wavelet. The resulting
filter produced a pass band of 74.8–193.9 Hz [16]. For example,
Fig. 4 shows a 2-s window of EMG that consists of more than
four EMG bursts, the first criterion that had to be met to designate clonus. Next, a short-time Fourier transform was applied
to the EMG envelope to locate the clonus periodicity using 2-s
windows with 1.9-s overlaps. If the largest spectral peak within
a 2-s window occurred at a frequency between 4 and 12 Hz, and
that spectral peak was at least twice as large as the second largest
spectral peak (which ensured the frequency component of the
clonus dominated the spectrum), the second criterion for clonus
was met. For example, the 6-Hz peak in Fig. 4 (inset, left) was
2.2 times the harmonic at 12 Hz, so clonus was deemed present.
III. RESULTS
A. GUI to Assist Verification of Expert Spasm Analysis
A GUI program was created using MATLAB (The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) to assist the expert in verifying spasm identification and classification. The GUI program
utilized MATLAB as an activeX server for DaDisp 2002
(DSP Development Corporation, Newton, MA, USA) so that

Fig. 5. MATLAB graphical user interface (GUI) program for viewing EMG.
The GUI (left panel) executed commands to navigate through each hour of
EMG, and enabled the user to change classifications or timings, create new
events, merge, and separate existing spasm events. Different colored windows
enclosed spasm events with different classifications. The merge tool within the
GUI was used to combine (right panel) two contractions (solid and dashed lines)
that were less than 1 s apart to adhere to spasm rules (Subject 1, Right vastus
lateralis, 9 AM–10 AM).

commands executed by the GUI controlled the EMG data displayed by DaDisp 2002. Fig. 5 shows an example of the GUI
control window (left) and EMG data (right) plotted with windows marking the start and end of spasms.
The GUI assisted the expert with 5 years of experience in
EMG recognition in navigating through 24-h EMG recordings,
changing spasm classifications or noise, and modifying event
timing. The navigation buttons were used to either move to the
previous event, advance to the next event, the next hour, or jump
to an arbitrary hour. Classifications were changed by clicking
the appropriate spasm type (left buttons). Existing events could
be merged or separated. For example, the merge tool was used
to join two manually labeled events that were less than 1 s apart
(solid and dashed windows, right). New events could be created,
in addition to modifying the start and end points of events. All
changes made using the GUI were automatically saved and
appended to the spasm event records for each recording.
B. Automatic Event Identification
First, the automatic algorithm was evaluated by comparing its
ability to find spasm events to the results generated manually by

WINSLOW et al.: AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF MUSCLE SPASMS IN LONG-TERM EMG RECORDINGS

467

repeated measures ANOVA). Results also differed by muscle
(manual: 3.08 ± 1.01 s, 1.61–5.47 s; automatic: 3.80 ± 1.07 s,
1.79–6.05 s, p < 0.001). When noise was removed, the average
manual spasm duration per subject (3.20 ± 0.99 s, 2.15–4.55 s)
was comparable to the automatically found duration (3.22 ±
0.98 s, 2.15–4.56 s, p = 0.891), as were durations by muscle
(manual: 2.98 ± 0.93 s, 1.60–5.03 s; automatic: 3.01 ± 0.96 s,
1.60–5.07 s, p = 0.891).
C. Classification Performance Evaluation

Fig. 6. Manual and test spasm durations. (A) Mean manual spasm durations plotted against automated (test) durations by subject (diamond, dashed
line; y = 0.8001x + 1.2619, R 2 = 0.658, p = 0.03; least squares linear
regression) and by muscle (triangle, solid line; y = 0.8696x + 1.1484,
R 2 = 0.748, p = 0.005) and (B) after reduction in noise events (subject:
y = 0.9846x +0.0755, R 2 = 0.998, p < 0.001); muscle: y = 1.02x – 0.0311,
R 2 = 0.999, p < 0.001).

an expert. Each event that was manually defined by an expert and
verified using the GUI (hereafter referred to as a manual event)
was compared with all automatically found events (test events).
A test event was matched with a manual event if the durations of
the test and manual events overlapped. If there was overlap only
between one test event and one manual event, then that manual
event was said to be a “one-to-one match.” If multiple test events
overlapped the same manual event, the result was a split (i.e.,
the manual event was split into multiple events by the automatic
analysis). A combination occurred if multiple manually defined
events were classified as part of one test event.
The automatic algorithm was able to identify an average
(±SD) of 94.5 ± 3.6% (range: 89.3–98.8%) spasm events
correctly over all seven experiments (5334 ± 2147 out of
5695 ± 2385 events per experiment were one-to-one matches).
The unmatched events were either split into multiple events
(0.7 ± 0.4%, 0–1.1%) or combined (4.8 ± 3.4%, 1.2–10%).
For one-to-one matches, there were significant positive correlations between the mean manual and test spasm durations by
subject (diamonds) and by muscle (triangles), both before and
after the number of noise events were removed (see Fig. 6). Only
stand-alone noise, or noise that was not adjoining manual spasm
events, was removed for these comparisons. The automatically
found event durations tracked the manually found durations better after stand-alone noise events were removed [see Fig. 6(b)].
Before noise was removed, the average manual spasm duration by subject was 3.34 ± 0.96 s (range 2.74–4.57 s), which
was significantly shorter than the corresponding automatically
found duration (3.93 ± 0.94 s, 2.69–5.17 s, p < 0.001, two-way

The following definitions categorize the results of the automatic classification algorithm. A test event was a True Positive
if its spasm type matched an overlapping manual event. A test
event was a False Positive if no manual events overlapped it. A
manual event was Missed if it did not overlap any test events. A
test event was Misclassified if it overlapped a manual event with
a different spasm type. If the class of a constituent test event of
a split matched the spasm type of the manual event, that constituent event was a True Positive. All other test events that did
not share the same spasm type as the manual event were False
Positives. False positives were expressed as a percentage [test
events that were incorrectly assigned a spasm class with respect
to the total number of events (false positives, true positives) that
were assigned that class (1)]. Accuracy for a given spasm type
was the percentage of events that were correctly classified with
respect to all spasm events that were assigned that spasm class
%FalsePostive = NF P / (NF P + NT P )

(1)

%Accuracy = NT P /(NF P + NT P + NM isclassiﬁed
+ NM issed ).

(2)

In equations (1) and (2), NF P is the number of false positive
test events and NT P is the number of true positive test events.
In (2), NM isclassiﬁed is the number of misclassified test events,
and NM issed is the number of missed test events.
Fig. 7(a) shows the total number of true positive and misclassified spasm events by muscle. The percentage of true positives (range: 88–94% across muscles) and misclassified spasms
(range: 6–12%) was comparable across muscles (p = 0.882; Chi
square test). Overall, the automatic algorithm was able to correctly classify 91.6 ± 1.9% of all spasm events (n = 7 subjects,
each experiment 24 h of data from eight muscles) with an accuracy of 61.7 ± 16.2%, and a false positive rate of 34.4 ± 17.8%
(see Table I). The accuracy and false positive rate improved
to 85.5 ± 5.9% and 7.1 ± 7.3%, respectively, if stand-alone
noise events were removed. Out of 37,308 spasm events that
were one-to-one matches, 2785 stand-alone noise events were
removed (7.5%). Noise typically included high amplitude, transient spikes that were an order of magnitude larger than actual
EMG, high-frequency spikes, or spikes that had broader durations than actual motor unit potentials. Some of the noise came
from cell phones, electric wheelchairs, or mechanical artifacts
due to uncontrolled limb movements. Experts could visually
recognize these waveforms as noise versus EMG and manually excluded them from subsequent processing. Of all noise

468

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE III
EXECUTION TIMES

automatic algorithm performed poorest on clonus, achieving an
accuracy of 67.9 ± 19.9% after noise removal.
D. Execution Times

Fig. 7. Spasm events by muscle and type. Total number of true positive, and
misclassified spasm events found by the automatic algorithm across muscles
(a; n = 7 experiments) and by type (b).
TABLE I
OVERALL CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE

Since the algorithm cannot automatically identify noise, its
results must be verified by an expert (i.e., GUI-assisted analysis).
Thus, to evaluate the execution time we conducted a threeway comparison of analysis methods (manual versus automatic
versus GUI-assisted) for 15 h of data with average amounts of
EMG. Execution time was measured using the computer clock.
The average time required for an expert to manually analyze
and verify 1 h of data (Intel Core i7 machine, 24 GB RAM)
was 39.8 ± 26.0 min (using DaDisp cursors, mouse clicks, and
keyboard navigation), significantly longer than the automatic
algorithm (3.4 ± 0.5 min; p = 0.017; Intel Core i5 machine,
8 GB RAM) or the GUI-assisted method (Intel Core i7 machine)
which involved running the automatic algorithm and the time
required to verify these results using the GUI (10.8 ± 4.1 min;
p = 0.025; Repeated measures ANOVA; Table III). When these
results were extrapolated to the time it would take to analyze
an entire experiment (192 h of data), automatic classification
using the algorithm was 11 times faster than manual analysis.
GUI-assisted analysis was almost four times faster than manual
analysis.
IV. DISCUSSION

TABLE II
ALGORITHM PERFORMANCES BY SPASM TYPE

events, 80% had durations less than 3.2 s, the average duration
of spasms.
Fig. 7(b) shows the total number of true positive and misclassified spasm events with respect to spasm type. Across all
subjects, most spasms were either tonic (52%) or unit spasms
(46%). Only 2% of spasms were labeled as clonus. Of these
clonus spasms, 67% were true positives. The percentage of true
positives for tonic (91%) and unit (92%) spasms was comparable (p = 0.79) but lower for clonus (p < 0.001; Chi square
tests). Overall, tonic and unit spasms were classified to an accuracy of 85.7 ± 9.4% and 87.5 ± 6.2% when stand-alone noise
was removed, respectively (Table II, n = 7 experiments). The

An algorithm was created to automatically find muscle
spasms in long-term EMG recordings and to classify the spasm
type. The algorithm employed the same timing and classification
rules developed by experts in EMG recognition, removing subjective judgment calls. A GUI was also created to allow effortless navigation through the long EMG recordings so an expert
could verify or modify spasm events and classifications generated automatically or manually. Not only was the automated
method significantly quicker than manual analysis, verification
with the GUI increased classification accuracy to match that
of an expert. The automatic spasm identification, classification,
and viewing system developed here provide a powerful tool to
quantify and assess the involuntary muscle contractions that are
characteristic of spasticity.
A. Accurate and Automatic Identification of Muscle Spasms
An algorithm can only be expected to perform as well as the
agreement between two experts in EMG recognition, because
individuals can make different subjective judgments when utilizing the same rules. Elsewhere, we have systematically assessed

WINSLOW et al.: AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF MUSCLE SPASMS IN LONG-TERM EMG RECORDINGS

the interrater reliability of our spasm identification and classification 14]. Two experts evaluated 48 h of EMG data using the
same rules that the algorithm used. These results are discussed
concurrently with the automatic algorithm results. The algorithm developed here correctly identified 94.5 ± 3.6% of all
spasm events as one-to-one matches because it employed the
same above-threshold integral, 1 s, and 100 ms timing rules developed by experts. In contrast, experts missed 1.8% of spasms
using these same rules. Experts marked another 1.9% of events
that did not meet spasm criteria. Thus, an algorithm is much better suited to counting above-threshold integrals than an expert
when there are a large number of spasms to be found in multichannel EMG recordings. Operator fatigue can set in and the
actual number of above threshold integrals can be miscounted.
Experts combined an average of 4.7% spasm events which
was similar to the 4.8% of spasm events that the algorithm
combined. Expert combinations resulted from grouping various
contractions as myoclonus or from misapplying rules, such as
the 1-s rule, whereas the algorithm combinations were due to
noise occurring within or between different spasm events. Noise
within spasm events was excluded and labeled during manual
classification, but not by the classification algorithm, leading to
combinations and longer duration spasms. Automatically identifying noise was not a goal of this study, but will be addressed in
future work through software and hardware measures. Nevertheless, when noise was included, the algorithm correctly deduced
the spasm start and end times within an accuracy of 1 ms (one
sampling period) in 89% and 90% of all one-to-one matched
events, respectively. When stand-alone noise was removed, the
average spasm length found manually by subject (3.20 ± 0.99 s)
and muscle (2.98 ± 0.93 s) was on par with the average automatically found durations (subject: 3.22 ± 0.98 s; muscle:
3.01 ± 0.96 s).

B. Different Spasm Types Can be Classified Automatically
The algorithm showed good classification performance. A
large percentage (91.6 ± 1.9%) of spasms was classified correctly, both across muscles and subjects (see Fig. 7). This was
due to the fact that unit and tonic spasms could be appropriately
identified 92% and 91% of the time, respectively, using the simple rule of either five nonconsecutive or consecutive integrals
that exceeded the threshold [see Fig. 7(b)]. Misclassifications
largely occurred due to noise that either stood-alone or was
mixed together with actual spasm events. For example, some
unit spasms were misclassified as tonic spasms because the algorithm identified above-threshold noise as EMG. An expert
would label noise separately, whereas the algorithm was not
programmed to do so. After the stand-alone noise was removed,
algorithm accuracy averaged 85.5 ± 5.9%. Two raters agreed
on spasm classification 89% of the time [7], results that were
comparable to the algorithm (p = 0.669, Chi square test).
Clonus was difficult to classify. When noise was removed,
the accuracy of identifying clonus averaged 67.9 ± 19.9% (see
Table II). For simplicity, clonus was identified by inspecting
the frequency content of the EMG envelope using a short-time

469

Fourier transform. Better performance may be obtained by modifying the clonus finding portion of the automatic algorithm to
identify the harmonics at multiples of the base clonus frequency
(see Fig. 4) instead of just relying on spectrum peak ratios.
Additionally, wavelet transforms could be used to analyze the
EMG envelope signal because they provide better time resolution than a short-time Fourier transform [16], [17]. Even though
clonus had been previously analyzed using wavelets, it was not
automatically classified as accomplished by the current algorithm. Mummidisetty et al. [16] identified EMG burst start and
end times within already recognized clonus.
The timeframe for identifying and classifying muscle spasms
from EMG recordings has different requirements from those of
other signals like EEG. When EEG data are monitored acutely
for the presence of spikes that indicate seizures, high accuracy
is required immediately in order to make clinical decisions [9],
[10]. In contrast, spasm identification and classification can be
done offline. Longer EMG datasets are required to build a global
view of muscle activity over time so that spasms with functional
consequences can be identified and managed clinically.

C. Use of a GUI Can Improve the Accuracy of Automatic
Spasm Analysis
A GUI was created to enable human operators to easily navigate through long EMG recordings using a point and click
interface, and to verify or modify manual or automatic spasm
analysis where appropriate. Using the GUI only warranted an
additional 7.4 ± 3.7 min to verify the automatic classifications
of each hour of EMG, which is almost five times less manual
work than classifying that same hour by hand (see Table III).
This verification process increased analysis accuracy to match
manual levels.
The flexibility of the GUI is a strength. There are multiple
approaches that can be used to fix a given event. For example,
if only the last part of an event is noise, it could be divided in
two and each part reclassified. Another approach would be to
change the start and end of the noise, then to create a new event
for the EMG.
Other approaches could also be implemented to improve performance. If the automatic classification algorithm only found
and classified events as unit or tonic spasms, execution times
would be twice as fast (103 s to process 1 h of data compared to
206 s) because spectrogram calculations to identify clonus were
computationally intensive. This would yield execution times
of 5 h, 29 min per 8-channel experiment which could be accomplished overnight. Across seven subjects, clonus made up
only 2% of the total number of spasm events. The number of
spasms involving myoclonus was also low and only its constituent events were marked as tonic, unit or clonus spasms
here. However, if the algorithm was used with the GUI program developed here, an expert would only need to change
a few classifications (mainly clonus and myoclonus) because
unit and tonic spasms were classified correctly to a high degree
(91.9 ± 3.5% and 90.7 ± 3.1%, respectively). This would speed
up the verification process.

470

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

D. Automatic Analysis of Muscle Spasms Allows Important
Rehabilitation Questions to be Addressed Comprehensively
Using Large Datasets
The combination of automated analysis and computerassisted verification of results by EMG experts enhanced the
accuracy of muscle spasm analysis in 24-h EMG records and
reduced the analysis time well below that required to accomplish this work manually. The algorithm results are comparable
to the performance of two experts with respect to identification
of spasm events (95% versus 96% one-to-one matches found),
but automated analysis was 11 times faster than manual analysis. Automatically, generated spasm classifications were correct
92% of the time, on average, with an accuracy of 86% after
noise removal. These results compare favorably to the classification agreement found between two experts in EMG recognition (89%). Thus, the automated analysis performs just as well
as two experts, but the execution time is much faster and less
tedious.
Analysis of an entire day of EMG obtained from multiple
muscles in everyday settings allows some of the most problematic symptoms of spasticity to be quantified objectively during both wake and sleep time. When linked to the individual’s
perception of these muscle spasms, these data will provide insight into how these involuntary contractions interfere with rehabilitation, care, mobility, and sleep. Clinical assessments rely
on subjective spasm counts but contraction duration, intensity,
type, or the particular combination of active muscles may also
make spasms disruptive. Long-term EMG records provide this
information and can be used to ask clinically important questions about involuntary muscle contractions. For example, examination of the likelihood that a certain type of spasm may
occur again, or how spasms are influenced by medication or
training, may lead to improved clinical management of these
contractions.

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

the upper motor neuron syndrome,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry.,
vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 776–781, Jul. 1993.
J. W. Little, P. Micklesen, R. Umlauf, and C. Britell, “Lower extremity
manifestations of spasticity in chronic spinal cord injury,” Amer. J. Phys.
Med. Rehabil., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 32–36, Feb. 1989.
R. Meier, H. Dittrich, A. Schulze-Bonhage, and A. Aertsen, “Detecting
epileptic seizures in long-term human EEG: A new approach to automatic
online and real-time detection and classification of polymorphic seizure
patterns,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 119–131, Jun. 2008.
C. K. Mummidisetty, J. Bohorquez, and C. K. Thomas, “Automatic analysis of EMG during clonus,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 204, no. 1, pp. 35–
43, Feb. 2012.
A. Smrdel and F. Jager, “Automatic classification of long-term ambulatory
ECG records according to type of ischemic heart disease,” Biomed. Eng.
Online, vol. 10, no. 107, pp. 107–110, Dec. 2011.
S. C. Telles, R. C. Alves, and G. Chadi, “Periodic limb movements during
sleep and restless legs syndrome in patients with ASIA A spinal cord
injury,” J. Neurol. Sci., vol. 303, no. 1/2, pp. 119–123, Apr. 2011.
C. K. Thomas, R. S. Johansson, and B. Bigland-Ritchie, “EMG changes
in human thenar motor units with force potentiation and fatigue,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 1518–1526, Mar. 2006.
C. K. Thomas, M. Dididze, A. Martinez, and R. Morris, “Identification
and classification of involuntary leg muscle contractions in electromyographic records from individuals with spinal cord injury,” J. Electromyogr.
Kinesiol., in press, May 2014.
D. M. Wallace, B. H. Ross, and C. K. Thomas, “Characteristics of lower
extremity clonus after human cervical spinal cord injury,” J. Neurotrauma,
vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 915–924, Mar. 2012.
J. Winslow, M. Dididze, and C. K. Thomas, “Automatic classification
of motor unit potentials in surface EMG recorded from thenar muscles
paralyzed by spinal cord injury,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 185, pp. 165–
177, Sep. 2009.
I. Zijdewind and C. K. Thomas, “Firing patterns of spontaneously active
motor units in spinal cord-injured subjects,” J. Physiol., vol. 590, no.
Pt 7, pp. 1683–1697, Apr. 2012.

Jeffrey Winslow (M’95) received the Ph.D. degree
from the University of Miami, FL, USA, in 2008.
He is currently a Professor at Yavapai College,
Prescott, AZ, USA. His research interests include
muscle spasticity and the processing of biological
signals.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. D. Dietrich and
Dr. Z. Rymer for support of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. M. Adams and A. L. Hicks, “Spasticity after spinal cord injury,” Spinal
Cord, vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 577–586, Oct. 2005.
[2] R. Agarwal, J. Gotman, D. Flanagan, and B. Rosenblatt, “Automatic EEG
analysis during long-term monitoring in the ICU,” Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 44–58, Jul. 1998.
[3] J. A. Beres-Jones, T. D. Johnson, and S. J. Harkema, “Clonus after human
spinal cord injury cannot be attributed solely to recurrent muscle-tendon
stretch,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 149, no. 2, pp. 222–236, Mar. 2003.
[4] L. Debnath, “Wavelet transforms and their applications,” in Proc. INSA-A,
vol. 64, pp. 685–713, 1998.
[5] R. Iansek, “The effects of reflex path length on clonus frequency in spastic
muscles,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1122–
1124, Oct. 1984.
[6] C. S. Klein, L. B. Peterson, S. Ferrell, and C. K. Thomas, “Sensitivity of
24-h EMG duration and intensity in the human vastus lateralis muscle to
threshold changes,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 655–661, Mar.
2010.
[7] J. H. Koelman, L. J. Bour, A. A. Hilgevoord, G. J. van Bruggen, and
B. W. Ongerboer de Visser, “Soleus H-reflex tests and clinical signs of

Adriana Martinez received the B.Sc. degree in
mathematics from Havana University, Havana, Cuba.
She is currently a graduate student in Statistics at George Mason University, Fairfax, VA and a
Research Support Specialist at The Miami Project to
Cure Paralysis, Miami, FL.

Christine K. Thomas received the Ph.D. degree from
the University of Alberta, Canada, in 1986.
She is a Professor at The Miami Project to Cure
Paralysis, at the University of Miami, FL, USA. Her
research examines the consequences of spinal cord
injury on skeletal muscle, including muscle atrophy,
weakness, denervation, fatigue, and spasticity.

