1020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Tracking Epithelial Cell Junctions in C. elegans
Embryogenesis With Active Contours
Guided by SIFT Flow
Sukryool Kang∗ , Chen-Yu Lee, Monira Gonçalves, Andrew D. Chisholm, and Pamela C. Cosman

Abstract—Quantitative analysis of cell shape in live samples is
an important goal in developmental biology. Automated or semiautomated segmentation and tracking of cell nuclei has been successfully implemented in several biological systems. Segmentation
and tracking of cell surfaces has been more challenging. Here, we
present a new approach to tracking cell junctions in the developing
epidermis of C. elegans embryos. Epithelial junctions as visualized
with DLG-1::GFP form lines at the subapical circumference of differentiated epidermal cells and delineate changes in epidermal cell
shape and position. We develop and compare two approaches for
junction segmentation. For the first method (projection approach),
3-D cell boundaries are projected into 2D for segmentation using active contours with a nonintersecting force, and subsequently
tracked using scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) flow. The
resulting 2-D tracked boundaries are then back-projected into 3-D
space. The second method (volumetric approach) uses a 3-D extended version of active contours guided by SIFT flow in 3-D space.
In both methods, cell junctions are manually located at the first
time point and tracked in a fully automated way for the remainder of the video. Using these methods, we have generated the first
quantitative description of ventral epidermal cell movements and
shape changes during epidermal enclosure.
Index Terms—Active contours, C. elegans, cell junction tracking,
embryogenesis, scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) flow.

I. INTRODUCTION
RACKING cells or subcellular structures in developing
embryos is important to understand developmental processes. Computer aided tracking allows quantitative analysis of
large numbers of cells or objects and is of increasing importance
in quantitative and systems developmental biology.

T

Manuscript received October 29, 2013; revised February 19, 2014; accepted
April 11, 2014; Date of publication April 22, 2014; date of current version
March 17, 2015. This work was supported by an award from the NIH (R01
GM054657) and an American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Supplement to
A.D.C. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ S. Kang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0407 USA (e-mail:
srkang@ucsd.edu).
C.-Y. Lee and P. C. Cosman are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 920930407 USA (e-mail: chl260@ucsd.edu; pcosman@ucsd.edu).
M. Gonçalves is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Rio de
Janeiro State University, Maracanã, Rio de Janeiro 21941590, Brazil (e-mail:
moniragoncalves@gmail.com).
A. D. Chisholm is with the Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Cell
and Developmental Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, 92093-0368 USA (e-mail: chisholm@ucsd.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2319236

Recently, several automated or semi-automated nuclei tracking algorithms [1]–[3] that allow quantitative analysis of nuclear positions in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans have
been developed. However, nuclear positions do not provide direct information on cell shape, size, or cellular contacts. Thus, a
major remaining challenge is to segment and track cell surfaces
or contacts in 3-D space over time.
Here, we focus on epidermal epithelial cells in embryos of
C. elegans. Like all epithelial cells, C. elegans epidermal cells
display apical–basal cell polarity, such that the apical surface
faces outwards from the embryo and the basal surface contacts
an internal basal lamina. Epithelial cells are tightly connected
by adhesive cell–cell junctions, one component of which is
the protein DLG-1. When visualized from the apical or basal
orientation, each cell appears outlined by a ring of DLG-1 at the
apical or subapical level [see Fig. 1]. In this paper, we refer to
cell boundaries or perimeters as defined by the localization of
subapical junctional markers such as DLG-1.
Over the past decade, numerous automated or semiautomated algorithms for cell boundary segmentation in two
or three dimensions (2D or 3D) have been developed. Active
contours [4], [5], watersheds [5], [6], gradient-curvature driven
flow [7], and subjective surface techniques [8] have been used
to segment membranes in 2-D images. For 3-D images, active
surfaces [9], watersheds [10], [11], gradient-curvature driven
flow [7], subjective surface techniques [12], and polygon model
fitting combined with image thresholding [13] have been used
to segment cell surfaces. Most of the algorithms require labeling
of the entire cell surface to construct cellular shape. Watershed
methods, gradient curvature driven flow, and subjective surface
techniques require detection of seed points that are enclosed by
continuous surfaces. A region from the seed point is expanded
until the growing region meets neighbor regions from other seed
points or the region reaches the limit of the object. In contrast,
labeling of subapical junctions in the C. elegans embryo does
not provide information on the entire cell surface or even all
points of cell–cell contact, precluding use of many of the seedpoint-based methods.
An additional challenge in the C. elegans data is that the
junctions of individual cells are not confined to a 2-D focal
plane. In imaging data where the overall curvature of the sample
is small with respect to the region of interest, projection of the
3-D data to a 2-D plane allows segmentation of cells in a ‘quasi2D’ setting, as used in several studies of Drosophila epithelial
junctions [14]–[18]. However, the high degree of curvature of
the C. elegans embryo and cells makes a simple 2-D projection

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KANG et al.: TRACKING EPITHELIAL CELL JUNCTIONS IN C. elegans EMBRYOGENESIS WITH ACTIVE CONTOURS GUIDED BY SIFT FLOW

1021

Fig. 1. Confocal z-stacks showing DLG-1::GFP embryos during epidermal enclosure. (The actual fluorescence data is imaged as bright pixels on dark background;
for display purposes, we invert the gray scale to show dark signals on a white background.) Each row represents a single time point and each column shows a
single z-slice. The final column shows the maximum intensity projection for each row.

challenging. We, therefore, needed to develop new methods to
track cell boundaries in highly curved 3-D movies.
In this paper, we present two related methods to segment
epithelial junctions in 3-D movies. Both methods are based
on the fundamental concept of active contours or snakes [19].
A snake is a curve controlled by internal elasticity and image
forces that pull the curve towards object contours. We generate
initial contours for epithelial junctions manually at the first time
point and then track the junctions with snakes guided by scaleinvariant feature transform (SIFT) [20] flow in 2-D (projection
approach) and 3-D (volumetric approach) space. A preliminary
version of this study is in [21].
The contributions of this paper are in several areas. First, this
paper presents the first algorithm that provides fully automated
tracking (following initialization in the first frame) of epithelial
junctions in highly curved 3-D datasets over time. Second, we
develop algorithmic innovations in the use of a nonintersecting force (NIF) for snakes which improves tracking of narrow
cells. We also demonstrate the use of SIFT flow in 2-D and
3-D cell tracking. A third contribution is in evaluation methods,
since we apply mean absolute deviation to compare cell contours, and we provide a comparison of projection and volumetric
approaches to cell tracking and feature extraction. In the biological domain, computational modeling of epithelial cell shape
changes in other organisms such as Drosophila has led to numerous insights into mechanisms of tissue morphogenesis, and
has relied heavily on automatic analysis of cell boundaries and
shapes [17], [22], [23]. Our study provides a first step towards
similar computational analysis of C. elegans embryonic epidermal enclosure, including precise measurements of displacement
and changes in cell perimeter, surface area, and compactness.
II. DATA ACQUISITION
Fluorescently-labeled C. elegans embryos were recorded by
time lapse 4-D microscopy with confocal laser scanning microscopes. The subapical junctions of epidermal cells on the embryo surface were marked with the transgene xnIs17 [24], which
expresses green fluorescent protein (GFP) fused to the DLG-1
protein. DLG-1::GFP is visible as an irregular 3-D lattice of
lines approximately 1 μm in width. We used Zeiss LSM700 or

LSM710 confocal microscopes equipped with 100 × NA 1.46
oil immersion objectives. We segmented and analyzed three
embryos (datasets) in the paper. Datasets 1, 2, and 3 have 3-D
stacks of 512 × 275 × 35, 512 × 275 × 35, and 512 × 256 ×
35 voxels with resolutions of 0.125 μm × 0.125 μm × 0.9 μm,
0.125 μm × 0.125 μm × 0.9 μm, and 0.15 μm × 0.15 μm
× 0.85 μm, recorded at intervals of 180 s, 90 s, and 180 s,
respectively.
III. METHODS
Our goal was to develop tools for quantitative analysis of
epithelial cell shape changes in 3-D samples such as the C. elegans embryo, and we begin with the development of algorithms
for tracking cell junctions over time. In this study, we image
DLG-1::GFP-labeled junctions of epidermal cells on the ventral embryo surface [see Fig. 1]. The images of junctions in our
4-D movies are often low and variable intensity, resulting in
incomplete contours. These incomplete contours can be completed using snakes [19]. A snake is a curve that moves towards
object outlines controlled by internal forces such as elasticity
and rigidity as well as by image forces such as edges of objects
in the image. The missing signals can be completed by using
internal forces that make the contour smooth. In the original
active contour model [19] developed for 2-D datasets, the snake
was represented by a set of n points vi = (xi , yi ), i = 1, . . . , n.
To detect epithelial junctions in the 3-D stack, we extended
the snake to three dimensions represented by a set of n points
vi = (xi , yi , zi ), i = 1, . . . , n. The contour deforms to minimize the energy functional
∗
=
Esnake

n


Esnake (vi )

i=1

=

n


Einternal (vi ) + Eim age (vi ) + Econ (vi ).

(1)

i=1

Einternal represents the internal energy of the contour due
to the bending, Eim age represents the image forces, and Econ
denotes the external constraint forces. The internal energy of

1022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

the contour is written as
1
(αvi − vi−1 2 + βvi−1 − 2vi + vi+1 2 )
2
(2)
where we define v0 = vn and vn +1 = v1 . The first term will
have a large value if there is a gap in the curve (i.e., two successive points are spaced far apart). The weighting factors α
and β control the relative penalty of stretching and bending. A
large value of α will increase the internal energy as the contour stretches. A small value of α will make the contour less
sensitive to the amount of stretch. The second term makes the
contour smooth by reducing contour oscillations. The second
term will have a large value if the contour is bending sharply.
Eim age represents the image force and is defined as
Einternal (vi ) =

Eim age = wline I(x, y, z) + wedge |∇I(x, y, z)|2

(3)

where wline and wedge are weighting factors. The first term is
the image intensity itself, which pushes the snake to align with
the brightest nearby pixels. The second term (edge attraction)
uses image gradients and pushes the snake to be attracted to
image edges. In the volumetric approach (described in detail
below), to determine the weighting factors, we tested values of
α and β equal to 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.1, and
0.2 in conjunction with the values of wline equal to 0, 0.5, . . . ,
2.5, 3 and the values of wedge equal to 3, 3.5, . . . , 5.5, 6, and
determined that α = 0.01, β = 0.01, wline = 1, and wedge =
5 yielded optimal results as evaluated using methods discussed
in Section IV. In the projection approach, we tested values of
α and β equal to 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, and 0.3
and values of wline equal to 0, 0.001, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and
0.5 and wedge equal to 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4, and we chose
α of 0.2, β of 0.2, wline of 0.05, and wedge of 2 as yielding the
best result. Econ denotes the external constraint forces; Econ
can be used to guide the contour towards or away from specific
features. In our study, a NIF was used as an external constraint
as described in Section III-C.
We compared two related approaches based on snakes to
track epithelial junctions. The projection approach uses 2-D
maximum intensity projection images [last column in Fig. 1]
to segment cell boundaries. The resulting 2-D boundaries are
back projected into 3-D space. The volumetric approach uses
the original 3-D image z-stack instead of a 2-D maximum projection. The projection approach is computationally simple and
requires less user effort to generate initial contours. Working on
the 3-D stack requires more computation and more user effort
to generate initial contours; however, the volumetric approach
reduces errors introduced by the projection process.
The tracking process is presented in Fig. 2. All processes
are fully described in Sections III and IV. Our contour tracking software, ContourTracker4D, is implemented in MATLAB
(MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) and is available as an open
source project at Sourceforge (https://sourceforge.net/projects/
contourtracker4d/).

Fig. 2.

Flowchart and estimates of processing time for each step.

Fig. 3. Initial contour collection in a maximum intensity projection image.
(a) Key points along the boundary are manually selected. (b) Selected points
are connected into a closed contour using low pass interpolation. (c) Snakes are
applied to refine the interpolated contour.

A. Initial Cell Boundary Collection
In either the projection or volumetric approaches, the initial
positions of the cell boundaries must be defined by the user.
Users manually define key points on the initial contour, as described below. Snakes are then applied to refine the contour
defined by the key points. Both the projection and volumetric
approaches do not need any further user input after this initial
contour generation, and will track all cell boundaries automatically until the end of the video sequence. These steps will be
described in more detail below.
1) Projection Approach: In the projection approach, we use
2-D maximum intensity projection images to track contours.
After projecting the maximum pixel intensity of the top half of
the stack (slices 1 to 17), some key points along the boundary of
each cell are manually selected [see Fig. 3(a)] and are connected
into a closed contour by low pass interpolation [see Fig. 3(b)]. In
Fig. 3(a), eight points are manually selected. Seven–ten points
are enough to generate the initial contour for most cells except
for the large cell hyp7(18 + 19) [to the right of the example
cell in Fig. 3(a)]. We use the interp function in MATLAB to
perform low-pass interpolation for each dimension separately;
the interpolated contours have ten times as many points as the
selected key points. Finally, we refine these interpolated cell
boundaries using snakes [see Fig. 3(c)]. This approach quickly

KANG et al.: TRACKING EPITHELIAL CELL JUNCTIONS IN C. elegans EMBRYOGENESIS WITH ACTIVE CONTOURS GUIDED BY SIFT FLOW

generates initial cell boundaries at the first time point with minimal curation.
2) Volumetric Approach: The original z-stack derived from
LSM confocal data has lower z resolution than xy resolution. We
therefore first render each z-stack isometric by applying linear
interpolation along the z axis. The initial contours are identified
manually with a visualization tool that displays each z slice,
allowing the user to select sequential points on the contour. In
the display, adjacent z slices are superimposed on the current
z slice, which makes it possible to see both the small junction
segments in the current slice as well as their continuations in the
neighboring slices. For display purposes only, the tool connects
the selected key points with a straight line and displays the
connection in the 3-D stack whenever new points are added.
Due to the higher number of degrees of freedom, about twice
as many points are used to generate the initial contour as in the
projection approach. After collecting key points for each cell,
we apply low pass interpolation as in Section III.A.1 to obtain
a contour based on points uniformly distributed at five pixel
intervals. We then apply snakes to refine the interpolated points.
Identical sampling processes are applied at the subsequent time
instants during tracking to obtain uniformly distributed points.

1023

Fig. 4. NIF. (a) (Left) An example of self-crossing after applying snakes.
(Middle images) Visualization of procedure that generates the NIF. (Right)
Contour after applying snake with a NIF. (b) Visualization of procedure that
generates the 3D skeleton.

If the difference between the two values is larger than a threshold
(20 pixels), we use the z value at the previous frame instead of
the tracked z value.

B. Tracking
Given a cell boundary at a certain time, we aim to track its
location to the next time. Optical flow [25] is a feature matching technique that computes motion patterns of two consecutive
images under the assumption of small displacement. In such
methods, optical flow is computed for the video data and then is
used to estimate object movement. For example, given an object
point (x, y) at time t with optical flow (u, v), one can estimate
the same object point at time t + 1 will be at (x + u, y + v). Although optical flow works reasonably well for most of the cell
junctions tracked here, some cell boundaries move too much
between successive time points for optical flow to work. To
handle these large displacements, we need to use a more distinctive image feature representation instead of raw pixel values
to provide more information. SIFT [20] is a popular image feature representation in computer vision and image processing.
SIFT features [26] encode image gradient orientations around
each point of interest, and therefore provide more general and
robust structural information. SIFT flow replaces raw pixel values with SIFT features, and then performs a modified optical
flow algorithm based on those SIFT features.
In the projection approach, we use 2-D SIFT to track x and
y components in the 2-D projection image. In the volumetric
approach, due to the large number of voxels in our datasets,
computing 3-D SIFT and matching between two consecutive
frames is too complex. So for the volumetric approach, we
still begin with 2-D SIFT in the 2-D projection image to track
x and y components. After tracking x and y components, the
corresponding z values are taken to be the actual z values which
are saved for every (x, y) point in the 2-D projection image
when the 2-D maximum intensity projection was applied. Due
to the errors introduced by projection, we compare z values at
the previous frame with the tracked z value at the current frame.

C. Boundary Refinement
Although SIFT flow provides improved tracking results over
using optical flow, the tracked contour might still miss subtle details of contours. We apply snakes to align the tracked contours
with true cell boundaries. Snakes also can produce incorrect segmentation results where contours are close together. We define
self-crossing as occurring when the boundary of one side of a
cell crosses or touches the boundary of the other side [left image
in Fig. 4(a)]. We, therefore, added a NIF [see Fig. 4(a)] as an
external constraint to avoid self-crossings in both the projection
and volumetric approaches.
1) Projection Approach: We add a NIF to snakes as an external constraint to prevent self-crossing:
Econ = wNIF · ENIF

(4)

where wNIF is a weighting factor. Fig. 4(a) shows the process to
generate ENIF . After filling the inside of the tracked contours,
we apply a thinning operation to generate the skeleton. To avoid
branches on the ends of the skeleton, we shrink the skeleton
from all its end points until only two end points are left. Then,
we grow out the two remaining end points along the unpruned
skeleton by repeating a dilation operation to obtain the longest
end-to-end path [27]. We then apply a Gaussian filter (size:
10 × 10 pixels, standard deviation: three pixels) on the skeleton
image. ENIF is normalized by the maximum value of the filtered
skeleton image. Pixels close to the center line have stronger NIF
than pixels far from the center line. To determine wNIF , after
selecting weight factors in (2) and (3), we tested values of wNIF
equal to 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9, 1, and chose wNIF = 0.3.
When we apply snakes with a NIF, we solve the minimization
of (1) using techniques of variational calculus described in [19].
The coefficients of the Euler–Lagrange equations are formed as

1024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 5. 3-D embryo shape estimation and back projected contours: (a) Contours of the embryo surface for z slices. (b) Estimated surface. (c) Back projected
contours on the surface.
Fig. 6.

a sparse matrix and the matrix is inverted to obtain the minimum
∗
iteratively.
energy of Esnake
2) Volumetric Approach: To generate a NIF in 3-D space, we
need to extend the skeleton image to 3-D space. When we have
a contour in 3-D space [left image in Fig. 4(b)], we generate the
2-D skeleton on the 2-D projection image through the method
in Section III-C1. The cell’s apical surface is reconstructed as
described in Section III-D [middle image in Fig. 4(b)]. For every
(x , y  ) point on the 2-D skeleton, the (x , y  , z  ) point on the
cell’s apical surface is considered to be part of the 3-D skeleton
(a process we refer to as back projecting the 2-D skeleton) [right
image in Fig. 4(b)]. We then apply a 3-D Gaussian filter (size:
7 × 7 × 7 pixels, standard deviation: 1.5 pixels) on the 3-D
skeleton. ENIF is normalized by the maximum value of the
smoothed image. To determine wNIF , we tested values of wNIF
equal to 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9, 1, and chose wNIF = 0.5.
When we minimize (1), variational calculus in Section III-C1
is extended to 3-D space. Additionally, a greedy algorithm [28]
option is available due to the complexity of variational calculus
in 3-D space. Each point of each snake is moved within a small
neighborhood (3 × 3 × 3) to the point which minimizes the
energy function. In the neighborhood, all energy terms are normalized by the largest value separately. The energy function is
computed for the current point and its new location will be the
point that has the smallest value in its neighborhood. We repeat
this operation until no more points are moved. This approach is
computationally simple. If the initial contours are close to the
epithelial junctions, this greedy algorithm produces results comparable to those from variational calculus. If the initial contours
are far from the epithelial junctions, the greedy algorithm can
cause more errors. We will compare the results from variational
calculus and the greedy algorithm in Section IV.
D. 3-D Global Shape Reconstruction
To compute biological features in 3-D space, we reconstruct
cells’ apical surfaces on the embryo surface. The projection approach does the cell tracking in the 2-D projection image, but
we then need to reconstruct the 3-D embryo surface at each time
instant in the video. Since the original data only has scattered
points on the embryo surface, we need to model the 3-D embryo
surface at each time instant. We first extract contours of the embryo surface for each slice as shown in Fig. 5(a). The union of
the set of contours can be considered as a point cloud of the 3-D
embryo surface. We use the gridfit function [29] written in MATLAB to fit a smooth surface to the extracted point cloud. The

Contour correction via a manual correction tool.

estimated surface is shown in Fig. 5(b). The estimated embryo
shape allows us to estimate surface areas and cell perimeters.
After the surface reconstruction, the contour points in 2D
are back projected on the reconstructed surface. We use the top
half of the stack to reconstruct the top half of the embryo. The
reconstructed surface has a one-to-one mapping for every pixel
in the 2-D images [29]. After back projection, we can then have
estimated 3-D locations of each contour as shown in Fig. 5(c).
Cell surface areas and cell contour lengths can then be computed
using these 3-D locations.
In the volumetric approach, unlike contour lengths, which can
be computed directly from the 3-D contour points, cell apical
surface areas require interpolation of the cell surface enclosed
by the cell contour. We use the gridfit function on points of
all cell contours without extracting the global contours of the
embryo surface for each z slice.
IV. TRACKING EVALUATION
To evaluate and compare the tracking results of our algorithms, we need to generate ground truth. After generating
ground truth, we analyze the tracking algorithm performance
by calculating the mean absolute distance (MAD) [30] between
the segmentation result and ground truth.
A. Generation of Ground Truth
We use a manual correction tool to generate ground truth at
each time instant from the tracked cell contours [see Fig. 6].
After selecting the contour that we want to correct [left image
in Fig. 6], we select multiple sequential points on the desired
contour [middle image in Fig. 6]. The first point and the last point
should be correct points of the segmented contour before the
correction. When the first point and the last point are manually
selected by clicking, the points might not be on the segmented
contour, in which case the algorithm moves them to the closest
point on the segmented contour. Then, an open ended snake is
applied on the multiple sequential points to correct the contour
[right image in Fig. 6].
At the first time instant, we generate 3-D ground truth through
the initial cell boundary collection described in Section III-A2.
Generating an initial cell boundary for a single cell takes approximately 2 min including the processing time for contour
refinement via snakes. The generation of 24 initial contours
takes approximately 40 min of user time; the snake processing
time for 24 contours takes 4–5 min with a Six-Core Intel Xeon

KANG et al.: TRACKING EPITHELIAL CELL JUNCTIONS IN C. elegans EMBRYOGENESIS WITH ACTIVE CONTOURS GUIDED BY SIFT FLOW

2.8 GHz CPU. Compute time could be significantly reduced
by using C instead of MATLAB. At the next time instant, the
contours at the previous time instant are tracked via SIFT and
refined via snakes with the volumetric approach. The average
processing time of SIFT and snakes for 24 contours per frame
is 5 min 15 s. After tracking and refining contours, we check 24
contours visually and correct wrong contours. On average, we
corrected 9.5 out of 24 contours (39%) in each frame; however,
it should be noted that only a small part of each contour required
correction. The average time for the visual check and manual
correction per frame is 13 min. The 3-D ground truth without
the z component is considered to be 2-D ground truth and is used
to check the tracking performance of the projection approach.
When it comes to computation of biologically relevant features
in Section V, we consider 3-D ground truth to be the most accurate ground truth, and compare the features from both the
projection and volumetric approaches against those from 3-D
ground truth.
B. Comparison of Tracking Methods
We analyze the tracking algorithm performance by calculating the MAD [30] between the segmentation result and ground
truth. In [30], a metric to measure the distance e(A, B) between
two contours A = {a1 , a2 , . . . , an } and B = {b1 , b2 , . . . , bm }
is defined, where ai and bi are points sampled from curve A and
curve B. The distance to the closest point on curve B for point
ai is defined as
d(ai , B) = min bj − ai  .
j

(5)

In [30], these distances are computed for all the points on
the two curves and averaged to yield the MAD between two
contours:

 n
m
1 
1 1
d(ai , B) +
d(bi , A) .
(6)
e(A, B) =
2 n i=1
m i=1
We compute the MAD in units of pixels between the ground
truth and the segmentation result for each frame.
We compare the tracking performances of the volumetric approach, the projection approach, and the 3-D back projection
approach. A total of 24 contours on the ventral side are used
to evaluate the algorithms. In Fig. 7, all tracking algorithms are
initialized with ground truth at time 0 and are then allowed to
proceed in fully automatic forward tracking mode with no manual correction. Figs. 7(a) and (b) show MAD with the volumetric
approach. Comparing snakes with variational calculus, NIF, and
SIFT flow, we find that MADs of most contours are less than
three pixels distance except for six contours that have MAD
from 3–6.5 [see Fig. 7(a)]. To compare algorithms, we use the
averaged MADs for all contours at each time [see Fig. 7(b)].
It is evident that both optical flow and SIFT flow dramatically
improve tracking accuracy. SIFT flow also shows better tracking
accuracy than optical flow, although since SIFT’s advantage is
primarily for the few cells that move rapidly, the advantage appears small when averaged over all cells. To demonstrate SIFT’s
advantage, we measured MADs with SIFT and optical flow on
hyp6(V), hyp6(VI), and hyp7(18–19) with the volumetric ap-

1025

proach (variational calculus) [see Fig. 8]. These three cells move
rapidly to enclose the head [see Fig. 9]. In an embryo recorded
at 90-s interval, the MADs with SIFT flow remain less than
4 and most MADs with optical flow are in the range 4–6 [see
Fig. 8(a)]. In embryos recorded at 180-s interval, rapidly moving
cells have higher displacement and the MADs with optical flow
reach 20 in the worst case while MADs with SIFT flow remain
low (less than 5) [see Figs. 8(b) and (c)]. Use of variational calculus slightly improves segmentation over the greedy approach.
The main advantage of the greedy algorithm is computational
efficiency, as it is about ten times faster than variational calculus.
The greedy algorithm takes about 30 s to track 24 contours per
frame with a Six-Core Intel Xeon 2.8 GHz CPU. As the imaging
interval for our movies is 90 to 180 s, the greedy algorithm can
operate in real time, whereas variational calculus cannot. Use
of the NIF helps avoid self-crossing; as such events are rare this
improvement is not obvious at the level of the overall average
MAD [see Fig. 7(b)].
Fig. 7(c) shows the MADs from the projection approach with
variational calculus, SIFT flow, and NIF. To compute MADs,
we use X and Y components of ground truth. Due to the fewer
degrees of freedom, the MAD values (less than 1.4) remain
lower than the results with the volumetric approach. Although
the contours with the projection approach appear to show high
accuracy, their 3-D back projected contours have high MAD values (larger than 18) [see Fig. 7(d)]. We plotted 3-D ground truth
and 3-D back projected contours to visualize the errors. Fig. 7(e)
(view from the top) shows 3-D back projected contours (blue)
and 3-D ground truth (red) and the contours are almost identical. When the contours are rotated, the differences between
3-D ground truth and 3-D estimated contours are observed [see
Fig. 7(f)]. In summary, both the projection and volumetric approaches are capable of accurate tracking (where accuracy is
determined relative to 2-D and 3-D ground truth, respectively)
when used with SIFT flow and a NIF. The 3-D back projected
contours showed higher deviations from ground truth, largely
because of errors in estimation of the surface. We, therefore,
did not pursue 3-D back projection (of the projection approach)
further, and in our analysis of biological features, compare only
our projection and volumetric algorithms.
V. BIOLOGICAL FEATURE COMPUTATION AND RESULTS
To analyze the dynamics of epidermal ventral enclosure, we
focused on epidermal cells that eventually make up the ventral
side [see Fig. 9]. The ventral epidermis comprises a network of
24 cells each demarcated by lines of DLG-1::GFP that merge
at cell–cell interfaces within the epithelium. We define the zero
time in 4-D videos as the stage when the leading epidermal cells
(hyp7 cells 18–19) have just fused into a single cell hyp7(18–
19). About 30 min later, the entire embryo begins to rotate and
elongate. When epidermal cells move left or right after the embryonic rotation, epithelial junctions may not be imaged clearly
due to the lower resolution in the z direction. Because our projection approach is based on a 2-D projection of the top half of
the image stack, it is not possible to segment cells on the left
or right sides (i.e., the lateral seam epidermis). The volumetric

1026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 7. Algorithm evaluation with mean absolute distance (MAD). (a) MADs for 24 contours with snakes (Variational calculus + SIFT flow + NIF). (b) Average
value of MADs for all contours at each time instant with the volumetric approach. (c) Average value of MADs with the projection approach (Variational calculus
+ SIFT flow + NIF). (d) Average value of MADs with the 3D back projection. (e) Comparison of 3-D ground truth (red) and 3-D back projected contours (blue).
(f) View from the side shows the difference in the mid-body.

Fig. 8. Comparison of SIFT and optical flow on rapidly moving cells in three embryos. (a) MAD in embryo recorded at 90 s interval. (b), (c) MAD in embryos
recorded at 180 s interval.

approach could allow tracking of lateral cells with sufficiently
high pixel intensities, however due to the lower z resolution
the junctional signals were not clear enough for efficient segmentation. We, therefore, restricted our analysis to the ventral
epidermis. We compare features from 3-D ground truth and features from the projection and volumetric approaches, which are

fully automated after generating initial contours. An important
goal was to determine how well the automated projection and
volumetric tracking methods performed, with reference to our
3-D ground truth data. Below, we compare the performance of
the two methods in terms of their depiction of quantitative trends
in cell perimeter, apical surface area, and cell movement.

KANG et al.: TRACKING EPITHELIAL CELL JUNCTIONS IN C. elegans EMBRYOGENESIS WITH ACTIVE CONTOURS GUIDED BY SIFT FLOW

1027

Fig. 9. Segmentation results for the 24 ventral epidermal cells, spanning the ventral half (15–16 μm) of the embryo in the z-axis. Contours are depth coded as
indicated. (Left column) Maximum intensity projection image. (Right column) Results of ground truth of the 24 epidermal cells on the ventral side.

A. Cell Perimeter
The cell boundary length or perimeter as defined by DLG1::GFP provides one indication of the change in cell size over
time. We measured cell perimeters in three datasets (three embryos) using the ground truth, the volumetric approach, and the
projection approach. Comparing the ground truth and the projection approach in the same embryo [left image in Fig. 10(a),
showing left side cells only], it is apparent that the projection approach underestimates cell perimeter when contours are spread
over many z slices (e.g., the P cells). The volumetric approach
and the ground truth show similar cell perimeter except for
hyp(18–19), G2, and hyp11 [see Fig. 10(a)]. These outlier cells
have incorrect segmentation results due to their low pixel intensities or narrow cell width. Fig. 11 shows the segmentation
errors of the narrow part of the G2 contour. The G2 contour
increases by expanding the narrow part [first row in Fig. 11].
The projection and volumetric approaches do not produce correct segmentation results for the expanded contour because the
snakes do not allow cell configurations in which the cells have
long, narrow shapes unless they are initialized close to that configuration [second row in Fig. 11]. Nevertheless, using either
approach, it is apparent that all ventral epidermal cells increase
in perimeter during enclosure: ground truth shows overall a 9.4%
increase (84 μm from 887.2 μm at t = 0) in total perimeter of
24 cells on the embryo in Fig. 9 and the volumetric and projection approaches show overall 2.8% (25.2 μm from 877.2 μm at

TABLE I
TOTAL PERIMETER OF 24 CELLS ON THE EMBRYO IN FIG. 9

t = 0) and 6.7% (48.9 μm from 731.1 μm at t = 0) increases,
respectively, in Table I. For the average of all three embryos,
ground truth, the volumetric approach, and the projection approach show overall 8.8% (78.4 μm from 891.3 μm at t = 0),
3.8% (33.7 μm from 891.3 μm at t = 0), and 8.2% (62.7 μm from
729.4 μm at t = 0) increases in cell perimeter, respectively.
To analyze the relative change in perimeter for individual
cells, we normalized cell perimeters to the cell perimeter at t =
0. Most cells showed an increase in relative perimeter under
either the volumetric or projection approaches, agreeing with
ground truth [see Fig. 10(b)]. However, certain cells such as G2
show an increase in perimeter in ground truth but a decrease
in the projection or volumetric approaches. This discrepancy
arises due to errors in segmentation of the narrow part of the G2
contour [see Fig. 11]. Although the projection and volumetric
approaches have segmentation errors on a small number of cells,
when examined across all cells, both approaches have high correlation coefficients for cell perimeters (0.93–0.99) with ground

1028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 10. Analysis of epidermal cell perimeter over time. Color bar represents the time from 0 to 30 min. Each X point with a cell name represents one individual
cell. Y values show the change in cell perimeter over time. (a) Cell perimeters on the left side (Circles: ground truth, Diamonds: projection approach, Triangles:
volumetric approach). (b) Normalized cell perimeters on the left side. Each cell perimeter was normalized by the perimeter at the start time. (c) Averaged cell
perimeter over three embryos and left–right cells.

truth. To better visualize trends in the data, we plotted perimeters
of four selected cells which are the leftmost cell (hyp6(V)), two
middle cells (G2, P5/6L), and the rightmost cell (hyp11) [see
Fig. 12]. Volumetric and projection approaches do not show an
increase in cell perimeter for G2. The other three perimeters
show similar trends between ground truth and volumetric and
projection approaches.
We applied a Wilcoxon matched pairs test on the normalized
cell perimeters to determine whether the three methods (ground
truth, volumetric approach, and projection approach) are significantly different or not. We normalized 24 cell perimeters at the

last time point to the perimeters at t = 0. We used three embryos and applied a Wilcoxon matched pairs test on 72 (=24 ×
3) data points. P values between ground truth and volumetric
approach and between ground truth and projection approach
were less than 0.0001, and the P value between volumetric and
projection approaches was 0.0483. The three different methods
showed significant differences on the normalized cell perimeter.
Both volumetric and projection approaches underestimated the
normalized cell perimeters.
To compare the two approaches and derive an overall description of changes in cell perimeter, we averaged cell perimeter

KANG et al.: TRACKING EPITHELIAL CELL JUNCTIONS IN C. elegans EMBRYOGENESIS WITH ACTIVE CONTOURS GUIDED BY SIFT FLOW

1029

B. Apical Surface Area

Fig. 11. Ground truth and segmentation result of G2. The volumetric approach
has errors in segmentation of the G2 contour. The estimate of surface area is
less sensitive to errors in segmentation of the narrow part.

Fig. 12.

Perimeters of four individual cells averaged over three embryos.

measurements over three embryos, keeping left and right cells
separate. Correlation coefficients for the cell perimeter among
three embryos were high (0.9–1). Correlation for 24 cell pairs
(3-D ground truth) between embryos was calculated at each
time. The correlation coefficients for left–right symmetric cell
pairs range between 0.55 and 0.95. We averaged normalized
cell perimeters instead of the cell perimeters [see Fig. 10(c)].
Overall, junctional contours increase by 10%–20% during ventral epidermal enclosure, consistent with the epidermal cells
spreading, and increasing in apical surface area as they spread
over substrate cells [left image in Fig. 10(c)]. The increase in
cell perimeter for G2/W and hyp11 is higher than average [left
image in Fig. 10(c)], likely reflecting the small size of these
cells at the beginning of the video sequence. Comparing the two
approaches and the ground truth, the projection approach [right
image in Fig. 10(c)] yields better similarity to the ground truth
[left image in Fig. 10(c)] than the volumetric approach [middle
image in Fig. 10(c)]. The projection approach also yields slightly
higher estimates for cell perimeter increases for P cells than the
ground truth. Such discrepancies likely reflect the contribution
of the z-axis to the cell perimeter (at t = 0).

In the volumetric approach, we estimate apical surface area
using cumulative patch areas based on the 3-D estimated surface
and projected cell contour in 2-D space. We first extract the cell
contour mask in the 2-D projection image. On the integer grid,
there are square patches that have 1 pixel height and width.
If all four points of each patch are inside the mask, we back
project the patch on the reconstructed surface in Section III-D.
We calculate each projected patch area by adding the areas of
two triangles on the patch, and estimate apical surface area by
summing all areas of the back projected patches. We calculated
ground truth surface area with the identical method.
We computed apical surface areas from the three datasets and
compared our two approaches and ground truth. The volumetric and projection approaches gave more consistent estimates
of surface area [see Fig. 13(a)] compared to estimation of cell
perimeter [see Fig. 10]. The greater consistency between the
two methods is because our surface area measurement is less
sensitive to errors in segmentation (e.g., G2) [see Fig. 11]. Errors in segmentation of the narrow part lead to large differences
in the estimate of cell perimeter, but not large differences in the
estimate of surface area. When we plotted the trends in surface
area for four individual cells, we found that surface area shows
more similar trends between ground truth and both methods [see
Fig. 14] than cell perimeter [see Fig. 12]. Essentially, all ventral epidermal cells increase in surface area during enclosure:
ground truth shows an overall 19.1% increase (204 μm2 from
1065.4 μm2 at t = 0) in epidermal surface area [embryo in Fig. 9]
and the volumetric and projection approaches estimate 21.6%
(230.2 μm2 from 1065.4 μm2 at t = 0) and 18.6% (119.5 μm2
from 642.6 μm2 at t = 0) increases respectively in Table II. For
the average of all three embryos, the ground truth, the volumetric approach, and the projection approach show overall 19.1%
(208.2 μm2 from 1087.8 μm2 at t = 0), 20.9% (227.5 μm2 from
1087.8 μm2 at t = 0), and 22.9% (151.3 μm2 from 659.4 μm2
at t = 0) increases in surface area. In contrast, the projection
approach estimates a 10%–30% higher increase in surface area
for P cells. This discrepancy results from the underestimation
of initial surface area by the projection approach when cells are
spread over multiple z slices.
We applied a Wilcoxon matched pairs test on the normalized
surface areas of 72 data points (=24 contours × 3 embryos) to
check the statistical significance of differences for three methods. P values between ground truth and volumetric approach,
between ground truth and projection approach, and between
volumetric and projection approaches were 0.1568, 0.1677, and
0.5625, respectively. P values showed that the differences were
not statistically significant.
We next compared the consistency of the projection and volumetric approaches between different datasets. Cell surface areas
display a correlation coefficient of 0.96–0.99 between embryos,
whether the projection or volumetric approach is used. Left and
right cells of a pair also show correlations of 0.9–0.98. Overall, surface area estimates are more highly correlated than cell
perimeter because of the higher sensitivity of cell perimeter to
errors in segmentation of narrow cells.

1030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 13. Changes in epidermal cell surface area during enclosure. (a) Surface area on the left side with both approaches (Circles: ground truth, Diamonds:
projection approach, Triangles: volumetric approach). (b) Normalized surface area. (c) Averaged surface area over three embryos and left-right cells.

Fig. 13(c) shows the average of normalized surface areas over
three embryos and left–right cells. Both approaches show high
increase in surface area for hyp6 cells, hyp7 cells 18–21, P
cells 1–4, and hyp11. P cells show about 20%–30% differences
in surface area and those cells are spread over more z slices.
The projection approach produces accurate area measurements
except when cells have a high z value. Cell surface areas in
the same embryo display a correlation coefficient of 0.95–0.99
between both approaches and the ground truth.
Comparing our analyses of junctional length and area [see
Figs. 10(c) and 13(c)], we can see that leading cells (anterior
hyp6 and hyp7 cells) do not change in junctional length over the
time of enclosure while their surface areas increase by ∼20%.
The increase in surface area of hyp6 and hyp7 leading cells

Fig. 14.

Surface areas of four individual cells averaged over three embryos.

KANG et al.: TRACKING EPITHELIAL CELL JUNCTIONS IN C. elegans EMBRYOGENESIS WITH ACTIVE CONTOURS GUIDED BY SIFT FLOW

1031

Fig. 15. Compactness of contours. Circularity factor or compactness (range: 0–1, where 1 = a circle) averaged over three embryos and left–right cells. Circularity
on (a) ground truth, (b) the volumetric approach, and (c) the projection approach.
TABLE II
TOTAL SURFACE AREA OF 24 CELLS ON THE EMBRYO IN FIG. 9

in circularity for G2 due to segmentation error [see Fig. 11].
During enclosure, hyp6, hyp7(20–21) increase in circularity, as
do P1-4, while the ratio for other cells decreases. This reflects
the large changes in shape of the anterior epidermis as it spreads
anteriorly to enclose the head; in contrast, the major movement
of the ventral pocket is a migration of the medial edges towards
the midline, making the cells more elongated.
C. Estimation of Cell Movements from Contour Centers

Fig. 16.

Circularity factor of four individual cells averaged over three embryos.

therefore reflects a change in shape from elongated to round.
Similarly, ventral pocket cells hyp7(20–21) and P1–P4 increase
in apical surface area by 30%–40% yet display only a 10%
increase in junctional length; this disproportionate increase in
area reflects a change in shape as well as an increase in cell
perimeter. To quantitatively analyze trends in cell shape, we
calculated a measure of compactness, i.e., the circularity factor
[see Fig. 15]. The circularity factor is defined as
Circularity =

4π × Surface area
.
Cell perimeter2

(7)

The circularity factor ranges within 0–1, where 1 is a circle.
At t = 0, some ventral epidermal cells such as hyp6, hyp7(20–
21), T, and hyp11 have relatively large circularity factor values
(>0.5), whereas the rest are highly elongated [see Figs. 15(a) and
(b)]. The projection approach shows slightly lower circularities
on hyp7(20–21) and hyp11 [see Fig. 15(c)]. When we plotted
the trends in circularity for four cells, we found that the three
approaches show similar trends except for G2 [see Fig. 16]. The
volumetric and projection approaches do not show a decrease

As an alternative means to visualize epidermal cell movements, we tracked the centers of the cell contours [see Fig. 17].
We averaged displacements over embryos to obtain overall
movement in each axis and in three dimensions. All cells show
anterior movement (x axis); the anterior movement of hyp6 and
hyp7 during enclosure of the head is clearly seen [see Fig. 17(b)].
Cell centers in the mid-body (P3–P8) undergo minimal x displacements (less than 1 μm), whereas cells between the midbody and posterior show significant anterior movement. Cell
displacement in the y axis [see Fig. 17(c)] clearly reveals the
midline convergence of the ventral pocket during enclosure.
Displacement in the z axis is largely a result of the embryonic
rotation from left to right [see Fig. 17(d)]. When displacement
in three dimensions is summed, the leading cells stand out as
undergoing the most change in position, even though at this
point they have completed their ventralward migrations. This
underscores previous observations that leading cells undergo a
second major phase of anterior migration during enclosure of
the head [3], [31].
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Our goal is to rapidly and accurately track cell junctions in
4-D movies to allow quantitative analyses of cell shape change
and movements. We have presented novel algorithms for tracking of epidermal cell junctions in C. elegans embryos. We use
manual initialization followed by fully automatic membrane
tracking to achieve accurate and efficient segmentation of epidermal membranes over time. The segmentation performance
evaluated by the MAD between ground truth and segmented
contours assesses the accuracy of our algorithms. The errors introduced by automatic analysis generally only compromise our

1032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 17. Cell movement from contour centers. (a) Trajectories of contour centers (blue contour at the beginning, red contour at the end). (b) x displacement.
Displacements of contour centers from 0 to 27 min are averaged over two datasets (blue bar: cells on the left side, red bar: cells on the right side). (c) y displacement.
(d) z displacement. (e) 3-D displacement.

goal for a small number of cells that are either extremely thin in
terms of apical surface, or extend across many z planes. As this
is a small number of cells known to be problematic, they can
be prioritized for manual curation; the vast majority of cells are
well tracked.
Our quantitative analysis has been restricted to epidermal
cells on one side of the embryo. Our current datasets have insufficient image SNR in the z slices farthest from the objective
(dorsal surface in these video sequences), and lower resolution
along the z direction. The low image SNR prevents us from
analyzing cells on the bottom of the image stack. Epidermal
junctions of lateral cells are also less clear due to the reduced
z resolution. Although membrane segmentation is feasible on
some lateral cells with high pixel intensities, our volumetric
algorithms are not able to segment most lateral cells. Emerging microscopy methods such as Bessel sheet imaging, iSPIM
or SIM [32]–[34] may allow collection of 4-D videos with the
improved SNR and z-resolution necessary for segmentation of
epidermal junctions throughout the epidermis.
Our algorithms have not dealt with fusion or division of cells.
The number of epidermal cells during the period of ventral enclosure imaged here does not change. In later epidermal development, a large number of additional fusions occur that would
require manual curation or new algorithms. A further challenge
would be to track division of epidermal cells.
Our algorithms enable quantitative analysis of epidermal morphology and movement in C. elegans. The projection approach

requires less initialization and computation than the volumetric
approach. The projection approach shows similar length and
surface area measurements to the volumetric approach except
for cells that are widely spread over z slices. The volumetric
approach with depth information produces better descriptions
of cell junctions, although the volumetric approach needs more
time-consuming initialization. Both methods generate robust
segmentation results with less user effort than manual tracking.
In conclusion, our tracking algorithms have produced the first
quantitative descriptions of cellular shape during C. elegans epidermal enclosure. In combination with tracking of cell nuclei,
these tools should assist in developing quantitative descriptions
of embryonic morphogenetic processes as an essential step towards modeling of forces and cellular mechanisms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Claudiu Giurumescu for recording the 4-D movies
of DLG-1::GFP used in this study. We thank Yoav Freund,
Truong Nguyen, and Nuno Vasconcelos for discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Bao, J. I. Murray, T. Boyle, S. L. Ooi, M. J. Sandel, and R. H. Waterston,
“Automated cell lineage tracking in Caenorhabditis elegans,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 103, no. 8, pp. 2707–2712, 2006.
[2] S. Kang, C. A. Giurumescu, A. D. Chisholm, and P. Cosman, “Automated
nuclei tracking in C. elegans based on spherical model fitting with multiple

KANG et al.: TRACKING EPITHELIAL CELL JUNCTIONS IN C. elegans EMBRYOGENESIS WITH ACTIVE CONTOURS GUIDED BY SIFT FLOW

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

target tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Southwest Symp. Image Anal. Interpretation, 2012, pp. 17–20.
C. A. Giurumescu, S. Kang, T. A. Planchon, E. Betzig, J. Bloomekatz,
D. Yelon, P. Cosman, and A. D. Chisholm, “Quantitative semi-automated
analysis of morphogenesis with single-cell resolution in complex embryos,” Development, vol. 139, no. 22, pp. 4271–4279, 2012.
A. I. Dow, S. A. Shafer, J. M. Kirkwood, R. A. Mascari, and
A. S. Waggoner, “Automatic multiparameter fluorescence imaging for determining lymphocyte phenotype and activation status in melanoma tissue
sections,” Cytometry, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 71–81, 1996.
I. Dagher and K. E. Tom, “WaterBalloons: A hybrid watershed Balloon
Snake segmentation,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 905–912,
2008.
C. Wählby, J. Lindblad, M. Vondrus, E. Bengtsson, and L. Björkesten,
“Algorithms for cytoplasm segmentation of fluorescence labeled cells,”
Anal. Cell. Pathol., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 101–111, 2002.
C. Ortiz de Solorzano, R. Malladi, S. A. Lelièvre, and S. J. Lockett, “Segmentation of nuclei and cells using membrane related protein markers,”
J. Microsc., vol. 201, no. 3, pp. 404–415, 2001.
A. Sarti, R. Malladi, and J. A. Sethian, “Subjective surfaces: A method
for completing missing boundaries,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 97, no. 12,
pp. 6258–6263, 2000.
A. Dufour, V. Shinin, S. Tajbakhsh, N. Guillén-Aghion, J-C. Olivo-Marin,
and C. Zimmer, “Segmenting and tracking fluorescent cells in dynamic 3D microscopy with coupled active surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1396–1410, Sep. 2005.
K. R. Mosaliganti, R. R. Noche, F. Xiong, I. A. Swinburne, and
S. G. Megason, “ACME: automated cell morphology extractor for comprehensive reconstruction of cell membranes,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 8,
no. 12: e1002780, 2012.
M. T. Veeman and W. C. Smith, “Whole-organ cell shape analysis reveals
the developmental basis of ascidian notochord taper,” Dev. Biol., vol. 373,
no. 2, pp. 281–289, 2013.
C. Zanella, M. Campana, B. Rizzi, C. Melani, G. Sanguinetti, P. Bourgine,
K. Mikula, N. Peyriéras, and A. Sarti, “Cells segmentation from 3-D
confocal images of early zebrafish embryogenesis,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 770–781, Mar. 2010.
M. A. Gelbart, B. He, A. C. Martin, S. Y. Thiberge, E. F. Wieschaus, and
M. Kaschube, “Volume conservation principle involved in cell lengthening
and nucleus movement during tissue morphogenesis,” Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci., vol. 109, no. 47, pp. 19298–19303, 2012.
G. B. Blanchard, A. J. Kabla, N. L. Schultz, L. C. Butler, B. Sanson,
N. Gorfinkiel, L. Mahadevan, and R. J. Adams, “Tissue tectonics: Morphogenetic strain rates, cell shape change and intercalation,” Nat. Methods,
vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 458–464, 2009.
A. C. Martin, M. Kaschube, and E. F. Wieschaus, “Pulsed contractions
of an actinmyosin network drive apical constriction,” Nature, vol. 457,
no. 7228, pp. 495–499, 2008.
B. Aigouy, R. Farhadifar, D. B. Staple, A. Sagner, J. C. Röper, F. Jülicher,
and S. Eaton, “Cell flow reorients the axis of planar polarity in the wing
epithelium of Drosophila,” Cell, vol. 142, no. 5, pp. 773–786, 2010.
R. Fernandez-Gonzalez and J. A. Zallen, “Oscillatory behaviors and hierarchical assembly of contractile structures in intercalating cells,” Phys.
Biol., vol. 8, no. 4, 045005, 2011.
F. Bosveld, I. Bonnet, B. Guirao, S. Tlili, Z. Wang, A. Petitalot,
R. Marchand, P. L. Bardet, P. Marcq, F. Graner, and Y. Bellaı̈che, “Mechanical control of morphogenesis by Fat/Dachsous/Four-jointed planar
cell polarity pathway,” Science, vol. 336, no. 6082, pp. 724–727, 2012.

1033

[19] M. Kass, A. Witkin, and D. Terzopoulos, “Snakes: Active contour models,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 321–331, 1988.
[20] C. Liu, J. Yuen, A. Torralba, J. Sivic, and W. T. Freeman, “SIFT flow:
Dense correspondence across different scenes,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2008, pp. 28–42.
[21] C. Lee, S. Kang, A. D. Chisholm, and P. C. Cosman, “Automated cell
junction tracking with modified active contours guided by SIFT flow,” in
IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2014, pp. 290–293.
[22] N. Gorfinkiel, G. B. Blanchard, R. J. Adams, and A. M. Arias, “Mechanical control of global cell behaviour during dorsal closure in Drosophila,”
Development, vol. 136, no. 11, pp. 1889–1898, 2009.
[23] J. Solon, A. Kaya Copur, J. Colombelli, and D. Brunner, “Pulsed forces
timed by a ratchet-like mechanism drive directed tissue movement during
dorsal closure,” Cell, vol. 137, no. 7, pp. 1331–1342, 2009.
[24] R. Totong, A. Achilleos, and J. Nance, “PAR-6 is required for junction formation but not apicobasal polarization in C. elegans embryonic epithelial
cells,” Development, vol. 134, no. 7, pp. 1259–1268, 2007.
[25] B. D. Lucas and T. Kanade, “An iterative image registration technique
with an application to stereo vision,” in Proc. Int. Joint. Conf. Artif. Intell.,
1981, vol. 81, pp. 674–679.
[26] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–110, 2004.
[27] W. Geng, P. Cosman, C. C. Berry, Z. Feng, and W. R. Schafer, “Automatic
tracking, feature extraction and classification of C. elegans phenotypes,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1811–1820, Oct. 2004.
[28] D. J. Williams and M. Shah, “A fast algorithm for active contours and curvature estimation,” CVGIP: Image Understanding, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 14–
26, 1992.
[29] J. D’Errico. (2006). Understanding Gridfit. [Online]. Available:
http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/8998
[30] V. Chalana, D. T. Linker, D. R. Haynor, and Y. Kim, “A multiple active contour model for cardiac boundary detection on echocardiographic
sequences,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 290–298, Jun.
1996.
[31] E. M. Williams-Masson, A. N. Malik, and J. Hardin, “An actin-mediated
two-step mechanism is required for ventral enclosure of the C. elegans
hypodermis,” Development, vol. 124, no. 15, pp. 2889–2901, 1997.
[32] T. A. Planchon, L. Gao, D. E. Milkie, M. W. Davidson, J. A. Galbraith,
C. G. Galbraith, and E. Betzig, “Rapid three-dimensional isotropic imaging of living cells using Bessel beam plane illumination,” Nat. Methods,
vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 417–423, 2011.
[33] Y. Wu, A. Ghitani, R. Christensen, A. Santella, Z. Du, G. Rondeau, Z. Bao,
D. Colón Ramos, and H. Shroff, “Inverted selective plane illumination
microscopy (iSPIM) enables coupled cell identity lineaging and neurodevelopmental imaging in Caenorhabditis elegans,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.,
vol. 108, no. 43, pp. 17708–17713, 2011.
[34] L. Gao, L. Shao, C. D. Higgins, J. S. Poulton, M. Peifer, M. W. Davidson,
X. Wu, B. Goldstein, and E. Betzig, “Noninvasive imaging beyond the
diffraction limit of 3D dynamics in thickly fluorescent specimens,” Cell,
vol. 151, no. 6, pp. 1370–1385, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

