2444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Pulsatile Flow Characterization in a Vessel Phantom
With Elastic Wall Using Ultrasonic Particle Image
Velocimetry Technique: The Impact of Vessel
Stiffness on Flow Dynamics
Ming Qian∗ , Member, IEEE, Lili Niu, Kelvin Kian Loong Wong, Derek Abbott, Fellow, IEEE,
Qifa Zhou, Senior Member, IEEE, and Hairong Zheng∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This study aims to experimentally investigate the impact of vessel stiffness on the flow dynamics of pulsatile vascular flow. Vessel phantoms with elastic walls were fabricated using
polyvinyl alcohol cryogel to result in stiffness ranging from 60.9
to 310.3 kPa and tested with pulsatile flows using a flow circulation set-up. Two-dimensional instantaneous and time-dependent
flow velocity and shear rate vector fields were measured using
ultrasonic particle image velocimetry (EchoPIV). The waveforms
of peak velocities measured by EchoPIV were compared with the
ultrasonic pulse Doppler spectrum, and the measuring accuracy
was validated. The cyclic vessel wall motion and flow pressure were
obtained as well. The results showed that vessel stiffening influenced the waveforms resulting from vessel wall distension and flow
pressure, and the fields of flow velocity and shear rate. The stiffer
vessel had smaller inner diameter variation, larger pulse pressure
and median pressure. The velocity and shear rate maximized at
peak systole for all vessels. The results showed a decrease in wall
shear stress for a stiffer vessel, which can initiate the atherosclerotic process. Our study elucidates the impact of vessel stiffness
on several flow dynamic parameters, and also demonstrates the
EchoPIV technique to be a useful and powerful tool in cardiovascular research.
Index Terms—Flow velocity, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) cryogel,
shear rate, ultrasonic particle image velocimetry, vessel stiffness.

Manuscript received January 9, 2014; revised April 15, 2014; accepted
April 21, 2014. Date of publication April 30, 2014; date of current version
August 18, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation Grants (11272329), in part by the National Key Technology R&D
Program of China (2012BAI13B01), in part by the Guangdong Research Grant
(2011A030300016), and in part by the Shenzhen International Collaboration
Grant (GJHZ20120617111428312). M. Qian and L. Niu are co-first authors.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Qian is with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: ming.qian@siat.ac.cn).
L. Niu is with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: ll.niu@siat.ac.cn).
K. K. L. Wong and D. Abbott are with the Centre for Biomedical Engineering, and School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Adelaide, Adelaide SA5005, Australia (e-mail: k.wong@rmit.edu.au;
derek.abbott@adelaide.edu.au).
Q. Zhou is with the NIH Ultrasonic Transducer Resource Center and Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Southern California, CA 90089
USA (e-mail: qifazhou@usc.edu).
∗ H. Zheng is with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: hr.zheng@siat.ac.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2320443

I. INTRODUCTION
T has been known for over two centuries that the integrated
effect of hemodynamics and arterial wall mechanics plays
a fundamental role in cardiovascular health [1], [2]. Measuring
the details of flow in arterial models or artificial organs is essential to investigate various flow-induced changes, and to evaluate
patient-specific parameters such as geometry, non-Newtonian
flow characteristics, wall elasticity, and steady and pulsatile flow
[3]–[7]. Techniques that can assess diseased arteries via flow
information and vascular mechanics can provide insight into
the diagnostic or therapeutic management of cardiovascular
diseases (CVD). Till now, many studies have been performed.
However, the experiments on the impact of arterial stiffness on
blood flow dynamic parameters are seldom reported.
In clinical practice, the changes in blood flow dynamics
have been used to diagnose the location and extent of disease.
Ultrasound-based techniques have gained broad applications
for the purpose of blood flow imaging due to the advantages of
real time, cheap, easy to use, safe and nonionizing. The pulsed
wave Doppler technique is routinely used to obtain 1-D timedependent blood flow velocity information [8], [9], but the typical limitation of this technique is angle dependence. In order to
overcome this limitation, and to obtain more accurate 2-D blood
flow velocity patterns, many novel ultrasound-based techniques
have been developed in the past two decades, including ultrasonic speckle velocimetry [10], vector flow imaging using plane
wave excitation [11], ultrasonic perpendicular velocimetry [12],
and ultrasonic particle image velocimetry (EchoPIV) [13], [14].
These techniques not only provide a better way to understand
the flow velocity distribution but also can result in more accurate
shear stress calculations. Based on this, the impact of hemodynamic shear stress on the arterial wall has been studied [15], [16].
The innermost intima vessel layer is exposed to both wall stress
caused by pulsating blood pressure and wall shear stress (WSS)
caused by pulsatile blood flow, and influences the many functions of endothelium that control the process of production and
degradation [17].
More recently, researchers have been paying increasing attention to arterial stiffness, considering it to be both a diagnosis target and an important issue in the development of CVD. Changes
in arterial stiffness may occur early in the atherosclerotic
process, even before the anatomical changes of intima-media

I

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

QIAN et al.: PULSATILE FLOW CHARACTERIZATION IN A VESSEL PHANTOM WITH ELASTIC WALL USING ECHO PIV TECHNIQUE

Fig. 1. Diagram of the experimental setup: the pump pushed the working fluid
to circulate and flow through the vessel phantom with elastic walls; pulsatile flow
was generated in the vessel; the flow pressure was recorded using the pressure
sensor; the B-mode image sequences were acquired using the ultrasonix RP
ultrasound system for postprocessing.

thickening become perceptible [18], [19], and arterial stiffening
plays an important role in the process of CVD. A number of studies examined the ability of arterial stiffness to predict the risk of
future fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events and total mortality [20]–[22]. Correspondingly, several ultrasound-based techniques have been developed for arterial stiffness measurements,
including pulse wave velocity (PWV) measurements [23], [24],
regional PWV [25], [26], tissue Doppler [27], [28], phasetracking [29], and an ultrasound image-based texture matching
method [30]. Lately, Niu et al. have combined EchoPIV and
image-based texture matching method to simultaneously measure arterial strain and flow pattern [31].
Till now, there have been limited experimental studies on how
arterial stiffness can influence the blood flow dynamics and how
arterial mechanics and blood flow interact, which provides the
motivation of this study. In this paper, vessel phantoms with
elastic walls were made using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) cryogel
in order to simulate human common carotid arteries of different
stiffness. Then, the pulsatile flows within the vessels having variable stiffness were characterized using EchoPIV. The accuracy
of EchoPIV measurements was demonstrated by comparing the
waveforms of peak velocities with the ultrasonic Doppler spectrum. Importantly, 2-D detailed maps of blood flow and shear
rate patterns, as well as waveforms of the vessel wall distension,
flow pressure, and time-dependent flow velocity and shear rate
were obtained, analyzed, and discussed.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Pulsatile Flow Circulation and Ultrasound Imaging System
A pulsatile flow was generated within an elastic vessel phantom using a flow circulatory test rig as shown in Fig. 1. An ultrasound system (Sonix RP, Ultrasonix, Canada) equipped with a
linear transducer (L14-5W/60, transmit frequency 10 MHz) was
used for data acquisition. The vessel was coated by synthetic
tissue to simulate human common carotid artery surrounded by
human tissue. The elastic vessel phantom had initial inner diam-

2445

eter of 6 mm, and underwent distension and contraction when
pumped. The whole phantom was immersed in degassed water
for the convenience of ultrasound beam transmission. An aqueous solution of ultrasound contrast microbubbles was used as the
working fluid. The bubbles were generated using the mechanical agitation method and suspended in deionized water [32].
Each bubble consisted of octafluoropropane gas encapsulated
by a phospholipid shell. Bubble concentration and size distribution were characterized using an AccuSizer 780A particle sizing
system (Santa Barbara, CA, USA). Each milliliter of solution
contained 1 ∼ 2×109 bubbles. A major peak was observed at
the size of 0.67 μm, with mean and median size of 1.90 and
0.93 μm, respectively. The working fluid (microbubbles aqueous solution) had a bubble concentration of 1 × 103 bubbles/ml.
This concentration was chosen for the optimum quality of ultrasonic images, so as to maximize the accuracy of EchoPIV
measurements [33].
The pulsatile pump (Model 55-3305, Harvard, USA), the
vessel phantom, the pressure sensor (HDP708, Hedi Sensing
Instrument, Guangdong, China), and the reservoir filled with
the working fluid were connected using plastic tubes. The pump
simulated the ventricular action of the heart and pushed the
fluid to circulate. The stroke volume, stroke rate of the pump
were maintained at 15 ml per stroke, 60 strokes per min in all
experiments, so as to simulate the heart beat at 60 beats/min. The
pressure sensor was connected to an oscillograph (DPO3032,
Tektronix) for recording the flow pressure waveform, which
was composed of systolic phase and diastolic phase. The peak
systole was defined as the time point when the systolic pressure
reaches maximum.
B. Phantom Fabrication and Characterization
The vessel phantoms with elastic walls coated with synthetic
tissue were made from PVA cryogel (PVA-C). The PVA aqueous solution was filled into a steel mold, and then frozen and
subsequently thawed to form a cryogel with rubber-like properties [34]. The composition (by weight) of the solution was 10%
PVA powder, 87% deionized water, and 3% scattering particles
(Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The mold consisted of a sleeve (14 mm
inner diameter), two diaphragms (10 mm inner diameter and
14 mm outer diameter), a cylindrical rod (6 mm outer diameter), and two caps [see Fig. 2(a)]. All components except the
upper cap were assembled, the solution was injected into the gap
between the rod and the diaphragms, and the upper cap was then
screwed [see Fig. 2(b)]. The whole mold underwent a number
of (1 to 8) freeze–thaw (f–t) cycles to result in different stiffness. Each f–t cycle comprised of 12 h of freezing at −20 ◦ C
and 12 h of thawing at 20 ◦ C. The obtained vessel phantoms
with elastic walls had a regular concentric lumen and different
stiffness. The vessel had 6 mm inner diameter, 10 mm outer diameter, and 16 cm length. The vessel with the inserted steel rod
was assembled inside a glass tank, and the same PVA solution
was gently poured into the tank to coat the vessel. The steel rod
insured that the elastic tube did not deform. The whole tank was
then subjected to one more f–t cycle. The vessel was covered
with 2 cm of synthetic tissue [see Fig. 2(c)]. The synthetic

2446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE I
SPEED OF SOUND AND SOUND ATTENUATION FOR PHANTOMS OF DIFFERENT
NUMBER OF F–T CYCLES

Fig. 2. Fabrication of the vessel phantoms with elastic walls coated with
synthetic tissue: (a) the steel mold was composed of a sleeve with 14 mm
inner diameter, two diaphragms with 10 mm inner diameter and 14 mm outer
diameter, a cylindrical rod with 6 mm outer diameter, and two caps; (b) all
the components except the upper cap were assembled together, and the PVA
solution was injected into the gap, and the upper cap was then screwed; and
(c) the resulted vessel phantoms with elastic walls surrounded by synthetic
tissue.

tissue supported the vessel and guaranteed isotropic vessel wall
motion. Three phantoms (3, 5, and 8 f–t cycles) were used in
flow experiments.
The speed of sound within and the attenuation coefficient of
the vessel samples were determined using the pulse–echo substitution method [35]. A 10 MHz single element transducer (Panametrics, Olympus, MA, USA) acted as both the transmitter and
receiver. Young’s modulus was measured using a CMT 6104
testing instrument (MTS System Corporation, China). Each
sample was subjected to stress–strain cycles to a displacement
of 15% of the gauge length. The Young’s elastic moduli were
calculated from the upward loading portion of the stress–strain
curves. The modulus was evaluated as the mean gradient of the
best-fit least-squares line to the data from 6%–15% [36].
C. Vessel Inner Diameter Measurements
Vessel diameter was automatically acquired from ultrasonic
B-mode images. In sequential B-mode images, the boundaries
between the flow and the walls were delineated using a region
growing image segmentation method [37]. In this method, the
intensity (or grayscale) difference in two consecutive frames of
ultrasound contrast images was termed as window frame difference (WFD). The blood flow and microbubbles within move
much faster than the arterial walls. Thus, there is much higher
intensity variation in the lumen regions (microbubbles within)
than in the arterial wall regions. Note that WFD information can,
therefore, be used to segment these two regions. Our proposed
segmentation method combines WFD and region growing algorithm to delineate the boundaries of the arterial walls from
ultrasound contrast images and can automatically get the value
of inner diameter.

algorithm. The B-mode images were acquired at a frame rate of
200 Hz using 128 ultrasound beams with focal depth of 2 cm and
field of view of 3 cm (depth) by 3 cm (width). For each single
data acquisition, more than 1200 frames were recorded, so as to
cover at least five cardiac cycles. A new EchoPIV algorithm was
used to process sequential image frames to get 2-D map of velocity vectors. This new algorithm made several improvements
on the conventional PIV algorithm. A cross-correlation method
was initially applied with a large interrogation window to estimate the displacement, and a multiple iterative algorithm was
used to enhance the spatial resolution of the velocity measurements. Then, subpixel method, filter and interpolation method,
and removal of spurious vectors were applied to improve the
accuracy of velocity measurement. Please refer to [33] for more
details about the algorithm. The 2-D flow velocity pattern allows detailed evaluation of the flow-mediated shear rate which
can be calculated from the radial velocity gradient based on the
following equation:
dv
(1)
dr
where v is the axial velocity, and r is the radial coordinate.
S=

III. RESULTS
A. Phantom Characterization
Five samples were prepared for each batch of phantoms that
were subjected to the same number of f–t cycles, and the results of the five measurements were averaged. Table I lists the
speed of sound and sound attenuation for phantoms of 1, 3, 5,
and 8 f–t cycles. The speed of sound increased from 1536.5 to
1552.1 m/s. The synthetic tissue (1 f–t cycle) had a speed of
sound of 1536.5 m/s, which was quite close to the routine value
of 1540 m/s for human soft tissue. The speed of sound of the
three phantoms (3, 5, and 8 f–t cycles) was close to the reported
values for normal arteries [38]. The sound attenuation values at
10 MHz ranged from 0.96 to1.70 dB/cm.
The strain–stress curve is plotted for each vessel sample in
Fig. 3(a). An increase in the mean Young’s moduli with the
number of f–t cycles was observed in Fig. 3(b). The 3, 5, and 8
f–t cycle phantom had modulus of 165.0, 250.5, and 310.3 kPa,
respectively.
B. Flow Mediated Vessel Motions

D. Echo Particle Image Velocimetry Technique
The EchoPIV technique consists of identifying and tracking
a tracer (ultrasound contrast microbubbles) within a flow field,
and computing local velocity vectors using a cross-correlation

The vessel dilated and contracted periodically (time period
1 s). The time-dependent curves of inner diameter (see Fig. 4)
showed that it increased from a minimum at end diastole to a
maximum at peak systole, and then declined to the minimum.

QIAN et al.: PULSATILE FLOW CHARACTERIZATION IN A VESSEL PHANTOM WITH ELASTIC WALL USING ECHO PIV TECHNIQUE

2447

Fig. 3. Mechanical characteristics of vessel phantoms of different number of
f–t cycles: (a) stress–strain curves; and (b) Young’s modulus versus number of
f–t cycles.

Fig. 6. Two-dimensional maps of flow velocity and shear at the peak systole:
(a)–(c), velocity maps of 3, 5, and 8 f–t cycle vessels; and (d)–(f), shear rate
maps of 3, 5, and 8 f–t cycle vessels.

Fig. 4. Time-dependent curves of vessel inner diameter. The red, green, and
blue solid curves correspond to the measured results of 3, 5, and 8 f–t cycle
vessel, respectively. The black dotted line denotes the initial inner diameter for
all the vessel phantoms. The red, green, and blue arrows point out the maximum
diameters for the three vessel phantoms. The dotted vertical lines demonstrate
the time points for the inner diameter achieving maximum.

calculated from the difference of systolic and diastolic pressures,
and mean pressure (MP) from the averaged pressure within a
cycle. For 3, 5, and 8 f–t cycle vessels, PP and MP were 31.9
and 98.5 mmHg, 43.4 and 100.7 mmHg, and 60.7 and 103.9
mmHg, respectively. The vessels that pertain to 3 and 8 f–t
cycles had the smallest and biggest PP and MP respectively. As
the vessel became stiffer, the time durations from diastolic to
systolic peak pressure (0.26, 0.28, and 0.30 s) increased, and the
time duration from peak systolic to dicrotic notch (0.21, 0.17,
and 0.14 s) decreased, and the time duration from the dicrotic
notch to end diastole increased.
D. Two-Dimensional Distribution of Flow Velocity
and Shear Rate

Fig. 5. Time-dependent pressure waveforms corresponding to different vessels: The red, green, and blue solid curves correspond to the measured results
of 3, 5, and 8 f–t cycle vessel, respectively. The arrows point out peak systole,
dicrotic notch, and end diastole. The dotted vertical lines demonstrate the time
points for the pressure achieving systolic peak pressures and dicrotic notch.

For 3, 5, and 8 f–t cycle vessels, the maximum and minimum
values were 6.69 and 5.30 mm, 6.61 and 5.40 mm, and 6.54
and 5.46 mm, respectively. The peak-to-peak diameter variation
(1.39, 1.21, and 1.08 mm) became smaller as the vessel increased
in stiffness. The time duration increased correspondingly
(at 0.26, 0.28, and 0.30 s).
C. Flow Pressure Waveform
The recorded pressure was plotted against time in different
colors (see Fig. 5). The pressure achieved maximum (113.9,
122.7, and 135.4 mmHg) at peak systole, and minimum (83.0,
79.3, and 74.7 mmHg) at end diastole. Pulse pressure (PP) was

The instantaneous 2-D maps of flow velocity and shear rate
can be obtained. The typical flow patterns at peak systole were
shown in Fig. 6 with arrows showing magnitude and direction,
and color denoting contour. The maps of velocity vector in
the left column showed parabolic profiles. The flow velocity
maximized at the centerline, and gradually decreased to zero
at the boundaries. The maps of shear rate in the right column
demonstrated that this property is maximized near the walls.
The time-dependent waveforms of the peak velocities measured by EchoPIV were depicted in Fig. 7(a). Measurements
starting from soft to stiff vessels result in the peak systolic and
end diastolic velocities with magnitudes of 55.0 and 12.3 cm/s,
50.0 and 13.4 cm/s, and 44.9 and 14.8 cm/s. To evaluate the
accuracy of EchoPIV measurements, the peak velocity deduced
from radial velocity profiles in the vessel were compared with
the profile obtained from Doppler velocity spectrum. The results
were shown in Fig. 7(b)–(d). The Doppler-measured peak systolic velocities were 57.0, 53.3, and 47.2 cm/s, slightly bigger
than the EchoPIV-measure values. The biases were below 5%
during the whole cardiac cycle. Fig. 7(e) shows the near-wall

2448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 7. Time-dependent waveforms of the peak velocities and shear rates:
(a) the waveforms of peak velocities measured by EchoPIV; (b)–(d) the comparison between the waveforms of EchoPIV-measured peak velocities and
the ultrasonic Doppler spectrum: (b) 3-ft-cycle vessel; (c) 5-ft-cycle vessel;
(d) 8-ft-cycle vessel; and (e) the time-dependent waveform of wall shear rate
close to the near wall.

shear rate plotted against time for different vessels. The maximum shear rates were 650, 550, and 500 (1/s), respectively.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, three elastic vessel phantoms with identical
structure and different stiffness were made from PVA-C and
used in the same fluid circuit. Under the pulsatile flow condition, the vessels underwent cyclic dilation and contraction
during one cardiac cycle. The recorded vessel wall distension
waveform (see Fig. 4) of the vessel is similar to that of an
asymptomatic common carotid artery [39]. While it is easy to
understand that a stiffer vessel would undergo smaller wall motions, it is also interesting to observe that it took longer time
to achieve maximum inner diameter for a stiffer vessel. The
increased vessel stiffness had degraded deformation ability in
response to an applied force.
The flow pressure waveforms (see Fig. 5) revealed significant
information on the systolic and diastolic pressure, PP, and MP.
For instance, the 8 f–t vessel pertains to the largest PP and MP.
This confirmed the correlation between hypertension and artery
stiffening. The time to achieve peak systolic pressure in the pressure waveform coincided with the time to achieve maximum inner diameter in the wall distension waveform. This indicates that
the wall motion and flow pressure was synchronous. Another
point to note is that the stiffer vessel reached the dicrotic notch
earlier. The reason could be the earlier arrival of the reflection
wave for the stiffer vessel.
The EchoPIV technique enabled the measurements of 2-D
color flow velocity vector maps, and thus the calculation of detailed shear rate values at different locations in the flow. From
the typical 2-D maps of velocity at the peak systole, we examined the parabolic flow velocity profiles for all the vessels
(see Fig. 6). The shear rate maximized at the boundaries and
minimized in the center. The comparison of time-dependent
EchoPIV-measured peak velocities with the profile of Doppler
velocity spectrum validated the measuring accuracy (see Fig. 7).

In one cardiac cycle, the cyclic change of the near-wall shear
rate was synchronous with that of the flow velocity. For the
vessel phantoms of a regular shape, the stiffer one resulted in
smaller peak velocity in the lumen center and shear rate close
to the walls at the peak systole.
Considering that the endothelium is very sensitive to shear
stress, local hemodynamic conditions such as low and oscillating shear can result in abnormal and disarrayed endothelial cells
and increase in the intercellular permeability and the vulnerability of these vessel segments to atherosclerosis, and consequently
lead to various cardiovascular events. This indicates that the reduced WSS due to increased vessel stiffness can initiate the
atherosclerotic process. Further hemodynamic and pathological
studies can be performed in animal models.
The usage of deionized water as the working fluid in the
Harvard blood pump may cause some drawbacks in the experimental setup. Water has smaller viscosity and density as compared to real human blood, which may affect the flow velocity
distribution and influence the WSS. Synthetic blood based on
realistic viscosity is desirable in the future work. The pump cannot ideally simulate the real function of a human heart, and the
impact of wave reflections at tube connections would inevitably
influence the pressure waveforms and the velocity waveforms.
Nonetheless, since we only substituted the vessel phantoms and
remained other components the same throughout all the experiments, the comparison between the results of different vessel
phantoms can cancel out the resulting errors. The measured
results of this study demonstrated that the experimental configuration did simulate the blood flow in the artery very well,
and the use of elastic vessel phantoms of different stiffness indeed provided a way to study the impact of arterial stiffness on
flow dynamics. Also, EchoPIV was proven to be a useful and
powerful tool in blood flow dynamics studies.
V. CONCLUSION
We have fabricated elastic vessel phantoms of different stiffness with PVA-C and successfully generated pulsatile flows
in the vessels using a circulatory rig. Using the EchoPIV to
provide accurate measurements of 2-D instantaneous and timedependent flow velocity and shear rate vector fields in the vessel
allow us to study three different vessels and demonstrate that the
vessel stiffness can influence vessel wall distension, flow pressure, and time-dependent flow velocity and WSS. A decrease
in wall shear rate was observed for a stiffer vessel, and this
factor may function to prompt the pathological development
of the endothelial cells. In future, more sophisticated-shaped
phantoms (such as bifurcation or stenosis) and preclinical and
clinical studies may be studied using the framework proposed
in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] C. S. Roy, “The elastic properties of the arterial wall,” J. Physiol., vol. 3,
pp. 125–159, 1881.
[2] T. Young, “Hydraulic investigations, subservient to an intended Croonian
lecture on the motion of the blood,” Philosoph. Trans. Roy. Soc. London,
vol. 98, pp. 164–186, 1808.

QIAN et al.: PULSATILE FLOW CHARACTERIZATION IN A VESSEL PHANTOM WITH ELASTIC WALL USING ECHO PIV TECHNIQUE

[3] R. Botnar, G. Rappitsch, M. Beat Scheidegger, D. Liepsch, K. Perktold,
and P. Boesiger, “Hemodynamics in the carotid artery bifurcation: A comparison between numerical simulations and in vitro MRI measurements,”
J. Biomech., vol. 33, pp. 137–144, 2000.
[4] D. Liepsch, “Biofluid mechanics-an interdisciplinary research area of the
future,” Technol. Health Care, vol. 14, pp. 209–214, 2006.
[5] O. Greil, T. Kleinschmidt, W. Weiss, O. Wolf, P. Heider, S. Schaffner,
M. Gianotti, T. Schmid, D. Liepsch, and H. Berger, “Flow velocities after
carotid artery stenting: Impact of stent design. A fluid dynamics study
in a carotid artery model with laser Doppler anemometry,” Cardiovasc.
Intervent. Radiol., vol. 28, pp. 66–76, 2005.
[6] J. Mejia, B. Ruzzeh, R. Mongrain, R. Leask, and O. F. Bertrand, “Evaluation of the effect of stent strut profile on shear stress distribution
using statistical moments,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 8, pp. 1–10,
2009.
[7] G. Choi, C. P. Cheng, N. M. Wilson, and C. A. Taylor, “Methods for
quantifying three-dimensional deformation of arteries due to pulsatile and
nonpulsatile forces: Implications for the design of stents and stent grafts,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, pp. 14–33, 2009.
[8] R. Aaslid, T.-M. Markwalder, and H. Nornes, “Noninvasive transcranial
Doppler ultrasound recording of flow velocity in basal cerebral arteries,”
J. Neurosurg., vol. 57, pp. 769–774, 1982.
[9] J. R. Overbeck, K. W. Beach, and D. E. Strandness, “Vector Doppler:
Accurate measurement of blood velocity in two dimensions,” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 18, pp. 19–31, 1992.
[10] L. Sandrin, S. Manneville, and M. Fink, “Ultrafast two-dimensional ultrasonic speckle velocimetry: A tool in flow imaging,” Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 78, pp. 1155–1157, 2001.
[11] J. Udesen, F. Gran, K. Hansen, J. A. Jensen, C. Thomsen, and
M. B. Nielsen, “High frame-rate blood vector velocity imaging using
plane waves: Simulations and preliminary experiments,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1729–1743, Aug.
2008.
[12] B. Beulen, A. C. Verkaik, N. Bijnens, M. Rutten, and F. van de Vosse,
“Perpendicular ultrasound velocity measurement by 2D cross correlation
of RF data. Part B: Volume flow estimation in curved vessels,” Experiments
Fluids, vol. 49, pp. 1219–1229, 2010.
[13] F. Zhang, C. Lanning, L. Mazzaro, A. J. Barker, P. E. Gates, W. D. Strain,
J. Fulford, O. E. Gosling, A. C. Shore, and N. G. Bellenger, “In vitro
and preliminary in vivo validation of echo particle image velocimetry in
carotid vascular imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 37, pp. 450–464,
2011.
[14] H. Zheng, L. Liu, L. Williams, J. R. Hertzberg, C. Lanning, and
R. Shandas, “Real time multicomponent echo particle image velocimetry
technique for opaque flow imaging,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 88, art. no.
261915, 2006.
[15] J. D. Humphrey, “Mechanisms of arterial remodeling in hypertension coupled roles of wall shear and intramural stress,” Hypertension, vol. 52,
pp. 195–200, 2008.
[16] Y. Qiu and J. M. Tarbell, “Interaction between wall shear stress and circumferential strain affects endothelial cell biochemical production,” J.
Vasc. Res., vol. 37, pp. 147–157, 2000.
[17] Y.-S. J. Li, J. H. Haga, and S. Chien, “Molecular basis of the effects of
shear stress on vascular endothelial cells,” J. Biomech., vol. 38, pp. 1949–
1971, 2005.
[18] M.-L. M. Grønholdt, “Ultrasound and lipoproteins as predictors of lipidrich, rupture-prone plaques in the carotid artery,” Arterioscle., Thromb.,
Vasc. Biol., vol. 19, pp. 2–13, 1999.
[19] R. H. Selzer, W. J. Mack, P. L. Lee, H. Kwong-Fu, and H. N. Hodis,
“Improved common carotid elasticity and intima-media thickness measurements from computer analysis of sequential ultrasound frames,”
Atherosclerosis, vol. 154, pp. 185–193, 2001.
[20] F. U. Mattace-Raso, T. J. van der Cammen, A. Hofman, N. M. van Popele,
M. L. Bos, M. A. Schalekamp, R. Asmar, R. S. Reneman, A. P. Hoeks,
and M. M. Breteler, “Arterial stiffness and risk of coronary heart disease and stroke the rotterdam study,” Circulation, vol. 113, pp. 657–663,
2006.
[21] G. F. Mitchell, S.-J. Hwang, R. S. Vasan, M. G. Larson, M. J. Pencina,
N. M. Hamburg, J. A. Vita, D. Levy, and E. J. Benjamin, “Arterial stiffness and cardiovascular events the framingham heart study,” Circulation,
vol. 121, pp. 505–511, 2010.
[22] C. Vlachopoulos, K. Aznaouridis, M. F. O’Rourke, M. E. Safar, K. Baou,
and C. Stefanadis, “Prediction of cardiovascular events and all-cause
mortality with central haemodynamics: A systematic review and metaanalysis,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 31, pp. 1865–1871, 2010.

2449

[23] K. Sutton-Tyrrell, S. S. Najjar, R. M. Boudreau, L. Venkitachalam,
V. Kupelian, E. M. Simonsick, R. Havlik, E. G. Lakatta, H. Spurgeon,
and S. Kritchevsky, “Elevated aortic pulse wave velocity, a marker of
arterial stiffness, predicts cardiovascular events in well-functioning older
adults,” Circulation, vol. 111, pp. 3384–3390, 2005.
[24] T. W. Hansen, J. A. Staessen, C. Torp-Pedersen, S. Rasmussen, L. Thijs,
H. Ibsen, and J. Jeppesen, “Prognostic value of aortic pulse wave velocity as index of arterial stiffness in the general population,” Circulation,
vol. 113, pp. 664–670, 2006.
[25] J. Luo, R. X. Li, and E. E. Konofagou, “Pulse wave imaging of the human carotid artery: An in vivo feasibility study,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason.,
Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 174–181, Jan. 2012.
[26] J. Luo and E. E. Konofagou, “Imaging of wall motion coupled with blood
flow velocity in the heart and vessels in vivo: A feasibility study,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 37, pp. 980–995, 2011.
[27] S. Golemati, A. Sassano, M. J. Lever, A. A. Bharath, S. Dhanjil, and
A. N. Nicolaides, “Carotid artery wall motion estimated from B-mode
ultrasound using region tracking and block matching,” Ultrasound Med.
Biol., vol. 29, pp. 387–399, 2003.
[28] T. Zakaria, Z. Qin, and R. L. Maurice, “Optical-flow-based b-mode elastography: Application in the hypertensive rat carotid,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imag., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 570–578, Feb. 2010.
[29] H. Kanai, H. Hasegawa, M. Ichiki, F. Tezuka, and Y. Koiwa, “Elasticity
imaging of atheroma with transcutaneous ultrasound preliminary study,”
Circulation, vol. 107, pp. 3018–3021, 2003.
[30] L. Niu, M. Qian, R. Song, L. Meng, X. Liu, and H. Zheng, “A texture matching method considering geometric transformations in noninvasive ultrasonic measurement of arterial elasticity,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 38, pp. 524–533, 2012.
[31] L. Niu, M. Qian, R. Song, L. Meng, X. Liu, and H. Zheng, “A 2D noninvasive ultrasonic method for simultaneous measurement of arterial strain
and flow pattern,” Clin. Physiol. Funct. Imag., vol. 32, pp. 323–329, 2012.
[32] M. Qian, L. Niu, Y. Wang, B. Jiang, Q. Jin, C. Jiang, and H. Zheng,
“Measurement of flow velocity fields in small vessel-mimic phantoms and
vessels of small animals using micro ultrasonic particle image velocimetry
(micro-EPIV),” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, pp. 6069–6088, 2010.
[33] L. Niu, M. Qian, K. Wan, W. Yu, Q. Jin, T. Ling, S. Gao, and H. Zheng,
“Ultrasonic particle image velocimetry for improved flow gradient imaging: Algorithms, methodology and validation,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55,
pp. 2103–2120, 2010.
[34] K. C. Chu and B. K. Rutt, “Polyvinyl alcohol cryogel: An ideal phantom
material for MR studies of arterial flow and elasticity,” Magn. Resonance
Med., vol. 37, pp. 314–319, 1997.
[35] F. Dunn, Ultrasonic Tissue Characterization. New York, NY, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 1996.
[36] R. Song, M. Qian, L. Niu, Q. Jin, and H. Zheng, “Multi-component hemodynamic measurement in flexible vascular phantom using echo particle
image velocimetry,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng. Informat., 2011,
pp. 404–407.
[37] B. Jiang, M. Qian, L. Niu, R. Song, H. Zhu, Q. Jin, and H. Zheng, “Region
growing based on window frame difference for segmenting ultrasonic
contrast images of arteries,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Bioinformatics Biomed.
Eng., 2011, pp. 1–4.
[38] J. Greenleaf, F. Duck, W. Samayoa, and S. Johnson, “Ultrasonic data
acquisition and processing system for atherosclerotic tissue characterization,” in Proc. Ultrason. Symp., 1974, pp. 738–743.
[39] J. Dineley, S. Meagher, T. Poepping, W. McDicken, and P. Hoskins, “Design and characterisation of a wall motion phantom,” Ultrasound Med.
Biol., vol. 32, pp. 1349–1357, 2006.

Ming Qian (M’12) received the B.S. degree in
physics and the Ph.D. degree in optics from
Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
China, in 2003 and 2008, respectively.
He joined Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008 as
an Assistant Professor, and was then promoted to
be Associate Professor in 2011. His research interests include ultrasonics, ultrasonic imaging, ultrasonic transducer design and fabrication, and also signal and image processing. He has published more

2450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

than 40 peer-reviewed journal papers and international conference proceedings
with more than 30 indexed by SCI/EI, and applied more than 10 patents. He is
principal investigator of more than ten projects including National Key Technology R&D Program of China, National Natural Science Foundation Grant of
China, etc.
Dr. Qian is a member of the EMBC, committee member of the acoustical society of China, and the referees for funding agencies National Natural
Science Foundation of China and Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong
Province. He is the reviewer of Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology, Ultrasonics, PLOS One, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, Journal of
Biomechanics, etc.

Lili Niu received the Master’s degree in biomedical engineering from Northeast University, China, in
2009, and the Ph.D. degree in computer application
technology from the Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), in 2012.
She is now an Assistant Professor at the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, CAS. Her
main research interests include developing advanced
biomedical ultrasound techniques for measuring vascular biomechanics, ultrasound contrast imaging, and
high-frequency ultrasound imaging. She has published more than ten peer-review journals in the biomedical engineering field.

Kelvin Kian Loong Wong was born in Singapore in
1976. He received the B.Eng. (Hons.) degree in mechanical and production engineering from Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, in 2001, the
MAIT degree in applied information technology from
The University of Sydney, Australia, in 2003, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineering
from The University of Adelaide, Australia, in 2009,
mainly under the supervision of Jagannath Mazumdar and Derek Abbott.
He has more than 5 years of medical imaging and
computational modeling and simulation experience. From 2006 to 2009, he was
doing research work on medical imaging and cardiac flow analysis. Since 2009
to now, he was involved in computational fluid and solid dynamics. In 2013,
he began working on discrete element method with applications in biological
systems. He is the author of the book “Methods in Research and Development of
Biomedical Devices,” and has served as Associate Editors for journals in the area
of biomedical engineering. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the School
of Computer Science and Software Engineering at The University of Western
Australia. His publications now span a diverse range of research fields, including physics, applied mathematics, mechanics, cardiac flow analysis, multiscale
modeling, medical imaging, medical image reconstruction, discrete element
method, computational fluid dynamics, and biomedical device production.

Derek Abbott (M’85–SM’99–F’05) was born in
South Kensington, London, U.K., in 1960. He received the B.Sc. (Hons.) degree in physics from
Loughborough University, Leicestershire, U.K., in
1982 and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from The University of Adelaide,
S.A. Australia, in 1995, under K. Eshraghian and
B. R. Davis.
From 1978 to 1986, he was a Research Engineer at
the GEC Hirst Research Centre, London, U.K. From
1986 to 1987, he was a VLSI Design Engineer at

Austek Microsystems, Australia. Since 1987, he has been with The University of Adelaide, where he is presently a Full Professor with the School of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering. He coedited Quantum Aspects of Life
(London, U.K.: Imperial College Press, 2008), coauthored Stochastic Resonance
(Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2008), and coauthored Terahertz Imaging for Biomedical Applications (New York, NY, USA: SpringerVerlag, 2012). He holds more than 800 publications/patents and has been an
invited speaker at more than 100 institutions. His research interests include the
area of multidisciplinary physics and electronic engineering applied to complex
systems. His research programs span a number of areas of stochastics, game
theory, photonics, biomedical engineering, and computational neuroscience.
Prof. Abbott is a Fellow of the Institute of Physics. He has won a number
of awards including the South Australian Tall Poppy Award for Science (2004),
the Premier’s SA Great Award in Science and Technology for outstanding contributions to South Australia (2004), and an Australian Research Council Future
Fellowship (2012). He has served as an Editor and/or Guest Editor for a number
of journals including the IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Journal of Optics B, the Microelectronics Journal, Chaos, Smart Structures and Materials,
Fluctuation Noise Letters, PLOSONE, and is currently on the editorial boards
of the Proceedings of the IEEE, and the IEEE Photonics Journal.

Qifa Zhou (SM’11) received the Ph.D. degree from
the Department of Electronic Materials and Engineering at Xi’an Jiaotong University, China, in 1993.
He is currently a Research Professor at the NIH
Resource on Medical Ultrasonic Transducer Technology and the Department of Biomedical Engineering
and Industry and System Engineering at the University of Southern California (USC), Los Angeles, CA,
USA. Before joining USC in 2002, he worked in the
Department of Physics at Zhongshan University of
China, the Department of Applied Physics at Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, and the Materials Research Laboratory at Pennsylvania State University. His current research interests include the development
of piezoelectric high-frequency ultrasound transducers for medical imaging applications such as photoacoustic imaging, intravascular imaging and cell–tissue
imaging. He has published more than 150 journal papers in this area.
Dr. Zhou is a Fellow of SPIE and AIMBE, a senior member of the IEEE
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control (UFFC) Society and a member of the Ferroelectric Committee, UFFC in IEEE. He is also a member of the
technical program Committee of IUS in IEEE and Photoacoustic Committee in
SPIE. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE UFFC.

Hairong Zheng (SM’11) received the B.S. degree
from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in
2000 and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Colorado at Boulder, USA,
in 2006.
He joined the University of California, Davis,
USA, first as a Postdoctoral Fellow, and then as a
Project Scientist in the Biomedical Engineering Department. He is now a Full Professor and the Director
of the Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research areas have been focused on developing ultrasonic techniques and systems for imaging, drug delivery, and therapy,
and multimodality medical imaging systems. He has published more than 100
peer-reviewed journal papers and international conference proceedings.
Dr. Zheng is a recipient of the American Heart Association Pre-Doctoral
Fellowship (2005). He is a committee member of the IEEE-EMBS technique
standard association, editor of Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology, committee
member of Ultrasound in Medicine, the acoustical society of china, standing
committee member of imaging physics and technology society, standing committee member of molecular imaging society, committee member of young
association of the Chinese academy of science, the chairman of IEEE Shenzhen
Chapter.

