IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

453

An Intelligent Recovery Progress Evaluation System
for ACL Reconstructed Subjects Using Integrated
3-D Kinematics and EMG Features
Owais A. Malik, S. M. N. Arosha Senanayake, Senior Member, IEEE, and Dansih Zaheer

Abstract—An intelligent recovery evaluation system is presented
for objective assessment and performance monitoring of anterior
cruciate ligament reconstructed (ACL-R) subjects. The system acquires 3-D kinematics of tibiofemoral joint and electromyography
(EMG) data from surrounding muscles during various ambulatory
and balance testing activities through wireless body-mounted inertial and EMG sensors, respectively. An integrated feature set is
generated based on different features extracted from data collected
for each activity. The fuzzy clustering and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference techniques are applied to these integrated feature sets in
order to provide different recovery progress assessment indicators
(e.g., current stage of recovery, percentage of recovery progress as
compared to healthy group, etc.) for ACL-R subjects. The system
was trained and tested on data collected from a group of healthy
and ACL-R subjects. For recovery stage identification, the average
testing accuracy of the system was found above 95% (95–99%) for
ambulatory activities and above 80% (80–84%) for balance testing activities. The overall recovery evaluation performed by the
proposed system was found consistent with the assessment made
by the physiotherapists using standard subjective/objective scores.
The validated system can potentially be used as a decision supporting tool by physiatrists, physiotherapists, and clinicians for
quantitative rehabilitation analysis of ACL-R subjects in conjunction with the existing recovery monitoring systems.
Index Terms—Electromyography, fuzzy systems, kinematics,
knee injury, motion sensors, rehabilitation.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE use of objective assessment of rehabilitation activities
after anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction has
been advocated for safer return to demanding and high level
sporting activities [1]–[3]. Several factors affect the restoration of dynamic knee stability and neuromuscular control after
ACL surgery and time to recovery depends on individuals’ characteristics and their compliance to rehabilitation routines [4].

T

Manuscript received September 19, 2013; revised February 12, 2014 and
April 14, 2014; accepted April 17, 2014. Date of publication April 25, 2014; date
of current version March 2, 2015. This work was supported by the University
Research Council grant scheme at the Universiti Brunei Darussalam under the
Grant UBD/PNC2/2/RG/1(195).
O. A. Malik and S. M. N. A. Senanayake are with the Universiti Brunei
Darussalam, Faculty of Science, Jalan Tungku Link, Gadong BE1410, Brunei
Darussalam (e-mail: 11H1202@ubd.edu.bn, arosha.senanayake@ubd.edu.bn).
D. Zaheer is with the Sports Medicine and Research Center, Department of
Rehabilitation, Hassan Bolkiah National Stadium, Berakas, Brunei Darussalam
(e-mail: smrc@brunet.bn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2320408

Moreover, impaired gait, muscle weakness, deficits in neuromuscular control, and functional instability may persist even
several months after ACL surgery, which may also lead to longterm problems including cartilage degeneration and early onset
of osteoarthritis [5]–[9]. Identification of patterns of knee joint
dynamics during convalescence upon ACL reconstruction can
be used to develop an intelligent recovery evaluation system to
analyze the movement impairments. Determining the progress
and stage of recovery of ACL reconstructed (ACL-R) subjects
can assist in timely intervention and adjusting the rehabilitation
strategies as per individual’s requirements.
The design and performance of an evaluation system highly
rely on appropriate selection of input parameters. The functional outcome after ACL surgery is usually assessed based on
dynamic knee joint stability and neuromuscular function in clinical settings. It has been reported in many studies that the static
knee laxity can be reduced within clinical satisfactory range
after ACL reconstruction but the changes in tibiofemoral kinematics are not completely restored even after surgery [10], [11].
Moreover, one of the main objectives of the rehabilitation after ACL injury/reconstruction is to restore the lower extremity
muscle strength and function. In particular, the quadriceps and
knee flexors have an important role in regaining the normal knee
function after ACL reconstruction and avoiding asymmetries in
movements and risk of reinjury [1], [5], [12], [13].
The use of machine learning techniques has been successful in the fields of medical diagnosis and pathology identification [14], [15]. Different intelligent methods have been applied
for assessment and classification of gait patterns for subjects
having lower limb impairments due to stroke or cerebral palsy,
but less emphasis has been found in using these techniques for
gait and recovery analysis after ACL injury/reconstruction. An
intelligent classification system has been developed to differentiate normal and ACL injured knees based on arthrometric data
with an overall 95.5% sensitivity and 100% specificity [16].
In [17], the status of gait normality was classified for ACLR subjects using principal component analysis and regression
modeling based on 3-D rotational kinematics with an accuracy
of 93.75%. These studies prove the potential of applying computational intelligent techniques for differentiating the normal and
impaired human motion. However, overall recovery progress
and return to high-level sporting activities do not solely depend
on restoration of normal gait patterns. Activities such as high
speed ambulation, balancing, cutting, and jumping, which require more involvement of biomechanical and neuromuscular
control, are critical for competitive sports. Furthermore, most of

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

454

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

the existing studies have utilized only one type of data (either
kinematics or kinetics or electromyography) and limited parameters (e.g., only sagittal plane kinematics data) to classify the
gait patterns and human movements [17]–[19]. Recent studies
show that the integration of multiple types of biosignals can improve the clustering of the human motion as compared to using
only one type of biosignals [20]–[22].
This study investigates the feasibility of a multiactivity-based
automated evaluation system for objective recovery assessment of post ACL-R subjects. The developed system acquires
3-D kinematics and electromyography (EMG) data from lower
extremities through wireless body-mounted motion and EMG
sensors, respectively. The data are recorded for three ambulatory (normal walking, walking at 7 km/h and at 8 km/h) and
two single-leg balance testing activities [eyes open (EO) and
eyes closed (EC)] and relevant features are extracted for each
activity. The recovery progress and stage assessment are performed by designing an intelligent system using fuzzy clustering and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) techniques [23], [24]. Fuzzy clustering has been successfully used
in different biomedical applications, and fuzzy logic (FL)-based
recognition system is well suited for domains like injury recovery evaluation, which have nonlinearity and impreciseness in
measurements due to variations in subjects’ physiological conditions [24]–[26]. For recovery analysis of an ACL-R subject
during rehabilitation period, the proposed system provides three
outputs for each activity (percentage of the recovery progress
during an activity as compared to the healthy group, current
recovery stage for an activity and percentage of the recovery
progress within a identified stage for an activity) and an overall
combined recovery state for all activities monitored. This system can be used as a decision supporting tool by physiatrists,
physiotherapists, and clinicians for quantitatively analyzing the
performance of the ACL-R subjects during different rehabilitation activities in conjunction with the existing rehabilitation
monitoring systems.
II. SYSTEM HARDWARE
The recovery evaluation system consisted of two hardware
components: 1) microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) motion sensor module, and 2) EMG sensors module. These components were used simultaneously to acquire the experimental
data.
A. Wireless Microelectromechanical Systems Sensors
The wearable MEMS motion sensors (KinetiSense,
ClevMed., Inc.) were used to measure the subjects’ lower extremity motion in terms of angular rates and linear accelerations. The KinetiSense biokinetic analysis system consisted of
a command module (mass: 148.72 gm), wireless transmission
radio, and sensor units [see Fig. 1(a)]. Each sensor unit (size:
2.2 cm ×1.5 cm ×1.25 cm, mass: 4.35 gm) contains a triaxial
MEMS accelerometer and a triaxial MEMS gyroscope to measure 3-D linear accelerations and 3-D angular velocities, respectively. The motion sensor data were sampled at 128 Hz (12 bit

Fig. 1. Hardware components of recovery evaluation system. (a) Wireless
motion sensor unit command module and USB receiver from KinetiSense. (b)
EMG electrodes with wireless BioRadio and USB receiver.

analog/digital resolution within a frequency range 0–20 Hz) and
wirelessly transferred through USB receiver to the computer.
B. Wireless EMG Capturing System
The EMG sensors (Ag/AgCl electrodes) provided the muscle
recruitment pattern for knee extensors and flexors. A BioCapture
physiological monitoring system (ClevMed., Inc.), consisting of
BioRadio (mass with batteries: 210 gm) and USB receiver, was
used to record the EMG signals from knee extensors and flexors
[see Fig. 1(b)]. The BioRadio, worn by the subjects, records the
EMG signals through surface electrodes, does initial processing
(amplification, sampling, and digitization) and then wirelessly
transmits them to the computer using USB receiver. The EMG
signals were recorded at a sampling rate of 960 Hz (12 bit
analog/digital conversion), which was sufficient to record the
muscular activity that usually lies in the range of 10–450 Hz
[27].
III. METHODOLOGY
The sequence of steps followed to design and validate the
proposed recovery evaluation system for each activity are shown
in Fig. 2. A detailed block diagram of the multiactivity-based
recovery evaluation system is illustrated in Fig. 3. This section
discusses the experimental setup and the processes as shown in
Figs. 2 and 3.
A. Participants and Experimental Setup
A total of 26 subjects (10 healthy ACL intact and 16 unilateral ACL-R athletes) were recruited from performance optimization center at Ministry of Defense and sports medicine and
research center at Ministry of Sports, Brunei Darussalam. The
healthy subjects (four females and six males) were having following mean and (SD) readings: age of 29.4(4.15) years, height
169.3(4.30) cm, and weight 72.8(14.17) kg. ACL-R subjects
(six females and ten males) were in the range of 2 to 13 months
postreconstruction with mean 7.25 (3.53) months. The mean
(SD) age, height, and weight of this group were 25.6 (4.15)
years, 164.5(5.34) cm, and 68.5(12.54) kg, respectively.
All subjects read and signed an informed consent form and
ethical procedures were carried out according to the guidelines
approved by Ethics Committee at Universiti Brunei Darussalam.

MALIK et al.: INTELLIGENT RECOVERY PROGRESS EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR ACL RECONSTRUCTED SUBJECTS

455

Fig. 4. Global coordinate system {G} with placement of MEMS and EMG
sensors on lower extremities (a) Front view (b) Back view.

Fig. 2. Sequence of steps followed to (a) design and (b) validate the recovery
evaluation system for each activity for ACL-R subjects.

Fig. 3. Multiactivity-based recovery evaluation model for ACL-R subjects
using multichannel EMG and 3-D motion signals and sensors placement on
human lower extremities (front view).

In order to design and test the proposed system, 3-D kinematics and EMG parameters were recorded for healthy and the
ACL-R subjects for five different activities: normal walking
on flat surface at comfortable speed, two high speed walking
activities (7 and 8 km/h) on a treadmill, and two single-leg balance testing (EO and EC) on balance training platform. The
selection of these activities was based on the recommendations
from physiotherapists and due to the presence of the ACL-R
subjects at varying level of recovery. For ambulation activities,
each subject was setup with four motion sensors attached on lateral aspects of his/her thighs (at two thirds up the tensor fascia
latae) and shanks (on halfway up the surface of the tibia) using
a self-designed flexible bulk straps and adhesive medical tape to
note the 3-D angular rates and 3-D accelerations of lower limb
extremities (see Figs. 3 and 4) [28], [29]. The neuromuscular
signals were recorded by placing Kendall disposable pregelled
snap electrodes (Ag/AgCl sensor, 24 mm) on four different knee
extensor and flexor muscles including the vastus medialis, vas-

tus lateralis, semitendinosus, and biceps femoris on both legs
of the subjects. For skin preparation and electrodes placement,
SENIAM EMG guidelines were followed [30]. While data were
collected from both lower limbs for ambulation activities as part
of the ongoing research, but kinematics and neuromuscular signals were processed only for one leg (operated leg for ACL-R
subjects and randomly selected leg for healthy subjects) in this
study. For balance testing activities, motion sensors and EMG
electrodes were setup on weight bearing leg (see Fig. 4) of
each subject (operated leg for ACL-R subjects and randomly
selected leg for healthy subjects) using same procedure as described above. Additionally, EMG data from the gastrocnemius
medialis of weight bearing leg were also recorded for balance
testing activities. In this study, only four/five muscles were considered from each leg due to their relevance to ACL injury and
based on the availability of number of channels in the EMG
monitoring system. The placements of sensors and electrodes
were done by the same person for all experiments based on standard guidelines and a calibration procedure was adapted in order
to minimize the setup errors [31]. The motion sensors and EMG
electrodes were attached to the command module and BioRadio
unit, respectively, worn by subjects using a waist-belt.
The 3-D kinematics and EMG signals were recorded simultaneously from each subject for a testing session. During each
testing session, three trials were performed by every test subject
for all five activities (i.e., 15 total trials) and the duration of each
trial was 1 min for ambulatory activities and 20–30 s for balance
testing activities. The rest interval between any two trials was
approximately 1 min. The data for multiple trials were collected
in order to take care of variability in signals and generating
a large dataset containing knee dynamics and neuromuscular
signals for recovery evaluation task.
B. Data Processing and Analysis
1) Wireless Data Acquisition: Wireless data transfers from
motion sensors’ command module and BioRadio were handled
by the host computer via 2.4-GHz wireless link. Before starting

456

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

a testing session for each subject, both devices and their respective software were setup and tested for data transfer. When a
testing session was initiated, the command module transferred
3-D angular rates and 3-D linear accelerations from connected
motion sensors to the KinetiSense software for each trial. Simultaneously, EMG data for different muscles were also transferred
through BioRadio to BioCapture software. After completion of
each testing session, motion and EMG data were exported to
.csv file format for further processing by MATLAB software.
2) Data Preprocessing: The kinematics and EMG data were
preprocessed to prepare the input for feature extraction step. In
order to compensate for the constant bias error of inertial sensors, the measurements for zero-referencing were obtained prior
to starting the experiment when the subjects were in upright
position and then subtracted from respective recorded signals
during experiments. The angular rate and acceleration measurements obtained from the motion sensors were low-pass filtered
using sixth-order Butterworth filter. The 3-D orientation of lower
limbs was estimated by applying trapezoidal integration method
on angular rates. A complementary filter was used to correct the
gyroscope integration drift by fusing orientation measurements
from gyroscopes and accelerometers [32]. For each trial, the raw
EMG data with zero mean were band-pass filtered (20–450 Hz)
using fourth-order Butterworth filter. Both kinematics and EMG
signals were synchronized (due to different sampling rates and
recording delays) and data segmentation was performed prior
to feature extraction. For ambulatory activities, each gait cycle
was segmented by detecting the heel strike [33]. Ambulatory
data from ten gait cycles per trial were averaged for each subject and the percentages mentioned in [34] were used to identify
each phase from the averaged gait cycle (seven phases of gait cycle: load response, mid-stance, terminal stance, preswing, initial
swing, mid swing, and terminal swing) for feature extraction.
For balance testing activities, three segments of different sizes
(10 s, 15 s, and 20 s) were marked from each trial data for each
subject in order to compute the features. Based on the accuracy
of recovery evaluation, finally one time segment with highest
value was selected for further validation.
3) Feature Extraction: Based on previous studies and our
current experiments, following kinematics and EMG feature sets
were generated for all activities monitored during this study [7],
[26], [35].
The kinematics feature set included data from 3-D rotations (flexion/extension, internal/external rotations, and abduction/adduction) in sagittal, frontal, and transversal planes. The
orientations of right and left limb segments were determined
by using the coordinate frame transformation standard for joint
kinematics proposed by International Society of Biomechanics
(ISB) [36]. Rotation matrices were computed to align the origin
of axes of sensors on right and left limbs to ISB coordinate
system {G} by rotating with a magnitude of π along Z-axis and
X-axis, respectively, and Euler angles were computed from the
rotation matrices [37]. The kinematics feature set for each ambulatory activity included nine parameters from 3-D rotational
movements (mean, maximum, and standard values for flexion/extension, abduction/adduction, and internal/external rotation) for each phase of a gait cycle (averaged gait cycle per trial).

Thus, a total of 63 features (3 × 3 rotational kinematics features
× 7 phases of a gait cycle) were computed from averaged gait cycle data for each trial of an ambulatory activity. For balance testing activities, nine parameters from 3-D rotational movements
(mean, maximum and standard values for flexion/extension,
abduction/adduction, and internal/external rotation) were computed from weight bearing leg for all three time segments (10 s,
15 s, and 20 s), separately.
In order to generate an EMG feature set, multilevel discrete
wavelet decomposition analysis has been used due to its effectiveness in dealing with random and nonstationary nature
of EMG signals for classification problems [26], [38]. By employing discrete wavelet transform, the filtered time-domain
EMG signals were iteratively transformed into multiresolution
subsets of coefficients using Daubechies 05 wavelet basis function with five levels of decomposition to compute EMG features [26], [38]. For both ambulatory and balance testing activities, six wavelet coefficients (cD1,. . .,cD5 and cA5) were
computed, which represent the energy distribution of the EMG
signals from four/five identified muscles. From these coefficients, five statistical features including maximum, minimum,
mean absolute value, standard deviation, and average power of
the coefficients were calculated for each phase of gait cycle
and balance testing segment. Thus, a total of 840 features from
EMG data were saved from each ambulatory activity trial for
each subject (5 EMG features × 6 coefficients × 4 muscles ×
7 phases of gait cycle). Similarly, a total of 150 features from
EMG data were saved from each balance testing trial for each
subject (5 EMG features × 6 coefficients × 5 muscles) for each
time segment.
4) Formation of Dataset: A dataset for each activity was
formed by using the kinematics and EMG feature sets described
above. The dataset for each ambulation and balance testing activity consisted of 78 feature vectors (26 subjects × 3 trials
per activity) with corresponding feature vector length. A single
averaged gait cycle for a trial during each ambulatory activity
was represented by a feature vector of length 903 (840 EMG
features + 63 kinematics features). For balance activities, the
feature vector length was 159 (150 EMG features + 9 kinematics features) for each time segment per activity. Thus, a total of
nine datasets (three for ambulation activities + 3 × 2 for balance
testing activities) were generated for further processing.
5) Statistical Analysis: Before applying feature transformation and clustering technique, the statistical difference between
the mean values of features for healthy and the ACL-R subjects was computed for each dataset separately. Since there
were many features so the multivariate analysis of variance
(MANOVA) was employed in order to evaluate the difference
of the entire set of means for multiple features between healthy
and ACL-R groups for each dataset. The purpose of statistical
test was to confirm/disconfirm that two groups have overall different mean values of extracted features. The MANOVA results
show that there were significant differences (p < 0.05) between
two groups for all datasets of selected activities.
6) Features’ Projection and Analysis: In order to reduce the
length of feature vectors for efficiently applying the pattern
recognition techniques, principal component analysis (PCA)

MALIK et al.: INTELLIGENT RECOVERY PROGRESS EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR ACL RECONSTRUCTED SUBJECTS

has been used [39]. PCA is an efficient and simple feature
projection/transformation technique that projects the high dimensionality of data to the low dimensionality and transforms
the original feature set of variables into a new feature set of variables, known as principle components (PCs), of reduced dimension by minimizing the mean-square error between the original
and projected sets. PCA was carried out on the dataset for each
activity and new datasets (nine pattern sets) were generated using the reduced number of PCs for applying fuzzy clustering
and classification techniques. The number of PCs to be retained
in each pattern set for recovery evaluation was determined by
considering multiple criteria including eigenvalue-one criterion,
scree test, proportion of variance explained by each component,
and the recovery stage identification accuracy obtained during
experiments [40].
7) Formation of Groups (Clusters) of Subjects: The intention of clustering was to separate the individuals into homogeneous groups based on the selected input kinematics and
EMG features for different activities. Data from healthy and
the ACL-R subjects were clustered and labeled using a semiautomatic process. The assignment of data points to each cluster
was based on their similarity to each other rather than time
since ACL reconstruction. This was essential because the sample space consisted of the ACL-R subjects at different stages
of recovery and time since injury may not directly correlate
with amount of recovery for all subjects due to multiple factors
(compliance to the rehabilitation protocol, type of surgery, age,
gender, etc.). The fuzzy clustering technique was used for partitioning the sample space (3-D kinematics and neuromuscular
patterns for each activity for all subjects) and organizing the
data into approximate clusters [23]. Once the clusters were generated, the groups were manually verified and labeled with the
assistance of physiotherapists/trainers as follows: the group of
healthy subjects was identified and the label for each group was
assigned based on the distance of its centroid from the centroid
of healthy subjects’ group (CH ). The centroid of each cluster
(mean of the data points weighted by their degree of belonging
to the cluster) represents the average behavior of the subjects
belonging to that group. If the centroid of a cluster i (Ci ) lies
much closer to the centroid of healthy subjects’ group, it implies
that the ACL-R subjects (data points) belonging to ith group are
at an advanced level of recovery stage. In contrast, a cluster j
with centroid Cj much far from CH represents the group of
the ACL-R subjects (data points) who are partially recovered or
at an early stage of recovery. Thus, depending on the number
of clusters determined, the group labels can be assigned based
on the stage of recovery from stage 1 (farthest to the group of
healthy subjects) to stage n–1 (closest to the group of healthy
subjects) with stage n representing the group of healthy subjects
and n is the total number of clusters identified from the given
data. Based on the pool of subjects available for this study, the
stages were mainly defined as a variation of criteria mentioned
in [3], considering the local norms and rehabilitation protocol
followed by the ACL-R subjects.
8) Recovery Progress Indicator: In order to assess the recovery progress of a particular individual after ACL reconstruction,
a numerical value was computed that correlates to deviation of

457

an ACL-R subject’s data from the normal ambulation and postural control data. The percentage of recovery progress score (Rp )
for each activity i (i = 1, ..., 5) can be calculated as follows:


1
Rp i =
× 100
(1)
→ −
−
→
1 + α × dist( C H i , C R i )
−→
−→
where CH and CR are n-dimensional vectors, representing the
cluster center for healthy subjects for an activity and the transformed vector of average values of parameters for an activity for
a new ACL-R subject, respectively, and α is a positive constant.
Rp can provide an approximate percentage of recovery progress
for an ACL-R subject. The dist was computed using the Mahalanobis distance (2), which is a better distance measure for
pattern recognition problems [41]

→
→ −
−
R − C
 H )T S −1 (C
R − C
 H ) (2)
dist( C H i , C R i ) = (C
i
i
i
i
where S is the covariance matrix for cluster of healthy subjects. The Mahalanobis distance was preferred over Euclidean
distance in order to take into account the covariance among the
variables in calculating distances and avoiding problems related
to scale and correlation.
9) Determining the Current Stage of Recovery of a New Subject: The identification of current recovery stage of a new subject based on the given kinematics and EMG measurements
provides useful complementary information in order to make adjustments in his/her rehabilitation process. An automated identification system has been developed to assess a new subject’s
current recovery stage based on the patterns of 3-D kinematics
and EMG data during five different activities. For each dataset
of an activity, one classifier was trained and tested based on the
groups formed using fuzzy clustering technique. The classification model was developed by using ANFIS based on the subtractive clustering training technique [24]. The ANFIS-based classification was preferred over simple distance metrics because it
can effectively identify the stochastic changes in biosignals, and
can also deal with the impreciseness in measurements and variations in the kinematics and EMG data due to the subjects’ physiological conditions [26], [42]. The ANFIS model was trained
using 75% of data from groups generated during clustering and
then tested on remaining 25% of data after transforming the
input patterns.
10) Determining the Recovery Progress Within the Identified
Stage: After identifying the current stage of recovery of a new
subject, a numerical value can also be computed to determine
the similarity between the new subject and the average of subjects (i.e., centroid of the group) in the identified group. This
information can be useful in distinguishing new subjects who
belong to a group but their characteristics vary from ideal or
average value of the subjects in the identified group. The percentage of recovery within a stage (Rstage ) can be computed
similar to (1) by changing the centroid CH with Cstage representing the centroid of the current stage identified for the new
subject


1
Rstage i =
× 100. (3)
→
−
−
→
1 + α × dist( C stage i , C R i )

458

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

C. Overall Recovery Evaluation
An overall assessment of the recovery stage of a subject can
be done by combining results from individual evaluations for
different activities. Due to variations in a subject’s performance
during a rehabilitation activity or incomplete information for
training of the inference system (ANFIS), different stage of recovery may be identified in each activity for the same subject.
A reliable decision fusion mechanism was employed in order
to achieve combined accurate results. In this study, the results
of recovery stage evaluation from ANFISs have been combined
using Choquet integral method [43]. The Choquet integral is a
nonlinear functional defined with respect to a fuzzy measure g
and its densities. The steps for computing the fusion of evaluations are described below.
Step 1: Let there be i = 1, ..., 5 fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS), denoted by y1 , y2 ,. . .,y5 .
Step 2: Calculate the accuracy of each of the ANFIS by
using cross validation technique for each stage of recovery
stge1 , stage2 ,. . .,stage4 for each activity.
Step 3: Calculate fuzzy measure g i (degree of importance) of
each ANFIS based on its performance calculated in step 2 using
 i
g = βpi ,
i=3
(4)
g i = (1 − β)pi , i = 1, 2, 4, 5
where pi is the identification accuracy rate in the [0,1] interval,
β in interval [0,1] is a scaling factor for ANFISs. The selection
of i = 3 in (4) is based on the reliability/high accuracy value of
the third ANFIS (which is for walking activity at speed 8 km/h).
Step 4: Compute the gλ fuzzy measure by solving (5) such
that λ ∈(−1,+∞) and λ =0
λ+1=

5


(1 + λg i ).

(5)

i=1

Step 5: Let for k = 1, ..., 4 stages of recovery, hk (yi ) represents the partial evaluation of a subject A for stage k, i.e., hk (yi )
indicates the certainty of the identification of subject A to be in
stage k using the ANFIS yi . Arrange hk (yi ) for each stage k =
1, ..., 4 such that h(y0 ) = 0 and h(y1 ) ≤ h(y2 ) ≤ ... ≤ h(yn )
and then rearrange corresponding g i s for each stage.
Step 6: Compute g i (A), a fuzzy measure for A, using (6) for
each stage

g(A1 ) = g 1
(6)
g(Ai ) = g i + g(Ai−1 ) + λg i g(Ai−1 ), 1 < i ≤ 5.
Step 7: Compute the Choquet integral using (7) for each stage
k = 1, ..., 4
ek =

5


(hk (yi ) − hk (yi−1 )).g(Ai ).

(7)

i=1

Step 8: Select the stage of recovery with the highest value of
e computed using (7) as the output (overall recovery stage) of
the fuzzy integration.

Fig. 5. Percentage of cumulative variance explained by first 150 principal
components for five different activities.

IV. RESULTS
A. Features’ Transformation and Analysis
A feature vector was generated for each data segment of a
subject’s test based on the kinematics and EMG features during
different activities. The length of raw feature vector was 903 for
ambulatory activities and 159 for balance activities, representing different properties of knee joint and selected muscles. In
order to remove the redundancy in feature vector/set and making
the recovery evaluation system more efficient, PCA was applied
successfully. Fig. 5 presents the cumulative variations explained
by first 150 principal components (PCs) for five different activities. The curves for percentage of cumulative variation become
straight for all activities as the number of PCs increases showing that almost 100% of variance can be obtained by including
a reasonable number of PCs. The first four PCs explain more
than 50% of the cumulative distribution of variance for all activities except for normal walking activity. This demonstrates
that reduced number of PCs is sufficient for identification task.
Based on the eigenvalue-one criterion, scree plot, percentage
of variance explained and the accuracy of recovery evaluation,
different number of PCs were selected for each activity (four
PCs for normal walking, three PCs for walking at 7 km/h, three
PCs for walking at 8 km/h, five PCs for EO balance testing, and
three PCs for EC balance testing). No further significant improvements in accuracy of recovery evaluation were noticed by
increasing the number of PCs above than as mentioned earlier.
B. Fuzzy Clustering
FCM was applied to the transformed features for each activity in order to form the groups of subjects having similar health
conditions. Based on the available data, four clusters were identified for all activities, which were verified by the physiotherapists
and labeled as “healthy subjects,” “ACL-R Subjects at Stage 3,”
“ACL-R Subjects at Stage 2,” and “ACL-R Subjects at Stage
1” representing different stages of health/recovery condition of
the subjects (stage 1 represents the initial level of recovery and
stage 3 represents the advanced level of recovery). The clusters identified by FCM for normal walking were found more
scattered (see Fig. 6) as compared to closely distributed clusters for higher walking speeds (see Fig. 7). The distributions
of clusters for high walking speeds indicate that gait patterns
for the ACL-R subjects noticeably deviate from the normal gait

MALIK et al.: INTELLIGENT RECOVERY PROGRESS EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR ACL RECONSTRUCTED SUBJECTS

459

Fig. 6. Clusters and their centers identified by FCM for normal walking—
Healthy subjects (+), ACL-R subjects at stage 3 (×), ACL-R subjects at stage
2(∗ ), ACL-R subjects at stage 1 ().

Fig. 9. Comparison of recovery stage identification accuracies for walking and
balance testing activities based on 3-D kinematics features alone and combined
3-D kinematics and EMG features.

Fig. 7. Clusters and their centers identified by FCM for walking at 8 km/h—
Healthy subjects (+), ACL-R subjects at stage 3 (×), ACL-R subjects at stage
2(∗ ), ACL-R subjects at stage 1 ().

Fig. 10. Effect of segment length on the recovery stage identification accuracy
for EO and EC balance testing for combined 3-D kinematics and EMG features.
Fig. 8. Clusters and their centers identified by FCM for EC balance testing
with segment size = 15 s —Healthy subjects (+), ACL-R subjects at stage 3
(×), ACL-R subjects at stage 2(∗ ), ACL-R subjects at stage 1 ().

patterns. For balance testing activities, three different segment
sizes were tested. The clusters for segment size of 15 s were
found more closely distributed for both types of balance testing
activities. For EC balance testing, the clusters’ distribution for
segment of size 15 s is shown in Fig. 8. The purpose of the
ellipses/circles in these figures is to roughly mark and show the
data points belonging to a single cluster.
C. Training and Testing of Recovery Stage Identifier
An automated recovery stage detection model was developed
based on the identified clusters and selected PCs (3-D kinematics and EMG features). For each activity, ANFIS-based classifier was trained and tested by partitioning into training (75%)
and testing (25%) sets using cvpartition function in MATLAB.
The cross validation was performed 100 times and the average
values for identification accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and
F-measure were calculated. In order to evaluate the effective-

ness of data integration, ANFIS-based classifiers were trained
and tested not only for combined (3-D kinematics + EMG)
feature set but also for 3-D kinematics features alone. The outcomes of the classifiers for different activities are illustrated
in Fig. 9. The identification accuracies for ANFIS classifiers
were found higher for combined features set as compared to
only 3-D kinematics feature set for all activities except for normal walking activity. The accuracy due to features’ integration
improved by 4.63%, 5.58%, 37.42%, and 22.09% for walking
at 7 km/h, walking at 8 km/h, EO balance testing, and EC balance testing, respectively. However, for normal walking activity,
the identification accuracy for combined feature set was 1.09%
lower as compared to ANFIS classifier based on 3-D kinematics
features alone. For combined feature set, the highest accuracy
(99.46 ± 0.21%) was found for 8 km/h walking speed and the
lowest accuracy (80.87 ± 12.46%) was found for EC balance
testing activity. The effect of segment length on identification
accuracy for balance testing activities is depicted in Fig. 10.
Maximum accuracy (84.13% for EO and 80.87% for EC) for
both types of balance testing activities was found with a segment
length of 15 s.

460

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
PERFORMANCE MEASURES (SENSITIVITY, SPECIFICITY, AND F-MEASURE) FOR
ALL ACTIVITIES USING COMBINED 3-D KINEMATICS AND EMG FEATURES

In order to compare the performance of individual ANFISs, three statistical measures (sensitivity, specificity, and Fmeasure) were also computed for four different groups (see
Table I). During identification, a data point belonging to one
stage of recovery may be misplaced into other stage of recovery. These measures help in quantifying such misplacements
problems (false negative and false positive). The percentages of
different measures in Table I are reported to the nearest whole
percentile. In general, for ambulatory activities, the values for
these measures were found more than 95% which shows very
low misidentification rate. However, for balance testing activities, these measures have values mostly below 90%, which suggests that misidentification rates of the trained model are little
higher for balance testing activities as compared to ambulatory
activities.
D. Validation of Proposed System
In order to validate the proposed system, a dataset of testing
activities from five new ACL-R subjects with known recovery
status was used. PCA coefficient matrices were applied on the
collected kinematics and EMG data (average of ten gait cycles per trial for ambulation activities and three trials of 15-s
segments of balance testing activities) for new subjects, and
different proposed metrics were used to determine their level

TABLE II
RECOVERY EVALUATION FOR FIVE SUBJECTS FOR DIFFERENT ACTIVITIES

of recovery condition based on transformed features. Table II
presents the mean (S.D) of percentage of recovery progress (1),
recovery stage, and percentage of recovery within the identified
stage (3) for three trials for five subjects during different activities monitored for testing. The percentages of different measures
in Table II are reported to the nearest whole percentile. The value
of α was chosen between 0.01 to 0.04 in (1) and (3) for validation data based on maximum similarity value for the centroid of
respective clusters.
In order to verify the recovery evaluation of subjects, subjective assessments from two experts (the physiotherapist, and
physical strength and conditioning coach) were used. An overall assessment of current recovery status for each subject was
given by these experts based on their judgments and standard
physical fitness test scores (Tegner/Lysholm scores, assessment
of leg press, half squat and vertical/horizontal jumps, etc.) for
ACL-R subjects. The scales for subjective evaluation used by
the physiotherapists were as follows: excellent (>90%), good
(84–90%), fair (65–83%), and Poor (<65%). While the subjective grades used by the physical strength and conditioning
coach were A (94–100%), B (77–93%), C (60–76%), D (43–

MALIK et al.: INTELLIGENT RECOVERY PROGRESS EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR ACL RECONSTRUCTED SUBJECTS

TABLE III
COMPARING SUBJECTIVE ASSESSMENT AND RECOVERY EVALUATION
COMPUTED BY THE PROPOSED SYSTEM

59%), and E (26–42%). Table III shows the comparison of
overall subjective assessments (grade and percentages) given
by the experts and an overall recovery value (stage and average percentage of recovery progress for all activities) obtained using proposed system by combining the evaluation results using Choquet integral method. Based on the accuracies
of the five ANFIS recovery stage identifiers, the fuzzy densities of each systems were computed as g 1 = 0.2861, g 2 =
0.2954, g 3 = 0.6962, g 4 = 0.2524, g 5 = 0.2426 by using (4)
with β = 0.7 giving the maximum recognition rate. The value
of λ was found to be −0.8603 by using (5). By calculating
the g(Ai )s and h(yi )s, the Choquet integral was used to compute the final recovery evaluation. The subjective assessments
and the recovery stage identified by the proposed method are
mostly consistent for all subjects. The percentages mentioned
in the parentheses vary as these depend on the range assigned
by different experts and techniques used to compute the values.
The average percentage of recovery progress for all activities
computed by the proposed system depends on the formation of
respective clusters. However, a trend can be noticed for recovery
evaluation values such that the subjects with lower percentage
of subjective assessments also have low percentage of recovery
computed by the proposed system while the subjects with higher
percentage of subjective assessments also have high percentage
of recovery computed by the proposed system.
V. DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to test the viability of an intelligent system for objectively evaluating the rehabilitation progress
of ACL-R subjects. The high values of performance measures
(accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and F-measure) and validation
suggest that recovery evaluation of ACL-R subjects can be determined using integrated 3-D kinematics and EMG patterns,
collected during ambulatory and single-leg balancing activities.
The individual evaluation results of different activities can be
combined to find out an overall recovery status of each subject.
Based on the clusters’ formation, numeric measures can also be
computed in order to indicate how well a particular individual
is recovering after ACL reconstruction.

461

The proposed system uses wireless motion and EMG sensors to effectively measure the lower extremity movements of
the ACL-R subjects, while performing different ambulatory and
balance testing activities. These portable sensor units facilitated data recording during dynamic rehabilitation testing activities where the use of traditional measuring equipment (e.g.,
arthrometer/goniometer, wired EMG units) could be obstructive and cumbersome. The parameters measured by the sensors
units were 3-D kinematics movements and neuromuscular signals, which are usually altered due to ACL injury and post ACL
reconstruction [1]. Two recovery stage evaluation models, one
based on 3-D kinematics feature set and the second based on
combined 3-D kinematics and EMG features, were designed and
their accuracies were compared. The feature integration-based
model performs superior than 3-D kinematics-based model for
high speed walking and balance testing activities. In particular,
for single-leg balance testing activities the recovery stage identification performance of the 3-D kinematics model was substantially low as compared to feature integration-based model.
However, for normal walking, the identification accuracy of 3-D
kinematics-based model is slightly higher (96.41%) than the integrated feature set model (95.36%). The results of this study indicate that higher performance (see Fig. 10) can be achieved for
identification of recovery stage of ACL reconstructed subjects
using combined feature set as compared to only 3-D kinematics
data, which is in line with the previous studies mentioning the
effect of muscle strength and recruitment on restitution of knee
function and gait patterns after ACL surgery [5], [6], [44], [45].
The categorization of the ACL-R subjects into different
groups based on their kinematics and neuromuscular patterns
during ambulatory and balance testing activities has been implemented using fuzzy clustering technique, which was a novel
approach so far not applied by other researchers in the domain
of ACL recovery analysis. One of the main advantages of using
fuzzy clustering was that it formed different groups based on
the similarities among different subjects’ characteristics (kinematics and EMG data) rather than depending on the time from
surgery. Such grouping is effective as even though the ACLR subject follow same rehabilitation procedures but still there
are variations in their physiological conditions and compliance
to the protocol. Similar trend was noted in this study, where
the ACL-R subjects were in the range of 2–13 months postsurgery and followed the same rehabilitation protocol. Additionally, fuzzy clustering deals well with the intrasubject variations by forming soft clusters, which may occur during different
trials. During the clusters’ analysis, it was found that some of
the data points lie on the boundary of different groups, which
depicts that these points belong to different clusters with some
membership value and it was unavoidable to completely categorize them into a single group (see Figs. 6 and 8). A possible
reason for this overlapping is the intrasubject variability, which
can cause some of the data points of a subject to be scattered
in the same cluster. It was found that clusters become more
distinct for high speeds walking and the overlapping between
clusters reduced as we moved from lower to higher speeds (see
Fig. 7). A numerical indicator representing the deviation of an
ACL-R subject’s data from normal patterns was computed using

462

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

center of the cluster for healthy subjects. This numerical value
gives an approximate percentage of recovery progress and provides a quantitative feedback to subjects in order to help them
accomplish required training within specified time period and
timely return to the preinjury activities. The accuracy of this
parameter depends on the quality of healthy subjects’ cluster
and parameters included in forming the clusters.
The recovery stage identification model was developed by
using ANFIS technique because of its capability of dealing with
imprecise data and nonlinear models. Pattern learning ability of
ANFIS enabled to design an identification model with high accuracy from motion and EMG data (see Fig. 10). This suggests
that the combination of FL with the learning capabilities of neural network is well suited for classifying the recovery progress
of the ACL-R subjects for different activities based on the 3-D
kinematics and EMG features. However, for large feature set,
ANFIS takes longer training time. The training time was shortened by using feature transformation and reduction technique
(PCA), which not only reduced the redundancy in feature set
but also made the training and testing process more efficient.
These validated ANFIS-based identifiers can be applied to evaluate the performance of a new ACL-R subject during individual
ambulatory and dynamic balance testing activities by providing
the rehabilitation progress in terms of recovery stage (Stage 1 to
Stage n) and the results can be combined using choquet integral
to determine the overall postsurgery improvements. This new
method provides an objective assessment of ACL recovery as
compared to previously existing subjective measures.
The restoration of knee joint function after ACL reconstruction is a multifactor problem. In addition to 3-D kinematics and
EMG signals, there are several other parameters (e.g., gender,
age, height, type of graft used for surgery, kinetics, secondary
injuries, psychological factors, etc.), which may impact the rehabilitation progress of an ACL-R subject. Moreover, there are
number of muscles active during different types of human motion activities, which may also affect the performance of subjects/athletes. These parameters can be taken into consideration
to enhance and refine the recovery evaluation model developed
in this research. The developed system has been tested for five
fundamental activities using available the ACL-R subjects. The
study will be expanded by collecting data for other activities
(jumping, running, cutting, etc.) and including more subjects
for the experiments. Thus, the system will be trained with large
number of healthy and the ACL-R subjects so that the clusters
are well formed and variations in data are covered, which would
help in performing a more comprehensive recovery analysis.
VI. CONCLUSION
A novel approach has been presented in this study for identification and quantification of recovery progress of the ACL-R
subjects based on intelligent techniques and multimodal feature integration mechanism. The noninvasive wireless sensors
facilitated 3-D kinematics and neuromuscular data recording
from knee joint and relevant proximate muscles during ambulatory and dynamic balance testing activities. Different statistical
and time-frequency features were extracted from recorded data

in order to identify the fuzzy clusters and training/testing of
ANFIS-based identifiers for each activity. An overall recovery
assessment was computed by combining the evaluation results
of individual activities. A quantitative feedback was also generated to indicate the percentage of recovery of the ACL-R
subjects as compared to healthy subjects based on the identified clusters. The high accuracy results obtained in this study
demonstrate the viability of the developed system for monitoring the postsurgery performance of the ACL-R subjects. The
system has been implemented such a way that additional tools
and routines can be added based on more activities and features
identified in the clinical environment. This system can be used as
a decision supporting tool, in addition to the existing rehabilitation monitoring mechanisms, to enable the clinicians, trainers,
and physiotherapists to objectively monitor the rehabilitation
progress of athletes and their compliance to the rehabilitation
protocol during different convalescence stages in order to help
them accomplish required training within specified time period
and timely return to the preinjury activities.
REFERENCES
[1] T. E. Hewett, S. L. Di Stasi, and G. D. Myer, “Current concepts for injury
prevention in athletes after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction,”
Amer. J. Sports Med., vol. 41, pp. 216–24, 2012.
[2] J. J. Irrgang, “Current status of measuring clinical outcomes after anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction: Are we good enough?,” Operative Techn.
Sports Med. Double-Bundle Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction,
vol. 16, pp. 119–124, 2008.
[3] G. D. Myer, M. V. Paterno, K. R. Ford, C. E. Quatman, and T. E. Hewett,
“Rehabilitation after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: Criteriabased progression through the return-to-sport phase,” J. Orthop. Sports
Phys. Ther., vol. 36, pp. 385–402, 2006.
[4] D. Adams, D. S. Logerstedt, A. Hunter-Giordano, M. J. Axe, and
L. Snyder-Mackler, “Current concepts for anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: A criterion-based rehabilitation progression,” J. Orthop.
Sports Phys. Ther., vol. 42, pp. 601–614, 2012.
[5] M. Lewek, K. Rudolph, M. Axe, and L. Snyder-Mackler, “The effect of
insufficient quadriceps strength on gait after anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction,” Clin. Biomech. (Bristol, Avon), vol. 17, pp. 56–63, 2002.
[6] A. C. Thomas, M. Villwock, E. M. Wojtys, and R. M. Palmieri-Smith,
“Lower extremity muscle strength after anterior cruciate ligament injury
and reconstruction,” J. Athl. Train., vol. 48, pp. 610–620, 2013.
[7] S. F. Scanlan, A. M. Chaudhari, C. O. Dyrby, and T. P. Andriacchi, “Differences in tibial rotation during walking in ACL reconstructed and healthy
contralateral knees,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, pp. 1817–1822, 2010.
[8] B. Gao and N. N. Zheng, “Alterations in three-dimensional joint kinematics of anterior cruciate ligament-deficient and -reconstructed knees during
walking,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 25, pp. 222–229, 2010.
[9] B. E. Oiestad, L. Engebretsen, K. Storheim, and M. A. Risberg, “Knee
osteoarthritis after anterior cruciate ligament injury: A systematic review,”
Amer. J. Sports Med., vol. 37, pp. 1434–1443, 2009.
[10] B. D. Beynnon, R. J. Johnson, J. A. Abate, B. C. Fleming, and
C. E. Nichols, “Treatment of anterior cruciate ligament injuries, part i,”
Amer. J. Sports Med., vol. 33, pp. 1579–1602, 2005.
[11] R. Papannagari, T. J. Gill, L. E. Defrate, J. M. Moses, A. J. Petruska,
and G. Li, “In vivo kinematics of the knee after anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction: A clinical and functional evaluation,” Amer. J. Sports Med.,
vol. 34, pp. 2006–2012, 2006.
[12] S. N. De Jong, D. R. Van Caspel, M. J. Van Haeff, and D. B. Saris, “Functional assessment and muscle strength before and after reconstruction of
chronic anterior cruciate ligament lesions,” Arthroscopy, vol. 23, pp. 21–
28, 2007.
[13] G. D. Myer, K. R. Ford, K. D. Barber Foss, C. Liu, T. G. Nick, and
T. E. Hewett, “The relationship of hamstrings and quadriceps strength
to anterior cruciate ligament injury in female athletes,” Clin. J. Sport
Med., vol. 19, pp. 3–8, 2009.
[14] D. T. H. Lai, R. K. Begg, and M. Palaniswami, “Computational intelligence in gait research: A perspective on current applications and future

MALIK et al.: INTELLIGENT RECOVERY PROGRESS EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR ACL RECONSTRUCTED SUBJECTS

[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]

challenges,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 687–
702, Sep. 2009.
P. M. Ermes, P. Korpipaa, J. Mantyjarvi, J. Peltola, and I. Korhonen,
“Activity classification using realistic data from wearable sensors,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 119–128, Jan. 2006.
Z. Heydari, F. Farahmand, H. Arabalibeik, and M. Parnianpour, “Adaptive
neuro-fuzzy inference system for classification of ACL-ruptured knees
using arthrometric data,” Annu. Biomed. Eng., vol. 36, pp. 1449–1457,
2008.
G. Leporace, L. A. Batista, A. M. Muniz, G. Zeitoune, T. Luciano,
L. Metsavaht, and J. Nadal, “Classification of gait kinematics of anterior cruciate ligament reconstructed subjects using principal component
analysis and regressions modelling,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2012, vol. 2012, pp. 6514–6517.
M. Alaqtash, T. Sarkodie-Gyan, H. Yu, O. Fuentes, R. Brower, and
A. Abdelgawad, “Automatic classification of pathological gait patterns
using ground reaction forces and machine learning algorithms,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, vol. 2011, pp. 453–457.
D. M. Karantonis, M. R. Narayanan, M. Mathie, N. H. Lovell, and
B. G. Celler, “Implementation of a real-time human movement classifier
using a triaxial accelerometer for ambulatory monitoring,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 156–167, Jan. 2006.
H. Ghasemzadeh, R. Jafari, and B. Prabhakaran, “A body sensor network
with electromyogram and inertial sensors: Multimodal interpretation of
muscular activities,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 198–206, Mar. 2010.
S. Senanayake, O. A. Malik, M. Iskandar, and D. Zaheer, “3-D kinematics and neuromuscular signals’ integration for post ACL reconstruction
recovery assessment,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. EMBS, Osaka,
Japan, 2013, pp. 7221–7225.
G. N. Pradhan and B. Prabhakaran, “Analyzing and visualizing jump performance using wireless body sensors,” ACM Trans. Embed. Comput.
Syst., vol. 11, pp. 1–26, 2012.
J. C. Bezdek, Pattern Recognition With Fuzzy Objective Function Algorithms. Norwell, MA, USA: Kluwer, 1981.
J.-S. R. Jang, “ANFIS: Adaptive-network-based fuzzy inference system,”
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 665–685, May/Jun.
1993.
A. A. Gopalai and S. M. N. A. A. Senanayake, “A wearable realtime intelligent posture corrective system using vibrotactile feedback,”
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mech., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 827–834, Oct. 2011.
A. Subasi, “Classification of EMG signals using combined features and
soft computing techniques,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 12, pp. 2188–2198,
2012.
R. Merletti, “Standards for reporting EMG data,” J. Electromyography
Kinesiol., vol. 9, pp. III–IV, 1999.
N. Lopomo, C. Signorelli, T. Bonanzinga, G. M. Marcheggiani Muccioli,
A. Visani, and S. Zaffagnini, “Quantitative assessment of pivot-shift using
inertial sensors,” Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc., vol. 20, pp. 713–
717, 2012.
H. Lau and K. Tong, “The reliability of using accelerometer and gyroscope
for gait event identification on persons with dropped foot,” Gait Posture,
vol. 27, pp. 248–257, 2008.
H. J. Hermens, B. Freriks, C. Disselhorst-Klug, and G. Rau, “Development of recommendations for SEMG sensors and sensor placement procedures,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 10, pp. 361–374, 2000.

463

[31] R. S. Uiterkamp, “Ambulatory knee monitoring in the rehabilitation process following ACL reconstruction,” in Biomedical Engineering. Enschede, The Netherlands: Univ. of Twente, 2010, p. 134.
[32] S. Madgwick, “An efficient orientation filter for inertial and inertial/magnetic sensor arrays,” Dept. Mech. Eng., Rep. x-io and Univ. Bristol, Bristol, U.K., 2010.
[33] J. M. Jasiewicz, J. H. J. Allum, J. W. Middleton, A. Barriskill, P. Condie,
B. Purcell, and R. C. T. Li, “Gait event detection using linear accelerometers or angular velocity transducers in able-bodied and spinal-cord injured
individuals,” Gait Posture, vol. 24, pp. 502–509, 2006.
[34] J. Perry. (1992). Gait Analysis: Normal and Pathological Function, Florence, KY, USA:, 1992.
[35] K. E. Webster and J. A. Feller, “Alterations in joint kinematics during
walking following hamstring and patellar tendon anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction surgery,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 26, pp. 175–180, 2011.
[36] G. Wu, S. Siegler, P. Allard, C. Kirtley, A. Leardini, D. Rosenbaum,
M. Whittle, D. D. D’Lima, L. Cristofolini, H. Witte, O. Schmid, and
I. Stokes, “ISB recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate system
of various joints for the reporting of human joint motion—Part I: Ankle, hip, and spine. International society of biomechanics,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 35, pp. 543–548, 2002.
[37] W. C. Mostertz, “Quantifying antalgic gait knee function using inertial
sensor technology,” in Biological and Agricultural Engineering. Clemson, SC, USA: Clemson Univ., 2008, p. 78.
[38] A. Phinyomark, A. Nuidod, P. Phukpattaranont, and C. Limsakul, “Feature
extraction and reduction of wavelet transform coefficients for EMG pattern
classification,” Elektronika ir Elektrotechnika, vol. 122, pp. 27–32, 2012.
[39] I. T. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis, 2nd ed. New York, NY,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[40] A. C. Rencher and W. F. Christensen, Methods of Multivariate Analysis.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2012.
[41] R. De Maesschalck, D. Jouan-Rimbaud, and D. L. Massart, “The mahalanobis distance,” Chemometrics Intell. Lab. Syst., vol. 50, pp. 1–18,
2000.
[42] M. Khezri and M. Jahed, “A neuro–fuzzy inference system for SEMGbased identification of hand motion commands,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1952–1960, May 2011.
[43] T. Murofushi and M. Sugeno, “An interpretation of fuzzy measures and
the choquet integral as an integral with respect to a fuzzy measure,” Fuzzy
Sets Syst., vol. 29, pp. 201–227, 1989.
[44] M. C. Morrissey, D. M. Hooper, W. I. Drechsler, and H. J. Hill, “Relationship of leg muscle strength and knee function in the early period after
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction,” Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports,
vol. 14, pp. 360–366, 2004.
[45] R. Thomee, Y. Kaplan, J. Kvist, G. Myklebust, M. A. Risberg, D. Theisen,
E. Tsepis, S. Werner, B. Wondrasch, and E. Witvrouw, “Muscle strength
and hop performance criteria prior to return to sports after ACL reconstruction,” Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc., vol. 19, pp. 1798–1805,
2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

