IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

2451

Improved Subspace Estimation for Low-Rank
Model-Based Accelerated Cardiac Imaging
Anthony G. Christodoulou, Student Member, IEEE, T. Kevin Hitchens, Yijen L. Wu, Chien Ho,
and Zhi-Pei Liang∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Sparse sampling methods have emerged as effective
tools to accelerate cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Low-rank model-based cardiac imaging uses a predetermined temporal subspace for image reconstruction from highly undersampled (k, t)-space data and has been demonstrated effective for
high-speed cardiac MRI. The accuracy of the temporal subspace is
a key factor in these methods, yet little work has been published on
data acquisition strategies to improve subspace estimation. This
paper investigates the use of non-Cartesian k-space trajectories
to replace the Cartesian trajectories that are omnipresent but
are highly sensitive to readout direction. We also propose “selfnavigated” pulse sequences that collect both navigator data (for
determining the temporal subspace) and imaging data after every
RF pulse, allowing for even greater acceleration. We investigate
subspace estimation strategies through analysis of phantom images and demonstrate in vivo cardiac imaging in rats and mice
without the use of ECG or respiratory gating. The proposed methods achieved 3-D imaging of wall motion, first-pass myocardial
perfusion, and late gadolinium enhancement in rats at 74 frames/s,
as well as 2-D imaging of wall motion in mice at 97 frames/s.
Index Terms—Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), low-rank imaging, MRI pulse sequences, partial separability (PS), subspace estimation.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE practical utility of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is limited by its relatively low imaging speed.
In recent years, significant effort has been made to accelerate cardiovascular MRI using sparse sampling data acquisition
strategies. Early examples of sparse sampling for cardiac MRI
include DIME [1], UNFOLD [2], and k-t BLAST [3]; more recent methods use sparsity models (often known as compressed
sensing, e.g., [4]–[8]), low-rank models (e.g., [9]–[12]), or

T

hybrids of both (e.g., [13]–[16]). It has been demonstrated that
these methods are effective for accelerating cardiac MRI.
A key component in low-rank model-based imaging with explicit subspace constraints is the acquisition of navigators for
subspace estimation. Existing methods collect navigators using
separate RF pulses, often with Cartesian trajectories. Such methods have relatively low data acquisition efficiency and can miss
temporal components (e.g., those associated with object translation in the direction perpendicular to the sampling trajectory).
This paper focuses on investigating navigator strategies to improve temporal subspace estimation, increasing imaging speed,
and reducing sensitivity to orientation of the sampling trajectory.
More specifically, we investigate the use of 2-D spiral and 3-D
cone navigators, as these trajectories measure k-space locations
more representative of the full set of k-space locations than do
Cartesian navigators. We also introduce faster “self-navigated”
pulse sequences that collect both navigator data and imaging
data within each TR (i.e., after every RF pulse). We accomplish
self-navigation using a novel “music note” (♪) trajectory.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides background on subspace imaging with low-rank models.
Section III describes the proposed method. Section IV shows
simulated and experimental results. Section V contains the
conclusion.
II. LOW-RANK MODEL-BASED IMAGING
A. Partial Separability (PS) and Subspace Modeling
The PS model expresses a cardiovascular image sequence
ρ(r, t) as
ρ(r, t) =

Manuscript received December 29, 2013; revised March 19, 2014; accepted
April 16, 2014. Date of publication April 24, 2014; date of current version
August 18, 2014. This work was supported by the National Institute of Health
under the Grant NIH-R01-EB013695, Grant NIH-P41-EB001977, and Grant
NIH-P41-EB015904. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. G. Christodoulou is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering and the Beckman Institute of Advanced Science and Technology,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (e-mail:
christo8@illinois.edu).
T. K. Hitchens, Y. L. Wu, and C. Ho are with the Pittsburgh NMR Center for Biomedical Research, Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: hitchens@cmu.edu;
y127@andrew.cmu.edu; chienho@andrew.cmu.edu).
∗ Z.-P. Liang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Beckman Institute of Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana IL 61801 USA
(e-mail: z-liang@uiuc.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2320463

L


ψ (r)ϕ (t).

(1)

=1

Correspondingly, the (k, t)-space signal d(k, t) =
Fr {ρ(r, t)} can be written as

L

d(k, t) = ρ(r, t)e−i2π k·r dr =
(2)
ψ̃ (k)ϕ (t)
=1

where ψ̃ (k) = Fr {ψ (r)}. The Lth-order PS model in (2) implies that the following Casorati matrix formed from d(km , tn )
N
from any sampling points specified by {km }M
m =1 and {tn }n =1 ,
⎤
⎡
d(k1 , t1 ) d(k1 , t2 ) . . . d(k1 , tN )
⎢ d(k , t ) d(k , t ) . . . d(k , t ) ⎥
⎢
2 1
2 2
2 N ⎥
C(d) = ⎢
⎥
..
..
..
..
⎦
⎣
.
.
.
.
d(kM , t1 ) d(kM , t2 ) . . . d(kM , tN )

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

has a rank no larger than L [10], [11]; the same is true for
C(ρ) (the Casorati matrix of the image ρ). Equations (1) and
(2) permit matrix factorization: C(ρ) = ΨΦ and C(d) = Ψ̃Φ,
where Ψij = ψj (ri ), Ψ̃ij = ψ̃j (ki ), and Φij = ϕi (tj ).
The PS of ρ(r, t) or d(k, t) implies that the signal resides in a
low-dimensional subspace. More specifically, in terms of its Casorati matrix representation, C(d) and C(ρ) belong, in general,
to C M ×N , but because of their low-rankness induced by PS, they
actually reside in an L-dimensional subspace SΦ , spanned by,
for example, {[ϕ (t1 ), ϕ (t2 ), . . . , ϕ (tN )]}L=1 . This subspace
property enables accelerated imaging with sparse sampling.
B. Subspace-Based Accelerated Imaging
Subspace imaging can be implemented in two ways: Type-1)
with a known temporal subspace SΦ (determined from auxiliary/navigator data [9], [10], [14]); and Type-2) with an unknown SΦ (to be determined from the sparse imaging data [11],
[15]). This paper is focused on type-1 subspace imaging.
Data acquisition for type-1 subspace imaging is characterized
by the collection of two sets of (k, t)-space data: 1) a navigator dataset D1 that covers limited k-space locations at a high
temporal rate (to enable high temporal resolution); and 2) an
imaging dataset D2 with the desired contrast-weighting, which
covers (k, t)-space sparsely (to enable high spatial resolution).
The navigator data D1 are used to determine SΦ and then Φ,
which is often done using the L most significant right singular
vectors of C(D1 ). This approach is based on the assumption
that D1 and D2 share the same temporal subspace, which is
valid. However, D1 often covers a very limited set of k-space
locations (to obtain high temporal resolution), which may not
capture all the temporal components in the extended k-space
covered by D2 . This paper is focused on addressing this issue.
Image reconstruction in type-1 subspace imaging is equivalent to recovery of Ψ from D2 given Φ. This is often accomplished through a regularized least-squares model fitting
problem in the form
Ψ̂ = arg min d − Ω{Ψ̃Φ}2 + G(Ψ)
Ψ

(3)

where d is the measured data, Ω{·} is the sparse sampling operator, and G(·) is the regularization function. For the purposes
of this paper, we will consider the regularization function from
[16]
G(Ψ) = λ1 R{Ψ}1,2 + λ2 vec(ΨΦF t )1

(4)

where R{Ψ}1,2 is a group sparsity penalty that imposes a
spatially varying model-order constraint (allowing model order
L1 over the noncardiac region and model order L2 ≥ L1 over
the cardiac region), and vec(ΨΦF t )1 is the spatial-spectral
sparsity constraint widely used in compressed sensing cardiac
MRI (e.g., [4]–[6], [8], [13], [14]). The final reconstructed image
is calculated as Ĉ(ρ) = Ψ̂Φ.
C. Subspace Error
Accurate estimation of the subspace SΦ and thus Φ
is essential for accurate image reconstruction in subspace
imaging. Potential sources of error in the estimated subspace

Fig. 1. Demonstration of the null space problem using central Cartesian navigators. (a) One frame of a numerical phantom and (b) a spatiotemporal slice
through the dotted line. Spatiotemporal slices after projecting the phantom onto
the subspace S Φ̂ estimated from (c) horizontal and (d) vertical Cartesian navigators through the k-space origin. The vertical translation of the gray circle is
not captured by the horizontal navigator, and the horizontal translational of the
white circle is not captured by the vertical navigator.

SΦ̂ are measurement noise and limited k-space coverage of D1 .
Both sources of error are closely tied to the choice of navigator trajectories (i.e., navigator k-space locations). Although
measurement noise is unavoidable, navigator trajectories can
be chosen to traverse regions of k-space that generally have
high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) (e.g., central k-space). The
second source of error occurs when SΦ nontrivially intersects
a null space associated with the chosen navigator trajectory,
preventing accurate subspace estimation even under noiseless
conditions: C(D1 ) ∈ SΦ̂ ⊂ SΦ , with dim(SΦ̂ ) < L.
A simple example of this null space problem arises for any
navigator trajectory, which is a line through the k-space origin:
here, the navigator data are Fourier-transformed projections of
ρ(r, t), so any translation of ρ(r, t) perpendicular to the navigator direction will have no effect on D1 and will, therefore,
go undetected. Fig. 1 shows the results of projecting a numerical phantom onto subspaces estimated from horizontal [ky = 0,
pictured in Fig. 3(a)] and vertical (kx = 0) Cartesian navigators.
This phantom depicts a large gray circle that translates vertically
and a small white circle that translates horizontally; additionally, the two circles live in orthogonal temporal subspaces. The
horizontal navigator fails to capture vertical translation, and the
vertical navigator fails to capture horizontal translation.
In this paper, we quantify the error between the estimated
subspace SΦ̂ and the true subspace SΦ in terms of Epro j , the
error that results from projecting C(ρ) onto SΦ̂ (i.e., the distance
between C(ρ) and SΦ̂ ), as well as Erec , the error that results
from reconstructing C(ρ) ∈ SΦ̂ from noisy sparse data. Epro j
is defined as the normalized root-mean-square (NRMS) error of
Ĉpro j (ρ) = C(ρ)Φ̂H Φ̂ = arg minX∈S Φ̂ C(ρ) − XF
Epro j (Φ̂) =

C(ρ) − Ĉpro j (ρ)F
C(ρ)(I − Φ̂H Φ̂)F
=
C(ρ)F
C(ρ)F

Erec is the NRMS error of Ĉrec (ρ), the reconstruction from
noisy sparse imaging data d = Ω{C(ρ)} + η (where η is the
noise vector) according to (3) and (4)
Erec (Φ̂) =

C(ρ) − Ĉrec (ρ)F
.
C(ρ)F

Epro j quantifies the optimal reconstruction (in the Frobenius
norm sense) of C(ρ) given SΦ̂ ; Erec quantifies the error of a
practically achievable reconstruction of C(ρ).

CHRISTODOULOU et al.: IMPROVED SUBSPACE ESTIMATION FOR LOW-RANK MODEL-BASED ACCELERATED CARDIAC IMAGING

2453

Fig. 3. Illustrations of the k-space trajectories used for simulations: (a) Cartesian, (b) spiral, (c) music note.

gradient combinations and k-space trajectories could be used
for self-navigation, and that the pulse sequence described here
simply represents one possible implementation of the proposed
data acquisition strategy.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 2. FLASH sequences with slice spoiler, illustrating (a) the conventional
navigation strategy, (b) one possible variation of the proposed self-navigated
strategy, and (c) the music note trajectory navigated during the “read dephase”
portion of (b). The self-navigated sequence is shorter than the conventional
sequence, leading to faster imaging at higher frame rates.

III. IMPROVED DATA ACQUISITION FOR SUBSPACE ESTIMATION
We propose to improve the data acquisition sequence for lowrank model-based cardiac MRI in the following ways: 1) replace
the conventional Cartesian trajectories with 2-D spiral trajectories (or 3-D cone trajectories, in the case of 3-D imaging); and
2) perform self-navigation using 2-D music note trajectories
instead of using separate pulses for collecting the navigator signals (as illustrated in Fig. 2). Unlike the Cartesian trajectories,
each of these trajectories has no problem detecting translation
perpendicular to the readout direction; this makes subspace estimation robust to navigator orientation. The self-navigated pulse
sequence acquires navigator and imaging data within a single
TR , increasing the temporal resolution of the estimated subspace; this is especially useful for applications with very high
temporal resolution requirements (e.g., mouse imaging).
The proposed data acquisition strategy can be implemented by
modifying existing low-rank model-based imaging sequences.
Typically, an imaging readout is preceded by three gradient
pulses: a slice rephasing pulse, a read dephasing pulse, and a
phase encoding pulse, which can be applied either simultaneously or in sequence. Fig. 2 shows an example of slice-spoiled
FLASH pulse sequences implementing separated navigation
and self-navigation, respectively. Note that for self-navigation,
we applied the slice rephasing, read dephasing, and phase encoding pulses in sequence, collecting navigator data during slice
rephasing and read dephasing [as seen in Fig. 2(b)]. Our “read
dephasing” gradient actually traverses the 2-D music note trajectory illustrated in Fig. 2(c), ending in the same k-space location
as the 1-D Cartesian read dephase trajectory which it replaces.
The music note trajectory is a practical and efficient stand-in
for a spiral trajectory, traversing a high-SNR region of k-space
with low gradient slew rates. It should also be noted that other

A. Evaluation
1) Simulation Results: We used a numerical cardiac phantom to synthesize and compare different navigator trajectories
and the accuracy of the resulting temporal subspaces. We measured six sets of noisy navigator data using the three trajectories
in Fig. 3, as well as those same trajectories rotated clockwise
by 90◦ . The SVD of the ith noisy navigator dataset yielded each
Φ̂i , which were used to define the temporal subspaces.
The cardiac phantom was generated from 256 × 256 in vivo
human MR cardiac images and features variable-rate cardiac
and respiratory motion. The images were collected using retrospective ECG and respiratory gating, resulting in images of a
single representative cardiac cycle. These images were looped
and time-warped to simulate a variable-rate heartbeat, and then
spatially deformed to simulate variable-rate respiration. White
complex Gaussian noise with a blood-to-myocardium contrastto-noise ratio of 10 was added to all simulated data to better
represent realistic experimental conditions. For simulated sparse
sampling, Ω{·} retained only one random k-space line per time
frame.
Fig. 4 depicts an 81 × 81 closeup of the heart from the
gold standard ρ(r, t), from the direct Fourier reconstruction
of fully sampled noisy data, and from {Ĉrec,i (ρ)}6i=1 , reconstructed from sparsely sampled noisy data using L1 = 14
and L2 = 32. Error images (scaled by a factor of 3) are also
shown for all reconstructions. Table I shows the corresponding
NRMS errors {Erec (Φ̂i )}6i=1 . Fig. 5 shows the NRMS errors
for {Epro j (Φ̂i )}6i=1 over a variety of ranks.
2) Experimental Results: Throughout the rest of this paper,
all pulse sequences are customized FLASH sequences. All animals received humane care in compliance with the Guide for
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the National Academy of Science [17], and the animal protocol was
approved by the Carnegie Mellon University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
To compare subspace estimation schemes in vivo in rats,
we implemented different navigator schemes using customized FLASH pulse sequences. We modified the two-pulse

2454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. NRMS errors {E p ro j (Φ̂ i )}6i = 1 over a range of ranks. Rotation of the
Cartesian navigator causes noticeably larger error. The spiral navigator is robust
to rotation, yielding similar error amounts regardless of rotation. The music note
navigators are the most accurate and are also robust to rotation.

Fig. 4. Closeup (left) and error image (right, scaled by a factor of 3) from one
frame of (a) the gold standard image ρ(r, t), (b) the direct Fourier reconstruction
from fully sampled noisy data, and (c–h) {Ĉ re c , i (ρ)}6i = 1 (L 1 = 14, L 2 =
32) reconstructed from sparsely sampled noisy data. The navigator data were
collected using the (c) Cartesian, (d) rotated Cartesian, (e) spiral, (f) rotated
spiral, (g) music note, and (h) rotated music note trajectories. Rotation of the
Cartesian navigator causes spatiotemporal blurring, with examples indicated by
the arrows. Regardless of rotation, the spiral and music note navigators yield
similar visual quality to the unrotated Cartesian navigator.

TABLE I.
NRMS ERRORS {E re c (Φ̂ i )}6i = 1

Standard
Rotated

Cartesian

Spiral

Music note

5.63%
5.90%

5.70%
5.67%

5.61%
5.66%

navigation strategy [see Fig. 2(a)] to use spiral navigators, and
we performed self-navigation using a music note navigator [see
Fig. 2(b)]. Both experiments used Cartesian trajectories to collect D2 . For reference, we also acquired 2-D self-gated cine
images using the Bruker IntraGate technique (Bruker BioSpin
MRI, Ettlingen, Germany).
Experiments were conducted on a Bruker Avance AV1 4.7
T scanner equipped with a B-GA12 gradient set capable of
400-mT/m maximum gradient strength and a four-channel array
coil. Imaging data were collected with FA = 18◦ , FOV = 40 mm
× 40 mm, matrix size = 256 × 256, spatial resolution = 0.16 mm

× 0.16 mm, slice thickness = 2 mm, and imaging time = 5 min.
Parallel acceleration was performed as in [16] with NACS = 32
and P = 2. The timing parameters for each imaging method
were selected for maximum speed: the Cartesian- and spiralnavigated images were collected with TE = 3.0 ms and TR =
6.8 ms, for a frame rate of 74 frames/s (fps); the self-navigated
images were collected with TE = 4.9 ms and TR = 10.5 ms, for
a frame rate of 95 fps; and the IntraGate images were collected
with TE = 3.6 ms, TR = 7.3 ms, and ten frames per cardiac cycle
(analogous to 67 fps for a 400 beats/min heart rate). The animals
used in the comparison study were Brown Norway (BN) rats.
All data for subspace-based imaging were collected continually
with neither ECG gating/triggering nor breath holding. Lowrank images were reconstructed with L1 = 16, L2 = 24 and
shared regularization parameters.
Fig. 6 shows representative images and spatiotemporal slices
from each method. The IntraGate method only reconstructs a
single representative cardiac cycle; this cycle is repeated here
to depict two cardiac cycles. The spiral-navigated images have
a slightly higher frame rate than the gated images, and the selfnavigated images are faster still, reaching 95 fps.
B. Applications
1) Self-Navigated Mouse Imaging: Mouse imaging is a particularly challenging application of cardiac MRI due to very
high spatial and temporal resolution requirements. Mice have
even smaller hearts and higher heart rates than do rats, making
ungated, free-breathing cardiac imaging particularly difficult to
perform. Here, we employ self-navigation to image myocardial
wall motion in mice at 0.12 mm × 0.12 mm spatial resolution
at 97 fps.
Experiments were conducted on a Bruker Avance III 7 T
scanner equipped with a B-GA12S32 gradient set capable of
480-mT/m maximum gradient strength and a quadrature surface
coil. Imaging data were collected with FA = 18◦ , FOV = 30 mm
× 30 mm, matrix size = 256 × 256, slice thickness = 1 mm, and

CHRISTODOULOU et al.: IMPROVED SUBSPACE ESTIMATION FOR LOW-RANK MODEL-BASED ACCELERATED CARDIAC IMAGING

2455

Fig. 7. Single frame and spatiotemporal slice of a mouse heart using music
note self-navigation. At 0.12 mm × 0.12 mm spatial resolution at 97 fps, these
images show the capability of self-navigated imaging.

Fig. 6. (a) Bruker IntraGate frame and a spatiotemporal slice through the
dotted line, followed by frames and spatiotemporal slices of low-rank images
using (b) two-pulse navigation with a spiral navigator trajectory, and (c) selfnavigation with a music note trajectory. Gated scans reconstruct only a single
representative cardiac cycle, so the same cycle is shown twice in (a). The
spiral-navigated images have a slightly higher frame rate than the gated images,
without the experimental burdens and sensitivities to arrhythmia and respiration
associated with gated imaging. The self-navigated images share these benefits
and are faster still, reaching 95 fps.

imaging time = 11 min. No parallel acceleration was performed.
Images were collected with TE = 5.1 ms and TR = 10.3 ms. Data
were collected continually with neither ECG gating/triggering
nor breath holding. Images were reconstructed with L1 = 16
and L2 = 24.
2) Three-Dimensional Myocardial Perfusion Imaging in
Rats: Myocardial perfusion imaging has potential for tissue as-

sessment and early detection of coronary artery disease (among
other applications). It can be particularly useful in animal models, although it is difficult to perform in rodents even in 2-D.
Major advantages of 3-D imaging over 2-D imaging include
whole-heart coverage, no slice gaps, matched cardiac phases
across slices, and no need for preparation pulses. However,
imaging speed is a major concern for 3-D myocardial perfusion
imaging, so 2-D methods are still more commonly performed.
Here, we demonstrate integrated whole-heart 3-D imaging of
myocardial wall motion, first-pass perfusion, and late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) using two-pulse navigation with a cone
navigator trajectory.
For this application, we employed a rodent ischemic reperfusion injury (IRI) animal model using male BN rats. For
IRI experiments, rats had a 45-min transient left circumflex
coronary artery occlusion followed by reperfusion. For control rats, no coronary artery occlusion was performed. Contrast enhancement was performed in all subjects by injecting a
0.2-mmol/kg bolus of gadolinium contrast agent (Gd-DTPA) 5
min after the start of data acquisition. For reference, the 2-D IntraGate method was used to image a mid-ventricular slice before
and after each 3-D imaging experiment.
Experiments were conducted on the Bruker Avance AV1 4.7
T scanner described in Section IV-A-2. 3-D imaging data were
collected with FA = 10◦ , FOV = 40 mm × 40 mm × 24 mm,
matrix size = 128 × 128 × 24, spatial resolution = 0.31 mm ×
0.31 mm × 1.0 mm, NACS = 24, P = 2, TE = 2.5 ms, and TR =
6.8 ms, for a frame rate of 74 fps. At 16 min, imaging time was
short enough to remain practical and long enough to collect both
first-pass and delayed myocardial perfusion images. All data for
subspace-based imaging were collected continually with neither
ECG gating/triggering nor breath holding. 3-D low-rank images
were reconstructed with L1 = L2 = 24. IntraGate images were
collected using the same parameters as the IntraGate images in
Section IV-A-2.
Fig. 8 shows pre- and postcontrast images of an IRI subject on
the day of surgery. The figure shows both 2-D IntraGate and 3-D
cone-navigated low-rank images in order to compare the extent
of the perfusion defect imaged by both methods. Fig. 9 shows
bullseye plots depicting time to peak concentration (TPC) of the
first pass of Gd-DTPA through the myocardium of a) a control
subject, and b) the same IRI subject as in Fig. 8. The bullseye

2456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 9. Seventeen-segment bullseye plots showing TPC for: (a) a control rat;
(b) a rat with IRI (the same rat shown in Fig. 8). The TPC measurements
in (b) indicate extensive myocardial damage compared to (a), especially in
the apical anterior, mid-ventricular anterior, mid-ventricular anterolateral, and
apical lateral segments, consistent with the LGE images in Fig. 8.

Fig. 8. Representative IRI images on the day of surgery. (a) 2-D IntraGate
images pre and postcontrast, (b) corresponding slices from 3-D cone-navigated
images pre and postcontrast, (c) three perpendicular views of the 3-D conenavigated images postcontrast, and (d) spatiotemporal slices through the dotted
lines. The extent of the in-plane LGE perfusion defect match in (a) and (b). The
images in (a) and (b) have different contrast due to the differences between slice
and slab excitation. The spatial-coverage benefit of 3-D imaging can be seen in
(c), which shows how far the perfusion defect extends toward the apex of the
heart.

plots conform to the American Heart Association 17-segment
standard [18].
C. Discussion
Figs. 4 and 5 demonstrate that the subspace accuracy when
using Cartesian navigation is highly dependent on trajectory orientation: rotating the trajectory 90◦ caused a noticeable degradation in the image quality. The spiral and music note trajectories
were more robust to orientation. For both projections and reconstructions, the rotated Cartesian navigator yielded the least
accurate results, whereas the music note navigator provided the
most accurate results.

Fig. 6 depicts the same myocardial wall motion at different
frame rates. The low-rank images are free of the experimental
burdens and sensitivities to arrhythmia which are characteristic of ECG-gated images. Additionally, the low-rank images
capture respiratory motion (the IntraGate images were created
using retrospective respiratory gating) and depict the entire image sequence (as opposed to a single representative cardiac
cycle). Each of the low-rank approaches reconstructed more
cardiac phases per cycle than the IntraGate method, with the
self-navigated images having the highest frame rate (95 fps).
The primary tradeoff of the speed boost from self-navigation
is a later minimum echo time; however, the signal gain from a
longer repetition time may offset the signal loss from the later
echo time, depending on the T1 and T2∗ values of the tissue being
imaged. Indeed, when compared to Fig. 6(b), the self-navigated
images in Fig. 6(c) have increased T2∗ -weighting due to the later
echo time but higher overall SNR due to the longer repetition
time. The importance of this tradeoff is application-dependent:
for some T2∗ -weighted imaging applications, an even later echo
time is desired, and the tradeoff disappears entirely.
Fig. 7 demonstrates the effectiveness of the method for ungated, free-breathing imaging given particularly high spatial and
temporal resolution requirements, successfully imaging mouse
hearts at 97 fps with an in-plane spatial resolution of 0.12 mm.
In Fig. 8(a) and (b), the extent of the in-plane LGE perfusion defect matches in the 2-D IntraGate reference images
and the corresponding slice from the 3-D images. The defect
is specifically seen in the mid-ventricular anterior and anterolateral myocardial segments. The contrast weighting of the 2-D
and 3-D images is different due to the differences between slice
excitation and slab excitation; here, the 3-D images have a better contrast enhancement ratio. The additional benefit of 3-D
imaging can be seen in Fig. 8(c), which shows how far the perfusion defect extends along the anterior and lateral walls of the
myocardium toward the apex.
The first-pass perfusion measurements in Fig. 9(b) indicate
extensive myocardial damage when compared to the control rat
in Fig. 9(a). This is clearest in the apical anterior, mid-ventricular
anterior, mid-ventricular anterolateral, and apical lateral segments, which is consistent with the LGE images in Fig. 8.

CHRISTODOULOU et al.: IMPROVED SUBSPACE ESTIMATION FOR LOW-RANK MODEL-BASED ACCELERATED CARDIAC IMAGING

V. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented an improved strategy to collect navigator data for subspace estimation in low-rank model-based
cardiac MRI. We have shown that: 1) non-Cartesian navigation
makes subspace estimation robust to navigator orientation; and
2) the data acquisition speed of subspace imaging can be further
improved using self-navigated pulse sequences that collect both
navigator and imaging data within the same TR interval. These
advantages of the proposed data acquisition schemes have been
validated using both simulation and in vivo cardiac imaging data,
and future work can include multiple in vivo studies to additionally substantiate improvement in subspace estimation accuracy.
The advances presented in this paper may further improve the
practical utility of low-rank model-based cardiac MRI.
REFERENCES
[1] Z.-P. Liang, H. Jiang, C. P. Hess, and P. C. Lauterbur, “Dynamic imaging
by model estimation,” Int. J. Imag. Syst. Tech., vol. 8, pp. 551–557, 1997.
[2] B. Madore, G. Glover, and N. J. Pelc, “Unaliasing by Fourier-encoding
the overlaps using the temporal dimension (UNFOLD), applied to cardiac
imaging and fMRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 42, pp. 813–828, Nov. 1999.
[3] J. Tsao, P. Boesiger, and K. P. Pruessmann, “k-t BLAST and k-t SENSE:
Dynamic MRI with high frame rate exploiting spatiotemporal correlations,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 50, pp. 1031–1042, 2003.
[4] M. Lustig, J. M. Santos, D. L. Donoho, and J. M. Pauly, “k-t SPARSE:
High frame rate dynamic MRI exploiting spatio-temporal sparsity,” in
Proc. Int. Soc. Magn. Reson. Med., 2006, p.2420.
[5] U. Gamper, P. Boesiger, and S. Kozerke, “Compressed sensing in
dynamic MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 59, pp. 365–373, Feb. 2008.
[6] H. Jung, K. Sung, K. S. Nayak, E. Y. Kim, and J. C. Ye, “k-t FOCUSS:
A general compressed sensing framework for high resolution dynamic
MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 61, pp. 103–116, Jan. 2009.
[7] G. Adluru, C. McGann, P. Speier, E. G. Kholmovski, A. Shaaban, and
E. V. R. DiBella, “Acquisition and reconstruction of undersampled radial
data for myocardial perfusion magnetic resonance imaging,” J. Magn.
Reson. Imaging, vol. 29, pp. 466–473, 2009.
[8] R. Otazo, D. Kim, L. Axel, and D. K. Sodickson, “Combination of
compressed sensing and parallel imaging for highly accelerated first-pass
cardiac perfusion MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 64, pp. 767–776, Sep.
2010.

2457

[9] A. Sen Gupta and Z.-P. Liang, “Dynamic imaging by temporal modeling
with principal component analysis,” in Proc. Int. Soc. Magn. Reson. Med.,
2001, p.10.
[10] Z.-P. Liang, “Spatiotemporal imaging with partially separable functions,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imaging, 2007, pp. 988–991.
[11] J. P. Haldar and Z.-P. Liang, “Spatiotemporal imaging with partially
separable functions: A matrix recovery approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Biomed. Imaging, 2010, pp. 716–719.
[12] H. Pedersen, S. Kozerke, S. Ringgaard, K. Nehrke, and W. Y. Kim, “k-t
PCA: Temporally constrained k-t BLAST reconstruction using principal
component analysis,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 62, pp. 706–716, Sep. 2009.
[13] B. Zhao, J. P. Haldar, and Z.-P. Liang, “PSF model-based reconstruction
with sparsity constraint: Algorithm and application to real-time cardiac
MRI,” in Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 3390–3393.
[14] B. Zhao, J. P. Haldar, A. G. Christodoulou, and Z.-P. Liang, “Image reconstruction from highly undersampled (k, t)-space data with joint partial
separability and sparsity constraints,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 31,
pp. 1809–1820, Sep. 2012.
[15] S. Goud Lingala, Y. Hu, E. DiBella, and M. Jacob, “Accelerated dynamic
MRI exploiting sparsity and low-rank structure: k-t SLR,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging, vol. 30, pp. 1042–1054, May 2011.
[16] A. G. Christodoulou, H. Zhang, B. Zhao, T. K. Hitchens, C. Ho, and
Z.-P. Liang, “High-resolution cardiovascular MRI by integrating parallel
imaging with low-rank and sparse modeling,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 60, pp. 3083–3092, Nov. 2013.
[17] Committee for the Update of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals; National Research Council, Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, 8th ed. Washington, DC, USA: The National Academies
Press, 2011.
[18] M. D. Cerqueira, N. J. Weissman, V. Dilsizian, A. K. Jacobs, S. Kaul,
W. K. Laskey, D. J. Pennell, J. A. Rumberger, T. Ryan, and M. S.
Verani, “Standardized myocardial segmentation and nomenclature for tomographic imaging of the heart: A statement for healthcare professionals
from the Cardiac Imaging Committee of the Council on Clinical Cardiology of the American Heart Association,” Circulation, vol. 105, pp.
539–542, 2002.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

