2582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Methods for Characterizing Human Coronary Artery
Deformation From Cardiac-Gated Computed
Tomography Data
Gilwoo Choi∗ , Guanglei Xiong, Christopher P. Cheng, and Charles A. Taylor

Abstract—Accurate quantification of changes in length, curvature, and bifurcation angles of coronary arteries due to cardiac motion is important for the design of coronary stents. A new method
is developed to describe the dynamic characteristics of the human coronary artery. From cardiac-gated computed tomography
(CT) data, 3-D surface geometry and centerline paths of the coronary arteries were constructed. For quantification of strain and
twisting deformation, 3-D distortion-free vessel straightening and
landmark matching algorithms were developed to compute the relative translation and rotation of distal landmarks with respect to
a proximal landmark. For quantification of bending deformation,
change in curvature was measured by computing a best-fit torus
in the region of interest within a coronary segment. The optimal
torus parameters were estimated by minimizing the standard deviation of distances from the surface mesh to the centerline of the
torus. The angle between branch vessels was measured using linear fitting of centroid sets from the cross-sectional vessel lumen.
The proposed methods were verified using a software phantom and
applied to two patient specific CT datasets. Vascular deformations
derived from these methods can provide information for designing bench-top tests for endovascular devices that better replicate
the in vivo environment, thereby improving device performance
prediction and leading to more durable designs.
Index Terms—Biomechanics, computed tomography (CT), implantable biomedical device, strain.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE design of endovascular devices necessitates the accurate assessment of in vivo geometry of human blood
vessels. Quantification of length, curvature, and bifurcation angles of blood vessels are particularly important since a mismatch in device size can increase the risk of complications
such as stent malapposition and late stent thrombosis after interventional therapy [1]–[12]. The information about vascular
deformations is also critical for improving device design. Coronary stent fractures, possibly induced by arterial deformations

T

Manuscript received October 17, 2013; revised March 1, 2014 and April 12,
2014; accepted May 6, 2014. Date of publication May 13, 2014; date of current
version September 16, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ G. Choi is with the HeartFlow, Inc., Redwood City, CA 94063 USA and also
with the Department of Surgery, Stanford University, CA 94305 USA (e-mail:
girool@gmail.com).
G. Xiong is with the Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New
York, NY 10021 USA (e-mail: gux2003@med.cornell.edu).
C. P. Cheng is with the Department of Surgery, Stanford University, CA
94305 USA (e-mail: cpc@stanford.edu).
C. A. Taylor is with the HeartFlow, Inc., Redwood City, CA 94063 USA and
also with the Bioengineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305 USA (e-mail: taylorca@stanford.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2323333

resulting from cardiac motion, have been hypothesized to cause
in-stent restenosis [13], [14]. Moreover, the recent development
of bioabsorbable stents requires accurate evaluation of in vivo
arterial deformation for balancing the mechanical strength with
the degradation rate of stent materials (e.g., polymers) to avoid
recoil and inflammation [15].
Many research groups have presented methods for measuring static vessel geometry and deformations, as reviewed in
our previous study [2]. Quantification metrics can be classified
into two categories depending on whether they are intended to
measure global or local quantities. Vessel curvature and branch
angle metrics are designed to characterize the global shape of
the geometry over a region longer than the vessel diameter,
whereas strain and twisting metrics are designed to characterize
local changes in geometry. Therefore, the focus of quantification
methods for these metrics should vary accordingly.
For computing a curvature metric, it is required to directly
capture a global shape of the geometry rather than resort to
the postprocessing of local measurements, such as arithmetic
averaging. In addition, measuring curvature requires special
attention because the vessel section of interest needs to be approximated accurately with an appropriate circular segment for a
valid curvature measure. For example, curvature methods based
on differentiation of centerlines can be overly sensitive to local
perturbations in the centerline that have little relevance to stent
performance. Methods for calculating branch angle also need to
incorporate the global characteristics of vessel direction.
On the other hand, length change and twisting calculations
require an accurate assessment of the landmark location, where
local accuracy would be the primary consideration rather than
global accuracy. In most previous analyses, blood vessels were
expressed as 3-D centerline paths. The idea of representing a
volumetric vessel as a centerline is based on the assumption that
the geometric information of a 3-D tubular structure can be approximated by a 3-D space curve [16]–[24]. The vessel segment
length is generally measured by the cumulative sum of piecewise intervals along the vessel centerline between landmarks
such as branch bifurcations. Therefore, the accuracy of length
measurement depends on the exactness of the centerline and
the represented landmarks. The measurements of static geometries are reasonably accurate when the range of measurements
is sufficiently large compared to the image resolution.
If, however, the primary quantity of interest is the deformation
measured by a difference or percentage change on the order of
several voxels of the image resolution, a more robust approach
is required to consistently detect corresponding landmarks

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHOI∗ et al.: METHODS FOR CHARACTERIZING HUMAN CORONARY ARTERY DEFORMATION FROM CARDIAC-GATED CT DATA

between different images [25]–[27]. Since the magnitude of
length change or twisting angle may be relatively small compared to reference values, the accuracy of detecting a landmark is critical for determining the direction and magnitude of
change. The location of a landmark such as side branches can be
represented by a cross-sectional centroid or bifurcation point.
However, determining the location of nontubular landmark, e.g.,
irregularly shaped plaques, is especially challenging because no
appropriate centerlines can be defined for the landmarks and
hence cross-sectional centroids may be difficult or impossible
to determine. Due to these reasons, we believe that previous
vascular deformation studies were more useful for describing
the changes in global characteristics of blood vessels, such as
curvature, torsion, and branching angle.
To describe the local characteristics of blood vessels, we developed a robust and accurate method by using 3-D surface geometries. We assume the surfaces were already constructed by
image segmentation methods. Our geometric analysis method
does not depend on a particular type of segmentation method.
In this study, we utilized an edge-based segmentation method
and focused on developing methods for comparing segmented
3-D surface meshes to quantify deformation metrics: length
change, twisting, bending, and bifurcation angle change. In particular, we describe the underlying algorithms of the centerline
extraction, vessel straightening, and landmark matching used for
calculating strain and twisting metrics. Next, we describe methods for quantifying bending deformation and bifurcation angle
changes. We also validate these proposed algorithms with a software phantom created with known geometric parameters, and
illustrate the application of this method on two human coronary
datasets. Finally, we discuss the significance of this research
related to improving preclinical evaluation of medical devices.

2583

Fig. 1. Geometry of straight software phantom in reference configuration.
(a) Entire view of a software phantom. (b) Intervals between landmarks.
(c) Bifurcation angle. (d) Angle of separation between landmarks as viewed
from the bottom.

TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS OF SOFTWARE PHANTOM

Main vessel length
Main vessel diameter
Branch vessel interval
Branch bifurcation angle
Branch angle of separation
Plaque size
Plaque interval
Plaque angle of separation

Reference
Configuration

Deformed
Configuration

Change

120 mm
5 mm
20 mm
70°
30°
3 × 2 × 2 mm
ellipsoid
20 mm
30°

85 mm
5 mm
15 mm
60°
45°
3 × 2 × 2 mm
ellipsoid
15 mm
45°

−35 mm
0
−5 mm
−10°
−15 º
0
−5 mm
−15°

II. METHODS
We demonstrate our proposed quantification methods using a
software phantom composed of six branch bifurcations and five
plaques.
A. Software Phantom Creation
A straight 3-D surface mesh was created with designated
geometric parameters of branch locations, bifurcation angles,
and angles of branch separation [see Fig. 1(a)–(d)]. Detailed
specifications of the software phantom for the reference and
deformed configurations are shown in Table I.
This software phantom is served as the ground truth to validate each algorithm, which is discussed in the result section.
The model consists of six branch vessels and five plaques represented by cylinders and ellipsoids, respectively. Plaques were
included in order to demonstrate the broad applicability of proposed methods irrespective of landmark shape. To evaluate the
robustness of these methods, we assigned different bifurcation
angles between the two configurations. These two models represent 10° of twisting and 5-mm shortening deformations (see
Fig. 1).
The straight geometry was then transformed by a bending
algorithm along a curved centerline. Specifically, to create a

Fig. 2. Bending transformation. (a) Straight mesh in cylindrical coordinate
system. (b) Bent mesh in curvilinear coordinate system.

bent vessel from the straight 3-D surface mesh, the longitudinal, angular, and radial locations of the mesh vertices were first
determined in cylindrical coordinates. For the determination of
angular position, a parallel path with respect to the centerline
starting from the topmost point on the surface mesh was computed as a datum line for the reference direction [see Fig. 2(a)].
Since the coordinates of all the mesh vertices are parameterized by R, Θ, and Z, the next step is to locate them in the

2584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Fig. 3. Curved software phantom with true centerline. (a) Reference configuration (bright). (b) Deformed configuration (dark). (c) Overlapped view (bright:
reference, dark: deformed configurations).

curvilinear coordinate system. In the curvilinear coordinate system, a longitudinal local basis was defined as the tangential
vector along the curved centerline, and the angular position was
determined with respect to the reference direction from the centerline to a parallel path created by using a finite rotation matrix
[2] [see Fig. 2(b)]. The starting point (s) of the parallel path
was defined by the point in the orthogonal direction to the centerline at o. This bending transformation based on the parallel
path preserves the relative angular position of mesh coordinates.
Consequently, except for vessel curvature, all of the geometric
parameters shown in Table I are unchanged in the bent geometry.
Two curved centerlines with different curvature values were
used for bending transformation, resulting in geometries of the
reference and deformed configurations (see Fig. 3).
B. Strain and Twisting Angle Calculation Algorithm
Strain and twisting metrics were determined by the change in
the longitudinal and angular positions of landmarks, which were
assumed to undergo only rigid transformation. These metrics are
quantities defined in the tangential direction of the vessel centerline. Therefore, the quantification of strain and twisting angle
can be simplified by separating the bending component from the
total deformation using a straightening algorithm. Straightening
the vessel geometry eases the comparison procedure through
simple superposition of geometries. This process is similar to
generating a straightened curved planar reformat (CPR) view.
The straightened CPR is defined by two basis vectors of a moving plane orthogonal to the tangential vector of each point on the
centerline. Typically, one of the basis vectors includes the corresponding radial direction of minimum cross-sectional area, as it
provides an effective visualization of longitudinal luminal cross
sections for diagnostic purposes. Although this operation preserves the length and radius of vessels (i.e., arcwise isometric),
the lateral orientation can be distorted due to the arbitrary selection of moving coordinate frames. In general, the distortion of
the lateral orientation does not hinder evaluating cross-sectional
area. However, for quantifying twisting angle, the straightening algorithm is required to preserve the angular positions as
well as longitudinal positions. Thus, we devised a robust mesh
straightening algorithm by employing a 3-D parallel path that

Fig. 4. Algorithm to determine strain and twisting angle. (a) Geometry in
reference configuration (geom A ). (b) Geometry in deformed configuration
(geom B ). (c) Overlapped view of reference (bright) and deformed (dark)
configurations: Plaque1 and Plaque2 are used as reference landmarks for
coregistration. (d) Geometries are coregistered by Plaque1 . (e) Geometries are
coregistered by Plaque2 .

provides a consistent basis for moving coordinate frames in both
reference and deformed configurations.
The straightened vessel, which retains all geometric information from the original mesh except for curvature, enables the
direct comparison of landmarks by simple superposition along
the straightened centerlines [see Fig. 4(a)–(c)].
Since the landmarks were assumed to be rigid, length changes
were calculated by subtracting the computed longitudinal translations at adjacent landmarks and twisting angles were measured
by subtracting the computed rotation angles around the longitudinal axis [see Fig. 4(c)–(e)]. A positive twisting angle referred
to a counterclockwise rotation as viewed from the proximal
portion of the vessel.
Due to the anatomical variations of the bifurcation location
in patients, the strain and twist rate values measured from each
segment were averaged over equal thirds (proximal, middle,
distal) based on the weights defined by the segment length over
total length of the coronary artery [3].
Using the software phantoms, we illustrate the underlying
algorithms for centerline generation, vascular model straightening, and shape matching for calculating strain and twisting
angle.
1) Centerline Extraction Algorithm: The mesh straightening
algorithm necessitates the creation of an accurate centerline. The
definition of an “accurate centerline” for a tubular structure is
clear and consistent across different techniques. At bifurcations,
however, its definition may vary depending upon the intended
application. In this study, centerlines of parent vessels were created such that they were not perturbed by the presence of side
branches. In doing so, we developed a novel algorithm to generate centerline paths by using cross-sectional centroids of 3-D
surface meshes as follows. First, starting and ending points were
defined on the vessel region of interest. An initial path between
the starting and ending points was then created using Dijkstra’s
algorithm, which calculates the shortest path on the surface, i.e.,
the geodesic path. Along the initial path, cross-sectional lumen
boundaries were created such that the closed contour of the lumen boundary had the minimum cross-sectional area based on

CHOI∗ et al.: METHODS FOR CHARACTERIZING HUMAN CORONARY ARTERY DEFORMATION FROM CARDIAC-GATED CT DATA

Fig. 5. Straightening transformation. (a) Original mesh in curvilinear coordinate system. (b) Straightened mesh in cylindrical coordinate system.

the conjugate gradient method with guaranteed descent [28]. To
improve the speed and convergence of numerical iteration, two
previously calculated adjacent centroids were used as the initial
normal direction of the next cross-sectional lumen boundary.
In order to minimize the effect of abnormal centroid deviation
caused by branches or plaques, the circularity of cross sections
was determined by the ratio of minor axis over major axis,
and noncircular cross sections were excluded from the collected
centroids sets.
This centerline extraction algorithm enabled collection of the
centroids of the vessel cross section without perturbation by
other structures such as plaque or branches. By the nature of
using a geodesic path, the shortest path on the surface effectively avoids branch structures. However, since the initial centerline connecting centroids was inherently irregular, an optimal
Fourier smoothing technique was applied to the centerline [2].
2) Distortion-Free Vascular Model Straightening Algorithm:
The straightening algorithm transforms curvilinear coordinates
to cylindrical coordinates in the straight reference axis (see
Fig. 5).
The centerline of the geometry served as a reference curvilinear axis for the mesh straightening operation. This transformation is essentially equivalent to the inverse transformation of
the bending algorithm described previously.
In particular, the determination of the longitudinal coordinates Z needs careful attention in order to preserve the smoothness of the surface mesh, since the centerline coordinates are
discrete. For example, if the projection of mesh coordinates to
the centerline is simply used to obtain longitudinal position,
then all of the mesh coordinates in Si region will be mapped
to the same Z value as the closet point to the centerline is Pi
[see Fig 6(a)]. This would preclude a one-to-one mapping of
this transformation. To ensure one-to-one mapping, the longitudinal position of the mesh coordinates [see Fig 6(b)] was
parameterized by employing the center of a circumscribed circle passing through three consecutive points (Pi−1, Pi, Pi+1 ).
Specifically, each mesh coordinate was projected onto the plane
of the circumscribed circle and then the longitudinal posi-

2585

Fig. 6. Algorithm to determine longitudinal position. (a) Defect of using
projection for the definition of longitudinal position: the entire mesh coordinates
in the region S i are mapped to the same Z value because the closest point is P i ,
which can create step artifact in the straightened mesh. (b) Proposed algorithm: X
is projected onto the plane of circumscribed circle and the longitudinal position
is determined by the intersection between the centerline and X  O.

tion was
from the intersection between the cen
 determined
terline Pi−1 Pi and the line connecting the mesh coordinate to
the center of circumscribed circle (X  O). If the three points are
collinear, the projection of mesh coordinates to the centerline
can be simply used.
Radial and circumferential coordinates were accordingly
transformed such that the distance from each coordinate to the
centerline and the angle between coordinates was preserved, respectively. In this transformation, a datum path parallel to the
centerline served as a reference orientation to determine the
angular coordinates [2].
3) Landmark Shape Matching Algorithm: Once the vessel
was straightened, the optimal translation and rotation of the
mesh were determined for each landmark. This process consequently led to the quantification of strain and twisting deformation. In contrast to previous methods based on the centroid
of landmarks [2], a shape matching algorithm utilizes more
surface-based information, including the nontubular shapes of
bifurcation geometries and plaques.
To implement the landmark shape matching algorithm, two
meshes were optimally coregistered by applying translational
and rotational transformation to the landmarks. This optimality
was determined by the conjugate gradient method based on the
cost function defined as the average distance between landmarks
in the reference and deformed configurations. Because the contour of the main vessel on the opposite side of the landmark
does not contribute to the identification of the longitudinal location, only the relevant portion of the landmark was used as a
reference template for the cost function.
C. Curvature Calculation Algorithm
Curvature is a global geometric feature that needs to be
assessed over a longer region than the radius of the vessel
cross section. The simplest method to compute curvature is by
applying a mathematical curvature formula on centerline coordinates [2]. The centerline-based method is effective for capturing
the overall shape of the vessel along the length and identifying

2586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

torus ring d, normal vector of the torus n, and radius of the
torus cross section ρ. A procedure for determining these four
parameters was divided into the following three steps.
First, the centroid P of the surface mesh was computed and
used as a point on which the plane for torus cross section was
located
N
1 →
−
Si
P =
N i=1

Fig. 7.

Software phantom of a vessel represented by a torus segment.

the location of maximum curvature. However, comparison of
two curvature plots, generally represented on a parametric graph
of curvature value (vertical axis) versus arc-length (horizontal axis) is not straightforward because corresponding locations
along the vessel arc length are not matched. This misregistration
of two plots may result in computational artifacts when these
two curves are subtracted. We thus have devised an algorithm
to coregister graphs based on the maxima and minima locations
of the curves. This coregistration scheme is particularly important to prevent overestimation of maximum curvature change,
which is an important quantity for characterizing the dynamics
of bending.
1) Centerline-Based Curvature Analysis Using Coregistration: The comparison of two curvature graphs necessitates local
coregistration, as discussed earlier. Since the number and distribution of anatomical landmarks are often limited, we used
maxima and minima locations of curvature as fictitious landmarks assuming that geometric maxima and minima locations
are preserved over the course of dynamic motions since the
highest curvature location would have the largest moment arm
during ventricular contraction. The maxima locations are particularly important for evaluating bending deformation accurately,
as measured by change in curvature. In order to coregister maxima locations between diastolic and systolic phases, we utilized dynamic time warping techniques based on a cost function
defined by curvature and its derivative [30]. After maxima locations were coregistered, curvature values were linearly interpolated between the maxima landmarks to properly coregister
two plots and compute change in curvature from the reference
to deformed configurations.
2) Surface-Based Curvature Analysis: Once a region of interest (e.g., maximum curvature location) is identified on the
basis of centerline coordinates, the curvature value can be refined by directly using surface mesh coordinates in that region.
This refinement step can improve the accuracy of curvature
calculations when the centerline is locally corrupted by noise
despite smoothing operations.
Measuring curvature based on centerline coordinates is analogous to finding a best-fit circle to the curve. For a 3-D surface
geometry, this process can be extended to finding a best-fit torus
to the section of the geometry. As illustrated in Fig. 7, a torus
can be determined by the center of the torus C, radius of the

(1)

→
−
where Si is the coordinate of the surface mesh in the region of
interest.
Second, the unit normal vector n was determined such that
the distance from the centerline to the plane could be minimized
min
n

M


−
→
|n · (Xi − P )|

(2)

i=1

−
→
where Xi is the coordinate of centerline and M is the number of
centerline coordinates in the region of interest.
 and radius of the torus cross section ρ
Third, the center C
were computed such that the standard deviation of distances
from the surface mesh to the centerline of the torus (i.e., circle)
were minimized by the following function:


N
 1 

2
di − d¯
min 
(3)
 ,ρ
N − 1 i=1
C
N
→
−
where d¯ = N1
n · (Si − P )| and N is the total
i=1 di , di = |
number of coordinates of the surface mesh in the region of
interest. For optimization, a conjugate gradient method with descent gradient was utilized and the parameters of circumscribed
circle along the centerline were used as a reference initial value.
Assuming the reference initial value had ±50% error, initial
values for the radius of curvature were ranged from 50% to
150% of the radius of circumscribed circle with 5% increment
to achieve global optimality. The resultant mean distance d¯ from
the surface mesh to the centerline of the torus was used as the
torus cross-section radius.
D. Branch Bifurcation Angle Calculation
Determination of the angle between nonstraight segments
requires an approximation of their linear directions. Therefore,
the angle between branch vessels was measured using linearfitting of centroid sets from the cross-sectional vessel lumen.
Specifically, each branch vector was defined as a linear-fit of the
centroids generated in a particular set of cross sections. In order
to represent the vessel direction, the region of interest for the
vessel was selected to be twice the length of the larger vessel
→
→
v2
diameter. Then, the angle between the main −
v1 and branch −
segment vectors was measured on the basis of the linear branch
vectors as follows:
→
−
→
v1 · −
v2
Branch angle = cos−1
.
(4)
v1  v2 

CHOI∗ et al.: METHODS FOR CHARACTERIZING HUMAN CORONARY ARTERY DEFORMATION FROM CARDIAC-GATED CT DATA

2587

TABLE II
MEASUREMENTS OF LENGTH AND ANGLE OF SEPARATIONS BETWEEN
LANDMARKS, AND DEFORMATIONS
(a) Length and Angle of Separations
Metric

Length

Fig. 8. Centroid filtering and smoothing. (a) Initial centroids are collected
along geodesic path on surface. Thin solid line represents true centerline.
(b) Centroids perturbed by plaque or branch are excluded on the basis of crosssectional circularity (circularity <0.9) and only the centroids from circular cross
section (circularity >0.9) are used for Fourier smoothing. (c) Fourier-smoothed
centerline is overlapped with the true centerline.

Angle of separation

True
Measurement
Error
True
Measurement
error

A. Verification of Centerline Extraction Algorithm
The accuracy of the created centerline was evaluated by the
calculation of maximum and average deviation from the groundtruth centerline. The original centroid set prior to circularity
filtering and Fourier smoothing resulted in a deviation of 0.14 ±
0.16 mm (average) and 1.32 mm (max) from the true centerline
[see Fig. 8(a)]. The filtered and Fourier-smoothed centerline
resulted in a deviation of 0.046 ± 0.015 mm (average) and
0.086 mm (max) [see Fig. 8(c)].

Deformed
Configuration

20 mm
20.0 ± 0.0049 mm
0.0040 ± 0.0033 mm
30°
29.9 ± 0.19°
0.14 ± 0.13°

15 mm
15.0 ± 0.0061 mm
0.0047 ± 0.0036 mm
45°
45.0 ± 0.15°
0.13 ± 0.076°

Length Change

Twisting Angle

−5 mm
−5.00 ± 0.0069 mm
0.0057 ± 0.0023 mm
−5 mm
−5.00 ± 0.0011 mm
0.014 ± 0.011 mm

−15°
−15.04 ± 0.0036°
0.043 ± 0.036°
−15°
−15.04 ± 0.0048°
0.042 ± 0.010°

(b) Length Change and Twisting Angle
Landmark

III. RESULTS

Reference
Configuration

Plaque

Branch

True
Measurement
Error
True
Measurement
Error

B. Verification of Strain/Twisting Calculation Algorithm
To investigate the accuracy of the straightening and landmark
shape matching algorithms, we evaluated the geometric parameters of the straightened model, namely the length and angle
of separations between adjacent landmarks. The average error
of the length and angle of separation measurements between
the landmarks were 0.0042 ± 0.0033 mm and 0.14 ± 0.10°,
respectively. Table II(a) shows the individual measurement errors of length and angle of separation. Table II(b) shows the
deformation measurements of length change and twisting angle
between landmarks as a result of the geometric change from the
reference to deformed configurations.

Fig. 9. Coregistraion of curvature graphs. (a) Before coregistration. (b) After
coregistration.

C. Verification of Coregistration of Curvature graph
The algorithm for coregistering curvature graphs was verified
on actual data. Maxima locations were aligned between diastole
and systole graphs (see Fig. 9).
D. Verification of Optimal Torus Calculation Algorithm
The algorithm for the calculation of optimal torus was verified using a software phantom represented by a segment of torus
with known parameters (see Fig. 10). The true radius of curvature of this segment was 25.00 mm and the initial values for
optimization were set by use of circumscribed circle along the
centerline. For verification purposes, a relatively straight section of the vessel centerline, potentially caused by smoothing
artifacts, was selected (see Fig. 10), and the radius of curvature
computed from the centerline was 29.20 mm in this section.

Fig. 10. Verification of algorithm for the curvature calculation. Through optimal torus computation algorithm, the initial radius of curvature (bright circle)
set by three points on the vessel centerline converges to the true radius of torus
curvature (dark circle).

2588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

TABLE III
SENSITIVITY OF DEFORMATION METRICS TO SEGMENTATION
(a) Strain (%)

Proximal
Middle
Distal

Fig. 11. Coronary geometries generated by different segmentation methods
in original and straightened configuration. (a) Edge-based level set method.
(b) Threshold-based level set method. (c) Threshold level set method with
low threshold value. (d) Overlaid view of three geometries. (e) Coregistered
landmarks (dark gray) in vasodilation testing.

This radius of curvature was used for the initial value in the
optimal torus calculation. Following the three procedures described above, the optimization algorithm resulted in a radius
of 24.82 mm. Consequently, the initial error of 4.2 mm was
decreased to 0.18 mm by a surfaced-based curvature estimation method. This analysis showed that minimizing the standard
deviation of distances from the surface mesh to the centerline
of the torus effectively determined the optimal torus fit to the
vessel segment.
E. Sensitivity of Quantification Methods
to Segmentation Methods
To investigate the sensitivity of the proposed methods with
respect to segmentation methods three LAD geometries were
created from edge-based level set methods [see Fig. 11(a)] and
threshold-based level set methods using two different threshold
values. One threshold value was selected such that the lumen
boundary resulting from the threshold level set methods approximately matches that of the edge-based methods [see Fig. 11(b)],
whereas the other threshold value was set to be lower to test
the effect of vasoconstriction or vasodilation on deformation
metrics [see Fig. 11(c)]. Vasodilation was tested using the combination of systolic coronary from the reference threshold value
[see Fig. 11(b)] and diastolic coronary from a low threshold
value [see Fig. 11(c)] since the cross section of the coronary
decreases due to the cardiac contraction at systole.
Variations in measurements of each deformation metric according to four test cases (three variations in segmentation
methods and one vasodilation testing) are summarized in Table III. Strain measurements ranged from −0.34% to −0.98%
(Mean ± STD: −0.59 ± 0.29%) in the proximal segment,
−1.35% to −2.03% (−1.78 ± 0.30%) in the middle segment,
and −3.40% to −3.68% (−3.56 ± 0.12%) in the distal segment. Twist rate measurements ranged from 0.87 to 2.60°/cm
(1.86 ± 0.81°/cm) in the proximal segment, −0.88 to −0.06°/cm
(−0.36 ± 0.36°/cm) in the middle segment, and −2.83 to
−3.48°/cm (−3.20 ± 0.27°/cm) in the distal segment. Maximum curvature change ranged from 1.20 to 1.39 cm−1 (1.27 ±
0.08 cm−1 ) and bifurcation angle change ranged from −7.12°
to −5.57° (−6.44 ± 0.69°).

Edge

Threshold

−0.61%
−1.82%
−3.40%

−0.34%
−2.03%
−3.59%

Low
Vasodilation
Threshold
−0.41%
−1.35%
−3.56%

−0.98%
−1.92%
−3.68%

Mean

STD

−0.59%
−1.78%
−3.56%

0.29%
0.30%
0.12%

Mean

STD

1.86
−0.36
−3.20

0.81
0.36
0.27

Mean

STD

2.25
3.52
1.27

0.02
0.08
0.08

Mean

STD

80.94
74.50
−6.44

0.23
0.83
0.69

(b) Twist Rate (°/cm)

Proximal
Middle
Distal

Edge

Threshold

0.87
−0.06
−3.48

1.54
−0.34
−2.83

Low
Vasodilation
Threshold
2.44
−0.16
−3.30

2.60
−0.88
−3.19

(c) Curvature at Maximum Location (cm–1 )

Diastole
Systole
Change

Edge

Threshold

2.26
3.47
1.20

2.22
3.48
1.26

Low
Vasodilation
Threshold
2.26
3.65
1.39

2.26
3.48
1.22

(d) Bifurcation Angle (°)

Diastole
Systole
Change

Edge

Threshold

81.23
75.66
−5.57

81.02
73.90
−7.12

Low
Vasodilation
Threshold
80.75
74.54
−6.21

80.75
73.90
−6.85

F. Deformation of Coronary Artery
We applied these 3-D surface-based methods to extract the
centerline paths of the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery and right coronary artery (RCA) of two subjects at
systole and diastole. Subsequently, we calculated longitudinal
strain, twisting angle, curvature change, and branch bifurcation
angle change. The two sets of preexisting 64-slice multidetector
CT images with retrospective ECG gating were obtained from
the Stanford PACS system with an IRB waiver. The largest (diastole) and the smallest (systole) left ventricular volumes were
referred to as the reference and deformed configurations, respectively. From cardiac-gated coronary CT angiography, the
LAD geometries of diastolic (grey) and systolic (dark grey)
phases were constructed and straightened for coregistration (see
Fig. 12).
Strain and twisting angle were then measured by comparing the translation and rotation angles at the corresponding
landmarks [see Fig. 13(a) and (b)]. A positive twisting angle
referred to the counterclockwise rotation as viewed from the
proximal LAD [see Fig. 13(b)]. On the basis of these straightened geometries, the residual of the difference between the ostia
after the shape matching procedure was 0.024 ± 0.014 mm, possibly due to inherent differences in image segmentation between
two cardiac frames.
To calculate the bifurcation angle between the LAD and left
circumflex coronary artery (LCX), cross-sectional vessel lumen

CHOI∗ et al.: METHODS FOR CHARACTERIZING HUMAN CORONARY ARTERY DEFORMATION FROM CARDIAC-GATED CT DATA

2589

TABLE IV
MEASUREMENTS OF DEFORMATION METRICS
(a) Strain (%)
Case

Vessel

Proximal

Middle

Distal

I

LAD
RCA
LAD
RCA

−0.61%
−1.62%
−6.20%
−2.04%

−1.82%
−0.24%
−8.49%
−5.07%

−3.40%
0.18%
−5.94%
−8.87%

II

−3.68 ± 3.16%

Average
(b) Twist rate (°/cm)

Fig. 12. Straightening transformation of 3-D surface mesh to calculate strain
and twisting angle (grey: diastole, dark grey: systole). (a) Curvature change is
quantified by use of the original LAD geometries. (b) Straightened geometries
are used for quantification of strain and twisting angle metrics. Note that the
straightening transformation removes bending components of geometries, while
preserving relative orientation of each coordinate in the triangular surface mesh.

Case

Vessel

Proximal

Middle

Distal

I

LAD
RCA
LAD
RCA

0.87
2.18
−0.05
−1.62

−0.06
−1.29
0.46
−3.23

−3.48
−0.03
3.86
−2.26

II

(c) Curvature (cm−1 )
Case

Vessel

I

LAD

RCA

II

LAD

RCA

Average change

Fig. 13. Deformation metrics of the coronary artery. (a) Shown is the straightened geometry after alignment based on the centerline prior to optimal coregistration (grey: diastole configuration, dark grey: systole). (b) Length change and
twisting angle are computed by subtraction of resultant translation and rotation
angle, respectively. (c) Curvature calculation using optimal torus at the LAD.
(d) Branch angle calculation between the LAD and LCX. Centroids are collected
in each vessel and linear-fits of each centroid set are computed.

boundaries for each branch vessel were created over a sufficiently long (e.g., two times the vessel diameter) distance from
the left main bifurcation [see Fig. 13(d)]. Then, the angle between the LAD and LCX segment vectors was measured by use
of the linear-fits of the vessel centroid sets.
Total 17 subsegments were defined by branches of the LAD
and RCA from two patients. The average length of the entire
LAD and RCA was 12.5 ± 1.6 cm and the average length of
subsegment was 3.0 ± 2.1 cm. Table IV shows the deformation metrics over proximal, middle, and distal segments of the
coronary arteries. In addition, the bifurcation angle between the
LAD and LCX decreased by 5.6° (diastole: 81.2°, systole: 75.7°)
and 11.7° (diastole: 52.4°, systole: 40.7°), from the diastole to
systole for patients I and II, respectively.

−0.39±2.15 º/cm
1.62±1.39 º/cm

Average
Average absolute

Diastole
Systole
Change
Diastole
Systole
Change
Diastole
Systole
Change
Diastole
Systole
Change

Proximal

Middle

Distal

0.516
0.524
0.007
0.702
0.671
−0.031
0.512
0.584
0.072
0.418
0.466
0.048

0.555
0.676
0.121
0.604
0.706
0.102
0.628
1.033
0.406
0.399
0.419
0.021

0.923
1.176
0.252
0.890
0.939
0.049
0.815
1.287
0.473
0.512
0.616
0.105

0.137±0.128 cm−1 (37.8±19.8%)

IV. DISCUSSION
Three-dimensional surface-based methods utilize direct comparison of all the 3-D surface mesh coordinates to determine
deformation metrics. This study focused first and foremost on
the development of accurate and robust methods for quantifying vascular deformations from a surface mesh constructed from
image segmentation.
The proposed methods are intuitive. When two curves are to
be compared, the easiest way to compare the length difference is
by placing the two straightened curves side by side. To compare
the location of ostia between two vessels, it is natural to use the
whole 3-D structure of ostia as is the case for visual comparison. Similarly, the twisting of a vessel segment can be directly
determined by a comparison of the relative rotation angle measured at each ostium around the straightened vessel centerline
axis. The proposed methods utilize these intuitive and efficient
algorithms, and also take individual attributes (global or local)
of deformation metrics into account.
Coregistered graphs of centerline-based curvature help us to
understand global change in curvature along the vessel length.
The algorithm to find a best-fit torus to a vessel segment with

2590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

a window size of vessel diameter length effectively determines
the appropriate scale of curvature measure with minimizing the
sensitivity to potential irregularities in the centerline.
The use of linear-fits of cross-sectional centroids along a vessel axial path provides a reasonably accurate average direction
of that vessel, and hence global branch angles and angle changes
can be effectively measured.
The shape matching algorithm for the strain and twisting angle calculations utilizes an optimization scheme to minimize
the differences between geometric models based on all of the
3-D coordinates of the landmark, and hence improves consistency in detecting the landmark location. This technique is particularly valuable when the landmark has an irregular shape,
such as a calcific plaque.
Using the software phantom, we verified the algorithms to
compute deformation metrics. In addition, different segmentation methods were employed to investigate the sensitivity of
deformation measurements to potential variations in geometry from image processing methods or imaging artifacts. With
these segmentation differences, some variations were observed.
Particularly, strain and twisting angle metrics exhibited more
variation, i.e., higher relative variability, than curvature and bifurcation angle metrics. Since strain and twisting metrics are
characterized by local features, ensuring the consistency in the
sharpness of bifurcations is important to obtain accurate measurements. Although these variations are inevitably caused by
the changes in bifurcation shapes due to different segmentation methods [see Fig. 11(e)], we think the surface-based shape
matching algorithm would help minimize the effect of introduced noise. Notably, the sign of strain and twisting showed
consistent directions of deformation (e.g., shortening or clockwise twisting). Since curvature and bifurcation angle metrics
were designed to measure global characteristics of vessels, the
change in segmentation methods did not cause large variations
on these metrics. Moreover, the effect of vasodilation was minimal. The proposed methods are inherently robust to the radial
variations of geometry (e.g., vasoconstriction and vasodilation)
for several reasons. First, the centerline extraction algorithm is
based on the cross-sectional centroids and thus centroids are
by definition invariant to isotropic radial deformation. Second,
the optimization process of the shape matching algorithm minimizes bias and identifies the center branch ostia [see Fig. 11(e)].
Therefore, vasoconstricted or dilated branches would have minimal impact on the deformation metrics unless vasodilation or
constriction occurs anisotropically.
Using cardiac-gated CT data, we confirmed the applicability of the proposed methods to measure coronary artery deformation. The coronary arteries exhibited 3.68 ± 3.16% length
change, 0.137 ± 0.128 cm−1 curvature change resulting in a
37.8 ± 19.8% increase from diastole to systole, and 1.62 ±
1.39 °/cm twisting deformation due to cardiac pulsatility. The
longitudinal strain values in this study [see Table IV(a)] are similar to the range of those measured in Zhu et al. (5% and 15%
arc length changes of two patients’ LAD over the cardiac cycle
estimated from plots) [29]. Most validation studies for curvature
or torsion were based on 3-D helices or circles by computing the
Frenet–Serret curvature and torsion metrics. Liao et al. proposed

a method to measure the temporal changes in the curvature and
torsion of coronary arteries using biplane angiograms, and reported LCA curvature measurements of 0.87 ± 0.05 cm−1 with
38% increase in curvature from diastole to systole [31], which
is similar to our study. No twisting deformation was available
in the literature for comparison.
The methods described in this paper build on centerlinebased quantification methods presented in our previous work
[2]. Centerline and parallel paths play major roles in providing
a reference path to straighten vessel geometry. Metrics based
on the centerline also provide a good initial condition for the
optimization process. Centerline-based methods are useful to
determine static measurements such as length and angle of separation, while centerlines combined with surface-based methods
are most useful to determine a change in length or change in
angle of separation.
Indeed, those two methods complement each other because
a 3-D centerline stores volumetric vessel information in a
1-D parameterization, while 3-D surface mesh stores it in a 2D parameterization. The combination of the two methods truly
restores the 3-D information of the image volumes.
Deformation metrics measured by the proposed methods can
provide guidelines for the design of endovascular implants and
accessary devices, particularly in determining the mechanical
property of devices. The curvature metrics can be used to determine the necessary flexibility of guide-wires to ensure easy
access to distal lesions in tortuous vessels. For stents, the proposed deformation metrics can be directly used to influence
bench-top testing protocols and finite element fatigue studies.
For example, the structural strength of a biodegradable stent is
intended to provide a temporary luminal scaffold from which
antirestenosis drugs can be released. Therefore, axial strain and
twist rate measurements can help provide criteria with which to
perform axial length change and axial twist tests, respectively.
The knowledge of in vivo deformations can also help provide
insights to optimize stent design and mechanical properties. For
example, the mismatch of axial stiffness between the stent and
native vessel can cause adverse mechanical and hemodynamic
effects that may influence clinical outcome. The discontinuity
of stiffness in conventional metal stents can cause the concentration of mechanical stresses at the edges of implanted stents
and flow disturbances due to a change in pulse wave propagation, and thus increase the risk of endothelial injury or in-stent
restenosis [32], [33].
There are several limitations in this study. First, the proposed
methods do not provide an algorithm to quantify cross-sectional
area change during the cardiac cycle. To calculate area consistently, intensity inhomogeneities should be compensated for
across the image volume over the cardiac cycle, and image resolution would need to improve. Second, the deformation measurements are limited by the number of branch vessels or plaques
that are visible in the images. A deformation image registration
algorithm could be used to obtain more spatial correspondences
with improved image quality. Third, while the software phantom
study provided a verification of proposed algorithm in an ideal
situation, the effect of potential errors associated with imaging
artifacts and segmentation techniques was not investigated in

CHOI∗ et al.: METHODS FOR CHARACTERIZING HUMAN CORONARY ARTERY DEFORMATION FROM CARDIAC-GATED CT DATA

this study. Ideally, a validation study using a physical phantom or ex vivo model of coronary and high-resolution imaging
techniques (e.g., micro-CT) would be valuable to determine the
accuracy of proposed quantification methods as presented in previous studies. For example, Wischgoll et al. utilized cast models
of excised porcine hearts to evaluate the accuracy of measurements from CT scan as compared to the optical measurements
from dissection microscope and digital camera [34].
V. CONCLUSION
We have developed methods for quantifying vessel deformation based on the direct comparison of 3-D geometries using
centerline and surface meshes. Minimal user input of the algorithm ensures the ease of use and the reproducibility of the
methods. In addition, the analysis with the software phantom
demonstrated the accuracy and robustness of the quantification
algorithms. In the application of this method to patient-specific
CT data, strain and twisting measurements based on direct comparison of straightened meshes enabled the calculation of cyclic
longitudinal strain and twisting deformation of the coronary arteries. Moreover, the branch angle change between the LAD
and LCX was also calculated, which may bring further insight
to how the heart deforms during contraction and relaxation.
Although we focus on applications to the coronary artery, quantification methods in this study can be extended to other areas
of the vasculature. Vascular deformations derived from these
methods can provide information for designing bench-top tests
for endovascular devices that better replicate the in vivo environment, thereby improving device performance prediction and
leading to more durable designs.

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank N. Xiao and C. Hunley for
valuable discussions.

[20]
[21]

REFERENCES
[1] M. T. Draney, C. K. Zarins, and C. A. Taylor, “Three-dimensional analysis
of renal artery bending motion during respiration,” J. Endovasc. Ther.,
vol. 12, pp. 380–386, 2005.
[2] G. Choi, C. P. Cheng, N. M. Wilson, and C. A. Taylor, “Methods for
quantifying three-dimensional deformation of arteries due to pulsatile and
nonpulsatile forces: Implications for the design of stents and stent grafts,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, pp. 14–33, 2009.
[3] C. P. Cheng, C. Choi, R. J. Herfkens, and C. A. Taylor, “The effect of
aging on deformations of the superficial femoral artery due to hip and knee
flexion: Potential clinical implications,” J. Vasc. Interv. Radiol., vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 195–202, 2009.
[4] C. P. Cheng, N. M. Wilson, R. L. Hallett, R. J. Herfkens, and C. A.
Taylor, “In vivo MR angiographic quantification of axial and twisting
deformations of the superficial femoral artery resulting from maximum
hip and knee flexion,” J. Vasc. Interv. Radiol., vol. 17, pp. 979–87, 2006.
[5] O. Smedby, “Geometrical risk factors for atherosclerosis in the femoral
artery: A longitudinal angiographic study,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 26,
pp. 391–7, 1998.
[6] N. B. Wood, S. Z. Zhao, A. Zambanini, M. Jackson, W. Gedroyc, S. A.
Thom, A. D. Hughes, and X. Y. Xu, “Curvature and tortuosity of the
superficial femoral artery: A possible risk factor for peripheral arterial
disease,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 101, pp. 1412–8, 2006.
[7] P. J. Wensing, F. G. Scholten, P. C. Buijs, M. J. Hartkamp, W. P. Mali, and
B. Hillen, “Arterial tortuosity in the femoropopliteal region during knee

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

2591

flexion: A magnetic resonance angiographic study,” J. Anatomy, vol. 187,
Pt. 1, pp. 133–139, 1995.
C. B. Bargeron, G. M. Hutchins, G. W. Moore, O. J. Deters, F. F. Mark,
and M. H. Friedman, “Distribution of the geometric parameters of human
aortic bifurcations,” Arteriosclerosis, vol. 6, pp. 109–113, 1986.
W. C. Sternbergh, III, S. R. Money, R. K. Greenberg, and T. A. Chuter, “Influence of endograft oversizing on device migration, endoleak, aneurysm
shrinkage, and aortic neck dilation: Results from the Zenith multicenter
trial,” J. Vasc. Surg., vol. 39, pp. 20–26, 2004.
M. A. Heikkinen, J. M. Alsac, F. R. Arko, R. Metsanoja, A. Zvaigzne, and
C. K. Zarins, “The importance of iliac fixation in prevention of stent graft
migration,” J. Vasc. Surg., vol. 43, pp. 1130–1137, 2006.
P. Benharash, J. T. Lee, O. J. Abilez, T. Crabtree, D. A. Bloch, and C. K.
Zarins, “Iliac fixation inhibits migration of both suprarenal and infrarenal
aortic endografts,” J. Vasc. Surg., vol. 45, pp. 250–257, 2007.
F. J. Veith, W. M. Abbott, J. S. Yao, J. Goldstone, R. A. White, D. Abel,
M. D. Dake, C. B. Ernest, T. J. Fogarty, and K. W. Johnston, W. S. Moore,
A. van Breda, G. Sopko, P. Didisheim, R. B. Rutherford, B. T. Katzen,
and D. C. Miller, “Guidelines for development and use of transluminally
placed endovascular prosthetic grafts in the arterial system,” J. Vasc. Surg.,
vol. 21, pp. 670–85, 1995.
G. Nakazawa, A. V. Finn, M. Vorpahl, E. Ladich, R. Kutys, I. Balazs, F. D.
Kolodqie, and R. Virmani, “Incidence and predictors of drug-eluting stent
fracture in human coronary artery a pathologic analysis,” J. Amer. Coll.
Cardiol., vol. 54, no. 21, pp. 1924–1931, 2009.
S. H. Lee, J. S. Park, D. G. Shin, Y. J. Kim, G. R. Hong, W. Kim, and B. S.
Shim, “Frequency of stent fracture as a cause of coronary restenosis after
sirolimus-eluting stent implantation,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 100,
no. 4, pp. 627–630, 2007.
C. Sarisozen, B. Arica, A. A. Hincal, and S. Calis, “Development of
biodegradable drug releasing polymeric cardiovascular stents and in vitro
evaluation,” J. Microencapsulation, vol. 26, pp. 501–512, 2009.
D. S. Paik, C. F. Beaulieu, R. B. Jeffrey, G. D. Rubin, and S. Napel, “Automated flight path planning for virtual endoscopy,” Med. Phys., vol. 25,
pp. 629–637, 1998.
W. E. Higgins, W. J. T. Spyra, and E. L. Ritman, “Automatic extraction
of the arterial tree from 3-D angiograms,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1989, pp. 563–564.
T. Deschamps and L. D. Cohen, “Fast extraction of minimal paths in 3D
images and applications to virtual endoscopy,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 5,
pp. 281–299, 2001.
F. K. H. Quek, “Vessel extraction in medical images by wave-propagation
and traceback,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 117–131, Feb.
2001.
P. M. O’Flynn, G. O’Sullivan, and A. S. Pandit, “Methods for threedimensional geometric characterization of the arterial vasculature,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, pp. 1368–1381, 2007.
L. Antiga, B. Ene-Iordache, and A. Remuzzi, “Computational geometry
for patient-specific reconstruction and meshing of blood vessels from MR
and CT angiography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 674–
684, May 2003.
S. Y. Chen, J. D. Carroll, and J. C. Messenger, “Quantitative analysis of
reconstructed 3-D coronary arterial tree and intracoronary devices,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 724–740, Jul. 2002.
R. Liao, N. E. Green, S. Y. Chen, J. C. Messenger, A. R. Hansgen, B. M.
Groves, and J. D. Carroll, “Three-dimensional analysis of in vivo coronary
stent—Coronary artery interactions,” Int. J. Cardiovasc. Imag., vol. 20,
pp. 305–313, 2004.
J. Puentes, C. Roux, M. Garreau, and J. L. Coatrieux, “Dynamic feature
extraction of coronary artery motion using DSA image sequences,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 857–871, Dec. 1998.
D. B. Abel, H. G. Beebe, M. M. Dedashtian, M. C. Morton, M. Moynahan,
L. J. Smith, and S. L. Weinberg, “Preclinical testing for aortic endovascular
grafts: Results of a Food and Drug Administration workshop,” J. Vasc.
Surg., vol. 35, pp. 1022–1028, 2002.
D. B. Abel, M. M. Dehdashtian, S. T. Rodger, A. C. Smith, L. J. Smith,
and M. S. Waninger, “Evolution and future of preclinical testing for endovascular grafts,” J. Endovasc. Ther., vol. 13, pp. 649–659, 2006.
P. S. Chowdhury and R. G. Ramos, “Images in clinical medicine.
Coronary-stent fracture,” N Engl. J. Med., vol. 347, p. 581, 2002.
W. W. Hager and H. Zhang, “Algorithm 851: CG_DESCENT, a Conjugate
gradient method with guaranteed descent,” ACM Trans. Math. Softw.,
vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 113–137, Mar. 2006.
H. Zhu, J. J. Warner, T. R. Gehrig, and M. H. Friedman, “Comparison
of coronary artery dynamics pre- and post-stenting,” J. Biomech., vol. 36,
pp. 689–697, 2003.

2592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

[30] K. Wang and T. Gasser, “Alignment of curves by dynamic time warping,”
Ann. Stat., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1251–1276, 1997.
[31] R. Liao, S. Y. Chen, J. C. Messenger, B. M. Groves, J. E. Burchenal,
and J. D. Carroll, “Four-dimensional analysis of cyclic changes in coronary artery shape,” Catheter. Cardiovasc. Interv., vol. 55, pp. 344–354,
2002.
[32] J. J. Wentzel, D. M. Whelan, W. J. van der Giessen, H. M. van Beusekom,
I. Andhyiswara, P. W. Serruys, C. J. Slager, and R. Krams, “Coronary stent
implantation changes 3-D vessel geometry and 3-D stress distribution,” J.
Biomech., vol. 33, pp. 1287–1295, 2000.

[33] R. Krams, J. J. Wentzel, J. A. Oomen, R. Vinke, J. C. Schuurbiers, P. J. de
Feyter, P. W. Serruys, C. J. Slager, “Evaluation of endothelial shear stress
and 3D geometry as factors determining the development of atherosclerosis and remodeling in coronary arteries in vivo: Combining 3-D reconstruction from and IVUS (ANGUS) with computational uid dynamics,”
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., vol. 17, pp. 2061–2065, 1997.
[34] T. Wischgoll, J. S. Choy, E. L. Ritman, and G. S. Kassab, “Validation
of image-based method for extraction of coronary morphometry,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 36, pp. 356–368, 2008.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

