IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

399

Electromagnetic Respiratory Effort Harvester:
Human Testing and Metabolic Cost Analysis
E. Shahhaidar, Member, IEEE, B. Padasdao, Member, IEEE, R. Romine, C. Stickley,
and O. Boric Lubecke, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Remote health monitoring is increasingly recognized
as a valuable tool in chronic disease management. Continuous respiratory monitoring could be a powerful tool in managing chronic
diseases, however it is infrequently performed because of obtrusiveness and inconvenience of the existing methods. The movements of
the chest wall and abdominal area during normal breathing can be
monitored and harvested to enable self-powered wearable biosensors for continuous remote monitoring. This paper presents human
testing results of a light-weight (30 g), wearable respiratory effort
energy harvesting sensor. The harvester output voltage, power, and
its metabolic burden, are measured on twenty subjects in two resting and exercise conditions each lasting 5 min. The system includes
two off-the-shelf miniature electromagnetic generators harvesting
and sensing thoracic and abdominal movements. Modules can be
placed in series to increase the output voltage for rectification purposes. Electromagnetic respiratory effort harvester/sensor system
can produce up to 1.4 V, 6.44 mW, and harvests 30.4 mJ during a
5-min exercise stage. A statistical paired t-test analysis of the calculated EE confirmed there is no significant change (P > 0.05)
in the metabolic rate of subjects wearing the electromagnetic harvester and biosensor.
Index Terms—Electromagnetic (EM) harvester, energy expenditure (EE), energy harvesting, respiratory effort.

I. INTRODUCTION
EMOTE health monitoring is increasingly recognized as
a valuable tool in chronic disease management, with potential benefits for both patients and health care providers.
Home monitoring of vital signs is particularly effective for
patients with congestive heart failure and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, where changes in vital signs can signal a

R

Manuscript received September 15, 2013; revised April 23, 2014 and February 3, 2014; accepted December 20, 2013. Date of publication May 22, 2014;
date of current version March 2, 2015. This work was supported in part by
the National Science Foundation under Grant ECCS-0926076, the University of
Hawaii Renewable Energy and Island Sustainability Program, and by Department of Energy under Grant DE-OE0000394.
E. Shahhaidar was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA. She is now with Incube Labs
Company, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA (e-mail: ehsaneh@incubelabs.com).
B. Padasdao was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA. He is now with the Department
of Math and Science, Leeward Community College, Pearl City, HI 96782, USA
(e-mail: brysonep@hawaii.edu).
R. Romine and C. Stickley are with the Department of Kinesiology and
Rehabilitation Science, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822,
USA (e-mail: rromine@hawaii.edu; cstickle@hawaii.edu).
O. Boric-Lubecke is with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA (e-mail:
olgabl@hawaii.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2326597

need for medical intervention. Continuous respiratory monitoring could be a powerful tool in managing these diseases, and
reducing associated mortality and cost [1], [2]. Observation of
abnormal respiration just few hours prior to cardiopulmonary
arrest could increase early therapeutic intervention, and potentially decrease serious adverse events as ICU admission [2], [3].
Nonetheless, accurate observation of respiration is infrequently
performed because of obtrusiveness and inconvenience of the
existing methods. Using wearable health-monitoring systems is
an unobtrusive alternative method of measuring physiological
parameters such as respiratory activity. This method may be
able to address early detection of abnormal conditions and prevent serious consequences by providing real time monitoring of
patients’ physiological parameters. However, one of the main
obstacles for widespread use of wearable systems is their dependence on batteries with limited lifetime and storage ability.
Although the power requirements of wearable health monitoring systems are decreasing to a couple of μWs [4], continuous
health monitoring by these devices requires frequent battery
change, which is not always easy and desirable. An on-body
energy harvester can eliminate the need for battery replacement. For this reason, a number of human energy sources were
identified for powering wearable computers in the 1990’s [5],
yet the focus of most investigations have been on locomotion
energy harvesting [6]–[8].
Movements of the torso during breathing are another form of
human energy that can be exploited for such purposes. Energy
from breathing has the advantages of being always available and
carrying critical medical information. Some preliminary studies [9]–[12] have shown the possibility of concurrent sensing
and harnessing movements of the torso during breathing. Simultaneous scavenging and sensing of human respiratory effort
may lead to a stand-alone, self-powered wearable biosensor for
continuous medical monitoring.
The biomechanics of breathing present several challenges for
designing a harvesting sensor. The design must use an efficient
mechanism for converting very small mechanical movements
of the torso to electrical output energy. The output power must
be on the order of at least tens of microwatts, to be able to
power wearable sensors, with sufficiently high voltage to enable efficient rectification. Low power microcontrollers with
wireless connectivity are readily available as a system on chip
(SoC) that includes ADC, CPU, RAM, and wireless transceiver,
suitable for biosensing data acquisition, processing, storage,
and transfer. To realize the zero-net energy biosensor concept,
the SoC should operate under minimum power consumption,
and the scavenged energy should be sufficient for sensing and

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

400

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
POWER REQUIREMENTS OF A SAMPLE SOC, TI CC430F61X, AT DIFFERENT
MODES OF OPERATION
Mode
Off (RAM retention)
Standby
ADC
CPU active mode
Transmission

Voltage [V]

Current

Power

Freq. [MHz]

2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2

1 μA
2 μA
125 μA
160 μA/MHz
14.2 mA

2.2 μW
4.4 μW
275 μW
352 μW/MHz
31.2 mW

−
−
5
315

transmitting information at reasonable intervals. Table I shows
an example of typical SoC power requirements. In [13], maximum available power during normal breathing for a female
subject in seated position was estimated to be around 3 mW
from back and forth movement and 44 mW from circumferential movement of the chest. The estimated amounts highly
depend on the physical characteristics of the subject however,
hypothetically an efficient harvesting system embedded in a
chest belt, harvesting the expansion and contraction of the chest
could provide enough power for a SoC with power requirements
in Table I.
The additional challenge for wearable sensors is the need for
compact, lightweight, and unobtrusive system. No extra load and
effort should be applied to the body while wearing the device,
so that the sensed signal represents the unburdened physiological activity. The ideal case is when wearable device does not
increase the normal energy expenditure (EE) of the subject.
Linear displacement caused by changes in chest circumference during breathing can be converted into electricity by a
linear or rotary electromagnetic generator inducing a voltage
signal proportional to the chest motions. A gearbox in a rotary
generator increases the small velocity of breathing [9]. In [10], a
high gear ratio servo motor, functioning as a generator, showed
an output voltage of 0.7 V with 15-mW output power. The drawback of this system was a fairly high force required from the
torso to move the armature of the generator. Another study [11]
was focused on improving the electromagnetic harvester design,
based on decreasing the required force from the torso to move
the armature of the generator, while having a rectifiable output
voltage and a reasonable harvested power. In [12], the possibility
of estimating respiratory rate with an electromagnetic biosensor
has been investigated.
This paper presents the first reported human study of a noninvasive, unobtrusive electromagnetic respiratory effort harvesting sensor with metabolic cost analysis. The EE for individuals
wearing the sensor was calculated and compared with individuals of a control group and a statistical comparison of two
conditions proves that there is no significant metabolic impact
due to wearing the sensor. The output power is sufficient to continuously power the SoC in standby condition even at resting
positions. Application of some power optimization methods,
such as peak detection by ADC decreases the total required
power during processing. In this case, the harvesting system is
able to power the SoC after less than 1 min of energy accumulation during seated position, and after less than 3 s of energy

Fig. 1. (a) Top view of the harvesting system and direction of movements
during inhalation, and (b) exhalation, the angle (θ) and the arc traveled by the
arm (R is the length of the arm measured from the center).

accumulation during a brisk walk. For remote health monitoring
applications, the intervals for sending/receiving the information
will depend on the patient condition. The EM harvesting system
can power up the SoC for transmission every 6 min during fast
walk.
II. METHODS
A. Respiratory Effort Energy Harvesting
The expansion and contraction of the chest and abdominal
area due to respiration can be transferred to a belt, wrapped
around the torso, and resulting in a linear velocity (vr ). The
linear velocity is then converted to an angular velocity by a
rotary arm connected to the armature of a miniature generator:
vr = ωr × R = ωr R sin θ

(1)

where θ is the change in angular displacement (measured in
radians), R is the length of the arm measured from the axis of
rotation, and ωr as dθ/dt is the angular velocity (see Fig. 1).
The rotation of the armature in a uniform magnetic field
(B), introduces a time varying flux (2), thereby inducing an
electromotive force (emf), ε, (3) proportional to the angular
velocity of the rotating armature
→ 
−
= B.A. cos θ = B.A. cos ωt
(2)
ΦB = B .A
dφ
= −N BAω sin(ωt)
(3)
dt
where N is the number of coil turns in the armature.
Fig. 1 illustrates the operation of the respiratory effort energy
harvesting system, containing an electromagnetic rotary generator embedded in a belt. The electromagnetic generator had a
gearbox attached directly to the armature of the generator in
order to increase the velocity. The rotary coupling arm of the
harvester is connected to the belt. A small spring is fixed at
one end and is connected to the rotating pulley (including the
rotating arm) at the other end to help retracting the arm and
continuing power generation during the exhalation/contraction.
ε = −N

SHAHHAIDAR et al.: ELECTROMAGNETIC RESPIRATORY EFFORT HARVESTER: HUMAN TESTING AND METABOLIC COST ANALYSIS

401

Fig. 2. (a) Pololu 50:1 micro metal gearmotor #1098 and modified into a
(b) wearable chest belt.

Inhalation causes the arm and spring to be pulled by the belt.
This process can cause a relative decrease in metabolic rate
during exhalation.
The arm will return to its first position by the restorative force
of the spring during exhalation. The output voltage and power
is recorded and harvested across a load resistor.
The generator type, gear ratio of the gearbox, length of the
rotary arm connected to the armature, type and length of the
spring, type and length of the belt, and the load resistance all
play important roles in the harvested output power. A higher
load resistance lowers the required force and increases the output voltage, with the tradeoff of reduced harvested power [12].
Considering (1)–(3), the output voltage of the generator (V) depends on the linear displacement (xr ) and velocity of the belt
resulted from torso expansion and contraction during breathing
 x 
vr
r
ε = V = −N BA.
. sin
.
(4)
R sin θ
R sin θ
A gearbox amplifies the angular speed by converting a small
movement on a bigger gear to couple of rotations on a smaller
gear. After considering these tradeoffs, the harvester module
was built using an off-the-shelf, low-speed, high-torque micro
dc motor with a 50:1 gear ratio, and an arm length of R = 2.5 cm.
The selected load resistance, based on the minimum required
force in order to turn the armature, the output voltage, and the
output power, was equal to ten times the internal resistance of the
motor as 160 Ω [12]. Fig. 2 shows the actual harvester module.
Since breathing motion can come from one of the two primary regions, chest, or abdomen, two harvesters were used to
pick up both thoracic and diaphragmatic breathing. One of the
belts is placed around the chest with the harvester module on
the xyphoid process, and the other belt was around the abdominal area with the harvester module on the umbilicus. This setup
allows harvesters to concurrently harvest the movements of the
chest wall, and the diaphragm, reflected in the abdominal area.
The two outputs could be connected in series (two 160 Ω in
series, total amount of 320 Ω) to increase the output voltage
for easier rectification, while sacrificing harvested power by a
factor of two. Fig. 3 demonstrates the testing schematic of the
system. Vc and Vb represent the output voltage of the harvesters
on chest and abdominal area, respectively. Versus represents
the hypothetical (dashed lines in the schematic) output voltage
when the two outputs are connected in series. The output of
each harvester was measured by a separate probe, but both were

Fig. 3.

Schematics of the testing system.

connected to a 14-bit portable National Instruments Data Acquisition (DAQ) device, recorded and digitized by LabView with a
1-kHz sampling rate.
B. Metabolic Cost of Harvesting
One of the gold standard methods to measure EE in humans is
indirect (respiratory) calorimetry. This method [14] involves an
oxygen and carbon dioxide analyzer interfaced with computer
software, and relies on the metabolic conversion of food energy
with oxygen to create carbon dioxide. The gas analyzer analyzes expired gases for oxygen and carbon dioxide content, and
using minute ventilation (VE), oxygen uptake (VO2 ), and carbon dioxide production (VCO2 ) can be precisely calculated. EE
can be then estimated from the volume of oxygen uptake (VO2 )
and carbon dioxide produced (VCO2 ). The values of VO2 and
VCO2 are used to calculate respiratory exchange ratio (RER) as
follows:
RER = VCO2 / VO2 .

(5)

The calculation of RER allows for accurate determination of
kilocalories derived per liter of oxygen consumed (RER constant), e.g., for RER = 0.7 the yield is 4.686 kcal/liter O2 ; for
an RER = 0.97 the yield is 5.010 kcal/liter O2 [15]. The EE for
any activity during a limited amount of time will be estimated
as




L
Kcal
Energy [Kcal] = VO2
× RERconstant
min
LO2
× time [min] .

(6)

1) Testing Protocol: Twenty subjects, thirteen males, and
seven females, volunteered for this study. The descriptive statistics of the participants are presented in Table II. The subjects
were all physically active, healthy, and were not using any medications known to affect energy metabolism. Written informed
consent was obtained from all subjects (approved human testing,
protocol: CHS#19176). Prior to the test initiation, participants
were fitted with a heart rate monitor, wearable respiratory sensors, headgear, and a breathing mask to assess respiratory gas

402

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE II
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE STUDY SAMPLE

Variable
Age (years)
Height (cm)
Body Mass (kg)
BMI (kg/m2)

Entire sample
Mean ± SD

Males
Mean ± SD

Females
Mean ± SD

27 ± 3.5
174.4 ± 8
70.8 ± 9.9
23.3 ± 3

28 ± 3.4
176.9 ± 6
75.2 ± 6.1
24.1 ± 1.8

26.1 ± 3.4
169.8 ± 9.8
62.5 ± 10.6
21.8 ± 4.2

during all stages. Participants used the 6–20 point Borg Scale at
the end of each stage by pointing to the appropriate RPE value
while continuing to exercise.
Metabolic cost was estimated based on measured O2 and
CO2 volume using metabolic cart for open-circuit spirometry.
Output of the harvesters was synchronized manually with the
electrocardiogram and the indirect calorimeter. The metabolic
cart outputs were reported both breath-by-breath and every 30 s.

III. DISCUSSION

Fig. 4.

Human testing, subject walking on the treadmill (exercise stage).

exchange throughout the test. The harvested electrical power
was determined by the output voltage of two Pololu MicroMetal
Gearmotors, as the harvesters, recorded across the load resistors. Each subject was tested with and without the harvesters.
Testing conditions included a range of respiratory effort in order to determine if any effect of the harvester application is
consistent across the activity range. Throughout the duration of
the test, participants had to breathe through the mask, which
was connected to a metabolic cart through ventilation tubes.
The metabolic cart was used to determine oxygen consumption
(VO2 ) and RER. All subjects completed four stages, two resting stages, and two exercise stages of testing, each lasting five
minutes. Fig. 4 shows the system set up during human testing.
3) Outcome Measures: Oxygen consumption, heart rate
(HR), RER, O2 sat., rate of perceived exertion (RPE), harvested voltage, and power were measured during each stage.
Cardiovascular responses were collected via standard open circuit spirometry. Inspired ventilation was measured with a previously calibrated dry gas meter (Rayfield RAM-9200) fitted
with a potentiometer. The concentrations of oxygen and carbon
dioxide were continuously sampled with an Applied Electrochemistry Oxygen analyzer S-3A/1, Oxygen sensor N-22M,
carbon dioxide analyzer CD-3A, and a carbon dioxide sensor P61B, which was calibrated with commercially available primary
standard grade gases. HR was measured via Model Q710 electrocardiogram (Quinton Instrument Co., Bothell, Washington).
Respiratory rate and tidal volume were measured by spirometry

During the resting stages, the participants were asked to sit
for 5 min, and then to stand still for 5 min. During the exercise stages, the participants were required to walk on a treadmill with 1% inclination. At the beginning of exercise stage
1, the treadmill was set immediately at 3.5 mph pace (approximately equivalent to 17 min per mile walking pace, considered a “fast walk”). At the beginning of exercise stage 2,
the speed was decreased to 2.5 mph (approximately equivalent
to 24 min per mile walking pace, considered normal walking
speed). During exercise stages, the speed and the treadmill inclination was held constant within each stage. Upon completion
of the test, a cool down took place which consisted of a slow
walking pace for 2 min.
Accuracy of the VO2 measurement is performed with less
than 1% error according to specifications provided by the manufacturer. For a 70 kg individual sitting quietly (metabolic cost
of approximately 3.5 mlO2 /kg/min or 1.2 kcal/min) this equates
to a potential error of 0.025 kcal/min. The sensitivity of the measurement of VO2 in this case demonstrates that in practice, if an
individual shows no detectable increase in VO2 due to the use
of the harvesting system, the addition of the harvesters will have
potentially increased the metabolic cost so minimally within the
range of potential for measurement error that it should not be
considered practically meaningful for a biological system.
The efficiency of a system can be estimated while both input
power to the system and output power is measured at the same
time. During the advanced human testing, while the spirometer
and the wearable sensor/harvester were being used for each
subject, there was no practical way to measure the input power
at the same time as the output power.

IV. RESULTS
A. Harvester Output
Vb and Vc (see Fig. 3) for each subject were recorded separately from the abdominal and chest harvesters of each subject.
Vs was calculated as the sum of Vc and Vb of each subject at any
sampled time. For analytical purposes, the mean value of Vc ,
Vb , and Vs at each stage was calculated for the whole sample
study. Considering that the movements of the chest and abdomen while breathing may or may not occur at the same time
for different people, (thoracic versus diaphragmatic breathing)
the mean value of the Vs will not necessarily be equal to the
mean value of Vb + Vc of the whole study sample.

SHAHHAIDAR et al.: ELECTROMAGNETIC RESPIRATORY EFFORT HARVESTER: HUMAN TESTING AND METABOLIC COST ANALYSIS

Fig. 5. Sample output voltage from harvesters worn by a male subject from
(a) chest, (b) abdominal belts, and (c) two harvesters in series.

403

Fig. 7. Difference in metabolic rate of a female subject sampled every 30 s
(Dashed line: with the harvester, Solid line: without the harvester).

TABLE IV
AVERAGE HARVESTED POWER AND THE ACCUMULATED ENERGY AT THE END
OF EACH STAGE (AFTER 5 MIN) FOR THE STUDY SAMPLE

Power (μW)

Energy (μJ)

Fig. 6. Sample output power from harvesters worn by a male subject from
(a) chest, (b) abdominal belts, and (c) output power of two harvesters in series
(c).

Location on body

Sit

Stand

Walk-Fast

Walk-Normal

Abdomen
Chest
Series
Abdomen
Chest
Series

3.0
6.9
5.0
900
191 700
1,500

3.4
12.0
6.2
1,020
3,600
1,860

102.4
71.5
101.4
30 720
21 450
30 420

54.6
72.6
63.7
16 380
21 780
19 110

TABLE V
CALCULATED METABOLIC RATE (KCAL) FOR THE WHOLE SAMPLE STUDY,
AVERAGED FOR THE LAST 2 MIN

TABLE III
MAXIMUM HARVESTED VOLTAGE AND POWER FROM THE STUDY SAMPLE

Voltage (mV)

Power (mW)

Location on body

Sit

Stand

Walk-Fast

Walk-Normal

Abdomen
Chest
Series
Abdomen
Chest
Series

368.5
511
667.3
1.6
2.1
1.5

353.4
657.6
717.2
2.2
3.7
1.7

956.9
811
1397
7.3
5.1
6.4

750
797
1217
5.1
4.5
5.1

The harvested power from each person and by each harvester
was estimated by (7)
P=

V2
.
RL

(7)

RL is the load resistance of each harvester (160 Ω) and V is
the output voltage of the harvester. Figs. 5 and 6 show samples
of recorded output voltage and output power of the harvesters
for a male subject for the whole testing period while Table III
summarizes the maximum harvested voltage and power at each
stage averaged for all 20 subjects. Meanwhile, the recorded output voltage and power of the harvester gives some interesting
information about the breathing patterns (thoracic or abdominal), respiratory rate, etc. For example, Tables III and IV show
that during rest stages (sitting and standing) higher displacement

Without harvester
With harvester

Sit

Stand

Walk-Fast

Walk-Normal

2.743
2.738

2.938
2.918

10.468
10.709

7.649
7.704

(and thus, higher output voltage and harvestable power) takes
place in thoracic/chest area, while during exercise stages (walking) higher displacement resulting in higher output voltage and
harvestable power will be available in the abdominal area.
From Table IV and the SoC requirements (see Table I) it
can be inferred that the harvesting system including both chest
and abdominal harvesting modules can continuously power the
SoC in standby condition even at resting positions. Power optimization methods, such as peak detection, could be applied
by ADC as an initial processing of the sensed respiratory effort [16] in order to decrease the power required by CPU. In
this case, the harvesting system is able to power the SoC after
less than 1 min of energy accumulation during seated position,
and after less than 3 s of energy accumulation during brisk
walk. For remote health monitoring applications, the intervals
for sending/receiving the information will depend on the patient
condition. The EM harvesting system can power up the SoC for
transmission every 6 min during fast walk.
Results of the preprocessing of the recorded output voltage
compared to the spirometer showed that the respiratory rate is

404

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE VI
RESULTS OF PAIRED SAMPLE T-TEST ON ALL SUBJECTS
Paired Differences

Pair1: Sit w sensor and w/o sensor
Pair2: Stand w sensor and w/o sensor
Pair3: Walk fast w sensor and w/o sensor
Pair4: Walk normal w senor and w/o sensor

P-value

Mean

Std. Deviation

Std. Error Mean

−0.005
−0.019
0.241
0.055

0.320
0.330
0.641
0.661

0.072
0.074
0.143
0.148

detectable with a mean difference of 0.36 ± 2.83 breaths/min
sitting, 0.23 ± 2.64 breaths/min standing, and 0.48 ± 3.06
breaths/min during walking [12]. The other important information that can be detected by the EM harvester/sensor is change
in the tidal volume (VT ) which is related to the change in torso
circumference. The feasibility of the chest circumferential displacement by the EM harvester/sensor has been investigated in
[17].
B. Metabolic Cost
To estimate the metabolic change due to the harvesters, the
testing procedure was repeated without the harvesters, right after
a 20 min rest interval for the subjects to return to normal physiological condition. The testing procedure without harvesters
was considered the control situation and the testing procedure
while wearing the harvesters was chosen to expose the subjects
to a physically more demanding breathing situation that might
increase muscle activation in the major muscles of the torso.
Fig. 7 shows the comparison of the EE under both situations,
with (dashed line) and without (solid line) the harvesters during
the whole 20 min of all stages for a female subject.
The transitions between stages cause the oxygen uptake
to increase rapidly. This change in oxygen uptake is considered
to reach to its steady state within 1–4 min [18]. For this reason,
to estimate the EE difference, VO2 , and RER were averaged for
the last 2 min of each stage. The total EE was also estimated for
the last 2 min of each stage. The average metabolic rate for all
subjects with and without the harvesters has been summarized
in Table IV. Surprisingly, the average metabolic rate without the
harvester for all stages (except in walking fast) shows a slight
increase. The reason might be the order of experiments. As mentioned previously, we first tested the subjects with the harvester
on and then without the harvester. Although there was a 20-min
break, there still might have been some fatigue left from previous testing with the harvesters. Moreover, the spring used in the
EM harvester system may help reducing the net required energy
during exhalation of resting positions leading to a less EE while
wearing the EM system (see Table V).
C. Statistical Analysis
After the mean value of the EE for the last 2 min (3 to 5 min)
of each activity was calculated, paired sample t-tests (performed
by SPSS statistical analysis software) was performed to assess
the comparison of metabolic rates of participants to determine
if the EE was significantly elevated in individuals when wearing

0.945
0.800
0.109
0.716

the harvester. With a common statistical significance defined as
P < 0.05 for all stages, the study of 20 adults showed that there
is no significant change of total EE measured by the indirect
calorimeter. Table VI illustrates the paired t-test results.
IV. CONCLUSION
Remote health monitoring and wearable sensors promise to
transform the chronic disease management. In this paper, we
presented a wearable respiratory harvesting sensor that may
enable continuous respiratory monitoring without the need for
battery replacement. Two miniature electromagnetic harvester
modules were used to harvest energy from movements of the
torso due to breathing. Twenty subjects were tested in four
different scenarios. The output power of the harvesters and the
EE of the human subjects were measured.
Experimental and analytical results indicated that with no
significant change in metabolic rate 6.44 mW could be harvested
with 1.4-V output induced across load resistor.
The EM harvesting sensor is able to power up an ultralow
power SoC, continuously for standby position, and data transmission for every 6 min during brisk walk. It can power the
ADC part of the SoC for pre-processing by power optimization
methods after 3 s of energy accumulation during fast walk.
The respiratory rate is detectable by EM harvesting sensor
with a mean difference of 0.36 ± 2.83 breaths/min sitting,
0.23 ± 2.64 breaths/min standing, and 0.48 ± 3.06 breaths/min
during walking.
Consequently, the EM harvester/sensor may be used to power
low-power personal electronic devices while it can also detect
important information about respiratory activity and enable selfpowered wearable biosensors.
REFERENCES
[1] R. E. Litan, “Vital signs via broadband: Remote health monitoring transmits savings, enhances lives,” Better Health Care Together. Oct. 24, 2008.
Available: www.corp.att.com/healthcare/docs/litan.pdf
[2] J. Sarasohn-Kahn. (2011) .The connected patient: Charting the vital signs of remote health monitoring. California Healthcare Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://www.chcf.org/publications/2011/02/theconnected-patient
[3] A. Pantelopoulos and N.G. Bourbakis, “Prognosis—a wearable healthmonitoring system for people at risk: Methodology and modeling”, IEEE
Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 613–621, May 2010.
[4] G. Yang, J. Chen, L. Xie, J. Mao, H. Tenhunen, and L.-R. Zheng, “A
hybrid low power biopatch for body surface potential measurement,” IEEE
J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 591–599, May 2013.
[5] T. Starner and J. A. Paradiso, “Human generated power for mobile electronics,” in Low-Power Electronics Design, Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC
Press, 2005.

SHAHHAIDAR et al.: ELECTROMAGNETIC RESPIRATORY EFFORT HARVESTER: HUMAN TESTING AND METABOLIC COST ANALYSIS

[6] J. Kymisis, C. Kdall, J. Paradiso, and N. Gershenfeld, “Parasitic power
harvesting in shoes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Wearable Comput., 1998, pp.
132–139.
[7] L. C. Rome, L. Flynn, E. M. Goldman, and T. D. Yoo, “Generating electricity while walking with loads,” Science, vol. 309, pp. 1725–1728, Sep.
2005.
[8] Q. Li, V. Naing, and J. M. Donelan, “Development of a biomechanical
energy harvester”, J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 6, no. 22, 2009.
[9] E. Shahhaidar, O. Boric-Lubecke, M. Wolfe, and R. Ghorbani, “Electromagnetic generators as respiratory effort energy harvester,” presented at
the IEEE Power Energy Conf., Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA, Feb. 2011.
[10] B. Padasdao and O. Boric-Lubecke, “Respiratory rate sensing using servo
motors,” presented at the 33th Int. Conf. IEEE Med., Boston, MA,
Aug. 2011.
[11] E. Shahhaidar, B. Padasdao, and O. Boric-Lubecke, “Piezoelectric and
electromagnetic respiratory effort energy harvesters,” in Proc. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., Jul. 2013, pp. 3439–3442.
[12] B. Padasdao, E. Shahhaidar, C. Stickley, and O. Boric-Lubecke, “Electromagnetic biosensing of respiratory rate,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 13, no. 11,
pp. 4204–4211, Nov. 2013.
[13] E. Shahhaidar, E. Yavari, J. Young, O. Boric-Lubecke, and C. Stickley,
“Respiratory effort energy estimation using Doppler radar,” in Proc. IEEE
34th Int. Conf. Med., San Diego, CA, USA, Aug. 2012, pp. 719–722.
[14] W. D. McArdle, F. I. Katch, and V. L. Katch, Exercise Physiology: Energy
Nutrition and Human Performance. Philadelphia, PA: Lei & Fiberger,
1981.
[15] S. P. Brown, W. C. Miller, and J. M. Eason, Exercise Physiology: Basis of
Human Movement in Health and Disease. New York, NY, USA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2006.
[16] B. Padasdao, R. Yee, and O. Boric-Lubecke, “Low-power system-on-chip
implementation for respiratory rate detection and transmission,” in Proc.
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 4501–4504.
[17] B. Padasdao, E. Shahhaidar, and O. Boric-Lubecke, “Measuring chest
circumference during respiration with an electromagnetic biosensor,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Jul. 2013, pp. 1–3.
[18] S. K. Powers and E. T. Howley, “Exercise Physiology: Theory and Application to Fitness and Performance”, 7th ed. New York, NY, USA:
McGraw-Hill, 2009.

Ehsaneh Shahhaidar (S’09–M’13) received the B.S.
and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from
Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran, and the
University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran,
in 2003 and 2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of
Hawaii at Manoa, Honlulu, HI, USA, in 2013.
From 2005 to 2008, she was a Lecturer at the
Department of Electrical Engineering, K. N. Toosi
University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. From 2010
to 2013, she was a Research Assistant with the Renewable Energy and Island Sustainability, Honolulu, HI. Also, in 2013, she was
an Intern with the State of Hawaii, Office of Information Management. She is
currently a Postdoctoral Research Associate at Incube Labs, San Antonio, TX,
USA.

Bryson Padasdao (S’11–M’13) received the B.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, in 2009
and 2013, respectively.
From 2009 to 2013, he was a Research Assistant with Renewable Energy and Island Sustainability, Honolulu, HI, USA. In 2010, he was a Project Estimator with American Electric, where he completed
equipment and cost proposals for various electrical
construction projects around Oahu. He is currently
an Instructor in the Department of Math and Science,
Leeward Community College, Pearl City, HI, USA.

405

Rebecca Romine received the B.A. degree in liberal arts from Boston College, Boston, MA, USA,
in 1998, and the M.S. degree in kinesiology with
specialization in athletic training from University of
Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA, in 2009. She
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in kinesiology at University of Hawaii at Manoa.
Since 2011, she has been a Research Assistant
with the Hawaii Center for Aids (HICFA). She is a
Healthcare Provider and BLS Instructor at American
Heart Association, is a Member of Hawaii Athletic
Trainer’s Association (HATA), and also a certified Athletic Trainer (ATC).
Ms. Romine received the Dr. Hans and Clara Zimmerman Foundation Health
Scholarship for individuals pursuing an education in a health field, John &
Gertrude Moir Jr Scholarship, and the Mildred Towle Scholarship for African
Americans.

Christopher Stickley received the B.S. degree in
health education and exercise science from Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA, in 1997, the M.A.
degree in kinesiology from the California State University, Fresno, CA, USA, in 1999, and the Ph.D.
degree in kinesiology from the University of Hawaii
(UH) at Manoa, Honlulu, HI, USA, in 2008.
Since 2008, he has been with the University of
Hawaii at Manoa as an Assistant Professor. Prior to
joining UH, he was the Head Athletic Trainer and an
Associate Athletic Director for Sports Medicine with
Northern Kentucky University, Highland Heights, KY, USA, where he directed
the medical care for NCAA intercollegiate athletes in 13 sports. He served
as an Adjunct Faculty Member with the Athletic Training Education Program
and directed clinical education for athletic training students. He teaches human
anatomy for graduate and medical students with the John A. Burns School of
Medicine and conducts anatomy related research. His current research interests
include the modeling of gait related risk factors for overuse injuries of the lower
extremity and the changes in gait following total hip and total knee replacement.
Dr. Stickley serves as the Program Director of the CAATE Accredited Postprofessional Graduate Athletic Training Program and as the Director of the
University’s Biomechanics and Gait Laboratory.

Olga Boric-Lubecke (S’90–M’90–SM’01) received
the B.Sc. degree from the University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in 1989, the M.S. degree from
the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
USA, in 1990, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
USA, in 1995, all in electrical engineering. Since
2003, she has been with the University of Hawaii
(UH) at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA.
She is currently a Professor of electrical engineering at the UH. Prior to joining UH, she was a
Technical Staff Member with Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray
Hill, NJ, USA, where she conducted research in RF integrated circuit technology and biomedical applications of wireless systems. She has authored or
co-authored over 150 journal and conference publications, and her research has
been featured in various newspapers, magazines, and radio programs.
Dr. Boric-Lubeke was a co-recipient of the Emerging Technology Award at
TechConnect in 2007, and co-founded and served as a Chief Technical Advisor
for a start-up company Kai Medical. She was an Advisor of the Student Paper
Competition Award Papers at the 2001 IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques International Microwave Symposium (Honorable Mention), the 2001
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Conference (Third Place),
and the 2003 IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques Society–International
Microwave Symposium (First Place). She served as the Workshop Chair for 2003
IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques Society–International Microwave
Symposium and as a Technical Program Vice-Chair for the 2007 IEEE MTTS IMS. She is currently an Associate Editor for the IEEE MICROWAVE AND
WIRELESS COMPONENTS LETTERS and IEEE ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE AND
BIOLOGY SOCIETY CONFERENCE.

