1788

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Exploiting Wearable Goniometer Technology
for Motion Sensing Gloves
Nicola Carbonaro, Gabriele Dalle Mura, Federico Lorussi, Rita Paradiso, Danilo De Rossi, and Alessandro Tognetti

Abstract—This paper presents an innovative wearable kinesthetic glove realized with knitted piezoresistive fabric (KPF) sensor technology. The glove is conceived to capture hand movement
and gesture by using KPF in a double-layer configuration working
as angular sensors (electrogoniometers). The sensing glove prototype is endowed by three KPF goniometers, used to track flexion
and extension movement of metacarpophalangeal joint of thumb,
index, and middle fingers. The glove is devoted to the continuous
monitoring of patients during their daily-life activities, in particular for stroke survivors during their rehabilitation. The prototype
performances have been evaluated in comparison with an optical
tracking system considered as a gold standard both for relieving
static and dynamic posture and gesture of the hand. The introduced
prototype has shown very interesting figures of merit. The angular
error, evaluated through the standard Bland Altman analysis, has
been estimated in ± 3◦ which is slightly less accurate than commercial electrogoniometers. Moreover, a new conceptual prototype
design, preliminary evaluated within this study, is presented and
discussed in order to solve actual limitations in terms of number
and type of sensor connections, avoiding mechanical constraints
given by metallic inextensible wires and improving user comfort.
Index Terms—Hand posture monitoring, poststroke rehabilitation, sensing glove, textile deformation sensor, wearable
goniometers.

I. INTRODUCTION
ONITORING joint angles through wearable systems allows reconstructing human posture and gesture for supporting physical rehabilitation both in clinics and at patient’s
home.
Recently, the use of textile-integrated deformation sensors
made of conductive elastomer (CE) materials permitted the realization of wearable and unobtrusive sensing garments for human
motion detection and classification [1]–[6], assistive devices
controlling [7], and biometrics identification [8], [9]. These materials can be selectively smeared on fabrics, with the possibility

M

Manuscript received December 4, 2013; revised March 27, 2014; accepted
May 7, 2014. Date of publication May 14, 2014; date of current version November 3, 2014. This work was supported by the EU 7th framework under Project
INTERACTION (FP7-ICT-2011-7-287351).
N. Carbonaro, G. D. Mura, and F. Lorussi are with the Research Center
E. Piaggio, University of Pisa, Pisa 56122, Italy (e-mail: nicola.carbonaro@
centropiaggio.unipi.it; gabrieledallemura@gmail.com; f.lorussi@ing.unipi.it).
D. De Rossi and A. Tognetti are with the Information Engineering Department, University of Pisa, Pisa 56122, Italy and also with the Research Center E. Piaggio, University of Pisa, Pisa 56122, Italy (e-mail:
d.derossi@centropiaggio.unipi.it; a.tognetti@centropiaggio.unipi.it).
R. Paradiso is with the Smartex S.r.l., 56023 Navacchio, Italy (e-mail:
rita@smartex.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2324293

of obtaining the desired sensor network topology [5]. Main features of these sensors are flexibility and the preservation of the
mechanical properties of garments where they are deposited.
CE sensors show several advantages with respect to solid-state
sensors: negligible weight, low thickness, and possibility to distribute a high number of measuring points on a flexible substrate.
Sensing garments can be realized by applying CE stripes in chosen locations on normal cloths.
Prototype working principle was inspired from the strain sensitivity of human hand skin mechanoreceptors, exploited by the
central nervous system to codify joint movements: adherent CEaugmented clothes are worn as a second skin and, as the subject
moves, redundant sensor elements related to body segments are
stretched or shortened modifying their electrical resistance as a
function of the applied deformation [10].
Data interpretation is based on the high correlation which
relates changes in the electrical resistance of the sensor elements
and variations in the correspondent kinematic configuration [4],
[5].
CE-based sensing garments have shown good performance
for slow and wide movements while the accuracy, transient time,
and hysteresis have limited their use in reconstructing small and
fast movements [11].
Recently, knitted piezoresistive fabric (KPF) technology has
been introduced for biomechanical activity and respiration monitoring through plethysmography [12], [13]. KPF-based sensing
garments have the same working principle of the CE ones, but
they present improvements in terms of transient time, hysteresis,
and reproducibility.
The present study is focused on the design, development, and
preliminary validation of a kinestetic glove for grasping detection. It is oriented to the hand posture recognition in poststroke
patients for the evaluation of the activity recover of long finger
extensor and the intrinsic muscles of the thumb or to quantify
the presence of compensatory movement of the wrist within
daily-life activity when the rehabilitation fails.
This device has been realized within the INTERACTION
European funded project [14], aimed at the continuous dailylife monitoring of the functional activities of stroke survivors
in their mechanical interaction with the environment. This approach is fundamental for an optimal guidance of rehabilitation
therapy by physicians. From a technical point of view, the main
objective of the project is to exploit smart sensory fusion of
flexible and inertial sensors in order to develop an effective and
as unobtrusive as possible wearable sensing system. Through
this prototype, it will be possible to provide full body motion
monitoring and to detect the patient kinetic interaction with the
environment. The project foresees a set of wireless on-body

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CARBONARO et al.: EXPLOITING WEARABLE GONIOMETER TECHNOLOGY FOR MOTION SENSING GLOVES

devices fully integrated in a modular textile platform (shirt,
trousers, gloves, shoes), including telemonitoring and adaptive
on-body feedback capabilities [15]. Telesupervision facilities
will enable a clinical expert at a distance to effectively evaluate
performance, coach the patient, and influence training.
With respect to previous prototypes based on textile deformation sensors [5], [6], [16], [17] for wearable motion detection,
the present study introduces two main innovations. First, a new
sensing material is employed (i.e., KPF instead of CE). Second,
the glove prototype is based on a different sensor configuration
(i.e., angular instead of strain sensors). Following the theoretical working principle and the derived electromechanical model
previously proved for CE sensors [18], KPF angular sensors,
hereinafter called goniometers, are obtained by coupling two
identical KPF layers.
The sensing glove prototype presented is endowed with three
KPF goniometers placed on the metacarpophalangeal area of the
thumb, index, and middle fingers. The prototype performances
have been evaluated in comparison with an optoelectronic instrument considered as a golden standard both for static and
dynamic hand posture and gesture tasks. Testing results have
been very promising, showing comparable performances with
the ones of off-the-shelf devices.
Despite the promising results, the KPF goniometer technology has some drawbacks mainly related to the high number
of electrical connections per degree of freedom (DOF), that
can limit the use of such prototypes in complex and multiDOF joint systems. These issues have been analyzed, and an
additional conceptual sensor configuration has been designed,
characterized by the following peculiarities:
1) two goniometers are obtained on an unique sensing substrate;
2) the connections between the goniometer extremities and
the acquisition electronics have been realized by KPF
tracks in order to avoid mechanical constraints given by
metallic inextensible wires.
This new sensor arrangement has been applied on the realization
of an advanced sensing glove prototype for the independent
monitoring of flexion-extension of the metacarpophalangeal and
the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint of the same finger (i.e.,
tested on the forefinger, but it can be easily extended to the other
long fingers and thumb).
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Extensible Goniometer Principle
This section describes the working principle of double-layer
(DL) textile-based goniometers starting from the electromechanical characteristics of a single-layer (SL) piezoresistive
sensor. SL sensors, constituting one side of the whole device
in Fig. 1, are made of a piezoresistive textile attached to an insulating layer. The electrical modeling of the sensor is obtained
considering the following assumptions: 1) the sensing layer is
subjected to iso-volumetric deformations, 2) the resistivity (ρ)
is constant, and 3) the insulating substrate is inextensible under
bending. Under these assumptions, it was demonstrated that the
layer electrical resistance RSL is function of the sensor total

1789

Fig. 1. Representation of goniometer under bending. The two single layers
SL1 and SL2 are attached to the insulating layer L 0 to reach the DL configuration. θ is the angle measured by the sensor. h 1 and h 2 are the piezoresistive
layers thickness.

curvature θ through the following relation:


ρ
ρ
2
− θ + O sup k(s)
RSL = l
=
dh d
s∈(0,l)


ρ
ρ
= l2
− θ + O sup k(s)2
V0
d
s∈(0,l)

(1)

where l is the length of the sensor, V0 its volume, d its width,
θ is the angle between the tangent planes to the sensor extremities, h0 is the specimen initial thickness, s is the arch length
of the parameterized side of the sensor, and O(sup(k(s)2 )) is
a second-order infinitesimal function which tends to zero if the
curvature k(s) → 0. Equation (1) derives from the Corbino formula for the circumferential resistance of a conductive disk,
expressed in Taylor expansion [19]. A bending in an opposite
direction, with respect to the same versus of the arch length
parameterization, is characterized by opposite sign in even position signs.
DL angular sensors, shown in Fig. 1, are based on the measurement of the resistance difference (ΔRDL = RL 1 − RL 2 )
between two identical piezoresistive samples coupled via an
insulating layer. The electrical representation of this device is
shown in Fig. 2, where L1 and L2 are the piezoresistive layers
having the same rest thicknesses h0 , RL 1 and RL 2 are the electrical resistances of the two layers, respectively, L0 represents
the insulating layer whose thickness is negligible with respect to
h0 . In case of device deformation without bending, the electrical
resistance difference between the two layers is zero, since both
the sensing layers undergo the same transformation. When the
device is flexed, it was proved that there is dependence between
ΔRDL and θ [19] , shown as follows:


ρ
3
(2)
ΔRDL = RL 1 − RL 2 = 2 θ + O sup k(s) .
d
s∈(0,l)
Equation (2) points out the advantage of invariance with respect
to the device length variation (no dependence on l) and a reduced
error in approximating the electrical resistance via a Taylor

1790

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. DL KPF goniometer structure is represented. The central pads are
devoted for the voltage acquisition, and the extremities are related for current
supply and for the connection of the two single layer sensors.

expansion. With this configuration, the error in angle estimation
reduces to a third-order infinitesimal function with the maximum
of the curvature k(s) due to the alternate signs of the Taylor
expansions of the elecromechanical characteristics of the two
layers. The hypothesis of inextensibility can be removed since
in (2) there is no dependence on the sample actual length l.
By neglecting the third-order error term, the angle θ, between
the tangents on the sensor endings, as shown in Fig. 1, can be
estimated by
θ=

d
ΔRDL .
2ρ

(3)

The independence of ΔRDL on the local curvature of the goniometer expressed by (3) makes the device to work independently by the bending profile, which can prevent measurement
artefact due to garment miss-positioning that can generate wrinkle on the fabric structure. This last aspect is a definite advantage in the use of goniometer technology with respect to the
strain one, used in previous wearable textile-based prototype.
It is important to underline that the relation (3) is valid if the
two piezoresistive layers have the same electrical characteristics. This property can be difficult to be in practice obtained
and to compensate differences among the two piezoresistive
sensor layers, a calibration procedure can be applied to extract
corrective coefficients, which take into account the geometrical and electrical differences between the two layers due to the
production process.
B. KPF Goniometer Realization
Textile-based sensors have been realized through KPFs which
contain 75% electroconductive yarn (Belltron, produced by
Kanebo Ltd.) and 25% Lycra, manufactured by using a circular
machine as described in previous works [5], [6]. The samples
were realized according to the single and DL design introduced
in the previous section, referred as SL and DL sensors, respectively. Coupling one KPF rectangular sample with an elastic
fabric through a double side adhesive membrane makes the SL
structure. Adding another KPF layer to the back of the elastic fabric by using the same adhesive membrane produces the
DL structure. Electrical connections, made of textile conductive
yarns with polyvinyl chloride insulation (Bekinox, produced by

Fig. 3. KPF goniometer electrical equivalent and block diagram of the electronic acquisition system. The voltage output ΔV is proportional to the resistance difference ΔR D L and thus to the angle θ.

Bekaert), were fixed by using an ultrasonic welding device. The
analog front-end for signal acquisition from the single electrogoniometer is showed in Fig. 3. Each piezoresistive layer can
be represented as a series of three resistances. The topology of
the connecting pads was specifically designed for a four point
measurement in order to minimize the effect of connection resistances. A constant current I is supplied through the external
pads and the voltages VL 1 (VP 1 − VP 2 ) and VL 2 (VP 3 − VP 4 )
between the internal pads are measured. The acquisition system is conceived with an high-input impedance stage realized
by two instrumentation amplifiers (A1 and A2) to read sensor
voltages. VL 1 and VL 2 are proportional to resistances RL 1 and
RL 2 dividing by I. A third differential amplifier A3 has been
included to amplify the difference (ΔV = VL 1 − VL 2 ) which
is proportional to the ΔRDL that is related to the flexion angle
through (3). The A3 amplifier is used to adapt the signal to
the input range of the ADC converter and to compensate the
goniometer offset value (i.e., in this study NI6071 by National
Instruments).
C. Sensor Calibration and Bench Characterization
Considering the described front-end and imposing the same
amplification for A1 and A2, the following theoretical output is
obtained:
ΔV = k ΔRDL = k1 θ

(4)

where k1 depends on the total amplification of the two stages, the
supply current I and the constants of (3). In practical cases (4)
will not be verified, due to the unavoidable difference between
the two piezoresistive layers. To compensate this difference, a
calibration procedure has been conceived, based on the following linear approximation for the relation ΔV versus θ
ΔV ≈ Sθ θ + ΔVo

(5)

where Sθ and ΔVo represent the device sensitivity and offset,
respectively.
If (5) is verified, the goniometer can be calibrated by measuring its output for two different angular positions. Typically,

CARBONARO et al.: EXPLOITING WEARABLE GONIOMETER TECHNOLOGY FOR MOTION SENSING GLOVES

the sensor is calibrated at 0◦ (i.e., to obtain offset ΔVo ) and
at a second angular position θC (i.e., to obtain the sensitivity
Sθ = Δ V θ cθ C−Δ V o ).
A static bench characterization was performed on a set of
KPF goniometers in order to verify the output invariance with
respect to elongation and to assess the validity of the linear
approximation of (5), which describes the relation between the
measured ΔV (ΔRDL ) and the estimated flexion angle θ taking
into account the layer dissimilarity.
Elongation response was assessed on the unflexed KPF goniometer using a custom-designed electro-dynamic testing system able to apply strain cycles with controlled amplitude and
velocity. ΔV was recorded as a function of the applied elongation in 20 equivalent steps (total deformation of 5 mm). These
elongation tests demonstrated that ΔV does not depend on the
sensor length. This finding implies that the sensor offset ΔVo
is independent on the elongation. Thus, it is easy to obtain the
offset value ΔVo from the output of the unflexed device for any
applied deformation.
Quasi-static flexion characterization was carried out by relating ΔV with the output of a commercial electrogoniometer (SG110 by Biometrics, ±2◦ accuracy [20]). The KPF goniometer was attached to a flexible substrate. The Biometrics
electrogoniometer was attached to the opposite side of the flexible substrate. Starting from 0◦ , the structure was bent to 90◦
through 13 steps. These last tests have confirmed the linear behavior of the KPF goniometers. The sensor accuracy in angular
reconstruction was assessed in comparison with the Biometrics
electrogoniometer. A maximum error in the order of 5◦ was
evaluated.
D. Kinesthetic Glove
The kinesthetic glove presented in this study is one of the main
components of a modular prototype conceived for whole body
monitoring of stroke patients [14], [15]. Within this prototype,
organized as wireless network of sensors integrated in the same
textile platform, real-time tracking of the hand function will
be implemented as a tool for the evaluation of affected hand
recovery. Hand information will be monitored during dailylife activities both for kinesthetic, in terms of movement quantity/quality, and kinetic evaluation, in terms of force interaction
with the environment. According to medical staff requirements,
the kinesthetic glove, worn on the stroke patient’s affected hand,
will have to recognize the occurrence of grasping from a limited
set of hand configuration that represents the basic hand grips:
precision pinch, pulp pinch, key pinch, chuck grip, hook grip,
span grip, power grasp.
The kinesthetic glove has been conceived to recognize the
aforementioned basic hand grips with a minimal set of sensors
according to the following design figure of merits: 1) wearability and comfort for the user (i.e., reduction of the sensor and
interconnection number); 2) limited bandwidth for the streamed
data on the sensor network (i.e., just one channel with 20-Hz
data rate was available, thus real-time elaboration of the sensor signal is mandatory); 3) low power consumption (i.e., the
system has to work continuously for at least 4 h).

1791

Fig. 4. Kinesthetic sensing glove and a detail of the goniometers placed on
thumb, index, and medium fingers.

The study of the basic hand grips points out the possibility of
discriminating between them having information at least about
thumb, index, and medium finger position. Moreover, literature
studies on hand synergies aimed at sensor reduction for hand
pose recognition have demonstrated that monitoring a low number of relevant joints [21], [22] allows the discrimination of the
most functional hand positions.
Fig. 4 shows the produced kinesthetic glove in which three
KPF goniometers are placed on a Lycra fabric covering the joints
of interest. For index and middle fingers, the KPF goniometers
have been placed on the dorsal side of the hand in correspondence with each metacarpal-phalangeal (MP) joint to detect
flexion and extension movement. To capture the opposition of
the thumb, the goniometer has been placed in correspondence
of the trapezius-metacarpal and the MP joint. Each piezoresistive layer has four semicircular pads specifically designed for
sensor wiring. Each goniometer has a total of eight connecting
pads, as shown in Fig. 2 and displayed in Fig. 4. The glove long
fingers are uncovered on the fingertip to preserve the patient
tactile sense.
E. System Evaluation
The performance of the sensing glove in terms of finger joint
angle reconstruction was evaluated in comparison with an optical tracking system (Smart DX 100 produced by BTS Bioengineering). The Smart DX 100, considered as a gold standard for
our analysis, represents a new generation of high precision optoelectronic systems consisting of four high-resolution infrared
video cameras (up to 4 Megapixels) and strobes with an accuracy higher than 0.2 mm and a maximum acquisition frequency
of 280 frames/s [23]. The performed trials were focused on the
measurements of the flexo-exstension angles of the metacarpophalangeal joints during user hand movements. During the

1792

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. Sensing glove with the markers positioned on the relative joints for
angle reconstruction using the BTS system.

testing procedure, five subjects, having similar hand size in order to well fit the glove, were asked to wear the sensing glove
with the reflective markers in the configuration shown in Fig. 5
and to perform repeated natural hand movements involving the
metacarpophalangeal joints under monitoring (i.e., static and
dynamic opening/closing cycles of the hand).
Markers were placed according to the standard protocol described in [24], slightly modifying the marker position on the
metacarpal bones in correspondence of the proximal acquisition
point of the KPF goniometer which lies in the diaphysis of the
bone. The proposed biomechanical model consists, for each finger, in a couple of segments, having the markers as extremities
and placed in a 3-D space. This strategy consents to reconstruct
the angle having vertex in the central marker of each finger. In
[24], it is also proved that the accuracy of the motion capture
data with the adopted model is in the order of 2–3◦ . The adherence of the glove to the hand skin ensures that no geometric bias
errors are introduced in the measurement.
The testing phase consisted of different sessions. In the
first one, the KPF goniometers were calibrated (as reported in
Section II-B) in order to obtain the three angular values from the
relative sensor outputs to be compared with the ones extracted
from the optical tracking system. The second step is related to
the synchronization of the two acquisition systems in order to
have the same time reference on data analysis. Then, the last
one is devoted to the simultaneous acquisition of BTS data and
sensing glove signals during the subject hand movements. Data
gathered during this evaluation phase are reported and discussed
in detail in next section.
III. RESULTS
Representative plots which compare the kinesthetic glove angle estimation with the optical reference system during dynamic
tasks are shown in Figs. 6 and 7 for the long fingers and thumb,
respectively.
It can be observed from Figs. 6 and 7 that the glove shows
good performance in angular measurements and capabilities to
follow dynamic finger flexions, suitable for human body movement detection. As a first preliminary evaluation, glove angular

Fig. 6. Dynamic comparison between index and medium fingers flexionextension angles extracted from the KPF glove and the BTS system. The red
dashed lines represent the KPF goniometer output, while the blue solid lines are
the output of the BTS reference system. On top is reported the index signals,
and on bottom medium one.

Fig. 7. Dynamic comparison between thumb flexion-extension angles extracted from the KPF glove and the BTS system. The red dashed line represents
the KPF goniometer output, while the blue solid line is the output of the BTS
reference system.

measurements were compared with the outputs of the optical
reference instrument to quantify the maximum and root mean
squared (RMS) errors, as reported in Table I for each finger. In
addition, it can be observed that the main error is performed
when the speed of the movement quickly changes, as shown in
Fig. 6 in the second series of waves (i.e., from 30 s to the end
of the trial). This issue may be explained taking into account
the well-known phenomenon of the dependence of transient
time length on the movement velocity which is intrinsic in the
material properties, as reported for CE materials in [1] and [5].
To reinforce this first analysis and to better quantify the angular accuracy of the described sensing glove, kinematics data

CARBONARO et al.: EXPLOITING WEARABLE GONIOMETER TECHNOLOGY FOR MOTION SENSING GLOVES

1793

TABLE I
SENSING GLOVE EVALUATION RESULTS IN RMS, MAXIMUM ERROR,
AND BLAND–ALTMAN ANALYSIS

Finger

RMS

Max Error

BA bias

BA Limits of agreement

Thumb
Forefinger
Medium

1.3
1.4
1.86

5.7
5
7

0.67
0.25
0.2

−1.5 : 2.8
−2.3 : 2.60
−3.4 : 3.8

Fig. 9. Bland–Altman comparison of flexo-extension angle of the index finger
made by sensing glove and the optical system. The horizontal axis is the mean
measurement of the two systems, and the vertical axis is the difference between
the two systems.

Fig. 8. Bland–Altman comparison of flexo-extension angle of the thumb finger made by sensing glove and the optical system. The horizontal axis is the
mean measurement of the two systems, and the vertical axis is the difference
between the two systems.

were compared with the optical system using the statistical
method of Bland–Altman [25]. This technique has been extensively used to compare two methods of measurement, or a
new method respect to a gold standard, and to determine the
error committed in replacing the new method with the other
one. This method has been widely used also for evaluating new
biomechanical reconstruction techniques in comparison with
gold standards [26], [27].
The Bland and Altman (BA) method consists in a graphical analysis of the data, obtained by plotting the difference
between the two measurement systems (θ − REF, where θ is
the calibrated glove output and REF is the output of the optical reference system) against their average ((θ + REF )/2).
In addition, on the same plot are reported the mean difference
between the two methods (the bias m) and the 95% limits of
agreement (m ± 2 SD, where SD is the standard deviation of the
difference). The limits of agreements provide an interval within
which the angle estimation errors fall with a 95% probability.
Thus, the smaller the range between these two limits, the better
the agreement is.
The graphical representation of the BA analysis for the glove
against the optical reference is reported in Figs. 8–10 for thumb,
index, and medium, respectively. As resumed in Table I, the BA
plots point out the very low bias error for all the three finger
sensors and show that the measurement accuracy of the glove

Fig. 10. Bland–Altman comparison of flexo-extension angle of the medium
finger made by sensing glove and the optical system. The horizontal axis is the
mean measurement of the two systems, and the vertical axis is the difference
between the two systems.

goniometers, represented by the BA limit of agreements, is lower
than ±3.6◦ (i.e. the worse case of the medium finger).
IV. DISCUSSION
The very promising performances showed by the sensing
glove led to the overall results reported in Table I where, in
addition to the bias and the limits of agreements of the Bland–
Altman analysis, the RMS and absolute maximum errors are
reported.
The Bland–Altman analysis has shown limits of agreement
in the order of ±3◦ , which is slightly bigger than the precision
of commercial electrogoniometer (e.g., BIometrics SG110 has

1794

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 11. (a) Schematic realization of the goniometer series and (b) advanced
sensorized glove (dorsal view).

±2◦ accuracy). Dynamic tests of Figs. 6 and 7 have confirmed
the average good performances.
In particular, the use of KPF materials and the DL structure
described in this paper, which tends to compensate errors due to
material relaxation time, have consistently improved the overall
performance with respect to previous results obtained on CEs.
Despite the very promising results, the described technology
presents some drawbacks. In particular, goniometer configuration needs a high number of connections per DOF. A single joint
DOF needs eight connecting pads and six wires for connection
to the acquisition electronics (two for current injection and four
for signal acquisition). This limitation makes this kind of sensors
difficult to be applied in multi-DOF joints especially for small
articulations, e.g., monitoring the three joints of a long finger.
The high number of metallic wires on a single joint may reduce
the system reliability, due to the presence of electrical connections on moving parts, and make the device obtrusive for the user.
An additional sensor configuration aimed at overcoming the described limitations is proposed. An advanced kinesthetic glove
has been designed and developed for the independent monitoring of two DOFs of the forefinger, the MP and PIP joints. This
prototype introduces two main innovations with respect to the
one described in Section II-A and II-B. First, two goniometers are placed and connected in series on the same sensing
substrate, thus reducing the overall number of electrical connections. Second, the same piezoresistive and elastic material
used for the sensing layer is employed to connect the goniometers with the acquisition electronics. In this way, flexible and
elastic interconnections have been obtained, avoiding mechanical constraint due to the presence of metallic wires. As shown in
Fig. 11(a), a conductive layer (black) is shaped according to the
desired topology (including sensors and connections), folded
and applied on the two sides of an insulating layer by adhesive
membranes. In terms of electronics, the architecture of Fig. 3
is adapted to the sensor series. Having the two goniometers
on the same substrate, just one current generator supplies both
devices. Then, four high impedance stages acquire the voltage
falls on the respective piezoresistive layers through the piezoresistive connection tracks. The high-input impedances ensure a
very low current (amplifiers bias) in these piezoresistive tracks,
making the voltage falls on the tracks negligible. Thus, the

Fig. 12. Metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeral flexion angle
reconstruction in a sample acquisition of the advanced kinesthetic glove.

voltage presented by tracks on the wrist is the same relieved at
the goniometer extremities. This prototype, shown in Fig. 11(b),
has been realized by cutting a preglued multilayer specimen
(conductive layer-adhesive membrane-insulating layer-adhesive
membrane-conducting layer). It is to be noticed that the electrical connection are made on the periphery of the device and not
on the moving joints. In this case, the calibration procedure to
determinate the offset and sensitivity coefficients of the two layers of each goniometer is crucial to avoid cross-talk phenomena
among different goniometers. A preliminary testing has been
performed on the advanced kinesthetic glove to verify that the
proposed sensor and connection configuration do not affect the
prototype capability to independently detect MP and PIP flexion
angles. Subjects were asked to move the index finger following
a predefined scheme: start with the index fully extended, flex the
PIP joint while the MP is extended, flex the MP joint while the
PIP is extended, flex the PIP joint while the MP is extended, flex
both MP and PIP joints. The prototype has performed good capabilities on detecting the considered joint movement as shown
in the representative plot of Fig. 12. In particular, flexion, extension, and iper-extension of the MP joint are detected (red graph)
such as the PIP flexion (blue graph).
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new wearable technology allowing the reconstruction of joint angles has been introduced. It consists in KPF
in a DL configuration which provides a direct insight on samples flexion angle independently by their bending profile. The
independence of KPF goniometers output with respect to their
bending profile allows to avoid complex calibration procedure,
making the device suitable for human movement detection for
different structure of the users. A KPF goniometer-based kinesthetic glove for the independent monitoring of the MP joints
of thumb, index, and medium has been designed, developed,
and preliminary validated in comparison with an optoelectronic

CARBONARO et al.: EXPLOITING WEARABLE GONIOMETER TECHNOLOGY FOR MOTION SENSING GLOVES

standard instrument. KPF goniometers have shown performances comparable with commercial devices. KPF goniometers need high number of connections per DOF and this can
reduce the use of such devices especially for multi-DOF joints.
To overcome this limitation, an additional sensor configuration
has been proposed. In particular, the movement of MP and proximal phalangeal joints of the forefinger has been independently
relieved by an advanced version of the sensing glove. It consists
in KPF goniometers, singularly used or linked by a connection
topology realized by piezoresistive and elastic tracks.
Future works will be aimed at further assessing the sensing
glove capabilities in terms of tracking patient hand function in
daily-life conditions, with special focus on stroke patients. In
addition, the technology which consented the development of
both sensors and connecting wires using KPF materials will be
improved to optimize the sensor spatial resolution and enable
the possibility of using goniometer networks for monitoring the
complete set of the hand joints.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Tognetti, F. Lorussi, M. Tesconi, and D. De Rossi, “Strain sensing
fabric characterization,” in SensorsProc. IEEE, 2004, pp. 527–530.
[2] F. Lorussi, W. Rocchia, E. P. Scilingo, A. Tognetti, and D. De Rossi,
“Wearable, redundant fabric-based sensor arrays for reconstruction of
body segment posture,” Sensors J. IEEE, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 807–818,
Dec. 2004.
[3] A. Tognetti, N. Carbonaro, G. Zupone, and D. De Rossi, “Characterization
of a novel data glove based on textile integrated sensors,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006, pp. 2510–2513.
[4] A. Tognetti, R. Bartalesi, F. Lorussi, and D. De Rossi, “Body segment
position reconstruction and posture classification by smart textiles,” Trans.
Inst. Meas. Control, vol. 29, nos. 3/4, pp. 215–253, 2007.
[5] A. Tognetti, F. Lorussi, R. Bartalesi, S. Quaglini, M. Tesconi, G. Zupone,
and D. De Rossi, “Wearable kinesthetic system for capturing and classifying upper limb gesture in post-stroke rehabilitation,” J. NeuroEng.
Rehabil., vol. 2, no. 1, 2005.
[6] N. Vanello, V. Hartwig, M. Tesconi, E. Ricciardi, A. Tognetti, G. Zupone,
R. Gassert, D. Chapuis, N. Sgambelluri, E. P. Scilingo, G. Giovannetti,
V. Positano, M. F. Santarelli, A. Bicchi, P. Pietrini, D. de Rossi, L. Landini,
“Sensing glove for brain studies: Design and assessment of its compatibility for fMRI with a robust test,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 345–354, Jun. 2008.
[7] T. Gulrez and A. Tognetti, “A sensorized garment controlled virtual robotic
wheelchair,” J. Intell. Robot. Syst., vol. 74, no. 3–4, pp. 847–868, 2014.
[8] M. Ferro, G. Pioggia, A. Tognetti, N. Carbonaro, and D. De Rossi, “A
sensing seat for human authentication,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 451–459, Sep. 2009.

1795

[9] D. Ioannidis, D. Tzovaras, G. D. Mura, M. Ferro, G. Valenza, A. Tognetti,
and G. Pioggia, “Gait and anthropometric profile biometrics: A step forward,” in Second Generation Biometrics: The Ethical, Legal and Social
Context, New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2012, pp. 105–127.
[10] D. De Rossi, F. Lorussi, A. Mazzoldi, P. Orsini, and E. P. Scilingo,
“Active dressware: Wearable kinesthetic systems,” in Sensors and Sensing in Biology and Engineering, New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2003,
pp. 379–392.
[11] T. Giorgino, P. Tormene, F. Lorussi, D. De Rossi, and S. Quaglini, “Sensor
evaluation for wearable strain gauges in neurological rehabilitation,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 409–415, Aug. 2009.
[12] M. Pacelli, L. Caldani, and R. Paradiso, “Textile piezoresistive sensors for
biomechanical variables monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2006, pp. 5358–5361.
[13] G. D. Mura, F. Lorussi, A. Tognetti, G. Anania, N. Carbonaro, M. Pacelli,
R. Paradiso, and D. De Rossi, “Piezoresistive goniometer network for
sensing gloves,” in Proc. 13th Mediterr. Conf. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.
2013, 2014, pp.1547–1550.
[14] www.interaction4stroke.eu
[15] E. A. Veltink and P. H, “Interaction, training and monitoring of daily-life
physical interaction with the environment after stroke,” presented at the
12th Int. Symp. 3D Anal. Human Movement, Bologna, Italy, 2008.
[16] C. Mattmann, F. Clemens, and G. Troster, “Sensor for measuring strain in
textile,” Sensors, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 3719–3732, 2008.
[17] P. T. Gibbs and H. H. Asada, “Wearable conductive fiber sensors for
multi-axis human joint angle measurements,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil.,
vol. 2, no. 1, 2005.
[18] F. Lorussi, S. Galatolo, D. De Rossi, and R. Bartalesi, “Modeling and
characterization of extensible wearable textile-based electrogoniometers,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 217–228, Jan. 2013.
[19] F. Lorussi, S. Galatolo, and D. De Rossi, “Textile-based electrogoniometers for wearable posture and gesture capture systems,” IEEE Sensors J.,
vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 1014–1024, Sep. 2009.
[20] www.biometricsltd.com/gonio.htm
[21] M. Bianchi, P. Salaris, A. Turco, N. Carbonaro, and A. Bicchi, “On the
use of postural synergies to improve human hand pose reconstruction,” in
Proc. Haptics Symp., 2012, pp. 91–98.
[22] M. Santello, M. Flanders, and J. F. Soechting, “Postural hand synergies
for tool use,” J. Neurosci., vol. 18, no. 23, pp. 10105–10115, 1998.
[23] http://www.btsbioengineering.com/products/kinematics/bts-smart-dx/
[24] F. Cordella, L. Zollo, A. Salerno, D. Accoto, E. Guglielmelli, and
B. Siciliano, “Human hand motion analysis and synthesis of optimal power
grasps for a robotic hand,” Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst., vol. 11, 2014.
[25] J. M. Bland and D. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 327,
no. 8476, pp. 307–310, 1986.
[26] A. Brennan, J. Zhang, K. Deluzio, and Q. Li, “Quantification of inertial
sensor-based 3D joint angle measurement accuracy using an instrumented
gimbal,” Gait Posture, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 320–323, 2011.
[27] E. A. Hassan, T. R. Jenkyn, and C. E. Dunning, “Direct comparison of
kinematic data collected using an electromagnetic tracking system versus
a digital optical system,” J. Biomechan., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 930–935, 2007.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

