2718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Clinically Relevant CNT Dispersions
With Exceptionally High Dielectric Properties
for Microwave Theranostic Applications
Shawn X. Xie, Fuqiang Gao, Student Member, IEEE, Sunny C. Patel, John H. Booske, Fellow, IEEE,
Susan C. Hagness, Fellow, IEEE, and Balaji Sitharaman∗

Abstract—We present a formulation for achieving stable highconcentration (up to 20 mg/ml) aqueous dispersions of carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) with exceptionally high microwave-frequency
(0.5–6 GHz) dielectric properties. The formulation involves functionalizing CVD-synthesized CNTs via sonication in nitric and sulfuric acid. The overall chemical integrity of the CNTs is largely
preserved, as demonstrated via physical and chemical characterizations, despite significant shortening and functionalization with
oxygen-containing groups. This is attributed to the protected inner
walls of double-walled CNTs in the samples. The resulting CNT
dispersions show greatly enhanced dielectric properties compared
to a CNT-free control. For example, at 3 GHz, the average relative permittivity and effective conductivity across several 20 mg/ml
CNT samples were increased by ∼70% and ∼400%, respectively,
compared to the control. These CNT dispersions exhibit the stability and extraordinary microwave properties desired in systemically
administered theranostic agents for microwave diagnostic imaging
and/or thermal therapy.
Index Terms—Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), dielectric properties,
microwave frequency, theranostic agents, thermal therapy, tumor
detection.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARBON nanotubes (CNTs) are promising nanoparticlebased theranostic platforms for diagnostic imaging and
thermal therapy due to their unique interactions with electromagnetic radiation over a broad range of frequencies [1]–[4]. In
particular, recent microwave-frequency experiments show that
aqueous CNT dispersions can significantly enhance the effective dielectric properties—relative permittivity r and effective
conductivity σe —of tissue-mimicking materials [5] and breast
tumor xenografts [6]. Such enhancement may be exploited for

C

Manuscript received February 28, 2014; revised May 5, 2014; accepted May
10, 2014. Date of publication May 22, 2014; date of current version October 16,
2014. This work was supported by the Department of Defense through a Breast
Cancer Research Program Idea Award (W81XWH-10-1-0521 and W81XWH10-1-0522), the National Science Foundation under ECCS 1128049, and the
Philip D. Reed Chaired Professorship. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
F. Gao, J. H. Booske, and S. C. Hagness are with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA
(e-mail: fgao4@wisc.edu; booske@engr.wisc.edu; hagness@engr.wisc.edu).
* B. Sitharaman is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony
Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA (e-mail: balaji.sitharaman@
stonybrook.edu).
S. X. Xie and S. C. Patel are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA (e-mail:
shawn.xie@stonybrook.edu; sunnypatel19@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2326398

microwave-based detection [2] and thermal therapy of tumors
mediated by CNT theranostic agents.
The appropriate in vivo dose of CNT theranostic agents has
not yet been established for microwave-based tumor detection or
therapy. For other in vivo theranostic technologies investigated
using small-animal models, the potential CNT dose ranges from
units to tens of mg/kg of body weight [1], [7]. For example, in
a rat model with a blood volume of ∼10 ml and a weight of
∼0.2 kg, a dose of ∼10 mg/kg requires a CNT stock dispersion concentration of ∼2 mg/ml, assuming that the maximum
injection volume is ∼1 ml (i.e., no more than 10% of the blood
volume). Higher doses may prove to greatly enhance the efficacy of tumor detection or therapy at microwave frequencies.
Furthermore, preclinical pharmacology guidelines established
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration suggest assessing
safety at doses that are at least ten times higher than the projected therapeutic dose [8]. Thus, future in vivo preclinical safety
and efficacy studies of CNT theranostic agents for microwave
technologies will require stable CNT stock dispersions that pass
through injection needles without clogging at concentrations on
the order of tens of mg/ml.
Natural or synthetic amphiphilic macromolecules that are biocompatible are widely employed as dispersing agents in the
preparation of aqueous CNT dispersions. However, these functionalization strategies only allow stable dispersions of individual or debundled CNTs up to hundreds of μg/ml. Methods
employing mixtures of strong acids that covalently functionalize CNT sidewalls with carboxyl or hydroxyl functional groups
have been shown to yield stable dispersions of debundled CNTs
at concentrations on the order of 10 mg/ml. However, this increased CNT dispersibility has generally been accompanied by
changes in CNT chemical and physical properties [9], [10] that
lead to changes in their intrinsic electromagnetic properties.
In particular, both decreased length and increased oxidation
of CNTs have been shown to reduce the microwave dielectric
properties of CNT dispersions [10]. The degree of chemical and
morphological change induced by acid-based oxidation methods
is highly sensitive to the treatment conditions, such as temperature, time, and whether sonication was employed [11]. We have
also recently shown that the dispersible concentration of nonisolated CNTs that can pass through small needles is limited to
a few mg/ml [6].
In this paper, we present a method for producing CNT dispersions that satisfy previously unmet criteria for systemically administered CNT-based microwave theranostic agents. Namely,

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

XIE et al.: CLINICALLY RELEVANT CNT DISPERSIONS WITH EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH DIELECTRIC PROPERTIES

the dispersions of highly debundled CNTs are achieved at high
concentrations (i.e., tens of mg/ml) and yet do not clog injection needles; furthermore, they exhibit extremely high dielectric properties at microwave frequencies. Both the stability and
microwave properties of these high-concentration dispersions
represent dramatic improvements over what has been achieved
previously. Additionally, we report physical and chemical characterizations that reveal why this particular processing method
results in CNT dispersions with such desirable properties.
II. METHODS
The CNTs chosen for this study were synthesized by catalytic
chemical vapor deposition over cobalt catalysts (Cheaptubes,
Inc.). The pristine CNT samples comprised an approximately
50:50 mixture of single- and double-walled CNTs (SWCNTs
and DWCNTs), and were treated as follows. For each treatment
batch, 60 mg of CNTs were thoroughly mixed in 60 ml of 3:1
H2 SO4 :HNO3 with a glass rod, and bath-sonicated at 100 W for
4 h. The temperature of the bath water was initially 25 ◦ C. Sonication raised the water temperature to 50 ◦ C after two hours, at
which point the temperature was maintained at 50 ±5 ◦ C until
completion. The mixture was then cooled to room temperature,
diluted with deionized (DI) water at a 1:4 ratio, and pelleted
by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 15 min at 10 ◦ C. The supernatant acid mixture was discarded and the CNT pellets were
collected and resuspended in 50 ml of DI water. The centrifugation, discarding, and resuspension steps were repeated until
the supernatant color remained dark, typically between pH 1.0–
2.0. The mixture was then neutralized with NaOH and filtered
through a 0.1 μm pore-sized filter. The product on the filter was
washed thoroughly with excess DI water (≥2 ml per mg CNT)
and collected in 15 ml of DI water. The suspensions were then
aliquoted, and after flash-freezing the aliquots in liquid N2 , the
dry product was collected by lyophilization for 24 h. The yield
per batch was typically between 80–90%.
Test samples for microwave-frequency dielectric characterization were prepared by dispersing treated CNTs in DI water
with mannitol (Sigma-Aldrich M8429), a sugar excipient used
in pharmaceutical formulations for intravenous injections, at
CNT concentrations of either 10 or 20 mg/ml. It was not possible to create test samples of well-dispersed pristine (untreated)
CNTs in water at these high concentrations for measurement
comparisons. The concentration of mannitol in DI water was
chosen to be 50 mg/ml to achieve an osmolality within the
range of blood (290–320 mOsm/kg); the osmolality was confirmed by a single-sample osmometer (Advanced Instruments
3D3). No surfactant or sonication was required in the preparation of the samples. Control samples containing only DI water
with mannitol (i.e., no CNTs) were also prepared. All samples
were confirmed to be at neutral pH (6.8–7.2) by a benchtop pH
meter (Fisher Scientific accumet AB15 + Basic). This ensured
that any observed differences in the microwave measurements
of the test and control samples were due to the presence of CNTs
rather than pH-based effects.
We characterized the dielectric properties of the dispersions
over the 0.5–6 GHz frequency range using a flange-free 2.2-mm

2719

diameter dielectric probe (Agilent 85070E-030) and a vector
network analyzer (Agilent N5221A). We also measured CNT
dispersions in vials before and after passing the dispersions
through a 25 gauge needle. The heating response of each dispersion was characterized using an experimental setup described
previously [5]. We poured the dispersion, after passing through
the needle, into a 1.1-mm diameter glass capillary tube. The tube
was then inserted into an S-band rectangular waveguide through
a small hole drilled into the center of one of the broad walls of
the waveguide. A microwave synthesizer (Agilent, 83623B) and
amplifier (Mini-Circuits, ZHL-42W) generated 1 W of continuous microwave power at 3 GHz, which was delivered to the
sample via the waveguide. The waveguide was terminated with
a matched load to ensure single-pass microwave illumination of
the sample. We used a fluoroptic thermometer (Luxtron 3100)
to measure the temperature of the sample over time for 3 min
of microwave heating. We note that the samples used in these
heating experiments do not include the presence of cancer cells
because the cytotoxic effects of heat are already well established
[12]. The focus of these experiments is on the impact of CNTs
on heating efficiency.
Raman spectra of all samples were obtained using a
ProRaman-L system (Enwave Optronics) equipped with a
532 nm laser. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy
was performed on dry powders on a Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Atomic force micrographs
using an EasyScan 2 FlexAFM (Nanosurf) operating in the tapping mode were obtained to analyze the lengths and diameters
of the CNTs. Previously reported methods were used in the
preparation of the AFM samples and analysis of the length distributions [10]. 70 objects per group from multiple spots on the
substrates were measured from the micrographs. Lastly, thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) were performed using a thermogravimetric/differential thermal analyzer (Perkin Elmer) in
the range of 20–800 ◦ C in air at a scan rate of 5 ◦ C/min.
III. RESULTS
Fig. 1 shows the measured dielectric properties of several
samples for each of the two test sample types (10 and 20 mg/ml
concentrations), before and after passing through the 25 G needle, in comparison to the control (CNT-free mannitol solution).
Each 20 mg/ml curve (blue) represents the average across 12
measurements (four samples, three measurements each). Each
10 mg/ml curve (red) represents the average across 15 measurements (five samples, three measurements each). The vertical
bars span the maximum and minimum values; we refer to this
spread in the data as the variability in the measured properties.
The bars are staggered around 3 GHz to avoid overlap; the bars
at 2.9 GHz show the variability before passing through the needle, while the bars at 3.1 GHz show the variability after passing
through the needle.
The dielectric properties of the CNT dispersions shown in
Fig. 1 are significantly higher than those of the control samples.
For example, at 3 GHz, the average r across all dispersions
of a fixed CNT concentration, before passing the needle [i.e.,
the solid colored curves of Fig. 1(a)], is increased by 14% at

2720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Measured heating response (1 W, 3 GHz) of aqueous dispersions of
treated CNTs after passing through the 25 G needle, compared to the control. Each curve represents the average across multiple samples of the same
concentration.

Fig. 1. Measured microwave-frequency (a) relative permittivity and (b) effective conductivity of aqueous dispersions of treated CNTs, before (solid colored)
and after (dashed colored) passing through a 25 G needle, compared to the
control. Each curve represents the average across three measurements each of
multiple samples.

10 mg/ml and 68% at 20 mg/ml relative to the control; the
average σe is increased by 66% and 404% for the 10 and 20
mg/ml samples, respectively. The variability in the 20 mg/ml
samples is much greater than the variability in the 10 mg/ml
samples.
Fig. 1 shows that the difference in the dielectric properties
of the CNT dispersions before and after passing through the 25
G needle is negligible. This is in stark contrast to the behavior
of dispersions of non-isolated CNTs, for which the dielectric
properties of a sample have been shown to decrease dramatically after passing through a 25 G needle due to clogging, even
at much lower concentrations than those considered here (i.e.,
<10 mg/ml) [6]. The results of Fig. 1 indicate that the CNTs
treated with the method reported here are very well dispersed at
these high concentrations. The well-dispersed nature is further
confirmed by dielectric-properties stability measurements over
time. The dielectric properties of one representative 20 mg/ml
sample, monitored over a period of two months, exhibited a
variation smaller than the variability observed in Fig. 1.
The greatly enhanced effective conductivity of the samples
with CNTs, compared to the CNT-free control, leads to more
efficient microwave heating of those samples, as illustrated in
Fig. 2. Each curve represents the average temperature of multiple
samples at a fixed concentration (four samples for 20 mg/ml,
and five samples for 10 mg/ml). The bars span the minimum
and maximum temperatures across samples after heating for
one minute. The heating rate and the steady state temperature
are greatly increased for samples with CNTs. For example, the
average heating rate during the first 20 s is 0.14 ◦ C/s for the

Fig. 3. Functionalized CNT length distributions characterized by AFM. Average lengths: pristine = 2.43 μm, treated = 0.68 μm.

TABLE I
PERCENT CHANGE IN ATTRIBUTES OF TREATED CNT DISPERSIONS
RELATIVE TO PRISTINE CNT DISPERSIONS

AL
ID /IG

∗

HCl+H2 O2

HNO3

H2 SO4 :HNO3

−11∗
+1∗

−43∗
+75∗

−72
+25

Values from [10].

control, 0.26 ◦ C/s for the 10 mg/ml samples, and 0.63o C/s for
the 20 mg/ml samples.
We performed AFM, Raman, FTIR, and TGA analyses to
characterize the physical and chemical properties of pristine
and treated CNTs. Fig. 3 displays histograms of the CNT length
distributions obtained by AFM measurements. Fig. 3 indicates
that, after the acid sonication treatment, the average length
(AL) of the CNTs decreased significantly by 72% from 2.43 to
0.68 μm, indicating a greater length-shortening effect than previous methods employing either HCl + H2 O2 or HNO3 reflux
[10], as summarized in Table I.
Fig. 4 displays the Raman spectra of the CNTs. There are
two distinct peaks below and above 210 cm−1 in the radial breathing mode (RBM) frequencies [see Fig. 4(a)], which
indicate the presence of DWCNTs [13]. The decrease in the

XIE et al.: CLINICALLY RELEVANT CNT DISPERSIONS WITH EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH DIELECTRIC PROPERTIES

Fig. 6.

Fig. 4. Raman spectra of pristine and treated CNTs. (a) RBM mode. (b) Dand G-bands. All spectra were normalized with respect to the G-band intensity.

Fig. 5.

FTIR spectra of pristine and treated CNTs.

intensity of the lower frequency RBM posttreatment signifies a chemical alteration to the outer diameter of the DWCNTs [14]. Fig. 4(b) shows the relative G (∼1590 cm−1 )- and
D (∼1340 cm−1 )-band intensities. As a measure of disordered
sites and indicator of oxidation level in CNTs [15], [16], the
ratio of the D- to G-band intensity (ID /IG ) increases only mildly
from 0.12 to 0.15 (a 25% increase) posttreatment. This relatively small increase in ID /IG may be attributed to the fact that
the inner tubes within the DWCNTs are largely protected from
chemical alteration. Indeed, larger diameter CNTs are generally
less prone to destruction by acids and sonication [17].
Evidence of CNT functionalization is present in the FTIR
transmittance spectra of the CNTs, as shown in Fig. 5. The pristine CNT band around 1593 cm−1 , which is assigned to the
C = C stretching mode [18], is shifted to a lower frequency
around 1570 cm−1 after treatment, which may suggest a chemical change in the CNT structure. Indeed, the appearance of
new bands around 1348 and 1715 cm−1 in treated CNTs is
assigned to the asymmetric SO2 -stretching mode of sulfonic
acid (-SO2 -OH) groups and C = O stretching in carboxylic acid
(-CO-OH) groups, respectively [19]. Furthermore, bands between 1000–1300 cm−1 are typically associated with C-O

2721

TGA curves of pristine and treated CNTs.

stretching and O-H bending modes of alcoholic, phenolic,
and carboxylic groups; specifically, the higher frequency band
(∼1219 cm−1 ) present in the pristine CNTs is assigned to phenolic O-H groups, whereas the lower frequency band (∼1094
cm−1 ) present in the treated CNTs is assigned to carboxylic OH groups [20]. Finally, in the pristine CNTs, there exists a weak
band around 1410 cm−1 , which is most likely due to sorbed
water (O-H in-plane deformation) [21].
The TGA analysis shown in Fig. 6 also confirms the chemical alteration of CNTs and the presence of functional groups,
thereby corroborating the Raman and FTIR results. Typically
for CNTs, thermal decomposition between 150–350 ◦ C is attributed to loss of functional groups such as -CO-OH groups
present on the CNT walls, and decomposition at ∼425 ◦ C is attributed to the thermolysis of SWCNTs; the leftover mass at 800
◦
C is attributed to residual metal catalyst [10]. It is apparent that
the thermal stability for the pristine CNTs is actually centered
at ∼570 ◦ C, which indicates the presence of both SWCNTs
and DWCNTs in the sample, as the thermal stability of pristine
DWCNTs is centered at ∼630 ◦ C [22]. The TGA traces show
that the acid sonication led to increased mass fraction of functional groups from ∼1% to ∼30% that are present on SWCNT
sidewalls and the outer layer of DWCNTs; the thermal decomposition between 350–480 ◦ C can be attributed to leftover and
inner layer SWCNTs in the sample.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we demonstrate that high-concentration dispersions of CNTs functionalized via a H2 SO4 :HNO3 treatment
with sonication exhibit dramatically enhanced dielectric properties. Chemical and physical characterizations of these functionalized CNTs highlight the properties that yield these highconcentration formulations, as summarized in Table I. We note
that alternate reflux methods (HCl + H2 O2 and HNO3 reflux)
[10] yielded CNTs that could not be dispersed in water at high
concentrations; the highest concentration achievable with no
surfactants was ∼1 mg/ml. In stark contrast, the H2 SO4 :HNO3
sonication method yields CNTs that are readily dispersed in
water at concentrations as high as 20 mg/ml. Based on the
data, we attribute the increased CNT dispersibility to a stronger
length-shortening effect (indicated by the larger percent decrease in AL) by the sonication method than the alternate reflux
methods, as it has been shown that CNT dispersibility only
correlates qualitatively but not quantitatively with ID /IG [23].
Indeed, nanotube length has been shown to be important to

2722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

dispersibility [24], [25]. The shortened CNT lengths (<1 μm on
average) will also likely facilitate the CNTs’ use in biomedical
applications due to both increased biocompatibility [26] and dispersion stability. Successful functionalization by the addition of
carboxylic and sulfonic acid groups on the outer CNT sidewalls
is largely responsible for the stable and high CNT concentrations (≥10 mg/ml) reported in this study. Empirical evidence
thus far and theoretical principles of strong microwave field
enhancement by large-aspect-ratio conductors suggest that the
use of DWCNTs for microwave medical applications may be
preferred over SWCNTs. This is because DWCNTs offer both
an exterior layer that can be functionalized for water solubility
and an interior layer that can mitigate changes to the CNT’s
intrinsic electromagnetic properties by chemical treatments. In
summary, the CNT formulations reported in this paper show
high potential as microwave-frequency theranostic agents.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Liu, S. Tabakman, K. Welsher, and H. Dai, “Carbon nanotubes in
biology and medicine: in vitro and in vivo detection, imaging and drug
delivery,” Nano Res., vol. 2, pp. 85–120, Feb. 2009.
[2] J. D. Shea, P. Kosmas, S. C. Hagness, and B. D. Van Veen, “Contrastenhanced microwave imaging of breast tumors: a computational study
using 3-D realistic numerical phantoms,” Inverse Problems, vol. 26,
pp. 074009–0740031, Jun. 2010.
[3] J. K. Young, E. R. Figueroa, and R. A. Drezek, “Tunable nanostructures
as photothermal theranostic agents,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, pp. 438–
459, Feb. 2012.
[4] C. J. Gannon, P. Cherukuri, B. I. Yakobson, L. Cognet, J. S. Kanzius,
C. Kittrell, B. R. Weisman, M. Pasquali, H. K. Schmidt, and
R. E. Smalley, ‘Carbon nanotube-enhanced thermal destruction of cancer cells in a noninvasive radiofrequency field,” Cancer, vol. 110,
pp. 2654–2665, Dec. 2007.
[5] A. Mashal, B. Sitharaman, X. Li, P. K. Avti, A. V. Sahakian, J. H. Booske,
and S. C. Hagness, “Toward carbon-nanotube-based theranostic agents for
microwave detection and treatment of breast cancer: enhanced dielectric
and heating response of tissue-mimicking materials,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, pp. 1831–1834, Aug. 2010.
[6] F. Gao, S. C. Hagness, J. H Booske, S. X. Xie, and B. Sitharaman, “In
vivo microwave dielectric spectroscopy of breast tumor xenografts with
intra-tumoral injections of SWCNT dispersions,” in Proc. Int. Instrument.
Meas. Tech. Conf., May. 2013, pp. 1441–1444.
[7] P. K. Avti, Y. Talukdar, M. V. Sirotkin, K. R. Shroyer, and B. Sitharaman,
“Toward single-walled carbon nanotube-gadolinium complex as advanced
MRI contrast agents: Pharmacodynamics and global genomic response in
small animals,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part B Appl. Biomater., vol. 101B,
pp. 1039–1049, Aug. 2013.
[8] M3(R2) nonclinical safety studies for the conduct of human clinical trials and marketing authorization for pharmaceuticals,” U.S. FDA, Silver
Spring, MD, USA, 2008.
[9] M. C. Hersam, “Progress towards monodisperse single-walled carbon
nanotubes,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 3, pp. 387–394, May 2008.
[10] S. X. Xie, F. Gao, S. C. Patel, J. H. Booske, S. C. Hagness, and
B. Sitharaman, “Effect of synthesis and acid purification methods on the
microwave dielectric properties of single-walled carbon nanotube aqueous
dispersions,” App. Phys. Lett., vol. 103, p. 133114, Sep. 2013.
[11] Y. Li, X. Zhang, J. Luo, W. Huang, J. Cheng, Z. Luo, T. Li, F. Liu,
G. Xu, and X. Ke, “Purification of CVD synthesized single-wall carbon
nanotubes by different acid oxidation treatments,” Nanotechnol., vol. 15,
pp. 1645–1649, Nov. 2004.
[12] B. Hildebrandt, P. Wust, O. Ahlers, A. Dieing, G. Sreenivasa, T. Kerner,
R. Felix, and H. Riess, “The cellular and molecular basis of hyperthermia,”
Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol., vol. 43, pp. 33–56, Jul. 2002.
[13] W. Ren, F. Li, J. Chen, S. Bai, and H. Cheng, “Morphology, diameter
distribution and Raman scattering measurements of double-walled carbon
nanotubes synthesized by catalytic decomposition of methane,” Chem.
Phys. Lett., vol. 359, pp. 196–202, Jun. 2002.
[14] C. Shen, A. H. Brozena, and Y. Wang, “Double-walled carbon nanotubes:
Challenges and opportunities,” Nanoscale, vol. 3, pp. 503–518, 2011.

[15] P. C. Eklund, J. M. Holden, and R. A. Jishi, “Vibrational modes of carbon
nanotubes; Spectroscopy and theory,” Carbon, vol. 33, pp. 959–972, Feb.
1995.
[16] S. Hussain, P. Jha, A. Chouksey, R. Raman, S. S. Islam, T. Islam, and
P. K. Choudhary, “Spectroscopic investigation of modified single wall
carbon nanotube (SWCNT),” J. Mod. Phys., vol. 2, pp. 538–543, Jun.
2011.
[17] S. Nagasawa, M. Yudasaka, K. Hirahara, T. Ichihashi, and S. Iijima, “Effect
of oxidation on single-wall carbon nanotubes,” Chem. Phys. Lett., vol. 328,
pp. 374–380, Oct. 2000.
[18] J. Kastner, T. Pichler, H. Kuzmany, S. Curran, W. Blau, D. N. Weldon,
M. Delamesiere, S. Draper, and H. Zandbergen, “Resonance Raman and
infrared spectroscopy of carbon nanotubes,” Chem. Phys. Lett., vol. 221,
pp. 53–58, Apr. 1994.
[19] Y. Wang, Z. Iqbal, and S. Mitra, “Rapidly functionalized, water-dispersed
carbon nanotubes at high concentration,” J. Am. Chem. Soc., vol. 128,
pp. 95–99, Jan. 2006.
[20] B. K. Pradhan and N. K. Sandle, “Effect of different oxidizing agent
treatments on the surface properties of activated carbons,” Carbon,
vol. 37, pp. 1323–1332, Jan. 1999.
[21] L. Stobinski, B. Lesiak, L. Kvr, J. Tth, S. Biniak, G. Trykowski, and
J. Judek, “Multiwall carbon nanotubes purification and oxidation by nitric
acid studied by the FTIR and electron spectroscopy methods,” J. Alloy.
Compd., vol. 501, pp. 77–84, Jul. 2010.
[22] S. K. Smart, W. C. Ren, H. M. Cheng, G. Q. Lu, and D. J. Martin,
“Shortened double-walled carbon nanotubes by high-energy ball milling,”
Int. J. Nanotechnol., vol. 4, pp. 618–633, 2007.
[23] M. N. Tchoul, W. T. Ford, G. Lolli, D. E. Resasco, and S. Arepalli,
“Effect of mild nitric acid oxidation on dispersability, size, and structure
of single-walled carbon nanotubes,” Chem. Mater., vol. 19, pp. 5765–5772,
Oct. 2007.
[24] Z. Chen, K. Kobashi, U. Rauwald, R. Booker, H. Fan, W. Hwang, and
J. M. Tour, “Soluble ultra-short single-walled carbon nanotubes,”J. Am.
Chem. Soc., vol. 128, pp. 10568–10571, Jul. 2006.
[25] K. Kamalasanan, R. Gottardi, S. Tan, Y. Chen, B. Godugu, S. Rothstein,
A. Balazs, A. Star, and S. R. Little, “Zero-dimensional’ single-walled
carbon nanotubes,”Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., vol. 52, pp. 11308–11312,
Oct. 2013.
[26] K. Kostarelos, “The long and short of carbon nanotube toxicity,” Nat.
Biotechnol., vol. 26, pp. 774–776, Jul. 2008.

Shawn X. Xie received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, in 2011. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department
of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY, USA.
His research interests include using materials
chemistry to develop carbon-based nanomaterials for
tissue engineering as well as microwave-based imaging and thermal therapy applications.

Fuqiang Gao (S’09) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2008, and the M.S. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA, in 2010.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering at the University of WisconsinMadison.
His current research interests include bioelectromagnetics, microwave medical imaging algorithms,
and nanomaterials as theranostic agents for cancer
imaging and treatment.
Mr. Gao received an honorable mention in the student paper competition
at the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, and
was a finalist in the student paper competition at the 2013 IEEE International
Symposium on Antennas and Propagation.

XIE et al.: CLINICALLY RELEVANT CNT DISPERSIONS WITH EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH DIELECTRIC PROPERTIES

Sunny C. Patel received the B.E. degree in biomedical engineering from Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY, USA, in 2011. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of
Biomedical Engineering at Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY.
His research interests include creating novel
fabrication techniques for developing all carbon
nanomaterial thin films and coatings for coatingtissue integration, tissue engineering, and sensor development applications.

John H. Booske (S’82–M’85–SM’93–F’07) received the Ph.D. degree in nuclear engineering from
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in
1985.
From 1985 to 1989, he was a Research Scientist with the University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA, researching magnetically confined hot ion
plasmas and sheet-electron-beam free electron lasers.
Since 1990, he has been with the faculty of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Wisconsin-Madison (UW), Madison,
WI, USA, where he is currently the Chair of the department, Director of the
Wisconsin Collaboratory for Enhanced Learning (a learning space that supports IT-assisted, peer-collaborative learning) and the Duane H. and Dorothy
M. Bluemke Professor of Engineering. From 2001 to 2005, he served as the
Director of the UW Interdisciplinary Materials Science Program. His research
interests include experimental and theoretical study of coherent electromagnetic radiation, its sources and its applications, spanning the RF, microwave,
millimeter-wave, and THz regimes. His recent research interests include vacuum electronics, microfabrication of millimeter-wave and THz regime sources
and components, high-power microwaves, advanced cathodes, physics of the
interaction of THz radiation and materials, microwave-generated plasma discharges, and biological applications of electric and electromagnetic fields.
Prof. Booske is a Fellow of the IEEE (2007) and the American Physical
Society (2011). He was a coEditor of Microwave and Radio “Frequency Applications” (American Ceramic Society, 2003) and “Microwave and MillimeterWave Power Electronics” (IEEE/Wiley, 2005). He has been a Guest Editor of
the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PLASMA SCIENCE. He received the University of Wisconsin Vilas Associate Award for research and the U.S. National
Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator Award. He has received
many teaching awards, including the UW Chancellor’s Distinguished Teaching
Award.

2723

Susan C. Hagness (S’91–M’98–SM’04–F’09) received the B.S. degree with highest honors and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA, in 1993
and 1998, respectively.
Since 1998, she has been with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA,
where she currently holds the title of Philip D.
Reed Professor and serves as an Associate Dean for
Research and Graduate Affairs in the College of
Engineering. She is also a faculty affiliate of the Department of Biomedical
Engineering and a Member of the UW Carbone Cancer Center. Her current
bioelectromagnetics research interests include microwave breast imaging, microwave thermotherapy, nanoparticles as electromagnetic theranostic agents,
and computational electromagnetics theory and applications in biology and
medicine.
Dr. Hagness served as an elected Member of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society (AP-S) Administrative Committee from 2003 to 2005 and as an
Associate Editor for the IEEE ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS PROPAGATION LETTERS from 2002 to 2007. She also served as the Chair of Commission K of the
United States National Committee (USNC) of the International Union of Radio
Science (URSI) from 2009 to 2011, and Technical Program Chair of the 2012
IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation and USNC/URSI
National Radio Science Meeting. She currently serves as the Chair of the IEEE
AP-S Fellows Committee. She was the recipient of the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers presented by the White House in 2000.
In 2002, she was named one of the 100 top young innovators in science and
engineering in the world by the MIT Technology Review magazine. She is also
the recipient of the UW-Madison Emil Steiger Distinguished Teaching Award
in 2003, the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Early Career
Achievement Award in 2004, the URSI Isaac Koga Gold Medal in 2005, the
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering Outstanding Paper Award in
2007, the IEEE Education Society Mac E. Van Valkenburg Early Career Teaching Award in 2007, the UW System Alliant Energy Underkofler Excellence
in Teaching Award in 2009, the Physics in Medicine and Biology Citations
Prize in 2011, the UW-Madison Kellett Mid-Career Award in 2011, and the
UW-Madison College of Engineering Benjamin Smith Reynolds Award for Excellence in Teaching Engineers in 2014.

Balaji Sitharaman received the B.S. degree from the
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India, in
2000. He received the M.A and Ph.D. degrees from
Rice University, Houston, TX, USA, in 2005.
He is currently an Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY, USA. He where he had completed his
Postdoctoral research from 2005 to 2007 as the
J. Evan Attwell-Welch Postdoctoral Fellow at the
Richard E. Smalley Institute for Nanoscale Science
and Technology. His lab’s research program aims to
develop materials, tools, and methods that can be employed for basic and applied research at the interface of nanotechnology and other emerging fields such
as molecular imaging, targeted therapeutics, and regenerative medicine. He is
the author of over 50 peer-reviewed publications.
Dr. Sitharaman has received several awards for his research including NIH
Director’s New Innovator Award from the National Institute of Health, Translational Research Award from Wallace H. Coulter Foundation, Idea Award from
the Department of Defense, the Carol M. Baldwin Breast Cancer Research
Award from the Carol Baldwin Foundation, and the George Kozmetsky Award
from the Nanotechnology Foundation of Texas.

