2458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Surgical Robot for Single-Incision
Laparoscopic Surgery
Hyundo Choi, Ho-Seong Kwak, Yo-An Lim, and Hyung-Joo Kim∗

Abstract—This paper introduces a novel surgical robot for
single-incision laparoscopic surgeries. The robot system includes
the cone-type remote center-of-motion (RCM) mechanism and two
articulated instruments having a flexible linkage-driven elbow. The
RCM mechanism, which has two revolute joints and one prismatic
joint, is designed to maintain a stationary point at the apex of the
cone shape. By placing the stationary point on the incision area,
the mechanism allows a surgical instrument to explore the abdominal area through a small incision point. The instruments have six
articulated joints, including an elbow pitch joint, which make the
triangulation position for the surgery possible inside of the abdominal area. The presented elbow pitch structure is similar to the
slider-crank mechanism but the connecting rod is composed of a
flexible leaf spring for high payload and small looseness error. We
verified the payload of the robot is more than 10 N and described
preliminary experiments on peg transfer and suture motion by
using the proposed surgical robot.
Index Terms—Cone-type mechanism, flexible linkage, minimally
invasive surgery, surgical robot.

I. INTRODUCTION
INGLE-INCISION laparoscopic surgery (SILS), or singleport access (SPA) surgery, is a recently developed laparoscopic procedure that involves passing multiple instruments and
an endoscope through a single incision [1], [2]. It is a minimally
invasive surgical procedure in which the surgeon operates almost
exclusively through a single entry point, typically the patient’s
navel. When compared with traditional multiport laparoscopic
techniques, the benefits of SILS techniques include less postoperative pain, less blood loss, faster recovery time, and better
cosmetic results.
Despite the potential advantages of SILS techniques, there
may also be limitations such as inadequate triangulation and
an impaired view at positions in line with the instrument [3].
Additionally, the small operation space can make it difficult
to manipulate surgical instruments and an endoscope because
they are passed through a single incision. These problems can

S

Manuscript received December 20, 2013; revised March 25, 2014; accepted
April 22, 2014. Date of publication May 12, 2014; date of current version August
18, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
H. Choi, H.-S. Kwak, and Y. A. Limare are with the Samsung Advanced
Institute of Technology, Gyeonggi-do 446-712, Korea (e-mail: hyundo.choi@
samsung.com; hoseong.kwak@samsung.com; yoan.lim@samsung.com).
∗ H. J. Kim is with the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Gyeonggido 446-712, Korea (e-mail: hjuro.kim@samsung.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2320941

be solved by the improved ergonomic design, accuracy, and
dexterity provided by teleoperated robotic surgery systems.
A number of manual single-site surgeries have been successfully performed by adopting an endoscopic robot [4], [5]. The
aim of these studies was to substitute a robotic manipulating
system for the assistant surgeon tasked with manipulating the
endoscope. These studies efficiently overcame space limitations
of the operation site.
A few researchers have attempted to apply robotics technologies to SILS as well as endoscope manipulation robot. In one
approach, the surgery area is accessed by an overtube that includes the surgical instruments and endoscope, and surgery is
performed locally. Examples include a bimanual robotic system with two arms having six degrees of freedoms (DoFs) for
single-port laparoscopy [6] or that with a deployable mechanical structure and stereo vision [7], [8]. Master–slave robotic
systems that use long flexible instruments with multiple DoFs
alongside existing flexible endoscopes are currently being developed [9], [10]. These overtube-type surgery robots have a
single robotic arm that manipulates an overtube outside the patient’s body. View-independent instrument motion is limited by
the overtube, and flexible overtubes can also degrade the stiffness of the instrument end. These problems can be more serious
when multi-DoF motions of the instrument and endoscope must
be implemented inside the body.
Another approach for single-site surgery involves substituting the surgeon’s hand with a robotic arm; the rigid instruments
and endoscope are connected to a robotic arm outside of the
body and passed through the single incision. In particular, a remote center-of-motion (RCM) mechanism can be used to maintain the stationary point at the incision area. Mechanical RCMs
are considered safer owing to their reduced DoFs, decoupled
motion, controller simplicity, and locked pivot features [11].
Robotic single-port surgery has been introduced to perform
transumbilical single-port radical prostatectomy, dismembered
pyeloplasty, and radical nephrectomy procedures [12]. Instruments modified for triangulation are also used in single-incision
surgery performed with the da Vinci system [13]. An instrument that possesses high stiffness can be applied with relatively
high force to the tissue and manipulated in a large workspace.
However, existing surgical robot systems are not optimized
to a single-port configuration, owing to collisions between
the robotic arms that manipulate the surgical instruments and
endoscope [14].
Recently, a more compact system to position and manipulate
the surgical instruments has been proposed conceptually. The
system is composed of two instruments and one endoscope attached to a common rotating base ring [15]. In this approach, the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHOI et al.: SURGICAL ROBOT FOR SINGLE-INCISION LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY

2459

TABLE I
DGS AND APPROACHES

Fig. 1. Proposed single-incision surgery robot equipped with a cone-type
RCM mechanism and articulated instruments.

key requirements are to maintain triangulation of the instrument
and to prevent mutual interference between the robotics arms.
We present the first purposely designed SILS robot to successfully pass in vivo preclinical tests. We have reported the
in vivo animal trial using the proposed surgical robot in [16].
This paper focuses on the mechanical design of the surgical
robot which includes an RCM mechanism and two articulated
instruments. The elbow structure of the instruments makes the
triangulation position of the instruments possible inside the abdominal area, and the RCM mechanism prevents interference
between the robotic arms by separating the areas of motion for
single-port surgery when they are passed through a single incision. We have verified that the proposed surgical robot can
overcome the inadequate triangulation and the arm collision
problems through simulations and experiments. A preliminary
version of this work has been reported [31].
II. DESIGN GOALS AND APPROACH FOR SILS
Some issues regarding the surgical robot for SILS should be
considered before proceeding to its conceptual and detailed design. Considering the requirements of a single-port surgical procedure and referring to [17], which reviewed kinematic design
considerations for minimally invasive robots, we established
the design goals (DGs) and the approaches to meet the goals as
shown in Table I. The first three DGs are requirement for the
conventional laparoscopic surgeries, and the last three goals are
additional requirements to satisfy single-incision laparoscopic
surgeries.
We propose the surgical robot satisfying the established DGs.
Fig. 1 shows the presented surgical robot which weighs about
35 kg and is 80 cm long, 50 cm wide, and 100 cm high. It is
inspired by the work given in [18], which described a compact
modular robot for multiport laparoscopic surgery that implements the RCM mechanism near incision areas. In this approach,
the base frame, which stays stationary during surgery, is close
to the incision area. Thus, the moving component of the mechanism is more compact than a system in which the base frame
is far from the incision area.
Building upon this work, we designed the cone-type RCM
mechanism to have a base frame near a single incision point

(DG2). Here, we arrange two RCM mechanisms on a single
conical structure but separated in space to avoid mutual interference, so as to enable the entire system to manipulate two
surgical instruments through a single incision point without colliding (DG4).
Another important point is a flexible linkage of the instrument elbows. When manipulating the tissues or objects, required
torque on the elbow is higher than the others. The roll motion
(outside body) of the elbow can be implemented outside surgical
site. However pitch motion of the elbow should be implemented
in the narrow instrument body. Here, flexible linkage makes it
possible to increase moment arm of applied force on the elbow.
Thus, the torque acting on the elbow joint has increased.
Fig. 2 shows a conceptual design of the presented surgical
robot. It has two arms and eighteen DoFs. The conically shaped
RCM mechanism has three external positioning DoFs, and the
replaceable instrument with elbow has six DoFs, including gripper motion. Due to the elbow structure of the instruments, the
triangulation position for the surgery is possible inside the abdominal area (DG5). The cone-type RCM mechanism and elbow
structure will be described in the following chapters.
III. RCM MECHANISM
In this section, we briefly describe nine different types of
RCM mechanism mentioned in [17], including the presented
mechanism. We analyzed the previously proposed RCM mechanisms from the viewpoints of applicability, compactness, and
results from implementation in SILS robots presented in Table II. To be applicable to SILS robots, an RCM mechanism
should not have mechanical components such as linkages or
joints around the incision area because the instruments and endoscope must pass through a single incision area. For compactness, a mechanism in which the base frame is close to an
incision point was considered more compact than other mechanisms because the moving components of the mechanism must
cover the distance from the base frame to the incision point (e.g.,
compact MIS robot RAVEN [28]). Finally, we investigated the
RCM mechanisms that were implemented in SILS robots.

2460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE II
RCM MECHANISMS AND APPLICABILITY TO SILS ROBOT

Fig. 2.

Conceptual design and parameter definition of the surgery robot.

The parallelogram-type mechanism is the most widely used
RCM mechanism in the area of endoscope control, instrument
manipulation, and needle insertion [11], [20]. The da Vinci system [22], which is a successful example that has adopted a
parallelogram-type RCM mechanism, is also implemented in
SILS robots. The compactly designed RAVEN, which is from
the University of Washington [28] and is based on a spherical linkage-type mechanism, is also a successful example of a
minimally invasive surgical robot. However, it has not yet been
applied to SILS robots. Isocenter, gimbal, and parallel wristtype RCM mechanisms can be used for a single instrument or
endoscope. However, they are not applicable to SILS, which
requires instruments and endoscopes to pass through the same
incision point.
As shown earlier, most research on RCM mechanisms has focused on applications to endoscope operation, needle insertion,
and minimally invasive multiport surgery. RCM mechanisms
for SILS robots have not yet been actively studied.
A. Operation Principle
The conceptual design of the RCM mechanism is shown in
Fig. 2. The RCM mechanism, which has two revolute joints and
one prismatic joint, is designed to maintain a stationary point at
the apex of the conical shape. By placing the stationary point on
the incision area, the mechanism allows a surgical instrument to
explore the abdominal area through a small incision point. The
mechanism consists of a base frame, an inner cone, an inner
rotator, and a linear instrument guide. The base frame is fixed

to the ground and the inner cone is connected to the base frame
by a circular track, whose rotation axis passes through an apex
of the conical structure of the base frame. The circular track
can increase the stiffness of the mechanism because the inner
rotator is supported by four points separated from one another.
The inner rotator and inner cone are connected by a long revolute
joint, whose rotation axis crosses the axis of the circular track.
Thus, the point of intersection between the first and second axes
becomes a stationary point. By using a prismatic joint attached
between the inner rotator and instrument guide, an instrument
can be passed through the intersection point. Finally, the two
axes of the revolute joints and the axis of the prismatic joint
converge at one point, which becomes the incision point in a
surgery.
The joints that make up the conically shaped RCM mechanism are the circular track, a long revolute joint, and a prismatic
joint. This novel and simple kinematic structure satisfies the
DGs. The RCM constraint is satisfied when the three axes intersect at a single point (DG1). The mechanism with high stiffness
can maintain high externally applied forces because the base
frame is close to the incision point (DG2). To prevent collisions
of the instruments, the motion areas of the instrument guides
are separated so that each covers half of the entire cone area
(DG4). The remote centers of the two RCM mechanisms are
also separated from one another while the two instrument guides
are extended in opposite directions. This configuration enables
collision-free motion of the RCM mechanisms and makes instruments pass through single incision area. Interference between the arms is thus prevented in the design and simulation
processes, and the robot can move freely in a given range of
motion.

CHOI et al.: SURGICAL ROBOT FOR SINGLE-INCISION LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY

2461

B. Workspace Analysis
In this section, we derive the kinematic relations among the
joint parameters and elbow position in Cartesian coordinates.
Fig. 2 shows the parameters of the RCM mechanism, where γ
and η are design variables and {a1 a2 a3 } is an inertial reference
frame fixed to the ground. To account for the three joints that
constitute the mechanism, the joint parameters are defined as
q = [q1 q2 q4 ], where q1 is the rotation angle of the circular
track, q2 is the rotation angle of the long revolute joint, and q4 is
the displacement of the prismatic joint. By defining the position
of the elbow as pe , we can write the forward kinematic relation
of pe and q as follows:
pe = Φ(q).

(1)

By using the rotation matrix with respect to the current rotation axis, we can rewrite (1) as follows:
pe = Ra 3 ,q 1 Ra 1 ,γ Ra 2 ,q 2 Ra 1 ,η (−q4 c2 )
⎛
⎞
c1 s2 sη − s1 (cγ cη − sγ sη )
⎜
⎟
s s s − c1 (cγ cη − sγ sη ) ⎟
= −q3 ⎜
⎝ 1 2 η
⎠
sγ cη + cγ sη c2

(2)

where c and s are the abbreviations for cosine and sine, respectively, and subscripts 1 and 2 refer to q1 and q2 , respectively.
With a given set of joint parameters (q1 , q2 , q4 ), we can calculate the elbow position. By using the forward kinematic relation,
we analyzed the range and isotropy of the elbow workspace and
determined the design values for γ and η.
From (2), the workspace of the two elbows was calculated. The motion ranges of the three joints are −π/3 < q1 <
π/3, 0 < q2 < π/3, and 0 < q4 < 200 mm. The workspaces of
the mechanism were semiconical in shape and overlap around
the center line. To achieve smooth motion in Cartesian coordinates, we selected the values for the design parameters γ and
η so that the elbow workspace could be large and isotropic. By
using (2) with various sets of design parameters, we studied
the size and shape of the elbow workspace (see Fig. 3). In this
simulation, the range or value of each of the three joints was set
to −π/3 < q1 < π/3, 0 < q2 < π/3, and q4 = 200 mm. Note
that as q4 is a constant, we can easily inspect the workspace in
the form of a surface. The workspace of the elbow was projected
onto the x−y plane (see Fig. 3).
A remarkable observation in the simulation is that the shape
of the workspace almost depends on the value of γ + η. The
workspace with γ = 30◦ and η = 60◦ was similar to that with
γ = 20◦ and η = 70◦ . To identify the conditions for a large
workspace, we calculated the area of the blue points shown in
Fig. 3, which is proportional to the elbow workspace. Fig. 4
shows that the projected area increases with increasing link
angle η and decreasing cone angle γ. These conditions are the
same as those for high manipulability.
We adopted the determinant of the Jacobian matrix as a
measure of manipulability [29]. From (2), this measure can be

Fig. 3. Workspace of the proposed surgical robot. Workspace of the (a) elbows
and (b) end-effectors.

Fig. 4.

Projected area of the workspace on x-y plane.

calculated as follows:



∂pe 

= |sη cγ sq 2 | q42 .
w = det
∂q 

(3)

For good manipulability, the mechanism should be designed
to have a high link angle η and low cone angle γ. Thus, we can
satisfy DG3 with good manipulability by selecting a high link

2462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Next, the q1 angle can be calculated as follows. b2,z and c2
can be readily obtained
b2,z = sin γ,

c2 =

−pe
.
|pe |

(5)

By projecting b2 onto the a1 − a2 plane, the following can
also be obtained:
b22.x + b22.y = 1 − sin2 γ = A.
Fig. 5.

(6)

In addition, by using the inner product, (6) can be rewritten
as follows:

Examination of interferences by superimposition.

c2,x b2,x + c2,y b2,y = cos η − c2,z sin γ = B.
angle η and low cone angle γ. In addition, the mechanism will
have high manipulability when q2 and q4 are far from zero.
Next, we established a simulation model to confirm interference among the arms, endoscope, and instruments. With the
established model, we checked DG4 and DG6 by superimposing
the solid models of the presented mechanism. This process was
performed with various sets of design parameters. For a distance
of 4 cm between the two remote centers of the cone-type RCM
mechanisms, we identified the conditions under which the motion areas of the two RCM mechanisms were fully separated.
For values of γ + η > 90◦ , the mechanisms easily interfered
with one another.
Among the various sets of values that satisfy the condition
γ + η ≤ 90◦ , we attempted to select a low cone angle γ for a
large workspace. However, the base frame of the mechanism
is positioned very close to the patient if the cone angle γ is
too small (below 30◦ ). This could pose problems when changes
in the orientation and position of the mechanism are required
to satisfy various surgical tasks. Thus, we selected γ = 30◦
and maximized the link angle (η = 60◦ ) for the workspace and
manipulability.
Fig. 3(b) shows the workspace of the end-effectors when we
use the selected design variables and 5-cm-long lower arms. The
reachable and common workspaces are 9.2 L and 1.7 L, respectively. If we use 7-cm-long lower arms and optimize the position
of the instruments, the reachable and common workspaces can
be extended to 12.7 L and 3.2 L, respectively.
With selected design variables, we have investigated the mechanical interferences of the arms and instruments. Fig. 5 shows
the separated motion areas of the two RCM mechanisms.
From the inverse kinematics, we can find the reference control
parameters of the joints given the desired elbow position.
The RCM is located at (0 0 0) and the coordinate frames attached to each joint are defined as in Fig. 2, in which a3 , b2 , and
c3 represent the rotation direction of q1 , rotation direction of q2 ,
and translation direction of q4 , respectively. First, for the elbow
position given in the reference coordinate frame {a1 a2 a3 } , q4
can be easily obtained as in (4)

(7)

Then, assuming that b2,y is always positive, we can calculate
b2,x and b2,y as shown later. Note that b2,z and c2 are already
obtained earlier
	
Bc2,y + B 2 c22.y − (c22.x + c22.y )(B 2 − Ac22.x )
b2,y =
c22.x + c22b.y
b2,x =

B − c2,y b2,y
.
c2,x

(8)

Consequently, we can obtain q1 , whose range is between –π/2
and π/2, as follows:



b2,x
.
(9)
q1 = tan−1 −
b2,y
Finally, the q2 angle can be obtained as follows. First, we
(2)
(2)
set pc and pd , whose coordinates are given with respect
(2)
(2)
to the {b1 b2 b3 } coordinate frame as (pc = (0, 0, 1), pd =
(0, − sin η/ cos η, 1)) on the b2 -axis and c3 -axis, respectively.
(2)
(2)
(2)
Note that pc and pd are selected such that pc is the pro(2)
(2)
jection of pd and |pd | = 1. Then, the coordinate of pd with
respect to the reference frame becomes
pe
(2)
= R20 pd
pd = −
(10)
|pe | cos η
and because the rotation matrix is orthogonal, we can readily
obtain the following:
(2)

pd = (R20 )T pd .
Subsequently, we obtain
−1

q2 = sin



(2)

pd.x
sin η/ cos η

(11)

.

(12)

Note that q2 is between –π/2 and π/2. With a given elbow
position, we can thus derive the solutions for the joint parameters
from (4), (9), and (12).
IV. REPLACEABLE SURGICAL INSTRUMENT WITH ELBOW

q4 = sgn(pe.z ) · |pe |
where
pe = (pe,x pe,y pe,z ) .

(4)

One important feature of the SILS is the triangulation position of the instrument (DG5). An elbow structure can make the
triangulation position of the instrument in the abdominal area
even though they are passed through a single incision. In previous work [30], an elbow joint having a pin and a sliding slot has

CHOI et al.: SURGICAL ROBOT FOR SINGLE-INCISION LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY

Fig. 6.

2463

Fig. 7.

Flexible slider-crank type elbow mechanism.

Fig. 8.

Stress analysis model of the elbow mechanism.

Overview of the proposed articulated instrument.

been proposed to achieve high force and accuracy in addition to
the triangulation.
In this paper, we proposed an instrument having six articulated joints, including an elbow pitch joint. The elbow pitch
structure is similar to the slider-crank mechanism but the connecting rod is composed of flexible leaf spring for high payload
and small looseness error.
Fig. 6 shows an overview of the articulated instrument, which
includes gripper, wrist joints, and elbow mechanism for singleincision surgery. The instrument can be easily replaceable from
the actuation part, and the 6 DoFs motion are transmitted via
mechanical interface. Except elbow pitch motion, all of the
components are actuated by the cable–pulley mechanism. The
breaking strength of the steel cable is 11.8 kgf and its diameter
is 0.483 mm.
A. Slider-Crank Mechanism With Leaf Spring
Typically, the bearing unit is used to reduce friction and maintain the concentricity between links in the slider-crank mechanism. In case of the small mechanism such as surgical instruments, the bearing cannot be easily applied due to the limited
space of the instrument. The simple pin connection can replace
the bearing unit. However, mechanical looseness between the
joints inevitably happens because of the tolerance from machining. And small amounts of looseness at slider-crank mechanism
causes large position error at the end-effectors even when the
slide link is not driven.
The presented elbow mechanism can overcome the looseness
problem and is suitable for the high force operation. The point
that the connecting rod applies force on is far from the elbow
pitch axis. Thus, the moment applied to the elbow pitch axis by
the slider link could be high (DG2).
The elbow joint mechanism, shown in Fig. 7, is actuated
by the connecting rod consisting of rigid rod and flexible leaf
spring. Slider link is connected to the connecting rod. When the
pitch joint rotates, the elastic energy is accumulated in the leaf
spring so that equilibrium force is applied to the pivot of the
crank. This characteristic can decrease joint looseness.

The flexible leaf spring is made of the nickel–titanium alloy
which has high yield strength and low Young’s modulus. Thus,
it could easily bend and restore to the original shape. The leaf
spring should bend within the motion range of the elbow pitch
without the breakage. In order to prevent the breakage of the
leaf spring, we performed the dynamic simulation of the elbow
motion in ADAMS, dynamics analysis program. And we decided the dimension of the leaf spring considering the simulation
results.
Fig. 8 shows simulation environment. All of the components
except the leaf spring are modeled as rigid bodies, and the leaf
spring is model as a flexible linkage. Considering interaction
force between the instrument and the organ, we assumed that
10 N of disturbance force is applied to the end of the instrument
of which elbow angle is 45◦ . As the elbow pitch angle increases,
the flexible leaf spring bends and the moment and force applied to the leaf spring increase. And the bending moment and
the internal forces are calculated from the simulation model.
The maximum stress on the flexible leaf spring is obtained from
the following:
σF x + σM y =

My z
Fx
+
.
bh
Iy y

(13)

The stress by the bending moment is much larger than those
by shear and normal force. Table III shows stress analysis result
by the leaf spring length. The width and the thickness of the
leaf spring are 2.5 and 0.5 mm, respectively. The moment and
maximum stress decreases with the increasing length of the leaf
spring because the curvature of the leaf spring decreases. This
tendency is valid until the leaf spring begins to buckle. When the
length of the leaf spring reached 21 mm, the maximum stress
drastically increases because of the buckling by disturbance
force. And we observed that the change of the force acting on
the guide is small and the elbow angle variation increase linearly.

2464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE III
STRESS ANALYSIS RESULT OF LEAF SPRING

Fig. 9.

Remote center of the cone-type RCM mechanism.

Thus, if we permit the angle variation over than 1.3◦ , we could
select the 19 mm as the length of the leaf spring at which the
maximum stress of the leaf spring is lowest.
V. FABRICATION AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROTOTYPE
In the detailed design process, we focused on a compact
design for the RCM mechanism. We defined the motion conditions for the elbow. With the established simulation model, we
estimated the operation conditions of each joint, including the
required torque or force. On the basis of these operation conditions, we selected the motor, gear ratio of the gearhead, lead of
the lead screw, and drive mechanism. Lead screws are used to
drive the elbow pitch motion and the instrument linear motion.
In this case, the drive mechanism and gearhead were designed
for the motor to operate with a speed of around 3000 r/min under nominal operation conditions. We have used various Maxon
DC motors (RE25, RE30, RE16) and gears for the operation of
the RCM mechanism and instruments. And all of the joints are
design to be back-drivable.
And the unilateral teleoperation system has established with
the master input device, OMEGA 7 from Force Dimension Inc.,
and control system, PXI series from National Instrument Inc.
Control of the robot was achieved with the inverse kinematics.
We calculated the control references of the joints q from the
inverse kinematic relation; therefore, individual joint actuators
could be controlled in the joint space to follow the desired
trajectory expressed in Cartesian coordinates.
The presented robot exhibited motion of the remote center
around the incision point (see Fig. 9). During the experiment,
mechanical interference did not occur between the arms as in
the simulation. Fig. 8 shows a finger between the two remote
centers. The endoscope can pass through the area where the
finger is inserted. With an externally equipped endoscope that
passes through the area, we performed the in vivo animal trial
successfully [16].
The presented surgical robot successfully performed the three
kinds of experiment. First one is the payload test as shown in
Fig. 10(a). We tested the Cartesian motion of the instrument
under the condition in which a 1-kg mass was applied at the

Fig. 10. Experiment: (a) 10 N weight pick up test; (b) peg board transfer test;
and (c) suturing and knotting test.

end of the instrument. Within the workspace of the mechanism,
smooth motion was observed without sudden divergences or
unstable vibrations. Here, we have confirmed strength of the
instrument especially, including the elbow mechanism.
Second is peg board transfer test as shown in Fig. 10(b).
Externally equipped endoscope is used for the experiment. The
time limits are from the curriculum of standard Fundamental
of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) tasks. And the ring objects are
used instead of the standard FLS objects. Twelve pegs are fixed
in a single board, and six rings are on the six pegs of the left
side. The six rings are manipulated to move to the six pegs of the
right side by the instruments. And then, reverse manipulation is
proceeded.
Suturing and knotting test are performed to verify the dexterity and accuracy of the proposed surgical robot. Fig. 10(c) shows
the suturing and the knotting procedure, which is successfully
completed. We have carried out the three kinds of experiments
in the limited time and summarized the completion time and
success or failure results in Table IV.
VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The focus of this study was to design a new surgical robot
for an SILS robot. We considered the DGs and showed how
the requirements could be satisfied in the design process. We
showed that the RCM mechanism maintains a stationary point

CHOI et al.: SURGICAL ROBOT FOR SINGLE-INCISION LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY

TABLE IV
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED ROBOT

at the apex of the conical shape and the elbow structure of the
instrument is suitable for the high payload manipulation in the
triangulation position. The collision of the robotic arms in the
mechanism is prevented by separating their areas of motion. By
designing the base frame near an incision point, the mechanism
was made to be lighter and more compact, and to require less actuation force. On the basis of the kinematic analysis, the design
parameters were determined.
The surgical robot system developed in this work includes
two cone-type RCM mechanisms and two high-dexterity instruments attached to the end of the RCM mechanism. We verified the payload of the robot is over 10 N. The surgical robot
is used to perform in vivo surgical tasks on a porcine model.
Peg board transfer and the suturing test are successfully performed. In future studies, we will address the optimal placement
of the presented RCM mechanisms and the endoscope drive
mechanism.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Ahmed, T. T. Wang, V. M. Patel, K. Nagpal, J. Clark, M. Ali, S. Deeba,
H. Ashrafian, A. Darzi, and T. Athanasiou, “The role of single-incision laparoscopic surgery in abdominal and pelvic surgery: A systematic review,”
Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1–19, Jul. 2010.
[2] C. R. Tracy, J. D. Raman, J. A. Cadeddu, and A. Rane, “Laparoendoscopic
single-site surgery in urology: Where have we been and where are we
heading?”,” Nat. Clin. Pract. Urol., vol. 5, pp. 561–568, 2008.
[3] J. R. Romanelli, L. Mark, and P. A. Omotosho, “Single port laparoscopic
cholecystectomy with the TriPort system: A case report,” Surg. Innov.,
vol. 15, pp. 223–228, 2008.
[4] A. Gumbs, L. Milone, P. Sinha, and M. Bessler, “Totally transumbilical
laparoscopic cholecystectomy,” J. Gastrointest. Surg., vol. 13, pp. 533–
534, 2009.
[5] S. Kane and K. J. Stepp, “Laparo-endoscopic single-site surgery hysterectomy using robotic lightweight endoscope assistants,” J. Robot. Surg.,
vol. 3, pp. 253–255, 2010.
[6] M. Piccigallo, U. Scarfogliero, C. Quaglia, G. Petroni, P. Valdastri,
A. Menciassi, and P. Dario, “Design of a novel bimanual robotic system for single-port laparoscopy,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 15,
no. 6, pp. 871–878, 2010.
[7] J. Ding, K. Xu, R. Goldman, P. Allen, D. Fowler, and N. Simaan, “Design,
simulation and evaluation of kinematic alternatives for insertable robotic
effectors platforms in single port access surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int Conf.
Robot. Autom., 2010, pp. 1053–1058.
[8] N. Simaan, X. Kai, W. Wei, A. Kapoor, P. Kazanzides, R. Taylor, and
P. Flint, “Design and integration of a telerobotic system for minimally
invasive surgery of the throat,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 28, pp. 1134–
1153, 2009.
[9] D. Abbott, C. Beck, R. Rothstein, and W. Peine, “Design of an endolumenal NOTES robotic system,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., 2007, pp. 410–416.

2465

[10] L. Phee, S. Low, Z. Thant, K. Ho, and S. Chung, “Robotic system for noscar gastrointestinal surgery,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg.,
vol. 4, pp. 15–22, 2008.
[11] R. Taylor and D. Stoianovici, “Medical robotics in computer-integrated
surgery,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 765–781, Oct.
2003.
[12] J. H. Kaouk, R. K. Goel, G. P. Haber, S. Crouzet, and R. J. Stein, “Robotic
single-port transumbilical surgery in humans: Initial report,” BJU Int.,
vol. 103, pp. 366–369, 2009.
[13] G.-P. Haber, M. A. White, R. Autorino, P. F. Escobar, M. D. Kroh,
S. Chalikonda, R. Khanna, S. Forest, B. Yang, F. Altunrende, R. J. Stein,
and J. H. Kaouk, “Novel robotic da Vinci instruments for laparoendoscopic single-site surgery,” Urology, vol. 76, no. 6, pp. 1279–
1282, 2010.
[14] R. J. Stein, W. M. White, R. K. Goel, B. H. Irwin, G. P. Haber, and
J. H. Kaouk, “Robotic laparoendoscopic single-site surgery using gelport
as the access platform,” Eur. Urol., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 132–137, 2010.
[15] P. Berkelman and S. Okamoto, “Compact modular system design for
teleoperated laparoendoscopic single site surgery,” in Proc. 4th IEEE
RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatronics, Roma, Italy, Jun.,
2012, pp. 24–27.
[16] H. Kim et al., “A novel compact single incision surgical robot with conical
remote center-of-motion mechanism and rod elbow joint,” in Proc. EUS
Annu. Meeting, San Diego, CA, May 2013, p. 25.
[17] C. H. Kuo, J. Dai, and P. Dasgupta, “Kinematic design consideration for
minimally invasive surgical robots: An overview,” Int. J. Med. Robot.
Comput. Assist Surg., vol. 9, pp. 127–145, 2012.
[18] P. Berkelman and J. Ma, “A compact modular teleoperated robotic system
for laparoscopic surgery,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1198–1215,
Sep. 2009.
[19] D. Sanchez, M. Black, and S. Hammond, “A pivot point arm for a robotic
system used to perform a surgical procedure,” Eur. Patent 1 254 642,
2002.
[20] J. Hong, T. Dohi, M. Hashizume, K. Konishi, and N. Hata, “An ultrasounddriven needle-insertion robot for percutaneous cholecystostomy,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 49, pp. 441–455, 2004.
[21] J. Rosen, J. D. Brown, M. Barreca, L. Chang, B. Hannaford, and M.
Sinanan, “The BlueDRAGON—A system for measuring the kinematics
and the dynamics of minimally invasive surgical tools in-vivo,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Washington, DC, USA, 2002, pp. 1876–
1881.
[22] G. S. Guthart and J. K. Salisbury, Jr., “The intuitive TM telesurgery system: Overview and application,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot., 2000,
pp. 618–621.
[23] D. Stoianovici, L. L. Whitcomb, J. H. Anderson, R. H. Taylor, and L.
R. Kavoussi, “A modular surgical robotic system for image guided percutaneous procedures,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted
Intervention, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1998, pp. 404–410.
[24] M. Lum, J. Rosen, M. Sinanan, and B. Hannaford, “Optimization of a
spherical mechanism for a minimally invasive surgical robot: Theoretical
and experimental approaches,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 7,
pp. 1440–1445, 2006.
[25] K. Ikuta, K. Sasaki, K. Yamamoto, and T. Shimada, “Remote microsurgery system for deep and narrow space—Development of new surgical
procedure,” in Proc Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention,
Tokyo, Japan, Sep. 25–28, 2002, pp. 163–172.
[26] J. S. Navarro, N. Garcia, C. Perez, E. Fernandez, R. Saltaren, and M.
Almonacid, “Kinematics of a robotic 3UPS1S spherical wrist designed
for laparoscopic applications,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg.,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 291–300, 2010.
[27] A. C. Lehman, M. M. Tiwari, B. C. Shah, S. M. Farritor, C. A. Nelson, and
D. Oleynikov, “Recent advances in the CoBRASurge robotic manipulator
and dexterous miniature in vivo robotics for minimally invasive surgery,”
in Proc IME, Part C: J Mech. Eng. Sci., 2010, vol. 224, no. 7, pp. 1487–
1494.
[28] M. Lum, C. Friedman, G. Sankaranarayanan, H. King, K. Fodero,
R. Leuschke, B. Hannaford, J. Rosen, and M. Sinanan, “The RAVEN:
Design and validation of a telesurgery system,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 28,
pp. 1183–1197, 2009.
[29] T. Yoshikawa, “Manipulability and redundancy control of robotic mechanisms,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1004–1009, 1985.
[30] W.-H. Shin and D.-S. Kwon, “Surgical robot system for single-port surgery
with novel joint mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 4,
pp. 937–944, Apr. 2013.

2466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

[31] H. D. Choi, H. J. Kim, Y. A. Lim, H. S. Kwak, J. W. Jang, and J. H. Won,
“Conically shaped remote center-of-motion mechanism for single-incision
surgery,” presented at the IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Tokyo,
Japan, Nov. 2013.

Hyundo Choi was born in Pusan City, Korea, in 1980.
He received the B.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from Pusan National University, Busan, Korea, in
2002, and the M.S. and the Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, Daejeon, in 2004 and 2008,
respectively.
He is currently a research staff at the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
His current research interest includes mechanism design, traction control of mobile robot, and surgical
robot.

Ho-Seong Kwak was born in Daejeon City, Korea,
in 1978. He received the B.S. degree in mechanical
engineering from Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea,
in 2005, and the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea, and Hanyang University, Seoul, in
2007.
He is currently a Research Staff Member at
the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea. His current research interests
include mechanism design, motion/force control using system ID result of humanoid robot, and surgical robot.

Yo-An Lim received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from the University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea, in 1996
and 1998, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from
the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
Gwangju, Korea, in 2010.
From 1998 to 2003, he was a Research Engineer at
the Agency for Defense Development. He is currently
with the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea. His current research interests
include haptic interaction control, design and control
of haptic devices, and medical imaging devices.

Hyung-Joo Kim received the M.D. degree from
the Soonchunhyang University, in 1996 and the
Ph.D. degree in medical engineering from the Biorobotics Lab, Mechanical Engineering Department,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea, in 2010.
He was a Professor of Urology at Hallym
University, Korea. He was a Research Fellow at Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, from 2010
to 2011. He is currently a Research Staff Member
at the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea. His current research interests include design and system
architecture of medical robot and medical devices.

