IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

623

A Comparison of US- Versus MR-Based 3-D Prostate
Shapes Using Radial Basis Function Interpolation
and Statistical Shape Models
Ran Tao, Student Member, IEEE, Mahdi Tavakoli, Member, IEEE, Ron Sloboda, and Nawaid Usmani

Abstract—This paper presents a comparison of threedimensional (3-D) segmentations of the prostate, based on twodimensional (2-D) manually segmented contours, obtained using
ultrasound (US) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging data collected from 40 patients diagnosed with localized prostate cancer
and scheduled to receive brachytherapy treatment. The approach
we propose here for 3-D prostate segmentation first uses radial
basis function interpolation to construct a 3-D point distribution
model for each prostate. Next, a modified principal axis transformation is utilized for rigid registration of the US and MR images
of the same prostate in preparation for the following shape comparison. Then, statistical shape models are used to capture the segmented 3-D prostate geometries for the subsequent cross-modality
comparison. Our study includes not only cross-modality geometric
comparisons in terms of prostate volumes and dimensions, but also
an investigation of interchangeability of the two imaging modalities in terms of automatic contour segmentation at the pre-implant
planning stage of prostate brachytherapy treatment. By developing a new scheme to compare the two imaging modalities in terms
of the segmented 3-D shapes, we have taken a first step necessary
for building coupled US-MR segmentation strategies for prostate
brachytherapy pre-implant planning, which at present is predominantly informed by US images only.
Index Terms—Prostate brachytherapy, radial basis function,
rigid registration, segmentation, statistic shape model.

I. INTRODUCTION
ROSTATE cancer has been identified as the most common
nondermal cancer in North American men [1], [2]. Among
various treatment options, including surgery, external beam
radiotherapy, and hormone therapy, brachytherapy has emerged
as a popular minimally invasive approach with excellent longterm results. Consensus guidelines developed by the American

P

Manuscript received November 13, 2013; revised March 24, 2014; accepted
May 6, 2014. Date of publication May 19, 2014; date of current version March
2, 2015.
R. Tao was with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, INSA de Lyon,
Villeurbanne 69621, France. He is now with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3,
Canada (e-mail: ran1@ualberta.ca).
M. Tavakoli is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada (e-mail:
mahdi.tavakoli@ualberta.ca).
R. Sloboda is with the Department of Medical Physics, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB T6G 1Z2, Canada (e-mail: ron.sloboda@
albertahealthservices.ca).
N. Usmani is with the Department of Radiation Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB T6G 1Z2, Canada (e-mail: nawaid.usmani@
albertaservices.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2324975

Brachytherapy Society suggest using biplanar transrectal ultrasonography (TRUS) for preoperative planning and intraoperative stages, with computed tomography (CT) or magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging utilized for postoperative dosimetry
[3]. While ultrasound (US) imaging is predominantly the imaging modality of choice in pre-implant planning, MR imaging
presents certain advantages over it such as improved tissue contrast. An important question is, can MR imaging replace or
complement US imaging in prostate brachytherapy pre-implant
planning? A few studies have been carried out to investigate
the feasibility of replacing US imaging with MR in pre-implant
planning [4] and intraoperative stages [5]–[7].
Given that traditional manual segmentation of the prostate,
which is a prerequisite for pre-implant planning, is timeconsuming and tedious for clinicians and vulnerable to
inter- and intraobserver variability, automatic or semiautomatic
prostate segmentation techniques have been developed in twodimensional (2-D) and three-dimensional (3-D) for alleviating
clinicians’ workload and reducing contour segmentation times.
Such techniques include edge and texture-based segmentation
[8]–[10], deformable-model-based segmentation [11], [12], and
ellipsoid fitting [13], [14]. Among these techniques, one method
that has seen increasing success in medical image segmentation
and that we will use is the statistical shape model (SSM) based
segmentation [15], lately applied to prostate segmentation [8],
[9], [16]. It uses prior statistical information to create a model
for the spatial shapes of prostate boundaries.
Recently, dual modality segmentation methods based on SSM
have been developed. For instance, in [17], a cardiac left ventricle SSM model was built based on MR images with superior tissue definition and then used for contour segmentation
in CT images without the need to retrain the model with CT
datasets. In [18], a scheme for concurrent segmentation of the
prostate using MR and CT images via linked SSM was proposed,
again leveraging the superior soft tissue definition of MR over
CT to improve the performance of CT-based segmentation in
prostate radiotherapy planning. Similar to these efforts concerning dual-modality segmentation in various medical applications,
in prostate brachytherapy, coupled strategies involving both US
and MR imaging can be devised for pre-implant planning where
TRUS is predominantly the modality of choice at present.
Since the segmentation of prostate in clinical images provides
the very foundation of brachytherapy pre-implant planning, the
choice of imaging modality (e.g., US versus MR) changes the
perception of the prostate in terms of volume and shape and
may have implications to current practices [4], [19]. Studies

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

624

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

have been carried out to compare the prostate shapes obtained
by different imaging modalities. In [4], MR-based and TRUSbased preplanning in prostate brachytherapy were compared
using dosimetric results, and prostate volume measured in MR
and TRUS were also compared. In [20], prostate shapes obtained from post-implant 3-D TRUS, MR, and CT images were
compared in terms of volume and contouring variability. Both
intra- and intermodality variation was analyzed in 3-D. In [19],
pre-implant TRUS and MR images were used for cross-modality
shape and contouring variability comparison. Pre-implant images are not subject to post-implant edema. Specific attention
was given to the effect of the TRUS probe induced deformations
in this study. Therefore, replacing or complementing US with
MR imaging needs to be done only after careful studies. To address this need, in this paper we will compare US and MR based
prostate segmentation in 3-D from a new perspective that utilizes
models built from statistical shape analysis. Our approach will
not only allow for a statistical geometric comparison between
the two imaging modalities in terms of segmented 3-D shapes,
but also provide insight into the influences and intrinsic differences of the two imaging modalities (including the effect of the
transrectal US probe) on the SSM-based analysis results. As
elaborated later, our analyses help to correlate different modes
of the SSM to aspects of the prostate shape that are interesting
clinically.
To be more specific about the steps taken in the paper, after
first using manually delineated contour points in US and MR
images of each prostate in a 40-patient database, radial basis
function (RBF) is used to convert each set of 2-D contours into
a 3-D surface model; RBFs have previously been successful
in generating 3-D models for prostate [21] and other organs
from point clouds [22]–[24]. While in [21], a fan-shaped TRUS
sweeping was used to obtain nonparallel prostate contours, our
study acquired parallel prostate contours in both TRUS and MR
under the conditions of prostate brachytherapy. While, to the
best of the authors’ knowledge, using parallel prostate contours
for RBF interpolation was without precedence in the literature,
the success of RBF interpolation in similar contexts in the literature made it a promising choice for prostate modeling in our
application.
Next, the paper investigates the differences between preimplant US and pre-implant MR prostate contours via an analysis of SSM models built from both data groups; a few studies
have been conducted to directly compare US and MR imaging
modalities in terms of prostate shape delineation and even fewer
have used pre-implant images, which are particularly pertinent
to our brachytherapy treatment planning.
On the other hand, before working towards the establishment
of coupled US-MR pre-implant planning strategies, the SSMs
built from the two individual modalities need to be examined for
their interchangeability. To our knowledge, such comparisons
based on SSMs built from pre-implant US and MR prostate
contours do not exist in the literature and constitute one of
the contributions of this paper; our approach provides a new
method for image modality comparison and constitutes a first
step towards a US-MR coupled prostate segmentation scheme.
The proposed comparison method is completely open-source

TABLE I
PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
Number of patients
Median age (yrs)
Median pretreatment PSA (ng/mL)
Gleason score:
ࣘ5
6
7
Clinical stage:
T1c
T2a
T2b
Risk group:
Low risk
Intermediate risk

40
64
6.3

(range: 51–79)
(range: 2.0–14.0)

2
36
2

(5%)
(90%)
(5%)

24
9
7

(60%)
(22%)
(18%)

26
14

(65%)
(35%)

and reproducible as it does not rely on any commercial software
particular to prostate brachytherapy.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the
methods and materials used for data collection (Section II-A),
3-D prostate model development (Section II-B), and SSM implementation (Section II-C). The paper will continue to discuss
the results of the comparison between models built from US
and MR imaging modalities in Section III, including average
shape comparisons (Section III-A), SSM principal component
analysis (PCA, Section III-B), and interchangeability investigation (Sections III-C and III-D). In Section IV, our results are
compared to previous studies both from a geometric point of
view (Section IV-A) and an SSM point of view (Section IV-B).
Finally, concluding remarks are provided in Section V.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Imaging and Contouring
The study used imaging data from 40 consenting patients
diagnosed with localized prostate cancer, who were scheduled
to receive 125 I brachytherapy treatment. Prior to the implant
procedure, each patient received a pretreatment planning scan
using a Sonoline Adara TRUS scanner with an Endo PII probe
(Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc., Malvern, PA, USA),
yielding a set of parallel axial images spaced at 5 mm intervals
from the base to the apex of the prostate. Four to six weeks after
the US scan and still prior to the implant procedure, an MR scan
was performed using a 1.5 T Gyroscan Intera Imager (Philips
Healthcare, Andover, MA) with a five-channel cardiac coil. The
acquired MR image slices were spaced with spatial depth increments of 3–4 mm; the prostate boundaries were made clearly
visible by applying a T2-weighted spin echo pulse sequence
[25] and the consistency in pelvic orientation was assured by
the use of an under-knee rest. A recapitulation of the patient
group information is shown in Table I. In Table I, PSA is the
abbreviation for “prostate specific antigen.” Gleason score is
the score a pathologist gives to a prostate cancer based on its
microscopic features at diagnosis that help characterize the aggressiveness of the cancer. Clinical stage refers to the extent of
disease within the prostate that is palpated by a physician during

TAO et al.: COMPARISON OF US- VERSUS MR-BASED 3-D PROSTATE SHAPES USING RADIAL BASIS FUNCTION INTERPOLATION

625

1) Principles of RBF Interpolation: The RBF interpolation
approach, first used for medical 3-D modeling by Carr et al.
[22], [26], approximates an input function of unknown form
with three variables f : R3 → R by an interpolation function
s : R3 → R given the values {f (xi ) , i = 1, 2, . . . , n}. Here,
{xi , i = 1, 2, . . . , n}, where xi = (xi , yi , zi ), is a set of distinct
input points in the 3-D space R3 called nodes of interpolation
or radial centers. Also, an evaluation point x = (x, y, z) represents a point at which the function f is to be approximated. The
following form of the interpolation function is considered:
s (x) = p1 (x) +
Fig. 1. (a) Prostate gland image from TRUS. Manually delineated contour
points are in yellow squares. (b) Resampled points in white circles are superimposed on the original manually delineated contour points.

a digital rectal examination, with severity increasing from T1
to T4.
The 40 image volumes for each imaging modality were then
imported into folders on VariSeed system (Varian Medical Systems, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) for contouring. All volumes
were anonymized and randomized to minimize contouring bias
associated with expectation of a given patient’s prostate shape.
Then, three experienced oncologists performed contouring on
all images. The contours, consisting of discrete points in parallel
planes, were exported from the VariSeed planning system into
MATLAB [see Fig. 1(a)]. In the orthonormal coordinate system
shown, X and Y axes specified the image plane, while the Z-axis
lied in the probe direction and oriented from the base to the apex
of each prostate.
After importing these 2-D contours into MATLAB, they were
first interpolated in their own plane (i.e., XY plane) to decrease
the spatial intersample gap; as a result, the total number of points
per slice was increased to 60 (from on average approximately
22 points per slice) with the interpolated points being at equal
angular distances from each other with respect to the center of
mass (CoM) of each 2-D contour. To do this, we used spline
interpolation as it has been found well capable of representing
prostate shapes [11]. Then, a cubic smoothing spline was applied
to the interpolated contour in order to give it a smooth shape.
The original (manually delineated) and the resampled contours
of a typical slice are shown in Fig. 1.

n


λi φ (x − xi ) , x ∈ R3 , λi ∈ R

i=1

(1)
where p1 is a first-order polynomial, φ (r) = r for bi-harmonic
splines, and  ·  refers to the Euclidean norm. Let π13 represent
the space of all first-order polynomials with three variables. The
coefficients λi in (1) are determined by satisfying the interpolation conditions (2) and the side conditions (3)
s (xi ) = f (xi ),
n


λi q (xi ) = 0,

i = 1, 2, . . . , n

(2)

for all q ∈ π13 .

(3)

i=1

Equations (2) and (3) can be put into the following matrix
form for algorithm implementation [26]:

   
A
P
λ
f
=
(4)
c
0
PT 0
where
A = (ai,j ) = (φ (xi − xj ))
= xi − xj ,
⎡

i, j = 1, 2, . . . , n

1
⎢1
⎢
P =⎢.
⎣ ..

x1
x2
..
.

y1
y2
..
.

z1
z2
..
.

1

xn

yn

zn

(5)

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

(6)

λ = (λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λn )T

(7)

c = (c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 )T

(8)

B. RBF Interpolation
Noting that the outcome of contouring in Section II-A is
a set of discrete contour points in parallel planes in the axial
direction of the prostate and that our aim is to compare the
prostate shapes obtained from US and MR imaging modalities
in 3-D, it is necessary to first fit a 3-D surface to the 2-D contour
points for each prostate. The method applied here is the RBF
interpolation, which is capable of effectively interpolating point
data generated from a nonstandard grid possibly with large datafree gaps [23]. In fact, since the gaps between our image slices
range from 3 to 5 mm, RBF is ideal in our application for
interpolating the sparse collection of contours obtained from
TRUS and MR scans. We begin by briefly discussing the RBF
interpolation method.

p1 (x) = c1 + c2 x + c3 y + c4 z.

(9)

Solving (4) yields values of λi for each radial center and
coefficients (c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 ) for p1 . In this way, the value of f at
the evaluation point x can be estimated from (1). When applied
to the surface interpolation problem f (xi ), which represent the
input function values at the provided points, are assigned to
two groups of points: on-surface points and off-surface points.
On-surface points (existing data points) are assigned the value 0
while off-surface points, which are artificially introduced along
the surface normal in order to avoid the trivial solution f = 0 everywhere, are assigned nonzero values. Typically, as suggested
in [21], [26], [27], two layers of off-surface points, one on each
side of the surface, are added. These points are given a positive

626

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

value if on the outer surface and a negative value if on the inner
surface. If at an evaluation point x, s(x) is evaluated to be 0 then
this point belongs to the surface.
Directly solving the linear system (4) is not practical as the
matrix becomes very ill-conditioned as the number of interpolation nodes increases. Therefore, the RBF algorithm is combined
with the partition of unity algorithm [27]–[29]. The idea is that
RBF can be applied to interpolation problems involving a large
number of data points by breaking down the large-scale interpolation problem to several small-scale interpolation problems.
After solving (4) with the partition of unity algorithm, a mesh
will be created in the entire volume where the interpolation is
planned and, at these evaluation points, the interpolation function s(x) is evaluated according to (1). Finally, MATLAB’s
isosurface algorithm is called and the surface, which is defined
by all points carrying a value of 0, is rendered in 3-D.
2) Implementation of RBF Interpolation with Rigid-body
Registration: Given that the purpose of this study is to investigate the differences in shape that the two imaging modalities
introduce, a rigid-body registration accompanied the RBF interpolation. Shape is defined as a property that is invariant to
similarity transformations [15] including translation, rotation,
and scaling. In this case, the same prostate was not represented
in the same coordinate system in the two imaging modalities; the
TRUS probe and MR machine have their own coordinate systems. Thus, translations and rotations introduced during imaging
must be eliminated in order for us to be able to compare pure
shapes. Sometimes, the scaling is of interest in shape comparison
[30], as is in our case since we want to investigate the difference
in prostate volume introduced by different imaging modalities.
Therefore, the scaling factor was not eliminated at this stage.
On the next step, after obtaining the resampled prostate contour
points in Section II-A, the CoM of each 3-D volume was determined. Then, each 3-D volume was translated so that its CoM
was placed at the position (0, 0, 0), eliminating the translation
component. As for the rotation component, based on a modified
version of the principal axis transformation [31] as described
next, each prostate was rotated such that the cranial–caudal
axes of all prostates were aligned to the same line in a uniform
coordinate system. To this end, first a moment of inertia tensor
was calculated for each prostate assuming the mass of each slice
was concentrated at its CoM. The principal axis calculated from
the inertia tensor pointed along the longitudinal direction of the
prostate, thus defining the cranial–caudal axis. Then, all 2-D
contours of each prostate were pivoted as the same solid around
the corresponding prostate CoM so that the cranial–caudal axis
of the prostate coincided with the Z-axis of the uniform coordinate system (see Fig. 2). After this step, the orientation of
the axial plane (perpendicular to the cranial–caudal axis) of the
prostate is not yet the same across all prostates. To give every
prostate model the same orientation in the axial plane, another
principal axis analysis was carried out on the central three slices
of each prostate, which best represent the orientation of the axial plane of the prostate. The second component of this analysis
was aligned with the Y axis of the new uniform coordinate system (see Fig. 3). This rotation sets the prostate “straight” on
the XY plane. Note that although in Figs. 2 and 3 the surface

Fig. 2. (a) Prostate shape in the original imaging coordinate system (sagittal
view). (b) Prostate shape aligned with its cranial–caudal axis (sagittal view).

Fig. 3. (a) Prostate shape before rotation around the cranial–caudal axis (axial
plane). (b) Prostate shape after rotation around the cranial–caudal axis (axial
plane).

Fig. 4. (a) Resampled and aligned contour points from each slice are stacked
together in the same coordinate system (b) Off-surface points are added: original
surface points are in blue (second innermost layer), inside points are in green
(innermost layer) and two outside layers are in red and pink (second outermost
layer and outermost layer respectively). (c) Interpolated prostate surface.

was fitted to the resampled contour points to better demonstrate
these transformations, we only have the resampled points at this
stage.
Subsequently, the resampled and aligned contour points were
stacked by using the same X–Y–Z coordinate system. In this
way, a structured cloud of points was constructed [see Fig. 4(a)].
Next, off-surface points were added [see Fig. 4(b)]. Then, the
RBF surface fitting algorithm was applied [see Fig. 4(c)].
At the end of RBF interpolation aided with rigid-body registration, each prostate was represented by 30 evenly spaced
slices, with each slice containing points resampled at 6 degree
intervals placed radially with respect to the CoM of each slice.
Therefore, a total of 1800 points were placed on each prostate
model from either imaging modality.

TAO et al.: COMPARISON OF US- VERSUS MR-BASED 3-D PROSTATE SHAPES USING RADIAL BASIS FUNCTION INTERPOLATION

The interpolation process discussed earlier is crucial to building an SSM and to the statistical shape analysis in the next subsection as it allows for representing each prostate with a point
distribution model (PDM); this process has now allocated an
equal number of points evenly distributed in the z-direction and
across each XY plane to each prostate in each imaging modality. Thus, we did not perform the RBF interpolation aided with
rigid-body registration for mere visualization purposes; rather,
it has been used to generate methodically placed and consistent
contour points for each prostate in spite of the differences in orientation and slice gaps of the original manually placed contour
points. This processing greatly increases the data density along
the Z-axis, making the subsequent 3-D shape analysis feasible.

627

Fig. 5. (a) Superimposition of MR prostate average shape (in blue, or the
shorter shape) and US prostate average shape (in red, or the longer shape) in
sagittal view. (b) Superimposition of MR prostate average shape (in blue, or the
wider shape) and US prostate average shape (in red, or the narrower shape) in
axial view. Length, width and height are indicated by “L,” “W,” and “H”.

C. Implementation of SSMs
The SSM is a multivariate statistical approach to model data
with a PDM and analyze their variations with PCA [32]. It is
often combined with image search algorithms to perform image
segmentation [9], [16]. The details of implementation are given
below.
In the Section II-B, a PDM was constructed for each prostate
of both imaging modalities by using the RBF interpolation
with rigid-body registration. The 1800 points allocated to each
prostate are regarded as corresponding landmarks. Normally,
landmarks include points marking parts of the object with particular application-dependent significance such as the center of
urethra in a prostate US scan, or points marking applicationindependent items such as the highest point of a prostate model,
or other points that can be interpolated from points of the previous two types [32]. In medical applications, landmarks may be
segmented manually by clinical experts but this procedure can
be tedious and time consuming. Thus, in our work, the geometric
correspondence between landmarks was decided automatically:
points at the same radial position (in the XY plane) of 2-D slices
on the same length proportion (Z-axis) of each prostate were
considered to correspond to each other. A similar approach can
be found in [20], in which the so-called solid angles were used to
locate corresponding landmarks; points on the same solid angle
from the center of prostate were assumed to correspond to each
other. However, in our application, due to the lack of sample
points at the base and at the apex of the prostate caused by the
2-D nature of our imaging modalities, the prostate could not be
put in such a spherical coordinate system. Instead, we adopted
a cylindrical coordinate system and determined the correspondence of the landmarks through a similar parameterization. The
scaling, directly associated with volume, was preserved at this
stage because, as explained in Section II-B prostate volume provides an interesting parameter to compare between US and MR
imaging modalities.
After placing corresponding landmarks and aligning, we obtained the mean shape of all k prostates (with k = 40) for each
imaging modality by

x̄ =

k
1
xi
k i=1

(10)

with xi = (x1 , y1 , z1 , . . . , xj , yj, zj )T , which is the shape vector
of each prostate shape, constructed from coordinates of the j =
1800 landmark points.
Next, an eigen decomposition on the corresponding covariance matrix delivered 3j, principal modes of variation φm
(eigenvectors), and their respective variances λm (eigenvalues).
Then, it was possible to approximate every valid shape by a
weighted linear combination of the first c modes
xestim ate = x̄ + Pb

(11)

with P = [φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φc ] being the matrix composed of the
first c eigenvectors and b = [b1 , b2 , . . . ,bc ]T being the weight
vector.
The value of c was chosen so that the accumulated variance cm =1 λm reached a certain ratio r of the total variance
3j
m =1 λm . Commonly used values for r are between 0.9 and
0.98.
III. RESULTS
A. Average Shape Comparison
After performing RBF interpolation coupled with rigid-body
transformation and by applying (10) on the 40 groups of contour
data from each imaging modality, the average shapes for both US
and MR were obtained. The resulting PDMs obtained from MR
and US data are displayed together in Fig. 5; both models were
translated so that their CoM were located at (0, 0, 0) in the same
coordinate system. Four geometrical features were compared:
average volume, average length, average height, and average
width. For each feature, the ratio of the value corresponding
to the US data to the value corresponding to the MR data was
calculated as well. Length, height and width refer to the longest
possible distance between any two points in the Z, Y, and X
directions, respectively. The same coordinate system as defined
in Section II-A was used for model construction. The paired
Student’s t-test was applied to test for statistical significance of
the four measures. The tests were two sided by default and the
p-value threshold was set to be 0.05. The results are displayed
in Table II.
It can be observed that the volume of the average US shape
model is smaller than that of the MR average model by 1.4 mL.

628

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE II
GEOMETRY COMPARISON BETWEEN AVERAGE US AND MR SHAPE MODELS

US
MR
p-value
US/MR ratio

Average Volume

Average Length

Average Height

Average Width

36.5 mL
37.9 mL
0.55
0.96

38.40 mm
36.28 mm
0.06
1.06

33.53 mm
34.50 mm
0.24
0.97

46.13 mm
47.64 mm
0.26
0.97

Fig. 6. Differences in Euclidean distance (mm) to the CoM of the average
shape models between US and MR. Positive values indicate larger US distances.

However, the difference in average volumes is not statistically
significant. On the other hand, the US average model is longer
than that of the MR average model by 2.1 mm, whereas in terms
of width and height, the MR average model appears to be bigger
than the US average model by 1.5 mm and 0.97 mm, respectively. Although the differences in width, height, and length are
not statistically significant, the p-value for length is considerably
smaller than for the other two, implying a greater difference in
length between US and MR average models than in width and
in height. This appears to be logical as the ends of prostates in
both imaging modalities are particularly difficult to determine,
thus introducing a greater error. The US/MR average volume
ratio is 0.96.
The two average shape models were then compared by using
a color map to illustrate shape differences at more local levels;
Fig. 6 shows apex-anterior, base-anterior, and posterior views.
The Euclidean distances from each landmark to its model CoM,
which is located at (0, 0, 0) for both imaging modalities, were
first calculated. Then, for each pair of corresponding landmarks,
the distances calculated were compared and the differences were
mapped onto the color map. The comparison was carried out
with the MR model as the reference. Therefore, red, which
represents positive values, indicates areas where the US model
is larger compared to the MR model. Blue, which represents
negative values, indicates areas where the US model is smaller
compared to the MR model.
From the apex-anterior view, it can be concluded that the US
average shape is longer and flatter than the MR average shape.
From the apex-anterior view and the base-anterior view, it can
be observed that near the base and the apex of the prostate, US
contours are generally larger than MR contours particularly on

Fig. 7. Visualization of the first 5 modes in the US statistical shape model.
Modes 1, 2, 3, 5 are shown in the sagittal view and mode 4 is shown in the axial
view. The unit used is mm.
√ Blue (or darkest grey): average shape x̄;√red (or
lighter grey): x = x̄ + 2 λi φ i ; yellow (or lightest grey): x = x̄ − 2 λi φ i .

the anterior side, reaching a maximum difference of 2 mm. In
the posterior areas, however, MR and US average models do not
show significant differences.
B. PCA of Shape Vectors
By continuing to apply the analysis procedure presented in
Section II-C, a PCA decomposition was performed on the two
sets of shape vectors. The first 15 eigen modes of each model
were retained. While for the US shape model the first 15 modes
represented 97.2% of its variance, for the MR-shape model, the
first 15 modes represented 95.1% of its variance.
The first five modes of each model are visualized in Fig. 7 in
order to provide a more direct impression of what these modes
represent. In order to visualize the influence of each mode on
the shape model, the following operation was performed [16],
[32]:
√
with i = 1, 2, . . . , 5.
(12)
x = x̄ ± 2 λi φi ,
In (12), λi is the variance for each mode i and φi is the ith
eigenvector.
The original average shape is plotted
in blue, x =
√
√
x̄ + 2 λi φi is plotted in red, and x = x̄ − 2 λi φi is plotted in
yellow.

TAO et al.: COMPARISON OF US- VERSUS MR-BASED 3-D PROSTATE SHAPES USING RADIAL BASIS FUNCTION INTERPOLATION

Fig. 8. Visualization of the first 5 modes in the MR statistical shape model.
Modes 1, 2, 3, 5 are shown in the sagittal view and mode 4 is shown in the axial
view. The unit used is mm.
√ Blue (or darkest grey): average shape x̄;√red (or
lighter grey): x = x̄ + 2 λi φ i ; yellow (or lightest grey): x = x̄ − 2 λi φ i .

In the US model (see Fig. 7), the first mode represents variations in the diameter of the prostate shape in the XY plane, while
the second mode represents the variations in the length along
the X-axis of the prostate. Modes 3, 4, and 5 appear to represent
more localized effects on the shape: modes 3 and 5 introduce
variations at the base and the apex of the prostate while mode
4 acts directly on the posterior surface of the prostate. It is interesting to note that with mode 4, the prostate model is able
to exhibit different degrees of drooping; the presumed effect of
insertion of the US probe into the rectum is well captured by
mode 4.
In the MR model (see Fig. 8), the first two modes appear to be
less decoupled than those in the US model. Mode 1 appears to
represent a combination of variations in length along the Z-axis
and a rotation around the X-axis. Mode 2 seems to represent a
combination of variations in diameter in the XY plane and also
a rotation around the X-axis. Modes 3, 4, and 5 show greater
similarities with the results from the US model: modes 3 and 5
represent local variations close to the base and the apex of the
prostate, while mode 4 once again corresponds to the different
degrees of drooping. Since in MR imaging no probe was inserted
in the rectum, the results in Fig. 8 imply that prostates naturally
have different degrees of drooping.
C. In-Group and Cross-Group SSM Comparison
Using the Generalization Measure
In the next two sections, the US SSM and the MR SSM are
compared and evaluated using two measures, the generalization
measure and the specificity measure, to examine their interchangeability. In order to take into account the interobserver
variability, a total of three oncologists were involved in the segmentation process on the same set of US/MR images. By doing
this, we will see what happens if we use data from one imag-

629

ing modality to build an SSM and then use it to recreate the
shapes from another imaging modality. Therefore, four cases
are considered:
1) Use US contour data for SSM construction and approximate the shapes obtained from US imaging modality.
2) Use MR contour data for SSM construction and approximate the shapes obtained from MR imaging modality.
3) Use US contour data for SSM construction and approximate the shapes obtained from MR imaging modality.
4) Use MR contour data for SSM construction and approximate the shapes obtained from US imaging modality.
In order to quantify and compare the performance of the two
SSMs in question in their respective scenarios, we used the previously mentioned two measures, which were first introduced
in [33] as metrics to compare shape models obtained from different registration and alignment methods. Here, we use them
to see how predictive and pertinent the shape models obtained
from US and MR imaging modalities are, both within their
own population group and within the other population group.
First, the generalization measure was used, which measures the
ability of an SSM model to provide a good fit under unseen
circumstances. It follows a “leave-one-out” approach where
s – 1 samples of a total of s samples are used to produce an
SSM while the remaining sample is used as a test sample. From
(11), we have
b = PT (x − x̄)

(13)

as P is orthonormal [16]. The estimate of the left-out shape is
calculated with (11), while the vector b is calculated in (13) and
x̄ and P are calculated from the s – 1 samples. The vector x
in (13) represents the shape vector of the left-out sample. The
average error between the estimate of the left-out shape and the
true left-out shape over the entire set of trials is quantified by
the measure G as
G=

M
1  2

M i=1 G i

(14)

and
2G i = |xi − xi |

2

(15)

where M is the total number of shapes (40 in this study), xi the
left-out training shape, and xi is its estimate by the SSM built
from the rest of the population, and ε2G i represents the sum-ofsquares of approximation errors. An SSM that has a lower G
value is better in terms of approximating unseen shapes whereas
an SSM that has a higher G value implies less capability of taking
on unseen shapes [33].
Therefore, if we regard the entire 40 prostate samples as one
population, the s – 1 samples can come from either the US
modality or the MR modality, and the same is true for the leftout sample. As a result, the aforementioned four scenarios were
produced in order to see how the SSM of US and MR shapes
were validated both in-group and cross-group. The measure G
results from the three oncologists’ data are given in Table III, in
which model imaging modality denotes the imaging modality
from which the s – 1 samples were taken and test imaging

630

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE III
RESULTS FROM THE GENERALIZATION MEASURE APPLIED TO IN-GROUP AND CROSS-GROUP APPROXIMATIONS
(ALL G MEASURES HAVE THE UNIT OF 10 3 mm 2 )
Case
1
2
3
4

Model Imaging Modality

Test Imaging Modality

G measure Observer 1

G measure Observer 2

G measure Observer 3

US
MR
US
MR

US
MR
MR
US

1.7
2.1
2.5
2.2

2.3
2.9
3.6
3.5

2.7
3.6
4.2
3.7

modality denotes the imaging modality from which the test
sample (the left-out sample) was taken. The first 15 modes of
each model were used.
The results show that US models (Case 1) perform better
than MR models (Case 2) in-group, with a smaller average G
value across all three observers. This is not surprising as we
showed in Section III-B that the first two US modes are much
more decoupled than the first two MR modes. When it comes to
cross-group approximation, MR models perform slightly better
than US models. The MR-US (Case 4) averages are inferior
to that of the US-MR (Case 3) consistently across all three
observers.
Next, the squared errors ε2G i in (15) for each prostate are
broken down in Figs. 9–11 for all four combinations. For brevity,
we are only showing data from one of the observers, which is
representative. The X-axis represents the prostate number and
the Y axis represents the corresponding ε2G i values.
As displayed in Fig. 9, the MR prostate shapes have several samples that are associated with much higher ε2G i values.
The samples that present the highest ε2G i values include prostate
numbers 4, 17, 24, and 39. Although suspected to be outliers at
first, we reperformed the segmentation of the prostate samples in
question and the results were unchanged. Therefore, in the MR
imaging modality there exist shapes that are harder to be modeled by the obtained MR SSM. In the case of testing US samples
with both US and MR models, the US and MR SSM perform
similarly (see Fig. 10). They both have difficulties estimating a
certain number of shapes. In the case of testing MR shapes with
both US and MR models, interesting similarities can be found
(see Fig. 11). The ε2G i values of these two scenarios follow each
other much more closely across prostates than the previous case
where the US shapes were tested as samples. Overall, while
the US SSM model performs better than MR in-group, they
have comparable results in cross-group modeling. Cross-group
results also appear to be reasonable when compared with ingroup results for both modalities (Case 1 compared to Case 4
and Case 2 compared to Case 3, respectively, in Table III).
D. In-Group and Cross-Group SSM Comparison
Using the Specificity Measure
The specificity measure quantifies the ability of an SSM
to generate only valid shapes [33]. The specificity value is
evaluated by generating a test set comprised of a large number of random shapes by applying (11) while restricting each
parameter bi of the vector b to follow a normal distribution
with zero mean and λi standard deviation. The squared error

ε2S i between each generated shape and the closest match of the
training set is then calculated according to
ε2S i = |xj − x i | .
2

(16)

And the specific value S is the average of all squared errors
S=

N
1  2
ε .
N i=1 G i

(17)

In (16) and (17), xi is the random shape and xj its closest shape in the training set. N, the number of random shapes
generated, is set to 10 000 in this study.
As with the generalization measure, four scenarios were taken
into account for both in-group and cross-group approximation:
US training set and US test set; MR training set and MR test set;
US training set and MR test set; and MR training set and US
test set. With 15 modes, all combinations showed stabilized S
measures and the corresponding results are shown in Table IV.
As can be observed from Table IV, US SSM shows a better
ability to generate valid shapes within group, as the S values
in the first row are consistently smaller than those in the second row. This may be due to the MR SSM’s less decoupled
modes as shown in Section III-B. In comparison to the obvious superiority of US in-group S measure over that of MR, two
out of three observers show smaller differences in cross-group
comparisons: differences between US and MR for observers
2 and 3 are −2.8 ×103 and −1.3 ×103 mm2 , respectively,
in in-group performance, while the cross-group differences are
1.5 ×103 and −0.6 ×103 mm2 , respectively. This shows that
the cross-group performance between the two modalities is more
comparable.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Prostate Volume and Shape
The volume ratio and geometric characteristics observed
in this study are comparable to the results found in the
literature. Whether in [34] and [35], where pre-implant US and
post-implant MR contours were compared, or in [20], where
post-implant US and post-implant MR contours were compared,
the US/MR ratio was reported to be relatively stable, varying
from 0.90 to 0.95, and is comparable to the ratio of 0.96 found
in this study. In the aforementioned studies, however, degraded
imaging conditions for both US and MR were reported due to
implanted seeds [20], which did not exist in our study. As we
only used pre-implant images for contouring, prostate edema,

TAO et al.: COMPARISON OF US- VERSUS MR-BASED 3-D PROSTATE SHAPES USING RADIAL BASIS FUNCTION INTERPOLATION

631

Fig. 9. In-group error comparison. The ε2G i between MR-based models and MR test samples are plotted in red (or darker grey) whereas the errors between
US-based models and US test samples are plotted in blue (or lighter grey).

Fig. 10. Cross-group error comparison. The ε2G i between MR-based models and US samples are plotted in red (or darker grey) whereas the errors between
US-based models and US samples are plotted in blue (or lighter grey).

Fig. 11. Cross-group error comparison. The ε2G i between US-based models and MR samples are plotted in red (or darker grey) whereas the errors between
MR-based models and MR samples are plotted in blue (or darkest grey).

TABLE IV
IN-GROUP AND CROSS-GROUP SPECIFICITY MEASURES WITH 15 MODES FROM THREE OBSERVERS
(ALL S MEASURES HAVE THE UNIT OF 10 3 mm 2 )
Training Imaging Modality
US
MR
US
MR

Test Imaging Modality

S Measure Observer 1

S Measure Observer 2

S Measure Observer 3

US
MR
MR
US

2.5
3.5
4.5
3.0

3.6
6.4
8.8
7.3

4.2
5.5
6.4
7.0

which could have influenced the results reported in studies involving post-implant images, did not have any influence.
In terms of the prostate shape, similar results were obtained
in this study as were found by Smith et al. [20]. In their study,
by comparing post-implant US contours obtained from a 3-D
TRUS device and post-implant MR contours, the US contours
were reported to be longer and flatter than the MR contours by
1.1 and 2 mm, respectively. In our study, the US average model
exceeded the MR average model in length and height by 2.1

and 1 mm, respectively. In both studies, the US contours were
found to be larger than the MR contours near the base on the
sides and the anterior surface of the gland. The relative flatness
and increase in length of the US contours can be explained
by the insertion of the TRUS probe, which presses against the
rectum and the prostate. The difference in shape can also be
attributed to the different imaging requirements of US and MR,
since standard MR bore could not accommodate a patient in
the lithotomy position, which is required for TRUS imaging.

632

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

This introduces therefore different patient positioning, and thus
difference in prostate orientation and shape [19]. Although there
is a three-week gap between US and MR scan, we expect the
influence of rectal and bladder filling difference to be minimal,
as all patients were instructed to have a comfortably full bladder
and empty rectum before each scan session.
As far as the indentation is concerned, Smith et al. [20] found
very prominent deformation of the inferior half of the prostate
in the US contours compared to the MR contours, which was not
observed in our study. This difference is most likely associated
with differences in insertion angle and y-axis positioning of the
US probe in the rectum. Also, Smith et al. [20] showed that the
undeformed prostate imaged by MR was convex. This convex
shape can be observed in our Fig. 5 and, more importantly, the
natural drooping effect was made evident in our PCA analysis on MR shape vectors in Fig. 8, where different degrees of
indentation were created with the fourth mode.
B. US and MR SSMs
In this study, a new method was used for landmark placement (RBF interpolation combined with rigid-body registration) in order to go from 2-D slices to 3-D shapes. RBF were
used especially to overcome several obstacles encountered in
SSM building: insufficient sampling along the Z-axis, different
interslice distances between the US and MR modalities, and
different number of points representing each prostate shape.
Hodge et al. [16] used a 3-D TRUS imaging system to directly
obtain volumetric images based on which contouring was performed. In this way, contours that are consistently and equally
distributed in space were obtained. When it comes to the correspondence of points located on corresponding slices, Hodge
et al. [16] tested several labeling methods. In our study, one
of the tested methods (equally spaced rotational samples) was
applied, which had been shown to provide accurate results and
easy implementation. Instead of breaking 3-D shapes or image
volumes into corresponding slices and then into corresponding
points for labeling as was done in [16] and the present study,
other approaches include the iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm introduced by Besl and McKay [36] and the softassign
procrustes introduced by Rangarajan et al. [37], which operate
directly in 3-D space and do not require equal numbers of points
between two models. The method used in this study takes into
consideration the physical meaning behind numerical models
by aligning cranial–caudal axis of each prostate to the same
axis in a uniform coordinate system and adjusting the orientation of the axial plane. For the purpose of the current study,
it was found sufficient to apply the same correspondence and
labeling procedure to both imaging modality groups, despite
the numerical errors (assumed to be identical for both imaging modalities) that may be introduced during this processing.
Nonetheless, other correspondence methods can be applied in
future studies [33] to see whether the results in the current study
exhibit a dependence on correspondence and labeling methods.
By the application of the generalization measure and the
specificity measure on both SSMs, we found that the US
SSM performed better than the MR SSM in both measures,

particularly in-group and slightly cross-group. However the
cross-group performance is comparable between the two modalities and remain reasonable when compared to in-group G and S
measures, indicating interchangeability between the two imaging modalities. The prostate SSM has traditionally been created
from the US imaging modality [9], [16]; therefore there does
not exist, to the authors’ knowledge, MR prostate SSM in the
literature with which we could compare our results. However,
MR images have been used for SSM building for brain structures [38], [39] and cardiac structures [17], [23] where they
have proven effective. The inferior model quality of the MR
SSM could be due to the fact that the oncologists participating
in this study have more experience dealing with US images.
This may result in the findings in [19], where the intraobserver
variability is found to be lower for US modality in midgland
slices as well as the prostate volume, the better consistency of
which can give the US SSM a more robust performance. Also
the difference in imaging resolution (0.18 mm for US images
and 0.44 mm for MR images in both x and y-directions) is advantageous for the US imaging modality. Finally, it could also be
due to the correspondence/labeling method applied. As shown
in [16], different labeling methods do influence the G and S
values of one particular SSM, but since we fixed the labeling
method for both imaging modalities, the next step of research
can be to study whether they are equally influenced by different
correspondence and labeling methods. Another improvement
that can be made in future studies is to use contouring results
obtained from the same oncologists involved in this study but
over a certain number of repetitions, in order to take into account
intraobserver effects.
C. SSM Methodology and Independent Component Analysis
The SSM was chosen to represent prostate shapes and as
a tool for shape comparison partly because of its popularity
and success to be combined with image search algorithms for
contour segmentations. Since the objective of our study is to
provide insight into the feasibility of coupled US-MR segmentation methods based on SSM, it makes sense to compare the
SSM shape models constructed from the data pertaining to these
two modalities. Also, as can be seen from the previous analysis, the SSM can not only be used to compare prostate shapes
across different imaging modalities, but also to visualize how
the shapes vary within the same imaging modality through PCA
eigenvectors. The RBF interpolation preceding the SSM modeling is a necessary step. More than a simple visualization tool,
it brings all prostate shapes to a unified 1800 data point representation and increases the data sample density. However, this
approach is not without its limitations. The PCA associated
with conventional SSM building is designed to address linear
(or slightly nonlinear) data and assumes a Gaussian distribution
of the data points. Therefore, in this study, we also assume the
data points obtained from both imaging modalities are normally
distributed. Another limitation is that PCA returns eigenvectors
that represent global deformations [40]. Since more localized
deformations would be likely to be included in eigenshapes describing less variance, they are likely to be ignored by PCA.

TAO et al.: COMPARISON OF US- VERSUS MR-BASED 3-D PROSTATE SHAPES USING RADIAL BASIS FUNCTION INTERPOLATION

However, PCA is able to rank the order of dominant eigenshape
components, which is relevant for our analysis as they show
the most dominant deformations that exist in both US and MR
prostate shapes.
On the other hand, independent component analysis (ICA)
originally developed to separate mixed audio signals into independent sources, is getting more and more popular in areas such
as feature extraction, signal processing and image processing
[41]. It has the potential to be combined with SSM [40] and
provide an alternative method to obtain deformation components. It does not need the assumption of Gaussian distribution
of data, and it is able to exploit higher order moments of the
statistical distributions. If used in shape analysis, ICA is able
to capture better local deformations compared with PCA, as it
maximizes the independence between the non-Gaussian component vectors [40]. However, the standard ICA algorithm does
not sort the components in the order of variance. An appropriate
ordering scheme has to be carefully investigated before ICA can
be applied to shape models for dimension reduction, which is
not in the scope of this current study. However, ICA and PCA
can be potentially combined to provide both global and local deformation information. It is an option we will try to explore to
improve our MR SSM results in future studies. Since compared
with US PCA results, the MR PCA results show less decoupled
principal modes, we have a reason to suspect that the MR shape
in this study might not follow a Gaussian distribution. Therefore, our next step will include applying ICA to the MR data set
to see if better decoupled components can be obtained.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, TRUS and MR pre-implant prostate scans for 40
patients were segmented by three experienced oncologists. The
2-D contours from both imaging modalities were interpolated
into 3-D shapes by combining radial basis function interpolation and principal axis rigid registration. The placement of
corresponding landmarks was accomplished by geometric registration. By comparing the mean shapes of the resultant US
and MR SSMs, geometric characteristics consistent with those
reported in prostate implant literature were found. The effect
of the US probe on prostate drooping was not readily apparent
from inspecting the mean shape. While we expected the prostate
drooping to be solely due to the US probe insertion, the PCA
on the MR data suggests that prostates naturally possess varying degrees of drooping. Therefore, the drooping demonstrated
in US shapes is a combined effect of US probe insertion and
prostate’s natural drooping. Statistical models based on MR and
US contours were tested using the generalization and specificity measures. It was found that, in this group of contours, US
SSM models perform in general better than MR SSM models.
However, we believe that there is relatively good compatibility between US and MR imaging modalities in terms of SSM,
due to the comparable generalization measure (G) and specificity measure (S) during cross-group analysis. Another reason
is since drooping naturally exists in prostates, it can be taken
into account by the MR SSM. In future studies, different correspondence/labeling methods can be used and oncologists with

633

more MR image segmentation experience can be recruited in
order to further investigate why the US model and MR model
had different performances regarding the used metrics in this
study. The possibility of incorporating ICA into the shape analysis together with PCA for better SSM construction will also be
explored.
REFERENCES
[1] American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures 2011. Atlanta:
American Cancer Society, 2011.
[2] Canadian Cancer Society’s Advisory Committee on Cancer Statistics.
Canadian Cancer Statistics 2011. Toronto, ON: Canadian Cancer Society,
2011.
[3] B. J. Davis, E. M. Horwitz, W. R. Lee, J. M. Crook, G. S. Merrick,
W. M. Butler, P. D. Grimm, N. N. Stone, L. Potters, A. L. Zietman,
and M. J. Zelefsky, “American Brachytherapy Society consensus guidelines for transrectal ultrasound guided permanent prostate brachytherapy,”
Brachytherapy, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 6–10, Jan./Feb. 2012.
[4] O. Tanaka, S. Hayashi, M. Matsuo, M. Nakano, Y. Kubota, S. Maeda, K.
Ohtakara, T. Deguchi, and H. Hoshi, “MRI-based preplanning in low-doserate prostate brachytherapy,” Radiother. Oncol., vol. 88, pp. 115–120, Jul.
2008.
[5] M. P. van Gellekom, M. A. Moreland, J. J. Battermann, and J. J. Lagendijk,
“MRI-guided prostate brachytherapy with single needle method—A planning study,” Radiother. Oncol., vol. 71, pp. 327–332, Jun. 2004.
[6] A. V. D’Amico, R. Whittington, S. B. Malkowicz, D. Schultz, K. Blank,
G. A. Broderick, J. E. Tomaszewski, A. A. Renshaw, I. Kaplan, C. J.
Beard, and A. Wein, “Biochemical outcome after radical prostatectomy,
external beam radiation therapy, or interstitial radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer,” JAMA, vol. 280, no. 11, pp. 969–974,
Sep. 1998.
[7] S. Oguro, J. Tokuda, H. Elhawary, S. Haker, R. Kikinis, C. M. Tempany,
and N. Hata, “MRI signal intensity based B-spline nonrigid registration for
pre- and intraoperative imaging during prostate brachytherapy,” J. Magn.
Reson. Imag., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1052–1058, Nov. 2009.
[8] D. Shen, Y. Zhan, and C. Davatzkikos, “Segmentation of prostate boundaries from ultrasound images using statistical shape model,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 539–551, Apr. 2003.
[9] Y. Zhan and D. Shen, “Deformable segmentation of 3-D ultrasound
prostate images using statistical texture matching method,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 256–272, Mar. 2006.
[10] J. Li, S. S. Mohamed, M. M. A. Salama, and G. H. Freeman, “Prostate
tissue texture feature extraction for cancer recognition in TRUS images
using wavelet decomposition,” in Proc. ICIAR (LNCS 4633), 2007, pp.
993–1004.
[11] H. M. Ladak, F. Mao, Y. Wang, D. B. Downey, D. A. Steinman, and A.
Fenster, “Prostate boundary segmentation from 2D ultrasound images,”
Med. Phys., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1777–1788, Aug. 2000.
[12] Y. Wang, H. N. Cardinal, D. Downey, and A. Fenster, “Semiautomatic
three-dimensional segmentation of the prostate using two-dimensional
ultrasound images,” Med. Phys., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 887–897, May 2003.
[13] S. Badiei, S. Salcudean, J. Varah, and W. Morris, “Prostate segmentation
in 2D ultrasound images using image warping and ellipse fitting,” in Proc.
MICCAI (LNCS 4191), 2006, pp. 17–24.
[14] S. Mahdavi and S. Salcudean, “3D prostate segmentation based on ellipsoid fitting, image tapering and warping,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Int. IEEE
EMBS Conf., 2008, pp. 2988–2991.
[15] T. Heimann and H. P. Meinzer, “Statistical shape models for 3D medical
image segmentation: A review,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 13, pp. 543–563,
Aug. 2009.
[16] A. C. Hodge, A. Fenster, D. B. Downey, and H. M. Ladak, “Prostate
boundary segmentation from ultrasound images using 2D active shape
models: Optimization and extension to 3D,” Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed., vol. 84, pp. 99–113, Dec. 2006.
[17] H. C. van Assen, M. G. Danilouchkine, M. S. Dirksen, J. H. C. Reiber, and
B. P. F. Lelieveldt, “A 3-D active shape model driven by fuzzy inference:
Application to caridiac CT and MR,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 595–605, Sep. 2008.
[18] N. Chowdhury, J. Chappelow, R. Toth, S. Kim, S. Hahn, N. Vapiwala,
H. Lin, S. Both, and A. Madabhushi, “Concurrent segmentation of the
prostate on MRI and CT via linked statistical shape models for radiotherapy planning,” Med. Phys., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 2214–2228, Apr. 2012.

634

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

[19] D. Liu, N. Usmani, S. Ghosh, W. Kamal, J. Perderson, N. Pervez,
D. Yee, B. Danielson, A. Murtha, J. Amanie, and R. Sloboda, “Comparison
of prostate volume, shape, and contouring variability determined from
preimplant magnetic resonance and transrectal ultrasound images,”
Brachytherapy, vol. 11, pp. 284–891, Jul./Aug. 2012.
[20] W. L. Smith, C. Lewis, G. Bauman, G. Rodrigues, D. D’Souza, R. Ash,
D. Ho, V. Venkatesan, D. Downey and A. Fenster, “Prostate volume contouring: A 3D analysis of segmentation using 3DTRUS, CT, and MR,” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1238–1247, Mar. 2007.
[21] D. Cool, D. Downey, J. Izawa, J. Chin, and A. Fenster, “3D prostate model
formation from non-parallel 2D ultrasound biopsy images,” Med. Image
Anal., vol. 10, pp. 875–882, Dec. 2006.
[22] J. C. Carr, W. R. Fright, and R. K. Beatson, “Surface interpolation with
radial basis functions for medical imaging,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol.
16, no. 1, pp. 96–107, Feb. 1997.
[23] W. Qiang, Z. Pan, C. Chun, and B. Jiajun, “Surface rendering for parallel
slices of contours from medical imaging,” Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 32–37, Jan./Feb. 2007.
[24] J. Pu, D. S. Palk, X. Meng, J. E. Roos, and G. D. Rubin, “Shape ‘break-andrepair’ strategy and its application to automated medical image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 115–124,
Jan./Feb. 2011.
[25] O. Tanaka, S. Hayashi, M. Matsuo, K. Sakurai, M. Nakano, S. Maeda,
K. Kajita, T. Deguchi, and H. Hoshi, “Comparison of MRI-based
and CT/MRI fusion-based postimplant dosimetry analysis of prostate
brachytherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 66, no. 2, pp.
597–602, Oct. 2006.
[26] J. C. Carr, R. K. Beatson, J. B. Cherrie, T. J. Mitchell, W. R. Fright, and
T. R. Evans, “Reconstruction and representation of 3D objects with radial
basis functions,” in Proc. SIGGRAPH, 2001, pp. 67–76.
[27] G. E. Fasshauer, Meshfree Approximation Methods with MATLAB. Singapore: World Scientific, 2007.
[28] I. Babuska and J. M. Melenk, “The partition of unity method,” Int. J.
Numer. Anal. Eng., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 727–758, Feb. 1997.
[29] H. Wendland, “Fast evaluation of radial basis functions: Methods based
on partition of unity,” in Proc. Approx. Theory X: Wavelets, Splines Appl.,
vol. 473, pp. 473–483, 2002.
[30] I. L. Dryden and K. V. Marida, Statistical Shape Analysis. New York, NY:
Wiley, 1998.
[31] N. M. Alpert, J. F. Bradshaw, D. Kennedy, and J. A. Correia, “The principal
axes transformation—Method for image registration,” J. Nucl. Med., vol.
31, pp. 1717–1722, Oct. 1990.

[32] T. F. Cootes, C. J. Taylor, D. H. Cooper, and J. Graham, “Active shape
models—Their training and application,” Comput. Vis. Image Und., vol.
61, no. 1, pp. 38–59, Jan. 1995.
[33] R. H. Davies, “Learning shape: Optimal models for analysing shape variability,” Ph.D. dissertation, Div. of Imaging Sci. Biomed. Eng., Univ.
Manchester, Manchester, UK, 2002.
[34] P. W. McLaughlin, V. Narayana, D. G. Drake, B. M. Miller, L. Marsh, J.
Chan, R. Gonda, R. J. Winfield, and P. L. Roberson, “Comparison of MRI
pulse sequence in defining prostate volume after permanent implantation,”
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 54, pp. 703–711, Nov. 2002.
[35] D. Taussky, L. Austen, A. Toi, I. Yeung, T. Williams, S. Pearson, M.
McLean, G. Pond, and J. Crook, “Sequential evaluation of prostate edema
after permanent seed prostate brachytherapy using CT-MRI fusion,” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 62, pp. 974–980, Jul. 2005.
[36] P. J. Besl and N. D. McKay, “A method for registration of 3-D shapes,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 239–256, Feb.
1992.
[37] A. Rangarajan, H. Chui, and F. L. Bookstein, “The softassign procrustes
matching algorithm,” in Proc. IPMI, 1997, pp. 29–42.
[38] J. Klemencic, J. P. W. Pluim, M. A. Viergever, H. G. Schnack, and V.
Valencic, “Non-rigid registration based active appearance models for 3D
medical image segmentation,” J. Imaging Sci. Technol., vol. 48, pp. 166–
171, Mar./Apr. 2004.
[39] Z. Zhao, S. R. Aylward, and E. K. Teoh, “A novel 3D partitioned active
shape model for segmentation of brain MR images,” in Proc. MICCAI,
LNCS 3749, 2005, pp. 221–228.
[40] M. Uzumcu, A. Frangi, J. Reiber, and B. Lelieveldt, “Independent component analysis in statistical shape models,” in Proc. SPIE, 2003, vol. 5032,
pp. 375–383.
[41] G. Naik and D. Kumar, “An overview of independent component analysis
and its applications,” Informatica, no. 35, pp. 63–81, 2011.

Authors, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

