2646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

A Damper Driven Robotic End-Point Manipulator
for Functional Rehabilitation Exercises After Stroke
Ard J. Westerveld, Bernard Johan Aalderink, Wouter Hagedoorn, Martijn Buijze, Alfred C. Schouten,
and Herman van der Kooij∗

Abstract—Stroke survivors may benefit from robotic assistance
for relearning of functional movements. Current assistive devices
are either passive, limited to only two dimensions or very powerful.
However, for reach training, weight compensation and a little assistance with limited power is sufficient. We designed and evaluated
a novel three-dimensional robotic manipulator, which is able to
support the arm weight and assist functional reaching movements.
Key points of the design are a damper-based drive train, giving an
inherently safe system and its compact and lightweight design. The
system is force actuated with a bandwidth of up to 2.3 Hz, which is
sufficient for functional arm movements. Maximal assistive forces
are 15 N for the up/down and forward/backward directions and
10 N for the left/right direction. Force tracking errors are smaller
than 1.5 N for all axes and the total weight of the robot is 25 kg.
Furthermore, the device has shown its benefit for increasing reaching distance in a single-case study with a stroke subject. The newly
developed system has the technical ability to assist the arm during
movement, which is a prerequisite for successful training of stroke
survivors. Therapeutic effects of the applied assistance need to be
further evaluated. However, with its inherent safety and ease of use,
this newly developed system even has the potential for home-based
therapeutic training after stroke.
Index Terms—biomechatronics, end effectors, patient rehabilitation, rehabilitation robotics, robot control.

I. INTRODUCTION
OBOTIC systems have found their way into rehabilitation
practice. Although the exact mechanisms underlying improvement of function after training with robotic assistance are
still unclear, several studies have shown benefits of the use of
robotic devices for movement therapy after stroke [11]. Robotic-

R

Manuscript received October 14, 2013; revised April 28, 2013; accepted May
6, 2014. Date of publication May 19, 2014; date of current version September
16, 2014. Asterisk indicate corresponding author.
A. J. Westerveld is with the Department of Biomechanical Engineering,
MIRA Institute for Biomedical Technology and Technical Medicine, University of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands (e-mail: a.j.westerveld@
utwente.nl).
B. J. Aalderink, W. Hagedoorn, and M. Buijze are with the Demcon Advanced Mechatronics, 7521 PH Enschede, The Netherlands (e-mail:
benno.aalderink@demcon.nl; wouter.hagedoorn@demcon.nl; martijn.buijze@
demcon.nl).
A. C. Schouten is with the Department of Biomechanical Engineering,
MIRA Institute for Biomedical Technology and Technical Medicine, University of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands, and also with the
Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands (e-mail:
a.c.schouten@tudelft.nl).
∗ H. Van Der Kooij is with the Department of Biomechanical Engineering,
MIRA Institute for Biomedical Technology and Technical Medicine, University of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands, and also with the
Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands (e-mail:
h.vanderkooij@utwente.nl).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2325532

aided therapy gives similar results as a conventional therapy [12]
and robotic manipulators facilitate more intensive training and
objective measurements [13], without the need of a therapist
being continuously present. Influenced by these positive results,
more and more devices are being developed for training of both
upper and lower extremity movement. Recently, a Swiss randomized clinical trial showed that robotic therapy for the arm
can give a significantly larger improvement compared to the
conventional therapy [14]. This is a promising result, although
the costs currently hamper the clinical use [15]. Therefore, more
simple and affordable robotic devices are desirable for rehabilitation practice.
Three recent reviews [16]–[18] provide an extensive overview
of upper extremity rehabilitation robotics. Most of these devices
are academic prototypes and not commercially available. A distinction in mechanical design can be made between end-point
manipulators like MEMOS [19] and InMotion ARM [20] on
one side and exoskeleton systems, like Armeo Power [21] on
the other side. Exoskeletons follow the natural arm anatomy and
can deliver joint specific assistance. However, with exoskeletons, proper alignment between joint axes and exoskeleton axes
is crucial, requiring time and experienced operators. Passive
alignment systems have been proposed to prevent misalignment
[2], [22], but will always increase the complexity and cost of
the device. Furthermore, the exoskeleton should provide large
shoulder torques to compensate for gravitational forces due to
the arm and the exoskeleton itself. End-point manipulators, in
general, have a more simple mechanical structure. Typically,
these devices have a single connection with the human arm and,
therefore, cannot assist individual joints.
Existing upper extremity devices can also be categorized according to the amount of assistance (e.g., number of degrees of
freedom, actuator power, controllability) they are able to provide, see Fig. 1. There exist very powerful high-end (mostly
exoskeleton) devices on the one side and passive devices on the
other side. Examples of powerful high-end devices are Armeo
Power [21], CADEN-7 [7], and MIME [23]. These devices share
properties like large work range, strong motors, and fast actuators. Some of these devices are suitable for movement assistance
and for diagnosis using system identification techniques [24].
These techniques need imposed perturbations of the arm, which
leads to increasing demands on the system. Some systems are
purposely built with this application in mind [8], [25]–[27]. Examples of passive devices are the Dampace [2], Armeo Boom
[28], and Armeo Spring [29]. These devices mainly counteract
the gravitational force acting on the arm and allow users to use
their remaining muscle capacity to move their arm without the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Ease of donning

WESTERVELD et al.: DAMPER DRIVEN ROBOTIC END-POINT MANIPULATOR

2647

MEMOS
Armeo Boom

MIME

Haptic Master

InMotion ARM

NeReBot

Dampace

CAREX

Armeo Spring

Armeo Power

LIMPACT

CADEN-7

Provided assistance
Fig. 1. Overview of existing commercial arm rehabilitation devices, arranged by their provided assistance (like number of degrees of freedom, actuator power,
controllability) and ease of donning. There exist a gap in the middle, for a device with simple donning/doffing and the ability to both provide arm weight
compensation and provide some guidance forces to the human arm. Images of devices reprinted with permission from [1]–[10].

Cam

β

l2

β

l2

Cable

load of gravity. In addition, several cable-based systems have
been developed to move the arm [3], [6].
Another important difference between existing devices is the
control architecture. Some devices (like MIME) are position
controlled. These devices are very stiff and move the arm in
a certain position, which has been shown less beneficial for
therapy [30]. Other devices are impedance controlled (Inmotion
ARM, ARMin) which means that they apply a force to guide
the arm based on a measured deviation from a desired position
or trajectory. A third category is of admittance-controlled devices (e.g., Haptic Master). In admittance control, interaction
forces are measured and used to control the speed of the actuators such that the user perceives a certain virtual (haptic)
environment.
For rehabilitation purposes, currently there exists a gap between the high-end active devices and the passive devices. A
low-power assistive device with a 3-D workspace can fill this
gap. Thereby allowing for functional task training, when the device is kept inherently safe and easy to operate by a nonexpert,
possibly even at home.
Arm weight compensation already has been shown to be beneficial for rehabilitation after stroke [31]–[33]. However, for
some patients weight compensation alone is not enough to complete certain reaching tasks, especially early after stroke. A little
extra active guidance in the movement direction additional to
gravity support may help these people in completing reaching
tasks, which makes therapy much more rewarding. Assistance
of reaching tasks does not necessarily require high actuation
forces. A small force guiding the patient in the right direction
would already be sufficient. A device capable of both counteracting gravitational force and supplying assistive forces in
three directions would in potential be a great therapeutic tool to
improve reaching movements after stroke.
To fill the gap, we developed a new lightweight active therapeutic device (ATD). This paper presents the design and evaluation of this novel three-dimensional end-point manipulator for
use in functional training of reaching tasks after stroke. Key
features of the system are the ability to provide both gravity
support and apply relatively small guiding forces. In addition,
the system is inherently safe, simple to install and easy to oper-

l1

load
l1
load

α

y
γ

α

Clock
spring

z x
10cm

Fig. 2. Overview of ATD system. The top left pane shows the ATD and
its range of motion (gray lines). The top right pane schematically shows the
passive gravity compensation mechanism. Interior CAD drawings, end-point
gimbal, and user interaction are shown in the bottom panes from left to right.

ate by a nonexpert. The design is relatively simple in order to
keep the costs low and, therefore, has the potential to make the
final step to clinical or even home use. This will be a big step
toward intensive after-stroke therapy and effective rehabilitation
outcome.
II. HARDWARE DESIGN
A. Specifications
The ATD is a training system suited for training of either the
left or the right arm of a patient, see Fig. 2. Table I lists the
key specifications of the ATD system. The system is intended
to be used by a patient who is seated in front of a table. Due to
its compactness and low weight, the system can be transported
by a single person. The system is very flexible and allows fast
adjustments of the exact training tasks, which is beneficial for

2648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF KEY SPECIFICATIONS OF ATD

Stature range of intended patient
population
Maximum patient weight
Fügl-Meyer/MRC** score of intended
patient population
Donning time
Size of housing
Size of ground frame
Length of links l 1 and l 2
System weight
Max power consumption
Maximum actuation force***
Bandwidth of force actuation (closed loop)
Bandwidth of position actuation (closed loop)
Hysteresis

Value

1.46-1.88 m*
120kg
(∼ 3kg arm weight*)
≥30 / ≥ 2
< 2 min
0.30 × 0.23 × 0.55 m
0.90 × 1.15 m
0.6 m
25.5 kg
600 W
F x = −16..15 N
F y = −13..17 N
F z = –9..9 N
2.3 Hz
2.1 Hz
< 2.2 N

∗
Corresponds to P01 and P99 stature range of Dutch 60+ male and female
population [37].
∗∗
MRC = Medical Research Council Scale of muscle power;
2 = movement only if gravity is eliminated.
∗∗∗
Determined open loop; negative forces indicate forces in the direction
of the negative axis.

the motivation and the overall training effect [34]. Furthermore,
the amount of support or restriction can be adjusted for each
training and person, from resistive 3-D forces to compensation
of arm weight and assistive guidance forces.
The ATD uses a combination of passive gravity compensation and active actuation to reduce required actuator power and
thereby costs. The gravity compensation is provided by a clock
spring, of which the pretensioning is manually adjustable, to
provide a nominal vertical force. The end of the clock spring is
connected to a cable, which runs parallel to link l1 , over a cam
and is connected to link l2 of the robot (see Fig. 2). The shape
of the cam compensates for both rotation of angle β, leading to
a reduction of effective length of l2 , and for the nonlinearity of
the rotational spring. To optimize the cam shape such that compensation forces are minimally influenced by position changes,
the force error was measured by vertical movement of a load.
For different angles of α, the load compensation error was measured by variation of β with a fixed load. Based on these load
curves, a new cam was calculated giving the least load variation
while varying α and β. Resulting in the passive curve shown in
Fig. 3. The remaining deviations can be actively compensated
for. Before a training session is started, the operator can adjust
the spring compensation to provide the desired compensation
for a specific patient. The use of a passive gravity compensation
keeps the robot in position during donning and doffing, ensuring
an intrinsic safe situation.
B. Actuation and Sensing
To meet the actuation demands of a high torque at a low speed
with a standard and compact motor, transmission and gearing
is needed. The limited backdrivability of gears results in unsafe

Vertical compensation
force change [N]

Parameter

Relative compensation vs position
10
x position change
y position change

0

-10
-0.4

-0.2
0.2
0
position relative to center position [m]

Fig. 3. Nonlinearity of the passive gravity compensation. Imperfections for
movement in x and y directions are shown relative to the center xyz-position
[0.6, 1.0, 0.0]. The actuators will compensate for the imperfections in passive
gravity compensation.

and direct coupling to the actuator. This can be reduced by
introducing compliance in the drive chain, i.e., series elastic
actuation [35]. However, the stored energy in the spring can
lead to potential unsafe situations. In the ATD, this is solved by
using a novel damper approach. With a damper, the generated
torque is proportional to the motor speed. The motor-damper
combination makes a fast and stable torque actuator and allows
for a very compact, safe (decoupling of subject and motor), and
robust design with a relatively high closed-loop bandwidth.
The damper in the drive train allows for force control by controlling the rotational speed, similar to the use of series elastic
actuators [35], where force is controlled by controlling spring
deflection. The use of a nondissipating element like a spring,
might however cause unstable oscillations [36]. As opposed to
the SEA, the rotational damper dissipates energy. This makes
application safer for usage in robots interacting with humans at
the cost of a reduced efficiency. Furthermore, the damper concept has a higher closed-loop bandwidth compared to position
feedback when using a motor with gearbox or flexible elements.
This higher bandwidth is caused by the fact that the closed-loop
system with a damper is part of the velocity feedback loop,
while the spring system is part of the position feedback loop.
The former has per definition a higher bandwidth.
All actuators are enclosed in the housing, see Fig. 2. The
drive train of the robot has active torque actuators for axes α
and β in combination with the passive gravity compensation.
The actuator for the γ axis is not influenced by the weight
of the arm, as the axis is vertical. Therefore, a more compact
drive train without damper was chosen for axis γ. All axes are
actuated by a DC motor combined with a planetary gearhead
with a reduction ratio of 51:1. For the base rotation axis γ, the
DC motor drives a tooth belt connected to the robot housing.
A mechanical break-out mechanism ensures that the maximum
torque in the γ direction is limited to a safe value of 11 N·m.
For the other two axes, the DC motor is placed in series with a
rotational damper (Kinetrol S-CRD, Kinetrol, Farnham, U.K.).
The use of a rotational damper ensures that the torque is limited due to the maximum speed of the motor and ensuring an

WESTERVELD et al.: DAMPER DRIVEN ROBOTIC END-POINT MANIPULATOR

Fig. 4.

2649

Schematic overview of control structure.

α

β

γ

2
0
-2
-4
-4 -2 0
low inertia

-4 -2 0
-4 -2 0
center position
high inertia

Fig. 5. Open-loop Nyquist diagrams for axes α, β, and γ. The open loop
response was estimated in the center position (green), with the device in the
configurations with the lowest inertia (blue) and highest inertia (red). The black
circles denote the M = 1.3 M-circle. The black cross denotes the [−1, 0] point
in the Nyquist diagram.

intrinsically safe situation. A disadvantage of using a damper
is the need for continuous motor rotation to provide a constant
force. However, in the ATD system, the majority of the constant
force is already provided passively by the parallel spring. Thus,
the motor damper combination only needs to provide small offset forces.
The combination of passive and active actuation ensures that
the required motor power is relatively low as the majority of
the gravity compensation is provided by the clock spring. This
ensures that the system has a low-power consumption and can
be connected to a standard mains connection. Furthermore, the
system is inherently safe since control errors or controller instability can never lead to large force fluctuations or a risk of
hyperflexion of patient joints. Also, the ATD does not depend
on an available mains supply to hold its vertical position, preventing the collapse of the robotic manipulator with the patient
attached in the case of unexpected power loss.
A six degree-of-freedom force sensor (JR3 20E12 100N, JR3,
Woodland, CA, USA) and three absolute angular encoders, together with a kinematic model of the actuator allows the measurement of the interaction force vector between the ATD and
the subject and also the position vector of the end-point position. A passive gimbal is located between the endpoint of l2
and the arm cuff. The gimbal is equipped with potentiometers
to measure the angles and allow for estimation of the hand and
elbow orientation.
C. Electronic Design
The ATD is controlled by means of an embedded computer. In this computer, an embedded safety software layer is

implemented to check whether values are within acceptable
bounds and ensure that possible errors in control do not lead
to unacceptably large actuation forces. On top of this embedded software layer, custom controllers can be implemented in
Matlab/Simulink (The Mathworks, Natick, USA) and uploaded
to the embedded computer system for real-time control. In this
Matlab/Simulink layer, desired variables can be selected for
logging, for instance the number of movements, the interval between movements, the quality of a movement (deviation from
an ideal path), and the amount of support during a movement.
This allows for feedback to patient and physician during and
after a training session. Patient feedback is an important motivator during training [34], while the feedback for the physician
allows evaluation of the training performance and on the longer
term evaluation of the training effect.
III. CONTROLLER DESIGN
The control scheme is shown in Fig. 4. Two feedback loops
are implemented. The inner force control loop is initially used
to compensate for small imperfections in the passive gravity
compensation (see also Fig. 3). The offset force term (Foﬀset )
can be used to compensate the premeasured arm weight. In the
outer feedback loop, the deviation from a set point trajectory
(xref ) is used to implement an impedance controller with a
virtual spring-damper system (bs + k), leading to a set point
force (Fref ).
Based on the calculated reference force (Fref ) and the measured forces (F ), the force errors are calculated and subsequently transformed into joint torque errors (τ[α ,β ,γ ],err ) with
the transpose of the Jacobian matrix. As the actuation for the
base (γ) is different from the other axes (α, β), this angle is controlled differently. For axes α and β, the joint torque errors are
used to calculate the desired motor speed (θ̇([α ,β ],ref ) ), which is
proportional to a joint torque as the motors are coupled through
a rotational damper, as explained in Section II-B. PI controllers
are used to control the speed of the motors. For γ, an inner
force control loop is created with PI control of the motor speed
(θ̇(γ ,ref ) ) based on the determined torque error.
A. Controller Tuning
The torque controllers for the three axes were individually
tuned. For this purpose, the endpoint of the robot with the force

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Coherence Phase [o] Gain [dB]
[-]

2650

20

Fx [N]

50

10

0

0
20

Fy [N]

-50
0

10
0
20

-200

0 -2
10

Fz [N]

-400
1
Fx

Fy
10-1

10
0
0

Fz
100
101
Frequency [Hz]

Reference
2

4

102

Fig. 6. FRFs for the force controllers along axes x, y, and z. The force control
bandwidth was estimated as the frequency where the gain crosses the −3 dB
line (dotted line). The top pane shows the gain of the FRF, and the phase is
shown in the middle pane. The coherence is shown in the bottom pane.

6

8 10 12 14 16
Time [s]

Fig. 7. Responses to step force inputs for X (top), Y (middle), and Z (bottom).
Reference forces are shown in black. Blue lines show the measured response.
Step inputs of 1, 5, 10, and 15N were applied. The 10- and 15-N step were
omitted for the Z-axis, as these are outside the force range of the Z-axis.

Reference
1

in which Kp and Ki are the proportional and integral gains of
the controller, respectively, and Hdevice is the transfer function
of the device for that specific axis.
The values for the control parameters were set using Nyquist
diagrams and M-circles, see Fig. 5 [25], [38]. Briefly, the Mcircle denotes a stability margin, where a specific value for
M indicates a constant closed-loop gain. When the dynamical
open-loop response of the system is obtained, theoretical values for the controller can be calculated iteratively such that
the closed-loop system remains stable. These control values are
then applied to ensure the closed-loop response of the true system indeed lies outside the selected M-circle. In our case, we
selected M = 1.3, which indicates that the highest gain of the
closed-loop behavior is 1.3. Bandwidths of the individual axes
were determined at 3.7, 6.4, and 2.4 Hz for axes α, β, and γ,
respectively.
IV. PERFORMANCE
A. Force Controller
To evaluate the bandwidth of the force controller, a multisine signal was applied as an offset force (Foﬀset ) while the
device was fixed to the world. The bandwidth of the system is
determined as the −3 dB point in the FRF FFr e f obtained from
this measurement. The obtained FRFs are shown in Fig. 6. The
bandwidth was estimated to be 7.0, 6.1, and 2.3 Hz for Fx , Fy ,
and Fz , respectively.

2

Measurement
3

Fx [N]
Fy [N]

5
-5

-5

Fz [N]

sensor was fixed to the world in the middle of the work range
and the frequency response functions (FRF) for the device were
estimated (Hdevice ). To estimate Hdevice , a multisine perturbation was applied to one motor directly (θ̇([α ,β ,γ ],ref ) ), while the
controllers were disconnected and the reference for the other
motors was zero.
Control parameters were set based on the open-loop FRF of
each axis. The loop gain for each axis is determined by


Ki
(1)
Hlo op = Kp +
Hdevice
s

Measurement

5

5
-5
0

5 10 0
5 10 0
5 10
Time [s]
Time [s]
Time [s]

Fig. 8. Tracking of sinusoidal reference forces. In each trial (1, 2, and 3), the
reference for a single axis was a 0.5-Hz sine with an amplitude of 5N, reference
forces for the other two axes were zero. Panes in the same column belong to the
same trial, thus indicating the induced errors based on a perturbation of one of
the other axes. Reference forces are shown in black, measured forces in blue.

Dynamic behavior of the device was tested by step reference
force inputs (1, 5, 10, and 15 N) to the controller. Fig. 7 depicts
the response of the robotic system by which average settling
times have been estimated at 0.24, 0.18, and 0.40 s for Fx , Fy ,
and Fz , respectively.
To evaluate the force tracking accuracy and whether the force
directions are properly decoupled, sinusoidal reference force
trajectories were applied. RMS errors between the reference
and actual trajectories were determined as a measure of performance. Fig. 8 shows reference and measured forces for all three
axes during the sine tracking experiment. RMS errors were estimated at 0.74, 0.35, and 1.47 N for Fx , Fy , and Fz , respectively.
B. Position Controller
To evaluate the bandwidth of the position controller, a multisine signal was applied as a deviation from a fixed neutral
position neutral position. The multisine signal consisted of 16
logarithmically spaced frequencies in a range from 0.03 to
30 Hz with amplitudes of the sines decreasing linearly with
frequency. The peak–peak amplitude range of the resulting signal was +/ − 0.2 m. The bandwidth was estimated to be 2.1,
3.9, and 2.1 Hz for x, y, and z, respectively.

WESTERVELD et al.: DAMPER DRIVEN ROBOTIC END-POINT MANIPULATOR

Force [N]

Force [N]

40
20
0
-20
40
20
0
-20
40
20
0
-20
40
20
0
-20

X

Y

0.5

Theoretical
Z
k=250
b=40

k=150
b=35

k=50
b=15

k=10
b=6
-0.2 0 0.2 -0.2 0 0.2 -0.2 0 0.2
Position [m] Position [m] Position [m]

X-position [m]

Force [N]

Force [N]

Measured

2651

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0.1 0.2
Z-position [m]

Reference
10 sec/circle
20 sec/circle
0.3

Fig. 10. Example of position tracking with a circular reference trajectory while
moving a 2.3 kg weight along a circular reference trajectory with k = 150 N/m
and b = 35 N · s/m. Reference trajectories were set at either 10 seconds per
circle of 20 s/circle. Three distinct circle diameters were used as reference: 0.1,
0.3, and 0.5 m. For each diameter/speed combination, the averaged resulting
movement of five repetitions is shown. Reference positions are shown in black.
The colored lines show the measured positions for the different combinations.
All starting positions were set at [0, 0] for comparison.

Fig. 9. Measured stiffness compared with stiffness set in the position controller. Gray lines show the measured stiffness. The black line indicates the
theoretical stiffness.

duration of 10 s (0.6 rad/s) and at 5.8, 0.86, and 3.1 mm for
x, y, and z directions, respectively, for the circular movement
duration of 20 s (0.3 rad/s).

End-point stiffness of the device was evaluated by using
a fixed reference position. The device was moved manually
away from its reference position while forces and positions are
recorded. The measured stiffness was compared to the value of
the virtual stiffness k, which was set in the controller. During
the measurement, the robot’s end point was manually moved.
Fig. 9 shows the measured and theoretical stiffness values for
x, y, and z directions during trials with different settings for the
position controller. The slopes of measured and theoretical lines
are similar. Note that the ATD can apply a limited amount of
force (also to ensure safety), which causes the saturation effects
in the graphs.
Another important observation from Fig. 9 is that the system has little force hysteresis. Any hysteresis present induces
nonlinear behavior of the system and reduces performance. In
practice, this will cause noncontinuous force assistance to a
patient when the movement direction of an axis inverts during
motion. If the assistive force fluctuates, this may be mistaken for
a patient-induced deviation from the ideal reference trajectory
and will cloud the measurement results.
The hysteresis present in the system was calculated from the
measurements shown in Fig. 9. The average hysteresis for the
different stiffness settings was estimated at 0.6, 1.4, and 1.6 N
for x, y, and z, respectively.
To evaluate the performance of the position controller, a mass
comparable to the weight of a nominal arm (2.3 kg) was attached
to the end point of the robot. Passive gravity support was adjusted to compensate for the added weight. Circular reference
trajectories were applied to move the weight along a circle in
the horizontal plane (k = 150 N/m, b = 35 N·s/m). The results
are shown in Fig. 10. RMS errors between the reference and
actual trajectories were estimated at 13.1, 2.1, and 4.0 mm for
x, y, and z directions, respectively, for the circular movement

C. Evaluation in Possible Application
To evaluate the ability of the device to assist patients, a singlecase study was performed with a male stroke subject (62 years
old) with minimal voluntary arm function (Action Research
Arm Test score of three points). The stroke subject was asked to
make a circular movement with his hand in the horizontal plane
using visual feedback under each of the following conditions: 1)
without support of the device, 2) with gravity support provided
by the device, 3) with a virtual table pushing the arm upward
when moved below a certain position threshold, and 4) passively,
with the device moving along a circular reference trajectory
(k = 100 N/m, b = 22 N · s/m). For conditions 2, 3, and 4, the
weight of the arm was measured beforehand and used as offset
force in y-direction.
Fig. 11 shows the results for all four conditions. Support of
arm weight has a clear beneficial effect as the patient is then
able to maintain the arm around shoulder level (compare the
blue line (voluntary movement) in Fig. 11 with the other lines).
Gravity support only (green line with dots) and combined with
a virtual table (red line with triangles) gave similar results.
The movement range was extended when the robot provides
additional movement assistance during the passive condition
(black line with crosses).
V. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we presented and evaluated a novel threedimensional end-point manipulator for use in functional training
of reaching tasks after stroke. The system is aimed at assisting
patients during functional upper extremity exercises. The system is lightweight (25 kg) and easy to operate by a nonexpert,
which leads to the potential of making the final step to clinical
or even home use.

2652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Fig. 11. Result of circle drawing tasks of the single stroke subject. Results
are shown for the following conditions: 1) without support of the device (blue);
2) with gravity support provided by the device (green with dots); 3) with a
virtual table pushing the arm upward (red with triangles); and 4) Passive movement pulling the arm towards a circular trajectory with k = 100 N/m and
b = 22 N·s/m (black with crosses). The gray circles indicate shoulder, elbow
and hand positions. The bars between the circles represent upper and lower arm
of the subject.

A. Comparable Systems
Our objective was to develop a device that fills the gap between passive devices and high-end devices. Therefore, there
are no directly comparable systems. However, we can compare
the system presented here to the other (high-end) active devices
as shown in Fig. 1, since in theory these devices could provide
the same assistance as the ATD system. The ATD system has
much lower assistive force capability (∼ 15 N) compared to the
Armeo Power (∼ 75 N) and the Haptic Master (∼ 100 N). Also
the bandwidth of the ATD’s position controller (1.4 Hz) is lower
than the bandwidth of the Armeo Power (2.1 Hz) and the Haptic
Master (> 10 Hz).
Currently, stiffness values of up to 250 N/m can accurately
be rendered with impedance control, which is low compared
to the Armeo Power (> 714 N/m) and the Haptic Master (up
to 50 kN/m). However, for guidance of movement 250 N/m
will be sufficient. Further reducing the stiffness of the position
controller can be used to allow the user to deviate more easily
from the reference trajectory, which is helpful for rehabilitation
purposes.
Although, the ATD system has lower force capability, lower
endpoint stiffness, and lower bandwidth compared to Armeo
Power and Haptic Master, this will not be a limitation when the
system is applied for low frequent functional tasks (e.g., reaching movements). Moreover, the ATD system is more compact
and has much lower weight (∼ 25 kg) than both the Armeo
Power (>200 kg) and the Haptic Master (∼ 40 kg). This gives
the current system the benefit of being more easy to handle,
move, and transport. Together with the low-force capability
and inherent safety due to the dampers in the drive train, this
makes the ATD perfectly suited for functional training in a home
environment.
B. Clinical Implications
The device has two main rehabilitation applications. These
can be deployed depending on the ability of individual patients,

possibly in a home environment enabling frequent training. The
first application is compensation of arm weight. Weight compensation had been shown beneficial for rehabilitation of stroke patients [31]–[33]. Literature reports increased work range due to
reduced flexion couplings when compensating for arm weight.
When patients improve, the compensation can be reduced to
keep the training challenging.
A second application is the active assistance of motion. When
patients have difficulties in reaching the arm toward an object,
the device can assist them in reaching the object with the trajectory guidance mode. When patients improve, the assistance can
be reduced again. For rehabilitation purposes, the virtual stiffness and damping parameters can be used as tuning parameters
to make the robot either stiff or compliant, depending on the
amount of assistance the subjects needs during the movement.
With such an approach, therapy can be both motivating (patients
can reach the targets) and challenging (patients should provide
sufficient effort to get to the target).
To assist reaching toward objects in a training environment,
a minimum jerk reference trajectory [39] toward a predefined
object position is currently implemented. In addition, circular
reference trajectories are implemented, allowing for assistance
during circle drawing tasks [40], [41]. However, the interface
also allows for defining custom reference trajectories.
The benefit of both the gravity support and active assistance
have been shown in a single-case study with a stroke subject
with minimal arm function (ARA test score of three points). In
Fig. 11, differences in movement can be observed between the
patient’s moving voluntarily without any assistance and moving
with support of his arm weight by the ATD. With support of
arm weight, the patient is capable of lifting the arm at shoulder
level. Since the patient had minimal arm function, the size of
the movement with compensation was still very minimal. When
active assistance was added, the movement size became much
larger, indicating the training potential of the device.
However, there was no noticeable difference between compensation of gravity only and the condition with a virtual table
surface. This is likely the result of the minimal voluntary function of the patient. We expect that patients with more voluntary
arm function can benefit from the virtual table, by using this
feature to get more elbow extension due to the synergies often
occurring after stroke [31]. Additional clinical tests are required
to verify this.
C. Limitations
The current design is a first iteration in developing a compact
low-power assistive end-point manipulator. The performance
was already shown sufficient for assisting functional reaching
movements. However, there are some small points that could
easily improve the performance even further. Currently, the
γ-axis has the lowest performance and is therefore the bottleneck. The lower performance mainly resulted from conservative
rules to limit the motor speed and torque output on this axis to
prevent enabling of the mechanical break out system. This also
resulted in a slower response and a lower force bandwidth in
the z-direction (2.3 Hz) compared to the x- and y-directions (7.0

WESTERVELD et al.: DAMPER DRIVEN ROBOTIC END-POINT MANIPULATOR

and 6.1 Hz, respectively). This bandwidth will be sufficient for
low frequent, relatively slow movements (e.g., reaching tasks);
however, with some minor modifications to the design (stronger
motor or also use a damper driven solution for γ-axis), the potential of the device could be increased even further.
In addition, the imperfections in gravity compensation in relation to movement along the x-axis are higher than expected.
This results in higher requirements for the motor (α) to eliminate these perfections. This limits the force range in certain
positions and could be overcome by the use of a spring with
higher stiffness for the passive gravity compensation around the
α-axis, which will be implemented in a follow up design.
During the passive movement condition, the reference trajectory was a large circle in the horizontal plane. However,
the patient’s arm did not follow this trajectory and the actual
circular path was much smaller than the reference path. This
resulted from a combination of imperfect gravity compensation
and limited motor power. This led to a saturation of the motor, as
this motor was already used partially for compensation of arm
weight. As mentioned before, this can be overcome by implementing a passive spring with a higher stiffness for providing
passive gravity compensation around the α-axis, which would
then also improve the provided assistance.
VI. CONCLUSION
The novel system presented here are able to fill the gap between high-power assistive devices and the passive devices.
With its capability of providing both compensation of arm
weight and assistance during functional tasks, the ATD system
is a great assistive tool during the rehabilitation process. Due to
the inherent safety, low weight, and compactness of the system,
intensive functional task training becomes available, potentially
even in a home environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the MIAS consortium
(http://www.mias-info.eu) as well as all project partners for their
continuing support.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Colombo, F. Pisano, S. Micera, A. Mazzone, C. Delconte, M. Carrozza, P. Dario, and G. Minuco, “Upper limb rehabilitation and evaluation
of stroke patients using robot-aided techniques,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf.
Rehabil. Robot., Jun. 2005, pp. 515–518.
[2] A. H. A. Stienen, E. E. G. Hekman, F. C. T. Van der Helm, G. B. Prange,
M. J. A. Jannink, A. M. M. Aalsma, and H. Van der Kooij, “Dampace:
Dynamic force-coordination trainer for the upper extremities,” in Proc.
IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2007, pp. 820–826.
[3] S. Masiero, A. Celia, G. Rosati, and M. Armani, “Robotic-assisted rehabilitation of the upper limb after acute stroke,” Archives Phys. Med.
Rehabil., vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 142–149, 2007.
[4] R. Q. Van der Linde, P. Lammertse, E. Frederiksen, and B. Ruiter, “The
hapticmaster, a new high-performance haptic interface,” in Proc. Eurohaptics, 2002, pp. 1–5.
[5] P. S. Lum, C. G. Burgar, D. E. Kenney, and H. F. M. Van der Loos,
“Quantification of force abnormalities during passive and active-assisted
upper-limb reaching movements in post-stroke hemiparesis,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 652–662, Jun. 1999.

2653

[6] Y. Mao and S. Agrawal, “Design of a cable-driven arm exoskeleton
(CAREX) for neural rehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 28, no. 4,
pp. 922–931, Aug. 2012.
[7] J. C. Perry, J. Rosen, and S. Burns, “Upper-limb powered exoskeleton
design,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 408–417,
Aug. 2007.
[8] A. Otten, H. C. Voort, A. H. A. Stienen, E. H. F. van Asseldonk, R. G.
K. M. Aarts, and H. van der Kooij, “Limpact: A hydraulically powered
self-aligning upper limb exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Mechatronics, to be
published.
[9] Armeo - hocoma (2013, Dec.) [Online]. Available: http://www.hocoma.
com/
[10] Interactive motion technologies—inmotion arm interactive therapy system. (2013, Dec.) [Online]. Available: http://www.interactive-motion.
com/
[11] G. Prange, M. Jannink, C. Groothuis-Oudshoorn, H. Hermens, and M.
Ijzerman, “Systematic review of the effect of robot-aided therapy on recovery of the hemiparetic arm after stroke,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop.,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 171–184, 2006.
[12] G. Kwakkel, B. Kollen, and H. Krebs, “Effects of robot-assisted therapy
on upper limb recovery after stroke: A systematic review,” Neurorehabil.
Neural Repair, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 111–121, 2008.
[13] P. Lum, C. Burgar, P. Shor, M. Majmundar, and M. der Loos, “Robotassisted movement training compared with conventional therapy techniques for the rehabilitation of upper-limb motor function after stroke,”
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 83, no. 7, pp. 952–959, 2002.
[14] V. Klamroth-Marganska, J. Blanco, K. Campen, A. Curt, V. Dietz, T.
Ettlin, M. Felder, B. Fellinghauer, M. Guidali, A. Kollmar, A. Luft, T.
Nef, C. Schuster-Amft, W. Stahel, and R. Reiner, “Three-dimensional,
task-specific robot therapy of the arm after stroke: A multicentre, parallelgroup randomised trial,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 13, pp. 159–166, 2014.
[15] G. Kwakkel and C. G. Meskers, “Effects of robotic therapy of the arm
after stroke,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 13, pp. 132–133, 2014.
[16] R. C. V. Loureiro, W. S. Harwin, K. Nagai, and M. Johnson,
“Advances in upper limb stroke rehabilitation: A technology push,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. [Online]. 49(10), pp. 1103–1118 Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11517-011-0797-0
[17] B. B. Brewer, S. D. McDowell, and L. Worthen-Chaudhari, “Poststroke
upper extremity rehabilitation: A review of robotic systems and clinical
results,” Topics Stroke Rehabil., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 22–44, 2007.
[18] R. B. Riener, T. B. Nef, and G. C. Colombo, “Robot-aided neurorehabilitation of the upper extremities,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 43, no. 1,
pp. 2–10, 2005.
[19] S. Micera, M. Carrozza, E. Guglielmelli, G. Cappiello, F. Zaccone, C.
Freschi, R. Colombo, A. Mazzone, C. Delconte, F. Pisano, G. Minuco,
and P. Dario, “A simple robotic system for neurorehabilitation,” Auton.
Robots, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 271–284, 2005.
[20] N. Hogan, H. Krebs, J. Charnnarong, P. Srikrishna, and A. Sharon, “MITMANUS: A workstation for manual therapy and training. I,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Human Commun., 1992, pp. 161–165.
[21] T. Nef, M. Mihelj, and R. Riener, “ARMin: A robot for patient-cooperative
arm therapy,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 887–900,
2007.
[22] A. Schiele and G. Hirzinger, “A new generation of ergonomic
exoskeletons-the high-performance x-arm-2 for space robotics telepresence,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2011, pp.2158–
2165.
[23] P. S. Lum, C. G. Burgar, M. Van der Loos, P. C. Shor, M. Majmundar,
and R. Yap, “MIME robotic device for upper-limb neurorehabilitation in
subacute stroke subjects: A follow-up study,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop.,
vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 631–642, 2006.
[24] H. van der Kooij, E. H. F. van Asseldonk, and F. C. van der Helm. (2005).
Comparison of different methods to identify and quantify balance control. J. Neurosci. Methods [Online]. 145(12), pp. 175–203. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165027005000130
[25] A. C. Schouten, E. de Vlugt, J. van Hilten, and F. C. van der Helm.
(2006). Design of a torque-controlled manipulator to analyse the admittance of the wrist joint. J. Neurosci. Methods [Online]. 154(1/2),
pp. 134–141. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0165027005004498
[26] H.-S. Park, Y. Ren, and L.-Q. Zhang, “Intelliarm: An exoskeleton for
diagnosis and treatment of patients with neurological impairments,” in
Proc. IEEE 2nd RAS EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatronics,
2008, pp.109–114.

2654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

[27] A. H. A. Stienen, J. G. McPherson, A. C. Schouten, and J. P. A. Dewald, “The act-4d: A novel rehabilitation robot for the quantification of
upper limb motor impairments following brain injury,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2011, pp. 1–6.
[28] A. H. Stienen, E. E. Hekman, G. B. Prange, M. J. Jannink, F. C. van
der Helm, and H. van der Kooij, “Freebal: Design of a dedicated weightsupport system for upper-extremity rehabilitation,” J. Med. Devices, vol. 3,
no. 4, 9 pp., 2009.
[29] R. Sanchez, J. Liu, S. Rao, P. Shah, R. Smith, T. Rahman, S. Cramer,
J. Bobrow, and D. Reinkensmeyer, “Automating arm movement training
following severe stroke: Functional exercises with quantitative feedback in
a gravity-reduced environment,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 378–389, Sep. 2006.
[30] D. J. Reinkensmeyer, O. M. Akoner, D. P. Ferris, and K. E. Gordon,
“Slacking by the human motor system: Computational models and implications for robotic orthoses,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2009, pp.2129–2132.
[31] R. Beer, M. Ellis, B. Holubar, and J. Dewald, “Impact of gravity loading
on post-stroke reaching and its relationship to weakness,” Muscle Nerve,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 242–250, 2007.
[32] T. Krabben, G. B. Prange, B. I. Molier, A. H. Stienen, M. J. Jannink, J. H.
Buurke, and J. S. Rietman, “Influence of gravity compensation training on
synergistic movement patterns of the upper extremity after stroke, a pilot
study,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 9, no. 1, p. 44, 2012.
[33] G. B. Prange, T. Krabben, G. J. Renzenbrink, M. J. Ijzerman, H. J. Hermens, and M. J. Jannink, “Changes in muscle activation after reach training
with gravity compensation in chronic stroke patients,” Int. J. Rehabil. Res.,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 234–242, 2012.
[34] A. A. Timmermans, A. I. Spooren, H. Kingma, and H. A. Seelen, “Influence of task-oriented training content on skilled arm-hand performance in
stroke: A systematic review,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, vol. 24, no. 9,
pp. 858–870, 2010.
[35] G. Pratt and M. Williamson, “Series elastic actuators,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. 95 Human Robot Interaction Cooperative
Robots, 1995, vol. 1, pp. 399–406.
[36] J. Oblak and Z. Matjacic. (2011). Design of a series visco-elastic actuator
for multi-purpose rehabilitation haptic device. J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. [Online]. 8(1), p. 3. Available: http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/8/1/3
[37] H. Daanen, A. J. Krul, and J. Molenbroek. (2013). DINED. Uitgeverij
Kerckebosch [Online]. Available: http://dined.io.tudelft.nl/dined/
[38] J. M. Maciejowski, Multivariable Feedback Design, vol. 8. Reading, MA,
USA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[39] R. Shadmehr and S. P. Wise, The Computational Neurobiology of Reaching
and Pointing: A Foundation for Motor Learning. Cambridge, MA, USA:
MIT Press, 2005.
[40] T. Krabben, B. Molier, A. Houwink, J. Rietman, J. Buurke, and G. Prange.
(2011). Circle drawing as evaluative movement task in stroke rehabilitation: An explorative study. J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. [Online]. 8(1), p. 15.
Available: http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/8/1/15 g
[41] T. Sukal, M. Ellis, and J. Dewald, “Shoulder abduction-induced reductions in reaching work area following hemiparetic stroke: neuroscientific
implications,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 183, no. 2, pp. 215–223, 2007.

Ard J. Westerveld received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, in 2009 and
2014, respectively.
Since 2014, he has been a Mechatronical Engineer at FWD Mechatronical Solutions B.V., Varsseveld, The Netherlands. His research focusses on the
development of control strategies for both robotics and functional electrical
stimulation targeted at poststroke upper extremity rehabilitation.

Bernard Johan Aalderink received the M.Sc. degree in applied physics and
the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering in 2003 and 2007, respectively,
from the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
Since 2007, he has been at DEMCON Advanced Mechatronics, Enschede, as
a System Architect. As such, he has been involved in the design, development,
realization, and testing of many industrial and medical devices, among which
the ATD robotic system.

Wouter Hagedoorn received the M.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering from
the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, with his mechatronics
thesis on “active vibration isolation.”
Since 2003, he has been at DEMCON Advanced Mechatronics as a System
Engineer, Enschede. As such, he has been involved in the design, development,
realization, and testing of many industrial and medical devices and research
equipment, including the active therapeutic device robotic system.

Martijn Buijze received the B.Sc. degree in automotive engineering from HTS
Apeldoorn, The Netherlands, in 1994.
He was at Buhrs Zaandam, Zaandam, The Netherlands, for seven years. First,
as a Mechanical Designer, then as a Project Leader at the Research and Development Department. In 2001, he started at DEMCON Advanced Mechatronics,
Enschede, The Netherlands, as a Senior Mechanical Engineer. He is specialized
in the design and development of new systems from scratch. The design of the
active therapeutic device robotic system is one of these projects, which led to a
system in which several innovative solutions are packaged in a tightly designed
outer shell.

Alfred C. Schouten received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from the Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, in
1999 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the Delft University of Technology
and the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands. He is the Co-Founder
of the Delft Laboratory for Neuromuscular Control, Delft. His research interests include the field of neuromuscular control and techniques to quantify the
functional contribution of afferent feedback, neuromuscular modeling, haptic
manipulators, and system identification.

Herman van der Kooij received the Ph.D. degree (with Hons.) from the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, in 2000.
He is a Professor of biomechatronics and rehabilitation technology at the
Departments of Biomechanical Engineering University of Twente (UT), and
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. At the UT, he is the
Founder and the Head of Rehabilitation Robotics Laboratory that developed
powered exoskeletons for the rehabilitation of upper and lower extremities. He
is the Founder of the Virtual Reality Human performance Lab that combines
robotic devices, motion capturing and virtual environments to asses and train
human balance, walking, and hand–eye coordination. His expertise and interests are in the field of human motor control, adaptation, learning, rehabilitation
robots, diagnostic and assistive robotics, virtual reality, rehabilitation medicine,
and neurocomputational modeling.

