IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

2467

Characterization of Radiofrequency Ablation Lesion
Development Based on Simulated and Measured
Intracardiac Electrograms
∗

Matthias Walter Keller, Member, IEEE, Steffen Schuler, Mathias Wilhelms, Gustavo Lenis, Gunnar Seemann,
Claus Schmitt, Olaf Dössel, Member, IEEE, and Armin Luik

Abstract—Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) therapy is the gold
standard in interventional treatment of many cardiac arrhythmias. A major obstacle is nontransmural lesions, leading to recurrence of arrhythmias. Recent clinical studies have suggested
intracardiac electrogram (EGM) criteria as a promising marker to
evaluate lesion development. Seeking for a deeper understanding
of underlying mechanisms, we established a simulation approach
for acute RFA lesions. Ablation lesions were modeled by a passive necrotic core surrounded by a borderzone with properties
of heated myocardium. Herein, conduction velocity and electrophysiological properties were altered. We simulated EGMs during RFA to study the relation between lesion formation and EGM
changes using the bidomain model. Simulations were performed on
a three-dimensional setup including a geometrically detailed representation of the catheter with highly conductive electrodes. For
validation, EGMs recorded during RFA procedures in five patients
were analyzed and compared to simulation results. Clinical data
showed major changes in the distal unipolar EGM. During RFA,
the negative peak amplitude decreased up to 104% and maximum
negative deflection was up to 88% smaller at the end of the ablation sequence. These changes mainly occurred in the first 10 s after
ablation onset. Simulated unipolar EGMs reproduced the clinical
changes, reaching up to 83% negative peak amplitude reduction
and 80% decrease in maximum negative deflection for transmural
lesions. In future studies, the established model may enable the
development of further EGM criteria for transmural lesions even
for complex geometries in order to support clinical therapy.
Index Terms—Acute lesion model, bidomain model, intracardiac
electrograms (EGM), radiofrequency ablation (RFA), simulation.

I. INTRODUCTION

C

ARDIAC arrhythmias are an important cause for life
threatening conditions in the western world. In this con-

Manuscript received November 5, 2013; revised April 8, 2014; accepted April
30, 2014. Date of publication May 7, 2014; date of current version August 18,
2014. This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG)
under Grant DO637/12-1. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. W. Keller is with the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe 76131, Germany (e-mail:
matthias.w.keller@kit.edu).
S. Schuler, M. Wilhelms, G. Lenis, G. Seemann, and O. Dössel are with
the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT), Karlsruhe 76131, Germany (e-mail: steffen.schuler@student.kit.edu;
mathias.wilhelms@kit.edu; gustavo.lenis@kit.edu; gunnar.seemann@kit.edu;
olaf.doessel@kit.edu).
C. Schmitt and A. Luik are with the Städtisches Klinikum Karlsruhe
(Karlsruhe Hospital), Karlsruhe 76133, Germany (e-mail: Claus.Schmitt@
klinikum-karlsruhe.de; Armin.Luik@klinikum-karlsruhe.de).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2322515

text, radiofrequency ablation (RFA) therapy is the gold standard
in interventional treatment. For example, catheter ablation of
atrial fibrillation, the most common arrhythmia, has emerged
to an effective treatment strategy in the last years. However,
longterm success rates are still moderate. Reconnection of isolated areas was frequently seen in patients returning for a second
procedure [1], [2]. A major reason for reconnection is nontransmural lesions after the initial ablation. Moreover, the lack of
transmurality in ablation lines has been shown to be proarrhythmic [3]. Reliable creation of transmural lesions is, therefore, a
key for successful treatment.
Several parameters and methods are under investigation to
control lesion development or serve as criteria for successful
ablation. It has been shown that contact force measurements
can facilitate the creation of complete lesions [4], [5]. Furthermore, tissue conductivity [6], pace capture [7], late gadolinium
magnetic resonance imaging [8], ultrasound [9] and electrogram
(EGM)-based criteria [10], [11] have been evaluated. All methods have shown a potential ability for clinical use. However, a
robust criterion for the endpoint of ablation is still to be established. A promising result has been presented by Otomo et al.
[10], who described EGM-based criteria for lesion transmurality
of single point RF ablations in a porcine model. In a prospective
clinical study, these criteria turned out to improve the outcome of
pulmonary vein isolation [11]. Both studies showed the potential
of intracardiac EGM analysis in the control and supervision of
lesion formation. A limitation of the previous studies was their
observational design. Therefore, further studies are needed to
evaluate the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms causing EGM changes. This knowledge could help to identify robust
criteria for lesion geometries beyond single point lesions, which
would be necessary for reliable clinical application.
In general, acute lesions can be described as a necrotic core
surrounded by a borderzone of heated but still vital tissue [12].
Data on electrophysiological changes during RFA are sparse, as
RF currents interfere with electrical measurements. Nath et al.
have overcome this limitation by producing elevated temperature in tissue using heated solutions. They found changes in
action potential (AP) characteristics, like a reduced AP duration
(APD) and amplitude (APA) for temperatures above 45 ◦ C and
loss of excitability above 50 ◦ C [13]. Furthermore, a slight increase in conduction velocity (CV) followed by a rapid decrease
was found for rising tissue temperature [14]. These changes were
confirmed by two studies performing microelectrode recordings
directly after the ablation sequence [15], [16]. Only one study

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE I
CONDUCTIVITIES USED FOR SIMULATION, EXTRACELLULAR CONDUCTIVITIES
σ e , INTRACELLULAR CONDUCTIVITIES σ i IN S/m

Fig. 1. Three-dimensional simulation setups, spatial resolution 0.2 mm. Numbers indicate dimensions in millimeter. An 8F ablation catheter (electrodes: red,
isolation: yellow) on a planar patch of myocardium (blue). Underneath the
catheter, an ellipsoidal lesion area (necrotic and elevated temperature) can be
seen (light blue). Planes of stimulation are highlighted in orange. Setups are
surrounded by blood (not shown). The height of the blood pool was 15 mm
above the tissue and 2.4 mm underneath.

measured optical APs during ablation using a voltage sensitive
fluorescent dye [17], which confirmed APD shortening in the
area around the ablation catheter.
Several simulation studies have assessed chronic states of
ablation lesions regarding days or weeks after the ablation procedure [18]–[21]. In this case, lesions were only modeled as
passive isolating areas consisting of a necrotic core, whereas
the acute state was left out.
Pursuing a deeper understanding of signal changes during
catheter ablation, in this study, we developed a simulation approach including acute electrophysiological changes caused by
RFA. We incorporated electrophysiological changes for acutely
ablated areas in a high-resolution ablation setup for bidomain
simulations of cardiac electrophysiology. Simulations include a
detailed geometrical model of an ablation catheter, which was
used to calculate intracardiac EGMs. For direct validation, clinical EGMs from five patients were analyzed for changes during
ablation and then compared to simulation results. The aims of
the study were to establish a simulation environment incorporating a model for acute ablation lesions and furthermore to
investigate the underlying mechanisms of EGM changes during
RFA.
II. METHODS
A. Geometric Parameters of Simulation Setups
Simulations were performed using a three-dimensional setup
with a spatial resolution of 0.2 mm on a regularly spaced
grid (see Fig. 1). On a planar isotropic patch of myocardium
(24 mm × 24 mm × 3 mm for orthogonal catheter orientation,
32 mm × 24 mm × 3 mm for parallel orientation), the tip of an
8 F (2.7 mm) ablation catheter with an 8-mm tip electrode and
a 1.2-mm proximal electrode was placed either orthogonal or
parallel to the tissue surface. In case of orthogonal orientation,
the catheter was assumed to deform the surface leading to an indentation of the tip by 1 mm. For parallel orientation, the tip was
fully in contact, but not deforming the tissue. Electrodes were
modeled as areas of high conductivity forming an equipotential
volume of extracellular potential. In between electrodes, electrically isolating material was placed. Underneath the catheter,
we defined lesion areas of different sizes representing different

Myocardium
Blood
Lesion (necrotic)
Lesion (40 ◦ C)
Lesion (41 ◦ C)
Lesion (43 ◦ C)
Lesion (45 ◦ C)
Lesion (47 ◦ C)
Lesion (49 ◦ C)
Electrode
Isolation

σi

σe

0.5
0.5
1.0
0.35
0.1
0.1
0.05
-

0.2
0.7
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
7000
10 −2 2

stages of the ablation process. A planar stimulation was applied
at one side of the myocardium (orange area in Fig. 1) to initiate
excitation propagation. Above and below the myocardium, the
setup was filled by blood. Intra- and extracellular conductivities
are displayed in Table I. For the extracellular space, conductivities for blood and myocardium were set to literature values
[22], [23]. Electrode conductivity was chosen high enough to
form an equipotential volume and set to the 10 000 fold value
for blood. It was not set to the real conductivity of metal to keep
numerical stability of the simulations. Intracellular myocardial
conductivity was adjusted to reach a CV of 0.8 m/s. The choice
of lesion conductivities is explained in the following sections.
At the bath-tissue interface, no-flux boundary conditions were
applied to the intracellular space, by setting the intracellular
conductivity outside the myocardium to zero. No-flux Neumann
boundary conditions were applied to the intra- and extracellular
space at the outside surfaces of the setup.
B. Ablation Lesion Formation
RF lesion formation follows the temperature profile generated by current flow from the catheter tip to a large dispersive
electrode at the body surface. Simulation and experimental studies have shown that the idealized shape of the isotherms can be
described by two half ellipsoids with differing semiaxes and a
width to depth ratio between 1.25 and 1.9 [10], [24]–[26]. For
atrial tissue, a ratio of 1.25 was reported for nonparallel catheter
orientation relative to tissue surface, compared to 1.6 for the
parallel case [10]. Areas above 50 ◦ C showed reversible or permanent loss of excitability [13]. A permanently necrotic core is
formed above 55–60 ◦ C [27].
In this study, we modeled the lesion as an ellipsoid consisting
of two half ellipsoids with different lengths of the semiaxes. The
ellipsoid half facing toward the tissue surface represented 35%
of the lesion depth compared to 65% for the one pointing inside
the myocardial wall. This approach produced an asymmetric
ellipsoidal lesion shape, which is flattened toward the endocardial surface (see Fig. 3). This geometry resembles the lesion
shape described in [25]. Width to depth ratio was set to 1.25 for
orthogonal catheter orientation and to 1.6 for parallel catheter

KELLER et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION LESION DEVELOPMENT

2469

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF AP-CHANGES AS DOCUMENTED BY GE et al. (GE) [15], WOOD
AND FULLER [16], AND NATH AND HAINES [28]

Fig. 2. Simulation setups representing different stages of lesion development:
(a) Mostly elevated temperature at the catheter tip (28%), (b) necrotic area (red)
penetrates half of the myocardial wall (50%), (c) transmural lesion (110%).

Vm
dV/dt
APA
APD

Ge

WF

Nath

11 / 39
−56 / −78
−23 / −61
−57 / −30

0/0
0 / −16
−12 / −19

0.5 / 8
−12 / −11
−3 / −9
−31 / −40

Numbers show changes in percent.
Ge: Values for first two measurements from lesion edge (0–2 /2–4 mm).
WF: Values for first two measurements from lesion edge (0.5 /1.5 mm).
Nath: Values for two temperature ranges (< 45◦ C/> 45◦ C).

C. Electrophysiological Changes During Ablation

Fig. 3. Modeling of the lesion area. Numbers in white indicate temperature
values in ◦ C. The lesion consists of a passive core for temperatures above 50 ◦ C,
surrounded by six layers of elevated temperature. Each layer has a different CV,
adjusted by intracellular conductivity and AP upstroke velocity. Above 43 ◦ C,
an area of changed AP morphology was inserted. AP effects were weighted by
a ZF.

orientation. Analogous to gradual lesion development, a series
of seven stages up to complete transmurality was created (0%,
28%, 50%, 71%, 92%, 100%, 110% of full transmurality, see
Fig. 2). For the 110% stage, the lesion was assumed to gain 10%
in width after having reached complete transmural extension.
The acute ablation lesion area was modeled by seven regions
representing relevant temperature stages (see Fig. 3). A passive
necrotic core was assumed for temperatures above 50 ◦ C, accounting for dead cells as well as cells with temporal loss of
excitability [14], [28]. Adjacent to the necrotic core, six areas
of elevated temperature were defined (49–40 ◦ C). Temperature
decrease starting at 50 ◦ C was modeled as slightly exponential
profile [26] down to 40 ◦ C within a distance of 3 mm, as shown
in [29].
A study measuring impedance over acute RF lesion tissue
in rabbit hearts [6] found an increase of total resistance post
ablation. Total resistance is a parallel circuit of blood and myocardial conductivity. As blood conductivity is hardly altered
by ablation, we deducted a strong decrease of the tissue component. To account for this effect, we set the tissue conductivity
inside the necrotic core to 0.1 S/m.
In other studies, the lesion is only modeled by a passive
necrotic core. Therefore, we performed simulations with the
same approach. These results were compared to our lesion
model accounting for the borderzone. In order to further study
the influence of CV and AP related EGM changes, one set of
simulations for a scar level of 92% was performed with a stepwise application of the lesion model parameters. First, only a
necrotic core was used. Then, the CV related changes were
added. Afterward, only the AP related changes were included
and finally the complete lesion model was applied.

Data on electrophysiological changes during RFA are sparse
and sometimes contradictory. Reported changes can be separated in cellular mechanisms seen in APs and changes on tissue
level targeting CV.
1) AP Parameters: Cellular level was investigated by microelectrode recordings in tissue shortly after ablation [15], [16]
and during solution-based global heating [28]. The first study
(Ge et al. [15]) reported altered AP behavior up to 6 mm from
the lesion edge, compared to 2.5 mm by the second (Wood and
Fuller, WF [16]). These differences can be explained by the
experimental approaches: Wood et al. used a perfused whole
heart preparation compared to superfusion in the study by Ge
et al. Perfusion leads to better fluid supply and, therefore, effective cooling of the area surrounding the lesion. Changes in
the lesion border area for both studies are listed in Table II.
Although the data were not acquired during RFA, the solution
based approach by Nath and Haines [28] was considered in this
study, as it enables measurements under stable temperature conditions. AP changes for temperatures between 40 ◦ C and 45 ◦ C
and 45–50 ◦ C from this study are also summarized in Table II.
Although the reported values display large deviations, some
major tendencies can be found for AP behavior for elevated
temperatures: 1) resting membrane voltage (Vm ) is higher, 2)
upstroke velocity (dV/dt) is reduced, 3) APA is reduced, and
4) APD is shortened. The detailed mechanisms behind these
changes are not understood. However, macroscopic changes are
the same as reported for ischemic tissue [30]. This similarity is
also supported by the results of Nath et al. [12], who showed
drastically reduced perfusion in RF lesion and borderzone areas. Based on these results we used the ten Tusscher model [31]
adapted for ischemia phase 1a by Wilhelms et al. [32] to model
AP related changes. Different from [32] we set the weighting of
all ischemia effects to increase linearly over the borderzone. AP
changes were implemented for temperatures between 43–50 ◦ C.
Ischemia related parameters in the cell model were weighted by
a zone factor (ZF), which was linearly increased over the borderzone (see Fig. 3). Values displayed in Table III were obtained
from a tissue simulation using a strand of myocardium (50 ×
10 × 10 voxels). Due to reduced AP upstroke velocity, CV is
reduced by 40%. For the final setup, CV was further adjusted
by modifying intracellular conductivity (see next section).

2470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE III
MODELING AP CHANGES AND RESULTING CV FOR ZF = 1

signals
vbi (t) = vuni,p (t) − vuni,d (t).

Control
Isch. P1A
Change %

Vm (mV)

APA (mV)

dV/dt (mV/ms)

APD (ms)

CV (m/s)

−85.48
−73.48
14

56.49
26.72
−52

107.46
87.45
−18

310
177
−42

0.83
0.5
−40

2) CV: Simmers et al. [14] reported CV changes for temperatures between 37 ◦ C and 50 ◦ C measured on superfused canine
myocardium. They showed that CV is elevated up to 115%
of baseline CV, for temperatures between 38 ◦ C and 42 ◦ C, followed by a decrease to 60% at 49 ◦ C. Conduction block occurred
above 50 ◦ C. These results agree with the results of WF, who
also found elevated CV in the wider lesion borderzone [16].
Gap junctional resistance is strongly reduced by elevated temperatures [33]. Therefore, intracellular conductivity was modified to produce suitable CV values in the borderzone. Tissue
strand simulations (50 × 10 × 10 voxels) were used to estimate
initial conductivity values for the borderzone conductivities.
These values were later adjusted to match the complex situation in an inhomogeneous piece of tissue, where also wavefront
curvature and source-sink mismatch influence CV [34]. An estimate of the local CV was calculated based on local activation
times (LATs). LATs were defined by the point in time, where
the transmembrane voltage (Vm ) exceeded −60 mV. In order
to minimize the error due to time discretization, the upstroke of
Vm was interpolated in time by a cubic spline function, obtaining an increased sampling rate of 1 MHz. Conduction velocities
were calculated based on the spatial gradients of the LAT [35],
[36].
D. Simulation Environment for Intracardiac Catheter Signals
Finite-element bidomain simulations using the software package acCELLerate [37] directly provided transmembrane voltages and extracellular potentials. The implemented bidomain
model is based on reaction–diffusion and follows the equations
presented, e.g., in [38]. We previously showed that the bidomain
simulations produce better results than a monodomain approach
with subsequent forward calculation in our small-scale geometry [39]. Furthermore, they closely match clinical intracardiac
EGMs [40] under physiological conditions. In the current study,
we used the ten Tusscher model [31]. The simulation setup was
initialized in a single-cell environment to reach stable conditions for an equivalent of 10 min at a stimulation rate of 1 Hz.
Tissue simulations were allowed to equilibrate for 10 ms before
an intracellular stimulus current of 100 pA/pF was applied for
1 ms to initiate a planar activation front.
Catheter signals were calculated based on the extracellular potentials on the distal and proximal electrodes pe,d (t) and pe,p (t).
Unipolar signals [vuni,d (t), vuni,p (t)] were defined against a reference potential in the blood, given by the mean of all extracellular potentials in the top voxel layer of the setup. Bipolar
signals vbi (t) were calculated by the difference of both unipolar

(1)

Simulated EGMs were stored at a sampling rate of 10 kHz. The
influences of the different components of the presented lesion
model were evaluated by a stepwise application of each feature of the model using a setup with 92% lesion transmurality.
Furthermore, characteristic points in the EGM were extracted
for quantitative comparison to clinical data. Therefore, signals
were downsampled to the clinical sampling rate of 1 kHz. The
characteristic features were: The positive and negative peak amplitude and the maximum first derivative between these points.
In order to evaluate the impact of the lesion borderzone, characteristic points were also analyzed for simulations, where the
lesion was only modeled by the necrotic core. Finally, the LATs
were compared to fiducial points in the filtered and unfiltered
simulated signals. Positive and negative peaks of the unfiltered
signal were compared quantitatively to LATs of the outer lesion
border (40 ◦ C area).
E. Clinical EGMs
We retrospectively analyzed intracardiac EGMs from five patients. All patients were undergoing ablation of the cavotricuspidal isthmus in the right atrium due to typical flutter. Ablation
was performed by a point-by-point technique without overlap
for the first points. Catheter orientation was annotated and verified by fluoroscopy for each point. Ablations and measurements
were performed by an 8F catheter with an 8-mm tip electrode,
3-mm interelectrode spacing and four 1.2-mm proximal
electrodes (Blazer Prime II XP, Boston Scientific, Boston,
MA, USA).
For each point, ablation cycles with a duration of 20–60 s
were applied. Before and after ablation, 10–20 s of signal were
acquired. For four of the five patients, ablation was performed
during pacing from the coronary sinus catheter (CS 7/8) at a
basic cycle length of 500 ms. The fifth patient presented sinus
rhythm. Unipolar EGMs (UEGM) against Wilson’s central terminal from both distal electrodes (uni 1 and uni 2) as well as
the bipolar EGM were exported from the clinical data acquisition system (EP Labsystem Pro, Bard, Natick, MA, USA).
Signals were sampled at a rate of 1 kHz and bandpass filtered at
30–250 Hz.
Analysis was performed only on datasets for which catheter
position was completely stable over the whole analyzed time
frame. This resulted in six sequences with nonparallel catheter
orientation and five with parallel orientation. Three of the latter
show a propagation direction from proximal to distal electrodes
(pPD) and two sequences have the opposite direction (pDP).
Based on the clinical annotations, EGMs of 20-s length were
exported for each stage of the recording sequence, which were:
1) signals before ablation, 2) signals recorded during ablation,
and 3) signals after the ablation sequence.
The EGMs were processed as follows. Active segments (AS)
were identified in the bipolar EGM (BEGM) using an adaptive
thresholding algorithm [41], which is based on the nonlinear
energy operator (NLEO) (see Fig. 4). An algorithm detecting

KELLER et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION LESION DEVELOPMENT

2471

Fig. 4. NLEO-based segmentation. A bipolar EGM showing stimulus artifacts, atrial EGMs, and ventricular activity. AS are marked by the step function
(red).

the dominant frequency was used [42] to choose only those
AS belonging to the stimulation frequency. Subsequently, only
AS that follow a stimulation from the CS and fit to the corresponding time lag for the dominant frequency were selected.
Starting points of AS in the BEGM were used as markers to
extract EGMs. For each marker, a 200-ms segment starting 50
ms before the marker was extracted from BEGMs and UEGMs.
Afterward, extracted segments from the BEGMs were grouped
in time frames of 5 s and aligned by maximum correlation.
In order to preserve time dependency between the leads, the
corresponding unipolar segments were aligned using the time
shift extracted from the bipolar segments. We created a template by calculating the mean of the aligned segments. These
templates were analyzed automatically to extract the introduced
characteristic features. For temporal analysis of EGM changes,
the negative peak amplitudes for two ablation sequences of 20
s with very good signal quality were analyzed by extracting
templates within 1-s time frames.
F. Estimation of the Clinical Filter Function
In order to compare clinical and simulated signals, it is necessary to know the exact filter characteristics of the clinical system.
Since this information is not known to the user, we used estimated spectral densities for system identification as proposed in
[43]. Briefly, the system transfer function H(f ), which stands
for the filter in our case, can be calculated from the power spectral density (PSD) of the input signal Sxx and the cross PSD
Sy x of input and output signal
H(f ) =

Sy x
.
Sxx

(2)

We exported the same signal with two filter settings. The highpass cutoff frequency for the first version was set to 1 Hz. The
low pass was disabled. The second version was exported with
clinical standard settings of 30 and 250 Hz. The first signal was
taken as input x(t) of the filter system. The second was defined
as output y(t). PSD were estimated by the method introduced
by Welsh [44], using a Hamming window with a length of 2048
samples. We compared the phase and magnitude of H(f ) to
standard filter types (Butterworth, Chebyshev, Elliptic) of different orders. After identifying the best match, we computed the
correlation coefficient between 80 EGMs filtered with the estimated filter and their filtered version from the clinical system.

Fig. 5. (a) Power spectral densities of the filtered (red) and unfiltered (blue)
signals. (b) Estimated amplitude and phase response of the clinical filter system. Blue: estimation from the transfer function. Cyan and green: Frequency
responses of first-order Butterworth high-pass and low-pass filters. Red: Resulting frequency response by a serial application of the high pass and the low pass.
(c) EGMs exported from the clinical system. Straight line: unfiltered EGM;
dashed: filtered EGM; (d) Overlay of the filtered clinical EGM (blue) and the
unfiltered EGM after application of the estimated Butterworth filter function
(green).

III. RESULTS
A. Clinical Filter Function
Magnitude and phase values of the estimated transfer function of the clinical system are shown in Fig. 5(b). Frequencies
up to 250 Hz are displayed to cover the relevant characteristics of the filter. However, as seen in the PSD [see Fig. 5(a)],
the major frequency content of the signal was in the range of
1–150 Hz, which limited the reliability of the estimation beyond this point. Among the tested standard filters, an exact
match was reached for a series of a first-order Butterworth high
pass at 30 Hz followed by a first-order Butterworth low pass at
250 Hz. The combined transfer function closely reproduced the
amplitude as well as the phase response of the clinical system.
We filtered 80 EGMs with the estimated filter and obtained a
mean correlation of 0.994 ± 0.013 with their versions filtered
by the clinical system [see Fig. 5(c) and (d)]
B. Conduction Velocity
The LAT pattern produced by our simulation approach is
shown in Fig. 6(a) in the X-Y-plane view. Around the necrotic
core, the isochrones become inhomogeneous. In the inner circle,
they point backwards, which represents slowed conduction. The
wider borderzone was activated earlier than the surrounding
tissue. CV in normal tissue was set to 0.8 m/s. In the wider
borderzone, CV was up to 1 m/s (+25%). Toward the necrotic
core, CV decreased down to 0.3 m/s (−63%) [see Fig. 6(b)].

2472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. (a) LAT map of an X-Y-plane view 1-mm beneath the endocardial
surface. Black circle in the center: necrotic core area. (b) Local CV of the same
view as (a); CV is increased in the outer area of the lesion and rapidly decreases
toward the necrotic core. (c) Temporal development of negative peak amplitude
for distal UEGM during 20 s of ablation (parallel: red, nonparallel: black).

Fig. 8. Sequence of clinical EGMs for parallel catheter orientation for different
stages. See Fig. 7 for legend.

Fig. 7. Sequence of clinical EGMs for nonparallel catheter orientation for
different stages: Before RFA (row 1), during RFA (row 2), after RFA (row 3);
Distal UEGM (column 1), proximal UEGM (column 2), BEGM (column 3).
Each row shows EGMs from a 20-s recording. EGMs from 5-s segments are
color coded. Yellow: 0–5 s, green: 5–10 s, red: 10–15 s, blue: 15–20 s; Respective
light colors represent the extracted segments, dark colors represent the mean for
the indicated time frame.

C. Clinical EGMs
Two exemplary sequences of signals for nonparallel and parallel catheter orientation relative to the tissue surface are shown
in Figs. 7 and 8. For the orthogonal case, the most important
change occurring during the ablation sequence was an amplitude
reduction of the negative peak of the distal UEGM. Furthermore,
a reduction in steepness of the negative downstroke can be seen.
Amplitude and shape of the first upstroke remained stable. The
second positive peak did hardly change in morphology, however,
it occurred later.
The described changes were also reflected in the BEGM,
which is dominated by the distal UEGM. The signal morphology changed predominantly during the 5–10 s period of the
ablation sequence. Before and after ablation, all AS show the

same morphology, which was stable for the complete 20-s
recording.
For the parallel recording position (see Fig. 8), both electrodes were in contact with the myocardium. Therefore, both
UEGMs show a similar morphology before ablation. During
ablation, the distal UEGM changed in the same fashion as for
the nonparallel case. Again, the amplitude of the negative peak
decreased, the steepness of the initial downstroke was reduced
and the second positive peak was delayed. As both electrodes
contribute to the BEGM, two pronounced peaks can be observed. During ablation, the first part of the signal, which is
produced by the proximal electrode, remained stable. However,
the positive deflection of the signal was reduced. Again, the
changes in signal morphology mainly occurred in the 5–10-s
segment [see Fig. 6(c)]. Quantitative values of relative EGM
changes during ablation are given in Table IV. Regarding the
distal UEGM, changes in negative peak amplitude as well as
the maximum downstroke velocity were most pronounced. A
reduction in the negative amplitude of more than 94% implies
a reduction of this peak nearly to the baseline for all catheter
orientations. Proximal UEGMs were only analyzed for parallel catheter orientation, where proximal electrodes have tissue
contact. As the electrode location was outside the lesion area,
changes in all EGM parameters were smaller than for the distal
electrode.
BEGMs reflect characteristics of both UEGMs. Therefore, alterations are dependent on catheter orientation. For the nonparallel case, changes were the inverted case of the distal UEGM,
as this signal dominates. For parallel orientations, the positive
peak amplitude decreased during the ablation sequence, which
resulted from the inverted distal UEGM.

KELLER et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION LESION DEVELOPMENT

2473

TABLE IV
RELATIVE CHANGES IN CLINICAL AND FILTERED SIMULATED EGMS
Max 1

Min 1

dV/dt

−0.94 ± 0.10
−1.00 ± 0.12
−1.04 ± 0.14

−0.80 ± 0.09
−0.88 ± 0.10
−0.81 ± 0.05

−0.46 ± 0.12
−0.09 ± 0.53

−0.45 ± 0.19
0.09 ± 0.41

−0.20 ± 0.33
−0.39 ± 0.03
−0.14 ± 0.54

−0.79 ± 0.10
−0.46 ± 0.13
−0.24 ± 0.82

−0.83 ± 0.00
−0.65 ± 0.00
−0.56 ± 0.00
−0.74 ± 0.00

−0.80 ± 0.00
0.07 ± 0.00
0.02 ± 0.00
−0.70 ± 0.00

−0.10 ± 0.00
−0.01 ± 0.00

0.13 ± 0.00
−0.02 ± 0.00

−0.32 ± 0.00
−0.10 ± 0.00
−0.04 ± 0.00
−0.29 ± 0.00

−0.83 ± 0.00
−0.09 ± 0.00
0.23 ± 0.00
−0.72 ± 0.00

clinical distal UEGM
np
pPD
pDP

−0.17 ± 0.27
−0.31 ± 0.21
−0.27 ± 0.53

clinical proximal UEGM
pPD
pDP

−0.22 ± 0.21
−0.15 ± 0.23
clinical BEGM

np
pPD
pDP

−0.95 ± 0.17
−0.59 ± 0.56
−1.06 ± 0.37

simulated distal UEGM
np
pPD
pDP
npn

−0.27 ± 0.00
−0.13 ± 0.00
−0.09 ± 0.00
−0.24 ± 0.00

Fig. 10. Filtered simulated EGMs for all simulated lesion levels. (0–110%
transmural extension); Top row: Orthogonal catheter orientation, Bottom row:
Parallel catheter orientation. Left: distal UEGM, middle: proximal UEGM,
right: BEGM, Color code: black (0% lesion) to light blue (110% lesion).

simulated proximal UEGM
pPD
pDP

−0.07 ± 0.00
0.03 ± 0.00
simulated BEGM

np
pPD
pDP
npn

−0.85 ± 0.00
−0.51 ± 0.00
−0.53 ± 0.00
−0.77 ± 0.00

Values are given as mean relative change ± stdev before and after the ablation;
catheter orientations np: nonparallel (orthogonal), pPD: parallel, proximal to distal propagation, pDP: parallel, distal to proximal propagation, npn: nonparallel only necrotic core;
EGM parameters Max 1: Positive peak amplitude, Min 1: Negative peak amplitude, dV/dt:
Maximum deflection.

Fig. 9. Comparison of the influence of the lesion model on filtered EGM
morphology for a scar with 92% transmurality. Green: only necrotic core, dark
blue: only AP changes, light blue: only CV changes, red: complete lesion model.
Left: distal UEGM, middle: proximal UEGM, right: BEGM.

D. Simulated EGMs
The first part of this section covers simulated EGMs, which
were filtered with the Butterworth filters derived from the clinical filter function in order to compare the results to clinical data.
The second part shows unfiltered signals.
1) Filtered Signals: The influence of the presented lesion
model was investigated by a stepwise application of the different components of the model (necrotic core, CV changes, AP
changes, complete model). Compared to a scar model, which
only includes the necrotic core, AP changes as well as CV
changes led to a reduction in EGM amplitudes (see Fig. 9). The
simulation which only included the CV related changes (intra-

cellular conductivities) produced a smaller signal amplitude than
the simulation regarding only AP changes. The complete model
produced the smallest and less peaked EGM. Slight differences in upstroke velocity could be observed. For an orthogonal
catheter orientation relative to the tissue surface, simulations
produced EGMs as shown in Fig. 10(top row). Analogous to the
clinical signals, the negative peak amplitude of the distal UEGM
decreased, whereas the first positive peak did not change much.
Also the steepness of the negative deflection decreased for increased lesion levels. Peak amplitude changed gradually with increased lesion depth. This process continued beyond the point of
the lesion being transmural (light blue curves). The three curves
with smallest negative peak amplitude represent the stages of
92%, 100%, and 110% transmural extent. Comparing the simulation directly before reaching complete transmural extension
(92%), the transmural simulation (100%), and the 110% stage,
no significant difference could be identified between transmural
and nontransmural states. Characteristics of the distal UEGM
can be translated to BEGM by changing polarity for orthogonal
orientation.
Simulations for orthogonal orientation were also performed
by only modeling the necrotic core of the lesion, to compare
with the approach of other studies. Signal morphology for
these simulations looked similar to the shown signals. However, quantitative differences could be extracted (see Table IV).
Taking a look at the parallel catheter orientation (see Fig. 10),
changes in the distal UEGM were similar to the orthogonal
orientation. Negative peak amplitude decreased during ablation. However, the steepness of the downstroke was not reduced. Proximal UEGMs hardly changed. The first part was
identical for all lesion levels, as this part of the signal was
produced by tissue outside of the lesion area. The second
maximum slightly changed, as this part of the EGM coincides with the point in time, at which the wavefront passes
the lesion area. In the BEGM, the second peak is decreased,

2474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 11. Unfiltered simulated EGMs for all simulated lesion levels. See Fig. 10
for legend.

which is in agreement with the clinical example. Changes of
the characteristic points are shown in Table IV. Quantitative
changes of clinical EGMs were reproduced in the simulations.
In particular, the negative peak amplitude of distal UEGM
was reduced (up to −83%) combined with stable behavior
of the positive peak. Downstroke velocity decrease was not
present for parallel catheter orientation. Looking at orthogonal
simulations incorporating only the passive necrotic core, both
the negative amplitude reduction (−74%) and also the change
in downstroke velocity (−70%) were less pronounced for distal
UEGMs. Simulated BEGMs showed the largest difference in
the positive peak amplitude (up to −85%). For nonparallel orientation, maximum dV/dt was reproduced properly, whereas for
parallel catheter orientations, clinical changes for this parameter
were not fully met.
2) Unfiltered Signals: The clinical filter with its high-pass
frequency of 30 Hz strongly changes signal morphology, which
was already shown in Section III-A. Therefore, this section depicts the unfiltered simulated EGMs. For an orthogonal catheter
orientation before ablation (see Fig. 11, top). UEGMs showed a
biphasic shape with a slightly higher negative peak amplitude.
For increasing lesion levels, signal amplitudes as well as the
steepness of the negative deflection decreased. BEGMs for this
orientation are dominated by the inverted distal UEGM.
Regarding UEGMs for a parallel catheter orientation (see
Fig. 11), the distal EGM showed similar behavior as in the
case of orthogonal catheter orientation. The proximal signal
remained unchanged in the positive part, which is produced
by tissue outside the lesion area. Negative deflection amplitude
decreased due to lesion formation. In the unfiltered BEGM,
differences between signals before and after ablation were less
visible than in the filtered version.
3) Correspondence Between Signals and Tissue Activity: Intracardiac EGMs are primarily a mean to analyze electrical activity inside the myocardium. We investigated corresponding
points of the spread of excitation and the simulated signals
in order to interpret the mechanisms behind the signal changes.
Fig. 12 visualizes simulated catheter signals and the correspond-

ing distributions of extracellular potentials. A closer look at the
distal UEGMs for both orientations reveals that the positive
and negative peaks of the unfiltered signals correspond with the
position, where the wavefront enters or leaves the lesion area.
We compared the LAT determined by the course of Vm at the
edge of the borderzone. Here, we found good agreement for
lesion sizes exceeding the size of the contact area of the catheter
electrode. In the orthogonal case, this was true for lesions of
≥28% transmural extent. Mean absolute error between LAT
and peak time was 0.85 ms for the positive peak and 0.18 ms for
the negative peak. In case of parallel orientation, spatial averaging of the electrode led to larger errors, which were 1.87 ms for
the positive and 0.67 ms for the negative peak. As the contact
area is larger for parallel orientation, high correlation was only
found for lesions above 92% transmurality.
The negative deflection of the unfiltered signal represents the
passage of the wavefront underneath the catheter. This deflection
produces the negative peak in the filtered EGM. For the filtered
case, the negative deflection steepness is partially represented
by the negative peak amplitude of the distal UEGM. The BEGM
morphology is strongly dependent on catheter orientation. For
orthogonal orientation, the criteria for the distal UEGM apply
with changed polarity. For parallel orientation, no clear criteria
could be derived as both electrodes are contributing to the signal.
The first peak of the filtered EGM also corresponds with the
time, when the wavefront enters the lesion area.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we analyzed changes of EGM morphology due
to RFA of myocardium. For this purpose, a simulation approach accounting for acute electrophysiological effects was
developed. This model describes the ablation lesion not only
by a passive necrotic core, but also accounts for changed AP
behavior and CV in the borderzone surrounding the lesion. Furthermore, the ellipsoidal shape of the lesion was reproduced.
Simulated catheter signals on this substrate closely reproduced
EGM changes, which we extracted from clinical recordings.
Several simulation studies have investigated ablation lesion
influence on myocardial excitation patterns during atrial fibrillation [19]–[21]. All studies considered the lesions in their chronic
state as passive, nonexcitable areas in the myocardial wall. In
this study, we accounted for the acute behavior of the lesion
including the surrounding area, which is affected by temporal
heating. Lesions of varying transmural extent were modeled by
an ellipsoidal shape reported from experimental and simulation
studies [25], [26].
We used a geometrically detailed catheter model incorporating electrodes as areas of high conductivity, leading to spatial
averaging effects of extracellular potentials on the electrode surface. This goes beyond the scope of most simulation studies of
intracardiac EGMs [45]–[49], which were mostly aiming at understanding global excitation patterns or modeling very small
electrodes and, therefore, neglecting detailed catheter geometry. An analytical approach to calculate extracellular potentials
was presented in [50], which enables small computation times
by assuming a planar wavefront and a predefined course of the

KELLER et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION LESION DEVELOPMENT

2475

Fig. 12. Extracellular potentials (V e ) and corresponding signal points for a transmural extent of 75%. a–e: Orthogonal orientation; f–j: Parallel orientation. For
each orientation, three relevant points in time are shown and indicated by vertical lines in the EGM: 1) Excitation front entering lesion area (cyan), 2) front passing
the distal electrode (magenta), 3) front exiting the lesion area (yellow); distal UEGM (d, f) and BEGM (e, g), unfiltered (green), filtered (blue).

transmembrane voltage. We performed full bidomain simulations, which take interactions between intra- and extracellular
space into account. These can arise from bath loading effects
and the influence of the relatively large catheter electrode on
transmembrane voltage. Additionally, by using the bidomain
approach, the simulation environment would also be capable to
simulate extracellular pacing. As this method is a standard in
clinical procedures to evaluate scar completeness [7], this is an
important feature.
By analyzing real clinical data from five patients, we were
able to evaluate our simulations on a very detailed scale. The
clinical data also enabled us to estimate the clinical filter function in order to apply it to our simulated EGMs, which turned
out to strongly influence signal morphology.
A. Clinical EGMs
We retrospectively analyzed clinical recordings from point
lesions before, during, and after the ablation sequence. Analyzed
signals were prefiltered by the clinical recording system with a
standard bandpass filter setting (30–250 Hz). Unfiltered signals
were acquired for parts of the datasets. During RF delivery, the
unfiltered data presented with severe baseline wander, which
led to alterations in EGM shape. Therefore, it was decided to
use the established filter settings, which are comparable to other
studies and which clinicians are used to. Based on the presented
study, it will be possible to find optimized filter settings, which
preserve important signal characteristics.
For stable catheter positions, templates as a mean of AS over
5 s were calculated. These displayed temporally stable morphology before and after the ablation (Figs. 7 and 8). The main
findings of the EGM analysis during ablation were a decrease
of the negative peak amplitude of the distal UEGM of up to
−100%, combined with a decrease in downstroke velocity of

the negative deflection. Furthermore, a reduction of the positive
peak in BEGM, which is dominated by the distal UEGM, was
found.
Signal morphology of distal UEGM was similar for all
catheter orientations, whereas BEGM morphology was strongly
variable to this parameter. The number of 11 point ablations from
five patients in our database is limited. However, the results
were consistent with the findings by Otomo et al. in a porcine
model, where they analyzed 125 ablation points [10]. Our study
showed that the morphological findings from this experimental
study can be translated to human data. This is in agreement
with the extensive study by Bortone et al. [11], who used the
unipolar amplitude criterion suggested by Otomo et al. [10]. In
addition to static parameters, we investigated the temporal behavior of amplitude changes during the ablation sequence. We
found, that the main changes occurred within the first 10 s after
the start of ablation [see Fig. 6(c)]. These findings are consistent
with data from ultrasound recordings [9] and histological data
[25].
The filter function of the clinical system was estimated by
the system transfer function obtained from two versions of the
same signal with different filter settings. The amplitude as well
as the phase response could be precisely reproduced by a series of first-order Butterworth filters. We built a filter equal to
the clinical version by a 30 Hz high pass and a low pass at
250 Hz. By applying this filter to 80 nearly unfiltered EGMs,
a correlation of 99.4% with the same segments filtered by the
clinical system was reached [see also Fig. 5(c)]. The importance
of an exact knowledge of the filter function was revealed when
studying its influence on EGM morphology. This has to be kept
in mind, when changing clinical filter settings. In our unipolar
signals, filtering led to a change in amplitude ratio between positive and negative amplitude and transformed the signal shape
to one similar to its mathematical derivative (see Fig. 12) by

2476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

emphasizing the steep deflections in the signal. However, especially the amplitude ratio of UEGM bears important information. For example, points where wavefronts start or come to an
end can be identified by the occurrence of monophasic negative
or monophasic positive UEGM, respectively [51].
B. Modeling Acute Ablation Lesions
We extracted geometrical as well as electrophysiological
characteristics of acute lesions from literature data on RFA.
Our final lesion model consisted of a passive core and several
layers of active tissue with changed AP and CV behavior (see
Fig. 3). EGM formation is mainly influenced by AP upstroke
velocity and amplitude that were modeled by an electrophysiological model for ischemic tissue [32]. This approach macroscopically reproduced the experimental findings for RFA and
heated myocardium [15], [16], [28]. The detailed mechanisms
of AP changes during RFA are not understood. However, ischemic effects may play a role [12]. By additional changes of
intracellular conductivity, which were motivated by alterations
in gap junctional behavior [33], a CV gradient as found by Simmers et al. [14] could be reproduced in the borderzone. We
used the ten Tusscher model to describe cardiac electrophysiology. This choice should have small influence on simulated
EGM morphology, as the EGM is mainly produced by the AP
upstroke. This part of the AP is similar for most current cell
models.
C. Filtered Simulated EGMs
Applying different components of the lesion model in a stepwise approach (see Fig. 9) we found, that AP as well as CV
changes in the borderzone influenced EGM amplitude and morphology. In comparison to the full lesion model, CV changes
produced a similar EGM shape with a slightly higher amplitude.
Based on these results, the model could be reduced to CV related changes for simplification. However, in our opinion further
research on EGM morphology for varying lesion geometries is
necessary to draw a decisive conclusion, if AP related changes
are of minor importance in this context.
Filtered simulated EGMs reproduced clinical EGM morphology and changes during ablation (see Fig. 10). This was especially true for the so called near field part of the EGM, which
represents the passage of the wavefront underneath the electrode. However, when regarding the first part of the EGMs,
following the stimulus applied at 10 ms, a relatively steep upstroke occurred in the simulated EGMs, which was not observed
in the clinical data. This behavior was caused by two effects.
The first one is the relatively short patch of simulated cardiac
tissue, which is activated by a planar stimulus. Thereby, a planar
wavefront was initiated, which instantaneously appeared within
the field of view of the catheter. Second, the ablation catheter
with its long tip electrode has a relatively large field of view,
from which it senses changes in the extracellular potential, especially for an orthogonal catheter orientation. As the scope of
this study was clearly on the near field part of the IEGM, we
accepted this difference in order to reduce the high computational cost of the simulations. Also, the relevant parts of the

filtered signals are not influenced due to the short memory of
the first-order Butterworth filters.
Usually, calculations of extracellular potentials are performed
with no-flux Neumann boundary conditions at the outside surface of the setup for extra- and intracellular space and at the
tissue-bath interface for the intracellular space. Furthermore,
Dirichlet conditions for the extracellular space are included as
ground potentials. Due to the Neumann conditions, the solution
for the extracellular space should be unique except for an additional constant [52]. As our signals are always calculated as
differences of two potentials, this constant is removed. In test
simulations, we compared EGMs produced by both approaches
without significant differences. As we found, that the simulation
time was reduced by omitting the additional Dirichlet boundary
condition we decided to use this approach.
For nonparallel (orthogonal) catheter orientation, BEGMs
showed a reduction in negative peak amplitude of −95% (clinical) compared to −85% (simulated). For downstroke velocity,
clinical changes were −79% compared to −83% for simulations
(see Table IV). At this point, the influence of the borderzone
could be studied. For a set of simulations incorporating only
the necrotic core, the corresponding values were −77% for the
amplitude change and −72% (see Table IV) for the downstroke
velocity. These results revealed that modeling the passive core
with a detailed geometry led to a good match with clinical data,
which was further improved by accounting for borderzone effects. This was also shown by a stepwise application of the
components of the lesion model. CV as well as AP related
parameters separately led to a reduction in EGM amplitude.
The remaining difference between clinical data and simulation
could depend on several uncertain parameters. First, the electrical conductivity of lesion tissue for the direct current case
is not precisely known. Furthermore, geometric effects like tissue swelling were not considered. In addition, injury currents
into the necrotic area may play a role. Furthermore, the electrochemical equilibrium potential at the electrode–tissue interface
(half-cell potential [53]), may be influenced by ablation currents.
D. Unfiltered Simulated EGMs and Translation to Tissue Level
Having in mind the strong influence of the clinical filter on
signal morphology (see Fig. 12), the question arises how the
characteristic points of both signals can be translated to diagnostic values connected to the electrical activity inside the myocardium. The strong high-pass filtering, which is used in clinic
to stabilize the baseline, leads to an overexpression of rapid
changes in the signal. Those are the steep up and downstrokes
in the unfiltered signal. For example, the amplitude of the negative peak in the filtered distal UEGM correlates strongly with the
maximum negative deflection of the unfiltered signal. By evaluating the LATs, we found that the negative peak of the filtered
distal UEGM occurred at the moment, when the wavefront was
passing the distal electrode of the catheter. This finding is consistent with experimental data of Ndrepepa et al. [54]. Analysis
of our clinical as well as the experimental data [10] showed that
the amplitude of this peak is correlated with lesion depth. Our
simulation results also support the idea to use this as a marker

KELLER et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION LESION DEVELOPMENT

to evaluate lesion formation during the procedure. Although we
could not find a characteristic change occurring when reaching
transmurality, it might still be a valuable information to judge
whether lesion formation has reached a steady-state level. Our
concern is that this value is strongly dependent on the filter setting and type. Therefore, it may vary due to different filter types
used in systems of different companies. Our analysis of unfiltered signals revealed a strong connection between the signal
peaks and the points in time, where the wavefront is entering and
exiting the scar area. This could be explained by the wavefront
leaving and returning to endocardial layers of the tissue, where
it contributes strongest to the EGM amplitude. Furthermore, the
lesion depth could be related to the downstroke velocity of the
unfiltered distal UEGM.
Based on these results, we suggest an improved approach for
EGM analysis including reduced filtering to preserve the original signal shape. Analysis of the first derivative of the UEGM
could serve as a robust system independent criterion for lesion
depth. Additionally, the time between peaks bears the potential
to evaluate lesion width relative to the propagation direction of
the excitation front.

E. Limitations
Regarding the modeling of the acute lesion, we approximated
the geometry by two half ellipsoids based on experimental and
simulation data. A better estimation might be possible by using
detailed temperature simulation data.
Our catheter model does not take into account capacitive effects at the electrode tissue interface, which cannot be accounted
for in a quasi-static simulation environment.
And finally, we could only describe morphological changes
regarding the clinical data, but we do not have information on
transmural lesion extension for the recorded signals.

V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we generated a simulation environment for acute
RFA lesions and their influence on intracardiac EGM morphology. With this approach, morphological changes from five clinical datasets were closely reproduced. Our approach opens the
opportunity to predict and explain EGM changes and thereby
develop robust and logical EGM criteria to evaluate various
ablation lesion geometries, which could, e.g., include linear lesions or lesion gaps. Furthermore, existing statistically identified
EGM parameters can be studied in order to find the underlying
mechanisms. We applied a clinical standard filter to simulated
EGMs. This revealed a strong influence of clinical filter settings
on EGM morphology.
One important finding from our clinical data was the study
of temporal development of EGM changes. By monitoring the
temporal behavior, the necessary ablation time may be estimated. Furthermore, revitalization directly after ablation might
be detected by observing EGM morphology.

2477

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Tobias Oesterlein for his
thorough reading and comments to the manuscript.

REFERENCES
[1] F. Ouyang, R. Tilz, J. Chun, B. Schmidt, E. Wissner, T. Zerm, K. Neven, B.
Köktürk, M. Konstantinidou, A. Metzner, A. Fuernkranz, and K.-H. Kuck,
“Long-term results of catheter ablation in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation:
Lessons from a 5-year follow-up,” Circulation, vol. 122, no. 23, pp. 2368–
2377, Dec. 2010.
[2] R. Weerasooriya, P. Khairy, J. Litalien, L. Macle, M. Hocini, F. Sacher,
N. Lellouche, S. Knecht, M. Wright, I. Nault, S. Miyazaki, C. Scavee,
J. Clementy, M. Haissaguerre, and P. Jais, “Catheter ablation for atrial
fibrillation: Are results maintained at 5 years of follow-up?” J. Amer. Coll.
Cardiol., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 160–166, Jan. 2011.
[3] N. Sawhney, R. Anousheh, W. Chen, and G. K. Feld, “Circumferential
pulmonary vein ablation with additional linear ablation results in an increased incidence of left atrial flutter compared with segmental pulmonary
vein isolation as an initial approach to ablation of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation,” Circ. Arrhythmia Electrophysiol., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 243–248, Jun.
2010.
[4] P. Neuzil, V. Y. Reddy, J. Kautzner, J. Petru, D. Wichterle, D. Shah, H.
Lambert, A. Yulzari, E. Wissner, and K.-H. Kuck, “Electrical reconnection after pulmonary vein isolation is contingent on contact force during
initial treatment: Results from the EFFICAS I study,” Circ. Arrhythmia
Electrophysiol., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 327–333, Apr. 2013.
[5] R. Wakili, S. Clauss, V. Schmidt, M. Ulbrich, A. Hahnefeld, F. Schüssler,
J. Siebermair, S. Kääb, and H. L. Estner, “Impact of real-time contact force
and impedance measurement in pulmonary vein isolation procedures for
treatment of atrial fibrillation,” Clin. Res. Cardiol., vol. 103, pp. 97–106,
Feb. 2014.
[6] J. H. Dumas Iii, H. D. Himel Iv, A. C. Kiser, S. R. Quint, and S. B.
Knisley, “Myocardial electrical impedance as a predictor of the quality of
RF-induced linear lesions,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1195–1207,
Oct. 2008.
[7] I. Kosmidou, H. Houde-Walter, L. Foley, and G. Michaud, “Loss of pace
capture after radiofrequency application predicts the formation of uniform
transmural lesions,” Europace, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 601–606, Apr. 2013.
[8] G. R. Vergara, S. Vijayakumar, E. G. Kholmovski, J. J. Blauer, M. A.
Guttman, C. Gloschat, G. Payne, K. Vij, N. W. Akoum, M. Daccarett,
C. J. McGann, R. S. Macleod, and N. F. Marrouche, “Real-time magnetic resonance imaging–guided radiofrequency atrial ablation and visualization of lesion formation at 3 Tesla,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 295–303, 2011.
[9] M. Wright, E. Harks, S. Deladi, F. Suijver, M. Barley, A. van Dusschoten, S. Fokkenrood, F. Zuo, F. Sacher, M. Hocini, M. Haı̈ssaguerre, and
P. Jaı̈s, “Real-time lesion assessment using a novel combined ultrasound and radiofrequency ablation catheter,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 8, no.
2, pp. 304–312, Feb. 2011.
[10] K. Otomo, K. Uno, H. Fujiwara, M. Isobe, and Y. Iesaka, “Local unipolar
and bipolar electrogram criteria for evaluating the transmurality of atrial
ablation lesions at different catheter orientations relative to the endocardial
surface,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 7, pp. 1291–1300, 2010.
[11] A. Bortone, A. Appetiti, A. Bouzeman, E. Maupas, V. Ciobotaru, J.-M.
Boulenc, P. Pujadas-Berthault, and P. Rioux, “Unipolar signal modification
as a guide for lesion creation during radiofrequency application in the left
atrium: A prospective study in humans in the setting of paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation catheter ablation,” Circ. Arrhythmia Electrophysiol., vol. 6,
pp. 1095–1102, Dec. 2013.
[12] S. Nath, J. P. DiMarco, and D. E. Haines, “Basic aspects of radiofrequency
catheter ablation,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 5, pp. 863–876,
1994.
[13] S. Nath, C. R. Lynch, J. G. Whayne, and D. E. Haines, “Cellular electrophysiological effects of hyperthermia on isolated guinea pig papillary
muscle implications for catheter ablation,” Circulation, vol. 88, pp. 1826–
1831, 1993.
[14] T. A. Simmers, J. M. De Bakker, F. H. Wittkampf, and R. N. Hauer,
“Effects of heating on impulse propagation in superfused canine myocardium,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1457–1464, May
1995.

2478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

[15] Y. Z. Ge, P. Z. Shao, J. Goldberger, and A. Kadish, “Cellular electrophysiological changes induced in vitro by radiofrequency current: Comparison
with electrical ablation,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 18, pp. 323–
333, 1995.
[16] M. A. Wood and I. A. Fuller, “Acute and chronic electrophysiologic
changes surrounding radiofrequency lesions,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 13, pp. 56–61, 2002.
[17] J. Wu, M. Biermann, M. Rubart, and D. P. Zipes, “Cytochalasin d as
excitation-contraction uncoupler for optically mapping action potentials
in wedges of ventricular myocardium,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol.,
vol. 9, pp. 1336–1347, 1998.
[18] M. W. Krueger, G. Seemann, K. Rhode, D. U. J. Keller, C. Schilling,
A. Arujuna, J. Gill, M. D. O’Neill, R. Razavi, and O. Dössel, “Personalization of atrial anatomy and elelectophysiology as a basis for clinical
modeling of radio-frequency-ablation of atrial fibrillation,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 73–84, Jan. 2013.
[19] M. Reumann, J. Bohnert, G. Seemann, B. Osswald, and O. Dössel, “Preventive ablation strategies in a biophysical model of atrial fibrillation based
on realistic anatomical data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 2,
pp. 399–406, Feb. 2008.
[20] M. Rotter, L. Dang, V. Jacquemet, N. Virag, L. Kappenberger, and
M. Haissaguerre, “Impact of varying ablation patterns in a simulation
model of persistent atrial fibrillation,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol.
30, pp. 314–321, 2007.
[21] L. Dang, N. Virag, Z. Ihara, V. Jacquemet, J. M. Vesin, J. Schlaepfer,
P. Ruchat, and L. Kappenberger, “Evaluation of ablation patterns using
a biophysical model of atrial fibrillation,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 33,
pp. 465–474, 2005.
[22] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: Iii parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2271–2293, 1996.
[23] B. C. Schwab, G. Seemann, R. A. Lasher, N. S. Torres, E. M. Wulfers, M.
Arp, E. D. Carruth, J. H. B. Bridge, and F. B. Sachse, “Quantitative analysis of cardiac tissue including fibroblasts using three-dimensional confocal
microscopy and image reconstruction: Towards a basis for electrophysiological modeling,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 862–872,
May 2013.
[24] M. K. Jain and P. D. Wolf, “A three-dimensional finite element model of
radiofrequency ablation with blood flow and its experimental validation,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1075–1084, Sep. 2000.
[25] Y.-C. Lai, “Lesion size estimator for cardiac radio-frequency ablation,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comp. Eng., Univ Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, USA, 2009.
[26] S. Tungjitkusolmun, E. J. Woo, H. Cao, J. Z. Tsai, V. R. Vorperian, and J. G.
Webster, “Thermal–electrical finite element modelling for radio frequency
cardiac ablation: effects of changes in myocardial properties,” Med. Biol.
Eng. Comput., vol. 38, pp. 562–568, 2000.
[27] M. Wood, S. Goldberg, M. Lau, A. Goel, D. Alexander, F. Han, and S.
Feinstein, “Direct measurement of the lethal isperiodicalm for radiofrequency ablation of myocardial tissue,” Circulation, vol. 4, pp. 373–378,
2011.
[28] S. Nath and D. E. Haines, “Biophysics and pathology of catheter energy
delivery systems,” Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis., vol. 37, pp. 185–204, 1995.
[29] D. Haemmerich, “Biophysics of radiofrequency ablation,” Crit. Rev.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, pp. 53–63, 2010.
[30] D. L. Weiss, M. Ifland, F.B. Sachse, G. Seemann, and O. Dössel, “Modeling of cardiac ischemia in human myocytes and tissue including spatiotemporal electrophysiological variations,” Biomed. Techn., vol. 54, pp. 107–
125, 2009.
[31] K. H. W. J. ten Tusscher and A. V. Panfilov, “Alternans and spiral
breakup in a human ventricular tissue model,” Amer. J. Physiol, vol. 291,
pp. H1088–H1100, 2006.
[32] M. Wilhelms, O. Dössel, and G. Seemann, “In silico investigation
of electrically silent acute cardiac ischemia in the human ventricles,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2961–2964, Oct.
2011.
[33] S. Nath, J. G. Whayne, S. Kaul, N. C. Goodman, A. R. Jayaweera,
and D. E. Haines, “Effects of radiofrequency catheter ablation
on regional myocardial blood flow possible mechanism for late
electrophysiological outcome,” Circulation, vol. 89, pp. 2667–2672,
1994.
[34] U. Schotten, S. Verheule, P. Kirchhof, and A. Goette, “Pathophysiological
mechanisms of atrial fibrillation: A translational appraisal,” Physiol. Rev.,
vol. 91, pp. 265–325, 2011.

[35] P. V. Bayly, B.H. KenKnight, J. M. Rogers, R. E. Hillsley, R. E. Ideker, and
W. M. Smith, “Estimation of conduction velocity vector fields from epicardial mapping data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 563–571,
May 1998.
[36] A. Barnette, P. Bayly, S. Zhang, G. P. Walcott, R. Ideker, and W. Smith,
“Estimation of 3-d conduction velocity vector fields from cardiac mapping
data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1027–1035, Aug. 2000.
[37] G. Seemann, F. B. Sachse, M. Karl, D. L. Weiss, V. Heuveline, and O.
Dössel, “Framework for modular, flexible and efficient solving the cardiac
bidomain equation using petsc,” Progr. Ind. Math., vol. 15, pp. 363–369,
2010.
[38] C. S. Henriquez, A. L. Muzikant, and C. K. Smoak, “Anisotropy, fiber
curvature, and bath loading effects on activation in thin and thick cardiac
tissue preparations: Simulations in a three-dimensional bidomain model,”
J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 424–444, May 1996.
[39] M. W. Keller, S. Schuler, G. Seemann, and O. Dössel, “Differences in
intracardiac signals on a realistic catheter geometry using mono and bidomain models,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., Krakow, Poland, 2012, vol. 39,
pp. 305–308.
[40] M. W. Keller, S. Schuler, A. Luik, G. Seemann, C. Schilling, C. Schmitt,
and O. Dössel, “Comparison of simulated and clinical intracardiac electrograms,” in Proc IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka,
Japan, Jul. 3–7, 2013, pp. 6858–6861.
[41] M. P. Nguyen, C. Schilling, and O. Dössel, “A new approach for automated
location of active segments in intracardiac electrograms,” IFMBE Proc.,
vol. 25/4, pp. 763–766, 2009.
[42] C. Schilling, Analysis of Atrial Electrograms (Karlsruhe Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering) (Volume 17). Karlsruhe, Germany: KIT Scientific Publishing, 2012.
[43] T. Söderström, System Identification. New York, NY, USA: Prentice Hall,
1989.
[44] P. Welch, “The use of fast fourier transform for the estimation of power
spectra: a method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms,” IEEE Trans. Audio Electroaccoust., vol. AU-15, no. 2, pp. 70–
73, Jun. 1967.
[45] V. Jacquemet, N. Virag, Z. Ihara, L. Dang, O. Blanc, S. Zozor, J.-M.
Vesin, L. Kappenberger, and C. Henriquez, “Study of unipolar electrogram
morphology in a computer model of atrial fibrillation,” J. Cardiovasc.
Electrophysiol., vol. 14, pp. S172–S179, 2003.
[46] U. Richter, L. Faes, A. Cristoforetti, M. Mase, F. Ravelli, M. Stridh, and L.
Sornmo, “A novel approach to propagation pattern analysis in intracardiac
atrial fibrillation signals,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, pp. 310–323, 2011.
[47] X. Zhu and D. Wei, “Computer simulation of intracardiac potential with
whole-heart model,” Int. J. Bioinform. Res. Appl., vol. 3, pp. 100–122,
2007.
[48] C. Tobón, C. A. Ruiz-Villa, E. Heidenreich, L. Romero, F. Hornero, and
J. Saiz, “A three-dimensional human atrial model with fiber orientation.
electrograms and arrhythmic activation patterns relationship,” PLoS One,
vol. 8, no. 2, p. e50883, 2013.
[49] F. O. Campos, A. J. Prassl, G. Seemann, R. W. dos Santos, G. Plank, and E.
Hofer, “Influence of ischemic core muscle fibers on surface depolarization
potentials in superfused cardiac tissue preparations: A simulation study,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 461–472, May 2012.
[50] J. V. Tranquillo, D. O. Burwell, and C. S. Henriquez, “Analytical model
of extracellular potentials in a tissue slab with a finite bath,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 334–338, Feb. 2005.
[51] M. S. Spach and J. M. Kootsey, “Relating the sodium current and conductance to the shape of transmembrane and extracellular potentials by
simulation: Effects of propagation boundaries,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. BME-32, no. 10, pp. 743–755, Oct. 1985.
[52] G. Fischer, B. Tilg, R. Modre, F. Hanser, B. Messnarz, and P. Wach, “On
modeling the wilson terminal in the boundary and finite element method,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 217–224, Mar. 2002.
[53] F. Bretschneider, Introduction to Electrophysiological Methods and Instrumentation, 1st ed., J. R. Weille, Ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier/Academics, 2006.
[54] G. Ndrepepa, E. B. Caref, H. Yin, N. el Sherif, and M. Restivo, “Activation
time determination by high-resolution unipolar and bipolar extracellular
electrograms in the canine heart,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 6,
pp. 174–188, 1995.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

