2688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Power-Assistive Finger Exoskeleton With a Palmar
Opening at the Fingerpad
Pilwon Heo, Student Member, IEEE, and Jung Kim∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a powered finger exoskeleton with
an open fingerpad, named the Open Fingerpad eXoskeleton (OFX).
The palmar opening at the fingerpad allows for direct contact between the user’s fingerpad and objects in order to make use of the
wearer’s own tactile sensation for dexterous manipulation. Lateral side walls at the end of the OFX’s index finger module are
equipped with custom load cells for estimating the wearer’s pinch
grip force. A pneumatic cylinder generates assistance force, which
is determined according to the estimated pinch grip force. The
OFX transmits the assistance force directly to the objects without
exerting pressure on the wearer’s finger. The advantage of the OFX
over an exoskeleton with a closed fingerpad was validated experimentally. During static and dynamic manipulation of a test object,
the OFX exhibited a lower safety margin than the closed exoskeleton, indicating a higher ability to adjust the grip force within an
appropriate range. Furthermore, the benefit of force assistance in
reducing the muscular burden was observed in terms of muscle
fatigue during a static pinch grip. The median frequency (MDF) of
the surface electromyography (sEMG) signal from the first dorsal
interosseous (FDI) muscle displayed a lower reduction rate for the
assisted condition, indicating a lower accumulation rate of muscle
fatigue.
Index Terms—Finger exoskeleton, grip force assistance, grip
force estimation, open fingerpad.

I. INTRODUCTION
XERTION of grip force is crucial for performing a wide
range of activities of daily living and physical works and
is thus an important factor that affects the health-related quality
of life [1]. A permanent or temporary weakness in grip force
can result from a variety of causes, such as impairment after stroke [2] or carpal tunnel release surgery for treating carpal
tunnel syndrome (CTS) [3]. In addition, people who exert repetitive and large grip forces are exposed to a high possibility of
work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs), such as CTS
[4]–[6].
Several hand exoskeletons have been developed to help people with weakened grip force or to prevent WMSDs by providing assistance force which is determined based on the wearer’s

E

Manuscript received September 24, 2013; revised May 11, 2014; accepted
May 14, 2014. Date of publication May 20, 2014; date of current version October
16, 2014. This work was supported by the Public welfare and Safety Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the
Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (No. 2010-0020449). Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
P. Heo is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea (e-mail:
pwheo@kaist.ac.kr).
∗ J. Kim is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea (e-mail:
jungkim@kaist.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2325948

intention of grip force exertion. The majority of the hand exoskeletons that have been developed so far can be classified into
three categories according to the source of intention extraction:
fingerpad contact force [7]–[10], finger motion [11]–[13], and
surface electromyography (sEMG) [14]–[17]. Although muscle
hardness can also be utilized for intention extraction [18], it
has neither been proven to be able to identify individual finger force nor been widely adopted. The fingerpad contact force
measurement is performed by force or pressure sensors that are
located on the wearer’s fingerpad so that the grip force being
exerted to the gripped object by the wearer can be identified.
Even though it is a straightforward method that is capable of
acquiring grip forces of individual fingers without complex signal processing, the existence of sensors between the fingerpad
and object diminishes tactile sensation. The tactile obstruction
caused by the sensors can result in reduced manipulation dexterity because humans’ grip force control largely relies on the
tactile sensation during manipulative tasks [19]–[22]. Specifically, the diminished tactile sensation can cause excessive force,
which can lead to object damage, or insufficient force, which can
cause slipping followed by injury and object damage [23], [24].
The intention extraction method based on finger motion measurement requires the finger to move preceding the controlled
motion of the exoskeleton and it necessitates the use of overlapping master–slave system which causes increased mechanical
complexity as well as diminished tactile sensation when the
finger being assisted is also used as a commanding finger. Furthermore, intuitive control of the exoskeleton is not possible
if the assisted finger is commanded by another finger. The intention extraction based on sEMG enables estimation of grip
force from the electric potentials that are acquired at the skin
on the muscles related to the grip force generation and therefore
direct contact of the fingerpad and object can be achieved so
that the tactile sensation can be allowed during object manipulation. However, sEMG signals are sensitive to skin conditions
and electrode locations [25], [26] and prone to motion artifact
[27]. In addition, the use of sEMG necessitates a large number
of electrodes as well as complex algorithm for achieving the simultaneous estimation of forces in multiple degrees of freedom
(DoF) which is mandatory for a hand exoskeleton with multiple
controllable fingers [28], [29]. From available literatures concerning hand exoskeletons, authors could not find any system
that is capable of identifying grip forces of individual fingers
while allowing direct contact of the fingerpad and object.
We present a modified approach of the contact force measurement that enables the estimation of individual finger force with
side-mounted load cells which are located at the lateral sides
of the finger whereas the central portion of the fingerpad is

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HEO AND KIM∗ : POWER-ASSISTIVE FINGER EXOSKELETON WITH A PALMAR OPENING AT THE FINGERPAD

2689

A. Index Finger Module

Fig. 1.

OFX (Open Fingerpad eXoskeleton).

exposed for tactile sensation. With this configuration, the
wearer’s finger simultaneously contacts the objects and load
cells and distributes force on them during object manipulation.
The signals from the load cells that reflect the amount of grip
force are used to estimate the grip force which is required for
determining the desired assistance force. An assistive hand exoskeleton utilizing this grip force estimation method, named
the Open Fingerpad eXoskeleton (OFX), was realized with index finger and thumb modules where the index finger module
has one actuated DoF. The thumb module has one passive DoF
which can be locked during force assistance. Because the load
cells are located at the index fingertip, a pulp-to-pulp pinch grip
using the index finger and thumb is considered, and therefore
the term “grip” is limited to this posture in this paper.
This paper is organized as follows. The next section describes
the components comprising the OFX. Section III describes
the methods for estimating the grip force of the wearer, and
Section IV addresses the determination of assistance force,
which denotes the grip force that is exerted by the exoskeleton. Section V describes the experiments and results used to
validate the performance of the exoskeleton in terms of the error in estimating the wearer’s grip force, ability to adjust the
total grip force within an appropriate range, and muscle fatigue
prevention. Here, “total grip force” refers to the summation of
the forces given by the wearer and the exoskeleton.

The index finger module has a revolute joint that is aligned
with the rotational axis of the wearer’s metacarpophalangeal
(MCP) joint and is directly connected to the piston rod of the
pneumatic cylinder. Although the rotational axis of a finger joint
varies according to the joint angle [30], it is assumed that the
axis remains constant for simplicity. Only the MCP joint is allowed to rotate due to the anatomical fact that it is independent
of the other interphalangeal joints, whereas the proximal (PIP)
and distal (DIP) interphalangeal joints are coupled to each other
[31]. The flexion angle of the PIP and DIP joints are fixed at
40◦ and 20◦ , respectively, because these angles are within the
functional range of motion [32] and are approximately at the
neutral posture. The distances between each joint can be adjusted according to the lengths of the wearer’s finger segments.
The index finger module has two lateral side walls at the radial
and ulnar sides of its distal end, and each has an inclined cantilever that protrudes toward the inside. The inclination forms
a wedge-shaped inner space for the fingertip, which becomes
narrower toward the palmar direction, and prevents the wearer’s
finger from separating from the OFX during unassisted flexion
motion. Each cantilever is equipped with a full-bridge strain
gauge (SGT-2/1000-FB13, Omega Engineering Inc., Stamford,
CT, USA) that is attached on its back surface and is connected
to an amplifier (ST-AM100, Senstech Co., Ltd., Busan, Korea).
This cantilever is used as a custom load cell that measures the
contact force between the finger and exoskeleton and is simply
denoted as “load cell” in this paper. The distance between the
load cells and their height is adjusted according to the width
and thickness of the wearer’s finger, and this adjustment is performed such that the fingerpad is exposed to the environment
through a palmar opening when the fingertip is inside the hollow space between the load cells. The exposure of the fingerpad
allows the wearer’s own tactile sensation to be utilized during
object manipulation. In addition, the wearer’s fingerpad protrudes slightly over the bottom surface of the side walls, where
the objects contact it, so that the fingerpad contacts the objects
before the OFX contacts them.
B. Thumb Module

II. OFX CONFIGURATION
The OFX consists of the following components: 1) an index
finger module, 2) a thumb module, and 3) a forearm frame with
an actuator. Fig. 1 illustrates the OFX when worn on a hand and
arm. The front view of the index fingertip displays an exposed
fingerpad between the bottom ends of the cantilever load cells,
which allows for direct contact between the wearer’s finger and
objects. The lateral sides of the fingertip make contact with the
inclined cantilever load cells that are mounted to the side walls
at the distal end of the index finger module. The load cells are
used to estimate the grip force. The thumb module is equipped
with a locking mechanism which is activated when the index
finger module is being actuated. A pneumatic cylinder mounted
on the forearm frame provides force to assist in flexion of the
index finger module.

The OFX has a thumb module that allows passive abduction
and adduction in the sagittal plane by approximating the motion
of the thumb as a rotation along an axis located between the
wearer’s carpometacarpal (CMC) and MCP joints. The position
of the revolute joint can be adjusted for comfortable motion. A
thimble of the thumb module is made of ABS plastic and has an
opening that allows tactile sensation during object manipulation.
The thumb module is driven passively by the wearer’s thumb
when the grip force assistance is not performed, and is immobilized by a locking mechanism only when the assistance force
is being provided to the index finger module. The locked thumb
module serves as a fixed counterpart to the power-assisted index finger module for gripping objects with the index finger and
thumb modules. Limiting the actuated DoF to one during grip
force assistance enables achieving stable static grip with relative ease without considering the equilibrium of forces between

2690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

finger. The grip force is estimated using two load cells at the
end of the index finger module. This estimated value is used
to determine the amount of assistance force. However, because
abduction and adduction of the index finger module are not allowed, the lateral force of the finger perpendicular to the sagittal
plane is not considered as a control source and thus does not need
to be estimated. Unless specified, the grip force denotes the grip
force that is exerted by the wearer and not by the exoskeleton.
A. Basic Principles
Fig. 2.

Operation of the thumb module locking mechanism.

the index finger and thumb modules. The locking mechanism is
actuated by a geared DC motor (IG-12GM, D&J With Co., Ltd.,
Seoul, Korea) powered by a motor driver IC (DRV8835, Texas
Instruments Inc., Dallas, TX, USA). As illustrated in Fig. 2, the
thumb module is unlocked or locked by disengaging or engaging the teeth of a ratchet disk to a toothed pad, where the linear
motion of the toothed pad is performed by a rotating screw shaft
driven by the motor.
C. Forearm Frame With an Actuator
The forearm frame provides attachment points for the index
finger module, the thumb module, and a pneumatic cylinder.
The frame is extended to the back of the hand, and the wrist
angle is fixed to 20◦ , which is approximately the neutral posture. A low-friction pneumatic cylinder (Airpel M16, Airpot
Co., Norwalk, CT, USA) is used as an actuator for the index finger module, where the extension movement of the piston flexes
the index finger module around the MCP joint. The inner diameter of the cylinder is 16 mm, and the maximum extension
force is 140 N at an air pressure of 0.7 MPa. The low-friction
feature, which exhibits static and dynamic friction within 2% of
the load, provides the OFX with passive back-drivability when
the cylinder is not pressurized. Although it is a double-acting
cylinder, the extension port is connected to the pressure control valve, whereas the other port is directly open to the air.
When force assistance is not performed, the cylinder is not
pressurized at either side so that the wearer can move the finger
freely with low resistance. A DS1103 PPC controller board and
a CLP1103 connect panel (dSPACE GmbH, Paderborn, Germany) with a desktop PC are used to acquire the signals from
the load cells and to control the pneumatic valve at 100 Hz.
The software for measurement and control was prepared using
MATLAB/Simulink (MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) and
executed with ControlDesk NG (dSPACE GmbH, Paderborn,
Germany). An oil-free air compressor (A-160, Dürr Technik
GmbH & Co. KG, Bietigheim-Bissingen, Germany) was used
to provide compressed air to the OFX, and a proportional pressure valve (VPPM, Festo AG & Co. KG, Esslingen am Neckar,
Germany) was used to control the air pressure that was supplied
to the cylinder.
III. GRIP FORCE ESTIMATION
The OFX requires an estimation of the wearer’s grip force,
which has direction perpendicular to the palmar plane of the

The grip force is transmitted from the distal phalanx of
the wearer’s finger to the object and to the load cells through
the finger tissue. When grip force is exerted, the inclination of
the load cells causes the decomposed pressing forces against
the load cells. In addition, the compressive force that is applied
by the distal phalanx to the finger tissue in the dorsal-volar
direction makes the tissue tend to expand laterally and finally
transmits the pressure on the load cells that confine the tissue.
The expansion of soft tissue perpendicular to the direction of
compression is called the compression-swelling effect which
results from the nearly incompressible characteristic of the soft
tissue. It is analogous to the Poisson effect with the Poisson’s
ratio of nearly 0.5. In fact, Srinivasan et al. [33] found that
the compressibility of the in vivo fingertip was less than 1%.
Typically, the decomposed force and the compression-swelling
effect simultaneously affect the forces that are exerted on the
load cells. However, because the wearer’s fingerpad protrudes
slightly over the OFX’s gripping surface through the palmar
opening, a range of grip force exists in which the objects make
contact with only the fingerpad and not the OFX. Inside this
range, only the compression-swelling effect contributes to the
force applied to the load cells.
Although only the grip force needs to be estimated, the load
cells are inevitably susceptible to both the grip and lateral forces.
The lateral force on the load cells can arise by the lateral motion
of the distal phalanx and/or fingerpad tissue within the OFX.
Assuming that the finger is secured to the OFX at the proximal or middle phalanges, lateral motion of the distal phalanx
is prohibited because the interphalangeal articulations can be
assumed to be hinge joints. Therefore, the lateral movement of
the fingerpad tissue by frictional traction at the contact surface
between the finger and objects is the only considerable source
of lateral force.
B. Relationship Between the Outputs of the Load Cells
to the Grip and Lateral Forces
The relationship between the outputs of the load cells and the
grip and lateral forces was identified to determine the form of the
equation used to estimate the grip force. The OFX was fixed on a
table with the sagittal plane of the index finger module parallel to
the table surface to eliminate the effect of gravity. The movable
thumb module was replaced by a fixed thumb module that has
a urethane-coated plate at its distal end as a gripping surface.
A reference load cell (651AL, KTOYO Co., Ltd., Uijeongbu,
Korea) was embedded to the fixed thumb module to measure the
total grip force, which is the summation of the forces given by

HEO AND KIM∗ : POWER-ASSISTIVE FINGER EXOSKELETON WITH A PALMAR OPENING AT THE FINGERPAD

Fig. 3.
force.

2691

Load cell output voltage versus wearer’s grip force without lateral

the wearer and OFX. A laterally movable plate was mounted on
the fixed thumb module’s end plate to displace the fingerpad skin
of the index finger by setting the displacement of the movable
plate when it was in contact with the index fingertip. The plate
surface was coated with a silicone rubber sheet to increase the
coefficient of friction, and the index fingertip made contact with
the plate when the MCP joint angle was 45◦ .
A participant wearing the OFX was first instructed to exert
a grip force of 0–10 N following a visual cue of a sinusoidal
waveform of 0.2 Hz for 20 s. This activity was used to acquire
data when lateral displacement was absent. This frequency was
determined through experiments so that it did not induce a difference in the results when compared to the quasi-static condition
(0.05 Hz) [34]. Outputs of the load cells at the fingertip and of
the reference load cell at the fixed thumb module were acquired.
After the session for zero lateral displacement, instructions
were given to the participant to randomly exert grip force of
0–10 N for 10 min. The measured value of grip force was
visually fed back to the participant to help regulate the grip force.
Lateral displacement was simultaneously given toward the radial
or ulnar side (defined in Fig. 1), and the participant adjusted the
lateral displacement of the movable plate in a randomly selected
direction and amount. Data acquired during the adjustment of
lateral displacement were not recorded.
Fig. 3 presents a plot of the measurements of the load cells
according to the grip force without lateral force. The measurement from each load cell can be regarded as a linear function of
the grip force, although the curve was composed of before and
after contact between the OFX and the movable plate. In fact,
the grip force range in which only the compression-swelling effect gives output was relatively narrow (up to 0.5 N), and it did
not result in a significant overall difference in the output curve.
The data with and without lateral force are plotted on axes
of the load cell outputs and grip force in Fig. 4. The data can
be divided into two sets according to the direction of the lateral
force, where each set can be fitted to a plane. The two fitting
planes meet on a vertical dividing plane that is defined by the
output ratio of the two load cells for the zero lateral force condition (uu = c · ur , where uu and ur are the load cell outputs
from the ulnar and radial sides, respectively). The constant c is

Fig. 4. Measured data and fitting planes for the load cell outputs with an
arbitrary lateral force given to the fingerpad.

determined by the linear regression using the load cell outputs
without lateral force.
Regarding the same level of grip force, the lateral force toward
a certain direction significantly increases the output of the load
cell at the same side, whereas the output variation of the other
side is relatively small (for example, uu > c · ur when the lateral
force is applied toward the ulnar direction, and vice versa). The
increment of output due to the lateral force mostly results from
the increased pressure that is applied on the distal portion of the
load cell toward it by the deformed fingerpad skin. This output
behavior makes it reasonable to fit the data with two planes that
have an intersection line on the dividing plane. The two divided
datasets can be fitted with (1), where F is the grip force

F =

a1 · ur + b1 · uu + c1 ,
a2 · ur + b2 · uu + c2 ,

uu ≤ c · u r
uu > c · u r .

(1)

The above equation describes the two fitting planes, whose
six coefficients are found using a linear least-squares regression
method with an equality constraint. When setting the linear
equality constraints with the matrix

Aeq =

0 0 1
1

c

1

0

0

−1



−1 −c −1

(2)

a column vector x containing the coefficients of the fitting planes
(x = [ a1 b1 c1 a2 b2 c2 ]T ) can be found by solving
the following equation:
1
min U · x − F2
x 2

such that Aeq · x = 0.

(3)

With m data samples for the case of uu ≤ c · ur (namely, set
1) and n data samples for the case of uu > c · ur (namely, set

2692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

2), the (m + n) × 6 matrix U is defined as

0
urr uru 1 0
U=
0
0 0 uur uuu

0
1


(4)

where urr and uru are m × 1 vectors composed of outputs of
radial and ulnar side load cells, respectively, for set 1. The n × 1
vectors uur and uuu contain outputs for the radial and ulnar side
load cells for set 2, respectively. F is the (m + n) × 1 vector,
which consists of the grip force data and is defined as
F = [ Fr

Fu ]T

(5)

where Fr and Fu are the 1 × m and 1 × n vectors of the measured grip force values for sets 1 and 2, respectively. In (2), the
constraint matrix Aeq requires that the two fitting planes share
two points on the dividing plane so that the intersection line of
the planes lies on the dividing plane. This constraint was provided to eliminate the discontinuity in the estimated grip force
along the zero-lateral-force condition.
The resulting fitting planes and dividing plane are shown
in Fig. 4. The goodness of fit of the fitting planes, which is
expressed as the root-mean-square error (RMSE), was 0.257 N.

Fig. 5.

Determination of the assistance force.

Fig. 6.

Grip force assistance with locking thumb module.

C. Calibration
The purpose for calibrating the grip force estimator is to find
the coefficients of (1) such that the grip force can be calculated
from the load cell outputs. The calibration process should be
always performed after wearing the OFX because the coefficients of the equation for grip force estimation are specific to
the participant’s finger geometry and wearing condition. The
apparatus setup was the same as that described for determining
the form of the grip force estimation equation. The participant
was instructed to exert a grip force of 0–10 N while following a
visual cue with a sinusoidal waveform of 0.2 Hz for 50 s. Lateral displacement was not involved for the first 10 s, and then,
1 and 2 mm of lateral displacement toward the radial direction
was applied for 10 s for each condition. The same procedure
was performed for the lateral displacement toward the ulnar direction. To reject unreliable data, data acquisition was paused
when adjusting the lateral displacement. The coefficients of two
fitting planes were calculated after the data were acquired.
IV. ASSISTANCE FORCE CONTROL
The OFX provides assistance force only when the estimated
grip force exceeds 5% of the wearer’s maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) grip force because it has been reported that
this value can be sustained for at least 1 h without significant
fatigue [35] and thus making force assistance below 5% MVC
unnecessary. When assistance is not needed, the OFX’s cylinder
pressure is maintained at the atmospheric level and free movement of the OFX is allowed by the low friction of the cylinder.
In fact, the fingertip force required for free movement was less
than 0.3 N which is low enough to be within 5% MVC range
of the targeted users based on the normative pinch force [36]
and the reduced grip force of chronic stroke patients [37]. An
estimated grip force of 15% MVC was selected as a saturation
point which is where the assistance force reaches its maximum

available value. The 15% MVC force can be exerted intermittently for at least 1 h without significant fatigue [35] and can
represent a steady state of maximal sustained grip force [38].
Therefore, the grip force of the wearer as a command for operating the OFX lies inside the sustainable range of muscle force.
The assistance force for estimated grip force of between 5% and
15% MVC force is determined by linear interpolation. Through
testing, the assistance force was identified as a linear function
of the air pressure of the cylinder and exerted 29 N at 0.3 MPa
for the MCP joint angle of 45◦ , which was a consistently used
posture for the experiments in this paper. For structural safety
of the OFX, the maximum operating pressure was limited to 0.3
MPa, and the assistance force was determined as a function of
the estimated grip force, as shown in Fig. 5. The proportional
pressure valve used in this paper exhibits a linear air pressure
output according to the control input voltage, which was set at
1 MPa of output for 10 V of control input. Therefore, the assistance force command can be directly converted to the control
input for the valve with simple scaling.
The thumb module is locked during the assistance force is
being provided to the index finger module. When the estimated
grip force exceeds 5% of the wearer’s MVC grip force, the
motor of the thumb module is activated to restrain the thumb
motion and then the motor keeps deactivated until the cylinder
of the index finger module is unpressurized. The unlocking of
the thumb module is performed when the estimated grip force
falls below 5% MVC force. The transitions between the locked
and unlocked configurations take 70 ms. Fig. 6 presents data

HEO AND KIM∗ : POWER-ASSISTIVE FINGER EXOSKELETON WITH A PALMAR OPENING AT THE FINGERPAD

Fig. 7.

Validation results of the grip force estimator for a participant.

during grip force assistance in a static posture for a participant
whose MVC grip force was 42.3 N. The shaded regions in the
plots mean the thumb-locked conditions. The delay caused by
the pneumatic system, about 90 ms between the pressure control command and measured pressure, made the thumb module
locked before the assistance force is exerted.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We performed experiments concerning the following three
aspects to validate the effectiveness of the OFX: 1) the grip
force estimation performance, 2) the ability to adjust the total grip force within an appropriate range, and 3) the effects
of force assistance on muscle fatigue. Ten right-handed participants (seven males and three females, aged 23–36) without
motor deficits were recruited for the experiments. In order to
eliminate the effects of the kinematics and tactile sensation of
the thumb while allowing the measurement of the total grip
force, the fixed thumb module equipped with a reference load
cell was used instead of the movable thumb module.
A. Performance of the Grip Force Estimation
For each participant, a calibration session was performed after wearing the OFX. Then, a validation experiment for assessing the accuracy of grip force estimation was performed using
the coefficients that were determined through the calibration.
The validation experiment used the same procedure as that for
the calibration. The outputs from the load cells, the actual grip
force that was measured by the reference load cell, and the
estimated grip force were recorded simultaneously.
Fig. 7presents the results for a participant. The grip force estimation error [see Fig. 7(b)] fluctuated as the grip force changed,

2693

Fig. 8. Experimental setup for assessing safety margin during static and dynamic manipulation.

but this value did not differ significantly according to the lateral displacement condition. The estimation error in the RMSE
throughout the validation was 0.546 N. For all ten participants,
the RMSE was 0.653 ± 0.287 N (mean±SD). Fig. 7(c) shows
that the lateral force toward the radial direction caused a relative
increase in the load cell output at the radial side and vice versa,
although the amount of change was considerably smaller when
the lateral force was applied in the ulnar direction. The amount
of change differed between participants.
B. Ability to Adjust the Total Grip Force Within
an Appropriate Range
The key feature of the OFX is the open fingerpad, which enables direct contact between the finger and object. As described
in Section I. the tactile sensation is essential to dexterous manipulation because it helps maintain the grip force within an
appropriate range. In this paper, a safety margin was selected
as a criterion for assessing the ability to adjust the total grip
force within an appropriate range using the human-exoskeletoncombined system. The safety margin, which refers to the grip
force that exceeds the minimum force required to avoid slipping,
plays an important role in preventing slipping when unexpected
fluctuations occur [19]. The safety margin S is defined by the
following equation:
S=

GL
−1
GLS

(6)

where GL is grip-to-load force ratio, and the GLS is grip-to-load
force ratio when the object starts slipping [39]. The GLS was
determined by the average of five slipping trials.

2694

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Total grip force (sum of the forces from the exoskeleton and wearer), load force, and GL of single trials for all experimental conditions, for a participant.

horizontal flexible rods that were spaced 200 mm apart vertically for indicating the upper and lower limits of motion during
dynamic manipulation task. The participants were instructed to
manipulate the object so that the vertical position of the load
cell mounted to the object does not exceed the limits.
The experimental procedures were as follows:

Fig. 10. Box plot of the safety margin for all participants (n = 10) at each
condition.

When a human manipulates an object, an automatic and synchronous modulation of the grip force that is in phase with the
load force fluctuation is performed to avoid slipping by making
the grip force slightly higher than the value at which slipping
occurs [40]. However, the loss of cutaneous feedback results in
an excessively large safety margin [20], [39], which should be
avoided due to muscle fatigue or object damage [41].
The safety margin during static and dynamic manipulation
tasks with the following five conditions were evaluated in this
paper: 1) bare-finger (BF), 2) OFX, unassisted (OU), 3) OFX,
assisted (OA), 4) closed exoskeleton, unassisted (CU), and
5) closed exoskeleton, assisted (CA). The closed exoskeleton
denotes an exoskeleton with a barrier between the wearer’s fingerpad and an object. To emulate the closed exoskeleton with
minimal alteration to the OFX, an ABS-plastic plate was used to
block the fingerpad. The grip force estimation method that was
used for the OFX was identically applied to the emulated closed
exoskeleton after recalibration. Fig. 8 presents the experimental
setup with the OFX. A test object of 480 g in weight that was
equipped with a load cell that measured the load force during
manipulation was used in the experiment, and the thickness of
the gripped portion of the object was 11 mm. There were two

1) A participant was seated in front of a table. At first, for
the BF condition, the OFX was worn, but the index finger
module was not worn.
2) To measure the minimum grip force that was required to
prevent slipping, the participant was asked to grip and
hold the test object so that the bottom of the object was
approximately 5 mm above the table. Then, the participant
reduced his/her grip force until the object began to slip.
This experiment was repeated five times, and the OFX
was fixed on the table during each trial.
3) (Static manipulation) After detaching the OFX from the
table, the participant was instructed to lift and hold the
object stationary between the flexible rods for 20 s.
4) (Dynamic manipulation) Then, instruction was given to
the participant to perform a vertical cyclic movement of
the object within 200 mm of range with a frequency of
1 Hz for 30 s, which was guided by a metronome.
5) Steps 3 and 4 comprised a trial and were repeated four
more times.
6) For the OA condition, the participant wore the index finger
module and performed calibration followed by measurement of the maximum voluntary grip force, which was
used to determine the threshold and saturation points of
assistance. Subsequently, steps 2–5 were repeated identically with assistance.
7) Experiment without assistance (condition OU) was performed after the assisted condition.
8) The experimental procedures for the closed exoskeleton
with and without assistance (CA and CU, respectively)
were the same as the previous conditions except that

HEO AND KIM∗ : POWER-ASSISTIVE FINGER EXOSKELETON WITH A PALMAR OPENING AT THE FINGERPAD

Fig. 11.

Box plot of the grip forces of the participants (n = 10).

Fig. 12. Slope of the MDF for assisted and unassisted conditions for all
participants (n = 10).

lateral displacement of the fingerpad was not involved
when calibrating the closed exoskeleton.
Fig. 9 presents a typical result of the total grip force, load
force, and the corresponding GL of the single trials under all
experimental conditions performed by a participant. Here, the
total grip force, which is sum of the forces that are given by the
exoskeleton and wearer, was used for the calculation of the GL.
The sudden increase in grip force at the beginning of the dynamic
manipulation and the tendency for a gradual decrease in grip
force during static and dynamic manipulation were consistent
with a previous observation [39]. The assisted conditions (OA
and CA) exhibited a larger grip force than the BF and unassisted
conditions (BF, OU, and CU). However, little difference was
observed between the BF, OU, and CU conditions. The GL
exhibited similar trends as the grip force.
The GL was averaged over the trials for each condition and
each participant to compare the safety margin between experimental conditions. It can be seen from Fig. 9 that at the beginning
and end of the experiment, the GL became large because the load
force approached zero, and therefore the data within the range
was not used for the calculation of the safety margin. Fig. 10
presents a box plot of the safety margin for all participants
(n = 10) at each condition, and the safety margin for each
participant was calculated as the average value of static and
dynamic manipulations.
According to the participants, the alteration of the fingerpad
contact condition by wearing the exoskeleton, whether the fingerpad was exposed or not, changed the perceived sensation at

2695

the finger. While the OFX allowed direct contact between the
fingerpad and object, the existence of the load cells inevitably
made the perception different from that of the BF even though
the deterioration of the tactile sensation was not as much as
that for the closed condition. In spite of the difference in sensation, the safety margins for the BF and unassisted conditions
with exoskeletons (OU and CU) did not differ significantly
(Kruskal–Wallis test: p = 0.823), which indicates that altering
the fingerpad contact condition, even during the closed condition, did not affect the safety margin considerably when the
assistance force was not provided. It is assumed that the participants could adequately regulate the grip force by relying on the
available sensation and prediction based on sensorimotor memory, although the slip information in the tactile sensation was
deteriorated. This observation is consistent with the previous
finding that the internal model of an object within the brain of a
participant can be used to compensate for the loss of cutaneous
sensation to some extent [42].
When comparing the assisted conditions (OA and CA) to the
BF and unassisted conditions (BF, OU, and CU), the former
displayed a significantly larger safety margin (Mann–Whitney–
Wilcoxon test: p = 9.17 × 10−8 ). The presence of an assistance force that is not transmitted through the wearer’s finger is thought to be a major reason for the difference between
the actual and predicted behaviors that caused the large safety
margin. In fact, the participants could hold the object without slipping with assistance when their own grip force was
lower than the minimum required to prevent slipping. Therefore, it became necessary to remap the perceived grip force of
the finger and the behavior of the object by updating the internal
model of the object within the brain. As expected, the closed
exoskeleton (CA) condition exhibited significantly larger safety
margin than that of the OFX (condition OA) (Mann–Whitney–
Wilcoxon test: p = 1.83 × 10−4 ). Physiologically, a cutaneous
sensation is crucial for adapting the GL based on the mismatch between the predicted and actual behaviors [19], [39].
It is thought that because the closed exoskeleton prevented the
transmission of slip information to the fingerpad, the GL could
not be adapted adequately, which resulted in an excessively large
safety margin. In contrast, the OFX allowed for the transmission
of the tactile sensation, which helped in adaptation. Although
the OFX with assistance (condition OA) had a larger safety
margin than the unassisted conditions (BF, OU, and CU), its
smaller safety margin, when compared to that of the assisted
closed exoskeleton (CA), indicated the higher dexterity during
assisted manipulation of the object.
C. Effects of Force Assistance on Muscle Fatigue
The wearer’s grip force during the BF and assisted-with-OFX
(condition OA) conditions were compared. For the OA condition, an estimated grip force was adopted for analysis because a
direct measurement of the wearer’s grip force was not available.
Fig. 11 presents a box plot of the average grip forces for all of
the participants during static and dynamic manipulations (n =
10). The assisted condition (OA) exhibited a significantly lower
grip force (Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test: p = 2.46 × 10−4 )

2696

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

indicating that the grip force that needed to be exerted by the
wearer was reduced as a result of the assistance that was given
by the OFX.
In addition to comparing the required grip force, an experiment was performed to compare muscle fatigue during the
assisted and unassisted conditions. Muscle fatigue, which is defined as an activity-induced loss of the ability to produce force
with the muscle, results from prolonged or repetitive muscular
activity [43]. The median frequency (MDF) of the sEMG signal,
which is defined as a frequency at which the sEMG power spectrum is divided into two regions with equal power, was chosen
as a criterion for muscle fatigue because the downward shift of
the MDF is a reliable measure of increasing fatigue [44].
These experiments were performed on a separate day to eliminate the influence of muscle fatigue caused by the previous
experiment. The experimental procedure was as follows. A participant was seated in front of a table and wore the OFX, and an
electrode for sEMG (DE-2.1, Delsys Inc., Boston, MA, USA)
was attached to the skin over the FDI muscle. After calibrating
the OFX for grip force estimation, the participant was asked to
maintain a 50% MVC grip force for 2 min with assistance. After
at least 1 h, a grip force exertion of 50% MVC was repeated
without assistance. The sEMG signal was measured through an
amplifier (Bagnoli-8, Delsys Inc., Boston, MA, USA), and was
notch-filtered at 60 Hz to reject power noise. Fig. 12 presents
the slope of the MDF for the assisted and unassisted conditions
of all participants (n= 10). As expected, the MDF for the assisted condition exhibited a significantly smaller negative slope
(Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test: 7.69 × 10−4 ), which indicates
a slower rate for the accumulation of muscle fatigue. This result
indicates that the assistance that was given by the OFX aided
the participant in reducing muscular burden.
VI. CONCLUSION
A finger exoskeleton with palmar opening, named OFX, was
presented to allow for the direct contact between the fingerpad
of a wearer and objects during grip force assistance. This device
enables the utilization of the wearer’s own tactile sensation and
therefore facilitates dexterous manipulation. The OFX provides
assistance force based on the wearer’s grip force, which is estimated using load cells that are integrated in sidewalls at the
distal end of the index finger module. The calibration process
for grip force estimation can be performed within 1 min, and
validation in the presence of lateral force exhibited an estimation error of 0.653 ± 0.287 N (mean ± SD) in the RMSE value
for ten participants. The ability to adjust the total grip force
within an appropriate range was validated in terms of the safety
margin. The safety margin is closely related to the manipulation dexterity of the human-exoskeleton-combined system, and
an excessively large safety margin should be avoided due to
muscle fatigue or object damage. During static and dynamic
manipulation of a test object, the OFX exhibited a lower safety
margin than a closed exoskeleton, indicating a higher ability
to adjust grip force adequately. When analyzing the benefit of
assistance in reducing muscular burden, muscle fatigue caused
by maintaining static force during the assisted condition was

compared to that during the unassisted condition. The MDF
of the sEMG signal from the FDI muscle exhibited a lower
reduction rate when being assisted, which indicated a lower
accumulation rate of muscle fatigue.
A multijoint mechanism will be developed to improve the
practicality of this paper. The introduction of the multijoint
mechanism necessitates the consideration of a change in the
finger cross section geometry during joint rotation because the
soft tissue of a finger segment tends to be laterally expanded
by flexion of the adjacent joints and it affects the outputs of the
side-mounted load cells.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Sayer, H. Syddall, H. Martin, E. Dennison, H. Roberts, and C. Cooper,
“Is grip strength associated with health-related quality of life? findings from the hertfordshire cohort study,” Age Ageing, vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 409–415, 2006.
[2] A. Sunderland, D. Tinson, L. Bradley, and R. L. Hewer, “Arm function
after stroke. An evaluation of grip strength as a measure of recovery and
a prognostic indicator,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, vol. 52, no. 11,
pp. 1267–1272, 1989.
[3] H. Gellman, D. Kan, V. Gee, S. H. Kuschner, and M. J. Botte, “Analysis of
pinch and grip strength after carpal tunnel release,” J. Hand. Surg. Amer.,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 863–864, 1989.
[4] K. H. E. Kroemer, “Cumulative trauma disorders: Their recognition
and ergonomics measures to avoid them,” Appl. Ergon., vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 274–280, 1989.
[5] Y. Roquelaure, S. Mechali, C. Dano, S. Fanello, F. Benetti,
D. Bureau, J. Mariel, Y. Martin, F. Derriennic, and D. Penneau-Fontbonne,
“Occupational and personal risk factors for carpal tunnel syndrome in
industrial workers,” Scand. J. Work Environ. Health, vol. 23, no. 5,
pp. 364–369, 1997.
[6] J. S. Moore and A. Garg, “The strain index: A proposed method to analyze
jobs for risk of distal upper extremity disorders,” Amer. Ind. Hyg. Assoc.
J., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 443–458, 1995.
[7] B. L. Shields, J. A. Main, S. W. Peterson, and A. M. Strauss, “An anthropomorphic hand exoskeleton to prevent astronaut hand fatigue during
extravehicular activities,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. A, Syst., Humans, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 668–673, Sep. 1997.
[8] D. Sasaki, T. Noritsugu, M. Takaiwa, and H. Yamamoto, “Wearable power
assist device for hand grasping using pneumatic artificial rubber muscle,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., 2004,
pp. 655–660.
[9] K. Tadano, M. Akai, K. Kadota, and K. Kawashima, “Development of
grip amplified glove using bi-articular mechanism with pneumatic artificial rubber muscle,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2010,
pp.2363–2368.
[10] M. D. Baker, M. K. McDonough, E. M. McMullin, M. Swift, and
B. F. BuSha, “Orthotic hand-assistive exoskeleton,” presented at the IEEE
Annu. Northeast Bioeng. Conf., Troy, NY, USA, 2011.
[11] Y. Yamada, T. Morizono, S. Sato, T. Shimohira, Y. Umetani, T. Yoshida,
and S. Aoki, “Proposal of a SkilMate finger for EVA gloves,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2001, vol. 2, pp.1406–1412.
[12] M. Takagi, K. Iwata, Y. Takahashi, S. I. Yamamoto, H. Koyama, and
T. Komeda, “Development of a grip aid system using air cylinders,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2009, pp.2312–2317.
[13] K. Toya, T. Miyagawa, and Y. Kubota, “Power-assist glove operated by
predicting the grasping mode,” J. Syst. Des. Dyn., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 94–108,
2011.
[14] N. Benjuya and S. B. Kenney, “Myoelectric hand orthosis,” J. Prosthet.
Orthot., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 149–154, 1990.
[15] L. Lucas, M. DiCicco, and Y. Matsuoka, “An EMG-controlled hand exoskeleton for natural pinching,” J. Robot. Mechatron., vol. 16, no. 5,
pp. 482–488, 2004.
[16] Y. Hasegawa, Y. Mikami, K. Watanabe, and Y. Sankai, “Five-fingered
assistive hand with mechanical compliance of human finger,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2008, pp. 718–724.
[17] H. In, K.-J. Cho, K. Kim, and B. Lee, “Jointless structure and underactuation mechanism for compact hand exoskeleton,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Rehab. Robot., 2011, pp. 1–6.

HEO AND KIM∗ : POWER-ASSISTIVE FINGER EXOSKELETON WITH A PALMAR OPENING AT THE FINGERPAD

[18] S. Moromugi, Y. Koujina, S. Ariki, A. Okamoto, T. Tanaka, M. Q. Feng,
and T. Ishimatsu, “Muscle stiffness sensor to control an assistance device
for the disabled,” Artif. Life Robot., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 42–45, 2004.
[19] R. S. Johansson and G. Westling, “Roles of glabrous skin receptors and
sensorimotor memory in automatic control of precision grip when lifting rougher or more slippery objects,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 56, no. 3,
pp. 550–564, 1984.
[20] D. A. Nowak, J. Hermsdörfer, S. Glasauer, J. Philipp, L. Meyer, and
N. Mai, “The effects of digital anaesthesia on predictive grip force adjustments during vertical movements of a grasped object,” Eur. J. Neurosci.,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 756–762, 2001.
[21] J. Monzée, Y. Lamarre, and A. M. Smith, “The effects of digital anesthesia
on force control using a precision grip,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 89, no. 2,
pp. 672–683, 2003.
[22] D. A. Nowak, S. Glasauer, and J. Hermsdörfer, “How predictive is grip
force control in the complete absence of somatosensory feedback?” Brain,
vol. 127, no. 1, pp. 182–192, 2004.
[23] H. Kinoshita, “Effect of gloves on prehensile forces during lifting and
holding tasks,” Ergonomics, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 1372–1385, 1999.
[24] J. M. Romano, S. R. Gray, N. T. Jacobs, and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Toward
tactilely transparent gloves: Collocated slip sensing and vibrotactile actuation, ” in Proc. Joint Eurohaptics Conf. Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual
Environ. Teleoper. Syst., 2009, pp.279–284.
[25] E. Huigen, A. Peper, and C. Grimbergen, “Investigation into the origin of
the noise of surface electrodes,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 40, no. 3,
pp. 332–338, 2002.
[26] R. Ronsse, N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, J. van den Kieboom, M. C. Carrozza, and
A. J. Ijspeert, “Human-robot synchrony: Flexible assistance using adaptive
oscillators,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1001–1012,
Apr. 2011.
[27] S. Roy, G. De Luca, M. Cheng, A. Johansson, L. Gilmore, and
C. De Luca, “Electro-mechanical stability of surface EMG sensors,” Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 447–457, 2007.
[28] F. Tenore, A. Ramos, A. Fahmy, S. Acharya, R. Etienne-Cummings, and
N. Thakor, “Decoding of individuated finger movements using surface
electromyography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1427–
1434, May. 2009.
[29] E. N. Kamavuako, K. B. Englehart, W. Jensen, and D. Farina, “Simultaneous and proportional force estimation in multiple degrees of freedom
from intramuscular EMG,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7,
pp. 1804–1807, Jul. 2012.
[30] I. Kapandji, The Physiology of the Joints, Volume 1: The Upper Limb, 6th
ed., London, U.K.: Churchill Livingstone, 2007.
[31] W. G. Darling, K. J. Cole, and G. F. Miller, “Coordination of index finger
movements,” J. Biomech., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 479–491, 1994.
[32] M. C. Hume, H. Gellman, H. McKellop, and R. H. Brumfield, Jr,, “Functional range of motion of the joints of the hand,” J. Hand. Surg. Amer.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 240–243, 1990.
[33] M. A. Srinivasan, R. J. Gulati, and K. Dandekar, “In vivo compressibility
of the human fingertip, ” in Proc. ASME Winter Annu. Meeting, Advances
Bioeng., 1992, vol. 22, pp. 573–576.
[34] S. A. Mascaro, and H. H. Asada, “Photoplethysmograph fingernail sensors for measuring finger forces without haptic obstruction,” IEEE Trans.
Robot. Autom., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 698–708, Oct. 2001.
[35] M. Björkstén and B. Jonsson, “Endurance limit of force in long-term
intermittent static contractions,” Scand. J. Work Environ. Health, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 23–27, 1977.
[36] V. Mathiowetz, N. Kashman, G. Volland, K. Weber, M. Dowe, and
S. Rogers, “Grip and pinch strength: Normative data for adults,” Arch.
Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 69–74, 1985.

2697

[37] P. Boissy, D. Bourbonnais, M. M. Carlotti, D. Gravel, and B. A. Arsenault,
“Maximal grip force in chronic stroke subjects and its relationship to
global upper extremity function,” Clin. Rehabil., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 354–
362, 1999.
[38] S. Yamaji, S. Demura, Y. Nagasawa, M. Nakada, and T. Kitabayashi,
“The effect of measurement time when evaluating static muscle endurance
during sustained static maximal gripping,” J. Physiol. Anthropol. Appl.
Human Sci., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 151–158, 2002.
[39] A.-S. Augurelle, A. M. Smith, T. Lejeune, and J.-L. Thonnard, “Importance of cutaneous feedback in maintaining a secure grip during manipulation of hand-held objects,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 665–671,
2003.
[40] J. R. Flanagan and A. M. Wing, “The stability of precision grip forces
during cyclic arm movements with a hand-held load,” Exp. Brain Res.,
vol. 105, no. 3, pp. 455–464, 1995.
[41] H. Forssberg, A. C. Eliasson, H. Kinoshita, G. Westling, and R. S. Johansson, “Development of human precision grip: Part IV. Tactile adaptation of
isometric finger forces to the frictional condition,” Exp. Brain Res., vol.
104, no. 2, pp. 323–330, 1995.
[42] P. Jenmalm and R. S. Johansson, “Visual and somatosensory information
about object shape control manipulative fingertip forces,” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 4486–4499, 1997.
[43] C. J. De Luca, “Myoelectrical manifestations of localized muscular fatigue
in humans,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 251–279, 1984.
[44] F. B. Stulen, and C. J. De Luca, “Frequency parameters of the myoelectric
signal as a measure of muscle conduction velocity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 515–523, Jul. 1981.

Pilwon Heo (S’12) received the M.S. degree
from the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea, and is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in mechanical engineering at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea.
His current research interests include power assistance devices and physical human–robot interactions.

Jung Kim (M’05) received the Ph.D. degree
from the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA.
He is currently a Professor in the Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea. His current research interests include haptics, biosignal analysis for healthcare, and physical human–robot interactions.

