2550

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Generation of the Probabilistic Template of Default
Mode Network Derived from Resting-State fMRI
Defeng Wang, Youyong Kong, Winnie C. W. Chu, Cindy W. C. Tam, Linda C. W. Lam, Yilong Wang,
Georg Northoff, Vincent C. T. Mok, Yongjun Wang, and Lin Shi∗

Abstract—Default-mode network (DMN) has become a prominent network among all large-scale brain networks which can be
derived from the resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data. Statistical
template labeling the common location of hubs in DMN is favorable in the identification of DMN from tens of components resulted
from the independent component analysis (ICA). This paper proposed a novel iterative framework to generate a probabilistic DMN
template from a coherent group of 40 healthy subjects. An initial
template was visually selected from the independent components
derived from group ICA analysis of the concatenated rs-fMRI data
of all subjects. An effective similarity measure was designed to
choose the best-fit component from all independent components of
each subject computed given different component numbers. The
selected DMN components for all subjects were averaged to generate an updated DMN template and then used to select the DMN
for each subject in the next iteration. This process iterated until
the convergence was reached, i.e., the overlapping region between
the DMN areas of the current template and the one generated from

Manuscript received November 6, 2013; revised February 18, 2014; accepted
April 30, 2014. Date of publication May 16, 2014; date of current version
September 16, 2014. This work was supported by grants from the Research
Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China under
the Projects CUHK 475711, 411910, and 411811, a grant from the Science,
Industry, Trade and Information Commission of Shenzhen Municipality under
the Project JC201005250030A and JCYJ20120619152326449 and a grant from
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under the Project 81201157
and 81271653 and project BME-p2-13 of the Shun Hing Institute of Advanced
Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
D. Wang is with the Department of Imaging and Interventional Radiology and
the Research Center for Medical Image Computing, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong and the CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute,
Shenzhen, China and also with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and
Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong SAR (e-mail: dfwang@cuhk.edu.hk).
Y. Kong and W. C. W. Chu are with the Department of Imaging and Interventional Radiology and the Research Center for Medical Image Computing, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong and the CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China (e-mail: kongyouyong@gmail.com;
winnie@med.cuhk.edu.hk).
C. W. C. Tam is with the Department of Psychiatry, North District Hospital,
Sheung Shui, Hong Kong (e-mail: tamwoonchi@hotmail.com).
L. C. W. Lam is with the Department of Psychiatry, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: cwlam@cuhk.edu.hk).
Y. Wang and Y. Wang are with the Department of Neurology,
Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China (e-mail:
yongjunwang1962@gmail.com; yongjunwang1962@gmail.com).
G. Northoff is with the Mind Brain Imaging and Neuroethics, Institute of
Mental Health Research, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON KIN 6N5, Canada
(e-mail: Georg.Northoff@theroyal.ca).
V. C. T. Mok is with the Department of Medicine and Therapeutics and the
Lui Che Woo Institute of Innovation Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: vctmok@cuhk.edu.hk).
∗ L. Shi is with the Department of Medicine and Therapeutics and the Lui Che
Woo Institute of Innovation Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: shilin@cuhk.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2323078

the previous stage is more than 95%. By validating the constructed
DMN template on the rs-fMRI data from another 40 subjects, the
generated probabilistic DMN template and the proposed similarity
matching mechanism were demonstrated to be effective in automatic selection of independent components from the ICA analysis
results.
Index Terms—Brain network, default mode network (DMN),
resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI), template.

I. INTRODUCTION
VER the last few decades, there has been growing
interest in investigating the large-scale brain networks
that exist in the human cognition, perception, and emotion. The
default-mode network (DMN) is a prominent one among these
discovered brain networks. The commonly accepted hubs of
DMN include the posterior cingulate cortex, the medial temporal lobes, the medial prefrontal cortex, and the angular gyrus
[1], [2]. These related brain regions are considered to be active
during resting state while deactivated when specific purposeful
cognitive tasks are performed. Moreover, the DMN has been
suggested to be related to various cognitive functions and be
altered in a series of neuropsychological disorders [3], [4].
The identification of DMN has been extensively studied in
both healthy individuals and subjects of various pathological conditions from resting state fMRI (rs-fMRI) [5]. Plenty
of methods have been proposed to derive the DMN from the
rs-fMRI datasets [6]–[8]. Among these approaches, the method
using independent component analysis (ICA) has been widely
utilized to extract networks in previous studies [9], [10]. ICA
technique enables the blind-source separation of mixed signals
into independent spatial and temporal components, which are
considered to represent different functionally connected networks [6], [11]. However, there remains the problem of how to
accurately select the component that best represents the DMN
from the numerous components. Manual selection may be time
consuming as all components should be carefully visualized and
analyzed. One objective approach is to automatically select the
best-fit component by matching with a given DMN template
[12], [13]. Therefore, a standardized DMN template representing the statistical location of the hubs is demanding for objective
component selections.
Plenty of approaches have been so far proposed to construct
the statistical structural brain template. In the early 1990s, Evans
et al. [14] introduced the concept of a statistical MRI template
for brain mapping. They constructed the MNI305 template
by linearly mapping 305 native MRI volumes to a manuallyderived average MRI. In 1998, Holmes et al. [15] created a new
atlas with much higher signal-to-noise ratio. One subject was

O

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: GENERATION OF THE PROBABILISTIC TEMPLATE OF DMN DERIVED FROM RESTING-STATE FMRI

scanned 27 times, and all the images were linearly registered
to compute an average which was finally mapped to MNI305.
However, linear registration cannot capture the local deformation between different subjects. In 2000, Guimond et al. [16]
developed a method of building a template atlas by nonlinearly
registering each subject to an initial template. With all nonlinear
transformations, original images were resampled to construct a
template with an average unbiased shape and average intensity.
Recently, Fonov et al. [17] proposed an iterative approach
to create an unbiased nonlinear statistical atlas that were not
subject to the vagaries of any single brain. This procedure
consisted of 40 iterations, and at each iteration, native volumes
were nonlinearly fitted to the template from the previous iteration. Being different from constructing statistical brain template
derived directly from scanned MRI volumes, DMN template
cannot be directly computed from fMRI data. Therefore, the
proposed structural brain atlas generation algorithms could not
be directly extended to the construction of DMN template.
To construct a DMN template, researchers have proposed
a lot of approaches, which can be classified into two groups.
One strategy is to manually select some regions from a structural brain atlas to generate a template [18], [19]. However,
there exist some inconsistencies in determining the neuronal
regions to compose a DMN template. The other approach is to
perform a group-level ICA analysis to produce a “distributed”
template [20], [21]. In this way, the fMRI data from all the
subjects is first concatenated to form one 4-D dataset. The
DMN template is then visually recognized from the independent components that are produced by the ICA analysis on
the concatenated 4-D dataset. However, the difference among
the fMRI data of each subject may not capture the intrinsic
functional connectivity [22]. The concatenated data cannot well
reflect the temporal relationship in the fMRI data of each subject, and thus, the resulting template may not fully preserve
the information in the original data. Moreover, only a few subjects were utilized to generate the template [23]. Therefore, it
is of great importance to construct a statistically representative
template for DMN.
This paper presents a novel framework to generate a probabilistic DMN template from resting-state fMRI. Inspired by
the structural brain atlas generation, an iterative approach was
developed to create an unbiased DMN template. Resting-state
fMRI data from 50 healthy subjects were utilized to generate
the template. An initial template was visually selected from
the independent components, which were obtained by performing ICA analysis on the concatenated fMRI data from
all the 50 subjects using FSL melodic software. For each
subject, as the selection of the component number could affect the ability to capture the resting-state functional connectivity, independent components were obtained on different
component numbers. To find the DMN from the components
in each subject, we developed a specific similarity measure.
The component with the highest similarity was selected as
the DMN component for each subject. All the selected DMN
components were then averaged to generate a refined DMN
template. The iteration process would stop once the overlapping region between the DMN areas of the current tem-

2551

plate and the one generated from the previous stage was
more than 95%. All selected components were finally masked
with a given z score. By averaging all the masks, a statistical DMN template was achieved. Resting-state data from another forty subjects were utilized to validate the automatic
component selection method using the constructed statistical
template.
II. MATERIALS AND METHOD
A. Subjects and Image Acquisition
Ninety healthy subjects (age range, 60–89; mean age, 73; 48
females; all right-handed) were scanned at the resting-state.
The rs-fMRI series were acquire on a 3T Philips Medical
Systems (Achieva, Philips, Germany), using the eight-channel
head coil. Subjects were instructed to relax and keep their
eyes open. In each scanning sequence, we obtained a series
of 40 axial T2-weighted gradient echo-planar images (repetition time (TR) = 3000 ms, echo time (TE) = 25 ms, flip angle = 90°, field of view (F OV ) = 220 × 220 mm2 , matrix =
64 × 64, in − plane resolution = 2.4 × 2.4 mm2 , slice thickness = 3 mm). Eighty volumes were acquired in the restingstate functional scan for each subject. Three-dimensional T1weighted images (T R = 18 ms, T E = 2 ms, ﬂip angle = 30◦ ,
voxel size = 1.04 × 1.04 × 0.6 mm3 ) were acquired in the
same session in order to have high-resolution spatial references
for registration and normalization of the functional images.
B. Preprocessing of rs-fMRI data
Among the 90 subjects, 50 subjects were used to generate
the template and the other 40 subjects were used for evaluation.
Functional MRI data of all the 90 subjects was preprocessed
using SPM8 (www.fol.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). Time series images
were first spatially registered to the MNI space using spatial
normalization. This could minimize the misalignment due to
patient motion and correct for slice-time acquisition differences.
Images were then resampled into 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 and spatially
blurred using an 8-mm Gaussian full-width half-maximum filter.
C. Generation of Anatomical Brain Template
The anatomical T1W images of the fifty healthy subjects were
nonlinearly registered and transformed to the T1W template using spatial normalization tool provided by SPM8. All the transformed images were finally averaged and spatially blurred using
a 6-mm Gaussian full-width half-maximum filter to generate an
anatomical brain template.
D. Generation of the Initial Template
Resting-state fMRI data from fifty healthy subjects was
utilized to construct the template. To construct a template, an
initial template should be first given to guide the template generation process. In structural MRI, the initial template was always
a single volume of one subject or an average of native MRI
volumes. However, the initial template could not be directly
obtained from the fMRI data. An appropriate way to obtain an
initial template was to perform a group-level ICA analysis.

2552

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Initial DMN template.

For each subject, the smoothed normalized fMRI images
were concatenated across time to form a single 4-D volumetric
dataset. All the preprocessed images from each subject were
then concatenated into one set of the 4-D image. The 4-D images with all the subjects were then processed with FSL melodic
ICA software (http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/index.html). The
Melodic software utilized probabilistic ICA to estimate the
number of relevant noise and signal sources in the 4-D data.
The number of components was automatically estimated. Afterwards, the fMRI data was decomposed into a set of spatially
independent maps. These maps provided intensity values (z
scores), and thus, a measure of the contribution of the time
course of a component to the signal for a given voxel. The initial DMN template was finally selected visually based on their
correspondence to the DMN identified by Damoiseaux et al.
[24]. Fig. 1 shows the selected initial DMN template from the
estimated maps.
E. Similarity Measure Between DMN Components
For each subject, ICA analysis was also carried out using FSL
Melodic software. For each subject, there were a large number of
spatial maps. It was time consuming to select the best-fit component by visually comparing among all the components. To
automatically select the most similar component, we developed
an effective similarity measurement algorithm. Z scores reflect
the degree to which a given voxel’s time series was correlated
with the time series corresponding to the specific ICA component. Similarity between the independent components and the
template was defined as the absolute value between their z maps
derived from the melodic as follows:



M 
 1 
zi (m) − z̄i
zt (m) − z̄t 

s(zi , zt ) = 
 (1)

M
δz i
δz t
m =1

where zi and zt are the z-values of M voxels in the common mask
of the z-value maps of the ith component and the initial template,
z̄i and z̄t are the mean values of the zi and zt , respectively, and
δz i and δz t are the corresponding standard deviations.
F. Iterative Procedure for Template Refinement
The selection of the number of components (N) could
influence the ability of spatial component to capture the resting state functional connectivity [25]. Setting N too small could

Fig. 2.

Flowchart of the DMN generation process.

squeeze independent networks to the same component. On the
other hand, hubs belonging to the same network might be separated into different components if N was set too big. Although
some researchers estimated the appropriate number of ICA components for fMRI data, it could vary across different individuals
[26]. Therefore, in order to obtain real independent components, multiple types of component numbers were utilized in our
approach, i.e., 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 50, 60, and 70. Best-fit
components were selected by matching with the initial DMN
template using the proposed similarity measure.
The main procedure of the template generation algorithm
is illustrated as Fig. 2. Starting with the initial template, we
iteratively selected the best-fit component from the independent
components of each subject and reconstructed a refined DMN
template. For each subject, similarity between each component
with the current DMN template was computed. Only the component with the highest similarity was selected as the DMN
component for that subject. All the selected components were
then averaged to generate a refined DMN template. The DMN
template was then thresholded with a given z score to extract
the DMN area. The termination criterion was that the similarity measurement between the DMN areas of current template
and the one generated from the previous stage was more than
95%. Fig. 5 illustrates the similarities between templates generated from adjacent stages during the iterations. The procedure
stopped after six iterations in our experiment. All selected components were finally thresholded with a given z score. By averaging all the masks, a statistical DMN template was achieved.
The template was further smoothed using a 6-mm Gaussian
full-width half-maximum filter.

WANG et al.: GENERATION OF THE PROBABILISTIC TEMPLATE OF DMN DERIVED FROM RESTING-STATE FMRI

Fig. 3.

Fig. 4.

2553

Anatomical template.

Fig. 5.

Similarities between templates of adjacent stage during the iterations.

Fig. 6.

Dice coefficients between automatic and manual DMN selection

DMN statistical template mapped onto the anatomical template.

III. RESULTS
A. Templates
The sagittal, coronal, and axial views of the anatomical
template are shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 4 shows the statistical
DMN template derived from the 50 healthy subjects. The
DMN template, a sample dataset, the DMN selected using
the proposed method, and the MATLAB code of DMN
selection and similarity measurement are downloadable at
http://www.droid.cuhk.edu.hk/staff/staff_list/dfwang/dmn.htm.
The identified areas were consistent with binary DMN templates
generated in previous works [1], [3], [25].

defined as
d(za , zv ) =

B. Validation of the Statistical Template
To validate the automatic component selection method using
the statistical template, we employed here the rs-fMRI data from
the rest 40 subjects. ICA analysis was performed on the restingstate data for each subject using Melodic software. Independent components were also generated in a range of components
numbers: 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 50, 60, and 70. We first
applied the proposed automatic selection approach to choose
the best-fit DMN components among numerous components.
On the other hand, we visually selected DMN components from
the acquired components. The DMN components from automatic and manual selections were all thresholded to achieve the
DMN. To evaluate the automatic selection result, the Dice coefficient was used to measure the spatial overlap between the two
DMN maps for each subject. With the binary DMN za and zv
from the automatic and visual selection, the dice coefficient was

2 |za |zv |
.
|za | + |zv |

(2)

Dice coefficients have a restricted range of [0, 1], where 0 represents that there is no overlap and 1 denotes that they are perfectly
overlapped. Fig. 6 gives the Dice coefficients for all the 40 subjects. Most of the values were equal to 1 and all the other ones
were very close to 1. This indicated that the DMN selected with
the automatic method was quite similar to the visually selected
results.
We further evaluate the superiority of our statistical template
by comparing with the traditional binary template. The binary
template was obtained by thresholding the recognized DMN
component from group-ICA analysis. This was widely used in
previous studies [20], [21]. We computed the dice coefficients
of the manually selected DMN of each subject with the two
templates. Fig. 7 gives the dice coefficients of the DMN of each
subject on the two templates. The statistical template obtained

2554

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Fig. 7. Comparison of dice coefficients of the manually selected DMN with
the statistical template and the initial binary template.

higher dice coefficient than initial binary template. This demonstrated that the statistical template was more consistent with the
DMN distribution.
IV. DISCUSSION
We presented a novel iterative method for creating a statistical DMN template through resting-state fMRI data from a large
number of subjects. Our method used an iterative refinement
with an effective similarity measurement algorithm to select the
DMN component from the numerous independent components
for each subject. The iteration process terminated until the difference between the templates of the current and previous stage
was less than 5%. With all the masks of the DMN areas from
each subject being averaged, the statistical DMN template was
achieved. For validation, unseen data from another 40 healthy
subjects were employed. The results demonstrated that the DMN
can be accurately selected with the currently constructed statistical template.
Our template-building algorithm is different from the iterative
methods for the brain structural template in the following ways.
In the construction of traditional structural MRI template, data
was directly used to generate the template. Here, the template
was constructed from the independent components which were
derived from ICA analysis on rs-fMRI data. The initial template
was visually selected from the independent components that
derived from group ICA analysis on the concatenated data of
all subjects. This is quite different from traditional structural
MRI that takes a single subject data or the averaged data as
an initial template. Previous methods performed ICA analyses
on a specific or an automatically estimated component number.
This differs from our method that utilized multiple types of
component numbers to better capture the resting-state functional
connectivity.
Previous DMN templates were often derived from group-level
ICA analysis with binary masks. All fMRI data from all the subjects was concatenated to form one 4-D dataset. DMN templates
were visually recognized among the components from ICA anal-

ysis on the 4-D dataset. The templates are binary masks from a
few subjects [20], [21], [23]. In our approach, a large number
of healthy subjects were employed to generate the probabilistic template. Compared with the binary templates, probabilistic
template could better represent the statistical DMN distribution
within a population. Limited by the data at hand, the present
template was constructed from the older subjects only. The connectivity in DMN has been demonstrated to be changed with
normal aging [27]. The DMN template may have differences
for different age stages. In future, more subjects with a wider
age range will be employed to refine the statistical template and
construct new age-specific templates. The algorithm can also be
extended to create template for other types of brain networks,
such as the executive control network, the salience network, and
the sensorimotor network, etc.
The probabilistic DMN template and the implementation of
the similarity measurement will be available online for free
download. The proposed DMN template can serve as an unbiased reference for the identification of DMN from resting-state
fMRI, and hopefully can be adopted as a useful tool for further
research into the brain network.

REFERENCES
[1] K. Supekar, L. Q. Uddin, K. Prater, H. Amin, M. D. Greicius, and V.
Menon, “Development of functional and structural connectivity within
the default mode network in young children,” Neuroimage, vol. 52,
pp. 290–301, Aug. 1, 2010.
[2] F. De Vogelaere, P. Santens, E. Achten, P. Boon, and G. Vingerhoets,
“Altered default-mode network activation in mild cognitive impairment
compared with healthy aging,” Neuroradiology, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 1195–
1206, Nov. 2012.
[3] M. D. Greicius, G. Srivastava, A. L. Reiss, and V. Menon, “Default-mode
network activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging:
evidence from functional MRI,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 101,
pp. 4637–4642, Mar. 30, 2004.
[4] G. Mingoia, G. Wagner, K. Langbein, R. Maitra, S. Smesny, M. Dietzek,
H. P. Burmeister, J. R. Reichenbach, R. G. Schlosser, C. Gaser, H. Sauer,
and I. Nenadic, “Default mode network activity in schizophrenia studied
at resting state using probabilistic ICA,” Schizophr Res., vol. 138, no. 2–3,
pp. 143–149, Jul. 2012.
[5] E. Widjaja, M. Zamyadi, C. Raybaud, O. C. Snead, and M. L. Smith,
“Impaired default mode network on resting-state fMRI in Children with
medically refractory epilepsy,” Am. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 34, pp. 552–557,
Mar. 2013.
[6] C. F. Beckmann and S. A. Smith, “Probabilistic independent component
analysis for functional magnetic resonance imaging,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imaging, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 137–152, Feb. 2004.
[7] M. H. Lee, C. D. Hacker, A. Z. Snyder, M. Corbetta, D. Y. Zhang, E. C.
Leuthardt, and J. S. Shimony, “Clustering of resting state networks,” Plos
One, vol. 7, no. 7, Jul. 9, 2012.
[8] R. F. Qi, L. J. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. H. Zhong, S. Y. Wu, Z. Q. Zhang, W. Liao,
L. Ni, Z. J. Zhang, H. F. Chen, Y. Zhong, Q. Jiao, X. J. Wu, X. X. Fan, Y.
J. Liu, and G. M. Lu, “Selective impairments of resting-state networks in
minimal hepatic encephalopathy,” Plos One, vol. 7, no. 5, May 25, 2012.
[9] C. Rosazza, L. Minati, F. Ghielmetti, M. L. Mandelli, and M. G. Bruzzone, “Functional connectivity during resting-state functional MR imaging: study of the correspondence between independent component analysis and region-of-interest-based methods,” Am. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 33,
pp. 180–187, Jan. 2012.
[10] G. V. Pendse, D. Borsook, and L. Becerra, “A simple and objective method
for reproducible resting state network (RSN) detection in fMRI,” Plos One,
vol. 6, no. 12, Dec. 12, 2011.
[11] Y. Deng, Q. H. Dai, and Z. K. Zhang, “Graph laplace for occluded face
completion and recognition,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 20, no. 8,
pp. 2329–2338, Aug. 2011.

WANG et al.: GENERATION OF THE PROBABILISTIC TEMPLATE OF DMN DERIVED FROM RESTING-STATE FMRI

[12] A. R. Franco, A. Pritchard, V. D. Calhoun, and A. R. Mayer, “Interrater and
intermethod reliability of default mode network selection,” Hum. Brain
Mapp., vol. 30, pp. 2293–303, Jul. 2009.
[13] P. G. Samann, R. Wehrle, D. Hoehn, V. I. Spoormaker, H. Peters, C. Tully,
F. Holsboer, and M. Czisch, “Development of the brain’s default mode
network from wakefulness to slow wave sleep,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 21,
no. 9, pp. 2082–2093, Sep. 2011.
[14] A. C. Evans, S. Marrett, P. Neelin, L. Collins, K. Worsley, W. Dai, S. Milot,
E. Meyer, and D. Bub, “Anatomical mapping of functional activation in
stereotactic coordinate space,” Neuroimage, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 43–53, Aug.
1992.
[15] C. J. Holmes, R. Hoge, L. Collins, R. Woods, A. W. Toga, and A. C. Evans,
“Enhancement of MR images using registration for signal averaging,”
J. Comput. Assisted Tomography, vol. 22, pp. 324–333, Mar.-Apr. 1998.
[16] A. Guimond, J. Meunier, and J. P. Thirion, “Average brain models: A
convergence study,” Comput. Vis. Image Understanding, vol. 77, pp. 192–
210, Feb. 2000.
[17] V. Fonov, A. C. Evans, K. Botteron, C. R. Almli, R. C. McKinstry, and
D. L. Collins, “Unbiased average age-appropriate atlases for pediatric
studies,” Neuroimage, vol. 54, pp. 313–27, Jan. 1, 2011.
[18] R. P. Dhond, C. Yeh, K. Park, N. Kettner, and V. Napadow, “Acupuncture
modulates resting state connectivity in default and sensorimotor brain
networks,” Pain, vol. 136, pp. 407–18, Jun. 2008.
[19] V. Napadow, L. LaCount, K. Park, S. As-Sanie, D. J. Clauw, and R. E.
Harris, “Intrinsic brain connectivity in fibromyalgia is associated with
chronic pain intensity,“ Arthritis Rheumatism, vol. 62, pp. 2545–2555,
Aug. 2010.
[20] F. Esposito, A. Aragri, I. Pesaresi, S. Cirillo, G. Tedeschi, E. Marciano, R.
Goebel, and F. Di Salle, “Independent component model of the defaultmode brain function: combining individual-level and population-level
analyses in resting-state fMRI,” Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 26, no. 7, pp.
905–913, Sep. 2008.

2555

[21] C. C. Guo, F. Kurth, J. Zhou, E. A. Mayer, S. B. Eickhoff, J. H. Kramer,
and W. W. Seeley, “One-year test-retest reliability of intrinsic connectivity
network fMRI in older adults,” Neuroimage, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1471–1483,
Jul. 16, 2012.
[22] Y. Deng, Y. Y. Zhao, Y. B. Liu, and Q. H. Dai, “Differences help recognition: A probabilistic interpretation,” Plos One, vol. 8, Jun. 3, 2013.
[23] C. Habas, N. Kamdar, D. Nguyen, K. Prater, C. F. Beckmann, V. Menon,
and M. D. Greicius, “Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks,” J. Neurosci., vol. 29, no. 26, pp. 8586–8594, Jul. 1,
2009.
[24] J. S. Damoiseaux, S. A. Rombouts, F. Barkhof, P. Scheltens, C. J. Stam, S.
M. Smith, and C. F. Beckmann, “Consistent resting-state networks across
healthy subjects,” in Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 103, no. 37, pp.
13848–13853, Sep. 12, 2006.
[25] A. Abou-Elseoud, T. Starck, J. Remes, J. Nikkinen, O. Tervonen, and V.
Kiviniemi, “The effect of model order selection in group PICA,” Hum.
Brain Mapp., vol. 31, pp. 1207–16, Aug. 2010.
[26] L. S. Ma, B. Q. Wang, X. Y. Chen, and J. H. Xiong, “Detecting functional
connectivity in the resting brain: A comparison between ICA and CCA,”
Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 25, pp. 47–56, Jan. 2007.
[27] L. Geerligs, N. M. Maurits, R. J. Renken, and M. M. Lorist, “Reduced
specificity of functional connectivity in the aging brain during task performance,” Hum. Brain Mapp., vol. 35, pp. 319–30, Jan. 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

