2538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

A Knowledge-Based Modeling for Plantar Pressure
Image Reconstruction
Sarah Ostadabbas, Member, IEEE, Mehrdad Nourani*, Senior Member, IEEE, Adnan Saeed,
Rasoul Yousefi, Member, IEEE, and Matthew Pompeo

Abstract—It is known that prolonged pressure on the plantar
area is one of the main factors in developing foot ulcers. With
current technology, electronic pressure monitoring systems can be
placed as an insole into regular shoes to continuously monitor the
plantar area and provide evidence on ulcer formation process as
well as insight for proper orthotic footwear design. The reliability of these systems heavily depends on the spatial resolution of
their sensor platforms. However, due to the cost and energy constraints, practical wireless in-shoe pressure monitoring systems
have a limited number of sensors, i.e., typically K < 10. In this
paper, we present a knowledge-based regression model (SCPM) to
reconstruct a spatially continuous plantar pressure image from a
small number of pressure sensors. This model makes use of highresolution pressure data collected clinically to train a per-subject
regression function. SCPM is shown to outperform all other tested
interpolation methods for K < 60 sensors, with less than onethird of the error for K = 10 sensors. SCPM bridges the gap
between the technological capability and medical need and can
play an important role in the adoption of sensing insole for a wide
range of medical applications.
Index Terms—Diabetic foot ulcers, Gaussian mixture models
(GMMs), image reconstruction, in-shoe monitoring systems, plantar pressure modeling, principal component analysis (PCA).

I. INTRODUCTION
RESSURE has been shown to be one of the main extrinsic factors in the development of tissue damage in the
foot’s plantar area [1]. Foot pressure monitoring systems offer
a valuable clinical tool in assessing foot problems caused by
excessive pressure exposure. The application of these systems
is not limited to the study of the foot ulcer etiology in diabetic
patients with neuropathic feet [2]. The information derived from
the plantar pressure data can also assist in-clinic gait analysis,
walking impairments evaluation, and the design of proper orthotic footwear [3], [4].
In-shoe pressure-measurement systems in particular are increasingly being used by researchers since they can provide

P

Manuscript received October 17, 2013; revised April 27, 2014; accepted May
6, 2014. Date of publication May 9, 2014; date of current version September
16, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. Ostadabbas, A. Saeed, and R. Yousefi are with the Quality of Life Technology (QoLT) Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of
Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080 USA (e-mail: sarahostad@utdallas.edu;
axs055200@utdallas.edu; rxy091020@utdallas.edu).
*M. Nourani is with the Quality of Life Technology (QoLT) Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson,
TX 75080 USA (e-mail: nourani@utdallas.edu).
M. Pompeo is with the Wound Care Clinic, Presbyterian Hospital, Dallas,
TX 75231 USA (e-mail: matthewpompeo@texashealth.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2322993

Fig. 1. (a) Medically important plantar regions including big toe (T), heel
(H), first to fifth metatarsal heads (MT1-5), (b) Custom-made portable pressure
monitoring insole. ([17]).

a pervasive measurement of the plantar pressure continuously
during daily activities [5]. High-resolution systems are commercially available [6]–[8], but tend to be limited to sports applications or in-clinic measurements due to the high per-unit cost,
low battery life, and the requirement of close proximity to a data
collection station. Therefore, for practical pervasive take-home
systems, the number of sensors is typically limited to 10 or less
[9]–[12].
However, the plantar pressure distribution has many highfrequency components, and one of the more important parts—
the high-pressure areas, are extremely localized phenomena
[13]. These limited-sensor systems typically compensate for
these requirements by placing pressure sensors precisely at
high-risk/high-pressure regions of the foot [see Fig. 1(a)]. Unfortunately, the sparse placement makes reconstruction of the
full plantar pressure image extremely challenging, and because
the size, number, and placement of sensors substantially vary
from study to study, it is almost impossible to compare research
outcomes among studies [14].
We propose solving this problem with a knowledge-based
regression model that can reconstruct the plantar pressure distribution from a small number (less than nine) of well-placed
pressure sensors. The existing heuristic of placing pressure sensors in key areas works because the anatomical structure of each
subject’s foot restricts the pressure distribution space. Specifically, the bones and soft tissue in a foot have a small number of
configurations for a given subject. This implies that the plantar
pressure distribution might be sparse in a properly defined image
subspace.
Our regression model, the sparse-sensing continuous plantar pressure model (SCPM), is trained from a small set of

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

OSTADABBAS et al.: KNOWLEDGE-BASED MODELING FOR PLANTAR PRESSURE IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION

high-resolution plantar pressure data taken from the subject
walking. The trained regression model can then reconstruct a
full plantar-pressure image from a small number of sensors at
arbitrary, but known locations. The locations do not need to be
chosen ahead of time, conferring on this system natural fault tolerance. However, our experimental results will show that good
sensor locations are still very important in image reconstruction accuracy. SCPM would be compatible with a wide variety
of pressure-sensing platforms from typical research platforms
(with different number and location of sensors) to Nike+ [15].
For each of these platforms, the reconstructed pressure distribution after applying our model will be in the same format,
allowing direct comparisons between the results from different
researchers.
A. Related Works
If the problems of cost and wearability can be overcome,
plantar pressure monitoring is expected to become a cornerstone of foot ulcer prevention and early detection. Several highresolution pressure sensing systems are commercially available
that have a variety of constraints such as high cost, and tethering
to a data collection computer [6]–[8]. The “wearable” versions
of these systems require the user to carry a large data collection device. Meanwhile, low cost and truly portable pressure
monitoring systems exist [e.g., see Fig. 1(b)], but have a limited
number of sensors and low spatial resolution [9]–[12].
Low spatial resolution can be a problem as the plantar pressure
distribution has high-frequency components and is characterized
by sharp peaks. Sparse placement of sensors results in two significant sources of error: 1) inadequate coverage (i.e., sensor not
under important area), and 2) underestimation of pressure due
to sensor size. The first problem can be ameliorated by careful
sensor placement. The second problem stems from the fact that
most pressure sensing systems use force sensors. The pressure
is obtained by dividing force by sensor area, which means the
sensor actually measures the average pressure over the entire
sensor surface. The resulting peak pressure underestimation is
exacerbated by large sensors or especially sharp pressure peaks
(e.g., metatarsal heads) [16]. One study showed that for a sensor of width 10 mm, local metatarsal pressure maxima can be
underestimated even more than 30% [14].
Underestimation can be corrected by using sufficiently small
sensors. Based on the frequency content of plantar pressure profile, Davis et al. advised that sensor diameters should be not
greater than 6.2 mm in order not to underestimate actual pressures in recording of plantar patterns [13]. Later, Giacomozzi
[16] mentioned that for a proper detection of localized peak pressures under the human foot, a diameter size of 2–3 mm might be
reasonable for a sensor, basing this estimation on location and
dimension of the metatarsal heads. Both these studies assumed
a sensor array covering the entire foot. Decreasing sensor size
results in a corresponding increase in the number of sensors to
maintain the same coverage.
With a small number of sparsely placed sensors, the choice
of size is not as obvious. Some regions, such as the heel, show
semiuniform pressure over large areas, while other regions show

2539

strong peaks [18]. Smaller sensors are more sensitive to placement, and can easily miss key details. The larger sensors, on
the other hand, are more likely to contain the peak pressure, but
the reading may be a significant underestimation of the peak
pressure [17].
Both problems can be overcome using a regression model to
reconstruct a complete pressure distribution from a sparse set of
pressure readings. One of the first such models was reported in
[14]. The author used a sinusoidal function to model the pressure distribution under the metatarsal heads. This model was
used to examine the effect of sensor size on accuracy. The author reported that 5-mm diameter results in a 90% measurement
accuracy. This research was important in a sense that it both
introduced a mathematical model for plantar pressure, and addressed resolution and sensor size using a theoretical framework.
Pataky extended the model to the heel and toe, and tried a number of different pressure fitting functions, showing that among
the functions he examined, Gaussian functions had the best fit
[19]. The author noted that a Gaussian could accurately reconstruct the peak pressure at a point not covered by an existing
sensor. This study still relied on a significant number of sensors
as it parameterized the Gaussians fully for each pressure frame.
Further, the plantar area was manually divided into pressure
regions.
In a previous work [20], we introduced a regression model
that extended these other works while addressing some of the
problems associated with applying it to sparse sensor sets. This
model moved beyond earlier works in several ways: 1) it created a unified pressure model for the entire foot, rather than
individual regions, 2) the region covered by each Gaussian and
the Gaussian parameters were chosen automatically through an
optimization framework, and 3) an algorithm was provided to
use this trained model to reconstruct a continuous pressure image from a set of sparse sensors. SCPM training uses a dense
(high resolution) set of pressure data to create and parameterize
the Gaussian functions [using the well-studied Gaussian mixture model (GMM)]. The resulting regression model has a small
number of free parameters. The image is reconstructed from a
sparse set of sensors using linear least squares (LSQ) to determine the value of the free parameters.
A significant difference between SCPM and previous works is
that SCPM separates the processes of model parameterization
(through training using high-resolution data sets) and reconstruction (based on sparse sensor readings).
While SCPM uses a regression model to build high-resolution
images from sparse sensor data, there are other approaches, such
as interpolation. Like regression, interpolation produces a continuous function from a set of sampled data points. A key difference is that in interpolation the resulting continuous function
passes through all the sample points. Interpolation is commonly
used to upsample pressure data taken from a pressure grid, but
it can also be used to increase the resolution of data taken from
sparse and arbitrarily placed sensors. Some of these approaches
to interpolate nongridded data include nearest neighbor, natural
neighbor, linear, and Laplacian interpolation [21]. We will show
in Section V that these methods are generally more accurate

2540

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

The basic regression model is
 y) =
P(x,

N


vi Fi (x, y) = Fxy v

(1)

i=1

where Fxy =< F1 (x, y), F2 (x, y), . . . , FN (x, y) > are the basis
functions.
A. Choosing the Basis Functions
Fig. 2. Key steps to apply SCPM for spatially continuous pressure image
reconstruction: Model training, data collection, and image reconstruction.

than SCPM for a high number of sensors, but below about 60
sensors, SCPM is more accurate than all of these approaches.

B. Key Contribution
In this paper, we enhance our previous problem formulation
[20] by using insight from biomechanics and considering the
possible sparsity of the problem. We use principal component
analysis (PCA) to reduce the number of free parameters without
significantly increasing reconstruction error. In this improved
model, each free parameter controls several Gaussian functions
rather than just one. By allowing a larger number of Gaussian
functions for the same model order, error performance for sparse
sensors is significantly improved, especially with nonoptimal
sensor placement.
We show, through extensive experimentations, that our
knowledge-based modeling performs better than blind interpolation techniques. SCPM offers high-resolution plantar pressure
imagery not previously available in portable systems with a
small number of pressure sensors. One typical use scenario is
outlined in Fig. 2: the regression model is trained using highresolution walking data collected in the doctor’s office. The
doctor gives the patient a pressure sensing shoe/insole. The
shoe/insole transmits pervasively collected pressure data to a
server that reconstructs the data and performs analysis. The patient and caregivers can access the sensor data, high-resolution
reconstruction, and analysis through the web or a smartphone.

II. SPARSE SENSING CONTINUOUS PLANTAR PRESSURE MODEL
The primary goal of this study is to reconstruct a continuous foot pressure image from a sparse set of K sensor readings, s. Using high-resolution training data, a regression model
is created with N free parameters, represented by vector v .
The continuous function reconstructing the estimated pressure,
 y) is a linear combination of N basis functions using the
P(x,
free parameters (v ) as weights. The training process selects and
parameterizes the basis functions (see Section III). Reconstruction samples the basis functions at the K sensor locations and
estimates v , the free parameters in our model, using linear LSQ,
provided K ≥ N (see Section IV).

As mentioned in Section I-A, Gaussian functions were shown
to closely approximate the pressure of isolated plantar regions
[19]. By treating the plantar pressure as a linear superposition
of the regional pressures, a unified model emerges. It would
be tedious to require researchers to manually specify regional
boundaries, and some regions such as the metatarsal heads, may
not even have clear boundaries.
The GMM solves both problems by providing an optimization
framework for parameterizing linear combination of Gaussian
functions to match any given function [22]. The method of
GMM training is discussed in greater detail in Section IV-C.
By using the Gaussian functions as our basis functions, (1)
becomes
 y) =
P(x,

M


 xy w
wi G(x, y, μi , Σi ) = G


(2)

i=1

 xy is defined as Fxy , and μi and Σi are the Gaussian
where G
mean and covariance matrices, respectively. Training this model
is about choosing the parameters μ and Σ, not about selecting
the basis functions. Also, note that the free parameter vector in
(2) is the M -dimensional w
 instead of the N -dimensional v in
(1). This small but very important modification sets us up for a
discussion about model order reduction using PCA in the next
section.
B. Model Order Reduction to Improve Sparse Performance
The pure Gaussian approach in (2) formed the basis of our previous work, [20]. The higher the number of Gaussian functions,
the lower the reconstruction error. However, visual examination
showed that several Gaussian functions appeared to consistently
change amplitude in tandem. This lead us to suspect that a better model might exist to treat each primary basis function as a
linear combination of Gaussian functions rather than as a single
Gaussian function.
1) Using PCA to Reduce Model Order: Another way to look
at it is that some configurations of the parameter vector w
 are
far more likely than others, implying that the M -dimensional
parameter subspace containing all possible values of w
 is sparse.
In this case, standard subspace reduction techniques can be used.
One of the most common techniques, PCA is guaranteed to
produce a LSQ optimal subspace reduction with respect to the
set of observed values of w
 encountered in training [23]. Using a
set of observations, PCA will create a ranked set of orthonormal
basis functions. The first basis function is a line with the highest
variance among the data set. The second is a line orthogonal to
the first with the second highest variance. The remaining basis
functions are constructed in the same manner.

OSTADABBAS et al.: KNOWLEDGE-BASED MODELING FOR PLANTAR PRESSURE IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION

The PCA subspace projection matrix A is an M × M matrix,
where M is the number of Gaussian basis functions. An M to
N projection matrix A can be created by selecting the first N
rows from A . This matrix can be either used to project the
M -dimensional w-subspace

[from (2)] onto the N dimensional
v subspace [from (1)], or to reconstruct w
 from v . In general,
projection is exact while reconstruction is not. PCA guarantees
the lowest least square error reconstruction error for a N → M
linear reconstruction. Both projection and reconstruction are
shown below
v = Aw


projection

(3)

w
 = AT v

reconstruction.

(4)



While A must be created during training, the truncated version A can be created on a per-frame basis during reconstruction.
This makes the model robust to a few sensor loss (given K stays
greater than N ) and flexible enough to change the subspace
dimensionality based on changing accuracy requirements.
2) Updating the Model: The finalized form of SCPM can be
obtained by combining (2) and (4)
 y) =
P(x,

N

i=1

=

vi

M


aij G(x, y, μj , Σj )

j =1

 xy AT
G
  
Trained parameters

v


(5)

Free parameters

where aij is a row/column reference to a cell in the PCA projection matrix, A. Note that this new formulation is just a special
case of the first general model of (1).
It will be shown in the experimental results that this dimensionality reduction (from M to N ) using PCA drastically reduces the reconstruction error for a given dimensionality of the
representation vector, M as well as for a given number of pressure sensors, K.
C. Sources of Error
While interpolation functions will pass through all sample
points, the regression functions in general may not (except for
N = K). The error represented by this mismatch can be attributed to a combination of measurement noise and model error.
Measurement noise comes from inaccuracies in measurement,
while model error comes from a failure of the model to accurately represent the underlying process generating the data. A
third type of error, reconstruction error, comes from inexact parameterization of the model during reconstruction (poor choice
of values in v ). As the number of sensors (K) increases, the reconstruction error will approach 0, while model error and noise
will remain relatively constant. This means that for a regression
model, the error can be expected to flatten out as K exceeds
some value and is high enough.
The smaller K is, the more measurement noise and model
error will distort parameterization, leading to a higher reconstruction error. Placement of sensors is just as important as the
number of sensors [14], [19]. Assuming a flat noise profile, the
low-valued regions of the basis functions are expected to have

Fig. 3.

2541

Overview of image reconstruction procedure in SCPM.

lower SNR. Sensors placed in a low-valued area will be unlikely
to provide a reliable estimate of that function’s weight. Heuristically, placing the sensors at peak locations within each basis
function will decrease the reconstruction error.
III. IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION FROM SPARSE SENSORS
The plantar image reconstruction from the sparse set of pressure sensors has two major steps. The first step is converting K
sensor readings s =<s1 , s2 , . . . , sK> into the N -dimensional
vector representation v using the LSQ algorithm. The second
step is reconstructing the image using (5). An overview of continuous plantar pressure image reconstruction is shown in Fig. 3.
Step 1 (LSQ Weight Computation): Each sensor reading (sk )
is a three-tuple containing the coordinate and observed pressure
value: sk = (xk , yk , PO k ). To estimate the weights vector v for
reconstruction, we first construct a matrix BK ×M containing the
value of each Gaussian basis function at each sensor location
⎡
x y ⎤
G
1 1
⎢ G
x y ⎥
2 2 ⎥
⎢
(6)
B=⎢
⎥.
..
⎣
⎦
.
x y
G
K K
 O where P
O = <
From (5), we have BAT v = P
PO 1 , PO 2 , . . . , PO K>T comes from K sensor readings. If the
dimensionality of the compact subspace equals the number of
sensors (N = K), v can be solved for exact. Otherwise, for
N < K, the problem is overconstrained and v can be estimated
using a LSQ approach [24].
Step 2 (Pressure Map Estimation): Since the trained parameters of SCPM are known in advance, and the free parameters (v )
have just been estimated, (5) can be used to reconstruct a spatially continuous pressure image or to sample a discrete pressure
image from a set of desired locations.
A series of actual and reconstructed pressure images of several
spots in a gait cycle is shown in Fig. 4. The reconstructed images
are obtained by using SCPM with M = 40 Gaussian mixtures,
N = 10 free parameters using all sensor locations under foot.
IV. MODEL TRAINING
One of the primary advantages of SCPM over conventional
interpolation techniques is that it takes advantage of training
data to create a more compact model of pressure. The training
phase can be completed during a clinical visit by having the
patient walk on a high-resolution pressure mat for a few minutes.
The trained model should be updated every once in a while,

2542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Fig. 4. Actual and reconstructed pressure images for different phases of a gait
cycle, the pressure is normalized from highest (red) to lowest (blue).

Fig. 5.

Per-subject SCPM training procedure to obtain trained parameters.

especially if the foot shape or walking pattern changes such as
in considerable weight loss or gain, or lower limb amputation.
The model training process has five parts: 1) splitting each
subject’s walking data into steps, 2) registering (aligning) the individual steps, 3) training Gaussian parameters with a modified
expectation maximization (EM) algorithm, 4) picking the best
GMM from training, and 5) creating the PCA projection matrix
A . An overview of per-subject training procedure is shown in
Fig. 5. The first two steps are only required for data taken from a
pressure mat; if the high-resolution data are taken from in-shoe
pressure-sensitive insoles, those steps are not required.
A. Step Splitting
The two aspects to step splitting are: 1) differentiating between one step and the next, and 2) determining whether the
step is a right or left step. The pressure mat used for this research [7], only had room enough for one foot, so subjects were
instructed to walk three steps in one direction, turn around, and
walk three steps in the opposite direction. Only the middle step
was recorded, and subjects were instructed to alternate between
right and left foot when touching the mat.
Individual steps were separated using the intervals of zero
pressure between steps. Steps were divided into left/right based
on even/odd occurrence in the data. Exceptions due to subject
mistake were manually moved to the correct set.
B. Image Registration
In order to align the foot pressure image of different steps, the
first walking step in each set of steps was used as the registration template for each subject and foot. The image registration

algorithm is a modified version of the methods presented in [25]
and [26] with the following steps:
Step 1 (Peak pressure image (PPI)): Each pixel of PPI holds
the maximum pressure value on that spatial coordinate among
all frames in a given step.
Step 2 (Rotational alignment): The PPI is test rotated by each
of several evenly spaced angles over an initial window of 360◦ .
The rotated PPI is transationally aligned (as described in Step
3). The alignment with the lowest root mean square (RMS) error
between the template and step PPIs is saved.
Step 3 (Translational alignment): Translation in the spatial domain corresponds to a phase shift in the frequency domain. Spatial translation can be determined by applying twodimensional Discrete Fourier Transform on the PPIs to measure
the shift between each PPI and the template.
Step 4 (Iterative Convergence): The angular window from
Step 2 is shrunk by a constant factor and centered on the saved
alignment. Steps 2 and 3 are applied iteratively until alignment
precision is sufficient, such that the angle difference between this
iteration and the previous one becomes less than a predefined
value .
C. Training With EM
The basis function parameters μi and Σi are trained using an
EM algorithm modified slightly from the process traditionally
used for training GMMs. The EM algorithm takes a set of samples and initial values of the Gaussian parameters and iteratively
converges to a local maximum.
The differences between our training process and the traditional EM process mainly arise from GMM being used to match
a probability distribution, and our process being used to reconstruct an arbitrary function. The key differences between our
training process and the GMM process are outlined below
1) Basis function weights can sum to a number other than
1: Probability distribution functions must integrate to 1.
Since the component functions in a mixture model have
this property, as long as the weights sum to 1, this is
maintained. The SCPM has no such limitation for either
the basis functions or the weights. This difference has no
effect on the training process.
2) Value associated with each observation: In a traditional
GMM, each observation only has a coordinate, but no
value. For the SCPM, each observation has a coordinate
and an associated pressure. The EM algorithm can be
adopted by assigning a weight to each observation equal
to the pressure. These weights are different than the basis
function weights [27].
3) Basis function weights calculated per frame, other parameters per foot: This is equivalent to saying that there
is a separate mixture model for each frame with the basis
function parameters tied across all frames from the same
subject and foot [28]. For further details, please refer to
our previous work [20].
4) Constraints on the Covariance Matrix: The covariance
matrix Σ can be constrained in several ways to either
force a circular Gaussian (equal covariance), allow an

OSTADABBAS et al.: KNOWLEDGE-BASED MODELING FOR PLANTAR PRESSURE IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION

elliptical Gaussian aligned to either the x- or y-axes (diagonal covariance), or to allow an arbitrarily rotated elliptical Gaussian (full covariance). In general, the full
covariance offers the most possibilities but is susceptible
to overfitting given insufficient training data. Experimental results from our previous work [20] showed that the
full covariance matrix was the best, and that our training
method did not result in overfitting.
D. Picking the Best
The EM algorithm finds a local minimum and is sensitive to
initial conditions. Our previous experiments [20] showed that
the best GMM from training also performed noticeably better
than the average. This was large because some trained GMMs
produce extraordinarily bad reconstruction outcome. Therefore,
for a given number of basis functions, the parameter estimation
phase was run five different times, and the best with the least
estimation error during training was selected.
E. Computing Projection Matrix
The full-dimensionality PCA projection matrix A is created
by applying PCA transformation to a matrix consisting of Gaussian mixture coefficients from all training observations. That is
to say
⎡
⎢
AM ×M = P CA ⎢
⎣

⎤
w
1
w
2 ⎥
.. ⎥
. ⎦
w
n

(7)

n ×M

where n is the number of training observations. The reduced
dimensionality projection matrix A can be obtained by considering only the first N rows of A based on system constraints.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Several experiments were performed to gauge the performance of SCPM in a variety of conditions and with various
parameter values. The proposed use of SCPM requires training using high-resolution data and then reconstruction of data
collected from sparse sensors placed in an insole. The insole
data are simulated by picking individual sensor cells from the
high-resolution data and calling them placed sensors. This allows us to freely experiment with sensor placement and more
importantly to have a ground truth to compare the resulting
reconstruction against.
Both training and image reconstruction were conducted using
MATLAB-R2012a. The most time intensive part of SCPM analysis is training with EM (explained in Section IV-C). However,
since it is part of the training process, it would not be problematic for real-time applications. During image reconstruction, the
LSQ weight computation and pressure map estimation using (5)
are a series of linear matrix operations that can be implemented
efficiently on most CPUs.

2543

A. Data Collection Protocol and Setup
Two separate experiments were conducted: the primary experiment, and the Fast/Slow experiment. Both experiments were
conducted with the same equipment and almost exactly the same
protocol: the only difference for the Fast/Slow experiment was
subject’s walking speed, as described below. Except for the
Fast/Slow case study, all results are from analysis using data
from the primary experiment.
1) Pressure-Sensing Equipment: The high-resolution data
collection was conducted by using MatScan pressure measurement platform [7]. This floor mat with the area of 435.9 mm ×
368.8 mm can capture barefoot plantar pressure with evenly
spaced sensors that are 8.38 mm in both the x and y directions.
MatScan uses resistive pressure sensor technology and has a
pressure measurement range of up to 862 kPa. The MatScan
sensor array is manufactured by Tekscan and the sensor specifications such as linearity, repeatability, and hysteresis are available on the company website. These values are valid when operating in the temperature range of −40 ◦ C to 60 ◦ C [29]. Our
experiments were entirely conducted within this temperature
range.
2) The Primary Experiment: Ten healthy subjects including
three females, with ages range from 19 to 51 years old, were
asked to walk on the high-resolution pressure mat for 2 min
and pressure data were sampled at 50 Hz. The pressure mat was
placed in the middle of a 5-m-long walkway and subjects were
asked to walk normally across it in one direction, then to turn
around and walk in the other direction. Subjects were asked to
put the right foot on the mat while walking one direction, and the
left foot in the other. All participants signed an informed consent,
a protocol that was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of the University of Texas at Dallas. Visual inspection of the
step registration for one of the subjects showed a very inaccurate
registration outcome in most of the steps, so this subject’s data
were eliminated from the study.
As per manufacture instruction, the system was calibrated for
each subject at the beginning of the data collection. The subjects
were asked to practice for 1 min before the test started to ensure
proper foot placement and to get them used to the system to have
normal walking steps. Out of the 100%, 70% of the steps were
used for training the model to extract trained parameters and
the rest used to test the accuracy of the reconstructed pressure
image using our proposed algorithm and comparing that with
other interpolation methods.
3) Fast/Slow Experiment Description: This experiment intends to show how changes in walking speed effect the reconstruction accuracy in our model. We asked four subjects
from the original experiments, including two females, to perform two additional walking experiments. In these experiments,
they walked once fast, then once slow, at speeds determined
by a metronome. The fast walking (2 steps/s) has four times
the speed of the slow walking ( 21 steps/s). In addition to these
two speeds, the walking from the original experiment was also
considered and labeled as “normal.” The normal walking was at
an unknown pace: the subjects had merely been asked to walk
at a comfortable speed.

2544

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

4) Sensor Location Sets: For our experiments, we wanted a
set of comparable sensor locations. These location sets belonged
to three categories: Rnd, Pk, and GC. For Rnd, the sensor locations were randomly sorted. For Pk, the sensors recording the
peak values for the four foot regions shown in Fig. 1(a) were
chosen and randomly sorted. Then, the remaining sensor locations were randomized and appended to the peaks. For GC, the
sensor locations at the Gaussian centers were randomized, and
then the remaining sensors were appended. Many of the experiments involved a subset of K sensors. In this case, the first K
locations were selected.
Ten sets were made for each of the three categories, and
the one with the median training error was chosen for each
experiment. This helped avoid choosing extraordinarily good or
extraordinarily bad sensor locations.
5) Error Measurement: The most common error measure
used to judge interpolation functions is RMS error, and that was
the primary error measurement used here. For each pressure
“pixel,” the difference between the pressure values of the sensor
in the ground-truth image (from high-resolution mat) and the
spatially continuous reconstructed image pixel is considered as
the reconstruction error. To report the overall error per model,
average RMS-per sensing cell error is used. RMS error is considered superior to average error as it considers both positive
and negative deviations, and it emphasizes the larger errors.
Specifically, RMS error is equivalent to
e2rm s = e2 + σe2

(8)

where e is the arithmetic mean and σe is the standard deviation
of per-sensor errors.
The average RMS reconstruction error for each experiment
is evaluated across all sensors covering the foot for all subjects. The sensors covered by the foot include all the sensors
that have nonzero value in the PPI for a given step (defined in
Section IV-B).
B. Characterizing SCPM
1) Model Error of Various SCPM Configurations: As mentioned in Section II-C, the regression models have inherent
model error that comes from the limit of the model’s ability
to accurately represent the data from the underlying process.
To measure this, we will reconstruct the pressure images using
all sensor locations, measuring the error as a function of model
order, N .
Fig. 6 shows the results of this experiment, comparing the
model error of the SCPM without PCA (“GMM”) in which
M = N , and SCPM with PCA applied to M = 20, 30, and 40
Gaussians basis functions. The GMM model is identical to the
model used in our previous work [20].
These results show that SCPM with PCA significantly outperforms the model with no PCA, with the error almost remaining
flat for N > 5. This result strongly supports the hypothesis that
the GMM with M > 10 was sparse with respect to measured
pressures and that each basis function Fi is better represented
as a linear combination of Gaussian functions than just a singlebasis function. The fact that the error suddenly starts increasing

Fig. 6. Error comparison between SCPM models with different number of
basis functions (free parameters).

around N = 5 shows that perhaps we are reaching the minimum
number of independent linear sources. Also, the model accuracy
does not significantly improve from M = 30 to M = 40, which
suggests that an RMS error of around 6 kPa may be inherent to
this model (a regression based on linear combination of Gaussian functions).
2) Reconstruction Error of Various SCPM Configurations:
The primary goal of SCPM is reconstruction from a small number of sensors, not minimal representation or data compression.
Therefore, we would like to study the effect of the number of
sensors K on the reconstruction accuracy. This error will be a
combination of model error and reconstruction error.
Several different SCPMs are studied, including a model with
M = 10 Gaussians without applying PCA (“GMM”), and two
SCPMs with PCA applied on M = 40 Gaussians, one with
N = 10 and the other with N = 5 free parameters. M = 40
was chosen since it has the least model error according to the
results shown in Fig. 6. For each of these variants, three sets
of sensor locations are used: Rnd, Pk, and GC as described in
Section V-A4.
The results are shown in Fig. 7. The LSQ approach requires
K ≥ N . Therefore, some of the models (such as PCA 40-10
and GMM-10) could not produce a reconstruction for K <
10. Fig. 7 strongly demonstrates the importance of the sensor
positioning in the reliability of pressure measurement as it was
also previously emphasized by other researchers [14], [19]. The
Gaussian centers significantly outperform any of the other sets.
Once again, SCPM with PCA significantly outperforms
SCPM without PCA. While the PCA with N = 10 outperforms
the one with N = 5 free parameters at higher values of K,
as the sensors become sparser, N = 5 starts performing better. This makes sense because lower values of N give the LSQ
algorithm more room to compensate for noise and model error. The flat nature of the error curve for PCA with N = 5 for
K > 10 shows that it is extremely robust at low sensor numbers. Even though the error for randomly chosen locations was
much higher than for Gaussian centers, the N = 5 variant still

OSTADABBAS et al.: KNOWLEDGE-BASED MODELING FOR PLANTAR PRESSURE IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION

Fig. 7. Error comparison between SCPM models with different number and
location of pressure sensors. Rnd, Pk, and GC stand for sensor locations randomly scattered, on peak pressures, and on Gaussian centers, respectively.

Fig. 8. Estimation error as a function of distance from nearest sparse sensor
in SCPM with M = 40 Gaussian mixtures, and N = 5 free parameters.

performed well here. Using Gaussian sensors, the GMM-10
performed reasonably well, although the error was significantly
higher for all other sensor sets. This shows that the PCA variant
is less sensitive to poorly chosen sensor locations.
3) Error versus Proximity to Nearest Sensor: A good regression model is as good at estimation of pressure points away from
the sensors location as for the sensor locations themselves. In
Fig. 8, error is shown as a function of distance from the nearest
sensor. For K = 5 and K = 7, it is clear that the regression
model is overfitting with low error on the sampled locations and
extremely high error elsewhere. As K goes up, the error away
from the sampled sensors becomes closer to the error on the
sampled sensors. This is the result of LSQ making use of extra
data to reduce reconstruction error.
At some distance, the error actually starts dropping again.
This is because sensor locations are at areas that tend to have
high pressure. The greater distance away from these areas, the

2545

Fig. 9. Error for overestimation, underestimation, and combined as a function
of pressure in SCPM with M = 40 Gaussian mixtures, N = 5 free parameters,
and K = 10 number of sensors.

greater the likelihood that the region has consistently a very
low-pressure values, therefore low error.
This graph was obtained by reconstructing all the test steps
of every subject using the PCA 40-5 configuration, and the
GC location set. Every location in the reconstructed image was
labeled with the Euclidean distance from the nearest sensor.
These locations were sorted based on the distance and divided
into ten bins. The first bin contains all 0 distance pixels. The
other bins had cutoffs chosen to roughly equalize the number of
pixels in each. The RMS error of each bin was compared. The
reported distance is the average distance of every pixel in the
bin.
4) Pressure Underestimation and Overestimation: Here, we
further examine the source of error: is it primarily from underestimation, or overestimation? How does the pressure value being
reconstructed affect error? In Fig. 9, we show RMS error for
overestimation, underestimation, and combined as a function of
pressure in PCA 40-5 model with the K = 10 from GC location
set.
After an initial climb, the overestimation remains flat as pressure increases. Overestimation error climbs linearly as a function of pressure. If we consider the error as a percent of pressure,
overestimation drops from 30% at 50 kPa to 18% at 200 kPa.
Similar to Fig. 8, the locations were sorted by pressure and divided into ten bins by choosing cutoffs to approximately equalize population in each bin. Once again, the first bin was reserved
for 0 pressure.
C. Comparing SCPM to Interpolation Methods
Both regression and interpolation methods use a set of sample
points to construct a continuous function approximating the
underlying process from which the sample points are taken.
Interpolating functions have several advantages over regression functions: 1) they converge to the underlying analytic function, 2) the interpolating function passes through all the sample

2546

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

points, and 3) they can approximate almost any function. On the
other hand, a regression model uses a template function with
a fixed number of free parameters. The sample points are used
to parameterize the function, often with a LSQ method and an
appropriate kernel. The advantage of a regression model is that,
given enough extra sample points, it can produce an accurate
approximation with fewer sample points and is more immune
to noise. However, if the function does not match the model,
convergence will not occur.
In this experiment, we compare SCPM to various interpolation functions. Our sample points are at arbitrary (nongrid)
locations, and so we compare to scattered data interpolation
functions instead of grid-based interpolation methods such as bilinear and bicubic. The interpolation methods we compared with
were: Laplace, Natural Neighbor, Linear, and Nearest Neighbor,
all described later.
For this experiment, the SCPM configuration used was PCA
40-5 with the Gaussian center, GC location set chosen with the
median training error. As the Gaussian Centers have no meaning
to the other interpolation methods, the Peak location Pk set was
used for the other interpolation methods (again with the median
training performance chosen). Given that most of these methods
would only produce results within the convex hull of the sample
points, every point on the image border was set to zero to provide
a suitable hull. These border points were not considered in the
sensor location count.
1) Laplace Interpolation: Laplacian interpolation is based
on the Mean Value Theorem using Laplace’s function [30]. All
known values of the function are set, and for all unknown values,
the Laplacian is set to 0, i.e., ∇2 f (x, y) = 0. Once the boundary
conditions are set, an iterative algorithm is used to converge on
the solution.
2) Natural Neighbor: This method is based on Voronoi diagram [31] of the sample points. A reconstructed point’s value is
the weighted average of its neighbors based on the area overlap
between the reconstructed point’s Voronoi cell and the cells of
a Voronoi diagram without the presence of the reconstructed
point.
3) Linear: Every value is linearly interpolated using neighbors from a Delauney triangulation [32].
4) Nearest Neighbor: It is the simplest method to reconstruct
an image by assuming for each pixel the value of the nearest
sampling sensor [21].
The result of comparison is shown in Fig. 10. As expected,
with a high number of sensors, the interpolation methods outperform the regression model. However, for K < 60, SCPM beats
all the other models, and it beats all but Laplacian for K > 120.
For K = 10, the error is three times as much for Laplacian, and
five times as high for linear and natural neighbor. The difference
is even more pronounced at K = 7. This shows a considerable
advantage to be gained by using a knowledge-based regression
model over blind interpolation techniques.
D. Case Studies
In this section, we will examine two specific applications of
SCPM. The first is a common technique, peak detection, and

Fig. 10. Error comparison for SCPM with M = 40 Gaussian mixtures, and
N = 5 free parameters, and other interpolation techniques including: Laplacian,
Natural neighbor, Linear, and Nearest neighbor.

TABLE I
AVERAGE PEAK PRESSURES IN DIFFERENT PLANTAR AREAS
Plantar area
Peak Average (in kPa)

Heel

Big Toe

MT1

MT2-5

219.37

177.25

174.17

212.64

in the second one, we examine the ability of this model to
accurately represent pressure for a different type of movement
(fast versus slow walking).
1) Peak Pressure Detection: Peak Pressure is the most
commonly used plantar pressure variables to assess foot
stress/loading. Elevated peak pressures are believed to increase
the risk of ulceration particularly in diabetic patients with neuropathy [33], [34]. The peak pressure is defined as the highest
pressure in a given region during a gait cycle. The plantar area
can be divided into several key regions, selected based on medical data showing ulceration risk. A study that was conducted
on 87 patients, with 103 existing foot ulcers, showed that ulcers
were located mostly under the metatarsal heads (56.3%), under
the toes (32.1%), and at the heel (1.9%) [35]. For this experiment, the plantar area was divided into four regions shown in
Fig. 1(a). The regions were manually defined based on visual inspection of the pressure data by a human technician. The region
definition was based on the diagram in Fig. 1(a). The average
peak pressure values for these regions among all of our subjects
are shown in Table I.
Many existing studies based on a small number of sensors
estimate peak pressure by placing in a good location and using
that sensor’s value as the peak pressure. As a point of comparison, in this experiment, two sensors were placed in each of
the four regions to optimally find the peak pressure based on
training data. The highest peak value measured by each sensor
was reported as the “Sensor Value” Peak pressure. Meanwhile,
the peak values were also estimated using a GMM 5 and a PCA
40-5 SCPM and K = 8 sensors from the GC location set.

OSTADABBAS et al.: KNOWLEDGE-BASED MODELING FOR PLANTAR PRESSURE IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION

Fig. 11.

2547

Regional peak pressure estimation (a) with no offset, (b) with one sensor location offset (8.4 mm), and (c) with two sensor locations offset (16.8 mm).

This experiment was performed with the originally chosen
locations [see Fig. 11(a)], locations offset by one sensor location
equal to 8.4 mm [see Fig. 11(b)], and locations offset by two
sensor locations equal to 16.8 mm [see Fig. 11(c)].
For no offset, we see that just placing sensors well and using
their values as peak values gives the best results, although the
PCA 40-5 model has less than 10% error overall. For one location offset, the gap between using the sensor values and PCA
40-5 narrows considerably, and the GMM 5 starts performing
much worse. Finally, for two location offsets, the PCA 40-5
performs better.
This experiment shows that for estimating peak pressure,
the RMS error is less than 10% with SCPM, but it is better to use the values from well-placed sensors. However,
peak pressure is only one of many possible ways of analyzing plantar pressure. SCPM supports any type of analysis that can be performed on high-resolution images, and
performs better than interpolation methods for low sensor
counts.
2) Different Walking Speeds: Continuous monitoring of a
diabetic patient is one of the primary applications of this study.
This collected data could be invaluable in analyzing the pressure exposure to assess the risk of ulceration, and work with
the patient to improve negative behaviors. Since the majority
of foot pressure exposure comes from normal walking, most
of our model accuracy evaluations used plantar pressure data
during normal walking. However, it is also important to see
how this model responds to abnormal behavior. To test this, we
had four subjects walk slow, normal, and fast, as described in
Section V-A3). As Fig. 12 shows slow and normal walking have
about equal error, but expectedly fast walking has significantly
more error.
3) Comments on Fault Tolerance: SCPM can quickly adjust to a different set and number of sensors, providing an
intrinsic fault tolerance property. As discussed, the LSQ algorithm can determine the free parameters provided that K ≥ N .
Furthermore, N can be decreased arbitrarily by selecting a
smaller number of rows from A to form A.
Fault tolerance comes not just from the ability to form a
reconstruction, but also the quality of the reconstruction. As
shown in Fig. 7, sensor locations are important. Some sensors

Fig. 12. Error comparison for SCPM with M = 40 Gaussian mixtures, N =
5 free parameters during different walking speeds.

in different locations are semiredundant in the sense that they
provide information about the same region, and losing one may
not drastically increase the error. To truly create a fault-tolerant
version of SCPM, one would have to place sensors with an aim
to achieve a degree of redundancy based on the desired level of
fault tolerance.
VI. PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF FOOT MONITORING
Almost all current clinically used pressure data come from
a patient standing still on an in-office pressure mat. This data
are inspected visually for peak pressure points and to find any
unusual pressure distribution patterns. It can also be used to help
construct an orthotic insole/shoe.
A. Clinical Applications
SCPM would allow clinicians to access similar highresolution data from a patient’s daily activities, such as walking
the dog or pacing at home. An important feature of plantar pressure measurement during walking is that it adds a dynamic functional component to such an evaluation [36]. This data could be

2548

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

examined visually or numerically. Visual analysis could include
looking at images representing average pressure distribution for
different parts of the gait phase cycle, comparing differences
between pressure distribution over time, or looking at morning versus evening. For visual inspection, SCPM offers a clear
advantage over the raw sensor readings by showing a better
estimation of the sensors values over areas not exactly under
sensors than other techniques (e.g., interpolation).
This data could also be analyzed numerically. Directly analyzing the raw data is certainly more accurate than first converting it to high resolution using SCPM, then down converting
during the analysis. However, if the analysis was specifically
developed for different sensor placement, SCPM can act as a
universal adapter. It can also allow comparison between studies
with different sensor placement methodologies. As an example,
regional analysis of the plantar pressure distribution is commonly used by clinicians especially to study the effectiveness
of a medical intervention such as corrective surgery or orthotic
footwear. However, the lack of standardization especially due to
variability of criteria for defining the at-risk regions or regions
of interest make the comparison between studies very difficult
[16]. SCPM could eliminate this problem.
B. Limitations
There are a number of limitations to this research as it stands.
One limitation is that this research has been conducted on
healthy subjects so far. Unfortunately, there are significant differences between healthy and diabetic patients. Changes in both
the soft tissues and bone of the foot in diabetes have the potential
to affect plantar pressure. Also, callus formation on the plantar
surface can cause elevations of approximately 30% in plantar
pressure [37]. A properly trained SCPM model should be able
to capture the pressure distribution of a diseased foot. In any
case, the differences in structure between diseased and healthy
patients could affect the accuracy and the number of sensors
required.
Another problem is that if the subject walks differently than
they did during training (e.g., faster, slower, on a sloped surface),
then the accuracy will likely be affected. In the experimental
section, we saw a greater than 50% increase in error for fast
walking based on a model trained for normal walking. This
problem can be fixed by either training a model for each of the
conditions and selecting the appropriate model using pattern
recognition algorithms, or discarding pressure data from patient
movements that do not fit the trained model. Obviously, neither
solution is ideal, but the model could be trained for the most
common type of walking. Even if this model was only able to
accurately capture normal walking, this would give physicians
a rich and informative data set not currently available.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Continuous plantar pressure monitoring could become an important part of diabetic treatment and could help to predict and
prevent pressure ulcer formation. At present, there is a disconnect between the medical need for high-resolution data and

the state-of-the-art technology, which can only provide systems
with a limited number of sensors. In this paper, we presented a
knowledge-based regression model (SCPM) that used PCA to
reduce model order and improve performance over our previous
work. SCPM performs significantly better than blind interpolation techniques for fewer than 60 pressure sensors. Experimentally, it was shown that estimation of points away from the sensors was almost as good as for the sensor locations themselves,
and we showed that percentage wise, the error decreased with
increasing pressure values. SCPM has the potential to become
an important tool bridging medical need and technological capability and can ultimately improve the quality of life for many
people suffering from foot problems.
There are a number of important research questions waiting
to be addressed. First, this model needs to be tested on diabetic
subjects, especially those with foot deformities to evaluate the
accuracy and its tradeoff with the number/location. Another important question is how to best determine number, sizing, and
placement of sensors. We showed the importance of placement,
and there has been much discussion concerning sensor size in
the literature. A formal method for determining optimal placement is necessary to ensure the best performance of SCPM. In
addition, reducing the model error is desirable. One particular
target for improvement is the assumption of linearity. In [19],
the authors showed that when evaluated on a per-frame basis,
Gaussian parameters change with amplitude. This fact could be
used to develop a nonlinear regression model with potentially
lower error.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Boulton, “The importance of abnormal foot pressure and gait in causation of foot ulcers,” in The Foot in Diabetes. Chilchester, U.K.: Wiley,
1987, pp. 11–26.
[2] A. Veves, H. Murray, M. Young, and A. Boulton, “The risk of foot ulceration in diabetic patients with high foot pressure: A prospective study,”
Diabetologia, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 660–663, 1992.
[3] M. Chen, B. Huang, and Y. Xu, “Intelligent shoes for abnormal gait
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2008, pp. 2019–2024.
[4] M. Mueller, “Application of plantar pressure assessment in footwear and
insert design,” J. Orthopaedic Sports Phys. Therapy, vol. 29, no. 12, pp.
747–755, 1999.
[5] P. R. Cavanagh, F. Hewitt, and J. Perry, “In-shoe plantar pressure measurement: A review,” foot, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 185–194, 1992.
[6] Novel USA. (2013). The Pedar system [Online]. Available: http://
www.novelusa.com/
[7] Tekscan. (2013). Pressure mapping, force measurement, and tactile sensors [Online]. Available: http://www.tekscan.com/
[8] The London Orthotic Consultancy (LOC). (2013). Parotec
plantar pressure measurement system [Online]. Available:
http://www.londonorthotics.co.uk/
[9] Z. Abu-Faraj, G. Harris, J. Abler, and J. Wertsch, “A holter-type,
microprocessor-based, rehabilitation instrument for acquisition and storage of plantar pressure data,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop., vol. 34, pp. 187–
194, 1997.
[10] S. Walker, P. Helm, and L. Lavery, “Gait pattern alteration by functional sensory substitution in healthy subjects and in diabetic subjects
with peripheral neuropathy,” Archives Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 78, no. 8,
pp. 853–856, 1997.
[11] Z. Pataky, L. Faravel, J. Da Silva, and J. Assal, “A new ambulatory
foot pressure device for patients with sensory impairment. A system
for continuous measurement of plantar pressure and a feed-back alarm,”
J. Biomech., vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1135–1138, 2000.

OSTADABBAS et al.: KNOWLEDGE-BASED MODELING FOR PLANTAR PRESSURE IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION

[12] L. Shu, T. Hua, Y. Wang, Q. Li, D. D. Feng, and X. Tao, “In-shoe plantar
pressure measurement and analysis system based on fabric pressure sensing array,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 767–775,
May. 2010.
[13] B. L. Davis, R. M. Cothren, P. Quesada, S. B. Hanson, and J. E. Perry,
“Frequency content of normal and diabetic plantar pressure profiles: implications for the selection of transducer sizes,” J. Biomech., vol. 29,
no. 7, pp. 979–983, 1996.
[14] M. Lord, “Spatial resolution in plantar pressure measurement,” Med. Eng.
Phys., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 140–144, 1997.
[15] Nike. (2013). Nike hyperdunk+ [Online]. Available: http://www.nike.com/
[16] C. Giacomozzi and K. Vaclav, “Potentialities and criticalities of plantar pressure measurements in the study of foot biomechanics: devices,
methodologies and applications. chapter 11,” foot, vol. 767, no. 470,
pp. 249–274, 2011.
[17] S. Ostadabbas, A. Saeed, M. Nourani, and M. Pompeo, “Sensor architectural tradeoff for diabetic foot ulcer monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 6687–6690.
[18] S. Albert and L. Christensen, “Diabetic foot pressure studies,” Lower
Extremity, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 21–27, 1994.
[19] T. C. Pataky, “Spatial resolution in plantar pressure measurement revisited,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 2116–2124, 2012.
[20] S. Ostadabbas, M. Nourani, and M. Pompeo, “Continuous plantar pressure
modeling using sparse sensors,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Bioinformatics Bioeng., 2012, pp. 309–314.
[21] T. M. Lehmann, C. Gonner, and K. Spitzer, “Survey: Interpolation methods
in medical image processing,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 18, no. 11,
pp. 1049–1075, Nov. 1999.
[22] D. Reynolds, “Gaussian mixture models,” in Encyclopedia of Biometric
Recognition. New York, NY, Springer, 2008.
[23] I. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
2005.
[24] C. L. Lawson and R. J. Hanson, Solving Least Squares Problems. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 1974.
[25] F. Oliveira, T. Pataky, and J. Tavares, “Registration of pedobarographic
image data in the frequency domain,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 731–740, 2010.
[26] F. Oliveira, A. Sousa, R. Santos, and J. Tavares, “Spatio-temporal alignment of pedobarographic image sequences,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 843–850, 2011.
[27] D. Reynolds, T. Quatieri, and R. Dunn, “Speaker verification using adapted
gaussian mixture models,” Digital Signal Process., vol. 10, no. 1–3,
pp. 19–41, 2000.
[28] S. Young, “The general use of tying in phoneme-based HMM speech
recognisers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
1992, vol. 1, pp. 569–572.
[29] Tekscan. (2013). Tekscan pressure and force measurement technology
[Online]. Available: http://www.tekscan.com/sensor-technology
[30] V. Caselles, J.-M. Morel, and C. Sbert, “An axiomatic approach to image
interpolation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 376–386,
Mar. 1998.
[31] N. Sukumar, “Voronoi cell finite difference method for the diffusion operator on arbitrary unstructured grids,” Int. J. Numerical Methods Eng., vol.
57, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2003.
[32] N. Dyn, D. Levin, and S. Rippa, “Data dependent triangulations for
piecewise linear interpolation,” IMA J. Numerical Anal., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 137–154, 1990.
[33] D. G. Armstrong, E. J. Peters, K. A. Athanasiou, and L. A. Lavery, “Is
there a critical level of plantar foot pressure to identify patients at risk
for neuropathic foot ulceration?” J. Foot Ankle Surg., vol. 37, no. 4,
pp. 303–307, 1998.
[34] L. A. Lavery, D. G. Armstrong, R. P. Wunderlich, J. Tredwell, and
A. J. Boulton, “Predictive value of foot pressure assessment as part of a
population-based diabetes disease management program,” Diabetes Care,
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1069–1073, 2003.
[35] L. Lavery, E. Peters, and D. Armstrong, “What are the most effective
interventions in preventing diabetic foot ulcers?” Int. Wound J., vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 425–433, 2008.
[36] P. Cavanagh and J. Ulbrecht, “Clinical plantar pressure measurement in
diabetes: Rationale and methodology,” foot, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 123–135,
1994.
[37] M. Young, P. Cavanagh, G. Thomas, M. Johnson, H. Murray, and
A. Boulton, “The effect of callus removal on dynamic plantar foot pressures in diabetic patients,” Diabetic Med., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 55–57, 1992.

2549

Sarah Ostadabbas (M’14) received the B.Sc. degree in both electrical and biomedical engineering
from Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran,
Iran, in 2005, the M.Sc. degree in control engineering
from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran,
in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from the University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson,
TX, USA, in 2013.
She is currently a Postdoc Research Fellow at
GT-Bionics Lab, Georgia Institute of Technology,
New Atlanta, GA, USA. Her research interests include machine learning and signal/image processing with an emphasis on medical/biological applications and modeling. A major application of this research
is the prevention of pressure ulcer formation and amputation through predictive
modeling and scheduling therapeutic care.
Mehrdad Nourani (SM’05) received the B.Sc. and
M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, and the Ph.D. degree
in computer engineering from Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
He is currently a Professor of electrical engineering at the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD),
Richardson, TX, USA. He is a Co-Founder of the
Quality of Life Technology Laboratory in UTD,
where he conducts an interdisciplinary research lab
focused on developing innovative technology and
systems that improve people’s quality of life. He has published more than 200
papers in journals and refereed conference proceedings. His current research
interests include fault-tolerant architectures, system-on-chip testing, design for
reliability, and special-purpose IC/system design for biomedical/biological applications.
Adnan Saeed received the B.Sc. degree in electrical
engineering from the National University of Sciences
and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2000, the
M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA, in
2008, where he is involved in the research on sensor
nodes for body-area networks. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Texas at Dallas, where he is also a Member of the
Center for Integrated Circuits and Systems and Quality of Life Technology Laboratory.
Rasoul Yousefi (M’14) received the B.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Shiraz University,
Shiraz, Iran, and the M.Sc. degree in circuits and
systems from the University of Tehran, Tehran,
Iran, in 2006 and 2009, respectively. In 2014, he
graduated from the University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX, USA, with a doctoral degree in electrical engineering.
His research interest includes digital circuits &
systems and signal processing. Since 2010, he has
been a Member of SoC Design and Test laboratory
and Quality of Life Technology Laboratory, the University of Texas at Dallas,
where he has been working on biomedical signal processing for wearable sensors and systems and processing algorithms for monitoring and prevention of
pressure ulcers.
Matthew Q. Pompeo received the B.Sc. degree in chemistry from the University of
Miami, Miami, FL, USA, in 1983. He received the
Medical degree from the University of Miami School
of Medicine, Miami, with Honors in trauma and thoracic surgery, in 1988.
His residency was in Parkland Memorial Hospital, Dallas, TX, USA (1988–1993) followed by a
fellowship in cardiothoracic surgery in the University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (1993–1995).
He is currently the Medical Director in Dallas Presbyterian Wound Center and Vibra Wound Clinic, Dallas, TX, USA.
Dr. Pompeo is a Certified Wound Specialist from American Academy of
Wound Management.

