440

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Integrated Inertial Sensors and Mobile Computing
for Real-Time Cycling Performance Guidance
via Pedaling Profile Classification
James Y. Xu, Student Member, IEEE, Xiaomeng Nan, Victor Ebken, Yan Wang, Greg J. Pottie, Fellow, IEEE,
and William J. Kaiser, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Today, the bicycle is utilized as a daily commute tool,
a physical rehabilitation asset, and sporting equipment, prompting studies into the biomechanics of cycling. Of the number of
important parameters that affect cycling efficiency, the foot angle
profile is one of the most important as it correlates directly with
the effective force applied to the bike. However, there has been no
compact and portable solution for measuring the foot angle and
for providing the cyclist with real-time feedback due to a number
of difficulties of the current tracking and sensing technologies and
the myriad types of bikes available. This paper presents a novel
sensing and mobile computing system for classifying the foot angle
profiles during cycling and for providing real-time guidance to the
user to achieve the correct profile. Continuous foot angle tracking
is firstly converted into a discrete problem requiring only recognition of acceleration profiles of the foot using a single shoe mounted
tri-axial accelerometer during each pedaling cycle. A classification
method is then applied to identify the pedaling profile. Finally, a
mobile solution is presented to provide real-time signal processing
and guidance.
Index Terms—Classification, mobile computing, pedaling profile, performance guidance, wireless health.

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE the invention of the Draisine by Baron Karl von
Drais for getting around the royal gardens more easily,
the bicycle has undergone a number of major modifications
from the introduction of the pedals to the additions of chains,
sprockets, and gears. Today, the bicycle is utilized as a daily
commuting tool, a physical rehabilitation asset, and sporting
equipment. While the dominant motion performed on a bike
is pedaling, the need to understand its efficiency, physiology,
and biomechanics is vital for providing accurate feedback and
guidance to users who may use cycling as a crucial tool for
transportation, rehabilitation, or athletic training.

S

Manuscript received July 6, 2013; revised May 5, 2014 and March 13, 2014;
accepted January 21, 2014. Date of publication May 9, 2014; date of current
version March 2, 2015. This work was supported by both the National Science Foundation under Grants 0120778 (The Center for Embedded Networked
Systems) and Qualcomm Innovation Fellowship #S2012–1638. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Qualcomm or
the National Science Foundation.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
(e-mail:
jyxu@ucla.edu; xiaomengnan@ucla.edu; vjebken@ucla.edu; phylliswany@
ucla.edu; pottie@ee.ucla.edu; kaiser@ee.ucla.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2322871

The biomechanical efficiency of different body positions
while cycling was studied in [1]. The work explored the effects
of modifying bike geometry such as saddle height, stem length,
and foot angle on the overall biomechanical efficiency. Measurements included oxygen uptake, heart rate, and effective pedal
force. Correlations between parameters such as saddle height,
foot angle, and efficiency were found. The physiological and
biomechanical factors associated with elite endurance cyclists
were studied to discover the dominant factors affecting cycling
performance [2]. Performance is measured using biomechanical indices derived from the amount of total power produced
by the athlete through analysis of foot and knee angles as well
as cadence. The study established the optimal torque production motion patterns through studying a number of elite cyclists.
Similarly, a two part study also provided the ground work in
theoretically analyzing the forward force produced for a particular pedaling pattern and solving multivariable optimization
problems linking the joint movements with bicycle parameters
to achieve optimal efficiency [3], [4].
Apart from improving athletic cycling performance, various
research efforts have also focused on injury prevention and rehabilitation. In [5]–[7], the effects of inappropriate foot and knee
joint movement during cycling were found to cause Achilles
tendinitis, sesamoiditis, shin splints, and nerve compression injuries over time. In [8], the cycling biomechanics of adolescents
suffering from cerebral palsy (CP) was studied in comparison to
normal adolescents in an attempt to use cycling to improve both
strength and cardiovascular health in the afflicted group. This
study found that patients suffering from CP present noticeable
early onset and later offset of muscle activation and concluded
that further studies could develop cycling based interventions.
Most of the published research in this area established good
crank/foot angle and torque patterns observed from athletes and
highlight the need to achieve proper motion patterns in cycling.
Given the importance of this, however, there has been no compact and portable solution for measuring the foot angle and
providing the cyclist with real-time feedback. Sports performance studies make use of either expensive camera equipment
[9], or elaborate instrumentation on parts of the bike [3], [4], [8],
which are both expensive and labor intensive to set up. More
recently, there have been studies using wearable sensors to provide effective real-time measurements of interest with less bike
instrumentation. The combination of biomechanics and a specialized extended Kalman filter in [10] was able to provide trunk
pose and bike roll angle tracking. In [11], physical constraints

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

XU et al.: INTEGRATED INERTIAL SENSORS AND MOBILE COMPUTING FOR REAL-TIME CYCLING PERFORMANCE GUIDANCE

Fig. 1

441

PC. (a) Crank and pedal angles. (b) Phases and points.

Fig. 2.

were introduced into Gaussian process dynamic model in order to predict leg movements using a small number of sensory
inputs.
In this study, a novel sensing and mobile computing system is proposed for classifying the foot motion profiles during cycling and for providing real-time guidance to the user to
achieve the correct pattern. Continuous foot angle tracking is
firstly converted into a discrete problem requiring only recognition of acceleration profiles of the foot, using a single tri-axial
accelerometer during each pedaling cycle (PC). This conversion bypasses the difficulties encountered in angle tracking as
those described in [10] and also removes the need to instrument
the bike (as seen in previous work by others), making deployment under real-world/racing conditions easier. A classification
method can then be applied to identify the pedaling profile. A
mobile solution is finally deployed to provide real-time signal
processing and guidance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an overview of the necessary biomechanics of cycling,
the difficulties achieving prolonged angle tracking, and how
the underlying biomechanics can be represented by acceleration profiles. The section then provides the implementation
of sensing methodology and the development of algorithms for
data processing, profile recognition, and real-time guidance. The
proposed system is evaluated in Section III and the conclusions
are drawn in Section IV.
II. METHOD AND SYSTEM
A. Cycling Biomechanics
As a cyclist completes each PC, the bike’s crank angle α progresses through 360° [see Fig. 1(a)]. Each cycle can be broken
down into two phases: the power phase starting from the center
top position (CTP) and continuing through the first 180°, where
a user pushes the pedal down with force; and the recovery phase
for the rest of the revolution where a user relaxes [1], [12], [13].
The two phases of the crank motion in a PC are depicted in
Fig. 1(b).
When pedal clips and cleats are used, the leg can pull up
the pedal and apply a force to the crank during the recovery
phase, thus applying power continuously during the entire PC
[1]. However, incorrect foot angle (θ) yields improper application of force and, thus, poor cycling efficiency and increased
possibilities of injury [5]–[7]. Therefore, the monitoring and

Examples of normalized profiles of foot acceleration.

correction of the foot angle is vital for all cycling applications
from athletic training to patient rehabilitation.
B. Pedaling Profiles
There exist many techniques for continuous monitoring of
foot angle: camera-based motion capture [9]; instruments such
as a rotary encoder; and inertial navigation using accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer [14]. The first two require
physical setup and modifications to the bike, while inertial sensors with algorithms such as Kalman and complimentary filters
suffer from severe motion noise, artifacts, and the need for continuous calibration [15]. None of the aforementioned techniques
are well suited to provide continuous foot angle detection and
feedback without significant bike instrumentation.
When the foot is attached to the pedal through cleats, the
foot/pedal angle θ can be seen as a function of crank angle α
with a range between 0 and 360° and its acceleration can be
measured by a tri-axial accelerometer, with data expressed using
vector magnitude M(α). Fig. 2 shows five sample waveforms of
the M(α) normalized to be between ±1.
The use of M(α) as the pedaling profile for subsequent analysis bypasses the need for continuous tracking of θ(α) that
suffers from various problems. As the crank completes each
PC, the waveform of M(α) serves as the profile for that cycle.
Previous studies on biomechanics and cycling efficiency have
determined the optimal range of foot angle that maximizes cycling efficiency in terms of converting energy expended into
forward momentum and in reducing muscle fatigue [16], [17].
The M(α) corresponding to the optimal profile was determined
through studying high speed video of UCLA’s cycling team, in
conjunction with foot mounted orientation sensors. A typical
optimal profile is shown in Fig. 2(a) with the angle ranges at
four points given in Table I.
Profiles deviating from the optimal are regarded to be suboptimal in this study. Four common suboptimal profiles were
determined also by studying the UCLA cycling team’s videos.
The profiles are shown in Fig. 2(b)–(e), whose angle ranges are
given in Table I. By identifying the key points [see Fig. 1(b)]
on the videos and matching them against accelerometer data,
we observed that profile waveform M(α) for each PC can
be segmented from the continuous accelerometer data stream

442

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
FOOT ANGLE RANGE AT KEY POINTS (DEGREES)
A (Center Top)
Optimal
Suboptimal A
Suboptimal B
Suboptimal C
Suboptimal D

27 ± 10
29 ± 10
50 ± 10
56 ± 10
52 ± 10

B (Right Horizontal)

C (Center Bottom)

D (Left Horizontal)

2 ± 10
−8 ± 5
46 ± 5
−10 ± 15
−3 ± 10

27 ± 5
48 ± 5
21 ± 5
11 ± 5
15 ± 5

50 ± 5
65 ± 5
32 ± 5
45 ± 5
66 ± 10

Fig. 5. Data processing pipeline for detecting individual pedaling phases from
raw data.

Fig. 3. Profile extraction from time series and individual quarter cycle
of a PC.

Fig. 6. Segmentation algorithm to segment PCs from continues data stream.
(a) Thresholding. (b) Local minimum within a time window.
Fig. 4.

System architecture overview describing the major components.

(see Fig. 3). There are also four quarter cycles within one PC,
marked by 1 to 4 in Fig. 3.
Based on the aforementioned findings, the problem of determining the optimality of the user’s cycling profile can be solved
by extracting features on a per PC and within that, per quarter cycle basis and leveraging machine learning techniques for
identification.
C. Proposed System
A real-time cycling performance guidance system is proposed
as outlined in Fig. 4. The main considerations for using mobilebased platforms were that mobile devices are pervasive with
extensive network infrastructure support, and that the high performing devices can interface easily with external sensors, perform signal processing, and provide onboard sensing.
The system functions are described as follows. First, the cyclist is given a single tri-axial accelerometer to wear on the
shoe and a smartphone (or a mobile device) is connected to the
sensor. The raw sensing data are then sent to a data processing
unit in the phone, where preconditioning and segmentation take
place. After the data stream is segmented into individual profiles (one per PC), they are sent to feature extraction where a
set of features that define the profile are extracted and used by
the classifier to determine the optimality of the current cycle.
Finally, the smartphone provides the user with feedback and
guides the user to the correct motion profile.

1) Sensing and Data Processing: A MotionFit SDK sensor
platform by InvenSense was used in this study to provide 3-D
accelerometer data. The sensor is configured to a range of 16 g
due to the large accelerations observed on the foot during pedaling (unlike the much lower range seen in walking). The sampling
rate is also configured to 200 Hz as a PC can be completed in
as little as 0.67 s for certain cyclists we observed. The high
sampling rate of the sensor ensures that enough sample points
are obtained for each PC.
Data processing begin with raw data received from the sensor
worn by a user, followed by signal conditioning and segmentation (see Fig. 5). The first two steps involve combining the
tri-axial accelerometer data to generate normalized vector magnitude data. This is essential since the vector magnitude data
are orientation invariant, and the normalized results are convenient for thresholding in subsequent computations. The signals
then pass through a band-pass filter with frequency range of
0.15 – 9 Hz to remove both the dc offset components and highfrequency sensor noise.
a) Segmentation: After preprocessing, a series of significant
local minima and maxima need to be identified in the data stream
in order to extract profiles as described by Fig. 3. Consider the
data series in Fig. 6 consisting of multiple suboptimal PCs. By
finding key local min/max points, the waveform can be split into
individual cycles.
The algorithm first detects all the minimum points below a threshold [see Fig. 6(a)], determined empirically to be
δ = −0.5. After all minima are identified, the regions with

XU et al.: INTEGRATED INERTIAL SENSORS AND MOBILE COMPUTING FOR REAL-TIME CYCLING PERFORMANCE GUIDANCE

443

TABLE II
CLASSIFIER FEATURES
Feature
Max Point (PMAX )
Number of Zero Crossings of 2nd Derivative (NZR 2 )
Min Linear Correlation (MLC )
Number of Zero Crossings of 1st Derivative (N Z C 1 )

Definition
idx p e a k − idx s t a r t
, where idx is the tim e idex
idx e n d − idx s t a r t
N Z R ( P̈ 1 , 2 )
, whereP x , y is the segm ent of signal from phase x to y
NZR ( P̈ 3 , 4 )
N Z R is numb er of zero crossings
m in {R (P 2 ) , R (P 3 )}


N Z R Ṗ 1 , 4
N
1 
|x n |
N n=1


std P̈ 1 , 4 )
N
−1
|x n + 1 − x n |

Mean Absolute Value (MAV )
Standard Deviation of 2nd Derivative (STD 2 )
Normal Path Length (P L )

n=1

Fig. 7.

Parameter Selection.

Fig. 8.

multiple minima within 0.1 s of each other are detected and only
the local minimum is kept in each such region [see Fig. 6(b)].
Apart from the algorithm presented here, other methods such
as matched filtering and dynamic time warping can be equally
effective at identifying the individual PCs given a template.
They can in fact yield results with less false positives due to
their individualization characteristics. However, obtaining individualized template samples from each user is difficult in-field
where the ability to interact with and instruct users is low.
b) PC phase detection: The output of the segmentation is
data sequences that represent the profiles of individual PCs
(see Fig. 2). As discussed in Section II-B, there are four points
of interest within each PC that divides the cycle into four phases
[the four quarter cycles in Fig. 1(b)]. The features computed
from the four phases of the PC define the pedaling profile of
the current cycle, which can be determined by a classifier. As
illustrated in Fig. 3, two successive troughs indicate the start and
end of a PC (CTP to CTP), and the crest signifies the CBP as
the downward force applied to the pedal as it reaches maximum
at the bottom of the power phase. The LHP and RHP are the
middle points between the CBP and CTP as shown in Fig. 3.
It is noted that while Fig. 3 shows the optimal profile, the
same PC phase detection approach can be applied to suboptimal

Guidance UI captured from Android application.

profiles where random spikes can be eliminated by a curve fitting
technique.
c) Feature extraction: Studying the waveform within each
profile (see Fig. 2), the following observations can be made: 1)
the position of the maximum point is different across profiles;
2) quarter cycle #2 and #3 of a PC can be approximated more
closely by a linear function in the optimal case compared to the
suboptimal; and 3) the number of peaks is different for different
profiles. Based on the aforementioned observations, a set of
seven features were selected to define each profile (Table II).
2) Classification: Using the features computed, a classifier
can be used to determine the pedaling profile in real time. In
this study, the support vector machine (SVM) was used, which
is briefly introduced below. While SVM was found to be effective in determining decision boundaries and performing classification, future work could evaluate the suitability of other
classification techniques such as neural networks.
a) Support vector machine: The SVM is a supervised learning algorithm for classification that observes data and labels
(classes), and builds a model that can later be used to identify
classes using new data. Given a set of feature vectors mapped

444

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE III
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS (AGGREGATED CONFUSION MATRIC) IN PERCENT

Optimal Profile
Suboptimal A
Sub optimal B
Suboptimal C
Sub optimal D

Optimal Profile
avg (best/worst)

Suboptimal A
avg (best/worst)

Suboptimal B
avg (best/worst)

Suboptimal C
avg (best/worst)

Suboptimal D
avg (best/worst)

99 (99/100)
1.0 (0/1.0)
0 (0/0)
0 (0/0)
0 (0/0)

2.4 (1.4/4.5)
89 (92/83)
1.5 (0/3.9)
4.8 (0/9.2)
3.1 (0/8.2)

1.1 (0/2.9)
2.0 (0/6.7)
89 (96/78)
4.8 (0/10.4)
3.1 (0/7.4)

1.0 (0/4.0)
3.6 (0/5.6)
3.1 (0/8.1)
91 (96/83)
1.5 (0/2.9)

0 (0/0)
2 (0/6.1)
11 (0/17)
2 (0/5.2)
84 (82/99)

into the feature space, the SVM tries to find the largest gap that
can separate the classes. SVM forms a hyperplane of dimension
of p-1 that divides classes given feature vectors of p elements
lying in a p-dimensional space. The benefit of using the SVM
to determine classes is that it provides a better match to the type
of statistical distribution for the features used here compared to
methods such as the Naı̈ve Bayes [18]. In this study, the classes
in the model are the different pedaling profiles, with the features
given in Table II.
b) Implementation, kernel, and parameter selection: Most of
the classifier implementation was abstracted by LibSVM [19],
which is a popular SVM library suitable for this study due to the
availability of Java bindings that can be used on Android platforms. In addition to LibSVM, a number of application specific
designs were also made.
First is the normalization of the features since they have dramatically different numeric ranges. Second is the choice of a
suitable kernel. Among four standard kernels available [linear,
polynomial, radial basis function (RBF), and sigmoid], the RBF
kernel was the preferred choice since it is widely accepted as the
default [20]. This kernel nonlinearly maps sample vectors into
a higher dimensional space so that it can handle cases where
the relation between classes and features are nonlinear. Also,
RBF has the least number of parameters, which reduces the
complexity of the model computation.
Once the RBF kernel was selected, a number of parameters
needed to be optimized to maximize prediction accuracy for
unknown data. The RBF kernel requires two parameters C and
ϒ. The parameter C trades off simplicity of the decision surface
against misclassification of training example, and is a parameter common to all SVM kernels. The parameter ϒ defines the
amount of influence that a training example has. The choice of
the two parameters is nontrivial. A common strategy, known
as grid search [21], is to perform k-fold cross-validation on a
dataset with exponentially growing sequences of parameter values in order to find the combination with the highest accuracy.
Fig. 7 shows the grid search results, obtained by selecting a range
of C and ϒ values for the kernel and performing classification
on the dataset to obtain classification accuracy. The colored regions indicate the classification accuracy achieved with various
parameter values. In this study, C = 512 and Υ = 0.03125 were
chosen.
c) Training and operation: As a supervised learning method,
the classifier requires training data in order to determine the kernel parameters and to learn the model. The training data should

consist of accelerometer data accompanied with ground truth
(profile label). Ground truth can be obtained by a number of
methods reviewed in Section II, such as video and inertial navigation. Here, the extra effort required to obtain measurements
is acceptable as it is only for initial training. All ground truth
datasets in this study were obtained using both high-speed video
recordings and orientation sensors.
3) Android and Guidance: All the components needed for
real-time classification were developed on the Android platform using a multithreaded approach. These include sensor instrumentation, data processing algorithms (see Fig. 5), feature
extraction and classification (through LibSVM).
Streaming of data from the sensor to the Android device
was achieved through Bluetooth. The Bluetooth thread continuously receives sensor data and inserts them into a globally synchronized buffer. A data processing thread monitors the buffer
and performs vector magnitude computation, filtering and segmentation to separate out the individual PCs. Once a PC is
found, the data processing thread extracts the data for the classification, thread to compute features and perform classification.
Finally, the guidance module executes on the user interface (UI)
process and provides the necessary guidance.
Guidance implementation followed a progressive training approach that was proven effective in athlete training and general
physical education [22], [23]. The method presents the user
with one movement to focus on at a time and the entire motion
is eventually corrected as a whole. Each profile apart from the
optimal corresponds to one where the foot is at an incorrect
angle at specific key point(s) outlined in Table I. The guidance
module displays an image where the incorrect key point is highlighted along with an arrow indicating the adjustment needed
(see Fig. 8). The instruction stays on screen until the foot is
corrected, and visual instruction is also accompanied by voice
guidance.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The effectiveness of the developed system relies on the accurate detection of the various profiles. The evaluation procedure
used in this study is described below.
A. Testing Procedures and Datasets
Six individuals were recruited. The group represents both
males (4) and females (2) with varying body height (160 –
178 cm) and cycling experience (2 with minimum experience,

XU et al.: INTEGRATED INERTIAL SENSORS AND MOBILE COMPUTING FOR REAL-TIME CYCLING PERFORMANCE GUIDANCE

1 with daily commute experience, 1 hobby racing cyclist, 1 racing cyclist). Each subject was shown videos of cycling sessions
ranging from elite athletes whose cycling profiles are optimal
to average cyclists whose pedaling profiles are not optimal.
Each subject then performed a number of cycling sessions over
multiple days mimicking the profiles seen in the videos but in
their own comfortable form (to reflect interperson variability).
During each session, the sensor worn by the subject was synchronized with the high-speed video through a series of tapping
signals at the start and end of the video. The video was then
analyzed to identify the profiles to provide both ground truth
and training data (20% of each labeled profile, other 80% used
as testing data). In total, the six subjects contributed over 3 h
(197 min) of valid data with 6395 individual PCs.
B. Results
The results of the classifier using individualized training are
given in Table III in terms of a confusion matrix. Each entry
represents the average accuracies obtained over all six subjects,
and the values in parenthesis are the best/worst results obtained.
The diagonal entries on the confusion matrix are the correctly
classified results (for example, instances of Sub B classified
as Sub B by the classifier) and the off-diagonal entries shows
the “confusion” of the classifier where incorrect classification
occurred.
The results have proved that the system developed in this
study is able to detect all of the defined cycling profiles with
high accuracy. The profiles defined are not simply subtle variations in a cyclist’s foot angle caused by interperson or temporal
variations, but are observable suboptimal behaviors obtained
from video data of subjects cycling over extended periods of
time. Using these profiles, the guidance system defined in Section III is able to provide the user with real time feedback on
their current profile and on how to achieve the optimal profile. In
a future study, the effectiveness of guidance will be monitored
over a larger population and for longer periods of time.
IV. CONCLUSION
An integrated inertial sensor and mobile computing system
for real-time cycling performance guidance via biomechanical
classification was presented. The system determines a user’s
pedaling profile during cycling and provides guidance in real
time to help the user to achieve improved efficiency. A number of innovations involved in the system development were
described in this paper. First, a methodology was put forward
that converts the problem of continuous foot angle tracking
into a discrete problem of recognizing a number of foot/pedal
acceleration profiles. Second, a classification method was proposed based on the measurements of shoe mounted tri-axial
accelerometer to identify the current pedaling profile. Third, a
mobile solution was implemented that provides real-time sensor instrumentation and guidance. The system developed was
evaluated using test data from multiple subjects and the results
confirmed that the system can detect motion profiles with high
accuracy and provide the appropriate feedback to the user. Using
the newly demonstrated ability to autonomously and portably
perform real-time cycling motion profile capture and real-time

445

feedback, the next steps in this research will include exploration
of more forms of feedback for real-time guidance and conducting a medium scale trial to study the efficacy of this approach
to optimize cycling efficiency and to reduce injuries.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Rottenbacher, D. Zaccaria, M. R. Gualea, G. Mimmi, G. Bonandrini,
and E. Buzzi, “A study on the biomechanical efficiency of different cycling positions,” presented at the 19th Congresso Associazione Italiana Di
Meccanica Teorica E Applicata, Ancona, Italy, 2009.
[2] E. F. Coyle, M. E. Feltner, S. A. Kautz, M. T. Hamilton, S. J. Montain,
A. M. Baylor, L. D. Abraham, and G. W. Petrek, “Physiological and biomechanical factors associated with elite endurance cycling performance,”
J. Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 23, pp. 93–107, 1991.
[3] S. A. Kautz and M. L. Hull, “A theoretical basis for interpreting the force
applied to the pedal in cycling,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 26, pp. 155–165,
1993.
[4] H. Gonzales and M. L. Hull, “Multivariable optimization of cycling biomechanics,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 22, pp. 1151–1161, 1989.
[5] M. B. Mellion, “Common cycling injuries,” J. Sports Med., vol. 11,
pp. 52–70, 1991.
[6] R. P. Pfeiffer and R. L. Kronisch, “Off-road cycling injuries,” J. Sports
Med., vol. 19, pp. 311–325, 1995.
[7] T. Wanich, C. Hodgkins, J. Columbier, E. Muraski, and J. G. Kennedy,
“Cycling injuries of the lower extremity,” J. Am. Academy Orthopaedic
Surgeons, vol. 15, pp. 748–756, 2007.
[8] T. E. Johnston, A. E. Barr, and S. C. Lee, “Biomechanics of submaximal recumbent cycling in adolescents with and without cerebral palsy,”
J. Phys. Therapy, vol. 87, pp. 572–585, 2007.
[9] J. K. Moore, J. D. G. Kooijman, A. L. Schwab, and M. Hubbard, “Rider
motion identification during normal bicycling by means of principal component analysis,” Multibody Syst. Dynam., vol. 25, pp. 225–244, 2011.
[10] Y. Zhang, K. Chen, and J. Yi, “Rider trunk and bicycle pose estimation
with fusion of force/inertial sensors,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60,
no. 9, pp. 2541–2551, Sep. 2013.
[11] K. Chen, Y. Zhang, and J. Yi, “Modeling of rider-bicycle interactions with
learned dynamics on constrained embeddeding manifolds,” presented at
the IEEE/ASME Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron., Wollongong, Australia,
2013.
[12] C. A. T. Wozniak, “Cycling biomechanics: a literature review,” J. Orthopedic Sports Phys. Therapy, vol. 14, pp. 106–113, 1991.
[13] I. E. Faria and P. R. Cavanagh, The Physiology and Biomechanics of
Cycling. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1978.
[14] S. Cockcroft, “An evaluation of inertial motion capture technology for use
in the analysis and optimization of road cycling kinematics,” M.S. Thesis,
Dept. Mech. Mechatronic Eng., Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch,
South Africa, Mar. 2011.
[15] W. Yan, C. Chien, J. Xu, G. Pottie, and W. Kaiser, “Gait analysis using 3D
motion reconstruction with activity specific tracking protocol,” presented
at the Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., Vancouver, Canada,
2013.
[16] E. Klein and M. Walsh, “Changes in ankle angle and muscle activation
during cycling to fatigue,” presented at the 22nd Int. Symp. Biomechanics
Sports, Ottawa, Canada, 2004.
[17] T. Henke, “Real-time feedback of pedal forces for the optimization of
pedaling technique in competitive cycling,” presented at the 16th Int.
Symp. Biomechanics Sports, Konstanz, Germany, 1998.
[18] C. Chien and G. Pottie, “A universal hybrid decision tree classifier design
for human activity classification,” presented at the 34th IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., San Diego, CA, USA, 2012.
[19] C. Chang and C. Lin, “LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines,”
ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 2, pp. 1–27, 2011.
[20] G. C. Cawley and N. L. C. Talbot, “Preventing over-fitting during model
selection via bayesian regularization of the hyper-parameters,” J. Mach.
Learning Res., vol. 8, pp. 841–861, 2007.
[21] A. Ben-Hur and J. Weston, “A user’s guide to support vector machines,”
Data Mining Techn. Life Sci., vol. 609, pp. 223–239, 2010.
[22] J. Rogers, USA Track and Field Coaching Manual. Champaign, IL, USA:
Human Kinetics Publishers, 2000.
[23] K. Bizley, Examining Physical Education. Oxford, U.K.: Heinemann Educational Publishers, 1994.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

