IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1775

Experimental Investigation of the Influence
of the Aortic Stiffness on Hemodynamics
in the Ascending Aorta
Utku Gülan, Beat Lüthi, Markus Holzner, Alex Liberzon, Arkady Tsinober, and Wolfgang Kinzelbach

Abstract—A three-dimensional (3-D) pulsatile aortic flow in a
human ascending aorta is studied to investigate the effect of the
aortic stiffness on the flow field and turbulent fluctuating velocities in the ascending aorta. A nonintrusive optical measurement
technique, 3-D particle tracking velocimetry (3D-PTV), has been
applied to anatomically accurate phantoms under clinically realistic conditions. A compliant silicon phantom was used to mimic the
healthy aorta, and a rigid model was used to imitate the pathological case that appears in aortas for example as a result of aging.
The realistic models are transparent which allows optical access to
the investigation domain, and the index of refraction was matched
to avoid optical distortions. Our results revealed that the aortic
stiffness leads to an increase in systolic velocity and a decrease in
the Windkessel effect, which is associated with the diastolic blood
pressure. Furthermore, we found that the turbulent kinetic energy
is about an order of magnitude higher for the rigid aorta, that is,
an increase in aortic stiffness increases the magnitude of turbulent
fluctuating velocities. The spatial distribution of the flow velocity
showed that the flow is more organized and coherent spiraling patterns develop for the compliant aorta which helps to dampen the
influence of disturbed flow. Finally, we observed higher Lagrangian
acceleration and hence higher instantaneous forces acting on blood
particles in the stiff case which implies that aging and hence arterial
stiffening provokes distinctive alterations in blood flow, and these
alterations may cause pathological symptoms in the cardiovascular
system.
Index Terms—Aortic flow, aortic stiffness, ascending aorta,
Lagrangian flow field, three-dimensional particle tracking velocimetry (3D-PTV), Windkessel effect.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIOVASCULAR diseases are still the major cause of
mortality. Therefore, early diagnosis has become a crucial
strategy in order to reduce the overall impact of these diseases.
The relation between hemodynamics and cardiovascular diseases plays an important role for early diagnosis. The onset of
abnormalities in blood flow, e.g., disturbed flow patterns, is an
indicator of morbidity. Increasing arterial stiffness, one of the

C

Manuscript received November 27, 2013; revised April 4, 2014; accepted
March 10, 2014. Date of publication May 9, 2014; date of current version
November 3, 2014. This work was supported by ETH Research Grant ETH-24
08-2 and COST Action MP0806.
U. Gülan, B. Lüthi, M. Holzner, and W. Kinzelbach are with the Institute
of Environmental Engineering, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail:
guelan@ifu.baug.ethz.ch; luethi@ifu.baug.ethz.ch; holzner@ifu.baug.ethz.ch;
kinzelbach@ifu.baug.ethz.ch).
A. Liberzon and A. Tsinober are with the School of Mechanical Engineering,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel (e-mail: alexlib@eng.tau.ac.il;
tsinober@eng.tau.ac.il).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2322934

common processes, leads to significant changes in blood flow.
Aging and hypertension are the primary causes of the arterial
stiffening [1]. Increased collagen deposition and arterial wall
calcification with aging lead to reduced elastic properties of the
arteries [2], [3]. Previous studies have shown that the arterial
stiffening is related to several cardiovascular diseases. Laurent
et al. [4] exhibited the direct relation between the aortic stiffness
and cardiovascular mortality in patients with severe hypertension. Boutouyrie et al. [5] showed that stiffness is a predictor
of primary coronary heart disease in hypertension patients. In
another study, it is presented that the aortic stiffness is strongly
associated with the atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries [6].
It is also known that arterial stiffening is a significant factor in
progressive myocardial hypertrophy with aging [7]. In addition,
Blacher et al. [8] showed that assessing the aortic stiffness is
an independent predictor of cardiovascular mortality in patients
with end-stage renal disease.
The aorta is the origin of the systemic circulation. It has higher
elastic properties compared to the other arteries. However, the
distensibility of the aorta attenuates when the stiffness of the
artery increases with aging and under pathological conditions
[9]. In general, the aorta is capable of storing approximately 50%
of the stroke volume in the systolic phase by extending the aortic
walls. When the aortic valve is closed in early diastole, the stored
volume is forwarded to the peripheral circulation which is due
to the so-called Windkessel effect [9]. An increase in stiffness
decreases the stored volume in systole and also leads to an
increase in the amplitude of the arterial pulse wave and systolic
blood pressure [1]. It can be explained as the reflected wave
which travels from the heart to the periphery and returns to the
aorta during late diastolic phase augmenting the central systolic
pressure by means of elevated pulse wave velocity [1], [10],
[11]. The augmentation of pressure is associated with cardiac
afterload and ventricular hypertrophy [1], [10]. It is also known
that drug therapy has no distinctive influence on reducing the
arterial stiffness but it may lower the amplitude of the reflected
pulse wave and, hence, cause a delay of the arrival of the reflected
wave [7].
Aortic flow is basically laminar; however, the flow becomes
turbulent for a short time interval during the deceleration phase
as a consequence of the fast pace nature of the flow [12]. Disturbed blood flow is a crucial marker for cardiovascular diseases
as pathophysiological responses of the arteries are associated
with abnormalities in blood flow. However, the effect of aging
and hence the influence of stiffness on the fluid dynamics of the
cardiovascular system remains unclear. Recent medical imaging

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1776

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

tools, e.g. magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and Doppler ultrasound, have limitations to assess three-dimensional turbulent
fluctuating velocities. Furthermore, it is informative to obtain
three dimensional instantaneous forces and stresses which are
not accurately accessible with the conventional medical imaging
tools. Recently, three-dimensional particle tracking velocimetry (3D-PTV) has been utilized in biomedical applications to
assess three-dimensional flow fields and turbulent fluctuating
velocities [12], [13].
In this study, an in-vitro investigation of the comparison of the
healthy aorta and a pathological aorta with reduced compliance
is presented. The aim of the study is to shed a light on the influence of the aortic stiffness on the flow field and turbulent intensity. The three-dimensional flow velocity measurements were
performed in anatomically accurate rigid and compliant silicon replicas. We present both Lagrangian and Eulerian analysis
of the flow. Lagrangian trajectories show the spatial differences
of the flow organization. Budgets of the volumetric flux give a
better understanding of the Windkessel effect and pulse waves.
The temporal evolution of mean kinetic energy (MKE) and
turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) provides complimentary information on the variation of turbulent intensity with increasing
stiffness. Finally, the analysis of the Lagrangian acceleration
exhibits the local effects of the stiffness and allows to estimate
forces acting on particles.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
3D-PTV is a flexible nonintrusive image-based measurement technique. The main principle is to assess the 3-D flow
field without disturbing the flow. 3D-PTV allows assessing
flow velocities, velocity derivatives, and Lagrangian trajectories
simultaneously [14].
The experimental setup mainly consists of operating and optical parts. The optical part comprises a high speed camera with
a frame rate of 7000 fps, an Ar-Ion laser with a power of 20 W,
and an image splitter to mimic four different simultaneous views
of the investigation domain. The operating part consists of a silicon phantom, a ventricular assist device and a pneumatic pump
as shown in Fig. 1. A more detailed description of the experimental setup is given in the study of Gülan et al. [12]. Two
silicon phantoms (Elastrat, Geneva, Switzerland) with different
distensibility properties were used in the measurements. The
compliant model imitates a healthy aorta, and the rigid model
mimics a stiffer aorta as a consequence of aging. The geometries
of both phantoms were obtained from a high-resolution MRI
scan of a patient. The rigid silicon phantom was introduced into
a thick silicon block to dampen the compliance effect. Both
models were placed in a water-tight box.
As 3D-PTV is an optical measurement technique, it is crucial
to avoid optical distortions. The technique allows working in
media with different refractive indices. Hence, the indices of
refraction of the material of the investigation domain and of the
working fluid have to be matched in order to get reliable results.
In our measurements, we used a mixture of glycerine, water,
and NaCl which has an index of refraction of 1.41. The working
fluid properties and flow parameters are shown in Table I.

Fig. 1. Schematic view of the operating part of the experimental setup (top)
and tracer particle streaklines obtained from a long exposure photograph obtained from a digital camera (bottom).

TABLE I
WORKING FLUID PROPERTIES AND FLOW PARAMETERS
Parameter

RIGID MODEL

Compliant Model

Stroke Volume (ml)
Density (g/cm3 )
Viscosity (cm2 /s)
Peak Reynolds number
Pulse Duration (s)
Field of view (mm3 )

54
1.2
4.85 × 10–6
3584
1.15
50 × 25 × 25

54
1.2
4.85 × 10–6
2323
1.15
50 × 25 × 25

In the measurements, 40 heart beats were recorded for both
rigid and compliant models in the ascending aorta (see Fig. 1,
bottom). Identical operational flow conditions were used for
both measurements. Fluorescent Rhodamine particles with a
diameter of 200 μm were used as flow tracers. The pneumatic
pump was synchronized with the camera which was triggered
at the onset of each pulse wave.
III. RESULTS
Aortic blood flow is of special interest as a consequence of the
three-dimensionality, pulsatility, and the complex nature of the
flow. The curved geometry of the aorta and high distensibility
properties lead to retrograde flow zones, secondary flow regions,
and disturbed flow. In this section, we present both Eulerian and
Lagrangian analyses of the flow field.
The Windkessel effect is one of the characteristics of the
aortic flow. It is known that the blood flow is considerably
dependent on the Windkessel effect during the diastolic phase
[9]. To study its magnitude, we analyzed the volumetric flux and
observed differences mainly during the diastolic phase for both
compliant and rigid cases. The temporal evolution of volumetric
flux at the inlet cross section, in the vicinity of the aortic valve,
for the rigid and compliant models is presented in Fig. 2.
The phase averaged volumetric fluxes are calculated integrating the streamwise velocity over the inlet cross section. It is

GÜLAN et al.: EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE AORTIC STIFFNESS ON HEMODYNAMICS

1777

Fig. 2. Temporal evolution of phase-averaged volumetric flux at the inlet cross
section for both rigid and compliant models.

Fig. 3. Rate of change of volumetric flux and its decomposition at the midascending aorta of the compliant model (26-mm downstream of the inlet).

seen from the figure that the differences in the systolic phase
are small. It is however interesting that the systolic part shows
steeper flanks for the compliant model compared to the stiff
one. A stronger discrepancy between the two cases becomes
visible during the diastolic phase. The compliant model shows
flux oscillations with magnitudes smaller than those in the systolic phase. These oscillations are due to the Windkessel phenomenon. That is, the contraction of the aortic wall and the
arrival of the reflected pulse wave are associated with the two
peaks in the diastolic phase.
To better understand the factors responsible for the flux oscillations, we decomposed the change of the volumetric flux
into two separate contributions. The temporal variation of the
volumetric flux can be expressed as

flux. Similarly, the aorta recoils and forwards the stored volume
into the peripheral circulation which contributes to the decrease
of the volumetric flux during the deceleration phase.
The budget of volumetric flux (see Fig. 3) shows that the effect
of the geometrical deformation as a consequence of the flexible properties of the artery is small. Nevertheless, the question
of what triggers the oscillations during diastole remains unanswered. Therefore, we investigate the budget of Eulerian local
acceleration. We analyzed the phase averaged Navier–Stokes
equation averaged over the cross sections for both rigid and
compliant models shown as follows:

∂Q
∂t

tem p oral change
of volum etric ﬂux

=

∂A
∂AU
∂U
=U
+ A
∂t
∂t
∂t


change
in area

(1)

lo cal
acceleration

where Q(x, t) is the volumetric flux at different cross sections,
U(x, t) is the streamwise velocity averaged over the cross sections, A(x, t) is the cross sectional area, and t is time along a
heartbeat. Hence, the change of volumetric flux is dependent on
the areal change and local acceleration. For the stiff aorta, the
change of area is zero as a result of steady-state boundaries, and
hence, local acceleration only is responsible for the change of
volumetric flux. On the other hand, it is interesting to analyze
the contribution of the terms in the flux change for the compliant
model. As depicted in Fig. 3, the influence of the area change
is small compared to the local acceleration term. Accordingly,
it is concluded that the flux oscillations exist as a result of the
variation in local acceleration.
Using the decomposition of (1), we also explain the previous
somewhat counter-intuitive observation of steeper slopes in the
flux curve for the compliant model (see Fig. 2). We compared
the local acceleration term for the compliant and stiff model, and
they are practically the same. Therefore, the steeper slopes of the
volumetric flux during systolic phase are due to the areal change
term, which adds a positive contribution during acceleration and
a negative contribution during deceleration and, hence, makes
the slopes steeper. In other words, as the aorta expands during the
early systole, the stored volume leads to a positive contribution
to the volumetric flux which increases the slope of the volumetric

∂ Ũ
∂t

lo cal
acceleration

= −aŨ

∂ Ũ
∂x


convective
term

τ̃0
1
−
−
ρ
Rh
A


wall
friction

−


1∂ P̃
+ g sin θ
  
ρ∂x
  
gravitational

pressure
gradient

acceleration

(2)

(ũ · ∇) ũϕ dA


Reynolds stresses

where Ũ is the streamwise velocity component averaged over
the cross section, α is the convective coefficient, P is the pressure
averaged over the cross section, g is the gravitational acceleration, τ 0 is the wall shear stress, Rh is the hydrodynamic radius,
ũ is the turbulent fluctuating velocity, and the angle brackets
denote the average over several pulses. The analysis shows that
the influence of the gravitational acceleration, wall friction, and
Reynolds stress terms is very small compared to the convective
term and the pressure gradient term. For this reason, we focus
on these two latter terms. The comparison of convective acceleration for the rigid and compliant models at the mid-ascending
aorta is presented in Fig. 4. The difference between two cases
becomes more apparent during the systolic phase. The convective acceleration is high at the peak systole for both cases.
The rigid aortic model shows a higher acceleration particularly
starting from the mid-systolic phase. This trend can be readily
explained as the phase averaged velocity is lower for the compliant model as a consequence of the expansion of the aortic wall.
Interestingly, there is no evidence for the oscillations during the
diastolic phase which manifests that the pressure gradient term
in (1) is responsible for diastolic flux variations as shown in
Fig. 2.

1778

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. Lagrangian trajectories along the compliant model (left) and rigid
model (right) during the deceleration phase (blue-coded trajectories correspond
to antegrade flow and red-coded trajectories correspond to retrograde flow).
Fig. 4. Temporal evolution of convective acceleration for both rigid and compliant models (26-mm downstream of the inlet).

Fig. 7. Time evolution of MKE (left) and TKE (right) averaged over the
ascending aorta for both rigid and compliant models.
Fig. 5. Time evolution of the pressure gradient term for both rigid and compliant models (26-mm downstream of the inlet).

Comparison of the time evolution of the pressure gradient
term for both rigid and compliant models at mid-ascending aorta
is depicted in Fig. 5. In the systolic phase, the pressure gradient
is considerably higher for the rigid model which is linked to the
early arrival of the reflected wave to the aorta.
On the other hand, the pressure gradient for the rigid model
is small during the diastolic phase. Differently, the compliant
model shows pressure oscillations indicating that the flux variations in the diastole develop as a result of the pressure gradient
term. The presented analysis on the Windkessel effect and the
temporal evolution of the volumetric flux shows that elastic
properties of the aortic wall lead to a second peak in flux during
the diastolic phase which assists providing a continuous blood
flow to the arteries and the veins. To sum up, it is concluded
that the aortic stiffness causes an increase in systolic convective acceleration, an increase in systolic pressure gradient, a
slight decrease in diastolic pressure gradient, and a decrease in
Windkessel effect.
To represent the spatial organization of the flow, we depict a qualitative comparison of the Lagrangian trajectories for
both compliant and rigid models in Fig. 6. The figure shows
Lagrangian trajectories for a time interval of 0.1 s during the deceleration phase in the ascending aorta. Blue-coded trajectories
refer to the antegrade flow, and the red-coded trajectories refer
to the retrograde flow. As shown in the figure, the particle trajectories in the compliant model (left) are mainly oriented along
the axial direction. A distinctive spiraling motion is observed
at the inner wall and reaches to the aortic arch. This finding

qualitatively agrees with the in-vivo studies [15]–[18] which
observed a similar pattern. However, a more irregular spatial
pattern of the flow exists in the rigid model (right). The spiraling motion is not as pronounced as the compliant one as the
flow is more disorganized in the rigid model. The qualitative
comparison of the trajectories manifests that the influence of
the aortic stiffness leads to a clear difference in the spatial evolution of the flow. The disorganized pattern of the trajectories
and diminishing spiraling motion with increasing stiffness of
the aorta indicates a more severely disturbed flow.
Aortic flow is a fast-pace flow, and the flow may become
turbulent for a short time interval in healthy aortas [12].
The turbulent flow in the aorta is not fully developed turbulence as there is not enough time for development. Hence, it is
interesting to investigate the causes and onset of turbulent flow
in the aorta.
It is also known that disturbed flow provokes higher shear
stress on individual blood elements compared to the laminar
flow in the small arteries. To get a better understanding of the
onset of turbulence and the influence of the aortic stiffness on
turbulent intensity, we depict the temporal evolution of MKE
and TKE averaged over the entire investigation domain for both
rigid and compliant models in Fig. 7. The comparison of MKE
between the two cases shows that MKE is higher for the rigid
model during the systolic phase which points to the fact that the
aortic stiffness leads to an increase in mean systolic velocity. As
mentioned previously, this distinctive increase is linked to the
fact that the aortic wall expands during systole for the compliant model, and hence, the streamwise velocity becomes slower
compared to the rigid model. The comparison of TKE depicts a

GÜLAN et al.: EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE AORTIC STIFFNESS ON HEMODYNAMICS

Fig. 8. Temporal evolution of the production of TKE averaged over the investigation volume for both rigid and compliant models.

more striking difference. Through the entire pulse, TKE for the
rigid model is considerably higher than that for the compliant
model. The discrepancy is largest at the peak systole. TKE of the
stiffer aorta is about an order of magnitude higher than that of
the distensible aorta which shows that the aortic stiffness plays
an important role for the appearance of turbulent fluctuating
velocities. This result is also consistent with the disorganized
nature of the flow field of the stiffer aorta shown in Fig. 6.
The investigation of turbulent fluctuating velocity indicates
that aortic stiffness induces elevated TKE during the entire pulse
duration. It is seen from Fig. 7 that peak TKE is reached during
the deceleration phase for both rigid and compliant models.
To highlight how much TKE is produced, we analyze the rate
of change of TKE and production of TKE which is written as
follows:
Pk


 u
= −u
l j

∂ Ũi
∂xj

(3)

pro duction
of TKE

where ui and uj are turbulent fluctuating velocities and the tilde
refers to phase averaging.
This quantity averaged over the entire domain is shown in its
time evolution in Fig. 8 for both rigid and compliant models.
The production of TKE reaches a maximum during the decelerating phase similar to TKE itself (shown in Fig. 7). The
maximum production is about an order of magnitude higher for
the rigid case. Although the trend is similar for both cases, the
shear production curve is steeper for the rigid model during the
systolic phase. This considerable increase can be explained as
the fact that turbulent fluctuating velocity and phase averaged
velocity become higher as the aorta loses it distensibility properties. It is also seen that production of TKE is negligible during
the early systole and late diastole.
The analysis of the Eulerian acceleration, shown in Fig. 4,
shows that the acceleration is associated with the Windkessel
phenomenon. Moreover, the investigation of TKE showed that
aortic stiffness provokes elevated TKE values.
As a final result, we study the influence of the aortic stiffness
on the Lagrangian acceleration which provides local information about the flow’s ability to exert forces on particles. The
probability density function (PDF) of the Lagrangian acceleration is presented in Fig. 9. It is clear that the individual blood

Fig. 9.

1779

PDF of the Lagrangian acceleration for the rigid and compliant models.

elements experience high acceleration and, hence, high instantaneous forces in the rigid model. The more disturbed flow nature
as a consequence of high turbulent fluctuating velocities and
high shear production seems to lead to higher instantaneous
forces acting on blood elements for the stiffer aorta. Therefore,
it can be concluded that the aortic stiffness as a consequence of
aging considerably provokes local alterations in the blood flow.
IV. CONCLUSION
An in-vitro investigation of the pulsatile aortic blood flow in
an ascending aorta is presented in this study. The main goal
is to better understand the influence of the aortic stiffness on
the phase-averaged flow field and turbulent fluctuating velocities using an image-based measurement technique. 3D-PTV
has been applied to anatomically accurate aortic phantoms. A
compliant replica and a rigid model are used to mimic the effect of the aortic stiffness. Clinically realistic aortic blood flow
conditions have been fulfilled. Our analysis revealed that a decrease in aortic distensibility leads to considerable effects on the
phase-averaged velocity field and its turbulent fluctuations. The
qualitative comparison of the Lagrangian trajectories between
the rigid and compliant models showed that the spatial organization of the flow field is more disorganized for the stiffer aorta.
We observed that the coherent spiraling motion of the flow vanishes in the rigid model whereas helical flow patterns develop
along the inner aortic wall for the compliant model. The flexible
boundaries and high distensibility are characteristics of the human aorta. We aimed at understanding the change in Windkessel
phenomenon with respect to the stiffening. Temporal evolution
of the phase-averaged volumetric flux analysis showed that a
distinctive difference develops during the diastolic phase. The
compliant model showed flux oscillations whereas there are no
oscillations observed for the stiffer aorta. To highlight the reason
responsible for these fluctuations, we investigated the budget of
the volumetric flux change. It is clear that the volumetric flux
change is directly proportional to the local acceleration for the
rigid model. However, we found that the same trend is valid
for the compliant aorta as the influence of the change in crosssectional area is negligible. Furthermore, we studied the budget
of local acceleration to answer the question as to what triggers the flux peaks during the diastolic phase. We found that
the pressure gradient is responsible for the flux oscillations in
the second half of the heartbeat. Moreover, we observed that

1780

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

convective acceleration plays a significant role on the local
acceleration during the systolic phase. It is shown that an increase in aortic stiffness leads to an increase in convective acceleration which is associated with the higher phase-averaged
velocities for the rigid model. Furthermore, it is presented that
the aortic stiffness induces an increase in systolic pressure gradient and a slight decrease in diastolic pressure gradient, which
is linked to the arrival of the reflected pulse wave in the central
aorta.
One of the goals of this study is to investigate the flow field
and turbulent fluctuating velocities. The analysis on MKE revealed that phase-averaged velocity is lower for the compliant
model which is associated with the distensibility properties of
the aortic wall for the compliant model. The difference between
the two cases is higher during the systolic phase. However, MKE
of the compliant model becomes as high as in the rigid model
during the diastolic phase. It was also found that an increase in
the stiffness of the aorta leads to an increase in systolic velocity which showed good agreement with the study of Belz [9].
On the other hand, the discrepancy in TKE between the two
cases is more distinctive throughout the entire pulse duration.
The highest TKE magnitudes are reached during the deceleration phase in late systole for both cases. Interestingly, TKE of
the stiffer aorta is about an order of magnitude higher than that
of the compliant model. Elevated turbulent fluctuating velocities for the rigid model are consistent with the results depicting
the disorganization of the flow field. Our findings support the
hypothesis that the coherent spiraling motion of the flow developing in the compliant aorta dampens the turbulence [17],
[18]. That is, the absence of the spiraling flow field in the stiffer
aorta is associated with elevated turbulent intensity, and hence,
spiraling motion seems to have a stabilizing effect. Analysis
of the production of TKE showed that the shear production is
higher during the deceleration phase whereas it becomes negligible during the early systole and late diastole for both cases.
These results state that aortic stiffness introduces elevated shear
production which shows that aging may lead to significant local
changes in the blood flow. Finally, the analysis of the Lagrangian
acceleration revealed that aortic stiffness introduces high acceleration which is associated with the high instantaneous forces
acting on the blood elements. This is in agreement with the high
shear production in the rigid model.
The turbulence-related analysis shown in this study concerns large-scale eddies. However, the data presented could also
provide complimentary results from small-scale investigations.
Therefore, this study will be extended toward the analysis of
small-scale stresses that blood elements experience to better
understand the influence of the aortic stiffness on the energy
cascade. Disturbed blood flow is an indicator for cardiovascular
diseases and is important for early diagnosis. The presented results and the further analysis on the small-scale turbulence may
provide full information on energy efficiency of the cardiovascular system for both healthy and pathological conditions as a
consequence of ageing. We expect that these findings can be
translated into clinical applications.

REFERENCES
[1] G. M. London and A.P. Guerin, “Influence of arterial pulse and reflected
waves on blood pressure and cardiac function,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 138,
pp. 220–224, 1999.
[2] J. L. Cavalcante, J. A. C. Lima, A. Redheuil, and M. H. Al-Mallah,
“Aortic stiffness: Current understanding and future directions,” J. Amer.
Coll. Cardiol., vol. 57, pp. 1511–1522, 2011.
[3] H. Y. Lee and B. H. Oh, “Aging and arterial stiffness,” Circ. J., vol. 74,
pp. 2257–2262, 2010.
[4] S. Laurent, P. Boutouyrie, R. Asmar, I. Gautier, B. Laloux, L. Guize,
P. Ducimetiere, and A. Benetos, “Aortic stiffness is an independent predictor of all-cause and cardiovascular mobidity in hypertensive patients,”
Hypertension, vol. 37, pp. 1236–1241, 2001.
[5] P. Boutouyrie, A. I. Tropeano, R. Asmar, I. Gautier, A. Benetos, P. Lacolley, and S. Laurent, “Aortic stiffness is an independent predictor of
primary coronary events in hypertensive patients: A longitudinal study,”
Hypertension, vol. 39, pp. 10–15, 2002.
[6] N. M. Van Popele, F. U. Mattace-Raso, and R. Vliegenthart, “Aortic
stiffness is associated with atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries in older
adults: The rotterdam study,” J. Hypertension, vol. 24, pp. 2371–2376,
2006.
[7] M. O. Rouke, “Arterial stiffness, systolic blood pressure, and logical
treatment of arterial hypertension,” Hypertension, vol. 15, pp. 339–347,
1990.
[8] J. Blacher, A. P. Guerin, B. Pannier, S. J. Marchais, M. E. Safar, and G. M.
London, “Impact of aortic stiffness on survival in end-stage renal disease,”
Circulation, vol. 99, pp. 2434–2439, 1999.
[9] G. G. Belz, “Elastic properties and windkessel function of the human
aorta,” Cardiovasc. Drugs Ther., vol. 9, pp. 73–83, 1995.
[10] J. L. Izzo Jr and B. E. Shykoff, “Arterial stiffness: Clinical relevance,
measurement, and treatment,” Rev. Cardiovasc. Med., vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 29–40, 2001.
[11] J. J. Oliver and D. J. Webb, “Noninvasive assessment of arterial stiffness
and risk of atherosclerotic events,” Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., vol.
23, pp. 554–566, 2003.
[12] U. Gülan, B. Lüthi, M. Holzner, A. Liberzon, A. Tsinober, and W. Kinzelbach, “Experimental study of aortic flow in the ascending aorta via particle
tracking velocimetry,” Exp. Fluids, vol. 53, pp. 1469–1485, 2012.
[13] V. Knobloch, C. Binter, U. Gulan, P. Boesiger, and S. Kozerke, “Assessment of 3D velocity vector fields and turbulent kinetic energy in a realistic aortic phantom using multi-point variable density velocity encoding,”
J. Cardiovasc. Magn. Reson., vol. 14, pp. 789–792, 2012.
[14] B. Luthi, A. Tsinober, and W. Kinzelbach, “Lagrangian measurement of
vorticity dynamics in turbulent flow,” J Fluid Mech., vol. 528, pp. 87–118,
2005.
[15] P. Kilner, G. Yang, R. Mohiaddin, D. Firmin, and D. Longmore, “Helical and retrograde secondary flow patterns in the aortic arch studied by
the three-directional magnetic resonance velocity mapping,” Circulation,
vol. 88, pp. 2235–2247, 1993.
[16] M. Markl, P. Kilner, and T. Ebbers, “Comprehensive 4D velocity mapping
of the heart and great vessels by cardiovascular magnetic resonance,”
J. Cardiovasc. Magn. Reson., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1–22, 2011.
[17] U. Morbiducci, R. Ponzini, G. Rizzo, M. Cadioli, A. Esposito, F. M.
Montevecchi, and A. Redaelli, “Mechanistic insight into the physiological
relevance of helical blood flow in the human aorta: An in-vivo study,”
Biomech. Model Mechanobiol., vol. 10, pp. 339–355, 2011.
[18] U. Morbiducci, R. Ponzini, G. Rizzo, M. Cadioli, F. Cobelli, A. Maschito, F. Montevecchi, and A. Redaelli, “In vivo quantification of helical
blood flow in human aorta by time-resolved three-dimensional cine phase
contrast magnetic resonance imaging,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 516–531, 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

