IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

37

Design and Technical Evaluation of an Enhanced
Location-Awareness Service Enabler for Spatial
Disorientation Management of Elderly With Mild
Cognitive Impairment
Pedro A. Moreno, M. Elena Hernando, Senior Member, IEEE, and Enrique J. Gómez, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The progressive ageing of population has turned the
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) into a prevalent disease suffered
by elderly. Consequently, the spatial disorientation has become
a significant problem for older people and their caregivers. The
ambient-assisted living applications are offering location-based
services for empowering elderly to go outside and encouraging
a greater independence. Therefore, this paper describes the design
and technical evaluation of a location-awareness service enabler
aimed at supporting and managing probable wandering situations
of a person with MCI. Through the presence capabilities of the
IP multimedia subsystem (IMS) architecture, the service will alert
patient’s contacts if a hazardous situation is detected depending on
his location. Furthermore, information about the older person’s security areas has been included in the user profile managed by IMS.
In doing so, the service enabler introduced contribute to “contextawareness” paradigm allowing the adaptation and personalization
of services depending on user’s context and specific conditions or
preferences.
Index Terms—Context-aware, dementia wandering support,
IMS presence service, personalized location-based services.

I. INTRODUCTION
OWADAYS elderly population is increasing in developed
countries and new sociohealthcare services are being demanded to maintain the older adult’s quality of life and autonomy in their own home and community. Home automation,
telehealth services, and ambient intelligence are increasingly
becoming elderly centered tools to support older adults. In particular, the European program ambient-assisted living [1] promotes the creation of products, systems, and solutions based on
Information and Communication Technologies for elderly’s life
independence support.
Older age is associated with functional decline in selective
aspects of cognitive performance (executive functions, attention verbal, visual memory, spatial navigation, and processing
speed). A survey exposes that up to 60% of people with mild
cognitive impairment (MCI) will experience any spatial disorientation incident (“getting lost” or “wandering”) and it increases

N

Manuscript received December 11, 2013; revised April 11, 2014; accepted
March 11, 2014. Date of publication June 2, 2014; date of current version
December 30, 2014.
The authors are with the Bioengineering and Telemedicine Group of
Technical, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain and
also with the Biomedical Research Networking center in Bioengineering,
Biomaterials and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Zaragoza, Spain (e-mail:
pmoreno@gbt.tfo.upm.es; elena@gbt.tfo.upm.es; egomez@gbt.tfo.upm.es).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2327638

the involvement in hazardous situations [2]. Being aware of wandering risks of a person with MCI (PwMCI), the caregivers suffer an increased distress. Also, they are involved in the conflict
between the prevention of wandering and the PwMCI’s right to
independence. This situation precipitates the institutionalization
of the PwMCI.
Currently, devices employed to connect to the Internet are
becoming more mobile, and they allow extracting user’s information or specific preference/conditions to provide personalized
services as the “context-awareness” paradigm establishes. Particularly, user’s location information becomes a critical piece
of context to customize “location-awareness” applications. The
location-based services (LBS) imply an added value to thirdparty applications and are poised to become the next innovation
in mobile phone. Therefore, the employment of new tracking
and communication technologies in LBS will allow PwMCI,
who have been stigmatized through the diagnosis of MCI, to
go outside with more independence and reduce their institutionalization time. By monitoring the patient’s location, their
caregivers will be able to manage wandering situations, and reduce probable anxiety and psychological burden [4]. Thus, these
solutions will allow substituting current practices (e.g., strong
medication or mobility restriction) that deteriorate the autonomy of a PwMCI, and decrease their self-esteem and quality of
life.
The main structure of a LBS is based upon a number of core
components as: location-based applications running on mobile
devices; handset location measurement technology (e.g., Cell
ID, GPS); location management platforms; and server side daemons (navigation systems, tracking systems or emergency systems). The reliability of location technologies in LBS is a key
issue that should be considered since the quality of service depends on the accuracy of mobile user’s location information.
For example, GPS systems can accurately locate an object but
Cell ID mechanism is a better alternative to indoor location. In
particular, Cell ID employs the geographical coverage of mobile
network’s base stations to calculate the device’s location [5]. In
addition, mature standards, architectures, and servers resources
in LBS are needed to support an increasing number of subscribers, and to achieve a high integration between the different
stakeholders.
This study presents an enhanced location-awareness service
aimed at detecting wandering episodes of a PwMCI in specific context situations. If disorientation occurs, the service will

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

38

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

activate dynamic alerts and notify to older adult’s contacts. The
service has been developed using the presence functionality of
IP multimedia subsystem (IMS) architecture due to its capabilities of interoperability, standard compliant, service modularity,
and horizontal architecture.
This paper contains five sections. Section I consists of an introduction. In Section II, previous works related to LBS focused
on wandering are described. The technologies and components
used in the service development as well as the service’s functionalities are described in Section III. Section IV describes
the results of the experiments carried out. Finally, Section V
presents discussions and conclusions.
II. RELATED WORKS
In locations-based services (LBS) domain, one of the most
common services is search engines that consider the subscriber’s
location and other issues as local time, weather, traffic, maps,
and directions [6]. As examples of the “location-awareness”
paradigm in e-health field, certain applications employ LBS to
send health information or reminders depending on the user’s
location; monitor patients ubiquitously for managing medical
emergencies; show environmental values dangerous to user’s
health; locate the nearest hospital facilities or staff; or trace the
routes taken by people infected [7].
Particularly, some experiences use LBS to track people with
MCI. The system described in [8] uses a GPS-enabled mobile
phone to locate missing persons with a high reliability and accuracy due to the stability of the central server that handles
the location service. The OutCare [9] and iRoute [10] systems
monitor subconsciously if the patient deviates from a reasoned
predicted route; try to guide the person back on track; and inform
to his relatives. A similar approach is implemented in LaCaSa
system that applies Markov models on the PwMCI context information (current location, noise or known locations) to infer
if the patient is wandering [11]. In addition, the iWander project
[12] presents an application capable of determining if the person is wandering depending on device’s GPS sensor, time of
day, weather condition, user feedback, and safe zones. It takes
actions that navigate the patient to a safe location, notify caregivers, provide the current location, and call 911. The OAED
system introduces another procedure based on GPS traces of
the PwMCI to estimate if he/she is wandering [13]. In [14],
the KITE project facilitates the communication between person
with MCI and their families in case of wandering. Apart from
GPS position technology, RFID [15] or WIFI [16] is used to
avoid uncontrolled movement in their daily life indoor areas,
getting lost or accessing dangerous areas.
Additionally, the study [17] reflects some requirements in the
adoption of devices employed in LBS by PwMCI and his/her
caregivers as: low cost, no need for training and support, technical and usability simplicity, size of equipment (a device as unnoticeable as possible), battery issues, location accuracy, presence
of desired features, privacy issues, and avoid the stigma of being
tagged. Apart from these previous considerations, LBS should
provide features in order to allow the communication between
caregivers and elderly, especially during the searching phase.

Regarding the use of IMS in LBS, a location emergency service is deployed in the architecture employing physical user
data (pulse, body temperature, blood pressure) [18]. Furthermore, an IMS framework that allows sharing location between
users or sending messages to users placed in a specific location
is presented in [19].
In this study, the enhanced location-awareness service enabler developed uses IMS presence service to send the location
information of a user (PwMCI) in a certain structured format
with the aim at personalizing the service’s functions. Moreover,
the employment of session initiation protocol (SIP) in IMS enhances the enabler interoperability with other services. Finally,
the service enabler provides a set of dynamic alerts considering other factors of patient’s context than the previous described
experiences (traveling, safety sense and day time, contacts companion).
III. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. IP Multimedia Subsystem
Since networks operators do not want to be relegated to just
an organizer of “bit pipes,” they are promoting the IMS architecture as standard to offer interactive and real-time IP multimedia
user services accessible from any place and any device. The
horizontality of the IMS architecture is based on a group of
common functions called “service enablers” that can be reused
many times by several services independently on the device and
access networks. These service enablers can implement application building blocks that represent basic “macro” capabilities
common to many third-party services.
In order to allow multimedia session management, IMS employs the SIP for signaling functions. As physical structure,
the entities responsible of signaling are a group of SIP servers,
named Call Session Control Function (I-CSCF, P-CSCF and SCSCF), and a home subscriber server (HSS). These components
manage user register and access; authorize the session’s multimedia resources; and enable “triggers” to activate value-added
services by means of initial filter criteria [20].
As location user data can be potentially confidential, users
demand guarantee of privacy and security. Thus, IMS is suitable
to deploy and offer the location enabler developed in this study
because of the great confidence users have in their operators
who are the main providers of the architecture.
B. IMS Presence Service
The IMS Presence Service is implemented in an added value
application server, named presence server. The presence model
defines presence as the information published by certain users,
referred as presentities, toward other users, watchers, indicating
their communication capabilities. The IMS architecture uses
SIP/SIMPLE protocol for publishing, subscription, and notifying users’ information through events definition. Therefore,
the presentities publish changes in their information by using
PUBLISH method, meanwhile watchers use SUBSCRIBE and
NOTIFY methods to receive the updated presence information
[20]. The presence information is described by means of a XML

MORENO et al.: DESIGN AND TECHNICAL EVALUATION OF AN ENHANCED LOCATION-AWARENESS SERVICE ENABLER

39

To include the information about the security areas in each
patient’s profile stored in the XDMS server, an appussage named
“security areas” has been defined and its structure is as follows:

Fig. 1.

Security-areas example (HS: Hot Spot; d: distance).

document with presence information data format (PIDF) format
specified by SIP/SIMPLE [21]. Since PIDF format only allows
giving information about the contact and its state, in this study
we use the GEOPRIV [22] extension to include the user’s geolocation to the presence information.
Moreover, the presence server can request or update user’s
profile data in a XML Document Management Server (XDMS)
by using the XML Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP). The
XDMS stores user’s information complying with appusages,
which refer to the XML data structure of user’s profile. The
server allows storing as much appusages as needed information
(contact list, user’s images).

C. Location-Awareness Service Enabler Design
The main contribution of this study is the design of a service
enabler for an enhanced wandering management of PwMCI. The
enabler uses the IMS presence service to monitor transparently
the person’s location; detect potential spatial disorientation or
wandering events; which happen when the patient would not
know the place where she/he is; and hence activates a set of
alarms. The inference of these wandering episodes and the alerts
are based on patient and contacts’ context.
1) Security Areas Configuration: A new methodology named
“Hot Spots (HSs)” has been defined to establish the security areas where a PwMCI could suffer a wandering episode. This
method links particular geographical locations with places related to the patient (home, relative’s house, nursing home, etc.).
Taking these locations as references, a group of distances (d1,
d2, and d3) are defined in order to delimit three security areas.
The “area 1” defines the area where the patient usually develops
his daily life activities. The second area refers to a caution area
where the patient does not move regularly. This area could involve a wandering episode if the person moves further. Finally,
the distance d3 determines the area where the PwMCI could
suffer a spatial disorientation as the zone is totally unfamiliar to
them. Fig. 1 shows the structure of these areas.

The document can have multiple security areas that could
be defined by a patient’s contact (doctor or a closest relative)
who know the places where patient usually moves. The items included for each security area (e.g., <ns: area name = “home”>)
are: a list of contacts to notify the patient’s situation (<ns:list>);
the location data needed to establish the hot spot, i.e., HS in
Fig. 1 (<ns:centerPosition>); the distances that conform the
security areas (<radius>, <radiusTwo> and <radiusThree>);
and a series of time slot that defines a period when the patient
should not go out from a certain area. Note that the contacts
would be involved in the document considering their will to be
included in the contact list.
2) Enabler’s Functionalities: The location enabler’s functions and their relationship, depicted in Fig. 2, are described as
follows.
a) Automatic Patient’s Subscription: By a set of filter criteria, the IMS Core detects a patient’s register and inform to the
enabler which will subscribe to patient’s presence information.
b) Patient’s Information Processing: When receiving the
patient’s information in a NOTIFY (step 1), the enabler extracts
from the XML certain information like current patient’s location, speed, and the time that are based on GEOPRIV and PIDF
as follows (steps 2 and 3):

Next, the enabler asks to the XDMS server the “securityusage” appusage of the PwMCI. Thus, the list of contacts and
the security-areas structure is extracted allowing the enabler
to subscribe to contacts’ presence information (step 4 and 6).
The enabler will distinguish if the NOTIFY is coming from the
patient or a contact.

40

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

@

Systems
Mobile[8]

OutCare[9]

iRoute[10]

LaCaSa[11]

iWander[12]

OAED[13]

KITE[14]

RFID[15]

UAS[16]

@

SIP presence standards use Contacts’ presence
Nearest contact
Panic button
Security areas
Time slots
Confirm location
Location message
Intelligent callback
Travelling function
Location
O
Route prediction
GPS accuracy mgmt.
√
Itinerary tracking
3-way call
-

√

√

O
√

√
√
√
√
√
√

√

√

√

√

@

Options

@
@
@

√
√

√

O
√

O
√
√
√

-

-

-

√
-

O
?
√
√
√

O
√
√
-

√
O
√

I
√

√
√
I
-

Loc.Enabler

TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN LBS FOR PWMCI WANDERING MANAGEMENT

√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
O/I
?
?

√
“ “ = supported, “-” = not supported, “O” = outdoor, “I” = indoor, and “?” = future
support.

Fig. 2.

Location enabler flowchart.

Fig. 3.

Enhanced location-awareness service enabler architecture.

c) Find the Nearest Contact: After receiving the XML
NOTIFY from a contact (steps 1, 2, and 3), the enabler store
the contact’s geolocation to calculate who will be first warned
in a wandering episode (steps 5 and 7). Moreover, the enabler
determines the distance between every contact registered and the
patient, creating a sorted contact list (the nearest, the first) (steps
9 and 11). Thus, if an alarm is triggered, the actions executed
by the enabler will involve the nearest contact as it is likely that
he/she could be the first to find the patient.
d) Patient is Accompanied: The enabler can estimates if
the patient is accompanied as the distance between the patient
and the nearest contact has been calculated, In case of compan-

ion, the actions to take in any of the security areas will not be
considered (steps 12 and 13).
e) Panic Button Function: The enabler offers to PwMCI
who are in a safe zone (area 1) and feel an emergency situation
the possibility to activate a direct and fast communication with
their contacts. Automatically, the enabler will proceed as the
patient would be in the area 3 (step 8).
f) Security Areas Inference: Once the security-areas structure have been extracted from the appusage (step 4), the enabler
determines the area where the patient is. If the distance between
the patient’s and the hot-spot’s location is under <radius> value,
between <radius> and <radiusTwo>, or among <radiusTwo>
and <radiusThree>, the patient will be in area 1, 2 or 3, respectively. If the distance exceeds <radiusThree>, the enabler will
act as if the patient is in area 3 because the risky situation is
maintained (step 10).
g) Time Surveillance: Although the area 1 does not imply
any hazardous situation, the PwMCI could be moving in not
recommendable hours (e.g., night time). By using the presence
information label <timestamp>, the enabler detects if the patient is out of the period established by the field “timeslot” of
the appusage. In case the patient will be out of this period, the
enabler will notify patient’s contacts (steps 14, 16, 18, and 19).
h) Traveling Detection: The speed of 5556 m/s (20 km/h
or 12.4 m/h) has been set as a threshold to detect if the patient
is traveling by checking the label <dyn:speed> in presence
information. Although the patient is in area 2 or 3 in this case,
the contacts will only receive a message (step 15).
i) Confirm Location in Area 2: The patient could be in
area 2 without involving a potential wandering episode. Thus,
the patient is asked if he/she feels safe in this location or if
he/she needs help. In case the patient feels safe, the patient’s
contact will only receive the patient’s location. Otherwise, the

MORENO et al.: DESIGN AND TECHNICAL EVALUATION OF AN ENHANCED LOCATION-AWARENESS SERVICE ENABLER

enabler will establish a call between contacts and patient (steps
17, 18, and 19).
j) Sending Location Messaging: When an incident is detected (e.g., patient is out in night time, he needs help, or he
is in area 3), the patient’s current position is sent to contacts
through a message that includes a link to Google Maps web page
(step 18).
k) Intelligent Callback: As final stage of the wandering
alarm, a SIP call between the PwMCI and the nearest contact
is established. Since contacts are organized in an array by the
nearest distance criteria, if the nearest contact does not answer
the next contact will be called. To avoid patient’s waiting, he/she
is not called until the contact’s answer (19). The call could
support audio and video depending on the capabilities of the
IMS client employed by the users (patient and contacts) as well
as the user’s preference. As the video is a reasonable approach
to maintain older adult’s peace of mind and satisfaction [23],
the video call would allow a PwMCI in a wandering episode to
see their contact in a display during the call and get relaxed until
they are found.
D. LBS Comparison Procedures
A literature search has been accomplished to review solutions
aimed at managing wandering episodes of PwMCI developed
between 2005 and 2013. The search was held by one person using “Google scholar” and “ISI Web of Knowledge” databases.
Search terms were: “wandering,” “spatial disorientation,” dementia,” “elderly,” “context awareness,” and “MCI”. Therefore,
nine relevant solutions that have been described in Section II
were identified [8]–[16]. Their main functionalities were extracted and compared with those offered by the service enabler
presented.
E. Implementation and Performance Test Methodology
A set of experiments has been conducted for testing the feasibility, usability, and robustness of the enabler in a real scenario.
To implement the components of IMS Core, the open-source
tool OpenIMS [24] was employed. Meanwhile, the open source
suite Mobicents [25] includes a XDMS server, which allows
developing the security-area appusage and providing a presence
information management support. Besides, Mobicents includes
a SIP Servlet which was used to deploy the location-awareness
enabler in the IMS architecture.
On the device side, a group of three Android smartphones
with GPS support were used: Samsung Galaxy S2, Sony Xperia
Arcs, and HTC Desire. Respectively, the versions of Android
installed were: 4.0, 2.3, and 2.2. GPS location technique was selected because of its extended use and its position measurement
robustness as any further computation is required. However, the
location information could also be extracted using the Cell-ID
mechanism provided by Android but the outdoor location accuracy would decrease. Specifically, we used the IMS Droid [26]
client for Android, which was enhanced by developing GPS location support and IMS presence features. Moreover, this client
allows the establishment of either a video call or an audio call.
In both cases (PwMCI and contacts), the election of call type

41

is simple for the users because he/she could choose the type of
media by pressing a button only once when accepting the call.
Finally, the enabler’s performance was assessed in every security area with the different steps showed in the flowchart (panic
button pressed, patient companion, patient traveling, patient out
of security time slot, message and callback sending, etc.). In
addition, three mobile phones were registered, one as a patient
and two as patient’s contacts. The success rates of every particular enabler’s function, as well as the positive false and negative
false rates were evaluated.
IV. RESULTS
A. Architecture of Location-Awareness Service Enabler
The structure of the location-awareness enabler, shown in
Fig. 3, follows the LBS components requirements: locationbased applications on mobile devices, location technology, location management platforms, and server-side daemons.
The users (both person with MCI and contacts) must employ
a smartphone with GPS and Cell-ID location capabilities, and
a nonspecific IMS client with presence support to insert the
user’s location extracted in the presence information. Since the
location enabler is compliant with PDIF and GEOPRIV standards, which are independent on location technology, outdoor
and indoor performance is achieved.
The IMS core is responsible of managing the SIP signaling
between users’ devices, the presence server (PS) and the location enabler. Moreover, the enabler triggers the filters to receive
the presence information. The PS handles the SIP/SIMPLE messages updating the user’s presence information. By using XCAP
protocol with the XDMS server, the PS updates the user profile
information considering an appusage previously stored. Additionally, the enabler receives user’s presence information and
detects a wandering situation by examining the patient’s profile. The enabler service uses the Google Maps api to show the
patient’s location.
B. Comparison between LBS for Wandering Support
The enabler’s dynamic alerts are based on multiple factors
of user’s context (contacts companion, travelling, safety sense,
time, etc.), and indicate a noticeable advance respect to the reviewed related work, specially the nearest contact. Moreover,
the personalized security areas, the intelligent management of
contact to alarm, and the inconspicuous location monitoring imply a contribution to current LBS, as well as an advance to patient’s independence and autonomy support. Thus, a comparison
between reviewed solutions’ functionalities and the enabler’s
ones is shown in Table I. Furthermore, the enabler handles the
standards (SIP, PIDF, and GEOPRIV) that would enhance the
interoperability with other services.
C. Implementation and Performance
As previously mentioned, the enabler’s performance was assessed in every security area combined with the different steps
showed in the flowchart. Each use case was proved five times

42

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF ENABLER’S FUNCTIONS

V. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION

Enabler’s functions

% success

%False positive

% false negative

1.Automatic patient’s subscription
2. Users’ information processing
3.Find the Nearest Contact
4. Patient is accompanied
5. Panic Button Function
6. Security areas inference
7. Time Surveillance
8. Travelling detection
9. Confirm location in area 2
10. Sending location messaging
11. Intelligent Callback

96,11
86,92
75,97
52,70
100
94,05
92,71
70,98
75,00
75,21
80,00

3,05
11,67
-

3,89
12,25
23,20
44,19
5,06
7,29
19,02
25
24,79
20

TABLE III
ACTIONS TO ACTIVATE ENABLER’S FUNCTIONALITIES
Click actions
0
1
2
3

Enabler’s Functionalities Identifiers (see Section IV B)
a, b, c, d, f, g, h
k (Patient answers the call); i (Patient answers is safe)
e(Patient activates panic button and answers the call), i
(Patient answer is not safe and answer the call)
j & k (Contact opens message with patient’s location,
accesses to Google Maps link, and answers the call)

at least reaching up to 81 tests that were carried out in 21 h
approximately. The results are shown in Table II.
With the exception of patient companion and patient traveling
detection, every function has shown a success rate higher than
75%. As the GPS device sensor’s accuracy was 30 m and it
exceeds the companion threshold established (5 m), the patient
companion failed in a 47% of the total cases. Thus, the false
negative error rate reached up to 44% of the cases producing
false alarms when the patient was accompanied. Furthermore,
the GPS sensor accuracy affected the patient traveling function,
which worked in 70% of total cases. Besides, the 20% of cases
of intelligent callback did not succeeded when it was needed
due to problems experienced with GPS signal acquisition of
the third device (HTC Desire). Thus, the location information
was not included in the presence document. Consequently, the
enabler could not process user’s location and transference call
to second closest contact. It is expected by using other mobile
device with better performance the error would be reduced.
Regarding usability and technical issues, both patient and
contacts activated certain location-enabler’s functions by clicking between 0 and 3 times as Table III shows. Moreover, 16 tests
were run combining devices with different connections (WIFI
or 3G) and no difference was found in the enabler performance.
In addition, the IMS architecture rejects a corrupt XML documents and informs the client about the error by means of a SIP
message.
Finally, certain PwMCI’s requirements about LBS described
in Section II (no need for training, usability issues, low cost,
size of equipment, and avoiding the stigma of being tagged)
have been covered considering the use of current smartphones
and the results of the enabler’s performance.

Currently, the smartphones are supplying a new infrastructure
of mobiles devices and Internet services delivery. In a close
future, these devices will become naturally attached to all people
throughout their lives. Thanks to GPS capability of smartphones,
the LBS are poised to become in the next stage of mobility
innovation, and promote the user’s location as a significant value
for context-aware applications.
The location-awareness service enabler presented in this
study tries to face the common limitations of current LBS as interoperability, usability or position issues. Consequently, a comparison table has been introduced in the results section showing
the advantages of the location-awareness service enabler respect
to the reviewed LBS in related works. Thanks to the IMS architecture, challenges related to network interoperability can
be solved due to the benefits of seamless roaming that IMS
provides. Regarding the application interoperability, the use of
GEOPRIV offers a single interface guaranteeing that any application, which follows the standard, could use the enabler or integrate its functions. Thus, our server-side solution can be reused
by third-party applications allowing client developers to be able
to focus their effort in the application interface improving usability issues. Moreover, the enabler’s location accuracy exclusively
depends on the device’s location technique (GPS or Cell-ID)
since the enabler only need the location information under the
GEOPRIV standard to perform its functions. As the experiments
carried out has shown, the location-awareness enabler offers an
acceptable success rate in most of its functions. However, one
of the limitations of the study was the wrong performance of
the specific GPS sensor integrated in the HTC Desire device,
which did not allow obtaining a correct validation of intelligent
callback function. Besides, the accuracy of the device’s GPS
sensor affected strongly the enabler reliability in patient accompaniment and traveling detection functions. Nevertheless, the
accuracy of GPS sensors integrated in smartphones is expected
to be increased integrating technologies as A-GPS, GLONASS
or GALILEO. Thus, the performance of these particular functions will be improved diminishing the false negative rate.
By describing a new appusage related to security areas of
users registered in the architecture, a contribution to “contextaware” services deployed in IMS architecture has been achieved.
Thus, the service enabler adapts its alarm functions depending
on the user profile and the contextual information (i.e., geolocation) included in the user’s presence document. Besides, the new
appusage allows defining as much as security areas needed for
each usual place, where a PwMCI develop their daily activities.
The employment of IMS could improve the confidence of
patients and contacts on using the service and providing their
location information since the architecture is controlled by networks operators and older people normally are reluctant to adopt
new entities in their use of technology. Thus, by managing efficiently subscriber location data, the enabler places network
operators in the value-added role of service providers. To promote the use of the enabler, the network operators could provide
users with a free IMS client, which could connect automatically
to the IMS architecture. Furthermore, the patients will not even

MORENO et al.: DESIGN AND TECHNICAL EVALUATION OF AN ENHANCED LOCATION-AWARENESS SERVICE ENABLER

feel stigmatized by wearing a special aid as the location enabler
developed can be used through smartphones.
As future works, the enabler is foreseen to show contacts
the entire itinerary followed by a patient during a specified
period of time (24 h, a week, etc.). Besides, including a special
media server in the architecture, the enabler will be able to
establish video call between three or more users in case needed.
Finally, the developed service enabler could be used in other
scenarios since “hot-spots” definition allows providing users
with different services considering their geographical proximity
to a particular location.
REFERENCES
[1] (2013, Oct.). Ambient assisted living web page [Online]. Available:
http://www.aal-europe.eu
[2] J. M. Wigg, “Liberating the wanderers: Using technology to unlock doors
for those living with dementia,” Sociol. Health Illness, vol. 32, no. 2, pp.
288–303, Feb. 2010.
[3] M. A. Rowe, S. S. Vandeveer, C. A. Greenblum, C. N. List, R. M. Fernandez, N. E. Mixson, and H. C. Ahn, “Persons with dementia missing in the
community: Is it wandering or something unique?” BMC Geriatrics, vol.
11, no. 1, p. 28, 2011.
[4] R. Landau, G. K. Auslander, S. Werner, N. Shoval, and J. Heinik, “Families’ and professional caregivers’ views of using advanced technology to
track people with dementia,” Qualitative Health Res., vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
409–419, Feb. 2010.
[5] B. Richard, J. Winterbottom, and Y. M. Dawson, “Internet geolocation
and location-based services,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 4, pp.
102–108, Apr. 2011.
[6] B. Sadoun and O. Al-Bayari, “Location based services using geographical
information systems,” Comput. Commun., vol. 30, no. 16, pp. 3154–3160,
Nov. 2007.
[7] M. N. K. Boulos,, “Location-based health information services: A new
paradigm in personalised information delivery,” Int. J. Health Geograph.,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 2, Jan. 2003.
[8] F. Miskelly, “Electronic tracking of patients with dementia and wandering
using mobile phone technology,” Age Ageing, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 497–499,
May 2005.
[9] J. Wan, C. Byrne, G. M. O’Hare, and M. J. O’Grady, “Orange alerts:
Lessons from an outdoor case study,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Pervasive
Comput. Technol. Healthcare, 2011, pp. 446–451.
[10] S. Hossain, K. Hallenborg, and Y. Demazeau, “iRoute: Cognitive Support
for independent living using BDI agent deliberation,” in Trends in Practical Applications of Agents and Multiagent Systems, eds., Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2011, pp. 41–50.
[11] J. Hoey, X. Yang, E. Quintana, and J. Favela, “LaCasa: Location and
context-aware safety assistant,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput.
Technol. Healthcare, 2012, pp. 171–174.
[12] F. Sposaro, J. Danielson, and G. Tyson, “iWander: An android application
for dementia patients,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2010, pp. 3875–3878.
[13] Q. Lin, D. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Ni, and X. Zhou, “Detecting wandering
behavior based on GPS traces for elders with dementia,” in Proc. 12th Int.
Conf. Control Autom. Robot. Vis., 2012, pp. 672–677.
[14] L. Robinson, K. Brittain, S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, and P. Olivier, “Keeping
in touch everyday (KITE) project: Developing assistive technologies with
people with dementia and their carers to promote independence,” Int.
Psychogeriatrics, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 494–502, Feb. 2009.
[15] J. Vargas, “RFID application to control unauthorized egress of people
with spatial disorientation,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006, pp. 6392–6395.
[16] J. van Hoof, H. S. M. Kort, P. G. S. Rutten, and M. S. H. Duijnstee,
“Ageing-in-place with the use of ambient intelligence technology: Perspectives of older users,” Int. J. Med. Informat., vol. 80, no. 5, pp. 310–331,
May 2011.

43

[17] Ø. Dale, “Usability and usefulness of GPS based localization technology
used in dementia care,” in Computers Helping People With Special Needs,
eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 300–307.
[18] M. E. Barachi, A. Kadiwal, R. Glitho, F. Khendek, and R. Dssouli, “An
architecture for the provision of context-aware emergency services in the
IP multimedia subsystem,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., 2008, pp.
2784–2788.
[19] C. Baladrón, J. M. Aguiar, B. Carro, L. Calavia, A. Cadenas, and A.
Sánchez-Esguevillas, “Framework for intelligent service adaptation to
user’s context in next generation networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol.
50, no. 3, pp. 18–25, Mar. 2012.
[20] G. Camarillo and M.-A. Garcia-Martin, The 3G IP Multimedia Subsystem
(IMS): Merging the Internet and the Cellular Worlds. New York, NY,
USA: Wiley, 2011.
[21] H. Sugano, S. Fujimoto, G. Klyne, A. Bateman, W. Carr, and J. Peterson
“Presence information data format (PDIF),” IETF RFC 3863, 2004.
[22] R. Barnes, J. Winterbottom, and M. Dawson, “Internet geolocation and
location-based services,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 102–
108, Apr. 2011.
[23] S. H. Kim, W. U. Koh, J. H. Rhim, M. H. Karm, H. S. Yu, B. Y. Lee, J.
W. Shin, and J. G. Leem, “Preconsent video-assisted instruction improves
the comprehension and satisfaction in elderly patient visiting pain clinic,”
Korean J. Pain, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 254–257, 2012.
[24] (2013, Oct.). OpenIMSCore web page [Online]. Avaialble:
http://www.openimscore.org/
[25] (2013, Oct.). Mobicents presence server web page [Online]. Available:
http://www.mobicents.org/products.html last view
[26] (2013, Oct.). IMS Droid web page [Online]. Available:
https://code.google.com/p/imsdroid/ last view
Pedro A. Moreno received the degree in telecommunication engineering in 2007, the Master’s degree
in biomedical engineering in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in 2014 from Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
(UPM), Madrid, Spain.
He is currently a Researcher at the UPM. His
main expertise is in the field of ambient-assisted living services for older adults and their caregivers.
His current research focuses on the employment of
next-generation networks technologies for supporting older adults’ daily living.

M. Elena Hernando (M’02–SM’12) received the
Telecommunication Engineering and Ph.D. degrees
in 1990 and 1997, respectively, from the Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid (UPM), Madrid, Spain.
She is currently a Professor of biomedical engineering at the UPM. Her main expertise is in the
field of telemedicine services for chronic patients and
older adults. Her current research focuses on the development of services for promoting healthy lifestyle
and independence living of elderly.

Enrique J. Gómez (S’83–M’85–SM’06) received
the Telecommunication Eng. and Ph.D. degrees from
the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain, in
1985 and 1987, respectively. He is a Full Professor of
biomedical engineering at Universidad Politécnica de
Madrid (UPM), Madrid, Spain, the Head of TF and
Bioengineering Department, and the Director of MSc
in Biomedical Engineering at UPM. He has published
410 publications on scientific journals and conference
proceedings in related fields and directed 50 national
and international research projects. His research interests include the areas of active and healthy ageing, and rehabilitation of
patients with cognitive deficits.

