1552

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

A Study on Quality Assessment for Medical
Ultrasound Video Compressed via HEVC
Manzoor Razaak, Maria G. Martini, Senior Member, IEEE, and Ketty Savino

Abstract—The quality of experience and quality of service provided in the healthcare sector are critical in evaluating the reliable
delivery of the healthcare services provided. Medical images and
videos play a major role in modern e-health services and have
become an integral part of medical data communication systems.
The quality evaluation of medical images and videos is an essential
process, and one of the ways of addressing it is via the use of quality metrics. In this paper, we evaluate the performance of seven
state-of-the-art video quality metrics with respect to compressed
medical ultrasound video sequences. We study the performance
of each video quality metric in representing the diagnostic quality
of the video, by evaluating the correlation of each metric with the
subjective opinions of medical experts. The results indicate that the
visual information fidelity, structural similarity index, and universal quality index metrics show good correlation with the subjective
scores provided by medical experts. The tests also investigate the
performance of the emerging video compression standard, highefficiency video coding-HEVC, for medical ultrasound video compression. The results show that, using HEVC with the considered
ultrasound video sequences, a diagnostically reliable compressed
ultrasound video can be obtained for compression with values of
the quantization parameter up to 35.
Index Terms—High-efficiency video coding (HEVC), medical
ultrasound video, medical video quality evaluation, objective
and subjective video quality assessment, service science, video
compression.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT advancements in communication systems have
enabled innovative telemedicine services like remote patient monitoring and diagnosis, medical video conferencing,
long-distance consultations, live surgery broadcast for educational purposes, ambient assisted living for old and cognitive
impaired people, etc. Further, the amalgamation of healthcare
services with various other disciplines like engineering, information technology, and business management has converted
healthcare into a major service sector in the modern world.
Hence, the application of service science in e-health can facilitate more efficient and reliable delivery of healthcare services.
In addition to the advancements in communication technologies, the emergence of advanced image and video compression

R

Manuscript received December 4, 2013; revised May 10, 2014; accepted May
13, 2014. Date of publication May 30, 2014; date of current version September
2, 2014. This work was supported by the European Union 7th Framework
Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under Grant 288502 (CONCERTO).
M. Razaak and M. G. Martini are with the Wireless and Multimedia Networking Research Group, Kingston University, London KT1 2EE, U.K. (e-mail:
m.razaak@kingston.ac.uk; m.martini@kingston.ac.uk).
K. Savino is with the University Hospital of Perugia, 06100 Perugia, Italy
(e-mail: kettysavino@hotmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2326891

standards has enabled efficient storage of medical images and
videos. However, the growth rate in data storage and communication technologies is still lower than the rate of increase in
demand for storage and transmission of medical data, in particular medical images and videos. Also, bandwidth is a precious
resource in communication systems and compression is often
needed before transmission, in particular over wireless systems
[1], [2]. Hence, compressing images and videos is still a requirement for most applications and services, and the effect
of compression and transmission is often a reduced quality.
Therefore, it is essential that the quality of the medical images
and videos received is monitored via image quality assessment
(IQA) and video quality assessment (VQA) techniques, in order
to facilitate, along with quality evaluation, also the design of
future medical multimedia services and applications [3], [4].
The quality evaluation of medical videos is particularly challenging, because most objective video quality metrics (VQMs)
are essentially based on the principle of measuring the visual
quality of the video. An impairment on video may result in loss
of information of diagnostic importance a medical and the objective metrics which primarily measure the visual quality of a
video may not give a reliable measure of the diagnostic accuracy
of the impaired medical video. Hence, it is important that the
VQMs used are tested for their reliability in approximating the
diagnostic quality.
In this paper, we delve into the topic of VQA in the context of
medical ultrasound videos, extending the work presented in [5],
where an insight into the VQA topic in the context of medical
videos is given. Video quality evaluation techniques are mainly
classified into objective and subjective methods. In subjective
VQA methods, subjects rate the quality of the video based on
their perception, whereas in objective VQA mathematical algorithms are employed to numerically represent the quality of the
video. In many cases, the objective VQA method is preferred
for quality evaluation since it is impractical to always assess
the video quality via subjects. However, subjective VQA better
represents the actual quality of experience and is also useful to
assess the performance of the objective VQA metrics [6]. An
efficient objective quality metric is expected to correlate well
with the subjective scores, since a good correlation is an indication of the metric’s reliability in representing the quality of the
video.
Subjective quality methodologies are widely used in the literature for validating objective quality metrics and for designing
and validating assessment models. For instance, in [7], an index to measure the decrease in diagnostic content of compressed
echocardiograms was developed based on the inputs from cardiologists. Nouri et al. [8] recommended acceptable compression

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

RAZAAK et al.: A STUDY ON QUALITY ASSESSMENT FOR MEDICAL ULTRASOUND VIDEO COMPRESSED VIA HEVC

ratios using MPEG-2 for surgical videos. Very few works in the
literature have focused on evaluating the performance of stateof-the-art objective VQMs in the context of medical videos,
in particular medical ultrasound videos. The works in [9]–[11]
have considered VQA of compressed medical videos. However,
the presented tests employed a limited number of videos and
VQMs and did not consider many popular state-of-the-art VQA
metrics. In this work, we try to fill the gap in the literature on the
evaluation of VQA metrics for medical ultrasound videos. Our
work considers seven state-of-the-art objective VQMs and tests
their performance in giving a reliable approximation of diagnostic accuracy on ultrasound video sequences. Further, we also
evaluate the compression performance of the high-efficiency
video coding (HEVC) standard for medical ultrasound videos.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an introduction to the medical video quality evaluation topic. Section
III describes the experimental setup, followed by discussion of
results in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. QUALITY EVALUATION FOR MEDICAL IMAGES AND VIDEOS
In medical VQA, both Objective and Subjective VQA methods are widely used. A brief overview of these methods is given
below.
A. Objective VQA
Over the years, several objective VQMs have been developed. Different metrics have employed different approaches for
the computation of video quality. The evolution of objective
VQMs can be broadly classified into two categories: Statistical
measures and human visual system (HVS) measures.
1) Statistical Measures: Most of the early objective metrics
are based on statistical measures of one or more specific
features of the video pixel information. For instance, one
of the most popular metrics, peak signal-to-noise ratio
(PSNR), measures the signal-to-noise ratio, wherein signal is the original video and noise is the mean square error
(MSE) between the original and distorted video. Similarly, the Moran peak ratio metric measures the spatial
correlation in the video, and the spatial frequency measurement metric computes the video quality as a measure
of row and column pixel difference [12]. In spite of low
complexity computation, these metrics at some occasions
show low correlation with the perceptual quality of the
video. To improve the performance, the more recent quality metrics were developed by considering the impact of
video features on the HVS.
2) HVS Measures: In the last decade, several metrics were
developed based on the response of the HVS to particular image and video features. One of the landmark IQA
metrics developed is the structural similarity index metric
(SSIM). SSIM measures the structural similarity between
the reference and impaired videos by means of luminance,
contrast, and structural comparison. The philosophy behind SSIM is to represent video quality degradation as a
measure of the changes in the structural information [13].
Other metrics like visual signal-to-noise ratio (VSNR),

1553

visual information fidelity (VIF) were also developed on
models based on the response of the HVS [14]. The metrics developed using the HVS approach showed better correlations with the perceptual quality of the video. This advantage was further exploited by researchers which eventually led to the increased adoption of HVS measures in
developing metrics for VQA.
Objective quality metrics may not always ensure the diagnostic quality of the medical video. Hence, an effective way to
evaluate the diagnostic quality of medical video is via the opinion of a medical expert. This is referred as subjective quality
evaluation.
B. Subjective VQA
In subjective quality assessment, medical experts give their
opinions on the videos based on the perceptual quality and
the diagnostic information preserved in the processed video.
Subjective VQA methods involve obtaining the mean opinion
score (MOS). To obtain the MOS, subjects are presented with
a randomized set of videos and are asked to rate the quality of
the videos on a given scale. The ratings obtained from all the
subjects are collected and their mean results in the MOS. Several techniques for subjective quality measurements are recommended by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU),
for instance, single stimulus continuous quality scale, absolute
category rating, double stimulus impairment scale, double stimulus continuous quality scale (DSCQS) [15].
In practical terms, the method of subjective VQA is not always feasible. Moreover, subjective VQA is often an inconsistent and lengthy procedure. On the other hand, objective VQA
is a quicker and an easier methodology; however, its reliability must be tested. Therefore, it is important to evaluate the
performance of objective VQA, in terms of its ability to give
a better approximation of the diagnostic accuracy of the processed video. One effective method to evaluate the performance
of objective VQA is to assess its correlation with the subjective
scores, a method which is explored in this paper.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Video Sequences
The performance of the objective VQA metrics was evaluated
on nine original medical ultrasound videos, each compressed at
eight different quality levels, with a frame resolution of 640 ×
416. Each video sequence has 100 frames, and a frame rate of
25 frames/s. Of the nine ultrasound videos, three videos are
related to the heart and liver each, two for kidney, and one
video is related to the lung. An example frame and a detailed
description of each medical video sequence used in the tests is
shown in Fig. 1.
To obtain the distorted video sequences, the medical videos
were compressed using the emerging video compression standard, HEVC. HEVC is the successor to the widely popular
H.264/AVC video compression standard. HEVC gives a 50%
higher compression than the H.264 standard for the same visual
quality [20].

1554

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. Example frame of each of the sequences used in the tests. (a) Echocardiography in four chambers view. The Right ventricle is dilated. (b) Echocardiography:
Subcostal view displaying the liver and the inferior vena cava. (c) Renal ultrasound: Cortical and medullary view. (d) Echocardiography: Parasternal long axis
view, displaying left atrium and ventricle, aorta and mitral valves. (e) Echocardiography: Subcostal view displaying the liver, the inferior vena cava and hepatic
veins. (f) Echocardiography in four chambers view: both atria and ventricles are visualized. (g) Echocardiography in subcostal view: Liver and hepatic veins are
visualized. (h) Renal ultrasound: Cortical and medullary view. (i) Ultrasonography of the lungs. Normal lung, no edema.

TABLE I
OBJECTIVE IMAGE QUALITY METRICS USED IN THE TESTS
Objective Image Quality Metrics

Defining Equation


PSNR
SSIM [13]
universal quality index (UQI) [16]
VQM [17]
noise quality metric (NQM) [18]
visual information fidelity (VIF) [19]
VSNR [14]

P S N R = 20 ∗ log 1 0

√

255

Features considered



M SE
(2μ x μ y + C 1 )(2σ x y + C 2 )
SSIM =
(μ 2x + μ 2y + C 1 )(σ x2 + σ y2 + C 2 )
4σ x y μ x μ y
Q=
(σ x2 + σ y2 )(μ 2x + μ 2y )

(1)

Gives ratio of signal over the noise, where the noise is represented in terms of
mean square error (MSE).

(2)

Measures the structural similarity between two images. The constant values are
chosen to be C 1 = 0.01, C 2 = 0.03.

Measures the structural distortion and gives good approximation of perceived
distortion.
A standardized metric developed by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, USA. VQM is also recommended by
ITU and is widely adopted. VQM measures the quality based on seven different parameters. The software is freely available at [17].
NQM is a weighted SNR measure between the original and the processed image. NQM considers variation in contrast sensitivity, local
luminance mean, and contrast measures.
The images are decomposed into wavelets and computation is done using several models which gives a measure of the visual quality.
Contrast thresholds are used to identify distortions. The distortions above the threshold are modeled to represent measure the image quality.

The compression of the sequences was done at eight different quantization parameter (QP) levels using the HM reference
software provided by the Joint Collaborative Team on Video
Coding [21]. The QP values chosen were 27, 29, 31, 33, 35, 37,
39, and 41. As the QP value increases, the compression ratio
increases, which in turn leads to lower quality videos. Four out
of the eight QP values [i.e., QP = 31, 35, 37, and 41] were
chosen as per the testing recommendations of the Video Quality
Experts Group [22]. In the tests, we used then 72 impaired medical video sequences i.e., nine video sequences, compressed at
eight different QPs.

B. Subjective Test
The compressed video sequences were subjectively evaluated
for the visual and diagnostic quality by both medical experts
and non-medical experts who provided their opinion scores on

(3)

a scale of a specified range. The subjective evaluation was done
using the DSCQS-type II, which is one of the methodologies recommended by the ITU in the document ITU-R BT.500-11 [15].
The DSCQS method is adopted in our tests because in this
method the subjective scores are less sensitive to the context,
i.e., the ordering and the level of impaired sequences has less
influence on the subjective ratings [23]. The DSCQS method is
widely used in medical video subjective quality evaluation, for
instance in [8], [24], and [25].
The DSCQS methodology uses a just noticeable difference
approach, in which the medical expert is presented with two
videos side by side, typically the original and a processed video.
The subject is asked to rank both the videos. One of the sequences is the reference video, i.e., unimpaired video, whereas
the other sequence is impaired. The subject is asked to rate both
the sequences on two separate scales of 1 to 5, where 1 corresponds to the lowest and 5 to the highest quality. The subject

RAZAAK et al.: A STUDY ON QUALITY ASSESSMENT FOR MEDICAL ULTRASOUND VIDEO COMPRESSED VIA HEVC

is unaware of which one is the reference video (the reference
video is displayed randomly either at the left- or at the right-end
side). In our tests, the video sequences were displayed on a liquid crystal display monitor. The original resolution of the videos
was maintained for display in order to avoid any distortions due
to scaling. For tests with medical specialists, the evaluation was
performed in a room which the specialists use to visualize video
sequences and perform diagnosis accordingly. For tests with
non-expert viewers, the light conditions in the room were those
suggested in ITU recommendation [26].
The video sequences were separated in two batches. The
subjects were allowed to take a break between the two batches,
so that fatigue could not affect their judgment. Prior to the
actual tests, the subjects underwent a short training session to
familiarize with the testing process. During the actual tests, if
the subjects were not able to judge the quality of the video in
the first viewing, they were provided with an option to play the
video sequence again, until they were confident of providing a
score. The Moscow State University perceptual quality tool [27]
was used to document the score obtained in the subjective study.
The ratings obtained were then used to get the mean scores and
other desired statistics.

C. Subjective Scores
The subjective evaluation was done by four medical experts
and 16 viewers without medical expertise. The experts rated the
video sequences for their diagnostic quality, whereas the nonexperts are more likely to rate based on the visual quality. In
the DSCQS method, for each video sequence, two ratings were
obtained. One of the scores corresponds to the reference video
and the other to the impaired video. If Ref i,j is the rating given
to the reference sequence of the j th video by subject i, and IQi,j
is the rating given to the impaired sequence of the j th video by
subject i, then the differential opinion score (DOS) for the j th
video by the subject i is given by
DOSi,j = Ref i,j − IQi,j .

(4)

The DOSi,j for each video j is obtained for i = 1, 2, ..., N
subjects. The scores of all the subjects were tested for reliability
and inter-observer variability via the subject rejection procedure
mentioned in [15]. The screening procedure methodology is
based on determining the normal distribution of the scores by
computing the Kurtosis coefficient of the scores. The scores are
accepted if the Kurtosis value of the scores is between 2 and 4.
If the standard deviation of the subject’s scores falls outside
the 95% confidence interval range from the mean score, then
it accounts for large inter-observer variability and makes the
scores unreliable, subsequently resulting in the rejection of the
subject’s scores. In our tests, out of the 16 non-expert subjects,
the scores of one subject were rejected since they were out
of the expected confidence interval range. None of the expert
scores got rejected in the screening procedure. The accepted
DOSi,j scores were further used to obtain the mean score, i.e.,
the differential mean opinion score (DMOS) for video sequence

1555

j, given by
DMOSj =

N


DOSi,j .

(5)

i=1

D. Performance Evaluation Tests
To test the performance of a given objective VQA metric,
the correlation of the objective metric with the DMOS is evaluated. A higher correlation would imply that the given objective
metric correlates well with the subjective quality and hence is
more reliable. Therefore, a correlation analysis between the objective VQA metrics and the DMOS is carried out according to
the methodology recommended in [28]. The objective VQA
metrics used in our tests are tabulated in Table I.
The correlation between the objective and subjective scores
is evaluated using the Pearson linear correlation coefficient
(PLCC) and the Spearman rank order correlation coefficient
(SROCC). We obtain the correlation with the expert DMOS
and then with the nonexpert DMOS, and finally with the combined scores of both experts and nonexperts. Further, a nonlinear
regression analysis using a four-parameter logistic function is
performed on the objective metrics in order to improve prediction accuracy and correlation with the DMOS [6]. The fourparameter logistic function is described in (6)


IQj = β2 +

β1 − β2
  I Q j −β 3  .
1 + exp −
|β 4 |

(6)

The β values are obtained by implementing (6) using the

nlinfit tool in MATLAB. The fitted objective values IQj are
tested for their correlation with DMOS using the PLCC method.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Results
Table II reports the correlation of objective VQA metrics with
the subjective scores of experts, nonexperts, and all subjects,
respectively, with the top performing metric in each correlation
test highlighted. In each subtable, the first two rows present
the PLCC measures of the objective metrics with the DMOS
for all video sequences before and after nonlinear regression
analysis. It can be noted that the correlation improves slightly
after nonlinear regression analysis. The third row reports the
SROCC measure after nonlinear regression analysis, a measure
of the monotonicity of the prediction.
Fig. 4 shows the scatter plots of the expert DMOS against each
objective VQA metric considered in the work. The plots show
the performance of each metric with respect to the subjective
scores of the expert. Further, the plots are logistic fitted with the
data to give a better approximation of the metric performance.
Fig. 2 shows the scatter plot of the metrics SSIM, VIF, and
universal quality index (UQI) versus DMOS for both the expert
and nonexpert scores. Fig. 3 shows the variation of DMOS
across the QP values for all the nine sequences considered in
the tests.

1556

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE II
PLCC AND SROCC OF THE OBJECTIVE SCORES WITH THE DMOS SCORES
State of the art objective metrics

Experts

Nonexperts

Experts and Nonexperts combined

CC

SSIM

VSNR

VIF

UQI

PSNR

VQM

NQM

PLCC
P LC CN li n
SROCC
PLCC
P LC CN li n
SROCC
PLCC
P LC CN li n
SROCC

0.9264
0.9366
0.9375
0.9208
0.9279
0.9383
0.9350
0.9427
0.9570

0.8925
0.9150
0.9139
0.8888
0.9200
0.9277
0.9022
0.9321
0.9456

0.9258
0.9417
0.9382
0.9431
0.9688
0.9663
0.9532
0.9770
0.9801

0.9292
0.9309
0.9251
0.9521
0.9521
0.9495
0.9612
0.9612
0.9633

0.9109
0.9261
0.9331
0.8896
0.9116
0.9280
0.9064
0.9272
0.9475

0.8080
0.8309
0.8368
0.8146
0.8440
0.8606
0.8249
0.8532
0.8789

0.8961
0.9127
0.9090
0.9233
0.9435
0.9464
0.9312
0.9510
0.9587

The first two rows of each category report PLCC results before and after nonlinear regression. The third row reports the SROCC results.

Fig. 2. Scatter plots of DMOS versus VQA metrics along with logistic fit for both expert and nonexpert scores. Blue ”+” markers indicate expert scores, and red
diamonds indicate nonexpert scores. (a) DMOS versus SSIM, (b) DMOS versus VIF, and (c) DMOS versus UQI.

Fig. 3. Variation of DMOS across different QP values. The nine curves represent the nine sequences used in the tests.

B. Discussion of Results
From Table II, it can be seen that the metrics VIF, UQI, and
SSIM show the highest correlations with the DMOS scores of
the experts. The performance of the metrics is further illustrated
in Fig. 4. However, the correlation results of nonexpert scores
slightly vary. The metric NQM shows a better correlation than
the SSIM metric for non-expert scores. The variation in the

logistic fit between the nonexpert and expert scores can be seen
in Fig. 2. For the overall scores, i.e., when both expert and
nonexpert scores are considered, UQI, VIF, and SSIM show the
highest correlations.
The correlation results from our tests indicate that the metrics VIF, UQI, and SSIM consistently show good correlations
with both expert and non-expert scores. To further interpret the
results, it can be inferred that these metrics provide a reliable assessment of both diagnostic and visual quality. The video quality
metric (VQM) metric shows the lowest correlation amongst the
metrics considered.
Fig. 3 shows the variation in the DMOS values across the
QP range of 27 to 41. As the value of the QP increases, there
is also an increase in the DMOS values, which indicates the
degradation in the video quality as perceived by the subject.
From the plot, it can be seen that considerable degradation in the
video quality for most sequences approximately starts around
QP = 35. In our tests, it was observed that HEVC is able to
compress diagnostically reliable ultrasound videos with low bitrate requirements. This implies that a high compression ratio
without a compromise on the video quality can be obtained for
medical videos using the HEVC standard.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have evaluated the performance of stateof-the-art VQA metrics for medical ultrasound videos. The

RAZAAK et al.: A STUDY ON QUALITY ASSESSMENT FOR MEDICAL ULTRASOUND VIDEO COMPRESSED VIA HEVC

1557

Fig. 4. Scatter plots of DMOS of experts versus VQA metrics along with logistic fit. (a) DMOS versus SSIM, (b) DMOS versus PSNR, (c) DMOS versus VSNR,
(d) DMOS versus VIF, (e) DMOS versus UQI, (f) DMOS versus VQM, and (g) DMOS versus NQM.

1558

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

correlation of the objective VQA metrics with the subjective
scores of both experts and nonexperts is used as a measure to
indicate the efficiency of the VQA metrics in predicting the diagnostic as well as the visual quality of the processed video. The
results showed that VIF, UQI, and SSIM are the best metrics for
medical ultrasound video quality evaluation among the considered metrics in this paper. Further, our tests showed that HEVC
can compress the considered medical ultrasound videos at low
bitrates without compromising on the diagnostic accuracy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would also like to thank the cardiologists at the
University Hospital of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, in particular Dr.
E. Bordoni and Dr. C. Riccini.
REFERENCES
[1] M. G. Martini, R. S. Istepanian, M. Mazzotti, and N. Y. Philip, “Robust
multilayer control for enhanced wireless telemedical video streaming,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 5–16, Jan. 2010.
[2] R. S. Istepanian, N. Y. Philip, and M. G. Martini, “Medical QoS provision
based on reinforcement learning in ultrasound streaming over 3.5 G wireless systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 566–574,
May 2009.
[3] M. G. Martini and M. Mazzotti, “Quality driven wireless video transmission for medical applications,” in Proc. 28th Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 3254–3257.
[4] M. G. Martini, “Wireless broadband multimedia health services: Current
status and emerging concepts,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Symp. Personal,
Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Nantes, France, Sep. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[5] M. Razaak and M. G. Martini, “Medical image and video quality assessment in e-health applications and services,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Conf.
e-Health Netw., Appl. Serv., Lisbon, Portugal, Oct. 2013, pp. 6–10.
[6] K. Brunnstrom, D. Hands, F. Speranza, and A. Webster, “VQEG validation
and ITU standardization of objective perceptual video quality metrics
[standards in a nutshell],” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 96–101, May 2009.
[7] A. Alesanco, C. Hernandez, A. Portoles, L. Ramos, C. Aured, M. Garcı́a,
P. Serrano, and J. Garcı́a, “A clinical distortion index for compressed
echocardiogram evaluation: Recommendations for Xvid codec,” Physiol.
Meas., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 429–440, 2009.
[8] N. Nouri, D. Abraham, J. Moureaux, M. Dufaut, J. Hubert, and M. Perez,
“Subjective MPEG2 compressed video quality assessment: Application
to tele-surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano Macro,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Apr. 2010, pp. 764–767.
[9] A. Kumcu, L. Platiša, B. Goossens, and W. Philips, “Subjective and objective quality evaluation of compressed medical video sequences,” presented
at the 3rd Int. Workshop Quality Multimedia Experience, Mechelen,
Belgium, 2011.
[10] B. Tulu and S. Chatterjee, “Internet-based telemedicine: An empirical
investigation of objective and subjective video quality,” Decis. Support
Syst., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 681–696, 2008.
[11] E. Cavero, A. Alesanco, L. Castro, J. Montoya, I. Lacambra, and J. Garcia, “SPIHT-based echocardiogram compression: Clinical evaluation and
recommendations of use,” IEEE J. Biomed. Heath. Informat., vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 103–112, Jan. 2013.
[12] C. Delgorge, C. Rosenberger, G. Poisson, and P. Vieyres, “Towards a new
tool for the evaluation of the quality of ultrasound compressed images,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 1502–1509, Nov. 2006.
[13] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality
assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, Apr. 2004.
[14] D. M. Chandler and S. S. Hemami, “VSNR: A wavelet-based visual signalto-noise ratio for natural images,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 16,
no. 9, pp. 2284–2298, Sep. 2007.
[15] ITU-R BT, Recommendation, “500-11, Methodology for the subjective
assessment of the quality of television pictures,” Int. Telecommun. Union,
Geneva, Switzerland, Tech. Rep. BT.500-11, 2002.
[16] Z. Wang and A. C. Bovik, “A universal image quality index,” IEEE Signal
Process. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 81–84, Mar. 2002.

[17] M. H. Pinson and S. Wolf, “A new standardized method for objectively measuring video quality,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 50, no. 3,
pp. 312–322, Sep. 2004.
[18] N. Damera-Venkata, T. D. Kite, W. S. Geisler, B. L. Evans, and A. C.
Bovik, “Image quality assessment based on a degradation model,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 636–650, Apr. 2000.
[19] Y. Han, Y. Cai, Y. Cao, and X. Xu, “A new image fusion performance
metric based on visual information fidelity,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 14, pp. 127–
135, 2013.
[20] G. J. Sullivan, J. Ohm, W.-J. Han, and T. Wiegand, “Overview of the high
efficiency video coding (HEVC) standard,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1649–1668, Dec. 2012.
[21] JCT-VC. (2013). High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC). [Online]. Available: http://hevc.hhi.fraunhofer.de/
[22] J. Ohm, G. J. Sullivan, H. Schwarz, T. K. Tan, and T. Wiegand, “Comparison of the coding efficiency of video coding standards—Including
high efficiency video coding (HEVC),” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1669–1684, Dec. 2012.
[23] M. H. Pinson and S. Wolf, “Comparing subjective video quality testing
methodologies,” SPIE Vis. Commun. Image Process., vol 5150, pp. 573–
582, 2003.
[24] H. Yu, Z. Lin, and F. Pan, “Applications and improvement of H.264 in
medical video compression,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 52, no. 12,
pp. 2707–2716, Dec. 2005.
[25] Y. Shima, A. Suwa, Y. Gomi, H. Nogawa, H. Nagata, and H. Tanaka,
“Qualitative and quantitative assessment of video transmitted by DVTS
(digital video transport system) in surgical telemedicine,” J. Telemed.
Telecare, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 148–153, 2007.
[26] Subjective Video Quality Assessment Methods for Multimedia Applications, ITU-T Recommendation, P.910, 2008.
[27] MSU. (2013). MSU perceptual video quality tool. [Online]. Available:
http://compression.ru/video/quality_measure/perceptual_video_quality
[28] K. Seshadrinathan, R. Soundararajan, A. C. Bovik, and L. K. Cormack,
“Study of subjective and objective quality assessment of video,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1427–1441, Jun. 2010.

Manzoor Razaak received the B.E. degree in electronics and communication engineering from the
Sambhram Institute of Technology, Bangalore, India,
in 2010, and the M.Sc. degree in embedded systems
from Kingston University, London, U.K, where he
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the
Wireless Multimedia Networking Research Group.
His research interests include medical image and
video processing and compression, medical video
quality assessment, and video transmission over wireless networks.

Maria Martini received the Laurea degree (summa
cum laude) in electronic engineering from the University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, in 1998, and the Ph.D.
degree in electronics and computer science from the
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, in 2002.
She is currently a Reader (Associate Professor) in
the Faculty of Science, Engineering, and Computing,
Kingston University, London, U.K., where she also
leads the Wireless Multimedia Networking Research
Group and is the Course Director for the M.Sc. degree
in “Networking and Data Communications.” Her research interests include quality of experience for wireless multimedia networks,
cross-layer design, joint source and channel coding, 2-D/3-D error resilient
video, 2-D/3-D video quality assessment, and medical applications. She is the
author of more than 90 international scientific articles and book chapters, and
the inventor of several patents on wireless video.

RAZAAK et al.: A STUDY ON QUALITY ASSESSMENT FOR MEDICAL ULTRASOUND VIDEO COMPRESSED VIA HEVC

Dr. Martini has led the KU team in a number of national and international research projects, funded by the European Commission, U.K. research councils,
and international industries. She is a Guest Editor and Reviewer for international journals and she has been in the organizing and programme committee of
several international conferences. An Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA (2014–2016), she has also been the Lead Guest Editor
for the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS special issue
on “QoE-aware wireless multimedia systems” and a Guest Editor for the IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics and the International Journal on
Telemedicine and Applications among others. She was the General Chair of the
ICST/ACM MOBIMEDIA 2009 conference and EUMOB 2008. She has coorganized the First and Second IEEE International Workshop on Service Science
for e-Health (SSH 2013 and 2014), the First Workshop on Wireless Solutions
for Healthcare Applications (2014), the IEEE Workshop on Streaming and Media Communications (ICME 2011), and the First International Workshop on
Cross-Layer Operation Aided Multimedia Streaming (IEEE VTC 2011). She
coordinated (2008–2010) the edition of the Strategic Applications Agenda on
mobile health and inclusion applications in the eMobility European Technology
Platform. She is part of international committees and expert groups, including
the IEEE Multimedia Communications Technical Committee, where she serves
as the Chair (2012–2014) of the 3-D Rendering, Processing, and Communications Interest Group and has been a key Member for QoE and multimedia
streaming, and the Net!Works European Technology Platform Expert Group.

1559

Ketty Savino received the Laurea degree in medicine
and surgery (summa cum laude) from the University
of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, in 1983, and she specialized in cardiology in 1988.
She is the Director of the “Non-invasive Cardiovascular Diagnostics” Department, Hospital of Perugia, Perugia, and an Assistant Professor in Cardiology and Cardiovascular Physiopathology at the
University of Perugia. She has published more than
100 articles in national and international journals and
three books.
Prof. Savino has been part of several national technical committees, including the committees on Training and on Quality and Accreditation of the Italian
Society of Cardiovascular Ultrasound. She has been a Member of the Board of
the Italian Society of Cardiovascular Ultrasound since 2013.

