IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

2779

Toward Microendoscopic Electrical Impedance
Tomography for Intraoperative Surgical
Margin Assessment
Ryan J. Halter∗ , Member, IEEE, and Young-Joong Kim

Abstract—No clinical protocols are routinely used to intraoperatively assess surgical margin status during prostate surgery.
Instead, margins are evaluated through pathological assessment
of the prostate following radical prostatectomy, when it is too late
to provide additional surgical intervention. An intraoperative device potentially capable of assessing surgical margin status based
on the electrical property contrast between benign and malignant prostate tissue has been developed. Specifically, a microendoscopic electrical impedance tomography (EIT) probe has been
constructed to sense and image, at near millimeter resolution, the
conductivity contrast within heterogeneous biological tissues with
the goal of providing surgeons with real-time assessment of margin
pathologies. This device consists of a ring of eight 0.6-mm diameter
electrodes embedded in a 5-mm diameter probe tip to enable access
through a 12-mm laparoscopic port. Experiments were performed
to evaluate the volume of tissue sensed by the probe. The probe
was also tested with inclusions in gelatin, as well as on a sample of
porcine tissue with clearly defined regions of adipose and muscle.
The probe’s area of sensitivity consists of a circular area of 9.1 mm2
and the maximum depth of sensitivity is approximately 1.5 mm.
The probe is able to distinguish between high contrast muscle and
adipose tissue on a sub-mm scale (500 μm). These preliminary
results suggest that EIT is possible in a probe designed to fit within
a 12-mm laparoscopic access port.
Index Terms—Electrical impedance tomography (EIT), prostate
cancer, radical prostatectomy (RP), surgical margin assessment.

I. INTRODUCTION
ROSTATE cancer is the most diagnosed form of cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer-related death in men. In
2014, 27% (233 000 men) of all diagnosed cancers are expected
to be within the prostate and approximately 29 480 men are
expected to die as a result of the disease [1]. The detection
of prostate cancer has matured since prostate specific antigen
(PSA)-testing began and as a result, the PSA-era in the United
States has witnessed the number of prostate cancers diagnosed
increase from 96.1 to 177.8 per 100 000 men since 1974 [2] with
a larger portion of these men having localized disease. This has

P

Manuscript received March 19, 2014; revised May 7, 2014; accepted June
2, 2014. Date of publication June 6, 2014; date of current version October
16, 2014. This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Institutes of
Health under Grant 1R01CA143020–01A1 and Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ R. J. Halter is with the Thayer School of Engineering and Geisel
School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755 USA (e-mail:
ryan.j.halter@dartmouth.edu).
Y.-J. Kim was with the Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755 USA. He is
now with Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 USA (e-mail: yk91@duke.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at link http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2329461

lead to a significant increase in the number of men undergoing
radical curative therapies to address their disease with the CDC
reporting that approximately 138 000 radical prostatectomies
were performed in the USA in 2010 [3].
Radical prostatectomy (RP) aims to remove the prostate from
the body with the objective of eradicating all cancer cells, maintaining urinary continence, and preserving erectile function. Following a routine RP, the prostate is pathologically assessed for
tumor size, Gleason grade (level of tumor differentiation), extracapsular extension (ECE), seminal vesicle (SV) or vas deferens
(VD) involvement, and positive surgical margins (PSMs). Patients with ECE and/or PSMs may be offered an immediate
adjuvant therapy in the form of hormones and/or external beam
radiation. If the pathological prognosis is good, these patients
will have their PSA levels routinely monitored. Patients with
biochemical recurrence, as indicated by high levels of PSA, are
either put on watchful waiting or active surveillance strategies
or offered salvage therapies of external beam radiation and/or
hormonal therapy. These adjuvant or salvage therapies have adverse side-effects including proctitis, cystitis, irritable bowel
syndrome, intermittent rectal bleeding, bladder irritability, and
intermittent gross hematuria in the case of radiotherapy, and
osteoporosis, hot flashes, sexual dysfunction, cognitive impairment, changes in body habitus, gynecomastia, and anemia in
the case of hormonal therapy [4]. If all cancer cells are removed
during RP, men have a high probability of a long disease-free
survival and a low probability of biochemical recurrence, and as
a result are not subjected to these noxious adjuvant and salvage
therapies.
Patients with PSMs have a significantly increased risk of
disease recurrence [5]–[7]. In one study, 18% of 3,478 men undergoing RP experienced cancer progression with ten-year biochemical progression-free survival estimates of 68%; patients
with PSMs and ECE had a ten-year progression-free survival of
only 53% [5]. Another group reported that 34% of patients with
PSMs developed biochemical recurrence, while only 7.8% of
those with negative surgical margins (NSMs) recurred; ten-year
biochemical disease free survival for patients with PSMs was
59.9%, and for those with NSMs was 89.6% [6]. Similarly, in
a large study of 5,831 men treated with RP, it was found that
patients with PSMs had significantly higher progression rates
than those with NSMs (36.1% versus 70.1% at ten years) [7]. In
addition, when combined with other risk factors including ECE,
SVI, lymph node involvement, pathological Gleason grade, and
preoperative PSA, surgical margin status was still found to be
an independent risk factor for biochemical recurrence [7].

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. a) Conceptualized configuration of how a microendoscopic EIT
probe will be incorporated into a laparoscopic procedure. Multiple port sizes
(7–12 mm) are often available for laparoscopic procedures depending on what
laparoscopic tools are required for a specific procedure. b) Abdominal surgical environment and port placement during a RALP. The EIT probe would be
introduced through the 12-mm diameter auxiliary port. Image acquired from a
RALP procedure at Dartmouth–Hitchcock Medical Center.

Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) gauges frequencydependent electrical properties of tissue by applying small
(<1 mA) alternating currents between two electrodes while
recording resultant voltages forming across two other electrodes. The voltage-to-current ratio defines the electrical
impedance, a function of tissue architecture that has been used
to distinguish between normal and pathologic tissues in a variety
of organs including cervix [8]–[11], breast [12]–[14], skin [15],
[16], and bladder [17], [18]. Significantly different electrical
property signatures have also been reported between malignant
and benign prostate [19]–[22]. These differences have been reported over the range of 100 Hz–1 MHz; additionally, parameterized spectral impedance parameters (derived from Cole-based
parameterization [23]) have exhibited even more contrast with
higher clinical metrics of sensitivity and specificity (approaching 70% and 81.5%, respectively) [21]. Electrical impedance
tomography (EIT) is a method that uses EIS measurements
across different sets of electrodes arranged in a known geometry in order to generate an image of the electrical properties of
the tissue. If EIT could be intraoperatively used on the resected
margins, images of the electrical properties of the tissue could
provide surgeons with real-time feedback on the presence of
PSMs and improve patient outcomes.
Today, the majority of radical prostatectomies in the US are
being performed laparoscopically with robot assistance. To access the prostate through a laparoscopic port, the EIT probe must
be both small enough to fit into the port and flexible enough to
be maneuverable using robotic graspers (see Fig. 1). A probe
that meets these specifications is described here. Specifically,
an endoscopic device was developed to intraoperatively gauge
these electrical properties and provide real-time pathological
assessment of surgical margins. Several experiments are performed to evaluate the volume of tissue the probe senses as well
as its capacity to detect changes in conductivity in a variety of
geometries and environments.
II. METHODS
A. Microendoscopic EIT Probe
The custom-designed EIT surgical margin assessment (EITSMA) probe consists of eight gold-plated copper electrodes

Fig. 2. a) Schematic and dimensions of designed microendoscopic EIT probe
tip. The edge-to-edge electrode array radius, re le c t , used for computing area
of sensitivity is 1.7 mm (distance from probe center to edge of electrode =
1.4 mm + 0.3 mm). b) View of active surface of EIT probe. The electrodes
are gold-plated and embedded in a polyethylene housing of 5 mm in diameter.
c) The entire housing and electrode cables are embedded within a 55 cm long,
7 mm diameter silicone tube. Scale in cm.

arranged in a ring pattern and embedded into a 5-mm diameter
polyethylene tip. The electrode assembly is housed within silicone tubing. The diameter of the silicone tubing is 7 mm, which
is small enough to be inserted into a 12-mm diameter auxiliary
port available during robot-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (RALP). The length of the tubing is 55 cm which is of
sufficient length for intracorporeal use during RALP; the length
and elasticity of the silicone tubing provide the surgeon with
sufficient dexterity to manipulate the probe so that it is capable
of accessing all surgical surfaces. Each electrode has a diameter
of 0.6 mm with the centers of opposite electrodes at a distance
of 2.8 mm (see Fig. 2). It is this 2.8 mm diameter circle that
forms the imaging field in the reconstructed EIT images. An
eight-electrode ring pattern was chosen to enable 1) radially invariant image sensitivity, 2) high speed data acquisition (higher
electrode numbers would require more data be recorded), and
3) data acquisition using EIT drive patterns optimized for circular domains. All materials can withstand temperatures of 135°C
or higher, which enables the probe to be steam sterilized following routine sterilization protocols used at our institution
(135°C steam sterilization for 6 min followed by a 45-min drying
period).
The probe was interfaced to Dartmouth’s voltage driven
broadband EIT system [24]. This is a parallel 64-channel voltage
driven system in which applied voltages and induced currents
are sensed at each electrode. The system operates over a bandwidth of 10 kHz to 10 MHz and is programmed to record data
at 20 logarithmically spaced frequencies. The acquisition bandwidth was limited to the nine logarithmically spaced frequencies
spanning 10 kHz to 183 kHz because the effects of parasitic
capacitances and inductances associated with the moderately
long cables (55 cm) are not able to be fully compensated
with the calibration procedure employed. The system was calibrated using the approach describe in [24]. Specifically, discrete
loads were applied to each channel and a set of channel and
frequency-dependent scaling factors was computed to ensure
that the measured impedance reflected that of the known load
impedance.
For this series of experiments, only eight of the system channels were used to interface with the eight-electrode probe. The
system was configured to drive seven spatially variant trigonometric patterns [25], such that the applied voltages, V, followed

HALTER AND KIM: TOWARD MICROENDOSCOPIC EIT FOR INTRAOPERATIVE SURGICAL MARGIN ASSESSMENT

the standard convention for these patterns:
⎧


2π p(e−1)
⎪
p = 1, 2, 3, 4
⎨ cos N e l e c t
V (p, e) =


⎪
⎩ sin 2π p(e−1)
p = 5, 6, 7
Ne le c t

2781

(1)

where p is the pattern number (1, 2, . . . ,7), e is the electrode
(1, 2, . . . ,8), and Nelect is the total number of electrodes (8 in
this case). Trigonometric patterns have been shown to be the
theoretically optimal patterns that can be applied for a circular
domain [25]. Other spatial patterns, including driving signals
between adjacent and opposite electrodes [26], are often used
in EIT systems that make tetrapolar (four-electrode) based measurements. However, this probe was interfaced to a fully parallel drive/sense EIT system optimized for applying these multielectrode patterns. A full spectrum of EIT data (8 channels,
10 frequencies) was acquired in 550 ms.
B. Image Reconstruction
Absolute conductivity images were computed using a dualmesh finite element method based approach standard in EIT
and described previously [27]. The forward problem was modeled using a two-dimensional (2-D) fine mesh consisting of
2560 triangular elements (1345 nodes) and the inverse problem
was computed on a coarser mesh consisting on 640 triangular
elements (353 nodes). Each mesh is a circular domain of diameter 2.8 mm. Electrodes were modeled as point-electrodes
equiangularly spaced around the periphery of the mesh and the
shunt-electrode model was used to describe the potential field
and current density at the electrodes [28]. While more computationally complex three-dimensional image reconstruction is becoming the norm for certain EIT applications [29], [30], a 2-D
approach was chosen here to speed image reconstruction computation as will ultimately be needed for clinical deployment; in
in vivo use, this system will need to provide images in near realtime to enable surgeons to extract additional tissues as needed.
Image reconstruction took <5 s to complete in MATLAB
(Mathworks, Natick, MA) running on a 2.9 GHz Intel Core
i7 processor.
C. Probe Evaluation
Phantom imaging studies were used to evaluate the probe in
preparation for preclinical deployment. These studies include
imaging saline phantoms, gelatin phantoms, and ex vivo porcine
tissue.
1) Saline Phantoms: The probe was submerged in a saline
bath to experimentally assess the probe tip’s area of sensitivity
(AOS) and the probe’s maximum depth of sensitivity (MDOS).
Together, these metrics are used to describe the volume of tissue
that influences the impedance measurements. The probe-tip’s
AOS is defined as the area below the probe–tissue interface
(and parallel to the probe face) over which changes in tissue
impedance result in detectable changes in the reconstructed conductivity image. The AOS includes the area directly under the
probe, circumscribed by the electrode array, as well as the region
outside the probe edge where fringing effects may occur and is

Fig. 3. a) Schematic view of the MDOS experiment. b) Schematic view of
the AOS experiment. An acrylic slab was used as the high impedance structure.

reported in mm2 . Changes in tissue impedance outside of this
area would not be detectable by the probe. Likewise, the MDOS
describes the furthest distance from the probe–tissue interface
(along the axial direction of the probe) at which point a change in
impedance would no longer result in a detectable change in the
reconstructed conductivity image; impedance changes beyond
this depth would not be detectable by the probe.
The AOS and MDOS were both measured experimentally
by inserting the probe in a tank filled with a saline solution
(0.1 S/m) and translating the probe from the edge of a high
impedance, nonconductive boundary preventing the flow of current (see Fig. 3). The EIT probe was submerged in the saline
and mounted on a multiaxis optics stage such that the probe tip
could be translated in both the axial and transverse directions
at submillimeter increments. A piece of flat acrylic was used as
a nonconducting surface with near-infinite impedance contrast
with respect to the saline. For the MDOS test, the probe tip was
moved from a position 0.5 mm in front of the acrylic to a distance of 10 mm away from the surface, with EIT measurements
recorded at 500-μm intervals [see Fig. 3(a)]. For the AOS test,
the edge of the electrode array was placed next to the acrylic
slab and translated away from the interface at 250-μm steps to
a total distance of 5 mm; EIT measurements were recorded at
each step [see Fig. 3(b)]. Because of the electrode ring configuration used, the AOS will represent a circular area at the
probe–tissue interface. For both AOS and MDOS experiments,
conductivity images were generated at each step and the maximum conductivity of the image was evaluated. The distance at
which the maximum conductivity of an image changes by less
than 2% with respect to the image acquired at the previous step
is used in defining the AOS and MDOS. In the case of the AOS
experimental configuration, this distance represents the radius
of the circular area. In the case of the MDOS configuration,
this distance directly defines the MDOS. A threshold of 2%
was chosen based on the typical image-to-image variation we
observe during repeated data acquisitions.
2) Gelatin Phantoms: A high contrast metal wire inclusion
(0.6-mm diameter) was embedded within a gelatin phantom to
mimic how the probe would be used clinically (gelatin from
porcine skin, Type A, G2500, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).
This inclusion represents a near-infinite impedance contrast with
respect to the gelatin and was used to verify that the probe
was at least capable of imaging small regions of high contrast

2782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 4. (a) Conductivity images of saline recorded as EIT-SMA probe is
translated away from a high impedance acrylic interface at distances of 0.5 mm,
1 mm, 1.5 mm, and 2 mm; frequency of operation is 127 kHz. The top row shows
the surface map for each location, while the second row shows the 2-D enface
view. b) Maximum conductivity computed as a function of distance as probe
is translated away from insulating inclusion for different signal frequencies.
Note that conductivity images and the maximum conductivity traces in (b)
demonstrate a maximum depth of sensitive (MDOS) to approximately 1.5 mm.
Additional high frequency data (263.6 kHz and 545.5 kHz) data is included to
show how the unaccounted for parasitic impedances of the long probe influence
reconstructed conductivities.

material in a heterogeneous imaging domain. The wire was
positioned vertically within the gelatin slab and the EIT probe
was positioned by hand over the wire inclusion in two different configurations; the wire was positioned at 3 o’clock and
9 o’clock positions. Data was collected from these two orientations and from a region on the gelatin in which no inclusion
was present; this served as a blank homogenous sample.
3) Porcine Tissue: A heterogeneous sample of an ex vivo
porcine tissue was used to demonstrate the probe’s imaging capabilities in a biological setting. The tissue sample consisted
of a large component of muscle surrounded by a rim of adipose tissue. In addition, strands of adipose tissues were present
throughout the large muscle components. The EIT probe was
first positioned at the muscle/adipose tissue interface and image data was recorded. The probe was rotated 180° and image
data was recorded from 10 to 183 kHz. In a second experiment,
the probe was positioned over a thin adipose streak, identified
within the muscle, to explore the probe’s ability to image smaller
structures within a biological sample.
III. RESULTS
A. Saline Phantoms
Conductivity maps were generated as the probe was moved
away from the acrylic surface [as configured in Fig. 3(a)].
Fig. 4(a) shows the 2-D conductivity maps along with the conductivity profile at 127 kHz. The profile becomes constant after
1.5 mm suggesting that the MDOS of the probe is 1.5 mm.
The Gaussian conductivity distribution is a well-described phenomena associated with using a 2-D reconstruction algorithm to
model a 3-D imaging domain [31]; specifically, the peripheral
region of low conductivity surrounding the central peak is associated with the inherent point-spread function of EIT [26]. In
addition, electrode artifacts (regions of low conductivity) associated with the point-electrode models used here are observed
around the periphery of the images. The maximum conductivity
was extracted from each 2-D conductivity map at six discrete frequencies (14.3 kHz, 29.7 kHz, 61.5 kHz, 127.4 kHz, 263.6 kHz,
and 545.5 kHz) and plotted as a function of probe-acrylic dis-

Fig. 5. Experimental configuration for gelatin experiments (left). Conductivity images generated when the probe was positioned on a gelatin-only region
of the phantom, positioned such that the metal inclusions was at the 3 o’clock
position, and at the 9 o’clock position (right). Yellow denotes high conductivity
associated with the metal inclusion. Color bar in units of S/m.

tance [see Fig. 4(b)] to a maximum distance of 10 mm. These
frequencies were chosen for display purposes only; all other system frequencies demonstrated similar trends. For all frequencies
<200 kHz the maximum reconstructed conductivity reached a
value of 0.055 S/m, which was 45% less than the true conductivity of 0.1 S/m. This underestimation of conductivity is a
common trend in absolute 2-D EIT imaging arising primarily
from the assumed planar geometry. The maximum conductivity
changed by less that 2% for all frequencies once the distance exceeded 1.5 mm, which is defined as the MDOS. The additional
high frequency data (263.6 kHz and 545.5 kHz) is included to
show how the unaccounted for parasitic impedances influence
reconstructed conductivities; frequencies greater than 200 kHz
will not be used in future in vivo deployment of this particular
probe.
In terms of the probe-tip AOS, the maximum image conductivity varied by less than 2% for all step sizes as the probe was
translated away from the edge of the acrylic slab. This suggests
that the fringing effects are minimal and that the field lines
extending beyond the electrode array do not significantly influence the estimated conductivity distribution bounded by the
array. The AOS is therefore assumed to be the area enclosed by
2
).
the electrodes only, 9.1 mm2 (= πrelect
B. Gelatin Phantoms
Conductivity images of the high contrast metal wire embedded in a gelatin substrate are shown in Fig. 5. Because the
probe was positioned by hand (to better simulate actual system
deployment), it was challenging to precisely identify the wire
location with respect to the probe’s electrode array. The images
were therefore qualitatively evaluated; more quantitative metrics (i.e., using GREIT parameters [32]) might be appropriate
for a more controlled experimental configuration. A high conductivity circular region, representing the metallic inclusion, is
correctly localized at both the 3 o’clock and 9 o’clock positions. Similar to the saline tank experiments, a peripheral ring
of low conductivity, associated with the 2-D FEM algorithm employed, is present around the circumference of the conductivity
images. The blank gelatin image shows a more heterogeneous
conductivity distribution than the saline images of Fig. 4; this
heterogeneity is likely due to the inherent heterogeneity of the
gelatin substrate, potentially stemming from small air bubbles
and nonuniform mixing and setting of the gelatin within the

HALTER AND KIM: TOWARD MICROENDOSCOPIC EIT FOR INTRAOPERATIVE SURGICAL MARGIN ASSESSMENT

Fig. 6. Experimental configuration for the two-tissue (muscle, adipose)
porcine EIT-SMA probing procedure (left). Black ink was used to identify
where the probe was positioned. The probe was rotated 180o to demonstrate
rotational invariance. Conductivity images for the two angular positions are
shown on the bottom right. The adipose tissue shows up as a low conductivity,
while the muscle tissue exhibits higher conductivities. Color bar in units of S/m.

Fig. 7. Conductivity images of two-tissue porcine sample at nine logarithmically spaced frequencies ranging from 10 to 183 kHz. Muscle is on the left of
each image (yellow) and adipose is on the right (dark orange/black). Color bar
in units of S/m.

small volume of the imaging domain. In addition, the electrode
artifacts are not as uniform as the saline images; this likely
arises from nonuniform electrode–gelatin interface for each of
the electrodes. The probe was held in place by hand, which may
result in nonuniform pressures being applied to each electrode.
C. Ex Vivo Porcine Imaging
The EIT probe was able to accurately differentiate muscle and
adipose tissue in a porcine sample (see Fig. 6). The probe was
straddled across a muscle/adipose tissue boundary; the resultant
conductivity image depicts a two-region distribution with one
half having a high conductivity (muscle) and the second half
having a low conductivity (adipose). The probe was rotated
180° and the same region was imaged to confirm that images
were independent of probe orientation. Fig. 7 shows discrete
conductivity images acquired at the nine acquisition frequencies
for one of the probe orientations. There is a clear separation
between the muscle and adipose regions.
A semicircular region of interest (ROI) was selected within
each half of the conductivity image (separating muscle and adipose regions) and the nodal conductivity values were averaged
within each ROI (see Fig. 8). The ROIs were chosen to exclude

2783

Fig. 8. Conductivity images were subdivided into adipose and muscle tissue
ROIs (left). The mean conductivity within each ROI (dashed lines) was computed and plotted as function of frequency (right). Error bars represent standard
deviation of nodal conductivity values computed from each tissue type.

peripheral nodes located within the outer 0.3 mm rim of each
half of the image (10% of the probe diameter); these regions
are more prone to electrode artifacts (i.e., the low conductivity
artifacts at 11:00 and 1:00 present in the conductivity images
in Fig. 7). In addition, because the region between the two tissue types has a relatively slow conductivity gradient (due to the
diffuse nature of EIT), and not the sharp step actually present
between the muscle and adipose tissue, a 0.3-mm separation
was included between the two ROIs so that the average conductivity computed within each ROI did not include the transition
zone. These averages were computed and plotted for each of the
nine frequencies scanned (see Fig. 8). The adipose tissue half
of the image had a significantly lower conductivity (p < 0.001)
than the muscle half did for all frequencies. The reconstructed
conductivity values for muscle were 0.15 S/m from 10 kHz–
183 kHz. The adipose conductivity was 0.015 S/m over this
same frequency range. The large standard deviations (33%
and 100% of the mean conductivity for the muscle and adipose regions, respectively) arise from the remaining peripheral
regions of low conductivity surrounding the muscle tissue and
peripheral regions of high conductivity surrounding the adipose
tissue. These variations are due to the inaccuracy of the 2-D reconstruction algorithms employed and the point-spread function
associated with EIT image reconstruction. Despite these artifacts, there is a significant separation between the high-contrast
tissues.
Conductivity images of a small streak of adipose tissue embedded within muscle are shown in Fig. 9. The conductivity
images clearly show a low conductivity region (adipose) straddled between two high conductivity regions (muscle). The width
of the adipose streak measured via digital calipers at the center
of the specimen was 0.46 mm, while the reconstructed stripe of
low conductivity was 0.36 mm at the same central location.
IV. DISCUSSION
There exists a strong clinical need for real-time intraoperative
assessment of surgical margin status during cancer resections.
The only approach currently in use to rapidly evaluate margin status during surgery is through microscopic assessment of

2784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 9. a) Experimental conditions for imaging small features in ex vivo
porcine tissue. A black circle denotes the region probed; the straight line identifies where electrode 1 was positioned. b) A magnified view of region probed.
A thin <1 mm thick streak of adipose tissue (white) is located between two
muscular tissue regions (pink). The image in B has been rotated with respect
to the image in A to align with the correct probe orientation used for the FEM
mesh (C). c) Conductivity image of the probed region shows a low conductivity
streak associated with the adipose streak surrounded by two higher conductivity
muscular regions. Color bar in units of S/m.

intraoperative frozen sections (IFS) [33], [34]. In these cases,
the tissue is removed from the body, flash frozen, histochemically stained, and microscopically evaluated by a pathologist.
There are two primary challenges to using IFS assessment during robot-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy (RALP). First,
gaining access to the prostate tissue during a RALP is challenging. The prostate is typically resected, bagged, and placed
within the pelvic space created through insufflation of the abdomen while the bladder neck / urethral anastomosis is completed (30–60 min). Removing the prostate prior to the anastomosis would require dedocking of the robot and removal of
one of the access ports, which would increase the overall operating time. Second, the surgeon would be required to mentally
register the margin identified as positive on the IFS specimen to
the tissues remaining within the body. This mental mapping is
challenging, especially for small positive surgical margins.
The microendoscopic EIT probe developed here has the potential to overcome both of these clinical challenges. This probe
is able to image at a near-millimeter resolution (i.e., Fig. 9),
which is needed for identifying small islands of tumor cells
left behind following tissue resection. Further, this probe was
specifically designed to interface to the patient through small
laparoscopic ports (<12 mm diameter), which will enable it to
gauge tissues intraoperatively. Because this will be used to interface directly with the marginal tissue remaining within the body
following tissue resection, the surgeon will not need to mentally
register where a positive surgical margin is. Instead, the conductivity maps computed directly at the probe tissue interface
will be displayed for the surgeon in real-time.
Fig. 10 shows an early prototype of the probe being manipulated during a RALP procedure under an Institutional Review
Board approved protocol. This protocol permitted use of a passive probe to evaluate how the surgeon would manipulate the
robotic forceps to interface with the silicone tube housing. The
probe was successfully introduced through a 12-mm auxiliary
surgical port and manipulated by the surgeon through use of the
robotic forceps. This particular probe had the electrodes embedded within the probe tip, but the probe was not interfaced
to an EIT system for voltage and current acquisition. Instead,
this passive devise was used to demonstrate that the probe could

Fig. 10. Left and right camera views recorded from the surgical console of a
da Vinci Surgical System. Images recorded during a RALP procedure. An early
prototype EIT-SMA probe was being manipulated by the surgical forceps (not
seen) and pressed into the periprostatic tissue bed after the prostate has been
fully resected.

easily be manipulated by the surgical instruments in preparation
for future in vivo deployment. The two images show the left and
right view screens that the surgeon sees during the procedure;
these images are extracted from the dual-camera stereoendoscope used to provide a surgeon with a 3-D field of view. We
anticipate overlaying EIT images directly onto the left and right
view ports of the surgeon’s field of view to show directly on the
tissue, and in 3D, where positive surgical margins might exist.
The only other previous attempt to construct an EIT-based
“endotomography” device consisted of a 50-mm diameter cylindrical form (too large for clinical applications) with line electrodes embedded around the periphery of the cylinder (not effective for probing tissue surfaces) [35], [36]; this device was
envisioned as being used for urethral introduction. Our device
overcomes the limitations of this device for use in laparoscopicbased surgeries by being less than 12 mm in diameter (enabling
it to fit through standard laparoscopic ports) and having surface
electrodes embedded at the end of the probe (see Fig. 2). A
second device recently reported for use in gynecological applications consists of a 48-electrode 30-mm diameter probe that
the authors propose to introduce through the vaginal canal [37].
They showed images of 6-mm diameter inclusions in phantom
studies. The device described here has a smaller diameter than
this gynecological probe and we have demonstrated submillimeter image resolution. Other small form-factor impedance
sensing probes have also been developed for evaluating tissue
anisotropy [38]–[40], but have not been specifically designed
for use in evaluating surgical margins during robotic surgical
procedures.
The 2-D reconstruction algorithms used here result in boundary artifacts clearly shown in the saline tank, gelatin, and porcine
experiments (see Figs. 4 and 5). The nonuniform conductivity
distribution is a well-documented artifact that arises when assuming a 2-D geometry in a 3-D experimental configuration
[31]. Three-dimensional reconstruction algorithms are becoming the standard for EIT [30] and should be considered for
this application going forward. One benefit of using 2-D algorithms is speed of image reconstruction; 2-D algorithms can
be used to produce images on the order of milliseconds on a
standard laptop/desktop computer, while 3-D algorithms typically require multiple minutes depending on the mesh density
used. In terms of clinical deployment, it is critical that surgeons

HALTER AND KIM: TOWARD MICROENDOSCOPIC EIT FOR INTRAOPERATIVE SURGICAL MARGIN ASSESSMENT

be given near-immediate feedback regarding margin pathology.
Speed optimized 3-D reconstruction algorithms based on precomputing the Jacobian or using novel algorithms implemented
for instance on graphical processor units should be considered
for clinically deploying this probe [41].
The significant drop in conductivity associated with increasing frequency [see Fig. 4(b)] is due to parasitic impedances
associated with the cable length of the probe. This limits
the spectral range that can be used to interrogate the tissue.
This spectral information is potentially important for enhancing
the sensitivity and specificity of EIT as discussed below. Ex vivo
studies have shown that spectral impedance properties are more
sensitive and specific than discrete frequencies alone [21]. One
approach to improving the spectral range of the probe would be
to consider using active electronics located near to the probe tip
similar to [42].
While the conductivity contrast between muscle
(15–40 mS/m) [43] and adipose (2 mS/m) [44] tissue exceeds that typically found between benign and malignant
prostate, these findings suggest that imaging biological tissue
samples is possible. The conductivity of malignant prostate
ranges from 90 mS/m–140 mS/m over the frequency range
of 100 Hz–100 kHz, which is significantly lower than the
conductivity of fibromuscular stroma (119 mS/m–150 mS/m)
and significantly higher than adipose (2 mS/m) over the same
frequency range [20]; fibromuscular stroma and adipose tissues
are the primary tissue types making up the peri-prostatic region
which would be probed following prostate resection. Other
electrical properties measured from ex vivo human prostate
samples have exhibited even higher contrast than conductivity
alone. The mean permittivity of cancer was reported to be
2.7 times larger than that of stromal tissues (30.3 mS/m versus
11.2 mS/m) at 100 kHz [20]. Likewise, Cole-based spectral
parameters including the high frequency conductivity (σ∞ ),
high-to-low frequency conductivity difference (Δσ), and
the characteristic frequency (fc ) have all been reported to
provide high levels of contrast approaching 1.6, 3.0, and 5.1,
respectively [21]. Further studies exploring a broad range of
frequencies and these additional electrical properties with ex
vivo and in vivo prostate tissue are needed to verify that small
islands of cancer cells can be visualized with this probe.
Based on these previous reports of ex vivo prostate tissue, it is
expected that imaging permittivity or spectral impedance parameters will provide even greater contrast than with conductivity
alone [20], [21]. One challenge to spectral parameter imaging
would be acquiring a wider band of frequencies (>200 kHz).
The parasitic impedances associated with the probe’s long form
factor (55 cm) make high frequency data acquisition challenging [see, for example, the conductivity traces for 263 and
545 kHz in Fig. 4(b)]. One might consider using a tissue-based
calibration in which the probe is calibrated with respect to known
tissue types (i.e., benign versus malignant) at high frequencies.
Alternatively, use of active electrodes might be a novel way
to enable wider band acquisition; however, instrumenting the
probe with the additional amplifiers required would be difficult
given the imposed space constraints. Extending the probe to
higher frequencies is an area of active research.

2785

Other competing endoscopic technologies are being explored
for use in surgical margin assessment. These technologies are
primarily optical-based approaches and include fiber-optic microscopy of fluorescent tracers [45], optical coherence tomography [46], two-photon excited autofluorescence microscopy
[47], Raman spectroscopy [48], and coherent antiStokes Raman
scattering microscopy [49]. The majority of these technologies
[45], [47] are being used for identifying the neurovascular bundles during nerve-sparing procedures. The Raman scattering
based approaches [48], [49] are also attempting to distinguish
benign from malignant tissues at the surgical margins. These
technologies are still in development, so precise measures of
sensitivity and specificity to surgical margin status are still undetermined. Going forward, a synergistic approach coupling a
fiber-bundle within the center of our electrode array might be
considered. Leveraging both the optical and electrical properties
in a multimodal device such as this may improve sensitivity and
specificity of surgical margin assessment.
V. CONCLUSION
To the best of our knowledge, this represents the first EIT device developed for endoscopic applications that is able to image
submillimeter features within biological tissues. Specifically, a
small form factor flexible endoscopic EIT probe has been successfully developed for use in RALP. This probe is able to accurately sense electrical properties up to a bandwidth of 183 kHz.
The probe is able to sense subsurface impedance changes down
to a depth of 1.5 mm and is able to image structures smaller
than 0.5 mm in width within a 9.1 mm2 circular field of view.
The probe can easily be grasped and manipulated with most
laparoscopic forceps. Additional testing on human tissues is
required to evaluate the efficacy of using electrical impedance
imaging for intraoperative surgical margin assessment during
RALP procedures.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Siegel, J. Ma, Z. Zou, and A. Jemal, “Cancer statistics, 2014,” CA:
A Cancer J. Clinicians, vol. 64, pp. 9–29, 2014.
[2] J. W. Anast, G. L. Andriole, T. A. Bismar, Y. Yan, and P. A. Humphrey,
“Relating biopsy and clinical variables to radical prostatectomy findings:
Can insignificant and advanced prostate cancer be predicted in screening
population?,” Urology, vol. 64, pp. 544–550, 2004.
[3] CDC/NCHS National Hospital Discharge Survey. (2010). [Online].
Available: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhds/4procedures/2010pro4_
numberrate.pdf
[4] J. D. Brooks, “Anatomy of the lower urinary tract and male genitalia,”
in Campbell’s Urology, 9th ed., A. Wein, Ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Saunders Elsevier, 2007.
[5] K. A. Roehl, M. Han, C. G. Ramos, J. A. V. Antenor, and W. J.
Catalona, “Cancer progression and survival rates following anatomical
radical retropubic prostatectomy in 3,478 consecutive patients: Long-term
results,” J. Urol., vol. 172, pp. 910–914, 2004.
[6] M. A. Orvieto, N. F. Alsikafi, A. L. Shalhav, B. A. Laven, G. D. Steinberg,
G. P. Zagaja, and C. B. Brendler, “Impact of surgical margin status on
long-term cancer control after radical prostatectomy,” BJU Int., vol. 98,
pp. 1199–1203, 2006.
[7] P. I. Karakiewica, J. A. Eastham, M. Graefen, I. Cagiannos, P. D. Stricker,
E. Klein, T. Cangiano, F. H. Schroder, P. T. Scardino, and M. W. Kattan, “Prognostic impact of positive surgical margins in surgically treated
prostate cancer: Multi-institutional assessment of 5831 patients,” Urology,
vol. 66, pp. 1245–1250, 2005.

2786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

[8] B. Brown et al., “Relation between tissue structure and imposed electrical
current flow in cervical neoplasia,” Lancet, vol. 355, pp. 892–895, 2000.
[9] A. Abdul, B. Brown, P. Milnes, and J. A. Tidy, “A clinical study of the
use of impedance spectroscopy in the detection of cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN),” Gynecologic Oncology, vol. 99, pp. S64–S66, 2005.
[10] B. Brown, P. Milnes, A. Abdul, and J. A. Tidy, “Detection of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia using impedance spectroscopy: a prospective
study,” Brit. J. Obstetrics Gynaecology, vol. 112, pp. 802–806, 2005.
[11] A. Abdul, B. Brown, P. Milnes, and J. Tidy, “The use of electrical
impedance spectroscopy in the detection of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia,” Int. J. Gynecol Cancer, vol. 16, pp. 1823–1832, 2006.
[12] J. Jossinet, “Variability of impedivity in normal and pathological breast
tissue,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 34, pp. 346–350, 1996.
[13] A. Surowiec, A. Stuchly, J. R. Barr, and A. Swarup, “Dielectric properties
of breast carcinoma and the surrounding tissues,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 257–263, Apr. 1988.
[14] Y. Zou and Z. Guo, “A review of electrical impedance techniques for
breast cancer detection,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 25, pp. 79–90, 2003.
[15] P. Åberg, I. Nicander, J. Hansson, P. Geladi, U. Holmgren, and
S. Ollmar, “Skin cancer identification using multifrequency electrical
impedance—a potential screening tool,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 2097–2102, Dec. 2004.
[16] P. Aberg, P. Geladi, I. Nicander, J. Hansson, U. Holmgren, and S. Ollmar, “Non-invasive and microinvasive electrical impedance spectra of
skin cancer—a comparison between two techniques,” Skin Res. Technol.,
vol. 11, pp. 281–286, 2005.
[17] B. Wilkinson, R. H. Smallwood, A. Keshtar, J. A. Lee, and F. C. Hamdy,
“Electrical impedance spectroscopy and the diagnosis of bladder pathology: A pilot study,” J. Urol., vol. 168, pp. 1563–1567, 2002.
[18] A. Keshtkar, A. Keshtkar, and R. Smallwood, “Electrical impedance spectroscopy and the diagnosis of bladder pathology,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 27,
pp. 585–596, 2006.
[19] R. J. Halter, A. Schned, J. Heaney, A. Hartov, S. Schutz, and K. D. Paulsen,
“Electrical impedance spectroscopy of benign and malignant prostatic
tissues,” J. Urol., vol. 179, pp. 1580–1586, 2008.
[20] R. J. Halter, A. Schned, J. Heaney, A. Hartov, and K. D. Paulsen, “Electrical
properties of prostatic tissues: I. Single frequency admittivity properties,”
J. Urol., vol. 182, pp. 1600–1607, 2009.
[21] R. J. Halter, A. Schned, J. Heaney, A. Hartov, and K. D. Paulsen, “Electrical
properties of prostatic tissues: II. Spectral admittivity properties,” J. Urol.,
vol. 182, pp. 1608–1613, 2009.
[22] R. J. Halter, A. Hartov, J. Heaney, K. D. Paulsen, and A. Schned, “Electrical
impedance spectroscopy of the human prostate,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1321–1327, Jul. 2007.
[23] K. S. Cole and R. H. Cole, “Dispersion and absorption in dielectrics: I.
Alternating current characteristics,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 9, p. 341, 1941.
[24] R. J. Halter, A. Hartov, and K. D. Paulsen, “A broadband high frequency
electrical impedance tomography system for breast imaging,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 650–659, Feb. 2008.
[25] M. Cheney and D. Isaacson, “Distinguishability in impedance imaging,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 852–860, Aug. 1992.
[26] D. S. Holder, Electrical Impedance Tomography: Methods, History and
Applications. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2004.
[27] K. D. Paulsen, K. Moskowitz, and T. Ryan, “Temperature field estimation
using electrical impedance profiling methods: 1. Reconstruction algorithm
and simulated results,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 10, pp. 209–228, 1994.
[28] K. S. Cheng, D. Isaacson, J. C. Newell, and D. G. GIsser, “Electrode
models for electric current computed tomography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 918–924, Sep. 1989.
[29] P. J. Vauhkonen, M. Vauhkonen, T. Savolainen, and J. P. Kaipio, “Threedimensional electrical impedance tomography based on the complete electrode model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 1150–1160,
Sep. 1999.
[30] A. Borsic, A. Hartov, K. D. Paulsen, and P. Manwaring, “3D electric
impedance tomography reconstruction on multi-core computing platforms,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008,
pp. 1175–1177.
[31] R. J. Halter, A. Hartov, and K. D. Paulsen, “Experimental justification for
using 3D conductivity reconstructions in electrical impedance tomography,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, pp. S115–S127, 2007.

[32] A. Adler, J. H. Arnold, R. Bayford, A. Borsic, B. Brown, P. Dixon, T. J. C.
Faes, I. Frerichs, H. Gagnon, Y. Garber, B. Grychtol, G. Hahn, W. R. B.
Lionheart, A. Malik, R. P. Patterson, J. Stocks, A. Tizzard, N. Weiler, and
G. K. Wolf, “GREIT: a unified approach to 2D linear EIT reconstruction
of lung images,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 30, pp. S35–S55, 2009.
[33] H. Lepor and L. Kaci, “Role of intraoperative biopsies during radical
retropubic prostatectomy,” Urology, vol. 63, pp. 499–502, 2004.
[34] W. Dillenburg, V. Poulakis, U. Witzsch, R. De Vries, K. Skriapas,
H. Altmansberger, and E. Becht, “Laparoscopic radical prostatectomy:
The value of intraoperative frozen sections,” Eur. Urol., vol. 48, pp. 614–
621, 2005.
[35] J. Jossinet, A. Fournier-Desseux, and A. Matias, “Assessment of electrical
impedance endotomography for hardware specification,” Biomed. Imag.
Intervention, vol. 2, pp. 1–15, 2006.
[36] J. Jossinet, E. Marry, and A. Matias, “Electrical impedance endotomography,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, pp. 2189–2202, 2002.
[37] V. A. Cherepenin, Y. V. Gulyaev, A. V. Korjenevsky, S. A. Sapetsky, and
T. S. Tuykin, “An electrical impedance tomography system for gynecological application GIT with a tiny electrode array,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 33, pp. 849–862, 2012.
[38] P. Steendijk, G. Mur, E. T. Van Der Velde, and J. Baan, “The four-electrode
resistivity technique in anisotropic media: theoretical analysis and application on myocardial tissue in vivo,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40,
no. 11, pp. 1138–1148, Nov. 1993.
[39] H. Kwon, H. Wi, B. Karki, E. J. Lee, A. McEwan, E. J. Woo, B. Harrach,
J. K. Seo, and T. I. Oh, “Bioimpedance spectroscopy tensor probe for
anisotropic measurements,” Electron. Lett., vol. 48, pp. 1253–1255, 2012.
[40] X. Huo, X. Shi, F. You, F. Fu, R. Liu, C. Tang, Q. Lu, and X. Dong, “Reliability of in vivo measurements of the dielectric properties of anisotropic
tissue: a simulative study,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, pp. 3163–3176, 2013.
[41] A. Borsic, E. A. Attardo, and R. J. Halter, “Multi-GPU Jacobian accelerated computing for soft-field tomography,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 33,
pp. 1703–1715, 2012.
[42] J. H. Li, C. Joppek, and U. Faust, “Fast EIT data acquisition system with
active electrodes and its application to cardiac imaging,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 17, pp. A25–A32, 1996
[43] T. J. C. Faes, H. A. van der Meij, J. C. de Munck, and
R. M. Heethaar, “The electric resistivity of human tissues (100 Hz–
10 MHz): A meta-analysis of review studies,” Physiol. Meas. vol. 20,
pp. R1–R10, 1999.
[44] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.
[45] L. B. Boyette, M. A. Reardon, A. J. Mirelman, T. D. Kirkley, J. J. Lysiak,
J. B. Tuttle, and W. D. Steers, “Fiberoptic imaging of cavernous nerves in
vivo,” J. Urol., vol. 178, pp. 2694–2700, 2007.
[46] S. Rais-Bahrami, A. W. Levinson, N. M. Fried, G. A. Lagoda, A. Hristov,
Y. Chuang, A. L. Burnett, and L. M. Su, “Optical coherence tomography
of cavernous nerves: A step toward real-time intraoperative imaging during nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy,” Urology, vol. 72, pp. 198–204,
2008.
[47] R. Yadav, S. Mukherjee, M. Hermen, G. Tan, F.R. Maxfield, W. W. Webb,
and A. K. Tewari, “Multiphoton microscopy of prostate and periprostatic
neural tissue: A promising imaging technique for improving nerve-sparing
prostatectomy,” J. Endourology, vol. 23, pp. 861–867, 2009.
[48] V. S. Hanchanale, A. R. Rao, and S. Das, “Raman spectroscopy and
its urological applications,” Indian J. Urol.: J. Urol. Soc. India, vol. 24,
pp. 444–450, 2008.
[49] L. Gao, H. Zhou, M. J. Thrall, F. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, and S. T. Wong,
“Label-free high-resolution imaging of prostate glands and cavernous
nerves using coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy,” Biomed.
Opt. Exp., vol. 2, pp. 915–926, 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

