22

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

EEG Activity During Movement Planning Encodes
Upcoming Peak Speed and Acceleration
and Improves the Accuracy in Predicting
Hand Kinematics
Lingling Yang, Howard Leung, Markus Plank, Joe Snider, and Howard Poizner

Abstract—The relationship between movement kinematics and
human brain activity is an important and fundamental question
for the development of neural prosthesis. The peak velocity and the
peak acceleration could best reflect the feedforward-type movement; thus, it is worthwhile to investigate them further. Most related studies focused on the correlation between kinematics and
brain activity during the movement execution or imagery. However, human movement is the result of the motor planning phase
as well as the execution phase and researchers have demonstrated
that statistical correlations exist between EEG activity during the
motor planning and the peak velocity and the peak acceleration
using grand-average analysis. In this paper, we examined whether
the correlations were concealed in trial-to-trial decoding from the
low signal-to-noise ratio of EEG activity. The alpha and beta powers from the movement planning phase were combined with the
alpha and beta powers from the movement execution phase to predict the peak tangential speed and acceleration. The results showed
that EEG activity from the motor planning phase could also predict the peak speed and the peak acceleration with a reasonable
accuracy. Furthermore, the decoding accuracy of the peak speed
and the peak acceleration could both be improved by combining
band powers from the motor planning phase with the band powers
from the movement execution.
Index Terms—Alpha and beta band powers, EEG, movement
execution, movement planning, peak speed and acceleration.

I. INTRODUCTION
RAIN computer interfaces (BCIs) aim to help users send
commands to the external world directly while bypassing
the brain’s normal output pathways of peripheral nerves and
muscles. One objective of BCI research is to decode the intention
of a subject to control external devices, such as a computer
cursor [1]–[3], a wheel chair [4], [5] or a robotic device [6]–
[8]. Movement aimed to a target is a natural and fundamental

B

Manuscript received December 15, 2013; revised April 7, 2014; accepted
March 13, 2014. Date of publication May 30, 2014; date of current version
December 30, 2014. This work was supported in part by the NSF under Grants
SMA-1041755 and ENG-1137279 (EFRI M3C) and by ONR MURI Award
No.: N00014-10-1-0072.
L. Yang and H. Leung are with the Department of Computer Science,
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong (e-mail:
linglyang2@student.cityu.edu.hk; howard@cityu.edu.hk).
M. Plank and H. Poizner are with the Institute for Neural Computation,
University of California, San Diego, CA 92093 USA (e-mail: markusplank79@
gmail.com; hpoizner@ucsd.edu).
J. Snider is with the Institute for Neural Computation, University of
California, San Diego, CA 92093 USA (e-mail: oldstyle_joe@yahoo.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2327635

task in daily life resulting from a movement planning phase
and a movement execution phase [9]. Understanding how the
kinematic parameters (such as velocity, direction, acceleration)
are encoded in the cortex during such a reaching task is an
important issue for the development of neuromotor prostheses
and should be investigated further.
A number of papers have studied the patterns of brain activity
during the motor execution [10], [11] and motor imagery [12].
Most EEG studies discretely classified kinematic parameters
during imagined and executed movements [13], [14]. Continuous hand velocities were first decoded from EEG signals during
a self-paced 3-D reaching task [15]. As the movement intervals
used in [15] were very short, it was not clear whether the reconstructed trajectories varied depending on the movement inertia.
Moreover, motor related potentials include components mainly
in high frequency [16]–[18], rather than in the low frequency
(EEG data below 1 Hz were used in the paper [15] to reconstruct
the movement velocity). Yeom [19] and Bradberry et al. [20] estimated the velocity of continuous hand movement from MEG.
However, MEG equipment is bulky, and thus not as suitable as
EEG for practical BCI applications.
Intended movement can also be estimated using EEG signals
in the planning phase. Lew et al. [21] detected subjects’ movement intention using EEG signals before the movement onset.
The reaching direction (left and right) [22] and target (food and
drinks) [23] can also be decoded from EEG activity in the planning period. Moreover, it was found that the amplitude of the
peak velocity and acceleration were correlated with the EEG
activity in the alpha band during the motor planning [24]. In
addition, the brain signals in the planning period have been considered by some researchers to improve the movement decoding
accuracy. Willett et al. [25] showed that monkeys could make
straighter, faster and smoother movements in a brain–machine
computer by decoding intended future movements.
Seidler et al. [26] pointed out that kinematic indices of peak
velocity and acceleration best reflect feedforward processes in
controlling movement. Perfetti et al. [24] showed correlations
between the amplitude of the peak velocity and acceleration
and the alpha band power using grand-average analysis, which
might conceal the trial-to-trial information. Moreover, due to
the low signal-to-noise ratio of EEG activity, the single-trial
decoding ability for kinematic indices still needs to be investigated. In this paper, using a center-out reaching task, we aimed
to examine whether the decoding performance of kinematic

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YANG et al.: EEG ACTIVITY DURING MOVEMENT PLANNING ENCODES UPCOMING PEAK SPEED AND ACCELERATION

23

C. Data Acquisition and Preprocessing

Fig. 1.

Timeline of each trial.

parameters, e.g., the peak speed and acceleration of reaching,
can be improved by adding EEG signals during the planning
interval, compared with the case of using EEG signals alone
during movement execution.
II. METHODS
A. Subjects
Nine healthy subjects (age: 20.8 ± 2.6 years, four females
and five males) participated in this study. All subjects were
right handed according to Edinburgh handedness inventory [27]
and had normal or corrected to normal vision. The procedures
conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by
the Institutional Review Board of the University of California,
San Diego. After detailed explanation of the procedures, all
subjects signed written informed consent.
B. Experimental Procedure
During the experiment, the subjects were instructed to reach
to a green 12.5 mm radius circular target which was placed in the
lower left or upper right (jittered with a variability of ±5°) with
respect to the center of a 32 touch screen. At the beginning of
each trial, a yellow 12.5 mm radius circular dock was presented
at the center of the screen, and each subject was asked to hold a
stylus/pen and his/her gaze on the dock in a self-paced manner
(see Fig. 1). The color of the center point turned white when the
subject touched it. After a randomized 500–700 ms interval, the
target disk was shown randomly on one of two corners (lower
left, 150 or 200 mm away, and high right, 200 mm away).
The subjects were required to hold the stylus/pen and gaze on
the center dock for another randomized 500–700 ms movement
delay interval until the dock disappeared. Then the subjects tried
to reach to the target as fast and as accurately as possible with
completely unrestricted movement. Gaze was monitored but not
constrained, except for the intervals prior to the go cue (dock
disappearance). The subjects were seated in front of a 32 touch
monitor (AccuTouch, Elo TouchSystems) in sufficiently close
proximity to allow comfortable reaches to both corners and with
their chin and forehead stabilized on a support. The number of
trials in a block was 25 and there were 16 blocks, i.e., a total
of 400 trials, were finished by each subject. The data from two
targets will be lumped and analyzed together in this paper. We
are not trying to decode which target the person was going to.

Scalp EEG, gaze position, and finger movement were
recorded simultaneously while subjects performed the reaching task. EEG was acquired at 512 Hz using a 70-channel active
electrode EEG system (Biosemi, Inc.), including 64 channels
mounted in a flexible cap according to the International 10–20
System [28], one electrode on each of left and right mastoids,
and four EOG channels located above and below the right eye
as well as lateral to the right and left eyes to monitor eye movements. Eye position was tracked at 1000 Hz with an Eyelink1000 (SR Research, Inc.) on a tower mount. Finger position was
sampled at 240 or 120 Hz using a PhaseSpace, Inc., 3-D motion
capture system.
EEGLAB [29] was used in the preprocessing procedure. The
continuous EEG signal was first rereferenced offline to the average of two mastoids and high-pass filtered at 1 Hz and lowpass filtered at 55 Hz. Afterward, EEG signals were segmented
into epochs of −200 to +1200 ms time-locked to target onset. Epochs with excessive peak-to-peak voltage fluctuations
(> 70 μV) were visually identified and rejected from further
analysis. Seventy independent components (ICs) were extracted
by ICA decomposition using extended Infomax [30] and ICs reflecting muscle or eye movement artifacts were rejected based
on power spectrum, trial-by-trial ERPs, topographic inverse
weights, and dipole location. Then the remaining ICs were projected back to the original electrode space. A common average
reference [31] signal, which was computed as the average voltage amplitude of all 64 EEG signal channels, was subtracted
from the signal from each EEG electrode. Moreover, the trials
in which subjects responded too slowly (> 500 ms) or missed
targets (hit the black area) were also excluded. An average number of 334 ± 43 of the initial 400 trials per subject was used after
rejection of bad trials.
D. EEG Analysis
Fast Fourier transform was applied to the single-trial EEG
signals to calculate the time–frequency representations. The
spectral change induced by planned and executed movement
was measured by comparing the event-related spectral power at
each channel in the alpha and beta bands over the entire planning or execution interval with respect to the power of a baseline
period. The individual event related spectral change for the two
time intervals (planning and execution) and the frequency band
was averaged over trials across subjects. The relative spectral
power p(dB) in each electrode of interest was defined as:
p(dB) = 10 log10 (Pij /Bi )

i ∈ {α, β}
j ∈ {1, 2}

(1)

where P was the average spectral power over planning (j = 1)
or execution (j = 2) intervals and B was the pooled spectral
power in baseline interval in the alpha (8–13 Hz) [32] and
beta frequency (13–30 Hz) bands, respectively. Averaged relative spectral power scalp maps in the alpha and beta bands
during the planning and execution time intervals were shown
in Fig. 2. The max/min numbers on the scale bars (±0.6 dB)
represent about 13% spectral power increase/decrease in the

24

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

vided into ten equal size (or approximately equal) groups. One
group of the ten was retained as the validation data for testing
the decoding model which was trained using the data in the
remaining nine groups. The procedure was repeated ten times
with each group serving exactly once as testing group. The accuracy of the decoding model was evaluated by averaging the
ten results from the ten testing groups.
The coefficient of determination, R2 was used to assess how
well the observed results were replicated by the decoding model.
The closer the R2 is to one, the better the decoding model is. As
R2 can be arbitrarily increased to be as close to one when adding
more variables to the regression, an adjusted R2 criterion [36] is
modified by considering the number of testing trials N and the
number of variables k as follows:

N −1 
1 − R2 .
(3)
R2 = 1 −
N −k−1
Fig. 2. Relative spectral power scalp across all subjects in alpha and beta bands
during the planning and execution time intervals. The max/min numbers on the
scale bars (±0.6 dB) represent about 13% spectral power increase/decrease in
the planning/execution time interval with respect to the baseline interval.

planning /execution time interval respect to the baseline interval. In this paper, [−200 0] ms time-locked to target onset was
selected as the baseline interval.
E. Feature Selection
In each of time intervals, a two-sample t-test was performed
to identify the electrodes of interest for all subjects showing significant alpha/beta power differences compared to the baseline
period (p < 0.01). Then a Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient r was calculated to measure the linear correlation
of the relative spectral power and peak speed/acceleration using
random 20% of all trials. The relative power for each pair of
band and electrode of interest was checked and the powers of
which correlations were significant were selected as decoding
features. Following this process, the channels selected for use
in decoding for each subject will be slightly different for each
subject.
F. Decoding Model
In order to estimate the kinematic parameters for each trial, a
linear decoding model was used:
u=η+

I

i=1

κi pαi +

J


λj pβj

(2)

j =1

where μ represents peak speed or peak acceleration, pα and pβ
are the relative spectral power in the alpha and beta bands, I
and J are the number of electrodes for the alpha and beta bands,
respectively, η, κ, and λ are the weights obtained from multiple
linear regression. Linear regression has been widely used in
decoding movement kinematics [33]–[35].
G. Assessment
Tenfold cross validation was applied to assess the performance of the decoding accuracy. All trials were randomly di-

III. RESULTS
A. Electrodes of Interest Showing Significant Alpha/Beta
Power Differences Compared to the Baseline Period
The electrodes of interest for alpha and beta bands during
the movement planning and execution phases across all subjects
were circled in Fig. 3. Electrodes of interest were those in which
band powers during the movement execution/planning phase
were found to be significantly different from band powers in
baseline interval. Such electrodes were located over occipital
and parietal–occipital cortices for the alpha band during both
the movement planning and execution phases. For the beta band,
the electrodes of interest spread over frontal and frontal-central
lobes during both the movement planning and execution phases.
The electrodes of interest were the same for all subjects and
then assessed for each subject to pick up an appropriate subset
to use in decoding. The individual differences among subjects
were reflected in the following feature selection (Section II-E).
Twenty percent trials of each subject for each electrode were
used to calculate the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between
band power and peak speed/acceleration in order to select the
most suitable electrodes used in the prediction models. The
shadows in Fig. 3 represent the number of subjects, out of a
total of nine, that each electrode of interest was used for in
decoding speed and acceleration.
B. Decoding Peak Speed for Each Trial From EEG
Alpha and Beta Power
The coefficient of determination R2 was computed by the
predicted and measured movement peak speed and acceleration
to measure the decoding accuracy.
The decoding accuracies for the peak speed achieved by EEG
data in the movement planning period, in the movement execution period, and in both periods are presented in Fig. 4. The
decoding accuracy for EEG alpha and beta activities during
the movement execution period was 0.24 averaged across all
subjects. This value is of moderate magnitude and is comparable to the results obtain by Bradberry et al., in which the average

YANG et al.: EEG ACTIVITY DURING MOVEMENT PLANNING ENCODES UPCOMING PEAK SPEED AND ACCELERATION

25

Fig. 4. Mean coefficient of determination R2 between predicted and measured
peak speed across cross-validation folds for each subject. Accuracies achieved
by alpha and beta bands from movement planning and movement execution
phase and combined band power from two phases. Standard deviation lines
were added to the mean bars.

Fig. 5. Mean coefficient of determination R2 between predicted and measured
peak acceleration across cross-validation folds for each subject. Accuracies
achieved by alpha and beta bands from the movement planning and movement
execution phase and combined band powers from two phases. Standard deviation
lines were added to the mean bars.

Fig. 3. Electrodes of interest for alpha and beta bands during movement
planning and execution phases were labeled in red and blue ovals. The circled
electrodes were significantly modulated on all subjects. The shadow inside each
circle represents the number of subjects using each electrode to (a) decode speed
and (b) acceleration.

decoding accuracy for x y z velocities was 0.19, 0.38, and 0.32,
respectively. However, it was not clear whether the reconstructed
trajectories mainly depended on the movement inertia because
the movement intervals used by Bradberry were very short. EEG
data during planning could also be used as prediction feature,
as shown in Fig. 4 achieving the coefficient of determination of
about 0.23. Adding EEG data in the planning period allowed
better prediction for all subjects except subjects 3 and 7 compared to the case of using data in the movement execution period
alone. The coefficient resulting from the alpha and beta power in
both movement planning and movement execution periods was

0.31. Post hoc analysis using a t-test (α = 0.05) was performed
on the decoding accuracy of peak speed across all subjects.
The decoding performances using band power from movement
planning and execution individually showed no significant differences. However, the decoding accuracy of peak speed was
increased significantly by using combined band power from the
planning and execution phases, compared to the cases using
the band power from either of the two phases individually (see
Fig. 4).
C. Decoding Peak Acceleration for Each Trial From EEG
Alpha and Beta Powers
EEG alpha and beta power from the movement planning and
execution phases as well as the combined band power across
movement phases was also investigated to predict the peak acceleration for each trial. The mean coefficient across all subjects
using band power from the movement execution period was
0.14, and the result from the movement planning period was
0.19. The final decoding accuracies achieved for individual subjects are presented in Fig. 5. The combined band power across
movement phases performed better for individual phases, having
an average decoding coefficient of 0.24 across all subjects. Post
hoc t-test analysis (α = 0.05) of the decoded peak acceleration

26

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

also was performed. Similar to the peak speed, the decoding
performance using band power from movement planning and
execution individually showed no significant differences. However, it should be noted that prediction performance of peak
acceleration using band power from the planning phase outperformed that of the movement execution phase for most subjects.
This was beyond our expectation and is discussed further in
Section IV. The combined band power from the planning and
execution phases compared to the case using band power from
single phases also showed a significant increase in decoding
accuracy of peak acceleration.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we sought to determine how well we could
predict the peak speed and acceleration of spatially directed
reaching movements using EEG alpha and beta power from
movement planning and execution phases, and the combined
band power from both phases. The main difference between
our study and that of Bradberry et al. [15] is that we included
EEG activity from both the movement planning and execution
phases to decoding movement speed and acceleration, whereas
Bradberry et al. only analyzed EEG activity from the movement execution phase. A multiple linear regression model was
selected after considering the regression speed and accuracy.
The results showed that band power from the movement planning and execution periods both could be used as features to
estimate the peak speed and acceleration of hand movement
during a center-out reaching task. Moreover, the combination of
band power from the movement planning and execution periods
further improved the decoding accuracy of the peak speed and
acceleration.
Since subjects reached with their right arms, one might have
expected greater beta band desynchronization over the contralateral (left) hemisphere, particularly during movement execution.
However, we found a more global pattern of beta desynchronization over frontal, central, and parietal areas (see Fig. 2).
It is possible there was even a greater global beta desynchronization that would have included the occipital region, but was
‘‘washed out” by neck/postural muscle contamination that was
not removed by our data preprocessing using ICA. A global beta
desynchronization pattern would imply that planning speed and
acceleration may be occurring via more distributed processing
than that involving contralateral sensorimotor areas.
As subtle changes in neck/scalp postural muscles as people stiffen their bodies before moving may cooccur with the
increase in alpha in the occipital areas, we redid the analysis
using just the beta band power for comparison, and found that
the decoding performance was still significantly improved by
the combination of band power from the movement planning
and execution periods (Appendix).
Human movement results not only from movement execution but also from the planning phase [37], [38]. The correlation
between EEG activity and peak velocity and peak acceleration in the motor planning phase proposed by Perfetti et al.
[24] was not concealed by the low signal-to-noise ratio of EEG
activity and proved to be able to estimate the trial-to-trial move-

Fig. 6. Mean coefficient of determination R 2 between predicted and measured
peak speed across cross-validation folds for each subject. Accuracies achieved
by beta band only from movement planning and movement execution phase and
combined band power from two phases. Standard deviation lines were added to
the mean bars.

Fig. 7. Mean coefficient of determination R 2 between predicted and measured peak acceleration across cross-validation folds for each subject. Accuracies achieved by beta band only from the movement planning and movement
execution phase and combined band powers from two phases. Standard deviation lines were added to the mean bars.

ment peak speed and acceleration. Our results demonstrated that
movement speed and acceleration parameters are encoded in the
EEG during the movement planning phase. Thus, the decoding
performance of peak speed and acceleration could be improved
by adding brain activity from movement planning phase to that
of the execution phase.
It is worth noting that compared to the movement execution phase, the band power extracted from the planning phase
obtained better prediction accuracy of peak tangential acceleration for most subjects. This result is consistent with the work
of Perfetti et al. reporting a higher correlation between peak acceleration and alpha band power in motor planning and a lower
correlation in motor execution. This might imply that the peak
acceleration information of the upcoming hand movement is
encoded in the human brain mainly during the motor planning
phase. Of course, further studies should be made about encoding
hand movement acceleration to verify this hypothesis.
The improved decoding accuracy of the peak speed and acceleration could benefit BCI development. Marathe and Taylor
[39] proposed a new option that BCI performance could be improved by remapping the decoded movement parameters to a
different control parameter. For example, the position decoding
errors were impossible to overcome. However, we can estimate
the movement trajectory using the better predicted velocity and

YANG et al.: EEG ACTIVITY DURING MOVEMENT PLANNING ENCODES UPCOMING PEAK SPEED AND ACCELERATION

acceleration based on some reasonable assumptions. In the future, this indirect estimated trajectory is to be compared to the
trajectory directly predicted using the brain activity.
APPENDIX
See Figs. 6 and 7 at the top of the previous page.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. McFarland, W. A. Sarnacki, and J. R. Wolpaw, “Electroencephalographic (EEG) control of three-dimensional movement,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 7, p. 036007, 2010.
[2] D. Huang, P. Lin, D. Fei, X. Chen, and O. Bai, “Decoding human motor
activity from EEG single trials for a discrete two-dimensional cursor
control,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 6, p. 046005, 2009.
[3] L. Yang and H. Leung, “An online BCI game based on the decoding of
users’ attention to color stimulus,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 5267–5270.
[4] D. Huang, K. Qian, D. Fei, W. Jia, X. Chen, and O. Bai, “Electroencephalography (EEG)-based brain–computer interface (BCI): A
2-D virtual wheelchair control based on event-related desynchronization/synchronization and state control,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 379–388, May 2012.
[5] K. Tanaka, K. Matsunaga, and H. O. Wang, “Electroencephalogram-based
control of an electric wheelchair,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 762–766, Aug. 2005.
[6] E. K. Chadwick, D. Blana, J. D. Simeral, J. Lambrecht, S. P. Kim, A. S.
Cornwell, D. M. Taylor, L. R. Hochberg, J. P. Donoghue, and R. F. Kirsch,
“Continuous neuronal ensemble control of simulated arm reaching by a
human with tetraplegia,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, p. 034003, 2011.
[7] J. Lee, J. Ryu, F. A. Jolesz, Z. Cho, and S. Yoo, “Brain–machine interface
via real-time fMRI: Preliminary study on thought-controlled robotic arm,”
Neurosci. Lett., vol. 450, pp. 1–6, Jan. 23, 2009.
[8] S. Vernon and S. S. Joshi, “Brain–muscle–computer interface: Mobilephone prototype development and testing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 531–538, Jul. 2011.
[9] R. S. Woodworth, “The accuracy of voluntary movement,” Psych. Rev.,
vol. 3, pp. 1–106, 1899.
[10] R. Vinjamuri, D. J. Weber, Z.-H. Mao, J. L. Collinger, A. D. Degenhart,
J. W. Kelly, M. L. Boninger, E. C. Tyler-Kabara, and W. Wang, “Toward synergy-based brain-machine interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 726–736, Sep. 2011.
[11] R. Vinjamuri, M. Sun, C.-C. Chang, H.-N. Lee, R. J. Sclabassi, and Z.-H.
Mao, “Temporal postural synergies of the hand in rapid grasping tasks,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 986–994, Jul. 2010.
[12] P. Herman, G. Prasad, T. M. McGinnity, and D. Coyle, “Comparative
analysis of spectral approaches to feature extraction for EEG-based motor
imagery classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 317–326, Aug. 2008.
[13] H. Yuan, C. Perdoni, and B. He, “Relationship between speed and EEG
activity during imagined and executed hand movements,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 7, p. 026001, 2010.
[14] W. Wu, X. Gao, B. Hong, and S. Gao, “Classifying single-trial EEG during
motor imagery by iterative spatio-spectral patterns learning (ISSPL),”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1733–1743, Jun. 2008.
[15] T. J. Bradberry, R. J. Gentili, and J. L. Contreras-Vidal, “Reconstructing
three-dimensional hand movements from noninvasive electroencephalographic signals,” J. Neuroscience, vol. 30, pp. 3432–3437, 2010.
[16] K. LaFleur, K. Cassady, A. Doud, K. Shades, E. Rogin, and B. He,
“Quadcopter control in three-dimensional space using a noninvasive motor imagery-based brain–computer interface,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10,
p. 046003, 2013.
[17] F. Pichiorri, D. V. Fallani, F. Cincotti, F. Babiloni, M. Molinari, S. C. Kleih,
C. Neuper, A. Kübler, and D. Mattia, “Sensorimotor rhythm-based brain–
computer interface training: The impact on motor cortical responsiveness,”
J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, p. 025020, 2011.
[18] G. Pfurtscheller, C. Brunner, A. Schlögl, and F. H. Lopes Da Silva, “Mu
rhythm (de)synchronization and EEG single-trial classification of different motor imagery tasks,” Neuroimage, vol. 31, pp. 153–159, May 15,
2006.
[19] H. G. Yeom, “Estimation of the velocity and trajectory of threedimensional reaching movements from non-invasive magnetoencephalography signals,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, p. 026006, 2013.

27

[20] T. J. Bradberry, F. Rong, and J. L. Contreras-Vidal, “Decoding center-out
hand velocity from MEG signals during visuomotor adaptation,” Neuroimage, vol. 47, pp. 1691–1700, Oct. 1, 2009.
[21] E. Lew, R. Chavarriaga, H. Zhang, M. Seeck, and J. R. Del Millan, “Selfpaced movement intention detection from human brain signals: Invasive
and non-invasive EEG,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2012, pp. 3280–3283.
[22] P. S. Hammon, S. Makeig, H. Poizner, E. Todorov, and V. R. De Sa,
“Predicting reaching targets from human EEG,” IEEE Signal Process.
Mag., vol. 25, pp. 69–77, Jan. 2008.
[23] D. Novak, X. Omlin, R. Leins-Hess, and R. Riener, “Predicting targets
of human reaching motions using different sensing technologies,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2645–2654, Sep. 2013.
[24] B. Perfetti, C. Moisello, E. C. Landsness, S. Kvint, A. Pruski, M. Onofrj,
G. Tononi, and M. F. Ghilardi, “Temporal evolution of oscillatory activity predicts performance in a choice-reaction time reaching task,” J.
Neurophysiol., vol. 105, pp. 18–24, 2011.
[25] F. R. Willett, A. J. Suminski, A. H. Fagg, and N. G. Hatsopoulos, “Improving brain–machine interface performance by decoding intended future
movements,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, p. 026011, 2013.
[26] R. D. Seidler, D. C. Noll, and G. Thiers, “Feedforward and feedback
processes in motor control,” Neuroimage, vol. 22, pp. 1775–1783, Aug.
2004.
[27] R. C. Oldfield, “The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh inventory,” Neuropsychologia, vol. 9, pp. 97–113, 1971.
[28] F. Sharbrough, G. Chatrian, R. Lesser, H. Lüders, M. Nuwer, and T. Picton,
“American electroencephalographic society guidelines for standard electrode position nomenclature,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 8, pp. 200–202,
1991.
[29] A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 134, pp. 9–21, 2004.
[30] A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski, “An information-maximization approach
to blind separation and blind deconvolution,” Neural Comput., vol. 7,
pp. 1129–1159, 1995.
[31] J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, and
T. M. Vaughan, “Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 113, pp. 767–791, 2002.
[32] D. P. Subha, P. K. Joseph, U. R. Acharya, and C. M. Lim, “EEG signal
analysis: A survey,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 34, pp. 195–212, 2010.
[33] H. A. Agashe and J. L. Contreras-Vidal, “Reconstructing hand kinematics
during reach to grasp movements from electroencephalographic signals,”
in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 5444–5447.
[34] A. Presacco, L. W. Forrester, and J. L. Contreras-Vidal, “Decoding intralimb and inter-limb kinematics during treadmill walking from scalp electroencephalographic (EEG) signals,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 212–219, Mar. 2012.
[35] J. M. Antelis, L. Montesano, A. Ramos-Murguialday, N. Birbaumer and
J. Minguez, “On the usage of linear regression models to reconstruct
limb kinematics from low frequency EEG signals,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8,
p. e61976, 2013.
[36] J. Black, N. Hashimzade and G. Myles, A Dictionary of Economics. London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2009.
[37] J. Gordon, M. Ghilardi, and C. Ghez, “Accuracy of planar reaching movements. I. Independence of direction and extent variability,” Exp Brain Res.,
vol. 99, pp. 97–111, 1994.
[38] J. Gordon, M. F. Ghilardi, and C. Ghez, “Accuracy of planar reaching movements. II. Systematic extent errors resulting from inertial
anisotropy,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 99, pp. 112–130, 1994.
[39] A. R. Marathe and D. M. Taylor, “Decoding position, velocity, or goal:
Does it matter for brain–machine interfaces?” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8,
p. 025016, 2011.

Lingling Yang is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in the Department of Computer Science, City
University of Hong Kong and expected to graduate
in October 2014.
Her research interests include brain computer interfaces, neuroprosthetics, biomedical signal processing, and machine learning.

28

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Howard Leung received the B.Eng. degree in electrical engineering from McGill University, Canada,
in 1998, the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 1999 and 2003,
respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science at City University of
Hong Kong. His current research projects include
brain computer interface, EEG data analysis, 3-D human motion capture and analysis, intelligent tools for
Chinese handwriting education, web-based learning technologies. He is also
supervising the 3-D Motion Capture Laboratory (http://mocap.cs.cityu.edu.hk)
which promotes the 3-D motion capture technology for research and teaching.
At present, he is the Treasurer of Hong Kong Web Society.

Markus Plank received the diploma degree in psychology from the University Trier, Germany, in 2005,
and the doctoral degree in psychology/neuroscience
from Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany, in 2009.
He is a Scientific Consultant at Brain Products, Germany. His primary interest is in innovative methodological and computational approaches to mobile brain imaging. His postdoctoral research at the Poizner Lab (UCSD, CA,
USA) focused primarily on neurophysiological correlates of spatial learning and memory in VR utilizing ICA and source
reconstruction.

Joseph Snider received the B.A. degree in physics
from the University of Chicago, USA, in 1998 and
the Ph.D. degree in physics from the University of
California, Irvine, in 2004.
He is a Research Scientist in the Institute of Neural
Computation, University of California, San Diego,
CA, USA. He is trained as a computational physicist and now applies computational and theoretical
techniques to the large-scale datasets created by the
combination of neural and movement recordings.

Howard Poizner received the B.A. degree from the
University of Texas, Austin and the M.A. and Ph.D.
degrees in cognitive neuroscience from Northeastern
University, in 1977.
He is a Research Scientist in the Institute of Neural Computation, a member of the Program in Neurosciences, the Institute for Engineering in Medicine,
and the Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind at the University of California, San Diego. He is also Professor
Emeritus of Neuroscience at Rutgers University. He
was a postdoc, staff scientist, and Associate Director
of the Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies from 1978 to 1989. From 1989 to 2004, he was a Professor and
then Distinguished Professor of Neuroscience at Rutgers University. He came to
UCSD in 2005. His research interests involve unsupervised learning, the neural
control of movement and the integration of brain and movement recordings in
virtual environments.
Dr. Poizner is the 2002 recipient of the Rutgers University Board of Trustees
Excellence in Research Award.

