IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1781

Monitoring Arterial Pulse Waves With Synchronous
Body Sensor Network
Mikko Peltokangas, Antti Vehkaoja, Jarmo Verho, Matti Huotari, Juha Röning, and Jukka Lekkala

Abstract—A wireless body sensor network for arterial pulse
wave (PW) measurements is presented and tested with ten subjects. The system is capable of recording both mechanical PW contours with sensors made of a low-cost polypropylene-based material called electromechanical film (EMFi) and volume pulse signal
with photoplethysmographic transducers. By using both types of
sensors, the PW contours can be recorded from various locations.
The system combined with automatic analysis methods enables to
easily analyze the PW contours in order to obtain a more comprehensive view on the vascular health. To demonstrate this, two
parameters used in literature, reflection index and radial augmentation index were calculated for the test subjects as a function of
time. The results show that these parameter values may vary more
than 20% in a period of 100 s, which suggests that a large number
of PWs should be analyzed before making conclusions based on the
calculated indices. In addition, the effects of the static bias force to
the mechanical PW signal recorded with the EMFi sensors were
studied. The PW signal with the maximum amplitude is obtained
when the pressure caused by the static bias force corresponds to
the contact pressure between typical systolic and diastolic blood
pressures. The EMFi sensors used in the proposed system are a
potential low-cost alternative for tonometric sensors in collecting
data in the PW analysis for arterial screening.
Index Terms—Body sensor networks, electromechanical sensors,
photoplethysmography, pulse measurements.

contraction of the heart and releasing the stored energy gradually during the diastole. However, the elasticity of the arteries
decreases with age, but also the unhealthy lifestyle speeds up
the arterial degeneration [2]. The arteries are stiffened since the
properties of the arterial wall material are changed: the elastin
lamellae on the arterial wall are fatigued, becoming replaced
by collagen fibers and this leads to thicker and stiffer arterial
walls resulting a disease called arteriosclerosis [2]. Stiffened arterial walls are not capable of storing the energy carried by the
pulse wave (PW) and this increases the systolic blood pressure
(BP) and the left ventricular load [2]. The increased systolic BP
stresses the stiffened arteries heavily, speeding up the degeneration of the arteries. This increases the risk of the fractures in the
arterial walls that may cause severe dysfunction of vital organs,
such as cerebral hemorrhage and even premature death.
Valuable information on the arterial elasticity can be obtained
by analyzing arterial PW contours and pulse wave velocity
(PWV) that depend on the arterial elasticity [2]–[6]. The PWV
can be expressed either by using Bramwell-Hill equation [4] as

AΔp
(1)
PWV =
ΔAρ

C

or Moens–Korteweg [4] equation as

Eh
PWV =
.
2ρr

Manuscript received November 27, 2013; revised May 26, 2014; accepted
May 27, 2014. Date of publication June 4, 2014; date of current version November 3, 2014. The work was supported by the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (TEKES) as a part of the project Human Body Embedded
Physiological Monitoring System (HealthSens, under Grant 40150/12).
M. Peltokangas, A. Vehkaoja, J. Verho, and J. Lekkala are with the Department of Automation Science and Engineering, Tampere University of
Technology, 33720 Tampere, Finland (e-mail: mikko.peltokangas@tut.fi;
antti.vehkaoja@tut.fi; jarmo.verho@tut.fi; jukka.lekkala@tut.fi).
M. Huotari and J. Röning are with the Oulu University, 90570 Oulu, Finland
(e-mail: matti.huotari@ee.oulu.fi; juha.roning@oulu.fi).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2328788

In (1) and (2), A and ΔA represent the arterial lumen area and
its changes due to the pulse pressure Δp, ρ is the density of
the blood, E and h are the Young’s modulus and the thickness of the arterial wall, and r is the radius of the artery. Both
equations show that the PWV is higher in degenerated stiffened
arteries than in healthy elastic arteries. The dependence between
the arterial elasticity and PWV provides the physical basis for
the PW analysis since the observed PW is a superposition of a
percussion wave that is induced by the heartbeat and its reflections from the impedance discontinuities of the central arterial
network (see Fig. 1) [7]–[9]. The percussion wave and its reflections overlap in the measured PW contour (see Fig. 1), so its
shape depends on the arrival times of each reflection and, thus,
the PWV and the arterial elasticity.
In this study, we present a wireless body sensor network
which is capable of measuring multiple channels of the PW
data synchronously from different locations on the body. Also
the ECG and respiration signals are simultaneously recorded by
the system. The benefit of a multichannel measurement setup
is that a more comprehensive view of cardiovascular health can
be obtained as the PW contours differ between the different

I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
ARDIOVASCULAR diseases (CVDs) are globally the
biggest cause of death, killing over 17.3 million people
in 2008. The number equals to 30% of the whole mortality
in that year. Unfortunately, the annual number of CVD-related
deaths is still expected to rise to over 23 million by year 2030
due to aging population and unhealthy lifestyle [1]. To diagnose
the latent disorders of CVDs, there is a need for an easy-to-use
method to evaluate the vascular condition in order to motivate
people suffering from such disorders to change their lifestyle to
healthier direction or to provide them a proper medication.
Healthy elastic arteries are capable of storing energy carried
by a systolic pressure pulse as a result of the left ventricular

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(2)

1782

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Radial Pulse Wave

PW amplitude (a.u.)

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Time (s)

Fig. 1. Radial PW from a 24-year-old test subject. Also the principle of the
overlapping of the percussion wave and its reflections is shown in dashed.

arterial sites depending on the arterial conditions and locations
of possible occlusions.
II. RELATED WORK
Current gold standard for studying the vascular condition
is based on the use of ultrasonic transducers. The ultrasonic
transducers are used to measure the intima media thickness of
the carotid artery or detecting the pulse onsets in the carotid
and femoral arteries for carotid-femoral PWV determination.
However, the use of the ultrasonic device requires a skilled
operator to perform the experiment, and this limits the usage of
these methods in systematic vascular screening [10], [11].
In related studies, the PW refers either to a volume pulse
or a pressure pulse. Thus, the data for the pulse analysis are
recorded as a pressure-dependent signal with force sensors or
as a peripheral blood volume dependent photoplethysmogram
(PPG). The information content of these two signals is different
because of a nonlinear pressure–volume dependence [12] and
because of the recording sites of these two signals are usually
different.
In the widely used noninvasive PPG technique, as, e.g., in
[3], [6], [9], and [12], the light is focused to the tissue and the
absorption of the light is determined by measuring the intensity
of transmitted or scattered light. Both of them are affected by
the varying peripheral blood volume caused by the pulsating
blood perfusion.
Another noninvasive method for the arterial PW recordings
is to place a force sensor on the pulsating artery. These kind
of PW signals are traditionally recorded by using expensive
high-fidelity applanation tonometry devices [2]. An alternative
technique for recording pressure-related PW signals is the use
of the sensors made of electromechanical film (EMFi) [9], [13].
A low unit price of the EMFi sensor enables to measure the PW
signal cost effectively from multiple body locations, which is
beneficial when studying the arterial condition.
In the analysis point of view, various indices derived from the
PW contours have been proposed in the literature to describe
the arterial condition. Takazawa et al. [3] proposed a parameter
called aging index (AGI) which is based on the second derivative of a index finger PPG. Parameters called reflection index
(RI) and stiffness index are calculated from the PPG signal
based on the locations and heights of the diastolic and systolic

peaks [5]. The pressure PW contours recorded from the carotid
and radial arteries have been analyzed by calculating different
augmentation indices (AIx) that are based on the amplitudes
of two systolic peaks [14]. However, currently the use of these
parameters is mainly limited to research purposes. There are
also studies that suggest different kind of PW decompositions
as a startpoint for the PW analysis. In the PW decomposition,
individual PW contours are presented as a sum of 2–5 highly
nonlinear basis functions [6], [9], [15], [16].
Without automatic analysis methods, the results of PW contour analysis are often studied only for a relatively short period
of PW signal by using a small number of PW contours. However, the beat-to-beat variation of the indices can be high even
for healthy subjects. For instance, the difference between the
AGI values computed from two consecutive PW contours can
be as high as 39% of the whole scale of the AGI [17].
III. MEASUREMENT SETUP
Our PW measurement system consists of wireless sensor
nodes and a network coordinator that communicates with a
computer through the USB. The synchronous sensor network
is partially based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard and it uses
time division multiple access as the mechanism for the bandwidth management. The maximum number of sensor nodes in
one measurement network is 8 and the transfer distance is approximately 50 m with full transmit power (0 dBm) in open
field.
In the proposed system, there are three different types of
sensor nodes: 1) two-channel force sensor nodes for pressure
PW measurements (see Fig. 2), 2) one-channel PPG nodes
for volume pulse measurements as well as, and 3) ECG and
respiration nodes. Each force sensor channel is equipped with
a dynamic force sensor and a piezoresistive static force sensor
(see Fig. 2). The dynamic force sensors are used for the PW
measurements, whereas the static force sensors can be utilized
in adjusting the proper static bias force that flattens the artery
for obtaining good-quality PW signal.
The sample rate for the dynamic force sensors is 250 Hz
and for the static force sensors 10.4 Hz. The PPG sensor
nodes measure one channel with 500-Hz sample rate and the
ECG/respiration nodes one ECG lead and one respiration channel with 250 Hz each. The recorded signals are sampled synchronously by using a 16-bit analog-to-digital converter. The
network structure includes additional transmission time slots
for retransmissions, thus allowing an average packet loss rate of
up to 25% without losing the data. When analyzing the recorded
signals, it was found that only 0.02% of the total amount of data
was lost in the wireless data transmission.
A. Force Sensor Nodes
The dynamic force sensors for the PW measurements are
made of a material called EMFi. EMFi is a permanently charged
electret material and consists of multiple polypropylene layers
separated by air voids [18]. When an external dynamic force
is applied on a piece of EMFi, the thickness of the air voids
changes, modifying the internal charge distribution that causes

PELTOKANGAS et al.: MONITORING ARTERIAL PULSE WAVES WITH SYNCHRONOUS BODY SENSOR NETWORK

(a)

1783

(b)

Fig. 2. a) Side and top views for the force sensor node and its placement on the artery. The EMFi sensor is under the plastic contact piece and the piezoresistive
static force sensor is under the EMFi sensor. b) Photograph of a force sensor node with two sensors.

a displacement charge to the electrodes covering the surfaces
of EMFi. The charge Δq generated by a dynamic force ΔF
exerted on EMFi sensor is expressed as
Δq = SΔF

(3)

where S is the sensitivity. The charge is turned into voltage ΔV
as
SΔF
ΔV =
(4)
C
where C is the capacitance seen at input of a voltage amplifier.
[18]
The schematic and photographic presentations of a force sensor node are shown in Fig. 2. The circular EMFi sensors used in
our system have a diameter of 20 mm. However, having a direct
skin contact with this large sensor does not produce good-quality
PW signals. For this reason, a rounded plastic contact piece having the contact area of approximately half of the sensor area is
attached on each sensor to press the pulsating artery and to focus the force transmission from the artery to the sensor. Each
EMFi sensor is fixed on a rigid backplate with a piezoresistive
static force sensor (FlexiForce A401 by Tekscan). The sensors
with the rigid backplate are fixed on each measurement point by
using textile bands around the limbs.
To verify that the mass of the contact piece does not affect
the spectral content of the recorded mechanical PW signal, additional measurements with another type of EMFi sensor with a
direct skin contact were performed. As a result of these experiments, the spectral contents and scaled time domain presentations of the simultaneously measured signals were found to be
equivalent.
In the electronics point of view, the preamplifier stage of
the EMFi sensors is a noninverting voltage amplifier, and the
total voltage gain of the EMFi signal is 13.2. This corresponds
roughly to the sensitivity of 1 V/N in our measurement setup.
The passband of the EMFi signals is limited to 50 mHz–100 Hz.
B. Force Sensor Placement
Eight EMFi sensors (Emfit Ltd.) are used on different arterial
locations as shown in Fig. 3. The measurement sites for the
EMFi sensors are both wrists (radial arteries) and the bends

Fig. 3. Sensor placement. The measurement sites with the similar marker
indicate that the sensors placed on these points are connected to the same sensor
node.

of the arms (brachial arteries), the neck (left and right common
carotid arteries), and both ankles (posterior tibial arteries). These
measurement sites were selected due to the existence of a large
artery near the skin surface.
C. PPG, ECG, and Respiration Measurements
While four sensor nodes of eight are equipped with the force
sensors, three nodes are used for the PPG measurements and
one node for the ECG and respiration measurements. Each PPG
node measures the transmitted or scattered infrared (IR) light
(wavelength 905 nm) with a photodiode. Two of the PPG sensors

1784

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Examples of different signals
0.40

ECG
PPG Forehead

are used to record transmitted IR light through the index finger
and the second toe (see Fig. 3). The third PPG sensor measures
the scattered IR light on the forehead (see Fig. 3). The lowfrequency baseline variations of the PPG signals are high-pass
filtered with a cutoff frequency of 0.15 Hz.
Bipolar ECG is recorded by two disposable Ag/AgCl electrodes placed under the right clavicle and on the left lower
abdomen (see Fig. 3). The ECG is used in recording the heart
rate and to assist in the PW detection for further analysis. The
ECG signal is recorded by using a passband of 0.2–40 Hz.
Because the respiration normally affects the heart rate and
also the PWV, the other channel of the ECG node is equipped
with an NTC thermistor integrated into a respiration mask. The
recorded respiration signal is bandpass filtered for a band of
3.4 mHz–40 Hz.
IV. TEST MEASUREMENTS AND DATA PROCESSING
The system was tested on ten subjects. The ages of the subjects
were 22–64 years and they were healthy without diagnosed cardiovascular disorders. The measurements were made in supine
posture and the data were collected for at least 10 min. The goal
of these measurements was to determine which measurement
points provide the best signal for the PW analysis, as well as to
see how much there are variations over the time in the parameters extracted from the PW signals. In addition, we validated
the suitability of the EMFi sensors for the PW recording. In that
experiment, we compared the pulse signal recorded with EMFi
to the pulse signal simultaneously recorded with a commercial
SphygmoCor applanation tonometer from test subject 6.
The values of two parameters, RI, and radial augmentation
index (rAIx), were calculated for all subjects for a 100-s period
in order to see how the features of PW contours vary with time.
The RI is calculated as the ratio of the amplitudes of the diastolic
(C) and the systolic (AP ) waves of the PPG signal from the left
index finger (see Fig. 4) as [5]
RI =

C
AP

(5)

and the rAIx is calculated as the ratio of the amplitudes of early
(AE ) and late (B) systolic waves of the EMFi signal from the
left wrist as [14]
B
rAIx =
.
AE

(6)

The amplitudes AP , AE , B, and C are illustrated in Fig. 4. If
the PW contour does not have a local maximum at point B or C,

PPG Toe

1.54
0.61

PPG Finger

0.48

L. Ankle
R. Ankle

0.48

L. Carotid

0.35

R. Carotid

0.35
2.64

R. Radial

2.64

R. Brachial

1.00

L. Radial

1.00
0

L. Brachial
0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Time (s)
Fig. 5. Examples of PW signals from different measurement points from a
25-year-old man. The signals are normalized by dividing with the normalization
factors shown on the left.

Pulse waves from PPG and EMFi sensors
Subject 1

Amplitude (normalized)

Fig. 4. Early systolic peak A P and diastolic peak C for the PW obtained
from PPG signal from left index finger (left panel) and early systolic peak A E
and late systolic peak B for the PW recorded with EMFi sensor the left wrist
(right panel).

Amplitude (normalized)

1.45

Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5
Subject 6
Subject 7
Subject 8
Subject 9
Subject 10

PPG

EMFi

Fig. 6. Examples of normalized PW contours for each test subject from the
index finger PPG signal and from the radial artery EMFi signal.

higher order derivative analysis is performed to find the values
of B and C [14].
Further, the effects of the static bias force on the EMFi sensor
signal from the radial artery were studied. These measurements
were performed by placing the EMFi sensor on the radial artery
as normally, and then inserting a set of plastic plates between
the wristband and the dorsal site of the arm. The plastic plates
were removed one-by-one in order to gradually decrease the
static bias force.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Signals From Different Measurement Points
Examples of recorded good-quality PW signals from different locations are shown in Fig. 5. In addition, PW signals
from the left index finger (PPG) and the radial artery (EMFi)
are shown in Fig. 6 for each test subject. The shape of the

PELTOKANGAS et al.: MONITORING ARTERIAL PULSE WAVES WITH SYNCHRONOUS BODY SENSOR NETWORK

1785

Amplitude (a.u.)

Pulse waves measured with EMFi and SphygmoCor
EMFi
SphygmoCor

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Time (s)
Fig. 7. Examples of PW contours recorded from subject 6 with EMFi (right
wrist) and SphygmoCor tonometer (left wrist) show very similar characteristics.

recorded PW contours varies between different measurement
sites (see Fig. 5), between different body positions, from person
to person (see Fig. 6) and between different sensor modalities.
The signal amplitudes are normalized in Figs. 5 and 6, but the
actual amplitudes of the signals from different recording sites
may vary about one order of magnitude. In all test subjects, the
mechanical PW signals with the best signal-to-noise ratios were
recorded from the wrists and the bends of the arms. Also all
the PPG signals from the forehead, index finger, and the second
toe were clear for visual interpretation. For some test subjects,
finding the correct placement for the EMFi sensor at ankles and
neck was challenging. Thus, the PW signals from the upper
limbs seem to be more suitable, e.g., for the quick screening of
the cardiovascular system.
Even though it is possible to record PWs from various measurement points, the analysis methods found in the literature
have been proposed mainly for the radial PWs and finger PPGs.
However, the measurement and analysis of the PW signals also
from the lower limbs could be a useful tool in studying the risk
for the vascular diseases (e.g., intermittent claudication) or the
severity of the diseases that cause symptoms only in the lower
limbs [19].
B. Comparison Between EMFi and Applanation Tonometer
The differences between the PW contours recorded with
EMFi sensors and a commercial applanation tonometry device
were studied. Based on our test, the very similar features are
widely seen in both sensor signals as in the example shown in
Fig. 7. This suggests that the EMFi is a potential low-cost alternative for recording data for the PW analysis for the vascular
health evaluation. However, the EMFi sensors are only sensitive
to dynamic forces whereas the tonometric sensors measure also
static forces. This limits the suitability of EMFi sensors, e.g.,
for tonometric BP measurements.
C. Reflection Index (RI) and Radial Augmentation Index (rAIx)
Beat-to-beat variability of the selected parameters, RI and
radial AIx (rAIx), were studied by computing their values for
each heart beat for a 100-s period. The RI is calculated from the
index finger PPG signal, whereas the rAIx is obtained from the
EMFi signal from the left wrist. The results for the RI and rAIx
are shown along with the respiration sensor output in Fig. 8.
Although some of the most spiky features in Fig. 8 are caused
by errors in the automated signal processing, the notable beat-to-

Fig. 8. RI and rAIx as a function of time for each test subject. Also the output
of the respiration sensor is shown.

Fig. 9. Examples of the rAIx and RI determination from the different PWs of
test subject 2 show that the parameter values vary from PW to PW.

beat variation (see Fig. 9) of both parameters indicates that the
analysis of a large number of PW contours could provide a more
reliable view on the vascular health than the analysis of only
a small number of individual PW contours. For instance, test
subject 1 has a temporary rise of approximately 20% in the value
of RI at 60–75 s. In addition to this, there are clear respirationsynchronous variations in the parameter values with most of the
subjects. Therefore, the analysis of only individual PW contours
may lead to totally wrong conclusions of the subject’s vascular
health.
For 22-year-old test subjects 4 and 5, the values of rAIx
time series are much closer to each other than the values of
their RI time series. This could be explained by the fact that
pressure and volume PWs are not linearly dependent on each
other [12]. Furthermore, the variation in the characteristics of
the PW morphology is wide from person to person as shown
in Fig. 6. For this reason, we believe that not only the arterial
condition but also other physiological reasons, such as BP or
the exact anatomical structure of arterial tree, may also affect

1786

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 10. Dependence of the mean radial artery PW amplitude on the supporting
bias force for three test subjects.

Fig. 11. Radial PW contours with optimal and too high bias forces from the
same test subject.

VI. CONCLUSION
to the PW morphology. Thus, single simple features such as
RI or rAIx should not be used alone to evaluate the arterial
condition. In this point of view, the automatic analysis methods
that produce multiple parameters from the PW signals measured from the various arterial sites with different techniques
could provide better understanding on the vascular condition.
Also novel parameters based on, e.g., the PW decomposition
analysis could provide additional information on the vascular
health.

D. Effects of Static Force
It was observed in the test measurements that the strength of
the effects of the static bias force to the PW amplitude are
personal and probably depend on the structure of the measurement site. The effects of the static bias force may be affected also by the skin-sensor contact and the temporary variations in the BP levels. In an earlier study, ±40% change in
the static force caused as high as 80% decrease in PW amplitude [20]. The amplitude of the PW contour recorded with
a PPG probe on the left index finger was not affected by the
bias force of the EMFi sensor on the left wrist that shows that
the two sensor modalities can be safely colocated to the same
limb.
When the static bias force is too small, the sensor does not stay
on the measurement site or does not flatten the artery enough. In
an opposite case, the EMFi sensor with too high bias force occludes the artery and attenuates its pulsations. The most optimal
static bias force is typically 2–3 N (see Fig. 10). These forces
correspond to the contact pressures of 90–140 mmHg for the
sensing area of approximately 1.6 cm2 , and these contact pressures are between the typical systolic and diastolic BP readings.
In such situation, the total loading of the arterial wall reaches
its minimum.
Besides the PW amplitude, also the shape of the PW contour
is affected by the bias force as seen in Fig. 11. If the applied bias
force is too high, the PW morphology is distorted: in Fig. 11,
the level of the dicrotic notch falls even under the baseline of
the PW signal. The changes in the PW contour morphology are
even more important aspects than the changing amplitude when
calculating the indices based on the waveform of individual
PWs.

A wireless synchronous body sensor network for the arterial
PW measurements is presented. The system allows to record
both mechanical PW signals by using EMFi sensors and volume pulse signals by using PPG transducers. Both types of
signals provide valuable information about the arterial elasticity. Because the signals recorded with the EMFi sensors follow
the shape of PWs recorded with a commercial pressure transducer, the EMFi is a potential low-cost alternative for expensive tonometric sensors. However, when using the EMFi sensor,
it is important to adjust the static bias force that flattens the
artery to an appropriate level to obtain the PW signal without
distortion.
Especially, the mechanical PW signals recorded from the upper limbs have a high signal-to-noise ratio. The signals recorded
from the lower limbs are more challenging to record although
they could provide additional information on the vascular diseases related to the lower limbs. When studying the indices
derived from the individual PW contours, the values of the parameters contain notable variations even in as short as a 100-s
period, caused not only by the respiration but also by the fluctuations of the autonomous nervous system. For this reason,
advanced automatic analysis methods could provide a more
comprehensive view on the cardiovascular health than a manual analysis of a small number of PW contours. However, more
studies are needed to verify the clinical significance of the data
recorded with the proposed system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all the volunteer test subjects
for their valuable contribution to the study.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Alwan, and World Health Organization, Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 2010. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2011.
[2] M. F. O’Rourke and J. Hashimoto, “Mechanical factors in arterial aging:
A clinical perspective,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 1–13,
2007.
[3] K. Takazawa, N. Tanaka, M. Fujita, O. Matsuoka, T. Saiki, M. Aikawa,
S. Tamura, and C. Ibukiyama, “Assessment of vasoactive agents and vascular aging by the second derivative of photoplethysmogram waveform,”
Hypertension, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 365–370, 1998.
[4] N. Westerhof, N. Stergiopulos, and M. Noble, Snapshots of Hemodynamics: An Aid for Clinical Research and Graduate Education. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2010.

PELTOKANGAS et al.: MONITORING ARTERIAL PULSE WAVES WITH SYNCHRONOUS BODY SENSOR NETWORK

[5] S. C. Millasseau, J. M. Ritter, K. Takazawa, and P. J. Chowienczyk,
“Contour analysis of the photoplethysmographic pulse measured at the
finger,” J. Hypertension, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1449–1456, 2006.
[6] U. Rubins, “Finger and ear photoplethysmogram waveform analysis by
fitting with Gaussians,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 46, no. 12,
pp. 1271–1276, 2008.
[7] M. C. Baruch, D. E. Warburton, S. S. Bredin, A. Cote, D. W. Gerdt, and
C. M. Adkins, “Pulse decomposition analysis of the digital arterial pulse
during hemorrhage simulation,” Nonlinear Biomed. Phys., vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 1–15, 2011.
[8] R. D. Latham, N. Westerhof, P. Sipkema, B. J. Rubal, P. Reuderink, and
J. P. Murgo, “Regional wave travel and reflections along the human aorta:
A study with six simultaneous micromanometric pressures,” Circulation,
vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 1257–1269, 1985.
[9] M. Huotari, A. Vehkaoja, K. Määttä, and J. Kostamovaara, “Photoplethysmography and its detailed pulse waveform analysis for arterial stiffness,”
J. Struct. Mech., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 345–362, 2011.
[10] M. L. Bots, A. W. Hoes, P. J. Koudstaal, A. Hofman, and D. E. Grobbee,
“Common carotid intima-media thickness and risk of stroke and myocardial infarction: The rotterdam study,” Circulation, vol. 96, no. 5, pp.
1432–1437, 1997.
[11] J. Sugawara, K. Hayashi, T. Yokoi, and H. Tanaka, “Carotid-femoral pulse
wave velocity: Impact of different arterial path length measurements,”
Artery Res., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 27–31, 2010.
[12] J. Talts, R. Raamat, and K. Jagomägi, “ Asymmetric time-dependent model
for the dynamic finger arterial pressure-volume relationship,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 829–834, 2006.
[13] J. Alametsä, A. Palomäki, and J. Viik, “Short and longer term repeatability
of ballistocardiography in a sitting position with EMFI sensor,” Med.
Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 881–889, 2011.

1787

[14] V. Melenovsky, B. A. Borlaug, B. Fetics, K. Kessler, L. Shively, and D.
A. Kass, “Estimation of central pressure augmentation using automated
radial artery tonometry,” J. Hypertension, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1403–1409,
2007.
[15] D. Goswami, K. Chaudhuri, and J. Mukherjee, “A new two-pulse synthesis
model for digital volume pulse signal analysis,” Cardiovascular Eng., vol.
10, no. 3, pp. 109–117, 2010.
[16] L. Wang, L. Xu, S. Feng, M. Q.-H. Meng, and K. Wang, “Multi-gaussian
fitting for pulse waveform using weighted least squares and multi-criteria
decision making method,” Comput. Biology Med., vol. 43, no. 11, pp.
1661–1672, 2013.
[17] K. Pilt, R. Ferenets, K. Meigas, L.-G. Lindberg, K. Temitski, and M. Viigimaa, “New photoplethysmographic signal analysis algorithm for arterial
stiffness estimation,” Scientific World J., vol. 2013, p. 9, 2013.
[18] J. Lekkala, and M. Paajanen, “Emfi-new electret material for sensors and
actuators,” in Proc. 10th Int. Symp. Electrets, 1999, pp. 743–746.
[19] S. A. Carter, “Indirect systolic pressures and pulse waves in arterial occlusive disease of the lower extremities,” Circulation, vol. 37, no. 4, pp.
624–637, 1968.
[20] M. Peltokangas, J. Verho, T. Salpavaara, and A. Vehkaoja, “Non-invasive
system for mechanical arterial pulse wave measurements,” in Proc. XIII
Mediterr. Conf. Med. Biol. Eng. Comp., 2014, pp. 1493–1496.

Authors’ photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

