IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

57

Improving Compliance in Remote Healthcare
Systems Through Smartphone Battery Optimization
Nabil Alshurafa, Student Member, IEEE, Jo-Ann Eastwood, Suneil Nyamathi, Student Member, IEEE,
Jason J. Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Wenyao Xu, Member, IEEE, Hassan Ghasemzadeh, Member, IEEE,
Mohammad Pourhomayoun, Member, IEEE, and Majid Sarrafzadeh, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Remote health monitoring (RHM) has emerged as a
solution to help reduce the cost burden of unhealthy lifestyles and
aging populations. Enhancing compliance to prescribed medical
regimens is an essential challenge to many systems, even those using smartphone technology. In this paper, we provide a technique to
improve smartphone battery consumption and examine the effects
of smartphone battery lifetime on compliance, in an attempt to enhance users’ adherence to remote monitoring systems. We deploy
WANDA-CVD, an RHM system for patients at risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD), using a wearable smartphone for detection
of physical activity. We tested the battery optimization technique
in an in-lab pilot study and validated its effects on compliance in
the Women’s Heart Health Study. The battery optimization technique enhanced the battery lifetime by 192% on average, resulting in a 53% increase in compliance in the study. A system like
WANDA-CVD can help increase smartphone battery lifetime for
RHM systems monitoring physical activity.
Index Terms—Battery optimization, remote health monitoring,
user compliance.

I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
N the U.S., 75% of our health care spending focuses on
chronic conditions, among which cardiovascular disease
(CVD) ranks among the highest in societal burden and also the
most preventable [1]. Remote health monitoring of patients with
chronic heart failure has been shown to improve heart failure patients’ health, resulting in reduced hospital readmissions and an
overall positive effect on clinical outcomes in communities [2].
Smartphones are increasingly used in remote health monitoring (RHM) as an information gateway to extract patient information, especially physical activity (PA) [3]–[6]. They have
multiple functionalities including: 1) data collector for PA from
on-board sensors; 2) information hub that extracts data from
other devices and user input; 3) data transmitter to server; and
4) feedback provider to relay information to the patient. Contin-

I

Manuscript received December 15, 2013; revised April 16, 2014; accepted
May 26, 2014. Date of publication June 9, 2014; date of current version December 30, 2014.
N. Alshurafa, S. Nyamathi, J. Liu, M. Pourhomayoun, and M. Sarrafzadeh are
with the Department of Computer Science, Wireless Health Institute, University
of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: nabil@cs.ucla.edu).
J.-Ann Eastwood is with the School of Nursing University of California, Los
Angeles CA 90095 USA (e-mail: jeastwood@sonnet.ucla.edu).
W. Xu is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering University at Buffalo, the State University of New York, New York, NY 14260
USA (e-mail: wenyao@cs.ucla.edu).
H. Ghasemzadeh is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science at Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164 USA (e-mail:
hassan@eecs.wsu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2329712

uous data collection of PA and data transmission contribute
the most to battery consumption. Patient compliance is defined as adherence to defined medical or study prescriptions.
In smartphone-based RHM systems, compliance can also be affected by other factors including lack of proper education and
poor mobile phone coverage (no Wi-Fi or cellular network) [3],
[7], [8].
In this paper, we designed and developed a battery optimization technique and test the effects of battery lifetime of smartphones on RHM system compliance. According to Desai et al.
[9], a major design challenge for remote monitoring systems is
improving patient compliance and self-care. By decreasing the
frequency with which a user must charge the smartphone, we
potentially increase compliance with the system. This battery
optimization technique has been tested both in-lab and in a clinical trial known as the Women’s Heart Health study. This trial
was designed to investigate the use of technology in decreasing
risk factors for CVD.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses related works. In Section III, we discuss the different components within the WANDA-CVD remote health monitoring system. Section IV presents our battery optimization algorithm. In
Section V, we discuss the experimental setup and the clinical
trial that tested the WANDA-CVD system. We, then, present
our experimental results and discussion in Section VI on smartphone battery lifetime along with participant compliance rates of
our WANDA-CVD system in the Women’s Heart Health Study.
Finally, we conclude and discuss future work in Section VII.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Recent advances in pervasive and networking technology
have enabled many remote monitoring systems [10], [11].
Despite the increase in research on RHM systems, it remains
to be seen whether the technical feasibility and effectiveness of
such systems will enhance patient care. Most mobile-based interventions are limited to data transfers unable to provide wireless coaching and feedback [12]. Chowdhury et al. designed
MediAlly [13], a prototype that would dynamically activate
the collection of data from other external sensors based on a
specified context. Misra et al. designed the ACQUA [14] framework to optimize smartphone data transfer using a process of
context determination. Our WANDA-CVD system, however,
detects active and inactive states and adjusts the sensor sampling rate accordingly. To enhance battery life, our system also
delays processing power until nurses need data, or until the
smartphone is being charged.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

58

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

WANDA-CVD system architecture comprises a DCC, a DSPC, and a medical user interface.

Many studies have performed detailed analysis of energy consumption in smartphones; Carroll et al. [15] showed how usage
patterns affect overall energy consumption and battery life. In
this paper, we focus on battery longevity in real world scenarios
under the continuous monitoring of PA. Lee et al. [16] developed a smartphone-based mobile health monitoring system that
focused on communication from a biosignal monitoring unit
and measured energy expenditure with a triaxial accelerometer,
but did not report on battery lifetime and compliance with the
system.
Many home-based monitoring systems have involved a substantial burden on participants. In Chaudhry’s telemonitoring
study [17], the patient sample had been recently hospitalized
with an acute exacerbation of heart failure. They were required,
for six months, to make daily phone calls, record a message,
and answer a series of questions. This study reported low compliance rates, and proved unsuccessful in reducing mortality in
this sample of heart failure patients. Mortara et al. [18] designed
a similar home monitoring system that attempted to supervise
patients with heart failure and transmitted measurements once a
week over slow telephone lines. This system showed little significance in reducing cardiac death or hospitalization, despite
the high-reported patient compliance rate (completion of 92%
of cardiorespiratory recordings, and transmission of 81% of vital signs). WANDA-CVD attempts to tackle a more preventive
approach by reducing risk factors as a preventive measure in
accordance with the Institute of Medicine Report and the goals
of Healthy People 2020 [19].

III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
There are several key components in the complete design
of the WANDA-CVD system illustrated in Fig. 1. The first
component is the automated data collection component (DCC),
which involves a smart phone application measuring, communicating, and collecting data from sensors, storing it locally, and
transmitting it through a network to the data storage and processing center (DSPC). The DSPC stores the raw data collected
from multiple DCC’s, and deploys automated data analytics,
which is then processed to determine what messages to transmit
to the nurse practitioner and the participants through wireless
coaching. The data presentation component displays the data
for nurses to provide a visual summary of each patient’s status.
These components will be described in detail in this section.
A. Data Collection Component (DCC)
The DCC senses and collects data. A WANDA-CVD
Android-based smartphone application has been designed to
collect data from patients and transmit it to the DSPC. The
application includes the following properties:
1) Smartphone interface: To appeal to the young women in
our clinical trial, we selected the Motorola Droid Razr
Maxx with 3300 mAh Li-Ion battery, a lightweight smartphone with an embedded accelerometer and Bluetooth
technology. The Android application is designed to run
on Android version 4.0 or higher, and uses a simple and
intuitive graphical user interface.

ALSHURAFA et al.: IMPROVING COMPLIANCE IN REMOTE HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS THROUGH SMARTPHONE BATTERY OPTIMIZATION

59

TABLE II
CATEGORY COMPLIANCE DEFINITION
Category (c)
DQ
WQ
BP
Activity

Fig. 2. Sample set of questions sent on a daily basis, to further reinforce the
education received during baseline.

Compliance Definition
Completed at-least 3 days out of the
6 DQs a week.
Completed the WQ once a week.
Measured BP atleast once a week.
Performed the equivalent of 20 min
of low intensity PA.

down, the event is logged. This allows the nurses to contact
participants who leave their phone on the charger or allow
the battery to run low, and encourage mindfulness.
B. Data Storage and Processing Center (DSPC)

Fig. 3. Snapshot of the WANDA-CVD application showing the steps necessary for the patient to measure their BP. They simply take their BP measurement,
then push a button on the application to transfer the data to the phone, which
is then uploaded to the server. The participants can also see their data on the
phone to validate that the data was received.
TABLE I
SMARTPHONE EVENTS AND USAGE TABLE
Event Type
ACTION POWER DISCONNECTED
ACTION POWER CONNECTED
BATTERY LOW
ACTION SHUTDOWN
BOOT COMPLETED
UPGRADED TO VERSION N

Description
Phone disconnected from charge
Phone connected to charge
25% of battery remaining
Battery dead and phone shutdown
Phone turned back on
Upgraded app version number

2) Questionnaire system:The WANDA-CVD system has
several customizable questionnaire templates selected by
the nurse practitioner and displayed to the participant
on a daily or weekly basis. The questions relate to diet,
lifestyle, and PA. Fig. 2 illustrates the different daily questionnaires (DQs) selected by the nurse prior to deployment
of the Women’s Heart Health study.
3) Bluetooth-enabled sensor: In the Women’s Heart Health
study, the nurse requested weekly monitoring of blood
pressure (BP) readings from each participant. We used
an FDA-approved BP monitor designed in collaboration
with Fora Care [20]. Fig. 3 illustrates the participant’s
communication process with the BP monitor.
4) Smartphone events and usage: Nurses have the ability
to observe a participant behavior regarding phone usage.
As shown in Table I, when the phone is connected to or
removed from a charger, runs low on battery, or is shut

The DSPC comprises two main components, namely data
storage and data analytics with wireless coaching, an enhancement to our previous RHM system [21]. In order to achieve high
scalability, availability, and reliability, DSPC is built using the
latest Google cloud technologies [22].
After the raw data have been stored in the data storage component, data analytics are performed to identify opportunities
to coach the users. The coaching is in the form of reminder
messages prompting the user to take certain actions, such as
taking BP measurements or enhancing exercise. The system
automatically determines the appropriate message to send.
C. Data Presentation
Continuous nurse exposure to the data is critical. For convenience and accessibility, we have designed a system that is
both web- and tablet-based. The web-based portal provides a
dashboard, with a summary of all the participants’ most recent
information. The system provides plots over time for each measurement type so the nurse can examine trends.
D. Compliance
In order to quantify the feasibility of our system, we defined a
metric of compliance in coordination with our nurses and medical experts. We provide an overall compliance rate, as well as
a per category compliance rate. There are currently four categories requiring feedback from the participant: DQ, weekly
questionnaire (WQ), BP monitor, and physical activity (Activity). Table II describes the definition of compliance for each of
the four categories. We determine compliance on a weekly basis
for each category c, and calculate the total compliance TCc for a
specific category c, for all subjects s (total of m subjects), over
n weeks by

1, if S compliant in week i in category c
c
Com(i)s =
0, otherwise
n
c
i=1 Com (i)s
Comcs =
n
m
c
Com
s
s=1
.
(1)
TCc =
m

60

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

P =


n
i=0

Fig. 4. Battery optimization state diagram. When the smartphone is charging
it enters an initial state. Once disconnected from power, it enters an active state.
If a participant is detected to have a low activity value for 60 s, the smartphone
enters an inactive state with a lower sampling rate, and once the participant
becomes more active the smartphone transitions back to an active state.

An overall compliance rate is calculated and gives participants
credit if they complied with at least two of the four categories.
IV. BATTERY OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE
In order to maximize compliance, it is critical that the smartphone is able to last a full day of regular use. The majority of
battery life is spent on processing triaxial accelerometer data
and transmitting data to the servers. We initially designed the
system to process the data constantly and upload it at a fixed
time interval, but realizing that many individuals spend much of
their days inactive, the smartphone could enter “sleep mode” to
decrease the sampling rate of the accelerometer when the user
is not in motion.
The battery optimization technique enters an initial state when
the phone is connected to a charger. The accelerometer can be
turned OFF in this state. Once the phone is disconnected from
the charger, it enters an “active” state, where the accelerometer
is turned ON and the sampling rate is set at 10 Hz. If the user
becomes stationary, as in sitting or not exerting much PA, the
smartphone enters to an “inactive” state. Fig. 4 provides the
state diagram that illustrates the transition from active to inactive
state.
In order to determine the participants’ PA level, we used the
algorithm proposed by Panasonic [23] shown to have high correlation (R2 = 0.86) with Doubly Labeled Water, one of the
most accurate methods for evaluating total energy expenditure
under free living conditions. Km values, shown in (3), are calculated for a given time window and mapped to activity levels.
We achieved optimal results using a 10 Hz sampling rate and a
time window of 5 s. Therefore, the number of samples n in five s
is 50. For each sample i, we use the data from each acceleration
axis, xi , yi , and zi , to calculate Km :



1
1
where
Km =
Q − (P )
n−1
n
Q=

n

i=0

x2i +

n

i=0

yi2 +

n

i=0

zi2 and

(2)

	2
xi

+


	2  
	2
n
n
yi +
zi .
i=0

i=0

Raw data is buffered into fixed size arrays and written to file
in an efficient batch to avoid unnecessary memory allocations
and garbage collection. Polling rates for accelerometer values
on Android devices are hardware dependent. One minute of
data are buffered before being written to file as a compromise
between disk I/O and the amount of memory that needs to
be reserved for such a buffer. The Android operating system
terminates applications in the order of highest memory usage
when resources become scarce, such as when the camera is in
use or during any other computationally intensive activity. For
this reason, it is imperative that the memory use of the activity
collection service be as small as reasonably possible to minimize
the risk of a pause in data collection. In the event that service is
terminated or the phone is restarted, the data collection service
will automatically reactivate.
Because our study looks at PA trends over time, we chose to
accept an increase in latency when receiving data to significantly
increase battery life and, thus, achieve higher compliance. By
delaying until an external power source is connected, the processing and uploading of accelerometer values into meaningful
data can be done without impacting battery life or generating the
excess heat that can be bothersome to participants. The battery
optimization technique is presented in Procedure 1. Recorded
data is queued for upload in a SQLite database, which is used
to maintain a synchronized state with WANDA-CVD servers.
Upon connecting the device to a charger, data values are processed and uploaded completely invisibly to the end user, requiring no intervention on their part. In the case of network
connectivity concerns, synchronization of all queued data will
automatically occur when the phone is charged.
V. EXPERIMENT SETUP AND CLINICAL TRIAL
In preparation for the Women’s Heart Health study, we perform an in-lab pilot study with five participants to test the smartphone application with and without battery optimization. To test
effects of battery lifetime on compliance in real life, we selected
seven participants from the Women’s Heart Health clinical trial
to test the system without battery optimization for two months
and with battery optimization for the remaining four months.
The Women’s Heart Health study focuses on preventive, sustainable CVD management through lifestyle changes in young
black women aged 25–45 years. The study aims to determine
the feasibility of using education and technology in reducing
risk factors. The intervention group receives four educational
classes on self-management of diet, nutrition, PA, and stress
reduction. After completing baseline screening of cholesterol
levels, BP, and BMI; demographic and psychosocial questionnaires; and the educational classes, the participants were taught
to wear and manage the phones and BP devices. They were
told that the primary purpose of the smartphone was to track
their PA, while providing a user interface and a mechanism for
automated feedback. The participants were asked to place the
smartphone in their pocket or around their waist throughout the

ALSHURAFA et al.: IMPROVING COMPLIANCE IN REMOTE HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS THROUGH SMARTPHONE BATTERY OPTIMIZATION

Procedure 1: Battery Optimization
Input:
W , Window size in seconds.
B, Buffer rate in seconds.
T , The threshold.
StateC , The current state. Charge, Active, Inactive.
P rocessedday , Last day data processed.
Output:
StateN , The next state Charge, Active, Inactive.
StateAcc , The updated accelerometer state. ON, OF F .
f , The new sampling rate.
1: if StateC = Charge then
2:
StateAcc = OF F
3:
f =0
4:
if P rocessedDay < Y esterday then
5:
Calculate Km values for previous day of data
6: end if
7: Synchronization Step: Upload data to database
8: end if
9: if StateC = Active then
10: f = 10
11: StateAcc = ON
12: Buffer Acc for B seconds & store in SqlLite DB
13: for i = 1 to i = Bdo
14:
Calculate Km from i to i + W
15:
i = i + W.
16: end for
17: Calculate Km for window size W
18: if Km < T then
19:
StateN = Inactive
20: end if
21:end if
22:if StateC = Inactive then
23: f = 1
24: StateA cc = ON
25: Buffer Acc for B seconds & store to SqlLite DB
26: for i = 1 to i = B do
27:
Calculate Km from i to i + W
28:
i=i+W
29: end for
30: if Km ≥ T then
31:
StateN = Active
32: end if
33:end if

day. They are able to send/receive unlimited text messages along
with unlimited data plans.
We tested the WANDA-CVD smartphone application under
four configurations: 1) airplane mode, 2) Wi-Fi only, 3) NG only,
and 4) Wi-Fi and NG both enabled. NG represents the cellular
network coverage whose changes based on locale between 2G,
3G, and 4G/LTE networks.
We tested each configuration in both a geo-active and geoinactive mode. Geo-inactive mode represents the participant
that uses the smartphone predominantly at home or in a single
location where Wi-Fi and NG coverage exist. Geo-active

61

Fig. 5. First graph (a) shows the data of one of the subjects in the study. The
subject charges the phone at 12 am, and takes it off the charger and wears the
phone at around 8 am. Then the subject transitions throughout the day from
active to an inactive state. Second graph (b) shows the battery lifetime of the
subject in (a). The red line represents an estimated battery lifetime without
battery optimization (showing the phone shutting down at 7 P.M., which would
prevent the system from capturing the remaining activity performed by the
subject. At around 1 A.M., the subject charges the phone again. (a) Sample
subject activity. (b) Sample subject battery lifetime.

mode represents the user that carries the smartphone all day
in a pouch around their waist and where signal strengths can
fluctuate with intermittent Wi-Fi and NG communication.
Geo-active mode participants in the inlab setting did not use
other features such as talk-time, camera, browsing, and gaming,
but we acknowledge that in reality such limitations do not exist,
so we also tested our system in a real world setting via the
Women’s Heart Health study.
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A) Battery Lifetime: Battery lifetime is defined as the hours
for the smartphone to go from 100% battery to the ACTION
SHUTDOWN event (when the battery is dead and the phone
shuts down). Fig. 5 provides a sample of an active subject’s
state over 24 h, comparing the battery lifetime with and without
battery optimization. We can see that without battery optimization the phone shuts down after approximately 9 h, while with
battery optimization the phone still has over 34% battery lifetime remaining at that point. The benefits of battery optimization
will be much greater for an inactive participant.

62

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 7. Comparing compliance rates between the system with and without
battery optimization based on each category. We see substantial improvement in
compliance in all categories: Activity = physical activity, DQ = daily questionnaire, WQ = weekly questionnaire, and BP = BP measurements. The overall
accuracy shows a 53% improvement from 55.3% compliance to 84.6%.

Fig. 6. Battery lifetime optimization in Geo-inactive and Geo-active mode for
the pilot study and Women’s Heart Health clinical trial. We notice substantial
improvement in battery lifetime with battery optimization in all smartphone
settings: Airplane mode, Wi-Fi only mode, NG and Wi-Fi mode, and only
NG mode. Results from the Clinical trial are provided that show substantial
improvement in battery lifetime by approximately 192%. (a) Geo-inactive mode.
(b) Geo-active mode.

Delaying the processing and communication of PA in our
battery optimization technique has drastically improved smartphone battery lifetime. We show results for Geo-inactive smartphone settings in Fig. 6(a), averaged over five participants,
where we compare results with and without battery optimization. When running the smartphone in airplane mode, we notice
100% increase, from 36.2 to 72.1 h, almost doubling the lifetime
of the battery. Testing in airplane mode purely tests the delay in
processing the accelerometer data, as no communication delay
can be tested. Increasing the latency in calculations and processing the data in batches results in minimizing file input/output,
which in effect reduces computing power.
In Fig. 6(a), we also see improvements in all modes. In the
Wi-Fi, NG, and Wi-Fi/NG mode, the battery lifetime increased
by 84%, 291%, and 257%, respectively. Our results also show
that running the system in purely Wi-Fi mode is power intensive,
lasting only 15.3 h, while running in NG-only mode lasts 45.3 h,
almost 192% that of Wi-Fi mode. When turning Wi-Fi and NG
on together, we notice a slight decrease in battery lifetime from
Wi-Fi/NG mode to about 38.2 h, with the understanding that

more energy is consumed whenever the smartphone searches
for signals.
While Geo-inactive mode showed promise, it is critical to
test when participants are actively moving around in areas
where there is limited coverage. In Geo-active mode, our results also show strong improvement. Fig. 6(b) compares results
with/without battery optimization for both the pilot study and
the Women’s Heart Health clinical trial.
In airplane mode, with no battery optimization, our system
lasted on average 35.2 h, whereas with the optimization battery
lifetime doubles to 71.6 h, as in Geo-inactive mode. This can
be explained as the smartphone in airplane mode will not be
affected by variations in signal strength. From the first inlab
setting of Geo-active mode, with no optimization, the results
do not exceed 11 h of battery lifetime in any nonairplane mode
[see Fig. 6(b)]. This is concerning as participants would have to
charge the phone before the end of the day. In the second in-lab
setting, with battery optimization, we see that we are able to
achieve improvements of 59%, 300%, and 256% in Wi-Fi, NG,
and Wi-Fi/NG modes, respectively.
In a more realistic clinical trial setting, the Women’s Heart
Health study, we see that on average the participants were able
to achieve a battery lifetime of 28.6 h compared to 9.8 h without
battery optimization. The battery lifetime results in the clinical
trial were less than our in-lab setting for Wi-Fi/NG mode, due
to the fact that some participants have Wi-Fi turned ON, but
also because we do not control their phone usage in terms of
browsing, camera time, downloading applications, and playing
games. Participants were quite happy with battery longevity,
with some realizing that if they forgot to charge their phone at
night, their phone battery did not go down. By increasing our
expected battery life to 28.6 h, we are able to ensure that most
participants will be able to complete a full day with the ease of
charging the phone at night.
B) Compliance: Participant adherence to the study protocol
is a very critical matter in order to ensure that a remote health
monitoring system can be successfully deployed in a real world
environment. Fig. 7 shows our battery optimization technique

ALSHURAFA et al.: IMPROVING COMPLIANCE IN REMOTE HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS THROUGH SMARTPHONE BATTERY OPTIMIZATION

resulting in a 53% increase in overall compliance from 55.3%
to 84.6%.
The effects are even more evident in the compliance of PA,
where compliance increased from 43.1% to 91.7%. This result is expected due to the fact that battery lifetime was not
lasting the entire day, and many of the participants were complaining that they would have to charge the device mid-day.
Many of the participants found the battery life without the battery optimization to be a main concern, and also found that the
phone would overheat from the continuous data processing and
transmission. Participant response to the DQ showed significant
improvement from 52.6% to 95.3%. The WQ compliance increased with battery optimization due to the fact that a few
of the participants would perform their response to the questions during the evening, and when battery drains and is left
to charge, the questionnaire would go unanswered. The same
effect is shown in the BP measurement compliance rate in Fig. 7.
It is interesting to note that compliance of BP measurements is
significantly lower than the other categories, as system messages
reminding users to take their BP increased. Factors that enter into
noncompliance could be that these women have children and are
very busy, but are taught to relax for 5 min prior to taking their BP
measurement. Further investigation is required to see whether
the BP monitor was difficult to use, or whether participants had
difficulty finding the time and a quiet place to take and transmit
the BP reading using both the phone and the device.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we provide a battery optimization technique to
reduce smartphone battery consumption and show the high correlation between battery lifetime and compliance in a remote
health monitoring system that uses a smartphone as an information gateway. The WANDA-CVD system has shown success
both in lab and real-world settings. Such a system can help reduce battery lifetime for RHM systems that use smartphones to
monitor PA. We have shown an ability to drastically enhance
compliance by optimizing the battery lifetime of the smartphone
application gateway by delaying processing and communication
until the phone is charged, resulting in 192% increase in battery
lifetime, yielding on average a 28.6-h battery lifetime in the
Women’s Heart Health study. The simplicity and ease-of-use
of our WANDA-CVD system yielded 85% overall compliance
by participants, and a 95% compliance rate in PA. Our battery
optimization improved compliance by 53%.
The final results from the goals of the clinical trial of the
Women’s Heart Health study will be published in a future
report. In future work, we plan to continue to enhance the battery
lifetime of the system, while testing the smartphone application
on other devices and under different settings. We also would
like to expand the WANDA-CVD system to perform real-time
activity classification.
REFERENCES
[1] (2009). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chronic disease the
power to prevent, the call to control. chronfic.pdf. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/AAG/pdf/
[2] R. A. Clark, S. C. Inglis, F. A. McAlister, J. G. F. Cleland, and S. Stewart,
“Telemonitoring or structured telephone support programmes for patients
with chronic heart failure: Systematic review and meta-analysis,” BMJ,
vol. 334, no. 7600, p. 942, May 2007.

63

[3] C. Worringham, A. Rojek, and I. Stewart. (2011). Development and feasibility of a smartphone, ECG and GPS based system for remotely monitoring exercise in cardiac rehabilitation. PLoS ONE. [Online]. 6(2). Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371
[4] N. Alshurafa, W. Xu, J. J. Liu, M.-C. Huang, B. Mortazavi, M. Sarrafzadeh,
and C. K. Roberts, “Robust human intensity-varying activity recognition
using stochastic approximation in wearable sensors,” in Proc. Body Sensor
Netw., 2013, pp. 1–6.
[5] N. Alshurafa, J.-A. Eastwood, M. Pourhomayoun, S. Nyamathi, L. Bao,
B. Mortazavi, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Anti-cheating: Detecting self-inflicted
and impersonator cheaters for remote health monitoring systems with
wearable sensors,” in Proc. Body Sensor Netw., 2014, pp. 1–6.
[6] N. Alshurafa, W. Xu, J. Liu, M. Huang, B. Mortazavi, C. Roberts, and
M. Sarrafzadeh, “Designing a robust activity recognition framework for
health and exergaming using wearable sensors,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., 2013, to be published.
[7] M. K. Suh, C. A. Chen, J. Woodbridge, M. K. Tu, J. I. Kim, A. Nahapetian, L. S. Evangelista, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “A remote patient monitoring system for congestive heart failure,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 1165–1179, Oct. 2011.
[8] N. Alshurafa, J.-A. Eastwood, S. Nyamathi, W. Xu, J. J. Liu,
M. Pourhomayoun, H. Ghasemzadeh, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Battery optimization in smartphones for remote health monitoring systems to enhance
user adherence,” presented at the Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Pervasive Technol.
Relat. Assistive Environ., Rhodes Island, Greece, 2014.
[9] A. S. Desai, and L. W. Stevenson, “Connecting the circle from home to
heart-failure disease management,” New Eng. J. Med., vol. 363, no. 24,
pp. 2364–2367, Dec. 2010.
[10] K. Hung, and Y.-T. Zhang, “Implementation of a wap-based telemedicine
system for patient monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 7,
no. 2, pp. 101–107, Jun. 2003.
[11] A. G. Logan, W. J. McIsaac, A. Tisler, M. J. Irvine, A. Saunders,
A. Dunai, C. A. Rizo, D. S. Feig, M. Hamill, M. Trudel, and J. A. Cafazzo,
“Mobile phone-based remote patient monitoring system for management
of hypertension in diabetic patients,” Amer. J. Hypertens., vol. 20, no. 9,
pp. 942–948, Sep. 2007.
[12] I. Kouris, S. Mougiakakou, L. Scarnato, D. Iliopoulou, P. Diem, A. Vazeou,
and D. Koutsouris, “Mobile phone technologies and advanced data analysis towards the enhancement of diabetes self-management,” Int. J. Electron. Healthcare, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 386–402, 2010.
[13] A. R. Chowdhury, B. Falchuk, and A. Misra, “Medially: A provenanceaware remote health monitoring middleware,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Pervasive Comput. Commun., 2010, pp. 125–134.
[14] A. Misra and L. Lim, “Optimizing sensor data acquisition for energyefficient smartphone-based continuous event processing,” in Proc. IEEE
12th Int. Conf. Mobile Data Manage., Jun. 2011, vol. 1, pp. 88–97.
[15] A. Carroll and G. Heiser, “An analysis of power consumption in a
smartphone,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2010,
pp. 21–21.
[16] Y. G. Lee, W. S. Jeong, and G. Yoon, “Smartphone-based mobile health
monitoring,” Telemed. J. E Health, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 585–590, Oct. 2012.
[17] S. I. Chaudhry, B. Barton, J. Mattera, J. Spertus, and H. M. Krumholz,
“Randomized trial of telemonitoring to improve heart failure outcomes
(Tele-HF): Study design,” J. Card. Fail., vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 709–714,
Nov. 2007.
[18] A. Mortara, G. D. Pinna, P. Johnson, R. Maestri, S. Capomolla, M. T. La
Rovere, P. Ponikowski, L. Tavazzi, and P. Sleight, “Home telemonitoring in
heart failure patients: The HHH study (home or hospital in heart failure),”
Eur. J. Heart Fail., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 312–318, Mar. 2009.
[19] (2013). Healthy people 2020 topics & objectives. [Online]. Available:
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topicsobjectives2020/default.aspx
[20] (2011). Fora care: Healthcare devices. [Online]. Available: http://www.
foracare.com/products.html
[21] M. Lan, L. Samy, N. Alshurafa, M.-K. Suh, H. Ghasemzadeh,
A. Macabasco-O’Connell, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Wanda: An end-to-end
remote health monitoring and analytics system for heart failure patients,”
presented at the Wireless Health Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2012.
[22] D. Sanderson, Programming Google App Engine: Build and Run Scalable Web Apps on Google’s Infrastructure, 1st ed. Sebastopol, CA, USA:
O’Reilly Media, 2009.
[23] Y. Yamada, K. Yokoyama, R. Noriyasu, T. Osaki, T. Adac hi, A. Itoi,
Y. Naito, T. Morimoto, M. Kimura, and S. Oda, “Light-intensity activities
are important for estimating physical activity energy expenditure using
uniaxial and triaxial accelerometers,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 105,
no. 1, pp. 141–152, Jan. 2009.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

